A GOSPEL PLEA (Interwoven with a RATIONAL and LEGAL) FOR THE LAWFULNES and
CONTINUANCE of the Ancient Settled MAINTENANCE and TENTHES Of the Ministers of
the Gospel: PROVING, That there is a Just, Competent, Comfortable Maintenance
due to all Lawful painful Preachers and Ministers of the Gospel, by Divine
Right, Institution, and express Texts and Precepts of the Gospel: That Glebes
and Tithes are such a Maintenance, and due to Ministers by Divine Right, Law
and Gospel: That if subtracted or detained, they may lawfully be enforced by
Coercive Laws and Penalties: That Tithes are no real Burden nor grievance to
the people; The abolishing them, no ease or benefit to Farmers, Husbandmen, or
poor people, but a Prejudice and Loss.

That the present opposition against Tithes, proceeds not from any real
grounds of Conscience, but base Covetousness, Carnal policy, etc. and a
Jesuiticall and Anabaptisticall design, to subvert and ruin our Ministers,
Church, Religion.

With a Satisfactory Answer to all Cavils and Material Objections to the
contrary.

By WILLIAM PRYNNE Of Swainswick, Esquire

Mal. 3. 8, 9. Will a man rob God? Yet ye have robbed me: But ye say, Wherein
have we robbed thee? In Tithes and Offerings. Ye are cursed with a curse, for
ye have robbed me, even this whole Nation. Mat. 22. 21. Render therefore to
Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and unto God the things that are his. AUG.
Sermon. 219. Si tu illam Decimam non dederis, dabis impio Militi* quod non vis
dar Deo and Sacerdoti: Hoc tollit Fiscus, quod non accepit Christus. London,
Printed by E. Cotes for Michael Spark, and are to be sold at the Blue Bible in
Green Arbor, 1653.

Christi servus etiam in summa Captivitate Liber, Anno 1653. Aetatis 49.
portrait of William Prynne All flesh is Grass, the best men vanity;
This, but a shadow, here before thine eye,
Of him, whose wondrous changes clearly show,
That GOD, not men, swayes all things here below.


The Places and Times of his First Imprisonments under his professed Enemies
the PRELATES.
1. THe Tower of London, to which he was committed for his Histriomastix,
Februa. 1. 1632. It being Licensed. II. The Fleet, when his first sentence for
his Histriomastix was executed, May, 7. 1634. III. The Tower of London, to
which he was committed from the Fleet, June, 1. 1639. IV. Carnarvan Castle in
Northwales to which by his second Sentence he was sent close Prisoner from the
Tower, August, 5. 1637. V. Mount Orguel Castle in the Isle of Jersy, where he
was close imprisoned, when removed from Carnarvan, Januar. 17. 1637. Whence he
was sent for and enlarged by the Parliament, November. 19. 1640.
The Places and Times of his Second Imprisonments under false Brethren and
pretended Friends.
I. HEll in Westminster by the Army Officers, for speaking his conscience and
discharging his duty in Parliament, December. 6. 1648. II. The Swan in the Strand
by the same Officers, for the same cause, December. 7. 1648. III. The King's Head
in the Strand by the same Power, for the same cause, Janua. 2. 1648. IV.
Dunster Castle in Summersetshire, where he was close Prisoner by a Whitehall
Warrant under Mr. ^^adshaw's hand, expressing no particular cause, July, 1.
1650. V. Taunton Castle and the Lamb Tavern in Taunton, when removed from
Taunton by no particular warrant, Janua. 12. 1651. VI. Pendennis Castle in
Cornwall, where he remained close Prisoner by a Whitehall Warrant under Mr.
Bradshaw's hand, mentioning no cause but Tauntons unfitness to restrain him
in, July, 2. 1651.
2 COR. 11. 23. to 28. In Labors more abundant, in PRISONS MORE FREQVENT, in
Deaths often, in Journying often, in Perils of waters, in Perils of Robbers, in
Perils by mine own Countrymen, in Perils in the City, in Perils in the Sea, in
Perils among false Brethren: In weariness and painfulnesse, in watchings
often, in cold and nakedness.

Lo here the shade, but not Heroic mind,
And Public soul of him, who most unkind,
Unjust Restraints, Bonds, Pressures has sustained
From foes and friends; because he still maintained
Religion, Truth, Laws, Freedom, Justice, Right,
His Countries common good, with his whole might,
In all ill Times; and never would once combine
With Lawless Grandees, these to undermine.
2 TIMOTHY 3. 10, 11, 12. But thou have fully known my Doctrine, manner of Life,
Purpose, Faith, Long-suffering, Charity, Patience, Persecutions, Afflictions,
which came unto me at Antioch, at Iconium, at Lystra, what Persecutions I
endured: But out of them all the Lord delivered me; yea, and all that will live
godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer Persecution.

London Printed for M. S. 1653.

To my most High, Mighty, Great, Dreadful, Omnipotent, Omnipresent,
Omniscient, Righteous, True, Faithful, All-gracious, All-sufficient,
Everliving, Everlasting, Immutable, Covenant-keeping LORD GOD; the God of my
Life, Health, Strength, Mercy, Preservation, Consolation, Supportation,
Salvation, Deliverance, Praise.
Isa. 45. 15. and 46. 9.
O God THE SAVIOR of Israel, (of England too, anciently styled Mat. West. An.
1055. p. 422. Antiq. Eccles. Brit. ^. 88, 89.
Regnum Dei, Gods Kingdom) Thou art God alone, and there is none else. Psalm.
73. 25.
Whom have I in Heaven but thee* and there is none upon earth, that I desire
besides thee. Act. 17. 28.
In thee alone I live, move, and have my being. Psalm. 73. 26
Thou art the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever. My 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23.
Romans 11. 36. Psalm. 139. 15, 16, 17.
whole Spirit, Soul, Body, Parts, Endowments Natural, Spiritual, are only of
thee, through thee: O sanctify them wholly for, and only to thee; to whom
alone I desire entirely and eternally to devote them; as Psalm. 100. 1, 2, 3. 1
Cor. 6. 19, 20. 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15. Job 7. 20. Genesis 48. 16.
due to none but thee, and that by right of Creation, Redemption, Resignation,
Preservation, and that extraordinary Tribute of gratitude I stand most deeply
engaged to render to thy most gracious Majesty, for those many and manifold
WONDERS of Preservation, Supportation, Concomitation, Protection, Consolation,
Absolution, Vindication and Restoration, thou have (of thy free Grace) most
miraculously extended to me, the meanest and unworthyest of all thy servants)
in, under, from all my former and late injurious, illegal Sufferings,
Oppressions, Imprisonments, inhumane close Restraints, Exiles, in TEN SEVERAL
PRISONS, CASTLES (some of them at remotest distance from all Acquaintance,
Kindred, Friends and thy public Ordinances, under some Rude, Barbarous armed
Gardians and Men of blood, of purpose to destroy me, where thou was present
with me, as with Dan 6. 16.
Daniel in the Lions den, 2 Timothy 4. 17.
Paul in the Lions mouth, the Dan. 3. 19, 20, etc.
three Children in the midst of the fiery Furnance, Jona. 1. and 2.
Jonah in the whales belly to, secure, comfort and supply me) for about ELEVEN
YEARS SPACE; through the malice and cruelty of merciless men: yet (blessed be
thy holy name) for no other cause or crime thy poor servants conscience is
guilty of (his last close Imprisonments in three several Castles being without
the least Examination, Hearing, Accusation, Charge of any particular offense
against him, or yet declared to him) but only his sincere cordial desire to
discharge his bounden duty to glorify thee in his generation, by opposing the
In my Histriomast^x, Healths sickness, Lovelocks, Cosens Cosening Devotions,
Breviate, Quenchcole, Memento, Speech in Parliament, and other Books.
dangerous wrath-provoking Errors and corruptions of the age in which he
lives; by contending earnestly for the faith which was once delivered unto the
Saints, according Jude 3. Levit. 19. 17. Tit. 1. 13.
to thy Commands, and for the settled fundamental Laws, Liberties, Rights,
Government of his distracted Native Country, against all secret Underminers,
open Oppugners or Subverters of them, to the uttermost of his Ability: By a
conscientious inviolable observation of all those solemn sacred Oaths,
Protestations, Covenants and Obligations, (prescribed by those lawful higher
Powers thou commandedst him to Romans 13. 1, 2.
submit to under pain of DAMNATION) wherewith he has frequently bound his
soul, not so much to men as to thee, who art a most Deuteronomy. 7. 9. Neh. 1. 5. P^a.
89. ^. 28. to 38* and 110 4. and 11^. 5. Jer. 33. 20, 21, etc. Heb. 5. 17, 18.
Faithful Promise-Oath-Covenant keeping God, especially of those Oaths and
Covenants wherewith thou vouchsafest to oblige thy self even to mere dust and
ashes, both IMMUTABLE and INVIOLABLE, never violating, nor repenting of them in
the least degree, and obliging men both by thine own example, and Gen 50. 5* 6
Levit. 19. 12. Number. 30. 2. Josh. 1. 17. and 6. 22. and. 9. 15, to 22. Psalm. 15.
4. Hos. 10. 4. Zech. 5 4. Eccles. 8. 2. Ezekiel. 17. 16, 18, 19.
Precepts to do the like, in all their public or private Oaths, Vows,
Covenants to thee or men, under pain of temporal wrath here, and eternal
exclusion from thy holy Hill: And for not daring to confederate or comply
(against his Oaths, Covenants, manifold public Engagements, Conscience,
Judgment and thy sacred Prove. 24. 21, 22. Romans 16* 17. 2 Ti^. 3. 1, to. 8.
Inhibitions) WITH THOSE WHO ARE GIVEN TO CHANGE; many of whose Calamities and
Ruins are suddenly risen and fallen upon them, by the Divine justice (even
from those they least suspected, and most relied on for Protection) for the
manifold changes they presumed to make against their Oaths, Vows, Trusts,
Protestations, Covenants, and unrighteous oppressing of their dearest Christian
Friends, Brethren, and thy suffering Servant among others. Now all Revel. ^^ 1,
2.
Glory, Honor, Power, Salvation and Praise be for ever rendered by me and all
thy glorious Saints and Angels in heaven and earth, because true and righteous
are thy Judgments: and because the deliverance of me thy oppressed Servant
(without any wound to his Conscience, dishonor to thy Name, or scandal to thy
People) is exceeding Gracious and Glorious. Psalm. 20. 5^ 6, 7, 8.
Now Know I, (again and again) that the Lord loves his anointed; that he has
heard him (and others praying for him) from his holy Heaven; WITH THE SAVING
STRENGTH OF HIS RIGHT HAND. Some (of his self-exalting Oppressors) trusted in
Chariots, and some in Horses; but he remembered the Lord his God: they are
brought down and fallen, but he is risen and stands upright: Who therefore ever
will rejoice greatly in THY SALVATION, and in the Name of his God will set up
his Banners. Ps. 107. 16.
For thou have broken the gates of Brass, and cut the bars of Iron in sunder:
Thou have sent thy holy Angel and knocked off the Chains from my long fettered
hands, and made the long-barred Iron Castle Gates (wherein I was close shut up)
to open of their own accord (without any enforced long-expected Petition from
me.) Thou have rescued me from more then 4. Quaternions of Soldiers, who most
strictly guarded me day and night, as they did thyimprisoned Apostle Act. 12. 4,
to 12.
Peter, (and more narrowly then any formerly under the Prelates greatest
Tyranny) and delivered him out of the hand of Herod, and from all the
expectation of the People of the Je^s; the Jesuits and Popish Priests, who
marched freely abroad, not only preaching, but printing and dispersing no less
then See the Beacon fired: and Nicolas Causins the Jesuit's holy Court; printed
at London 1650. in folio.
19. gross Popish Books in defense of their Religion, and condemning ours for
Heresy, whiles I (their chief oppugner) was shut up so close in three remote
Castles, that I could neither write against, nor discover their Plots against
our Church, State, Religion, nor yet send Letters to mine Imprisoners to demand
my liberty, unless I would first give Copies of them to my Gardians, and then
trust them to send them when and by whom they pleased, nor have admission to
thy public Ordinances for above two years space. In thankful Commemoration of
which my late and great deliverance from this Egyptian Bondage, I do here
presume, in all humility at thy feet, and Dedicate to thee, the Great Psalm.
146. 7.
GAOLE-DELIVERING, PRISONER-LOOSING GOD, (who Isa. 49. 9. and 42. 7.
say to the Prisoner GO FORTH, and to them that are in darkness SHOW YOUR
SELVES) this mean and unworthy Gospel Plea, for the lawfulness and
continuance of the Ancient settled Maintenance and Tithes of thy Minist^rs of
the Gospel, (reserved to and by thy self AS THY. DEVOTED PORTION, DEBT, DUE)
whereof many now by FRAUD and VIOLENCE, endeavor Sacrilegiously TO ROB BOTH
THEE and THEM; as the first fruits of my enlargement, a 1 Samuel 7. 12.
Second EBENEZER, Hitherto has the Lord HELPED ME, and a lasting Monument to
Posterity of my gratitude and thankfulness to thee my God, for my late
restitution to so much Liberty and Freedom, as to be able, thus once more
publicly to plead thine own and thy Ministers cause, against Jesuits,
Anabaptists and all other open Oppugners and Subverters of our Church and
State, and secret Underminers of the true Preachers and Preaching of the
Gospel, who now Psa. 83 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
like Gebal, Ammon, Amalek, Edom, Ismael, Moab, the Hagarens, Ph^listines, the
Inhabitants of Tire and armed Assure of old, have consulted together with one
consent, and are confederate against thee; and have said, Come and let us cut
them off from being a Nation, that the name of Israel, may be no more in
remembrance. Bes^eching thy Majesty most graciously to accept it, most
powerfully to protect and so effectually to bless, prosper it and thy servant
against all these combined Confederates, that they may be no way able to Act.
6. 10.
resist thy Truth, Wisdom, Spirit, appearing, pleading in it, by it, but
either like 1 Co. 14. 25.
convicted Seducers or Seduced persons, fall down flat on their faces before
it, worship thee and report, that God is in it (and in thy servant) of a truth.
Or, in case of wifull malicious obstinacy, against thee and thy faithful
Ministers, Houses of public worship, Truth and Gospel, Psalm. 83. 9. 10, 11,
etc.
Do unto them as unto the Midianites, as to Sisera, and to Jabin at the brook
of Kison, which perished at Endor and became as dung for the earth: Make their
Nobles like Oreb and Zeeb, yea make all their Princes as Zebah, and as
Salmunna; who said (as these do now) LET US TAKE TO OUR SELVES THE HOUSES OF
GOD IN POSSESSION. O my God make them as a wheel, as the stubble before the
wind: As the fire burns the wood, and as the flame sets the mountains on
fire; so persecute them with thy tempest, and make them afraid of thy storm;
fill their faces with shame, that they may seek thy name O Lord; let them be
confounded and troubled for ever, yea let them be put to shame and perish: That
men (these men) may know, that thou whose name alone is JEHOVAH, art the most
high over all the earth. Psalm. 79. 13.
So we thy people and sheep of thy pasture will give thee thanks for ever; we
will show forth thy Praise to all generations. And thy servant David's
resolution, Psalm. 146. 2. and 104. 33.
Whiles I live will I praise the Lord, I will sing praises unto my God, WHILE I
HAVE ANY BEING, shall through thy Grace be both the Resolution and Practice of

Thy unworthy, unprofitable, Redeemed, Preserved and frequently enlarged
Servant and Vassal William Prynne.
Swainswicke 1 Sep. 1653.
To the unprejudiced Christian Reader.
KInd Reader, the 80. Psalm in my weak judgment, is both a lively Character
of the deplorable condition of Gods Church of late yea^s, and l^kewise a most
excellent Morning and Evening Prayer for it, in pub^ick or private. The
Psalmist thus complains, That God (by the Ezekiel. 46. 16. and 5^. 16. give it
this Title.
OPPRESSING SWORD of combined enemies, as Psalm. 83. imports) had broken down
his Churches hedges, so that all they that passed by the way did pluck her, the
Boar out of the forest did wast it, and the wild beasts OF THE FIELD devour
it. The ancient Isa. 5. 25. Ezekiel. 13. 5. and 22. 30.
hedges of the Church here planted and spread in our Nation, to wit, Gods
divine protection and Law; the Patronage, Laws, Statutes, Privileges and
Immunities, granted, confirmed to our Churches, by the manifold Magna Carta of
King Henry the I. and K. John. Mat. Paris Hist. Angl. p. 53. 230. 246. and 9 H.
^. c. 1. 29. 37. ^imes since confirmed in Parliament.
great Charters, Laws, Statutes, of such bountiful devout Kings and Queens as
God himself Isa. 49 23. and 60. 9, 10. Psalm. 72 10, 11. Rev. 21 24.
predicted, should be NURSING FATHERS and NURSING MOTHERS UNTO HIS CHURCH under
the Gospel, and bring their Glory and Honor to it; and Kings of Isles, amongst
others; having been of late years very much broken down and almost levelled to
the dust, by arbitrarie Committees, Sequestrations, and the oppressing
all-devouring Sword of War, (which God has kept so long unsheathed, J^r. 47.
6, 7.
without returning into the Scabberd these many years, for the just punishment
of our manifold sins and enormities) all they that go by the way (or in
by-ways) taking advantage thereof, have so plucked, and the wilde-boares out
of the wood, and wilde-men, and wilde-beasts of the field, have so wasted and
devoured the best and richest part of our Country, Patrimony, originally
designed by the Parliament, by a A collection of Ordinances, and c. p. 124. 125.
spec^all Bill tendered to the late King at Oxford, April 1643. (when
Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes and Chapters were first voted down, and Mat. 15.
13*
extirpated as none of our Heavenly fathers plants or planting) for the
increase of the Crown Revenues, to ease the people in their future Taxes; and
the Augmentation of our Ministers maintenance and incompetent livings: that
there is little or none of it now remaining undevoured by them, for either of
these two public ends: And many new highway-men, wilde-boars and Beasts, as
well as old, encouraged by former rich Church-plunders, in stead of imitating
G^l. 3. 9.
faithful Abraham, (whose heirs and children they profess themselves) who
gave Genesis 14. 20. Heb. 7. 1, to 12.
THE TENTH OF ALL HIS SPOILS OF WAR to Melchisedec Priest of the most high
God, (a type of our Savior Christ, if not Christ himself, as Dr. Griffith
W^lliams in his Works in folio p. 811.
some probably assert) they most eagerly and violently attempt to spoil,
plunder all the Evangelicall Priests and Ministers of God throughout the Nation
at one blow (without any lawful Trial by their Peers, due process of Law or
Contrary to Magna Carta c. 1. 29. 25 E. 1. c. 1, 2, 3. 28 E. 1. c. 1. 5 E. 3.
c. 9. 25 E. 3. c. 4. 28 E. 3. c. 3. 37 E. 3. c. 18. 42 E. 3. c. 1. 3. 2 H. 4.
c. 4. 5 H. 4. c. 11. 27 H. 8. c. 20, 21. 32 H. 8. c. 72 E. 6. c. 13. The
Petition of Right 3 Caroli. and late Ordinances for Tithes and A^gmentations
Legal conviction of any Capital crimes, which cannot forfei^ their Churches
inheritance, which is not so vested in them as either to forfeit or alien, by
the Law of God or the Realm) in all their inconsiderable remaining Tithes,
Glebes, and settled ancient Maintenance, and of their very Ministry too, as
JEWISH and ANTICHRISTIAN, as John Can the old Anabaptist, in his new Voice
from the ALEHOUSES RATHER, then the TEMPLE (which certainly is as Jewish and
Antichristian as he would have Tithes to be) with sundry late The Kentish
Petition and others.
Petitions and Proceedings proclaim to all the World, and strip them naked of
all other coercive maintenance for the future, to starve them and their
families bodies, and the peoples souls: that so a new generation of ambulatory
Friars, Mendicants and Itinerary Predicants, fixed to no certain Parish or
Parishes, selected out of those swarms of Jesuits, Seminary Priests and
Popish Friars, now in England under the disguises of Anabaptists, Gifted
Brethren, Dippers, Seekers, Quakers, New-lights, Mechanickes of all Trades,
Gentlemen, Troopers and Soldiers too, (Ignatius Loyola Muffaeus Vegius and
Rabadenira (both Jesuits) in vita Ignatii Loyolae. Heylins Microcosme, p. 197.
their Father and founder of their Order, being a SOLDIER by his profession,
as diverse of his Disciples are now amongst us, as many wise men believe, and
some on their own knowledge aver) may succeed them in their Ministry, to
subvert our Church, Religion, and reduce us back to Rome; The Pope now living,
within these few years, affirming to some This one of them asfirmed lately to a
friend of mine.
English Gentlemen of quality in Rome (who out of curiosity only went to see
him, being Protestants) that he hoped before he died (though he were aged) to
see England perfectly reduced to her former obedience to the Sea of Rome,
having sent many Jesuits, Priests, Friars from all parts into England, and
particularly into THE ARMY (as The false Jew, newly printed, p. 4, 5* 11, 12,
13.
Ramsy the late detected Jesuit at New Castle, under the vizor of a converted
Anabaptized Jew, confessed in his printed Examination there lately taken, and
sent up with him to Whitehall. Against whom John Can might have done well to
have pressed those, to whom he dedicated his Voice from the Temple, to execute
the Statute of 27 Eliz. c. 2. particularly made against them, as most dangerous
insufferable Tray^ors, purposely sent over, TO WORK THE RUIN, DESOLATION, and
DESTRUCTION OF THE WHOLE REALM, as well as of our Church and Religion, as that
Statute reso^ves; and not to have most ignorantly and malicio^sly wrested it
contrary both to the very letter and inten^ion against our godly Protestant
Ministers (their greatest opposites and eye-sores) to strip them of their
Ben^fices, Livelihood and ^^ves together (the whole scope of his Dan. 6. 20.
Lamentable Voice) without so much as uttering one word against these
wilde-boares and beasts of Rome, with whom he and his Companions the
Anabaptists, are apparent Confederates, both in their principles and practices
against our Ministers Maintenance, Calling, Laws, and settled Government, to
their eternal Infamy.

The sad consideration whereof has engaged me, though no Impropriator (whose
cause I plead not) nor other Tithe-receiver, but a conscientious Tithe-payer
(as my Ancesters were before me) without any retaining fee, or other
Solicitation to appear publicly in the defense of this common cause of God
and all his faithful Ministers Tithes and ancient settled Maintenance, being
through his mercy and their Prayers enlarged from my long close remote
Imprisonments, as I did occasionally in private, whiles a close Prisoner in
Pendennis Castle in Cornwall (in December and January last) against some
Officers and Soldiers there, who publicly subscribed in the Castle by sound
of Drum three several mornings, and promoted in the Country a Petition for
abolishing all Tithes (though our Ministers own, by all Divine and Humane
Laws, Rights; which our Soldiers nor any mortals now living gave to them, nor
have any pretense of Law, Power or Authority from God or our Nation to take
from them) and all other compulsory Maintenance in lieu of them for Ministers;
sent to them (and to other Garrisons, as they then informed me) by the General
Counsel of Officers of the Army from St. James, both for their own
subscriptions (though few or none of them or other subscribers of such
Petitions, Tith-payers) and such hands of Countrymen, as they could procure.
Upon which occasion, I had some brief discourses with some of them concerning
the lawfulness and antiquity of Tithes, Genesis 14 20.
First paid by Soldiers out of the very spoils of Battle, taken in the very
first War we read of, to the very first Priest of God, we find recorded in
the Scripture, and therefore admired that Officers and Soldiers in this age
should so degenerate, as to be the very ringleaders and chief oppugners of
them: drawing up some brief Notes of this subject out of Scripture (to help
pass the time) in defense of Tithes, relating more particularly to Soldiers,
to silence, satisfy, and reclaim them from this Sacrilegious design: which
having since enlarged with Arguments and Answers to their Objections drawn from
their own Military pro^essions, for the better satisfaction and conviction of
all Swordmen and others, I hope, neither Officers nor Soldiers, nor any
others truly fearing God, if they confider Lecit. 19. 17. Mat. 18. 15, 16, 17.
Prove. 19. 25. and 10. 17. and 12. 1. and 13. 18. and 15. 10, 31, 32. and 17.
10. and 25. 12. Psalm. 141. 5. 1 Samuel 25. 32, 33. 1 Timothy 5. 20. Luke 3. 14. will
or can be justly Offended with me, no more for writing truth, then speaking it
to their faces, as I did upon all occasions whiles among them, not to defame,
but to inform and reform them, for their own and the public good, in what I
conceive not warrantable by, but repugnant to Gods word and their duties as
Soldiers or Christians, and to those known fundamental Laws, Liberties of
the Nation they were A collection of Ordinances, p. 539, 623, 878, 879.
purposely raised, commissioned, waged, and engaged by Protestations,
Covenants* and their own voluntary June 5. and 14. 1647.
printed Declarations to protect, and not subvert; and that they will not
repute it a capital crime in me, not to prove a flatterer or dissembler, or
not to act or write wittingly against my Science and Conscience, when our
Ministers Maintenance, Calling, Religion, Gods glory, Laws, Liberties, all we
have or hope for, are in danger of such a sad, sudden, and destructive
Convulsion and concussion (if not Subversion) as I long since by Authority of
Parliament discovered in Romes Masterpiece, (well worth perusal now) when so
many known Jesuits under a new Provincial (which Hugh Peter's himself reported
as I have been credibly informed) are now even in London it self, acting as
busily and sitting there in Council as duly, as when the reclaimed Author of
that discovery (purposely sent from Rome for the purposes therein discovered)
was resident amongst them. O that these professed Enemies of our Church,
Religion, Nation, and those Janissaries of Rome, may Mat. 13. 25* 26, 27.
not sow their Tares of error, and seeds of ruin and desolation amongst us,
whiles almost our who^e Nation (for ought I can discern) if not those who call
themselves Watchmen, are in a dead sleep or Lethargy, and heaving at our most
faithful Ministers maintenance and Callings too, in stead of enquiring after,
discovering these Archtraytors, and executing the good Laws and Oaths against
them, to prevent those treafonable practices, destructive designs, miseries
and that ruin to our Religion, Government, Governors, Laws, Parliaments,
Church and Commonwealth, which the wise Protestant vigilant Parliaments of 13
Eliz. c. 1. 23* Eliz. c. 1. 27 Eliz. c. 2. ^5 Eliz. c. 2. 1 Jac. c. 4. 3 Jac.
1, 2, 4, 5. 7 Jac. c. 6. and some hundreds of Exact Collection, p. 3. to 20,
498, 617, 698, 664, 665, 6^1, 491, 492, 8^6, 826, 827, 574, 6^5, 636, 918, 666.
A Collection, p. 218, 227, 2^4, etc. 267, 275, 883, 309, 313, 354, 360, 363,
371, 379, 412, 417, 424, 429, 452, 457, 470, 489, 706, and el^ewhere.
Declarations, and p^in ed Ordinances, R^monst ances of the Lords and Commons
the last Parliament (with the good new Laws and Oath they provided against
those Romish Vipers quite buried in Oblivion) have publ^shed to alarm all
drowsy, stupid, careless people; all lovers of God, their Religion, or
Country against them, even at this very season, when they and their
confederates are (wittingly or ignorantly) over-turning, overturning,
overturning, whatever is not yet totally subverted am^ng us, and carrying on
these their designs. If these my impotent undertakings with a sincere
affection only to Gods glory, and the real weal and preservation of our
Religion, Ministry, Laws, Native Country, and Exact Collection, p. 666. A
Collection p. 218, 254, 363, 424, 706. which I desire may be now seriously
perused together with my Romes Masterpiece.
all Protestant Churches (now endangered by their mutual discords and Jesuit
Emissaries to foment their intestine differences) may so far open the eyes of
all Degrees in our Nation really fearing God, so Luke 19. 42.
to know in this their day the things which belong unto their peace and
settlement, and to move them effectually to pursue them, before they be hid
from their eyes; I have all the reward I do expect, and shall bless God for
the good success. If any shall be offended with me, or it, and requite me only
with envy, hatred, persecution and new Oppression, Bonds, close Imprisonments,
for well-doing and endeavoring any more public good, for our Church, Religion,
Country; I shall 1 Pet. 2. 23.
commit my cause to God, who judges righteously, who has so often Ps. 37. 5,
6.
brought forth my righteousness as the Light, and my judgment as the
Noonday, to the shame and confusion of my causeless enemies: and shall carry
this comfortable cordial unto my breast, to any Prison, Pillory, Gibbet, Grave,
that the malice or power of poor vapouring Mortals (who know not how soon Psalm.
7. 16.
their violent dealing may or will come down upon their own pates, as well as
on other potent adversaries) shall be able to hurry me to, and ascend
triumphantly which is to heaven it self; that I have discharged that duty
which God, Conscience, Providence and the public danger of our Ministry and
Religion, and my sacred Oaths and Covenants have engaged me unto. And Esth. 4.
16.
if I perish for it, I perish; and in perishing shall (by Gods assistanced part
with this Swan-like, Saint-like Song of that eminent Ephesians. 3. 1. and 4. 1.
Philem. 9, 23. 2 Timothy 1. 8
Prisoner of Jesus Christ (who was in 2 Cor. 11. 23.
Prisons more frequent, in P^rils, Afflictions, and Persecutions often, as I
have been for the faithful discharging of his duty) I have 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8.
fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith:
henceforth is laid up for me a crown of righteoufnesse, which God the righteous
judge shall give me at that day; and not to me only, but to all them also which
suffer for his truth, and love his appearing: which is the unshaken constant
faith, hope, and expectation of thine and our Churches, Countries unmercenary
faithful Friend and Servant,

William Prynne.

A GOSPEL PLEA, FOR THE Lawsulnesse and Continuance of the Ancient settled
Maintenance and Tithes of the Ministers of the GOSPEL.
THE ancient, necessary, competent maintenance of our Ministers of the Gospel
settled on them by the Piety and Bounty of our religious Christian Kings and
Ancestors, See Speimanni Council. Tom. 1. p. 308. 348. 350.
almost from the very first preaching and embracing of the G^spell in this
Island, and constantly enjoyed ever since, without any public opposition, being
in these times of a long expected glorious resormation, and real propagation
of the Gospel, more audeciously oppugned, more impiously decryed, declaimed,
petitioned publicly against, and more sacrilegiously invaded, detained,
subtracted, then in the very worst or profanest of former ages; and that, not
only by professed enemies of the Ministers and Ministry of the Gospel, but by
such who pretend themselves their friends, and the most precious Saints; who
not yet satisfied with the late sales of all our Archbishops, Bishops,
Cathedrals, Deanes and Chapters Lands and Revenues, (the fattest morsels of the
English Clergy, tending rather to support their Lordly Power, Pride, Pomp, and
Luxury, then their true Gospel Ministry) engrossed into Sword-mens and
Laymens hands; do now industriously, and violently endeavor speedily to
deprive all our painful, godly preaching Ministers, of all their remaining
inconsiderable Maintenance by Tithes, Glebes, Oblations and other duties,
(formerly settled on them, by long prescription, by sundry successive Laws and
Acts of Parliaments, as well as ^^te Ordinances, with sufficient warrant even
from Gods Word and Gospel) and to leave them no other subsistence,
encouragement, or reward for all their labor in Gods harvest, but the mere
arbitrary unco^rcive Benevolence of the people, (who being generally profane,
covetous, vicious, and enemies to all godly Ministers, will not voluntarily
contribute one farthing toward them, desiring rather their room and ruin,
then their company or subsistence) and what they shall otherwise earn by their
own labor and industry in some other callings: It is high time for all sincere
Patrons and Friends of the Ministers and Ministry of the Gospel (now
dangerously assaulted) publicly to appear in their behalf, and openly to
vindicate, to secure as well the Divine as Civil right of their yet remaining
ancient, necessary, established Maintenance against the clamorous cavils and
false absurd Allegations of Sacrilegious, Covetous, Impious, Violent, 2 These.
3. 2.
Unreasonable, Ezekiel. 21. 31. Psalm. 92. 6. Psalm. 94. 8.
B^utish men; to convince them of their error and impiety herein, or else to
shame and silence them for the future, and preserve our Ministers and Ministry
(and by consequence our very Religion it self, now more endangered then in any
age since its first establishment) from impendent ruin. For which end, having
not long since had some private discourses with Soldiers concerning the
lawfulness of our Ministers Tithes and settled Maintenance, during my late
strict restraints under their armed Guards, and perusing some short Prison
notes and notions (upon that occasion of that subject lying by me) I thought
fit to enlarge and reduce them to these ensuing Propositions, (wherein the
whole controversy, now publicly agitated touching our Ministers Tithes and
Livelihood, is comprised) and to make them public, for the common good and
satisfaction of those who shall peruse them, especially Swordmen, whom I find
most violent against T^^hes and Ministers forced Maintenance, trusting more (as
I apprehend) to the length of their Swords, then strength of their Arguments
against them; which how weak they are, let all rational perusers hereof
resolve.

The Propositions, I shall here through Gods assistance make good, from the
very Law, Word, and Gospel of God, with all possible brevity, (I trust beyond
contradiction) are these,

1. That there is a just, competent, and comfortable Maintenance, due to all
lawful, painful Preachers and Ministers of the Gosp^ll from the people, even
by Divine right and institution, and express Texts and Precepts of the Gospel.

2. That the maintenance of the Ministers of the Gospel (and of Places and
Houses for Gods public worship) by Tithes, Glebes, Oblations (yea and spoils
won in battle by Generals, Colonels, Captains and Soldiers) is not only
lawful and expedient, but the most fitting, rational and convenient
Maintenance of a^l others, warranted by direct Precedents and Precepts, b^th
before and under the Law and likewise by the Gospel, which does no ways
abolish or condemn, but approve and confirm this way of Maintenance.

3. That if Tithes and other Ma^ntenance, formerly settled on our Ministers, be
either wilfully withheld, or subtracted from them by the people, in part or
in whole; the Civil Magistrates may and ought by coer^ive Laws and Penalties
to enforce the payment of them in due form and fine, both by the Law of God,
and Rules of Justice, without any injury or oppression to the people.

4. That our Ministers Tithes are really no burden, grievance or oppression to
the people; but a charge, debt, duty, as well as their Landlords Rents, or
Merchants poundage. That the abolishing of them* will be no real ease, gain,
or advantage to Farmers, Lessees, and the poorer sort of people, as is falsely
pretended, but only to rich Landlords, and Landed men; and a loss and
detriment to all others.

5. That the present Opposition and end^voured Abolition of Tithes and all
other coercive Maintenance for Ministers, proceed not prom any real grounds of
Piety or Conscience, or any considerable, real inconveniences, or mischiefs
arising from them, but merely from base, covetous, carnal hearts, want of
Christian love and charity to, and professed enmity and hatred against the
Ministers of the Gospel, and from a Jesuiticall, and Anabaptisticall design
to subvert and ruin our Ministers, Church and Religion; he probable, if not
necessary consequence of this infernal Project, if it should take effect;
which would prove the eternal shame, infamy and ruin of our Nation, not its
glory and benefit.

CHAP. I.
THe first of these Propositions being the foundation and cornerstone whereon
all the rest depend, and into which it has a prevailing influence; I shall be
most copious in its Probation, and in the Refutation of the Objections which
are or may be raised against it.

That there is a just, competent and comfortable Maintenance Proposition. 1.
due to all lawful, painful Preachers and Ministers of the Gospel, from the
people, even by Divine right and institution, and express Texts and Precepts
of the Gospel; is as clear as the noonday Sun, by these irrefragable Gospel
Testimonies.

I. By Matthew. 10. 5, 6, 9, 10, 11. where when our Lord and Savior Christ
himself first sent forth, authorized and commanded his 12. Apostles to preach
the Gospel, he gave them these instructions among other: Provide neither gold,
nor silver, nor brass in your purses, nor scrip (nor bread adds Mark 6. 8.)
for your journey, neither two coats, nor shoes, nor yet staves. (adding this as
the reason thereof) FOR THE LABORER IS WORTHY OF HIS MEAT; or his Reward, Hire,
Wages, Maintenance, as the Greek word will bear, and other following Scriptures
render it.

II By Luke 10. 1, 6, 10. where we read when our Savior Christ (not long after
h^s former Commission to the 12. Apostles) sent forth the 70. Disciples by two
and two, to preach in every City and place, whither himself would come; he
gave them almost the self same instructions: Carry neither purse, nor scrip,
nor shoes; and into whatsoever house ye enter, first say, Peace be to this
house, etc. And in the same house remain eating and drinking such things as
they give: (subjoyning this reason for it) FOR THE LABORER IS WORTHY OF HIS
HIRE: Go not from house to house (as Beggars use to do for alms) And into
what City ye enter, and they receive you, eat such things as are set before
you, etc.

III. By John 6. 35, 36, 37, 38. where our Lord Jesus Christ, (soon after the
former Commissions) used these words to his Disciples; Behold, I say unto you,
Lift up your eyes, and look on the fields, for they are white already to
harvest, And HE THAT REAPETH RECEIVES WAGES, and gathers fruit unto eternal
life, etc. I sent you to reap that whereon ye bestowed no labor, etc. Which
may be aptly paralleld with, and interpreted by Matthew. 9. 37, 38. Then said he
(our Savor) unto his Disciples, The harvest truly is plenteous, but the
LABORERS are few; pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest, that he would send
forth LABORERS INTO his harvest: Which when he did, he agreed with them all for
a certain stipend by the day, and when the evening was come, he sa^d unto his
Steward, Call the LABORERS, and GIVE THEM THEIR HIRE, beginning from the last
unto the first, Mat. 20. 1, to 15. as is there parabolically expressed.

From which Texts and words of our Lord and Savior Christ himself, it is most
apparent,

1. That the Apostles, Preachers and Ministers of the Gospel are and ought to
be diligent, painful Laborers in Christ's spiritual harvest, not idle
loiterers.

2. That they were not obliged, but expressly prohibited to provide gold,
silver, brass, scrips, shoes, clothes, bread, meat, drink, lodging, and other
necessaries at their own free cost, when they were commissioned and sent forth
to preach the Gospel, (as some now would enforce them to) for this very
reason, That being Laborers in the Lords own harvest, for the eternal
salvation of men's souls, they were worthy to receive them, as hire and wages
from those to whom they preached.

3. That our Savior Christ himself at the very original institution and
first mission of his 12. Apostles, and after of the 70. Disciples to preach the
Gospel; thrice one after another, expressly resolves in positive terms; That
they are worthy of their meat, hire, wages, for their Labor in the Gospel;
and so by consequence, all other lawful Laboring Ministers, that diligently
preach the Gospel, are worthy of the like at this day; and neither of them
obliged to preach the Gospel freely without any recompense, as some Seducers
now pretend.

4. That meat, drink, clothes, lodging, and a competent maintenance, are as
truly and justly due to the true Laboring Ministers of the Gospel from the
people, and that of pure common natural, yea Gospel right and justice, not as
mere arbitrary Charity or Benevolence, but as merited HIRE and WAGES; as much
as any deserved hire or wages are due to any other hired servant or labourer
whatsoever, by common justice, and the law of God, Genesis 29. 15. Exodus 2. 9.
Levit. 19. 13. Deuteronomy. 24. 14, 15. Mat. 20. 1, to 16. Joh. 4. 36. Or as well as
pay or wages are justly due to the best deserving Officers and Soldiers, Luke
3. 14. Ezekiel. 28. 18, 19. and that by Christ's own trebled resolution, recorded
by the Evangelists for the greater evidence and conviction; who emphatically by
way of reason applies these words only to his Apostles and Ministers, For the
Labourer is worthy of his meat, hire, wages; they being the most divine,
excellent, useful, necessary Laborers of all others, and that in matters of
highest concernment in relation both to God and Men: Therefore of all other
laborers they are most worthy of a honorable, comfortable, certain hire,
salary, reward for their support and encouragement.

5. Hence it follows by necessary consequence, (and let those who are guilty
consider it seriously in the fear of God with trembling and astonishment) that
the opposing, oppressing, defrauding the Ministers of the Gospel in their
deserved settled hire, wages; or the detaining all, or any part of their
ancient, just, established Dues, Tithes, or Revenues from them (especially out
of covetousness, spite, obstinacy or malice against their very callings) is as
great, as crying, as damnable a sin, oppression, unrighteousness; and will
bring down as gri^vous curses, plagues, judgments on all those who are
culpable thereof; as the defrauding, oppression of the hired servant or
labourer, of or in his hire, or detaining their wages from them, when due; as
will undenyably appear by Deuteronomy. 24. 14, 15. Levit. 19. 13. Genesis 31. 7. Mal. 3.
5. Jam. 4. 1, to 5. compared with Mal. 3. 8, 9, 10, 11. Nehem. 13. 10. 11. and
a sin against all these Scriptures; which all detainers of Ministers Dues and
Tithes, may do well to read and ponder.

IV. The truth of this Proposition is ratifyed by the Apostle Paul's resolution,
who thus prosecutes our Saviors forecited words, and seconds his argument in 1 Timothy 5. 17, 18. Let the Elders that rule well be counted worthy of double
honor, especially THOSE THAT LABOR IN THE WORD AND DOCTRINE: For the
Scripture says (Deuteronomy. 25. 4.) Thou shall not muzzle the Ox that treads out
the Corn. And, THE LABOURER IS WORTHY OF HIS HIRE: relating to Mat. 10. 10. and
Luke 10 7. forecited. In which words the Holy Ghost by the Apostle positively
asserts,

1. That the Elders and Ministers that rule well, especially such of them who
labor in the Word and Gospel, are really worthy of double honor from the
people, which double honor Interpreters generally resolve to be, 1. Due
reverence, love, and countenance; 2. A competent liberal maintenance and
reward: Or (as some conceive) a double salary and allowance to what others
receive, as a just honorable reward for their labor, which is here intended
by the words double honor; extending as well to an honorable salary and
reward, as to due reverence and respect, as is clear by the two Texts herein
cited to prove it, by the 3, and 16. verses of this very Chapter; and Romans 13.
1, 6, 7. 1 Pet. 2. 17. Prove. 3. 9. compared together.

2. That the people ought to count them worthy of this double honor, and to
render it unto them.

3. He ratifyes and proves this, not only by his own Apostolical authority,
but likewise by two other Texts of Scripture; the one taken out of the old
Testament Deuteronomy. 25. 4. (which proves, that the Texts and Precepts for the just
dues and maintenance of the Priests in the old Testament are still in force,
and not abrogated, so far as they are moral and judicial; and therefore may
be still aptly urged for proof of our Ministers due maintenance under the
Gospel;) The other out of the new Testament, Mat. 10. 10. Luke 10. 7. From
both which the force of the Apostles argument stands thus, The Elders who
labor in the Word and Gospel have as just, as natural, as moral, legal,
equitable a right and meritorious due to a liberal maintenance, salary,
reward, or double honor (as he styles it) as the Ox that treads out the
Corn has, to eat of the Corn and straw he treads out; or, as any other hired
labourer whatsoever has to his hire; they being the best and eminentest of all
other laborers; with the especial application of Deuteronomy. 25. 4. and of this
very sentence, here again to them, The labourer is worthy of his hire) imports:
Therefore for any people witting^y or wilfully to detain or defraud them
thereof, is as great an injustice, cru^lty, sin and unrighteousness, as to
muzzle the Ox mouth that treads out the Corn, or to detain the Laborers
wages, or defraud him thereof; yea, a sin against the express commandments of
God, Deuteronomy. 25. 4. chapter 24. 14, 15. Levit. 19. 13. 1 Cor. 9. 8, 9. 10. And so
much the rather because their hire and wages being THEIR RIGHT and THEIR OWN
(not the mere alms and charity of those who pay it) as Christ himself
resolves, Mat. 20. 4, 7, 8, 13, 14.

V. By Gal. 6. 6. where the Apostle lays down this general Gospel precept
for the maintenance of the Ministers of the Gospel, from which there can be no
evasion. Let him that is taught in the Word COMMUNICATE UNTO HIM THAT TEACHES
IN ALL GOOD THINGS. The word Communicate, signifies a free and liberal (not
base and niggardly) al^owance, as is evident by 1 Timothy 6. 18. Heb. 13. 16. 2
Cor. 9. 5, 6, 7, 8. Deuteronomy. 15. 8. 11. and that to be rendered to them, not as to
mere strangers, but as to those who have a kind of cop^rtnership, and tenancy
in common with them, not in one or two, but in all good things God has blessed
them with; as the primitive Christians had all things in common, and said not
that any thing was their own, but the Apostles and Brethr^ns as much as theirs,
Act. 4. 32, 34, 35. whence the Contents of our Bibles and Commentators on this
Text infer and conclude, That every Christian ought cheerfully to communicate a
liberal share and portion of all the fruits of the Earth, blessings and good
things he enjoyes, to his spiritual Pastor and Teacher, (and by consequence
Tithes of all tithable things) and that not as Alms, Charity or a free
Benevolence, but as a See Dr. Ca^ltons Tithes proved to be by Divine right, and
Dr. Burges.
just Debt and Duty commanded by this sacred Canon.

VI. By Romans 13. 6, 7, 8. For, for this cause pay you tribute also, FOR THEY
ARE GODS MINISTERS ATTENDING CONTINUALLY UPON THIS VERY THING. RENDER THEREFORE
TO ALL THEIR DUE, Tribute to whom Tribute is due, Custom to whom Custom, Fear
to whom Fear, HONOR TO WHOM HONOR. Owe nothing to any man, but to love one
another. Which Scripture though particularly intended of the higher civil
Powers, Rulers and Magistrates ordained by God; yet it equally extends to all
Spiritual and Ecclesiastical Pastors and Rulers over us, as well as to them.

First, because they being Gods Ministers attending continually upon this very
thing, (to preach the Gospel, and discharge their Pastoral charge over their
flocks) as well as civil Magistrates; and therefore by way of excellency are
more frequently styled Ministers, and Ministers of God and Christ in the new
Testament, then Magistrates are, Romans 15. 8, 16. 1 Chr. 4. 1. 2* Cor. 3. 6. chapter
6. 4. chapter 11. 23. Ephesians. 3. 7. Col. 1. 23, 25. chapter 4. 7. 1 Thessalonians. 3. 2. 1 Timothy
4. 6. whence their very work and calling is styled, The Ministry, Romans 12. 7.
Ephesians. 4. 12. Col. 4. 17. 2 Timothy 4. 5. 1 Timothy 1. 12.

Secondly, because the Precept subjoyned is universal; Render therefore TO ALL
THEIR DUE: and in the affirmative; Therefore to Ministers as well as
Magistrates, with the like care and conscience. And then the inhibition in the
close as universal, Owe nothing TO ANY MAN; Therefore not to Ministers no more
then to Magistrates or other men.

Thirdly, because it expressly enjoynes all Christians to render honor to whom
honor is due: now, not only honor, but double honor is due to Ministers
that rule well and preach the Gospel diligently, 1 Timothy 5. 17, 18. to wit,
Reverence, Obedience, Love and Maintenance; all here prescribed to be rendered
in this text to whom they are due. Therefore a liberal, honorable,
comfortable Maintenance and reward is both in justice and conscience DVE, as
well to the Ministers of the Gospel, as to the Magistrates and higher Powers,
and as duly, truly, and justly to be rendered, (and not owed, detained, denied)
unto the Ministers, as to Kings, Parliaments, o^ any other civil Rulers, even
by this Evangelicall precept, (from which there is no evasion) and that FOR
CONSCIENCE SAKE; as well as for fear of wrath and punishment: verse. 5. So as
none can plead or pretend the least color of conscience, for detaining, or not
rendering their Tithes and Duties to our Ministers of the Gospel, without
giving the Holy Ghost himself, and this Gospel Text the Lie, and incurring
Ananias and Saphiraes sin, Act. 5. 3, 4, 7, 8, 9, 10. for which they justly may
expect and receive their fatal exemplary punishment.

VII. The Apostle further clears this truth not only by way of Precept, but
Reason and Demonstration, Romans 15. 26, 27. It has pleased them of Macedonia
and Achaia to make a certain contribution for the poor Saints which are at
Jerusalem (Ministers and Apostles as well as other Saints that were poor.) It
has pleased them verily, and THEIR DEBTORS THEY ARE: For if the Gentiles have
been made pertakers OF THEIR SPIRITVAL THINGS, THEIR DVTY IS ALSO TO MINISTER
UNTO THEM IN CARNAL THINGS. I confess, the Text is not meant properly of
Ministers, and Apostles of the Gospel, but of poor believing Saints that were
Jews; but the reason and argument here urged, extends much more to Apostles
and Ministers of the Gospel, then to poor believing Saints: and thus I argue
from it. If the Christian believing Gentiles in Macedonia and Achaia were
strongly obliged not only in charity, but of debt and duty (as the Apostle here
argues and resolves) to make a certain contribution, for the poor Saints of God
at Jeru^alem who were Jews, and to minister to them in their carnal things
when they were in want, upon this account; that God had made them partakers of
their Spiritual things: (by the Apostles and other Ministers sent or repairing
to them from Jerusalem) then much more are they and all other converted
Gentiles then and now strongly obliged, not only in charity, but of just debt*
and duty to make a certain contribution, and maintenance for, and liberally to
minister in their carnal things unto those faithful Ministers of the Gospel,
who actually preach the Gospel, to them, and of whose spiritual things and
pains they are made partakers. But the antec^dent and supposition is an
unquestionable Gospel truth, by the Apostles resolution in this alleged Text,
and is and may be further ratifyed by Act. 11. 29, 30. Act. 4. 32, 33, 34, 35,
36. Act. 5. 1, 2, 3. 1 Cor. 16. 1, 2. 2 Cor. 8. 1. to 16. and chapter 9. 1, to 15.
Gal. 2. 10. Ephesians. 4. 28. 1 John 3. 17. Mat. 5. 42. and Deuteronomy. 15 7, to 12.
Therefore the consequent must be granted, being the Apostles express argument
in the very case of Ministers maintenance from the people, 1 Cor 9. 11. If we
have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great thing if we shall reap
your carnal things? Now in this reasoning of the Apostle, and Gods Spirit in,
and by him; there is a double emphaticall enforcement to prove Ministers
maintenance, both a just debt and duty, which the people are bound to render to
them, not as free givers, but as d^btors.

1. By the grounds of Communicative Justice. They are (or at leastwise may be
if they will themselves, the case only of obstinate Separatists) partakers of
the Ministers spiritual things and pains: and therefore ought in justice and
duty, to pay and render them some proportionable recompense for what they
receive from them; even as all other Merchants and Tradesmen who barter or sell
one commodity for another, or for ready money, use to do.

2. From the nature and value of the things they receive from Ministers; and of
those things they render back to them by way of exchange, which will hold no
balance nor equal value with what they first receive: For the things the
people enjoy by Ministers, are spiritual, which concern their souls, spirits,
everlasting salvation, eternal happiness, and are the most excellent and
precious things of all other, far excelling Gold, Silver, Tithes, and all
earthly Treasures. Ephesians. 3. 8, 18, 19. 2 Pet. 1. 4. 2 Cor. 3. 8, 9, 10. chapter 4.
7. Phil. 3. 8. Romans 2. 18. Psalm. 19. 10. and 119. 72. 127. Prove. 8. 18, 19. But
the things and recompense they return to Ministers for them, are only their
carnal things, for the necessary support of their bodies and families, which
are no way comparable in value, worth, b^nefit, or use to what they receive
from them, as the last recited Texts and others resolve. The people therefore
receiving from their Ministers quidpro quo; and things of infinite more value
and benefit, then what they render to them; the carnal things they receive for
their spiritual, (though in a liberal proportion) must needs be a most just
debt and duty; not mere arbitrary alms or charity. and can neither in justice
nor conscience* be detained from them, they being such infinite gainers by the
bargain.

VIII. This supposition is yet further professedly argued and debated at full
by the Apostle and the Spirit of God against all sorts of callings and
professions of men, that now oppose it, with the greatest evidence of reason,
justice, equity that may be, backed with Divine Authority; as if he had
purposely foreseen the violent, impious, heady opposition, now made against
Ministers Tithes and maintenance in these days by soldiers and other rusty
Tradesmen; and penned this Scripture purposely to refute them. 1 Cor. 9. 4. to
16. Have we not power to eat and to drink, etc. Who goes a warfare any time at
his own charges? Who planteth a vin^yard, and eats not of the fruit thereof?
Or, who feeds a flock, and eats not of the milk of the flock? Say I these
things as a man? or says not the Law the same also? For it is written in the
Law of Moses, Deuteronomy. 25. 4.
Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox that treads out the corn. Does
God take care for Oxen? Or says he it altogether for our sakes? For our sakes,
no doubt, this is written, that he that ploweth should plow in hope, and he
that thresheth in hope, should be partaker of his hope. If we have sown unto
you spiritual things, is it a great thing, if we shall reap your carnal
things? If others be partakers of this power over you, are not we rather?
Nevertheless, we have not used this power; but suffer all things, lest we
should hinder the Gospel of Christ. Do ye not know, that they which minister
about holy things live (or feed) of the things of the Temple? and they which
wait at the Altar are partakers with the Altar? EVEN SO HAS THE LORD ORDAINED,
THAT THEY WHICH PREACH THE GOSPEL SHOULD LIVE OF THE GOSPEL. But I have used
none of these things; neither have I written these things that it should be so
done unto me, etc.

In which Scripture the Apostle asserts the lawfulness and justness of
Ministers maintenance under the Gospel by sundry instances and arguments,
against all opponents. And because, perchance some soldiers, who now are the
chief opposers of Ministers maintenance, or rather, for that he foresaw (by a 1 Timothy 4. 1, 2. 2 Timothy 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
Prophetical Spirit) that they should prove such in our days, he first
re^utes and stops theirs and others mouths, with an argument drawn from the
wars, and their own Military practice: Who goes a warfare any time at his own
charge? In which short interrogative argument, these particulars are both
included and tacitly asserted.

1. That Ministers of the Gospel are true spiritual Soldiers under Christ
their Heb. 2. 10.
Captain; and their Ministry, a true spiritual warfare, against the world,
flesh, Devil, sins and vices of men, exposing them to many hardships, dangers,
and oft-times to loss of liberty, blood, limbs, and life it self* as he
expressly resolves in other Texts, 2 Cor. 10. 4. 1 Timothy 1. 18. 2 Timothy 2. 3, 4.
and 4. 7.

2. That being soldiers, it must needs be most unjust, unreasonable,
unconscionable, and against the common rules of war and practice of all
soldiers, that they should go a warfare ANY TIME at their own charge; since
no other soldiers ^lse will, or use to do it, (nor any officers or soldiers
of the Army now) who will follow the wars no longer, then they may do it at
free cost, no not for a moment; and will fight no longer then they receive or
expect full pay. And therefore should not now, nor at any time else, press
Ministers to preach freely at their own cost, unless themselves first went a
warfare on their own purses, to ease the impoverished oppressed country of
their long continued heavy Taxes.

3. That pay and wages are at all times as really and justly due to these
spiritual Soldiers for their spiritual warfare, as they are to any other
soldiers, warriers or officers whatsoever employed in actual service in other
wars. Luk* 3. 14. Therefore those Military officers who oppugn our Ministers
pay and se^led maintenance as unlawful, antichristian, and unevangelicall;
must first renounce their own pay and contributions as such; and war without
pay on their own charges for the future; (which many of them may well do,
having gained so much by the wars already, and being most of them out of
actual Military service) or else henceforth permit our Ministers to enjoy
their Tithes and settled maintenance without opposition, or substraction as they
do their pay: it being as great a robbery, injustice, fraud to deprive them of
all or any part thereof, as to defraud any soldiers, now in service by Land or
Sea, of their lawful day, Mal. 3. 8, 9, 10.

4. It hence necessarily follows, that as Soldiers pay and other Military
expenses, are not left to the arbitrary pleasures and free benevolence of the
people, (who would contribute little or nothing at all toward them at this or
any other season, if left to their own free wills) whence the present
dissolution and destruction of the temporal Army, and Militia would ensue; but
are reduced to a certainty by a settled establishment, and imposed and levied on
the people ^y coercive Laws, Ordinances, Forfeitures, Distresses,
Imprisonments, strict Penalties and illegal armed power, when wilfully
refused, detained or neglected to be paid in whole or part at the times
appointed: So the wages and stipends of these spiritual Soldiers the
Ministers, and of their necessary spiritual warfare are not to be wholly left
in any settled Christian State, to the arbitrary wills and voluntary Benevolences
of the people (which would soon necessitate them to disband, and frustrate
their soul-saving warfare) but reduced to some certainty by positive Laws (as
they have been time out of mind with us) and in case of wilful refusal,
detention, substraction in whole or in part, when due, to be levied by such
coercive legal ways and means, as our monthly Taxes, Contributions, and other
just Debts and Duties are, there being the self-same justice, reason, equity,
and necessity in both cases. Those Army Officers and Soldiers then, who
oppose, condemn our Ministers settled maintenance, and the coercive laws means
to recover it when de ained from them, as an intolerable oppressing yoke and
grievance, must first renounce, suppress all monthly Taxes, Contributions,
Excises, Customs, Impositions, and the many new severe coercive ways and
means to levy them, as such; being far more grievous, burdensome, illegal,
oppressive to the people, both in their value, frequency, novelty, illegality,
new way of imposing and levying, then Ministers Tithes and Dues; and the
saddest heaviest pressures they now languish under: and live wholly upon the
peoples free unconstrained Benevolences, taking only what they will freely give
them of their own accords, without coercive Laws, Ordinances, Forfeitures,
Penalties, and Distresses; or else recant their former erroneous opinion,
practice, and approve of our Ministers settled coercive maintenance for the
future, without opposition, being Soldiers as well, and having as just a right
to a settled enforced salary as they, as the Apostle here argues and resolves.

2. The Apostle having thus routed, silenced our Captains and Soldiers, the
Ringleaders against Ministers settled coercive maintenance, encounters in the
n^xt place, all Husbandmen, Sheep*masters, Shepherds, Ploughmen, Reapers,
Threshers, and other Oppugners of their Tithes and livelihood, Verse. 7, 9, 10.
Wherein he asserts that Ministers of the Gospel have as just, as equitable a
Right to a competent maintemance from the people for preaching the Gospel to
them, and to partake of their temporal things; as he that planteth a vineyard
has to eat of the fruit thereof; as he that keeps a flock has to eat of the
milk thereof; as the husbandman and labo^^^r who ploweth, reapeth or thresheth
corn, has to eat of the corn he sows, reapeth, ploweth: And that it is as
great injustice and unreasonable wrong to deprive Ministers who sow unto us
spiritual things, of a competent share in our carnal things; as to debar
one that plants a vineyard, right and liberty to eat of the fruits thereon; or
one that feeds a flock, to eat of the milk thereof; or those that sow, reap,
and thresh corn, to enjoy any share or portion in it: Which all Husbandmen,
Farmers, Sheep-masters, Shepherds, Plowmen, Reapers, Threshers, and other
laborers, who deny or beg^udge our Ministers their settled long-enjoyed Tithes
and Dues may do well advisedly to consider, to convince them of their error,
and reform their practice.

3. Verse. 8, 9. To convict all brutish men in these days, who are more
uncharitable to their Ministers, then men are or ought to be unto their very
beasts, in denying them so much as to eat of their Tithe Corn or straw; he
argues the justice of their maintenance (and that by the Tithes of their Corn,
Wine, etc. as the instances imply) from the very Law of God concerning beasts,
Deuteronomy. 25. 4. Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox that treads out the
corn: which though literally meant of Oxen, to whom all righteous men are and
ought to be just and merciful, Prove. 12. 10. Luke 13. 15. and 14. 5. Mat. 12.
11. yet it is principally written and intended altogether in its genuine sense
of the Priests of God, and Ministers of the Gospel, of whom God takes far
more care then he does of Oxen (of whom yet be has a general providentiall
care, as well as of all other beasts and sparrowes: Psalm. 104. 25, 27. and 145.
9, 15, 16. and 147. 9 Luke 12. 6, 7, 24. Mat. 6. 26. and 10. 28, 29.) and are
of more value then many Oxen or Sparrowes, and yet not o^e of them falls to
the ground without Gods spiritual Providence, though two of them be sold for a
farthing. The force of this argument stands thus, If God by a special Law
takes so much care of the very Ox that treads out the co^n, as to prohibit
the muzzling of his mouth, that he may not eat thereof; then questionless he
takes much more care of the Ministers of the Gospel, and much more inhibits
the muzzling their mouths, that they shall not so much as eat, feed and live
upon the Tithes, milk, wine, and fruits of your vineyards, straw, corn, and
other carnal things; they being far better then Oxen; and this Law purposely
and altogether written for their sakes, not for Oxen. Therefore those who deny
and deprive them of this their right, transgress this very Law of God, (still
in force under the Gospel, being founded upon natural justice and equity) and
are far more unrighteous, cruel, unmercifull to their Ministers, then they
are to their very beasts and Oxen, to whom they allow both corn, straw, and
sufficient maintenance for their very work. Verily our Ministers now were
better to be many men's Oxen, Horses, then their spiritual Pastors, for then
they would feed and keep them well, and allow them straw, hay and corn to live
on, as they do to their beasts; whereas now they will pay them neither Tithe,
corn, nor hay, nor straw. Such men, I fear, are worse and more Brutish then
their Ps. 49 20. Prove. 30. 2.
beasts that perish, regarding neither Law nor Gospel, here jointly urged by
the Apostle against their practice.

4. Verse. 11. He enumerates all Artificers, Merchants, Tradesmen, and others
who live by selling, buying, exchanging; who deny or detain their Ministers
Dues and Maintenance, by an argument drawn from their own practice, the rules
of commutative Justice, the nature and value of what they receive from
Ministers, and what they render, or should return them for it. If we have sow^n
unto you spiritual things (the most precious, excellent, useful, necessary of
all others) is it a great matter if we shall reap your carnal things? of far
less value, worth, use, then what you receive from us for them. Surely none of
these Traders, will give or sell away their wares without any money or
recompense for them; and if they sell or exchange them for less money, or
things of less value or moment then what they sell or exchange them for, they
may in all justice and equity expect and receive money and wares exchanged for
them from those who have so gainful a bargain, without the least shadow of
covetousness, injury, or oppression. Let then such and all others consider
their own daily practice, and the weight of this Apostolical Gospel argument
for our Ministers maintenance, Tithes, and Dues, against which there can be no
exception, nor reply, and then it will convince, convert them, if they have not
abjured all principles of common justice and commerce.

5. Verse. 12. He argues from others precedents and examples. If others are
partakers of this power over you (to reap your carnal things for spiritual)
are not we rather? which may receive these various constructions agreeable to
the general scope of the place.

1. If others who are true Apostles and Ministers of the Gospel, are partakers
of this power, though they have not been such to you, and did not convert you,
nor labor so much in sowing spiritual things to you; much more I (and
Barnabas) who have been the instruments of your conversion, and doubtless are
Apostles unto you, you being the Seal of mine Apostleship in the Lord, Verse. 1,
2. 2 Cor. 12. 11, 12. may likewise be partakers of this power.

2. If others, who are not Apostles of Jesus Christ, but mere false Apostles,
Seducers, slanderers of me and the truth of the Gospel, yea broachers of
Heresies and Schisms, are partakers of such a power amongst you; then much
more I and Barnabas, who are true Apostles and Ministers of the Gospel, and
preach nothing but soul-saving Gospel truths: which seems to be the genuine
sense of the place, by comparing verse. 1, 2, 3. with 2 Cor. 11. 1. to 16.

3. If your See 1 Cor. 8. 1, 10. and 10. 20. 21.
Idolatrous Pagan Priests before or since your conversion, be partakers of such
a power (as to receive a competent salary and maintenance out of your carnal
things) even for their idolatrous superstitious rites and ministry; or if your
Pagan Civil Magistrates receive a competent allowance from you for their care
and pains in civil government; then much rather we who are true Ministers and
Apostles may do the like for the true sqirituall things we sow among you. The
argument holds strongly in each of these constructions, but specially in the
two first, which are most suitable to the Text.

6. Verse. 13. He argues the justice of Ministers maintenance under the Gospel,
from the maintenance of the Priests by Gods appointment under the Law, both
before and after the Temple built. Do ye not know that they which minister
about holy things live of the things of the Temple, and they which wait at the
Altar, are partakers with the Altar? Numb. 18. 18, 19, to 31* Deuteronomy. 12* 6, 11,
17, 18, 19. and 14. 22. to the end of the chapter, and 18. 1, 2. 2 Chronicles. 31.
2. to 20. Nehem. 10. 32. to the end. and 12. 39, 47 and 13. 5. to 15. (The
Priests and Levites by Gods own institution then receiving a liberal
maintenance from the people, by First f^uits, Tith^s, Oblations, Sacrifices,
and likewise Cities, Suburbs, Lands, Houses, Chambers for them and their
Families, stocks of Cattle and Goods. Numb. 35. 2, to 9. Josh. 21. 2, to 43. 1 Chronicles. 6. 6, throughout. 2 Chronicles. 11. 13, 14. Neh. 10. 37, 38, 39. and 13. 10.
Ezekiel. 45, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. and 48. 9, to 15. Lev. 25. 32, 33, 34. compared with
the former Texts: and Levit. 27. throughout. Numb. 21. 28, 29, 30, 37, 47, 50,
51, 52, 53, 54. Heb. 7. 5, 8. None of which might be alienated, sold or
subtracted from them without sin and sacrilege. Mal. 3. 8. Ezekiel. 49. 14. Lev.
25. 33, 34. Genesis 47. 22, 26.) And then to stop and silence all future
objections and calumnies, he concludes his argument with a Divine Ordinance and
institution of Christ himself under the Gospel for the like liberal
maintenance of the Ministers of the Gospel, (whose ministration is much more
glorious then that of the Law, 2 Cor. 3. 7, 8, 9, 10.)

Verse. 14. EVEN SO HAS THE LORD ORDAINED THAT THEY WHICH PREACH THE GOSPEL
SHOULD LIVE OF THE GOSPEL, to wit, as leberally, as plentifully, as comfortably
in all respects, as the Priests and Levites under the Law, as the parallel, and
the words EVEN SO import. Who ever therefore oppose, resist, and censure this
their liberal settled Maintenance, oppose, resist, and censure the very
positive Ordinance of Christ himself under the Gospel; and therefore may and
shall receive to themselves damnation, Romans 13. 2. in case they do not repent
thereof.

Finally, the Apostle to prevent all cavils that either false* Apostles or
enemies to him and his Ministry, might th^n object against him for this
Doctrine, as if he were a self seeker, a covetous wretch, an oppressor,
fleecer and spoyler of his flock, or a partial Judge in his own cause (as
they now calumniate our Ministers pleading for their just settled Maintenance
and Tithes) because he thus st^ongly pleads and proves the Maintenance of the
Ministers of the Gospelll; concludes, v. 1^, 15, 18, 19. Nevertheless we have
not used this power: But I have used none of these things; neither have I
written these things, that it should be so done unto me etc. which he repeats
and amplifi^s in 2 Cor. 11. 7, 8, 9, 10. and 12. 13, 14, 15, 17. But he did it
only in the behalf of the rest of the Ministers of the Gospel, to justify
their Gospel right to a liberal, just and fitting livelihood for preaching of
the Gospel. Wherefore his Testimony and resolution in this case is beyond all
exception, sufficient to convince and silence all gainsayers th^n and now.

IX. The verity of this Proposition is thus demonstrated from 1 Timothy 3. 2.
Titus 1. 8. 3 John 9. 10. which prescribe this as one special qualification of
every Evangelicall Bishop and Minister of the Gospel, that he must be given
to, and a lover of Hospitality, a receiver of the Brethren, and receiv^r of
distressed Saints upon all occasions: And yet withal commands and requires;
That he must give himself WHOLLY to reading, fasting, prayer, meditation,
exhortation, doctrine, preaching the Word in season, out of season, giving
attendance on these and other Pastoral duties, not intangling himself with the
affairs of this life, being separated to the Gospel of Christ, Act. 6. 4. 1 Timothy 4. 13, 14, 15, 16. 2 Timothy 2. 4. 15. and 4. 2, 5. Romans 1. 1. T^t. 1. 9. and
2. 1. 1 Cor. 4. 17. Act. 20. 28. Now this they cannot possibly do without a
liberal, comfortable, constant, settled maintenance, unless they have good
estates of their own, which few of them have, who yet deserve a convenient
reward for the work of their Ministry from the people: therefore such a
maintenance of right belongs to them as Ministers of the Gospel, to enable
them to be hospitable and charitable to their Christian brethren, and the poor
that need relief.

X. Ministers of the Gospel, are to speak, exhort, and rebuke with ALL
AUTHORITY, and let no man despise them, Tit. 2. 15. 1 Timothy 4. 11, 12. Mat. 7.
29. Now this they can hardly do, if they be poor, beggarly, living upon alms
and benevolences of the giddy-headed people, and stripped of a competent settled
maintenance independent of the vulgars or Superiors mere wills and pleasures,
which will render both their Persons, Words, Doctrine and Ministry
contemptible, and less authoritative to the people: For the Scripture informs
us, That poor men are lightly esteemed, 1 Samuel 18. 23. and therefore David
couples these together, Psalm. 119. 141. I am poor (or small in estate) and
despised. And Solomon informs us, That the poor uses entreaties (speaks not
with authority like the richer sort) Prove. 18. 23. That the poor is hated even
of his own neighbor, separated from him, despised by him, and that all the
brethren of the poor do hate him, how much more do his friends go far from him?
though he pursues them with words, yet are they wanting to him. Prove. 14. 20.
and 19. 4. 7. Yea he resolves Eccles. 9. 15, 16. That a poor man's wisdom is
despised, and his words are not heard; and that no man remembered or regarded
that poor wise man, who by his wisdom delivered the small city that was
beseiged by a great King. Neither is this old Testament, but Gospel truth,
likewise. Jam. 2. 2, 3, 5, 6. If there come into your assembly a man with a
gold ring, in goodly apparel, and there come in also a poor man in vile
raiment; ye have respect to him that wears the gay clothing, and say to him,
sit thou here in a good place; and say to the poor, stand thou there, or sit
here under my footstool. Hearken my beloved Brethren, has not God chosen the
poor of this world rich in faith, and heirs of the Kingdom, which he has
promised to them that love him? But YE HAVE DESPISED THE POOR: a fault still
common in the world. Poor indigent Ministers, as well as Saints, though rich in
faith, are always generally contemptible to the greatest part of men, and
their very poverty makes not only their persons, but words and Doctrine to be
slighted and despised, as these Scriptures and experience manifest. Wherefore a
competent, settled maintenance and revenue, is not only just, but necessary, to
add more r^verence, esteem and authority to their Exhortations, rebukes, words,
and preserve their persons, callings, Doctrine from contempt and scorn in the
eyes and ears of men: Who though they ought to know them which labor among
them, and are over them in the Lord, and admonish them, and to esteem them very
highly in love for their works sake, 1 Th^ss. 5. 12, 13. Yet by reason of
their inbred pride and corruption, will be very averse to do it, if they be
very poor, indigent, and living like beggars upon alms and charity, as our new
Reformadoes would have them.

XI. Ministers of the Gospel must not seek to please men, but God; for if they
yet pleased men, they should not be the servants of Christ. Gal. 1. 10. Neither
must they corrupt the Word (as many do; to humor the Iusts, wills or
countenance, and carry on the unrighteous, covetous, ambitious, oppressive,
bloody, or treacherous designs of wicked men) fasting, (yea preaching,
praying) for strife and debate, and to smite with the fist of wickedness, Esa.
58. 4. But as of sincerity, but as of God in the sight of God, must they speak
in Christ, 2 Cor. 2. 17. Now a just, comp^tent, settled maintenance, independent
on the Governors, Magistrates or peoples wills and pleasures, (such as was the
Priests and Levit^s under the Law enjoyed by divine institution) is the best
means and preservative, to keep Ministers from being Men-pleasers, flatterers,
time-servers, and corrupters of the word of God, to humor men; a great
inducement to them to preach the word of God sincerely, and to rebuke and
exhort with all authority. Whereas a poor, beggarly, mean, dependent Minister,
whose whole maintenance and subsistence must only rest upon the arbitrary wills
of persons in highest present power (who may out, or strip them both of their
Callings and Benefices, when and for what they please) or only upon the peoples
voluntary contributions, will certainly be a men-pleasing, time-serving,
flattering, unsincere, and word corrupting Ministry, studying more to please
and favor those by and from whom they have their Livelihood, then to please
God; and fitting their preaching and praying to their opinions, tempers,
factions, parties, designs, holding always with the prevailing strongest
party, and wresting the Scriptures to support their very errors, vices, sins,
and most unrighteous, treacherous, perfidious, oppressing practices and bloody
usurpations, not daring to displease them, as See Nicephorus, Zonaras, and
Grimston in the life of Phocus: Platina and Bale in the life of Pope Gregory
the 7.
Ecclesiastical Histories record, and our own experience can sufficiently
testify in these late whirling times and changes, as well as in King Fox Acts
and Monuments, vol 3. Hist. De vita et obitu M. Buceri.
Edward the 6. Queen Mary's and Quen Elizabeth's reigns, when our Religion
suffered so many public alterations, and most Ministers theu changed their
peoples Opinion and Religion with the times. Hence the Scripture records this,
as one of Jeroboams policies to keep the People and Kingdom from returning to
the right heir, 1 King. 12. 28, 29, 31, etc. chapter 13. 33, 34. That he made
Priests of the lowest (or poorest) of the people, who were not of the Sons of
Levi, and placed them in Bethel: who being poor, mean and depending on him for
their Salaries, readily sacrificed to his golden Calves, offered upon the Altar
which he had made in Bethel, and observed his new prescribed Feasts: which the
Priests and Levites that were in all Israel, having Lands, Suburbs and a settled
maintenance, refused to do. Whereupon Jeroboam and his Sons cast them out
from executing the Priests office unto the Lord, and substituted these base
Idol-Priests for the Calves, 2 Chronicles. 11. 13, 14, 15. Which became sin unto the
house of Jeroboam even to cut it off* and to destroy it from the face of the
earth. God deliver us of th^s Nation from the like Atheistical Jeroboam-like
policy and practice now, which will certainly prove the ruin of them and their
house, who shall put it in execution, if not of our Religion and Nation, as it
did of Jeroboam his house, and the 2 King. 17. 16, 17, 18.
wh^le Kingdom of Israel.

XII. All Christians are commanded Gal. 6. 10. As they have opportunity to do
good to all men (to relieve their wants) especially to the household of faith.
Therefore they are in an especial manner bound to do good to their Ministers
in maintaining them, and communicating to them in all good things, as he
resolves v. 6. The rather because we have this Precept thus seconded, Heb. 13.
16. But to do good and communicate forget not; for with such sacrifice God is
well pleased: (coupled with this injunction) Obey them that have the rule over
yon, and submit your selves, for they watch for your souls, as they that must
give account, That they may do it WITH JOY and NOT WITH GRIEF, FOR THAT IS
UNPROFITABLE FOR YOU. Wherein these 3. Conclusions are positively asserted.

1. That Christians must not only obey their Ministers, but likewise do good
and communicate to them in all good things the want. 2. That this is so far
from being unlawful; that it is a sacrifice well pleasing unto God. 3. That
Ministers deserve not only obedience but maintenance from the people.
1. Because they have the rule over them.

2. See Romans 13. 4, 5, 6, 7. backing these Reasons.
Because they watch for their souls.

3. Because they must give an account to God for them.

4. Because it will be a great encouragement to them to discharge their duty
with joy, not with grief.

5. Because the not doing it, will both grieve the Ministers, and be
unprofitable to the people in regard of their souls and spiritual estate, and
also cause God to curse and blast them in their temporal estates, Mal. 3. 8,
9, 10, 11* 12. whereas the doing thereof will be advantageous to them in both.
Powerful reasons and motives to convince all of the justice of our Ministers
maintenance, and to induce them cheerfully to render it unto them, though due
by Law, as we know it is.

XIII. The very Gospel enjoynes all Christians, Romans 12. 20, 21. To distribute
to the necessity of the Saints, and to be hospitable (not only to those we
know, but) even to strangers. Heb. 13. 2. And if our enemy hunger, it comm^nds
us to feed him, if he thirst, to give him drink; and Not to be overcome with
evil, but to overcome evil with good; seconded Mat. 5 44, 45, 46, 47, 48.
Luke 6. 32. to 37. P^ov. 25. 22. whence thus I argue: I^ Christians must
distribute to the necessities, and be hospitable to Saints and others, who are
m^er strangers to them, yea give meat and drink to their very enemies, and
overcome their evi^l with goodness; Then it necessarily follows, they must
much more distribute to the necessities of, and be hospitable, liberal, and
give meat, drink and maintenance to their own faithful preaching Ministers,
and recompense their good with good again, else they shall be worse then
Publicans and sinners, who do good to those that do good to and for them.

XIV. This is evident by the practice of the primitive Saints and Christians
recorded in the Gospel for our imitation; who though they paid all civil
Tributes Customs, Duties to the civil Magistrates, and likewise Tithes and
other duties to the Jewish and Pagan Priests under whom they lived; yet they
likewise freely and liberally ministered and contributed of their substance and
temporal estates toward the maintenance of Christ and his Apostles, and the
Ministers of the Gospel. Hence we read, Luke 8. 2, 3. That Mary Magdalen,
Joann^ the wife of Cuza, Herod's Steward, Susanna and MANY others (of our
Saviors auditors) ministered to him of their substance: put, it seems, into a
common purse for the maintenance of Christ and his Apostles, which Judas kept;
wh^ provided bread, meat and other necessaries out of it; as is evident by Joh.
4. 8, 31. and 12. 5, 6. and 13. 29. and 6. 5, 7. compared together. After our
Saviors resurrection, when the multitude of believers at Jerusalem were much
increased, it is expressly recorded, Act. 4. 32, to the end, and 5. 1, to 10.
That they were of one heart and of one soul (and oh that we were so again)
neither said any of them, that ought that he possessed was his own, but they
had all things common; neither was there any amongst them (whether Apostle
Minister or Believer) that lacked; For as many as were possessors of Lands or
Houses SOLD THEM (not purchased them, as many do now, who say they imitate the
primitive Christians) and brought the prices of the things that were sold, and
LAID THEM DOWN A^ THE APOSTLES FEET; and distribution was made unto every Man
(therefore to every Apostle, and Minister of the Gospel, as well as others)
according as they had need. Amongst others, Joses a Levite of Cyprus, having
Land so^d it, and brought the money and LAID IT AT THE APOSTLES FEET: The like
did Ananias with Saphira his wife, but because they brought a certain part
thereof, and laid it at the Apost^es feet, and kept back part of the price of
the Land, (which is less then to keep back Tithes, when due by sundry Laws
and Ordinances) and thereby lied not unto Men (only) but to God, they both fell
down dead suddenly at the Apostles feet (in a miraculous manner) and were
carried forth and ^uried: And great fear came upon a^ the Church, and as many
as heard thereof. We find in 2 Cor. 11. 7, 8, 9. That though Paul preached the
Gospel at Corinth freely, yet HE ^OOK WAGES OF OTHER CHVRCHES (at the same
time) TO DO THEM SERVICE. And when he was present with them, and wanted, that
which was wanting unto him, the Brethren that came from Macedonia SVPPLIED;
that in all things he might keep himself from being burdensome to the
Corinthians; (for reasons expressed by him) In which respect, of not ministering
to him of their substance, he writes, THEY WERE INFERIOR TO OTHER CHVRCHES, 2*
Cor. 12. 13. How bountiful the Church and Saints of Philippi were to Paul not
only whiles present with them and preaching among them, but also absent from
them preaching the Gospel in other places, and how pleasing this their
liberality was to God, he thus records; Phil. 4. 10. to 21. But I rejoiced in
the Lord greatly, that at last your care of me is revived; wherein ye were also
CAREFVLL, but ye lacked opportunity: Not that I speak in respect of want, for I
have learned in whatsoever estate I am, therewith to be content etc.
Notwithstanding YE HAVE WELL DONE that ye did communicate with my affliction.
Now ye Philippians know also, that in the beginning of the Gospel, when I
d^parted from Macedonia, no Churches communicated with me as concerning GIVING
and RECEIVING BUT YE ONLY: For even in Thessalonica YE SENT ONCE and AGAIN TO
MY NECESSITY. Not because I desire a gift, but I desire fruit that may abound
to your account. But I have received all, and A^OVND and AM FVLL, having
received of Epaphroditus THE THINGS SENT FROM YOU; AN ODOVR OF A SWEET SMELL, A
SACRIFICE AC^EPTABLE, WELLPLEASING TO GOD. But my God shall supply all your
needs, according ^o his riches in glory by Jesus Christ; Now unto God and our
Father, be glory for ever and ever Amen. And in 2 Timothy 1. 16, 17. 18. He makes
this memorable Testimony and prayer for Onesiphorus: The Lord give mercy unto
the house of Onesiphorus, for he often refreshed me, and was not ashamed of my
chain: But when he was in Rome, he sought me out very diligently, and found me:
The Lord grant unto him, that he may ^inde mercy of the Lord in that day: And
in HOW MANYTHINGS HE MINISTERED UNTO ME AT EPHESUS thou know very well.

From all which precedents coupled together, these conclusions naturally, and
necessarily arise:

1. That it is not only the practice, but duty of the Saints and Christians
under the Gospel, cheerfully and liberally to contribute to the Apostles and
Ministers of the Gospel; and that not only whiles they are actually preaching
and resident amongst them, but whiles absent, preaching the Gospel in other
places, or suffering for the Gospel in bonds and prisons, if their necessities
so require.

2. That they ought not only barely to supply their necessities, when they are
in want; but in such a plentiful manner, that they may truly say, We abound
and are full, bless God for, rejoice in their peoples liberality, pray God for
a blessing upon them and theirs.

3. That in cases of necessity, when the wants of the Apostles, Ministers and
Saints of God require it, Christians are only not bound to pay them the Tithes
of their Lands and other settled Dues, but even to sell their very Lands,
Houses, Estates, and lay them down at the Apostles and Ministers f^^t for their
common supply; as the primitive Christians did; they being not real
proprietors, but mere Stewards of their worldly estates; which as they all
proceed from Gods hand, gift, blessing; so they are still, Gods own, not man's;
and therefore in such cases, to be cheerfully expended for the maintenance and
supply of the necessities of his Ministers, servants, worship: 1 Chronicles. 29. 11,
12, 14, 15, 16, 17. 1 Timothy 6. 17, 18, 19.

4. That the maintenance of the Ministers of the Gospel, is not mere pious
Alms, (as some have held) but wages; which though Paul (for some special
reasons) received not from the Corinthians, yet he did from other Churches,
under the name of wages.

5. That niggardliness, and not contributing toward the maintenance of
painful Ministers, is a shame, infamy, and dishonor to a Church and people,
making them inferior to all other Churches.

6. That peoples liberal and bountiful contributing to the Apostles and
Ministers of the Gospel, is a great joy, comfort, encouragement to them, and a
means to enlarge their hearts in prayers to God for spiritual and temporal
blessings on them and their households.

7. That bountiful and cheerful contributions to the Apostles and Ministers
of Christ, is not only a well doing, or good work, but an odor of a sweet
smell, a sacrifice acceptable and well pleasing unto God, though it stinks in
the nosthrils of many covetous earth-wormes, and pretended godly Saints now
adays.

8. That Liberality to the Ministers of the Gospel, and paying them their just
deserved Tithes and Dues, is so far from impoverishing and hurting men, that
it redounds to their spiritual account, and temporal too; causes God to
supply all their wants, and to bless them and their families with spiritual,
temporal and eternal mercies and rewards; as the several cited Sc^iptures,
Prove. 3. 9, 10. Mal. 1. 10, 11. Mat. 10. 41, 42. Mtr. 9. 41. 2 Cor. 9. 6, to
13. 2 King. 4. 8, to 38. 1 King. 17. 10, to 24. most abundantly prove.

9. That the wilful d^taining, withdrawing of any thing solemnly devoted to
the necessa^y maintenance of the Apostles and Ministers of the Gospel, brings
exem^plary curses and judgem^nts on those who are guilty thereof, as the
examples of An^nias and Sa^hira testify, compared with Mal. 3. 8, 9, 11. Ha^.
1. 9, 10, 11, and 2* 16, 17, 18, 19. further illustrating it: which all
sacrilegious inv^ders, plundere^s, detainers, oppugners of our Ministers
ancient established Maintenance, Tith^s, D^es, may do w^ll now seriously to
ruminate upon, and then reform their practice, or else renounce their p^^tended
Christianity and Saint hip, so much swarving from the recited precedents of the
first and purest Christians.

XV. This is further proved by Mat. 7. 12. Luke 6. 31. All things whatsoever ye
would that menshould do unto you, DO EVEN SO TO THEM, for this is the Law and
Prophets; yea and the Gospel too; thus twice enjoining it, from Christ's own
mouth. Whence thus I argue. All Estates, Callings and Professions of men
whatsoever, whether Kings, Princes, Rulers, Judges, Magistrates of all sorts,
Lawyers, Physicians, Surgeons, Merchants, Artificers, Traders, Husbandmen,
Laborers of all kinds, Seamen; yea and all Generals, Commanders, Colonels,
Captains, Governors of Forts, and common Soldiers whatsoever, with all
Officers in their respective Offices and employments, do and justly may by the
Law of God, Nature, Nations, expect and receive a just, certain comfortable
salary, reward, hire, maintenance and subsistence for their respective pains,
works, employments and exercises of their callings, and hires from those that
do employ them, or for whose good they work and serve. Therefore by the
self-same Laws and Rules of common, natural, moral justice and equity, all
Ministers and Preachers of the Gospel may justly expect and receive the like,
from those to whom they preach; Else all others whatsoever must ex reise their
respective Offices, Callings, Trades, Employments, Studies, Labors freely,
without expecting or receiving any stipend, wages, reward or maintenance, as
well as Ministers.

And great reason is there that the painful and fai^hfull Ministers of the
Gospel should receive a liberal, comfortable, competent, settled maintenance
and reward for their Ministry, as well as any other Callings, or Professions of
men, or as any Officers or Soldiers in the Army, between whom alone and
Ministers I shall here only make the parallel, because they most violently
oppugn our Ministers maintenance (if not their Ministry too) of all other^ I
have yet con^erred with.

First, all able, learned, judicious, pious Ministers, skillful in the
Original Tongues, and learned Languages, wherein the Scriptures were penned
(very necessary for them to understand) able soundly, judiciously, like
workmen who need not to be ashamed, to defend the truth of the Gospel, to
stop the mouths of Blasphemers, Heretics, Seducers, that oppugn it, and to
divide and preach the Word of God aright as they ought. Else they hardly merit
the name of able Ministers, 2 Cor. 3. 6. 1 Timothy 1. 7. 12. 2 Timothy 2. 15. and 4.
2, 3, 4, 5. Tit. 1. 9, 10, 11. but rather of pratlers and wranglers, under
standing neither what they say, nor whereof they affirm, wresting the
Scriptures to their own and others destruction through ignorance and want of
learning, 2. Pet. 3. 16. (the case of many unlearned usurpers of the office of
Teachers now) All such before they can be fit for the work of the Ministry,
spend sixteen or twenty years time, and hard study day and night at their Books
in Schools, and Universities, and double the years, study, industry, that most
other Artists (except Lawyers and Physicians) spend in fitting themselves for,
and in learning their Trades and Professions, whereas all common Soldiers, yea
many Officers and Commanders of late times, rush just like their horses, into
their work, calling, without one years, weeks, days preparation, study or
practice in the Wars, learning their Trade of Soldiers and Commanders, after
they are listed, as such, by practice and experience only without study.

2. Most Ministers or their Parents and Friends are at very great expenses for
many years time in fi^ting them for the Ministry, both in Schools and in our
Universities; whereas all our Soldiers and Army Officers were at no expense at
all, receiving full pay, as such, from the first day of their listing, and many
of them advance money to boot, before any practice at all or judgment in their
Art; learning their Military skill, not at their own, but the peoples great
costs.

3. Learned Ministers both before and after their admission into the Ministry,
are at great charges to furnish themselves with Books and Libraries, necessary
for their Calling: whereas our Officers and Soldiers are and were furnished
with all sorts of Arms and Ammunition fitting for their calling out of the
public Treasury only, which continually recruites them when lost in Service.

4. The calling of the Ministry requires men of far more able parts and
eminency of gifts (whereby they might gain far more worldly wealth, riches and
honors in many other callings, then they do or can do by the Ministry, by
which they are commonly losers in respect of worldly gains ^and preferments, a
thing very considerable) then the calling of an ordinary Soldier, or most
warlike Officers do; as experience manifests, and I think most Soldiers and
Officers will acknowledge; and thereupon must admit them proportionable
allowance to their parts and work in the Ministry it self.

5. Ministers when once entered into their callings, are always day and night
upon constant duty, without intermission; their whole lives being so taken up
with study, preaching, catechizing, praying, fasting, exhorting, admonishing,
reproving, comforting, visiting the sick in body, troubled in mind, resolving
doubts of conscience, and other Ministerial duties as well private as public;
that they have most of them scarce one spare day or hour all the year to employ
in other affairs, for their own advantage in worldly things. Whereas many of
our Army Officers and Soldiers lie idle in their Quarters many months (if not
years of late together) without any actual service, and yet receive their full
constant pay; and those in actual service and Garrisons, do that they call duty
only by turns; once or twice a week; and then but for two or three hours in a
day, being then successively relieved by others; having sufficient time every
day and week not only to follow their private Trades, if they please,
necessary, useful, beneficial to others, but also to exercise Merchandise and
other gainful worldly employments and Offices, to which they were never
trained up, whereby most of them are grown richer then most of our Ministers in
half the space they were fitting for their Ministry before they received one
penny profit by it. As for our Officers, they seldom do any duty, have all
their menservants listed under them, and paid by the people to do them service
only, being exempt from duty; and how seldom they have been of late times at
their Quarters upon their duty as Soldiers, but otherwise sitting in Counsel
to advance their own power, estates, and pull down all above them, to intrude
themselves into their places, we all see by experience; contrary to the
Apostles precept, 2 Timothy 2. 4. No man that warreth intangleth himself with the
affairs of this life, that he may please (not supplant) him who has chosen
him to be a Soldier: and to John the Baptists injunction to Soldiers, Luke 3.
14. Do violence to no man, neither accuse any falsely, and be content with your
wages. Which ungospell practices I wish they would first reform, by conforming
themselves unto this Precept, before they reform our Ministers or their settled
wages; a thing beyond, if not against their calling.

6. The calling of Ministers, as it is every way far more laborious, as
perilous and full of hardship as that of Soldiers, 2 Cor. 11. 23, to 33. and
4. 8, 9, 10, 11. 2 Timothy 2. 3, 9, 10, 12. and 3. 10* 11, 12. and 4. 5, 6, 7. So
questionless it is far more honorable, necessary, useful, beneficial to
others then that of Soldiers and Commanders; for they are the very Ambassadors
of God himself, and Jesus Christ (the 1 Timothy 6. 15, 16. Rev. 1. 5. and 17. 14
and 19. 16. Ps. 9. 10.
King and Lord of glory, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, the Prince of
the Kings of the earth, and only Potentate, to whom all other Powers and kne^^
must bow) beseeching men in Christ's stead to be reconciled to God, 2 Cor. 5.
20. The Ministers, servants, messengers of Jesus Christ, workers together with
him, Stewards of the mysteries of God and the glory of Christ, 1 Cor. 4. 1, 2.
2 Cor. 6. 1. and 8. 23. 2 Timothy 2. 24. employed to preach to sinful men, the
unsearchable riches of Christ, to turn them from darkness unto light, and
from the power of Satan unto God, Ephesians. 3. 8. Act. 26. 18. to rescue their souls
from the slavery and power of sin, Satan, hell, death, everlasting damnation;
and make them the sons of God, heirs and coheirs with Christ of everlasting
glory and felicity in Gods heavenly Kingdom, through the power of Gods Grace
and Spirit working in, with, by and through their Ministry on their hearts. Now
the calling of a Soldier though it be honorable, and in Grorius de jure
Belli. l. 1. c. 2, 3, 4, 5. l. 2. c. 1, 2. Gratian. causa. 23. qu. 1.
some cases lawful and necessary, if rightly managed; yet, it is for the most
part sinful, hurtful, pernicious, dangerous and unbeseeming the Gospel, in
respect of the cause, managing, abuses thereof; Gro^ius, de jure Belli. l. 2.
c. 23. sect. 10. ^. 388. and elsewhere. Nulla fides, Pietasque viris qui custra
sequuntur. Lucan. Hen. Huntindon. Hist. l. 8. p. 390.
it being accompanied with murder, violence, rapine, treachery, perjury,
sacrilege, cruelty, inhumanity, profaneness, blasphemy, contempt of God, of
all sacred, civil Laws and Ordinances; ambition, treason, and the worst of
sins; tending usually (like an overflowing Deluge) to the subversion,
desolation, ruin of whole Families, Cities, Countries, Kingdoms, Churches;
yea, Mankind it self, Religion, Laws, Liberties, Properties; turning whole
f^amous Cities into ashes, and Kingdoms into Golgatha. s, Acheldamaes, (fields
of blood and dead men's sculs) very wildernesses, as the Isa. 64. 10, 11. Jer.
49. 13. to 39. chapter 50. and 51. throughout. Ezekiel. chap. 35. Joel 2. 3. ^^a. 1.
7, 8. and 9. 12, 20, 21. and 19. 1, to 15.
Scripture, Histories and experience manifest. Hence God styles great Warriers
and Armies; The rod of his anger, a Battle Ax with which he breaks in pieces
the Nations, destroys Kingdoms, and treads them down like the mire in the
streets* and then at last destroys them in his wrath, when they have executed
his judgments, for their rapines, violence and bloody cruelty, Isa. 10. 5,
etc. Jer. 51. 20, etc. They being really carried on from one war to another,
out of vainglory, ambition, covetousness, a mad humor of false greatness; et
nullus supra caeteros eminendi modus; in sua fata pariter, ac publica; to their
own and the public ruin; yet still under a pretext of public good and
safety; as Seneca excellently writes in his 94 Epistle (a piece worth the
reading) of Alexander the great, Caesar, Pompey, Marius, qui cum omnia
concuterent, concutieb antur; et cum mult is fuerunt mali, pestiferam illam
vim, qua plerosque nocuerunt, ipsi quoque sentiunt. And indeed the Profession
of a Soldier even in the best of men and wars, is so full of danger and
pollution, that it leaves some scars of sin, and tincture of pollution on them.
Whence we read, that though David were 1 Samuel 13. 14. Acts. 13. 22.
a man after Gods own heart, and 1 Samuel 18. 17. and 25, 28.
fought the battles of the Lord against his professed enemies by his special
command, with constant success; yet God would by no means permit him to build
an house and Temple to him, for this very reason, BECAUSE HE HAD BEEN A MAN OF
WAR, and MADE GREAT BATTLES, and SHED MUCH BLOOD UPON THE EARTH IN HIS SIGHT;
And the 12000. Israelites, who by Gods special command went up to war against
the Midianites, and slew them, retu^ning with victory and great spoil without
the loss of one man though treble their numbe^, when as they came back from
the war, were all of them whosoever had killed any person, or touch^d any
slain, enjoined by God and Moses, to remain without the Camp seven days, and
to purify themselves on the third and seventh day, as unclean and polluted
persons, Numb. 31. 1, 17, 19, 20. and all the Officers, and Captains of
hundreds and thousands in the host brought an oblation, what every man had
gotten of Jewels, of Gold, Chains, Bracelets, Rings, Earrings and Tablets, TO
MAKE AN OBLATION FOR THEIR SOULS BEFORE THE LORD, v. 48, 49, 50. Such a stain
and guilt was there adhering to their Warlike calling, in this best of Wars
against Gods professed idolatrous enemies. And may not all Officers and
Soldiers then justly fear and find a deeper guilt of sin and stain of blood,
then was in David or those Officers and Soldiers adhering to their persons and
profession in our unnatural, uncivil Wars, even with, and against their very
Christian, nearest, dearest Brethren, Friends, Kindred, Neighbors of the
self-same reformed Religion, and thereupon make the like or a far richer
oblation then they did, not of their spoils and gains by War, as atonement
for their Souls, in stead of provoking God and increasing their guilt, by
seeking to spoil his faithful Ministers of their long enjoyed maintenance? In
all these 6. particulars wherein the calling of Ministers excels in merit that
of common Soldiers, Captains and Officers of War; both in respect of time,
study, costs, labor, diligence, parts, danger, honor, excellency, use,
profit, and necessity; (to which I might add, that the Ministers frequent
tears and prayers in times of War, and Judgments, are far 2 Chronicles. ^3. 9, 10.
11, 15. and 32. 20, 21. and 20. 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. Jam. 1. 16, 17, 8. Joel ^*
17, 18.
more prevalent, beneficial and victorious then the Soldiers Arms; besides
their constant use and benefit in days of peace, when Soldiers are needless,
useless:) I refer it to the unprejudiced judgments and consciences of all
rational Christian men and Soldiers themselves; whether our faithful
preaching Ministers be not worthy of as large, as liberal, as constant,
settled, honorable, and coercive a maintenance from the people, as any
Soldiers, Officers, Captains, Colonels, Majors or Major Generals whatsoever,
if not a better and larger salary and reward then they enjoy, for the premised
reasons; when as yet some ordinary Soldiers and Troopers receive as much or
more pay by the year, as many of our godly Ministers; and every Ancient,
Sergeant, Lieutenant, as much as the most and best beneficed Ministers; and
most Captains, Colonels and Majors five or six times more then our ablest,
best deserving Ministers; and some general Officers have received, gained more
in few months or years at least, then hundreds of our meritorious Ministers put
together can gain in all their lives by their Ministry? How then can they tax
them as covetous, oppressive, caterpillars of the people by their Ti^hes and
Duties, for receiving only 30. 40. 50. 80. 100. 200. or 300. l. a year (and
very few of them more or so much) from the people, by an ancient right paid
once a year, when as they receive ten times more from the impoverished people,
and at least the tenth part or more of all our poor Ministers livings by
mon^hly enforced contributions, and yet will neither give them the Tenthes of
their pay and spoils of War (as Abr^ham and others did Genesis 14. 10. Heb. 7. 4,
6. 1 Chronicles. 26. 26, 27, 28.) nor (many of them) pay their own Tithes, and
endeavor to hinder others, though willing, from paying them any Tithes or Dues,
to which they have a juster right then they have to their pay and enforced
contributions, against all Magna Carta c. 29, 30, 25. e. 1. c 5, 6, 28. e. 1.
c. 5, 6. 34. e. 3. c. 1. 14. e. 3. c. 21. 11 R. 2. c. 2. 23 H. 6. ^. 18. 1 R.
3. c. 4. The Petition of Right 3 Caroli.
aneient Laws and Statutes as now imposed and levied, esp^cially on the
Clergy, who were never Taxed or Charged either by See Rastals Abridgement
Tenths and Taxes, and Statutes at large, Acts f^^ the Clergies subsidies.
Lords or Commons in former ages, but only by themselves, by their o^n free
Grant^* in Parliament and Convocation by special Acts, as our Records and
Printed Seatutes manifest. Or with what face, reason or con^cience they can
seek to deprive them of all their Tith^s, Glebes and other legal settled
coercive Stipends, amounting to so small a value, as now they do; when as
themselves receive far more settled constant pay, levied with the greatest
rigor and extremity on the exhausted peoples every Month or Quarter; and some
of them have many Military, besides civil gainful Offices and employments,
and that in several Kingdoms, amounting to thousands, and ten thousands by
the year, when few Ministers now enjoy one or two hundred pounds a year de
claro, and most not sixty, all Taxes deducted; and must hardly be suffered to
hold two adjoining petty Benefices, to make up 80. or 100. l. a year, without
much clamor, censure and danger of deprivation: when as they can hold so many
gainful, incompetent Pluralities in these necessitous times; and when as
Popish, Pagan, Mahomitan and Egyptian Priests enjoy far more then our best
deserving Clergy at this day, without their Officers, Soldiers, Clamours or
opposition.

Having thus made good the proposition by these Scriptures and Reasons, to
which I could never yet hear the least colorable Answer given; I now proceed
to answer such Objections, as have been, or may be made against it. The
Objections answered.


Mat. 10. 8. Where when Christ sent out his 12 Apostles to preach, he says
unto them, Heal the sick, cleanse the Lepers, raise the Dead, cast out Devils;
FREELY YE HAVE RECEIVED, FREELY GIVE. Whence some infer, That Ministers and
Apostles of Christ, are here enjoined by him, to preach the Gospel freely,
without receiving any wages, reward or recompense for it, because they freely
received their power and commission to preach the Gospel, without giving money
or price for it.

To which I Answer,

Freely ye have received, freely give; it relates not to their preaching of the
Gospel, but is annexed only to the precedent words; Heal the sick, cleanse
the Lepers, raise the Dead, cast out Devils; which they are commanded to do
freely without any wages, hire or reward; having freely received this
miraculous power of healing the sick, etc. from Christ, who did it freely; and
that to gain credit to the truth of the Gospel, which was confirmed, credited,
propagated by these free miraculous works. Mark 16. 17, 18, 20. Act. 31. 1,
to 12. and 9. 38. to 43. and 5. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. and 13. 11, 12. Which power
of working miracles when Simon Magus would have bought for money of Peter; he
said unto him, Thy money perish with thee, because thou have thought, that the
gift of God may be purchased with money. Thou ^ast neither part nor lot in this
matter, for thy heart is not right in the sight of God: Repent therefore of
this thy wickedness, etc. Act. 8. 18, to 25.

2. He is so far from enjoining them to preach the Gospel freely without
recompense, that he allows them to take a recompense for it, closing it up
with a contrary clause, For the Labourer is worthy of his M^at and Hire, v. 10.
and recited Luke 10. 8. where the objected words are omitted, as likewise Mark
3.

3. Our new Mechanic Predicants to separate Conventicles, who urge this Text
against Ministers maintenance, should, receive no money, gift or recompense for
their prating from their Disciples, no more then our Ministers; who yet gain
far more from deluded blind followers of the blind, then many of our Ministers
get by their Ministry; and more then ever they ^arned by their Trades before,
which makes them wholly to desert them and turn Tubpreachers.

4. This sentence can no ways be truly applied now to Ministers; For though
they receive their Ministry and Orders freely without purchase (which some
bought for money heretofore) yet their preparation for the Ministry costs them
many years study and pains, them, their Friends and Parents many a pound, as I
sormerly proved; whereas the Apostles received the miraculous gift of healing
etc. immediately by divine inspiration, without study or cost.

5. If those who receive any Office, Commission, or place freely; must
discharge it freely without any Reward, Pay, as some Army Officers and
Soldiers hence conclude against our Ministers; then all our Soldiers, and
other Military Officers by Sea and Land, must henceforth at least (and should
have done heretofore) serve their Country freely without receiving any pay,
reward, or Contributions from the People; since I conceive few or none of them
ever bought their Offices, Places, Commissions, or paid any money for their
listing; yea then all other public Officers (real or pretended) must serve
their Country gratis, unless they purchased their Offices from those in late
or present power; and then they are ipso facto void by the Statute of 5 E. 6.
c. 16. against buying or selling of Offices. Now upon this condition, that all
Soul di^s Military and Civil Officers will henceforth serve their Country
freely without pay or recompense, for the oppress^d peoples future freedom
from long unsupportable monthly Taxes, Impositions, Excises; I dare presume all
or most of our Ministers will be content to preach the Gospel freely to the
people likewise, without Tithes or other Dues, for so long a time, as the
Soldiers and Officers shall freely serve our Nation; and I suppose all
Ministers in Scotland and Ireland will do the like; if the Officers and
Soldiers there will first really begin the Precedent. Which if they here and
there refuse, they must give Ministers leave to enjoy their ancient Tithes,
Dues, Stipends for preaching the Gospel, so long as they demand their former
pay and salaries; and renounce the objected Text, as fatal to their own wages,
as the Ministers, unless they dearly bought their Offices and Commands, and
did not freely receive them; which if true (as I presume it false) very few of
them would publicly acknowleuge.

Pendennis Soldiers, whiles there a prisoner under their Gards) is the Example
of the Apostle Paul, who staying and preaching at Corinth a year and six
months, because he would not be burdensome, but preach the Gospel freely to
them without charge or reward; wrought with his own hands, and got his living
by making tents; as is recorded, Act. 18. 1, 2, 3, etc. and 20. 34. 1 Cor. 4.
12. and 9. 12, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. 2 Cor. 11. 8, 9. and 12. 13, 16, 17, 18. The
like he did among the Thessalonians, laboring night and day, because he would
not be chargeable to any of them, when he preached unto them the Gospel of
God, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 8, 9. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 8. From whence they conclude, that all other
Ministers ought to preach the Gospel freely, and to labor with their hands
day and night in some other calling to supply their necessities and maintain
themselves and ^amilies, that they may not be chargeable to the people.

P^^^s particular practice in these two Churches, is very same and unsound; For,

1. Paul expressly resolves, that all Apostles and Minister^ of the Gospel have
a just right and power to receive a competent maintenance as wages from the
people, and most strongly proves it to be an ordinance of Christ himself, in
some of the objected Texts, as I have at large demonstrated*

2. He likewise declares (with a salvo jure, ^s Lawyers speak) that himself
had such a just right and power to receive wages and maintenance from the very
Corinthians and Thessalonians themselves, as well as others, though he made no
use of his power: witness, 1 Cor. 9. 4, 11, 12. where thus he expostulates,
Have we not power to eat and to drink, and to reap your carnal things, for
so^^ing u^t^ you spiritual things? If others be part^kers of this power over
you, ARE NOT WE RATHER? Neve^thelesse we have not used this power. And 2 Thessalonians.
3. 8, 9. Neither did we eat any man's bread for naught, but wrought with labor
and travel night and day, that we might not be chargeable to any of you; NOT
BECAUSE WE HAVE NOT POWER, but make our selves an example for you to follow us,
etc. We have much talk and crying up of late, HAVE WE NOT POWER, POWER, and
PRESENT POWER, in most Grandees mouths and public Papers (especially
Soldiers who carry it by their sides) in st^ad of old Language, LAW, LIBERTY,
RIGHT, FREEDOM* the things they say they fought for on the peoples behalf, who
pay them; which words and things, Have we not, the greater cry of Power, etc.
has made us not to have and quite swallowed up. I wish all such who press
these Texts against Ministers Tithes, and most use these words Have we not
Power, (if derived from God, or the Apostle who thrice mentions it in these
Texts) would only use and speak it in the Apostles sense and Language, (if not
assuming, usurping, but utterly disclaiming the real practice and abuses of it
in his self-denying words (worthy to be written in Capitalls that all persons
of, or in Power may now read and practice it) NEVER THELESSE WE HAVE NOT USED
THIS POWER, BUT WROUGHT WITH LABOR AND TRAVEL NIGHT AND DAY, THAT WE MIGHT
NOT BE CHARGEABLE TO ANY OF YOU, to make our selves an ensample for you
(Ministers) to follow us: Then we should be no longer overcharged with
endless Taxes, Excises, etc. by, for, or from any who have power, nor grieved
with any fresh changes of Laws, Church, Government or Ministers settled
maintenance, but be a Free State and Nation indeed, as some have long promised
to make us, but still the quite contrary way in direct opposition to the
Apostles, Nevertheless we have used and will still use this power, that we
might be chargeable (yea very chargeable) to every of you: Therefore no wonder
our Ministers (in their affected sense) do the like by their example, in
exacting of their Tithes and Dues, till they disclaim the use of their Iron
Power, in imposing, levying new Taxes and Excises, on Ministers as well as
people, in strange untroden ways, to pay their own and Soldiers salaries to
support their self-^reated Power in the highest strain of Exercise, which they
condemn in Ministers in a far more inferior degree; who questionless may
lawfully make use of it, as Paul himself might have justly done, as he
resolves, though he suspended its natural exercise.

3. Paul records 4 special reasons why he made no use of this his Evangelicall
power, but labored with his hands.

1. That he might not hinder the Gospel of Christ among the Corinthians, 1
Cor. 9. 12. they being then most of them Pagans, the rest but newly converted
to the Gospel by his preaching, and all of them very worldly and ^ovetous, as
he insinuates, 1 Cor. 4. 12, 13, 14. and 7. 30. 31, 32. and 11. 7, 8, 9. and
12. 10, to 21.

2. That he might not seem to abuse his power in the Gospel in the opinion of
these covetous worldlings, 1 Cor. 9. 18.

3. That he might add to his glory, in undergoing necessities for Christ,
wherein he gloried; and add to his future reward, 1 Cor. 9. 15, to 27. and 12.
10, to 13.

4. And principally, To cut off occasion of slander and reproach from some
false Apostles, and deceitful workers and Ministers of Satan, transforming
themselves into Angels of Light, (who sought occasion to slander him) counting
his preaching very contemptible, him to be none of Christ's, and a very
reprobate, 2 Cor. 10. 7, 10, 12. and 13. 6, 7. (as some now esteem our
Ministers) seeking a proof of Christ speaking to him, c. 13. 3. (as they do in
our Ministers) glorying (as some of the same Tribe do now) that they preached
the Gospel freely, and wrought with their own hands; whereupon he adds, that
wherein they gloryed, they might be found even as he, 2 Cor. 11. 12, 13, 14.
Which false Apostles and dissembling Hypocrites for all their brags, did yet
enslave, take of them, fleece and abuse them, more then any faithful
Ministers, and yet they patiently endured it; as he there thus insinuates, v.
20. FOR YE SVFFER IF A MAN BRING YOU INTO BONDAGE, IF A MAN DEVOVR YOU, IF A
MAN TAKE OF YOU, IF A MAN EXALT HIMSELF, IF A MAN SMITE YOU ON THE FACE*
taxing their wisdom: for ^his Asinine sottish stupidity; when as neither Paul
himself, nor Titus, nor any other of those Ministers he sent unto them, did
either burden, or catch them with guile, or make a gain of them, as these false
Apostles, domineering Hypocrites, and Ministers of Satan did; 2 Cor. 12. 16,
17, 18. These were the reasons expressed by him, why he took no wages of the
Corinthians, and supported himself with his own labor. But this is not our
Ministers case, after our so long enjoyment of the Gospel, and their enjoying
of a settled maintenance by Tithes and Glebes Spelmann.
about 800. years space, so long since settled on them by our devout Saxon
Kings, and continued ever since. When our Ministers have the self-same reasons
as Paul had, to move them to pursue his objected practice; I doubt not but they
will cheerfully imitate it, for the advancement of the Gospel, and winning
souls to Christ. The reason why he exercised not this power among the
Thessalonians, laboring amongst them night and day to support himself, was
much different from the former; thus recorded by him* 2 T^^ss. 3. 7, to 15.
When he was among them he heard, that there were some who walked disorderly,
WORKING NOT A^ ALL, BUT WERE BVSY BODIES (just such as o^^ ^^ew preaching
Weavers, Ginger-bread-makers, Smi^h^, Soldiers, and other Mechanickes are, who
give over their Trades and working, to busy themselves only in gathering new
Conventicles, new moulding our Church, State, and Preaching openly and in
corners every wh^re to carry on their own worldly designs:) Whereupon he then
commanded them THAT IF ANY (such busybodies) WOULD NOT WORK (but forsake his
calling) NEITHER SHOULD HE EAT: (A very good Gospell-law, if duly executed, to
quell all such busybodies) and upon this occasion, not because he had not
power, BUT TO MAKE HIMSELF AN EXAMPLE FOR THEM TO FOLLOW, (and encourage these
busybodies, with all other loyterers to labor) he refused to eat any man's
bread freely, but wrought with labor and travel night and day, that he might
not be chargeable to any of them. And because this his example did not reform
whiles he was present, but some such idle bodies still continued their practice
notwithstanding; he gives them this new Precept in and by this Epistle, verse.
14. Now them that are such WE COMMAND, and exhort by our Lord Jesus Christ (and
O that our prating busybodies who step out of their own callings into other
men's and Ministers too, would hearken and obey him!) that they with quietness
work, (or, do their own work, as some Translators render it, not other men's)
and eat their own bread: (not live upon other men's trenchers, sweat or labors,
as thousands do now) And, if any obey not our word, signify (or note) that by
an Epistle, and have no company with him (then he will be a Separatist in good
earnest) that he may be ashamed; yet count him not as an enemy, but admonish
him as a Brother. If our Ministers working with their own hands at our
preaching M^chanicks Trades, would reduce them to follow their Trades, and give
over busying themselves in Ministers and other men's public callings and
State-affaires, I presume many of them would fall a working for a time for such
a good end: But ^ince P^uls own example in this kind did not reclaim such
busybodies then; whereupon he prescribed another more effectual remedy, if
duly put in execution by Ecclesiastical and Civil Magistrates: Our Ministers
(who have lesser hopes to reclaim them now by such a practice, which would give
scandal unto many, and make them neglect their proper function) have neither
reason, nor precept to follow this his singular voluntary Precedent upon this
ground of his, which is no way^s binding to them.

4. Though Paul himself then labored among the Corinthians and took no wages
from them; yet he received wages from other Churches at the same time, to
supply their lack of Service unto him; 2 Cor. 11. 8, 9. Which by way of
Sarcasme (to upbraide their covetousness, tenacity and ingratitude toward
him) he calls, Robbing of other Churches; because it was to do them service,
not those Churches: Not that it was robbery indeed (as some ignorant asses
judge it who understand not Rhetoric and Eloquence) for in the next verse he
styles it, A supply; and Phil. 4. 10, 15, 18. a Communicating to his
Nec^sities; a well-doing, a fruit abounding to their account, as well as to
his rejoicing, an odor of a sweet smell, a sacrifice acceptable and
well-pleasing unto God; and wages in the self-same Text; therefore no unlawful
robbery.

5. Though the niggardly Co^inthians saved their purses by Paul's labor and
free preaching, yet they gained no honor, but disgrace and sharp censures from
him for it: witness 1 Cor. 4. 11, 12, 14. Even unto this present hour we both
hunger and thirst, and are naked, and are buffeted, and have no certain
dwelling place; and labor working with our own hands, etc. I write not these
things TO SHAME you, but as my beloved sons I admonish you: (of their harsh,
ingrate, despitefull carriage toward me, which makes my condition so
uncomfortable:) which he thus seconds, 2 Cor. 11. 7, 8. Have I committed an
offense in a^asing myself, that you might be exalted, because I have preached
the Gospel of God freely? I robbed other Churches, taking wage^ of them to do
you service. And chapter 12. 12, 13, 14, 15. T^uly the signs of an Apostle were
wrought among you in all patience, in signs and wonders, and mighty deeds; For
what was it WHEREIN YE WERE INFERIOR TO OTHER CHVRCHES, except it be, that I my
self was not burdensome to you? FORGIVE ME THIS WRONG: Behold, the third time I
am ready to come to you, and I will not be burdensome to you, for I seek not
yours but you, etc. And I will very g^adly spend and be spent for you, though
the more abundantly I love you, THE LESS I BE LOVED. Whence all may learn,
that it is a great disparagement, stain and certain sign of want of love both
to the Ministers and Ministry of the Gospel, for any Church or people to
suffer or enforce their Minister to hunger, thirst, be naked, and to have no
certain dwelling place, and to labor working with his own hands, that he may
preach the Gospel freely to them: and such kind of ungrateful, ungodly
people, who cause Ministers thus to spend and be spent for them, will be so far
from loving or respecting them for it, that the more they love them in this
kind, the less they will probably love them again, as the Corinthians did
Paul: who traduced and slandered him, as no true Apostle, a weak contemptible
Preacher, and a very Reprobate, in stead of commending him for his
extraordinary pains and cost, in preaching freely to them, 2 Cor. 10. 10. and
12. 11, 12. and 13. 6, 7, 9. Who then would hearken to, or gratify such
perverse Beasts, and unthankful Hypo^rites, though appearing in the shapes of
Saints, and notion of the godly party, (or rather un^odly faction) against our
Ministers and their maintenance?

6 Though Paul thus labored night and day with his own hands to maintain
himself and preach the Gospel freely, yet it follows not hence, that all
other Ministers now should do it.

1. Because he being an inspired Apostle and able to preach by immediate
inspiration and revelation from God without study or premeditation (as is
probable) his labor in this kind, was no hindrance to his diligent, constant,
powerful preaching. But no Ministers now (being thus immediately inspired)
must study and meditate day and night for what they preach, and examine their
Doctrines seriously by Gods word before they vent them: whence Paul enjoynes
even Timothy himself, 2 Timothy 3. 13, 15, 16. To give attendance to reading, to
exhortation to doctrine, to meditate upon these things, and give himselve WHOLLY
TO THEM, that his profi^ing might appear to all men: and to take heed unto his
doctrine: which he could not do, if he should labor night and day with his
hands as Paul did, to support himself and preach gratis: wheresore he tells
him, 2 Timothy 2. 4. That no man that warreth (a spiritual warfare as he and other
Ministers do) intangleth himself with the affairs of this life; that he may
please or serve him who has chosen him to be a Soldier. A direct inhibition
to Ministers to follow Paul's Precedent; who cannot serve and please God in
their Ministry, if they labor day and night in Mechanic trades for their
living. And upon this ground (which is very observable) the very Apostles
themselves, Act. 6. 3, 4, 5, 6. Calling the multitude to them, said, IT IS NO
[REASON (pray mark it) that we should leave the Word of God and serve Tables
(much less work day and night at a Mechanic trade:) wherefore br^thren look
ye out seven men of honest report full of the holy Ghost and wisdom, whom ye
may appoint over this business: BUT WE WILL GIVE OUR SELVES CONTINVALLY TO
PRAYER, and TO THE MINISTRY OF THE WORD: And THE SAYING PLEASED THE WHOLE
MVLTITVDE. From which Texts it is clear,

1. That the Apostles themselves resolve, that they could not exercise the very
ancient office of a Deacon in serving Tables, and attending on Widows and
other poor, aged, impotent Saints, without neglecting, or giving over preaching
of the Word: much less then can Ministers labor day and night with their
hands at some Trade, to maintain themselves and Families, without neglecting
and desisting the Ministry.

2. That the Apostles and Ministers ought to give themselves wholly and
continually to prayer, preaching, meditation, reading, and their Ministerial
duties, and must not therefore attempt or intermeddle with secular Employments
and Callings.

3. That the Apostles themselves have punctually resolved, and all the
primitive Christians unanimously assented to it; that IT IS NOT REASON, that
they should leave preaching the word of God, so much as to wait upon Widows
and poor people at their tables: whereupon they elected seven Deacons to
discharge that office. Therefore it is far less reason, and they are most
wicked and unreasonable men without faith or charity, from which God deliver
us, and all his Ministers, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 2. who urge it) to enforce all our
Ministers to neglect and forsake their Ministry, Preachings, Studies now, to
follow handicraft Trades to get their livelihood, that so they might preach
freely to the people without any recompense.

2. All godly Ministers and people in all ages, and the very Objectors
themselves of late years have extremely condemned, censured our Bishops and
Prelaticall Clergy, together with Popes, Popish Prelates and Clergy men for
intermedling with, and executing civil Offices, Employments and worldly
affairs, which necessitated them to neglect the preaching of the Gospel, and
their Ministerial duties; whereupon not only many ancient and late Councels,
Synods, but Acts of Parliament, have specially prohibited them, to be Privy
Counselors of State, Judges, Justices of the Peace, Lord Chancellers,
Treasurers, Keepers of the Privy Seal, Stewards of Courts, Commissioners; and
our very last Parliament by several late Acts disabled all Bishops from
sitting as Peers in Parliament, and them with all other Clergy men, to execute
any temporal Office, as See Anttqu; Ecclesiae Brit. p. 138, to 142. Hoveden
Annal. pars posterior. p. 767. 768. 769.
incompatible with their spiritual Function and an impediment to their
Ministry: according to the old proverbiall verse, Pluribus intentus minor est
adsingula sensus. Which I have proved at large by testimonies in all ages, in
my Breviate of the Prelates intolerable Usurpation; printed Anno. 1637. My
Vnbishoping of Timothy and Titus; and Antipathy of the English Prelacy to
Monarchy and Unity, Anno 1641. Therefore to force our Ministers to become
Mechanickes, and give themselves wholly to wordly callings or employments
incompatible with their professions, must needs be an irrational, unchristian
Project, unworthy the profession or professors of the Gospel, not justifiable
from Paul's example in them that would enforce it.

3. If this Precedent of Paul be a sufficient argument to prove, that our
Ministers ought to work for their living, and to preach the Gospel freely
without any reward or coercive Maintenance; I shall then by the self same
reason prove, that all Officers and Soldiers of the Army who make this
Objection, and all our public civil Officers approving it, ought likewise to
fight and discharge their Offices without pay or salary, and to work with
their own hands to get their livings, without oppressing the people with any
Contributions of Excises to maintain them.

1. Because Ministers are both of one profession in several senses, to wit,
Soldiers, 2. Tim. 2. 3, 4. as I have formerly proved: Therefore to fare both
alike in respect of pay or hire.

2. Because God records in Scripture, Ezech. 29. 18. That Nebuchadnezzar King
of Babylon (even by Gods appointment) caused his Army to serve a great service
against Tyrus; every head was made bald, and every shoulder was peeled. YET HAD
HE NO WAGES, NOR HIS ARMY FOR TYRVS, for the service that he served against it.
If Nebuchadnezzar and his Army served God freely against Tire. WITHOUT WAGES
many years; Should not our present Army and Officers much more serve God and
their Country freely without wages? True it is, God gave them (after their
service fully ended) not any Taxes or Contributions from their own Countrymen
or Nation, but the Land and spoil of Egy^^ for their wages, because they
^rought for him, verses 19, 20. And if our Officers and Soldiers will have
such wages, it must only be the Lands and spoils of forain Egyptian enemies,
not our Churches, or Crown Land or Revenue (formerly easing the peoples Taxes,
and defraying all Garrisons, and ordinary public expenses) which they now
claim and enjoy for Arrears of pay.

3. Nehemiah, both a godly Soldier, General and Governor of his people
records this for his own honor, and others imitation. Neh. 5. 14, 15, 16, 17,
17, 18, 19. Moreover from the time that I was appointed to be their Governor
in the Land of Judah from the 20. even to the 32. year of Ataxerxes the King;
Even TWELVE YEARS, I AND MY BRETHREN HAVE NOT EATEN THE BREAD OF THE GOVERNOR.
But the former Governors that had been before me WERE CHARGEABLE and had taken
of them BREAD AND WINE, BESIDES FORTY SHEKELS OF SILVER; yea even their
Servants bare rule over the people; BUT SO DID NOT I (mark the reason) BECAUSE
OF THE FEAR OF GOD. Yea, also I continued in the work of this wall, NEITHER
BOVGHT WE ANY LAND (as many Officers and Soldiers do now) and all my servants
were gathered thither unto the work. Moreover there were at my Table an 150 of
the Jews and Rulers, besides those that came unto us from among the beathen
that were about us. Now that which was prepared for me daily was one Ox, and
six choice sheep; also Fowls were prepared for me, and once in ten days store
of all sorts of Wine; YET FOR ALL THIS REQUIRED NOT I THE BREAD (that is, the
allowance, salary and revenue) OF THE GOVERNOR (observe the ground) BECAUSE THE
BONDAGE WAS HEAVY ON THIS PEOPLE (and has it not for 12. years space, or MORE,
and STILL IS AS HEAVY or HEAVIER UPON US?) Think upon me my God for good
according to all I have done for this people. Here was a worthy Governor,
General, Magistrate and Soldier, really fearing God, and tendering the ease,
liberty and welfare of the people, in good earnest, who with all his Officers
and Soldiers for 12. years space together, though he and they labored
constantly in building the wall of Jerusalem, and he was at so great expense
each day for his own Table, as Governor, yet took no Free Quarter, Bread,
Wine, Money, Wages or Salary from the people, as other Governors and Officers
before them had done; and that because of the fear of God, because the bondage
was great upon the people; expecting only a reward from God. I may safer argue
from this Scripture Precedent; Ergo, all our Governors, Generals, Officers,
Soldiers fearing God, during all our 12. years Wars, and as long as they and
our bondage shall yet continue; are bound to serve their Country freely without
taking Free Quarter, Corn, Wine, Money, wages, contributions or Excises from
the people; and ought not to purchase any Lands; and by consequence are
thereupon obliged in conscience to make restitution of all the Free Quarter,
Pay, Lands, Woods, Rents, Rewards and public Revenues they have received for
their pay, arreares, or rewards of service, expecting their reward only from
God hereafter. And so much the rather, because See a vindication of Sir Will.
Jews A justification of the XI. impeached Members, and their answer to their
Charge, printed 1647.
Sir William Jews, Mr. Denzill Holles and Col. Walter Long, 3. of the XI.
Members falsely impeached by the Officers and Army: An. 1647. for engrossing
much of the public Treasure, and giving no account of what they had received;
were so generous and truly Noble, as in their accounts (long before passed and
allowed by the Commons house) to demand no pay at all; the first, as Governor
of Portsmouth; the other as Colonels in the Army under the Earl of Essex; Mr.
Holles refusing to accept of the thousands voted him out of the Kings revenue
for recompense of his former wrongful imprisonment by the King for his
Countries good service in Parliament. Whose Precedents their accusers (at
least) are as far bound to imitate in this kind, as our Ministers are St.
Paul's. Upon which confiderations, I now refer the verity and solidity of this
argument from Paul's example to the judgments, consciences of all Officers,
Soldiers and others formerly triumphing in it, who upon second thoughts must
needs disclaim their own Pay, and Salaries for the future, or else renounce
this grand objection as ridiculous and irrational.

Epistle of John verse. 5, 6, 7. Where John writes to Gajus; Beloved thou do
faithfully whatsoever thou do, both to the Brethren and to strangers: which
have born witness of THY CHARITY (or Liberality) before the Church, whom if
thou bring on forward on their journey THOU SHALL DO WELL, because that for his
name sake THEY WENT FORTH, TAKING NOTHING OF THE GENTILES. Whence some may
infer (though I hear not this Text urged by any) That Ministers ought now to
preach the Gospel freely to the people, and to take nothing of them; because
John nentions some such that in his time preached to the Gentiles taking
nothing of them.

To which I answer,

Paul (the Apostle of the Gentiles, and his companions Timothy and Titus, who
took nothing of the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 12. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.) seeing Gajus
was not St. Paul's companion sometimes, being converted and baptized by him,
Act. 19. 29. and 20. 4. 1 Cor. 1. 14. but expressly styled by him, Romans 16. 23.
Gajus MINE HOST and OF ALL THE CHVRCHES; living then at Corinth, where Paul
preached freely; to whose Precedent I have given a sull satisfactory answer
already.

2. It is evident, that this Gajus (for some time at least) lodged Paul and
other Brethren; and was not only faithful, but charitable and liberal toward
them, though the other Corinthians were not.

3. St. John adds, verse. 8. WE THEREFORE OUGHT TO RECEIVE SVCH, that WE MIGHT
BE FELLOW HELPERS TO THE TRVTH; wherein he concludes it to be a duty incumbent
upon all Christians, to receive, encourage, accompany and be charitable and
liberal to the Apostles and Ministers of the Gospel, thereby to be
fellow-helpers to the truth, which otherwise they shall much hinder. So as this
Scripture fully warrants my Proposition, not oppugnes it.

John Wickliffe, who held Tithes, and Ministers maintenance to be mere alms,
whose opinion is largely defended by eminent John Hus, in Mr. Fox his Acts and
Monuments; Edit. 100. vol. 1. fol. 602, to 605. Therefore not due to Ministers,
but detainable, or payable only at the mere wills of the people, as mere alms
to Beggars are, which are arbitrary.

Whereto I answer,

pure alms, nor so styled, by Wickliffe, Hus, or Augustine, or Chrysastome
(whom Hus cites) as if Ministers had no right unto them for their pains, as a
just debt, hire or Wages; or, as if men might detain them at their pleasure;
since we are expressly not only exhorted, but commanded both in the Law and
Gospel, to give alms to those that want them, and that as Debtors to them so
far as our Abilities and their Necessities require, Romans 12. 10, 13, 20. and
15. 27. 1 Cor. 16. 1, 2. 2 Cor. 8. and 9. throughout. Heb. 13. 16. 1 Timothy 6.
17, 18, 19. Ephesians. 4. 28. Luke 18. 22, 23. and 19. 8. Gal. 2. 10. compared with
Deuteronomy. 15. 4, to 12. Exodus 23. 11. Levit. 19. Deuteronomy. 24. 19. Prove. 19. 19. and
22. 9. and 28. 27. and 31. 20. Eccles. 11. 1. Dan. 4. 27. Yea the Laws and
Statutes of our Land, expressly enforce and compel men to contribute to the
Poor as they shall be assessed; as well as to pay Tithes or Taxes; as you may
read in Rastals Abridgement, and Daltons Justice of Peace; Title Poor. But they
are styled Poor Alms in three other respects.

1. Because, they were originally given by people to the Ministers that mere
needy, out of charity and compassion FOR GODS SAKE, as well as for their work
sake.

2. Because Ministers after their own wants supplied, did use to distribute
part of them to the poor and needy, as alms, and are obliged still to do it.

3. Because they are poor alms in respect of God, as all other goods of
fortune are; which we both beg and receive from God; And in this respect they
write, evrry man as well Kings as Emperors, as Ministers and Priests, are
beggars of God.

2. As they styled Tithes Alms in these respects, so they likewise granted
Alms to poor people, and Tithes likewise to be A DEBT; for every man duly
giving alms, DOES AS HE OUGHT TO DO; and so he that gives Tithes.

3. Whereas they allege, That neither does Debt utterly exclude the purity of
Alms before God: and that it is no. Argument, that if the Curate do perform
his corporal Ministry, that he ought therefore to challenge Tithes by any
civil title: Because that as well on the behalf of him that gives the
Tithes, as also in the behalf of the Curate, every such Ministry ought freely
to be given, and not by any civil exchange. I conceive it both a fallacy and
error in them, being a just debt which may be demanded by a Divine and Civil
right too, when and where settled by a civil law, though freely to be given to
the Minister, without coertion or suit of Law both in point of conscience, and
by way of civil exchange too, out of a civil compact or contract.

And thus much in confirmation of the first Proposition, and refutation of all
Arguments, I yet know made against it.

CHAP. II.
I Now proceed to the proof of the 2. Proposition, wherein the Hinge and Marrow
of the Controversy concerning Tithes is included.

That the maintenance of the Ministers of the Gospel (and of Proposition 2.
Places and Houses for Gods public worship) by Tithes, Glebes, Oblations (yea
and spoils won in battle by Generals, Colonels, Captains and Soldiers) is
not only lawful and expedient, but the most fitting, rati^nall and convenient
Maintenance of all other, warranted by direct Precepts and Precedents, both
before and under the Law, which does no ways abolish or condemn, but approve
and confirm this way of Maintenance.

Before ever the Leviticall or Ceremonial Law was instituted; as the godly
Patriarchs built Al^ars and Houses for public worship unto God, Genesis 4. 3, 4.
and 8. 20. and 12. 7, 8. and 13. 4, 18. and 22. 9. and 26. 25. and 28. 20, 21,
22. and 33. 20. and 35. 1, 3, 7. So they likewise gave Tithes to the Priests of
God. The very law of Nature, Romans 2. 14, 15.
engraven in their hearts, before any written Moral or Ceremonial law,
dictating thus much to them, That, as there was a God who created them, in whom
they lived, moved, and had their being; so likewise this God was to be solemnly
worshipped by them, as well in public as private; by way of homage, gratitude,
and bounden duty, Psalm. 95. 1, to 8. and 100. 1, 2, 3, 4. Isa. 17. 7, 8. Act.
17. 26, 27, 28. Which worship of his (expecially when men multiplied into great
and many families, Villages, Cities, Kingdoms, Republics) could not be
decently, orderly and constantly performed in public, without appointing some
certain Times and Places of worship; Heb. 5. 1.
some certain holy persons and Priests to discharge the public duties and
Solemnities of their worship; and some convenient certain portion out of their
Estates for the maintenance and encouragement of those Priests in the execution
of their Office, on which they were to give attendance. Upon which grounds, as
the Patriarchs before the Law from the very Creation, (as Dr. Bound, Dr.
Twisse, Mr. Sprint, Mr. Bernard, Mr. Palmer, Mr. Caudry and others of the
Sabbath: Mr. Dod and others on the 4. Commandment.
^any Divines infer from Genesis 2. 2, 3. Exodus 6. 22, to 27 and 20. 11. and 31.
17. Deuteronomy. 5. 14. Heb. 4. 4.) dedicated every seventh day to Gods peculiar
worship, by his example and prescription; so they likewise offered a certain
portion of the fruits of their Ground, Fields and Flocks to God in Sacrifice,
as a Tribute due to him, by and from whom they received, enjoyed all the rest
they had. Whence the Scripture expressly records of Cain and Abel (the two first
borne of the world) Genesis 2. 2, 3, 4, 5. That Cain being a tiller of the ground,
brought of the fruits of the ground an offering to God; and that Abel being a
feeder of sheep, he also brought of the firstlings of his flock, and the fat
thereof for an Offering unto the Lord. And as most conceive their father Adam
did before them, by whose precept and example they did it: And after them we
read, that Noah built an Altar unto the Lord, and took of every clean beast,
and of every clean fowl, and offered burnt-offerings on the Altar, when he went
out of the Arc, Genesis 8. 20. (which he and his ancesters from the Creation in
all probality usually practiced, though not specially recorded by Moses, no
more then many other memorable accidents and actions, for brevity sake). Now
these clean Beasts and Fowls which he sacrificed entering into the Arc by
sevens: that is, seven of every sort: Genesis 7. 2, 3. he offered one of each
kind at least (and so one of seven) unto God, who consecrated and reserved one
day of seven from the Creation to himself. What proportion of their goods,
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob offered on their erected altars in sacrifice to God,
is not expressed, though probably it was such as God afterward prescribed the
Israelites, their posterity, not long after by his written law in Moses time,
augmented upon any extraordinary emergent occasion, though never diminished
from its usual rate. And for the Priests encouragement (directed by the very
dictate of Nature and Reason in forming them, That every Labourer was worthy of
some competent hire, as Christ resolves Mat. 10. 10. Luke 10. 17.) they pitched
upon Genesis 14. 20. and 28. 21, 22. Heb. 7. 2. 4.
the tenth of their increase and gains of every kind, as a competent and
fitting allowance, guided therein by divine inspiration (as is most probable,
if not infallible) it being the self-same proportion, God himself afterward
prescribed and ratifyed by his own written law in the old Testament, and
approved in the new, as I shall manifest by these ensuing Scriptures.

1. That Tithes were paid and vowed to God by the religious Patriarchs before
the Aaronicall Priesthood instituted, or Leviticall law given, is undeniable
by two Scripture instances: the first of them is thus recorded, Genesis 14. 17,
18, 19, 20. That Abraham returning victoriously from the slaughter of
Chederlaomer and the: Kings that were with him; Melchisedec King of Salem met
him, and brought forth bread and wine, and he was THE PRIEST OF THE MOST HIGH
GOD: and he blessed him and said, Blessed be Abraham of the most high God,
possessor of heaven and earth; and blessed be the most high God, which has
delivered thy Enemies into thy hand. AND HE GAVE HIM TENTHES OF ALL. This
History is thus recited and amplifyed in the new Testament, Heb. 6. 20. and 7.
1, etc. Jesus, made an higb Priest for ever after the order of Melchizedec King
of Salem, PRIEST OF THE MOST HIGH GOD, who met Abraham returning from the
slaughter of the Kings, and blessed him: TO WHOM ABRAHAM GAVE A TENTH PART OF
ALL; first being by interpretation. King of righteousness, and after that also
King of Salem, which is King of peace: without Father, without Mother, without
descent, having neither beginning of days nor end of life, but made like unto
the Son of God, abides a Priest continually. Now consider how great this man
was unto whom even the Patriarch Abraham GAVE THE TENTH OF THE SPOILS. And
VERILY they that are of the Sons of Levi, who receive the office of the
Priesthood, HAVE A COMMANDMENT TO TAKE TITHES OF THE PEOPLE, ACCORDING TO THE
LAW, that is, of their brethren, though they come out of the loins of Abraham:
But he whose descent is not counted from them RECEIVED TITHES OF ABRAHAM, and
blessed him that had the Promises. And without all contradition the less is
blessed of the letter. And here MEN THAT DIE RECEIVE TITHES, but there he
[RECEIVED THEM] of whom it is witnessed that he lives. And as I may so say,
Levi also WHO RECEIVES TITHES, PAID TITHES IN ABRAHAM. For he was yet in the
loins of his Father, when Melchisedec met him. If therefore perfection were by
the Leviticall Priesthood, (for under it the people received the Law) what
further need was there, that another Priesthood should rise after the order of
Melchisedec, and not be called after the order of Aaron? For the Priesthood
being changed, there is of necessity a change also of Law etc.

I shall draw my Observations and Arguments concerning Tithes from both these
Scriptures recited, and then answer the maine (if not sole) Scripture objected
against Tithes, drawn from the close of the Apostles words.

1. It is undeniable from these Texts, that Abraham the Father of the
faithful, is the first person we read of who gave and paid Tithes, recorded
both in the old Testament and new, for his greater honor and the imitation of
all the faithful.

2. That he gave and paid Tithes to Melchisedec, the first Priest of the most
high God, mentioned in sacred writ. Who this Melchisedec should be, there is
great controversy among the Learned; some affirming him, to be Sem; others a
Canaanitish King and Priest of that Name, and Dr. Griffith Williams of the
Incarnation of Christ, in his works in fol. p. 807, to 813.
Dr. Griffith Williams very probably and strongly arguing him, to be Christ
himself, then appearing to Abraham in his humane shape. I shall not decide the
Controversy: certain it is, he was either Christ himself, or rather a real
Type of Christ's and his eternal Priesthood; as the Apostle often resolves.

3. That he was a Priest of a far, ancienter, better and more excellent order,
then the Leviticall Priesthood; and that this payment of Tithes was long
before the Law given by Moses for payment of Tithes to the Leviticall Priests;
and before their order instituted. Therefoore Tithes ar^ not merely nor
originally in their nature Jewish or Leviticall, (as some rashly now aver)
nor eternally abolished as such by Christ's incarnation, and Priesthood, they
being originally paid and given, not the Leviticall Priests but to M^lchisedec,
who was either Christ himsel^e, or a Type of him and his Priesthood, not of
Aarons.

4. That this Melchisedec, as he had neither beginning of days, so he had no
end of life, but was made like the Son of God, and abides a Priest CONTINUALLY
(in See Hemingius on the place.
respect of the truth he typifyed) as Christ himself does, of whom he was a
Type, who has an endless life; and because he continues ever, has an
unchangeable Priesthood; and is by the very oath of God, MADE A PRIEST FOR
EVER AFTER THE ORDER OF MELCHISEDEC, Heb. 6. 20. and 7. 3, 8, 13, 15, 16, 17,
21, 24, 25. Psalm. 110. 4. Therefore Tithes being first paid to such an
everliving, everlasting, unchangeable Priest and Priesthood, for the execution
thereof; may and ought to continue and abide for ever, as long as the Priest
and Priesthood do: and if so, then Tithes are still due and payabIe to the
Ministers of Christ under the Gospel by all the Romans 4. 4, 16, 17. and 9 8.
Ga. 4. 7, 8, 9, 29.
Spiritual seed of faithful Abraham, as well as he and his Sons after the
flesh to the Leviticall or Aaronicall Priesthood whiles in being) and that in
the right of Christ, they being Ambassadors representing his person, beseeching
men in Christ's stead to be reconciled to God, 2 Cor. 5. 20. 21. Forgiving men
in the person of Christ, 2 Cor. 2. 10. and in whose persons Christ himself
still speaks unto men, 2 Cor. 13. 3. Whence Christ himself averres, Verily,
verily I say unto you, he that receives whosoever I send, receives me; and he
that receives me, receives him that sent me: He that hears you, hears me;
^and he that despises you, despises me; and he that despises me, despises
him that sent me, Matthew. 10. 40. Luke 10. 16. Joh. 13. 20. That what ever is
given or paid to them for their Ministry is given and paid to himself, Matthew.
10. 42. and 25. 35, to 41. and is a Sacrifice aeceptable and well-pleasing unto
God, Philip. 4. 18.

5. That Abraham gave Tithes to Melchisedec for the execution of his Priestly
office; and that not in offering any carnal or Leviticall Sacrifices to God for
him upon an Altar, but only for blessing him, and rendering thanks and blessing
to the most high God for his victory; which being one chief part of the
Ministers of the Gospels duty still continuing even to bless the people, and
to praise and bless God for them, and their successes in spiritual and
temporal things, Romans 1. 7, 8, 9. and 10. 24. 1 Cor. 1. 3, 4, 5. and 16. 23.
2. Cor. 1. 1, 2. 3. and 9. 10, 11. and 13. 14. Gal. 1. 2. and 6. 18. Ephesians. 1:
1, 2, 3, 16, 17, 18. and 3. 14, to the end. and 6. 23, 24. Phil. 1. 2, 3, 4.
and 4. 20, 23. Col. 1. 2, 3, 9. to 14. and 4. 18. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 1, 2, 3. and 2.
13. and 5. 23. 28. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 2, 3, 11, 12. and 2. 13, 16, 17. and 3. 18. 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2. Heb. 13. 25. 1 Pet. 1. 2, 3, 4. and 5. 14. 2 Pet. 1. 2. Revel. 5.
12, 13. as likewise to bless the Sacramental bread and wine for their use, 1
Cor. 10. 16. Mat. 26. 26. typifyed, as most hold, by the bread and wine
Melchisedec brought forth to Abraham: is a convincing Argument to me, that
Tithes are no way Leviticall or Jewish in their primitive institution, or
intrinsecall nature, but rather Evangelicall; and are as justly due and payable
by all believing sons and children of faithful Abraham, to the Ministers of
the Gospel for blessing them, and praying, blessing, and praising God for
them, and other Ministerial duties, as they were by Abraham to Melchisedec,
for performing the self-same Priestly duties toward him.

6. That the scope of the Apostle in the Hebrews, being to prove the Honor,
Dignity and Excellency of the order of Melchisedecs (and by consequence of our
Saviors) Priesthood above Aarons; uses this as one demonstration thereof:

1. That he received Tithes of the Patriarch Abraham himself, Heb. 7. 2, 4, to
11. whereas the Leviticall Priests received Tithes only of their Brethren, that
came out of the loins of Abraham.

2. That even Levi himself who received Tithes of his Brethren, paid Tithes in
Abraham, (being then in his Fathers loins) to Melchisedec, as his superior,
even as the Levites under the Law paid the tenth of their Tithes to the
Priests, as their superiors, Numb. 18. 26, 27, 28. And this payment of Tithes
to Melchisedec, he recites in the Gospel no less then five several times one
after another, insisting longer on it then on any other Argument, to prove the
preeminency of Melchisedecs Priesthood above Aarons. Whence it undeniably
follows,

1. That Tithes are not originally Jewish and Leviticall.

2. That the receiving of Tithes by faithful Ministers now, is no
disparagement, but an honor to their Ministry and function, as well as to
Melchisedecs heretofore.

3. That Ministers receiving Tithes now, does no more prove their Ministry to
be Judaicall or Leviticall, then it did Melchisedecs Priesthood, put in
contradistinction to it, and exalted above it by the Apostle, even by the very
receiving of Tithes from Abraham. Therefore those Jesuited and Anabaptisticall
furies against Tithes, who rail against our Ministers and their Ministry as
Jewish and Aaronicall because they receive Tithes, and urge this as a
disparagement to their Persons and Ministry, rejecting Tith-receiving
Ministers, as Antichristian and unlawful; do herein argue point blank against
the Apostle, and thereby conclude Melchisedecs (and by consequence our Saviors
Priesthood after the order of Melchisedec) to be Jewish, Antichristian,
dishonorable and unlawful, because Melchisedec received Tithes, which to do
is the highest blasphemy.

7. That the Apostle informs us, that God had never but two orders of Priests
in the world.

The first, after the order of Melchisedec in Abraham's days; discontinued
under the Law for a time, but revived again in our Savior Christ, and
continuing now for ever in him, compared here to Melchisedec, especially in his
Nature, the seat of his Kingdom, the perpetuity of his life, his Sacerdotall
blessing and IN THE RIGHT OF TITHES (as Hemingus on the place observes.)

The second, after the order of Levi and Aaron, abolished and changed by
Christ; and that Tithes were paid and belonged of right to both these orders of
Priests, for the exercise of their function by Gods own approbation and
appointment; as a just, fitting, righteous maintenance and reward; which since
they cannot now be paid to Christ himself in person, being ascended into
heaven, and there sitting at Gods right hand, a great high Priest for ever
after the order of Melchisedec; there is great Justice and Reason, they should
be still paid to, and be received by his Ministers, whom we have always with
us (as well as the poor) who are Vicegerents and 1 Cor. 4. 1, 2. Tit. 1. 7.
Stewards, with whom he has promised to be always present to the end of the
World, Mat. 28. 20. and that as the properest, justest, best and fitting
maintenance of all other, appointed, prescribed by God, and paid by Abraham and
all the faithful, before, under the Law, and is recited, justified, allowed,
and no ways condemned or ab^ogated by the Apostle and Gods Spirit under the
Gospel. And therefore those who inconsiderately revile and declaime against
Tithes as See the late Petitions against Tithes.
heavy Yoakes, Jewish Burdens, an unequal, unrighteous, wrangling, troublesome
maintenance, etc. do herein blasphemously traduce and censure the very wisdom,
justice, discretion not only of Abraham, and all the faithful servants of God,
approving and paying Tithes in former ages, but of God himself who prescribed
them, and of the Apostle pleading for them, as appertaining to both these
orders of Gods Priests for their maintenance.

8. Here is one notable observation for all the Officers and Soldiers of the
Army seriously to consider (and O that God would fix it effectually on their
Spirits!) That Abraham the Father of the faithful (as the Gospel styles him,
Romans 4. 16.) returning victoriously from the first Wars we read of in the
world, gave THE TENTH OF THE SPOILS taken from the Enemy in the wars, to
Melchisedec the first Priest of the most high God we find in the Word or
World, and an express type of Christ, our only high Priest, if not Christ
himself, as some affirm: To teach all Generals, Officers, Soldiers, who
profess themselves the Sons or Children of Abraham after the faith, to do the
like: And (which is very considerable) though this victorious General and
Soldier was urged by the King of Sodom, to take all the Spoil and Goods he
had taken and rescued from the Enemy to himself, and to give him only the
persons rescued; which he magnanimously refused, saying, I have lift up my hand
unto the Lord, the most high God, possessor of heaven and earth, that I will
not take from a thread even to a shoe-latchet, and that I will not take any
thing that was thine, lest thou should say, I have made Abraham rich, Genesis
14. 21, 22, 23. (And O that all Commanders and Soldiers now, were as
conscionable and just in performing their Oaths, Covenants and Vows, made
with hands lifted up unto the Lord, as faithful Abraham was!) yet he would not
renounce, nor give away Gods and the Priests portion upon any condition; but
GAVE THE TENTH OF ALL THE SPOIL TO THEM, restoring only the Surplusage. And
should not our Generals, Officers and Soldiers in these days (who profess
and style themselves, the Eminentest and most precious Saints, and spiritual
seed of faithful Abraham) more really prove themselves such indeed, to God,
the World, and their own Consciences, by giving the tenth of all their spoils
and gains of Wars to God and his faithful Ministers (which I never heard
one of them yet did) and making good of their solemn Oaths and Covenants to
God, (whereof this was one clause The words of the Solemn League and Covenant.
That they shall sincerely, really and constantly endeavor in their several
places and callings, the preservation of the reformed Religion, from utter
ruin and destruction against all the treacheries and bl^udy Plots,
Cons^iracies, Attempts and practices of the Enemies thereof; whereof this in
present agitation to deprive our Ministers of all Tithes and settled
maintenance, is one of the principal, which will ruin our Ministers, Ministry
and Religion with them) as faithful Abraham really did; rather then by
endeavoring what they can (as t^o many of them do) TO SPOIL THEM OF ALL THEIR
TITHES, both prediall, mixed and personal, which they have so long enjoyed, not
only by a just, civil right and title, confirmed by Prescription, the great
Charter and all sorts of Laws, Statutes and Ordinances in ancient and late
times, but likewise by a divine Warrant, from this Precedent of Abraham, in
stead of giving them THE TENTH OF THEIR SPOILS. Which practice, if pursued, as
it will infallibly demonstrate them to be no real Saints or Children of
faithful Abraham (our Savior resolving Joh. 8. 39. If ye were Abraham's
children, ye would do the works of Abraham, in paying Tithes as he did) so it
will probably exclude both them, and others guilty of it, out of Abraham's
bosom, Luke 16. 22. who will never own nor receive those as his friends or
children into his bosom, who are such virulent Enemies to his most commendable
Practice, of paying Tithes, even of the very spoils he took in War. With
this Argument I have so routed some Officers and Soldiers, that they blushed
for shame, had not one word to reply, and gave over further railing discourses
against Tithes, as men quite confounded, and I hope it will have the self-same
effect in all others, when they have well advised on it.

That they may have no Evasion from the dint thereof, I shall answer all Cavils
I know of to elude it.

Abraham in giving the tenth of the spoils of War is singular and voluntary,
not obliging other Soldiers to do the like, or to devote any of their spoils
to God and his service.

To this I answer,

Abraham, so transcendently eminent for his faith in the old and new Testament,
in both which it is recorded; was undoubtedly written for our imitation and
instruction, to do the like, as may be evidenced from Joh. 8. 39. 1 Cor. 10.
11. Romans 15. 4. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 7, 9. Heb. 13. 7. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 14. the rather
because the Apostle Heb. 6. 12. commands us, To be followers of those who
through faith and patience inherit the promises; and then presently after
instanceth in Abraham, and falls upon his practice of paying Tithes of the
spoil to Melchisedec. Therefore all Christian Generals, Officers, Soldiers
must follow him in paying Tithes of all their spoils, as well as in faith and
patience: his Precedent, having been the original impulsive ground of all
Tithes vowed or paid to Gods Priests or Ministers ever since, of Gods
subsequent commands to Abraham's posterity, to pay Tithes to the Priests and
Levites under the Law, as the Apostle insinuates Heb. 7. 4, 5, 6, 8. compared
together; and of all Laws, or Canons since enacted by Christian Kings and
Councels for due payment of Tithes to Ministers of the Gospel in Christian
Realms and Republics.

2. I answer, That this practice of his was frequently pursued by Generals,
Officers and Soldiers, in succeeding ages, of which we have very memorable
Precedents in Scripture, wherewith I have shamed and confounded Soldiers in
discourses with them about Tithes. It is specially recorded Numb. 31. that when
the 12000. Officers and Soldiers of the Israelites under the conduct of
Phinehas, returned from the slaughter of the Midianites with an extraordinary
great booty of all sorts* God gave a special charge, to levy a Tribute unto
the Lord OF THE MEN OF WAR THAT WENT OUT TO BATTLE, and to give it to Eleazar
the Priest for an heave offering of the Lord (which kind of offerings was
Aarons and his Sons for ever, from the children of Israel, as a due alms for
their service, Exodus 29. 27, 28. Levit. 7. 32, 33, 34. Numb. 18. 24, 27, 29.
Deuteronomy. 12. 11. and is coupled with Tithes as being of the same Nature in the two
last of these Scriptures) which tribute was accordingly levied: And because the
prey was first equally divided between them who took the War upon them, who
went out to Battle, and between all the Congregation, which had the other moity
of it; God out of the Soldiers moity (the prey being very great) reserved
only one of five hundred out of the Captives, Beeves, Asses and Sheep, for the
Priests, which were but few; and one of every fifty for the Levites, of the
peoples moity; the Priests share amounting to 675. Sheep, 78. Oxen, 64. Asses,
32. Captives; and the Levites share ten times so many. After which tribute
levied, the OFFICERS which were over thousands of the Host, THE CAPTAINS OF
THOUSANDS AND CAPTAINS OF HUNDREDS brought an oblation to the Lord, what every
man had gotten OF JEWELS OF GOLD; CHAINS and BRACELETS, RINGS, EARRINGS and
TABLETS to make an aton^ment for their souls before the Lord, amounting to
sixteen thousand seven hundred and fifty shekel^, (every Purchase Pilgrimage p.
132. Genundensis and Godwins Jewish Antiquities
shekel weighing half an ounce) Which Eleazet the Priest took of the Captains
of thousands, and of hundreds, and brought it into the Tabe^^acle of the
Congregation* FOR A MEMORIAL of the children of Israel before the Lord, Numb.
31. 48, to the end. Here were self-denying saint-like Officers, Colonels and
Captains indeed, after all the former deductions and tributes out of their
spoil, to bring to the Priest, and offer up to God all their Jewels of Gold,
Chains, Bracelets, Rings, Earrings, Tablets and richest plunder they had
gotten in the Wars, for the maintenance of his worship; when our Officers,
Colonels, Captains, Soldiers shall do the like, and pay a tribute of the best
of their spoils to our Ministers, as these by Gods command did to the Priests
and Levites, not purchasing Church Lands and Revenues with them, See the
Ordinances for ^ Augmentations.
devoted to the augmentation of our Ministers small Stipends; we will cry them
up for self-denying Saints and Soldiers indeed; and say, they are no
self-seekers. If this Scripture Precedent be not enough, behold a whole cloud
of Precedents, imitating them and faithful Abraham, recorded and united in one
memorable text seldom read or taken notice of, 1 Chronicles. 26. 26, 27, 28. Which
Shelomith and his Brethren, were OVER ALL THE TREASURES OF THE DEDICATED
THINGS, which DAVID THE KING, and the chief Fathers, THE CAPTAINS OVER
THOUSANDS and HUNDREDS, and THE CAPTAINS OF THE HOST, HAD DEDICATED: OUT OF
THE SPOILS WON IN BATTLES DID THEY DEDICATE TO MAINTAIN THE HOUSE OF THE LORD
(mark and imitate it O ye Army Officers, Captains, Soldiers!) And all that
SAMVEL the seer, and SAVL the Son of Kish, and ABNER the Son of Ner, and
Joab, the Son of Zeruiah had dedicated, was under the hand of Shelomith and
his Brethren. Here we have examples of all sorts and sizes for our Army
Officers and Soldiers imitation.

We have David, a victorious Warrier, General, King, and Act. 13. 21. Neh. 12.
24.
man of God, after Gods own heart, dedicating the Treasures and Spoils he
took from his enemies in Battles, to the House and service of God, thus more
specially recorded for his honor and others practice; 2 Samuel 8. 11, 12. And
Tol sent Joram his Son to King David to salute him, and to blese him, because
he had fought against Hadadezer and smitten him, and brought with him vessels
of Gold, and vessels of Silver, and vessels of Brass, which also King David
DID DEDICATE TO THE LORD, WITH THE SILVER AND GOLD THAT HE HAD DEDICATE OF ALL
NATIONS WHICH HE SUBDUED: Of Syria, and of Moab, and of the children of Ammon,
and of the Philistines, and of Amalek, and OF THE SPOILS OF HADADEZER Son of
Rehob King of Zobah. Recorded again in 1 Chronicles. 18. 2, to 12. with this
addition. And David took the shields of gold which were on the Servants of
Hadadezer, and brought them to Jerusal m. Likewise from Tibhath and from Chun
Cities of Hadadezer brought David very much brass, wherewith Solomon made the
Brasen-sea, and the pillars of the vessels of Brass. What the value of the
spoils which he dedicated to God and his service amounted to, himself
records, 1 Chronicles. 22. 14. Now behold, in my trouble I have prepared for the
house of the Lord AN HUNDRED THOUSAND TALENTS OF GOLD, and A THOUSAND THOUSAND
TALENTS OF SILVER, and OF BRASS and IRON IN ABUNDANCE WITHOUT WEIGHT: Besides
what he dedicated out of his own proper estate, registered in 1 Chronicles. 29. 3, 4.

2. We have Joab 2 Samuel 8. 16. 1 Chronicles. 11. 6.
David's Captain General, the Captains over Thousands and Hundreds, and the
Captains of the Army, dedicating out of the spoils won in Ba^tles to the
service of the House of the Lord: (and that in a liber^ll proportion) even five
thousand Talents of gold, and ten thousand drams; and of silver ten
thousand Talents, and of brass 18000. Talents, and one hundred thousand
Talents of Iron, besides precious stones, all which they offered willingly with
a perfect heart unto the Lord, rejoicing with great joy they had done it, 1 Chronicles. 29. 6, 7, 8, 9. When our Generals, Officers, Colonels, Captains and
Soldiers of the Army, shall imitate King David and his Generals, Colonels,
Captains, Officers, and Soldiers in such a liberal contribution of the
Jewels, Gold, Silver, Brass, Iron and Spoil they have won in Battles, at home
and from other Nations, to repair or build houses for Gods public worship,
and maintain the Ministers of the Gospel, in stead of seeking to demolish and
spoil those stately Edifices which our pious Ancestors have erected for that
purpose, and breaking down the Carved work thereof with axes and hammers; of
which David much complains, Psalm. 74. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. and in lieu of
endeavoring to divest our Ministers of their remaining Lands, Tithes, Glebes
not yet demolished; all the World will proclaim them, Men after Gods own
heart, and Men of God in truth, like David, and give over censuring them for
Sacrilegious Harpyes, more like to Zeba and Zalmunna, then him who said, Let us
take to our selves the Houses of God in possession, as David himself objects
against them, Psalm. 83. 11, 12.

3. Here is Samuel the seer, doing the like, out of his spoils won in Battle:
A precedent for all those Soldiers who will be Suns and New-lights to
imitate.

4. If the good men's examples be neglected, yet let the Precedents of bad men
shame and excite others to this duty: Here are Saul the Son of Kish, much
talked of and reviled now by many for a Tyrant, the Warrelike King given to
Gods people in anger, and taken from them in wrath, as these object now, Hos.
13. 11. (which I conceive rather meant of Jeroboam the Idolatrous usurper, who
made Israel to sin; as judicious Interpreters prove, by 2 Chronicles. 13. 20.
compared with 2 Kings 17. 10, to 24. and the context likewise, which made
mention of their Idolatry in kissing the Calves erected by Jeroboam: and speaks
only of the Kingdom of Israel, as divided from that of Judah) yet he as bad as
they make him, together with Abner 1 Samuel 14, 50.
his chief Captain (none of the best of men, as 2 Samuel 3. 7, 8. discovers) had
so much Piety, Zeal, and Religion in them, as likewise to dedicate part of
their richest spoils of War to the maintenance of Gods house and worship.
And will it not be a great dishonor to those Generals, Officers, Colonels and
Captains, who pretend themselves the holiest, justest, zealousest Saints, not
to be as bountiful toward the maintenance of Gods house and worship, and of
their spoils, as these they brand for Tyrants and ungodly wicked men? If these
Precedents be ineffectuall to work upon any Covetous or Sacrilegious bondmen,
let them reflect upon others, who were Idolaters, how near they came, in their
way, to imitate Abraham, David and these forecited. When Nebuchadnezzar King of
Babylon had taken Jerusalem, ransacked and burnt the glorious Temple there,
toward which David and his Captains contributed so largely out of their
spoils; he had so much Piety and natural Religion in him; as to dedicate all
the Vessels of Silver and Gold, which he took out of the house of God, to the
honor and service of his Idol-gods, and put them in the Temple at Babylon, not
converting them to his private or public Treasury, 2 Chronicles. 36. 7, 18. 2 King.
24. 13. Ezra. 1. 7. Which Vessels afterward being brought forth thence and
profanely caroused in by Belshazzar and his Princes, at his great feast,
wherein he praised the gods of Gold, and Silver, of Brass, of Iron, of Wood,
and of Stone; you may read what fatal judgment presently befell him, to the
loss of his life and Kingdom, Dan. 5. These Vessels though a just and lawful
spoil won by Wars, Cyrus King of Persia brought forth out of the house of
his Gods, where Nebuchadnezzar had put them, by the hand of Mithredah his
Treasurer, and numbered them unto Sheshbazzar the Prince of Judah, when he
proclaimed liberty, and gave order to the Israelites to rebuild the house of
the Lord God of Israel in Jerusalem; and this is the number of them, thirty
Chargers of Gold, a thousand Chargers of Silver, nine and twenty kniv^s, thirty
Basins of Gold, Silver basins of a second sort four hundred and ten, and
other Vessels a thousand: all the Vessels of Gold and silver were FIVE THOUSAND
AND FOUR HUNDRED: all these did Sheshbazzar bring with him from Babylon to
Jerusalem for the use and service of God in the Temple there: all these did
Cyrus a Heathen King restore by a Decree. Cyrus a Heathen King, restoring them
to God and the Temple by a Decree, when will our Army Saints depart with so
many Gold and Silver vessels to Gods house? This Decree was afterward
confirmed by Darius and Artaxerxes his successors, Ezra 1. 4. and 7 15, 16, 17.
and 8. 24, to 31. these and their Princes and chief Officers also freely
offered and dedicated Silver and Gold besides, amounting to a great value,
toward the reedifying of the Temple, and maintenance of the worship and
Priests of God there. Moreover, King Artaxerxes makes this Decree concerning
these Vessels, The Vessels also that are given thee for the service of the
house of thy God, those deliver thou before the God of Jerusalem; and
whatsoever more shall be needful for the house of thy God BESTOW IT OVT OF THE
KINGS TREASVRE HOUSE: Adding this further Decree, To all the Treasurers beyond
the river; Whatsoever Ezra the Priest shall require of you, let it be done
speedily; unto an hundred Talents of Silver, and to an hundred measures of
Wheat, and to an hundred bottles of Wine, and to an hundred bottles of Oil,
Salt without prescribing measure: Whatsoever is commanded by the God of heaven,
let it be diligently done for the house of the God of heaven; for why should
there be wrath against the Realm of the King and his Sons? Also we certify
you, that touching any of the Priests and Levites, Singers, Porters, Nethinims
or Ministers of this House of God IT SHALL NOT BE LAWFVLL TO IMPOSE TOLL,
TRIBV^E OR CUSTOM UPON THEM: and whosoever will not do the Law of God and the
Law of the King, let judgment be executed speedily upon him, whether it be
unto death, or to banishment, or to confiscation of goods, or to imprisonment;
Ezra 7. 11, to 27. The story of Cyrus and Darius, concerning the building of
the Temple and restitution of these Vessels, is very remarkable, and thus
recorded, Ezra 6. 3, to 13. Let the house be builded, the place where they
offered Sacrifices, and let the foundation thereof be s^rongly l^id, the height
thereof threescore Cubits, and the breadth thereof threescore Cubits; with
three rows of great stones, and a row of new Timber; and LET THE EXPENSES BE
GIVEN OVT OF THE KINGS HOUSE. And also, let the Golden and Silver Vessels of
the house of God, which N^buchadnezzar took forth out of the Temple which is
at Jerusalem, and brought unto Babylon, be RESTORED and BROVGHT AGAIN INTO THE
TEMPLE which is at Jerusalem, every one to his place, and place them in the
house of God. Now therefore Tatnai governor beyond the river, Shetharboznai
and your companions the A^harsachites which are beyond the river, be ye far
from thence: Let the work of the house of God alone, let the Governors and
the Elders of the Jews, build the house of God in his place. Moreover, I make
a Decree, what ye shall do to the Elders of these Jews, for the building of
this house of God; that of the Kings goods even OF THE TRIBVTE beyond the
river, forthwith expenses be given unto these men, that they be not hindered.
And that which they shall have need of both young Bullocks, and Rams, and
Lambs, for the burnt offerings of the God of heaven, Wheat, Salt, Wine, Oil,
according to the appointment of the Priests which are at Jerusalem, LET IT BE
GIVEN FROM DAY TO DAY WITHOUT FAIL; that they may offer Sacrifices of sweet
savor unto the God of heaven, and pray for the life of the King and his
Sons. Also I have made a Decree, that whosoever shall alter this word, let
timber be pulled down from his house, and being set up, let him be hanged
thereon, and let his house be made a dunghill for this. And the God that has
caused his name to dwell there, DESTROY ALL KINGS and PEOPLE THAT SHALL PVT TO
THEIR HAND TO ALTER and DESTROY THIS HOUSE OF GOD, which is at Jerusalem: I
Darius have made a Decr^e, let it be done with speed. If these three Heathen
Kings and Conquerors were so zealous to restore the Vessels of Gold and Silver,
amounting to so great a number and value, to the House of God at Jerusalem; to
contribute so literally toward the reedifying of it out of their own
Tributes, Treasures and Revenues won by War and Conquest; to allow them
Bullocks, Rams, Lambs, Wheat, Wine, Oil, Salt, and all other necessaries for
daily Sacrifices; to furnish the Priests and Levites with all Necessaries; to
exempt them all the Officers of the Temple from paying any Toll, Tribute, Tax
or Custom, which it was not lawful for any Officer to lay upon them, under
the severest penalties, and to enact such severe Laws, and pass such bitter
imprecations against all such as should oppress or hinder the work, or seek
to destroy or deface the Temple of God: Oh how should this inflame all
Generals, Officers, Soldiers, who profess themselves the choysest Christians,
and eminentest Saints, to imitate and equal them in all these particulars now?
Else how will they shame, confound and rise up in judgment against all such of
these and all others, who in stead of restoring the Gold and Silver Vessels,
Lead, Iron, Timber, Stones, they have taken from the Temples of God, and
repairing those Churches they have demolished and defaced, providing
necessaries for Gods wouship, and exempting his Ministers from Toll, Tribute,
Taxes, Custom, endeavor to make a prey and spoil of all our Churches,
Chapels, Church Vessels, Ornaments, Glebes, yet remaining, and oppress our
Ministers with endless Taxes, Tributes imposed on them without their consents
against all former Laws and Precedents to their utter ruin, and in stead of
paying them the tenths of their own Lands and spoils of War, endeavor to
spoil them of those Tithes which all others pay them. Of whom Hemingius thus
complains in his Commentary on Gal. 6. 6. p. 375. Quid dic^mus de illis, qui
Ministros Evangelii necessario victu spoliant? Quid de illis qui IMMODERATI^
EXACTIONIBVS tantum non eos interf^ciunt, ut multi honesti meriti cum suis
uxoribus et liberis cogantur quod^mmodo mendicare? Ho^um sane factum nihil
differ arbitror A SACRILEGIO and LATROCINIO, cujus poenas olim cens^nt
Architecti et fabri hujus mali.

To these Scripture Precedents of H^ath^n* Warriors, I might add the practice
of many Idolatrous Pagan Nations, who out of the very dictate of Nature gave
the tenth of their warlike spoils to their Idol-Gods and Priests; which
because Mr. Seldom writes at large in his History of Tithes, where all may
peruse them, I shall only give you the sum of them in learned Grotius his
words in his Book De jure Belli et Pacis, l. 3. c. 4. sect. 1. p. 454. By this
Law Abraham, out of the Spoils which he had taken from the five Kings, gave A
TEN^H TO GOD, as the Divine Author to the Hebrews, c. 7. 4. explaines the
History extant in Genesis 14. By WHICH CUSTOM THE GRECIANS ALSO WITH THE
CARTHAGINIANS and ROMANS DECI^AM DE PRAEDA SACRAVERVNT, CONSECRATED A TENTH OF
THE PREY TO THEIR GODS, as to APOLLO, HERCULES, JOVE. And should not Christian
Generals, Officers, Captains and Soldiers then much more do it now to God
and his Ministers from this Precedent of father Abraham, in stead of robbing
them of their Tithes? If any should object that these were old Testament, and
Heathen Practices; Let them remember, that Abraham's, is more particularly
related and frequently mentioned in the new Testament then old; the old
relating in general, that he gave Tithes of all; (which relates to all his
substance, as well as spoils) and the new Testament applying this general to
the TENTH OF THE SPOILS, Heb. 7. 4. as Mr. Seldom, Grotius and others observe.
But to hedge up this starting hole so as none may creep out of it; we have one
memorable Precedent in the new Testament, coming very near to this of Abraham,
Luke 7. 2, to 11. Where we read of a certain Centurion (or Colonel) a man of
no small authority, who had SOVDDIERS UNDER HIM; and said unto one one Go, and
he geeth; and to another, Come, and he comes; and to his servant, Do this, and
he does it: This Centurions servant, who was dear unto him, being sick and
ready to die, when he heard of the fame of Jesus, he sent unto him the Elders
of the Jews, beseeching him that he would come and heal* his Servant: and when
they came to Jesus they besought him instantly, saying, That HE WAS WORTHY FOR
WHOM HE SHOULD DO THIS: (And why so?*) FOR he loves our Nation, and HAS BVILT
US A SYNAGOGVE: Whereupon Jesus went with them, and healed his servant;
marvelling at the Centurions words, and turning about and saying unto the
people that followed him, I have not found so great faith, no not in Israel.
This great Centurion and Commander was no Jew, but a Gentile, and one who but
newly heard of Christ's name and fame; yet he had so much Piety and Bounty, as
out of his very Spoils and Gains of War (for we read of no other Lands or
Gains he had) to build a Synagogue for Gods worship; which the Elders of the
Jews, and Christ too, approved as a worthy act, and sufficient inducement for
our Savior to go with him and cure his servant. O that all our Centurions who
have Soldiers under them, and exceed or equal him in Command, would imitate
and equal this Gospel Centurion, in his Pious munificence, in stead of
contriving how to deface Temples, Churches, Synagogues, to abolish Tithes, and
ingrosse Church Lands and Livings into their own hands, and then should they
receive as large Encomiums of the reality and transcendency* of their Faith,
Piety, and Charity from men, as he did from our Savior, and the Elders of the
Jews, for building this new Synagogue.

I shall only add, for our Soldiers and Officers better Information; that
from the example of Abraham, approved in the new Testament, both Divines,
Councels, Canonists, and Casuists, have unanimously resolved, That Soldiers
ought to pay personal Tithes to Ministers out of their very Militia, pay and
spoils of War. This was St. Sermo. 219. Tom. 10.
Augustines Doctrine, DE MILITIA, de negotio, de artificio read Decimas:
recited, practiced, and long since prescribed here in England, in the
excerptions of Egbert Archbishop of York Spelman. Council. p. 268.
about the year of our Lord, 750. recited and confirmed by Gratian in his
Decrees, Causa. 16. qu. 1. f. 381, 382. By all the Canonists and Glossers on
his Text: by A^gelus de Cl^vasio, in his Summa Angelica, Tit. Decima: by
Hostiensis, Summa Rosella and other Summists and Casuists, in their titles of
Tithes, and ratifyed by the Synod of Lingore, An* 1404. apud Bochillum
Ecclesiae Gallicanae lib. 6. Tit. 8. c. 31. p. 967. This many excellent
Christian Commanders, Officers, Soldiers have in several ages performed, as
Histories record. I shall (for brevity) instance but in one domestic example,
and that a memorable one, King William the first (whom we usually style the
Conqueror, though he never claimed the Crown by Conquest, but Ingulph H^st. p.
899, 900, 901. Will. Malmesbur. De Gestis Regum Angl. l. 2. p. 93. Hen.
Huntindon Hist. l. 8. p. 307. Hoveden Annal* pars prior. p. 448. 449. and pars
posterior p. 608, 609, 610. Verstegan Restitution of decayed Antiquities;
accord herein, and Math. Westminster. An. 1059. p. 426.
only by the last Will, Testament and Donation of King Edward the Confessor in
his life time with the assent of his Nobles (who was educated with and
preserved by him, during his exile and seclusion from the Crown by the Danish
usurpers) and as COUSIN and HEIR to Edward the Confessor, as he styled
himself in the very Spelman. Council. p. 619.
Title of his Laws: He having vanquished and slain the perjured Usurper Herold
(who set the Crown upon his own head, and made himself King without any Title
or due Election, against his solemn Oath to Duke William, made to him in
Normandy, which he pretended to be forced;) in Mr. Camd^ns Britannia p. 317.
Mr. Seldens notes to Eadmerus p. 165. where the Charter is recorded: and most
of our Historians in the life of King William. Speeds History p. 451.
thankfulness to God for this his victory whereby he gained possession of the
Crown; out of the Spoils and Gains of his War, erected a Magnificent Church
and Abbey, to the glory of God and St. Martin (which he called De Bello, or
Battle Abbey) in that very place where Herold was slain and this battle
fought; which likewise he endowed with large possessions, Tithes and most ample
Privileges by his Charter, and therein offered up to God HIS SWORD, and the
royal robe which he ware the day of his Coronation, there reserved as a
Monument as well of his Piety as Victory.

After which this pretended Conqueror Hoveden Annalium pars p^sh ^io, p. 6^1
6^^ (...) Seldom ad ^a^^em^n Not^ p. 171, 172, 17^. Spel^^^ ^^^cil Tom. 1. p.
619* I^^ulpin ^ist* p. 914.
in the f^urth year of his reign by the Council of his Barons, through all
the Counties of England caused 12. men of the most Noble, wise and skilfullest
in the Law, to be sunm^ned out of every Shire, that he might learn their Laws
and Customs from them; and gave them this Oath, That proceeding in a right
path, without deel^ning to the right hand or the left, to the best of their
power, they should make known to him the Customs and Sanctions of their Laws,
pretermitting nothing, adding nothing, and altering n^thing in them by
prevarication: which they accordingly performing; and King William intending to
alter the Law only in one particul^^ according to the Laws of Norway, from
wh^nce he and his N^^^^ans desee^ded; all the Barons and Grand English Enquest
w^o presented him their Laws on Oath being much grieved at it, unanimosly
besought him, that he would permit them to enjoy their pr^pe^ Laws and ancient
Customs under which their Fathers lived, and themselves had been borne and
educated, because they deened it very hard for them to receive unknown Laws,
and to judge of those things they knew not, importunately beseeching him for
the sou^ of King Edward (WHO HAD GRANTED TO HIM THE CROWN and KINGDOM AFTER
HIS DEATH, and whose Laws they were) that he would not compel them to
persevere under the Laws of any Forainers, but their own Country Laws alone.
Wherefore the King taking advise, consented to the request of his Barons,
confirming all their Laws and Customs in Parliament without any alteration or
diminution, as they presented them. Whereof this is the very first Law
concerning the preservation of the Churches rights, and Scholars from rapine.

Hoveden ib^d. p. 601. Scld^^i ad Eadm^rum Notae p. 173.
Every Cleargy-man, and likewise all Scholars, and all their Goods and
Possessions, wheresoever they are, shall enjoy the Peace of God and of holy
Church, free from all forfeiture and Seizure; and if any shall lay hands on
that which Mother Church shall require, LET HIM RESTORE THAT WHICH HE SHALL
TAKE AWAY, and likewise one hundred shillings in the name of a sorfeiture, if
it be from an Abbey, or Church of Religion; and 20. s. if it be from a Mother
Parish Church; and 10. s. if it be from a Chapel. After Hoveden ibid. p. 601.
602. Spelman. Council. p. 619, 620. Lambardi Archaion.
which follow 6. other Laws concerning the Churches peace and privileges; and
then these two Laws concerning TITHES.

Of the TITHES of the Church. Of all Corn the tenth Sheaf is given to God, and
therefore to be paid. If any shall have a ^erd of Mares, let him pay the tenth
colt; he who shall have only one or two, let him pay a penny for every colt.
Likewise he who shall have many Kine, let him pay the tenth calfe; he who shall
have but one or two, let him pay a penny for every calfe: and he who shall make
cheese, let him give the tenth to God, and if he shall make none, the milk
every tenth day: Likewise the tenth Lamb, the tenth Fleece, the tenth Butter,
the tenth Pig.

Of BEES and all lesser TITHES. In like manner also of Bees, the tenth of the
profit, and also of Wood, of Meadows, Waters and Mils, and Ponds, and
Fishings, and Copses, and Orchards, and Gardens, and Negociations (wherein
Soldiery and all other Professions are included) and all things which the Lord
shall give THE TENTH PART IS TO BE TENDERED TO HIM WHO GIVES THE NINE PARTS
TOGETHER WITH THE TENTH: And he who shall detain it SHALL BE COMPELLED TO
RENDER IT BY THE JUSTICE OF THE BISHOP, and OF THE KING IF NEED BE: For these
things St. Augustine has prea^hed and taught, and THESE THINGS ARE GRANTED BY
THE KINGS and BARONS and PEOPLE. But afterward (let our Tith oppugners, and
detainers mark who is their original Tutor) BY THE INSTINCT OF THE DEVIL,
many have detained Tithes; and rich negligent Priests do not care to prosecute
them because they had sufficient necessaries for their life; for in many places
now there are three or four Churches, where at that time was only one, and so
they began to be diminished.

This is that William the Conqueror, whom our Officers, Soldiers (with the
Levellers and Anabaptists) most virulently reproach and rail against in their
Discourses, and silly ignorant scurrilous Royal Tyranny discovered: A defiance
against Arbitrary usurpation. Englands Birthright; and many late Pamphlets else.
Pamphlets, for an Invader, Usurper, ROBBER, TYRANT and subverter of our native
Laws and Liberties, etc. when as he claimed the Crown only by Gift and
Title, confirmed all our ancient Laws and Liberties Civil and
Ecclesiastical, without any alteration or diminution; put never a Noble man or
other person to death who rebelled or took up Arms against him all his reign,
but such who were actually slain in Battle; was the gallantest Soldier, and
best Justiciary of any in his age (as some Will. Malmesbury De Ge^tis Regum
Angl. l. 2. p. 93. etc. and Naucl. Speeds History p. 451. Daniel in his Life.
Historians then living attest) and not only much devoted to Religion,
frequenting the Church both morning and evening, but likewise very industrious
and bountiful to promote it, honoring and richly endowing the Clergy that
lived according to their rule and profession, but being very rough and hard
hearted to the licentious and scandalous, degrading his own Uncle Malgerius
Archbishop of Rhoan, and many English Bishops for their dissolute lives;
founding no less then three Churches and Abbeys of chief note (whereof that of
Battle was one) endowing them with large Possessions and Privileges (according
to the piety of those times) out of his Conquests, and confirming all the
Clergies Tithes, Rights, Privileges by the recited Laws. If those Officers
and Soldiers who now pretend themselves Conquerers, and us a Conquered (or
cousened) Nation, will really imitate his Justice, Piety, Bounty, in these
recited particulars; no man will thenceforth bestow such reproachful terms,
of Invaders, Usurpers, Robbers, Tyrants, Subverters of our Laws, Liberties,
etc. as they do usually on this first Norman King; but repute them real
Saints, and Patrons of Religion, Ministers and the Church, yea Sons of
faithful Abraham, who gave the tenth of the Spoils of war to God; whose
example, with all the rest here recited, in justice and conscience rather
obliges them to imitate his and their footsteps (as the premises evidence)
then to spoil our Ministers and Churches of their Tithes and Materials. And so
much in Answer of the first Evasion, respecting our Army Officers and Soldiers
only.

Abraham's Precedent, is made by Country Farmers, Tradesmen, and their
Advocates: who allege, That Abraham gave the tenth only of his spoils gained
in War to Melchisedec, but not of his Corn, Wine, Cattle and other Goods;
therefore this example binds only Soldiers to pay personal, but not them or
any others to pay any such prediall, mixed or personal Tithes, as now they do
by coercive Laws and Ordinances, against Law and Gospel.

To which I answer,

Moses Genesis 14. 20. are: And he gave him Tithes OF ALL. Which being universal,
not confined by him to the spoils taken in War, must be taken and intended in
the largest sense, that is, of all his Substance, or Increase, as well as of
the spoils then won.

2. The Apostle reciting the History Heb. 7. 2. uses the self-same general
expression: To whom also Abraham gave a tenth part OF ALL, without restraining
it to the Spoils of War: which must be intended in the best and liberallest
sense, for Tithes of all his Substance and gain, being mentioned both to
express his Piety and Bounty. True it is, the Apostle in the 4. verse uses
this expression, Unto whom the Patriarch Abraham gave the tenth of the Spoils;
which some oppugners of Tithes, would have to be the Interpretation of the two
former universal phrases; Tithes of all: But the Spoils being not Abraham's
all, nor in truth any part thereof, he refusing so much as to take a thread or
shoe-latchet thereof to his own use, Genesis 14. 23, 24. and the word all, being
not so much as once used in the latter clause, which recites, he gave the tenth
of the (not all the) Spoils; and the two first general expressions,
necessarily including in them the tenth of the Spoils; I conceive the latter
expression is rather a particular specification of one memorable thing he paid
Tithes of in a new case not formerly happening, even of the Spoils taken in
this first Battle he ever waged, or any other that we read of (included in the
general) rather then a full comprehensive exposition of all that is or was
intended, by the Tenth, or Tithes of all, in the two precedent Texts.

3. It is most probable, that Abraham paid Tithes of all his own substance to
Melchisedec, as well as of the Spoils; there being the self-same if not a
stronger ground, for him to pay Tithes of all his other goods, as of these
casual Spoils, out of which no constant maintenance could be raised for any
Pastor or Minister, as there might be out of the Tithes of his Cattle and
Substance increasing every year. Now Tithes being intended for the Priests and
Ministers constant Maintenance by God and Man, and this Precedent of Abraham,
recorded for that end; we cannot without an absurdity restrain his paying
Tithes of all, only to the Spoils then, and then only unexpectedly gained from
the enemy by Abraham, and offered to the right owners; but, of the Tithes of
all his Substance principally, whence a constant livelihood for the Priest
could only arise, and of the Spoils of War only by reason of his occasional
meeting of Abraham here returning from the Wars, and blessing him at that
time.

4. This president of his, was in all probability the ground of Gods appointing
Tithes, by a special Law, for all the Priests and Levites MAINTENANCE amongst
the Israelites, Abraham's Posterity, and the Apostle intimates as much, Heb. 7.
4, 5, 6, 7, 8. etc. that they receive Tithes of their Brethren in the same
manner by the Law, as Melchisedeck did of their Father Abraham. Now they
received Tithes of Corn, Wine, Oil, Cattle and all sorts of herbs and fruits,
for their standing Maintenance and Inheritance too; Number. 18. 20. to the end,
Levit. 27. 30, 31, 32, 33, 34. Deuteronomy. 14. 22. 28. Therefore it is most probable,
if not infallible, that Abraham paid Tithes of all those things which the
Levites and Priests afterward received from their brethren to Melchisedeck; and
not of the spoils alone, out of which no certain Maintenance could be raised,
not specified there in these general precepts concerning Tithes.

5. The Apostle arguing the natural justice of Ministers maintenance, Romans 15.
27. and 1 Cor. 9. 11. uses this expression. If we have sown unto you
spiritual things (in the plural number) is it a great matter if we shall reap
your CARNAL THINGS, in the plural number too; and such things as seem commonly
to grow and multiply; as the word reap imports. And Gal. 6. 6. he uses this
general precept. Let him that is taught in the word, communicate to him that
teaches IN ALL GOOD THINGS: Therefore to restrain Abraham's giving Tithes of
all, only to the Spoils; and not to all his carnal and Good things, is a very
improper exposition, dissonant from the scope and sense of these parallel
Texts, which seem aptly to interpret it.

6. The very Pharisee in the Gospel, boasting of his Justice and Piety, used
this expression, parallel with that of Abraham, Luke 18. 12. I GIVE TITHES OF
ALL THAT I POSSESS; and to confine Abraham's giving Tithes of all; to the
Tithes only of the Spoils, and not to extend it, with the Pharisee; to all
that he possessed besides; is to make this Father of the Faithful, less
righteous, and liberal than this hypocritical Pharisie.

7. That which seems to put all out of question, is the parallel Text of Genesis
28. 20, 21, 22. Where Jacob after his traveling vision, makes this vow to God,
even before the Levitical Law for Tithes, If God will be with me, so that I
come again to my Fathers house in peace; Then shall the Lord be my God, and
this stone which I have set up for a pillar, shall be Gods house: and OF ALL
THAT THOU SHALL GIVE ME, I WILL SURELY (without diminution or substraction)
GIVE THE TENTH UNTO THEE: When should godly Jacob take his pattern of surely
giving the Tenth of all (not of Spoils alone) that God should give him unto
God; but from the practice of his Grandfather Abraham, who gave Melchisedeck
the Tenth of all God gave him, as well as of the Spoils; Honoring God with ALL
HIS SVBSTANCE and increase: according to that precept of Solomon (having
relation to his practice and this Vow of Jacobs) Prove. 3. 9. Honor the Lord
with thy Substance, and with the first fruits of ALL THY INCREASE. And so much
in refutation of this second Evasion which some armed men much urge.

The Third Objection, which some would make fatal to all Tithes under the
Gospel, is from the close of the Apostles Ob. 3.
forecited words: Heb. 7. 12. For the Priesthood being changed, there is also a
necessity of a change of the Law, etc. From whence William Thorpe (one of our
Martyes) thus reasoned against Tithes, and others now, Fox Acts and Monuments
vol. p. 700.
Saint Paul says, That Tithes were given in the old Law to Levites and to
Priests, that came of the lineage of Levi; but our Priests come not of the
lineage of Levi, but of Juda, to which Juda no Tithes were promised to be given:
And therefore Paul says, since the Priesthood is changed from the generation
of Levi to Juda, its necessary that changing also be made of the Law: So that
Priests live now without Tithes and other Dues that they claim, following
Christ and his Apostles in wilful poverty, as they have given them example.

Moses (the Sea Hemingins and others on this place.
Covenant of this Preisthood) were both changed and abolished by Christ, and
his everlasting Priesthood, shadowed to us by them; and by consequence the
maintenance of the Levitical Priests by Sacrifices offered by them at the
Altar, and first fruits and Tithes themselves, so far as they were Ceremonial,
prescribed by the Ceremonial law, for the maintenance only of these abolished
Levitical Priests and Levites; which is all this Scripture proves, when pressed
to the uttermost. But can any rational man hence conclude; The Levitical
Priesthood, the Ceremonial law, and all the tithes and maintenance due to the
Jewish Priests and Levites by this Law are abolished by Christ, a Priest for
ever after the order of Melchisedeck, to whom Tithes were due and paid by
Abraham, before this law and Priesthood instituted: Therefore all Tithes and
maintenance due and paid to Melchisedeck, and in him to Christ, and the
Ministers of the Gospel under him, are eternally abolished as Jewish and
Levitical? Surely this is a mad inference, both besides and against this Text;
from which all Orthodox Protestant Commentators, as well as Papists and
Jesuits, conclude the quite contrary, and learned Nicholas Hemingius in his
Commentary on it, p. 805. thus determines. It is subjoyned, that Melchisedeck
received Tithes from Abraham, which tithes Abraham verily gave of his own
accord, following without doubt THE CUSTOM OF CONQVERORS (Let our Conquering
Officers and Soldiers observe and do the like) WHO WERE WONT TO CONSECRATE THE
TENTHES OF THEIR SPOILS TO THEIR GODS, OR TO GIVE THEM TO THEIR PRIESTS. But
THIS COLLATION OF TITHES, nullo meliori Jure Christo Sacerdoti debetur; IS DUE
BY MUCH BETTER RIGHT TO CHRIST OUR PRIEST; WHO AS HE GIVES ALL THINGS TO US OUT
OF MERE BOUNTY; ita vicissim illi non solum Decimas, verum omnia nostra
debemus; SO WE OWE TO HIM AGAIN, NOT ONLY TITHES, BUT LIKEWISE ALL WE HAVE.
Whether the Objectors or Hemingius speak most Gospel Divinity and Reason from
this Text, let every Christians conscience judge.

2. The Apostles words concerning the change and abrogation of the Ceremonial
Law, has no real coherence with or relation to the precedent discourse,
concerning payment of Tithes to Melchisedeck and the Levites; recited only to
prove the dignity and excellency of Melchisedechs Priesthood above Aarons; and
of the Leviticall Priests and Levites above their Brethren, from whom they
received Tithes. The ^orce of the Argument, reduced into a Logical form, being
thus. He who receives Tithes for the execution of his Priestly Office, is
better and greater than he who pays Tithes; But the Patriarch Abraham himself,
the very Father of the Faithful, and Prince of the Fathers, paid Tithes to
Melchisedech; and likewise the Leviticall Priests (then in his loins) in and by
him; who yet receive tithe of their Brethren, but not of their Father Abraham
(...) Melchisedech: Therefore Melchisedech is better and greater than their
Brethren who paid them Tithes. And by consequence, Christ being a Priest for
ever after the order of Mclchisedech, who was but a type of him, must be better
and greater than Abraham: (John 8. 55, 56.) or the Leviticall Priests, or than
Melchisedech himself, who did but typifie him. This excellency and precedence
of Christ's Priesthood before Aarons, he proves by other Arguments drawn from
Melchisedech, not pertinent to our present business, after which he largely
argues the change and abolition of the Leviticall Law and Priesthood by Christ,
(a theme of a different nature from the former) to which the objected words
refer; therefore the total and final abolishing of all Tithes, to which these
words have no relation, can never be enforced from them; being ratified by the
former clause, as appurtenances to Christ's everlasting Priesthood, as well as
to Melchisedechs; and therefore as due to his Ministers under the Gospel, as to
any Priests and Levites under the Law, which were likewise Types of Christ, the
true high Priest expiring at and by his death.

3. The Priests and Levites under the Law had Cities, Glebes and Houses settled
on them for their habitation, and Cattle, as well as Tithes, by the Ceremonial
Law, for their better maintenance and accommodation; and that in a large
proportion, Levit. 25. 32, 33, 34. Numb. 35. 1. to 12. Josh. 21. 1. to 43. 1
Chr. 6. 54. to the end, chap. 9. 10. to 35. 2 Chronicles. 11. 13, 14. Ezra 2. 70.
Neh. 11. 26. chap. 13, 10. Ezec. 45. 1. to 6. chapter 4, 8, 9. to 15. If then this
Text proves the Total Abolition of all our Ministers Tithes, root and branch,
as Jewish* and Antichristian; as some impudent Scriblers and Petitioners
against them, now affirm: It likewise proves, the abolition of all their
Rectories, Glebes, Houses likewise, as well as of their Tithes, as Jewish and
Antichristian: And so Ministers of the Gospel now shall neither have Tithes nor
Globes to support and feed them or their fami^ies and Cattle; nor yet so much
as an House wherein to lodge and put their heads; and be enforced to complain
as our Savior once did of his forlorn condition, Matthew. 8. 20. and Luke 9. 58.
The Foxes have holes, and the Birds of the air have Nests, but the Son of Man
has not where to lay his head. A condition to which some Jesuiticall,
Anabaptisticall and Athiesticall, uncharitable beasts of Prey, worse than any
Foxes or Harpies, would now gladly reduce all our faithful Ministers and their
Families, whiles some of them Lord it, and lodge themselves in our Kings,
Princes, Bishops, Deans and Chapters new acquired royal Palaces; and not
content therewith, would spoil all our Ministers of their more contemptible
Glebes and Rectories, to enrich themselves and their Posterities, and make our
Ministers like our Savior in his voluntary Poverty. They may with as much
Justice (like the hard-hearted bloody Jews and Soldiers) even Mat. 27. 35*
Luke 23. 32. to 46. Joh. 19. 18.
crucify them on crosses, between such thieves as themselves, to make them
like our Savior, even in his voluntary sufferings; as part their Gl^bes, Lands
and Rectories among them, and cast Lots upon their vestures, even before their
death, when as the Soldiers who crucified our Savior, did not part his raiment
amongst them, nor cast Lots on his vesture till after his crucifixion by them,
John 19. 23* 24. Mat. 27. 35, 36.
there being as much Authority Conscience, Law, Justice, Reasen for the one as
other: seeing none by any Laws can lose or forfeit their Lands and Livelihood,
but such who first forfeit their Lives to public Justice.

4. The Israelites were enjoined by the Leviticall Law, Deuteronomy. 12. 17, 18, 19.
chap. 14. 26, 27, 28, 29. to harbor and entertain the Priests, and Levites
within their gates, and not to forsake them as long as they should live upon
the earth, and freely to permit and invite them to come, and eat, drink, feast,
rejoice, and be satisfied with them and their Families before the Lord; as well
as to pay them Tithes. But this Law (as they argue) is now abolished by Christ
with the Priesthood; Therefore when our Ministers are stripped of all their
Tithes, Glebes, Rectories, Houses, by our new Reformadoes; it must be Jewish
and Antichristian for them or any others so much as to lodge, entertain, or
give them any thing to eat or drink within their gate^, or so much as to admit
or invite them to a Feast, or meat within their Houses; and then they, with all
theirs and other poor widows and orphans, must all presently starve and perish
by these men's new Gospel Light and Charity, because Hospitality and Alms to
such are Leviticall and Jewish, abolished with the Leviticall Law and
Priesthood; which abolished all Charity and Humanity out of the world, as well
as out of these Tith-Oppugners hearts, if this their Objection be Orthodox
Gospel truth.

5. Mere Freewill Offering and voluntary unconstrained Contribution were
prescribed by the Leviticall and Judicial Law, both for and toward the
Maintenance of Gods Priests, and worship of the buildding, and repairing of the
Tabernacle and of the Temple afterward, toward which the godly Kings,
Princes, Generals, Captains, Officer, Soldiers, and all the pious people of
God contributed most joyfully, liberally, and in such abundance upon all
occasions, that they gave far more then was sufficient; and thereupon
prohibited by special Proclamation to give or bring any more (as in the case
of Materials of all sorts, for the building and furniture of the Tabernacle of
the congregation) and of the Temple, toward which many Heathen Kings, and
their Officers contributed freely, and the very cap^ive Jews, Exodus 35. 20. to
30. chap. 36. 2. to 9. Levit. 22. 18. 21, 23. chap. 23. 38. Number. 15. 3. chap.
29. 39. chap. 31. 48. to the end, 1 Chronicles. 26. 26, 27, 28. chap. 22. 1. to 17.
chap. 29. 1. to 17. 2 Chronicles. 24. 4. to 15. chap. 27. 3. chap. 29. 3. to 20. 31.
chap. 34. 8. to 15. Ezra 1. throughout, and chap. 3. 5. chap. 7. 16. chap. 8.
28, 29. Therefore Ministers under the Gospel must not be maintained, nor
Churches and Houses for public Assemblies built or repaired by Free Will
offerings, and voluntary contributions, being Leviticall, Jewish and so
abandoned; and if not by Tithes nor forced Rates as they allege, then the
Ministers must utterly starve, and all our Churches fall to sudden ruin, as
many now do. And is this Gospel Saintship and Christianity?

6. The Priests and Levites by the Leviticall Lew, were prescribed what wives
they should marry and what not. Levit. 21. 7. to the 14. will it therefore
follow (as the Papists Votaries conclude) Therefore Ministers of the Gospel
must not marry, and must all now be divorced from their wives, as well as from
their Tithes and Benefices, because the Leviticall Law is abolished, and
Priests wives Jewish as well as their Tithes? Our beastly Ranters then may seize
upon Ministers, as well as the brutish Anabaptists and Swordmen on their Tithes
and Glebes.

7. The seventh day Sabbath it self, though prescribed by a Exodus 20. 8, 9, 10.
Deuteronomy. 5. 19.
Moral Law was in some sense ceremonial, and enjoined by Exodus 31. 14, 15,
16. c. 35, 2. 3. Levit. 24. 8* Number. 28. 9, 10* Deuteronomy. 5. 14, 15* Levit. 23. 3.
ceremonial Laws too; and therefore (as Dr. Bound, Dr. Twisse. Dr White, and
others, of the Sabbath. Bishop Andrews, Mr. Downham, Mr. Cleaver, Mr. Dod on
the fourth Commandment, and all other Commentators on it.
most affirm) abrogated by Christ's death as Jewish, as to the precise seventh
day from the Creation, and the Jewish rigidities and Sacrifices on it; will it
therefore follow that it is Jewish and unlawful for Christians under the
Gospel, to observe the Lords day every week, and render unto God the same
weekly proportion of time for public worship, as the Jews did, or to keep any
public Fasts, or Feasts to God at all, as the Jews by the Leviticall Law were
bound to do? If so, then farewell all Lords-dayes, Fasts, Feasts, public
Assemblies for Gods worship, Ministers, Churches, (God himself together with
them) as well as Tithes, and let Gain of Money be the only Deities hence forth
adored among us, as the Motto stamped upon our our new State-coyn, GOD WITH US:
and most men's practices sadly proclaim to Gods dishonor, and Religions
intolerable defamation. These Answers, I presume, will for ever satisfy or
silence these Objectors, with His second voice from the Temple.
John Can, their new Champion, who may now discern their gross mistake, and
learn this for a general certain truth: That whatever is not in its own nature
and Original, merely Jewish and ceremonial, and has a kind of natural
justice* equity, convenience, morality or necessity in it, and had a divine
original or institution before the ceremonial Law given, or the Leviticall
Priesthood instituted; That thing, though afterward given, limited or
prescribed to the Levitical Priests or Israelites by a general or special
Levitical Law-abrogated by Christ, does neither cease its being, nor become
unlawful in its primitive, or proper use unto Christian Ministers or Believers
under the Gospel, by the abolishing of the Leviticall Law and Priesthood, but
may, and must necessarily be continued, practiced, and perpetuated among them
without the least sin, scandal, or Judaisme, according to its own primitive
institution or natural, necessary, divine, moral or civil use; else Bread,
meat, drink, wines, clothes, religious Sabbaths, Fasts, Forts, Edifices and
Assemblies for Gods public worship* Houses, Hospitality and Charity to
Ministers, or poor distressed Saints and People, (yea, reading, prayer,
preaching of the word of God, and Magistracy and Government it self) should be
utterly unlawful unto Christian Ministers and People, as well as Tithes;
because given or prescribed to be used by the Leviticall Priests and Jews, by
the Leviticall Law. And seeing meat, drink, food, raiment, Lands, Houses and a
competent proportion of all worldly necessaries are as simply needful for the
preservation and subsistence of the Ministers of the Gospel and their Families
now, as for the Priest^ and Levites before and under the Law, or all other
sorts of men in the world, who cannot live without them: And Tithes, Lands,
Houses, both before and under the Law, were originally given to and settled by
God and Men upon Priests and Levites first, and Ministers since, not as mere
Types, Shadows or Ceremonies, but as a just, fitting, convenient recompense of
their Labor, necessary Livelihood, habitation, refidence for them and their
Families, and to provide them meat, drink, Books, clothes, and other
necessaries to live by: Why our Ministers under the Gospel should not still
enjoy them in this kind and Nature, without the least shadow of Judaisme,
as well as Melchise dec before the Law, or the Jewish Priests and Levites under
it, or their Predecessors before them, even from the first settlment of the
Gospel amongst us, or as well as any other Men, or the Objectors do their Lands,
Goods, Houses, and the other nine parts of their Tithes increase, for their
livelihood and subsistence, transcends my capacity to apprehend, and the
ability of all armed or unarmed Enemies of Tithes or Glebes to demonstrate from
Scripture, Law, Reason, or the objected abused Text, over-longinsisted on, to
clear it from all ignorant or wilful wrestings. And so much for the payment of
Tithes by Abraham, and vowing them by Jacob, before the Law, to justify the
lawfulness and continuance of them under the Gospel, against all cavilling
Exceptions.

Secondly, I shall make good the Proposition from the Maintenance of the
Priests and Levites by Glebes, Tithes, and Oblations under the Law, urged as
the strongest, if not only Reason against them: and thusform my Argument.

That which God himself, who is infinitely and only wise, just and holy, did
by his special Laws and Edicts institute and prescribe, as the most expedient,
equal, fit, just, rational and convenient maintenance of all other for his own
Priests and Levites to receive and take from his own People (when once settled
in the promised Land) for the execution of their function, must questionless
be, not only a lawful, but the most expedient, equal, fit, just, rational and
convenient maintenance of all other for his Ministers of the Gospel to receive,
and take from all believing Christians in any settled Christian Kingdom, State,
Church under the Gospel; especially, if he has neither positively prohibited
this kind and way of maintenance, nor specially prescribed any other way or
kind of settled maintenance for them in and by the Gospel.

But God himself, who is infinitely and Romans 16. 2^* Psalm. 147* 5. Isa. 45. 2^.
Zeph. 3. 5. Acts 3. 14. Josh. 24. 19* Isa. 6. 3. Rom 4. 3. cap. 15. 4.
only wise, just, and holy; did by his special Laws and Edicts institute and
prescribe Houses, Lands, Glebes, Tithes, and Oblations, as the most expedient,
equal, fitting, just, rational and convenient maintenance of all other for his
own Priests and Levites to receive and take from his own people, when once
s^tled in the promised Land, for the execution of their Functions; and has
neither positively prohibited this kind or way of maintenance, nor specially
prescribed any other way and kind of settled maintenance for them in and by
the Gospel.

Ergo, It must questionless be, not only a lawful, but the most expedient,
equal, fit, just, rational and covenient maintenance of all other for his
Ministers of the Gospel from all believing Christians in any settled Kingdom,
State, Church under the Gospel.

The Major, I suppose no rational Christian can or will deny, except he thinks
himself (as King Alphonso, the proud Atheistical self conceited Astronomer did)
more wise, just, holy than God himself; and abler to carve out a more
expedient, equal, just, fitting, rational and convenient maintenance for Gods
Priests, Levites, Ministers, than God himself has done; and dare bid defiance
to the Gospel precept. Ephesians. 5. 1. Be ye therefore followers of God as dear
children: The Minor I shall thus confirm in order.

1. That God did by special Laws and Edicts institute and prescribe Cities,
Suburbs, Lands, Houses, Glebes for the Priests and Levites habitation, and the
better maintenance of them and their Cattle, and that in a liberal proportion,
is apparent by Number. 35. from 1. to 12. where we find recorded, That the Lord
spoke unto Moses in the plain of Moab, by Jordan near Jericho, saying, COMMAND
THE CHILDREN OF ISRAEL THAT THEY GIVE UNTO THE LEVITES OF THE INHERITANCES OF
THEIR POSSESSION, CITIES TO DWELL IN; and ye shall give also unto the Levites
SVBVRBES FOR TEN CITIES ROVND ABOUT THEM. And the Cities they shall have TO
DWELL IN, and the suburbs of them, SHALL BE FOR THEIR CATTLE, and FOR THEIR
GOODS, and FOR ALL THEIR BEASTS. And the suburbs of the Cities which ye shall
give unto the Levites, shall reach from the wall of the City and outward, A
THOUSAND CVBITIS ROVND ABOUT. And ye shall measure from without the City on the
east side two thousand cubits, and on the south side two thousand cubits, and
on the west side two thousand cubits, and on the north side two thousand
cubits, and the City shall be in the midst; this shall be to them the suburbs
of the Cities. And among the Cities which ye shall give unto the Levites, there
shall be six Cities for refuge, which ye shall appoint for the Manslayer, that
he may fly thither; and to them ye shall add FORTY and TWO CITIES. So all the
Cities which ye shall give to the Levites shall be forty and eight Cities, them
shall ye give with their Suburbs. And the Cities which ye shall give shall be
of the possession of the Children of Israel: from them that have many, ye shall
give many; and from them that have few, ye shall give few: Every one shall give
of his Cities, according to his inheritance which he inheriteth. This positive
just command of God was given before the Israelites entrance into, and conquest
of the land of Canaan: And this further positive law then likewise made against
the sale and alienation of these Glebes and Possessions. Levit. 25. 32, 33, 34.
Notwithstanding the CITIES OF THE LEVITES, and THE HOUSES OF THE CITIES OF
THEIR POSSESSION, may the Levites redeem AT ANY TIME, which others could not
do, v. 30, 31. And if a man purchase of the Levites, then the House that was
sold and the City of his possession shall go out in the year of Jubilee; for the
houses of the Levites are their possession among the children of Israel: but
the field of the Suburbs of their City may not be sold, for it is their
perpetual Possession. After this, when the land of Canaan was fully conquered
by the Israelites and divided amongst the Tribes by bounds and limits: we read,
Josh. 21. 1. to 43. Then came near the heads of the Fathers of the Levites unto
Eleazer the Priest, and unto Joshua the son of Nun, and unto the heads of the
tribes of the Children of Israel; and they spoke unto them at Shilo in the land
of Canaan, saying, THE LORD COMMANDED by the hand of Moses (in text forecited)
To give us Cities to dwell in with the Suburbs thereof for our cattle. And the
children of Israel Gave unto the Levites, at the commandment of the Lord (mark
it all enemies of our Ministers, Rectories, Lands, Glebes and Maintenance)
these Cities and their Suburbs. Then follow the Names and Places of the Cities
allotted to the Levites proportionably out of every tribe, and how they were
divided by Lot amongst them: which you may read in the text it self, over large
to transcribe: After which ensues this close of the story, v. 8. 41, 42. And
the children of Israel gave by Lot unto the Levites these Cities and their
Suburbs, as the Lord commanded by the hand of Moses, all the Cities of the
Levites within the possession of the children of Israel, Were forty and eight
Cities, with their Suburbs: These Cities were every one with their Suburbs
round about them: These were all the Cities. In 1 Chronicles. 6. We have a recital
of the sons and Families of Levi, and the Office of the Priests and Levites,
with the names of all the Cities and Suburbs allotted to them out of every
Tribe, agreeing with this of Joshua, where those who please may read them at
their leisure. These forty eight Cities and their Suburbs (as some conceive)
amounted to the tenth, or at least twelfth Part of the Cities and Land of
Canaan; the Priests and Levites according to their number, enjoying in
proportion as large a share of the promised Land, as any of the other Tribes
for their Habitation and Glebes: besides their Tithes, First Fruits, Offerings
and other Dues.

All which (as In his Sermon. April 17. 1608. in defense of the Honorable
Function of Bishops.
) Dr. George Downham, and In his Pilgrimage, l. 2. c. 7. p. 133. the first
Edition.
Mr. Samuel Purchase observe) amounted to a far greater proportion for the
maintenance of that small Tribe, than all the Bishoprics, De^neries,
Benefices, Cathedral and College Lands, Revenues, Glebes, Tithes, and
whatsoever Ecclesiastical Profits and endowments of the Clergy, and Scholars
in our whole Kingdom and Nation. After this, when the Temple of Jerusalem was
built, where the Priests and Levites were to wait in their several Courses
successively, by David's appointment (1 Chronicles. chap. 23. to chap. 27. 2 Chronicles.
8. 14, 15. chap. 23. 8. and chapter 13. 10, 11. chap. 29. 4. chap. 31. 2. chap. 35.
2. Levit. 1 5, 8, 9.) they had Houses, Churches, Lodgings provided for them at
Jerusalem, near the Temple, (where some of them constantly dwelt and attended;)
and likewise for the Tithes, First Fruits and oblations brought thither to
them, 1 Chronicles. 9. 10. to 35. chap. 23. 28. chap. 28. 11, 12, 13. 2 Chronicles. 2. to
13. Ezra 8. 29. Neh. 10. 37. 38, 39. chap. 12. 44, 45, 47. chap, 13. 4. to 15.
Ezech. 40. 4. to 45. chapter 42. 1* to 19. chapter 44 19. chapter 46. 19. These Cities,
Suburbs, Habitations, Churches, the Priests and Levites constantly enjoyed
without interruption, till the revolt of the ten Tribes from Rehoboam: and
Jeroboam the usurper erected two Golden Calves in Dan and Bethel, to keep the
people from going up to Jerusalem to worship God there, out of carnal fear and
suspicion, saying in his heart, now shall the Kingdom return to the house of
David, if the people go up to Jerusalem to do Sacrifice in the House of the
Lord there* THEN SHALL THE HEART OF THIS PEOPLE TVRN BACK AGAIN TO THE LORD,
even unto Rehoboam King of Judah, and THEY SHALL KILL ME, and GO AGAIN TO
REHOBOAM KING OF JVDAH, 1 Kings 12. 26. to 33. and then we read 2 Chronicles. 11.
13, 14, 15, 16. The Priests of the Levites that were in all Israel resorted to
Rehoboam out of all their Coasts; For the Levites LEFT THEIR SVBVRBS and THEIR
POSSESSIONS, and came to Judah and Jerusalem; for Jeroboam and his sons had
cast them out from executing the Priests Office unto the Lord, and he ordained
him Pr^ests for the High Places, v 1 Kings 13. 33. c. 13. 33. 2 Kings 17. 32.
of the lowest of the people, and for the Devils, and the Calves which he had
made: which King Abijah warring with him after his Fathers death, when he
claimed the right of his usurp^d Crown, they objected against him, and the
revolted Tribes, 2 Chr. 13. 4. to 14. Hear me thou Jeroboam and all I^rael:
ought ye not to know that the Lord God of Israel gave the Kingdom over Israel
to David for ever, even to him and to his Sons by a Covenant of Salt? Yet
Jeroboam the son of Nebat, the servant of Solomon, the Son of David, is risen
up, and has rebelled against his Lord. And there are gathered unto him vain
men, the children of Beliall, and have strengthened themselves against Rehoboam
the Son of Solomon, when Rehoboam was young and tender hearted, and could not
withstand him. And now ye think to withstand the Kingdom of the Lord, in the
hand of the sons of David, and ye be a great multitude, and there be with you
Golden Calves, which Jeroboam made you for Gods. Have ye not cast out the
Priests of the Lord, the Sons of Aaron and THE LEVITES, and have made you
Priests after the manner of the Nations of other Lands; so that whosoever
comes TO CONSECRATE HIMSELF, with a young Bullock and seven Rams, the same may
be a Priest of them that are no Gods? But as for us, the Lord is our God, and
we have not forsaken him; and the Priests which minister unto the Lord are the
Sons of Aaron, and the^ Levites wait upon their business: etc. For we keep the
Charge of the Lord our God; but ye have forsaken him: And behold God himself is
^ith us for our Captain, and his Priests with sounding ^rumpets, to cry allarum
against you. The issue of this A^^eisticall policy, and Sacrilegious
deprivation, or Spoliation of Gods Priests and Levites of their Suburbs,
Possessions and Ministry by Jeroboam and his Sons; is very remarkable.

1. It brought ruin upon his whole Army, though double the number of Abijah
his host, of whom they had a great advantage by an ambushment; God himself
smiting him and his host, so that they fled before Judah, and Abijah and his
people slew them with a great slaughter, so that there fell down slain of
Israel five hundred thousand chosen men, 2 Chronicles. 13. 13. to 20. The greatest
slaughter in battle, that ever we read of in Sacred or profane Stories before
or since.

2. It brought Captivity on his Adherents who were brought under at that time,
pursued, and had their wives taken and plundered, v. 18, 19.

3. It brought this misery and fatal Judgment on himself v. 20. Neither did
Jeroboam recover strength again in the days of Abijah; And the Lord struck him
and he dyed.

4. It became sin to the house of Jeroboam, even to cut it off, and to destroy
it from the face of the earth, 1 Kings 13. 33, 34.

5. It made all the succeeding Kings of Israel professed Idolaters, and most of
them bloody Murderers, Usurpers, Persecutors, and produced perpetual
successive civil wars between Judah and Israel, 1 Kings 14. 30. chap. 15. 6,
7, 16, 32. 2 Chronicles. 28. 4. to 12.

6. It brought final captivity, ruin and desolation in conclusion to the
whole Kingdom of Israel, and the ten revolting Tribes, 2 Kings 17. 20, 21, 22,
23. where this sad story is recorded. And the Lord rejected all the seed of
Israel, and afflicted them, and delivered them into the hand of spoilers,
until he had cast them out of his sight. For he rent Israel from the house of
David, And they made Jeroboam the Son of Nebat King, (of which God thus
complains, Hos. 8. 4. They have set up Kings, but not by me, they have made
Princes and I knew it not) and Jeroboam drove Israel from following the Lord,
and made them sin a great sin: for the children of Israel walked in all the
sins of Jeroboam which he did, they departed not from them, until the Lord
removed Israel out of his sight, as he had said by all his servants the
Prophets: So was Israel carried away out of their own Land to Assyria, TILL
THIS Day; when as the Kingdom of Judah Dr. usher. ^^nales Eccles. veteris
Testamenti.
continued above 156 years after in David's royal posterity, enjoying Gods,
Priests, Levites, Prophets and Ordinances, till their captivity for their sins,
in mocking, abusing his Messengers, Prophets, and despising his words, 2 Chronicles.
36. 16, 17. And then See the Books of Ezra and Nehemiah.
after 70 years captivity, were restored again to their Country, reedified
Jerusalem and the Temple; and with them, the Priests, and Levites returning
from bondage, were restored likewise to their Cities and Glebes (of which the
Kings of Judah never deprived them, as Jeroboam and his Sons, and the Kings of
Israel, who were all Idolaters did) whence thus we read Ezra 2. 70. So the
Priests and the Leaites, and the Singers, and the Porters, the Nethinims DWELT
IN THEIR CITIES, and all Israel in their cities; Thus seconded, Neh. 11. 18,
20. All the Levites in the holy city were 284. and the residue of Israel, OF
THE PRIESTS and LEVITES* were in all the cities of Judah, Every Man in his
Inheritance, and Neh. 13. 10. The Levites and Singers that did the work, were
fled every one TO HIS FIELD. In the Prophecy of Ezechiel (written during the
Jews Captivity, in the Land of the Chaldeans, Ezech. 1. 1, 2, 5.) prophesying
of the reedifying of the Temple, and of the dimensions and whole fabric
thereof, chap. 40. 1. to 45. we find frequent mention of holy Chambers therein,
provided for the Priests and their vestments. And chap. 45. 1. to 5. God
enjoins the Israelites by him upon their restitution to their own Land, when
they should divide it by Lot for an Inheritance; That they should offer an holy
portion of the Land, an oblation unto the Lord: the length thereof twenty five
thousand reeds; and the breadth ten thousand; This shall be holy in all the
borders thereof round about. Of this there shall be for the Sanctuary 500 reeds
in length, with 500 in breadth square round about; and fifty cubits round about
for the Suburbs thereof. Then he adds: The holy Portion of the land SHALL BE FOR
THE PRIESTS the Ministers of the sanctuary; which shall come near to minister
unto the Lord, and it shall be a place for their Houses, and an holy place for
the Sanctuary. And the 25000. of length, and 10000. of breadth, Shall also the
Levites, the Ministers of the House have for themselves, for a possession for
twenty Chambers. In the 47. Chapter verse 13. to the end of the Prophecy, he
writes of the bounds and division of the land of Canaan (after their
restitution) according to their several tribes, in relation to imitation of the
bounds and division of it formerly made and recited by Joshua: out of which
there was a special portion reserved for the Priests and Levites, as there was
in Joshua's division forecited: Thus expressed, Ezech. 48. 8. to 15. And by
the order of Judah, from the east side unto the west side, shall be the
offering, which they shall offer of 25000. reeds in breadth, and in length as
one of the other parts, from the east side unto the west side; and the
sanctuary shall be in the midst of it: The oblation ye shall offer unto the
Lord, shall be of 25000 in length, and 10000 in breadth: And for them, even for
the Priests shall be this holy Oblation; toward the north 25000 in length, and
toward the west 10000 in breadth; and toward the east 10000 in breadth, and
toward the south 25000 in length, and the sanctuary of the Lord shall be in
the midst thereof. It shall be for the Priests, that are sanctified, of the
sons of Zadock, which have kept my charge, which went not astray, when the
children of Israel went astray (after Jeroboam and his calves) as the Le^ites
went astray. And this oblation of the land that is offered, shall be unto them
a thing most holy by the order of the Levites. And over against the border of
the Priests the Levites shall have 25000 in length, and 10000 in breadth: all
the length shall be 25000, and the breadth 10000. And they shall not sell of
it; neither exchange, nor alienate the first fruits of the land, for it is holy
unto the Lord.

From all these Scriptures (here recited at large for the Readers fuller
satisfaction, conviction, and ease in turning to them) these conclusions
undeniably arise,

1. That the Priests and Levites had by Gods special command and precept (often
repeated) both Cities, Houses, Suburbs, Lands, Gl^bes de^igned to and settled
on them by their brethren out of all the other tribes of Israel for their
habitation, and the feeding of their Cattle, Goods, Beasts, and that in a very
large and bountiful proportion. And likewise necessary and convenient houses,
chambers, and lodgings near the Temple, when first built, and when reedified
afterward, which refutes the common error of those ignorant Simpletons and
illiterate New-Lights: who from Numb. 18. 20. Deuteronomy. 10. 9. chap. 18. 1, 2. The
Priests, the Levites, and all the tribe of Levi shall have no part nor
inheritance with Israel: they shall eat the offerings of the Lord made by fire,
and his inher^tance: Therefore shall they have no inheritance among their
brethren, the Lord is their inheritance, as he has said un to them; Conclude:
That the Priests and Levites amongst the Israelites, had no cities, houses,
lands, suburbs or possessions of their own belonging to their Office, and were
expressly forbidden by God to receive or enjoy any among their brethren: And
hence infer; That Ministers of the Gospel ought not to enjoy any Rectories,
Houses, Lands or Glebes: Whereas all the forecited Scriptures directly record
the contrary, and the meaning of these seeming repugnant texts, is only this,
Heylins Cosmography, p. 564.
That they should have no inheritance amongst their Brethren in such sort and
manner as they had; set out altogether in one parcel by Joshua and the rest
who divided the land amongst the tribes by Lot (which would have hindered them
from their duties) but only a subsequent assignment of certain cities, houses
and suburbs seattered and divided one from another, in and out of every tribes
inheritance; that so they might perform their offices with more ease, and be
alwaves ready at hand to teach and instruct the people upon all occasions.

2. That the inheritance of the cities, houses and suburbs, which they enjoyed,
should not be reputed their own proper inheritance, though they enjoyed the
possession and profits thereof, BUT GODS INHERITANCE, as a thing devoted and
dedicated unto God; and therefore styled by Ezechiel, an Oblation unto God, and
an holy portion; as See Spelmanni Council. Ingulphi Historia: Matthew
Westminster, Antiquitates Eccles. Brit. M. Seldens History of Tithes, and our
Kings and others ancient Charters of Donations to Abbeys and Churches.
Histories, Divines, Common, Civil and Canon Lawyers style all our Rectories,
Church lands, and Glebes, with the Charters that first settled them, being given
and consecrated DEO ET ECCLESIAE, an oblation unto God, and the Church.

3. That these endowments and Glebes of theirs, were called and reputed, Gods
own Portion and Inheritance. 1. Because given by his specia^ command and
appointment by all the tribes.

2. Because originally consecrated and devoted to God and to his Priests and
Ministers only in Gods right, and for his sake.

3. Because given to promote Gods worship, and for an habitation and support to
Gods own Priests and Levites, employed wholly in his immediate service.

4. That they were expressly prohibited to be sold, exchanged, or alienated by
the Priests, Levites, or any others; because they were given unto God, as an
holy Portion and Oblation, and to the Priests and Levites for a perpetual
possession, whose inheritance was only in God himself: And therefore not
possible to be justly and lawfully sold, exchanged or alienated by the Priests,
Levites, or any other mortal Powers whatsoever, who could claim no power,
right, property or disposing interest in or over them against Gods own
Sovereign and sacred title.

5. That these Cities, Suburbs, and Glebes, were ratably set out in and by
every tribe in an equal proportion, according to the multitude or paucity of
their Cities, as a Tenth of their Cities and lands, to which their 48 Cities
and Suburbs amounted, as some probably conceive. And yet besides these 48
Cities, there were Houses and Schools of Prophets and Prophets children (in
nature of our Universities) in Bethel and in Jericho 2 Kings 2. 3, 4, 5, 7. to
24. chap. 6. 1, 2, 3, 4. which were none of these 48 Cities.

6. That none of the Kings and Princes of Judah, though many of them were
Idolatrous, wicked, and put to great extremities to raise moneys to pay their
Armies, and Tribute to foreign Invaders and Conquerors, did yet ever attempt
to sell or alienate the Cities, Suburbs, or revenues of the Priests and Levites
to maintain their wars, or pay public Debts or tributes, though King Asa,
Jehoash, Hezekiah by way of Lone) made bold with the Silver and Gold in the
treasure of the Lords house, in cases of public extremity (which might be
afterward paid) 1 Kings 15. 18. cap. 18. 15. 2 Chronicles. 16. 2. Yea, the
scripture expressly records, that in the great famine in Egypt, when all others
sold their lands, to buy bread, to King Pharo^h, ONLY THE LANDS OF THE PRIESTS
BOLIGHT HE NOT: For the Priests had a Portion assigned them of Pharaoh, and did
eat their portion which Pharaoh gave them, wherefore THEY SOLD NOT THEIR LANDS,
Genesis 47. 20. to 27.

7. That the Idolatrous usurper Jeroboam, out of a carnal fear and policy to
keep the people from returning to their rightful sovereign, and establish the
crown on himself and his Posterity, was the first man we read of, and his
Idolatrous sons and successors after him, who cast out Gods Priests and Levites
out of their offices, and then, out of their Cities, Suburbs and Possessions,
which he enforced them to desert, (though we read not, that they sold them to
maintain their Wars or pay Soldiers arrears) who thereupon repaired to
Jerusalem, to Rehoboam the right heir, and after them out of all the tribes of
Israel, such as set their hearts to seek the Lord God of Israel, came to
Jerusalem to enjoy Gods Ordinances, and strengthen Rehoboam and his kingdom,
against this persecuting usuper, 2 Chro. 11. 13. to 18.

8. That this casting out of the Priests and Levites from their Offices and
Possessions, and making Priests of the lowest of the People, and suffering
every one that would to consecrate himself a Priest without a lawful call, is
objected against Jeroboam by Ahijah as a very high crime, and provocation
against God; and the maintaining and encouraging of Gods lawful Priests and
Levites in their Offices and settled possessions alleged by him as a certain
argument of Gods presence with a King and people, and of victory and success
in conclusion, against sacrilegious Usurpers.

9. That when Gods lawful Priests and Levites are deprived of their Glebes and
Possessions, we must presently expect, a base, contemptible, time-serving,
Idolatrous, ignorant Priesthood, Jeroboams Golden Calves, with their new
Feasts and Sacrifices, and a universal inundation of Idolatry, wickedness,
profaneness to ensue, with all the forementioned calamities, which befell
Jeroboam^ Army, adherents, subjects, Person, Family, Kingdom: which the Lord
now set home on all our hearts, that we may never be guilty of such a
sacrilegious, ruinating, God-provoking, Realm-destroying, Church-subverting
practice in the least degree, as some would now persuade us to, in stripping
our Ministers of all their Gl^bes, Rectories and settled maintenance at one
blow, (which even Pharaoh himself, and godly Joseph refused to do toward the
very Idolatrous Priests of Egypt, allowing them an extraordinary daily portion
to preserve their Lands from sale in time of famine, Genesis 47. 22, 26. whereto
they have as lawful, as just, as Divine a right, as these Priests and Levites
had to their Cities, Suburbs, Houses and Possessions, as I shall prove anon.

2, That God only wise did by special Laws and Edicts institute and prescribe
Tithes, as the most expedient, equitable, fitting, just, rational and
convenient Maintenance and Reward of all other for his own Priests and Levites,
is undeniably proved by Levit. 27. 30. 31, 32. Deuteronomy. 12. 17. 18, 19, 31. chap.
14. 22. to the end. chap. 26. 7, 12, 13, 14, 15. Number. 18. 21. to 32. Neh. 10.
37, 38, 39. chap. 12. 44. chap. 13. 5, 11, 12, 13, 14. Prove. 3. 9. 2 Chronicles. 31.
3. to 15. Mal. 3. 8, 9, 10 Luke 18. 12. Heb. 7. 5, 8, 9. which Texts all may
read at leisure, and are needless to transcribe at large, this truth b^ing
confessed by all Opposites to Tithes, who hence condemned them as Jewish and
Ceremonial Rites now abolished. That which I shall observe from them, is
briefly this.

1. That the payment of Tithes to the Priests and Levites, was positively
prescribed by Gods special Precepts and Commands, frequently recited.

2. That Gods own People were specially commanded by him to pay Tithes of the
seed and increase af all their Land; of all Corn, Wine, Oil, Fruits, yea, of
Garden Herbs, Seeds, Matthew. 23. 3. Luke 11. 42. and likewise of the increase of
all their Cattle, Herds, Flocks.

3. That God gave these Tithes, and all the tenth in Israel, to the Priests
and Levites for an Inheritance, as a due Reward for their Service which they
serve, even the Service of the Tabernacle of the Congregation; which all
Israelites else were p^ohibited to come into, or do Service in, Lest they bear
their Sin and dye; And this was to be a Statute for ever throughout their
Generations. Numb. 18. 21, 22, 23, 26, 31. Heb. 7. 5.

4. That All the Tithes of the Land, Seed, Fruit, Herbs, Flocks, and of
whatsoever Annual increased, or passed under the Rod, are expressly said to
be the Lords, to be holy unto the Lord, consecrated unto the Lord, and an
Heave Offering unto the Lord, which he gave unto the Priests and Levites, for
an inheritance, Levit. 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33. Number. 18. 24. 2 Chronicles. 31. 6.

5. That God enjoined all the Israelites, Truly to tithe all the Tithes of
their Increase and not to eat or embesle, detain or exchange any of it,
especially for the worse, Deuteronomy. 14. 21. chap. 12. 17. Leuit. 27. 33. Mal. 3. 8.
And if any man would redeem his Tithes, he was to give the full price, and add
a fifth part over to it. Levit. 27. 31.

6. That all these Tithes were to be brought by the people to the places and
Treasuries appointed for them, (the Corn ready threshed, winnowed, and the
Wine, Oil, Fruits in Vessels) at the peoples own costs, without any trouble to
the Priests or Levites, and if the place, whither they were to be brought, was
too far off, then, that they called the second Tithe, ought to be turned into
money by the Owner, and the money paid to the Priest and Levites in lieu
thereof. Deuteronomy. 12. 17, 18, 19. chap. 14. 22. to 28. chap. 26. 12, 13, 14. 2 Chronicles. 31. 6. 12, 13, 14. Neh. 10. 38, 39. chap. 12. 44. chap. 13. 5. to 12.
Amos 4. 4. Mal. 3. 10.

7. That the detaining of these Tithes from the Priests and Levites was a great
sin and Sacrilegious robbing of God himself, accompanied with his Curse, and
punished with scarcity, barrenness, devouring locusts, blasting of the fruits
of the earth, etc. Mal. 3. 8. 9. 10. (a place worthy the saddest consideration
of all Tith-Oppugners and Substracters) Will a man rob God, yet ye have robbed
me: But ye say, Wherein have we robbed thee? In Tithes and Offerings: (Here is
the Sacrilegious Sin; pray mark the just deserved punishment*) Ye are cursed
with a Curse: For ye have robbed me, even this whole Nation (what this Curse
was, follows) THE DEVOURER, (that is, devouring Creatures, as Locusts,
Caterpilla^s, Palmerworms and Canker worms, and the like) did destroy the
fruits of their Ground, their Vines did cast their Fruit before their Times in
the Field; And God blasted and destroyed all their Corn and fruits with
blasting and Meldew, and Hail; A^os 4. 9. Joel 1. 4. yea; They sowed much and
brought in little; they did eat, but had not enough; they did drink, but yet
were not satisfied with drink: they did cloth themselves, but there was no
warmth: and he that earneth wages is to put it into a bag with holes. They
looked for much, and lo it came to little, and when they brought it home, God
did blow upon it; yea, the heaven over them was stayed from Dew, and the earth
was stayed from her fruits, and God called for a drought upon the Land, and
upon the Mountain^a, nd upon the Corn, and upon the new wine and upon the Oil,
and upon that the ground brought forth, and upon Men and Cattle, and upon all
the labor of their hands: when one cam^ to an heap of 20 measures, there were
but ten; when one came to the Presse-fat for to draw out fifty Vessels, there
were but twenty; and the Wine, and the figs, and Pomegranate tree, and the
Olive tree, did not bring forth, Hag. 1. 6. 9, 10, 11. chap. 2. 16, 17, 19. O
tha^ all hard hearted, covetous, hypocritical, atheistical detain^ers of, and
Declaimers against Tithes, and Ministers Just settled Maintenance, would lay
these Judgments, and curses of God close unto their hearts, that so they might
thereby be reclaimed from their robbery and Sacri^ledge against God, and
prevent, and divert these Judgments Curses from themselves, and our whole
Nation, which have cause to fear, and will doubtless feel them to their smart
an^ loffe if they rob God and our Ministers in such sort as many now
strenuously endeavor!

8. That God himself annexed many gracious Promise^ of giving abundance of all
earthly and spiritual blessings, t^ the cheerful, conscientious due payment
of Tithes to hi^ Priests and Levites for their Maintenance; which I shall
recite, to excite men cheerfully to this paractise now, Deuteronomy. 14 22, 23, 28,
29. Thou shall Truly Tithe all the increase of the seed, corn, wine, oil,
herds, flocks; that thou may learn to fea^ the Lord thy God always; And
that the Lord thy God may bless thee in all the work of thy Hand, which thou
do, Deuteronomy. 26. 12, 13, 14, 15. When thou have made an end of tithing all the
Tithes of thine Increase, the third year, which is the year of Tithing; and
have given it unto the Levite, etc. Then thou shall sa^ before the Lord thy
God, I have brought away the Hallowed thing* out of mine House, and also have
given them unto the Levite, etc. According to all thy Commandments which thou
have commanded me, I have not transgressed thy Commandments, neither have I
forgotten them. I have not eaten thereof in my mourning, neither have I taken
away ought thereof for my Unclean Use, nor given ought thereof for the dead,
but I have bearkened to the voice of the Lord my God, And have done according
to all that thou have commanded me: Look down from thy Holy Habitation from
Heaven, And bless thy People Israel, and the Land which thou have given us, a
Land that flows with milk and Honey. Such a conscientious true payment of
Tithes as this, according to all Gods Comandements, without the least
Substraction or embeslements, emboldens, enables every particular man to make
such a Prayer to God, as this, not only for himself, but for the whole Land;
and brings a blessing upon himself and all the Realm, and makes it a Land
flowing with milk and Honey, and abundance of all rich blessings. Besides, we
read in 2 Chronicles. 31. 1. to 15. That when godly King Hezekiah had destroyed
Idolatry, and appointed the Courses of the Priests, and Levites after their
Courses, every man according to his service, he brought offerings, and Peace
offerings, to minister and to give thanks, and to praise in all the Gates of
the Tents of the Lord: He appointed also THE KINGS PORTION OF HIS SVBSTANCE for
the burnt-offerings, for the morning and evening; for the Sabbaths, the new
Moons, and set Feasts; moreover he commanded the people that dwelt in
Jerusalem, To give the Portion of the Priests and the Levites, that they might
be encouraged in the Law of the Lord. And as soon as the Commandment came
abroad, the children of Israel brought in abundance, the First Fruits of Corn,
Wine, Oil and Honey, and of all the increase of the Field, and the Tithes of
all things brought they in abundance. And concerning the children of Israel and
Judah, that dwelt in the Cities of Judah, They also brought in the Tithes of
Oxen, and Sheep, and the Tithe of holy things, which were dedicated unto the
Lord their God, and laid them by heaps. In the third month they began to lay
the foundation of the heaps, and finished them in the seventh month, and when
Hezekiah and the Princes came and saw the heaps, THEY BLESSED THE LORD and HIS
PEOPLE ISRAEL. Then Hezekiah questioned with the Priests and Levites concerning
the heaps; And Azariah the chief Priest of the House of Zadok, answered him,
and said; Since the People began to bring the Offerings into the house of the
Lord; We have had enough to eat, and have left Plenty* (But did the people grow
poor thereby? no, but much richer than before) FOR THE LORD HAS BLESSED HIS
PEOPLE, and that which is left, is THIS GREAT STORE. Then Hezechiah commanded
to prepare Chambers (or storehouses) in the house of the Lord, and they
prepared them, and brought in the Offerings and THE TITHES, and the dedicate
things FAITHFULLY; over which Cononiah the Levite was Ruler. How different was
this practice of all the people and godly Saints in those days, in a cheerful
bringing in their Tithes and Oblations to the Priests and Levites in abundance
for their encouragement; which caused King Hezechiah, his Princes, the Priests,
Levites, and God himself to bless them; from the sacrilegious practice of
Tith-detaining Hypocritical Saints and Christians in our d^ies: who shall never
receive such a blessing as this from God or good men, but their curses: If
these Texts and (...) will not move such hard hearted men, let them consider
(...) this precept and promise of God. Prove. 3. 9, 10. Honor the Lord with thy
Substance, and with the first fruits of thine increase, SO SHALL THY BARNS BE
FILLED WITH PLENTY, and THY PRESS SHALL BURST OUT WITH NEW (...): and Mal. 3.
7, 10, 11, 12. Return unto me, and I will retu^n unto you, says the Lord of
hosts, wherein shall we return? Bring (...) the ^^^hes into the Storehouse,
that there may be meat in mine (...) me now herewith, says the Lord of Hosts,
If I will n^^ (...) the windows of heaven, and power you out a blessing, (...)
there shall not be room enough to receive it; And I wi^^ ^^^ke the devourer for
your sakes, and he shall not destroy the (...) of your ground, neither shall
your Vine east her fruit, before her ti^^ in the field, says the Lord of
Hosts: And all nations shall (...) you blessed, for ye shall be a delightsome
land, says the Lord of hosts. What Christians heart (though never so covetous
and worldly) should not these sacred promises of God, (the last of them
recorded in the last of all the Books and P^ophets in the Old Testament, they
being not merely Levitical and Judaical, but of eternal verity, use, and
evangelical to^) excite and engage, most cheerfully to pay and bring in all
their Tithes and Dues to Gods Ministers now, as w^ll as to the Priests and
Levites heretofore; Christ himself having made like parallel promises of
blessings and rewards for relieving and maintaining his Ministers in the
Gospel, Mat. 10. 40, 41, 42. Mar. 9. 41. Phil. 4. 18, 19.

9. That the due payment of Tithes to Gods Priests and Levites, was a great
encouragement to them in the law of the Lord, and in the diligent execution of
their duties, 2 Chronicles. 31. 3, 4, 5, 10. And on the contrary, The withholding
of them from them, a great discouragement, necessitating them to desert their
duties and functions: witness that memorable Text, Neh. 13. 10, 11. 12. And I
perceived that the portions of the Levites had not been given them (mark the
consequence) For the Levites and the Singers, that did the work were fled
every one to his field. Then contended I with the Rulers, and said; Wby is the
house of God forsaken? and I gathered them together, and set them in their
place. Then brought all Judah the Tithes of the Corn, and the new Wine, and the
Oil unto their treasuries; And I made treasurers over the treasuries,
Shelemiah the Priest, and Zadock the Scribe, and of the Levites Redajah, etc.
for they were counted faithful; and their office was to distribute unto their
Brethren. Which reason still continuing under the Gospel in relation to the
ministers and Preachers thereof. Heb. 13. 16, 17. Phil. 4. 10. to 21. Is a
strong argument to engage all true Christians desiring the propagation of the
Gospel, and a painful able Ministry duly to pay their tithes and portion to
them.

10. That it was the bounden duty and care of Religious Kings and Governors
amongst Gods own people, when the people were backwards to pay and bring their
tithes and duties to the Priests and Levites, to command, and enforce them to
do it by special Covenants and Oaths, sealed and subscribed by the Princes and
people (Neh. 9. 38. cap. 10. 1. to the end) and likewise by positive Ordinances
and Injunctions, and to be earnest and zealous in it, as the two last recited
examples of King Hezechiah, and Nehemiah evidence; And this was so far from
being an unjust and oppressive action and grievance to the people; as some now
term it; that it is recorded of God himself for their Honor, and others
imitation, and so well pleasing unto God; that Nehemiah closes up the history
of his acting, in this kind, with this memorable address and prayer to God
himself, Neh. 13. 14. Remember me, O my God, concerning this, and WIPE NOT OVT
THE GOOD DEEDS THAT I HAVE DONE FOR THE HOUSE OF MY GOD, and FOR THE OFFICES
THEREOF. And will not God remember their ill Deeds in wrath and vengeance, who
shall do the contrary to what he and King Hezekiah acted, in robbing God and
his Ministers of their Tithes and settled dues?

Hi^ron. Super Eze^h. Josephu^ Scaliger D^atriba de Decimis. Drusius Pro. ad
Man. 23. Pur^has Pilgrimage, l. 2. c. 7. M. Seldens History of Tithes.
St. Hierom with others affirm: That the Israelites had four sorts of ^ithes.

1. That which the people paid to the Levites, being the Tenth of every thing
that was food for man, not so much as Herbs excepted, and whatever received
increase from the earth.

2. That which the Levites paid to the Priests, being the full tenth, or their
tithes.

3. That which they received for expense in their solemn feasts, when they went
to the Tabernacle or Temple, whereof the Owner and his family were to eat in
those Feasts as well as the Levite, Deuteronomy. 4. 26, 27. chap. 12. 17, 18.

4. The third years tithes, which were then laid up for the Levites, and
likewise for the stranger, the fatherless, the poor widow within their gates,
in the Husbandmans own Barns and Storehouses, and not then carried to
Jerusalem, as the other tithes were. Deuteronomy. 14. 28, 29. cap. 26. 12. 13. Their
first and second Tithes every year (as they affirm) amounted to 13. in the
hundred; So as the Husbandmans clear Lay-Chattel, the tithes first deducted
came but to eighty one bushels of Corn, or eighty one Pipes or Tuns of Wine or
Oil, in every hundred; which considering the costs the Husbandman was at in
threshing and fanning the Corn, barrelling up the Wine and Oil, and carrying
them to Jerusalem, and the Priests treasuries at their own costs, amounted to
double the Tithes we pay now and more; besides the first fruits paid out of
them in kind before the Tithes; their Free Will Offerings, Sacrifices,
Oblations and other charges Gods worship prescribed by the Levitical law,
together with half a shekle every poll for the service of the Tabernable, Exodus
30. 12, 13, 14. yet the Israelites were obliged by God to pay all these tithes,
which all the godly amongst them cheerfully did without murmuring,
notwithstanding every seventh year amongst them was Sabbatical, and free from
tillage, and the voluntary fruits of the earth then growing were to be for the
poor, and the beasts of the field were to eat the rest, Ex. 23. 10, 11. Lev. 25
3, etc. What would our Anabaptists and tith-oppugners have said and done, had
they been born Israelites, under the law and clogged with so many Tithes and
expenses, who now grumble and refuse to pay half so much tithes as they
constantly did, though they pay no first fruits, Sacrifices, and other costly
Oblations of several sorts to God, as the Israelites did, besides all these
Tithes? I fear their covetuous, Sacrilegious hard-hearts would have induced
them to cast off, not only Gods Priests and Levites (as now many of them do
our Ministers) as superfluous creatures, but even all Gods chargeable
Ordinances and Levitic^l forms of worship as intolerable grievances,
oppressions, and renounced God himself to save their purses, and turned Athiest
outright: Let them therefore reform this their Sacrilegious tith-detaining
practices and opinions, lest whiles they pretend to avoid Judaisme, they prove
worse than the very Jews themselves; yea worse than the very Jewish Pharisees,
who paid tithes even of Rue, Annis, Mint, Comin, and all other Herbs, and OF
ALL THEY HAD. Matt. 23. 23. Luke 11. 42. cap. 18. 12. Whose righteousness all
Christians righteous must exceed by Christ's own verdict, else they shall never
enter into the kingdom of heaven, Mat. 5. 20. Nay worse than the very
Idolatrous Jews under Jeroboam and his successors, who paid their tithes duly
even to the base Idolatrous Priest at Bethel and Gilgal, who waited on the
Service of the golden Calves, and brought all the Oblations to their very
Calves, which God reserved to his Priests, Levites, and himself; as is evident
by Amos 4. 4, 5. Come ye to Bethel and transgress, at Gilgal multiply
transgression; and bring your Sacrifices every morning and YOUR TITHES AFTER
THREE YEARS, and offer a sacrifice of thanks giving with leaven, and proclaim
and publish the free offerings, for this likes you. O ye children of Israel,
says the Lord of Hosts. Let those Idolatrous Jews and Israelites now shame
them to their duties, lest they rise up in judgment and condemn them, at the
last day.

These Cities, Suburbs, Houses, Glebes, Tithes, thus settled on the Priests and
Levites for their Habitation, maintenance and reward of their Ministerial
Function, had nothing properly typical or Ceremonial in them; and being
assigned to them by God himself only, for their necessary Habitation and
competent Livelihood, may and ought to be continued, and imitated in a fitting
proportion under the Gospel, for the Habitation, maintenance and Livelihood of
the Preachers of the Gospel, who are to live by the Gospel, as well as they did
by the Temple and Altar, 1 Cor. 9. 13, 14.

3. There was another supplementall maintenance, besides these Glebes and
Tithes, prescribed by God in the Levitical Law for the Priests, and was
properly Ceremonial, Leviticall, and quite abolished with that Priesthood by
Christ's death; and that was the Priests Share out of every Meat Offering, made
of fine flower,, oil and frankincense unto the Lord by the people, a small part
whereof the Priests were to offer up to God upon the Altar, and the remnant
which was left was to be Aarons and his Sons, with the breast and right
shoulder of every Peace Offering, offered by the people, called the
Wave-breast, and the heave-shoulder, given by God to the Priest, who offered
the blood and fat of the Peace Offering at the Altar, together with the skin of
every burnt-offering, Levit. 2. 3, 10. chap. 7. 6. to 11. and 28. to 38. Exodus
29. 26, 27. chap. 9. 21. Numb. 6* 19, 20. And from them that offered a
Sacrifice, whether it were Ox or Sheep, this was the Priests DVE likewise from
the people; they were to give unto the Priest the shoulder and the two cheeks
and the maw, by Gods special appointment, Deuteronomy. 18. 3. Ezech. 44. 29. 30.
which Fee Eli the high Priests Sons exceeding and exacting more than was due
by violence, it exceedingly provokes God and Men to abhor the Sacrifices of the
Lord, and proved the ruin of Eli and his Family, 1 Samuel 12. 2. to the end.
These Dues and Fees of the Priests serving only at the Altar, had no affinity
with the forementioned Glebes and Tenths, belonging as well to the Levites ^s
Priests, and therefore are distinctly prescribed by themselves. Now for any to
argue that Tithes and Glebes, which were no ways properly Ceremonial,
Leviticall or Typical, are quite abolished by Christ, and incompetible with the
Gospel, because those meat offerings, Peace Offerings and Sacrifices, (which
were merely Ceremonial and Typical, and by consequence the Fees due unto
Priests out of them) are quite abolished by Christ, the only true
meat offering, peace offering and Sacrifice for us unto God; is a mere Non
sequitur, they being things of a different nature, and the one eternally
abolished by Christ, as the whole Epistle to the Hebrews testifies, but the
other not, as the said very Epistle attests, Hebrews 7. 1. to 9. compared with
1 Cor. 9. 4. to 16. 1 Timothy 5. 17, 18. Gal. 6. 6. And here I shall beat our
Swordmen and other Tithe-Oppugners with their own weapon. They tell us for an
unqu^stionable Gospel Truth; That Ministers of the Gospel ought to have no
certain or coercive Maintenance, but only voluntary Free will-Offerings, such
as the people shall willingly give them without any Law or constraint (though
their own unordained Chaplains in the Army and Garrisons have constant pay each
month out of the peoples Purses, to whom they do not speak, and are not
maintained by the Soldiers free, but the peoples enforced Monthly
Contributions; which practice they should first reform, if repugnant to the
Gosp^l: Now such Maintenance as this, is more properly and purely Levi^icall
and Ceremonial than Tithes; since all Meat Offerings, Peace Offerings and
Sacrifices, out of which the Leviticail Priests were to have their Share and
Maintenance, were only FREE-WILL-OFFERINGS voluntarily offered to God, without
any coercion, when they pleased, Levit. 2. 1. chap. 3. 1. chap. 22., 18, 19,
22, 23 Number. 18. ^. chap. 29. 39. Deuteronomy. 12. 6. chap. 16. 10. Psalm. 54. 6. If
then Tithes, Glebes, and all coercive or settled Maintenance for Ministers be
abolished and unlawful under the Gospel, though not primarily, and purely
Leviticall, but of divine, Moral, and natural Right, by the Dictate of
na^urall reason; as Tyndarus, Rebussus, and many others affirm in their
Treatises of Tithes; then much more must their maintenance by the Leviticall
Free-will-Offerings, Oblations, and Sacrifices be such; being more purely
Leviticall and Ceremonial than Tithes, as these Instances manifest, and 1 Cor*
9. 13. Heb. 7. 12, 13. And if Ministers of the Gospel must have neither a
settled nor enforced Maintenance, by Glebes, Tiths or otherwise; as some now
plead, nor yet an uncertain one by voluntary Free Will Offerings and
Contributions, they shall have no maintenance at all allowed them under the
Gospel; whereas the Priests of God under the Law had both a certain settled
Maintenance and reward by Glebes and Tithes; and likewise an arbitrary and
uncertain, by their Fees and Dues out of the peoples Freee-will-Offerings, and
Sacrifices; and why Ministers of the Gospel may not have a like settled and
coercive Maintenance, both by Glebes and Tithes, and likewise an honorary
super-additionall reward according to their pains and merits, by the voluntary
benevolences, and Free-will-Offerings of the People, as well as Priests under
the Law, or as well as Servants and all public Officers, Military or Civil;
Let their Opposites render me a reason, when they are able; the Apostle
resolving thus of Ministers of the Gospel in opposition to the Priests under
the Law, Heb. 13. 10. We have an Altar, whereof they have no right to eat which
serve the Tabernacle; which compared with 1 Cor. 9. 13, 14. Do ye not know,
that they which minister about holy things, live of the things of the Temple;
and they which wait at the Altar, are partakers with the Altar: EVEN SO HAS
THE LORD ORDAINED, that they which preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel,
and with Phil. 4. 18. But I have all, and abound, and am full, having received
from Epaphroditus the things (or voluntary Contribution) sent from you, an
odor of A MOST SWEET SMELL, A SACRIFICE ACCEPTABLE WELL PLEASING TO GOD: will
warrant this Conclusion; that as the Gospel in these Texts retains the old
legal Terms of Altar and Sacrisice, in a real, Evangelical Sense, in relation
both to the Office and Maintenance of the Ministers of the Gospel; So
Christians under the Gospel in the self same Sense, may and ought to allow them
the like settled Maintenance by Glebes and Tith^, and likewise Additionall
Rewards by voluntary Evangelicall Sacrifices and Oblations for attending on the
new Gospel-Altar, Jesus Christ preaching of his Gospel to them, as the Priest
under the Law received from the people.

4. There was another Additionall way of Maintenance for the Priests under the
Law, but certain and considerable by Gods special appointment; even the
firstborn of Man and unclean beasts, which were to be redeemed, at a set value
given by God to the Pri^fts, the firstlings of all their herds, beasts, flocks
that were clean, payable in kind; and the first fruits also of their Ground,
Corn, Wine, Oil, and of all manner of Trees and fruits, and likewise of their
dough: which God peculiarly reserving and consecrating to himself as his own,
and HOLY TO HIMSELF; did yet transfer them to his Priest, and enjoins the
People to give and bring unto the Priests, That they may cause the Blessing to
rest in the Peoples Houses; as you may read at leisure. Exodus 13. 12, 13. chap.
22. 29, 30. chap. 23. 16, 19. chap. 34. 19, 20, 22, 26. Levit. 2. 12, 14. chap.
23. 10, 20. chap. 27. 26, 27, 28. Numb. 28. 26. Deuteronomy. 12. 6. chap. 14. 23.
chap. 15. 19. chap. 26. 2, 16. compared with Number. 18. 11. to 20. 2 Kings 4. 22.
2 Chronicles. 31. 5. and Neh. 10. 35, 36. chap. 12. 44. chap. 13. 12. Prove. 3. 9.
Ezech. 20. 40. chap. 44. 30. chap. 48. 14. These First Fruits most hold to be
merely Ceremonial and Types of Christ, the firstborn of God, Heb. 1. 6.
Psalm. 89. 27. The First Fruits from the dead, 1 Cor. 15. 20, 23. and of
Christians under the Gospel, who are called a kind of First Fruits of his
creatures, Jam. 1. 18. and the First Fruits unto God and to the Lamb, Rev. 14.
4. Therefore abolished by Christ as Ceremonial and Leviticall. But yet
notwithstanding, seeing all true Christians are and ought still to be even
Spiritual First Fruits unto God under the Gospel; To present themselves, their
souls and bodies a living Sacrifice, and Oblation, holy, acceptable unto God
through Jesus Christ: in the first place, Romans 12. 1. 2 Cor. 8. 2, 3, 4, 5. And
to seek first the Kingdom of God, Mat. 6. 33. and then afterward to be ready
to consecrate all their Goods and Estates to God and his Service, so far ^orth
as there is occasion or necessity, Acts 4. 32, 33, 34, 35. I cannot yet
discern, but that all Christians by a proportionable kind of Gospel and
natural Equity, are still obliged to render a kind of First Fruits out of
their Estates, besides their Tithes, for the maintenance and propagation of the
Gospel when and where there is occasion; there being sarre more equity and
Gospel justice for it, than that our Ministers, out of their small, scarce
competent, and many very incompetent livings, should pay the First Fruits and
first years profits of their livings to the King or State (as formerly they did
unto the Pope through Papal Usurpation only) by the Sta^utes of 26 H. 8. cap.
3. 27 H. 8. c. 8. 1. 1 Eliz. c. 4. and almost above the tenth of all their
Livings to the Soldiers (amounting to treble their tenths to the King or Pope)
without any Grant at all by them or their Proxies in the usual legal, just,
Parliamental way, against all their Rights, Privileges and our Laws: The
Jewish Priests and Levites under the Law being never burdened with such first
fruits or taxes, by their Sovereigns, and exempted from them even by a heathen
Conqueror, Ezra 7. 24. Which those, who now endeavor to deprive them of their
Tithes, Glebes, and yet exact both First Fruits, Tenths and Contributions from
them, may do well to consider.

Having thus related at large, what a liberal, various, full, and competent
maintenance God settled on his Priests and Levites under the law, by Glebes,
Tithes, Oblations, Sacrifices, Poll-money, First Fruits, besides the Tenth and
Tribute out of the very spoils of war formerly insisted on. I shall now apply
it home to the Ministers of, and Christians under the Gospel, in these short
Aphorisms.

1. Ministers and Preachers of the Gospel inwardly qualified with sufficient
Gifts, Graces, and lawfully called and ordained, are Gods and Christ's own
institution, and Ministers as well as Priests and Levites under the Law, Matt.
10. 5, 6, 7. chap. 28. 19, 20. Luke 10. 1, 2, etc. chap. 24. 47, 49, 53. Mark
6* 7, 8, etc. cap. 16. 15, 20. Acts 13. 2, 3, 4, etc. cap, 14. 23. cap. 19. 1,
6, 7. cap. 26. 17, 18. 28. Romans 12. 6, 7, 8. 1 Cor. 12. 4, 8, 9, 28, 29, 30.
cap. 14. 29, 30, 31, 32, 40. Ephesians. 4. 8. to 17. Col. 4. 17. 1 Timothy 3. 1, 2.
cap. 4. 14, 15, 16. cap. 5. 21, 22. Tit. 1. 5, 6, 7. Heb. 13. 17. Jam. 5. 14,
15. 1 These. 5. 13. 1 Cor. 4. 1. 2* Cor. 3. 6. cap. 11. 23.

2. That their Ministry and Calling is far more Honorable, Glorious, necessary
and beneficial to men's souls, than that of the Priests and Levites under the
Law. 2 Cor. 3. 6. to 12. Heb. 7. 1 to 14.

3. That it is far more painful and labourious, than the Ministry of the
Priests and Levites under the Law; Acts 8. 4. 2 Cor. 11. 23. to 30. 1 Timothy 4.
13, 14, 15. 2 Timothy 4. 1. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 2. 2* Pet. 1. 12. Romans 15. 19, 20. cap.
12. 7, 8.

4. That therefore there is as just, as competent, as full, as honorable and
settled a maintenance, and as much honor, reverence, obedience, love and
recompense due unto them, for their very work and calling sake from all
Christians under the Gospel, as there was from Gods people to the Priests and
Levites under the Law; as I have already proved in the first Proposition; and
that by divine institution, 1 Cor. 9. 13, 14. 1 Timothy 5. 17, 18, 21. For whence
Comment. in 1 Thessalonians. 5. 13. p. 547.
Hemingius (with all O^thodox Protestant Divines, I have seen besides as well
as Papists and Jesuits) concludes thus. Admoneantur igitur Pii, QVOD JVRE
DIVINO ECCLESIAE MINISTRIS DEBEANT STIPENDIA; That all the godly are to be
admonished, that BY DIVINE RIGHT they ow wages to the Ministers of the Gospel.
And if so, then

5. It follows inevitably, that there being no other settled way of maintenance
particularly prescribed for them in the Gospel; and convenient Houses, Glebes
for them, their families, and necessary Cattle; and Tithes of the increase of
the fruits of the earth, and Cattle of all sorts, being as necessary and
requisite for the habitation, food, clothing, support of them, their Ministry,
families, and supply all their necessaries with as little charge or trouble, as
may be, as for the Priests and Levites under the Law: that Godly Christians
cannot pitch upon any equaller, fitter, juster, better, wiser, rational or
convenient way of maintenance for them, than that of necessary Houses,
Rectories, Glebes in every Parish, and Tithes of all things needful for food
and raiment, it being the constant standing settled maintenance which the most
wise, just, and holy God invented, prescribed for his own Priests and Levites
maintenance amongst his own people, when settled by him in the land of Promise,
and that which all settled Christians Empires, Kingdoms, States, Churches
generally through the Christian world have pitched upon, as most agreeable to
Gods will and word, under the Gospel, which no ways repeals nor contradicts
his own former prescriptions of this kind.

6. That the Glebes and Tithes of the Priests and Levites under the Law, were
reserved by God himself (the Supreme Landlord of all kingdoms, Countries,
Nations, Churches, People in the world, and the special God, Lord, King,
Father, Savior and Preserver of his own people) as a Sacred, Holy Tribute,
Rent, Portion, and Homage due unto Himself from poor Creatures, Servants,
Vassals (who are no true Proprietors, but only Stewards and Tenants at will of
all the Lands, Goods, earthly blessings and possessions they enjoy; The earth
being the Lords, and the fullness thereof, and the Corn, Wine, Cattle, fruits
and earthly creatures we possess, not really ours, but Gods own, 1 Chr. 29.
11. to 17. Psalm. 24. 1. Psalm. 97. 5. Psalm. 50. 9, 10, 11, 12. E^ech. 16. 18,
19, 20. Hos. 2. 8, 9. Dan. 4. 32, 35. Mat. 6. 10. 11.) The use and possession
of which tribute, He allotted to the Priests and Levites under the Law for
their maintenance, salary and reward of their labor in his service, for the
advancement of his worship, glory, honor, and his peoples spiritual good:
reserving the inheritance and right thereof always to himself; as the premises
sufficiently evidence: Now God himself to whom alone Tithes and Glebes (were
originally impropriated; not to the Levitical Priesthood) being unchangeable,
without any variableness or shadow of turning, Jam. 1. 17. Psalm. 102. 26, 27.
Mal. 3. 6. and Jesus Christ (to whom Tithes were first paid by Abraham in the
person of Melchisedeck) having an unchangeable Priesthood, and being a Priest
for ever after the order of Melchisedeck, Heb. 7. And all Christians whatsoever
under the Gospel, being as much his absolute Creatures, Vassals, Servants,
Stewards, and Tenants, as well, as the Israelites under the Law, and all their
Lands, Goods, Earthly blessings, Corn, Wine, Cattle, and employments, his in
right, and not their own, as well as theirs too; why they should not all render
to him the self same sacred Tribute, holy Portion, Rent, Homage of Glebes and
Tithes of all they have, as well as they (though the Levitical Priesthood be
abolished) they being so specially reserved and consecrated to himself, for the
support, maintenance, reward, encouragement of his faithful Ministers under
the Gospel, employed in his Service for his honor, glory and their everlasting
salvation; Let John Can, and all presumptuous peremptory tith-oppugners,
answer me; yea, this their Sovereign Landlord and Creator, if they can; who
will one day call them to a strictaccompt for detaining this due Rent, Tribute,
Homage from him, and may justly dispossess and strip them naked of all they
have for this their ingrate, contemptuous carriage toward him, as he has done
many of late, by fearful fires and other judgments, as well as heretofore,
Mal. 3. 8, 9, 11.

7. That as the Gospel it self succeeded the Levitical Law, and Baptism and
the Lords Supper, Circumcision and the Passover: So the Apostles and Ministers
of the Gospel, succeed the Priests and Levites under the Law in their
Ministerial function in the Church of Christ, by Gods appointment: their
Ministry and Office being both the same in substance (even to worship, praise
and honor God according to his revealed word and will, and instruct, exhort,
direct and guide his people in the way of salvation) though differing in some
circumstances of lesser moment, abolished by Christ's death. It is therefore
most reasonable, just, equitable, convenient, they should receive and enjoy the
like settled maintenance by Glebes and Tithes, as their predecessors did, God
hav^ng prescribed none other kind of reward or subsistence for them in the
Gospel that any can show me. It is usual in all Kingdoms, States, Nations,
where there are any public settled offices and Officers, for any persons who
succeed others in those Offices, to enjoy the self same Salaries, Houses,
Lands, Fees, and Revenues as their Predecessors lawfully received, unless
there be some special Laws to alter their Stipends: This we see verified in all
Civil, Military and Ecclesiastical Officers; yea, in the times of greatest
public charges that ever befell the Nation, those whom most yet call Judges,
Sheriffs, Majors, Generals, Colonels, Captains and Governors of Forts, etc.
though their Commissions be altered in some things, and themselves in more, do
yet receive the self same Salary, pay and maintenance annexed to their Offices,
as their lawful predecessors did; yea, to come closer home; All our Protestant
Ministers, since the reformation of Religion, have generally enjoyed the Gl^bes
and Tithes (as the Parishioners enjoy and frequent the Churches) as their
popish predecessors did before them; though the one of them (just like the
Levitical abolished Priests) made it their chiefest business and part of their
calling to say Mass, and offer an unbloudy Sacrifice (as they falsely termed
it) on their Altars both for the quick and dead; and the other, who succeed
them, make it their principal work to preach the Gospel, and administer the
Sacraments according to Christ's institution. Since then the Ministers of the
Gospel succeed the Levitical, as well as the popish Priests, as the Gospel does
the Law, and the Christian Sacraments the Jewish; and we, with all converted
Gentiles engraffed into Jesus Christ and the Church of God, succeed the Jews,
who were broken off from their own Olive Tree, that we might be engraffed in
their places, who now partake of the root and fatness of their Olive Tree; as
the Apostle resolves, Romans 11. 16. to 25. Why the Ministers of the Gospel
should not likewise succeed the Leviticall Priests (as well as the popish) in
the enjoyment of their settled maintenance by Glebes, Tithes, (being not merely
ceremonial, as I have proved) and all believing Gentiles, who succeed the
believing Israelites in Gods Church, succeed them likewise in the due and just
maintenance of their Ministers by Tithes and Glebes, reserved to and prescribed
by that true, holy, just and righteous God, who is not only the God of the
Jews, but of the Gentiles also, Romans 3. 19. Let any rational Christian now
resolve his own Conscience and mine, from friends or Scripture, Reason or
equity if he can; God having given us a Land flowing with milk and honey, and
as fit, as able to render Glebes and Tithes of all things in kind, as he did
unto the Jews. It is a received maxim in our Law, Quod venit in loco alterius
est de natura Prioris. If this be Gospel, as it has been h^ld both Law and
reason under the Gospel; I need add no more to this Aphorism, to prove the
lawfulness and equity of our Ministers Glebes and Tithes (and to continue as
well for the future as heretofore) by a divine Right.

8. That all Christian Churches, and pious Christians generally throughout the
world, from the Apostles days till now, have unanimously resolved, both in
point of Piety, Justice, Conscience, and right Reason, that they are bound to
consecrate and render unto God the sel^same weekly portion of time for his
public worship, as the Israelites and Jews under the Law were obliged to do;
to wit, one day in seven: though they differ in the circumstance only of the
day, they observing the seventh day from the Creation every week (in memory of
the Creation, and Gods rest thereon) for their Sabbath, prescribed by speci^ll
Laws; and we the first day of every week in memorial of our Saviors
Resurrection thereon, by the General, Moral Equity of these Laws warranted by
Apostolical practice only, without any special Gospel-precept. Let then the
whole Army of Tithe-Oppugners render me one dram of Reason, or shadow of answer
if they Can, why all Christian Realms, Churches, Nations in the world, may
not, should not by the self same rule of Piety, Justice, Equity and proportion
continue and render the like proportion of Glebes, Tithes to God and his
Ministers under the Gospel, as the Jews did to him, his Priests, and Levites
under the Law; as well as they render to him the self same Proportion of time
for his Weekly, public Service, and why payment of Tithes under the Gospel to
God, who gives us both them and the residue of our Estates, and increase out of
his own mere free grace, for the maintenance of the Ministers of the Gospel,
and support of his public Worship on the Lords Day should be more Judaicall,
Unchristian, Antichristian, Superstition (as Can and others style it) than
the dedicating and appropriating of the Lords Day to Gods public Worship, and
Honor, who has given and allowed us the other fix for our employments; when
as he might have justly reserved the nine parts of our Lands and goods to
himself, had he pleased, instead only of the Tenth, as well as the six days
in lieu of the seventh, wherrewith he is content, which Dr. Bound, M. Dod,
Cleaver, Dr. Twisse, Downham, Practice of Piety and others;
Divines usually urge men to induce men to the more cheerful Sanctification of
the Lords Day, and some Scribler^ against Tithes as well as others.

9. That Christians under the Gospel are bound in Justice, Equity and
Conscience to give their hired Servants and Laborers their due and deserved
Wages, and not to detain it from them, even under the Gospel, and that by
virtue of Gods command recorded in the Leviticall and Judicial Law. Levit. 19,
13. Deuteronomy. 14. 14, 15. approved in the Gospel, Col. 4. 1. and to allow their
Beasts and Oxen that plow and tread out their Corn, Straw and Provender,
without muzling up their mouths, by virtue of a like precept recorded, Deuteronomy.
25. 4. (twice repeated and urged by the Apostle in the new Testament, to prove
the lawfulness of Ministers maintenance under the Gospel: 1 Cor. 9. 8, 9, 10.
1 Timothy 5. 18.) and that without the least suspicion of Judaisme or
Antichristianisme; therefore they may, and are also bound in Justice, equity,
Conscience, not only to settle Glebes upon, but likewise to pay Tithes to the
Ministers of the Gospel, as a due Wages, Hire and Reward for their Labor in
the Ministry, as well as the Jews did to their Priests and Levites without the
least tincture of Judaisme or Antichristianisme: since Christ in the Gospel
resolves, Math. 10. 10. Luke 10. 7. and 1 Timothy 5. 18. That Ministers being
Laborers are worthy of their Meat, Hire, and a competent Maintenance suitable
to their pains and Function; as well as any other hired Servants or Laborers
in the Fields, or as our laboring Oxen or Horses are of Straw and Provender.

10. We read it recorded, 1 Samuel 8. 11, 15, 17. That this would be the manner
of the King that should reign over the Jews, that amongst other things, He will
take the Tenth of your Seed, and of your Vineyards; and the Tenth of your
Sheep, and give them to his Officers and Servants; In imitation whereof, the
Kings of England in ancient Parliaments, and of late times have usually
demanded and received by Grant in Parliament, a Decime or Tenth of the Goods
and Estates of their Subjects for their Supplies, and likewise a Tenth of their
Merchandise exported and imported for Tonnage and Poundage, as our Parliament
Records, Histories, and Rastall in his Abridgement of Statutes, Tithes, Taxes
and Tenths attest. If then our lawful Kings, Princes and Governors under the
Gospel, may justly demand and receive by Grantia Parliament, the Tenth of all
our Goods, Corn, Wool, Sheep, Estates, Merchandise, for their necessary
supplies, and the Defense of the Kingdom; and some who are no Kings, and have
engaged against Kingship as Tyrannical, do the like without a Parliament,
being not only a Tenth of all our Estates, but a double and treble Tenth of all
men's yearly Revenues and Estates, and of Ministers Tithes besides, for the
Maintenance of themselves and the Army, without the guilt of JVDAISME or
ANTICHRISTIAN TYRANNY, OPPRESSION OR SVPERSTITION: Why our faithful Ministers,
may not likewise demand and enjoy their Glebes, and Tithes, not only granted,
but confirmed to them by our Ancestors in successive Parliaments, from the
first planting of the Gospel in this Nation till the Reformation; all our
Protestant Parliaments since the Reformation, and by sundry Ordinances in the
very last Parliament, (to which some now in highest Power gave their cordial
Votes) for the Preaching and propagating of the Gospel, and saving of men's
Souls, without the like Brand of Judaisme and Antichristianisme, let In his
Second Voice from the Temple to the Higher Powers p. 1. 2, 7, 11. and elsewhere.
John Can resolve me when he can; who most falsely, scandalously, and
unchristianly brands both the last and all Protestant Parliaments confirming
Tithes, for Popish, Idolatrous Parliaments, acting against the Lord Jesus, and
our Ministry, for ANTICHRISTIAN MINISTRY; Who certainly was in his Cannes or
Cups, when he writ and published such palpable, Scandalous untruths, to the
dishonor of our Church, Parliaments, Nation, Religion: But such Cretians are
always LIARS, EVIL BEASTS, SLOW BELLIES: wherefore they need a sharp rebuke,
that they may be sound in the faith, Tit. 1. 12, 13. He might have done better
to excite those to whom he dedicates his Pamphlet against those Popish Priests,
Monks, Friars, Jesuits, sent from the Pope and Rome into England of late to
root out our Ministry, and their Maintenance, as most opposite to
Antichristianisme, and his Papal S^veraignty and Errors, under the Notion of
Anabaptised dipped Jews, Gifted Brethren, New Lights, Seekers, of which more in
its due place.

11. That God in the Leviticall and Judicial Law prescribed Laws for War,
and Soldiers in the Wars, Deuteronomy. 20. throughout, and amongst others, v. 2, 3,
4. It shall be, when ye come nigh unto the Battle, that the Priest shall
approach and speak unto the people, and shall say unto them (for their
encouragement) Hear O Israel, you approach this day unto battle against your
enemies; let not your hearts faint, fear not, and do not tremble, neither, be
ye terrified because of them, for the Lord your God is he that goes with you,
against your enemies to save you. After which, v. 8. etc. The Officers are
commanded to make Proclamation, that every man, who was fearful and
faint-hearted should go and return to his house, left they should discourage
their brethen, that they should proclaim Peace to every City they came nigh,
before they besieged or stormed it; and if they won it by force, the Soldiers
should take the spoil thereof unto themselves, and eat the spoil of their
enemies, which the Lord their God had given them. And by another Leviticall Law
the Priests were thus enjoined by God, to pray for and bless his people, Number.
6. 23. 24. etc. On this wise ye shall bless the children of Israel, saying to
them, the Lord bless thee, and keep thee; the Lord make his face shine upon
thee, and be gracious unto thee; the Lord lift up his Countenance upon thee,
and give thee Peace: and they shall put my name upon the Children of Israel,
and I will bless them. If then it be neither Jewish nor Antichristian, nor
Superstitious nor unlawful, for Ministers of the Gospel to encourage Christian
Soldiers going to battle in the self same manner and form, or to bless them
and the people in these very Leviticall words as Chaplain to Sir Arthur
Haslerigs Regiment and Garrison heretofore.
John Can and all Anabaptisticall and Independent Chaplains of the Army (and
Mr. Peter's especially) wlil grant, who have frequently used the sel^ same or
like encouragements and Exhortations to the Army, receiving good, constant pay
for their pains. And if it be neither Jewish nor Antichristian, nor unchristian
for our Saintlike Officers and Soldiers under the Gospel, to make like
Proclamation to cowardly persons, or to proclaim peace to Cities and garrisons,
ere they besiege or storm them, and if obstinate and won by force to take the
Spoil and Plunder of such Cities and Enemies to themselves, and eat thereof,
which I am certain all our Officers, Soldiers, and their Anabaptisticall
Tithe-oppugning Chaplains will grant and subscribe to, though thus prescribed
by the Leviticall Law, abolished (as they say) by Jesus Christ. Then
questionless our Ministers of the Gospel may still receive and enjoy their
Gl^bes and Tithes by like reason, without the least guilt or reproach of
Judaisme or Antichristianisme, though prescribed to the Levitical Priests and
Levites, by the Levitical law, else John Can and others of his fraternity
(professing themselves the only Ministers of the Gospel, and rejecting all
others as Antichristian) must give over their Chaplains places in the Army,
Navy, Garrisons, and no more encourage nor accompany any Soldiers in the wars,
or bless the people, as aforesaid; because it was a part of the Levitical
Priests Office (who were also to blow the Trumpets in the wars, Number. 6. 1. to
10. Josh. 6. 4, etc. prescribed by an abolished Levitical law.

12. That all Israelites and Jews both Priests and people, were by the
Levitical law frequently commanded inviolably to perform, keep, pay and execute
the solemn Oaths, Vows and Covenants they made to God or men, and no ways to
infringe them, or prevaricate in them, Levit. 19. 12. Number. 21. 3, 3. cap. 30.
2. to 16. Deuteronomy. 12. 11. cap. 23. 21, 22, 23. Josh. 2. 11, 12, 13. cap. 6. 22.
to 26. cap. 9. 15. to the end. And among other things, we find their Tithes
(vowed to God by Jacob, Genesis 28. 20, 21, 22.) coupled with their Vows, as
things devoted by them to God by Vow, as well as reserved by Law: Deuteronomy. 12. 11.
Yea, all the Jews were obliged by a Solemn Covenant to bring and pay their
first fruits and Tithes to God, his Priests and Levites. Neh. 10. 31. to 39.
will or dare John Can then, or any other Tith-denyers aver, that it is both
Jewish, Antichristian and unlawful for Ministers and Christians under the
Gospel, inviolably to observe and perform all those just and lawful^ Oaths,
Vows, Covenants, Solemnly made to God and men, with hands lifted up to heaven
(as some of their perfidious horrid violations of them without blush or check
of late seems to proclaim before God and all the world, and to pay those Tithes
and Dues to our Ministers, which our Ancestors and we by Solemn Vows and
Covenants too, have dedicated unto God and his Ministers, and never intended by
our Covenant to abolish or diminish in the least degree, (as he perjuriously
and absurdly asserts) but to establish and perpetuate, as the late Ordinances
for Tithes and Augmentations made by the very Prescribers and Subscribers of
the late Solemn League and Covenant (which it seems John Can never took,
though he presses it on others, as his words MANY HAVE SWORN, who I hope will
now observe it, import) both at the time and since the making and taking of the
Solemn League and Covenant, with the Assemblies Exhortation for the better
taking thereof, authorized by the late Parliament infallibly evidence. If so;
John Can with his perfidious Oath-Vow-Covenant-breaking Tith-abjuring
disciples must renounce that true and only God, they say they worship in
greatest truth and sincerity; as a Jewish, unchristian, antichristian God
likewise (I speak it with reverence and honor too, for their fuller
conviction) because he always has been, now is, and will be, a most true,
faithful, Oath-observing, Covenant-keeping, Vow-performing God, who reputes
his Oaths, Vows, Covenants, IMMUTABLE THINGS, and will never violate, falsify,
forget, or neglect them in the least degree, though made to sinful,
treacherous and perfidious men, Psalm. 89. 3, 4, 28. to 38. Psalm. 120. 4. Neh.
1. 5. cap. 9. 32. Psalm. 111. 5, 9. Isa. 54. 10. cap. 55. 3. Jer. 33. 20, 21.
Luke 1. 72, 73. and ^ Chron. 21. 6, 7. (a memorable Text) 2 Cor. 1. 18. which
all those, who own or challenge him to be their God, are peremptorily obliged
to imitate herein, or else they shall never enter into his holy hill, or dwell
with him in his Tabernacle, Ps. 15. 1, 2, 14 Psalm. 24. 3, 4. Romans 1. 31, 32. 1 Timothy 1. 10. Rev. 22. 15. and that in this very case of Tithes. If not, then why
should not Tithes and Glebes, which many Ministers and we have vowed and
devoted to God, continue and still be paid under the Gospel without
superstition, sin, or Judaisme, as well as other Vows, Oaths, and the religious
observation of them.

Upon these Considerations all or most Christian Kingdoms, States, Churches,
upon the very first preaching and embracing of the Gospel amongst them, not
only edified Churches and Chapels for Gods worship and public Assemblies,
but likewise endowed the Ministers thereof with convenient Glebes and Tithes,
as Eusebius, Socrates Scholasticus, Theodoret, Nicephorus, Calistus, the
Century Writers, Baronius, Spondanus, with other Ecclesiastical Historians, and
Hospinian De Origin Templorum, prove at large for foreign Parts; and our own
ancientest Annualists, with Antiquitates Ecclesiae Brittanicae, Sr. Henry
Spelman, Concilium Angl. Tom. 1. and learned Dr. Usher, in his Britanicarum
Ecclesiarum Antiquitates, manifest for our own Nations and Realms.

Now because John Can, out of his ignorance, has newly published in his Page
13, 14*
Second Voice from the Temple (or Alehouse rather, for which Cannes are more
proper) That Pope Gregory the tenth was the first that ordained Tithes to be
paid to Priests, in the year 1214. and that the Customs for paying Tithes at
this day, were settled upon the Kingdom by the Popes Legates in Provincial and
Synodall Constitutions about the time of Henry the third, and Henry the fifth;
Vouching Thorpe and Ridley the Civilian, to prove it; I shall give you a brief
touch concerning the Original of Churches, Glebes, Tithes in this our Island.

Joan. Capgrave in vita Josephi: Chr. Glastoniens. Vincentius Spec. Hist. lib.
23. c. 147. with sundry others, cited by Dr. Usher. Britan. Ecclesiarum
Antiquitates. c. 2. p. 973, 974 Spelman Conc. p. 12, etc. with the Authors
quoted by them.
About the year of our Lord 48. (as our Historians record) Joseph of
Aramathaea, who interred our Savior with XI. more Disciples, were sent into
Britain to preach the Gospel by Philip the Apostle, in the reign of Arviragus,
who arriving here were courteously entertained by this Pagan King, and
preaching the Gospel to him, and his people; he perceiving the purity of their
Doctrine, and the holiness of their Conversation, gave them twelve Hides of
land in the Isle of Avalon (since called Glastenbury) for to build a Church and
support them, (till this day called and known by the Name, of the twelve Hydes
of Glastenbury) where they built the first Church, erected for Gods worship in
this Isle, made of Wattle and Reed, and there continued together preaching the
Gospel, and living upon this their Glebe (now of great value) which was
afterward confirmed to them, and the Ministers of the Gospel there succeeding
them, both by Marius and Coilus, next successors to Arviragus, whom they
instructed in Christian Religion, to which they were well affected, albeit
neither of them, nor Arviragus himself proceeded so far as to be baptized, for
fear of displeasing their Pagan subjects; though Harding in his Chronicle,
chapter 48. (against the stream of our other Historians) writes, that King
Arviragus himself was Baptized by Joseph of Arimathaea. After this Dr. Usher
Brit. Eccles. Antiq. Spelmanni Conc. p. 12 etc. with the Authors quoted by them.
Lucius King of Britain being converted to the Christian Faith and Baptized,
his subjects and many other petty British Kings about the year of our Lord 176.
by Faganus and Domianus, sent to him at his earnest request by Elutherius then
Bishop of Rome (long before Pope or Popery were there erected or known in the
world) he upon the reception of the faith builds and ^ndows Ch^rches throughout
his Dominions with Glebes and Tithes, to support the Ministry, whence our
ancient Poets thus write of him,

Lueius in Christum credit, Christoque dic^tas

ECCLESIAS DOTAT, DISTINCT AS ORDINAT VRBES. Many of our ancient Historians
add, that in his time there were 28 Flamins, and three Ar^h Flamines in
Britain endowed with great Revenues for the Service of their Idol gods, to
whom they had erected so many fair Temples; and that Lucius after his
conversion, Turned these into 28 Bishoprics, and three Arch-Bishopricks, and
purging these polluted Temples from their Idols and heathenish pollutions,
dedicated them to the Service of the true God; which Sr. Henry Spelman, Dr.
Usher, Godwin, and the most judicious of our later Antiquaries, justly reject
as fabulou^. After Lucius, Churches were here and in other places endowed with
Glebes, and Bishops with rich Lordly possessions by Constantine the great: And
about the year of Christ ^12. the Christians being here and elsewhere restored
to peace, and freed from persecution by Constantine, Gildas, Dr. usher, Brit.
Eccles. Antiq. p. 193. Spelmanni Con^il. p. 36. 45.
began to build and repair those Churche^ which Dioclesian and other
persecutors had rased to the ground, and to endow them with maintenance for the
Ministry. In succeeding times, the English Saxons, who at their first arrival
(being bloody Pagans) cruelly wasted the British Churches, and butchered their
Ministers, Scholars, Saints, being converted to the CHRISTIAN FAITH by
Augustine, sent hither for that purpose by Pope Gregory the first, (who
disclaimed that Papal Supremacy his Successors since challenged) Aethelbert,
King of Kent, and his Saxons being baptized by Augustine about the year of
Christ 603 thereup* they began to repair the old ruinated Churches, and to
build new throughout his Dominions; this King turning his Royal Palace at
Spelman lb. p. 112, 113. de antiquit atibus Eccles. Brit. Dr. Usher.
Canterbury, into the Church of Christ, and that City, the Seat of his Kingdom
into a Bishops See, and bestowing them on Augustine who converted him and his
Subjects to Christianity, whom he made Archbishop of Canterbury, and endowed
with large Possessions: Not long after diverse other Saxon Kings and their
Subjects being converted and baptized, built and endowed sundry other Churches,
both with Glebes and Possessions of good value, and likewise with Tithes. And
in anno, 854. Malmesbury, de gestis Regu^ Angl. l. 2. c. 2. Mat. Westminster. Anno
854. Florentius Wigorniensis, Anno 855. Spelmanni Council. p. 348 353.
Aethelwolf King of the West Saxons, considering the perilous times then
fallen upon him and his Realm, by reason of the burnings of the Wars, the
Plunders of the Goods, the devastations of the Territories of his Kingdom by
the most cruel depredations of barbarous Enemies, and Pagan Nations, and the
manifold Tribulations afflicting him and his people, even to their destruction;
he thereupon summoning a general Council or Parliament at Westchester, in
which himself, Bernredus, King of Mercia, and Edmund King of East Angles, with
all the Prelates and Nobles of England, were present, did by their wholesome
Counsel, for redress of these evils by his Charter (ratified in and by this
Council) Give the Tenth part of all his own Lands in perpetuity to God and his
Servants, free and exempt from all Secular Services, and also from all Royal
Tributes, and Taxes, Great and Small, and from all Military Expedition,
Building of Bridges, and GVARDING OF CASTLES; that so they might the more
diligently power forth their prayers unto God for him without ceasing, who had
in some part thus eased them of their servitude: from which Grant of his, Sir
Henry Spelman conceives, the Parsonage House, Rectory and Glebes in every
Parish of his Realm, had its Original, though afterward increased by the
munificence of the Patrons. And this shall suffice touching the true Original
and progress of our Churches, Rectories and Glebes, in the beginning of
Christianity, both amongst the Britains, and Saxons of this Realm.

The first Law I find yet extant amongst us, for the due payment of all kind of
Tithes (in use and being as the Law imports, before its promulgation) was made
in the Spelman Council. p. 292, 293, 298. to 302. Cent. Magd. and cap. 9.
National Council, (or P^rliament) at Calchuth in the year of our Lord, 785.
in the Reigns of King Oswald and King Offa, who by the unanimous consent of all
their Princes, Nobles, and Senators, (as well as Prelates,) present therein,
made this memorable Decree, touching the Payment of Tithes, as a Right and
Duty, which they were bound to render by God himself, by his own Sacred Law,
originally given to the Israelites, which they deemed Obligatory likewise unto
them: Cap. 17. ut Decimae just solvantur, usura, iniqua Pondera, and Mensurae
prohibeantur: Thou shall bring the Tenth part of all thy Corn (or increase)
into the House of the Lord thy God, AS IT IS WRITTEN IN THE LAW, (viz. Levit.
27. 30. Numb. 12. 17, 18. etc. Deuteronomy. 12. 17, 18. chap. 14. 22, 23. Neh. 10. 38.
not in the Popish Canons) Again by THE PROPHET (not Pope) (Mal. 3. 10. etc.)
Bring says he, all the Tithes into the Storehouse, that there may be meat in
my House, and prove me now therewith, if I will not open the Doors of Heaven,
and power you out a Blessing, that there shall not be room enough to receive it.
And I will rebuke the Devourer for you, which eats and corrupts the fruit of
your grounds, and the Vine shall be no more barren in the field, says the
Lord. As the Wiseman says (in the Book of Wisdom, not the Pope) No man can
give any just Alms of those things which he possesses, unless he shall first
separate to the Lord that which from the beginning himself has appointed to be
rendered to him. And by this for the most part it happens, that he who pays
not Tithes is reduced (by Gods Justice) to the Tenth part of his former Estate,
whereupon) not by any Command from the Pope, or by his Authority) We Command,
even with an Obtestation, that all be studious to give Tithes of all things
they possess, quia speciale Dei donum est, BECAUSE IT IS THE PECVLIAR PORTION
OF THE LORD GOD: and let him love himself, and give Alms of the nine parts; and
we persuade them rather to do it in secret, because it is written, When thou
give Alms do not blow a Trumpet before thee, Mat. 6. 2. After which follows
laws against Usury, False Weights and Measures; FOR THE FAITHFVL PERFORMANCE OF
VOWS; and abolishing the very Relics of all Pagan Rites; warranted by the
very words and Presidents of the Sacred Scripture. Which Decrees being in a
public Council before the Kings, and all their Prelates, Duke^ Senator^, AND
THE PEOPLE OF THE LAND: Illi, cum omni devotione mentis, juxta possibilitatem
virium suarum, adjuvante superna clementia, SE IN OMNIBUS CUSTODIRE DEVOVERUNT:
who with all Devotion of mind, according to the utermost of their power, by the
assistance of Gods Grace vowed that they would observe them in all things:
which they all did with an unanimous Voice, a cheerful mind, and most ready
Will, ratifying this Council with the Subscriptions of their Names, and the
Sign of the Cross (the usual form of those times before States were in use.
This is the first Law I find extant in our Realm) for the due payment of
Tithes, grounded only on Divine precepts, cited in it, not on the Popes
Decrees. True it is, that Gregory, Bishop of Ostia, Legate to Pope Adrian, an
Englishman born, was President in this Council, and had a chief hand in making
these Laws, by this Popes direction, to whom he returned them: but are they
therefore popish and Antichristian Laws, which ought to be now abolished (to
gratify the present Pope and his Emissaries the Jesuits) as made against Jesus
Christ, as In his Second Voice from the Temple.
John Can most Magisterially determines? if so, then these and our other Laws
then made against Usury, false Weights, Measures (which too many cheating
Anabaptists use) Heathenish, Pagan Customs, must be Popish and Antichristian
too, with the Law for performing our Vows and Covenants to God and men; the
very Scripture cited in them, whereon they are grounded; which impudency and
Atheism it self dares not affirm: If he say they are Jewish Laws, then the
Scriptures cited in them must be Jewish too; Yea the, very Title, and every
page of his new Pamphlet, must be rejected as Jewish, as well as Jesuitish;
being Entitled, and Superscribed in every page, A Second Voice from the
Temple: The Temple being Jewish, and abolished as well as Tithes, 1 Cor. 9. 13.
John 4. 20. 21. Which I wonder this blind Zelot against Judaisme and Tithes,
had not Eyes to see, or Brains to consider. Now these our Predecessors, and
many others since, obliging themselves both by Vows, Laws, and Covenants, to
pay Tithes of all to God and his Ministers, as Gods peculiar Right, and God him
self not only enjoining men in the Old Testament not to remove the ancient
Landmarks their Fathers have (duly) set, Prove. 22. 8. and to make good their
Ancestors Oaths and Vows, (which oblige their Posterity, as Genesis 50. 24, 25,
Exodus 13. 19. Josh. 24. 32. chap. 2. 12. to 22. chap. 6. 21. to 26. chap. 9.
15. to 27. chap. 10. 1. to 12. 2 Samuel 21. 1. to 15. 1 Samuel 20. 14, 15, 16, 17,
23, 42. chap. 23. 8. chap. 24. 21. 2 Chronicles. 16. 3. compared together resolve)
but likewise informing them in the new, as a Gospel Truth, Gal. 3. 15. That if
it be but a man's Covenant, if it be confirmed (by many Succ^ssive Laws,
Statutes, Curses and Excommunications denounced against the infringers thereof
in all succeeding ages, as this of Tithes, and the Churches Rights and
Liberties have been) NO MAN DISANULLETH IT: By what Authority, Right, Law,
Reason, Justice, Conscience or power from God or Men, any presuming Mortals, at
the solicitations of Anabaptists, Jesuits, or Atheistical wretches, can
Sacrilegiously attempt to rob God himself, and plunder his faithful Ministers
of this their ancient, just, hereditary, Sacred, settled Maintenance (to which
our Ministers have a far ancienter, better Right and Title, by all Laws of God
and Man, than they have to their new acquired Purchases and Powers,
established, settled on them by particular Donors and benefactors out of their
own private Inheritances and Estates, not the Republics, which neither the
Patrons themselves, nor any others, nor yet the Ministers themselves can
alienate from the Church, as their own Consciences and Judgments must
acknowledge, unless strangely cauterized) Let them and Can answer to that
Sovereign Judge of all the Earth; who will probably judge them here, and shall
certainly judge them eternally hereafter for all such detestable Robberies, and
violent Rapines, if wilfully perpetrated and persevered in without repentance
after timely admonition, who can quickly strip both them and theirs naked of
all their temporal Powers, Honors, Possessions, Enjoyments, as he did
Jeroboam and his Sons for their turning the Priests and Levites out of their
Possessions, and King Ahab with his Family for seizing upon Naboths Vineyard,
in a violent and unrighteous manner, though colored over to delude the people
with an hypocritical Fast, and feigned, legal proceedings, 1 Kings 21. we
read it recorded of our Savior, Luke 12. 13, 14. that when one of the company
said unto him; Master, speak to my brother that he divide the Inheritance with
me: He returned them this answer, MAN WHO MADE ME A JVDGE OR DIVIDER OVER YOU?
Let every person now solicited by croaking Anabaptists, Jesuits and Soldiers,
or others, not only to judge and divide, but utterly to abolish and take away
our Ministers necessary Maintenance, (not unnecessary Abbots and Prelates,
Lordly superfluities long since dissipated) by Glebes and Tithes, return them
the self same; lest Christ himself at the last day condemn them for over
bold-intruders into such a Supreme Jurisdiction over his, and his Ministers,
Rights and Callings too, as neither God nor Man ever yet conferred on them. God
himself prohibiting the Sale, alienation, and Substraction of his Priests and
Levites necessary Glebes, or Tithes, and by consequence of our Ministers (as I
have formerly observed) and further informing all his, that it is a snare to a
man to devour holy things, and after Vows to make enquiry, Prove. 20. 25. But of
this second argument enough, the Negative part whereof I shall prove more fully
hereafter by way of answer to an Objection.

3. I shall make good the Proposition by arguments drawn from the New Testament
it self, which no ways contradicts, but confirms the lawfulness of Tithes.
This I have already proved from Heb. 7. 1. to 12. to which I shall refer the
Reader, and proceed to other Texts, I shall begin with Mat. 23. 23, 24. and
Luke 11. 42. Woe unto you Scribes, and Pharisees Hypocrites, for ye PAY TITHES
OF MINT, and ANNISE and CVMMIN, and all manner of HERBS, and have omitted the
weightier things of the Law, Judgment, Mercy, and Faith, and the love of God:
These OUGHT ye to have done, and NOT TO LEAVE THE OTHER UNDONE: Ye blind
Guides, which strain at a Gnat, and swallow a Camel. In which words our Savior
himself, though he denounces a Woe against the Hypocritical Pharisees, in
being just and careful in paying Tithes, even of Herbs and Seeds of all sorts,
of meanest value, and yet in the mean time neglecting works of Righte^usnesse
in matters of greater worth, and of Charity toward man, and of Faith and Love
toward God himself, straining at a Gnat, and swallowing a Camel; so he
positively resolves, that they ought not to omit the due and conscientious
payment even of these lesser Tithes of smallest value, much less then of their
Corn, Wine, Oil, Flocks, Herds, which were of greater worth. And if the Scribes
and Pharisees were no Saints, but Hypocrites for omitting these weightier
duties, though they paid these smallest Tithes; what are these Anabaptisticall
Scribes and Pharisees, who, not only against all Rules of Justice and Charity
toward men, but of Faith and Love to God (which they even renounce) rob God
and his Ministers, not only of all their own Tithes, small as well as great,
but of those Tithes which others would willingly pay them, and endeavor totally
to deprive them of those small Rectories, Glebes they yet enjoy, and of their
Ministry too; and when they have John Can, His Second Voice from the Temple*
p. 2.
stripped them stark naked of all they have, would eat their very flesh, and burn
them with Fire. Certainly such are worse and greater Hypocrites, than the
Scribes and Pharisees, pretending Conscience it self, for their most
unreasonable Dealing in this kind. Such men's throats are so wide, that they can
swallow not only Camels, but whole Rectories, Churches, Steeples, with their
Lead, Timber, Bells, Stone, (to say no more) for a Breakfast; all Tithes in two
or three Parishes and throughout the Land for a Dinner, and the public Lands,
Revenues of the Crown (which should defray all ordinary public Charges for the
peoples ease) for a Supper, that they may be Supreme, and every one of them
like our Savior Christ himself, both a Priest, Prophet, and a King, executing
a Plurality of these and three other Offices, and their Callings too all at
once, to enrich themselves faster than all other men. This Text was much
insisted on by John Can, His Second Voice from the Temple* p. 2.
John Hus to prove Tithes under the Gospel to be pure Alms, coupling it Fox,
Acts and Monuments, vol. c. s. 602, 603, 604.
with the former verse, Luke 11. 41. But rather give Alms of such things as you
have, and behold all things are clean unto you; but certainly the Text it self
proves, that this referrs only to the washing mentioned in the precedent
verses; and not to this subsequent clause concerning their payment of Tithes,
never styled Alms in any Text; and recorded by Matthew, as a distinct Woe, and
sentence of it self; without any mention of Alms in the Antecedent or
Subsequent verses: and John Hus himself, together with Augustine, Chrysostom,
Hierome, and Aquinas, (there cited by him) from hence conclude; That Tithes are
lawful under the Gospel, as well as alms, for so much as the Gift thereof unto
the Priest, did not cease in the time of Christ: and Saint Augustine in his
219. Sermon, of Paying Tithes, presses the payment of them under the Gospel,
as a Duty, by many enforcing arguments, before any Popes Decretall^ for payment
of them, or that we now call Popery, was known in the world, Saint Ambrose
before him doing the like, In Sermon Quadragesimae, cited by Gratian. Causa.
16. qu. 7. which had John Can, either known or considered, he would not with*
so much mistaken Ignorance and Impudence, have damned Tithes as POPISH, etc.
And the pleading for them, a pleading for Babylon, and for BAAL: in his New
Second Voice from the Temple of Babylon, or Baal, which he please, not of Old
or New Jerusalem.

The nex Gospel Text, I shall cite, is that of Gal. 6. 6. Let him that is
taught in the word, communicate to him that teaches him IN ALL GOOD THINGS: To
which I shall subjoyn, 1 Cor. 9. 11. If we have sowed unto you spiritual
things, is it a great matter, IF WE SHALL REAP YOUR CARNAL THINGS? and Romans
15. 25. And THEIR DEBTORS THEY ARE: for if the Gentile have been made partakers
of their spiritual things, THEIR DUTY IS ALSO to minister unt^ them IN CARNAL
THINGS. All these three Gospel Texts resolve, That Ministers of the Gospel,
have a just due and right to a competent, comfortable share in all the good
things, Temporal blessings and necessaries for the support of this life, which
the people instructed by them, and receiving spiritual things from them enjoy.
And that the people are bound both by express precepts in the Gospel, and the
rules of common, moral equity and justice, cheerfully to communicate and
minister such a share of all their good things and temporal blessings, as a
debt and due unto them for their ministering to them in spiritual things: which
I fully proved in the first proposition, and Impudency it self cannot deny. The
sole question then is, what this share or portion ought to be, and who shall
determine it in point of difference? I confess the Apostle does not decide
either of these in Terminis, those Texts being General, and all in the plural
number; All good things; your carnal things; comprising all such things out of
which Tithes, predial, mixed or personal (as Canonists and Lawyers distinguish
them) are or may be paid* Wherefore every faithful Christian, and spiritual
Son of God, and of faithful Abraham, (whose footsteps and prefidents) they are
to follow, in all doubtful cases (admit this one) to satisfy his conscience
and judgment in this case, must and will resort to the prefidents of the
Eminentest Saints in former ages, and Gods own prescripts in other express
Texts; and there finding the very Father of the faithful, Abraham, giving, and
his Grandson Jacob vowing, A TENTH OF ALL GOOD THINGS from his own people for
the maintenance of his Priests and Levites, under the Law; and they cheerfully
rendering it until and in Christ's own time; and that the very Pharisees and
Scribes (though Hypocrites) were so just, as to pay tithes of all, and Christ
resolving, that they ought to do it, and not leave it undone; and that none
before the Apostles days ever gave less than a Tenth part: (as the premises
largely evidence) must and will necessarily conclude from all these sacred
Directories, that the ordinary and constant standing Portion and proportion of
all his goods and carnal things here prescribed, and intended by Gods Spirit,
in the tenth part: and in extraordinary cas^s, more, when Gods glory, the
Ministers Necessities, the Defense or Propagation of the Gospel require it: and
when he shall further read in the Gospel it self, that speech of Zacheus, the
converted Publican, Luke 19. 8. Behold, Lord, THE HALF OF MY GOODS I give to
the poor: And how the first converted Christians and Jews in the Apostles days
sold their Lands and Houses, and brought and laid the money at the Apostles
feet, Act. 4. 5. His conscience (which must not guide the Word and Spirit of
God, as most men's consciences do now, but the word and spirit it and him too)
will and must from thence, conclude, that he must not give his faithful
Minister less than a Tenth part of all; and in cases of extraordinary
necessity, share even half his goods, yea, the price of all his Lands and
Houses, between the Ministers and poor Saints of God, specially in times of
persecution, when as he ought to hide, and feed them too, as godly Obadiah did
an hundred of the Lords Prophets, in the days of Jezabel, at his own charge,
with the hazard of his Office and Life, 1 Kings 18. 4. 13. And if any man's
conscience in a settled Christian Realm or State, be so obstinate or froward,
as not to submit to the lowest proportion of a tenth, which all Ages, and most
or all settled Christian Realms have unanimously agreed upon, and confirmed by
public Edicts, as well Civil as Ecclesiastical, whereof there are near
thousands in print; the Christian Kings and Magistrates (who are to determine
all controverfies of this nature, and state the due just proportion of this
Debt and Duty between the Minister and the people, where it is not publicly
decided, and may justly enforce the due payment of it (when and where it is
determined by positive public Laws) as a just Debt, as they do in all other
civil Debts and Accounts in controversy before them, (as I shall prove in due
place) even by these very Texts, though John Can denies it, in his VOX
praeterea NIHIL p, 14.

To these I shall subjoyn that noted Text in 1 Cor. 9. 13, 14. (which John
Can cites by piecemeal, as the Devil did scripture, leaving out the
principal branch; Mat. 4. 6.) Do ye not know that they, which Minister about
holy things, live of the things of the Temple, and they that wait at the altar,
are ^artakers with the altar? EVEN SO HAS THE LORD ORDAINED (this Can omits)
that they which preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel. I have urged this
Text before for proof of the first; I shall here apply it only to the second
Propositions confimation, as to Tithes.

1. Then we have here A DIVINE GOSPEL ORDINANCE made by the LORD OF HOSTS
himself, not repealable by any Army or Powers on Earth, as well as
PARLIAMENTARY ORDINANCES, for the Maintenance of the Preachers of the Gospel:
and let Can (the poorest Preacher of the Gospel ever yet knew in England,
(except one of his fraternity, who heard him once preach an assize and Fast
Sermon too at Chard) deny our Ministers to be able Preachers of the Gospel, at
the peril of his Soul, though he denies them to be lawful Ministers of Christ,
and censures them as ANTICHRISTIAN and POPISH: But why so? Because (forsooth)
they had their Ordination from Rome; and by consequence are TRAITORS and FELONS
too, by the Statute of 27 Eliz. c. 2. for which they might be legally executed
for Treason and Felony, if the State were pleased to interpret the Statute
contrary, as he conceives, to the Letter and form of it; (the words whereof he
both curtals and misrecites, just as he did this Text p. 5. To do him and his
b^st friends a kindness, and vindicate the lawfulness of our Mi^isters calling
against this ordinary slander; and convince him of his gross mistake; I shall
truly recite the Statut^, Thus entitled: JESUITS and PRIESTS, in England
shall depart, and NONE SHALL COME INTO THIS REALM. If so, then many Dippers and
Speakers, Administrators, Members in Anabaptisticall Congregations, many
New-lights and Gifted-brethren in separate Congregations; many Shakers,
Quakers, Ranters, Broachers of new Notions, Errors, Blasphemies, throughout
the Realm, many new-Polititians, Levellers, Agitators and Soldiers in the Army,
if not some Officers; all the late converted pretended See the false Jew
discovered at Newcastle for a cheat and Jesuit, p. 4, 5, 10 11, 12, 13. dipped
by M. Tillam at Hexam; a like Priest now Administrator of the Anabaptists
there. And Eliazer Bar Israel, his Vindication of the Messiah, a pretended
converted Jew, but sprinkled and baptized by the Jesuits, dipped by our
Anabaptists, and a Jesu^t in truth; (though the first in the Bead-roll.)
Jews, dipped in Anabaptisticall Congregations (discovered and known to be
disguised Jesuits, purposely sent from Rome, by the greatest sticklers against
our Ministers Tithes and Calling) must presently depart, and none of them
return into the Kingdom (as many have lately done; or else be executed for
Traitors: But why so? what is their crime, work and employment here; and by
what marks or fruits shall we know and discover both them and their
confederates? Let the words of the Statute (compared with all our late troubles
and changes) resolve the ignorant and incredulous, that there are many such
amongst us, and of John Cannes fraternity. W^ereas diverse persons called or
professed JESUITS (these Can wittingly conceals, and therefore is a Felon by
the law) SEMINARY PRIESTS and other Priests, which have been, and from time to
time are made IN PARTS BEYOND THE SEA; BY, OR ACCORDING TO THE ORDER and RITES
OF THE CHURCH OF ROME. (and when Can can prove that all or any of our
Ministers were thus made (as he has confidently averred in print to those, he
calls, the Higher Powers and Supreme Authority of the Nation) Let them be hanged
for Traitors and Antichristian Ministers in good earnest, else let him be
hanged in their steed, for this his impudent slander of them all, as well
Independents as Prebyterians:) Have of late years come and been sent into this
Realm of England (and were any of our Ministers such, and not rather Can
himself, coming hither from Amsterdam for the purposes following) and other the
Queens Dominions OF PURPOSE (AS IT HAS APPEARED, as well by some of their own
examinations (now out of date) as by diverse other Manifest means and proofs
(more visible of late years than ever) not only to withdraw her Highness
subjects from their due obedience to her Majesty, but also to st^r up and move
Sedition, Rebellion, and open Hostility within the same her Highness Realms
and Dominions, to the great indangering of the safety of her most Royal
Person, and to the utter ruin, desolation and overthrow of the whole Realm
(now effected as a Realm) if the same be not the sooner (and now pray God it be
not over late) by some good means foreseen and prevented. For reformation
whereof, be it ordained, etc. That All Priests and Jesuits (Can cannot spy
such good friends within the Act, but deletes them out of it) Seminary Priests,
and other Priests whatsoever, made and ordained out of the Realm of England,
etc. under the penalties therein mentioned. Had Can pressed this Statute to
those he dedicates his Pamphlet, for the speedy execution of it against those
many Jesuits and Seminary Priests now in England, for their traitorous
Practices and Designs therein mentioned of late, and now driven on and almost
completed by them, it had been a commendable zeal; but to write one word or
syllable against these Romish Vermin, arch-Engineers and Janissaries of the
Romish See, now swarming among us, to rui^^ our Kingdoms, Parliaments, Laws,
Liberties, Church* Ministers, Ministry, Religion, and foreign Protestant
States and Churches now engaged by them in bloody wars, both by Land and Sea;
and to omit the very name of the Jesuits (the first Popish Agents mentioned and
chiefly intended in this Act) and press it only against our Ministers
Calling, Ministry, Tithes, and Maintenance, of purpose to ruin them and
theirs, and by consequence our Church and Religion (the Design and scope of
his whole Pamphlet) is such a malicious, unchristian, Antichristian Practice,
as proclaims him to all the world, either a new converted Jesuit, or Romish
Factor, under the Garb of an old Anabaptist, or an overgrown cankered
Anabaptist, void of Piety, Honesty, and inspired by the very John 8. 44.
Father of Lies. For not one of our English Ministers I know or hear of (except
two or three Jesuits and Priests crept into Livings in Staffordshire and
elsewhere very lately, I know not by whose favor or negligence) was ever
ordained by any such Jurisdiction or authority, as is here mentioned, which all
our Ministers (and their Ordainers too; whether Prelates or Presbyters)
particularly and publicly abjured, both at the time of their respective
Ordinations and admissions to their Benefices, and likewise when they took any
Degree of Learning in our Universities, by the two known famous Oaths of
SUPREMACY and ALLEGIANCE, purposely made and ratified by * sundry, zealous,
Protestant Parliaments against the usurped Papal Jurisdiction and authority of
the Sea of Rome, 1 Eliz. c. 2. 5. Eliz. 2. c. 1. 3 Jac. c. 4, 5. 7 Jac. c. 6.
17 Car. The Act for Trienniall Parliaments.
and the Popes, Jesuits and Papists practices, to blow up and destroy our
Protestant Kings, Parliaments, Laws, Liberties, Religion, and subvert our
Kingly Government, whole State and Commonwealth, for the better discovering of
them; yet lately suspended, abrogated, as dangerous unlawful Oaths, by some of
Cannes good friends, who would be reputed Zealots against the Popes
Jurisdiction and his Creatures too: Now how those Ministers of our Church, who
thus abjured the Jurisdiction of Rome, at the time of their very Ordination,
(and their Ordainers too, before them) and since have done the like in their
Solemn League and Covenant, can without the highest slander be said to derive
their Ministry from it; and that by Can and his Jesuiticall and
Anabaptistical Fraternity who, never took one of these Oaths or the Covenant;
and revile, repeal them as unlawful out of love to the Popes Jurisdiction,
Jesuits, Priests, etc. or for want of zeal against them,) Let the world and
this slanderers own Conscience (if he have any left) determine. Besides, who
knows not (but this Ignoramus) that the Rites and Ceremonies of Ordination in
the Church of Rome, recorded at large in Ceremoniale, and Pontificiale
Pontificum Romanorum, and the ends of Ordination likewise (viz. to say Mass,
create their Creator, offer up Christ in Sacrifice at the altar to his Father,
Invocate Saints, adore Images, yield Canonical obedience to the Pope and his
Supremacy, etc.) are far different from the form and ends of our Ministers
Ordination in the Church of England, prescribed by the Parl. 5. and 6. Ed. 6.
c. 1. and ratified by the Statutes of 1 Eliz. 2. c. 1, 2. 5 Eliz. c. 1. 8 Eliz.
c. 1. and 39 Eliz* c. 8. (made only by Protestant Parliaments) as they
particularly condemn, renounce the Popes power and Jurisdiction; so they
declare and resolve our Ministers Ordination to be lawful; and them ^ Eliz. c.
1. and Book of Ordination.
in very deed to be Ministers, and rightly made, ordained and ^onsecrated,
according to Gods word, without any derivative power or Ordination from the
Church of Rome. And therefore for this New pander for the Whore of Rome to
aver, they receive their ministry and ordination thence, is a NOTORIOVS LIE;
yea, but says he, Francis Mason of Consecration, and Mr. Yates in his Model
of Divinity prove and confess, That the Ministry of the Church of England
(established by the Law of the Land) IS DERIVED FROM THE POPE and ROME. True,
but in what sense? only by way of Succession, as his own Ministry and Faith
(if he has any) were derived from John of Leyden: or just as our Bibles,
Religion, Baptism, Churches were derived thence, and all now living with Can
himself, derived from Popish Ancestors, many even from Popes, Popish Priests,
Prelates, Friars, by natural generation. God used the Popes of Rome and their
Instruments to convert the Britains and Saxons from they Paganism to the
Christian (not Papal or Roman) Faith, which through Gods mercy has continued
amongst us ever since* yet mixed of later times with manifold Popish Errors and
Superstitions: These Errors and Superstitions, our godly Martyrs, and by them
our Kings and Parliaments discovering, did thereupon by special Acts of
Parliament abolish, as derived from the Church of Rome, together with the Popes
usurped power, and Gain, which they served only to support, retaining only
the Scriptures, Sacraments, Soul-saving Doctrines thence derived by succession
only (but authoritatively, and originally from God and Christ himself) with
such Godly, Orthodox Bishops and Ministers, who though first ordained in the
Church of England when Popish, did yet renounce all the Popish Errors,
Corruptions, with the Popes Supremacy, and all Popish additionall Rites to the
form of their Ordination and Baptism: (which made neither of them void in
Substance, no more than their annexing of the Apocrypha to the Canonical
Scriptures, made them uncanonicall) These afterward ordained other Bishops and
Ministers without any Popish Rites, in such manner as the Gospel prescribes*
which Mr. Mason and Yates prove against the Papists, to be a lawful
Ordination, though not made by the Popes Authority, or according to former
Popish Ceremonies. In this Sense only, they write the bare Succession, not the
Office and Calling of our Ministers (as this wooden Can mistakes) was
derived from the Church of Rome; but their Ministry it sel^ from Christ's own
Institution. And if this makes them Popish and Antichristian, then all our
Protestant Kings, Parliaments, Magistrates, Judges, Officers of all sorts must
be Popish too, If not Paganish, because their Predecessors were such: and all
Officers, Soldiers of the Army, and Anabaptisticall Saints too, who have
purchased any Lands or Revenues of Abbeys, Priories, Archbishops, Bishops,
Deans, Chapters, must likewise be both Antichristian and Popish; because their
Predecessors, who first enjoyed, and from whom they do derive them, were such.
I hope therefore, they will all now renounce these their Purchases to avoid the
Guilt and high Scandal of Popery and Antichristianisme; or disclaim this
Second, Loud-lying Voice against our Ministers and their Ministry, as a Voice
only from a profane, empty Can; and not from a Sacred Temple.

But to return from the Lawfullnesse of our Ministers Calling, and to their
Tithes; We have Secondly in this Text a Gospel Ordin^nce for their very Tithes,
confirmed by the old Lev^ticall Law, and grounded on its Equity. But how does
this appear? By these emphaticall words; EVEN SO HAS THE LORD ORDAINED (in the
Preterperfect Tense) That they which Preach the Gospel, should live of the
Gospel; but where has the Lord ordained this? The Apostle thrice resolves
expressly, that he has done it in the Leviticall Law, ^. 9. For it is written
in the Laws of Moses, (Deuteronomy. 25. 4.) Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox
that treads out the Corn, does God take care for Oxen? Or says ^e it
TOGETHER FOR OUR SAKES? FOR OUR SAKES NO DOUBT THIS IS WRITTEN: that he that
ploweth should plow in hope, and he that thresheth in hope, SHOULD BE PARTAKER
OF HIS HOPE; which he again recites, 1 Timothy 5, 18. It this Precept concerning
the meat and maintenance of Oxen only in the Letter, though part of the
Levitical Law, was doubtless written for, and really intended of the Ministers
of the Gospels food and Maintenance, and in full force under the Gospel, as the
Apostle resolves then a fortiori; the Precepts of the Law concerning the food
and Livelihood of Gods Priests and Levites under the Law by Gl^bes and Tithes,
not purely Ceremonial (as I have already proved) must doubtless be intended
of them, and be in full force likewise in their natural, equitable Sense and
Proportion, in relation to their Livelihood for preaching of the Gospel; there
being a greater Analogy and Proportion between them and Preachers of the
Gospel, than betwixt them and Oxen: And to put it out of doubt, he subjoyns; Do
not ye know, that they which minister about holy things, live of the things of
the Temple; and they which wait at the Altar, are partakers with the Altar? To
wit by Go^s express Ordinance in the Leviticall Law, which ye know, and
therefore I need not particularly cite the words, as I did the other, of not
neglecting the Ox, etc. which was more obscure, and needed my former Paraphrase
on them; but thus mind you of in the General: and then he inferres and
subjoyns: Even so has the Lord ordained (to wit by the very natural, moral
Equity of the Laws and Ordinances he made for the Priests and Levites
Maintenance by Tithes and Glebes, and Free-will-offerings, for officiating in
the Temple, and at the Altar under the Law) that the Preachers of the Gospel
(who now succeed, and supply their places, though in different Services in the
Churches of Christ under the Gospel) should live of the Gospel; even so fully,
comfortably, and in such sort, as they did under the Law. And to make this out
more fully, and clear it from the Censure of Judaisme, take notice of these
four particulars.

1. That in the Holy Ghosts and Gospel phrase and Language, there is a Temple,
among and for Christians under the Gospel, as well as among and for the Jews
under the Law, (else Cannes Voice from the Temple, if there be no such place,
must be thus amended in his next Edition: A Voice from the Can or Alehouse)
and that this Temple is nothing else, but the Church, and Saints of Christ, 2
Cor. 6. 16. 1 Cor. 3, 16, 17. chap. 6. 19. Ephesians. 2. 21. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4. Rev. 3.
12. chap, 7. 15. chap. 11. 1, 2, 19. chap. 14, 15. chap, 15. 5, 6, 8. chap. 16.
1, 17.

2 That Christians under the Gospel, have likewise an Altar as well as the
Jews, though different from theirs, Heb. 13. 10. We have an Altar whereof they
have no right to eat which serve the Tabernacle, mentioned often, Rev. 6. 9.
chap. 8. 3, 5. chap. 9. 13. chapter 14. 18. often coupled with the Templ^, Rev. 11.
1. Rise, measure THE TEMPLE OF GOD AND THE ALTAR.

3. We have Sacrifices to be offered on the Altar, as well as the Jews in
theirs. 1. The Sacrifice of Prayer, Rev. 8. 3, 4, 5. 2. The Sacrifice of
Praise, Heb. 13, 15. 3. The Sacrifice of Charity, alms and good works, Heb. 13.
16. 4. Our own bodies, which we must present as a living Sacrifice, holy,
acceptable unto God, by serving him according to his word, as rational men,
not beasts, that were both slain and sacrificed under the Law, Romans 12. 1.

4. We have Priests likewise to offer up these Spiritual Sacrifices, 1 Pet. 2,
9. Rev. 1. 6. chap. 5. 10. chap. 20. 6. And these are three. 1. Every
sanctified Christian, who must offer up the Sacrifices of Prayer, Praise, alms,
and his own body to God, in his private Closet and Family. 2. The Ministers of
the Gospel, who must continually offer up these Sacrifices in the peoples
behalf, in public here on earth: now the T^mple, for which we are to render
them, not only Tithes and Glebes, but a Freewil offering of bounty and charity
besides, a sacrifice acceptable and well pleasing to God, Phil. 4. 16. 3.
Christ Jesus himself, our altar and High Priest too, now in heaven, Heb. 13.
15. cap. 2. 17. c. 4. 14, 15. c. 5. 10. c. 6. 20. c. 7. 17, 20, 21, 22, 27, 28.
c. 8. 1. c. 10. 21. And if Christians have even under the Gospel a Temple, an
Altar, and spiritual Sacrifices to offer them to God in public, as well as the
Jews. Why the Priests, who minister about holy things in this Evangelical
Temple, wait continually at this spiritual Altar, and offer these spiritual
sacrifices publicly unto God thereon, and preach the Gospel likewise (as the
Jewish Priests and Levites did teach and instruct the people in the Law, 2 Chronicles. 27. 7, 8, 9. cap. 35. 2, 3. cap. 15. 3. Ez^a 7. 25. Neh. 8. 5, to 12.)
should not receive both Glebes, Tithes and voluntary Oblations from the people,
as well as the Priests and Levites did under the Law, by virtue of the self
same Levitical law of God, by which they claimed them (they being both the
Priests of the self same God, and both executing the self same priestly office
in a different manner, and that by the Apostles own Argument, intention, and
positive resolution in this Gospel Text, let Can and all other oppugners of
their Tithes resolve me and others, from as clear Gospel texts these I have
here alleged, and others formely insisted on in the first Proposition, or else
yield their cause for ever lost.

I shall close up all with two other Gospel Texts, most urged and abused by
those now in their own cases, who most of all forgot, transgressed and oppugned
them heretofore in other men's. The first is, 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14. Submit your
selves TO EVERY ORDINANCE OF MAN for the Lords sake, whether it be TO THE KING
AS SUPREME; or UNTO GOVERNORS, etc.

The Second, Romans 13. 1, 2. Let every soul be subject unto the Higher powers,
for there is NO POWER BUT OF GOD: The powers that are, are ordained of God;
whosoever therefore resisieth the power* THE ORDINANCE OF GOD; and they that
resist shall receive to themselves Damnation. That these two Scriptures extend
only to lawful ^ereditary, or elective Kings. Governors, Higher powers, and
that in their lawful commands, alone; not to Usurpers, Tyrants, Invaders of the
peoples Rights, Laws, Liberties, Properties, Lives (who may and ought to be
resisted, as well as any other Thieves, Robbers, Invaders, Murderers
whatsoever) I have largly proved in my Second Part of my Sovereign Power of
Parliaments and Kingdoms, (Authorized by the Commons House of Parliament) p.
102 to 131. to which I shall refe^r the Reader for satisfaction, not being the
point in issue, to which alone I shall apply them. In the former Text last
insisted on, we had an Ordinance of God himself for the Maintenance and Tithes
of the Preachers of the Gospel: and here we have, two Gospel commandments to
submit TO EVERY ORDINANCE of our lawful Governors, and Higher Powers
(agreeable to Gods Ordinances, not repugnant to them) for the Lords sake, and
not to resist them: for though the Ordinances themselves be made but by men;
and in that sense sti^ed, every ordinance of man; yet the Powers that make
them, are ordained of God; and therefore those who resist them in their humane
ordinances, though but in humane things, do therein resist the very ORDINANCE
OF GOD; especially in things divine commanded by and approved in Gods own
sacred Word. Now the Maintenance of Gods Ministers by Tithes, is an express
Ordinance of God himself, both before and during the Law, and under the Gospel
too, prescribed, warranted by all the forecited Texts: And there are infinite
Laws, Statutes, Decrees, Canons, ORDINANCES of just and lawful Christian
Emperors, Kings, Governors, Parliaments, States, Councels, Synods and all
higher Powers as well Civil as Ecclesiastical in all Christian Kingdoms,
States, Churches, especially in our own, for the establishment and due payment
of them to the Ministers and Preachers of the Gospel too: Therefore they are
duly, constantly, cheerfully to be paid unto them by all Christians and
Professors of the very Gospel, and cannot, may not be oppugned, detained,
subtracted, resisted by John Can or any of his Confederates, nor abrogated
by any pretending to Power Ordained by God, without resisting the ordinance of
God himself, fighting against him; as these Texts and Acts 5. 39. resolve. For
which they shall receive to themselves damnation, though they dream (as many
now do) they should merit heaven and salvation, by subverting both Tithes and
Ministers, even by open armed violence, if they cannot accomplish it by
Jesuitical policy, and pious frauds. And thus much for the confirmation of the
Second Proposition by Scripture Texts and Presidents.

For humane Authorities, that Tithes are lawful and due to Ministers by a
Divine Right even under the Gospel; I could cite very many, were I near my
Library and Books as heretofore, but being far distant from them, I shall
trouble you only with a Catalogue of such as I have by me, or remember: For
Fathers of this Judgment and opinion you may peruse St. Ambrose in Sermon
Quadragesimae, cited by Gratian, Causa 16. qu. 7. St. Hierome on Mal. 3. and
St. Augustine Sermon. 219. De Reddendis Decimis Tom. 10. both cited by Gratian
Causa 16. qu. 1. For Councils, you may peruse Concilium Rothomagense and
Maforiense in Gratian. Causa 16. qu. 7. Concilium Matisconense 2. Anno 588.
Concilium apud Solomanum. Anno 1266. Synodus Rothingae An. 1581. Concilium
Trevense Ann. 1427. (which resolves, Decimae fuerunt a DEO primitus Institutae;
and ^raecipiuntur solvi tam de veteri, quam de Novo Testamento) Syndus Lingon
Ann. 1404. Synodus Turonensis An. 1588. Concilium Tridentinum; and Tholosanum.
Ann. 1591. which decree, That the payment of Tithes, Divino jure cautum est,
sacrisque utriusque Testamenti libris confirmatum. All these Collected together
by Bochillus Decreto Ecclesiae Gallicanae l. 6. Tit. 8. De Decimis, with many
more recorded in Binius, Sarius, Crab, Caranza, Merlin, Syrmond, and other
Collectors of the Decrees of Councils, resolve, Tithes to be due to the
Ministers of the Gospel by Divine Right. For foreign popish Authors, B^ch^llus
Decret. Eccles. Gal. 6. Tit. 8. c. 8. p. 904.
Aimericus Bishop of Poitiers in France in a Synod there held, An. 1367.
Enjoined all Chaplains on Lords-dayes and Holy Days diligently to declare to
the people in time of Mass, and likewise in their Sermons under pain of
Excommunication. Qualiter Ex praecepto Divinae Legis, quilibet Catholicus
tenetur solvere Ecclesiae decimas de omnibus licite acquisitis: Gratian the
Canonist Cause. 16. qu. 1. and 7. with John Therry, and others Glossers on his
Text; Hostiensis in his Summa Aurea, Angelus de Clavasio in his Summa Angelica:
Baptista Tirvomala, in his Summa Rossella: Tit. Decimae; Innocentius, Res. de
Decimis, Rezulfus de Decimis. Tyndanus in his special Tract de Decimis, printed
at Colen, An. 1590. and generally all other Canonists. Alexander Alensis, Summa
Theol. part 3. Richardus de Media vissa in lib. 4. Sentent. Distinct. 17. and
most other Schoolmen on that place. Aquinas 2. 2. quaest. 87. with most
Commentators on him there assert. That Tithes are even at this day JURE DIVINO,
in quantum sunt a jure Naturali and Morali, but not as they were Ceremonial.
That Popish old and new Expositors and Commentators on Gen* 14 and 28. Levit.
2. Chron. 31. Neh. 10. and 13. Mal. 3. Mat. 10. Luke 10. Romans 16. 1 Cor. 9.
Gal. 6. 6. 1 Thessalonians. 5. Heb. 7. 1 Timothy 5. are all of the same opinion, and most
Protestant Expositors likewise. And therefore the Jesui^^, popish Priests,
Papists activity, business now in declaming against English Tithes as popish
and antichristian, against the Decrees and Resolutions of their own Councels,
Canonists, Ca^uists, Schoolmen, Expositors, can proceed from no other ground
but a malicious design to subvert, starve and ruin our Ministers for want of
maintenance, and thereby extirpate our Religion to advance their own; and then
they will cry and set up Tithes again as much as ever. The judgment of
Foreign Protestant Divines concerning the Divine right of Ministers
maintenance, and that by Tithes were settled, and the Sacrilegious impiety of
those, who would rob them of it, you may read in their Commentaries and
Expositions on the Texts forecited. Let learned Nicholas Hemingius speak for
them all in his words already cited; and in his Exposi^ion on Gal. 6. 6. p.
175. Dicit Scriptura, Bovi trituranti non obligabis os. Et dignus est Operarius
mereede sua: Indignissimus igitur Christiano nomine censendus est, qui
Ministros Evangelii totius Ecclesiae curam Gerentes negligit. BESTIA QUAMVIS
IMMANIOR EST (Let Can and his Confederates remember it) qui eos odio
prosequitur and prascindit, quorum Ministerio ad salutem, and immortalitatem
invitatur. Sed proh dolor! bona pars mundi (and never so much as now) huc
incumbit, UT POTIUS ALLQUID ADIMAT MINISTERIO, QUAM ADDAT, tanta est
ingratitude and perversitas, etiam illorum, qui sacrilege gloriari de
Christiano nomine. Horum sane factum, nihil defferre arbitror a sacrilegio and
latrocinio, cu^us poenas olim luent architecti and fabri hujus mali. Non est
quod quisquam quaerat subterfugia, quibus se excuset, cur minus sit Liberalis
erga Ministr^s Evangelii: Oculos quidem hominum fallere potest; sed Deus non
fallitur, in cujus contemptum alia at qu^ alia praetexunt ingrati. Hic tres
Loei observantur: Primus, Quod victus and alia Officia debeantur oeconomis
mysteriorum Dei, seu Catechesis. Secundus, Quod perniciosus error fit, non
prudentia, defraudare ministros su^ debita mercede. Tertius, Quod Spiritus
Sanctus in Paulo interpretetur, Derisionem Majestatis divinae est, negare
victum and alia officia verbi doctoribus.

For our own Domestic Councils, Parliaments and Writers judgment herein;
Spelman Conc. tom. 1. p. 259, 268, 396, 347, 402, 418, 554, 620. Gulielmi
Lambardi Archaion.
Egbert Archbishop of York, in his Excerptions about the year of Christ, An.
750. c. 4. 99, 100. The National Council of Calchuch under King Oswald and
Offa, ann 787 c. 17. forecited. The famous Council of Patelean, under King
Athelstan, ann. 928. cap. 1. De Decimis solicit reddendis; Odo Archbishop of
Canterbury in his Constitutions, ann. 943. c. 10. De Decimis reddendis. The
Canons under King Edgar, about the year 967. Can. 54. The Ecclesiastical laws
of King Aethelred, ann. 1012* cap. 4. The Ecclesiastical laws of Edward the
Confessor, c. 8. confirmed by Wlilliam the Conqueror. The popish Schoolmen,
Canonists, and Commentators on the Texts forecited, (whose names, I pretermit)
resolve in positive terms, That Tithes are due to God and his Ministers under
the Gospel, by Divine Right. The same is asserted by diverse of our Protestant
Divines, particularly by Dr. George Carleton, in his Treatise entitled. Tithe^
proved TO BE DUE BY A DIVINE RIGHT, printed at London 1606. By Richard
Mountague, in his Diairibe on the first part of the History of Tithes, London
1628. by Robert Tileslee, his Animadversions on Mr. Seldens History of Tithes,
London 1619. Mr. Samue^ Purchase in his Pilgrimage l. 2. c. 7. with sundry
others. And though some English Writers are of a different opinion, yet all
accord, that being settled by our laws, they are duly to be paid, even in point
of justice and conscience, and that they are not simply unlawful; but a
fitting maintenance under the Gospel, which Mr. Seldom in his History of Tithes
does affirm, and no ways oppose: Seeing then all these, with the laws of
sundry other Authorities, conclude them to be of Divine Right, and a grievous
Sin and Sacrilege against God to substract or abolish them; and those, who
oppugn their Divine Right under the Gospel, do affirm, it is no sin, but a
bounden Debt and Duty to pay them, as settled by humane Grants, Donations, Vows,
Laws, Canons, Constitutions, Prescriptions time out of mind; how any bearing
the name of Christians, can or dare with open face oppugn, detain, or attempt
their total abrogation now, as Jewish or Antichristian, I refer it to their
own consciences, and others resolutions to determine.

I shall answer one grand Objection against Ministers Tithes, under the Gospel;
and so close up this Chapter. Neither Jesus Christ himself, nor his Apostles,
nor the Ministers of the Primitive Church for two or three hundred years after
them, received Tithes for preaching the Gospel, but lived only upon the
peoples alms and voluntary contributions. Therefore the Ministers of the Gospel
likewise after them ought to receive no Tithes of the people for preaching the
Gospel, but to live upon Alms and voluntary contributions, as they did. This
was William Thorpes chief argument against Tithes, Fox Acts and Monuments, vol.
1. p. 699, 700. who adds, That those Priests, who will challenge or take
Tithes, deny that Christ is come in the flesh, and do the Priests Office of the
Old Law, for whom Tithes were granted, for else Priests take now Tithes
wrongfully; citing this, not as his own, but a Doctors opinion, whose name he
remembered not, but thought it was St. Jerome (or rather St. Can) in his New
Voice p. 13, 14, 15. who delivers this for Orthodox Doctrine; which St. See
Gr^t^a^ Cause. 16. qu. 1. 7.
Jerome contradicts, with all other ancient Doctors I have read.

Ans. To this I reply, 1. That Christ and his Apostles lived amongst the Jews,
who at that time were obliged by Gods own Law to pay their Tithes only to such
Priests and Levites as were of the Tribe of Levi, of which Tribe Christ and his
Apostles were not, and therefore they challenged not Tithes from them, Heb. 7.
5. to 15.

2. They then paid their Tithes duly to their Priests and Levites (mention^^
John 1. 19.) for which Christ commended them, resolving they ought not to omit
it, Matthew. 23. 23. Luke 11. 42. Chap. 18. 12. Therefore it was no reason they
should pay them over again to Christ or his Apostles (no more than Papists, who
pay Tithes in kind against their wills unto our Minister, though not to their
own Priests, but only voluntary Contribution) whiles their Priesthood stood in
force, which they generally submitted to.

3. The total abrogation of the Leviticall Priesthood, and Ceremonies by the
death of Christ, was not certainly known to, nor resolved by the Apostles and
believing Jews or Gentiles, till some years space after our Saviors Ascension,
as is evident by Acts 15. in the great case of Circumcision, about which there
was a Synod assembled by Paul's circumcising Timothy after this, because of the
Jews. Acts 16. 3. and purifying himself, and shaving his head after the Jewish
manner, many years afterward Acts 21. 20. to 28. which he being a Jew was
obliged even then to observe to avoid scandal, but not to the Gentiles.
Therefore Tithes amongst the Jews, were then still paid to their Leviticall
Priests, and not to the Apostles.

4. Though Christ whiles on earth, received no Tithes from the Jews, yet he had
a just Right and Title to Tithes from Abraham and all his Posterity, and the
Leviticall Priests themselves (especially after their abolition) as he was a
Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedech, to whom Abraham himself and
the Levites then in his loins paid Tithes of all, Heb. 7. 1. to 15. (of which
at large before:) Therefore he had a just Right to receive Tithes from them,
both before and after the Leviticall priesthood was abolished, which he might
have both lawfully claimed and exercised, and his Apostles likewise in his
Right, though they did it not. We read that Christ had a just Right and Title
by Inheritance, and lineall descent from his Father King David to the Temporal
Crown and Kingdom of Judah; and is therefore said by the Wisemen Matthew. 2. 2.
TO BE BORN KING OF THE JEWS (an unanswerable Argument for the lawfulness and
Excellency of Hereditary Titles to Crowns and Kingdoms, before that of
Election only, wherewith I frequently silenced vapouring Soldiers against
Hereditary Kingship, being the very Title of Christ himself, both to his Luke
1. 32, 33. Rev. 22, 16 Isn. 9. 6, 7. Jer. 25. 5. c. 30. 9. c. 33. 17, 21, 26
Ezcch. 37. 24, 26.
Spiritual and Temporal Kingdom, and that which Genesis 49. 10. Deuteronomy, 17. 20. 2 Samuel 7. 12. to 24. 1 Kings 2. 4 c 8. 20. c. 9. 5, c. 15. 3, 4. Psalm. 89. 3, 4,
^8. to 39 Psalm 32. 11, 12, 13. 2 Ch^. 6 10, 16, 17. ^. 2. 11. c. 13. 5. c. ^.
18. c. 21. 7. c. ^3 3. Jer. 17 24, 25 26. c. 22. 3, 4. c. 33 17, 22.
God instituted amongst his Church and people, as the best, the surest of all
other, 2 Samuel 10. 1. 1 Chr. 19. 1. 2 Kings 3. 26, 27. c. 13, 24. c. 14. 37.
Isa. 19 ^1. c. 37. 38.
taken up by most Heathen Nations;) Now though Christ neither claimed nor
exercised this his Temporal Right; but avoided it, when the people would have
made him King by force, John 6. 15. who yet after cried him for the King of
Israel, John 12. 13, 15. which even Pilate himself acknowledged; when he said
unto the Jews BEHOLD YOUR KING: demanded of them SHALL I CRUCIFY YOUR KING?
and wrote and fixed this Title on his Cross, JESUS OF NAZARETH KING OF THE
JEWS John. 19 14, 15, 19. will or can John Can, or any other of his
confederates, h^nce justly inf^rre; that it was unlawful for Christ himself,
Right Heir by Descent to his Hereditary Temporal Kingdom, kept and thrust out
thereof by usurping Herod (who murdered all the Infants in Bethlehem, and the
Coasts thereof that were two years old and under, and should have murdered our
Savior himself to secure his own usurped Power, Mat. 2. 13, 16. (Such is the
bloody cruelty and Jealousy of Usurpers, to have claimed or exercised this his
just, Hereditary Right to the Crown, or unlawful for the people to have thrust
out this bloody Intruder, Herod by force from his usurped Authority and made
Christ King as they intended, or because Christ did then voluntarily forbear
and relinquish his Right to Herod, that it is therefore unlawful, for any
other Hereditary Christian King or Right Heir to a Crown, kept from, or thrust
out of his Throne and Kingdom by armed violence against the generality of his
peoples desires, by any aspiring, usurping Herod, to lay claim to his Crown or
Kingdom, or for the faithful, natural born Subjects, according to their
duty, Oaths, and Allegiance, to endeavor by all lawful means, and open force
to exp^ll, dethrone such Herod's, and crown and set their lawful Sovereign on
the Throne of the Kingdom. Doubtless they cannot be so absurdly stupid, as
affirm it, seeing Jeboiadah the high Priest, the Captains of Hundreds, Levites,
Soldiers and people too, thrust out Ath^liah (the bloody Usurper of the
Kingdom and Throne of Judah) in the seventh year of her Usurpation, and
crowned Joash THE KINGS SON, as the Lord had said OF THE SONS OF DAVID, and set
him KING UPON THE THRONE OF THE KINGDOM: whereupon ALL THE PEOPLE OF THE LAND
REJOICED AND THE CITY WAS QUIET: as is recorded at large to their eternal
Honor by God himself, and for others imitation in the like case, 2 Chronicles. 23.
and 2 Kings 11. and seeing all may justly lay claim to, and repossesse
themselves of such Lands, Houses, Goods, as others forcibly detain or take from
them against all Law, Right, notwithstanding Christ's Non-claim to his Rightful
Crown: then by the self same Reason our Ministers of the Gospel now may
lawfully take and challenge Tithes from the people, though Christ and his
Apostles did not, albeit they had a just Right and Title to them, which they
might have exercised had they pleased without Sin, or Judaisme, as our
Ministers do now. To clear which Right from Judaisme and all other Cevills
beyond all contradiction, I shall cite only two Proph^^ies, relating jointly
to Christ's Kingdom, and Ministers under the Gospel. The first is Jer. 33. 15.
to the end. In those days and at that time will I cause the Branch of
Righteousness to grow up unto David, and he shall execute Righteousness, and
Judgment in the Land. In those days shall Judah be saved, and Jerusalem shall
dwell safely, and this is the name wherewith he shall be called, the Lord our
Righteousness. For thus says the Lord, David shall never want a man to sit
upon the Throne of the House of Israel: Neither the Priests, the Levites, want
a man before me to offer Burnt-Offerings, and to kindle Meat Offerings, and to
do Sacrifices continually. Thus says the Lord, if you can break my Covenant of
the day, and my Covenant of the night, so that there should not be day and
night in their season: then may also my Covenant be broken with David my
Servant, that he should not have a Son to reign upon his Throne, AND WITH THE
LEVITES THE PRIESTS MY MINISTERS. As the Host of heaven cannot be numbered,
neither the sand of the Sea measured, so will I multiply the Seed of David my
Servant, AND THE LEVITES THAT MINISTER UNTO ME, etc. The 2d is Isa. 66. 18. to
22 I will gather all nations, and tongues and they shall come and see my Glory,
and I will set a Sign among them, and I will send those that escape of them
unto the Nations, and to Tarshish, etc. and TO THE ISLES AFAR OFF (whereof
England is chief and principally intended) And they shall bring all your
Brethren for an See Romans 12. 1.
Offering unto the Lord out of all Nations, upon Horses and in Chariots, and in
Litters, and upon Mules, and upon swift Be^sts, TO MY HOLY MOVNTAIN IN
JERUSALEM, says the Lord, as the Children of Israel bring on Offering in a
clean Vessel UNTO THE HOUSE OF THE LORD, And I WILL ALSO TAKE OF THEM FOR
PRIESTS and FOR LEVITES, says the Lord. From which Texts I shall observe;

1. That as Christ's Title to his everlasting Spiritual Kingdom under the
Gospel, over all the converted Gentiles, as well as Jews, is expressly set
forth to be neither elective, nor by conquest, but by DESCENT Whence he is
styled Heir of all things. Heb. 1. 12. And the Lord shall giv^ unto him. THE
THRONE OF HIS FATHER DAVID and HE shall reign over the House of Jacob for ever,
etc. Luke 1. 32, 33.
HEIRSHIP and lineall Succession from King David; and all the regenerated Sons
of God by their Right of Sonship, and new birth, even in like sort entitled
to the Kingdom of heaven (whence they are styled HEIRS and INHERITORS OF THE
KING-DOME, Jam. 2. 5. Gal. 3. 27. Romans 8. 17. Titus 3, 17. Heb. 1. 14. chap. 6.
17. 1 Pet. 3. 7. Mat. 25. 34. and this Kingdom THE INHERITANCE OF THE SAINTS,
Col. 1. 12. Ephesians. 1. 11. 14, 18. 1. Pet. 1. 4. Acts 20. 32. an unanswerable
argument, that Heirship and Birthright is the best, Surest, Jestest,
Honourablest, Lawfullest Title of all other to Crowns, Kingdoms, and
Possessions on earth, being the very Title of Christ himself to his everlasting
Kingship, and Kingdom, and of the Saints in and by Christ, to the Kingdom of
heaven it self, and Crown of Glory;) so the Seat and Throne of this His
Kingdom, is said to be Zion and Jerusalem: (most emphatically expressed, Isa.
24. 23. The Lord of Hosts shall reign in Mount Zion, and in Jerusalem, before
his Ancients gloriously) A typ^ of the Church of God under the Gospel, first
planted in, and propagated from thence throughout the World, according to the
Prophesies Isaiah 2. 3. Michah 4. 2.) Whence the Church under the Gospel is
called the New Jerusalem, etc. Rev. 3. 12. chap. 21. 2, 10. Gal. 4. 26. Heb.
12. 22.

2. That the Ministers of, and under the Gospel, are expressly styled in these
prophesies Priests and Levites, several times.

3. That their Office under the Gospel in a mystical sense, is to offer
bu^nt-offerings, to bake or kindle Meat Offerings, to do Sacrifices
continually, and to Minister unto God.

4. That these Priests and Levites, should be taken out of the converted
Gentiles, and Isles afar off, whereof our Isle was chief.

5. Priests and Levites should never fail, cease, nor want a man under the
Gospel, and that would multiply them as the Host of Heaven, as well as the Seed
of David.

6. That they should convert and bring their brethren for an offering out of
all Nations, and the Isles afar off, to Gods Mountain and House in Jerusalem,
as the children of Israel used to bring their Offerings thither. Since
therefore the Ministers of the Gopel in these prophesies are thus expressly
styled Priests and Levites, and are to offer burnt-Offerings, Meat Offerings,
Sacrifices and Oblations to God in his Mountain and House at Jerusalem, etc.
under David their King, in an Evangelicall sense; without any Judaisme or
denying of Christ's coming in the flesh; they may undoubtedly in the self same
sense and Right, receive all Glebes, Tithes, Oblations, and other dues from
Christians, and converted Jews under the Gospel, as the Priests and Levites did
at Jerusalem under King David and his Successors; seeing they succeed them in
their Office in an Evangelicall sense, according to these prophesies which as
strongly confirm the Maintenance of their Priestly Function, their Tithe^, as
their Evangelicall Priesthood.

7. Although Christ, his Apostles, and the Ministers of the Gospel in the
Primitive times, whiles the Church was in the Rev. 12. 16. 4
Wilderness under grievous, blo^dy, Antichristian Kings, Magistrates,
Persecutours, by reason of the present persecution, neither did nor could
receive Tithes and Gleb^s for their Maintenances from the persecuted
Christians, and therefore were necessitated to live by private Contribution and
extraordinary wages in that case of extremity, yet it no ways follows, that
therefore all Ministers of the Gospel afterward shall do so in settled
Kingdoms, States, Nations converted to the says; where Kings, Magistrates,
People do all generally embrace and profess the Gospel, and where Churches
are established, and Ministers Glebes and Tithes are or may be confirmed by
settled Laws: which I shall irrefragably prove by these instances.

1. The Priests and Levites under the Law, had no Glebes or Tithes at all,
whiles the Israelites wandered 40 years together in the wilderness, though they
had then Levit. 27. 30, 31, 32. Numb. 35. 2, 2, 4.
a La^, and right to receive them. Will the Objectors thence inferr^, Therefore
they ought to have no Tithes nor Glebes when the Israelites were possessors of
and setledin the Land of Canaan in peace; when they enjoyed both without
dispute?

2. The Priests and Levites had no Tithes nor Glebes in the Realm of Israel
under the Usurper Jeroboam, and his Idolatrous successors, who deprived them of
their possessions, Cities, Suburbs, Tithes and Priest Office too, 2 Chronicles. 11.
13, 14. c. 13. 9. Therefore, the Priests and Levites in the Kingdom of Judah,
might not lawfully claim nor enjoy any Glebes or Tithes, nor Ministers under
the Gospel, nor yet those in Israel, under David and Solomon, who were no
Persecutors but Patrons of them.

3. When both these Kingdoms with their Priest and Levites were carried away
captives into Assyria and Babylon; the Priests and Levites during the 70 years
captivity enjoyed neither Glebes nor Tithes: Will it them follow: Therefore
they might lawfully enjoy neither, after their restitution to their Country and
execution of their Priestly Function, and the reedifying of the Temple; as we
read they did: Neh. 10. 38. c. 12. 44. c. 13. 1. to 13. and the people charged
with robbing of God, when they neglected to pay Tithes and Oblations to them,
Mal. 3. 7, 8, 9, 10.

4. Christ himself, so soon as born was forced to fly out of his Country into
Egypt, by bloody Herod, and to remain there till after his death. Mat. 2. 13,
14, 15. After which he complained, That Foxes had holes, and Birds of the air
nests; yet he had not where to lay his head, Mat. 8. 20. Luke 9. 58, And at
last, he was apprehended, mocked, reviled, crowned with thorns, crucified by
the malicious Jews and SOLDIERS, who parted his Garments among them, and cast
Lots upon his Vesture: The Evang^lists closing up the Tragedy of his Passion
with this perpetual brand upon the Domineering cruel Soldiers: THESE THINGS
THEREFORE THE SOLDIERS DID: John 19. 24. For which, and for reporting a Lie to
smother the truth of Christ's Resurrection, the High Priest GAVE LARGE MONEY TO
THE SOLDIERS besides, Matt. 28. 12, 15. Will Can therefore hence conclude;
theresore our Soldiers now must force our Ministers to fly into Aegypt-till
Herod's death; leave them neither Rectory, Personage house, or Vicarge, nor yet
so much as a Bed, Bolster, Tith-Hay or Straw, whereon to lay their heads; and
nail them to the Cross, pierce their sides with spears-points, revile, deride
them, and at last part not only all their Glebes, Tithes and Goods, but their
very Garments and Gowns between them? Surely if they must and shall do so; let
them beware of another perpetual memento like the former. These things
therefore, The Soldiers did: So the Soldiers took the money, and did as they
were taught by Can and Popish Priests and Jesuits.

5. The Apostles who succeeded our Savior in those days of persecution, were
thus handled by Paul's own relation, 1 Cor. 4. 9, etc. We are made a spectacle
unto the world, unto Angels and to men: we are fools for Christ's sake, we are
weak, we are despised: even to this present hour, we are hungry and thirst,
and are naked, and are buffeted, and have no certain dwelling place, we are
reviled, persecuted, defamed; we are as the filth of the world, and the
offscouring of all things unto this day. If all Ministers in times of peace
and setlement must be like the Apostles, in not receiving ti^hes; then they
must be like them too even in settled Christian Kingdoms, States, Churches, in
all these their particular sufferings; and have no certain dwelling place, etc.
And if so; Let Can and his new Ministers of the Gospel (as they style
themselves) begin the president; of whom our Ministers may now say, as Paul did
of the Corinthians in the precedent verse of this chapter v. 8. Now ye are
full, nowye are rich, ye have reigned as Kings, without us: when as most of
them were very poor, and far enough from reigning as Kings, or so much as
Petty Constables before these unhappy Wars, and in days of former persecution,
when Can himself durst not show his face in England for fear of a Bishops
power, or High Commission Pursuivant; nor durst reproach our Orthodox
protestant pious Ministers, and Parliaments as Antichristian, Popish; and
compare their Laws for Ministers Tithes, with the very Idolatrous Statutes of
Omri and A^ab (as he does now p. 3.) for which he might have taken a turn at
Tiburn, in steed of walking fre^ly in Westminster Hall, without being
questioned for this his impudent high Slanders both of our Laws and
Parliaments, as well as Ministry.

6. If the M^nisters of the Gospel be bound to imitate the Apostles in all
things; then they must not have Gold nor Silver, nor Brass in their purses,
neither Scrip nor two Coats, nor yet Shoes, but Sandals only on their feet,
Mat. 10. 9, 10. Mar. 6. 8, 9. as the Capuchin-Friars Mendicants hence conclude:
this being a positive Precept, the objected examples of the Apostles, etc.
only a a President. And if so, not only all our Ministers, but Can and all
his Administrators, must turn Friars Mendican^s too in good earnest, (who
ground their Vow of Voluntary poverty on this Text; and the objected Presidents
of Christ and his Apostles) and so become no Ministers of Christ, but
Antichrist, and as truly Antichristian as these Friars are.

7. If our Ministers must all now be like those of the Primitive times, whiles
under persecuting Heathen Emperors, Kings, Magistrates, then all Saints and
Christians too in our days, and times must imitate and be like the Saints and
Christians in those days: They must sell all their old and new purchased
Lands, Houses, Lordships, Palaces, and lay the money at the Ministers feet,
have all things in common like the real Saints and Christians in the Apostles
times, Acts 4. 34. to the end, and instead of Lording and feasting it in their
new acquired Royal, Episcopal Palaces, and Manor Houses, they must wander
about in Sheepskins, and Goat Skins, in Deserts and in Mountains, and in Dens
and Caves of the earth, being destitute and affli^ted, like the Saints of old;
yea, and like them they must be tortured, not accepting deliverance, have
trialls of cruel mockings and scourgings, bonds and imprisonments, be stoned,
sawn asunder, slain with the Sword, instead of slaying, plundering, imprisoning
and sawing others asunder with the Sword, Heb. 11. 35. to 39. And when our
Army-Saints, Officers, Soldiers, with other Tithe Oppugners, who press this
Objection against Ministers Tithes, shall lay down their Arms, Commands, Power,
Lands, sell all they have and become like to all these Primitive Saints and
Martyrs of Christ in sufferings, in times of Persecution, I doubt not, but our
Ministers will joyfully part both with their Glebes, Rectories, Tithes, and
settled Maintenance to sympathize with them in their Persecutions and
Sufferings. But til^ such hard times of Persecutions, and they begin to follow
this President of the self-denying Primitive S^ints. I hope they will not make
all our Ministers present Martyrs in their Tithes and settled Maintenance, nor
enjoin them alone to follow the Primitive Ministers of the Gospel in those
times of persecution; and prove greater persecutors to them in these pretended
times of Christian Liberty and Justice, than the late Oppressing Prelates and
High Commissioners, who suffered many of them (though Non-conformists) to enjoy
their Tithes and Glebes; and not eject or disinherit them and their Successors
for ever, of their ancient Glebes, Tithes, and settled Maintenance, without any
Legal Tri^ll by their Peers, or Conviction of any Treasonable crimes against
our known Laws, for which they deserve to forfeit them; and all under the
false petence, that Tithes are Jewish and Antichristian under the Gospel, which
I hope I have sufficiently refuted (being established on them by Ch^istian
Kings, States, Parliaments, immediately after the Primitive persecutions,
generally throughout Christendom, as the fittest Maintenance of all other, and
particularly in our Realm, when as the abolishing of them will be really such
in the Judgment of all Godly Protestants and Patrons of Religion, both at home
and throughout the World.

FINS.

