A FULL Declaration Of the true State of the SECLUDED MEMBERS CASE. IN
Vindication of Themselves, and their Privileges, and of the respective
Counties, Cities and Boroughs for which they were elected to serve in
Parliament, against the Vote of their Discharge, published in print, Jan. 5.
1659. by their Fellow Members.

Compiled and published by some of the Secluded Members, who could meet with
safety and conveniencie, without danger of a forcible surprise by Red-coats.

Mal. 2. 10. Have we not all one Father? Has not one God created us? Why do we
deal treacherously every man against his Brother, by profaning the Covenant of
our Fathers? 1 Cor. 6. 8. Nay, you do wrong and defrand, and that your
Brethren. LONDON Printed, and are to be sold by Edward Thomas, at the Adam and
Eve in Little Britain. 1660.

A FULL DECLARATION OF THE True State of the matter of Fact, Concerning the
SECLUDED MEMBERS OF THE House of Commons OF THE Parliament, Begun at
WESTMINSTER, November 3d. 1640.
FOr the clearer stating of their Case, it will be necessary to have a
retrospect to the year 1642. and to observe down-wards such Proceedings, as had
a direct influence upon this matter. In order whereunto it must be considered,
that in the said year, some mis-understandings arising between the King, and
his two Houses of Parliament, concerning some evil Counselors about the King,
at which style his Majesty took offense, the two Houses in their Exact
Collection p. 199.
Declaration of the 19. of May 1642. have this expression in answer thereunto,
We his Majesty's loyal and dutiful Subjects, can use no other style, according
to that Maxim in the Law, the King can do no wrong: but if any ill be committed
in matter of State, the Council; if in matters of Justice, the Judges must
answer for it. They add further, Ibid. p. 203.
We cannot but justly think, that if there be a continuance of such i^l
Counselors, they will by some wicked device or other make the Bill for the
Triennial Parliament, and those other excellent Laws passed this Parliament, of
no value; And we are resolved, the gracious favor of his Majesty expressed in
that excellent Bill, for the continuance of this Parliament, and the advantage
and security which thereby we have from being dissolved, shall not encourage us
to do any thing which otherwise had not been fit to have been done.

And after by their Ibid. p. 264, 281.
Remonstr: of the 26 of May 1642. they gave this as a Character of those evil
Counselors, viz. These are the men that would persuade the People, that both
Houses of Parliament containing all the Peers, and representing all the Commons
of England, would destroy the Laws of the Land, and Liberties of the People:
wherein, besides the trust of the whole, they themselves in their own
particulars, have so great an interest of honor and estate, That we hope it
will gain little credit, with any that have the least use of reason, that such
as must have so great a share in the misery, should take so much pains in the
procuring thereof; and spend so much time, and run so many hazards to make
themselves slaves. And they conclude that Declaration with these words: We
doubt not but it shall in the end appear to all the world, that our endeavors
have been most hearty and sincere, for the maintenance of the true Protestant
Religion, the Kings just Prerogatives, the Laws and Liberties of the Land, and
the Privileges of Parliament: in which endeavors by the grace of God we will
still persist, though we should perish in the work: which if it should be, it
is much to be feared, that Religion, Laws, Liberties and Parliaments, would not
be long lived after Us.

Jealousies and differences increasing between the King and the two Houses,
they came at length to an open war; in the entrance whereunto, the Lords and
Commons assembled in Parliament, published a Declaration in Aug. 1642. in the
preamble whereunto they assert; Exact Collection, p. 491.
That a Malignant party was then in arms against them, to the hazarding of his
Majesty's Person, and for the oppression of the true Religion, the Laws and
Liberties of this Kingdom, and the power and Privilege of Parliament: all which
every honest man is bound to defend; especially those who have taken the late
Protestation, by which they are more particularly tied unto it, and the more
answerable before God should they neglect it. And finding themselves engaged on
a necessity to take up arms likewise for the defense of those, which otherwise
must suffer and perish; they did then think fit, to give that account unto the
world, to be a satisfaction unto all men, of the justice of their proceedings,
and a warning to the People, to let them see the necessity and duty which lay
upon them to save themselves, their Religion and Country. In the body of the
Ibid. p. 494.
Declaration they charge the Malignant party, with an endeavor to possess the
People, that the Parliament will take away the Law, and introduce an Arbitrary
Government; a thing which every moral man abhors, much more the wisdom,
justice, and piety of the two Houses of Parliament; and in truth such a charge,
as no rational man can believe it, it being impossible so many several persons,
as the Houses of Parliament consist of, about Nota.
600. and in either House all of equal power, should all of them, or at least
the Major part, agree in Acts of will and Tyranny, which make up an Arbitrary
Government; and most improbable, that the Nobility, and chief Gentry of this
Kingdom, should conspire to take away the Law, by which they enjoy their
Estates, are protected from any Act of violence and power, and differenced from
the meaner sort of people, with whom otherwise they would be but
fellow servants. They then further charge the said malignant party Exact
Collection, p. 494, 496.
to have combined to bury the happiness of the Kingdom, in the ruin of the
Parliament, and by forcing it, to cut up the freedom of Parliament by the root,
and either take all Parliaments away, or which is worse, make them the
instruments of Slavery to confirm it by Law, and leave the disease incurable:
With compelling the trained Bands by force, to come in and join with them, or
disarming them, and putting their arms into the hands of lewd and desperate
persons, thereby turning the Arms of the Kingdom against it self; And with an
intention to destroy the Parliament, and be Masters of our Religion and
Liberties, to make us slaves, and alter the Government of this Kingdom, and
reduce it to the condition of some other Countries, which are not governed by
Parliaments, and so by Laws. And upon these grounds they conclude that
Declaration in these words. Exact Collect. p. 497.
Therefore we the Lords and Commons are resolved, to expose our lives and
fortunes for the defense and maintenance of the true Religion, the Kings
person, honor and estate, the power and privilege of Parliament, and the just
rights and liberties of the Subject. And for the prevention of this mischievous
design, the alteration of our Religion. And we do here require all those who
have any sense of piety, honor or compassion* to help a distressed State,
especially such as have taken the Protestation, and are bound in the same duty
with us unto their God, their King and Country, to come in unto our aid and
assistance, this being the true cause for which we raise an Army, under the
command of the Earl of Essex, with whom in this Quarrel we resolve to live and
dye.

And in the Declaration and Resolution of both Houses, in answer to the Kings
Proclamation against the Ibid. p. 509.
Earl of Essex, they have these words, viz. And whereas the Lords and Commons
in Parliament, did formerly choose the Earl of Essex to be Captain General of
such forces as are or shall be raised for the maintenance of the true
Protestant Religion, the Kings person, the law of the Land, the peace of the
Kingdom, the liberty and propriety of the Subject, and rights and privileges of
Parliament; the said Lords and Commons do declare, That they will maintain and
assist him, and adhere unto him the said Earl, with their lives and estates in
the same Cause, as in conscience and duty to God, the King and their Country,
they are bound to do. And the Exact Collection, p. 657.
Petition of both Houses sent to the King by the Earl of Essex, when he marched
in the head of the Parliaments army says, That they have for the just and
necessary defense of the Protestant Religion, of his Majesty's Person, Crown:
and Dignity, of the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom, and the Privilege and
power of Parliament, taken up arms.

The two Houses of Parliament having thus taken up arms, and declared the cause
thereof, no success made them in the least to vary from it; but in the very
heat of the war, and whole prosecution thereof to the end, they asserted and
adhered to the same cause, as appears in all their Remonstrances, Declarations,
Orders and Ordinances, during the war: which being over-tedious to transcribe
at large, some material passages to that effect, shall only be inserted, viz.
In the Exact Collection, p. 632, etc.
Directions from both Houses, given to the Earl of Essex, General of the Army;
the cause is asserted to be, in defense of Religion, his Majesty's Person, the
Liberties and Laws of the Kingdom, and Privilege of Parliament

And in the Exact Collection, p. 666.
Declaration, and Protestation of the Lords and Commons in Parliament to this
Kingdom, and to the whole world, Dat. October. 22. 1642. (a day before the battle
of Edghil, ordered to be read in all Churches and Chapels) wherein they
express their resolution, to enter into a solemn Oath and Covenant with God,
they conclude with these words, viz. We doubt not but the God of truth, and the
great Protector of his people, will assist and enable us, in this our just
defense, to restrain the Malice and fury of those that seek our ruin, and to
secure the Persons, estates, and Liberties of all that join with us: and to
procure and establish the safety of Religion, and fruition of our Laws and
Liberties, in this and all other his Majesty's dominions; which we do here
again profess before the ever-living God, to be the chief end of all our
Councils and resolutions, without any intention or desire to hurt or injure his
Majesty, either in his Person or just power.

And whereas in the Exact Collection, p. 773.
Kings Proclamation of the 24. of October. 1642. It is alleged, that the war
raised against him, was to take away his life, to destroy his posterity, to
change the Protestant Religion, to suppress the Law of the Kingdom, and to
take away the Liberty of the Subject, and to subject both to an arbitrary
power; And in one of his Majesty's Declarations* there was this allegation,
That the Army raised by the Parliament, was to depose the King; Thereupon both
Houses of Parliament in a Declaration after the bloody battle of Edghill, in
answer to this Charge and Declaration, have these words, Exact Collection, p.
657, 658, 663, 664.
We hoped the contrivers of that Declaration, or any that professed but the
name of a Christian, could not have so little charity as to raise such a
scandal, especially when they must needs know the Protestation taken by every
Member of both Houses, whereby they promise in the presence of almighty God, to
defend his Majesty's Person; the promiss and Protestation made by the Members
of both Houses, upon the nomination of the Earl of Essex to be General, and to
live and die with him; wherein is expressed, that this Army was raised for the
defense of the Kings Person. And in the same Declaration, they rejoice that his
Majesty, and his Children escaped danger in that Battle.

In the Exact Collection, p. 696.
Remonstrance of the Lords and Commons of the 2d. of Nov. 1642. there is this
passage. As God is witness of our thoughts, so shall our actions witness to
all the world, that to the honor of our Religion, and of those that are most
zealous in it, we shall suffer more from and for our Sovereign, than we hope
God will ever permit the malice of wicked Counselors to put us to; and though
the happiness of this and all Kingdoms depends chiefly upon God, yet we
acknowledge that it does so mainly depend upon his Majesty, and the royal
branches of that root, that as we have heretofore, so we shall hereafter esteem
no hazard too great, no reproach too vile, but that we shall willingly go
through the one, and undergo the other, that we and the whole Kingdom, may
enjoy that happiness which we cannot in an ordinary way of providence expect
from any other fountain or streams, than those from whence (were the poison of
evil Councils, once removed from about them) we doubt not but we and the whole
Kingdom should be satisfied abundantly. The same Remonstrance also has these
words. Ibidem p. 697.
We do not say the Royal assent is not requisite in the passing of Laws, nor
do, or ever did we say, That because his Majesty is bound to give his consent
to good Laws, presented to him by his people in Parliament, that therefore they
shall be Laws without his consent, or at all obligatory: saving only for the
necessary preservation of the Kingdom, whilst that necessity lasted, and such
consent cannot be obtained. And again, Exact Collection, p. 727.
We did and do say, that the Sovereign power, does reside in the King, and both
Houses of Parliament. It follows in the same Remonstrance, P. 728.
Having the honor of God, and of his Majesty, and the peace, freedom and
prosperity of this Kingdom, chiefly before our eyes in our Propositions, and in
all our actions, we rest assured, that both God and man, will abhor and
abominate that monstrous and most injurious charge, laid upon the
Representative body of this whole Kingdom, Of desiring the ruins, not only of
his Majesty's person, but of Monarchy it self: and we appeal to all the world,
whether worse words than these can be given us; And whether it be not high time
for us to stand upon our defense, which nature teaches every man to provide
for, and this Kingdom (unless it be very unnatural, and very unmindfull of it
self) cannot but afford to them, whom it has entrusted, and by whom it is
represented; and if the Major part of both Houses, may sit free from force, we
doubt not, but that they will not only make it good, that they have done
themselves and the whole Kingdom right in their De^larations, and offered no
wrong, nor done any prejudice at all to his Majesty, but also be very sensible
of the great indignity offered to the representative body of this whole
Kingdom, by the contrivers of the Kings answer, and will make such persons
(that delight to foul their own nests, and to cast dirt in the face of the
Kingdom) instances of their exemplary justice, so soon as they shall be
discovered, and brand both them and their doctrine with the marks of their
perpetual scorn and indignation. And for a taste of their horrid doctrine, these
Particulars are mentioned from the Declaration, that Remonstrance answers, viz.
P. 729.
That his Majesty, or any other Person, may upon suggestions and pretenses of
Treason, Felony, or breach of the peace, take the Members of Parliament, out of
either House of Parliament, without giving satisfaction to the House whereof
they are Members, of the ground of such suggestion or accusation, and without
and against their consent, so they may dismember a Parliament when they please,
and make it what they will, when they will.

That the Representative body of the whole Kingdom, is a faction of Malignant,
Scismatical and Ambitious Persons, whose design is and always has been, to
alter the whole frame of Government, both of Church and State, and to subject
both King and people to their own lawless arbitrary power and Government, and
that they design the ruin of his Majesty's person, and of Monarchy it self,
and consequently that they are Traitors, and all the Kingdom with them (for
their Act is the Act of the whole Kingdom) and whether their punishment and
ruin may not also involve the whole Kingdom in conclusion, and reduce it into
the condition of a Conquered Nation; no man can tell, but experience shows
us, that success often draws men not only beyond their professions, but also
many times beyond their intentions.

Likewise in the Exact Collection, p. 736.
Declaration of both Houses, dated November. 7. 1642. for the encouragement of
the Apprentices, to list themselves under the Earl of Warwick, the cause is
declared to be, for the defense of Religion, and liberty of the Kingdom, his
Majesty's royal Person, the Parliament, and the City of London.

In the Ibid p. 802.
Declaration of the Lords and Commons of the 17 th. of December, 1642. The
Parliaments Army is said to be raised for the necessary defense of the true
Protestant Religion, the King, Parliament and Kingdom.

And in the Ibid. p. 823.
Declaration of both Houses concerning a Treaty of peace made by Cheshire
alone, it is held forth, That they ought not to withdraw themselves from the
common cause, but to join with the Parliament in the defense of the Religion,
and liberty of the whole Kingdom, and with them to labor by all good means to
procure a general peace and protection from the King for all his Subjects,
according to their general Protestation. In like manner in the Ibid. p. 325.
Declaration of the 7 th. of January 1642. for a subscription of money and plate
for supply of the Army, the cause of the war is expressed to be, for the
preservation of Religion, as well as the just and undoubted power and privilege
of Parliament, our Laws and Liberties from most apparent destruction.

And in the Ibid. p. 907.
preamble to the Propositions of both Houses tendered to his Majesty, Fe^r. 1.
1642. they say, That they took up Arms for the defense of our Religion, laws,
liberties, privileges of Parliament, and for the sitting of the Parliament in
safety.

Likewise in the first Exact Collection, p. 932. and Appendix, p. 4.
Ordinances for a general weekly Assesment, wherein the whole Kingdom was to be
satisfied, That they might freely pay their money, the same cause is held forth.

The A Collection of Orders and Ordinances of Parliament in fol. p. 807, 816,
890.
Associations also of the several Counties of the Kingdom were settled for the
same cause.

In the year 1643. A Collection, etc. p. 422, 424.
The Solemn League and Covenant was taken by all Members of Parliament, and
throughout the Kingdom, in maintenance of the same cause, as appears by the
Covenant, and the Exhortation to the taking of the same.

The Kingdom of Scotland engaged with us in the same cause. And all A Collect.
p. 496. E. Essex title.
Commissions to the Generals and Army Officers were in the name of King and
Parliament.

And when a new Army was raised of 20000. men under the command of Sir Tho.
Fairfax, by Ibid. p. 599.
Ordinance of both Houses dated the 13th. of Febr. 1644. it is held forth to
be, for the defense of the King and Parliament, the true Protestant Religion,
the laws and liberties of the Kingdom.

An Ordinance, dated 3. Aug. 1647. for raising of forces to be commanded by Sir
William Waller, is for defense of the King, Kingdom, Parliament and City.

Lastly, (to mention no more) toward the end of the war the House of Commons
alone published a memorable Ibid. p. 877, 878, 879.
Declaration, dated the 17th. of April, 1646. called, A Declaration of their
true Intentions concerning the ancient Government of the Kingdom, and securing
the people against all arbitrary Government, etc. Wherein remembering the
aspersions cast upon them in the beginning of the war, and that the same
Spirits were still working and mis-representing their intentions, and not
ceasing as well in print as otherwise, to beget a Belief, that they then desired
to exceed or swerve from their first ayms and principles in the undertaking of
this war, and to recede from the Solemn League and Covenant, and Treaties
between the two Kingdoms, and that they would prolong the troubles and
distractions in order to alter the fundamental constitution and frame of this
Kingdom, to leave all Government in the Church loose and un^etled, and our
selves to exercise the same Arbitrary power over the Persons and Estates of the
Subjects* which this present Parliament has thought fit to abolish, by taking
away the Star Chamber, High Commission* and other Arbitrary Courts, and the
exorbitant power of the Council Table; All which being seriously considered by
them, and foreseeing, that if credit were given to such dangerous in^inuations
and false surmise, the same would not only continue the then calamity, and
involve us into new and unexpected imbroylments: but likewise inevitably
endanger the happy issue and success of their endeavors, which by Gods
blessing they might otherwise hope for; they did declare in these words; We do
declare, That our true and real intentions are, and our endeavors shall be, to
settle Religion in the purity thereof, according to the Covenant, to maintain
the ancient and fundamental Government of this Kingdom, to preserve the right
and liberty of the Subject, to lay hold of the first opportunity of procuring a
safe and well-grounded peace in the three Kingdoms, and to keep a good
understanding between the two Kingdoms of England and Scotland, according to
the grounds expressed in the Solemn League and Covenant, and Treaties, which we
desire may be inviolably observed on both parts.

And lest these Generals should not give a sufficient satisfaction, they
thought fit, to the end men might be no longer abused in a misbelief in their
intentions, or a misunderstanding of their Actions, to make further
enlargement upon the particulars, most worthy a diligent peru^al and
consideration. Amongst which they have this observable passage, viz. And
whereas a safe and good peace is the right end of a just war, there is nothing
we have more earnestly desired, nor more constantly labored after, and to that
purpose both Houses of Parliament have framed several Propositions to be sent
to the King; wherein We are so far from altering the fundamental Constitution
and Government of this Kingdom, by King, Lords and Commons, that we have only
desired, that with the consent of the King such Powers may be settled in the
two Houses, without which we can have no assurance, but that the like or
greater mischiefs than these, which God has hitherto delivered us from, may
break out again, and engage us in a second and more destructive war. Whereby it
plainly appears, our intentions are not to change the ancient frame of
Government within this Kingdom, but to obtain the end of the primitive
institution of all Government, the safety and weal of the people.

And then that Declaration concludes thus, And for the Covenant, we have been
and ever shall be very careful to ob^erve the same, that as nothing has been
done, so nothing shall be done by us repugnant to the true meaning and
intention thereof, nor will we depart from those grounds and principles upon
which it was framed and founded.

This Decl. was then indeed of that moment, to quiet the Jealousies, and settle
the Distempers of the Kingdom, Ibid. P. 877*
that 4000 of them were ordered to be printed for the use of the Parliament.
And the Knights and Burgesses ordered, to take care for the speedy sending down
and publishing them in the respective Counties and places for which they
^erved. And by special order of the House, Sir Arthur Has^erig, Sir John
Eveling, and two others, were to take care that the printed Declarations were
published, set up, and ^^xed in every Parish Church by the Churchwardens, or
other Officers of the said Parish, which they were by the said Order required
and enjoined to ^ee published, set up and fixed in the said Parish Church
accordingly. Way being thus made to the Narrative and Treaty, we proceed.

The two Houses of Parliament, having thus for the space of six years or
thereabouts, been engaged in a war, for the defense and maintenance of the
Protestant Religion, the Kings person, honor and Estate, and his Royal
Posterity, the power and Privileges of Parliament, and the Laws and Liberties
of the Kingdom, as appears by all their said Declarations, Orders, Ordinances
and public writings, in the prosecution whereof, they did also declare, Exact
Collection, p. 491, 492. 498, 508, 567, 570, 574, 617, 631, 636, to 677. 812,
813, 814, 816, 826, 827, 832. 834, 890, 891, 898* 902, to 920.
That there was a design carried on by the forces levied against the
Parliament, to alter our religion, and the ancient frame and constitution of
the Government, both in Church and State, and the laws and liberties of the
Kingdom, and to introduce Popery and Idolatry, together with an Arbitrary form
of Government. And having in the heat of the war, sent Propositions several
times, and entered into diverse Treaties with his late Majesty, for a safe and
well-grounded peace, which had not the desired effect; at the cloze of the war,
finding the distempers of the Kingdom continued, though all adverse Armies and
Garrisons were reduced, and well remembering, that in the beginning of the war,
they had called God to witness, that the safety of the Kingdom and peace of
the people was their only aim; They did in July 1648. resolve upon a personal
Treaty with the King, the general desires of the City of London, and the rest
of the people concurring therewith. And in pursuance thereof, the Commons
assembled in Parliament, that they might have a full House, published the
following Declaration.

Die Martis 5. Septembris 1648.
A Declaration of the Commons assembled in Parliament, Concerning the Summoning
of the Members to attend the House on Tuesday the 26. of September. 1648.
WHereas, both Houses of Parliament have agreed upon A Personal Treaty with his
Majesty, which is speedily to commence, for the management whereof, the None
therefore, much less the Majority of them may or ought to be suspended or
secluded by the Minority, or armed force.
attendance of all the Members of Parliament, will be very necessary, because in
the Multitude of Counselors there is safety, and in the success thereof, the
Alaying of the present distempers, and future happiness of this Kingdom, is so
highly concerned; It is therefore ordered and declared by the Commons assembled
in Parliament, that the respective Sheriffs of each County, within the Kingdom
of England, and Dominion of Wales, do forthwith upon receipt hereof, give
particular notice to all the Members of the House of Commons, residing and
being within their respective Counties, to attend the House on Tuesday the
26th. September under the penalty of twenty pounds, fixed upon the defaultors;
that day being appointed for calling of the House.

The Members attended from all parts accordingly, and there were appointed the
Earls of Northumberland, Pembrook, Salisbury, Middlesex, and the Lord Say, for
the Lords House; And Mr. William Pierpoint, Sir Henry Vane, Junior, and eight
more of the House of Commons, Commissioners to carry on the Treaty with his
Majesty, at the Isle of Wight; who took great pains therein, and finished the
Treaty by the end of November. And on December the first, the Commissioners of
the House of Commons, made their report of the Treaty in the House; who
presently entered into debate thereof, and continued the debate, Dec. 2d. 3d.
4th. and 5th. when after a long, and serious debate, in a full House
(notwithstanding the Menaces of the Army, who had marched up to London, and
Westminster, contrary to the Orders of the House, removed their own guards, and
put new ones upon them, and their insolent and Rebellious Declaration of the
20th. of November. 1648.) they came to this resolution, without any division of
the House, viz.

Die Martis 5. Decembris 1648.
REsolved upon the Question, That the Answers of the King to the Propositions
of both Houses, are a ground for the House to proceed upon, for the settlement
of the peace of the Kingdom.
The just grounds and reasons of which vote, do partly appear in all the
forecited Declarations, and proceedings of both Houses during the War, the
Oaths, Protestation, League and Covenant, they took as Members; the Writs by
which they were elected, and the Indentures by which we were returned,
empowered, entrusted; but more particularly in the Vindication of the
imprisoned and secluded Members of the Commons House, from the aspersisions
^ast upon them, and the majority of the House, in a printed Paper of the
Gen-Council of Officers, Jan. 3. in answer to the Demands of the Commons
assembled in Parliament, concerning the securing or secluding the Members, Jan.
20. 1648. and See Mr. Pry^^es Speech, December. 4. 1648.
much more might be added, if that were our present work; but intending a bare
Narrative of matter of fact, we proceed.

The same day the House appointed a Committee, viz. Mr. William Peirpoint, and
others to go to the Officers of the Army for the preserving of a right
understanding and good correspondency between the House, and the General and
Army. The Committee repairing to the head Quarters that Afternoon, were so
rudely entertained, that some of them were secured by the Army Officers, and
the rest put off and slighted without any conference that day.

The Members coming in the usual manner to the House on Wednesday the 6. of
Dec. the Army Officers (contrary to orders of the House) having sent diverse
Regiments of Horse and Foot early in the morning to Westminster in a hostile
manner, they placed themselves in the Palace-yard. Court of Requests, the Hall,
Court of Wards, the Stairs, and the Lobby of the House, and all the avenues, to
imprison and seclude those Members who assented to the Vote; Colonel Pride and
other Officers who commanded the Guards having in their hands an Alphabetical
List of the Members names designed to be secured and secluded, given them (as
they confessed) by some of the d^ssenting Members, above forty of them were
imprisoned, and above a hundred more of them forcibly secluded that very day,
and the next, and Mr. Edward Stephens, and Col. Birch.
two pulled out of the House it self, into which they were got before the
Officers espied them. The 43. Members they had seized (being the legal number
of a House capable to vote) they secured that day in the Queens Court, and
afterward for several days; using them in a barbarous and inhuman manner,
forcing them the first night (though diverse of them grave aged Persons of
Quality, and tenderly bred,) in that cold frosty snowy weather, to lie upon the
bare Boards, in a place called H^ll in Westminster, and next night (after a
whole days attendance on them at Whitehall, without vouchsafing to speak with
any of them, though sent for and carried ^hither to confer with them) sent them
Prisoners to the Kings Head and Swan in the Strand, through the Snow and di^t,
guarded with three Musquiteers apiece, and Horse besides, like the vilest
Felons and Traitors, in such sort as no Prisoners of war, of any quality, were
ever used by them, and detained most of them Prisoners sundry weeks at the said
Common^ Innes, though many of them had Houses of their own in Town, sendi^g
some of them close Prisoners to St. James, and afterward to Windsor Castle,
and other Garrisons diverse years space, without the least particular
accusation, impeachment, hearing or trial, their dissenting Fellow Members the^
sitting, not so much as compassionating their barbarous usages, or taking any
effectual course for their enlargement.

Those few Members permitted by the Army to fit, Dec. ^. had ye^ so much
seeming resentment of this greatest and most horrid Violation of the privileges
of Parliament, ever attempted in any age, that as it appears in the Iour^all of
the House, Wednesday the six of December, 1648. The House being informed, that
diverse Members coming to attend the House were stayed and carried to the
Queens Court or Court of Wards, commanded the Serj^ant to go to them, and
require them to attend the Hou^e.

Mr. (...) brings word, That he signified to the Members in the Queens Court,
viz. That it was the pleasure of the House, that they should forthwith come and
attend the House: the Members seemed willing to consent, but an Officer there
gave him this Answer, that he could not suffer them to come, until he had
received his Orders which he had sent for.

The same day Lieut. Col. Axtel, and others coming with a Message from the
General, they were twice called in, and acquainted the House, That his
Excellency the Lord General, and the General Council of Officers had commanded
them to acquaint the House, that they had something to declare to this House
this morning, of very great concernment, which will be presently ready for
their view. This seems to be a Message sent to prevent the House rising before
they came, their Proposals not being yet ready. Mr. Speaker returned answer;
that the House will be ready to receive it. Some space after, the Officers from
the General, coming to the door, they were called in, and The Army Officers had
thrice access into the House, the very day they secured and secluded the
Members out of it.
Col. Whaley acquainted the House, that they were commanded by his Excellency
the Lord General, and the General Council of the Officers, to present something
to this House, the which the Officers being withdrawn was read, and was
directed, To the Honorable the Commons of England, in Parliament assembled, and
Entitled; The humble Proposals and desire of his Excellency the Lord General,
and the General Council of Officers, December. 6. 1648. in order to a speedy
prosecution of justice, and the settlement, formerly propounded by them.

The said Proposals were ushered in with two words, propound and demand,
language unfit for a Parliament, and stuffed with falsehoods, and unjust scandals
against the imprisoned and secluded Members; and chiefly they took particular
notice of the Vote of the said 5. of December. charging the said Members with
breach of Trust therein, and desired, that all such faithful Members, who are
innocent of the said Vote, would immediately by Protestation or public
Declaration, acquit themselves from the guilt of concurrence in the said Vote,
that the Kingdom may know who they are that have kept their trust, and
distinguish them from the rest, that have thus falsified the same; and that all
such, as cannot or shall not so acquit themselves particularly, may be
immediately excluded and suspended the House, and not readmitted, until they
shall have given clear satisfaction therein, to the judgment of those who now
so acquit themselves, and the ground of such satisfaction be published to the
Kingdom.

Notwithstanding these Proposals, the House then resolved that the Committee
formerly appointed, do confer with the General for discharge of the Members.

Thursday the 7th. of December 1648. ( as appears by the entries in the
Journal) A Letter from Sir Thomas Dacres, and Mr. Dodderidg, dated the same
day, half an hour past 9. in the morning, was read in the House, signifying,
that coming to attend the House to do their duties, they were kept back by
force. The like signification was made of the like usage to Sir Edward
Partridge. Also a Letter from Westminster, 7 th. December. 1648. from Sir Martin
Lumley, Sir John Temple, George Booth, Thomas Waller, Thomas Middleton, Mr.
Brampton Gurdon, Esaias Thomas, and Arthur Owen, signifying their restraint from
coming to the House, to do their duty there, by some of the Soldiers of the
Army.

The same day Mr. Pierpoint delivers in two papers from the conference with the
General, appointed by order yesterday, for the discharge of the Members, the
which were read, viz.

The Committees first Paper.
WE having command from the House of Commons, to let your Excellency know,
that diverse Members of the* House of Commons, are this day taken and detained
by your Excellencies Army: It is their pleasure, that they be discharged, for
which we desire your Excellencies present order, that it may be done
accordingly.

The General, and General Council of Officers answer.
Having seen the Order, upon which your last paper is given in, we do not
conceive it to be the A pretty distinction to evade their Order.
positive pleasure of the House, that the Members be discharged; But concerning
their discharge, for which you are appointed to confer, so soon as we shall
receive the Resolution of the House, upon that paper, this day sent in by us to
the House, which concerns those Persons detained, we shall then be prepared, to
give you answerable satisfaction, in relation to that particular.

The Committees second Paper.
IN answer to your Paper of the sixth of December. instant, now delivered, wherein
you do refer to a Paper, sent by you to the Commons, we affirm, that since the
reading of that paper by the House, Nota
it was expressed by them to be their positive pleasure* that the Members of that
House, this day taken and detained, by some of the Officers and Soldiers of
the Army under your Excellencies command be forthwith discharged and therefore
we do insist that according to our former paper, the said Members be forthwith
discharged

The General Council of Officers final answer.
IN return to your last paper, concerning your insisting for the discharge of
the Members, we refer to our former answer, and have no more to say to that
particular, till we receive the resolutions of the House upon our paper this
day sent to them, December. 6. 1648.

The House being thus twice ba^led and positively disobeyed by the Officers,
did nothing hereupon: Yet these demands of their release notwithstanding the
Armies Proposals and Papers, evidence, that they did not deem their Vote, any
^reach of their trust, or just ground for their seclusion.

After this, several attempts were made by diverse Members, which the Army still
suffered to sit, viz. William Pierpoint, Esquire Sir John Evelin of Wilts, William
Ashurst, Esquire Mr. Nathaniel Stephens, and many others, to have the so highly
broken privileges and Freedom of Parliament vindicated, and pressed hard, that
Exact Collection, p. 36, to 60.
according to the constant course of Parliament, no proceedings might be till
that were first done; but laboring many days in vain, and finding the force
continued upon the House, and secluded Members, they also withdrew, and never
sat since.

After their withdrawing, Dec. 12, and 13 the sitting Members repealed and
nulled the Votes of Febr. 28. and Dec. 5. according to the Armies Proposals:
and this was the first time the House declined their privileges. Tuesday the
14th. of De^. 1648. The Question being propounded, that A Committee do go unto
the General, to know of him upon what ground the Members of the House are
restrained, from coming to the House, by the Officers and Soldiers of the Army,

The House was divided. The Year went forth. Tellers for the No's, 18.
Mr. Smith. Mr. Martin.
Tellers for the Yeas, 35.
Mr. Carry. Mr. Pury.


So it passed with the affirmative, for the Members.

Resolved, that a Committee do go unto the General, to know of him upon what
ground, the Members of the House are restrained from coming to the House, by
the Officers and Soldiers of the Army.

And a Committee was appointed accordingly. Hitherto the major part of the
House, appeared sensible of their Privilege, though most of the Members were
imprisoned, secluded, or withdrawn as aforesaid, and there were but 18. of 53.
in the Negative.

Friday the 15th. of December. A Committee was appointed to enquire, who Printed,
contrived or published, the scandalous paper, Entitled, A Solemn Protestation
of the imprisoned and secluded Members of the Commons House, against the horrid
force and violence of the Officers and Soldiers of the Army, on Wednesday and
Thursday last, being the 6. and 7. of December. 1648. which did declare all
proceedings in the House of Commons, null and void, during the forcible
seclusion of the Majority of the Members, and the actual force upon the House,
according to the Ordinances of both Houses, Aug. 20. 1647

And* the same day an Ordinance passed both Houses, (when there were but 53.
Commons, and 4. Lords present) against the said Protestation; judging and
declaring, the said printed paper to be false, scandalous and Seditious; And
that all Persons, that have had any hand in, or given consent unto the
contriving, framing, printing or publishing thereof, shall be adjudged, and
hereby are adjudged, incapable to bear any office, or have any place of trust
or authority in the Kingdom, or to sit as Members of either House of
Parliament. And they did further order and ordain, That every Member of either
House, respectively then absent, upon his first coming to sit in that House
whereof he is a Member, for the manifestation of his innocence, shall disown
and disclaim his having had any hand in, or giving consent unto the contriving,
framing, printing or publishing of the said paper, or the matter therein
contained.

But as no Member was charged with, or convicted in particular of having any
hand in the said paper, so it does not appear by any entry in the Journal Book
of the House, that any Member was put to such disavowal or disclamor, which if
they had, there is no doubt they would generally and freely have made it.

Monday the 18th. of December. 1648. Before any Return was made by the General,
of the Grounds upon which he restrained the Members from coming to the House,
in compliance with the said Proposals of the Army,

They resolved upon the Question, that this House do declare, That liberty be
given to the Members of this House to declare their dis-assent to the Vote of
the 3d. of December, 1648.

And the same day they ordered, That it be referred to the former Committee for
drawing an Attestation, to bring in a Declaration, how and in what manner and
form the said dis-assent shall be entered. This was the second time that the
House declined their Privileges.

Wednesday, December. 20. 1648. The House again debated the Question, Whether the
former message to the General be renewed by the same Committee, concerning the
Members that are absent; and it was carried in the Affirmative by 32. against
19. So at that time there were but 19. in the House, against the restoring of
the Members. The same day, Mr. Scot reports the opinion of the Committee
appointed to draw a Declaration, how and in what manner and form the dissent of
the Members to the Vote of the 5th. of December. 1648. shall be entered. And 'twas
resolved that the manner be, That such Gentlemen as were present at the Vote,
do stand up and say, that they did dissent from the said Vote; which form,
contrary to all Presidents, and the very being and freedom of Parliament, being
agreed upon, the same day the dissent of the Members following is entered, viz.

Col. Boswell. Lord Gray. Mr. Peregri^^ Pel^am. Col. Jones. Mr. Richard Darley.
Col. Temple. Sir Thomas Malevery. Sir John Bouchier. Col. Peter Temple. Mr.
Humph. Edwards. Mr. James Challenor. Sir Gregory Norton. Mr. Oldsworth. Mr.
Garland. Mr. Nich. L^ve. Mr. Lisle. Col. Rigby. Mr. Holland. Col. Ludlow. Mr.
Clement. Col. Purefoy. Col. Stapley. Mr. Dunch. Mr. Cawly. Col. Downs. Mr.
Carry. Mr. Blaxtone. Mr. Scot. Sir John Danv^rs. Mr. Henry Smith. Mr. John Pry.
Mr. George Serle. Mr. Dove. In all 33.
So that it appears there was not yet the number of a House, which must be
forty at the least, that dissented to that Vote, though above 200. were kept
away by force concurring with it.

December. 21. Col. Hutchinson. Sir Hen. Mildmay. Sir James Harrinton
Declare their dissents to the Vote of December. 5. Monday Dec. 25. 1648. Col.
Harvey. Ald^rman Pennington. Mr. Main. Alderman Atkins. Mr. Blagrave. Col.
M^or. Mr. Millington.
Declare their dissents to the said Vote of December. 5.
There being now almost after three weeks time, and such strange tran^actions
as before, only 43. Dissenters to the Vote of December. 5. 1648. and that in
obedience to the Armies Proposals of the 6th. of December.

Upon Thursday the 11th. of January 1648. the House was conceived sufficiently
garbled and fitted for the Humble Answer of the general Council of Officers of
the Army, Jan. 3. to the demand of the House Dec. 14. touching the late
securing or secluding the Members thereof; which was this day read; And though
the same was notoriously false, and highly scandalous to the secured and
secluded Members, as appears by their Vindication published the 20th. of
January, which never received reply: yet the House* (without so much as
summo^ing or hearing of the said Members,) Resolved, the said 11th of January,
That they approve of the substance of the said Answer of the General Council of
Officers of the Army, to the demand of the House, touching the securing or
secluding some Members thereof. And appointed a Committee of the Dissenters to
consider, what was further to be done upon the said answer of the General
Council, and to present the same to the House.

And because (it seems) the said Committee was slack in meeting and making
their return. On Monday the 29th. of January, the House, consisting of the said
43. Dissenters, ordered, That the said Committee be enjoined to meet and bring
in their Report on Monday next.

But to give them a sure rule to walk by, and to prevent the sitting of any but
Dissenters, it was resolved, at the same time, That no Member of this House
that gave his consent to the Vote of the fifth of December ^^^t, do presume to
sit in this House, until this House take further order; though it was evident
the Dissenters* were yet but 43. and the number present at the Votes were 244.
So that by this Vote made but by the 43. who had entered their dissents, all
others must be presumed to be yet Con^^nters to the Vote.

This last Vote brought in afterward by degrees some more Dissenters

For Thursday, February 1. 1648.
Mr. Whitaker. The Lord Monson. Mr. Weaver. Mr. Lassells. Mr. Boon. Mr. T.
Chaloner. Mr. Wait. Mr. Harbert. Mr. Mackworth. Mr. Poynes. Mr. Miles Corbet.
Mr. Say. Sir Thomas Jervice. Mr. Trenchard. Alderman Wilson. Mr. Wogan. Mr.
Baker. Sir Tho. Witherington. Mr. Pury. Mr. Heveningham. Mr. Gratwick. Sir
Edward Bainton. Mr. James Nelthrop. Mr. Brewster. Sir who to make it sure
dissented also, Dec. 20.
Gregory Norton. Mr. Prideaux. Mr. Thorp. Mr. Whitlock. Sir H. Vane Junior. The
Lord Lisle.
Entered their Dissents.

The Dissenters being now in almost two Months time come to the number only of
72. they did on the same first of February make the Order following, viz.

Whereas on the 18th. of December last, this House did order and declare, that
liberty be given to the Members of this House to declare their dis-assents to
the late Vote of the fifth of December. 1648. That the Kings Answer to the
Propositions of both Houses, was a ground for the House to proceed upon for the
settlement of the peace of this Kingdom; And afterward viz. on the 20th. of
December. did order, That the Clerk should enter the names with the dissents of
such Members as declared their dissents in manner then directed; Whereupon
diverse Members that day present, and others at several times since, did cause
their names and dissents to be entered accordingly. And whereas it has been
further admitted in behalf of Members absent from the said Vote, That any such
Member might have liberty to express his dis-approving the said Vote of the 5
th. of December. It is now resolved and declared by the Commons assembled in
Parliament, that such Members who (being present at the House on the 5th. of
December.) did dissent from the said Vote, and from the putting that Vote to the
Question; or being not then present do dis-approve of the same, and have not
already declared in and to the House such their dissent or dis-approval of the
said Vote, may declare their Respective dissent or dis-approve of the said Vote
to the Committee herereafter nominated, viz. Mr. Scot. Mr. Martin. Sir John
Danvers. Mr. Millington. Mr. Hutchinson. Sir Will. Constable. Col. Moor. Mr.
Challoner. Mr. List. Mr. Hayes. Mr. Whittaker. Sir Tho. Jervis. Mr. Trenchard.
Sir T. Widderington. Mr. Cawley. Col. Downs. Col. Temple. Mr. Carry. Mr. Serj.
Thorp. Mr. Blackiston. Lord Lisle. Col. Purifoy. Sir. Mich. Livesay. Col.
Stapely. Lord Gray. Lord Monson. Alderman Wilson. Col. Bosvile. Mr. Boon. Mr.
Heveningham. Sir Gregory Norton.
Or any three or more of them.

Who are hereby constituted and appointed a Committee, to receive and take
notice of the Declarations of any such Member his dissent or disapproval
respectively, that shall desire to declare and enter the same; and the said
Committee are hereby required to make present report of the same to the House,
and shall from time to time be heard therein before any other business, or next
after the business then in debate, to the end such dissents or disapprovals may
be entered in the Books of the House, and such Members thereupon admitted; And
to that purpose the said Committee or any three of them are to sit when and
where they think fit and convenient. And it is further resolved and ordered,
That no Member of the House whose dissent or disapproval of the said Vote has
not been already entered, do henceforth presume to sit in the said House, Nota.
until his dissent from the said Vote of the 5 th. of December, ( if he were
then present) or disapproval thereof (if then absent from the House) shall be
by himself personally declared to the said Committee, and from thence reported
to the House, and entered as aforesaid; And that such Members of this House, and
every of them whose dissent from, or disapproval of the said Vote respectively
(being not already declared and entered in the House) shall not be declared to
the said Committee as aforesaid, before the first day of March next, shall from
thenceforth be, and are hereby declared from thenceforth, to stand and be
suspended from voting or sitting any more in this House, Nota.
or any Committee by this House appointed, until they shall both declare such
their dissent or disapproval to the said Committee as aforesaid respectively,
and shall also have given satisfaction to this House concerning their delay
thereof beyond the said appointed time, and until they shall be thereupon
restored by particular Order of this House.

After this Antiparliamentary Order, (destructive to the Privileges, Freedom,
Vote^, and Members of the House) some few Members dissented or disapproved the
said Vote, upon several days, as they were inclined or prevailed with
thereunto, before the first of March, the time limited by the said Order. And
Wednesday Febr. 28. 1648. It was ordered, That no advantage be taken against
Sir Peter Wentworth, Sir John Barington, Col. Fleetwood, Mr. Aldworth, Mr.
Robert Andrews, Alderman Hoyle, and Mr. Stockdale, for not haviug entered their
dissents before the first of March.

Monday the fifth of March, 1648. it is is ordered, That it be referred to Mr.
Lisle, Mr. Scot, Mr. Holland, Col. Ludlow, and Mr. Luke Robinson, or any three
of them, to receive what shall be tendered for satisfaction of such Members as
have not entered their dissents or disapproval to the Vote of the fifth of
December last, before the first of March, and to report their Opinions to the
House, concerning such Members as they shall receive satisfaction from.

The Committee being some of the most eminent Dissenters to the Vote when it
was past, and so not very inclinable to receive satisfaction from those Members
intended by the Order, there are very few appearing in the Journal to have been
admitted upon their Reports into the House in three months after, but as if too
many had been received already, they intended a New Test and Purge to feclude
the Majority even of those who dissented from or disapproved our former Vote;
For their Journal attests, that on Saturday, June 9th. 1649. This Question was
propounded: That none of the Members that have sat in the House since the 11
th. of Jan. 1648. shall be hereafter admitted to sit in this House, who shall
not first acknowledge and assert the just authority of this House, in making
the Act for erecting an High Court of Justice for trying and judging the King.

And the Question being put, whether this Question be now put, the House was
divided. And it was carried in the Negative by 27. against 22. that this
Question should not be put. So that the major part of themselves were not then
ripe for what the Minor would have them swallow.

Thereupon the very same day a final bar is put by them upon all the secluded
Members by this following Order, printed for that end, viz.

Ordered by the Commons assembled in Parl. That none of the Members of this
House, who by virtue of the Order of February, 1. 1648. do yet stand suspended
from voting or sitting any more in this House, shall henceforth be admitted
capable to sit, or have voice in this House during this present Parliament, who
shall not before the 30th. of this instant June address themselves to the
Committee appointed by order of the fifth of March, 1648. for receiving what
should be tendered for satisfaction by such Members as had not entered their
Dissent or Disapproval to the Vote of the fifth of December last, before the
first of March, and shall not before the said 30th* of June instant give such
satisfaction to the said Committee, according to the said Order, as this House
shall approve of: but the House will after the said 30th of June instant
proceed to take Order for the election of New Members in their rooms.

After this Order, though they sat till April 20. 1653. without itterruption,
yet they never issued out any Writs for Elections of New Members, monopolizing
the supreme and Parliamentary power into their own hands without copartners, as
now again.

April 20. 1653. they were forcibly ejected, and turned out of the House
themselves by the Army Officers for above 6. years, till on Saturday May 7.
1659. about 40. of the Members (interrupted in April 1653. and by reason of
diverse new Governments interposing, never durst re-assemble to sit or act) upon
the Army Officers invitation, went suddenly again into the House; whereupon See
Mr Prynnes true and perfect Narrative.
diverse of the secluded Members, then casually at Westminster, so soon as they
heard they were sitting, the same morning went to the House door, and claimed
their privilege of sitting, but were forcibly secluded then, and on May the
9th. by armed Gards: and to continue their seclusion, the House ordered the
9th. of May,

That such Persons heretofore Members of this Parliament, as have not sat in
this Parliament, since the year 1648. and This was a new addition, not
mentioned in any former Orders.
have not subscribed the Engagement, in the Roll of Engagement of this House,
shall not sit in the House till further order of the Parl.

At this time they were more tender of excluding the Major part of the Members
of the House, and only ordered, their not sitting till further order, not at
all conceiving that they were duly discharged, or dismembered by their former
Orders, in the years 1648. and 1649. as now.

After this they being forcibly interrupted and dispersed again, on the 13. of
Oct. last, and not suffered to sit till the 26. of Dec. following; upon the 27.
of Dec. many of the secluded Members, then in town, being informed of their
sudden re-assembling in the House did again ^^im their Right of sitting in
Parliament, but were by their Orders kept out of the Lobby and House, by their
armed Gard^ and Officers, and received the usage that has in A Narrative
thereof, been published to the Kingdom.

Since that time, viz. on Thursday the 5 th. of Jan. 1659. the day appointed to
consider of the case of absent Members; without calling the Members, or
admitting them which were at the door to fit, or appear in the House, it was
Resolved, by the Major part of about 47. Members only then present; That upon
the whole matter of the Not entered.
Report touching absent Members, The Parliament does adjudge and declare, That
the Members who stand discharged from voting or sitting as Members of this
House, in the years 1648. and 1649. do stand duly discharged by judgment of
Parliament, from sitting as Members of this Parliament, during this Parliament.
And it is Ordered, that writs do issue forth for Electing new Members in their
places.

And to prevent any vindication of our selves, against this Vote behind our
backs, upon Monday the 9th. of Jan. 1659. (but 4. days after the Vote) a party
of about 40. Red-coats were sent to seize us, at one of the Members Houses in
Drury Lane, where the Council of State (it seems) had notice, and we did not
conceal it, that some of us were met together: but being gone a little before,
they mist of us, though they searched the house at pleasure.

This Resolve being, as appears, intended, finally to exclude the said Members,
though double the Major part of the House, and leaving them (without any cause
therein expressed) under a reflection of the highest nature, as persons duly
expeld the House, during this Parliament, and ordering Writs to issue forth for
Electing new Members in their places (a proceeding never used toward a Single
Member, but upon breach of trust, or some high misdemeanor, much less to many,
least of all to the Majority of the House) has in justice to our selves, and
the Counties and places for which we are entrusted, necessitated us, by this
Declaration, fully to state the whole matter of Fact, and upon the whole, to
^aise such Observations and Concl^^sions, as we hope may evince, that we are
not duly discharged, and that the Judgment, if there be any given, is void in
Law, against the said Members, whereof we have in the end of this Declaration
inserted a perfect list.

First, it is manifest by the state of the Fact, that on the 6th. and 7th. of
December. 1648. and since, the said Members being then and now the Major part of
the House of Commons, have been by force of arms, and still are, ^estrained
from coming or entering into the House, though they have several times renewed
their claim, only upon the Army Officers Proposals and desires, Dec. 6. 1648.

2ly. That from that time to this day, there has been no legal accusation or
impea^hment exhibited against them, or any of them in Parliament, as a ground
for a Judgment of their supension or exclusion.

3ly. That they were never summoned nor called to hear or answer any charge,
nor ever heard in the House, nor particularly convicted, nor yet named in any
Order or Vote for their suspension or exclusion.

4ly. That all the pretense appearing for their exclusion in all the recited
Votes and Orders, is only, their Ay to the Vote of the fifth of Dec. 1648. (
That the Answers of the King to the Propositions of both Houses, are a ground
for the House to proceed upon for the settlement of the peace of the Kingdom,)
they being then and still the major part of the House: and for refusing (upon
the demands of the Army, and Orders of the minor part of the House made after
they were forced away) to enter their Protests against and Dissents from that
Vote, which was passed by them in Judgment and Conscience, upon unanswerable
grounds of Reason, justice, honor and faithfulness; or, for not disapproving
the said Vote.

5ly. That the Members permitted to sit after, and under the force, Dec. 6. did
several times positively order the secured and seluded Members to be forthwith
discharged; and that after the Demands and Proposals of the Army; which shows,
that they did not then judge them guilty of breach of Trust by this their Vote.

6ly. That many of the Members that were suffered to sit, when they saw no
hopes of preserving their Privileges and the freedom of Parliaments against
this force, did voluntarily withdraw themselves, and have ever since remained
in the condition of secluded Members, and are now comprised within the Vote of
Ian. 5. and former Orders.

7ly. That the Members formerly secured and secluded by the Army Officers in
Dec. 1648. against the Votes of the House, for their discharge, for their Vote
Dec. 5. are now for the self-same Vote alone, even by order and command of
those now sitting Members (after their own double dissipation by armed
violence) forcibly excluded both the House and Lobby, by armed Gards and
Army Officers, and likewise discharged from sitting as Members of the House
during this Parliament.

8. That the forcible suspension and secluding of the Majority of the House,
till they retract, and enter their particular dissents against, and disapproval
of their own Votes, was first introduced and imposed by the General Council of
Army Officers Proposals, to subvert the Privileges and Freedom of Parliaments:
And in obedience to their desires, it is afterward several times Voted,
Ordered and ratified by the sitting Members, to bar us from all future sitting,
or Voting in the House as Members, during the Parliaments continuance, and made
the secundary ground of our exclusion and discharge, though never in use
before, from the beginning of Parliaments, till this day, and that in relation
to this Vote alone. An Anti-Parliamentary President, fit only for everlasting
oblivion.

9ly. That for the mi^or part thus to sway in Council by help of an external
force, when reason within Doors could not carry it, is a course of proceeding
altogether illegal, irrational, and unparliamentary; the determining of
Questions and Controversies by the major Vote, being essential to Parliaments
and Great Councils, authorized by the usage and experience of all Ages and
Nations, without which it is impossible to settle any Government in Church or
State, or make any final judgment in Courts or Councils, without resolving all
into the mere will of a few single Persons. Upon all which grounds, we are so
far from r^tracting the said Vote of December. 5. that as both by the Vindication
of the secluded Members, published in January, 1648. and by this Declaration,
it stands unanswerably justi^ied to all the World, so we foretold the sad
effects that would follow the varying from it, and are now confirmed in the
necessity and prudence of that Resolution by eleven years further
consideration, and the many sufferings, calamities, strange unsettlement, and
Revolutions of Government; which the not harkening to the advice of that Vote
(then the judgment of the whole Kingdom, being past by the major part of their
Representatives) has brought upon us ever since, whereof we can yet see no end.

Having thus truly and fully stated the matter of Fact, relating to our former
and late seclusions, and the premised Vote of Jan. 5. for our discharge and
exclusion out of the House, during this Parli^ment, only for our Vote, Dec. 5.
1648. upon the Armies Proposals, without any particular accusation, hearing,
trial, or judgment pronounced against Us, or any one of Us by name at the bar;
we shall in the next place briefly demonstrate the Illegallity, Injustice and
Nullity of this general uncertain Vote, by which we are thus by wholesale
discharged behind our backs. 1. By Orders, Customs, Presidents, and Judgments
in Parliament. 2ly. By the Laws and Statute^ of this Realm. 3ly. By the Law of
Nations. 4ly. By the Law and Proceedings of God himself.

By the Orders, Customs and Proceedings of Parliament it is most apparent,

1. That in all Fidelissima custodia illius innocentia, hoc inexpugnabile
munimentum munimento non egere, Pli^. Pa^. Traja^^ dictus.
Parliaments, Treaties and Assemblies within the Realm of England for ever,
every man ought to come without force, armor, or multitudes of armed men, well
and peaceably to the honor and peace of the King and of his Realm, and all
wearing of Armor or other force against the Peace, ought to be defended and
prohibited in all places, Cities and Suburbs, where Parliaments convene, lest
the Members should be terrified, or driven away, or the proceedings of See Mr.
Prynnes, 1 part of the Register of Parliamentary writs, p. 27, 28, 177, 215,
part 2. p. 80, 81, 82. Plea for the Lords, p. 278, 279, 280.
Parliament interrupted thereby; as is evident by the Statute of 7 E. 1. Rastal
Armor, 1. cl. 5 E. 2. m. 22. 31. dors. cl. 2 E. 3. dors. 31. 4 E. 3. Rot. Parl.
n. 1. 2 E. 3. c. 3. 6 E. 3. rot. parl. n. 1. 13 E. 3. n. 2. 14 E. 3. n. 2. 15
E. 3. n. 2. 17 E. 3. n. 3. 18 E. 3. n. 2. 20 E. 3. n. 1. Cooks 4. Instit. p.
14. Exact Abridgement of the Records of the Tower, p. 11, 13, 14, 17, 19, 22,
27, 30, 43 46 51, 76, 78, 195. Therefore the forcible seclusion of the majority
of the Members by armed force, and Votes backed therewith, is most illegal and
unparliamentary.

2ly. That Plea for the Lords, p. 21, to 37. The 1. pt. of the Register of
Parliamenttary writs, p. 13, 27, 31, 112, 432, 434. 435, to 440. Exact
Abridgment* p. 43.
every Member of Parliament is bound to attend the Parliament, and freely to
sit and vote therein during its contiance, and never voluntarily to absent
himself, or depart without special license, under pain of Amerciament, loss of
wages, and other penalties; as is both enacted and resolved, 3 E. 3. f. 19.
Fitz. Corone 161. 5 R. 2. Stat. 2. c. 4. 18 E. 3. rot. parl. n. 5. 8 H. 4. n.
55. 31 H. 6. n. 45. Cooks 4 Instit. p. 15, 16, 17, 40. 9 H 8. c. 16. Stamford,
l. 1. c. 2. f. 153. Exact Abridgement, p. 13, 14, 43, 142, 194, 281, 361, 653.
The Order of the Commons House, 19. August, 1643 and Ordinance of both Houses,
9 October. 1643. Collection of Ordinances p. 274, 357. the Commons Declaration,
September. 5. 1648. 5 E. 3. dors 7. and 4 E 3 dors. 23. Therefore the majority of
the Members neither may nor ought to be forcibly secluded and hindered from
sitting and voting, especially by the Minority.

3ly. That First part of the Register of* Parliamentary writs, p. 24, 28, 29.
Plea for the Lords, p. 22, to 27. Exact Abridgement, p. 11, 13, 14, 19, 31, 36,
46, 51, 69, 73, 78, 90, 92, 96, 105, 120, 144, 154, 167, 173, 18^, 188, 193*
195, 201, 281, 286, 287, 288, 290. 298, 308, 454, 464, p. 50, 66, 74, 152, 169,
318, 321, 335, 373 427, 128, 430, 440, 665.
when any considerable number of the Members of Parliament through shortness of
warning, fo^d weather, or any other occasions have been absent from the House,
the Parliaments have constantly been adjourned and put off till a further day,
and nothing acted by those who appeared, in their absence, till the absent
Members coming, and the Houses were ful^; as is is evident, by Claus. 2 E. 3.
dors. 31. and 15. 6 E. 3. Rot. Parl. n. 1. 6 E. 3. part 2. n. 5, 6, 8, 9. 8 E.
3. n. 5. 15 E. 3. n. 4. 17 E. n. 2. 20 E. 3. n. 5. 21 E. 3. n. 4. 22 E. 3. n.
1. 25 E. 3. n. 1. 29 E. 3. n. 4. 30 E. 3. n. 1. 37 E. 3. n. 1. 42 E. 3. n. 1.
50 E. 3. n. 1. 51 ^. 3. n. 2. 1 R. 2. n. 1. 2 R. 2. n. 1. 3 R. 2. n. 1. 4 R. 2.
n. 1. 5 R. 2. n. 65. 6 R. 2. n. 6. 7 R. 2. n. 1. 9 R. 2. n. 1. 8 H. 4. n. 54.
The reason whereof is, because Nothing ought to be acted in Parliament, by any
party or faction, but in or by a full Parliament, when all or most of the
Members, representing all the Kingdom, are present, Cl. 23 E. 1. d. 4. 34 E. 1.
c. 1. 20 E. 3. rot. Parl. n. 46. 21 E. 3. n. 65. 25 E. 3. n. 10. 51 E. 3. n.
25. 2 R. 2. n. 26. 10 R. 2. n. 35. 11 R. 2. n. 8. 21 R. 2. n. 71. 5 H. 4. n.
17, 30, 44. 6 H. 4. n. 25. 39 H. 6. n. 10. and 1 R. 3. Wherefore their
seclusion, and ejection of the Majority of the Members, behind their backs, in
a thin and empty House, (not the fixed part of a full House of Commons) and
their Votes and Orders not only without, but against them, must be
unparliamentary and unwarrantable.

4. That as in 8 H. 6. c 7. 33 H. 8. c. 27. Exact Collection, p. 146. 274, 494,
700. A Collection, p. 284. Grotius de Jure Belli. l. 2. c. 26. 15^
Elections in the County, so in Votes, the Vote of the Major part of the House,
upon any question put, is the Vote and judgment of the whole House, including
and binding the dissenting Minority, as all Journals, Records of Parliaments,
Statutes, Law Books, and experience resolve, and the practice of those now
sitting; Therefore the dissenting Minority, can neither censure nor eject the
Majority of the House, for their Vote of December. 5. carried without any
division, and by above 2. parts of 3. then present, without ejecting and
dissolving the whole House, and themselves too, whose Vote was included in
theirs, and subverting the very essence and foundation of all Parliaments.

5. That every Cook^ (...) Report, p. 34. 35. See Scobels Memorials of the
method and manner of Parliaments, c. 4. 6.
Member present in the House, at the putting of any Question (then debated) is
bound by orders of the House to give his Ay thereto, or No, according to his
judgment, and conscience, freely and uncontroulably, without the least
question, check, or censure. This freedom of debate, Voting and speaking the
mind, being the grand essential Privilege of Parliaments, (giving both the name
and essence to them) which every Sp^ker demands, and every King granted at the
beginning of every Parliament, and of this now sitting. Therefore for the
Minority of the House, by the Army Officers Proposals and Desires, to make it
criminal and a breach of Trust, demeriting not only censure, but suspension,
exclusion and ejection out of the House, and that not in one or two Members,
but the Majority of the House, (the house it self,) as in our present case,
only for the Vote of December. 5. 1648. touching the Kings Concessions, and no
Vote else whatsoever, in any other Parliament, or this, before or since this
Vote, is not only the extremity of partiality and injustice, but an utter
subversion of the very essence, name and foundation of Parliaments themselves,
without President in any Age.

6ly. If one single Member alone give his Ay, or N, to any Question proposed,
against all the rest of the house, though the Question seems most clear and
undisputable, yet he is neither censurable nor questionable for it, because it
is his privilege and freedom as a Member, as was resolved in Dr P^rryes case in
the Parliament of 27 Eliz. (reported by Scobel out of the Journal,) who gave
his single No, against the Bill against Jesuits and Recusants; and in the
cases of all single Ayes or Noes, or but of 2, or 3. Members against all the
rest, in all former Parliaments, and this last, who were never once questioned
or suspended for them, nor ordered to retract their single Votes. Therefore the
suspension and ejection of the Majority of the house for their Vote of Dec. 5.
after so long and great debate, (given upon the greatest grounds of Conscience,
Law, Justice, Prudence, Reason and public safety,) and for their refusal to
retract and protest against it, by order of the minority of the No's, entering
their dissents against it, during their forcible seclusion from the house, must
questionless be most Antiparliamentary, erroneous, injurious, subver^ive to the
freedom of Parliaments.

7ly. That a matter Scobels Memorials. Cooks 4 Institutes, p. 32.
once debated and put to the Question in the House, (especially when full and
free) carried in the Ay, or No, by the majority of the House, (without any
surprise or fraud, as the Vote of Dec. 5. was, against all force and menaces to
prevent it,) ought to stand as the judgment of the whole House, and cannot by
the rules of Parliament be questioned again, or nulled and revoked, (especially
by the minor part in the absence and forcible seclusion of the Major,) during
that fession of Parliament, no more than an Act, or a judgment given and entered
in the Dyer, 182. a. 196. a. Ashes Tables, Error 65, to 75. and the Lawbooks
there cited.
Courts of Westminster, reversed in and by that Court which gave it; because
all Votes and Judgments, would otherwise be nugatory, arbitrary, reversed and
nulled over and over, and debates concerning them endless: as was resolved in
Sir Francis Goodwins case, upon long debate, 27 Martii, and in April, Anno
1604. and often before and since. Therefore our Vote of the 5th. of December. could
neither be questioned nor repealed by the dissenting mi^ority, nor protested
against, but stands still in force; much less then the majority who assented
to it, be suspended and ejected the House by the minority for not retracting
and entering their Protests against it, being a practice fatal to all Votes and
Parliaments, if admitted just in this, passed upon so full a debate.

8ly. That Scobels mem^^als, c. 12. See 31 H. ^.
no Member ought to be questioned for any offensive words, displeasing to the
whole House, or any particular Member, let fall upon any debate, unless
exceptions be taken to his words the same day, before he goes out of the
House, and satisfaction given, or judgment inflicted on him the same day. But
no exception at all was taken to the Debate, or Vote of the secluded Members by
the House, or any Member thereof the same day, nor in several days after, but
only by such Army Officers out of the House, who were no Members, and not privy
to the debate. Therefore they ought not to be suspended and excluded for it
many weeks, months, and now ejected out of the House for their Vote alone, and
debates thereupon, above 11. years after.

9ly. See 31. H. 6. c. 1. 39 H. 6. c. 1. Brook and Fitzherbe^^, and Ash. Title
Dure^s. A Collection, p. 221, 222, 700.
That the Speaker himself by his Letter, July 29. and both Houses by their
printed Ordinance of August 20. 1647. declare and resolve, all Votes, Orders,
Ordinances, Declarations passed in the House, whiles under a visible force, and
the Members forcibly driven from it, or unable to repair to, or ^it in it with
freedom and safety, to be null and void to all intents; and if that force upon
50. or 60. of them now sitting by Cromwell, Apr. 20. 1653. and Lambert, and
others, Oct. 13. 1659. was Antiparliamentary, Treasonable, and but a mere
interruption not dissolution of their Session, nor an inability for them to sit
again, though some of those who ejected, and declared them dissolved, were then
Members of the House, backed with the Army. Then by the self-same, yea better
reason, the former, late, present Orders and Votes for the suspension,
exclusion and ejection of the majority of the Members out of the House, made by
the minority, whiles sitting under an actual force, secluding them by Commands
of them now sitting, must be null and void to all intents, and no ways disable
them from sitting, when the armed force secluding them is removed.

10ly. That the Plea for the Lords, p. 23, 24, 25.
House of Lords heretofore in the Parliament of 2 Caroli, when the Earl of
Arundel, a single Member of their House, was imprisoned and restrained by the
King without their privity, from sitting in the House; and since that Exact
Collection, p, 34, to 60.
both houses, Ian. 5. 1641. at the beginning of this Parliament, when the King
impeached, and only demanded the Lord of Kimbolton, and the 5. impeached
Members of the Commons House, (whereof Sir Arthur Hasl^rigg was one) without
seizing either of them; adjourned and refused to sit or act as an House, till
their Members were restored to sit in saftty, and this high breach of their
Privileges vindicated. Therefore by the self-same Rule and Presidents, they
ought not now to sit and act, till the former and last violations of them by
the Army Officers and their Gards forcible seclusions and securings of them by
their order, be vindicated, and they restored to sit and act freely in the
house with safety, without any future Interruption.

11ly. That no particular member of Parliament in the Commons house, by the
constant course, proceedings and presidents in our Parliaments, may or ought to
be censured, imprisoned, suspended or ejected the house, unless he be 1.
Particularly accused or impeached of some misdemeanour, crime or breach of
trust, deserving imprisonment, suspension, or exclusion. 2ly. Particularly
summo^ed and resummoned to answer his charge, if absent, or commanded to answer
it, if present in the house. 3ly. Freely admitted to make his particular answer
and defense thereunto in the house, where he is to fit and vote as a Member,
till convicted or suspended by special Order. 4ly. Legally convicted by his own
Confession, evidence or witnesses produced face to face. 5ly. Particularly
sentenced by judgment pronounced against him at the Bar, and that judgment
particularly entered against him by name in the Iournal-book, or Records of
Parliament.

This is evident by the ancient Presidents of Sir William Courtney, An. 16 R.
2. rot. Parl. n. 6. Of Roger Swinerton, An: 17 R. 2. rot: Parl: n. 23. Thomas
Thorpes case, 5 H. 4. rot: Parl: n. 38. by Thomas Thorps case, when Speaker, 31
H: 6. Rot. Parl: n. 25, 26, 27. Arthur Halls case, 17 Maii, and 4 Febr. 1580.
Peter Wentworths case, 8 Febr. 1575. Thomas Longs case, 8. Eliz. entered in the
Journall, reported in Cooks 4 Institutes, p. 23. and Scobels Memorials, c. 12.
in Sir Edmond Sawyers case, Saturday 21 Junii, 1628. The Earl of Straffords,
and Archbishop Lauds cases and trials upon their Impeachments of high Treason
this Parliament, as Members of the house of P^ers: the cases of sundry Members
put out of the house of Commons, in the beginning of this Parliament, 1641,
1642, 1643. The Proceedings of both houses against their Members, who contrary
to their trusts, A Collection of Ordinances, p. 294, 357, 513.
deserted the Parliament, withdrew themselves voluntarily from it, and took up
arms against it, who were 4. times summoned to attend the Houses, (which they
neglected to do) without any disability, or new Engagement put upon them,
before they were disabled by Judgment to sit in the house during this
Parliament, in which Judgments they are particularly named, and after that by
a general Ordinance of both houses 29 Junii 1644. the Judgment against them
was confirmed as is evident by the 21 Jan and 5 Feb. 1643. and 4, 5, 8, 9, 10,
11, 12, 16, 20, 22, 26, 29. Augusti. 2, 6, 7, 12, 16, 19, 22, 23. Sept. 4.
Octo. 1642.
Journals of both houses. And the proceedings of those now fitting (since their
Vote of Jan. 5.) against Sir Henry Vane, Jan: 9. and Col. Sydenham, and Major
Saloway, since: who were all permitted to sit and vote in the house, till
particularly impeached, heard, convicted, and received their judgments at the
bar, before they were ejected, or suspended, though they joined with the
Army Officers who excluded them October 13. both in Councils and Actings
against their restitution. Which being denied only to all and every of the
secured and secluded Members, and to them alone, though the majority of the
house, guilty of no crime; merely for their Vote, Dec: 5. and were forcibly
secluded both the House and Lobby, Dec. 27. and voted out of the House, Jan. 5.
1659. without any accusation, hearing, defense, conviction, or particular
judgment against any of them by name, must needs be the extremity of
Anti-Parliamentary Injustice, especially in those of the Long Robe, sitting in,
and advancing themselves to the Seats of Justice in all the Courts of
Westminster.

12. It is the undoubted Privilege and Birth right not only of Members, See the
Parliament Rolls, wherein Receivers and Triers of Petitions are still appointed
at the beginning of every parliament. Exact Abridgement of the Records of the
Tower, Tit. Parl. in the Table. The 1. art of the Register of Parliamentary
Writs. And Plea for the Lords, p. 430, 431, 432.
but of the meanest, despicablest and most flagitious Commoners of England, if
complainants or petitioners, to be admitted freely both into the Lobby and
Commons House, without forcible seclusion, to present their complaints,
grievances, for their relief or redress; or if a Delinquents, to be accused,
summoned, heard, duly convicted and particularly sentenced at the bar by name,
before they be committed, or sentenced, as all Parliamentary Records, Journals,
and daily experience attest; Therefore that the Majority of the Members (persons
of greatest Eminency, Interest, Integrity, representing most Counties, Cities
and Boroughs of the Realm) should be denied that justice and privilege which
the meanest Commoners and most exec^able Del^^quents enjoy as their Birthright,
only for their Vote, and that by their Fellow Members, (the greatest pretenders
to public Justice, Liberty and Saintship,) is not only Anti-Parliamentary and
Injurious, but stupendous in the sight of God, Angels, Men, and the whole
Nation.

13ly. The whole House of Commons, and some of our secluders, in the case of
the XI. M^mbers, impeached by the Army (9. of them now secluded) upon long and
full debate June 25. 1647. Resolved, unanimously on the Question, without one
dissenting Voice (as to part of the Armies general charge against them, for
something they had spoken, and done within the House) That it did not appear,
that any thing had been said or done by them in the House, touching any matters
contained in the charge, or Papers sent from the Army, for which they could in
justice suspend them from ^itting and Voting in the House. In the debate
whereof they all concluded, it was a high breach of Privilege, for the Army or
any others out of the House, to impeach any Members for things spoken or done
within the House, whereof the House alone is to take notice, and be the sole
Judge. Therefore by this very Vote and resolution, the House upon the Armies
Proposals, and Desires alone, ought not in justice to suspend, much less
forcibly to seclude and eject us, only for our Vote within it, and it was a
transcendent breach of the Privileges of the House, to receive their Proposals
December. 6. and their Answer January 3. complaining against our Vote, and to
make it the only ground of our suspension and seclusion ever since, and now of
our Ejection. 2ly. They then unanimously resolved, That by the Laws of the
Land, no Judgment can be given to suspend those Members, or any of them from
sitting in the House, upon the Paper presented from the Army, before
particulars offered, and proofs made against them. Therefore they cannot
suspend, seclude and eject, both them and the Majority of the whole House now
from sitting, or Voting with them any more, only for their Vote, without any
other particular charge, hea^ing, conviction, or Judgment pronounced against
them at the bar.

14ly. Had this Vote and judgment of Supension and Discharge been given
against any one of the suspended Members, in a full and free house and
Parliament, and ratified by an Act, or Ordinance of both houses, without any
legal summons, trial and hearing at the Bar, yet it had been erroneous, null
and void, and ought to be reversed as such, and that by the express judgments
and resolutions of the Parliaments of 28 E. 3. Rot. Parl. n. 7, to 14. and 29
E. 3. n. 29. in the case of Plea for the Lords, p. 2^4 to 283.
Roger Mortymer Earl of March, who in the Parliament of 4 E. 3. Rot. Parl. n.
1. was impeached in Parliament of high Treason, for murdering of King Edward
the 2d. after his deposing, for accroaching to himself Royal Power, and the
Government of the State over the King; For coming to the Parliament at
Salisbury with force and arms, contrary to the Kings Writ and Prohibition under
his Seal, That none should come to the Parliament with force and arms, under
pain of forfeiting all that he could forfeit to the King. Whereupon the Earl of
Lancaster, and others of the Lords, by reason of his force, came not at all:
And when in the Prelates were there assembled in an house at the said
Parliament, to consult about the affairs of the King and Realm, The said Roger
broke open the Doors of the House upon them with men at arms, and threatened
them of Life and of Member, if they should be so hardy to speak or do any thing
against his Will and Ordinances. And did so much in the same Parliament, that
the King made him Earl of March, and gave him many Lands and Tenements, to the
dis-inheriting of the Crown; And afterward the said Roger, and those of his
confederacy, led the King armed against the Earl of Lancaster and other Peers
of the Land to Winchester, where they were coming toward the King to the said
Parliament at Salisbury: Whereupon the said Earl and other Peers of the Land,
to avoid the peril that might happen, out of reverence to the King, departed
and went toward their Country, grieving that they could not speak with, nor
counsel the said King, as they intended and ought to do. And for several other
grand misdemeanors drawn up and entered in the Parliament Rolls in 14. Articles
in French. Upon these Articles (by reason of the notoriousness of the Facts) he
was by Judgment and act of Parliament, condemned and executed as a Traitor, in
4 E. 3. without being brought personally to answer, or make his defense at the
Bar, and his Lands forfeited to the King. Whereupon in the Parliament of 28 E.
3. Roger Mortymer Earl of Worcester his Cousin and Heir, by Petition prayed,
That this Act of his Attainder might be examined, and the judgment against him
reversed for manifest errors therein. Whereupon the Record was brought into the
Parliament, and the Articles, Judgment and Proceedings read at large. Which
done, it was alleged, That the judgment was defective and erroneous in all
points (not for the substance and Truth of the charge) but for that the said E.
was put to death and dis-inherited, Sans nulle accusement, et sans estre mesne
au juggement, ou en respons, without any accusation face to face, and without
being brought to judgment, or to answer. For which cause it was prayed, the
said Act and Judgment might be reversed and annulled. And for these Reasons
our Lord the King, Prince, Dukes, Earls, and Barons, by Being by act of
Parliament.
accord of the Knights of Counties, and of the Commons, reversed and annulled
the said Records and Judgments, and adjudged them erroneous and void; And the
Parliament of 29 E. 3. did likewise confirm and assent thereto, as the
Parliament Rolls attest. If then this Judgment, though ratified by an Act of
Parliament, upon particular Articles of Impeachment, true in substance,
(against this Arch-traytor, and first forcer of Parliaments by armed men extant
on Record) was reversed as erroneous, void and null, because he was not accused
face to face, nor brought to judgment, and answer at the Bar before his
judgment and execution, though there was a judgment given against him by name
in the Parliament Roll and Act: Then much more must the Judgment and Vote
against all the secluded Members and majority of the house, kept out thence by
armed Gards, by command of our Secluders and Judges, without the least
accusation, Articles of Impeachment, hearing, trial, or bringing us to the Bar
to hear our judgment, or naming any of us particularly therein, be
unparliamentary, erroneous, void and null to all intents, and no ways
obligatory to us, or those for whom we do serve.

2ly. It is altogether erroneous, illegal and void in Law, 1. By the Great
Charter of our Liberties, 9 H. 3. c. 29. confirmed in above 40. successive
Parliaments, by the Statutes of 25 E. 1. c. 1, 2. 28 E. 1. c. 1, 2. 5 E. 3. c.
9. 25 E. 3. c. 4. 28 E. 3. c. 3. 42 E. 3. c. 2, 3. The Petition of Right, 3
Caroli, and sundry other Statutes, enacting and providing, That no Freeman of
England, shall be outed of his Freehold, Liberties, Franchises, outlawed,
pas^ed upon, fore-judged or condemned, unless he be, 1. Lawfully accused,
indicted and impeached. 2ly. Summoned and brought in to answer by legal
process. 3ly. Brought to judgment, trial and hearing at the bar, and admitted
to his just defense. 4ly. Legally convicted by his own confession, or witnesses
produced face to face. 5ly. Particularly judged and condemned by sentence at
the bar. And if any judgment be given to the contrary, it shall be reversed
and holden as null and void; All which particulars failing in our case, and
judgment, it must be erroneous, void and null to all intents.

2ly. By all the Presidents, forms, entries, in Cooks 3 Institute^ chapter 101. of
Judgment, old Book of Entries, Fitzherbert, Brook, Statham, Ash Title
Judgment, Treason, Debt, etc. all entries and Records of Judgments in
Parliaments and other Courts of Justice, wherein no Judgment was ever yet
given against many in the gross, (as now against 200. Members or more) without
naming any of them, but always particularly by name, the Judgment being else
void in Law, for its generality and incertainty, as ours is, wherein not one
secluded Member is named, nor in any Vote or Order for our suspension or
exclusion.

3ly. It is a Maxim in Law Lit sect. 678. Cooks 1 Inftit. ^ 35. 209, 352, 356,
357. 142. Hobards Reports, p. 85, 86. Dyer 165. 2 R. 2. c. 2.
that no man ought to take advantage of his own covin or wrong, much less be
both a Judge and ^arty, it being both against justice and reason too: Therefore
the minority of our Fellow Members, cannot first seclude us out of the House by
covin, wrong and armed force, against our Rights, Privileges, the Protestation,
Covenant, and then as our Judge, exclude us from sitting with them, behind our
backs, only for dissenting from them in our Votes and Judgments, crossing their
own private Interests and Innovations, repugnant to the public Interest,
Peace, and settlement of the Kingdom which we then endeavored to effect.

4ly. The Statutes of 5 R. 2. c. 7. 15 R. 2. c. 2. 8 H. 6. c. 9. and 31 Eliz.
c. 11. prohibiting all entries into Houses, Lands or Tenements, where the entry
is given by Law, with strong hand, or multitude of people, and armed men, but
only in peaceable and easy manner; or keeping possession thereof, after
peaceable entry, by Force; enabling all Justices of the Peace, to view and
remove such force, and punish those who are found guilty of it, upon Inquest,
by fine and imprisonment; do questionless prohibit the entry of our secluders,
into the Commons House of Parliament, by strong hand, and multitudes of people,
and armed men, against the usage and Priviiege of Parliaments, guarded hitherto,
Cicero in Antonium,
Caritate and Benevolentia Civium, non armis. And their keeping out the
Majority of their fellow M^mbers, by armed force, and Votes, without any color
of Law or reason but only their Vote therein December. 5. may more justly expose
them to Fines and imprisonments, than any other forcible enterers into, or
detainers of other men's houses, the whole Kingdom being prejudiced and
dispossessed in their representatives by these forcible detainers of the
Commons House.

5ly. The notable S^^ ^i^zherbert, Brooks, S^ ^ham and Ash Title Variance.
Variance between their Orders of 1648. and 1649. touching our suspension and
seclusion, wherein they always style themselves, The House, and This House, as
likewise in the body of their Order December. 27. 1659. from their Vote of
January 5. and their other Papers, wherein they style themselves, The
Parliament, and the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland and
Ireland; and their Judgment, the Judgment of the Parliament; and from the Act
of 17 Caroli. c. 7. by which they pretend to fit, which only styles them, the
Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and the House of Commons; makes
their Judgment void to all intents, especially compared with the entry of
their own Journal by their Clarke, April 20. 1653. That they were dissolved on
that day, and so have no right now to sit, by virtue of this Act, or to
pronounce any Vote or Judgment against us.

3 ly. This Judgment and Vote against us, is void and null by the Law of
Nations, the very Pagan, Idolatrous Babylonians, Persians, Caldeans, Romans,
and all other Nations, condemning and sentencing no person or malefactor
whatsoever, but in his presence; it being not their manner, to condemn, or
censure any man, before he who was accused, had his Accusers brought face to
face, and had license to answer for himself, concerning the crimes laid against
him, and was legally convicted of them, and had his crimes mentioned in his
mittim^^ and Judgment, they deeming it unreasonable, to imprison or condemn
any man, and not withal to signify the crimes laid against him: as you may
read at leisure, 2 Kings 25. 6, 7. Jer. 52. 9, 10. Ezra 7. 25, 26. Esth. 1. 12,
to 22. c. 2. 1. Acts 23. 25. c. 24. 2, to 23. c. 25. 2, etc. 16, 17, 18, 27. in
Alexander ab Alexandro, Geni^lium Dierum, l. 3. c. 5. and Frederi^us
Lindebrogus, Codex Legum Antiquarum. This being a principle amongst them,
Seneca Tragin Medae^.
Qui aliquid statuerit part inaudita altera, licet recte statuerit haud aequus
est judex. And that all their Alexand ab Alexandro, Genesis Dierum, l. 4. c. 11.
Interrog^vit quisque quod placuit; di^^e^tire, discedere, and copiam judicii
sui reip. facere: tutum f^^t, consultio^nes atque dinumerati sumus, vicitque
sententia ^on prima* sed melior and major. C. Plin. Pan. Trajano dictus, p. 145.
senators, ought to Vote freely in the senate; and the Major Vote to sway.
Therefore our judgment, exclusion, without accusation, hearing, witnesses,
trial, conviction, behind our backs for our Major Vote, must needs be most
unjust and void, if the very Heathens and laws of all Nations be Umpires
between us and our Ejectors.

Finally, this Judgment and Vote is contrary to, yea void, null by the law of
God, ( the Gen* 18. 25.
righteous Judge of all the earth,) as appears by comparing it with Number. 35.
30. Deuteronomy. 17. 4, to 13. c. 19. 15. c. 16. 18, 19, 20. 2 Chronicles. 19. 5, 6, 7.
John 7. 51. And condemned as unjust, by the President of God himself; who as he
does not pervert judgment, nor do wickedly, Job 8. 3^ c. 34. 12. but judges
uprightly without respect of persons, 1 Pet. 1. 17. Justice and Judgment being
the habitation of his Throne, from whence he administreth Judgment in
Righteousness, Ps. 89. 14. Ps. 9. 8. So he always pleads with Malefactors, and
judges them face to face, Ezech. 20. 35. Thus he proceeded against and judged
the very first Offenders, Eve Adam, and the Serpent, for the first offense in
the world after the Creation, summoning all three of them before him, and
impeaching and hearing their Answers to his Charge, and last of all giving a
particular judgment against each of them according to their Offenses, Genesis 3.
8, to 20. as a President for all other Judges to imitate. And thus God and
Jesus Christ will proceed in the last general judgment of the whole world,
when all Mankind and every Person good or bad, from the Creation till the
worlds expiration, shall be summoned and personally stand and appear before the
judgment Seat of God and Christ, where every one of them shall give a
particular account of himself to God, of whatever he has done in the Body,
whether it be good or evil, (and we and our Secluders too amongst the rest) and
be judged according to their works, and receive a particular sentence of
Condemnation or Absolution, as Eccles. 12. 14. Mat. 25. 33, to 46. Romans 14. 10,
11, 12. 2 Cor. 5. 10. Rev. 20. 12, 13. Mat. 12. 36. Romans 2. 1* 2, 3, to 13.
resolve.

Upon all which premises we conclude, the Votes and Proceedings against us by
our Fellow Members, to be erroneous, injurious, unrighteous, null and void to
all intents; And if they and the Army Officers, for want of Law, Reason,
Presidents, shall still endeavor, (as hitherto) to make them valid, and
obligatory to us and those we represent, only by Club-Law and violence; We
shall then conclude, as the Lords and Commons (and most of themselves
heretofore,) did in their Declaration of August 4. 1642. against the King and
his forces, who were never guilty of so high a violation of our Privileges, as
those now sitting. Exact Collect. p. 496.
If the King may force this Parliament (by demanding only 6. Members of it, and
our Secluders now by excluding above 200. at once by force and Arms) we may bid
farewell to all Parliaments from ever receiving good by them. And if
Parliaments be lost, the People are lost, their Laws are lost, as well those
lately made (for Triennial Parliaments, and the continuance of this, against
the Council-Tables Extravagances, etc.) as in former times; which will be cut
in sunder by the same Sword now drawn for the destruction of this, (by ours and
others forcible seclusions.) Then if they will not come and help the
Parliament, and save themselves, though both they and we must perish, yet have
we discharged our Consciences, and delivered our Souls, and will look for a
Reward in Heaven, should we be so ill requited upon Earth, by th^se of whom we
have so well deserved: which we cannot fear, having found upon all occasions
such real Demonstrations of their Love and Affection, and of their r^ght
understanding and apprehension of our and their common Danger, especially now,
that the Question is so clearly stated.

We shall only subjoyn 3. Considerations more in point of Law and prudence,
arising from our forcible seclusion and exclusion by the minority of our fellow
Members.

1. That both Houses, and most of themselves have declared in their Evact
Collection. p. 650, 655, 657.
Declaration of 23. October. 1642. that the raising of forces only to force some
particular Members of this Parliament, (as the 6. impeached by the King) to be
delivered up, and secluded the House, is a levying war against the Parliament;
For to raise an Army to compel the Parliament to expose these Members to the
fury of these wicked Counselors, that thirst after nothing more, than the
ruin of them and the Commonwealth; What can be more evident, than that the
same is levied against the Parliament? For, did they prevail in this, then by
the same reason they might d^mand twenty more; and consequently, never rest
satisfied, until their Malice and Tyranny did devour all those Members they
found cross and opposice to their Lewd and Wicked designs. And so by depriving
the Parliament of their Members, destroy the whole Body. That both Houses in
their Votes of 20 Maii 1642* Exact Collection, p. 259, 260.
resolved, That the levying war against the Parl. is Treason; and whoever shall
assist the King (though the chief Member and Modus Tenendi Parliamentum, Cooks
4* Instit. c. 1.
head of the Parliament, much more then any inferior Members of it) in such a
War, are Traitors, by the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, and have been so
adjudged by two Parliaments 1^ R. 2. 1 H. ^. and ought to suffer as Traitors.
Which Votes were seconded by many A Collection of Ordinances, p. 13. 14, 33,
etc.
Ordinances, for sequestring and confiscating the real and personal estates of
all Members of Parliament, and others, who sided with the King and his Forces
against the Houses of Parliament; by the condemnation of Mr: Waller, and
execution of Mr. Tomkins, and others, as TRAITORS A Collect^o^ p. 200, 201.
for conspiring to seize several Members of both Houses, by force of arms,
under a pretense of bringing them to justice, by a Commission from the King,
dated 16 March 1643. though they actually attempted not to se^fe any Member. By
the proceedings against the A Collection p. 452, 453, 454, 455, 513.
Members of both Houses deserting the Parliament, under pretext, that they were
forcibly driven away from Westminster by seditious Tumults and imposed
traiterous Oaths, summoned to meet at Oxford by the Kings Proclamation of Jan.
29. 1643. where 49. Members of the Lords House, and 175. of the Commons House
assembled, and sat in Council with the King; and yet for levying war against
the majority of the Parliament, and both Houses sitting at Westminster. they were are
all of them sequestered, and after several summons, discharged to sit in either
House by a special Ordinance; and See the 2d. part of the History of
Independency, and their Declaration of 17 March* 1648.
some of the said Lords, together with the King himself, condemned and executed
as Traitors for levying war against the Parliament, and majority of the
M^mbers, at a great distance, not personally in or at the House doors, without
se^uring or secluding any Members or interrupting their sitting in the House by
armed forces. If then it were high Treason in the King and his party to raise
forces to demand and secure but 6. Members of both Houses by force; and for the
minority of the Lords and Commons house, to levy war against the majority of
the Parliament only at a distance, for which they were thus sequestered,
conde^^ed, executed as Traitors, even by those now sitting, as well before as
after our seclusion; we refer it to their own Consciences, Judgments, and the
whole Kingdom to determine, whether it be not a higher and worser Treason and
levying war against the Parliament, for them, being but the Minority of the
House and Members, to engage and order the very A Lawyer now ^itting, lately
used these words of the secluded Members, That they would still keep them out
perforce, and hold their Noses to the Grindstone, because they had the Army on
their side.
forces raised against the King and his party, to guard and defend the Members
to both Houses, to fit and vote with freedom and safety, by armed force to
secure and imprison above 40. Members at once, and to seclude above 200. more
by their Commands, being the minority of the House, at the House doors, and
suppress the whole House of Lords three or four times one after another, after
their executions and sequestrations; and what punishment such unpresidented
offenses de^^erit, should we demand justice against them for it, after so many
provocations, and not willingly prete^mit it upon their repentance and
satisfaction, for the public peace and settlement in the midst of our present
Did. actions, upon their voluntary admission of us, without any of their new
Eagagements on our Consciences, to discharge our Trust, and prevent the ruin
of our three Kingdoms, by their rash and dangerous Counsels.

2ly. That their own Votes, Publications, and censures against the
Army Officers, as well Members as others, who forcibly excluded and dissipated
themselves beyond expectation, April 20. 1653. and October 13. 1659. (a just,
divine retaliation, for secluding their Fellow Members) which they deemed both
tyrannical, yea treasonable in them, and deme^iting expulsion out of the House,
in Sir H. Vane, and others of their own Members, who gave a subsequent assent
thereto, will now recoyl upon themselves with infinite disadvantage, and draw
some new Romans 2, 1, 2, 3. Prove. 24, 21, 22. Obad. 15. 16. Judge. 16. 8. Rev. 13.
10.
exemplary punishment of God upon them for their new forcible secl^^sion and
ejection of us; they being but 60 at most, and we near 200. they having Cooks
11. Rep. f. 98, 99.
violated their Trusts, Protestation, Covenant, and the privileges of
Parliament, which they were obliged constantly to maintain all their days,
without defection or Apostasy, by our former exclusions and ejection, and we
having done neither, but only endeavored inviolably to preserve them by our
Vote, and claims to sit in the House: They keeping up the same armed Gards, as
their only security to sit, which secluded us heretofore, and now, and twice
ejected them; and we desiring no other Gards, but those Pan. Trajano dictus, p.
93. and Lip^ius commentar. Ibid. p 94.
Pliny De Clementia, l. 94.
Seneca, In Antoni^m.
Tully, inform us to be the best and safest of all other, our own Innocence,
and the Peoples love for whom we serve, remembering that of Pliny to the good
Emperor Trajan, Quanto tutior, quanto securior eadem domus postquam ejus non
crudelitatis sed amoris excubiis, non solitudine and claustris, sed Civium
celebritate defenditur? Frustra se terrore succinxerit, qui septus ^aritatenon
fuerit; Armis enim arma irritantur (as we have found by sad experience) Vnum
est inexpugnabile munimentum, amor Civium; which they will never gain, but lose
and forfeit by our unjust seclusion, and expulsion.

3. That it is a Maxim in Law, inserted into the very Writs of summons to
Parliaments Register of Parliamentary Writs, part 1. p. 6.
Calus. 23 E. 1. m. 4. dorso, as a most just, and provident Law, established by
all prudent pious Princes, and the very reason and ground of all Parliamentary
assemblies, ut quod tangit omnes ab omnibus appr^betur. Hereupon our Judges and
39 E. 3. 7. 2 R. 3. 11. 8 H. 6. 34, 35. 4 H. 9. 10 17. 1 Jac. c 1. Brook Parl.
26, 40. 41, 98, 101* Cooks 4 Instit. c. 1.
Law Books resolve, that general Acts made, and Taxes granted in and by
Parliaments, oblige all men, upon this only account and reason, because all
Counties, Cities, Boroughs and Ports, are parties and consenters to them in
Parliment, in and by their Knights, Citizens, Burgesses and Barons, empowered
with full and sufficient Authority for themselves, and the Commonalties of the
said Counties, Cities, Boroughs and Ports, by their Indentures and Retorns, to
consent to, and do whatever shall happen to be ordained in Parliament by common
council; as the last clauses in the Writs for Elections, with their Retorns and
Indentures resolve; and for want of which power, and Representatives, if
secluded, no Acts can be passed, no Taxes imposed on them that are obligatory.
And upon this very ground, the Statutes of 25 E. 1. c. 5. 8. and De Talligio
non Concedendo, c. 1, 2. 14. E. 3. Stat. 1. c. 21. Stat. 2. c. 1. 15 E. 3.
Stat. 2. c. 1. Stat. 3. c. 5. 21 E. 3. rot. Parl. n. 16. 25 E. 3. rot. Parl. n.
16. 27 E. 3. Stat. 2. c. 2. 36 E. 3. rot. Parl. n. 16. 38 E. 3. c. 2. 38 E. 3.
rot. Parl. n. 40. 51 E. 3. rot. Parl. n. 25. 11 H. 4. rot. Parl. n. 50. The
Petition of Right, 3 Car. and the Statutes of 17 Car. c. 1. 8. 12. made at the
beginning of this Parliament, do all enact, declare and resolve, in precise
words; That no Tax, Tallage, Aid, Subsidy, Loan, Custom, Imposition, or other
Assesment whatsoever, shall or may be imposed, or levied on the Subjects,
without common consent of the Lords and Commons in full Parliament, by Act of
Parliament: And those now sitting in their printed Paper, October. 11. 1659.
Entitled, An Act against the raising of Moneys upon the people, without their
consent in Parliament; enact, That no person or persons shall after the XI. of
October 1659. Assess, Levy, Collect, gather or receive any Customs, Impost,
Excise, Assesment, Contribution, Tax, Tallage, or any Sum or Sums of Money, or
other Imposition whatsoever, upon the people of this Commonwealth without their
consent in Parliament or us by Law might have been done before the third of
November. 1640. And it is further enacted and declared, That every Person
offending contrary to this Act, shall be, and is hereby adjudged guilty of H^gh
Treason, and shall suffer, and forfeit as in case of High Treason. If then they
shall forcibly seclude, not only the whole House of Lords, but the Majority of
the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, out of the Commons House, as now they do,
most Counties, Cities and Boroughs of England, having not so much as one
Knight, Citizen or Burgess, to represent them, being all forcibly excluded, or
dead, they being not a fifth part of the House, (who could never legally impose
any Tax upon the people, before Nov. 3. 1640. nor since, as all these Acts,
with Cooks 2 Instit. p. 530, to 536 Mr. Hacwel^s, Judge Hut^ons, Crooks, and Mr
St. John's Arguments and speech against Shipmony and Impositions.
sundry other Records and Law Books resolve) they can make no Laws, Orders,
Ordinances, that are binding, nor impose the least Tax, Talluge, Imposition,
Excise, Contribution, or any other payment whatsoever, upon the people of this
Nation, much less upon us, whom they thus forcibly exclude, and those
Counties, Cities and Boroughs for which we serve; nor any person or persons
levy them, without incurring the Crime, Penalty, and forfeiture expressed in
their own late Act, it being a received Maxim amongst all Politicians, Lawyers,
Nations Groti^s de Jure Del i, and p. ci^, l. 2. c. 15. fect 3. Alex, ab
Alevandro, Genesis Di^^um, l. 4. c. 11.
Populi Minor pars, pop^l^m non ol ligit; and that nothing is or can be said to
be done, or acted, by the Common Council and consent of the people in full
Parliament, by Act of Parliament, which is done and acted only by the Minor
part of the Commons House, when the greatest part of the Members of Parliament,
are forcibly s^oluded, or driven thence by armed violence, especially by the
commands and consederacy of the Minority of their Fellow Members; our present
case and condition, which we represent, to the whole Nations serious
consideration, and of a full and free Parliament, as thus st^^^d in matter of
Fact, and debated in point of La^, for our necessary Vindication, and theirs we
represent; and to our Secluders second thoughts: Who having in their fresh page
8, 9, 10. 14.
Declaration of the 24. of this instant Jan. published, That their intentions
are, and that they are resolved, (through the Goodness and Assistance of God)
to remain constant and unmovable, That the People of these Nations may be
governed from time to time by Representatives in Parliament chosen by
themselves, in whom alone the Supreme Authority of these Nations does and ought
to reside; and that they should be governed by the Laws, and that all
Proceedings touching the Laws, Liberties, and The seizing of 4500. pounds ready
money by Armed Troopers and Soldiers in a Citizens house in Paul's Churchyard
at 12. of the clock at night, the 27th. of this January, and carrying it away
by order from White Hall, is a memorable performance of this Declaration.
Estates of the free People of this Common wealth, shall be according to the
Laws of the Land: It being their principal care to provide for the freedom of
the people, against all arbitrarinesse in Government; And that it is one of the
greatest cares they have upon them, how to give the people that ease from their
present Burdens, which their impoverished Condition calls for. We hope they
will not immediately violate it in the case of us* who are their
Fellow Members, the Majority of the House, and the Representatives of the
greatest part of the people, entrusted and chosen by themselves, who earnestly
press our frec admission, by secluding us against all rules of Law and Justice,
and imprisoning those Si^ Robert Pie, and Major Fincher.
Gentlemen and Freemen sent up with See the Letters from the Co^nties of
Cornwall, Devon* Berk^, Gloucester, Northampton, suffolk, etc.
Letters unto them from the several Counties and places we represent, to demand
our speedy restitution to our trusts, as the only means to redress their many
insupportable Grievances, and by Gods blessing to reduce them to a firm, free
and legal settlement of their Rights. And by imposing on the whole Nation (in
their miserably exhausted condition, and want of Trade) and us their excluded
Fellow Members, and those many Counties, Cities and Boroughs we represent, a
Monthly Tax of one hundred thousand pounds a month, for six months time, to
begin from December 25. last, without and against our privity and consents;
especially after their enforcing the people to pay a whole years Contribution
within three months space, contrary to the first Grant thereof, under the late
Protector, upon their first convening in May last, during these very 6. Months
space, they paid before hand, on which they now tax them afresh, higher than
ever the old Parliament, or their new Protectors, or any Kings of England in
former times have imposed; an oppression not to be presidented in any age. And
all to pay forces to keep us out of the Houses, and support themselves in their
usurped The highest and worst of Tyra^n^es and Treasons.
Parliamentary power, and discharge those Debts, their own extravagant Councils
and Actions (in not harkening to our Vote for which they Excluded us) have
contracted, only to make us more miserable, base, slavish, unsettled than ever
heretofore.

Upon the whole matter which we have truly stated, and debated (though with
some Distraction, and Interruption) in our own behalf, and of those Counties,
Cities and Boroughs by whom we were elected, and whom we have faithfully served
in Parliament, according to their trusts reposed in us; we do appeal from the
Armies unjust force and illegal violence, and from the unpresidented, general
unreasonable, unparliamentary Votes and Judgments of a few of our dissenting
Fellow Members, procured by the force and demands of the Army, and passed by
parties behind our Backs, during our forcible seclusion, only for our free Vote
in Parliament, when they and the Commons of the whole Kingdom were involved
therein by the resolution of the Majority of the House, unto the impartial
Judgment of a full and free^ Parliament: and in the mean while we do claim the
benefit of our Laws, and especially of the Great Charter, the Petition of
Right, and the good Acts made in the beginning of this Parliament, (after so
much Blood and Millions of our Treasure expended) for the protection of our
Persons, Estates, and Liberties, and of those we represent, against all
arbitrary. Proceedings, Votes, Impositions, Taxes, and armed violence of our
Secluders, or their forces, that whereas by the Romans 13. 2, 3* 4. 1 Pet. 2. 14.
Ordinance of God, the Sword is given to the Magistrate, only for the
punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well, we nor any
of us who are quiet in the Land, and accountable to law, which is our
Birthright, may not be hunted or seized by Soldiers, for our former Vote, and
observing the Declarations and Remonstrance of this Parl. the Protestation,
Solemn League and Covenant, and other Oaths which lawful Authority have
engaged us in, (and our Secluders jointly with us, and the Army Officers too)
and in the conscientious observance whereof we hold our selves obliged to live
and die.

And having nothing (if we know our own hearts,) in our thoughts or endeavors,
but that the true reformed Religion may be preserved and flourish; the Plots of
Jesuits and Romish Emissaries prevented; the Privileges, Rights, Honor, and
Splendour of Parliaments vindicated and restored, the Laws and Liberties of the
Kingdom cleared, rescued, and preserved from arbitrary violations, a d^e regard
had to tender Consciences, intolerable public burdens eased, as
comprehensive an Act of O^l^vion and free Pardon past, as will stand with
public safety, honor and justice; Trade in City and Country restored, the
increased swarms of starving Poor relieved and employed; just Debts and Rewards
both to Soldiers, Purchasors, and others satisfied and secured, and these
ruined Kingdoms happily established upon lasting Foundations of Truth,
Righteousness and Peace; now we have cleared our selves to the world, and
those who have entrusted us, we can patiently attend Gods future dispensations;
yet should be very glad, that as a Exact Co^^^tion, p. 13.
few of the faithful Nobility, when the Kingdom was in much less danger, were
judged so considerable, as to prevail with the late King to follow their
advice, for the calling of this Parliament in 1640. So in this time of the
greatest dangers and difficulties, that these 3. Nations and the Protestant
cause throughout the world, ever wrestled or contended with, there may not be
found amongst us, a generation of men, who for filthy lucres sake, particular
groundless fears, apprehensions of less or suffering, guilt, self-seeking,
ambitious aims of Dominion over, or envy, or revenge against their Brethren, or
pretended self-preservation, shall continue our confusions and calamities, and
as Vipers gnaw out the bowels of their native Country; and because of a little
present power, in their hands (which like Jona^s gourd they see by sensible
experience may wither in a day, or be turned against them,) harden themselves
against the safe, sober, and Christian Councils of so many of the Nobility,
Gentry, Ministry and Commonalty of all Callings and Degrees, as of necessity
must conceive themselve; for the safety of the Nations, or perish with them,
obliged to endeavor that the great Council of this Nation, (by the advice of so
many persons of Interest and Quality) may be suffered to sit free of force or
guards, but of their own appointment, and dead places filled up by new
election, until a free Parliament, according to the triennial Act, may be
called and convened without interruption or praelimitations. That so by sober,
discreet, peaceable, impartial, full and free Councils, these three languishing
divided Nations, and the City of London (the Metropolis of this Empire) may be
restored to their former renown, honor, peace, unity, prosperity and trade,
the two great Pillars of Magistracy and Ministry, vindicated from contempt and
violence, and thereby a stable Settlement obtained both in Church and State, to
the rejoicing of all that truly fear God at home, and the reviving and
preservation of the reformed Churches abroad, almost totally ruined, and become
a prey to the common enemy, by our and their unchristian divisions.

Alexander ab Alexandro, Genial. Dierum, l. 4. c. 11. Erat igitur Sena^oris
Officium, tam de promovendis Magistratibus, provinciisque administrandis, quam
de bellis, triumphis, supplicationibusque decernendis, deque praefidibus in
provincias, and a^xiliis submittendis, de leg^ de foedere, and pactionibus, ac
to^a gerenda rep. libere sentire, ac fortem constantemque sententiam dicere. Et
si duae Senatum distinerent sententiae, cum ^liud alii ^^nferent, Id quod
Senatus maxima pars decer^^xet, id ra^um fieri annotatum est.

An exact List of the secluded Members names still living and those refusing to
sit, till their restitution, to undeceive the Nation and World.
THe Earl of Ancram Sir Ralph Ashton Knight. Arthur Annesley Knight. William Arthington
John Arundel Mr. Ascough Sir John Barrington Sir Thomas Barnardiston Sir Robert
Benloes Sir George Booth Knight. Sir Humphrey Bridges Sir Ambrose Brown Knight. Sir
Roger Burgoin Knight. Francis Bacon Nathaniel Bacon Edward Bainton John Barker
Alderman Maurice Barroe William Bell Alexander Bence Col. John Birch Edward
Bish John Bond Doctor of Law John Bowyer Knight. John Boys Knight. Major Brooks Major
General Brown Samuel Brown Serg. at Law Francis Buller John Bunckly Knight. Hugh
Buscoen Knight. John Button Sir Henry Cholmley Sir John Clotworthy Sir John Corbet
Knight. Sir John Curson Knight. John Carew William Carrent Colonel Ceely Robert Clives
Elias Crimes Lionel Copley John Crew Sir Thomas Dacres Knight. Sir Francis Drake
Sir William Drake Thomas Dacres John Doyle Mr. Francis Drake Sir John Eveling
of Surrey Sir John Eveling of Wilts Sir Walter Earl William Edwards Robert
Ellison Richard Erisy George Eveling Mr William Fenwick William Lord
Fitzwilliams Sir Edmund Fowel William Foxwist John Francis James Fiennis Knight.
Nathaniel Fiennis John Fiennes Sir Gilbert Gerard Knight. Sir Harbotle Grimston
Samuel Gardener Francis Gerard Thomas Gewen John Glynne Serg. at Law Samuel
Got Thomas Grove Sir Richard Haughton Knight. Sir John Holland Col. Edward Harley
Knight. Major Harley Thomas Hatcher James Herbert Peregrine Hobby Thomas Hodges
Denzil Hollis Francis Hollis George Horner Knight. Edmund Hoskins Henry Hungerford
Colonel Hunt Sir Anthony Irby Richard Jennings William Jones Sir Norton
Knatchull George Keckwich Richard Knightly Sir John Leigh Sir William Lewis Sir
Martin Lister Sir William Litton Knight. Sir. Samuel Luke Henry Laurence Knight.
Colonel Lee Mr. Lewis Col. Walter Long Col. John Loyd Knight. Mr. Lucas Mr. Luckin
Sir. Thomas Middleton Knight. John Mainard Serj. at Law. Mr. Christopher Martin
Major General Massey Thomas Middleton Thomas Moor William Morris Knight. George
Montague Col. Edward Montague Knight. Sir Robert Napper Sir Robert Nedham Sir Dudly
North Knight. Sir John Northcot* Mr. Nash John Nelthrop John Nixon Alderman Mr.
North Col. Norton Knight. Sir Richard Onslow Knight. Mr. Onslow Arthur Owin Knight. Henry
Oxinden William Owfield Sir John Palgrave Knight. Sir Philip Parker Knight. Sir Thomas
Parker Sir Edward Partridg^ Sir John Pellam Sir William Platers Sir John Potts
Knight. Sir Nevil Poole Sir Richard Price Knight. Sir Robert Pie Robert Packer Henry
Peck William Pierpoint Edward Poole Col. Alexander Popham Mr. Potter Thomas
Povy William Priestly William Prynne Sir Frances Rus^^l Knight. Mr. Ravinscraft Mr.
Ratclifft Charles Rich Col. Edward Rossiter Sir Beachamp Saint-John Sir John
Seymor Knight. Sir Thomas Soam Robert Scawen Mr. Scut Col. Robert Shap^ot Col.
Shuttleworth Mr. Springate Mr. Simon Snow Henry Stapleton Edward Stephens John
Stephens Nathaniel Stephens Knight. John Swinfen Col. William Stroud Mr.
Shuttleworth John Spilman Sir John Temple Sir Thomas Treavor Mr. Temple Mr.
Thistlethwait Samuel Terri^k Edward Thomas Esaia Thomas John Thin Richard
Tolson Knight. John Treavor Knight. Tho. Twisden Serj. at Law. Samuel Vassal Edward
Vaughan Knight. Edward Vaughan Sir William Waller Tho. Viscount Wenman Knight. Sir
Henry Worsly Thomas Waller Esquire William Wheeler Col. Whitehead Knight. Henry Wills
Capt. Wingate Mr. Winwood William Wray Richard Win Knight. Sir John Young.
In all 194. besides above 40. secluded Members, now dead since 1648. whereof
many were Knights of Counties, and of these yet living, 37. are Knights of
Shiers, with Knight. added against their names.

Upon an exact view of the Members now sitting, or which are permitted to sit,
if they were all present, being about 89 in number, there are not above 16.
Knights of Shires, 7 Citizens, and the rest Burgesses, whereof seldom 50.
appear at once together: the excluded and deceased Members being also
considered, it will appear, that the House of Commons consisting by right of
508 Members: whereof there are 78 Knights of Shires for England, and 12. for
Wales: There are no Knights of the shires sitting in the House for these 26
English and 11 Welsh Counties following, Bes^^es there are no Citizens sitting
for 14* cities following, viz.

BEdford shire Cornwall Cambridgshire Derbyshire Devonshire Dorse^shire
Essex Glostershire Har^fordshire Heref^rdshire Lincolnshire Lancashire
Middles^x Munmothshire Norfolk Nor^humberland Oxfor^shire Surrey Shropshire
Southampton Suffolk Somersetshire Sussex Westmorland Warwickshire Yorkshire
Angl^sey B^eckn^ck Cardiganshire Carmarthenshire. Carnarvonshire Denbighshire
Fli^shire Glamorganshire Pembrockshire M^^^gomeryshire Rad^^shire
And but 1 Knight of the Shire in each of the nine following Counties.
Berkshire Ch^shire Hunting ^^nshire Kent Leicestershire Northamptonshire
Staffordshire Wil^shire Worcestershire
And only the full number, of Knights of the Shire in Buckinghamshi^e
Nottinghamshire, Rutlandshire, Merionethshire.
York Westminster Bristol Canterbury Chester Exceter Oxford Lincoln Worceste^
C^ichester Carlisle Rochester Coventry Wells Have no Citizens in the House.
And but one of the 4 for London, 1 for Norwich, 1 for Bath, Gloucester and
Salisbury alone of all the Cities in Engl. having their full number. And there
will also appear now wanting and excluded about 313 Burgesses and many of them
of the principal Buroughs in Engl. So that the whole number now permitted to
sit is about 89 and the whole number excluded or wanting 420 besides the Lords
So tha^ upon an indifferent calculation and survey, there will scarce the 10th
part of the Commons be found at this time to have Members representing them in
Parliament, and yet these take upon them to act, enact and impose, And that not
only on the Laity, but Clergy too: who cannot legally, and were not formerly
Taxed, but only by their own ^^ee grant and con^ent in convocation.
Taxe^ not only as a whole Commons House, but as as an absolute, full and
complete Parl. of England, yea of Ireland and Scotland besides* whose
Parliaments they have quite swallowed up, and monopolized to themselves*
imposing Taxes on them, which no English Parliament ever did.

C. Plinii Pan Trajano dictus Melius omnibus quam singulis creditur: singuli
enim dec^pere and decipi possunt ^^nemo omnes, neminem o^nes fe^ellerunt.

FINIS.
Printed January 30. 1659.

