AN HVMBLE REMONSTRANCE TO HIS MAJESTY, AGAINST THE TAX Of Ship Money imposed,
laying open the illegalitie, abuse, and inconvenience thereof.

Printed Anno 1641.

AN HVMBLE REMONSTRANCE TO HIS MAJESTY, AGAINST THE TAX Of Ship Money imposed,
laying open the illegalitie, abuse, and inconvenience thereof.
MOST Gracious and dread Sovereign, we your poor and loyal Subjects of this
your Realm of England, now grieved and oppressed with the late Taxes imposed
upon us, for setting out of diverse Ships, for guarding of the narrow Seas,
without a common assent thereunto had in Parliament, do here in all duty
prostrate our selves, and this our Remonstrance against the said Taxes, at your
Highness feet, beseeching your Majesty of your Royal Justice and clemency, to
take the same into your Gracious and most just consideration; and thereupon to
release us your poor Subjects, from the intolerable burden and grievance,
under which we groan and languish.

And here first of all, we most humbly represent to your most excellent
Majesty, that the Tax of Ship Money, is directly contrary to the fundamental
Laws of this your Realm of England, which your Majesty both in point of
Justice and Honor, is obliged inviolably to preserve, according to the Oath
made to God and your subjects at your Coronation, and your faithful printed
royal Protestations since both in your Answer to the Petition of Right, in the
third year of your Highness Reign, in your royal speech in Parliament,
printed then with your Command, and your Declaration to all your loving
Subjects, of the Causes which moved your Majesty to dissolve the last
Parliament, made and published by your special Command; likewise by 22. 23.
42. 43. 44. in all which, your Majesty to all your subjects Comfort, have made
their several Declarations of your royal pleasure in these your most royal
words: The King wills, that Right be done according to the Laws and Customs
of the Realm, and that the Statutes recited in the Petition of Right, be put
in execution; that his subjects may have no cause of Complaint, of any wrong or
oppression, contrary to their just rights and liberties, to the preservation
whereof, he holds himself in Conscience obliged as well as of his Prerogative.
Let right be done, as is desired, and I assure you, that my Maxim is, That the
peoples liberties strengthens the Kings Prerogative, and the Kings Prerogative
is to defend the peoples liberties; I do here declare that those things that
have been done, whereby men had some cause to suspect the liberty of the
Subject to be trenched upon, shall not hereafter be drawn into example for
your prejudice; and for the time to come, in the word of a King, you shall not
have the like cause to Complain; We were not unmindfull of the preservation of
the just and ancient liberties of our Subjects, which we secured to them by our
just and gracious Answer to the Petition in Parliament, having not since done
any Act whereby to infringe them, but our Care is, and hereafter shall be, to
keep them entire, and inviolable, as we would do our own Right and
Soveraigntie. We also declare that we will maintain the ancient and just
Rights and Liberties of our Subjects, with so much constancy and Justice, that
they shall have cause to acknowledge, that under our government and gracious
protection, they live in a more happy and free estate, than any Subjects in the
Christian world.

If then we shall make it appear to your Majesty, that the Tax is against the
Laws of the Realm, and the just and ancient Rights and Liberties of your
Subjects; we doubt not but your Majesty, out of your Royal Justice, and
Goodness, will be most Graciously pleased to exonerate us thereof, and never
to draw it into example any more.

That it is against the fundamental Laws, just Rights, and ancient Liberties
of your people, we shall make it appear by these particulars.

First, we conceive it is against sundry Statutes of this Realm. First the
Statute of Magna Charta, cap. 29. 39. ratified in Parliament 5. E. 3. cap. 9.
25. E. 3. cap. 18. 42. Ed. 3. cap. 3. and to the late Petition of Right in the
third year of your Majesty's Reign, who enacts, that no Freeman shall be
taken, or imprisoned, or disseized from the Freehold or liberty, or free
Customs to them, or to be outlawed, or exiled, or otherwise destroyed, or
pressed upon, nor dealt with, but by the Law of the Land, and by the lawful
Judgment of the Peers; but diverse of your poor Subjects by virtue and
authority of Writs for Ship Money, have been taken, and imprisoned by your
Officers, their Goods and Chattells seized, distreined and sold, to their
great damage and destruction, without any lawful Judgment first given against
them, and before the right and title of the Tax has been lawfully heard, and
decided against the very tenor of the Statute.

Secondly, against the Stat. of 25. Ed. 1. de tallagio non concedendo. 14. Ed.
3. 2. cap. 1. 25. Ed. 3. Rich. 2. cap. 9. 1. Rich. 3. cap. 2. and the late
Petition of Right, certified by your Majesty, which enacts that no Tallage
shall be laid, or levied by the King, or his heirs, without the good will and
consent of the Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, Barons, Knights, Burgesses, and
other Freemen of the Comonalty of the Realm. By virtue of which Statute, your
Subjects have Inherited this freedom that they should not be compelled to
contribute to any Tallage, Tax, Aid, or other charge, not set by Common consent
in Parliament, as is recited by the same Petition; Therefore not with this Tax
of Ship Money not settled, but being against the several Acts, against all the
Acts of Tunnage and Poundage, and other subsidies, which have been from time to
time in all your royal Progenitors Reigns granted them either for years, or
for term of their natural lives, as a certain Tax and Subsidy for the
safety and defense of your Seas, against enemies and Pirates, and as a free
voluntary Grant, because themselves, by your royal Prerogative, had no power
to impose it upon the subjects; some few of which Acts, we shall here recite,
14. E. 3. Stat. 1. cap. 20. and Stat. 2. cap. 1. The Prelates, Earls, Barons,
and Commons in Parliament, granted the King the ninth Lambs fleece, fifteenth
sheafe, ninth part of all Goods and Chattells in Burroughes for two years
space then next ensuing, to be taken and levied by full and reasonable Tax for
the same two years, in aid of the good keeping of the Realm as well by Land as
by Sea, and of his wars, as well against the parts of Scotland, France, etc.
and elsewhere, with promise that the Grant so chargeable, shall not another
time be brought for an example, nor fall to their prejudice in time to come. 5.
Rich. 2. per Stat. 2. cap. 3. a subsidy of two shillings on every Tun of Wine,
and six pence in the pound of every Merchandise else imported (some few
excepted) was granted to the King by Parliament for two years, during which
time the Mariners of the West proffered the Parliament to make an Army on the
Sea: Provided always that the money thereof coming be wholly employed for the
keeping of the Sea, and no part elsewhere; the receivers and keepers whereof
were appointed likewise, that the people keeping of the Sea Army, shall have
all the lawful prizes shared among them,; And that the Admiral and others of
the said Army should give assurance to save the Kings friends and Allies
without danger to be done to them, or any of them by any means, which if they
do, and it be proved, they shall put them in grievous pains to make amends,
4. Ed. 4. 12. Ed. 4. cap. 3. the Commons of the Realm of England granted a
Subsidy to the King called Tunnage during his life, for the defense of the
Realm, and especially for the safeguard of the Sea, they are the words of the
said Act repeated, which Act was continued and revived 40. H. 8. by Act of
Parliament 6. H. 8. cap. 14. which grants him Tunnage and Poundage all his
life, 1. Ed. 6. cap. 1. 3. Mar. cap. 18. 1. Eliz. cap. 20. for the granting of
Tunnage and Poundage, all severally recited, H. 8. and H. 7. have had granted
to them being Princes, and their noble progenitors, Kings of England for time
being, by common assent of Parliament for defense of the Realm, and the
keeping, and safeguard of the Seas, for the intercourse of Merchandise, safely
to come in and pass out of the Realm, certain sums of money, named
Subsidies, of all manner of Goods, or Merchandise coming into, or growing out
of the Realm. The words of the forenamed Act are these: First, for as much as
we the poor Commons, etc. now we your poor Commons wishing that such
furniture of all things may be had in readiness for time to come, when
necessity shall require for the speedy and undelayed provision, and help of
the suppressing of such inconveniences, and Invasions, humbly desire of your
most excellent Majesty, lovingly and favorably to take and accept and receive
their poor graunts, hereafter ensuing, as granted of true hearts and good
wills, which we bore to your Highness, toward the great costs, charges, and
expenses, which may be laid out by your Majesty, for the causes beforesaid
when need shall require.

Secondly, no Dismes, Quadrismes, or grand Customs, and such like aid can be
imposed, the act of Tunnage and Poundage, 1 Iac. cap. 33. which graunts this
Subsidy to your Majesty's Royal Father during his life, makes the same
recital word for word. If then the subsidy of Tunnage and Poundage have been
already granted as a Tax upon his Subjects for guarding of the Sea, both
against enemies and Pirates by Act of Parliament, and not otherwise, and all
your Royal Progenitors have accepted of it in this manner by a grant in
Parliament, and not imposed any such annual Tax as now by Writ, for the
defense of the Seas by your Prerogative royal, we humbly conceive, that your
Majesty cannot now impose it upon by Law, rather because your Majesty ever
since your coming to the Crown, has taken and received this Tunnage and
Poundage, and still takes it, and claims it for a defense only of the Seas,
professing in your royal Declaration to all your loving Subjects by your
special command, A. 7. page 44. that you took this duty of Five in the
Hundred for guarding of the Sea, and defense of the Realm, to which you hold
your self still charged, as you declared. Now since your Majesty receives this
duty at your Subjects hand, to this very end and purpose, the moity of which
is abundantly sufficient to defend the Seas in these days of peace with all
neighbor Princes and Nations, and by reason whereof you hold your self still
obliged to it; we humbly conceive, you cannot in point of Law and Justice,
neither will you in point of honor and conscience, receive the said Duty,
sufficient with an overplus to defend the Seas, and yet impose this heavy Tax
and burden upon your Subjects, and lay the whole charge of guarding the Seas
in these days of peace on them, as if no Tunnage or Poundage were taken for
that purpose, which none of your royal Progenitors ever yet did.

Fourthly, against most of the Acts of Parliament for the several Subsidies of
the Clergy and Commonaltie, in all your Royal Progenitors Reigns, and your
own too, who when the annual revenues of the Crown, and your Customs, and
Subsidies granted them for the guarding of the Realm, and Seas, by reason of
open wars aforesaid, and defensive, or both were not able to supply and
defray the extraordinary expenses, never resorted to such Writts as these for
the levying of Ship Money, especially in times of peace, but ever to the
Parliament to supply for the defense of the Seas, and Realm, by grant of
Subsidies, Impositions, Dismes, Quadrismes, rated and taxed by Parliament, and
not by your own authority royal. That is evident by all the Acts of
Subsidies, Taxes, Ayds, and Customs, granted by your royal Progenitors, and
especially by the 14. E. 3. cap. 21. Stat. 2. 15. E. 3. Stat. 3. cap. 1. 23.
18. Ed. 3. Stat. 2. Pron. Stat. cap. 1. 25. E. 3. Stat. 7. 36. E. 3. cap. 14.
11. Rich. 2. 9. H. 4. cap. 7. 11. H. 4. cap. 10. 32. H. 8. cap. 23. 37. H. 8.
cap. 24. 2. and 3. E. 6. cap. 35. 36. 1. Ed. 6. 6. 12. E. 5. P. and M. cap. 10.
11. 5. Ed. 6. cap. 29. 13. Ed. 3. 27. 28. 17. Eliz. 22. 23. 23. Eliz. cap. 14.
15. 27. Eliz. cap. 28. 29. 29. Eliz. cap. 7. 8. 31. Eliz. 14. 15. 35. Eliz.
cap. 12. 13. 39. Eliz. cap. 26. 27. 43. Eliz. cap. 17. 18. 3. Jac. 26. 21. Jac.
cap. 33. 1. Car. cap. 5. 6. and 3. Car. cap. 6. 7. expressly recite the Aid and
Subsidy therein granted were for the defense of the Kingdom by Sea and Land,
the maintenance of the Navy, and so forth. If now these Princes that would part
with no title of their just Prerogative, and your Majesty your self have from
time to time resorted for supplies by Sea and Land to Parliament, when Tunnage
and Poundage and your own ordinary revenewes would not suffice, which they
would never have done, might they have supplied themselves by such Writs of
Shipmoney as these are, we humbly conceive it to be against the common Law,
and that your Majesty ought to run the same course again, and may not by your
Prerogative Impose this Tax of Ship Money without common consent in Parliament,
contrary as we believe to the Petition of Right, confirmed by your Majesty as
our undoubted Rights and Liberties, and as the Tax of Ship Money is against the
several recited Statutes, so we humbly conceive it to be against the very
common Law, and Law books.

First, by the Common Law every several Duty and service which concerns the
subjects in general or greatest part of them, that is uncertain and
indefinite, not reduced to any positive certainty, ought to be rated and
imposed by a Parliament only, not by your Majesty (as the party whom it
concerns) as appears by two notable instances, pertinent to the present
purpose, whereof the first is, that of Taxes uncertain, which though a duty
to the King, and other Lords heretofore upon every voice royal against the
Scots, yet because it concerns so many, it could not be taxed; but by
Parliament, Litt. 2. 97. 98. 100. 102. F. N. B. 8. Cook on Litt. sect. 97.
101. 102.

Secondly, in Case of Aid to marry the Kings or Lords Daughter, and to make his
son a Knight, which though a Duty, yet taxed and reduced to a certainty by
a Parliament, not left arbitrary, 3 E. 3. cap. 35. 25. E. 3. Stat. 5. cap. 11.
F. M. B. 82. If then these uncertain services and duties, to avoid opposition
and Injustice, ought to be taxed in Parliament, much more the uncertain and
indefinite Tax being no duty nor debt at all, and not yet prescribed or
reduced to any certainty by any Law.

Secondly, no Dismes, Quadrismes, or grand Customs, and such like, can be
imposed by the very common Law, though usually subsidies and supplies, but by
Act of Parliament, as appears by all them in Fitz and Brooks Abridgements,
titles, Quadrismes, 9. H. 6. 13. grand. Cust. 26. 4. E. 4. 3. 4. 5. Fitz Bar.
304. 14. E. 3. 21. 26. E. 3. cap. 11. 45. E. 3. 4. 11. Rich. 2. 9. Dyer. 45. 6.
165. therefore much less the unusual and extraordinary Taxes of Ship Money,
amounting the first year to ten fifteenes, and this year to three subsidies a
man, of which there is not one syllable or tittle in any of our Law Books.

Thirdly, No Law can be made within the Realm, to bind the Subjects either to
the loss of Liberty, Goods, or member, by your Majesty's absolute power, nor
yet by your Majesty, nor the Lords in general, without the Commons consent in
full Parliament, as is resolved in these common Law Books, 11. H. 6. 17.
Ployd. 74. M. 19. E. 3. Fitz Iurisdict. 28. Annum, the very reason why Acts of
Parliament bind all, is because every man is party and consenting to them, 3.
E. 4. 2. 2. E. 4. 45. or 4. H. 11. 22. H. 1. 5. Ployd. 59. and 396. If then no
Laws can be imposed on the Subjects, but such as are made and consented unto
by them in Parliament, because every Law that is penal deprives them either of
their liberties, person by imprisonment, or the property of their Goods by
Confiscation, much less then any Tax, or the Tax for Ship Money, for the which
their goods shall be, and are distreined, the persons imprisoned, in case they
refuse to pay it, contrary to Magna Charta promis. Stat.

Fourthly, every subject has as absolute property in his Goods by the common
Law, as he has in his lands, and therefore as your Majesty cannot lawfully
seize any of your Subjects lands, unless by some just title or forfeit upon a
penal Law or Condition infringed, or by the parties voluntary consent, so
cannot you seize upon his Goods, unless by some Grant from the party
himself, either mediately as in Parliament, or immediately for some debt, or
either granted you in like manner, therefore not for Ship Money, unless
granted by common consent in Parliament.

Fifthly, it is a Maxim in all Laws civil and common, and a principle of
reason and nature, Quod tangit dom. ab omnibus debet approbari, Regis Iac. 11.
9. This Rule holds in all natural and politic bodies, nothing is or can be
effected by the head, hand, or foot alone, unless the other parts of the body,
or faculties of the soul assent. In all elections popular, where there are
diverse Electors, there must either be a general consent of all, or of the
mayor part, or otherwise the election of the fewest, or one only is a mere
nullitie, in all Parliaments, Colleges, Synods, Cities, Cathedrals, in Laws,
Canons, Ordinances, or by Laws, neither Levies, nor Taxes can be imposed, but
by all, or the Mayor part. The Bishop, or the Deane without the Clergy, the
Major without the rest of the Corporation, the Abbot without the Covent, the
Master of the College, without the fellows, the Master or Wardens of
Companies, without the Assistants, the Lords of the Parliament without the
Commons, nor the lesser part, without the consent, or against the greater part;
in all these can do nothing, either to bind or charge the rest by the Common
or Civil Law. Your Majesty therefore by the same Reason, being but a member
of the body politic of England, though the most excellent and supreme above
all the Rest, can impose no Laws, or binding Taxes on your Subjects, without
the common consent in Parliament, especially now in times of peace, when a
Parliament may be called and summoned to help these.

Sixthly, if your Majesty shall grant a Commission, to imprison, or to seize
any of your Subjects Goods without any Indictment or Process of Law, that has
been adjudged void and against Law. 42. H. 8. tit. 5. Br. Commission 15. 16.
therefore your Majesty's Writts to distreine men's Goods, and imprison their
persons or bodies for Ship Money, must be so too. And as your Majesty by your
Letter cannot alter the Common Law, 6. H. 4. 5. 10. H. 4. 23. so neither can
you do it by your Writts, 11. H. 4. 91. Br. Prerog. 15. 49. ass. 37. H. 6. 27.
3. H. 9. 15. 18. Ed. 4. 76. 5. H. 4. 21. Ed. 4. 79. Book pat. 25. 52. 41. 53.
69. 79. 73. 100. Descent 57. Dangilt 9. Fitz-toll.

Seaventhly, it is a Maxim in Law, that no man ought to be Judge in his own
Case, and therefore no man can have Cognizance of Pleas where himself is Judge
and party. And if a Lord of a Manor prescribe in a Custom to distreine all
beasts that come within his Manor damage fezant, and to deteine them until
Fine be made to him for the damages at his will; this prescription is void,
because it is against reason, that he be Judge in his own Case; for by such
means, though he had damage but to the value, but of old, he might asseise and
have a hundred pound, Tit. 31. Iac. 2. 11. 212. Cau. ibm. 3. E. 3. 24. 4. E. 3.
14. 10. E. 3. 23. 28. E. 3. Plac. 20. H. 4. 8. Br. Let. 12. 7. H. 6. 13. 9. H.
6. 10. the same holds in reason concerning Ship Money, if it lay in your
Majesty's power to impose, what sum they pleased upon your people, you should
be Judge in your own Cause, and so your Majesty by your Officers
misinformation for their own private lucre might levy far more than need
requires for your service; yea, so much, and so often, as would soon exhaust
your whole estates, which is against both reason, and justice, and therefore
this concurrent assent in Parliament is requisite, that no more be demanded
then shall appear to be necessary to avoyde opposition, both in frequency of
the opposition, the quantity of the sum collected, and the undue and
unequal Taxing thereof.

Eighthly, if your Majesty by your absolute authority, might impose such Taxes
as there at your pleasure might be fulfilled on your subjects, you may do it
as often, and raise them as high as you please; for what Law is there to hinder
you from it, but that which denies you any power at all to do it. Now if you
may impose these Taxes as often, and raise them as high as you please, even
from a hundred to two hundred Ships every year, as well as forty or fifty
in times of peace, and distreine upon all your Subjects Goods, and imprison
their bodies for it, then all their Goods, Lands, and Liberties will be at your
Majesty's absolute disposition, and then are we not freeborn Subjects, but
villains, and rascals, and where then are our just ancient Rights, and
Liberties, confirmed by your Majesty in the Petition of Right, which you have
protested you are bound in conscience to perform and keep inviolable.

Ninthly, it has been adjudged in ancient time, that the Kings of England
cannot by their prerogative create a new Office by Pattent in Charge of the
people, neither can they grant Murage, or any such tallage to, or demand it of
any one by Writ, or Pattent, because that it is in Charge of his people, Que ne
part est sans parliament, 13. H. 4. 14. Br. Pat. 12. 37. H. 8. Pat. 100.
therefore by the same reason that Tax, that lays a far greater Charge upon
the Subject, than any new Office, Murage, Tallage, Travers, or through Toll,
cannot be imposed but by Act of Parliament.

Tenthly, admit your Majesty by your absolute prerogative might enforce the
Subjects to set out Ships to guard the Sea, yet we conceive humbly as things
now stand, you cannot do neither in Honor, nor Justice, nor yet in that way
and proportion as it is now demanded.

For first, we humbly conceive, that your Majesty cannot impose this annual
charge on your Subjects, and wholly, because you receive Tunnage and Poundage of
your Subjects, on purpose to guard the Seas, and ease your Subjects of this
burden, which is sufficient to discharge the service, with a large surplusage
besides to your Majesty, either therefore your Majesty must now both in Justice
and Honor release the Tax of Ship Money, or else your Tunnage and Poundage,
since either of them are sufficient for the service, and one of them not due,
if the other be taken.

Secondly, we humbly conceive that you cannot demand it now in a general
peace, when there is no fear at all of foreign enemies, or open war,
proclaimed against any neighbor Prince, or State, there being, as we believe,
no president for any such Tax in the time of peace.

Thirdly, we conceive that since the Writ enjoined every County to furnish a
Ship of so many Tons, for so many months;

First, that no Counties can be forced to furnish, or hire any Ships, but those
that border on the Seas, and have Shipping in them.

Secondly, that they cannot be compelled to furnish out any other Ships, of any
other burden, than such as they have for the present, unless they have
convenient time allowed them to build others.

Thirdly, they cannot be compelled to levy so much money, to return it to
your Exchequer, or to any of your Officers hands, as now they do when they
cannot call them to account, to see how the money is employed, but that they
may, and ought to appoint their own Officers, Treasurers, and Collectors, to
make their own estimates, proportions, and provisions at the best, and
cheapest Rates, as every one does that is charged and over-rated in their
estimates, and put to almost double expense by your Majesty's Officers, who are
not, neither can be compelled to give your Subjects any accounts, as those
Officers may be that collected the Subsidies of Tunnage and Poundage anciently
were to do, 5. R. 2. cap. 3.

Fourthly, that they cannot be compelled to hire your Majesty's Ships at such
rates and with such furniture and provisions, as your Officers shall seem meet
to have and appoint for them; for by the same reason, your Majesty may enforce
those Gentlemen and grand Soldiers, who are bound to keep Lances, and light
Horses, or to provide Arms in every County, though they have Arms and Horses
of their own, which are serviceable, to buy or hire your Majesty's Horses and
Arms every year at such Rates as your Officers please, and lay by their own
at your own Officers rates, and your Merchants that traffic, only in your
Majesty's Ships, not in their own at your own Officers rates, there being the
same reason in both. But your Majesty, as we suppose, cannot enforce your
Subjects to the one, to hire your Horses, Arms, or Ships, to train or trade
with, therefore not to the other.

Fifthly, that they cannot be compelled to contribute money to set out forty
seven Ships, as they did the last year, and yet but twenty seven, and some of
them of less burden then limited in the Writts to be set out by your Officers,
and so scarce half the pretended number employed, and not that money
collected, disbursed in that pretended service.

Sixthly, that they cannot be enforced to provide forty, forty five, fifty shot
round of Powder and Bullets for every Piece in the Ship; now there is a
general peace, and no likelihood of Sea Fights, when fifteen, twenty, or
twenty five at most round is sufficient, and no more was allotted in eighty
eight, when the Spanish Fleet came against us, and was of purpose, as may
seem, to put them to double charge.

Seaventhly, that they cannot be enforced to pay for new Rigging, Cables,
Anchors, Carriages, Powder and Shot, Matches, Pikes, Muskets, and that every
year, when little or nothing at all of that provision provided and paid for by
them the first and last year both, is spent but only victuals, and wages,
and all the other provision at the end of the service taken into your Majesty's
storehouse, and so to buy their own Powder, when the twenty seven Ships were
set out, and thereby at the first gained four pence in every pound of Powder,
when they were so set out, all which were taken into your Majesty's
storehouses at their return, but what was vainly shot and spent away the
last year, and bought again afresh, amounts to sixteen pence clear gain in
every pound, and if this third year were brought over again, as it is likely
according to a new estimate, will be two shillings four pence clear gain in
every pound, the like doubled and trebled again will be now and every
subsequent year, if this Tax proceed upon Powder, Shot, and Match, Carriages,
and so forth, and all such victuals the only provision that is spent, the
most part of the rest returning, which if your Subjects found and provided at
the best rate, and took again into your own stores upon the Ships return
one quarter of that that they are now rated at, at the best rate, by reason
that the remaining provision would discharge the intended service.

Eighthly, that they cannot be enforced to contribute seven thousand pounds to
the furnishing out of a Ship of seven thousand Tun, according to your
Majesty's Officers estimation, when as they themselves would every way furnish
one at the first for five thousand pound and less, and the next year for
less than half the money, by reason of the remaining store.

Ninthly, that they cannot be enforced to give your Majesty after the rate of
sixteen shillings or eighteen shillings the Tun, by the month, for the
hire of your Ships, when as they can hire other Ships for four or five
shillings the Tun a month, or under, and your Majesty allowed them no more
for their Ships than four shillings a Tun, when they were employed at Callis
or Rochell voyage, some of which money is yet unsatisfied, through the Officers
default, to their impoverishing, whereas your Majesty receives all, or the most
part of the money before hand, ere the Ships do set out to Sea.

Tenthly, they ought not to be charged with any such Tax, unless those
Officers and others whom your Majesty imployes to guard the Sea, put in good
security, and preserve your Subjects, friends, and Allies, from Pirates and
others without damage and loss to any of them. And if any sustain any damage
or loss as none ever did more in our memory, than the last year in the west
Coasts by the Turks, to give them full satisfaction and damage, as those that
undertook to guard the Seas at the Subjects charge were obliged to do, 5.
Rich. 2. Stat. 2. cap. 3. the which is but just and equal.

Eleventhly, they conceive, that every Subject that is not a Seaman, is bound
by the Law to provide Horse and other Arms for Land service, at their own
proper Costs, according to their estates and abilities, and therefore ought not
by Law to be double charged with Sea and Land service too. But that Mariners
and Seamen that are freed from Land service, Muster and Arms, ought only to
be charged with the Sea-service, either out of their own proper Costs, if
discharged of Tunnage and Poundage, or else upon your Majesty's, as they were
in Matthew Paris, Anno 1213. cap. 224. Matthew Westminster, Anno 1613. pa. 91.
and since in Eighty eight, when Land-men were discharged from Sea-service, and
Seamen from Land-service, the one serving with their Horses and Arms only on
Land, the other with Ships on the Sea only: when Philip of France intended to
have invaded the Land, and deprived King John of his Crown, whom the Pope had
injuriously deposed. Upon those grounds we humbly represent this to your
Majesty's just and royal consideration. And we most humbly conceive the Tax of
Ship Money is altogether unjust and unequal, especially as it is now ordered,
and therefore humbly pray to be freed therefrom.

Secondly, admit your Majesty by your absolute power prerogative, might impose
this present Tax as it is now levied and ordered, yet it is a great grievance,
not only in regard of the forenamed particulars, specified in the preceding
Reasons, but of these also ensuing.

First, in regard of the greatness and excessivenesse of these Charges and
Taxes; the first to the Port Towns only for twenty seven Anno 1634. came in
most Towns to fifteen Subsidies a man, and that the last year for forty
seven Ships to all Counties of England and Wales, amounting to three or four
Subsidies in every County or more, this present year for forty seven Ships
to as much, all these payable at once, the highest Tax that ever was imposed on
Subjects in this Realm, for ought we read in our Stories, and that in times
of general peace, when the Subsidies of Tunnage and Poundage, of purpose to
guard the Sea, by treble, if not six times greater than in Queen Elizabeth's,
or any other Princes days before hers; and half of the Tax or less, as we
shall be able to prove and make good, will furnish out the Ships set forth.

Secondly, the annual vicissitude of it for three years together, in the time
of peace, not to be paraleld in any Age, which is like to make a dangerous
president for us and our posterity after us.

Thirdly, the inequality of taxing of it, in the first Tax ordinary Merchants
charged, to pay, ten, twelve, fifteen, yea, twenty five pound, or more; when
as diverse of your great Officers, Earls, and Lords, who had forty times
greater Estates and Annual revenewes, paid but two, three, four, or five
pound at the most. The last years Tax was rated accordingly in Cities and
Corporations, where the middle and poor sort of people, paid more than the
richest; and in the Country, where men are now rated by the acre; some Farmers
pay more than the richest Knights or Gentlemen, and many poor men who have
scarce bread to put in their mouths, are feign to sell their pewter, bedding,
sheep, and stock to pay it; the like inequality is in this present year,
and how the poor who made such hard shift the last year, can be able to
discharge this, we are not able to conceive, especially in London and other
Cities, who are and have been visited with the plague, where thousands that
lived well before the sickness, now live upon alms, and they that have means
and wealth now by the means of want of trading, the charge of their families,
and their seasements to relieve the poor, are become poor themselves, sitter
to have relief, than to pay so heavy a Tax as this.

Fourthly, the abuse of some Sheriffs and Officers, in levying far more than
is prescribed in the Writts, as in Lincolneshire the last year, and other
places before.

Fifthly, the distreining of such Goods, Chattells, and other Commodities, for
Ship Money, as are imported, not exported, whereas no goods, but of such as had
Lands only, have been anciently charged with any Tax toward the guarding of
the Seas, as appears in the several Acts of Tunnage and Poundage.

Sixthly, the ill guarding of the Seas against Turks and Pirates,
notwithstanding the great Tax, more mischief being done by them both by Sea
and Land, more of our Ships taken and pillaged by Sea, and some persons carried
away Captive from the Land, in the West parts these last years,
notwithstanding the Navy, than in many years before, and no satisfaction
given to the Subjects for their irreparable losses, which they ought in Justice
to receive. If a Carrier, or Skipper undertake to carry any Goods, and they
miscarry through his default and negligence, an Action of the Case lies
against him, and he shall render all damage to the party. Your Majesty's
Officers employed by you, undertook to secure the Sea this last year, yet
when they knew the Turks were pillaging in the Western parts, they negligently
or wilfully left these Coasts unguarded to go Southwards, to pick a quarrel
with the Hollanders Fishermen, or to draw them to a Composition, not having a
Ship thereabouts to secure those Coasts, but two only in the Irish Seas, in
the view of which some of your subjects Ships were taken, and yet not one
Pirate taken, or brought in by them, though they did so much mischief, and
took so many of your Subjects prisoners, to their undoing.

Seventhly, the general fear and jealousy which your poor Subjects have of
an intention of your great Officers to the Crown, and the ayding of the Seas,
a mere pretense to levy and collect it, which jealousy is grounded on these
particulars.

First, the continuance of the annual Tax for three years together now in
times of peace.

Secondly, the sending out of twenty seven Ships the last year by your
Officers, when money was levied for forty seven, and the levy of money for
forty seven Ships this year again, when not above twenty seven are to be
set out: this year again for ought we hear of so many, if any be collected;
for these twenty Ships more than are set out in the beginning of this project,
they fear worse consequence in the sequel.

Thirdly, your Officers mis-informing your Subjects to buy their own Powder,
Match, and Shot, Cording Stores, and other provisions afresh, the last year
and this, with your full pay the first year, and then taken into your
Majesty's store at the first and last return, and reteining the estimate as
high the last year, and that as at first, when as any third part of the first
estimate of the old store, and other things considered, would defray the Charge.

Fourthly, your Officers having turned Tunnage and Poundage, which is only
abundantly sufficient to defend the Seas withal, into a mere Annual revenue,
and laying the whole charge of guarding the Seas upon your Subjects
notwithstanding. Now if the Tunnage and Poundage to guard the Seas withal, be
already turned by them into a mere annual revenue, they fear these also will
be so; the moity of the money collected, being not disbursed for the defense of
the Sea, for which it is intended.

Fifthly, the speeches and mutterings of some of your Officers, who style it a
duty and project, thereby to improve your Majesty's revenues, and for the
greatest part of the moneys they make it so.

Sixthly, the stopping of some legal proceedings by Replevies or Habeas corpus,
to bring the rightfulnesse or lawfulness of the Tax, to a fair, just, and
speedy trial and decision. It ever being formerly adjudged contrary unto Magna
Charta, 129. 2. E. 3. cap. 8. 18. E. 3. Stat. 3. 20. Eliz. cap. 9. and the
Judges Oath.

Seaventhly, the levying this as a present supply by some of your great
Officers, under color for guarding the Seas, of purpose to keep off a
Parliament, wherein our particulars may be heard and redressed, and these
Officers who have abused your Majesty's trust reposed in them, oppressed your
people, and violated the just rights and liberties condignly questioned.

Eighthly, the diverse Corporations of Le. F. P. together with the Clergy men,
Exchequer men, Church lands, ancient Demeasnes excepted from Dangilt, and all
Taxes and Tallages by prescription or penal Charters, confirmed by Parliament;
and many that have been privileged from paying of Subsidies, now burdened
with this Tax, contrary to these Charters of exemption; which several
grievances we most humbly submit to your Majesty's most wise and gracious
Consideration.

Ninthly, Admit your Majesty might by your royal Prerogative, Impose the Tax,
yet the manifold inconveniences ensuing thereupon, both for the present and
future, which we shall here likewise in all humility represent to your
Majesty's royal wisdom, may justly induce your Highness to free us from this
mischievous burden.

For first it causes a general decay of trading, both by impairing most of
the current money of England, the means of trading, or by breaking and
undoing, or casting many poor tradesmen, and those so far behind hand in the
world, that they cannot recover themselves again.

Secondly, it causes many Farmers in the Country to break, or hide their
heads, or to give over their Farms, and makes every where such a multitude of
poor, that in a short time, the rich will not be able to relieve them.

Thirdly, it procures a great decrease and abatement in the Rent and prices of
Land, and enhaunceth all other kind of common duties, and provisions, to such
an extraordinary rate, as the poor will not be able to live, and subsist, nor
the rich to keep hospitality, and train up their children to learning and
services of Arms, to secure your Majesty, and Country, if this Tax should
continue.

Fourthly, it stops the current of the Common Law of the Realm, by disabling
men to prosecute their just suits, and to recover their rights, for want of
means, which will breed much opposition and confusion, if not prevented.

Fifthly, it much discontents the minds, and dejects the spirits, and slackens
the industry of most of your Subjects, and causes many to leave the Kingdom,
and to give over trading.

Sixthly, it so exhausts your Subjects purses now in the time of peace, that
they will not be able, though willing, to supply your Majesty in time of war,
and upon other needful, important, and necessary occasions; things
considerable, lest that which the History of Great Britain, H. 7. 44. sect.
197. as Speed writes of Dangilt, prove true of this Tax. Likewise that it
empties the Land of all Coin, the Kingdom of all their Ships, Nobles of all
their Carriage, the Commons of their Goods, and the Sovereign of his wonted
respect, and reverence, and observance.

Seventhly, it makes our neighbor Princes jealous of us, moves them to
fortify themselves extraordinarily at Sea, more then otherwise they would have
done, and to call in the Turks to annoy and infest us.

Eighthly, it much hinders traffic of Merchandise, and our Fishing, by
employing diverse of our ablest Ships, Masters, Pilots, Mariners, and
Fishermen for this service, who otherwise should and would have been employed
in Merchants voyages and fishings.

Ninthly, it is like to bring in great insupportable burdens, and an annual
and constant pay of above three if not four Subsidies a year upon your
Subjects, and so breed a dangerous president for posterity, if not now
released, or withstood; For though commonly one swallow makes not a summer,
yet as Mat. Paris Hist. Angl. 822. and 625. Si nunc itcrum fieret, timeri
posset non immerito, ne ad consequentiam traheretur; Binus enim actus inducit
consuerudinem. Eo ipso reststendum est, quod Franci contribuerunt. Binus enim
actus inducit consuetudinem. A double and treble payment without opposition,
will introduce a Custom and prescription, be the Taxes never so unjust and
unreasonable; as the Prelates and Clergy themselves could jointly conclude in
Henry the thirds time, in the Case of Taxes.

These most Gracious Sovereign, are the grounds and reasons we humbly
represent to your sacred Majesty, against the Tax of Ship Money, set on foot,
as we have just Cause to suspect, by such who aim more at their private lucre,
and sinister ends, then at your Majesty's Honor and service, or your kindreds
welfare; upon which we most humbly supplicate your Majesty to be exonerated of
it, since for the premised reasons, we neither can nor dare contribute any more
to it. Now because these men who have put your Majesty upon these projects,
pretend some ancient president for the lawfulness of this Tax for the
Ship Money, thereby to induce your Majesty, whose Justice and integrity they
know is such, as will never consent to any the least taxations, unjustly to
oppress your Subjects withal, contrary to the just rights and liberties
confirmed by your Majesty, and your own Laws, to impose it, and exact it as a
just duty, and lawful tallage, we shall here for the opening of the
unlawfulness of it, give a brief Answer to the chiefest of these presidents,
which they produce and suggest to your Majesty, to manifest the illegalities of
it. In general, we give this Answer to all the presidents they produce to
justify this Tax.

That there is no direct president in point of Law, to compel the Subjects to
find Ships to guard the Seas, or if there be any one such president, yet that
never ruled, neither was adjudged lawful upon solemn debate, either in
Parliament, or any other Court of Justice.

Secondly, the presidents produced that have any color at all to prove the Tax
just and legal were before Magna Charta, and the Statutes afore-cited, Taxes
and Tallages without consent of Parliament, or at least before Tunnage and
Poundage were granted for guarding of the Seas, and not since.

Thirdly, that they were only in times of war, and open hostility, not of
peace, as now, this will sufficiently answer all presidents that can be
produced.

Fourthly, that they were only either in times of wars, and open hostility,
or that they were by assent in Parliament, or else withstood, and complained of,
as grievous if otherwise.

Fifthly, that they were only for suppressing and taking off Ships upon the
Kings hire, and wages, not for setting out of Ships on the Subjects proper
Costs, or else for stay of Ships for a time, and so impertinent to the Case in
question.

Sixthly, that these presidents were not annual, or for sundry years together,
but rare, once perchance in an age, and that on special occasions, in time of
eminent danger, and will not prove pertinent, if duly examined.

These general Answers now premised, we shall descend to the most material
particular presidents, the answering which alone will clear all the rest.

A maine president they insist on, is that ancient Tax of Dangilt, they say
the same was lawfully imposed by his Majesty's royal progenitors on his
Subjects by mere royal authority without act of Parliament, to defend the
Seas and Realm against the Danes. Therefore his Majesty may now impose on his
Subjects the like Tax by his royal Prerogative.

To this objected president we answer, that there was a double kind of
tribute, called Dangilt, memorized in our Chronicles, and Writers. The first
Wigorniensis, and Matthew of Westminster, Anno 983. 986. 994. 1002. 2007. 1011.
871. 873. 1041. Polichronic. lib. 1. cap. 5. lib. 7. cap. 15. 16. Fabian part
6. cap. 194. 200. Graston pa. 162. 164. 165. Master Speeds Hist. lib. 7. cap.
44. sect. 20. 14. 22. 25. lib. 8. cap. 2. sect. 12. William Malmesbury de
Justicia regnt Angl. lib. 2. cap. 12. page 76. 77. John Salisbury de luctis
Anglie. lib. 8. cap. 22. Ad finem. Spilman glossar. page 199. 200. Flood. An.
pa. 10. 428. Rastalls terms de ley, Lit. Dangilt, Minshaws Dictionary, title
Dangilt. Seldens Mare Clausum, lib. 2. cap. 11. 15. Imposed by and paid to the
Danes themselves, as to conquering enemies, by way of Composition tribute, to
the which the King himself did contribute as well as the Subjects. This
Composition was first begun by Pusillamenus, King Ethelbert by ill advice,
Cretineus Archbishop of Canterbury, and other Nobles, Anno 991. This tribute
came to ten thousand pound, Anno 983. to as much 986. to 16994. to the like
102. to fourteen thousand pound, Anno 1607. to 300. out of Kent alone Anno
1012. to twenty eight thousand pound, Anno 1014. so Matthew of Westminster and
others write, that Ethelbert at five several times paid the Danes 113000.
pounds, and there was granted to him an annual tribute of 48000. pounds, to be
exacted of all the people, which properly was called Dangilt; which tribute was
exacted and collected by Hardicanute, whose Officers were slain at Worcester
in gathering up this exonerable tribute and importable, as Matthew of
Westminster, and Malmesbury term it, De hostibus regni Angl. lib. 1. cap. 12.
page 76. 77. And when King Swanus the Dane exacted this tribute from Saint
Edmondsbury, out of King Edwards Lands, which pleaded exemption from it, he was
stabbed to death with King Edwards sword in the midst of his Nobles, as our
Historiographers report. Nay, the Dangilt, which may be so termed because it
did gelt much and pare men's estates, and emasculated their spirits, has no
Analogy with this Tax of Ship Money.

For first it was not paid to a King, but to a conquering Enemy.

Secondly, it was paid by the King himself, as well as by his Subjects, and
that not as a debt or duty, but a composition or tribute, most unjustly
imposed and exacted by an usurping and greedy Enemy.

Thirdly, it was exacted by force and violence, not by Law or Right.

Fourthly, it was paid by the joint composition, and agreement both of King and
people, not by the Kings absolute power; that is evident by Florentinus
Wigorniensis, and Mat. Westminster, Anno 983. Danis omnes portus regni
infestantibus, dum nesciretur, ubi eis occurri deberet, decretum est a viris
prudentibus, ut vincerentur argento, qui non poterant ferro. Itaque december
millia librarum soluta Danorum avaritiam expleverunt, Anno 991. Quo audito,
datum est ijs tributum december millia librarum per Consilium Syricii
Cantuariensis Archiepiscopi, and aliorum nobilium Regni ut a crebis rapinis,
cremationibus and hominum caedibus quae circa maritima agebant cessarent, Anno
994. Tunc Aethelredus per Consilium suorum nobilium dedit iis pensionem de tota
Anglia collectam 16000. librarum ut a cadibus hominum innocentium cessarent,
Anno 1002. Rex Aethelredus Consilio suorum ob multas Injurias a Danis acceptas
tributum illis statuit, and taxati Angli fuere, ut pacem cum eis firmam
tenerent, cujus postulationem Concesserunt, and ex eo tempore de tota Angliae
sumptus illis and tributum quod erat 36000 lib. persolvebatur, Anno 1012. Dux
Edvardus and omnes Anglia primates utriusque ordinis ante Pascha Londini
congregati sunt, and ibi tam diu morati sunt, quousque tributum Danis promissum
quod erat 45000. l. persolverent. By all which it is evident, that this tribute
was not imposed by the Kings absolute power, and will, but by the common
consent of all the Peers in Parliament.

Fifthly, it was paid to save and ransom their lives and liberties from a
conquering Enemy, not to a Gracious Prince, to secure them from an Enemy.

Sixthly, it was then thought and called by all our Historians an Intolerable
grievance and oppression; which as Speed says in his History of Great
Britain, lib. 7. cap. 44. sect. 147. and others, emptied all our Land of all
our Coin in the Kingdom. Therefore in all these respects, no warrant at all
of the lawfulness of this Tax, but a strong Argument against it, to prove it
both an Intolerable grievance, and an unjust vexation.

The second Tax, called Dangilt, intended in the Objection, is thus defined in
Edward the Confessors Laws, Cap. 28. by that famous graund Inquest of twelve
of the principal men out of every County of England, appointed by William the
Conqueror in the fourth year of his Reign, as Hoveden, page 602. 603.
Dangilt was enacted to be paid by reason of Pirates infesting the Country, who
ceased not to waste it all they could. To repress this their Insolency, it was
enacted that Dangilt should be yearly rendered, to wit, one shilling out of
every Plough land throughout England, to hire those that might resist or
prevent the occasion or eruption of Pirates. The black Book of the Exchequer,
Lib. 1. cap. 11. thus defines it, to repulse the Danes; It was enacted by the
Kings of England in Parliament, that out of every hide of Land by a certain
perpetual Rent, two shillings should be paid to the use of Valiant men, who
had diligently and continually should guard the Sea Coasts, should repress the
force, and the assaults of the Enemy; because therefore two shillings rent was
principally instituted for the Danes, it was called Danes gelt. But that
president of the second sort of Dangilt, most insisted upon, is so far from
warranting of the lawfulness of this present Tax, that in truth it is an
unanswerable argument against it, if well considered; For the first, it was not
imposed upon the subject by the Kings absolute Prerogative, as this is; but
granted and imposed by Parliament, with the peoples consent, as Tunnage and
Poundage has been since.

This is evident by the Laws of the Confessor, Et ad eam insolentiam
reprimendam, statutum est dare geldum, reddi conjunctim, etc. If therefore at
first enacted to be paid yearly one shilling out of every hide of Land, to
find men to guard the Sea and Sea Coasts, against the Danes and Pirates, that
then this was certainly granted and enacted by Parliament, since the King alone
by his absolute power, much less to such a Writ as now issues, could make no
such Act or annual Law.

Secondly, by this the black Book of the Exchequer, H. 1. cap. 11. Ad
injurias igitur arcendas a Regibus Angliae, to wit, in Parliament, where the
Kings of England are said only to enact Laws, and the Laws then enacted are
said to be the Kings Laws and Acts, because his assent is unto them binding,
Statutum est ut de singulis hidis Iure quodam perpetuo duos solidos argenti
solverent ad usus nostros, cum factum and hoc legitur antiqua lege, etc.

If then this were enacted by a certain perpetual Law, and paid by an annual
Law, as by this Exchequer Record appears, then certainly by an Act of
Parliament.

Thirdly, by an addition to the Laws of King Edward the Confessor, Cap. 12.
cited in Hoveden likewise, Annalium posteriorum page 603. which says that
every Church wheresoever situated is exempted from this Tax, until the days
of William Rufus, because they put more confidence in the prayers of the
Church, than in the defense of Arms, Donec tandem a Baronibus Angliae auxilium
requirebatur ad Normandiam requirendam and retinendam de Roberto sue fratre
cognomine Curt. concessum est ei, non lege sanctum atque firmatum, sed hoc
necessitatis causa erat de unaquaque hide, quatuor solidos, ecclesia non
excepta: dum vero collectio census fieret proclamabat, ecclesiae suae reposcens
libertatem, sed nihil profecit, by which exemption of the Church and Church
Lands, from this Tax, and this request of William Rufus to his Barons, to grant
him their Aid, to gain and retain Normandy, which they did grant unto him
only for their present necessity, but did not annually establish and confirm
the grant of four shillings on a hide land by Law, as Dangilt first was
granted, and that upon the lands of the Church, as well as others, it seems
most apparent, that Dangilt and this Tax succeeding in lieu of it, and then
taken by grant, was first granted by Parliament, and that then no such Tax
could be imposed by Kings, even in times of war and necessity, to regaine
and preserve their proper Inheritance, but by Parliament.

Fourthly, by Sir Henry Spilman in his authorized Glossary, 1626. title
Dangelt, pa. 2009. 201 Mr. Seldom in his Mare clausum, 1636. dedicated to your
Majesty, and published by your Majesty's special command, 6. 2. cap. 11. 15.
who both include to this opinion, that the Dangelt was most imposed by royal
authority, but given by the peoples full consent in Parliament, and that the
taxes which succeeded were not annually granted nor paid, but only in time of
War, sc. Consult. etiam magnatibus and Parliament. secundum authoritatem, the
advice of the great men of the Kingdom and by the authority of Parliament. If
then this tax of Dangelt to defend the Seas was granted and imposed by
Parliament only with these taxes that succeed it, not by the Kings royal
prerogative without a Parliament: This tax for the Shipmoney also ought to be
thus imposed, and not otherwise even by thief present Examples.

Secondly, the Dangelt was not imposed or enacted in times of Peace, but if
War ceased, the tax also ceased in point of Law, and it is Justice according
to the Law and Philosophers rule, cessante causa, cessat effectus, that the
tax lasted and was granted, and lawfully taken, only during the wars with
the Danes, is most apparent by the fore-recited orders of Edw. the Confessors
Laws, cap. 12. by the black book of the Excheque lib. 1. cap 11. which adds
moreover, that when the land had the tax being under Wm. the Conqueror,
Noluit hoc annuum solvi quod erat urgenti necessitate bellicis tempestatibus
exactum, non tamen omnino propter Importunarum causas dimitti rerum: igitur
temporibus ejus vel successoribus ipsius solutum est hoc cum ab exteris
periculis bella vel opiniones bellorum fuere, which Sir Henry Spilman in the
very same words, in librum Glossarii.

If then this Dangelt though granted by Parliament, was due and collected by
right on the subjects only in time of foreign Wars, not in days of peace,
we have neither open War nor any opinion nor eminent fear of Wars with any
enemy, or foreign danger, but a direct president against it, we being now in
peace with all our neighbors,

Thirdly, the Dangelt though granted by Parliament, when it begun to be usurped
as an annual duty by the Kings of England, and that in times of peace, as well
as War, was complained of as an insufferable Grievance, and thereupon
formerly released to the subject by four several Kings: First by that good
and gracious King, Edward the Confessor, of W. Ingulphus our ancient Historian,
pa. 897. which Mr. Seldom in his Mare clausum, and Sir Henry Spilman in his
Glossarium title Dangelt out of him writes this, Anno 1051. when the Earth
yields not her fruits after her accustomed fertility, but devoured diverse of
her Inhabitants with Famine, Insomuch that many thousands of men dyed for want
of Bread, the most pious King Edward the Confessor moved with pity toward his
people Tributum graviss. the Dangelt dict, or by Angl. imperpetuum relaxavit,
for ever released to England the most grievous tax called Dangelt; some add
and report, that when his Lord Chamberlain had brought the Dangelt then
collected into his Bedchamber, and carried him in thither to see so great a
heap of Treasure, the King was aghast at the very sight of it, protesting that
he saw a Devil dance upon the great pile of money, and tryumphing with
overmuch Joy; whereupon he presently commanded it to be restored to the first
Owners, Ex tam fera exactions ista ne unum volint ritinere.

An excellent precedent both of Justice and Charity for your Majesty now to
imitate in these days of Plague and penury, qui enim in perpetuum remisit; To
wit, in the 28 year from that time that Swanus King of the Danes commanded it
yearly to be paid to his Army. In the time of King Ethelbert his Father,
Matthew Westmonaster. 105 Polycronicon. lib. 6. cap. 24. Fabian in his
Chronicle, page 150. and Speed in his History of Great Britain, Liber 8. cap.
6. sect. 7. page 410. with others record, that Edw. the Confessor discharged
Englishmen of the great and heavy tribute called Dangelt, which his Father
Ethelbert had made them to pay to the soldiers of Denmark, so that after that
day, says Fabian, it was no more gathered.

This good King releasing it to all England as a most cruel and heavy
taxation, and restoring that money collected by it, to his eternal Honor, we
hope his Majesty's gracious Successor can or will alter that which has been
discontinued 600 years and upwards, and can renew it by your prerogative as a
lawful duty, but rather for ever to remit it, and restore the money collected
as he did.

Secondly, it was released by Wm the Conqueror from requiring it, there was the
like tax for a time imposing a tax of 6s. on every Hide of land toward the
payment of his soldiers as a Conqueror, caused rebellion against him in the
Western parts, polycronicon lib. 7. cap. 3. Fab. 7. lib. cap. 119 220 page 300
308. did at the last release this tax of Dangelt but only in time of war,
as appears by the black book in the Exchequer formerly cared, which writes
thus: Ipse namque regnat tam diu quam terrae marisque predones hostiles cohibet
incursus, Cum ergo dominus solvisset terre sub ejusdem Regis Imperio noluit hoc
esse ann^^ quod solv. fuerit urgente necessitate bellicis tempestatibus exactum
nec tamen annuum non propter Inopinatos casus, dimitti ratione igitur
temporibus ejus, or rather never for ought appears by our Chronicles and
Records, vel successorib. ipsius solutum est, hoc est cum exteris gentibus
bella vel opiniones bellorum insurgebant: This Conqueror therefore releasing
the annual payment of it in time of peace, as unjust and unreasonable and
against the primitive institution of it, and demanding it only in time of
war, your Majesty coming to the Crown by lawful succession and Inheritance,
not by an absolute conquest as he, ought much more to release, and by no means
to demand any such tax in times of peace.

Thirdly, it was released by King Hen. 1. who as in the beginning of his reign
Spilmans Glossary, page 200 201. exempted the Charter of London, and all
Knights by his great Charter from Dangelt, to wit 12d out of every hide land,
or other land, which tax it seems by his laws, cap. 16. was granted to him
in Parliament, so he made a vow he would release the Danes tribute,
Polycronicon lib. 7. cap. 17. Spilmans Glossary, pa. 200. 201. and it seems he
was as good or better the^ his word; for Fab. page 7. cap. 239. pa. 327. and
4th story that he releases unto Englishmen the Dangelt that was by his Father
removed, to wit, by a grant in Parliament, as appears by Edw. the Confessors
laws, cap. 12. the laws of H. 1. stat. cap. 16. Hovedens annual part
posteriori, pa. 603. Spil. Glossary, pa. 200 201. and he released it, then also
we hope your Majesty cannot in Justice renew it or the like tax now.

Fourthly, it was released by King Stephen both at his Coronation, and a
Parliament held at Oxford; for Polycronicon. lib. 7. cap. 18. fol. 283. Fab.
part 7. cap. 232. 233. Hovedens annum part priore, Page 482. page 4. Spilman,
page 28. records, That when King Stephen was Crowned he swore before the Lords
at Oxford, that he would forgive Dangelt as King Henry before him had done, and
that Anno 1136. he coming to Oxford confirmed the Covenant which he had made
to GOD, the people, and holy Church in the day of his Coronation, the last
clause whereof was this; that Dangelt, Idest duos solidos quos antecessores
sui accipere soliti sunt in Aeternum condonoret, this he would for ever, that
is two shillings of every Hide land which his Ancestors were accustomed to
receive, and though Hoveden lay the brand of Perjurie on him. Hac principaliter
Deo venit and alia sed nihil horum servavit; Yet we neither find nor read in
our Record or Chronicles, that this tax of Dangelt or any of the like nature
was ever imposed since that time by him or any of his Successors, but by the
advice of the Great men of the Realm, Et Parliamenti authoritate, for so that
homo antiquar. Sir Henry Spilman concludes in his Gloss, page 201.

Being thus for ever released as an intolerable Grievance and exaction by these
four several Kings, and discontinued full 500 years and not revived. We
humbly conceive that these antiquated and so often so anciently released
exactions, or any of the like nature ought not nor cannot either in point of
Honor, Law, or Justice be revived, or imposed on Us by your Majesty now, and
that this Tax is successefully released as a Grievance though at first granted
by Parliament, can be no president to prove the lawfulness of this present
Tax, but a most pregnant Evidence against it, having no continuance or
allowance at all from any Parliament as Dangelt had.

Fifthly, admit that the tax of Dangelt were not imposed by Parliament but only
for Regal power, and that lawful in these ancient times, as is pretended, all
which we have manifestly proved void; yet it is no Argument at all to prove the
lawfulness of this present tax of Shipmoney and that in these respects.

First, that Dangelt was first imposed in time of War and destruction before
the government of the Kingdom was settled by good laws; therefore no president
for this in time of Peace, nor in this settled estate of the Realm, so long
continued in wholesome Laws.

Secondly, it was before any extant Statutes made against the imposing of any
Tax, tallage, aid, or benevolence, without common consent of the Lords
spiritual and temporal, and Commons in Parliament, this and diverse
fore-recited Acts of this nature against it, are ratified by your Majesty in
the Petition of Right.

Thirdly, it was before any subsidy of Tonnage and poundage granted to guard
the Seas and Sea Costs to exempt the subject from these, and all other taxes
for that purpose, and in truth it was the Tonnage, and poundage of those times
that after Tonnage and Poundage granted to guard the Seas, etc.

Fourthly, it was certain first 1s. afterward, 2s. every hide land, and that
certainly limited, this arbitrary and incertainly now, rated by any Parliament.

Fifthly, that was only charged upon lands, not goods, this on goods, and those
that have no lands.

Sixthly, it was not always annually paid, but in times of wars, as Spil.
Glossary, pa. 200 and diverse others fore-recited authors have it thus:

Now for 3. years together in time of peace, in these respects therefore we
humbly declare unto your Majesty that this principal president of Dangelt is
no warrant of all for lawfulness of this tax of Shipmoney, but a clear and
undeniable authority against it, in answering whereof we have deseated and
cleared, and so answered most other presidents.

The next Presidents that are objected, are those out of ancient stories, Mat.
Westminster. Anno 874 writes of King Alfred that when the Danesinvaded the Realm
with two Navies having prepared a Navy to set it to Sea, took one of the
Enemies ships, and put six more to flight, Anno 877. the enemies then
increasing in all parts, the King commanded Galies and Galeas 2 and long as
naves fubricari per Regnum, and prelio hostili adventantibus obcurrit imposit
is que piratio in illis viis maris custodiendis commisit Anno 877. and 992,
that King Alfred appointed guardians in several parts of the Realm against
the Danes, quo etiam tempore fecit Rex Alfridus totum Navile quod terrestre
prelio Regni sui tranquillitati providerat: that Anno 1008. Rex Ethelberdus
jussit parari, 310. hadis navem vnam and ex orto hi tum galeam vnam and
loricam, that Anno 1040. Rex Hardecanutus vnumquemque reminisci suas classes
orto mencos and singulis rationibus december naues de tota Angl. pendi precipit
vnde cuncti qui ejus advent. prius oraverunt exosus est effectus. It is added
with all that those Kings imposed ships and ship money on the subjects,
therefore your Majesty may do the like.

To these presidenrs we answer.

First, that they are only in time of open War, and invasion by enemies for
the Kingdoms necessary defense, not in times of peace.

Again the three first of them are only that the King provided a Navy,
commanded ships to be builded through the Kingdom, to guard the Seas, and
encounter the enemy as well by Sea as by Land, but speaks not that this was
done at the subjects own charge, nor that any tax was laid upon them for it,
or that the Command of his was obeyed, or that he might lawfully impose a
charge on his subjects without their common consent.

The fourth of them Anno 1008. says of Ethelbert, that he commands one ship to
be provided for, out of every two hundred and ten Acres; but says not, that
this command was not by the King absolute power only, for it might be by
common consent in Parliament agreed upon, for ought appears, or that this
command was just, and lawful; neither does he inform us that they were built:
Wigorniensis, Anno 1008. adds that they were accordingly prepared, and that
the King put these soldiers into them with Victuals, that they might defend
the Coasts of the Kingdom from the incursion of Forreyners, so that the
subjects were not only at the charge of the building of the ships, the King
for the Victuals, Mariners, soldiers, and wages, and in truth when all was
done, they had but bad success, for the same Historian says, that a great
storm arose, which tore and bruised the ships, and drove them a shore, where
Holuo thus burnt them, sic totius populi maximus labor periit, yet this
president though nearest of all, comes not home to the present cause.

First, because it was only to build ships in the case of necessity for
defense of the Realm, where there wanted ships to guard it, but now (thanks
be to God) we have ships enough already built to guard the Sea against all the
World.

Secondly, every 100 and ten Acres to build a ship of 3 Oars, unam triremem,
Wigorne writes, but not taxed to pay so much to build one as now.

Thirdly, the ships built, were set out not at the subjects, but at the Kings
charge and cost, therefore no president for this Tax to set out ships built at
ours.

Fourthly, the charge was certain, and equal every hide land, being equally
charged; this altogether uncertain and unequal.

Fifthly, this was after the time of Dangelt was set on foot, therefore not
done by the Kings absolute power, but by common consent in Parliament, as we
have proved Dangelt to be granted.

Sixthly, this president proves only that such a thing, was there commanded to
be done by the King, not that the King might or did lawfully command, or
enforce the subjects to do it without the common consent.

Seventhly, that was no annual charge put on the subjects, as that now, but
extraordinary, not drawn into practice since, for ought that appears,
therefore differs from this Tax of Ship Money.

Eighthly, no corporation, or goods, were then charged but only lands, and all
were ruled by the land they held, therefore this exte^ds not to justify the tax
of ship money, which is laid upon Corporations, Goods, and such as have no Land
at all.

Ninthly, no man was enjoined this under pain of Imprisonment, nor his goods
distrained, or sold if he refused it, for of this there is not a syllable,
therefore no president to warrant the present imprisonment, and destreining of
these men's goods, who now refuse to pay the tax, for that of Hardicanutus not
to be just, and lawful, but an illegal, and tyrannical Act, which says Mat.
Westminster. Anno 1040. made him odious and harefull to those that desired him for
their King, before Florentinus Wigorniensis, Anno 1040. adds that it was such a
tribute, that scarce any man could pay it, quapropter ab iis qui prius adventum
ejus desider abant magnopere factus est exosus summopere memorabile, and
importabile quod cum ciuibus extincti sunt, and such a grievous insupportable
Tax, as that was then reported, imposed by noe hereditary Prince, but a
foreign Danish Tyrant who dyed in drink amidst his cups very shortly after,
as all our Historians Record, be made or deemed a just and lawful president
for your Majesty row to follow (God forbid.)

Thirdly, we answer that all these presidents were before the government of
the Kingdom was settled, before any Charter, or other Statutes against Taxes,
and tallages, loanes, aids, and benevolences, without common consent in
Parliament, enacted before Tonnage and poundage granted, therefore insufficient
to this present cause.

Fourthly, neither of the presidents was ever adjudged lawful against the
subjects, and therefore not binding poor pr. 3. 93. Slades case, Cook 6. 75.
and they are very ancient.

Fifthly, all these were during the time of Dangelt, and involved in it, what
there we answer to that of Dangelt, is applyable to all, and each of these, and
that making clear nothing for this tax, as we have manifested, these
presidents must do the like.

The chief and most pertinent of all other since that of Dangelt, is that of
King John, 1213. who being injuriously deprived of his crown and Kingdom at
Rome by the Pope: at the earnest solicitation of that arch Traitor Stephen
Langton, Archbishop of Canterbury, William Bishop of London, and the Bishop of
Ely, these Prelates departing from Rome, went into France, and there conspired
with the Bishops, and King Philip of France against their own Sovereign; they
then solemnly published the deposition and sentence of the Pope given against
him at Rome, and then in the behalf of the Pope, they enjoined as well the King
of France, as all other men, as would obtain remission of sins: that uniting
themselves together, they would all go into England, in an hostile manner, and
depose King John of his Crown and Kingdom, and substitute another worthy man
in his stead by the papisticall authority, when as the Apostles never deposed
any Princes of their Crown and Kingdom, but commanded all to fear, and
submit to them, Romans 13. 12. 1 Timothy 13. 12. 1 Pet. 2. 13. Hereupon the King of
France prepared a very strong, and great Army and Navy to invade England both
by Sea and Land, to depose King John, and to get the Crown of England to
himself. King John having perfect intelligence of all these things, in the
month of March commanded ships excellently furnished, to come together out of
all the parts of England, that so he might with strong hand resist boldly those
that intended to invade England, he likewise raised, and gathered together a
very great Army, out of all England, and Ireland, and the places adjoining,
that Mat. Westminster. 1213. pa. 90. relates the story, Mat. Paris adds this unto,
that the King in the Month of March, caused all the ships out of the Ports of
England to be in readiness, by his Writ which he directed to all the Bayliffes
of the Ports in these words.

Johannes Rex Angliae, etc. praecipimus tibi quatenus visis istis literis eas
in propria persona vna cum balivis portuum ad singulos portus, and balliva tua,
and facias diligenter numerare equos aut plures and praecipuos ex part vestra,
Magistri omnium naviu illorum quorum naves sunt quot sunt, suos and naves suas
and omnia sua diligenter habea^^t illas apud Pert^^osum in media quadra gessis
be^^e ordinat. bonis and probis marinellis and been armatis qui ituri sunt in
servitium nostrum, ad liberationes nostras and tum habeas ibi memoriter and
distinct in breviate. fere post quorum nomina in singulis partibus inveneris,
and quorum ipsi sunt, and quot equos quilibet far potest and hunc facias
nobis scire quot and quae naves iis fuerunt in partibus suis die dominico primo
post cineres sicut praecipimus and habeas ibi hoc breve test meipso apud novum
templum tertio die Martii. These things thus done concerning ships, the King
sent other letters to all the Sheriffs of this Kingdom, in this form.
Johannes Rex Angliae, etc. Summoniens per bonos summonitores Barons, milites,
and omnes liberos homines and servientes vel quicunque sunt vel quocumque
tendunt qui arma debent habere, vel arma habere possunt, and qui homagium nobis
vel ligantium fecerunt quod sicut nos and semetipsos. and omni sua diligunt
sint apud Doveram Instant. clausam paschae been parati cum equis and armis, and
cum toto posse suo ad defendendum Caput nostrum, and capita sua and terram
Angliae quod nullus remaneat qui arma portare poterit sub nomine Culvertugii
and perpetuae servitutis and ut illi veniant ad capiendos solidos nostros
habend. victualia and omnia mercata balroarium mare venire facias ut sequantur
exercitum nostris hominibus belli. Ita quod mill mercarum de Ballivis alibi
teneatur; alit. tuipse tum sis ibi cum predictis summonitoribus and scias quod
scire volumus quomodo venerunt and qui non, and videas quod te est formale
venias cum equis and armis and hoc ita exequeris ne inde certificandum, ad
corpus tuum nos capere debeamus and inde habeas rotulum tuum ad nos
certificand. quis remanesrit.

These two Writs therefore being divulged throughout England, there came
together to the Sea coasts in diverse places where the King most suspected, to
wit, at Dover, Feverisham, and Ipswich men of different condition, and age
fearing nothing more then that report of Culvertage, but when after a few days
there wanted victuals for so great a multitude, the chief Commanders of the
Wars sent home a great company of the unarmed vulgar, retaining only the
Knights, their servants, and freemen, with the slingers, and Archers near the
Sea Coast; moreover John Bishop of Norwich, came out of Ireland with 500
soldiers, and many horsemen to the King, and were joyfully received of him.
All therefore being assembled to the battle, and mustered at Bark Downs, there
were amongst selected soldiers, and servants strong, and well armed 60000.
valiant men, who if they all had one heart, and one mind toward the King of
England, and defense of their Country: there had not bin a Prince under heaven,
against whom the King of England might not have defended himself safe:
Moreover, if the King of England resolved to join in battle at Sea with the
Adversaries, that they might drown them in the Sea before they could land; for
he had a greater Navy then, then the King of France, whence he conceived
greatest security of resisting the Enemies thus, Mat. Westminster. Paris History of
England, Anno 12, 13. page 224. 225. whose words we have related at large, to
clear and take off the edge of this Prime president, in answering which, since
all things will be cleared from these Writs, to press and provide ships; your
Majesty's Officers would infer the lawfulness of these Writs, for ships and
ship money now.

But under correction, we humbly conceive, that this president makes much
against, and nothing at all for these Writs, and taxes which now issue forth:
for

First, it was before Magna Charta, the taxes and Tallages, the Petition of
Right, or any Subsidy, Tonnage or poundage to guard the Sea, the statutes are
against them.

Secondly, it was only directly in Port-townes, that had ships, not to
Countries and places that had no ships, as the Writs are now.

Thirdly, it was to the Masters, and Owners of ships, not to any other persons,
who being exempted from all Land-service, were to serve the King and Kingdom
at this pinch and extremity at Sea, but these Writs reach to all, as well those
that have no ships as others.

Fourthly, it was only to furnish out their own ships, not to contribute
money to hire the Kings ships or others, or to build new of other, or greater
Burdens the^ these that had bin. These Writs now are contrary to this in all
these respects, at least in the intention and execution.

Fifthly, here was no leavying of money to be paid to King John, his Executors,
or Officers hands to provide, or hire ships as now, but every man was left to
furnish his own ships at his best rates, with his own provision and
Mariners, this quite otherwise.

Sixthly, though the Mariners and Owners of the ships were by this Writ to
furnish ships at their own proper costs, yet when they were thus furnished,
the King was to pay them both wages, hire, and freight, as his successors ever
had done, since when they pressed any of your subjects ships, or Carts for
War, or Carriage, these were the words, Iterum in servitium nostrum ad
liberationes nostras, which imply a Constancy as in all like Cases, yea of
your Majesty who now pay wages, and freight for all the Mariners and Merchants
ships, your press resolves as much, therefore this makes nothing at all, for
this enforceing the subjects to set out ships to guard the Seas, to serve your
Majesty at your own proper costs and charges, but point blanke against it.

Seventhly, this president makes it evident that those who are bound by their
Teunres, Lands and Laws of the Kingdom to serve the King, and defend the
Kingdom by Land, as all the horses, foot, Trained Bands, and Companies
throughout England, neither have bin ought to be charged with any Sea-services,
for here all the Land men are charged to serve the King, and defend the
Kingdom by Land, and these Seamen only by Sea, neither of them enforced to
serve or contribute to any service or defense both by Sea and Land, for that
had bin double and unreasonable charge, therefore now who are charged with
Land-service by these very presidents related, ought not to be taxed toward
the setting out of ships, but Seamen only are to guard the seas with such
ships as they have, and no other, upon your Majesty's pay, therefore these
Writs which charge Land-men to contribute to the setting out of ships, are
directly against these Presidents, and the Laws, and practice of these Laws.

Eighthly, These Land men that were not bound by their Tenures, and Lands to
fine, and yet were able to bear Arms, were to receive the Kings pay, and not
to serve gratis even in this necessary defense of the Kingdom, as these words
ad capiendum solidos nostros, resolve, therefore certainly Mariners in those
ships received the Kings pay too, and the owners freight as now they do from
your Majesty, and so the King, not the Subjects bare the charge of the shipping
then, and if so in that time, and age before Tonnage and poundage, then your
Majesty ought much more now to do it, since Tonnage and poundage is taken for
that purpose.

Ninthly, this Writ was in an extraordinary cause upon an extraordinary
Exigent, and occasion. The King was here deprived of his Crown and Kingdom,
most unjustly by the Pope, and the instigation of these treacherous Prelates,
and both of them given to King Philip of France, a strong Army both by Sea and
Land, was ready to invade this Land, yea, to take possession of his Crown, and
Kingdom, this extraordinary sudden Exigent put the Kingdom to these two
extremities of those Writs, there being therefore (blessed be GOD) no such
extraordinary occasion as then, this President being extraordinary, is nothing
pertinent to the Writs now in question, nor any proof at all of the
lawfulness of this Tax.

Tenthly, it was in a time of open, and eminent War, and danger, only upon
invasion ready to be made upon the Realm by a foreign Prince, and Enemy both
by Sea, and Land, therefore no proof of the lawfulness of the present Writs
and Taxes in time of peace. For instance,

First, Marshall Law may be executed and exercised by your Majesty's Commission
and Prerogative in time of War, but not in peace, as was lately resolved by
your Majesty and the whole Parliament in the Petition of Right.

Secondly, the Kings of England, in times of open War, might compel trained
soldiers and others out of their own Counties to the Sea coast, or other
parts, for the necessary defense of the Realm, but this they cannot do in
time of Peace. 1. E. 3. 4. 5. Parliament. M. Ca. 3.

Thirdly, the Kings of England, in time of foreign Wars, might by their
Prerogative Royal, seize the Land of all Priors, Aliens, when they were extant
in England, but that they could not do in times of Peace, 27. Asss. 48. 38.
Asss. 20. page 27. Asss. lib. 3. 2. Cap. 8. Ed. 3. 38. 27. E. 3. 16. 40. E. 3.
10. 14. H. 4. 36. 22. E. 3. 43. 21. H. 4. 11. 12.

Fourthly, that the Kings of England, when they had defensive Wars with
Scotland, they might lawfully demand, receive, and take Escuage of their
subjects, and so did other Lords of their Tenants, but in times of peace, they
neither did, nor could do otherwise. Lit. Sect. 199. 95. 98. 100. 101. 102.

Fifthly, the Dangelt there granted at first, by common consent of the people
in PARLIAMENT, was due only in the time of War, and not of peace; as
appears by the Premises.

Sixthly, subsidies and aides in former times were not demanded by KINGS, nor
granted in Parliament by the subjects, but in time of War, or to defray the
debts of the Prince, contracted by the Wars, 14 E. 3. Ca, 21. 15. E. 3. Ca.
12. 3. stat. 2. stat. 3. Ca. 1. 25. E. 3. stat. 7. 11. H. 4. Ca. 10. 32. H. 8.
cap. 23. 37. H. 8. 1. 14. and other fore-recited Acts.

Seventhly, the Goods of their Enemies may be lawfully seized by the King, and
his subjects, in time of open War, not in days of Peace. 2. R. 3. 2. 7. E.
4. 13. 44. Bro. forfeit 5. 22. Ed, 4. 45. 22. Ed. 3. 16, 17. 36. H. 8. Bro.
property, 38. Ployd. 384.

Eighthly, by the custom of Kent, and the common Law, not only the KINGS of
ENGLAND, but their Subjects too, may justify their entry into another man's
ground, and the making of Bulwarks and entrenchments therein of defense, or
offense of the Enemy in time of War, which they cannot do in time of Peace.
8. Ed. 4. 73. Bro. Custom 45. and trespass 406.

Ninthly, in times of War, men may justify the pulling down of Houses, and
Suburbs adjoining to a Fort, or City, for their better defense and safety, but
they cannot do it in time of Peace. 14. H. 8. 16. Bro. trespass. 406.

Tenthly, Your Majesty's Royal Progenitors, might appoint Merchants and
others, in time of Wars for your Armies, and Forts, without Commission, not
only in time of peace. 14. E. 3. 2. 19.

And so might Lords and Knights give Liveries in time of War, but not in
peace. 17. H. 4. Ca. 14. 8. H. 6. Ca. 4. 1. H. 4. Ca. 7. by these ten Cases
then to omit others,

It is apparent, that there is a vast and infinite difference in one, and the
selfsame Act in time of War, and of peace, that the same Act may be lawful
in time of Hostility; yet utterly unlawful in the days of peace, this
President is no Argument of the lawfulness of this Tax, nor any others of
like nature that can be objected, being only in time of War to prove the
tax of Ship Money, nor yet for pressing Ship-vales for carriage, and other
special service upon hire, and your Majesty's own wages, not at the Subjects
costs, as Carts, horses, Loyters are now often pressed in these times of Peace,
but a direct Argument against them, as the ten forecited Cases do evidence.
For any other pretended president that may be alleged to prove the lawfulness
of this Tax we intend for brevities sake here not to trouble your Majesty
with any particular Answer unto them, they being all answered fully in these
fore-objected, the prime and most pertinent that are extant, yet now, as we
have cleared them point blanke against those Writs and Taxes for Ship Money.

These, our most gracious Sovereign, are the Grounds, Reasons and Authorities
on the one hand, and Replies on the other: whereupon we humbly conceive these
Writs and Taxes of Ship Money wherewith we have lately been, and yet are
grievously burdened, to be directly contrary to the Laws and Statutes of this
your Realm, and the ancient Just hereditary Rights and Liberties of your poor
Subjects, and an intolerable Grievance and oppression to us all, which we
here in all humbleness submit to your Highness most just, and mature
consideration, not doubting but your Majesty, however formerly by some of Your
great Officers misinformed of the legalitie of it, will now upon the serious
view of this our humble, and dutiful Remonstrance which we in all Humility,
together with our selves prostrate at Your Royal feet, will alter Your royal
Judgment of this Tax, and conclude it to be against the Laws, and our Rights
and Liberties, we almost assure our selves, that your Majesty's most
Honorable privy Counsel, with the Reverend sage Judges of the Common Law, if
seriously charged on their Allegiance to your Majesty's Highness without
fear, or flattery what they conceive of the lawfulness of those Writs, and
Taxes, will upon the Consideration of these our Reasons and Answers to these
chiefest presidents, at leastwise upon the full hearing of the Arguments of our
Counsel learned in the Laws, ready to debate it more amply, if this short
Remonstrance be not satisfactory, with our Council may be fairly and
indifferently heard in all your Majesty's Courts of Justice where this Point
shall be drawn in question by us if occasion require, truly informing Your
Majesty, that they concur in Judgment with us in these, that these Writs
and Taxes are against the Laws and Statutes of this your Realm, the ancient
Rights and Liberties of us Your Subjects, which we know and are assured Your
most Gracious Majesty will inviolably preserve considering your promised Oath,
and Regal protestation, notwithstanding the misinformation and false
suggestion of any of Your great Officers, and Servants to the contrary; the
rather, because it was Your late royal Fathers Speech of blessed memory to all
the Nobles, Commons, and people in the Parliament house, Anno 1609. twice
Printed for an eternal monument of his Goodness, and real Justice by his
special Command, both by it self, and in the large Volumes of his peerless
Works: That a King Governing in a settled Kingdom leaves to be a King, and
degenerates into a Tyrant so soon as he leaves to Rule by his Laws;
Therefore, all Kings that are not Tyrants or perjured, will be glad to bound
themselves within the limits of the Laws, and they that persuade them to the
contrary, are Note well these fitting Epithetes.
Projectors, Vipers, and Pests, both against them, and the Commonwealth.

Upon the tender Considerations of these premises, we most humbly beseech Your
most Excellent Majesty, out of your Princely goodness and Justice since by
the great God of Israel commanded, he that rules over men must, and ought to
be just, ruling in the fear of God, and we all know and believe your Majesty
to be such a Ruler set upon Gods own Throne over us your people, for that
purpose, to do Justice and Judgment to all your loyal Subjects, in all Cases
whatsoever, especially such as are most public, and of greatest Consequence
to your peoples woe or weal, to exonerate Us your true hearted, dutiful
Subjects from these your Royal writs, and heavy Taxations, which we neither
can, nor dare any longer contribute to, for the premised Reasons. And we, as
our Common duty ever obliges Us, shall persevere to pray for your Majesty
long to continue a most just, and gracious Prince over us to our joint and
several comforts, and to Your own eternal Honor, in the surviving monuments
and Annals of your Fame.

A List of Ships with their Charge.
Ships. Tons. Men. Money. BArkshire 1 400 160 4000 Bedfordshire 1 400 120
3000 Bristoll 1 200 80 2000 Buckingamshire 1 450 180 4500 Cambridgeshire 1 350
140 3500 Cheshire 1 350 140 3500 Cornwall 1 650 260 6500 Cumb. and Westminster. 1 100
40 1000 Darbyshire 1 350 40 3500 Devonshire 1 900 360 9000 Durham 1 200 80 2000
Dorsetshire 1 550 220 5000 Essex 1 800 320 8000 Glocestershire 1 550 220 5500
Hampshire 1 600 260 6000 Huntingtonshire 1 200 80 2000 Herefordshire 1 400 160
4000 Kent 1 800 320 8000 Lancashire 1 350 140 3500 Lestershire 1 450 180 4500
Lincolnshire 1 800 320 8000 London 2 each 800 320 16000 Middlesex 1 550 220
5500 Munmoth 1 150 60 1500 Norfolk 1 800 320 8000 Northumberland 1 500 200
5000 Northampton 1 600 240 6000 North Wales 1 400 160 4000 Nottingham 1 350 140
3500 Oxford 1 350 140 3500 Rutland 1 100 40 1000 Salop 1 450 180 4500 South
Wales 1 490 200 4900 Stafford 1 200 80 2000 Suffolk 1 800 320 8000 Somerset 1
800 320 8000 Surrey 1 400 160 4000 Sussex 1 500 200 5000 Warwick 1 400 160
4000 Wiltshire 1 700 129 7000 Worcestershire 1 400 161 4000 Yorkshire 2 600 240
12000 Ships. Tons. Men. Money. Sum, 45. 20450. 98030. 228500.

FINIS.

