Ardua Regni: OR, XII. Arduous Doubts Of great Concernment to the KINGDOM,
Requiring a full and speedy Resolution: Propounded to M. Speaker, and the House
of Commons, Touching some of their late Proceedings against their own
Suspended, Ejected Members, and the Impeached Lords.

Printed in the Year 1648.

Twelve arduous Doubts of great Concernment to the whole Kingdom, requiring a
full and speedy Resolution: Propounded to M. Speaker and the House of Commons.
1 BY what Law or Authority can the House of Commons alone, without the
concurrent assent and Judgment of the King and Lords (the only proper Judges in
Parliament) eject or suspend the late impeached Members, or any other, having
no power of Judicature in themselves alone, nor authority to exanime Witnesses
upon Oath, as all other Courts of Judicature have, and being all equally
empowered, and entrusted by the Countries, Cities and Buroughs for which they
serve, and Cromptons Jurisdiction, p. 1, 2.
summoned to the Parliament by Writ, only to advise and consult together with
the King and Lords, about the arduous Cook 4: Instit: c: 1:
and urgent affairs of the Realm and Church of England, not to suspend, nor
expel one another the House? And being all but equals, whether one Justice of
Peace, of Assize, Judge of the Kings Bench or Common Pleas, Commissioner of
Oyer and Terminer, Sewers, Committee-man, Grand-Iury man, and the like, may not
as lawfully displace and thrust out another by their own Authority, without the
Kings, Parliaments, or Lord Keepers consents and advice, as one Commoner
suspend or put another out of the Commons House, without the Kings and Lords
assents, since Par in parem non habet imperium; and no Freeman by Magna Charta
ought to be outed of his Liberties or free Customs, but by the lawful
Judgment of his Peers (in a legal way) or by the Law of the Land; and that in
some Cook 4: Instit: c: 1: p: 11, 24:
Court of Record and Judicature, which the House of Commons alone is not; no
Writs of Error nor other Records being returned before them? and they being the
grand Inquisitors only of the Realm to inquire and impeach offenders, not
Judges to censure or condemn them, whose impeachments they are only to
transmit to the King and Lords to judge and determine.

2. Whether this ejection and suspention of Members by their Fellow Members,
without confession, or legal conviction upon Oath, be not a late dangerous
innovation, and tyrannical usurpation upon the Subjects and peoples Liberties,
depriveing them of the benefit and freedom of enjoying the counsel and advice
of those Knights, Citizens and Burgesses they have elected to Vote, assent and
dissent for them in Parliament? And whether the House of Commons be able to
produce any one ancient President before Queen Mary's Reign, in all the
Parliaments before or since the Conquest, to warrant their own sole
suspentions or expulsions of their own Members? If yea, let them then produce
them to satisfy the Kingdom, which expects an account of the justice of these
proceedings at their hands: If nay, (as confidently they cannot) then these
their expulsions and suspensions must of necessity be unwarrantable and merely
void in Law, and the ejected and suspended Members may and ought to be
readmitted, till they can produce sufficient evidence and proof of their sole
Authority to suspend or expel them without the Kings or Lords concurrence upon
full hearing and conviction of some horrid crimes, which really disable them to
be Members.

Every County, City and Borough ought 5. R. 2. Stat. 2. 0. 4. 7. H. 4. c. 14.
6 H. 6. c. 2. 32. H. 6. c. 6. 9. H. 8. c. 16. 4. E. 4. 44. b. Cromptons
Jurisdiction of Courts, Tit. Parliament.
ex debito Iustitiae, to send Knights, Citizens and Burgesses to consult,
debate, vote, assent and dissent for them in Parliament, and every of these
ought to come to the Parliament when elected, and to continue there all the
Session without intermission, unless he can reasonably excuse himself by
sickness or otherwise, neither ought he to depart the House, without special
license of the House (and King too anciently) first obtained, under pain of
being amerced and otherwise punished. And for this very reason every Member of
Parliament during the Session of Parliament and so many days before and after,
is privileged and exempted from all Arrests of his person, Dyer. f. 60.
because he is bound personally and constantly to attend the House till the
Session or Parliament ends, and his presence so necessary that he cannot be
spared, nor absent upon any occasion: for proof whereof you may consult Modus
Tenendi Parliamentum, Sir Edward Cook 4. Institutes chap. 1. and the
Authorities and Records there cited; how then their Fellow-Commoners, Knights,
Citizens and Burgesses can exercise or claim any legal Authority or
Jurisdiction to eject or suspend any Member lawfully elected without legal
trial, conviction and the concurrent judgment and consent of the whole
Parliament, (whereof the House of Commons is but one branch or Member) and that
upon such just and weighty reasons as may satisfy the Freeholders, Citizens,
and Burgesses, who elected them, whose persons they represent, and whose
Attourneyes and Proxies they are, and so ought not to be discharged of their
trust without their privity by any of their Fellow-Commoners, of the justice of
their expulsion or suspension, is a Moot-point which concerns the whole
Kingdoms Interest, and fit to be resolved by M. Speaker and the Commons of
the Long robe, in a substantial manner for the Kingdoms satisfaction: the
rather because the Speaker of the Commons House cannot be removed or changed
for sickness or other cause, but by the Kings and Lords assents, Cook 4.
Institut. page 8. and 39. H. 8. number. 38, 39. Baron Thorpes Case.

3. Seeing the Writ for "Elections of Knights, Citizens and Burgesses cannot be
altered in any thing but by Act of Parliament, and all Elections ought to be
freely and indifferently made, without any prayer or commandment of the King,
by Writ, Letter or otherwise, or of any other, and no Letter, Order, or
Ordinance can disable any freeborn Englishman of full age, and not attainted of
Treason or Felony to be chosen a Member, but only an Act of Parliament, as 4:
Ins^it: ch: (...) p: 10: 3: E: 1: c: 1 4: E: 4: 44:
Sir Edward Cook affirms, and the Statutes of 5 R. 2. Stat. 2. c. 4. 7. H 4.
c. 15. 32. H. 6. c. 15. determine. And seeing no Member anciently was or could
be dismissed or discharged from his attending the House till the Session or
Parliament it self was dissolved, as is apparent by all the Adjournments,
Prorogations, and Dissolutions of Parliaments and their forms. How can the
Commons House alone, by any clause of the Writ that summons them, or any Law or
Statute extant, suspend or expel any untainted Member, before legal trial
and conviction in full Parliament, without the Kings and Lords consents (with
whom they are chosen, and trusted to advise) against the tenor of the Writ, and
these Acts; and disable any from sitting or voting as Members, whom the
Freeholders, Citizens and Burgesses by their free Elections, and the Laws and
Statutes of the Realm have made as free and absolute Members in every
particular as themselves who vote them out, and their only Trustees and
Attorneyes; especially since the Commons whom they represent, and from whom
they derive their power and authority (as the Cromptons Jurisdiction, S: 1, 2:
Writ recites) gave them no such Commission at all to eject or suspend their
Fellow Members, "but only to consult of, do and assent unto such things as
should be ordained by the COMMON COUNCIL (not Commons) OF THE REALM in
Parliament, concerning the urgent and weighty affairs thereof for which they
were summoned to advise about; of which the ejectment or suspension of their
Fellow-Commoners certainly was none, neither in the Kings nor Peoples
intention, when the Parliament was first summoned, and they made their
elections of those they most confided in.

4. Whether the Statutes of 5. Eliz. c. 1. and 16. Caroli made this Parliament,
for preventing the inconveniences happening by the long intermission of
Parliaments, which enact; That every person which shall be elected a Knight,
Citizen, or Burgess, or Baron for any Cinque Ports, or any Parliament
hereafter to be holden, shall before he enter into the Parliament House, or
have any voice there, openly receive and pronounce the Oath of Supremacy before
the Lord Steward for the time being, or his Deputies: And that he which shall
enter into the Parliament House without taking the said Oath, SHALL BE DEEMED
NO KNIGHT, CITIZEN, BURGESS, NOR BARON for that Pailiament, NOR SHALL HAVE ANY
VOICE, but shall be to all intents, constructions and purposes, as if he had
never been elected, nor returned Knight, Citizen, Burgess, or Baron for that
Parliament, and shall Suffer such pains and penalties, as if he had presumed
to sit in the same without Election, return or Authority, be not a direct
resolution and judgment in print; that no Member of the House of Commons once
lawfully elected and returned, can be disabled to sit and Vote in the House by
his Fellow-Commoners alone, but only by Act of Parliament, or joynt-judgement
and concurrence of the King, Lords and Commons at the least? And whether the
taking away of the Archbishops, and Bishops Votes this Parliament by a special
Act of Parliament, be not a full Declaration of the Law in this particular,
that Members of Parliament (especially such as sit, Vote in others rights, and
behalfes) ought not to be ejected or unmembred by the Commons, Lords, or King
alone, in a divided capacity, but only by Act of Parliament, or by the Kings,
Lords and Commons joint assents and judgments, Cook 4. Instit. c. 1 Dyer. f.
60. a. 19. H. 6. 63, 64.
because the whole House of Parliament is but one entire body and Court, which
cannot be deprived of the presence or assistance of any one legal Member, but
by common consent of the whole Body and Court, and not of one branch or Estate
alone without the other, being contrary to all rules of reason and justice, and
proceedings in other Courts, where one Judge or Justice, or Commissioner cannot
be unjudged, unjusticed, uncommissioned by the others alone.

5. Whether the Commons late usurpations of such a power of suspending and
ejecting their own Members (especially without any legal hearing, and
examination, viva voce, of witnesses against them upon Oath, or admitting their
just defense) be not a president of very dangerous consequence, destructive to
the very freedom and being of Parliaments and Counsels, wherein all Members
Cook. 4. Instit. p. 8.
ought to have equal liberty and freedom of speech and advice, and to carry
all things by plurality of voices, and strength of argument, not by new devised
suspensions and expulsions, seeing it gives the strongest party and faction a
liberty to expel the weaker, and the lesser number backed with an armed-force,
a possibility not only to pack and make a House of what Members they think
meet, and eject and over-Vote the greater part of the House upon mere pretended
offenses and Misdemeanors, and then to vote and pass what Acts and Ordinances
they please in a thin and empty Parliament, when the major part of the Members
are suspended, ejected, or forced away? And whether all those Counties, Cities
and Buroughs, whose Knights, Citizens and Burgesses have been or may be thus
ejected, and the whole Kingdom too concerned in it, be not bound in point of
conscience and duty for the maintenance of the Honor, Freedom, and fullness
of Parliaments, and their own and the Kingdoms safety, publicly to protest
against it.

6. Whether the Commons suspending and ejecting of their Members by their own
sole Votes and power, gives not the King and Lords (who are Judges in
Parliament) a like Authority, jointly or severally to imprison, eject or
suspend the Members of the Commons House without the Commons consents as well
as the Commons, who have no sole Judicature, and are but inferior Members and
no Court of Parliament alone, and so justifies the Kings imprisonment, and
impeachment of any Members in this and former Parliaments, without the Lords or
Commons, who has a greater Jurisdiction over any Members of either House,
being his Subjects and the Modus tenendi Parliamentum.
chief Members of Parliament, who summons and dissolves it, then any Members
have over their Fellow Members and Subjects.

7. Whether those Counties, Cities, and Buroughs whose chosen Knights,
Citizens and Burgesses have been Co. 4. Institut. p. 1. 25.
thus illegally suspended or ejected without and against their privities or
consents, or any revocation of that trust and power wherewith they invest them,
are or can in point of Law or justice be obliged by any Votes, Orders or
Ordinances of one or both Houses, to which themselves, nor those they elected,
by reason of their illegal ejections or suspensions, either did or could
assent, and to which perchance they would not have assented, but voted against
and overruled by the majority and plurality of voices, if present and admitted
to give their Votes? The rather, because our 7: H: 6: 35: b. Bro: Wast: 81:
Dyer: 373: b.
Law Books are express, 'That Tenants in ancient Demesne were not bound by
Acts of Parliament heretofore, because they sent no Knights nor Burgesses to
the Parliament, which contribute to their wages, and so neither did nor could
assent unto them by their Representatives or themselves:' and, Quod omnes
tangit, ab omnibus debet approbari: the very ground why any Acts of Parliament
bind all being only this, 39: E: 3: 7: Cook 4: Instit: c: 1: 3: E: ^: 1: 4: E:
4 44:
Because all are consenting to them in their Knights and Burgesses. But those
whose Knights and Burgesses are either expelled or suspended the House, without
and against their good wills, neither do, nor can be legally said to assent to
any Votes, Orders or Ordinances, no nor Acts of Parliament made after their
expulsions or suspensions (recorded in the Iournall Book, which absentees are
not, and therefore are intended always present:) how then those Counties,
Cities, Buroughs, can be obliged by them, it behooves the Commons who ejected
and suspended them to declare in print, if they expect any future submission to
their Votes, or Taxes from them, to which they did not consent?

8. Whether, since every Knight, Citizen and Burgess is chosen and called to
attend the Parliament only by the Kings Writ, and may be amerced, fined, and
otherwise punished by virtue of the Writ it self, by the Statute of 5: R: 2: c:
4: the Common Law of the Realm and custom of Parliament, 3: E: 3: coram Rege,
Rot: P: 3: E: 3: 13: Stamfords Pleas, f: 38: 155: Cook 4: Instit: p: 15 to 22:
in case he absent himself or depart from Parliament without the Kings license,
unless he can honestly excuse himself to our Lord the King. And since the
words and form of dissolving Parliaments, The King licens^th the Lords and
Commons to depart, etc. 37: E: ^: n: 34: 38: E: ^: n: 18: 4^: E: 3. ^: 1^: 43:
E: 3: n: 34: 45: E: 3: n: 9: 13: and all dissolutions of Parliament since,
which intimates, that none but the King, who summons all Members to Parliament,
can remove or discharge them, without the Kings consent: whether the Commons
alone, without his or the Lords privity, can lawfully suspend, eject or
discharge any of their Members, upon any pretense?

9. Whether those Members who have been ejected or suspended in a thin and
empty, may not appeal to a full House of Commons for justice and restitution,
or at least wise to the upper House of Peers, to whom the power of Judicature
in Parliament appertains of ancient right, not only in the cases of Peers, and
other Commons, but even in cases of illegal Elections and Returns, and breach
of Privilege by imprisonment of Knights and Burgesses of the Commons House, as
is evident by ^: H: 4: Rot: Parl: n: 38: 31: H: 6: n: 25, 26, 27, 28, 29:
Thorpes Case.
some notable Records: And whether a Writ of Restitution lies not to the
Commons House to restore and re-admit an ejected or disfranchised Member, as
well as an ejected or disfranchised Citizen, Alderman, Mayor or Common
Councell-man; of which there are sundry presidents in Sir James Boggs Case, and
M. Estwicks of late.

10. Whether the ejecting of the Members lately impeached in the name of the
Army only, without any particular Prosecutor, personal summons, hearing,
defense, or once reading, debating, or overruling the Answer and Demurrer put
in by them in writing under their hands to the particular Articles of their
Charge, (even whiles a Garrison of their Prosecutors and Accusers are residing
at White Hall, the Mues, and Tower of London, and a guard of them attending at
the Commons door;) and the voting of M. Glyn Recorder of London and Steward of
Westminster, not only out of the House, but out of his Recordership and
Stwewardship (being his freehold) without ever being heard, or summoned to
answer any Charge or Articles conc^rning them; and that about 7. or 8. a clock
on a Saturday at night, when there were not above 51 present in the House, and
accommending others to his places, which are not in the Commons disposal, be
not an usurping or exercising of a transcendent arbitrary and tyrannical
power, contrary to Magna Charta, chapter 29. and Collected and recited in Rastall,
Tit. Accusation: and the Petition of Right.
sundry other Statutes, the fundamental Laws of the Realm, the Liberties of
the Subject, the Solemn League and Covenant, and sundry Remonstrances and
Declarations of both Houses; and an higher act of tyranny and injustice then
ever King Charles, Strafford, Canterbury, the Councell-Table, or High
Commission were guilty of in the worst times; for which those Members who did
it, are in point of justice obliged to give their absent and dissenting Members
(far the major part) and the ejected Members, those for whom they serve, and
the whole Kingdom satisfaction and reparation, to prevent the like proceedings
against other Members, and Freemen who are no Members, who may justly fear far
harder measure from them upon all occasions, since they are so arbitrary and
unjust toward their own dear Members, some whereof have deserved as well, and
done as good service for the Realm and Kingdom, as any now sitting in the
House.

11. Whether some of the Commons impeaching of their own Members, Lords and
Citizens of high Treason, for sitting and acting in the Houses, or by Orders,
Votes and commands of one or both Houses, only for their self-defence against
the Armies violence, and the fugitive Speakers and Members who engaged with
them, who were not a Parliament in the Army, and not half so many as those who
continued sitting in the Houses, be not a dangerous and inevitable impeachment
of themselves, both Houses of Parliament, and all those who have acted under
them by virtue of their Ordinances and Commissions, ever since the Kings
departure from the Houses, in military, judicial or criminal affairs, for
Traitors and high Treason, and a nulling of all Ordinances for Indemnity, who
have no other Plea in Bar, or Justisication to bear them out, or protect
them against the King, or any other that shall indict, impeach, sue or question
them now or hereafter, but only this, that what they spoke, voted, ordained,
did or acted, was in, or by authority of Parliament, or in obedience to the
Votes, Orders, Ordinances or Commissions of one or both Houses; which Plea
these impeachments utterly subverting, must of necessity expose all and every
Member of both Houses, and all who have acted for, or adhered to them during
these wars, to the mere merciless tyranny of the King and his Cavaliers, if
ever they prevail in present or future times, and declare them guilty of high
Treason; and so dis-ingage and discourage all men from adhering to, or acting
for or under them any more, to prevent the guilt and danger of high Treason:
which seriously considered, may justly engage both Houses, and all those who
have cordially adhered to, and served under them, to question and impeach those
of high Treason, who were the plotters and contrivers of these Impeachments of
so dangerous and destructive consequence to both Houses, and all their cordial
friends and adherents, who stand amazed at such proceedings.

12. Whether some Commoners impeachment of seven Lords at once of High Treason,
and suspending them the House, be not a plot of Cromwell and the Levellers, to
destroy and abolish the House of Peers, by leaving them not Members enough to
sit and make an House by degrees? and what assurance have the few remaining
unimpeached Lords, if they condemn or eject those now impeached for what they
did or acted in or by authority of Parliament for their own defense, and the
Houses against the Army, that their turns and impeachments will not be next,
till they be all impeached, ejected and made no House, since there is an
apparent design in many of the prosecutors of the Lords impeached to have no
House of Peers, or Lords at all to overtop them, that they may be the only
Lords and Kings themselves, and command and dispose of all things at their
pleasures, as they have for the most part done of late, before and without the
Lords concurrence. If so, (as is very probable) it will be wisdom in the House
of Lords to consider and prevent this Design in time, before it be too late,
and to make no Presidents to destroy themselves, and the very freedom and
being of Parliaments and Peers, after so vast an expense of blood and treasure
to defend them against the King and his armed party, whose designs are now
almost accomplished against them by those Heads and Hands which of all others
we did least suspect, who reallize and verify this Adagy to the full, Nulla
fides pietasque viris qui castra sequantur. To close up all; Let the Commons
consider well of S. Paul's caution, Gal. 5. 15. But if ye bite and devour one
another, take heed that ye be not consumed one of another.

FINIS.

