VIII QVERIES Upon the late Declarations of, and letters from, the ARMY:
Proposed to all true Lovers of their Country and Parliaments, And conscientious
Soldiers in the ARMY.

1 John 4. 1. Beloved believe not every spirit, etc.

London, Printed in the Year 1647.

Eight Queres upon the late Declarations of, and Letters from the Army;
proposed to all true lovers of their Country and Parliaments, and conscientious
Soldiers in the Army.
1 Whether an whole well-minded and well-meaning Army, may not by specious
pretenses be abused to carry on the ambitious and pernicious designs of some
persons they most confide in, as well as others; and be drawn on by degrees to
act and demand that at last, which their judgments and consciences at first
abhorred, as well as Hazael, 2 Kings 8. 12, 13? And whether all who have
religious and specious pretenses in their mouths, have the like real
intentions in their hearts and reins, which the Anabaptists proceedings in
Germany disprove, who had as holy and just pretenses, as any now inclining to
their way and opinions?

2. Whether an Army, formerly dutiful and meritorious, yet now so far
distempered, as to rule (if not overruled) their own General and Officers; to
seize and remove the Kings own person, (with the Commissioners of both houses
appointed to attend him) from the place designed for his residence by the
Parliaments of both Kingdoms (upon mere ground-less and proof-less surmises,
never revealed to any in Authority) without the Parliaments privity, in high
affront of their privileges and power; endeavoring to overawe, if not to
force the Parliament which raised them, by marching up against them; laboring
to dis-ingage the People, City, and Kingdom, from; and engage them against it,
contrary to their solemn Covenant; refusing to disband for the Kingdoms ease
and peace; and acting for the present by their own mere power and will; can be
a probable and fitting instrument of redressing those Arbitrary and injurious
proceedings in the Houses, Committees, and others, of which they now complain?
And whether their refusal to dis-band, or to remove farther off from London, or
obey the Parliaments present just Commands (upon what ever specious printed
pretexts) be not a very sad public president, likely to conjure up a spirit of
Universal Disobedience to Parliaments, Magistrates, and superiors of all
sorts throughout the Kingdom, to its utter ruin, if not timously prevented,
dis-liked, opposed by all well-wishers to the weal and tranquillity of Church
and State?

3. Whether 31. H. 6. 1. 1
Jack Cades and his confederates traitorous forcing of the Parliament in former
times, upon popular pretenses; Henry Jermins, Percies and Gorings Treason, in
practicing to bring up the Northern Army toward London, to overawe and force
the Parliament soon after its commencement; and the Kings coming to the
Commons House with an armed Train of Cavaliers, to demand the five Members,
Jan. 4. 1641. ( An Exact collection, etc. p. 35. etc.
Voted to be a Treasonable Act, and high breach of the Rights and Privileges
of Parliament, and so resented by the whole Kingdom, though varnished over
with most specious pretenses, and the public good) will not be all justified,
if not exceeded by the Armies seizing and removing of the Kings person,
refusal to disband, and marching up to London, to overawe the Parliament
demand Members, and dis-ingage the City and people from them? And how their
Offenses can be differenced or justified, where their proceedings and pretenses
are the same?

4. Whether the Armies present disbanding now they have proposed their
grievances and demands to the Houses, in a dutiful and peaceable manner upon
receipt of their Arrears, without marching nearer London, to ease the Kingdom
of new taxes and Free quarter, to expedite the relief of Ireland (interrupted
by their mutiny) and prevent new civil broils, be not a more conscientious,
just, probable, safe, and honorable way to obtain all their just demands on
their own and the Kingdoms behalf, from both Houses, then their refusal to
disband, or marching up to London? Which as it will savor of high
disobedience, violence, and breach of privilege at the least, if not of some
dangerous design of higher nature; so it will certainly endanger the
adjournment or dissolution of the Houses, the pillaging of the City, the
imbroyling of the Kingdom in a new War; blemish the Armies former reputation,
and fidelity, encourage Malignants, grieve the well-affected, and procure more
mischiefs then it can redress; and bring* just damnation on the contrivers of
it; who in point of conscience ought not to do evil that good may come of it.
And therefore the justification of their proceedings and not disbanding from
the Scots (whose proceedings here though more dutiful and respectful to the
Parliament then theirs, were yet much declaimed against by them and their
party) and Netherlands, who raised Forces, as the Parliament did now, only in
case of absolute necessity for their own and Kingdoms necessary preservation
against their oppressing Princes, when there was no other remedy; is no ways
suitable to their or our condition, in relation to the Parliament; who need no
Armies, nor external violence (especially from their own friends) to enforce
them to do justice and redress all public grievances, which they have
solemnly covenanted to perform and will accordingly execute, though you
disband?

5. What assurance, can the Parliament, City, or Kingdom receive from a
discontented Army, holding their guns and Weapons in their hands, if not
balanced by an equal armed force for their defense, if all their present
demands, that are just and reasonable, be granted; they will not afterward
proceed to demand that which is neither honorable, just, nor reasonable for the
Parliament to grant, and yet dangerous to deny, for fear of violence and new
tumults, since their demands do daily multiply; and some of their Heterodox
Chaplains, Officers, and Soldiers in Anti-Magistratical Principles, Writings,
Speeches, engender a just fear, of such subsequent demands, of whose justice or
reasonableness themselves will be the Judges, not the Parliament? And how they
shall be ascertained that when they have demanded and removed some Members
(opposite to them and their proceedings, perchance only out of grounds of
conscience, which they grant must not be forced, especially in Parliaments,
where there should be most freedom both of speech and Votes) that they will
not demand and remove all others who are not of their party or confederacy, and
recruite the House with new members of their own, and thereby gain a power
(which some fear is their real design) to change the Laws and Government of
Church and State, and dispose of all Offices and places to their own Creatures,
as they have done for the most part in the Army? To avoid which justly feared
mischief they have cause both in conscience and honor to disband upon the
Parliaments command which raised them. The rather, because their refusing to
disband till such Members and others whom they intend to impeach as
incendiaries and enemies to the Army, be tried, will be contradictory to their
own principles and desires, of free and impartial Public Justice; which cannot
be reputed free or unbiassed, when the Parliament and Judges shall be awed and
terrified with an whole Army of Accusers and prosecutors; by whose over-awing
power, Terror, Menaces (the highest Champarty and Maintenance that can be)
justice will probably if not certainly be perverted, the Judges, witnesses, and
parties terrified, mere innocents condemned; and Members of the Armies party
(though perhaps justly impeached of higher crimes and misdemeaners then any of
their opposites) escape either un-impeached or un-censured, contrary to their
present pretenses.

6. Whether the Armies complaint of undue elections if impartially examined by
impartial Judges, will not light heaviest on their own friends and members the
greatest sti^lers in, and the occasions of them? Whether their general
exceptions against elections in Cornwall and Wales, proceeded not from their
Chaplain Mr. Peter's (who has gained more by the wars then any two Presbyterian
Ministers) whose sickness hindered his presence at them, to bring in Members of
his own party? And whether the Officers and Soldiers of the Army themselves,
have not in some places, deprived the people of their freedom in elections, to
bring in themselves, to strengthen their party in the House? And if so (as may
be proved) they have most cause to complain against themselves; there being no
complaint or Petitions that we hear of against the unjustness of any Elections
in Cornwall, or Wales, though many against the Elections of diverse of their
party in other parts; and they must disband their Army, that so all future
elections may be free as they desire.

7. Whether the Independent party and some of the Armies friends, have not been
more arbitrary, exorbitant, and irregular in their Votes and proceedings in the
Houses, Committees, and several Employments; disposed of and fingered more of
the Kingdoms Treasure; carried and disposed of more Offices and gainful places,
received greater rewards, Salaries, and far more and better pay for the most
part, and pursued their own ends and interests more then any others they
asperse? And whether their private listing of many thousands to recruite the
Army since the wars ended without the Public knowledge of the Houses, to
increase the Kingdoms charge, gives not the Parliament and others just
occasion, (in regard of the Armies present and late actions) to suspect the
carrying on of some desperate and destructive designs in England, rather then
any hints or jealousies or other private listings of men without authority of
Parliament, (suggested but not proved in the fourth page of the late
Declaration.) And whether such new Recruites can with equal justice take and
Challenge Arreares, as well as those gallant Soldiers employed in action all
the Wars; or any of the Army challenge pay from the time they were voted to
disband, for continuing together against the Houses Order, and marching up
against their Privileges, which they were raised to defend?

8. Whether the Armies late proceedings, if not qualified by their speedy
disbanding and future Obedience to the Parliament; will not eclipse and nullify
all their former merits, glory and esteem, in the eyes of all the world; draw
perpetual scandal on the Profession of Religion, amaze all their friends abroad
and at home, endanger the loss of dying Ireland; rejoice the hearts, elevate
the hopes and accomplish the designs of our Malignant Prelatical and Romish
Enemies; bring perpetual shame, if not utter ruin to our Nation; and in
conclusion to the chief Contivers and Fomenters of them? If so, We confidently
hope, that all Conscientious Officers and Soldiers in the Army, upon second
thoughts, and serious perusal of these Queries, will give over their intended
designs and distand, as many of them have done; and if any obstinately
persevere to force the Parliament and infringe their Privileges, or disburb
the Public peace; that the whole Kingdom, City, and Country, according to
their solemn Covenant, will Unanitnously withstand them, and chastise their
dangerous disobedience to the Highest Powers; which many fear they project to
overawe and subvert.

FINIS.

