UNITY, TRVTH and REASON.

Presented in all Humility Petition-wise to the Honorable, the Knights,
Citizens and Burgesses for the Commons House of PARLIAMENT.

By some moderate and Peace-desiring Ministers, for the mo(...) and certain
reconciling of the C^^^ch d(...)s.

LONDON.

Printed for Thomas Underhill, in the year, 1641.

To the READER.
IT was not at first intended that this following Discourse presented
Petition-wise should fly so pub likely: but such modesty and truth withal are
both so evenly expressed, that the eyes of envy, malice, and uncharitableness
(which usually are most quick upon actions of this nature) cannot take just
advantage, as far as we can apprehend. We therefore on the behalf of our
selves and others, do humbly crave, that what is here presented with a
dexterous intention may not have a sinister acception.

TO THE HONORABLE the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses for the Commons House
of Parliament.
Humbly represents,
THAT Episcopacie is a frame anciently raised out of the Pastoral place, built
up with Chancellors, Deanes, Archdeacons, Commissaries, Surrogates,
Officialls, Apparitors, etc. And further finished with their Consistories,
High Commission, Oath Ex Officio, Books of Canons, old and new, Books of
Recreation and Liberty, Ceremonies, and manifold Innovations enlarged,
especially in latter times by violent and intemperate Spirits, which have
pursued many of the best lived of the Ministry and People, with too much heat,
insomuch that many choice Men have bin wormed out, the most scandalous
cherished, Doctrine adulterated; the fire of zeal quenched, Tyranny
exercised, especially over the Consciences of their Brethren; Primitive
Discipline defaced, the judgments of many engaged for Episcopacie Jure divino;
Civil Wars encouraged (the most dangerous and hazardous undertaking of a
State.) In the mean time the Prelates not sufficiently sencible of the
dishonor of our gracious Sovereign, and security of these happy and
Illustrious Kingdoms. Nay, besides all this, many of the late
Church Governors have also complied too much with the Popish Faction, and
drawn (quantum in illis) the odium of the late disturbances upon his Majesty
(let them pretend what they please) and dishonor upon the Protestant Religion,
in the eyes of the Romish party, and the whole world by their tongues, pens
and endeavors.

May it therefore please this Honorable House to take Episcopal Government
into your grave and serious Consideration. And if it may stand with the ways
and customs of this Honorable House, That our Petition may be presented to
the House of the Lords, and finally to his most excellent Majesty.

1. First, that a speedy survey may be taken of this old-ruinous and decayed
building by a Commission ad inquirendum, concerning the truth of the numerous
Complaints from all parts of this Kingdom. When God visited Sodom in
Judgment, he first sent his Angels to inquire of the truth of the crimes
thereof.

2. If upon just and exact trial the whole building from the foundation to the
highest part of the superstructure, prove sound, God forbid any moderate spirit
should desire the alteration of a Government so long established: but if (in
toto composito) there be an universal dissolution and weakness of all parts,
that then the old decayed frame may be taken down; and such a new model
propounded as may most nearely agree with the Word, the Apostles, and Primitive
times: with the Assistance of a select Company of grave pious-learned and
Orthodox Divines, in nature of a National Synod, which may be chosen by your
singular care and wisdom, gathered out of all parts of the Kingdom, and
authorized for that purpose. And in case it may stand with the pleasure of his
Majesty, and this High and Honorable Court of Parliament, that some Scots and
Irish Divines may be also admitted to such Assembly, which may happily tend,
not only to mutual information of themselves, but to a more firm obligation
of all members in these Churches in Civil or Ecclesiastical affairs under
our most gracious Sovereign as Supreme Governor unto a more firm union and
obedience.

Notwithstanding all this, it is not the desire of your Petitioners, with the
Sons of Zebedee, that fire should come down from heaven and destroy this
frame of Government; neither any illegal or precipitant violence should
demolish it; such reverence do we owe to the memory of those
industrious-pious-learned Bishops, which have sometimes sealed the testimony of
the Gospel with their blood. And to our happy Princes (whose Names are ever
blessed with us) who have yielded all Princely indulgence unto Episcopal
dignities. Only thus far do your Petitioners humbly sue, for as much as there
is such a considerable number of grievances and complainants, through the whole
Kingdom, (as may appear by the numerous Petitions and Remonstrances to this
Honorable House,) That in the mean time whilst a Commission issues out for a
more full discovery of Corruptions in Ecclesiastical Government and Ministers,
notoriously scandalous, the abovenamed Ecclesiastical Assembly be called, and
Episcopal Governors allowed a fair and legal trial by Ministers, men of
their own Order (as Lords are tried by their Peers) but impartial, and not
engaged by the dignities and preferments of the times.

And if it may not savor of sawcines, or too high presumption, May it please
this Honorable House, to require the Episcopal party to assign some of their
own choice to answer in such a well constituted Assembly, and to give liberty
to the Presbyteriall Disciplinaries, as in Scotland, or them of the Pastoral
and more Independent way, as in New England, to come in and oppose, only give
leave we beseech you that the Word may be the moderator in this National
Synod. And if we may not be thought to presume upon this intelligent and
Religious House, we humbly sue, First, that in such a well disposed Assembly,
the Doctrine of the Chnrch may be cleared and explain.

Secondly, the Discipline questioned. First by what tenure Episcopacie holds,
whether Jure Divino, vel Ecclesiastico? If Divino, it must necessarily stand
for ever. Secondly, if Ecclesiastico whether it be not alterable according to
Corruptions attending it, or the varying Constitutions of particular Churches,
or the like considerable Circumstances?

3. If alterable, whether this Government may safely be altered in this Church
of England?

4. If it may be altered, what Government can be propounded more nearely
agreeing to the Word, and more fit for these times?

5. Whether Christ left any certain and necessary Discipline to be observed in
his Church for ever?

6. Whether Examples, which have not grounds on express Rules, or necessary
Consequences out of those Commands do bind the Conscience to subjection, as to
an Ordinance of Christ's?

7. Whether it be not fit for Christians rather to follow the Examples of
Christ, his Apostles, or the purer times for Presidents, then the more
degenerate and corrupt times of the world?

When these or the like Questions are well discussed and decided, The
confirmation of such Acts of Assembly as shall be then determined, we submit
unto the wisdom of this Honorable House.

In the mean time most noble Patriots, suffer not the glory of our Church to
set under a cloud. We have betrusted you with our selves, and all ours, fail
us not in the maine, (viz) in the matters of Religion, neither Doctrine not
Discipline.

Begin we beseech you where your forefathers left, in the days of King Edward
the 6 th. Let the noble blood of your Ancestors which runs in your veins
induce you to perfect the glorious beginnings of your renowned Predecessors.
Never think the Commonwealth can be well healed, unless the Church be also
Cured. Did not our sufferings in the Church lead the way to yours in the Civil
State? If you conceive your work is fully ended, when the Commonwealths
grievances are removed: God himself will not take it well at your hands to
leave Sion weeping, and none comforting her. You have come on nobly and like
religious Patriots, in giving fair hopes of easing the distressed part of the
Church: Go on like your selves, and the God of Heaven prosper you. Let not
golden Balls turn you out of the way: Neither Syrenian music, nor Crocodile
tears of the degenerate part of the Tribe of Levi captivate your judgments.
You have the whole Nation engaged to be Servants unto the King for ever in a
stricter bond, if you his great Council of State, according to his trust in
you, see Religion freed from the complaints and grievances of it. It is true,
Episcopal Governors, with their nearest friends, think it scorn to come to
trial of their title. We are not ignorant of many of their choysest Arguments:
but if you please with patience to survey them, you shall find they have
studied fallacies more then demonstrations. It is true, they pretend 1. the
Word: 2. Antiquity. 3. Reference to our Laws. 4. Order. 5. Suppression of
Errors, Schisms, and Heresies. 6. Encouragement to Learning. 7. Conformity of
Episcopal Government unto Monarchy. All specious pretenses we confess, like
the Grapes and fruits of Sodom: but if you touch them they fall to Ashes.

First, the Word, no better plea in the world, nor stronger Argument, if the
pontificiall side would show but one express Command or necessary inference
for Episcopacie over the Clergy (it is our meaning) to be a constant and
standing office in the Church: we should think our selves deserved to lose our
Ears, liberty, life and all, for speaking against a Law of Gods own making.
But whilst the great Clerks of the Kingdom in this multa dicunt, nihil
probant. We must desire this Government (but in an Ecclesiastical assembly)
may go to the question.

Secondly, Antiquity, a plea which would well have served in the days of
Hezekiah and Josiah for keeping up the High Places, because they had continued
from the days of Solomon or before. If this Argument were sufficient, the
Reformers in the days of Edward the 6. and Queen Elizabeth of famous memory
should have staid their hands from taking away such ancient Ceremonies as had
continued many hundred years.

Upon this ground an old ruinous House which is rotten from the foundation, to
the highest part of the superstructure should not be pulled down; upon the like
ground old Vines, where the humidum radicale is quite gone, and fruit ceases,
should not be plucked up, nor others planted in their room.

The brazen Serpent was at the first erected upon better warrant then ever
Episcopacie, yet when it grew worm-eaten with corruption of Antiquity, Hezekiah
made bold to take it down, and the fact is fronted with the name of Zeal unto
Immortality.

Thirdly, Reference to our Laws, It is true, Episcopacie is too truly and too
much Inter-woven with the Statutes of this Kingdom; Not that Episcopacie
strengthens the Laws, but the Laws Episcopacie. So that it seems no necessary
Argument for this dignity standing Statu quo nunc, but rather serves for a good
caution that in the taking down of this old frame, the Statutes of the Land
suffer no violence, which we doubt not but by the wisdom of this Honorable
House, may be well contrived.

Fourthly, Order, a great deal of reason for it, if Order do not violate that
eternal and indispensible Rule of charity, unto which the Episcopal
Government has done much violence, by their Pride and Tyranny over the
Consciences of their Brethren. In such case we desire the Word, Christian
Liberty and Charity may be preferred before any pretended Order in the the world.

Fifthly, Suppressing of Schisms, Errors, and Heresies; we deny not but when
Episcopacie was first raised and instituted in the Church, there was such a
politic intention, but Where is the Success? Have not Corruptions, Schisms,
Errors, if not Heresies, more grown under the shadow of Episcopacie, then under
any other Reformed Protestant Church in the world?

Let the Remonstrance of the Ministers speak unto this, together with the
Numerous Complaints from all parts of the Kingdom. It is not to be denied, but
as these Weeds, so much precious Corn has grown within the bounds of
Episcopal Government, not that we must thank the smiles and indulgence of the
Pontificiall party, but their frowns, brow-beatings, and manifold oppressions,
or rather God himself, who multiplied the Israelites under Pharaohs Tyranny
and Cruelty.

Sixthly, Encouragement to Learning, Give loosers leave to speak, let the
inferior Clergy of the Kingdom (as they are usually called) come in, and
speak what they usually feel in their own experience; Does not the burden and
heat of the day lie upon poor Parsons, Vicars, Lecturers, and Curates? What
encouragement to Learning, whilst a few Bishops, Deanes, Archdeacons, etc.
swallow up the best and riches^ part of Ecclesiastical maintenance, taking
little or no pains, in feeding the souls of the people, studying only
Lawsuits; how to rise higher in the world, and to sow dissension betwixt
Kingdoms, Princes, and their Subjects, when the inferior Clergy in the mean
time must sit below the salt, gather up the Crumbs from under Episcopal Tables,
and account it favor enough to have a nod from a Bishop; nay happily less
then that, an hollow-hearted leave or License to use a Pulpit in his Diocese.

Seaventhly, A Conformity of Episcopal Government unto Monarchy. We confess
the Conformity is too much and too near. For Kings send out Writs in their
own Names (as it is fit they should) so do Bishops. Kings Rule and Command, so
do Bishops: yet this Conformity in Government unto Monarchy, cannot induce
our Charity to think they (at least many of them) can cordially affect Supreme
Government whilst so many in latter times have complied so much with the Pope
in all Papal usages, the great enemy to all Kingly Government. How can we
judge, but if oppertunity served, they would fall in with the Pope in matter of
Supremacy, as in other his Traditions; Besides our Bishops in late days have
cast the odium of all unacceptable Commands upon the King, a point of
Bishopcraft we confess, but never used by faithful Statesmen to their
Princes, since the beginning of the world, till these our days. Whereas, we
(though the lowest of the Tribe of Levi) dare protest unto this Honorable
Assembly, we could be contented to wipe off with our blood the least aspersion
upon the honor of our most gracious Sovereign, whom we sincerely value above
all Princes of the world.

But now most noble Senators, mistake not, we beseech you, the candor and
ingenuity of our intentions, we do account it an inexpiable fault to prescribe
unto you that must prescribe Laws to us; only we prostrate what we have
propounded in all hvmility at your feet, wherein we have both expressed our
grievances and Petitions. Notwithstanding all abovesaid, we are not so fallen out
with Episcopal Government: but if it seems good to his Majesty, and this High
and Honorable Court of Parliament to continue it, we can (as formerly) sit
down under the shadow of it* if the Authority of it be sufficiently cleared by
a well constituted Church Assembly, whereunto we should willingly subject, as a
way of the Church (anciently used) in such difficulties; only, in case it be
thought meet upon advise by your singular wisdoms to continue Episcopal
Government in the Church; be pleased that the sting thereof be taken away: we
mean the High Commission burdensome and superfluous Officers, the unnecessary
Ceremonies and subscriptions, according to their Canons, which they have only
used as snares and nets to catch the Innocent and faithful in the Land; And
the scandalous Ministers removed, the spots and blemishes of the
Ecclesiastical State. But in case such a Church Synod, or Assembly, do find
a Presbyteriall, or Pastoral, and independent Jurisdiction to be more nearely
agreeing unto the Word, and more fit for the present Constitution of our
Churches, May it then please you to encourage that way which comes next to the
mind and will of God, and suits best with the present state of times.

So that finally, the sum of all we sue for, is, that Justice may be eminently
done unto all sides, and truth (with leave of his Majesty, as Supreme) may by
the best Reason hew out its way in a Church Assembly or Synod, unto peace and
unity; not that we any way suspect your Candor or Integrity, with whom we have
trusted both our selves and all ours: But because the premised Considerations
do chiefly fall under Ecclesiastical cognizance, it would be most
satisfactorie (under correction of more sublime judgments) to the minds of all
men, and no way derogatory to the honor of his Majesty, or this High and
Honorable Court of Parliament. If such of the Ministry as have not violated
their Consciences, nor staind their garments, but men of good temper, Piety,
Learning, and consulting heads should be authorized to advise in the matters of
the Church both Doctrine and Discipline.

Pardon we beseech you, our rudeness, and brokennesse of our expressions,
Truth is never so amiable as when she goes in her playnest garb. Honor us so
far as not to take us for the giddy Sons of Apollo who would set the whole
world on fire. We abhor the intemperance of such spirits. And do humbly
desire that all Pamphlets may be staid from the Press, which take upon them
(before their time) to propound modells and new forms of Government till a well
Constituted Church Assembly have fully discussed the maine questions now in
Controversy. So shall you honor God Almighty, bring out the Truth more fully,
which is now overclouded and obscured; perform the Trust which his Majesty
has put in you; happily unite more firmly these Churches of England, Scotland
and Ireland. Make our State admired in the eyes of foreign Churches, pull
down the proud and mighty from their Seats, and exalt the humble and meek. And
by such happy satisfaction in all Ecclesiastical ways, you shall engage the
Church to pray more fervently for the happiness of our Illustrious King, and
this flourishing Common wealth.

Which God grant, Amen.
FINIS.

