AN APPENDIX TO A SEASONABLE VINDICATION OF FREE-ADMISSION, TO, AND FREQUENT
ADMINISTRATION OF THE Lords Holy Communion, To all Visible Church Members,
Regenerate or Unregenerate.

By William Prynne Esquire, a Bencher of Lincolns Inn.

Augustine. in Psalm. 48. Enar. Concio. 1. Tom. 8. pars 1. p. 535. Manducant illi
et adorant; manducant isti et saturantur, tamen Omnes manducant. Exigitur de
manducante quod manducat; non prohibeatur manducare a Dispensatore; sed
moneatur timere Exactorem. Audiant ergo ista Peccatores et Justi; Gentes et qui
habitant orbem, terrigenae et filii h^minum, simul in unum dives et pauper, non
divisi, non separati: Tempus Messis hoc faciet, manus ventilatoris hoc poterit.
Nunc simul in unum audiant Dives et Pauper, Simul in unum pascantur Haedi et
Agni, donec veniat qui segreget alios ad dextram, alios ad sinistram. Simul in
unum audiant docentem, ne segregati ab invicem audiant judicantem. LONDON,
Printed in the Year 1657.

An Appendix to a Seasonable Vindication of a Free -- Admission to, and
Frequent Administration of the Lords Holy Communion, etc.
HAving at large demonstrated the constant practice of the Primitive Church in
the frequent administration of the Holy Communion to all Visible
unexcommunicate Church Members, by the testimony of Fathers, Councils, and
other Writers of all sorts, with the continuation, approbation of this laudable
Practice in our own and other reformed Churches, till of late years; I cannot
but with much grief of heart, behold the discontinuance and disusage of it in
sundry of our Churches for diverse years together, as a sad symptom both of the
Corruption, Degeneracy, Apostasy, unzealousness of our Church and Ministers in
these reforming times; It being In his Catechism, Vol. 1. f. 463.
Tho. Beacon his true observatior; That when the Church of Christ was most
pure, the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ was most often received of
the Christians. Therefore the rare using, suspending, and quite casting aside
of this Sacrament for sundry years together in many Churches, is an undoubted
evidence, not of the reformation, but corruption, apostasy of those Churches
(especially of their Ministers, the chief Authors of it through ambition,
faction, design, Anabaptistical, or Popish principles: which I hope those who
profess themselves Judges of the Law will now take care publicly to redress,
upon the peoples See My Legal Resolution of two Important Quaeres.
sad complaints of their Ministers neglects herein, on the one hand, as well as
to give them relief for their Tithes, when or where injuriously detained, on
the other hand. For their better encouragement herein, I shall for the Honor of
the Professors of the Law of that honorable Society of Lincolns Inn, whereof I
am a Member, present the world with some Memorable Orders, made by the Benchers
of that Society in the Reigns of Q. Eliz. K. James, and K. Charles, for the
frequent receiving of the Lords Supper in the Chapel thereof, by every Member of
the same; and expulsion of all such out of the Society as unworthy to be
Members, who refused frequently to receive it; or forbore to Communicate in the
Chapel there; (according very well with the Discipline of the Primitive Church
and times) now fit to be revived in the said Christian Society, where two or
three Sacraments for many years past have been, and still are constantly
administered every Term, to give good Example to all other Churches, Chapels
throughout the Nation, and convince all present Members of that Society, who
negligently, or obstinately forbear to repair to the Ordinances, and Sacrament
there administered in this age, how well they deserve to feel the rod of the
ancient Discipline of the Society, inflicted upon such delinquents in former
times, comprised in these following Orders entered in the Black Books thereof
for that end, and the benefit of Posterity.

Lib. Niger 5. f. 111, 112.
Ad Concilium ibidem tentum in fest. Ascentionis Lincolns Inn.
Anno 12. Reginae Elizabethae, in praesentia of 12. Benchers, this Letter from
the Lords of the Queens Council was read and entered in the Black Book.

To our loving Friends, the Ancients and Benchers of Lincolns Inn, Whereas of
late time knowledge has been given to us of her Majesty's Council, and the
same also manifestly and orderly declared this day in the Starred Chamber at
Westminster, being then accompanied with the most Reverend Father in God the
Archbishop of Canterbury, and other Bishops of the Realm, and certain of her
Majesty's Justices, and others of her learned Counsel, that these persons
hereafter named, that is to say, Roger Corham, Gerrard Lother, Henry Harper,
John Brown, and Thomas Egerton, being Fellows of Lincolns Inn, have of long
time misused themselves, in contempt of the Laws of this Realm, and contrary
to the Laws ecclesiastical; partly in not resorting to the Church, or other
place of Common Prayers at accustomed times; partly in not receiving the
blessed Communion at times convenient, but contrariwise, using other Rites and
Services, which are by the Laws of the Land prohibited, and in these disorders,
have lived and continued a long time, to the evil example of others in their
Society. We have upon good deliberation ordered and decreed, and by these
presents do ordain and decree in the Queens Majesty's name, that every of the
said persons shall immediately for these their former long and manifest
contempts and offenses, be excluded out of Commons in that House, and shall
forbear to give any Counsel in the Law, or to resort to any bar or place of
Justice, there to plead by Plaint, Defense, or Demand, in any Suit or Cause
belonging to the Law, other than for themselves, if they shall be by ordinary
Process thereto called; And that they and every of them shall obey this Order,
until they shall by Gods goodness reconcile themselves, and amend those their
defaults; which is a thing more desired, than any punishment of them: and the
same their reconciliation to be testified by the Bishop of London their
Ordinary: Whereupon they shall be received again into Commons, and allowed to
give Counsel, and plead to all purposes, as before this Order they might have
done. And otherwise upon continuance in their obstinacy* to be utterly excluded
for ever from the Society, with such further punishment as shall thereto belong.

Furthermore, to avoid the increase of these contempts in that House, we have
thought meet, and so we do by these presents command, that no person of your
Society being commonly or wittingly known or vehemently suspected to mislike of
the Rites and Orders established in this Realm for Religion, be called, or
allowed from henceforth, to any degree in that house until the same have
sufficiently purged himself of the said suspstion.

And to the intent that this our Order and Decree may be duly executed, we
will and straightly command you with all convenient speed openly in the
accustomed place of your Assembly, to notify the same to the parties
abovenamed, and to all others of that Fellowship, to the end they may thereof
take knowledge, and avoid all occasions of offense in the like on their own
part, or otherwise they must look to be ordered, according to their deserts. At
Westminster the 20th of May, 1569.

Your loving Friends, Nicholas Bacon, C. S. J. Pembrook. W. Northampton, E.
Bedford. R. Leicester. G. Clinton. William Howard, F. Knowels, W. Cicill, R.
Sadler.



After this Letter: Lincolns Inn.

Lib. Niger 5. f. 151. b.
Ad Concilium ibidem tentum 4 die Junii, Anno ( b) Lib. Niger 5. f. 113. b.
Regni Elizabethae Reginae 12. in the presence of 14. Benchers.

It is Ordered, that for as much as Mr. Cortham, Mr. Gerrard Lother, and Mr.
Brown have been out of Commons, and sequestered from practice by the Councils
Letters for Ecclesiastical causes, by the space of one year and more, that
unless they bring certificate of their Reconciliation in Religion from the
Bishop, before the last day of this term, that then they three shall be utterly
expulsed the House, without all hope of readmission. And that all others which
have been called before the said Bishop, and other Judges in causes
ecclesiastical, for suspicion of their sincerity in Religion, or their Offenses
in these matters, shall be likewise expulsed the Fellowship, unless they bring
certificate of their Reconciliation from the said Bishop, before Quindena
Michaelis. And if Mr. Egerton shall bring Certificate from the Bishop that he
is reconciled in Religion before the end of this term, then he likewise to be
called to the bar at the next Moote.

One chief cause of these Gentlemen's suspension from Commons, Practice, and
Final expulsion, is expressed to be, Their not receiving the blessed Communion
at times convenient. Which was seconded with other succeeding Presidents of
Expulsion for this very cause.

(d) Ad Concilium ibidem tentum 28 die Octobris, Anno Regni Elizabethae 14. in
praesentia Gubernatorum (being 13. in Number, whereof three were not long after
made Judges under the Queen.)

Inprimis it is ordered, that if Mr. Blackwell upon Saturday next be not at
Service in the Chapel here, and upon Sunday next at the Service and Sermon in
the Chapel here, and there decently behave himself all the Service while, and
receive the Communion here upon Sunday next, that then he shall stand out of
Commons and forbear the benefit of his Chamber. And unless he receive the
Communion here openly some Sunday this Term (...) He shall be no fellow of this
House, and stand expulsed from thenceforth.

Lib Niger 5. f. 200.
Ad Concilium ibidem tentum 17. die Novembr. Anno Regni Dom. R. Elizabethae 18.
at which 11 Benchers were present, Richard King smell Attorney of the Queens
Court of Wards and Liveries, being the first.

Mr. Vicars is expulsed the Fellowship of this House, for that he has
obstinately refused to receive the Communion according to the Orders of this
House.

Lib. Niger 5. f. 248. b.
Ad Concilium ibidem tentum: die Jovis 8. die Maii Anno Regni Dom. Reginae
Elizabethae, etc. 2c. in the presence of 13 Benchers.

It is ordered, that Every Man of the House shall at the least once in the year
((...) be in Commons receive the Holy Communion in some Term time, within the
Chapel of Lincolns Inn.

Ibidem, f. 358. b.
Ad Concilium ibidem tentum 28 die Maii, Anno Regni Elizabethae, etc. 26. in
praesentia Thomae Egerton, then Solicitor, and ten more Benchers.

Mr. Henry Stephens sometimes a Gent. of this Fellowship for not Communicating
by the space of two years, being also moved, to communicate, he refused; and
therefore it is ordered, that for those causes he shall be expelled out of this
Fellowship.

These Presidents I find in Queen Elizabeth's Reign; from which I descend to
King James. The Benchers of the Society taking Notice of the Paucity of those
who resorted to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper when administered every term,
thereupon made this ensuing Order.

Lib. Niger 6. p. 308. 2.
Ad Concilium ibidem tentum, 2 die Maii Anno Lincolns Inn.
Regni Regis Jacobi, etc. 3. in the presence of 15 Masters of the Bench
presen(...).

For as much as it appears at this Council, that there is in Commons in this
House of Benchers, Barresters, and young Gentlemen every Term to the number of
140 persons and above; but there having been in every Term a Communion in the
Chapel of this House; that of the said 140. persons there communicates not
usually above the number of Forty. Thereupon Sir John Tindal Knight Dean of the
Chapel, Mr. Irbie, Mr. Hughes, and Mr. Winch, four of the Masters of the Bench,
are entreated to call before them all such as have so neglected to receive, and
to examine their Religion, and life, and of their Opinions and proceedings in
this behalf to certify the Bench, so soon as conveniently they may.

Further, at this Council it was ordered; That all such as are now in Commons
in this House every one of them shall communicate in our Chapel on Sunday next,
or on Thursday following, ^^ing ^^cension ^ay, A^^ if any shall refuse or
neglect so to Receive, he shall be expelled this House and Fellowship, unl(...)
shall show good (...) the Bench of such his refusal, or forbearing to
communicate.

Lib. Niger 7. f. 46
At a Council held in Lincolns Inn, 30 Januar. Anno 18. Jacobi Regis. Mr.
Clinton a Popish Recusant; who would not conform himself (in repairing to the
Chapel, and receiving the Sacrament) was declared, not to be called to the
bar, and likewise expelled the Society: And at a Council there held, 23
Aprilis 19 Jacobi* Mr. Anthony Hunt for the self-same cause; was expelled the
House, by a special Order.

After this, during the reign of King Charles, Mr. Andrew Brown. and Mr. Richard
Minshaw were both by several Orders of the Council of Benchers in Lincolns Inn,
first suspended the House, for not repairing to the Chapel, and Receiving the
Communion of the Lords Supper, and continuing still obstinate (notwithstanding
the Queens Letter and intercession) finally expelled the Society, as appears by
the Lib. Niger 7. f. 183, 184, 185, 186, 187, 188, 190, 191, 199, 294.
Orders of 29 Julii, and 30 Octobris Anno 2. Caroli Regis, entered in the Black
Book.

Lib. Niger 7. f. 493.
Novembr. 18. 1641. at a Council held in Lincolns Inn before Mr. Oliver
Saint-John, then Solicitor to the King, Sir Rowland Wainsford, Attorney of the
Court of Wards and Liveries, and the rest of the Benchers, the Butler was
ordered, to deliver the Names of such to the Bench as had not received the
Communion in the Chapel of this House, within one year last past; to the end
that they might tender the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance to them, by a
special Commission then directed to them to administer these Oaths to all
Members of the House, and of the Innes of Chancery thereto belonging, who were
suspected in their Religion. The not receiving the Sacrament at least once a
year in the Chapel of the House, being then and in all former times, reputed a
sufficient badge of suspicion in Religion, and inclination to Popery. How then
it can be now reputed a Character of Saints, or Protestants of the highest
Form, and of the most refined sublimated orthodox Christians, transcends my
Capacity to comprehend.

By these Presidents (omitting See Lib. Niger 5. f. 181, 182.
others of like Nature,) it is apparent, That Queen Elizabeth, with her
Council, Judges, and the Masters of the Bench of the Honorable Society of
Lincolns Inn, during hers, King James, and King Charles successive reigns,
reputed all those admitted into it, of what quality soever, unworthy to be
called to the Bar, Bench, or permitted to reside in, or continue Members of
the Society; who neglected or peremptorily refused to repair constantly to the
Chapel to Gods public Ordinances, or to receive the Lords Supper there with
the rest of the Society, at least once every year: Whereupon after due
admonition and perseverance in this their irreligious neglect, they finally
expelled them the House, as putrid Members, suspected, tainted in their
religion, lest they should corrupt and leven others; even as the Primitive
Church, and Christians constantly excommunicated, expelled all those from their
Church, Society, who neglected or refused to communicate constantly with them
in the Lords Supper, when it was administered. Which Godly Discipline, I
heartily wish may now be carefully revived, severely executed in all our Innes
of Court, and all Churches throughout the Realm, as well on refractory
Ministers, who obstinately refuse to administer the Sacrament to their people,
as on negligent or obstinate Non-Communicants, who repair not to the Communion,
when and where it is administered; All of them forgetting that memorable saying
of St. Bernard, recorded by In his Catechism, Vol. 1. f. 463.
Thomas Beacon; He that has a wound, seeks a Medicine: We have a wound
whiles we are under sin; The Medicine is The Sacrament, Daily receive, daily
thou shall be healed; Bernard. in Coena Domini Ser. f. 38.
Duo enim illud Sacramentum operatur in nobis; ut videlicet ita sensum minuat
in minimis, et in gravioribus peccatis tollat omnino consensum: Si quis
vestrum, non tam saepe modo, non tam acerbos sentit iracundiae motus, invidiae,
luxuriae, aut ceterorum hujusmodi, gratias agat Corpori and Sanguini Domini,
quoniam virtus Sacramenti operatur in eo; et gaudeat quod pessimum ulcus
accedat ad Sanitatem. Tanta siquidem est vis Sacramentorum qui diebus istis
recoluntur, ut possint ipsa quoque lapidia scindere cordae, and pectus omne
licet ferreum emollire sufficiant: as the same Bernard elegantly resolves.
Those Ministers then may justly fear their hearts are harder than stone, and
breasts more obdurate than iron, who Si lucri spiritualis gratia hoc faciunt,
laudandus est zelus, sed praesumptio corrigenda, Bern. Epist. 42.
neglect or refuse diligently, frequently, constantly to administer this
Sacrament to their people to break their stony hearts, soften their iron
breasts, abate the power of their greatest sins, close up and cure their
wounded souls; and those Christians doubtless are the greatest Enemies to
their own Salvation and Spiritual Cure, who make the greatness, heinousness of
their sins, the only Argument to keep them from the constant use of this holy
Sacrament, which should be the strongest motive to invite them thereunto, that
they might be healed and reformed by it. It is' acknowledged by all Divines,
that this Sacrament is both a special means of Grace, and Sovereign Balsom to
cure all wounded sin-sick Souls. Therefore for any Ministers, or Spiritual
Physicians to suspend their people, or for any visible Churchmembers to seclude
themselves totally from this means of Grace, and Sovereign Medicament, till the
work of saving Grace be visibly wrought in them, and their Spiritual wounds and
maladies perfectly cured, is professedly to keep them from the means, till they
have attained the end thereof without them, and diametrically to contradict both
our Saviors Doctrine and Practice, Mat. 9. 12, 13. They that be whole need not
the Physician, but those that are sick: For I came not to call the righteous,
but sinners to repentance. Wherefore Bernard Epist. 42.
Nolite illorum acquiescere consiliis qui cum sint Christiani, Christi tamen
vel sequi facta, vel obsequi dict is opprobrio ducunt.

FINIS.

