A TRVE AND SAD RELATION Of diverse passages in Somersetshire, between the
Country and the Cavaleers concerning the Militia, and the Commission of Array,
August. 5. 1642.

Wherein some were slain, others distracted, and the Town of Wells taken by
the Cavaleers, and since besieged by the Country.

With the Votes of the Lords and Commons concerning diverse Delinquents in that
Action.

John Brown Cler. Parliament.

LONDON, Printed by A. N. for Ed. Blackmore, and Richard Lownds, 1642.

August. 9.

SIR,
I Long to hear from you, in regard I must inform you of the great misery this
Country is in, the Cavaleers in Somersetshire have used violence on the
Yeomanry, and have turned them out of doors, and take their arms from them,
the people seeing it could not suffer it, For if they prevail now they think
they shall be slaves for ever. For the Lord Pawlet has declared that it is not
fit for any Country Yeoman to have above ten pound a year: the people murmured
much at him: the malignant part have as it were proclaimed war already, For
place of Randevouz is Wells, this Week the people came in daily. For the
Militia yesterday was appointed, at the meeting there came in thirty thousand,
for the Militia, there is five hundred gone out of Bristoll, they went
yesterday morning, and are not returned yet, it is but twelve miles where the
Army lies, there is like to be fearful times here. There came in on Thursday
night against Friday, a hundred men for the Militia, they being few in respect
of the malignant party, they went out of Wells, and killed some, and took the
rest, for the number it is but few that were killed, they are merciless men,
they care not what they do: the Deputy-Lievtenants have demanded their
prisoners but cannot have them: they have all ihis night been planting
Ordnance against Wells, and will certainly batter down the town unless they
deliver them: there is like to be great bloudshedding; the people have resolved
rather to lose their lives then to be slaves, the people have bin out this two
days and two nights, and have not time to refresh themselves, the place to
meet at is on Mendip: the Cavaliers faild their promise, and did not appear
yesterday, in regard of the many that came against them: you would admire to
see what weapons the people got for want of Arms: there is not two thousand of
the Advers party: the chief are the Marquess of Hartford, the Lord Paulet,
sir Ralph Hopon, sir Francis Dorington, and Master Smith for the Pa^liament,
There is sir Francis Poppam and his son, sir John Horner, Master Richard
Col^* Master Sirood, Master Pine, sir Edward Hungerford, sir Edward Gainton;
There comes in for their assistance, Gloucester, Wilts, Dorset, and Devo^
shires, Master Alexander Poppam bestirres himself bravely: our well affected
people in the Town have sent three or four field pieces to him, and much
Arms, Lord grant them a good success; This evening will produce much news, I
wish it may be for the best. I pray let me hear from you of that business I
wrote of, so for this present I rest,

Yours ever to be Commanded Joseph Proud. Bristoll
August 5. 1642.
Die Veneris 5 August, 1642.
Resolved upon the Question by the Lords and Commons in Parliament.
THat Sir Ralph Hopton. M. Tho. Smith, and Captain John Digby shall be
disabled to sit as Members of the House of Commons during this Parliament.

Resolved, etc. That Captain John Digby be forth with sent for as Delinquent.

Resolved etc. That Sir Ralph Hopton, Mr. Tho. Smith, Sir Ferdinand Gorges, and
Sir Francis Dodington be forthwith sent for as Delinquents.

Resolved, etc. That Richard Board. Hercules Whiting, Nicholas Dounton, ^^mes
Stroud, John Walker, and John Cooth, the Parson of Shipton* (...). ^e forthwith
sent for as Delinquents.

ORDERED,
THat the High Sheriff of the County of Somerset, and the Deputy-Lievtenants
and Committees of the same County, and the Forces that shall be sent down to
the assistance of the said Deputy-Lievienants, and Comittee, be all required to
use their best endeavors for the apprehending and sending up to the Parliament
the Delinquents voted of that County.

August.

