A Fresh DISCOVERY Of some Prodigious New Wandring-Blasing-Stars, and
Firebrands, Stiling themselves NEVV-LIGHTS, Firing our Church and State into
New Combustions.

Divided into Ten Sections, comprising several most Libellous, Scandalous,
Seditious, Insolent, Uncharitable, (and some Blasphemous) Passages; published
in late UnlicensedPrinted Pamphlets, against the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction
and Power of Parliaments, Councels, Synods, Christian Kings and Magistrates, in
General; The Ordinances and Proceedings of this present Parliament, in
special: The National Covenant, Assembly, Directory, our Brethren of
Scotland, Presbyterian Government; The Church of England, with her Ministers,
Worship; The Opposers of Independent Novelties; and some Seditious Queres,
Incitations, Practices, to stir up the Commonalty and rude Vulgar against the
Parliament, Assembly, Ministry; worthy both Houses, and all Sober-minded
Christians serious consideration, detestation, and crying for speedy exemplary
Justice on the Libellersand Libels, to prevent our Churches, Religions,
Parliaments, Kingdoms eminent ruin.

Whereunto some Letters and Papers lately sent from the Sommer-Islands, are
subjoyned, relating the Schismatic, illegal, Tyrannical proceedings of
some Independents there, in gathering their New-Churches, to the great
Distraction and prejudice of that Plantation.

Published for the Common good By WILLIAM PRYNNE of Lincolns Inn, Esquire.

Take heed therefore, that the Light which is in thee be not Darkness: If
thine Eye be evil, thy whole body is full of Darkness: If therefore the Light
that is in thee be Darkness, how great is that Darkness? Luke 11. 25. Mat.
6. 23. These filthy Dreamers despise Dominion, and speak evil of Dignities:
These are raging waves of the Sea, foaming out their own shame; WANDERING STARS,
for whom is reserved the Blackness of Darkness for ever. Jude 8. 13. LONDON
Printed by John Macock, for Michael Spark senior, at the sign of the blue Bible
in Green Arbor. 1645.

TO The High and Honorable Court of PARLIAMENT.
MOst Religious and Judicious SENATORS, I here present to your saddest thoughts
and serious deliberations, an abstract of sundry most scurrilous, scandalous,
seditious railing Libels, lately published to the world in Print, by some
Anabaptisticall Independent Sectaries, and New-lighted FIREBRARNDS; wherein the
undoubted Privileges, Ordinances, just Proceedings of Parliament; the Reverend
Assembly of Divines; our Brethren of Scotland; the Church of England, with her
Government, Ministers, Worship; the National Covenant, Directory, Presbytery;
professed Defenders of the Parliaments Privileges, Ordinances against their
Licentious Schismatic Practices, (according to their Solemn Vow and
Covenant) are so audaciously affronted, oppugned, slandered, railed against;
and the Common people so earnestly excited to mutiny against the Parliament
Assembly, Presbytery, Government and Ministers of our Church of England, that I
am confident no former Age did ever produce such Monstrous Insolences, such
detestable virulent Libels, which neither the Honor, Justice, nor Wisdom of
that Sovereign Court of Justice wherein you are Assessors, nor the Peace and
Safety of our Religion, Church, State, nor your own personal security, nor the
National Vow and Covenant, (engaging both your Honors and all others who have
taken it against these pernicious Mutiniers) can any longer suffer you
patiently to tolerate (as hitherto you have done) without exemplary
proceedings against, and punishments upon the Authors, Printers, Publishers,
Dispersers of these most scurrilous and mutinous Pamphlets. Wherein they most
injuriously and falsely revile, traduce all such for Persecutors, Fighters
against Christ and his Kingdom, Enemies to the ways of Christ, pulling his
royal Crown from off his head, his kingly Scepter out of his hand, Oppugners
of the most religious, conscientious, Godly, best-affected Party (as they
Pharisaically and falsely term themselves) dividers between the Parliament and
their best, their faithfullest Friends; Profane Apostates, Popish Jesuiticall
Incendiaries, haters of Gods people, and the like; who out of conscience, solid
Judgment and cordial affection to the safety, tranquillity of Religion,
Parliament, Church, Kingdom, dare openly by word or writing, maintain the
undoubted Jurisdiction of Parliaments, Synods, Magistrates in Ecclesiastical
affairs, or oppose their factions, schismatic Independent ways and
Innovations, destructive both to Magistracy, Ministry, Unity, Parliaments, and
that blessed Reformation so much desired.

For my own particular, I have with much Patience and Contempt endured,
without any Reply at all, their false unchristian Invectives against my self,
only for Writing in Vindication of the undoubted Ecclesiastical jurisdiction,
directive and coercive power of Christian Emperors, Kings, Magistrates,
Parliaments, in matters of Religion and Church Government, in my, Truth
triumphing over Falsehood, Antiquity over Novelty, published with Your special
approbation; and my Independency Examined, (which have much incensed this
waspish Generation, unable to give any satisfactory answers to them) and I
should have continued silence still, had my own private interest only been
concerned. But when I discerned them to be so audaciously licentious,
presumptuous, as To Psalm. 73. 9.
set their mouth against the Heavens, to Exodus, 22. 28. Acts 23. 5.
revile the very Gods themselves, and curse the Rulers of the people; 2 Pet. 2.
10.
to despise Government and speak evil of Dignities, to bring railing
accusations against, and 2 These. 2. 4.
resist the Higher Powers, publishing Libell after Libell, against the
Proceedings, Ordinances, and Jurisdiction of the present Parliament and
Assembly, yea with Antichristian pride, to 2 Pet. 2. 11. Romans 13.
oppose and exalt themselves above all that is called God, or that is
wershipped (as they have lately done, in the Pamphlets hereafter mentioned, and
in the Nativity of Sir John Presbyter, etc. freshly published since the rest;
every of these latter Libels being more seditious and pernicious then the
former) and Mar. 15. 7.
Barrabas like, to stir up sedition and insurrection among the people,
against the Ordinances, Votes of Parliament, and that Ecclesiastical
reformation and Pre-byteriall government You have resolved to establish; Jer.
4. 19.
My bowels; my bowels were pained within me at my very heart, so that I could
not hold my peace, nor keep silence any longer, because thou have heard, O my
soul, the sound of these seditious Trumpets, and the alarm of this
Schismatic Anti-Parliamentary war: Yea should I now refrain from writing,
the very stones themselves would immediately cry out against their most
infamous Libels and mutino^s presumptuous Practices, opposite to all public
Order, Government, Authority.

And the rather am I necessitated to this ungrateful work, because their very
Libels, actions, speeches proclaim a plotted avowed Confederacy among some
furious Ringleaders of these Independent Sectaries (though I presume the more
moderate are not guilty of it) against the Parliament, Assembly, and all their
Resolves in matters of Religion or Church Government, yea, against our very
Church, Ministers, and Tithes the means of their support; as their Libellous
Passages against the Ecclesiastical Power, proceedings of the Parliament and
Assembly; their public oppositions against the National Covenant, Directory,
the Ordinances prohibiting disorderly and unlicensed Printing of Libellous
Scismaticall Pamphlets; against Laymens preaching in the Army or elsewhere;
for due Payment of Tithes, etc. recited in the ensuing Sections, will at large
declare.

And that which further confirms me in this opinion, is: First, the New
Seditious Covenants which the Members of some Independent Congregations enter
into; To adhere, defend, maintain, to the utmost of their powers, and contend
for, even unto blood, the establishment of that Independent form of Church
Government which themselves have set up and submitted to, and oppose the
Presbyterian, in contempt of the Parliaments Authority: in truth mere
Anti-covenants of the National League and Covenant, which they utterly refuse
to take, and rail against.

2. Their menacing predictions to the Assembly and Presbytery in their two last
Martins Echo. p. 5. 6. The Nativity of Sir John Presbyter, p. 5. 9. 10. 1^.
Libels; wherein they print, That the time hastens the people will call them to
an Account, and repel and confound them by the sword; That the life of Sir
John Presbyter is like to be neither long nor good; That he will be brought to a
sudden untimely end, Perhaps HANGING. That Presbytry shall live but a short
time to do mischeife, and then, THE COMMON PEOPLE will beg in to sing, Her
Toss, The Devil's dead; Presbytery will quickly dye, the Synod be dissolved,
the devil chained up: and therefore follow the advice of old Cat^; Spem
retine. Rejoice O heavens, sing aloud O earth, clap thy hands for Joy, O
England-post nubula soles; thou shall have a time of Quietness, of pence, of
content, for Presbytery will have never a Child to vex thee, to Imprison thy
free Denizens, to suck up thy fat, devour thy good things and eat up thy
bread out of thy Childrens mouths, and himself is not long lived, as I showed
before; and then farewell persecution for conscience, farewell Ordinance for
Tithes, farewell Ecclesiastical Supremacy, farewell Pontifical Revenue,
farewell Assembly of Divines dissembled at Westminster, you shall consult
together no more, farewell Sr. Simon Synod, and his son Presbyter Jack.

Gens antiquaruit, multos dominata perannos, etc.

Which passages, presage and intimate naught else, but a plain conspiracy,
confederacy, against the Assembly, Presbytery and presbyterian party.

3. Some late seditious speeches of two preaching Captains of this
Schismatic Confederacy; who being apprehended and questioned by Sr. Samuel
Lukes Officers for preaching in Newport-Pannell, and other places near
adjoining, in contempt of an Ordinance of Parliament made the 26. of April
1645. which ordaines, That no person be permitted to preach who is not ordained
a Minister* threatening condign punishment to the offenders against it for
their contempts; enjoining Sr. Thomas Fairfax, the Lord Major, the Committee of
Militia for London; the Governors, Commanders, and Magistrates of all
Garrisons, Castles, Places of strength, Cities, Towns, Forts, Ports, and the
respective Committees of each County, To see the same duly observed in the Army
and places aforesaid, and make speedy representation to both Houses, of such as
shall offend therein. These Captain preachers; (far wiser then that devout
Centurian Cornelius, who feared God with all his house, and prayed to God
always; yet never turned Preacher to his own Band, for ought we read, but by
Gods own direction from heaven, sent for the Apostle Peter to instruct him and
his family, Acts 10.) among other speeches averred; That they were illegally
used by Sr Samuel in being apprehended (for their contempt against this
Ordinance;) most fasly and seditiously affirming, That the General and all the
Colonels in the Army were deeply engaged. IN THEIR DESIGN: That they would
acquaint their FRIENDS IN THE HOUSE OF COMMONS of their bad usage, that they
had done nothing but taught the Word of God; (among other things, that we had
no true Church not Ministry, and that the children of Believers had no more
right to Baptism then those of Infidels, etc.) which they would justify, and
those friends likewise: That they had Commission from the Parliament for what
they did, etc. Whereupon one Capt. Oxford answering them; That he was confident
there were few or none in the House would uphold them (against an express
Ordinance of both houses) and that the General and Colonels would not side
with them in this case: The said Pedicant Captains replied; That should be
tried speedily: For they were resolved to make this business THE LEADING CASE
OF THE KINGDOM FOR ALL THE GODLY PARTY: Note.
adding; That if the godly and well-affected party were thus persecuted, they
should be forced TO MAKE A WORSE BREACH THEN WHAT WAS YET, WHEN THEY HAD DONE
WITH THE KINGS PARTY: and telling Ensign Ratford and his Soldiers, that they
were worse then Cavaliers; and that when they had made an end of the war with
the Cavaliers, THEY SHOULD BE FORCT TO RAISE A NEW ARMY TO FIGHT WITH THEM.

Certainly these seditious privy Covenants, Libels, Speeches, compared with the
ensuing Sections, Letters, discover and portend no less then a strong
conspiracy among some Anabaptisticall Sectaries to oppose the Power, Ordinances
and Proceedings of Parliament, to extirpate all other Governments but their
own, and to set it up by the sword, or popular commotions in despite of your
Authority. And is it not then high time for your Honors, with all other
well-affected Persons to look about you? to Vindicate your own Power, Honor,
Justice, against these most seditious, audatious, contemptuous libellers
against your Sovereign Authority, your most Religious Ordinances, proceedings
in the desired ways of Reformation; and to make some of them Exemplary
Monuments of your Impartial severity, to deter others from the like
unparalleld Insolences, not read nor heard of in any preceding Age, nor
practiced by any Generation of men, but these New furious Sectaries: who to
engage all sorts of people in their Quarrel, proclaim a free Toleration and
Liberty of Conscience, to all Sects, all Religions whatsoever, be it Judais^e,
Paganism, Turcisme, Arianisme, Popery; (as all their Pamphlets manifest) And
to interest the female Sex, and draw them to their party, they (contrary to the
1 Cor. 14. 34. 35. 1 Timothy 2. 11, 12.
Apostles precept) allow them not only decisive Votes, but Liberty of Preaching
Prophesying, speaking in their Congregations; yea, power to meet in their Which
they used in New port Pa^^ell, (contrary to the Governors Command.
Nocturnall Conventicles, without their Husbands, Parents, Ministers Privitie,
the better to propagate Christ's Kingdom, and multiply the Godly party: Which,
what confusion and Ataxy it will soon* produce in Church and State, if not
prevented by your Honors extraordinary speedy Diligence, Wisdom, Power, I
humbly submit to your deepest Judgments.

I am certain your Honors have read the Sl^idan, Com. l. 5. 10. Gastius, de
Anabaptist: Erroribus. Bullinger advers. Anabaptist. Guil. de Bres C^ntr. Les
Anabap^^stes. D. Featlies Dippers Dipped, p. 199. 200, etc The History of the
Anabaptists.
Histories of the Tragical Wars and Commotions of the Anabaptists in Germany;
whose Opinions wherever they predominate, are fatal to the Government,
Magistracy, Ministry of all States, Churches, and bring in popular Tyranny,
and licentiousness, the worst of evils. O then let not your Honors Patience
or Indulgence to such Anabaptisticall Libellers involve both you, us, our
Realm, in like German popular Sedicions, Devastations, and bloody Massacres,
which they threaten: but if these New seditious Lights and Firebrarnds, will
needs set up New Churches, Heresies, Church-governments, and vent their new
errors or opinions against your Power and Authority, let them do it only in
NEW ENGLAND, or other NEW-FOVNDLANDS, since OLD ENGLAND needs them not,
unless it be to set her all on fire.

As for those furious Champions and Emissaries of theirs who have most
presumptuously opposed your religious Ordinances, by word, deed, and presuming
on the strength of their Friends within your Walls, (the opinion whereof, with
your former Lenity toward them has much increased their spreading Leprosy]
intend now at last to try this issue with your Honors; whether your just
Ordinances, or their wilful Contempts against them shall take place; It is
presumed you will so proceed against them, and the Authors, Printers, Publishers
of the execrable Libells h^re presented to your veiw, that they and all the
world shall know, You a^e a Sovereign Court of Parliament; whose privileges,
Honor, you have all jointly Covenanted to mantain with your Lives, Power,
Fortunes; and to proceed against all such secret Underminers or open Impugners
of them, as Capital Delinquents: and these Mutineers experimentally know, that
no one Member of your Honorable Assembly, will so far dishonor himself, or
violate his public trust and Covenant, as to countenance such audacious
wilful offenders in the least degree; nor yet for Fear or Favor of any
Faction, any Person how great soever, decline one hairs-bredth from that
strait path of Truth and public Justice, [the greatest Security and support
of Parliaments, Kingdoms] especially in these Leading-cases, wherein you are
most concerned, and as much obleiged to maintain your own Privileges, Power,
Reputations, Ordinances, against Seditious Sectaries, as against Rebellious
C^valeers: or else dissolve, give over your intended almost-accomplished
Reformation; and so render your selves, with your Proceedings contemptible to
all the world: which God forbid.

If any should Object; Object.
that the Punishment of these gross Libellers and Ringleaders of sedition
would discontent and disengage the Independents, with all other Sectaries of
their opinion, who are a considerable party now; which might prove dangerous to
the state in this juncture of our public Affairs.

I answer: Answ.
1. That I doubt not all moderate and juditious persons of that party will
willingly disclaim, if not excomunicate, banish them their Congregations, and
yield them up to public Justice, as persons worthy the severest Censures; else
all the world will cry shame upon them. Secondly, Admit your executing Justice
on them should discontent their party; yet thanks be to God (for all their
vapouring] they are not so potent, so considerable as to over-aw a Parliament
from doing Justice on such of their party, who Libel against, or affront their
power and proceedings; in which case, our whole three Kingdoms are solemnly
engaged by public Covenant to assist you to the utmost, with their very lives
and fortunes. Thirdly, The greatness of the Kings Power, party, has not
retarded you from executing Justice upon Strafford, Canterbury, Tompkins, and
sundry other delinquents: Shall then the less considerable Faction of
Anahaptists and other Sectaries hinder you from proceeding against a few
seditious Libellers and Delinquents of their party? Fourthly, Either you must
permit them to go on to libel and affront your Authority, Orders, proceedings
still, without exemplary punishments, to your great dishonor, infamy: or else
proceed against them now, whiles your Ordinances, and their contempts against
them are fresh, their party small: else they will plead prescription, and you
will be less engaged, less able to punish them hereafter, in case they should
grow stronger and more numerous. Principiis obstandum; is ever the best policy.
Fifthly, Let their party be as considerable, as potent as is falsely surmised by
themselves, yet I humbly conceive, it stands neither with the Majesty, Honor,
Power, nor Wisdom of a Parliament, to be afraid of doing Justice (especially
in maintenance of their own Ordinances, Privileges whoever they discontent: In
such a case, Fiat Justitia, ruet Caelum; is the safest Resolution.

Majestrates and inferior Judges (much more then supreamest Courts of
Judicature) must not Psalm. 56. 4. Isa. 7. 4. Jer. ^. ^. 17*
fear the faces nor Frowns of any Mortals in discharging their duties, but
execute Justice and Judgment, what ever comes of it, and trust God with the
Event.

Sixthly, The not doing Exemplary Justice in such leading cases of public
Concernment, will render your Parliamentary Authority, Ordinances, Proceedings
more contemptible to your own party, then ever they were unto the Kings: yea,
animate the Country Club-men and every inconsiderable Sectary, not only to
Jeat, contemn, disobey your Ordinances and Commands, but at last to prescribe
Laws unto you, [as See 31. H. 6. c. 1.
Jack Cade and his Confederates did to the Parliament in the 29. of Hen. 6.]
Which will by consequence bring Parliaments into contempt, and so speedy
desolation upon all our Dominions, after so many successful proceedings. Up
therefore and be doing Justice upon some few chief offenders of this kind for
the present, to prevent execution upon many others, if not ruin on us all, for
the future, and God himself will no doubt be with you; Psalm. 56. 4.
You need not fear what flesh can do unto you, or Sectaries speak or write
against you: whose ensuing scurrilous Libellous Seditious passages will so
publicly discover their uncharitable, unchristian, Libellous, slandering,
tumultuous dispositions, and hypocritical, false, froward, licentious tempers,
to all the world, as will render them odious to all sober minded, peaceable,
conscientious, modest Christians, if not to themselves, and all ingenious
persons of their own Sects; and so, through Gods blessing, reduce many of them
to the bosom of our Church, from which they have formerly revolted.

It is not my intention by any the premises to sour or exasperate your
Honors in the least degree against any peaceable, Conscientious, Orthodox, or
truly Religious Christians, seduced by the Independent party; or to stir up any
kind of persecution against such; whose consciences will (I doubt not) in due
time be fully satisfied, persuaded to submit to that Presbyteriall
Church-Goverment and Discipline, which you have now resolved to establish in
our Churches* there being naught there in repugnant to Gods word, or which any
well-informed Conscience, can have cause to scruple at. Toward such as these,
it is most just and reasonable, all Christian Charity, meekness,
long-suffering, brotherly love, and fitting liberty should be Indulged for the
present, till God shall further open their eyes and turn their hearts unto us.
For whose better sati^faction in the irregularities of their new concealed
Independent way, I have here-unto subjoyned some Letters and other Papers
lately sent me from the Summer Islands; whereby they may discover, the faction;
arrogance, pride and Cruelty of the Independent Ministers there, and that the
Liberty of conscience they plead for, and pretend they grant to Presbyterians,
others; and the peaceablenesse of their way, is but a mere fiction,
contradicted by their practice; and likewise discern, how they lead their
followers by a mere implicit faith; impose upon them a Popish blind
Obedience; exercise a mere Papal Authority and unlymited dangerous Arbytrary
power over them and others; pretending an Vtopian Government after the mind of
Christ, which is no where written in his word; nor in any classical Authors,
Ancient or Modern, but founded only in their own Fancies, not yet fully
discovered, nor set down in writing, nor agreed on among themselves, nor
published to others for their better satisfaction. The serious Consideration
whereof may happily reclaim our Independents here from the error of their
seperating destructive ways, and ease the oppressed Planters of those Islands
from that Independent yoke of Bondage under which they so much groan, as to
cry out to You for releife of their sore oppressions in their Letters: which I
shall beseech your Honors in their behalf (since they have made their
addresses to your Tribunal by my mediation) seriously to lay to heart, and
seasonably to redress.

Thus humbly craving Pardon from your Honorable Assembly for my true-hearted
Zeal to do you faithful service, by this unburthening of my conscience, and
presenting You with this Fresh discovery of those New Wandring-starres and
Firebrands who revile, oppugn your Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, Proceedings,
Ordinances; disturb the muchdesired peace of Church, State, (which we should
all earnestly endeavor in these distracted Times;) I humbly recommend all your
faithful undertakings for the security, tranquillity of both, to Gods own
blessing with my devoutest Orisons to the throne of Grace, and ever remain,

Your Honors, the Republikes, Churches, most devoted Servant, WILLIAM PRYNNE.

A fresh Discovery of prodigious New-Wandring-Blasing-Stars and Firebrarnds,
stiling themselves NEVV-LIGHTS: Firing our CHURCH and STATE into New
Combustions.
THe Apostle Paul, led by a Prophetical Spirit, has left us such an exact
Character of the last times, and of the exorbitant tempers of many Christian
Professor living in them, as never suited with any age so fitly as this wherein
we live, nor with any generation of people, so well, as those New-Lights and
Sectaries, sprung up among us, who (being many of them Anabaptists) have all
new-christned themselves of late, by the common name of Independents: This
character we find recorded, 2 Timothy 3. 1. to 10. This know also, that in the
last days perilous times shall come: (and what times were ever more perilous
then the present?) For men shall be lovers of themselves, coveteous, boasters,
proud, blasphemers, disobedient to Parents (Natural, Civil, Ecclesiastical)
unthankefull, unholy; without natural affection, trace-breakers, false
accusers, incontinent, fierce, dispisers of those that are good; Traitors,
heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasures (of their own bellies, lusts, ways,
opinions, fancies) more then lovers of God; having a form of Godliness, but
denying the power thereof: FROM SVCHTVRNE AWAY. But some might demand of him,
by what distinguishing mark may we know who these persons are? The Apostle
therefore subjoynes such a symptom, as suits most exactly with our new
Separating Lights and Conventiclers, Genesis 3. 1, 2, 12. 1 Timothy 2. 14.
who forsake the public assemblies, and creep into private houses, working
principally (as the * Devil did at first) upon the weakest Sex: For of this
sort are they WHICH CREEP INTO HOUSES (thus interpreted by the Apostle: Heb.
10. 25. Not forsaking the assembling of our selves together, or the public
Assemblies, as the MANNER OF SOME IS, and of our Sectaries now) and lead
Captive SILLY WOMEN, laden with sins, led away with diverse lusts: EVER
LEARNING AND NEVER ABLE TO COME TO THE KNOWLEDGE OF THE TRVTH (as those
Independent Seekers are, Jude 23.
who like * Wandering Stars, gad every day after New-Lights, New-fashions of
Church Government, James 2.
wavering like empty Clouds without wa^er, or waves of the sea, driven with the
wind and tossed; not knowing yet what Government they would have, or where to
fix; Believing and practicing all things, with a reserve, to alter their
opinions and practice every day upon discovery of further light, (...) the
Independent Apologists profess for themselves, and advise all others to do.
Now because such House-creepers and New-lights, have usually lofty conceits of
their own opinions, judgments, ways; as if the truth of God were monopolized
unto them, and therefore all the World should speedily submit to their foolish
dictates, and erroneous bypath: the Apostle immediately passes this censure
of their persons and proceedings. Now as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so
do these also resist the truth: men of corrupt minds, reprobate (or of no
judgment) concerning the faith: but they shall proceed no further, for their
folly shall be manifest unto all men, as theirs also was. The very detection of
their abominable, seditious, seducing practices, shall put a stop to their
proceedings, and frustrate all their expectation. Now if any man should doubt
whether this prophecy of the Apostle were really intended of Separatists and
Sectaries; the Holy Ghost has resolved it in direct terms in the general
Epistle of Jude, v. 17, 18, 19. But beloved, remember that the words which were
spoken before of the Apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ (and among others of the
Apostle Paul in the for ecited Text) How that they told them, there should be
mockers in the last time, who should walk after their own ungodly lusts (not
after the Spirit and Word of God which they most pretend to: and would you know
who these are?) These be they who SEPARATE THEMSELVES, sensual, having not the
Spirit. To which the Apostle Peter adds these further descriptions of them. 2
Pet, 2. 10, 11, 12, 14, 18, 19. That they despise government, are presumptuous,
felfe-willed, speak evil of Dignities, bring railing accusations against them,
speak evil of the things they understand not, beguile unstable souls having
hearts exercised with covetous practices, being clouds carried with a tempest,
Wels without water, who when they speak great swelling words of vanity, allure
through the lusts of the flesh, through much wantonness (of spirit as well as
flesh) those who are clean escaped from them who live in error: While they
promise them liberty (the liberty of conscience to profess what Religion they
list, to use what Church government they please, without control of
Parliament, Synod, or Magistrates) they themselves are the servants of
corruption; and as Jude, v. 13. prove Raging waves of the sea, foaming out
their own shame, wandering stars, to whom the blackness of darkness is
reserved for ever. All which descriptions, how properly they suit with our
NewIndependent-lights and Incendiaries, I shall clearly demonstrate out of
several clauses in their late seditious Anti-Parliamentary Impressions,
betraying the rottenness of their hearts, the pride, sedition, and rebellion
of their spirits, which I shall reduce to these ten Sections.

1. Seditious, scandalous, libellous, and uncharitable passages against the
authority and jurisdiction of Parliaments, Synods, and temporal Magistrates in
general, in Ecclesiastical affairs. 2. Against sundry Ordinances and
proceedings of this present Parliament in particular. 3. Against the National
Covenant prescribed by Parliament. 4. Against the present Assembly of Divines,
sitting and acting by order of Parliament. 5. Against the Directory ratified by
Ordinance of Parliament. 6. Against our Brethren of Scotland, whom of late they
much applanded. 7. Against Presbyterians and Presbyterian government in
general. 8. Against the Church of England, her Worship, Ministers, and
Government in general. 9. Against such who have out of conscience written or
preached against their seditious ways, and Libels. 10. Seditious Queres,
Passages, and Practices, to excite mutinies and popular commotions against the
Parliament, and disobedience to its commands.
Section I.
Containing diverse seditious, scandalous, libellous passages against the
authority and jurisdiction of Parliaments, Synods, and temporal Magistrates in
general, in Ecclesiastical affairs, in the late writings of several
Independent New-lights, and Firebrands.
I Shall begin with a Copy of a Letter written by John Lilburne, Lieu,
Colonel, (the Ringleader of this Regiment of New-Firebrands) to William Prynne
Esquire; upon the coming out of his last book, entitled, Truth triumphing over
Falsehood, Antiquity over^Novelty: Of which Letter there have bin three
Impressions made by him, without license; contrary to the Ordinance of both
Houses, restraining the printing or dispersing of unlicensed, libellous, and
seditious Pamphlets: whre he p. 4. writes thus.

Sir, in your last book that you put out, you spend a great deal of pains in
citing old rusty Authors, to prove that Kings, Councels, Synods, and States,
have for so many hundred years meddled with matters of Religion. I grant you
they have; but I demand of you, by what right, or by what authority out of the
Word of God they have so done? Has God the Father, or Jesus Christ his Son
given them any allowance in this? Or have they not hereby rather fulfilled the
prophesies of the Scripture, which says, Rev. 17. 17. That the Kings of the
Earth shall give their power unto the Beast till the Word of God be fulfilled,
which they have done in assisting the Popes to join the Ecclesiastical and
Civil State together, making the Golden Laws of Christ to depend upon the
Leaden Laws of Man; yea upon such Laws, as was just suitable to their
tyrannical lusts, and which might the most advance their wicked ends and
designs: and in the doing of this, they have set up a perfect Antichrist
against GOD'S CHRIST, yea, England is not free from this. And to hold, that
Kings, Parliaments, Synods, States, have any thing to do in matters of Religion
and Church Government, he concludes page 5. to be a setting of the Potentates
of the earth together by the ears with Christ (who is to rule all Nations,
Rev. 12. 5.) to pluck his Crown from his head, his Scepter out of his hand, and
his person out of his throne and State, that his Father has given him to reign
gloriously in.

Which is thus backed by Henry Robinson the (supposed) Author of the Answer to
Mr. William Prynnes 12. Questions concerning Church Government, page 6.
Particular Churches, members of a Kingdom and Nation, are not obliged in point
of Conscience and Christianity, to submit unto whatsoever public Church
Government, Rites, and Discipline, a National Council, Synod, and Parliament
shall conceive most consonant to Gods Word, unless it prove so in the whole
Kingdoms, Nations, and those very particular Churches Judgment, page 8. The
grounds of Independent Government, attribute nothing to the Magistrate in
Church affairs further then the Magistrate is a member of their Churches and
Assemblies, page 12. You can no more Justify a National Church of Christians
shall likewise go up to the Temple of Jerusalem from whence by the same
Prophecy, they are also to receive the Word of God, and not from Parliament,
Pope, Synod or Presbytery.

Mr. Henry Burton in his Vindication of Churches commonly called Independent,
etc. p. 49, 50, 51, etc: The Church is a spiritual kingdom, whose only King
is Christ, and not Man: It is a spiritual Re-publick, whose only Lawgiver is
Christ and not Man. No man nor power on earth, has a Kingly power over this
kingdom. No earthly Lawgiver may give laws for the government of this
Republic. No man can or ought to undertake the government of this communion of
Saints. No humane power or law may intermeddle to prescribe rules for the
government or form of this spiritual house. NOT COUNCELS, NOT SENATES. This is
Christ's Royal Prerogative, which is uncommunicable to ANY, TO ALL THE POWERS
ON EARTH, etc. he adds, p. 60, 61.

We challenge you to show us, any Parliament, Council, Synod, ever since the
Apostles, that could or can say thus, It seemed good to the Holy Ghost and us,
to determine controversies of Religion, to make and impose Canons to bind all
men, etc. Show this to us at this time, and we will obey. But if you cannot, as
you never can; never let any man press upon us that Scripture, that Synod,
which has no parallel in the whole world, and so is no precedent or pattern,
for any Council, Synod, Parliaments.

A short Answer to Adam Stewarts second part of his overgrown Duply to the Two
Brethren; with certain difficults questions easily answered: printed (without
license) 1644. supposed to be written by Mr. John Goodwin, p. 13, 17. But
perhaps you will say, there is an Act of Parliament, a Civil law declaring
heresy, or any different from the State opinions, such as for the present are
in fashion to be censurable by the civil power; I answer, not without all due
respect unto the laws, and such as made them, that if there be any distinction
between a Churchstate and a civill-state, which all Christians hitherto
acknowledge, the enacting civil laws to punish spiritual offenses, is not
only a solecisme or impropriety in state, but an incroaching on the Churches
power, a profaning of the Keys, and injurious to the offender, who by this
means is punished both beyond the degree and nature of his offense. If the
blessed Spirit should at any time bear witness unto your spirit, or unto the
spirit of a whole Parliament and Synod, what were this to the spirits of other
men? must not they wait with patience until the blessed Spirit be pleased to
visit their spirits likewise, before they can join with yours or the
Assemblies spirit? But if the Synods determination of this or that controversy
should seem good unto the holy Ghost, as the Churches decrees of Jerusalem did,
must they therefore be imposed upon the Country, the whole world? Is not this
to equallize your Synodall Canons with those decrees of the Apostolical Church
of Jerusalem, and to make Scripture of yours, as well as theirs? is not this to
add to Scripture? nay, to alter it, p. 28. But if King and Parliament may not
force a new Religion or Sect, suppose Presbyterian, upon the kingdom, much
less can the Synod, which neither has not yet pretends as is alleged, to use
the material sword? And if for matters of religion all power originally is in
Christ, as you sometimes acknowledge, How can King, Parliament, or Synod, wrest
it from him? Nay what think you? is it not secondarily in the people, as well
as civil power, which you affirm in the same page? and so doubtless is
spiritual power, unless you will make God to have provided mankind better of
a safeguard, or liberty to defend their bodies, than their souls: If then the
spiritual power be so inherently in the people next under Christ, as that they
cannot so well renounce and part from it in many respects, by what they may of
civil; how can it be thought by any one, that the King, Parliament, Synod,
though never so much importuned by a thousand such Asses, should go about to
settle a new Presbyterian Scotch government, with an intention to force a
conformity of the whole Kingdom, three quarters whereof cannot as yet be
thought to submit unto it willingly or for conscience sake, Page 32, 33, 34,
35, 36. Qu. 5. Is it not an ungodly thing to suffer men to be of any Religion?
Ans. No, For both our Savior his Apostles, and the Primitive Christians did
the same: neither is it in the power of flesh and blood to hinder it. Qu. 6. Is
it not the most unseemely sight to see the people of one City run seambling
from their Parishes to twenty Conventicles where so many several doctrines are
taught? An. No, but far more monstrous and abominable in the eyes of God, for
people of twenty several opinions for fear or favor to assemble and Join
together hyprocritically in one way of worship or Church discipline. Q. 8.
Ought we not then at least to keep our different opinions and Religion unto
our selves in obedience to the Civil Magistrate that commands it? An. No,
because it is better to obey God then man. Qu. 9. If Jesuited Papists and other
subtle Heretics be suffered, will they not likely seduce many unto their
erroneous by-pathe? Ans. Though a Tolleration of erroneous opinions may gain
some to satan, yet truth being therewith to be published and improved will in
all probabillity, not only gain so many more to God; but any one thus won
to God, unto his truth, is worth thousands of those that fall from it. Qu. 10.
But may not the multiplying of Heresies stifle or expel the truth like as the
abounding of tares and weeds often choke the wheat and for this cause not to
be permitted? An. Though it seem to be many of the first, yet our Savior in
the parable of Tares. Math. 13. teaches us a quite contrary doctrine, and
forbids (Heresies) the Tares to be pulled up before [the day of Judgment] the
harvest. v. 30. 39. least the wheat, the children of the Kingdom true
professors, v. 30. 39. be therewith rooted up. Qu. 21. Is it not a pious Act to
compel a Company of careless Idle people to hear a good sermon, to do a good
work whether they will or no; Ans. No more pious an Act, then for Papists to
use the like compulsion toward Jews and Protestants, enforcing them to hear
their sermons, Mass, or Vespers. Q. 24. May not the Civil Government interpose
to punish such Church members with whom the spiritual by reason of their
refractorinesse cannot prevail? Answ. Nothing less, since the Civil State or
government has no more power, nor virtue to make a Papist turn Protestant in
England, then it can prevail to make a Protestant become a Papist in Spain.
Qu. 29. But can there be any hurt in forceing refractory people to be present
at Religious orthodox assemblies, where if they will, they may be informed of
the truth. An. Yes, first because there can come no good thereof through want
of willingness, which God only reguards in him which is thus compelled; and
secondly, because this (forceing) is a doing evil that good may come thereof,
which is prohibited, Romans 3. 8.

The Falsehood of M. W. Prynnes Truth triumphing, etc. printed in London 1645.
without license (written by H. Robinson, who has set up a private unlicensed
printing Press) determines thus: p. 19. 20. 26. But did, the only wise God
think we resolve to create man after his own Image, to estate him in such a sad
and execrable condition, worse then that of beasts, wolves, Bears and Tigres,
as that he must necessarily tyrannize or be Tyrannized over both in soul and
body and yet it cannot possibly be otherwise; if you will grant a power to
Kings, Parliaments or Synods, to require conformity from others in any thing
which is not agreeable to their consciences; for if such a Latitude and height
of Jurisdiction be granted but to the more orthodox Kings Parliaments and
Synods; both Papists, Lutherans, Calvinists and Independants pretending and
really taking themselves to be the most orthodox, are bound in conscience to
lay Claim to, and put in Execution this power of Compelling all the world unto
their uniformity, and so infallibly produce the most cursed enmity and hatred
betwixt all the people but differing in opinion exceeding that of Cannibals, or
the profoundest of Antipathics between any rational creatures whatsoever. You
say the oposites to Parliaments Ecclesiastical Jurisdictions have formerly and
more especially in this Present Parliament addressed several Petitions to this
High and honorable Court for Reformation of the Church, etc. wherein under
favor, I conceive you have mis-apprehended their proceedings and Intentions,
which doubtless was for the most part, or best affected, that the Parliament,
in whom they acknowledge the Sovereign power to reside, would permit,
Countenance and encourage all godly men of gifts in preaching down Heresies,
Errors, Idolatry, Popery, etc. Many whereof had either been formerly
established by Law, or not permitted to be preached down, through the Prelates
corruption contrary to the Law. This is the best, even all the Reformation,
which the Civil Magistrate, as Civil, has a Capassity of compassing against
all Heresies and Errors, which must necessarily be vanquished by the sword of
the Spirit and cannot possibly be suppressed by carnal weapons or the civil
sword; they may destroy the flesh, but cannot properly be said to touch and
work upon the Spirit. It Is no small dis-service which you do both Parliament
and Assembly, in thus exposing their proceedings, to be questioned by no
little, and that the Pray God you prove so.
most conscionable and best affected party of the kingdom, such spirits of
contention as this of yours, were those which made the first great breach among
the Parliaments friends,

Master John Goodwins Theomathia, page 48, 49, 50. The generality and
promiscuous multitude of the World, who have a right of nominating persons to a
Parliamentary trust and power, are but a Secular Root, out of which the
Independent Brethren conceive, an impossibility that a spiritual extraction
should be made: A man may as well bring a clean thing out of an unclean, (in
Jobs expression) as make a spiritual extraction out of this secular root, who
have no Authority nor power from Christ to nominate or appoint who shall be the
men, that shall order the affairs of Christ's kingdom, or institute the
government of his Church; Therefore there is an impossiblity that a legitimate
Ecclesiastical power, should according to the mind of Christ, or any precept
or president of Scripture be by them conferred upon any man, or that the
persons so elected should have a power by virtue of such nomination or
election, to enact Laws or Statutes in matters of religion; and to order under
Mulcts and Penalties, how we shall worship and serve God.

Section II.
Comprizing their seditious, scandalous, libellous and daring passages against
sundry Ordinances and Proceedings of this present Parliament in particular not
to be paralel'd in any Age, nor tolerable in this.
THeir intolerable libellous seditious passages of this nature are so many and
various that I must branch them into several Heads. 1. Libellous seditious
passages against the Ordinances in regulating Printing.


I shall 1. begin with their Invectives against the several Ordinances of both
Houses of Parliament, for the regulating of Printing, and suppressing the great
late abuses, and frequent disorders, in printing many false, scandalous,
seditious, libellous and unlicensed Pamphlets, to the great defamation of
Religion and Government.

John Libourne in his unlicensed, printed Libell, entitled, A copy of a Letter
to Master Prynne, thus declares against these Ordinances page 2, 3. But being
that Neither I nor the black-coats, but the Parliament, were the sole Authors
of these Ordinances.
you and the Black-coats in the Synod, have not dealt fairly with your
Antagonists, in stopping the Press against us, while things are in debate,
yea, robbing us of our Liberty (as we are Subjects) in time of freedom, when
the Parliament is sitting, who are sufficiently able to punish that man And
therefore you who have abused your pen, as much as any man.
whatsoever he be) that shall abuse his Pen; so that whilst we are with the
hazard of our dearest lives, fighting for the Subjects Liberty, we are brought
into Egyptian bondage in this and other particulars, by the Black-coats, who I
am afraid will prove more cruel Task masters then their dear Fathers the
Bishops; who cowardly sit at home, in my apprehension, for no other end but to
breed faction and division amongst the You would say illaffected, as your
Libels against their power, Ordinances, and proceedings evidence
well-affected to to the Parliament, promoting thereby their own interest,
which is Laziness, Pride, Covetousness and Domination, endeavoring to lay
lower then the dust, a generation of men whom they falsely call Sectaries, that
have in the uprightness of their hearts, without Synodianlike ends, ventured
all they have in the world for the good of the Parliament, and the
Commonwealth of England, and who may bid defiance to all their adversaries,
that brand them with unfaithfulness; so that by means of which, I have not
been able that way, yet to accomplish my earnest desire; and truly it argues no
manhood nor valor in you not the Black-coats, by force to throw us down and
tie our hands, and then to fall upon us, to beat and buffet us; for if you had
not been men that had been afraid of your Cause, you would have been willing to
have fought and contended with us upon even ground and equal terms namely,
that the So it is in an orderly and regular, though not in a Libellous and
seditious way.
Press might be as open for us as for you, and as it was at the beginning of
this Parliament; which I conceive, the Parliament did of purpose, that so the
free borne English Subjects might enjoy their Liberty to Print Libels,
standers, invectives against Parliamentary proceedings, is not the Subjects
Liberty or privilege but his claim and shame.
Liberty and Privilege, which the Bishops had learned of the Spanish
Inquisition to rob them of, by locking it up under the key of an Imprimatur, in
whose tyrannical steps the Synod treads; so that you and they think you may
rail at us cum privilegio, and rank us amongst the worst and basest of men,
as Your Libels, carriages proclaim them such.
rooters up of Parliaments, and disturbers of States and Commonwealths.

The scurrilous, blaspemous, unlicensed Libell, styled, The Arraignment of
Persecution; thus contemptuously affronts and jeers this Ordinance, with the
Parliament, Synod and Directory, in the very Title Page; This is licensed and
printed according to holy Order, but not entered into the Stationers Monopoly:
and in the opposite page:

Die Saturni, April. 6. 1645.
It is Decreed and Ordained by the Reverend Assembly of Divines, now Assembled
in holy convocation, that Doctor Burgess and Master Edwands do return thanks
unto the worthy Author of this Treatise, entitled, The Arraignment of
persecution, for his Impious, and seditious, if you will not pious.
pious endeavors and vigilant care he has therein, at the entreaty of this
Synod. And it is further Ordained, that they do desire him, to print and
publish the said Treatise forthwith, and that it be recommended to the people,
as Rather a Diab^licall Libell against it.
a divine Handmaid to the right understanding of the Directory. And it is yet
further Decreed and Ordained, that none shall presume to print or re-print the
said Treatise, but whom he shall authorize under his own hand writing, till
this most holy Synod shall further Order.

Scribes.
Henry ROborough. Adoniran Byfield

I appoint my divine Cousin MARTIN CLAW-CLERGY, Printer to the Assembly of
Divines, and none else to print this Treatise.

Young MARTIN MAR-PRIEST.



What more audacious, jeering affront could be afforded to the Commons or
Assembly, then this feigned libellous Order?

In the Book it self, page 2. Persecution had a thousand trucks, above all the
rest, for to block up all passages. stop all mouths, and fortify himself
round; he turned reverend imprima^ur: and here the pursuer was at a stand; for
all was as fast as the Devil and the Presbyters could make it: They sought to
authority to Not to print modest and sober Trea^ies, but seditious Libels,
(...), blasphemy.
o^en the Press, and still the Presbyters (as the custom is) were in the way,
that nothing could be done.

P. 10. This fellow Persecution stops Presses, whereby men cannot make their
just defense, suffers nothing to be licensed, printed, preached, or otherwise
published, but what himself allows; and having thus bound the hands, and
stopped the mouths of all good men, then he comes forth in print against them,
like an armed man, and furiously assaults them, exaults and exalts himself
over them, faineth Arguments for them, and then like a valiant Champion, gives
them a conquering Answer, and thus puts them to flight, and pursues them with
revi^ings, scandals, forgeries, and opprobrious nicknames, as Anababaptists,
Br^wnists, Independents, Scismatiques, Heretics: Thus he deals with the
godly party; (How godly you are, well appears to all the world by these your
libellous, seditious, ungodly Pamphlets.)

The libellous Book in pursuance of this styled, A sacred Decretall etc.
proceeds in the same language, page 24. Lest they should fall upon our rear,
under pretense of suppressing the Kings papers, we bounded the Press with our
It was a Parliamentary Ordinance of both Houses not made by Presbiterians.
Presbyterian compass; that they could not without hazard of plundering,
transgress our reverend Imprimatur. Then issued out witless scholastic
Tractates, against the Anabaptists, etc. Having thus neatly stopped their mouths,
we sophisticated their Arguments, etc. and then with our politic Answers, we
present them to the people with an Imprimatur. JAMES CRANFORD or the like. We
employ Doctor Featly's Devil (a very reverend ten pound Sir John) to make a
description of the Anabapti^^s, etc. and this foul spirit for the love he
bears to the Black-coats at the Doctors decease, transmigrated into old Ephram
Pag^t (seldom lies the Devil dead in a dry ditch) so that the good old man to
confute the It seems th^^ Libeller denies the souls immortality, and writes as
it there were no heaven nor hell.
mortality of the soul, has made himself sure of an immortal spirit.

Many such scurrilous passages against the Ordinances for regulating printing,
(made by both Houses, special care and direction before the Assembly met) are
scattered in their libellous pamphlets, which I pretermit, wherein they write,
^s if there were neither heaven nor hell.

Only I shall add, that some of these persons have acted as contemptuously
against these Ordinances, as they have written and printed.

For Master Henry Robinson (the supposed Author of the Arraignment of
persecution. A sacr^d Decretal, M^^tyns Echo, and other most scurrilous,
seditious Libels) has maintained a private Printing-presse, and sent for
Printers from Amsterdam, wherewith he has printed most of the late scandalous,
libellous Books against the Parliament; and though he has been formerly sent
for before the Committee of Examinations for this offense, which was passed by
in silence; yet he has since presumed and proceeded herein in a far higher
strain then ever: besides John L^lburne being questioned before that Committee
by special Order of the Commons House for printing his libellous Letter*
contrary to th^se Ordinances* has pending his very Examinations*
contemptuously printed and dispersed abroad his false and scandalous Reasons
delivered in to that Committee, for printing his former libellous Letter, with
some marginall ^nno^ations and a scandalous, libellous Petition, Remonstrance
(as formerly Articles) against Colonel King; (to omit other printed unlicensed
Papers) an insolent contempt not to be paralleled, Libellous, seditious
passages against the Ordinance for Tithes.
at least not to be tolerated.

Secondly, I shall proceed to their libellous, scurrilous and seditious
Invectives against the Ordinance for payment of Tithes; which John L^lburne in
his forementioned libellous Letter thus affronts charging the Parliament with
no less then perjury and breach of their Covenant, for making it.

Page 4. 27. If you put the parliament in mind of their Covenant, tell them. I
think they have sworn to root out all Popery, and therefore have lately
abolished the Common Prayer (that great Idol) but yet have established Tithes,
etc. the very They were long before Popery; and being the Ministers
maintenance warranted not only by the law of Nature, of Nations, and the old
Testament, but by the new too, 1 Cor. 9. 7. to 16.
root and support of popery;which I humbly conceive is a contradiction of their
Covenant; and which will be ^ greater snare then the Common Prayer to many of
the precious consciences of Gods people, whose duty is, in my judgment, to dye
in prison, before they act or stoop unto so dishonorable a thing as this is to
their Lord and Master, as to maintain the black-coats with Tithes, whom they
look upon as the professed enemies of their anointed Christ; he that pays If
you add, by virtue and in (...) of the Leviticall law to Leviticall Priests,
your argument, might have some weight, but if by virtue of the forecited
Gospel Texts, the law of the Land and common equity to Ministers of the Gospel
(as now Tyths are (...)) your (...) nonsense
Tithes, is subject to the whole law of tithes, in which there was a Lamb to
be brought for a sin Offering, which is abolished; also, he that was to take
Tithes, Luke 10. 7. 1 Timothy 5. 17, (...).
was one that was to offer sacrifice daily for sin, which if any do so now,
it is to deny Christ come in the flesh, and to be the alone sacrifice for sin
by his death, and so overthrow all our comfort, joy and hope.

A most insolent, G^l. 6. 6.
scurrilous and seditious passage to stir up the people to rebel against
this Ordinance.

This Libell is thus seconded in the seditious pamphlet, instiled the
Arraignment of persecution, in the Epistle Dedicatory.

To the Reverend, learned Prolocutor, Assessors, the Commissioners of the
Church of Scotland, and the rest of the Venerable Assembly of Divines now
sitting in holy Convocation at Westminster.
Reverend Sirs,
According to my duty, at your divine entreaty I have reduced those pious
instructions received from you unto such a pleasing form as, I hope, shall not
only affect, but abundantly edify the people of this Kingdom under your holy
jurisdiction, for considering your spiritual care over them, and how your time
has been token up wholly in the procurement of that sacred Ordinance for
Tithes, wisely thought o^ before the Directory, for he is an Infidel and
denies the faith, that does not provide for his Family, etc. and page 26. lib.
Consc. My Lord, the Defendant smells of a fat benefice; see, see his pockets are
full of presbiterian steeples, the spires stick under his Girdle, ha, ha, ha:
instead of Weather-cocks, every spire has got a black-box upon it, and in it
the pure and imaculate Ordinance for Tithes, Oblations, etc. sure shortly
instead of Moses and Aaron, and the two tables, we shall have Sir Simon and Sir
John, holding the late solemn League and covenant, and that demure, spotless,
pretty, lovely, sacred, divine, and holy Ordinance for tithes (the two Tables
of our new Presbyterian Gospel) painted upon all the Churches in England: O
brave Sir Simon, the Bells in your pocket chime all-in, ours chime all-out; I
pray give you a funeral Homily for your friends here, before you depart; here is
twenty shillings for your pains; you know it is sacrilege to bring down the
price, as it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be* world without
end, Amen. Sop. 38. My Lord, but our dissembly Doctors teach otherwise; yet I
think if your Lordship should settle Anabaptistry or the like, even that which
they now persecute and threaten, preach and pray against, and forwarne the
people of as heretical and damnable, provided you should endow it with goodly
fat Benefices, and sanctify it with the hallowed Ordinance for Tithes,
offerings, oblations etc. questionless the generality of those persecutors of
Anabaptists, would have the wit to turn Anabaptists, for their Religion is
moved upon the wheel of the State: Our Temporizing Doctors, our state
Protestant Ministers are not so simple to swim against the stream, they are
wiser in their generation, for they know most wealth goes that way; as long as
our Ordinance is laden with Tithes, offerings oblations, they will be sure to
give fire; but should the State deprive their Religion of all Ecclesiastical
revenue, of parsonages, tithes, etc. yea, should it be this very Presbytery
they so aim at, that they should so impoverish, certainly we should have more
parishes then Presbyters, more steeples then Doctors; then they would not be so
hot for Presbytery, or zealous to persecute its opposers; I would your Lordship
would make trial; call in but your Ordinance for tithes, and turn them to the
good will of people, and then -- a tythe-Pig will be sold for a penny.

Page 44. there is this scurrilous Quere put among others. 5. Whether the late
divine Ordinance for tithes, offerings, oblations and conventions, be not
better Gospel, and in all Presbyterian wisdom to be preferred and provided
before the Directory for the worship of God?

O cives, cives, quaerenda pecunia primum Virtus post nummos.

Many more clauses of like nature are in this profane Libell, which I
pretermit.

But that which is the most audacious, contemptuous, seditious, public affront
of all others against the Ordinance, is the profane, scurrilous Libell,
entitled. A Sacred DECRETALL nor Hue and cry from his superlative holiness,
Sir Simon Synod, for the apprehension of reverend young MARTIN MAR-PRIEST: In
the front whereof there is the picture of a Bull, tossing Sir Simon Synod on
his horns, and trampling the ordinance for Tithes under his feet, with this
inscription upon it, ORD. for TITHES.

And page 2. this explanation of it; nothing appears but a Bull tossing Sir
John upon his horns, and stamping the blessed Ordinance for tithes under his
cloven feet; O PROFANE MARTIN! O wicked MARTIN! O sacrilegious MARTIN! O
blasphemous MARTIN! what? toss a Presbyter, and profane the holy Ordinance
for tithes? MARTIN'S not a beneficed man, that is infallible divinity; wherefore
being thus jeered and bul'd, we Decree and Ordain etc.

Page 7. 8. 10. the subtle tell-tale must be taken, else all is mart'd; both
Parliament and people will understand our deceit, and then Sir John may go
whistle for his tithes, if the people once understand their own right: and
that the exaction of tithes IS MERE THEFT and ROBBERY: they will have the wit
(if they be wise) to keep their own; cease hiring us to cheat and delude them
to their faces, and we shall be laid level with the mechanic illiterate
Laics; a wickedness not to be mentioned in the Church of God. Page 10. 11.
Else how should we have got in our Tithes, though now, God be thanked and the
Parliament, we have an Ordinance for it: In case Martin run, push or gore at
the Ordinance for tithes with the right horn, at the Directory with the left
horn, let all the trained bands in the Kingdom he speedily raised to confute
him, that we may sophistically conclude our Presbyterian premises, with take
him Jailer.

Martyns Echo proceeds in the like dialect, page 3. 4. 14. (o divine pillage,
graceful children!) if he had considered your pious providence to make sure
the ordinance for tithes, before you could be inspired with the Directory, he
would first have had his 400. l. per annum with the Deane of Paul's house,
confirmed by the Ordinance of Parliament upon him during his natural life,
like as our Brother Burges has (a super-Episcopall Induction, etc.) If Sir
John Synod shall renounce the Ordinance of tithes, be content with the good
will of the vulgar, etc. then Martyn will cease libelling against him: In the
mean time you are to provide that order may be taken, that the supervisers make
diligent search and enquiry after all conventicles and private meetings, etc.
for they are very dangerous and destructive to your proceedings; for truly
their practice and obedience to Christ will make your Law and Gospel, your O^d.
for tithes, and your Directory the two great commandments, the fulfilling of
the Law, and the Prophets, your Fathers, of none effect.

Many such passages I find against the Ordinance for tithes; the very design
of these libellous and seditious Sectaries being to incite the people to
withold all Tithes and maintenance from their Ministers, and so to subvert
the Ministry, that none but their illiterate Tub-preachers may instruct men's
souls; and this (I fear) brings many Ministers into question as scandalous and
malignant, who might else sit quiet would they desert their Tithes, and
renounce their ministry to please these Sectaries.

Thirdly, (...).
I shall recite some of their contumelious libellous Invectives against the
Ordinances of both Houses of the 26 of April: That no person or persons be
permitted to (...) Minister.

The seditious, libell^^^ pamphlet entitled* A sacred synodicall Decretal; or
(...) from (...) Simon Synod, for the apprehending of Martyn Ma-Priest: (the
Quintessence of scurrility, blasphemy and sedition) writes thus, page 5. Yea
he will not stick to tell the people, that the inhans^^ng and engrossing of
Interpretations, Preachings and Discipline into our own hands, is a mere
Monopoly of the spirit, worse then the Monopoly of soape, etc. and that the NEW
ORDINANCE of the 26. of April, that no person or persons be permitted to preach
that is not ordained a Minister, etc. is but a Patent of the spirit, to get the
whole trade into their own hands, and so rob the people with what Ware, and of
what price we please, thereby only to advance and enrich themselves,
impoverish and delude them, look in their faces and pick their pockets: If
preaching should not be reduced and confined in the ancient bounds of the
Clergy, the Mechanics would outstrip the Scholasticks in teaching and *
knowledge would so increase and multip^y among the common people, He should say
(...).
and preaching grow so common with them, that we should grow out of esteem, and
all things that are good and dainty depart from us; therefore it was wisely
prevented in time.

Page 17. Martyn will tell the people, that we (Sir Simon Synod) FORGED THE NEW
ORDINANCE (that none may preach that is not ordained Minister, on purpose to
make the Sectaries fly before us (to use the Doctors phrase) like lightning
before the thunder. Their preaching in the Army is very destructive to our
Cloth; therefore the Ordinance was wisely commended to his Excellency Sir
Thomas Fairfax to be executed there, which occasioned a pretty story betwixt an
Englishman and one of Jemmy's own Countrymen: quoth the Scotch-man, Man, is
it fit that Colonel Cromwels Soldiers should preach in their Quarters, to
take away the ministerial function out of the Ministers hands? Why man (quoth
the English man) do they so? quoth the Scotch-man, I say man it is a common
thing amongst them; truly says the English man, I remember they made a gallant
Sermon at Marston-Moore near York (where they were Instruments to save this
Kingdom) but your Countrymen were in such a fright, they durst not stay to
hear them: MARTIN prays (notwithstanding the Ordinance) they may make many
such Sermons, for that was one of the best Sermons that has been preached in
the Kingdom since our troubles began.

Page 21. Indeed Sir John's gummes being lately rubbed with a Parliament Coral
(the late Ordinance that none may treach that is not ordained a Minister) is
mad to put his boarish tuskes, his huge great iron fangs in execution; to
devour, rend, tear and crush these Heretics. And therefore we wisely
consulted among our selves of a COMMITTEE OF EXAMINATIONS to be chosen out of
us. It must not be esteemed a Court of Inquisition* that is Popery: nor a
renovation of the High Commission that is Antichristian; only an inlet to a
through Reformation, that is a godly name and may do much good* etc.

How contemptuously they have opposed this very Ordinance in their practice,
sending our their Emissaries, Captains and Soldiers every where to preach in
corners, and giving tickets of the time and place of their conventicles (some
of them boasting of working miracles, and casting devils out of men possessed
by their exercis^es at the Jesuits and Papists do) is so experimentally known
to all and proved before the Committee of Examinations, in the case of Captain
(newly) Hobson, a Tailor, and his confederate Lay-preachers, who lately
exercised their new ministerial function near Neuport Painel, railing against
our Church, Ministry and childrens baptism, that it needs rather Reformation
by, then Information to the higher Powers.

I shall close this Section with some general passages, affronting and jeering
all Ordinances of Parliament in direct terms.

The new most seditious Libell, called Martyns Echo, published the last week,
styles Ordinances of Parliament TOYS: page 11. You must be careful that your
Directory and all other yout Ecclesiastical Acts, be with great sanctity and
reverence adored amongst the people, or else your esteem will go down; and
this cannot be done without some severe Laws, ordinances and the like to that
end, which you must put the Parliament upon; you know your power and influence
upon them, they will gratify you with SVCH TOYS, etc.

The late seditious pamphlet, styled A sacred Decretal, is yet more vile; page
3. 4. O ye classical Clerks and Sextous of the three Kingdoms, demolish and
pull down all the Martyns nests from your Church-wals and steeples, and have a
spiritual care (as you will answer the contempt of the new ordinance) that
hereafter no birds build, chatter, do their business, or sing there, but
Church-owles, Jackdawes, otherwise called Sir John's, blind Bats, Presbyterian
Woodcocks, and the like: O ye two Houses of Parliament, make another Ordinance
to make all the MARTINS fly the three Kingdoms the next midsommer with
Cuckowes and Swallows, that we may have a blew-cap Reformation among Bats,
Owls, Jackdawes and Woodcocks (and then blew-cap for us.)

I could furnish you with more such Independent stuff, but I am loath to defile
more paper with this infernal language of rai^ing Rabshakeh's; and shall here
appeal to every ingenuous man's conscience, whether he can with any shadow of
reason or charity believe, that this froward, libellous generation of
Independent Sectaries, who thus publicly libell, inveigh and oppose themselves
against the jurisdiction, Ordinances and proceedings of Parliament, are the
most (...)
holy, religious, conscientious, best affected party; the most precious Saints
and generation of Gods dearest ones; the Parliaments best and faithfullest
friends who have to their utmost power, and diverse of them beyond their
ability, supported and ventured their lives in the Parliaments cause and
service; doing them more real and faithful service then any other generation
of men in England, and the only Vindicators of the Parliaments Privileges and
Subjects Liberties against presbiterian and synodical usurpations; (as they
boast in every one of these their Libels against the Parliament and its
proceedings;) Or whether they are nor in truth those (...).
despisers of government, those evil speakers against dignities, those
resisters of the higher powers, prophesied of the last times; (...) Pet. 2. 10.
who have forgotten Saint Paul's Canon, Romans 13. 1. Let every soul be subject
to the higher powers, etc. and Tit. 3. Put them in mind to be subject to
principalities and powers, (...) 13. 2, 3.
to obey Magistrates, etc. Yea, the most desperate unparalled, public
contemners, affronters, deriders of the Parliaments power, Ordinances,
proceedings that ever breathed in our English Climate: who under the pretext
name and color of the well-affected, faithful, godly party, and stoutest
Champions for the Parliament, endeavor by degrees to advance themselves (by
policy and the Sword) above it, and trample its authority (as they do the
Ordinance for Tithes, and others) in the very Front of their sacred Decretal,
under their cloven feet. Doubtless they can never fight cordially for the
Parliament and its proceedings (but only for their own designs and
interests) who that seditiously, contemptuously speak, write, print against
them; and if their insolences against the parliament, Synod, Magistrates, be
already grown so intolerable, whiles their faction is yet but in the birth,
how transcendently arogant and contumelious will they prove when they have
accroached greater power, both in our Armies and Councels? God give our
supreme council hearts, wisdom, zeal and fervency seriously to suppress
and punish these Epidemicall growing insolences in due time, for fear they
become masterlesse, remediless in the end; else these Anabaptistical
sectaries, these Germane opinions and practices will (I fear) suddenly involve
us in the Germane, Anabaptisticall distractions, insolences, wars and
disolations, recorded by Sleidan and others, for Englands admonition.

Section III.
Containing scandalous, seditious, scurrilous passages against the National
Vow and Covenant, prescribed by Parliament.
THis National Vow and covenant was deemed at first the only probable means
under God to unite our three Kingdoms and the protestant party of all sorts
together in a mutual, brotherly, inviolable League against the common enemies
of our Religion, parliament, Laws and Liberties: It was therefore universally
prescribed to the Members of both Houses, the Assembly of Divines, Lawyers of
all sorts, the Officers and Soldiers in the Army, and to the Ministers and
people of all conditions under the parliaments power in all our three
Dominions, being refused, oppugned at first apparently by none but papists,
Royalists or Malignants: And the Houses were so impartial in the prescription
of it, that such Members of the Lords or Commons House, who did but scruple the
taking of it, were suspended the Houses till they did conform. But now of
late, a generation of Independent Sectaries, conceiving this Covenant to thwart
their licentious, schismatic whimseys, not only generally refuse to take
it, and plead a special privilege and exemption from it (as if they were more
privileged persons then any Peers, Commons or Subjects whatsoever, and must
be left at large to do what they lift, when all others are obliged, (and which
is strange to me and others, some Independent Ministers,) if not Members of
Parliament who have taken it themselves, and enjoined it to others, have yet
adventured to plead for an exemption of this mere refractory party from it,
which much encourages them in their obstinate refusal of it, and has so
animated this seditious, lawless generation, that they have lately in print,
not only oppugned, but derided, libelled against this sacred Covenant (which
we have all most solemnly in Gods presence sworn, and under our hands
subscribed to maintain to the utmost of our power, even with the hazard of our
lives and fortunes) which, I beseech you, let us all now most cheerfully,
really observe, by proceeding against the contemners infringers of it, or else
for ever as readily, as solemnly renounce it, to our eternal infamy, as we at
first cheerfully subscribed to it.

I shall begin with John Lilbournes Letter: page 6. 7. It may be in stead of
satisfying my desire, you will run and complain to the Parliament, and press
them with their Covenant, to take vengeance upon me. If you do, I weigh is
not; for I bless God I am fitted to do or suffer whatsoever the Parliament
shall impose upon me; but if you do, take these two along with you: if you put
them in mind of their Covenant, tell them, I think they have sworn to root out
all Popery, but yet have established Tithes, the very root and support of
Popery, which I humbly conceive is a contradiction to their Covenant etc. A
bold censure and scandal.

The Arraignment of persecution, thus traduceth and jeers the reverend Assembly
of Divines and Covenannt together: page 33. 34. Persecution, Is thy name
perfect Reformation? Perse. Yes my Lord: Judge. Who gave you this name? I,
Reason, His Godfathers and Godmothers in his Baptism, wherein he was made a
Member of the Assembly, and an inheritor of the Kingdom of Antichrist. Judge,
Who are your Godfathers and Godmothers? Pers. My Lord, Master Ecclesiastical
supremacy, and Master Scotch-government are my Godfathers; Mistress
State-ambition, and Mistress Church-revenue are my Godmothers, and I was
sprinkled into the Assembly of Divines at the taking of the late SOLEMN LEAGVE
AND COVENANT. Judge. It Is strange that at the making of the late solemn League
and Covenant, blood-thirsty persecution should be anabaptized present
Reformation: then HERE IS A DESIGN OF BLOOD IN THE COVENANT, if under the name
of Reformation the Clergy have infused the traiterous, blood-thirsty spirit of
persecution into it. J. Human. My Lord, there was never any National or
provincial Synod but strengthened the hand of persecution, and that under the
vizor of Religion, J. Reason, As soon as these underling Divines are from under
their Episcopal Taskmasters, and beginning to encroach upon your Lordships
power, they presently take this notorious, bloody traitor persecution, stripped
by your Lordship of his High Commission habit, and out of their zeal dress
him in a divine synodicall Garb, and change name from persecution, and
christen him Reformation, so to engage your Lordship and the Kingdom of
England and Scotland in blood, to settle and establish bloody persecution BY
COVENANT, over the Consciences of honest and faithful men to the State, under
the specious and godly pretense of Reformation: page 39. By the late SOLEMN
LEAGVE and COVENANT, good Lord deliver us.

The sacred Decretal runs in the same strain: page 13. 19. When we had
introduced the Brethren of the holy League, we so joined their hands in the
Synodian hands of Presbytery* that their League could not be inviolate, their
COVENANT (the bed of their contract) undefiled if our presbitry were not
concluded. Martyn will tell the people, that we contrive Oaths and COVENANTS
merely to ensnare and catch the people in our wiles; make them carry a face of
Reformation according to the Word of God, and thereby betray their innocent
subscription to our presbyterian construction.

John Lilbourne in the unlicensed printed Reasons of sending this Letter; page
4. complains against the Parliament; that the COVENANT was as earnestly pressed
upon tender consciences, though their faithfulness were no what doubtful, as
upon Newtrals and Malignants, and refusing, because of some expressions, put
from Offices of trust, and public employments.

Yet most of our sectaries and Independents (in immitation of the Cavaleers)
have entered into Ants covenants against this SOLEMN COVENANT, in their private
Congregations, to defend^ and maintain their own Independent government even
to blood etc. whatever form of government the Parliament shall establish; the
very extremity and height of seisme and sedition, if not of professed rebellion
against supreme Authority; which makes them thus to villifie, traduce and
contemptuously refuse the taking of this SOLEMN COVENANT, and plead exemption
from it, for fear of dis-ingaging so faithful considerable A PARTY as they
have in the Army; who in time (perchance) will prescribe their new
Church-covenants unto us, or else exclude us from our Native soil, as now they
do from their Independent Congregations and the Sacraments, unless we will
submit unto them.

Section IV.
Containing sundry scurrilous, seditious, libellous, railing and blasphemous
Invectives against the Assembly of Divines, the Presbyterian Members of it, and
their proceedings, though summoned, nominated, continued and directed in all
things by Ordinances of both Houses of Parliament.
BEfore this Assembly met by Order of both Houses, or had given intimation what
kind of Ecclesiastical Government they intended to fix upon, our Independent
sectaries not only petitioned for such an Assembly to be called, but made
means that as many of their party as possible might be elected Members of it.
But when at last they discerned the Assembly and Parliament to dis-affect their
anomolous, absurd Independent way, as having no foundation in Divinity nor
Policy, and tending to utter confusion in Church, State; and thereupon to
incline to a Presbiteriall government, embraced by all reformed Churches in the
Christian world; upon this they presently begin to declaime against the
Assembly and their proceedings in private, and soon after to libell against
them in-publike, with such unchristian, uncivil, approbrious, Billingsgate
terms, as (I am confident) no Oxford Aulicus or Satyricall cavaleere is able
to parallel, their very tongues and pens, being doubtless James 3. 6.
set on fire of hell: And not contented herewith, they lately conspired
together to exhibit a petition to the Parliament, for present dissolving the
Assembly and sending them hence to country cures (to prevent the settling of any
Church Government,) to which end, they met at the Windmil Tavern, where
Lievteu. Col. John Lilbourne (a fit instrument for such a seditious design)
sat in the chair, and Master Hugh Peter suggested the advice, which was
accordingly inserted into the Petition; but the Common counsell-men (smelling
out the design) when the Petition came to their hands, most discreetly left
out that request, as seditious and unjust; which yet the libellous Author of
Martyns Echho. page 15. has since in wish renewed in these scandalous terms.

You have as near as you can made a third party, in laboring by your
Jesuiticall machiavilian subtilty, to divide the Parliament, contrary to the
trust reposed in them from the godly party, who have assisted them with their
estates and blood, (...).
and to deny those their faithful friends of their just deservings, their
purchased freedoms, which should they do, they would be branded as infamous
to posterity, even unfaithful, ungrateful, etc. at meliora spero, I hope
better of them if your wicked Machiavilian Assembly were but taken from them
and sent to their particular charges.

In what sort they have libelled against them, has partly appeared in other
Sections, but I shall give you a more particular account thereof in this.

I shall begin with that most infamous, seditious, railing Libell, entitled,
The Arraignment of persecution, the whole scope whereof against the Assembly,
is thus boldly expressed in the very Title page, The Arraignment of Master
Persecution, presented to the consideration of the House of Commons, and to all
the Common people of England: In the prosecution whereof, the Jesuitical
designs and secret encroachments of his Defendants, Sir Simon Synod, and the
John of all Sir John's, Sir John Presbiter, upon the liberty of the subject, is
detected and laid open, by reverend young Martyn Marpriest, son to old Martyn
the Metropolitan; printed by Martyn Claw-Clergy, Printer to the reverend
Assembly of Divines, for Bartholinew Bang-Priest, and are to be sold at his
shop in Toleration-street, at the sign of the subjects liberty, right opposite
to Persecution-court, 1645.

The seigned License and Epistle Dedicatory to the Assembly before it are
altogether libellous, as is the whole book, against the Assembly and its
Members: I shall give you only a taste of some phrases and epithites in it,
viz. Such a holy such a reverend Assembly, such a Quagmire of croaking,
skip-jack Presbiters, A reverend synodian, disguised with a sophistical pair
of breeches, saving your presence in Bocardo, Sir Simon Synod: New upstart
frisking Presbiters, Synodian Cormorants, the Synodian Whore of Babylon; the
traitorous Synod, called the Assembly of Divines, presbiterian horse-leeches,
blood thirsty Cattle; this great gore-bellied idol called the Assembly of
Divines, Arch-Jesuiticall traitors; the Jesuiticall and traitorous designs of
the Synod; our dissembly Doctors, a Consistory of devils, and the like. These
be the charitable, modest, Independent Epithites which this libeller bestows
upon them. See next his libellous and blasphemous speeches against and censure
of them, and the good end his charity wishes to them.

Page 1^. The Synod is guided by the holy Ghost sent in a cloke-bagge from
Scotland, as of old from Rome in the Council of Trent: Note.
Because the Assembly have sadled the Parliament, it is unlawful for the
Presbiters to go on foot: page 29. The traitorous Synod called the Assembly of
Divines, labors with might and main to establish and settle this traitorous
spirit (of persecution) in the land.

page 35. 36. It is most certain that this fellow, whose name Sir Simon
faineth to be Reformation, is absolute Persecution, so that had these Reformers
but as much power as Queen Marie's Clergy, their reformation, would conclude in
fire and faggot.

Judge. Oh insufferable Assembly! I see, it is dangerous for a state to pin their
faith upon the sleeve of the Clergy.

J. Reason. Further my Lord, whereas others are impoverished, spend their
estates, engage and loose their lives in this Quarrel they are enriched and
advanced by it, A most Independ^nt false calumny.
save their purses and persons, cram and fill their greedy guts, too filthy to
be carried to a Bear, heap up wealth to themselves, and give not a penny,
while others (against whom they exclaim) venture and expend all; yea my Lord,
this great gorebelly Idol, called the Assembly of divines, is not ashamed in
this time of state-necessity, to gull up and devour more at one meal, then
would make a feast for Bell and the Dragon: for besides all their fat Benefices,
forsooth they must have their four shillings apeece by the day for sitting in
constollidation, and poor men, when they had filled all benefices with good
Trencher-men of their own presbiterian Tribe, they move your Lorpship, that
all Ministers may be A gross scandal, they never de^^red, but to be
moderately taxed in equa^ity with others:
wholly freed from all taxations, that now the trade of presbiter is the best
trade in England; all are taxed, and it goes free; poor men that have no bread
to still the cry of their children, must either pay and go in person to the
wars, while these devouring Church lubbers live at ease, feed on dainties,
neither pay nor go themselves, but preach out our very hearts; they make it a
case of conscience to give all, but wise men they will give none: Let the sick,
the lame and maimed soldiers, and those that have lost their limbs and beg
in streets; let women that have lost their Husbands, let parents that have lost
their children, let children that have lost their parents, and let all that
have or suffer oppression and misery in and for the public Cause consider
this, and be no longer ridden and jaded by Clergy masters; but to give the
devil his due, one thing to their commendations I have observed, that they are
so zealously affected with the honor of their Cloth, that 'twere pity to
disrobe them of their cassock Garb, to be led in a string from Westminster to
Algate in Leatherne Jackets, and Mattockes on their shoulders: and my Lord,
though some think they would do the State more good in leatherne jackets and
Mattockes, then in long cloakes and cassockes, yet my think they would do the
state better service with their canonical girdles, were the knot tied in the
right place.

page 36. 37. Primacy, Metropolitanisme, prelacy, etc. are shrunk into the
presbytery, and our High Commission turned into an Assembly of Divines.

My Lord, they have sat even till they have run mad, you might do well to
adjourne, them to Bedlam; for my Lord, they are raging mad to have the innocent
blood of the Anabaptists, Brownists, Independents etc.

My Lord, they have over-studied themselves and even wracked their wits to find
out a Religion for us; poor men they have been mightily puzzled about it, it
has cost them the consumption of many: fat pig, chicken, capon, etc. the
infusion of many a cup of sack to bring it to birth, and after such dolorous
pangs and bitter troubles for almost these two years, who would have thought
they would be delivered of such a ridiculous vermin, called a Presbyter;
parturiunt montes, nascitur ridiculus mus: And now my Lord, after this
montanous delivery, they are at their wits end, (...) their.
what dressing to put it out in; all the Tailors in the Kingdom are not able
to content them, what to do they know not, and now the matter's worse then
ever it was; they had thought to have shown the world it in the godly shape of
Reformation, but upon examination, it is found to be Persecution; a sad event!
there is no way now but Bedlam for our Doctors, it may chance to chastise them
into their wits again, and then upon their second thoughts, it may be, they are
bethink themselves to put a blew bonnet upon'^, and then it will pass from
England to Scotland, and Scotland to England again without question or
control.

Page 93. Good my Lord have mercy upon me; I beseech your honor even for the
Clergy sake have mercy upon me; consider my Lord, that in my death is their
ruin, it will be the greatest inroad upon the Divines of Christendom, that
ever was made: Oh!

I beseech you my Lord. by the Mystery of their holy Convocation, by their
agony and bloody sweat, by their cross and passion, at my shameful
approaching death and burial, Good Lord deliver me.

By their glorious resurrection and assention from the Pulpit above the State;
by the coming of the holy Ghost to them in a cloak-bag from Scotland, Good
Lord deliver me.

By the late solemn League and Covenant; by the 400. and 50. l. for the Copy
of their Directory, because they could get no more, by all the fat Benefices
and goodly revenues of the Clergy, Good Lord deliver me.

Page 43. 44. It is the sentence of this Court concerning Sir Simon and Sir
John Presbyter, who have thus Jesuitically endeavored to pervert the Justce of
this Court, That Sir Simon be committed close prisoner to King Henry the eights
chapel, there to be kept in Parliamentary safe custody, till the Great
Assiges, held in the first year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord Christ
(when the Kingdom and the greatness of the Kingdoms under the whole Heaven
shall be given to the Saints of the most high) there and then to be arraigned
with the rest of his holy Tribe* whether universal, national, provincial or
consistorial counsels or Synods, whatsoever before his Highness the King of
Kings and Lord of Lords; and my Lord in the mean time to keep his Holiness in
action, I beseech your Honor that he may Synodicate, a full resolution to
these ensuing Queries, 1. Whether it does not as much conduce to the subjects
liberty still to be subjected to Episcopal usurpation, as to be given over to
Presbyterian cruelty? Whether Saint Peter's chair does not become a Presbyter,
as well as a Bishop? etc.

As for Sir John Presbit^r, this Court has voted him to the unclean, filthy,
impious* unholy dark and worldly Dungeon, called jure Humano, etc. as for
Persecution, the sentence of this Court is, that thou shall return to the place
from whence thou came to wit the noisome and filthy Cage of every unclean
and hateful bird, The Clergy of Christendom there to be fast bound with
inquisition, synodical, classical, Pres^byter, al chains, until the appearing
of that great and terrible J^dge of the whole earth; who shall take thee alive,
with Sir Simon and his son Sir John and cast thee with them and their
Confederates into the Lake of fire and brimstone, where the Beast and the false
Prophet are, there to be tormented day and right (...) ever and ever.

Here is the Independents incomparible charity to the Assembly, Presbyters and
their Adherents, to adjudge them thus to eternal torments in the fiery Lak^; I
fear their New-Lights originally sprung upthence, without more charity,
sobriety, will undoubtedly be extinguished in this fiery region which they
allot to others: the rest of the Invectives against the Assembly and Presbytery
in this persecuting Arraignment. I shall pass by in silence and proceed to
some fresher scurrilites of this kind.

I find another most scurrlous Libell against the Assembly and their
proceedings thus entitled; A sacred Decretall, or Hue and Cry from his
superlative Holiness Sir Simon Synod, for the apprehension of reverend young
Martin Ma^-priest; wherein are displayed many witty synodian conceits, both
pleasant and commodious; printed by Martin Claw-Clergy, Printer to the reverend
Assembly of Divines, for Bartholmew Bang-Priest, and are to be sold at his shop
in Toleration-street, at the sign of the subjects Liberty, right opposite to
Persecution^ Court, and it concludes thus, Given at our Court of Inquisition in
King Henry the sevenths Chapel June 6. 1635.

William Twisse, Prolocutor. Cornelius Burges Assessor. John White, Assessor.
Adoniran Byfield Hen. Roborough S^ibes.
This Libell brings in the Assembly, blasphemously abusing the sacred Scripture
Names of God (as El, Eloim, Jah, Theos, Adonas, etc.) in Synodicall
Convocation, classical and Presbiteriall Exorcismes: and page 2. Gives the
Assembly and Presbiters these most scurrilous, railing Epithites; classical
Bore-p^gges, divine, white-faced Bull-calves; Presbyterian Turkey-cocks,
bidding them advance their learned Coxcombs, etc. Church-owles, Jack-dawes,
blind Bats, Presbyterian Wood-cockes, Presbyterian Hangmen cruel executioners,
terrible tormenters, synodian Canibals, the ravenous tythe-panched numerous
headed Hydra of Divines: The holy ravenous Order of Syon-Jesuits, absolute
Jesuits, only a little worse: It begins thus, page 1. We the Parliament of
Divines now Assembly in holy Convocation at Westminster, taking into our grave,
learned and pious consideration, all the goodly fat Benefices of the Kingdom,
the reverend estimation, honor and supremacy due unto the Clergy, and out of a
godly care and pious providence as becomes Divines* for our own guts, having
used all subtilty and policy we in our divine wisdoms could devise, to take a
goodly possession of the dearly beloved glorious inheritance of our Fathers the
late Lord Bishops, their divine supremacy, their sweet, their wholesome and
nourishing revenues, their dear, delicate, toothsome tithes, most
supernatural and pleasant to a divine palate: After which it calls them The
p^issant Assembly of Divines (Lords Paramount over Church and State) in
Parliament Assembled at Westminster, divine Merchants, etc. Avers p. 18. That
the Order. Jesuits may become Disciples to the Order of presby^ers for
equivocations, mental reservations, dispensations of Oaths, Covenants, etc.
Charge the Assembly, p. 6. For dealing craft^ly with the Parliament and
cheating the State. Adding this most scandalous, seditions passage, extremely
derogatory to the Parliaments honor.

As the way of a serpent upon a rock is unknowable, so have our circumventions,
underminigs and subtle contrivances been ever invisible, insensible to them,
and so silently, secretly and gradually, have enticed them with the bait of
Religion; and caught them with a synodian hook; we held out the League and
Covenant, the Cause of God, and the like, to the Kingdom, and at length plucks
up a fish called a Parliament out of their proper Magisteriall Element, into
our synodian spirituallity; and thus neatly wrested the Scepter out of their
bands, that they neither know nor perceive it; (...).
that in truth the Assembly is Dissembled into the Parliament, and the two
Houses made but a stalking horse to the designs of the Clergy: They say it is
decreed and ordained by the Lords and Commons, etc. but in plain English, it
is the Assembly of Divines; it is true, it is the Lords and Commons in the
History, but the Assembly of Divines in the Mystery, as Martin wisely hinted in
his License before the book of the Arraignment; for we are become the whole
directive and coercive power both in Church and State, a supremacy due unto us,
as well as to the Pope; and though we give them (as men do bables to children)
the title of making and judging of Laws, to please them, yet with such
distinctions and limitations (to speak this under the Rose) that we intend for
our selves, that which we give unto them, even as our Brethren of the society
of Jesus do concerning his Holiness the Pope, in the infallibility and
temporal power: this honor and privilege was of divine right given, and
anciently enjoyed by our reverend Fathers the Bishops; and why should not we be
heirs unto it by our legitimate lineall descent? All Laws, Statutes and
Ordinances, both concerning Church and State, were Decreed, Ordained and
enacted by the Lords spiritual and temporal, etc. And why not now by the
Assembly of Divines and Parliament now Assembled at Westminster? this is not
yet in the History, for indeed our matter is not yet ripe for such a discovery,
etc.

As all other wicked men, so these seditions Libellers grow worse and worse;
their next most seditious Libell against the Assembly and Parliaments
proceedings being entitled, Martins Echo, or a Remonstrance from his
holiness reverend young Martin Mar-priest, responsory to the late sacred
synodical Decretal; in all humility presented to the reverend pious and grave
consideration of the right reverend Father in God, the universal Bishop of our
souls his superlative Holiness Sir Simon Synod.

It begins thus.

Whereas his Holiness reverend young Martin Mar-priest; taking into his grave
and learned consideration the insufferable arrogance of our ambitions, aspiring
Presbytery their super-prelaticall supremacy, their ravenous blood-thirsty
malice against the poor Saints of the most high God, their inordinate,
insatiable covetousness after the fat things of the Land, their unparalled
hypocrisy, their plausible pretenses* their incomprehensible policy, craft and
subtilty; their cunning insensible encroachments upon the privileges of
Parliament, the just liberties of and freedom of the people; (...).
their enchanting delusions wherewith they bewitch both Parliament and
multitude, the cruel thraldom, inhumane slavery, insufferable bondage they
would reform us and our Children unto from generation to generation; their
powerful endeavors to make the Parliament betray their trust, break their
Oaths, pull down old Courts of tyranny and oppression, to set up new; free us
from Episcopal persecution, to devour us with presbyterian cruelty; convey our
natural rights and freedom to the pontifical usurpation of the Clergy, that
neither we nor our children after us (notwithstanding the expense of our
estates ruin of our families, effusion of our blood to redeem them) may live
in the land without the hazard of imprisonment, loss of goods, banishment,
hanging etc. except we be presbiterian: these and many other things of high
concernment, reverend young Martin taking into his serious and deliberate
consideration* and seeing this eminent, irrecoverable ruin ready to devour
both Parliament and people hang over their heads, threatening certain
destruction to us and our posterity, if not timely and suddenly prevented:
Hereupon his Holiness reverend young Martin, out of sincerity to God, and
natural love unto his distressed Country, most willingly became servant to
your superlative Holiness, to ease your burden in this your toylsome time of
Classical exaltation of a little State ambition and spiritual supremacy and as
much as in him lies, to vindicate the privilege of Parliament, our
birthrights and native freedom from your divine spirituality, that you may
have the more time to stuff your guts extend your panches eram your bellies,
farcinate your ventricles A very modest Christian Phrase.
s^ort out Directories, blurt out Ordinances, grin at Christ, swell at his
Sectaries, and for his meritorious pious endeavors Martin expected a reward,
as very justly he might; but to cloak your covetousness and ingratitude, you
pick quarrels against him for some small failings in his Treatise; I hope you
will deal better with Master Prynne for his midnight dreams his distracted
subitane apprehensions, I can tell you he expects it: But Martin might have
considered your ingratitude to the Lord Bishops, from whom formerly you
received the holy Ghost with all your spiritual preferments, and were first
put into a capacity of Lording it, as you now do over the people; whom, like
ungracious children, viperous vermin, inhumane Canibals, notwithstanding their
grace and favor; you have devoured up, and share their inheritance amongst
you. (O divine pilage! grateful children!) etc.

page 4. 5. Yet that his Holiness (like yours) might appear immaculate and
infallible to the whole world; Martin proclaims and demonstrates to all
persons Ecclesiastical, by what name or title soever dignified or
distinguished, whether Archbishop Calamie 's, or other inferior single-sold
Presbyters; That his Holiness, reverend young Martin Mar-priest, freely
offerereth plenary pardon and remission to that traitorous, blood-thirsty
Man-eater Sir Simon Synod, for his foul ingratitude, his malicious,
mischievous, murtherous debates, consultations and conclusions, to shed the
blood of his Holiness reverend young Martin Mar-priest, and deliver him as a
prey to the monstrous huge iron faings and venomous boarish tuskes of his son
Jocke, and his bloody crew (break their teeth o God in their mouth; Psalm. 58.
break out the teeth of the young Lions o Lord;) if the said savage, barbarous
Caniball Sir Simon Synod, the next day of humiliation after the publishing
hereof, shall very penetentially (as if he were to preach a fast sermon) come
in unto reverend Martin, and humbly submit himself to his Holiness, at his
sanctuary in Toleration-street, right opposite to state-opression and synodian
tyranny; and there humbly before reverend young Martin confess his evil,
acknowledge his errors, and be heartily sorry for the same; live sociably and
quietly amongst his Neighbors, never molest or injure any man for Conscience,
suffer his teeth and nails to be plucked out and pared by an honest Independent
barber, that hereafter he may never bite nor scratch; and then peaceably
return to his Parochial Charge, render up all the goodly fat Benefices in the
Kingdom to supply the necessities of the State, pay their Arreares in the Army
gratify their sick, same and maimed soldiers with a reward more honorable
(according to their deserts) then a tiket to beg; supply the calamity,
poverty and misery of poor Widows and Orphans, whose dear Husbands and
Fathers have been slain in the service of the State, and not (out of synodian
state policy) to save their charity, subject the innocent Babes to be led by
the spirit into Indian deserts and Wildernesses, and under pretense of
Authority, rob the tender mothers of the fruit of their wombs (a wickedness
insufferable in a Commonwealth) and to send the freeborn out of their native
protection to foreign destruction, least the cry of the fatherless and
Widows should call for relief out of their fat Benefices pontificiall
revenues, etc. O the covetousness of the Priests and the mercy of God (as the
Germane says) endure for ever: If he shall hereto assent, renounce the
Ordinance of tithes, be content with the good will of the vulger, lay down his
state-ambition and usurpation of the Civil power, suffer the Commons of the
Land (both rich and poor) which are freeborn people, to enjoy quietly their
own national freedom, etc. he will not deride you any more. But if Sir Simon
shall reject this grace and favor freely offered to him and to all the Sir
John's in the Kingdom by his Holiness, reverend young Martin Mar-priest, out
of his divine clemency thus graciously extended from his holiness proclaims
to the whole assembly of Sir John's and to the whole Kingdom, (...) well (...)
Kingdom (...).
that come bondage, come liberty, come life come death; come what come will, by
the grace of God, young Martin is resolved to u^mask your vilany to posterity,
and lay a foundation for a future; it not for the present recovery of the
privilege of Parliament, and liberties of the common people from your
synodicall, classical Presbyterian predominancy; and therefore Sir Simon be
advised betime, accept of this grace and favor offered, harden not your hearts
as in the days of the Bishops, lest the fierce wrath of the Lord, even sudden
destruction fall upon you as it did upon them; for be assured, swift and
fearful destruction and ruin does attend you and the Lord will avenge his
quarrel at your hands and as it is done unto your Fathers the Bishops, so
shall it be done unto you; and if your rising ambition be not suddenly repel'd
your rise^reign and fall will be terrible to the Kingdom: you may delude the
people a while, but the time hasteneth that the (...).
people will call you to an account the Lord grant it be not, as I fear (...)
By the Sword. He adds p. 5. 6. Well Sir Simon, if you will not mend your
manners, Martin will observe all your postures, and tells you plainly, that
he will not only fall upon your bones himself, but heel set his celestial
brother. Christopher Scal^^kie his catechisticall brother, Rouland
Rattle-priest, his divine Brethren Martin Claw-Clergy. Bartholmew Bang-priest,
all upon your back, and amongst us all, we shall in time turn up the
foundation of your classical supremacy, and pull down your Synod your Sphere
about your ears; behold a troop comes Sir Simon, Martin is of the Tribe of
Gad, though a host of Sir John's overcome him, yet he shall over come at last,
yea, heel'e jeere you out of your black Cloaks, and make you ashamed of King
Henry the seventh's Chapel, and he glad to work with your hands, or to be
content with the good will of the vulgar, and then it will too late to compound
with reverend MARTIN and his divine Brethren, therefore consider with your
self Sir Simon before the mighty Acts of the house of Martin be come forth
against you; we do not intend to dally with you, we will handle you with Mittins,
thwack your Cassocks, rattle your Jackets, stamp upon the panch of your
villainy, and squeze out the filth and garbidge of your iniquity, till you stink
in the nostrils of the common people; yea, we will beat you and your son JACK,
guts and all, into a Mouse-hole. There Is no one of MARTINS Tribe, but is a man
of Metal, and hates a Tithe-devouring persecuting Priest, as he hates the
Devil, scorns their bribes, and bids defiance to their Malice.

These are to advise you, Sir Simon turn ye to MARTIN in Tolleration-street,
ye stiff necked generation of Priests, lest the fierce wrath and sore
displeasure of mighty MARTIN fall upon you, confound you and your whole, Sir
John's generation, Root and Branch; hearken ye rebellious Assembly unto MARTIN,
persecute no more, take no more Tithes, be content with the good will of the
Vulgar.

Whether these most seditious menacing passages and railing Libels against the
Assembly, Presbytery, and all Ecclesiastical Parliamentary proceedings, be not
published in print by seditious Seectaries to stir up the people to mutiny
against the Parliament, Assembly, Ministry, to fire us into new Civil wars
and commotions among our selves, and that by the underhand plots of some
Jesuiticall spirits, and Malignant Royallists, I shall humbly submit to the
saddest thoughts of our supreme Council, which is best able to judge of them,
and most able to prevent the eminent dangers which they do portend.

I shall close this Section with a new printed Libell, entitled, The Nativity
of Sir John Presbyter; Dedicated, To the Right Worshipful the: ASS: of
Divines, assembled at Westminster; with a most railing libellous Epistle; to
which these Verses in derision of it are subjoyned.

Reverend Assembly up, arise, and jogge,
For you have fairly fisht and caught a Frog.
Now have you set two years, pray can you tell
A man the way that Christ went down to Hell?
In these two years what can a wise man think
That ye have done, ought else but eat and drink?
Presbytery (climbed up to the top of fame)
Directory and all from Scotland came;
O monstrous idleness! alack and welly,
Our learned Rabbis minds naught but their belly.
Section V.
Containing libellous, scurrilous, profane, and unchristian passages against
the Directory, established by Ordinance of Parliament.
YOU have met with some of these Invectives already in the preceding Sections,
which I shall not repeat; but only add two or three passages more of this
nature, full of Athesticall and blasphemous scurrillity.

The Araignment of Persecution, p. 44. desires, That his Holiness Sir Simon
Synod my Synodecate a full resolution to these ensuing Queres.

Whether it would not have been more profitable for the kingdom of England to
have forth with hired a Coach and twelve Horses, to have set a Directory from
Scotland; then to have spent the learned consultations, pious debates, and
sacred conclusions of such an holy, such a reverend, such a heavenly, such a
godly, such a learned, such a pious, such a grave, such a wise, such a solid,
such a discreet, such a spiritual, such an Evangelicall, such an infallible,
such a venerable, such a super-celestioll Queer of Angels, such a suparlative
Assembly of Divines; for almost these two years space, after the profuse and
vast expense of above forty thousand pounds, besides their goodly fat
Benefices, upon their devouring Guts, for an English DIRECTORY of worship,
equivalent to the Scotch DIRECTORY?

Whether this Directory standing in so many thousands to sumble it together,
and the Copy sold at 400 and 50 l. be not of more value then the writings of
the Prophets and Apostles?

The sacred Synodicall Decretall or Hue and Cry, uses the like Dialect, p. 23.
Be it secula seculorum, as authentic as the Directory, etc. We had better have
set two years longer in our most holy Consultations, and made our forty
thousand four hundred pound Directory, a Directory of fourscore thousand eight
hundred pound value.

Page 5. Martin will tell the Country, That we sanctify our new DIRECTORY
Gospel, but to the temper of the City: Tell the City, That the Country people
know not what to do with it, except to stop their Bottles, unless we spend the
State the other odd trifle of 40000 pounds, to divide it into Chapters and
Verses (the Lord put it into their hearts;) and that as the truth is, its
sanctity is only grounded upon the Divine Ordinance for Tithes, (some wiser
then some) for no longer Penny, no longer Paternoster,

I will defile no more Paper with such horrid blasphemies; only add, That
Martins Ecco, p. 12. makes the Parliaments endeavoring to establish the
Directory the cause of the loss of Leicester, in these words: And now the
Parliament being busied to fortify your Directory, etc. in the mean time
Leicester is taken, thousands are put to the sword, etc. Which is sufficiently
answered, by Sir Thomas Fairfax routing the Kings whole Army and re-taking
Leicester, even whiles the Parliament was most busy in fortifying the
Directory. But I proceed to another Section.

Section VI.
Containing their libellous, scandalous, seditious passages, against our
Brethren of Scotland, to raise divisione between us and them, contrary to the
Act of Pacification, and the late solemn League and Covenant.
MAny are their intolerable libellous Invectives of this kind. I shall
transcribe but few.

Hen. Robinson in his Answer to M. Py^nes 12 Questions, made the first assault
upon our Brethren, in this Language. And what, think we made our Brethren the
Scots so successelesse here in England, whilst the wars are now beginning to
kindle in their own Country, if it were not that they join with this Nation,
or rather provoke them to establish their so much idolized Presbyteriall
discipline of persecutions? when they themselves thought they had just cause to
be highly offended with the same (their own) persecuting spirit in Episcopacy.
When the Lord required the Israelites to appear before him at Jerusalem thrice
a year, he promised, that no man should invade their habitations in their
absence, Exodus 34. 23, 24. which gracious providence of his, no doubt continues
still protecting all such as are employed by his command: but unless our
Brethren of Scotland bethink themselves in time, and consider, that even as the
persecuting Bishops of England attempting to impose their government in
Scotland gave occasion to begin the wars in England: so if the persecuting
Presbyters of Scotland continue to advance and get set up the Scotch government
in England, it may likely bring all the three Kingdoms to make the seat of
war in Scotland: I would be loath to prophecy upon this occasion; but do
much fear, that in how bad condition soever both England and Ireland are at the
present, if the wars last, but little longer Scotland will yet be far
worse. God of his infinite mercy open the eyes of all three Kingdoms in this
their heavy visitation, reconciling himself unto them all, and them to one
another, for his dear Son Christ Jesus sake.

The Araignment of Persecution by way of jear and scorn, p. 3, 8, 9. 19, 39,
42. satyrically inveighes against and derides Scoth government, ranking it with
Satan, Antichrist, the Spanish Inquisition, Council of Trent, High Commission,
etc. beings in Liberty of conscience, thus complaining. My Lord, Sir Simon
Synod is like to pull out my throat, with the ravinous claws of an Assembly;
and Master Scotch Government was fit to stab me with his Scoth Dagger: Iemmy
put up thy Dagger; Averres, The Synod is guided by the Holy Ghost sent in a
Cloke-bag from Scotland, as of old from Rome to the Council of Trent. Often
mentions by way of scorn and jeere, The advancing of the mickle Army into the
South; adds, you may easily perceive how they would pinch your Lordships nose
with a pair of SCOTCH SPECTACLES, that your Lordship might see nothing but
BLEW CAPS; he has plaistred up the wrinkles of his face with SCOTCH MORTAR,
etc.

The Sacred Synodicall Decretall, p. 4. tells us, etc. of a Blew-capreformation,
and then Blewcap for us, p. 7. Of the ay-blessed Divines of Scotland, p. 16. Of
laying Rods in piss for Crumwel; let him take heed of a Scotch --:another
course must be taken with Heretics, else our Brethren cannot further engage;
God speed them well home again, and let all the people in the kingdom say,
Amen. p. 18. Of their running away at Maston-More. p. 20. Of an Angel in the
Mount, upon whom o^^ reverend Assembly of grave and learned Divines do daily
wait, which Mount is Dunce-Hill (which by translation out of the Original) by
the Divines of Scotland (whose countryman this Angel is) is englished Mount
Sion: with other such like stuff.

And Martins Echo, p. 8. Our Scottish Brethren advanced lately as far into the
South, as from Brampton-moore to Westmerland, for your assistance, are all
yours, by virtue of the Holy League and Covenant, which they may in no wise
falsify, until they see it convenient for them to do, as in the most sacred
Exhortation to the taking of the said League and Covenant you have taught them.
Many other such seditious passages, tending to sow division between both
Nations, (contrary to the fourth clause of the National Covenant) these
New-Libels, have lately published, which I forbear to Register.

Section VII.
Containing most scurrilus, libellous, scandelous, railing invectives against
Presbyterians, and Presbyterian government in general, which many of them not
long since so much applauded, desired, before the Bishops removal.
WE have met with much of this scurrilous stuff in other Sections; to which
some few additions only shall be made in this.

Mr. Henry Robinson his FALSEHOOD, etc. shall lead up the Forelornehope: where
thus he writes to the Christian Reader: Free thy conscience from the thraldom
and bondage of those Egyptian Taskmasters, who care not what trash and trumpery
they vent, so they may gain Proselytes and contributions. Which he thus
prosecutes, p. 9. But what avails it to have the head of one Lordly
Episcopal Prelate cut of, when a Hidra, a multitude, above seventy seven times
as many Presbyteriall Prelates succeed instead thereof? Prelatia, Prelacy,
Prelacy, as we use it vulgarly, is a preferring one before another; and the
Presbyteriall government is much more truly said to be Prelaticall, then either
Episcopal or Papal; unless you will say that neither Episcopal nor Papal
be Prelaticall at all. For in either of those governments there are but few
Prelates; but in the other there are, to wit, so many Prelates as there are
Presbyters, each whereof is an absolute And is it not much more so in Independ.
Churches, where the Minister in truth like a Pope rules all the rest at his
pleasure? will admit none but those of his own faction.
Prelate; that is, one preferred above his Brethren.

The Araignment of Persecution, declaimes thus against Presbyterian government,
p. 21. Both Papal and Episcopal government is better then Presbyterian, for
they are, and have been more uniforme, and have continued many hundred years
longer then Presbyterian, and were long before Presbytery was thought on: For
alas, it was but a shift at a pinch the Devil made, when neither of the other
would serve his turn, and so came up Presbytery; but what good the Devil
will have of it I know not: for who knows the luck of a lousy Cur, he may
prove a good Dog.

The Sacred Synodicall Decretall inveighes thus against Presbyterian
government, p. 11. Martin will put the Parliament and people in mind of their
Protestation, and tell them, that by the same rule they pull down the Bishops,
they are bound to put down the Presbyters, etc. For in Martins Astrologicall
judgment, all the Plagues of Egypt were but a Flea-biting to what one
Presbyterian Church will be (vinci si possunt regales cestibus enses) we having
mortified Episcopal Hercules, and possessed his Club. p. 19. Indeed the Pope is
as truly Christian, and his function as equally Jure Divino, as our
Presbytery, conveyed from his Holiness^, by our Fathers the late Lord Bishops
upon us.

The unlicensed Nativity of Presbytery, said to be licensed by Rowland
Rattle-Priest, a terrible Imprimatur: writes p. 5. That the Devil made the
Vrchin Sir John Presbyter: an abject, a Fugitive, newly come out of Scotland, a
Witch, a Rogue, and in apparel delighting in black as his Father the Devil;
fitter to be a Weather cock then a Divine: only the Evil Spirit of Mercury,
presented him to be the Devils Goat-head.

Section VIII.
Containing sundry Libellous, Schismatic, uncharitable, and unchristian
passages against the Church of England, her Worship and Ministers in general.
John Lilburne in his Answer to nine Arguments, Printed without License,
London, 1645. with his picture cut before it; Writes thus of the Church of
England, page 4. The Church of England is a true Whorish mother, and you are
one of her base-begotten, and Bastardly children, for you know a Whore is a
woman as truly as a true wife, and she may have children as proportionable, as
the children of a true wife; yet this does not prove her children which are
base-begotten are true-begotten children, because they have all the parts, and
limbs of children, that are begotten in a true married estate and condition;
even so say I, the Church of England neither is, Note
nor never was, truly married, joined, or united to Jesus Christ, in that
espousall band, which his true Churches are, and ought to be, but is one of
Antichrists National Whorish Churches, or Cities spoken of Rev. 16. 19.
United, joined, knit to the Pope of Lambeth; as Head and Husband thereof; being
substitute to the Pope of Rome, from whom he has received his Arch-Episcopall
power, and Authority.

Page 18. Your Church is false, and Antichristian: Therefore if every Parish in
England had power in themselves (which in the least they have not) to choose
and make their own Officers, yet for all this they would be false, for a false
and Antichristian Church as yours is, can never make true Officers and
Ministers of Jesus Christ, and though that the Churches of the Separation, want
Apostles in personal presence to lay hands upon their Officers which lawfully
they choose out from among themselves, yet have they their Laws, Rules, and
Directions in writing, which is their Office, and is of as great Authority as
their personal presence.

Page 19. And thus have I sufficiently by the Authority of the Sacred Word of
God proved all your Officers, and Ministers false and Antichristian, and none
of Christ's, which if you can groundedly contradict, show your best skill
challenge I you, and put you to prop, to hold up your tottering and sandy Church
and Ministry, or else your great brags will prove no better then wind and
Fables, and you your self found to be a Liar.

Page 22. And as for these two things, Of Conversion, and confirmation, or
building up in the ways of God, which you speak of, if you mean by conversion,
and opening of the eyes, to turn them from darkness to light, and from the
power of Satan unto God; or if you mean by conversion, a deliverance from the
power of darkness, and a translation into the Kingdom of the Son of God, both
of which the Apostles Ministry did accomplish in the hearts and lives of Gods
people, Act. 26. 18. Coll. 1. 13. I absolutely deny it, that your Ministry in
England does this: And therefore I desire you to declare, what you mean by
Conversion, and prove your definition by the holy Scripture, and also prove
that you in England are so converted, which when you have done I shall further
answer you by Gods assistance, and as for their building them up in the ways
of God, as all true Shepherds ought to build up their sheep, as Acts 26. 1 Pet.
5. Yet I deny it, that your Ministers do it, for how can they build them up in
that, which they themselves are ignorant of, and enemies unto? for as Jannes
and Jambres which withstood Moses, so do these men also resist the Truth, being
men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the truth, 2 Timothy 3. 8. And do feed you
with husks and Chafe, being neither willing to embrace it themselves, nor to
let those that would, as their constant preaching and speaking against the
truth of God, and the Kingdom of his Son does witness, etc. I have taken the
pains by the Word of God, and demonstrable Arguments grounded thereupon, to
prove the Church of England Antichristian: I do promise you, I will by the
strength of the Lord of Hosts, for ever separate from Church, Ministry and
Worship in England, Note.
all and every one of them, as Antichristian and false: Yet thus much I say,
and do acknowledge, and the Scripture proves it, that God has a people or an
elect number in spiritual Babylon; yea in the Kingdom of Antichrist, part of
which the Church of England is, and none of them shall perish, but be eternally
saved; yet I say, it is the duty of all Gods Elect, and chosen ones, that are
yet in the Whorish bosom of the Church of England, or in any part of
Antichrists Regiment to separate away from it, and come out of it, least God
plague them for their staying there.

Page Note.
23. All the Ministers of the Church of England are not true Ministers of
Christ, but false and Antichristian Ministers of Antichrist.

Page 24. And as for your Minor and Assumption, which is, that you in the
Church of England do enjoy, and outwardly submit your selves to the true
worship of God: It is most false, and a notorious lie and untruth, and as well
might wicked Faux, and the rest of the Gunpowder-Plotters say, that they
submitted unto Noble King James Laws and Scepter, when they went about to blow
up the Parliament House, that so they might destroy him and all his; for you do
not only oppose and justle ou^ the true worship of God, and throw down and
trample upon the Scepter of Jesus Christ his son, but also you set up false and
Antichristian Worship, the inventer of which is the Devil, and the Man of sin,
his eldest and most obedient Son.

Page 26, 27. Now from that which I have said, I frame these Arguments:

1. That Worship which is of the Devils and Antichrists invention, institution
and setting up, is no true Divine worship.

But the Worship of the Church of England is of the Devils and Antichrists
invention, Note.
institution and setting up, as Revel. 13. does fully prove.

Ergo, the Worship of the Church of England is no true Worship.

2. That Worship, which is a main means and Cause of pulling down the Kingdom
of Jesus Christ, Note.
and establishing, maintaining, and upholding the Kingdom of the Devil and
Antichrist, and sends more souls to Hell, then all the wickedness, impiety,
ungodliness, in the Kingdom does besides, is no true worship of God, but ought
to be detested and abhorred of all his people. But such is the worship of the
Church of England; Ergo, etc.

Page Note.
29. I absolutely deny your Argument, and affirm, that your Religion neither
is the true Religion, nor that it leads men the true way to salvation.

Page 37, 38. I groundedly and absolutely deny, that either the Church of
England is, or ever was a true Church, and till you have proved it true, all
the pains that you have taken in proving that it is possible for corruptions
and evil livers to be in a true Church, is spent in vain, and to no purpose,
and I am confident, that you nor none else will ever be able to prove the
Church of England true, nor any other National Church: for Christ Jesus by his
death did abolish the National Church of the Jews, with all their Laws, Rites
and Ceremonies thereof, and in the New Testament did never institute no
National Church, nor left no Laws, nor Officers for the governing thereof, but
the Church that he instituted, are free and Independent bodies, or
Congregations, depending upon none but only upon Christ their Head: Therefore
National Churches under the Gospel are of Antichrists, that man of sins
institution and ordaining, who only has ordained Laws and Officers of his own
for the governing of them; Therefore for you, or any other to say, and affirm,
that this monstrous, ugly, botched and scabbed body, is Christ's true Spouse, is
dishonorable to his blessed being and Mediatorship.

His Schismatic seditious conclusion from all these Premises is this, page
35. Therefore let all Gods people, Note.
that yet are in the bosom of the Church of England, as they love their own
inward peace, and spiritual joy, and look that their souls should prosper and
flourish with grace and godliness look to it, and withdraw their spiritual
obedience and subjection from all Antichrists Laws and worship, and join
themselves as fellow Citizens of the City of God, to worship and serve him in
Mount Sion the beauty of holiness, and there only to yield all spiritual
obedience to Christ's spiritual Laws and Scepter.

This language and opinion of his, concerning our English Church, and Ministry,
is seconded by most Independents in their late Pamphlets; of which you have had
a bitter taste in the preceding Sections, and their practice proves as much.

For first, though they proclaim Liberty of conscience to all Sects and
Religions whatsoever; yet they have so harsh an opinion of Presbyterians, and
all others, who submit not to their Independent Model; that they esteem them
no better then Heathens, Master Henry Burton his Vindication of the Churches
commonly called Independent, p. 56. 62, 63.
Infidels, unbelievers; and proclaim them in their Books to be * Men who deny,
disclaim, and preach against Christ's Kingly Government over his Churches; men
unconverted, or at least converted but in part, vvanting the main thing, to
wit, Christ's kingly Office: men visible out of the Covenant of Grace, who have
not so much as an outward profession of Faith, who deny Christ to be their
King; to whose persons and infants, the very Sacraments and seals of grace,
with all Church Communion, may, and ought to be denied, which is in effect to
un-Christian, un-Church, un-Minister all Presbyterians, and to make them
cast-awayes: If this be their charity to us already, what may we expect from
them hereafter if their Faction bear the sway?

Secondly, when they gather any Independent Congregation, their practice is,
for their Ministers solemnly to renounce and abjure their former Ordination in,
and the people their Pristine Communion with the Church of England, and all
Congregations else, whereof they have been Members, and then to new-mould
themselves into an Independent Church; which practice they have lately begun in
the Plantations of the Summer Islands; as a Friend of mine from thence informed
me by a Letter dated, May 14. 1645. in these ensuing terms.

The Independent Church was set up here the last year, wherein they have
covenanted to stand unto the death: but their Covenant is not fully expressed
reserving power in themselves, especially in their Pastor, to alter it when
they will, and as they think good; they have expressed nothing in writing, though
often urged to it, Note.
but he that joins with them, must do it by a kind of implicit faith, to
embrace what their Church does or shall embrace, not knowing what it is or will
be: When they began it, their Minister called a Fast for all that would be
present, where in the public Congregation, our Ministers being then but
three, Note.
Did lay down and renounce their Ordination and Ministry received in the Church
of England, and so become (as they said) no Ministers; but did joy^ themselves
together in Covenant by words only to become a Church; first making a kind of
confession of their sins, and signifying that others might also join themselves
to them, if they were such as after such confession they should approve of, and
there was one principal Officer did then join himself with them; they then
continued weekly Lecturers still, yet as they said, not as Ministers, but only
as private men to exercise their gifts: wherein they labored to draw others to
join with them, and every week received in some: but that confession of sins
grew daily more and more out of date, Such were fit to make Independent Members.
the rather for that * some were threatened to be called in question at the
Assizes for some things which they confessed there; so that at this time all is
in a manner implicit, and though little or nothing be expressed by the party
to be received in, yet he is not put back: But when they had gotten about
thirty to join with them, they again called a Fast for all that would be
present, where it seems having appointed one of our assistant Governors for
their Prolocutor, he nominated Master White to be their Pastor, which the rest
confirmed by erection of hands; then it seems Master White nominated our other
two Ministers, Master Copland and Master Golding for his ruling Elders, yet
they continue to preach constantly as before, but Master White only does
Administer the Sacraments, and that only to such as have joined themselves in
their implicit Covenant with them.

Their practice therefore and their writings demonstrate, what ungrateful
sons, and unnatural Vipers they are to our Mother Church and Ministers of
England; which has little cause to harbor these Rebellious Apostate sons, who
thus abominate, renounce both her and her Ministers, as Antichristian.

Surely, some of their own Independent Faction, had other thoughts of her and
her Ministry (unless they dissembled before God and man, as they commonly do
without blush or check) but very few years since; and among other the five
Independent Apologists, and Master Hugh Peter, (Solicit^r general of the
Independent Cause and Party;) whose Subscription before the Bishop of London,
concerning our Church of England in the late Prelaticall times, when far more
unreformed then now, I shall here present you with; the Original whereof I
found in the Archbishops study, under Master Peter his own hand, c^dorsed with
the Archbishops, thus.

Master Hugh Peter's Subscription before the Bishop of London, August 17. 1627.
RIght Reverend Father in God, and my very good Lord; being required to make
known to your Lordship my Judgment concerning some thing propounded at my last
being before your Lordship, from which Propositions though I never dissented,
nor know any cause why I should be suspected, yet being ready and willing to
obey your Lordship in all things, especially in so just a demand as this, I
having consulted with Antiquity, and with our modern Hooker, and others, humbly
desire your Lordship to accept the satisfaction following.

1. Note
For the Church of England in general (I bless God) I am a member of it, and
was baptized in it, and am not only assured it is a true Church, but am
persuaded it is the most glorious and flourishing Church this day under the
sun, which I desire to be truly thankful for; and for the Faith, Doctrine and
Articles of that Church, and the maintenance of them, I hope the Lord will
enable me to contend; Tanquam ut pro aris and focis: Yea, I trust to lay down
my life, if I were called thereunto.

2. For the Governor and Government thereof; viz. The reverend Fathers, the
Archbishops and Bishops, I acknowledge their Offices, and jurisdictions, and
cannot see, Note
but there would a fearful ataxy follow, without the present Government,
whereof I so approve, that I have, and do willingly submit to it, and them; and
have, and will press the same upon others.

3 For the Ceremonies that are in use among us (as I have already subscribed)
so I shall diligently and daily practice, neither have I ever been accused for
neglect therein, Note
where I have formerly exercised my Ministry, but to them do give my full
approbation and allowance.

4. For the Book of Common Prayer, the Lyturgie of the Church, and what is in
them contained (finding them agreeable unto the word of God) I have used as
other Ministers have done, and am resolved so to do, and have not been
Refractory in this particular at any time, Note
nor do I intend to be (God willing) and to these, I Subscribe with my heart
and hand; humbly, submitting them, and my self to your Lordships pleasure.

Your Lordships in all humble service, HUGH PETER.
London the 17. of August. 1627.

IF Master Peter be now of another Judgment, it manifests either his gross
ignorance, or temporizing then, or his levity now, and that he is as unsteady
in his opinion, as in his excentrick motion from place to place: But this is in
verity, the essential property of our Lunacy New sights, who like the Moon
(whose light Predominates in them) are always changing; 2 Timothy 3. 7.
yea, ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the Truth;
which they continually intricate with their Independent doubts.

Section IX.
Containing Libellious, Scandalous, unchristian Censures, and Invectives
against those Persons, who out of conscience have Written or Preached against
the Independents Seditious, Schismatic ways and Practices.
I Shall first begin with such Invectives as concern my self: What large
Encomiums (beyond my deserts) I received from the Independent party, before I
writ against their new ways and opinions, only in a moderate and modest manner
by way of Questions; is very well known to themselves and others, being such
and so many, that modesty forbids me to relate them; lest I should be thought
the Herald of my own praises and deserts: How many Libells, Scandals, and false
reports of all kinds they have causlesly published of me since, by Speech and
Printed Libells, only because I differ from them in opinion, and have in point
of conscience (being requested so to do) declared my opinion of their new
groundless ways and Tenets, is very well known unto many, who have leisure to
peruse the several empty Pamphlets and Invectives daily published a against me:
I shall give you a taste of some few in lieu of many.

It pleased John Lilburne among others, for whom I have done some courtesies,
but never the least injury, or discourtesie in word or deed, upon the coming
out of my Truth Triumphing over Falsehood, etc. (Licensed by a Committee of
Parliament for the Press) before ever he had read the Book, to write a
Libellous Letter to me concerning it, which he sent to the Press and published
in Print without License, before I received and perused it: which though
answered in Print by others without my privity; openly complained of in the
Commons House, (who referred it to the Committee of Examinations as a most
Seditious Libell against the Parliament and Assembly;) yet I deemed it more
worthy contempt then any Answer, as refuting not one syllable in my Book: In
this Letter, he styles me, An inciter of higher Powers to wage war with the
King of Saints, and his Redeemed ones: An endeavourer to set the Princes of the
earth together by the ears with Christ, to pluck his Crown from his head, his
Scepter out of his hand, and his Person out of his Throne of State, that his
Father has given him to reign gloriously in: He most falsely charge me with
this false Position: That there is no rule left in the word, how we may worship
God; but that Kings and States may set up what Religion they please, or may
mould it to the manners of their people: Whereas there is not any such syllable
in any of my Books, but the contrary profe^sedly asserted and the Controversies
therein debated, concern not the substance of Gods worship or Religion, but
only the Circumstance of ChurchGovernment: which I asserted then, on such
grounds as their party has not yet refu^ed* not to be precisely set down and
determined in the New Testament in all particulars, but yet conclude, that no
Church Government ought to be set up, but that which is agreeable to the
Scriptures, though not dogmatically and precisely prescribed in them: ^o that
if this Libeller were not past all shame, he might have blush^ to Print and
^^print so notorious a falsehood, without retractation.

After this he thus proceeds: Had I not seen your name to your Books, I should
rather have judged them a Papists or a Jesuits, then Master Prynnes; and
without doubt, the Pope when he sees them, will CANONIZE YOU FOR A SAINT, in
throwing down his enemy Christ. Certainly no Book of mine, either in the Front
or Bulk, carries the least badge of a Priest or Jesuit in it; and so far am I
from demeriting any thing from the Pope, or to be Canonized by him for a Saint;
that I can without vanity or ostentation affirm before all the world, that I
have done more disservice to Priests, Jesuits, and the Pope: made more
discoveries of their Plots, and written more against them and Popery, then all
the whole generation of Sectaries and Independents put together; and I
challenge all their Sects to equalize, or come near, what I have really
performed in this particular; so that if any man this day breathing in England
deserve an Anathema Maranathae, from the Pope and his party, I have more cause
to expect itthen any other: The whole Kingdom therefore will Proclaim him a
notorious slanderer in this particular: He proceeds yet further, Surely (he
writes, but his words are no Oracles) you have given away your ears, and have
suffered as a busie-body in opposing the King and the Prelates: without doubt
all is not Gold that glisters: for were you not a man that had more then truth
to look after, namely your own ends and particular interests, which I am afraid
you strive to set up more then the public good, you should have importuned the
Parliament to have continued their favor and respect to that people, that
cannot prostrate their consciences to man's devices.

Surely my conscience tells me, that I am free from this injurious calumny: For
my ears, I bless God I gave them not away, but lost them in a just quarrel,
against all Law and Justice, as both Houses of Parliament have unanimously
adjudged: But whether you did not justly lose your ears for Sedition then, and
deserve not to lose he remainder of them (that I say no more) for your
Seditious and Libellious carriage now, is a great question among your most
intelligent friends: For my opposing King and Prelates as a busie-body,
perchance it might be your own case, it was never mine: What I have done
against the unjust usurpations, and illegal excesses of either, I did it in a
just and Legal way, upon such grounds and Authority, as was never yet
controuled; and this I dare make good without vainglory, that I have done more
real cordial service with my pen against the Usurpations of Regality and
Prelacy, in defense of the Subjects Liberties, and Parliaments jurisdiction,
then all Independent Sectaries whatsoever, and that only out of a zeal to Gods
glory and the public good, without the least private end or Interest, which
never yet entered into my thoughts, having suffered as much as any man of your
Sect (if not more) for the Public, without either seeking or receiving the
least recompense, or reward; having spent not only my time and Studies, but
some hundreds of Pounds in the Republics service since my enlargement, without
craving or receiving one farthing recompense in any kind; whereas if I had
sought my self, or been any way covetous or ambitious, I might perchance have
obtained as advantageous and honorable preferments, as any Independents have
aspired to, if not challenged as their right, for less meritorious public
services and sufferings then the least of mine. As for my importuning the
Parliament for continuance of their favors to that people you speak of; surely
when I find them more obsequious to the Parliaments just Ordinances and
commands, less wilful and more conscientious; I shall do them all the
offices of Christian love; but whiles contumnacy, obstinacy, licentiousness,
uncharitableness and Schism are most predominant in them, the greatest favor
I can move the Parliament to indulge them, is to bridle these their
extravagances with the severest Laws, and to prefer the public safety of
Church and State, before their private Lawless conceits and fantastical
opinions.

He adds, That I am in this as cruel a Task-master as Pharaoh: and that the
Son of God, and his Saints are but little beholding to me. Surely to confine
Licencious lawless consciences to the rules of Gods word, the justLaws of the
Realm, and rectified reason, can Proclaim me no Egyptian Task-master: but
rather decl^re your Sect mere Libertines, who will not be Regnlated by, nor
confined within these Bounds; yea, I trust the Son of God and his true Saints
are as much beholding to me (in your sense) as to the greatest Patriarchs of
your Independent Tribes, be they whom they will.

This Libeller being questioned before the Committee of Examinations concerning
this Letter, by their special favor returned his Reasons why he sent it in
writing, which he no sooner exhibited, but published in Print the next day
after, to defame and slander me among his Confederates; who give me now no
other Epithites in their discourses; but a Papist, a Persecutor of Gods Saints,
an Enemy of Christ's Kingdom, who deserve to lose my head for opposing them in
this cause, etc. which I no more value, Then the Moon does the barking of a
lousie Cur.

In this new unlicensed Paper, first he vaingloriously relates his own
sufferings and deserts: Secondly, Traduceth the justice of the Parliament and
others, against some seditions Sectaries; misreciting many of their proceedings
to the scandal of Public justice, and the Parliament, page 3, 4. Thirdly,
page 5. He pretends my Books against Independents (Licensed by Authority of a
Committee of Parliament) to be the principal causes of the rigid Proceedings
against Separatists especially my Truths Triumphing over Falsehood; which being
subsequent in time to all the particulars he recites, could certainly be no
occasion of them; and therefore he plays not only the Sophyster, but Slanderer
in this particular. Fourthly, page 5, 6. He misrepeats, and misapplies some
Passages of mine, to all of his Sect in general, and to HIMSELF and SVCH AS HE
IS in the ARMY and ELSEWHERE: Whereas there is not one Syllable in my Passages
to that purpose, but only against some particular Authors I there mention, and
such of their Confederates, who maliciously and audaciously oppugn the
undoubted Rights, Privileges, and just Proceedings of Parliament, contrary to
their Solemn Covenant, League, and Protestation; and if you proclaim your self
or any other in the Army or elsewhere to be of this Anti-Parliamentary Regiment
(as now you do) I then profess my self an opposite to you, and shall make good
against you what ever I have written, when and where you please. Fifthly, He
writes, That I eagerly endeavor to incense the Parliament against him, and
such as he is in the Army, and elsewhere, and in the Conclusion of my
Independency examined, press the cutting of them off by the sword, and
executing wrath and vengeance on them upon pain of contracting the guilt of
highest Perjury: A most malicious scandal: For first I never mentioned him or
his in particular; neither knew I how he stood inclined. Secondly, In my
Independency examined; I only in a general discourse affert, that Kings and
Civil Magistrates, have by the Law of God a Lawful coercive power, thought
not to restrain the sincere Preaching of the Gospel and truth of God, yet to
suppress, restrain, imprison, confine, banish the brea^hers of Heresies,
Schisms, Erroneous, seditious Doctrines, Enthusiasmes, or setters up of new
Forms of Ecclesiastical Government without Lawful Authority, to the
en^^ngering of men's souls, or disturbance of the Churches and Kingdoms Peace:
These are my formal words which I there make good by Scripture, and Presidents
in all Ages (and will justify by Gods assistance upon any occasion against all
Sectaries and Independents whatsoever) After which I close up this discourse in
these very words: And if any Heretics, false-Teachers, Schismatics (choose
which of these three ranks you and yours will fall under) obstinatly refuse
conformity after due admonition, and all good means used to reclaim them, the
Poets Divinity and Policy must then take place, as well in Ecclesiastical, as
civil and natural maladies.

Cuncta prim tentanda, sed immedicabile Vulnius,
Gal. 5. 2^.
Ense rescidendum est, ne pars syncera trahatur.
Is this any urging of the Parliament, To cut you and yours off by the sword?
and to execute wrath and vengeance on you? If you be such obstinate Heretics,
Schismatics, or false-Teachers, who fall within the compass of my words, God
forbid, but the sword of Justice should be drawn out against you, as well as
others, at least to chastise and reduce you to obedience, though not finally to
cut you off, unless in case of absolute necessity: But if you are none of this
obstinate Heretical, Schismatic Brigade (as I make you not, unless you
make your selves) my general indefinite words will relate, neither to your
self in person (whom I never once minded in my writings) nor to any of your
Tribe: And therefore in this particular, I charge you for a malicious
slanderour and false Informer, demanding justice and reparation from you for
this, and all the forementioned passages, wherein you have wilfully done me
wrong. Sixthly, page 6. He injuriously charge me, as guilty of being an
Incendiary, betwixt the Parliament and their faithful friends and servants;
and that my actions and practices tend to no better end, but to make him and
his party (US) to be slighted and contemned, and that they a faithful,
conscientious, AND CONSIDERABLE PARTY IN THE ARMY and KINGDOM MIGHT BE
DISINGAGED Note.
and CAVSED TO LAY DOWN THEIR ARMS, etc. After which, he concludes thus, page
7. Now I appeal to every true hearted Englishman, that desires a speedy end
of these Wars, of what evil consequence it would be to the Parliament and
Kingdoms, to have such a faithful and considerable party as Mr. Prynne
calumni^teth, and reproacheth as bad, if not worse then ever the Bishop of
Canterbury did, should be causleslie cut off with the sword, or be disingaged
by his means (especially seeing the Kingdoms necessities is such, that they
stand in need of the help of Forrainers) In which Passage he intimates: First,
that those Anti-Parliamentary seditious Sectaries, who confederate with this
Libeller know their own particular (pretended) strength in the Army and
Kingdom. Secondly, that they fight only for their own private interests, and to
erect their own Church Government, not for Religion not the public Cause;
since my very writing against their Schismatic seditious ways but in mere
general terms (as this Libeller, one of their privy Cabinet Council
intimates) and that by Authority of a Committee of Parliament, in just defense
of the Parliaments undoubted Ecclesiastical jurisdiction and Authority (which
they most affront of any men whatsoever) Is a means to disingage, and cause
them to lay down their Arms: Thirdly, I answer, that if he and his party be
such faithful friends and servants to the Parliament, and such a conscientious
considerable party both in the Army and Kingdom as he pretends, my writing in
defense of the Parliaments jurisdiction (which they pretend to fight for) can
be no dis-ingagement or dis-couragement to them; And therefore himself alone
must be the Incendiary twixt them and the Parliament, and the dis-ingager of
them to lay down their Arms, by these his slanderous Libells against the
Parliaments jurisdiction, Privileges, Proceedings, not I who have only
Cordially maintained them (according to my solemn Vow and Covenant) by public
encouragement, and special approbation.

I shall therefore challenge so much Justice from this Epistoler, as publicly
to retract all these his malicious Libellous slanders of me, without the least
provocation given him on my part; or else he must expect from God and all good
men (yea from his own best friends and party) the brand of a most malicious
Libeller, slanderer, Incendiary, and undergo the punishment due to such.

To this I might add a whole bundle of Calumnies and injuries against me in
Master John Goodwins Calumny Arraigned and cast, wherein he charge me, page
2. for aspersing the Honorable Committee for Plundered Ministers and himself,
in averting, that he was suspended and sequestered by that Committee; which all
the Committee then, and himself with his Confederates since experimentally know
to be a real truth, however they outfaced it for a time: His other Calumnies
are so gross, and trivial, that I will not waste Paper to refute them.

These Libellers are not single, but thus seconded by a Brother of their Sect,
one Henry Robinson in his Pamphlet entitled; The Pretenses of Master William
Prynne, etc. (A mere empty Libell fraught with nothing but railings, and
slanders against me) and in his latter Libell entitled: The Falsehood of Master
William Prynnes Truth Triumphing, in the Antiquity of Popish Princes and
Parliaments: To which he attributes a sole Sovereign Legislative, Coercive
power in all matters of Religion; Discovered to be full of absurdities,
contradictions, Sacrilege, and to make more in favor of Rome and Antichrist*
then all the Books and Pamphlets which were ever published, whether by Papal
or Epi^copall Prelates or Parasites, since the Reformation: with twelve Queries,
eight whereof visit Master Prynne the second time, because they could not be
satisfied at the first; Printed in London, 1645.

Here is a large Libellous Title, but not one syllable of it so much as proved
or made good in the Book: Note.
wherein he convinces me, neither of Falsehood nor absurdities, nor
Contradictions, nor Sacrilege: And whereas he charge; That my Truths
Triumphing, etc. Makes more in favor of Rome, and Antichrist then all the
Books and Pamphlets which were ever published by Papal or Episcopal Prelates
or Parasites since the Reformation (of which he makes not the least offer of
proof in his Book) I shall aver to all the world (I hope without ostentation,
being thus enforced to it) and appeal to all men of Judgment who have read it;
that it makes more against Rome, Antichrist, and the usurped power of Popish,
Lordly Prelates and Clergymen in points of calling Councels, the Authority of
Prelates, Clergy men and Synods in making binding Canons, etc. and other points
therein debated then any Book or Pamphlet whatsoever of this Subject written by
any Prelate, Clergy man, Laicke, or by all the whole Mungrell Regiment of
Anabaptists, Sectaries or Independents put together: Therefore this Title of
his; is a most false malicious impudent slander, of a Libeller past shame, void
both of truth and conscience.

His passage against me, page 9. 10. Is much of kin to his Title Page, where
thus he writes: The truth is, I cannot deny but Master Prynne was once by more
then many, and they godly too, held to be a man of Piety (and was highly
honored, in whose Books and Pamphlets notwithstanding which have been
published of late) may be observed more corrupted Principles, and a far worse
spirit of persecution, then ever was discovered in the late Delinquent
Decapitated Archbishop, from his first ascending unto his highest growth of
Authority and greatness; and in the Diary of his life, which I suppose Master
Prynne Printed, not to do him honor (though after Ages will not be tied to be
no wiser then Master Prynne) I find such eminent signs of a Moral Noble
pious mind, according to such weak principles as he had been bred up in (his
own persecuting disposition, disabling him from being instructed better) and
particularly so ingenious a passage in his Funeral Sermon, whereby he justifies
the Parliament in putting him to death; as I may safely profess to all the
world, I never yet could discern any thing near of like piety, or ingenuity to
be in Master Pryune, by all that ever I yet heard of him from first to last, or
by all the books of his which ever came to my hands, wherein yet I have
hitherto done him the honor in being at charges to buy as many, I mean one of
every sort, as I could ever meet withal.

Surely, I am much beholding to this Gentleman, for proclaiming me a man of
more corrupt principles, and a person possessed with a worse spirit of
persecution then the late Decapitated Archbishop, but the Archbishop far more
obliged to him, in Canonizing him for such a Saint: As for his Diary, I
published it as I found it, not so much to do him honor as right, which is due
to the very Devil himself: But had this Libeller remembered, that I reserved
the criminal part of his life, for two other Volumes, one of them already
published; and the first part of the other now at Press, which will render
him, the Archest Traitor and underminer of Religion, Laws, Liberties,
Parliaments that ever breathed in English Air; or had he seriously considered
his obstinate impenitency, and justificntion of his innocence (though most
criminal of all that for which he was condemned) even on the very Scaffold; he
would have blushed at his large Encomiums of such a Traitor in affront of
public justice, to cast the greater blemish on my self, who was publicly
called by Authority to bring him to his trial.

Having thus reviled my person only for w^iting against Independent new ways
and fancies; having naught else to object against me, he falls soul upon my very
Profession of the Law in these reproachful terms, page 21, 22. Certainly it is
none of Master Prynnes least oversights thus to bring himself a Lawyer, (whose
wrangling faculty sets and keeps all people at worse war amongst themselves,
then all Foreign enemies can do) into a Contest with Mr. Goodwin,etc.

If Master Prynne were a man truly godly and conscientious, he might long ere
this time have considered the unlawfulness of his very calling, acco^ding to
the greatest part of Lawyers practice, in entertaining more causes then they
can possibly take care of as they ought, in taking of excessive Fees,
prolonging suits, and so involving the whole Kingdom in their Sophistical
quirks, tricks and quillets, as that a man can neither buy nor sell, speak nor
do any thing, but he must be liable to fall into their tallons, without ever
being able to redeem himself, the Lawyers having most of their mysteries
written in little less then Heathen Language, and detaining us in such
Ignorant captivity, as that we may not plead nor understand; by which and such
like devises of theirs, they are become the greatest grievance, Note.
crying loudest to heaven for Justice to be done upon them by this Parliament,
next to the corrupted, depraved Clergy men.

Surely these Independent Sectaries, resolve to extirpate all Lawyers and
Clergymen, as the greatest grievances under Heaven; that so both Law and
Gospel may be dispensed only by their Lawless, Gospellesse lips, hands: and
this makes them rail at these two Honorable Professions, without which no
Kingdom or Church can long subsist: For my own part, I bless God, I am not
ashamed of my Profession; its no dishonor unto me, (since God himself has
honored Zen^ a Professor of it, Tit. 3. 13.) and I trust I shall never
dishonor it: and though some perchance abuse it (as many do all other
Callings) (...) makes it not unlawful or a grievance, no more then other
Callings, (...) being the fault of the person, nor of the Profession: Take he^d
therefore how you pr^ss^ this Argument further, lest it reflect with
disadvantage on your self, who have much abused the Profession of a Gentleman,
by turning Lib^ller; of a Merchant, in turning an Independent Preacher; of a
Minister, in becoming an unlicens^d Mr. Printer of all these new Seditious
Libels, in an Alley in Bishopsgate street, the very name whereof, made you such
a Panegyrist, to trumpet out the Archbishops P^ety and Gr^ces to the world,
after his Execution as a Traitor.

I shall rake no more in this Pamphleters nasty Kennel, which abounds with such
fil^hy stinking stuff, and Billingsgate Language as this.

The Author of The Araignment of Persecution, thus makes himself merry with me,
page 15. That Learned Gentleman, Just-as conformity of Lincolns Inn, Esquire; can
thoroughly resolve you, both by Scripture Texts, Presede^ts of all sorts, and
the constant uninterupted practices, examples of the Emminentest Emperors,
Princes, Councels, Parliaments, etc. It is well these illiterate Ass^s are able
thus to de^ide, what they can no ways Answer or Re^ute by Scripture, Reason,
or Authorities of any kind, but their own brainsick fancies.

He proceeds thus, page 39. By the Apochrypha writings, and Nonsense Arguments
of Mr. Edwards: By the distracted thoughts, and subitane apprehensions of Mr.
Prynne; By the design of the Clergy; By their forced tears; By their
Hypocrisy; By their false Glosses, Interpretations, and Sophystications, Good
Lord deliver us. Here I am joined with very good company, though in a
Blasphemous railing Lyturgy, fit only for such Conventicles as this Libeller
indoctrinates.

The Compiler of the Sacred Synodicall Decretall, thus sports himself with Dr.
Bastwick and me, page 22. Dr. Bastwick and Jockey shall be Godfathers, and the
Whore of Babylon God-mother, and it shall be Christened, COMMONCOUNCELL OF
PRESBYTERS: (heare's like to be a City well governed) but it is not yet fit to
be known by that Name, while the Child is in the Cradle; when it can go alone,
it will be a pretty play-fellow for my son Jack, if the Doctor can but cure him
of the Martin: It Is true, he has given him a good Cordial against some
Independent Qualmes, wherewith my son Jack has been much oppressed, since Mr.
Prynne has been Outlawed by the Gospel, his Voluminous errors had the benefit
(Sir Reverence) of the peoples posteriours to correct them, (Let the Doctor
have a care of his Bills) Nam in posteriori pagina, omnia sua fic Corriguntur
Errata: that is a sign of some Grace; who says Mr. Prynnes not an honest man,
that has consecrated so much to such a Reverend use? But he shall have a
better place when it falls, he is in the way of preferment, he does supply the
place of an Informer already, for he must do a little drudgery before he be a
Judge.

In what an uncivil, unchristian manner they have rayled against my ever
honored Brother Dr. Bastwick, as an Apostate, a fighter against God, an enemy
of Jesus Christ's, etc. only for writing against their Independent Novelties,
himself has at large related in his Postscript.

How they have abused Dr. Twisse, Mr. Hindersham, Mr. Calamy, Mr. Marshall, Dr.
Burges, Dr. Featly, Mr. Paget, and especially Mr. Edwards, (whom they revile
beyond all measure) only for opposing their new Anarchicall Government, has in
part been formerly touched, and would be over-tedious particularly to relate: I
shall therefore conclude with two passages more; the one concerning Doctor
Burges, the other Doctor Twisse and the Assembly, in their last Libell, called
Martins Echo, p. 7 8. Such has been their good service to the Church and
State, that for my part, it should not much trouble me, to see them as well
knocked down: I mean to see Doctor Burges, and a competent number of his
brethren, set down upon their Presbyterian Thrones, judging the Tribes of this
our Israel; Be ye mounted upon your great Coach-Horses, which trundle you too
and fro, from London to Westminster; mount all your new Canons, and advance
like mighty men of valor, The horsemen and Chariots of Israel, even whole
black Regiments of you into the fields, under the Conduct of your
General^ssimo, William Twisse, Prolocutor; and fire all your new cast
Ordinances at once in the face of your enemies, and so finish your good work
your selves, and trust your Sacred cause no longer in the hands of the profane.

By this short taste, you may discern the most uncharitable, slanderous, lying,
Libellous disposition of these new Independent lights, whose works are so full
of infernal deeds of darkness, and of the black Language of Hell.

Section X.
Containing seditious Queries, Passages and Practices to excite the people to
mutiny, Sedition, Disobedience, and contumacy against the Parliaments
proceedings, Ordinances, and to resume their power from them.
I Have in the preceding Sections, already transcribed sundry clauses of this
nature; I shall remember you only of some few more, in two or three late
unlicensed Libels.

The Author of, an Answer to Mr. Prynnes twelve Questions concerning
ChurchGovernment (supposed to be Master Henry Robinson) page 2. makes this
Quere: What if the Parliament should be for Popery again, Iudaisme or Tur^isme?
It Is no offense to make a Quere, NOR IMPOSSIBLE TO COME TO PASS: The greatest
part of such as choose our Parliament men are thought to be Popishly or
Malignantly affected: by the same Law and Doctrine the whole Kingdom must in
consequence, and such obedience as you dictate, conform themselves to Popery,
Iudaisme, or Turcisme, etc.

And page 24. 25. He propounds these Queries, of purpose to blast the power,
and Ecclesiastical Proceedings of our present Parliament, and render them
detestable, or contemptible to the people.

Whether have not Parliaments and Synods of England in times past established
Popery? And whether may they not possibly do You mean and conclude; Erge, you
must not obey them in pulling down Popery, and setting up a Presbyteri^ll
Government againstus now.
so again hereafter? Whether in case a Parliament and Synod should set up
Popery, may they therein be disobeyed by the people? If they may be disobeyed
in one particular, whether may not they upon the like grounds be disobeyed in
another? Whether the people be not judge of the grounds for denying obedience
to Parliament and Synod in such a case? Whether the pretense of giving a
Parliament and Synod power to establish Religion, and yet reserve in our own
hands, a Prerogative of yielding or denying obedience thereunto, as we our
selves think good, be not an absolute Not so, but only in things simply civil,
and directly against Gods word. We must not obey them in things against Gods
word, but must obey them in all things not repugnant to it, is no contradiction.
contradiction? And lastly, Whether they that Attribute such a power to
Parliaments and Synods, as they themselves will question and disobey, when No
but when God commands us not to obey.
they think good; do not in effect weaken and quite enervate the power of
Parliaments, or else condemn themselves in censuring the Independents for
withholding of obedience from Parliament and Synod in such things, wherein
Note, the Parliament must have no more power then Independents give, or mean to
give them.
they NEVER GAVE, OR MEANT EVER TO GIVE POWER? If the whole Kingdom may deny
obedience unto Popish Acts and Canons, or upon any other the like just
occasion, and they themselves be judge whether the occasion be just or n^:
Whether may not Independents a part of the Kingdom only, do the like in all
respects? Or whether ought they because a lesser part of the Kingdom, to yield
obedience to Popish Acts and Canons because a Major part approve of, and agree
with a Parliament and Synod in establishing them? Whether would it not be an
ungodlie course for any people to hazard any thing at the disposal of
others, or to be carried by most voices, which may possibly, if not more then
probably be decided in such a manner as the yielding obedience thereunto would
be burthensom to their consciences, if not absolutely sinful? Whether were it
not an Where any such are imposed on them by the Parliament, they may passively
disobey, not seditiously oppose; But this is not our present case, but the
quite contrary.
ungodlie course for the whole Commons of a Kingdom so far differing in
Religion as that they profess before hand that they dare not yield to another,
upon peril of damnation, to make choice of a Parliament and Synod, with
entering into Vow and Covenant, to become afterward all of that Religion,
whatsoever the Parliament and Assembly should agree on? Whether it be not
absurd for men to say, they will be of such a Religion as shall be settled,
before they see evidence to convince them? And whether it be in the power of
man to be really of what Religion he will, until he see reason and
demonstration for it? If a representative State or A presumptu^us censure of
the Vow and Covenant, and Parliaments pressing of it.
You Devil-like omit out of the Vow and Covenant, according to Gods word, etc.
Magistrate may have Laws for setting up of a Religion, or establish what
Church Government they please; whether have not the people the same power
originallie in themselves, to A seditious Quere to stir up the people against
the Parliament, and reseinds their Acts.
assume again, and put it in execution when they please? And whether were
this otherwise then to attribute unto a mixed multitude, to the world, if not
absolutely as it is distinguished from the Saints in Scripture, Ioh. 15. 18,
19. and 17. 6, 9, 11, 4. at least by some voices, to make choice of a Religion,
Laws and Discipline, vvherevvith the Saints, household and Church of God must
necessarily be governed?

These seditious Quaere's are since reprinted and propounded by the same Author
(Henry Robinson) in another Libell of his, Entitled, The Falsehood of Mr.
William Prynnes Truth triumphing, etc. p. 26, 27. to what other end, but to
stir up the people to Mutiny, to rebellion against the Parliament and its
proceedings (a thing lately attempted by a mutinous Petition framed by
Independents, but afterward moderated by some discreeter persons, and by some
late Libellous, seditious Pamphlets) no wise man can conjecture.

To omit many new seditious, mutinous Passages in the Arraignment tf
Persecution, A sacred Decretall, and Martins Echo; compiled, published,
printed, vended, dispersed by Independent Sectaries, who highly applaud them;
instead of excommunicating, detecting, suppressing, punishing the Authors and
dispersers of them, I shall (for brevity sake) transcribe only this most
seditious Oration in the close of Martins Echo, directed to the common people,
to excite them to mutiny and Rebellion against the Assembly, Parliament, their
Military, Civil and Ecclesiastical present proceedings, deserving no less
then capital punishment, being done in seditionem Regni, no less Glanvil. l.
14. p. 170.
then high Treason by the Common Law.

Page 16. Rejoice, Rejoice good people, for this blessed Reformation, which is
ready, like an evening Wolf, to seize upon you and yours: Loving Friends and
Neighbors, stand still gaping with your mouths, and quietly bow down your
backs, whilst you are bridled and sadled, and let the holy, humble, and You
should rather say furious Sectaries and Anabaptistical Independents.
gentle Presbyterians get up and ride, they will doubtelesse deal very meekly
with you, and not put you out of your place, though the proverb be, Set a
Beggar on horseback, and he will ride to the Devil; though they have spurs, yet
they will not use them. You remember how the Bishops posted you furiously to
and fro like Iehu the son of Nimshi, until with foundring and surbats they
have even wearied you of your lives; the gentle Presbyters will in no wise ride
you so hard, though some Malignants would make you believe, that Sir John will
never be off of your backs, because it is intended he shall have his holy
Spiritual Courts in every Parish of the Kingdom; but this benefit you are
like to have, That if by his continual riding he so gall your backs and
shoulders, that you can no longer endure, but cry out by reason of your severe
oppression, you shall have Liberty granted you, To leap out of the Frying pan,
into the fire, by making your Your Independent Conventicles, admit of no
appeal, and so are merely Arbitrary and Tyrannical
appeal to the Common Council of Presbyters; forsooth, where when you shall
come with this complaint, Your Fathers the Bishops made your yoke grieveous,
and our Parochial Presbyters, (those Lions Whelps) do add hereto: Now do you
ease somewhat the grievous servitude, and heavy yoke put upon us. You may They
may infall^bly expect it from your Independent Churches who claim by their own
private usurped power, authority to exclude all from the Sacraments, and their
Children from Baptism, and imprison all such who submit not to, or oppose
their Government upon just grounds of piety and policy.
expect from this Honorable Court, an Answer like unto that of Rehoboams to
those distressed people, that cried unto him, Our Fathers made your yokes
heavy, but we will add thereto: Our Fathers Chastised you with Whips, but we
will Chastise you with Scorpions, and mend your selves as you can, for we are
the Divine power, and consequently the Lawgivers both of Church and State;
therefore you are to be content and submit your selves to your Superiors; your
several Presbyters in you several Parishes, that have the Rule over you, must
in no wise be resisted, but as it is meet, be humbly obeyed in all things that
they shall Command you; and Your Independent Churches power, is such who admit
of no appeal or superior Judicature, which Presbyterians plead for.
their power is not to be questioned, for the same power which lately was
resident in and confined to the breast of one man, to wit, an Archbishop, is
inherent, and of Divine Right, in the body of a Presbytery, and conveyed
equally to every particular Presbyter: therefore if this Episcopal power be
offensive and obnoxious to you, never expect to have it otherwise, for your
Against Independents proceedings, admitting no Appeals.
Parliaments themselves cannot lawfully help you.

Now have you not cause to rejoice for this Iubilee, this year of deliverance
from your Antichristian servitude, to Egyptian bondage? Yes sure, therefore I
say, Rejoice and be glad, and again Rejoice, lift up your heads, For doubtless
your Redemption draws nigh: The Righteous shall be delivered out of trouble,
and the Wicked shall come in his stead, Prove. 11. 8 But in plain terms (loving
friends, Neighbors and Countrymen) let us a little reason together seriously:
Have not you born the brunt and heat of this unnatural War? Is it not you that
pay all the Taxes, Cessements, and oppressions whatsoever? Is not the whole
burden laid upon your backs? Burden after burden? Even till your Does not
your neck deserve to be broken at Tiburn, for such seditious incitations to
Rebellion and mutiny against the Parliament?
backs break? How many thousands of you, who were of great Estate, are even
reduced your selves, your dear Wives and Children, to misery and poverty? How
many thousands and millions have you exhausted? Yea, has not your hands been
liberal beyond your Abilities? How freely have you brought in your Gold, your
Silver, your Jewels, Rings etc. which in London, Middlesex and Essex, amoun^ed
to above eleven Millions, besides threescore Millions extract^d out of the
Counties, with the innumerable sums otherwise raised, and spent in this
service? Has not your blood, the blood of your dear Children and Friends, been
only engaged and spilt? A loud lie.
And is it not daily shed in this Quarrel, while the Why not the Independents
rather, who are guiltiest of the two, and boast so much of their number in the
Army, and good service in the wars.
Presbyters clap you on the backs, animate, encourage, and Preach out your very
lives and estates, and involve you in all these miseries, and themselves touch
it not with the tip of their little finger; You have your Hu^bands, your Sons
and Servants, Imprested from you, and forsooth, a Priest must not be meddled
withal, under Sacrilege, Blasphemy, or profaneness at least: They are A
most false, seditious slander, the contrary being true, that Presbyterian
Ministers pay greater Taxes, according to their prop^rtion, then any other men,
though many Independents escape scotfree.
freed from all charges and Taxations, and all is laid upon you; and
notwithstanding your insufferable misery, your unsupportable charge and
oppr^ssion, under which you groan, and are fit to expire, those greedi^
wretches are not ashamed to exact their Why may not Presbyterians as justly
exact Tithes for their pains and maintenance, being due by Law, as Independent
Ministers both Tithes and Contributions too, Independent Officers, Soldiers,
pay?
tithes, though they pluck it out of your Childrens mouths. There had been
more need of an Ordinance to have Sessed the Priests, and imprested them to the
Wars, for that would be more conducent for the Kingdoms good: For should the
King set up his Episcopal Clergy, and the Parliament their Presbyterian
Clergy, in the forefront of their battles, forlorn hopes, and put them
instead of other honest innocent harmless souls, upon all their desperate
attempts, without doubt they would as zealously preach for peace, as they do
now for war: they would quickly agree and turn as they were, rather then loose
all. I am confident this would prove the most effectual means for When all
Ministers are destroyed on both sides, Independents Lay-preachers, and
Sectaries will embrace peace, not before,
our reconciliation, then any that has been yet attempted. Consider this I
beseech you, call to mind all your former expenses, ventures and cessements
for this present war, and the miserable condition you and the whole Kingdom
strugleth in, as it were for life, and are now all ready to be devoured; your
estates are wasted, your men slain, your hands weakened, and the Kingdom is
fit to be overrun, your strength decays, and your enemy increases, and all
your assistance has been conveyed through the hands of the Some think most
money sticks in Independents singers, who have been most active in singering
and disposing moneys, of which some of them give very poor accounts.
Presbyterian party, they have Some think Independents have born two to one
for the Presbyterians considering their number.
born al offices, and have had all in their own disposing, but what is become
of it? Wisemen say, that the treasures and wealth, that has been spent for the
managing of this war, would have maintained a greater war seven years
longer, some body have feathered their nests, though yours are bare: Now how
think you, is it otherwise possible but the Kingdom must be ruined if this
course be continued, and to add more certainty of destruction to it, these men
now in this our greatest extremity, labor to divide the Its such libellous
firebrands as you that do it.
Parliament party in twain;

Before the Synod was assembled, the cries of the people were heard, their
Petitions answered, miseries redressed, Monopolies remooved, oppressions eased,
tender consciences respected, the servants of God delivered out of prisons,
courts of tyranny and oppression suppressed, etc. But since their Session, the
case is quite altered, nothing but Jesuitical and Machivillian policy has
bin on foot, thousands of Petitions of poor Widows, Orphans and all manner
of distressed oppressed persons, who cry daiely and cannot be heard; and these
fat Priests can have Ordinance upon Ordinance for their ends; they can have the
sweat of other men's brows confirmed upon them by an Ordinance, whiles others A
gross scandal to the Parliament, tending to mutiny.
cannot have their just requests, for their own rights Answered: though their
Wives and Children perish; our This indeed is true of your Independents wives,
who marry Ladies and rich widows who go thus attyred.
Presbyterians wives must go like Ladies, with their silk and Taffety, some
with their fanns and silver watches forsooth hunging by their girdles, to
please the pretty sweet faced, lovely Mopphet withal pretty things, it is pity
there is not an Ordinance all this while, for them to wear Rattle^; Consider
this with your selves, and for what your estates and blood have been engaged,
The liberties of the subject, and the Protestant Religion, now how much after
this vast expense, this sea of blood, of the subjects Liberties, have you
attained? even thus much, He that shall open his mouth freely for the
Vindication of your Native Liberties, cannot do it without the hazard of his
own, yea of his life; I know that the Priests thirst after my blood, but I call
the God of heaven to witness, would it quench their thirst, and be a ransom
for our posterity, I would freely offer it to the Common good^ and as for the
P^^testant Religion has it not been locked up in the breasts, of the
Assembly? has not your faith been pined upon their sleeve? your estates
spent, and your blood shed for the result of their minds, right or wrong, and
so have fough^ for you know not what? But it may be you will say, you have engaged
for the suppression of Prelacy, HighCommission etc. you have indeed beat the
bush, but the Presbyters have caught th^^ Hare, instead of one High Commission,
in the whole kingdom, you shall have one in This is true of your Independent
Conventicles.
every Parish under the name of a Parochial Sessions, besides the general
Highcommission called the Common Council of Presbyters; Now have you not, to
shu^ the smoke, skippt into the fire? is the matter any thing amended? sure you
have got a worthy Reformation: But it may be you have a better esteem of these
new Courts, then of the old High Commission: Let me ask you? do you think
that they will be better then their pattern? etc.

Thus you may see what you are, to rely upon, if in conscience you cannot
submit to any thing they command, you know your wages, you must be banished:
and do not our Presbyters not only labor for the banishment, but for the
lives of the Contrary minded to them? And is not this think you, as evil
measure as ever was measured out of the High Commission? Wherefore I beseech you
Friends, consider what you do, consider the frait of your bodies; into what
slavery you are fit to inthrall them. I know you would be loath your Children
after you should be deprived of trading or living in the Kingdom, though they
should differ a little in opinion from others.

I beseech you therefore, save your selves from this wicked Generation, who have
spent your estates, * A most sedi(...) flander.
your blood and all, and you are now worse then ever you were hitherto, all
has been in their disposing, and you are betrayed, and daiely delivered as a
prey to the Enemy: The Lord Deliver us, Amen.

Whether this be not another Sheba, a Trumpeter to blow up popular sedition and
Rebellion against the Parliament, Synod, and their proceedings, deserving
Sheba's punishment; and whether it be not more then time for the Honorable
Court of Parliament to proceed severely against such Scismaticall Libellous and
Seditious Mutiniers as these forementioned, let all wise men judge. If our
foolish pity and indulgence toward them (according to the proverb) destroy
our City, our Church, our Religion, our Parliament, our Realms, let those
superior Powers answer it, who have authority to prevent it; I can with a good
conscience profess and say, Liberavi animam meam, what ever censures,
reproaches Scandals, Libels I suffer for my good intentions, from this
Libellous Generation of 2 These. 3. 2.
unreasonable men, who have little faith and less Charity.

Certain Queres propounded to Independent Ministers and their Members,
convincing them in many things to be mere Papists, and swervers from the Word
of God.
1. WHether Independent Ministers prescribing, and Members submitting to a
New-forme of Church Government, not yet fully known to, or agreed on among
themselves; nor reduced unto certainty by any of their Sect, but fluctuating
and swimming in their Ministers giddy brains, with a reserve of altering,
adding or diminishing at their pleasure; be not a mere Popish blind obedience?
a receiving of a Church Government with an implicit Popish faith, to believe as
their Minister or Church believes, without knowing certainly and determinately
what they do dogmatically believe? and a plain worshipping of they know not
what, their Independent way and Government, being yet not fully delineated nor
(...) in writing by any of their party, though frequently pressed to it.

2. Whether Independent Ministers, Members, Churches denying the lawful
legislative, directive, coercive Authority, Jurisdiction of Parliaments,
Councels, Synods, Kings, and Temporal Magistrates in all Ecclesiastical
affairs, or matters of Religion; appropriating this power wholly to themselves
and their Independent conventicles; Their pleading of an exemption of
themselves and Members from all secular Powers in Church matters, as being
immediately subject herein to none but Christ: Their usurping Authority to
erect and gather New Independent Churches not only without, but against the
command of Parliaments and Princes; Their daily practice of admitting,
rejecting Church Members, and excluding godly Christians not only from their
Churches, but even from the Sacraments, and their children from baptism in
case they submit not to their Newfangled way: Their denying the liberty and
benefit of Appeals from themselves to any superior Tribunal; be it a Classis,
Synod, or Parliament, by way of ^urisdiction but only of advice. Their
proclaimeing their own Independent Churches, to be the only true Churches of
Christ; and allothers f^lse, erroneous, Antichristian, from which all must
sever under pain of damnation; Their imposing New O^thes and Covenants, under
pain of exclusion from Church Communion on all their new members; and binding
them wholly to their ways, Edicts; Their stilling themselves supreme heads of
the Church next under Christ; and exalting themselves, above all that is called
God, or worshipped, above all other Ministers or Christians whatsoever, as the
ONLY Lights of the world, and tying the Scriptures to their own newfangled
expositions; be not an erecting of a mere arbitrary, tyrannical, Pap^ll,
Antichristian Jurisdiction in every Independent congregation, both over the
souls, consciences, bodies of Christians, and a setting up of as many Petty
Popes, as there are Independent Ministers or congregations?

3. Whether Independents admitting Women, not only to vote as members, but
sometimes to preach, expound, and speak publicly as Predicants, in their
Convent^cles, be not directly contrary to the Apostles Doctrine and practice, 1
Cor. 14. 34. 35. 1. Tim. 2. 11. 12. and a mere politic invention to engage
that Sex to their par^y? Whether their pretended Liberty of conscience for
every man to bleeve, profess, and practice, what Religion he pleases, (be it
Paganism, Judaisme, Turcisme, Popery) without co^rtion or punishment by the
magistrate, be not a like wicked Policy, contradictory to Scripture and
Religion: which proclaims a licen^iousnesse to practice any sin with
impunity? and warrants Popes, Papists, Jesuits to murder Protestant Princes;
blow up Parliaments; Massacre Heretics; absolve subjects from their
allegiance; Equivocate; worship Images, Saints, Relics, and their
Breaden-god; and commit any wickedness for the advancement of the Catholic
cause, because their Religion and Consciences hold them lawful. And how then
can we justly punish any Traitor, Rebel, Murder, Adulterer, Swearer, Drunkard,
Polyganist, Thief, in case he be really persuaded in his conscience, what he
does is lawful?

4. Whether the Independent Ministers in the Assembly will undertake to bind
either themselves or all others of their party for the future, without any
reserve of altering or changing their opinions and practice, to that
Independent way of Church Government, which Mr. Thomas Goodwin, or they shall
at last, after long expectation, set down in Writing? If yea, that contradicts
their own Profession, and Prot^station in their Apollogy: takes away that
liberty of conscience they contend for; and Attributes a greater Authority to
them alone to oblige their party, then to the whole Parliament or Synod. If no,
then certainly it is vain to exspect a set (...) of Church Government from
those fluctuating Divines, who till neither under-take to oblige themselves or
others for the future, by anything they resolve on or practice for the present:
and a meare sottishness for any people to depend upon such unstable
weather-cocks, and roling stones, who know not where to rest or settle; And
that way certainly can be none of Christ's, on which the very prime sticklers
for it d^re not absolutely and immutably to fasten for the future, what ever
they pretend for the present.

5. Whether public preaching, prophefying, and expounding the Scriptures by
Independent Soldiers, Tailors, Weavers, and other illiterate Mechanics,
neither publicly called to, not fitted for the Ministry, especially when and
where there are able painful preaching Ministers to instruct the people, be
not a most exorbitant. arrogant, scandalous, and disorderly practice, no where
warranted by Gods word, but directly condemned by Numb. 18. 21. 22, 23. c. 16.
3. to 41. 2 Samuel 6. 6. 7, 2 Chronicles. ^6. 16. to 23. Ier. 14. 14. c. 27. 19. Hosea
4. 4. 9. Mal. 2. 7. 2 Chronicles. 17. 8. 9. Neb. 9. 4, 5. c. 12. throughout. Mat.
28. 18. 19. 20. Mar. 16. 14. 15. 20. Acts 20. 28. Gal. 6. 6. Hebr. 13. 17. c.
5. 4. 1 Timothy 3. 2. c. 4. 14. 16. 2 Timothy 4. 2. 5. Romans 10. 14. 15. 1 Cor. 12.
28. 29. c. 14. 29 to the end. Tit. 1. 7. 9. Contrary to the very light of
Nature, the Priests among all heathen Nations whatsoever being distinguished
from the people, and not all promiscuously Priests, Genesis 42. 22. 26. 2 King.
17. 32. 1 Kings 12. 31. 32. Zeph. 1. 4. Acts 14. 13. And quite opposite to the
practice of all christian Churches in all ages?

^ 6. Whether Mr. Hanserd Knols (the illitterate Anabaptist) his Moderate
Answer to Dr. Bastwicks book, p. 19. 20. where he averres: That the condition
upon which people are to be admitted into the Church, are Faith, Repentance,
and BAPTISM; and NONE OTHER. And whosoever (poor as well as rich, bond as
well as free, servants as well as masters) Acts 16. 30. 31, 32, 33. Acts 8. 12.
36, 37. 38. 39. Acts 18. 8. Neither of which texts warrant your practice of
Re-baptization of Christians formerly baptized by others.
did make a profession of their faith in Christ Jesus* land would be baptized
(he means rebaptized) into (he should say in) the name of the Father, Son,
and holy Spirit* were admitted Members of the Church; but such as did not
believe, and would not be baptized (though formerly baptized by others) they
would not admit into church communion. And that this has bin the practice of
some churches in this city, without urging or making any particular covenant
with members upon admittance: Does not herein diametrally contradict his other
Independent brethren, who exact particular covenants, from their new admitted
Members and do not re-baptize them? Whether he has not played the
Anabaptisticall jugler with* Mr. Cranford, in printing only, Imprimatur IA:
CRANFORD, in the title of his Book, and leaving out the preceding formal
words of his License, to the great abuse both of the Reader and Licenser, viz.
I have perused this Treatise (called A Moderate Answer to Dr. Bastwick) which
THOUGH^ JUDGE ERRONEOUS, yet to satisfy the desire of a Friend, and prevent
the cavils of some Adversaries, I oppose, Imprimatur Ia: Cranford.

And whether these and such like practices proclaim not the Anabaptists such as
The Dippe^s dip^. p. 204* etc.
Dr. Foa^ly proves them: A False and lying sect, if not blasphemous too, as the
premised Sections declare some of them to be?

A Transcript of a Letter lately written from the Summer Islands, to William
Prynne of Lincolnes Inn Esquire; relating the Schismatic, Tyrannical, and
Seditious Proceedings of the Independents there; and how they Lord it over the
souls and bodies of those who dare oppose them; how contemptuously they speak
against the power of Parliaments, the Church of England, and scandalize all
others whatsoever, who are not of their Faction. Which Gods Providence newly
brought to my hands from thence, when I was closing up the premised Discovery.
Worshipful Sir,
ALI health, happiness, and prosperity wished unto you (as to mine own
soul.) The occasions moveing me at present to trouble you with these
unprofitable papers, are great and many; and happily I being a stranger unto
your Worship, you may account it more then boldness, yea even peremptory
sauciness, in me to presume to write and crave favor to and from one who
never had the least knowledge of me. But the manifold reports I have heard of
you by diverse good Christians, emboldeneth me; but especially seeing your good
works which I have perused with care and diligence, which from Mr Sparks his
brother I procured, enforces me so much the more in this my boldness, not
doubting but that you are a true hearted Christian, truly fearing God,
embracing piety and hateing iniquity, a faithful well-willer to the Church of
God; and to all the Israel of God, and to all true Israelites who with
faithful hearts love the Sion of God truly and sincerely, without hypocrisy
or halting between opinions, dessenting from it in any by or false respects,
the which are the only causes moving me hereunto: And for which I have
suffered, and a^^ and have been these thirteen mo^nthes This is the
Independents liberty of conscience where they have power in their hands.
prisoner in bonds, for standing in defense, and an opposite unto, or against a
certain Independent Church, hatched and forged in the brains of our Divines;
and by them constituted, erected, and fully accomplished; and with us held in
great repute and adoration, yea and the Actors of it not as men, but even as
demi gods, attributing that unto them, which is only proper unto God;
especially unto their Pastor Mr White, Note
the chief Actor of their Faction, a most seditious turbulent, and hateful
malicious person, and as politic as Achitophell, and as crafty and subtle as
the Devil, having as he holds the world in hand, that by his wisdom none can
excel him in the laws, both Ecclesiastical and Civil; and therefore amongst
us, (a company of poor simple ignorant and undiscerning people) he is so
accounted of, as all his words are oracles, and himself no less sent from
God; and therefore whatsoever he says, is and must be a law, whether it
concerns Body, Soul, or Conscience; for he cannot crre, so perfect is he in
their conceits: And if Is this the liberty of conscience Independents plead so
much for?
Christians in grief and distractions of soul and conscience, at their
courses, shall sue unto our Rulers for redress of their factious and seditious
courses by way of humble petition, for a cessation of those things, till we
shall hear from England, what Discipline the high Court of Parliament and
Synod has concluded upon, and that to embrace and follow; then shall we
presently be summoned to an Assizes, and there undergo such penalties as by
the Court shall be censured upon, or else, which they most aim at, to have us,
contrary to knowledge and conscience, acknowledge we have wronged them, and
there in open Court before the Country confess our selves sorry for what we
have done; this is our misery: yea if I shall speak, much more write in our
own defense against their Independent Church, laying open their factious and
schismatic government, and their envying against our Church, and Church
government, and Discipline, though they have proofs and grounds sufficient by
the word of God to convince them, the which I could never yet see disproved by
them; together with my name annexed thereunto, yet if he threaten me for
boldness herein to have a Counsel Table called against me, I am sure of it,
and there to be baited and banded to and again by a whole Counsel; together
with our Schismatic Divines, even as a Bear at a stake, not one to speak
one word in my defense, nor in the defense of Gods cause; Let their own Law
there be their Judge here.
but with an unanimous consent and voice my writings exclaimed against,
pronounced Libels, and ignominious and slanderous writings, though none of them
approved so to be, nor disproved for the Truth I stand for; yet shall I be
censured by them, for them, bound to my good behavior, put in sureties; and if
at any time afterward I shall divulge any thing either by pen or tongue
against this Independent Church* their Governors, or Government, Doctrine, or
the like, I must then presently be declared infamous* and lie in prison till to
the contrary we hear out of England; yea however, for want of Sureties in this
case, to lie in prison notwithstanding till I can or do put in Sureties; the
which I did for the space of five weeks, to my great damage and charge, and
also detriment, being an aged poor man of 74 years of age; and five nights in
the cold winter time almost drowned in the prison with rain, and sore
tempestuous weather, Independents Liberty and Charity to their brethren.
having no shelter to save my self dry: These, with other things, have I
undergon, too large for to relate, and that chiefly from this White of this
Independent Church, Pastor; I mean by his means, for if he sayit, it must
and shall be by our Rulers, who indeed ought to be chief instruments in
removing and casting out such venomous vermin out of both Church and
Common-weal^^ But how can it be expected, when they themselves are
inconfederacy with him, and join hand in to work wickedness; therefore
whoever speaks or writes against one, does it against all; therefore with a
cunning slight they put it off, as not being done in the behalf of their
Church; but as that by it I labor the subversion of the peace of our Country
as much as in me lay, as though our Countries peace rested wholly upon the
planting of this their Independent Church, whereby they have made more and
greater breaches, as can be manifestly proved, then ever they will be able to
make good, both in Church and Common wealth: Not
yea in private families also, the husband against the wife, the wife against
the husband, the children against the parents, the parents against the
children; and the like, according as your self have worthily noted in your
twelve Interrogatories. Is not this a great misery in so little a spot, even a
handful of people; Oh miserable times! Oh unhappy conditions! Now if you
demand a title or name of this their Church, or from whence derived, I cannot
answer you; for I suppose themselves know not, only framed of their fancy and
brains, only to get themselves a name, fame, and popular applause and
estimation of the world: But thus much I am sure of, it is derived partly from
the Anabaptists, partly from the Brownists, but most especially from the
Donatists, having in it a smatch of each; however they feign it to the Church
of New England, which, as they say, is the purest Church this day in the world;
yet come they far wide of it, so that it is but their saying not their doing.
But grant that they were in their way aright, yet hold it we not requisite that
their examples should be rules to us to walk by, seeing that both the one and
the other have been constituted and erected by an indirect way, Note
without the advice and approbation of lawful Authority of King, Parliament,
and Synod, the which our men say they are not to attend or wait upon Princes
nor Parliaments leisures, the cause being Christ's own, and depending only and
alone upon him, and not upon any humane power: and they his servants, and
Christ their Lord, it refteth on them in his behalf to do it, it being a
spiritual and no carnal work. And again some of them have said it, Note
their Insolency against the power of Parliaments.
that Parliament and Synod can establish no other Church Discipline or
Government then theirs, unless they will go contrary to the word of God; this
has been publicly delivered: yea by the same party such stuff has been
delivered, that has made all modest and shameful faces to blush, ears to
glow, and hearts to grieve that has heard it; yea and that upon days of
humiliation, making diverse people both objects and subjects openly to work
upon; thundering out punishments and judgments, both spiritual and temporal,
against diverse persons, as though they had both swords in their own power, or
as though they had absolutely known Gods secret decree; and this has been
held for sound and good Orthodox Doctrine, when diverse have repented of their
hearing; and these not once nor twice, but often. Infinite might I relate, even
from their own mouths, which would make wise men admire, but I must pass
over them to avoid tediousness to my self, and trouble to you. And that in
your wisdom you may the better conceive of this their Church, The first
beginning was a certain Feast, held every week at several houses, which Feast
they called a loblolly Feast; which for the common fare of our Country is as
our watergruell in England, so they would have it but of a common food; at
which Feast each did strive to excel another in the difference of making it:
after they had once gotten a certain number unto them, and so of an ordinary
food they made it extraordinary; yea so extraordinary, that some in few
meetings were forced to sell the feathers out of their bedding, Note
for milk, butter, and cream to feed them withal, and to make their Loblolly
the more dainty and toothsome; others again to maintain this Feast, for one
days entertainment, themselves and whole family must pinch for it two or three
months after; by which Feast, by the show of neighborhood or Feast of Love,
though never none was found, in short time they increased in every parish to a
pretty number. At which Feast also their bellies and stomachs being well
gormondized, the Minister propounds certain questions unto them by way of
catechizing of his own framing, for half an hour; which each had in writing
one from another, and like Scholars these their lessons to learn against each
Wednesday, and great care was taken; some for fear of reproof, and some
popular applause: and these ca^^chisings being ended, they then for an hour or
two discourse of neighbors that would not join with them, traducing both
names and persons; this man is a drunkard, a whooremaster, and the like; such a
woman was light and wanton, and loved such and such a man; such a man loved
such a woman; this was the manner and order of their Feasts, till at length
themselves were most of them drunkards and whooremongers. Note


The next thing was, a day in a week at noon for two hours space to catechize
youth and children, upon a simple small Catechism set out by one Mr Oxenbridge,
son to Doctor Oxenbridge of London, who with his wife especially were the
first ground-works of this Faction: Who in time before it came to any
perfection, departed from us, but left the cursed seed or fruit of their
Faction behind them: they being gone, this Mr White as chief, takes in hand
to accomplish this business, which with another as forward, but better seen
in it then themselves, one Mr Golding, a young head but well learned in
Schismatic Science, if not worse, joins together, labors with and
overcomes an ancient man, Mr Copeland by name; and then on all hands with an
unanimous consent, they join their forces for the erecting and establishing
this their Church; and then in stead of catechizing youth, they would catechize
ancient people young and old of both Sexes: This they could not well
accomplish, being by diverse withstood; but seeing they could not bring that to
pass, then would they not suffer any to communicate without examination
before, and that as well Believers as others, yea them especially, though never
so learned and sufficient, which bred a sore broile amongst us; yet of many
could they not have their wills, though put from the Sacrament.

Then denied they to baptize children, unless the Parents rehearsed the Creed,
and such as did had their children baptized, and such as would not, theirs were
not. Then having made themselves strong by increasing their company, they then
began a weekly Lecture upon every Wednesday, one one week, another another
week; these exercises were wholly and only for the building up of this their
Church: Exclaiming against our Church, both in Matter, Manner, Order,
Government, Discipline, and Governors, applauding this their own, the
holiest, and purest Church upon the earth, next unto New England: here they
deny all supreme power of Magistracy, yea of the King himself, only to guide
them in the channel, and to defend them and maintain them in this their
Church, Orders, and Discipline, to punish all such as shall oppose them:
themselves being chief thereof under Christ, but especially their Pastor
White, so pronounced by their Prolocutor, one of our present Governors in the
house and presence of God, and the whole congregation, that he was A New
Independent King and Pope.
Supreme head of this Church next under Christ, and none above him: this was
one Mr Painter a Cooper. Then the other two Ministers were chosen Elders,
whereof Mr Golding the younger man in years was the chief, Mr Copeland the
inferior, next a Deacon one Mr Robert Cesteven a Counceller, and a great
stickler; thus have you as yet all the Officers: But before this choice the
baptizing of Infants was quite rejected and given over, holding a tenet, that
children ought not to be baptized, but only such as were of years of
discretion, and able to render an account of their faith, according to Mark 16.
16. with diverse other places, saying, they were no Pastors, and therefore durst
not Independents true Anabaptists.
baptize one nor other, and that they had baptized more children already then
they knew how to answer: this was Mr Whites own speech unto my self upon a
Lecture day, I having two of my children to baptize at the same time. Upon this
I confess, and se^ing the great inconveniency that did arise thereon, and many
children in the Country to be baptized, and many more like to be, I put pen to
p^per and write unto our chief Governor Capt. William Sail, four or five
sheets of paper, and presented as a new years gift, he being the only man, as
I supposed, to redress and reform by virtue of his place and power, all such
erroneous and factious errors both in Church and Common weal; but hard
success I found in my Epistle unto him: In the front of the work, I showed him
how I was perplexed both in mind and conscience for yielding unto them through
his instigations and persuasions, at an Assizes before, Note this schismatic
practice.
for another writing delivered by me unto Mr White himself, upon his and the
rest their silencing themselves, leaving our Churches upon the Lords days, and
gathering swarms of people into their own houses as Conventicles; and there
have reading, singing, praying, expounding, and preaching, yea if truth were
known, the Sacrament also administered in their private houses; and all these
Ordinances denied in the houses of God, yea they were slighted, contemned,
scorned, and rejected, even as Iakes: these at the beginning of constitution of
their Church; nay in one small tribe or parish three or four such several
places of meetings, and the houses of God destitute. Secondly I writ against
Independent Churches according to my poor understanding, I being a man of no
learning, but especially against their Church, saying, had I power and
approbation, I would shake the whole fabric thereof; this was taken very
heynously. But to let pass other things contained therein, come we to the
work, where first I maintained our Church of England against all Independent
Churches, to be a true and a perfect Church; yet so, as not being free or
clear from all defects, as no Church under heaven was, is, not never will be,
comparing our Church with all other reformed Churches, and their defects and
deformities. Secondly by seven ways I maintained the lawfulness and the
necessity of baptizing Infants, where I answered diverse objections of the
Anabaptists, and theirs also unto me in number fourteen, and laid down their
objections severally.

Thirdly and lastly, I showed who of necessity were bound, and therefore ought
to baptize infants, namely those to whom God had given the dispensation of the
Word and Sacraments, that is, such as God has called to the Ministerial
function, and endued them with gifts and graces answerable for their Callings,
such and none but such ought to meddle in the word or Sacraments; here I showed
the duty of all who had children to baptize only to such, and to none but such:
then next, the duty of Ministers, they being so sought to; they ought, they
must baptize them: next I confuted and condemned certain heretick^ and
schismatics that denied and refused to baptize infants, and namely themselves;
and lastly concluded with a friendly exhortation to all Ministers to be
careful to perform their duty in this, and in all other points. This in brief
was the sum and effect of my new years gift, of which I heard not a word for
three weeks space, in which time, yea so soon as he had it, he shows it to the
Ministers, who all this time perused, scanned, and sifted it; upon the which Mr
White comes to my School, salutes me kindly, with one with him to catch and
bear witness what proceeded from me, at length uttered his mind; amongst many
other passages, that I perverted the Scripture to my own ends, saying I had
abused the words of our Savior, Luk 10. where he commands little children to
come unto him, and forbid them not: you maintain says he, he means such
children as suck the breast, here is your error, says he, Note.
and for this you shall smart; but says he, his meaning was, such as were
newly converted to the faith, these, says he, are those that Christ calls
little children or babes, as in 1 John 2. 1. Therefore for this your This is
the Lordly Anabaptisticall li^erty of conscience that Independents grant to
their Orthodox Brethren.
absusing and wresting the Word, you shall answer it, and I doubt not but to
crave so much favor of the Governor, as to call a Council table, where you
shall answer your abuses, and peremptory scandalous and libellous writings, and
so at length we parted. The next week following I writ a Letter to the
Governor, giving him to understand, I had taken him for an honest Christian
friend, telling him withal* I sent it not to them but unto him, supposing
himself only would have made use of it for some better ends, and withal
laving open Schismatics more plainer then before, advising him upon them five
marks or tokens to know them by, to search and see if he knew none or could
find none. Then I showed, that Faction and Sedition did spring from these
sins, Pride, Hypocrisy, and Ambition; and from these three did arise
presumption, and rebellion, both against God and man, showing how and wherein;
praying these sins were not found amongst us, but neither named nor pointed
at any that hold could be taken. The next Sahbath a warrant was served on me
for my appearance at a Council table the thirteenth of February 1644, where
being as before, I was so baited and banded to and again, as wonder it was,
and shortly Why should not independents have the like liberty of conscience as
they grant their opposites?
after clapped in prison: however nothing traverst that day, save only the
Letter, nor my new years gift never questioned; when and where I made mine
appeal for England, where God blessing me, would I have been at present, had
it not fallen out, that in October last in the dead of the night, my house with
all I had therein was burned, to my great loss and prejudice; so that being
altogether unable, I am forced with sorrow to stay behind, as not being able
to put clothes on my back; having also burnt all my writings, which has been
more grief to me then the loss of all my means and goods, which was more
then of mine own I shall ever see again.

But having digressed from the proceeding of this Sect, I return again where
I left: and having given over the baptizing of infants for a good season, at
length they gave over preaching, as being no Ministers, as being made so in an
Antichristian manner; Note the manner of ga^hering Independent Churches and
ordi^ation of their Ministers.
and no true Ministers till such time as they were new called and ordained by
their holy Church; which at length was accomplished: in which time they still
continued their weekly Lectures; whereat there was added, and they received
members unto and into their Church daily, but after a most strange manner;
their exercise being ended, those that were to enter in, came upto the Chancell
with great sobriety and show of humility, and sorrow, with contrition, and
wounding of conscience for sin; and there stand, but with much hypocrisy and
dissimulation; and there before the Pulpit, with all the holy brethren and
sisters about them, they make a consession of their sins, are in outward show
sorry for them, with great contrition: upon which enquiry is made among them,
what they think of their confession and contrition, and whether they are not
worthy as members of their holy Church to be received in? answer is made, yea:
then they tell them, they do accept of them, and with great applause they all
receive them, all shaking and embracing and hugging them, with great joy,
biding welcome brother, Such are fit members for lawless Independent Churches.
welcome sister. But such confessions and doings as you never saw the like;
insomuch that Law might justly take hold of many of them: but these open
confessions have a pretty while bin left off, they being ashamed of it in
regard the people mock them, telling them that this open auricular confession
is mere idolatry and superstition; therefore now they have private
confessions; and whosoever enters into their church, must also enter into
covenant to stand to and to maintain their church and church discipline,
orders, governors, and government, Note this confederacy.
to the uttermost of their powers and abilities; yea they must endeavor and
strive therein even unto blood. And concerning baptizing of infants at the
taking up again of their ministry; they also have taken up again the use of
the Sacraments, but only among themselves; but for any that are not in or of
their church, their children shall not be baptized unless they will enter
into their church, and covenant with them; neither for the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, shall any partake thereof, but only their own Flocks and
Members, by which cause many people who have an ardent desire thereunto, have
been deprived of it, some Is this liberty of conscience or rather tyrannizing
over men's consciences?
two years, some three years, some more some less, to their great grief and
sorrow; And for the manner, form, and order of the Sacrament amongst
themselves, it is according to their Faction, derogating from our mother Church
as I hear: and for all such as are not of them, nor adheres unto them, we are
accounted as This is Independents charity and humility.
heathens, yea even as dogs, or swine, and so reputed. Thus in brief have I
laid you down the order and manner of their Church from the beginning to this
present, which has been in agitation these four or five years; and whether
it be yet fully perfected, I think themselves are ignorant of; but now is their
maine hope, that their great Pastor of their Church is now come for England,
and that from and by the Parliament he will accomplish a full and absolute
settling and establishing this their Church amongst us, Note
by virtue and power from the Parliament, and by friends that he will raise,
especially by the means of one Mr Holland, one that bears some place of
eminency in Parliament, who is a great and extraordinary friend of his; the
which if he should accomplish this their wicked desires, then will they
tyrannize over us, and bring a great confusion upon our whole Country, and
raise civil wars among us, to our utter subversions, being in comparison but
a handful of people, to the great grief and hearts sorrow of many honest
Christian hearts, who desire the peace of Gods true Church, but for all false
ways we utterly abhor. And now Worshipful Sir, with favor give me leave to
use by way of similitude the words of Mordecay unto Ester c. 4. 14. who knows
whether thou art come to the Kingdom for such a time as this? Even so say I to
you Sir, what know you whether the God of mercy and consolation has raised you
up as an instrument or means for these distracted times? yea, what know you,
whether by your help and assistance you may not be a means and help for the
release and delivery of many poor distressed and distracted Christians from
the cruelty and tyranny of these Schismatic Schismatics, Note
whose mercies are mere cruelties, which we know by woeful experience we
shall find. And however we are far remote from you, yet we beseech you (I
speak in the behalf of many) let your goodness by your aid and assistance
even stretch it self to the utmost ends of the world, if occasion be offered,
for the good of Gods Church and people; and as your works coming by Gods
blessings amongst us, to our great joy and comfort, and to the vexation of our
malignant adversaries; who notwithstanding slights them, saying, you have writ
according to your understanding, and to the corruption of your own heart, and
that you have been answered and foiled in your own arguments; persuading
poor simple ignorant people unto any thing; for diverse having seen your
twelve Interrogatories, struck them into such a damp and distemperature, that
they knew not what to say or do, until their Pastor especially with their
Elders, through deluding speeches, gave them as they suppose some comfort;
otherwise I persuade my self many of their adherents had revolted from them,
and turned Cat in the pan. But no marvel though they slight you; for they do
slight all the most reverend Divines and men of learning, Independen^s
Atrogance and spiritual pride
wisdom, and gravity, whose lives have been cautious, pious, and religious
that have been before them: let a man name any foreign and domestic, some
they will set at naught, others happly with a more reverend respect, yet
slight them (as my self at times have produced at least a hundred upon
occasions) they will answer, they were good Reverend men in their days, and
taught well according to their times; though you name the Interpreters of the
Scriptures, or bring in Beza or Iunius, upon their Annotations, yet say they,
these were but men, subject to failings and errors, and their days were the
times of ignorance, and of superstition, and the clear light of the Gospel was
not then so manifestly and so clearly made known unto them as now it is, the
Lord revealing his will with a greater splendour in these latter days unto his
Servants the Ministers then in former times, for the calling and gathering
together of his Elect from the four corners of the world, and by them in these
latter times has showed a more nearer and easier way to Heaven then formerly
(O impious impiety!) wherewith they delude poor simple people, deceiving them,
being void of understanding and discerning even to their destructions: for let
a man discourse with them, and show them their solly and their blindness, and
show them the erroneous ways they are in; this presently is their answer,
Independents blind obedience as bad or worse then Popish.
we do know that our Teachers, who are our Leaders, they are wise, learned,
religious, pious, and holy men, and they cannot err, say they; and they have
paund their souls upon this way, and would they wilfully damn their souls
were it not the right way, no it is impossible; therefore we will never forsake
this way, but whatever they say or teach we will build our Salvation upon it,
and seal it with our blood: Thus have they taken poor souls captives and
deceived them; and through their delusions we have daily a falling away,
forsaking the old way which is the true way, and turning to Sin and Schism,
and erroneous Factions, which are new invented ways never heard on till not
much my time before. Wherefore we beseech you, we beseech you in the bowels of
love and compassion, let the serious consideration hereof move you to enter
list with this stout Champion, whose pride we know to be such, that he will
overcome ten thousand better then himself; and not only to enter list, but
also as God has called you to, and seated you in a place in that high Court of
Parliament; that so you would oppose his enterprises and hinder him of his
desired purposes, that so he may not come with Power and Authority from that
High Court, to lord it and to bear rule over the Lords inheritance amongst us,
but rather forced to recant, and lay down all his and their Schismatic
courses, or confine them all together to some other place. Things coming into
my mind one after another, causes me not to set them down so exactly in
order as they happened, but somewhat confusedly: I should have told you at first,
this man, Mr White, was by the Company of Adventurers sent over some years
since, Minister for our two Tribes, Pembrook and Devon, and by the Earl of
Dorset then Governor, with the whole Company, they bound him in a bond of two
hundred pound stirling to live with us peaceably and quietly, and to follow the
Orders and Discipline of our Church for the space of three years after his
arrival; which argued he was a man of a turbulent spirit in the place where he
was, at Knights bridge near Westminster Independents formerly as Episcopal
and Ceremonious as Presbyters.
; during this time of his bonds he was at hot a zealot as possible might or
could be, both for the Book of Common Prayer, as also for all other Ceremonies
of the Church, as kneeling at the Sacrament, Cross in Baptism, Ring in the
Marriage, and all other things whatsoever, so long at his bonds lasted: But
suddenly after he turned upside down, and after four years he began these
things; and seeing he could not accomplish his desire with us, he made shows
of leaving us and go to another Charge that was vacant, unless we would sue
unto him by Spiritual pride if not Papal.
humble petition, as unto a Prince, which we refused to do; the other they
did, and gave him a Call, and with their Call, a hog of forty shillings
price; which Call he received and embraced, forsook us, and went unto them: He
had not long been there, but by some of our Tribe he was sued unto to come to
us to baptize three children; the which he did, he and his wife, Mr Copeland
and his wife being witnesses to one; where his Text being (He that despises
you, despises me; and he that d^spiseth me, de^^iseth him that sent me;) At
which time he did so exclaim against us, saying, we despised him and his
Doctrine, and had cast both him and it from us, and so consequently God the
Son, and God the Father, because we would not sue* unto him by way of
petition: When he also for our fact, pronounced a doom against us in his
Pulpit, saying, Stand up ye of Pembrook Tribe and hear your doom, which was,
you shall live here these twenty years without a preaching Minister; comparing
also our Reader to the Idol Dagon; the Reading-pew to the place of Desolation,
saying, Here sits the Idol of Abomination in the place of Desolation; saying
our Book of Common Prayer was an Idol also. And still in their weekly
Exercises, defame they our Church, and Church Discipline, with the Orders and
Manner thereof, crying, she is unclean, she is unclean, polluted, defiled
with Antichristianisme, both in Church Government, Manners, Orders, and
Discipline, yea throughout; therefore say they, Come out of her my people, and
take not of her pollutions, with diverse such like; yet for the man, I must
confess he has been and is a worthy and reverend Teacher, which causes
many, yea most people the easier and sooner to be deceived, as also by humble
carriages, and pious walking, which is such, that as our Savior says, is able
to deceive the very Elect, by their walking in sheeps clothing; but sure I am,
they are ravening wolves, and easily may be discerned by their fruits; that is,
by their Doctrines, the which however it sound good to simple people, and is as
honey in their mouths, but sure I am, they tend only and wholly to their own
Schismatic Faction. And thus have I been large in my Discourse, and
troublesome unto you, though in brief. Now Sir, you know that he who cutteth
wood over his head, is in danger of the chips flying in his face; so fares it
with me, I having been an opposite against them, both by speaking and
writings; they are therefore become mine inveterat enemies, and have from time
to time traduced me: and as the case once was yours, so is it and has been
mine, having suffered much by our Rulers, through their means, they being all
in a confederacy; and likely, if he can possibly, suffer more; but I hope will
defend me from their cruelty by the help and means of you; who are able to
sympathize another man's case by his own, and be the easier stirred up to
compassionate my case, and to do your best endeavor for me, and many more
honest hearted people, who by me desire from you the like favors; so shall I
and them also be bound to pray for your prosperity here, and everlasting
happiness hereafter; desiring you to keep this writing to your self, and make
use of them, and not show them to any, except to some sure friends, not but
that any thing herein contained is also absolutely true, but that they are mine
inveterate and malicious enemies, and if by the Parliament they should get
their desires, then am I sure to suffer most exceedingly; therefore I am forced
to send to you underhand by way of Mr Spark, and another to write the
subscription of his Letter, that my hand be not seen; such laying wait there
is for any my writings. This Gentleman the Bearer, has in some measure been a
co-partner with me in suffering, and has had much trouble, and is now come for
England to clear himself from many false accusations laid to his charge, as
also to maintain the Countries agrievances and his own also: And if your
Worship shall be pleased to do him any friendly office, either by word or
Counsel, he will be thankful, and so shall more; and with my self in
especial be bound to pray for you, and ever rest your truly devoted and
faithful well-willer in heart till death to be commanded.

Richard Beak.
Sir, I desire your favor I may hear from your Worship, which will be a joy
to me and many others, who rejoice of you, and hope well in you.



This Letter is seconded by sundry others from thence to the same effect, and
to move the Honorable Houses of Parliament to take some speedy course for the
quenching of those flames of Schism and Sedition, which these New Independent
Lights and Firebrands have kindled in this Plantation, and taking off the
unsupportable yoke of Tyrannical and Arbitrary Government over the Persons,
Estates, and Consciences of the Freeborn English Subjects there, which these
Lordly Tyrants have imposed on them, threatening ruin to this Plantation; which
I hope their Honors, and all others concerned in it, will seriously lay to
heart.

I shall add to this two other Papers, (to wit, a Petition, and Advertisement)
sent lately from the same Islands to me by Mr Richard Norwood, which fully
discover the Schismatic and arrogant Proceedings of the Independents there;
and refute their present Innovations in a substantial satisfactory manner.

To the Right Worshipful our Worthy Governor Captain Josias Forster, and his
Council.
Right Worshipful and worthy Governor, etc.
I Know you are not ignorant of the rent or division here begun, which though I
believe (as you have often testified) you favor not, yet through your
gentleness and forbearance toward the Authors and Abetters; It grows very
strong, and is like to prevail; which I suppose you know not, but may further
understand if you be pleased to make enquiry, and to hear other men. For mine
own part I frame not this as a complaint or accusation against them, being but
one man, and the matter concerns all; besides I have seen the success that
others have had that ways, and I know they are too strong a party for me or
any one man to encounter with. But being very sensible of the danger
approaching, lost by my silence I might seem to consent unto it, I thought it
necessary to give notice, and to endeavor what in me lies to prevent it,
whatsoever may befall me for so doing.

Therefore I have written this Advertisement following, which I could wish might
come to the hands of all. The intent and scope whereof is, to invite and
persuade all to a cessation from setting up any new discipline and government
amongst us until we hear what is decreed by the Honorable Assembly of
Parliament: Or if that cannot be obtained (as I have small hope, considering
how eagerly they pursue their ends, and how great a number they have gained to
their party) yet that the authors would express punctually in writing, what
manner of Discipline and Government it is which they would set up.

And because (it may be) they will say, that they have already expressed it in
their Sermons, especially in their Lectures ordained for that purpose;
therefore I have set down thirty or more doubts of special moment which they
have not yet cleared. Neither is it fit that our Religion or this part of it
(which they would seem to make a principal part) should remain in their
breasts only, for so they may add, detract, or alter, as they please; but
ought to be fully expressed in writing. And I believe they are scarce agreed
themselves touching all points of their intended Discipline; which you may
perceive if you please to examine them severally, according to these or such
other questions, as you shall think fit.

Therefore in the first place (according to my duty) I humbly present this
Advertisement to the consideration of your Worship and your Council, to whom
God has committed the Government of this place, and of all persons here, and
of whom he will certainly require it, if such an evil as is threatened should
befall through your neglect. For although the great Antichrist and his Clergy
did prevail to persuade Christian Princes and Magistrates, that the Government
of the Church and care of Religion pertained not to them, but to the Clergy,
and the like, is now here preached amongst us: yet I verily trust, you
entertain no such false principle. For, to establish true Religion, to maintain
it, and to see that the duties of Religion be duly performed to God and man, is
almost all that the Law requires, and so is almost (if not all) the duty of
the Christian Magistrate. And this being taken from him, and put upon the
Clergy, he may serve as an officer to execute what the Clergy shall decree, but
cease in a manner wholly to be a Magistrate. Thus commending you to the
tuition and direction of Almighty God. I rest

March 6. 1642. Your Worships in all due observance, RICH. NORWOOD.

An Advertisement to such here as have care of the Conservation of true
Religion.
IT is and ought to be the principal care of every good Christian, to conserve
the knowledge and exercise of true Religion in himself and others, being the
one thing necessary. But from this these times have much declined everywhere;
and even in our dear native Country, so far as called for a speedy
Reformation, or threatened ruin. And seeing little hope of the one, the latter
was justly feared by many, and by my self (I confess) amongst others, being
the principal cause of my coming hither. But the Lord has mercifully stayed
those fears, and given us fresh hopes by the Reformation in so great a measure
begun by the present Parliament, which also they endeavor through many
difficulties to accomplish more fully. And considering how worthily they have
begun, and what great things they have effected above all expectation, we have
no cause to mis-doubt them, nor to anticipate their Honorable proceedings, but
rather to attend what shall be determined by them; especially considering that
we of this place, as we have not been much burdened, except by some
Ministers; so now we are altogether unburthened of the Ceremonies, and
whatsoever else has usually been offensive to good Christians in England. For
if we should set up a new Government or Discipline and form of Religion here,
we must alter it again when we understand out of England what form the
Parliament have or shall establish: Some say no, our Ministers are as supreme
heads under Christ of their several Churches here, and not subordinate in
these things Ecclesiastical, to Parliament or any other power upon earth
whatsoever: but this opinion savors too much of Antichristian pride and
presumption. Others say, the Parliament will establish the same form that our
Ministers will set up here; but these conjectures do much wrong that
Honorable Assembly; for if the matter were so easy and evident, that our
Ministers here can presently determine it; then what need the Parliament so
long to debate and consider of it? What need such consultation with the ablest
Divines in England, and many other from all parts? And why has there been
such difference of opinions touching this matter even amongst the most godly
and learned in Christendom for these 100 years together.

I remains therefore, that we must change again when we hear from thence,
and considering what changes have been made by some already, if we should now
make another change in setting up a new Discipline, and shortly after another
when we hear out of England; such mutability would neither be safe for this
place, not suitable to the steadfastness of the Church and people of God, (...).
which is the Pillar and ground of truth, and must not be wavering, and carried
about with every wind of Doctrine etc. The Apostle makes it a sign of a
double minded man to be unstable in all his ways: and in the Epistle to the
Hebrews; (...).
Be not carried about with diverse and strange Doctrines etc. And the Prophet
says, Why runnest thou about so much to change thy ways? It will be answered,
we intend not to change, but to the better; but withal remember, that such is
always the pretense, and oft-times the intent in all Innovations whatsoever.
Therefore Solomon says, My son fear God and the King, Prove. ^. 21.
and meddle not with them that are given to change. Not but that even the best
Christians may al^er sometimes in some circumstances of Religion (some good and
weighty causes requiring it) but it must not be through levity, nor of an high
mind, nor for self ends. A restless levity, and that with contempt of
Authority, under pretense of greater and new lights, is a dangerous sign of an
Anabaptisticall spirit. Therefore I say, what we change, ought to be done with
the fear of God and the King. In the fear of God, namely according to his
Word; and with the fear of the King, that is, consenting with the Laws and
Sovereign Authority set over us; or at least not with an high hand in contempt
thereof; For every soul must be subject to the higher powers; Romans 13. 1.
yea says Chrysostom, though he be an Apostle, though an Evangelist, though a
Prophet.

Therefore I could wish (as I have often persuaded) that we might stay for the
determination of the Parliament in these things, and likewise the approbation
of the Company in those that concern^ them. But because some here are very
impetuous, and a further change is daily preached and pressed amongst us, I
have little hope to stop the violence of this stream. Therefore to the intent
we may understand and consider what to do, and (as the saying is) look before
we leap, I should in the next place desire, as many others do, and as it
concerns us all to desire of them, and of our Ministers especially, that they
would be pleased to set down in writing, Note
whatsoever new thing in Doctrine or Discipline they would have us entertain,
different from the practice or tenants of the Church of England; that so each
thing being well considered, examined, and adjudged by the Word of God, we may
entertain or reject it accordingly.

I know there are sundry Objections alleged and pretended, more then I need
to repeat or answer here; For howsoever it is true that we are to submit our
selves to the Word of God, I mean the holy Scriptures in all things; yet not
so to men, Objections
especially when they seek themselves in stead of Christ: No though they tell
us, they are the mouth of God, and sit in Moses chair; and therefore must be
heard and obeyed; and that the government of the Church belongs to them next
under Christ, and that even Caiaphas, though a persecutor of Christ. yet when
he had the place of High Priest he prophesied the truth. And though they tell
us we must not strive with the Priest, nor reprove our R^prover; and though
they accuse us to have rejected and opposed more good Ministers then any other
like place professing Christianity (of which there is no show of truth I know)
and that they which rebel against the Ministers, cannot be under the
Government of Christ, with many heavy threats against such: And though they
threaten to leave us destitute of the Word of God, if we make any resistance;
and though it be often alleged, that we have rare and reverend Ministers,
endued with new light, and that so great, O Arrogance^
as the like has scarce been since the Apostles times; Nay I have heard some,
and those of note, prefer it before that of the Apostles, at least in some
things. And further, that all four of our Ministers concluded of a new
Discipline, and new courses of edification, whereof two being gone into England
to agitate the business there with their friends, and in Parliament: God has
sent another from Providence almost miraculously, who was not of their
counsel, and yet does approve of all their proceedings, and as earnestly
press them as the rest. Besides (say they) all the chief professors in the
Country are for the same; yea the chief Authority in the Island, next the
Governor. So that all things thus concurring, shows (say they) that there is
an extraordinary hand of God in the effecting of it; and therefore we ought
quietly to yield our selves to them, least we resist even God himself.

These (I say) and other the like arguments in this case, Answer
however they may prevail much with some that have other foundation for their
Religion besides the Scriptures; yet to an understanding man they will easily
appear to be of small value, as would be more evident in answering them
particularly, which I shall readily do if it be needful. But having no
purpose here to dispute, but rather to invite to a cessation from these
occasions of strife and controversy, or at least wise to a due consideration
of what we do; I shall only answer in general. It is a saying of Divines
agreeable also to the experience of good Christians, That Satan never tempts
more dangerously whether by himself or others, then when he does most persuade
us not to resist his temptations, but to yield our selves to them; And even the
Lord himself does sometimes prove his Church and people, whether they will
cleave unto him (that is hold fast to his Word) or unto other Lords, other
lights, other spirits besides his, 1 Cor. 11. 19.
as Deuter. 13. 3. And so the Apostle foretells, there should be Schisms,
and Heresies in the Church, as, For there must be heresies even among you, 2
Pet. 2. 1^
that they which are approved amongst you might be known. And so, But there
were false Prophets also among the people, even as there shall be false
Teachers among you. Therefore we must not take up our Religion upon the credit
of men, how great soever they may seem to be, but examine things by the word
of God, and see that it be firmly grounded there. To the Law and to the
testimony, if they speak not according to this word, it is because there is no
light in them. Therefore they must prove by the word of God (not by outward
signs and wonders) the things they teach, and would have practiced. And first
let us know them fully, and with those noble Bereans, search the Scriptures,
and examine them thoroughly before we entertain them.

They tell us daily of a greater light, whereby they discern these things, and
other great and glorious things that are working and already begun in the world
within these three years, and will shortly be accomplished, even so great and
so excellent a change in the world as may seem to be a heaven upon earth; the
Lord grant it, and hasten it; but withal let us desire and expect these things
with sobriety and watchfulness, lest whilst our eyes be taken up and dazzled
with a present expectation of these high and glorious things, we see not the
danger that is at our feet, but be caught in the snare before we be aware, Act.
1. ^.
remembering the words of our Savior in this case, when his Disciples asked him
saying, Lord will thou at this time restore the Kingdom to Israel, Act. ^. 7.
He answered, It is not for you to know the times or the seasons, which the
Father has put in his own power.

I have read in some History of the West Indies, that about 100 years since or
more, the Island Vianis (which some of our men are now gone to discover) and all
those Islands thereabout were Inhabited by certain Indians, which for ingenuity
and feature surpassed many others; these held the immortality of the soul, and
thought that when it departed the body, it went to a kind of Purgatory, which
they supposed to be the cold Northern Mountains congealed with frost and snow;
where after it was sufficiently purged, it went from thence into countries more
Southerly, and there abode for ever, enjoining a thousand delights and
pleasures. The Spaniards having knowledge of this opinion of theirs, and
wanting men to work in their gold mines, came thither with Ships from
Hispaniola or Cuba (which are to the Southward) and making some goodly show,
told these silly Indians that they were come from the Southern parts, places of
great felicity, where the souls of all their Ancestors and friends departed
were in all joy and happiness; and they were now come to transport them
immediately thither, that they might never come at all into that Purgatory in
the Northren parts: These simple people being dazelled with the conceit and
imagination of these things, could not forethink their danger at hand, but came
flocking to the Spaniards in great numbers; who when they saw their opportunity
set sail, and carried them thence to their gold mines, where they were soon
consumed with grievous service and slavery. In like sort it concerns us not to
be so much transported with any glorious pretenses of some great temporal
freedom and felicity at hand, as to be drawn in any sort from the Church of
England, especially as it is now reformed and in reforming, but to know fully
of those that would draw us whither they would have us go, and upon what
grounds, that so we may search the Scriptures, and thoroughly examine those
grounds thereby.

God has delivered our Nation (as many others in Christendom) from under the
bondage of the great Antichrist, we have not prized this deliverance, nor made
that use of this liberty, nor those many mercies and blessings accompanying it
that we ought. And considering our great abuse of Gods favors, and in
particular the sins of this place in all sorts, Magistrates, Ministers and
people, and especially the evident unsoundnesse of those that are Professors
here: It were just with God whilst we look for light to send us darkness, and
whilst we propose to our selves the speedy ruin of Antichrist, great freedom
and glorious times (all which the Lord can effect in his due time) we fall our
selves into another servitude and bondage perhaps as grievous as the former,
under petty Antichrists. For if that grand Antichrist come down (as we have
good hope) and a company of Clergymen should arise (whether Ministers, or who
else) that should as it were divide his kingdom among them, by assuming every
one to himself such a like power over his Church, or the people committed to
his charge as the grand Antichrist usurped over the Catholic Church, and that
as he did lure Divino (which they pretend) surely they would become so many
petty Antichrists, and the Church should be brought into servitude and
thraldom as before.

And indeed, as the error to which the Jews were most inclined in general,
was to set up other gods, that is false gods, attributing something to them
which was proper to the true God: So the error to which Christians in general
are most inclined, is to set up false Christ's; that is Antichrists of the
Clergy, attributing something to them that is peculiar to Christ himself, or
to his Church, which is Christ mystical; As was foretold by the Apostles, and
is evident by the experience of all Ages since Christ: And of which our Savior
himself seems to give warning, Matthew. 24. 24.
when he says; For there shall arise false Christ's and false Prophets, and
shall show great signs and wonders, so that if it were possible, they should
deceive the very Elect. And by such means, even the Pope himself and all his
Clergy had their first rising, having the Suffrages and help of some that
seemed otherwise to be good Christians.

It behooves us therefore to be earnest with God in prayer, to walk more worthy
of his grace, 2 These. 2. 11.
and the light of the Gospel vouchsafed unto us, least he send us strong
delusions; to be sober minded and watchful, remembering there will be always
some Antichrists, and that the Church and people of God is never like to be
free from persecution, affliction, and temptation in this world; And that we
shall never have such Ministers, whom we may absolutely trust to for our
Religion (as some here profess to do.) Calvin in his Preface to
Psychopannychia, has those words, Is this to learn Christ, when a man shall
apply his ear to any doctrines; yea, though they be true without the word of
God? If thou receive it as from man, will thou not as easily entertain lies?
for what has a man that is his own but vanity? Therefore we must always have
the loins of our minds girded and our lamps burning, Luke 12. 35.
and stand upon our guard our selves: And so follow men (even the Apostles
themselves) as they follow Christ. Cor. 11. 1.
The Apostle speaking of Ministers says, Col. 2. 1^.
Let (...) man at his pleasure bear (...) over you by humbleness of mind^ --
advancing himself in those things which he never saw (but are of his own
devising) rashly puffed up with his fleshly mind. And in another place, Believe
not every spirit, but try the spirits whether they are of God: Ioh. 4. 1.
And for trying the spirits, we must follow the rule of our Savior, who says,
Beware of false Prophets which come to you in sheeps c^oathing, but inwardly
they are ravening Woolves, Mat. 7. ^6.
ye shall know them by their fruits, etc. And their fruits are their
conversation and doctrine: But the conversation of themselves and their
adherents, being a thing more personal, and so apt to stir up offense (which
I would avoid so much as I may) I forebeare to prosecute.

Their Doctrine then we must examine by the rule of Gods word; which that we
may the better do being a matter that so much concerns us, we should desire as
I have before said, we might have the particulars wherein they differ from the
public doctrine and practice of the Church of England set down in writing.
This if they be not able, or shall disdain to do, as not accounting us worthy
for whom they should do it, they must not be offended, nor complain of us
that we are opposers in this matter of the Kingdom of Christ, and will not be
ruled by them in the course of their Ministry; for what discretion were it, to
follow strangers we know not whither?

Its like they will say, they are no strangers, they have lived long here. But
as we know one of them came by an accident very lately; the other two though
they have been long among us, yet they are in a manner strangers to us, for
they are not the same men that formerly they were, having changed their
opinions and practices in many things that we know, and it is like in many
other things that we know not, and how far they will proceed, and where they
will make a stand we know not, nor it may be they themselves.

If they shall say (as some pretend) that the Government and Discipline which
they would have us entertain, is of it self evident by the word of God, to
every one whose eyes are not blinded by the god of this world, and that they
have declared it already in their Sermons, especially in their weekly Lectures,
which it seems they have instituted for that purpose: As he that preached the
third Lecture seemed to intimate, when speaking of this intended Church and
Discipline, he said, His first reverend Brother had laid the foundation, his
second reverend Brother had showed what must be the materials of this building,
namely, such and only such as could bring good testimony of their conversion
and holy conversation: And he was now to show the form and order to be
observed in every particular Church, and how each one was to be Superior or
Subordinate to others (though he did not this at that time so far as I
understood.) The same things or to the same purpose were again repeated in the
fourth Lecture. But I say, all this notwithstanding, the things are of
themselves obscure and doubtful; which doubts they have not taken away, but
rather increased. Some of which doubts amongst many, I will here set down, not
raised from speculations of things afar off, and not like to trouble us, but
such as arise from that which is frequently preached and pressed or practiced
amongst us. In which though I endeavor to understand things in the best sense,
yet because they express not themselves plainly, I may mistake their meaning
in some things, and therefore also do the rather desire they would fully and
plainly express their intent in writing: as one that am ready to join in
whatsoever I understand, to tend truly and indeed to the advancement of the
Kingdom, and Government Jesus of Christ, but would not be missed by the
devices of men, under this or any other pretense whatsoever.

1. A man would think that seeing there are twelve Laymen (a^ they term them)
to one Cleargyman, be could not retain his power ^ver them, but experience
shows the contrary, that if he be an active Politition that has authority on
his side, and can make use of a Popists Princiciple which is in most men by
nature, he may rule them almost as he list.
WHether they mean to set ut Vestries again, for every Tribe as formerly they
have done, and so to govern the several parts of their charge by several
Ve^^ries of a douzen men in each Vestry* whereof the Minister to be the chief;
and so to enquire, hear, and present Offenders as heretofore?

2. Whether they mean to continue those weekly meetings which they call
L^blolly Feasts, whereof also the Minister is the chief; And what persons
shall be admitted to them, and upon what terms?

3. Whether they mean to continue that Lordly or Masterly practice of
universal Catechizing all men and women weekly, begun here almost two years
past, and pressed upon all with great vehemence; And that all shall still be
tied to answer according to that Catechize of Mr Oxenbridges, called Babes
Milk, or some other?

These three practices as they have been used here, being as I conceived their
own inventions, and not grounded on the word of God, nor the examples of the
Primitive or other Reformed Churches, nor on the Laws of our Land, but pressed
upon us merely by their own Authority, I did in some sort oppose at their
first coming up; namely, by testifying both privately and publicly my dislike
of them, and the reasons why: But especially the last more at large, whereunto
I was moved by Mr John Oxenbridge, who took upon him to write a defense of this
practice of universal Catechizing all men and women, and of true Believers in
special; and to answer the Objections which I had made against it. But what he
has performed, and how well beseeming his worth and reputation, I leave to the
j^dgemnt of such as have or shall peruse my Confutation of that his Defense and
Answer, where I have put them together: Touching these three practices, I
should move sundry questions, but that it seems they are all laid down of
late, and as it is thought will not be taken up again, therefore we shall
pass them over, that we may come to those new things which they urge now.

4. Whether this Discipline and form of Religion, which they would set up, be
the same in all points of moment with any other Reformed Church whatsoever,
except perhaps in Providence, where it had no such success as should induce us
to embrace it. If they say, yes, in New England, we are very doubtful of that,
(not knowing certainly what is practiced there) the rather for that some have
endeavored to establish universal Catechizing here upon that ground saying,
it was generally used there, which appears not to be true: Besides, if such a
Discipline be there, it is no leading example to us, partly because they have
had no long experience of it, and partly because there may be much difference
between the people there and here; for if all Magistrates, Ministers and People
were eminent in piety, we need not much care what Government were used, no,
though it were wholly Arbitrary, for none would injure another (and to this
condition the Churches in the Apostles times seem nearest to ^pproach.) But
here where it is far otherwise, and in other places in general, men must be
wary what Discipline and Government they set up, presupposing it must come into
evil men's hands as well as good, yea, and that more often.

5. Whether this Discipline be fully set down by any sound Divine, and not
rather framed by themselves, borrowing from several Churches, and several
Divines, what will best serve their turn? And whether our three Ministers
agree in all points touching the Discipline they would have us embrace?

6. What several Offices, and how many Officers shall be in every Church, and
how subordinate one to another? And whether the Minister shall not be the
chief of those Officers, or as it were the supreme Moderator or Governor of
them all, without whom nothing shall be established, and also to have the
principal hand in putting in and putting out these Officers? for so they seem
to intimate.

7. Whether this Minister and his Officers will govern and censure the rest
according to some laws or in an Arbitrary way? and if in an Arbitrary way, to
whom shall they appeal if they have wrong? And who shall question and judge
the Minister if he decline from the truth, or be a wicked liver? And whether
this be not like to prove a very tyrannical government if it come into evil
hands, which must be presupposed?

8. If they will govern and judge according to some laws; what be those laws?
whether some already extant, or some others which they will frame, and who they
be that shall frame these laws? and what shall be the several penalties or
censures for Delinquents?

9. What trial (in things of importance) the party accused shall be allowed?
The Common Law of England (to avoid tyranny and injustice, to which the
corrupted nature of man is much inclined, and even of Clergy men as well as
others) allows a trial by 12 indifferent men, which are honest and free men,
of good rank, having no dependence, nor are in fear of the Judge, nor bear
no ill will to the party accused, but such as are like to deal impartially,
and that upon Oath. Whether he shall have that or some other so fair a trial?

10. What things they be which they will undertake to judge of? and whether any
thing shall be wholly reserved to the judgment of the Civil Magistrate? or
whether the party offending, or the matter in controversy, shall be punished
or judged of both, namely, by the Civil Magistrate, and also by th^se
Ecclesiastical Judges?

11. If they say they will judge only of Ecclesiastical matters, what are
those matters Ecclesiastical, and how exempted from the jurisdiction and
authority of the Christian Magistrate? For the Pope and Bishop obtained of
Kings that sundry things might be called Ecclesiastical, and so belong to
their spiritual Courts (as they call them) which are no more Ecclesiastical
then other matters which belong not to them.

12 Whether these Ministers and other Officers shall be judged by the Christian
Magistrate in all things as other men? or how far forth they shall be under
his jurisdiction and authority, and how far forth exempted?

13 From what places of Scripture is such a form of Government deduced,
justified, or allowed?

14 Who shall be the other members constituting these intended Churches, and
who shall be excluded from them? To this all or some of them at least seem to
answer expressly, that they shall consist only of such as are truly regenerate,
and can bring sufficient testimony of their conversion and holy conversation;
and all others shall be excluded as Heathens, Cananites, Publicans, etc.

15 And seeing they have said sometimes, and will, I suppose, grant, that not
one fourth part, nor it may be, one tenth part of the people here or in
England, are able to bring such sufficient testimony of their true conversion
and holy conversation, and thereupon shall be excluded Christian society, and
reputed as aforesaid, whether this will not breed a most dangerous division
between Church and Common wealth, threatening the ruin of both?

16. I suppose they cannot but be sensible in part, and foresee the desperate
issues of such a Separation; and therefore it would in the next place be known,
whether they intend not to salve it by some politic course, contrary to these
principles, and what good policy can be used to this purpose? For mine own
part, I can think of none; for either they must frame Religion to the people as
the Popes and Romish Clergy did heretofore, making it suitable to the
dispositions of most men; or else (which is more usual) feign a people to
Religion; admitting and accounting whom they lift through partiality, favor,
and sinister respects, to be truly religious, though they be not, and so
receiving them into the Church as true converts, though they can bring no good
testimony of their conversion and conversation. This policy (I confess) may
have fair pretenses, and would advance them highly above all men; As they
which opening, no man can shut; and shutting, no man can open; this would set
them a^ Gods in the Temple of God, the Church, and bring them in infinite
gains. But it would set up many Antichrists, as busy, violent, and rigorous
within the small sphere of their activity, as the great Antichrist has been
in his: It would turn Religion into policy, making it serve for humane
purposes. Iam, (...).
The faith of our glorious Lord Jesus Christ should be had in respect of
persons; It would prove a tyrannical usurpation over the true Church, as the
popish policy has done; for which, as for sundry other reasons that might be
alleged (if it were not palpably wicked) it ought not to be suffered.

17. Whether there be any place of Scripture to justify such a Separation as
is before mentioned? they say, yes; because John the Baptist said to the Scribes
and Pharisees, O generation of Vipers, who has forewarned you to fire from the
wrath to come? therefore a Minister may keep out of the Church such as cannot
bring testimony of their true conversion and holy conversation; This and other
like reasons they allege, which are so insufficient, that they need no
answer, especially having no purpose, as I have said, to dispute here. But a
matter of so great consequence ought to be clearly and foundly proved; which
doubtless they can never do.

18. What times they were wherein the Church did thus separate from it self
all that could not bring sufficient testimony of their conversion and holy
conversation? because they say, in former times it was the usual practice of
the Church, but show not in what times, nor where, nor for what causes. There
is no doubt but those that live or fall into gross or manifest sins, may be
separated or excluded; Also in times of persecution they would no doubt be very
wary what strangers they did admit into the Church; but that is not the thing in
question.

19. Many other doubts in this matter they leave untouched or uncleared; As 1.
Whether Infants shall be received into the Church by Baptism before they can
bring this testimony? 2. Whether those that have been baptized without such
testimon^, have been rightly entered into the Church, or shall need to be
baptized again? such a rumor there is spread, upon what occasion I know not.
3. What manner of testimony this must be? 4. Who must give it, and whether a
man's own testimony may not serve in this case, and when? etc. these and many
other like should be cleared, which we pass over.

20. Whether they mean, that any man may of himself excommunicate another,
when they say frequently, a man may, or I would pass a private excommunication
against such or such a man?

21. What they mean to alter in the administration of the Sacraments? I hear
there is much variety of late. The last child which I saw baptized, the
Minister required the Father to say his Creed, which done, the Minister made an
exposition of it, making some doubt also of some part of it, and then asked the
Father if he would have his child baptized into that faith, who answering, yea,
it was baptized; and thus I hear he uses of late to baptize others. Now it
would be known, why it may not serve the turn for the Father to testify his
assent to the Articles of the Creed etc. as heretofore has been used? 2.
Whether the child and parent also may not be very uncertain of the Faith into
which the child was baptized* seeing the Ministers exposition is not recorded?
3. Whether they have the same opinion of the Creed that they seem to have of
the Scriptures, that it may not be publicly read or repeated unless it be
also expounded by a Minister, and why? 4. Whether this tying of the Baptism to
the Ministers exposition, may not serve as a fit opportunity for Heretics (not
yet discovered) to baptize children into their Heresy?

22. Whether the Scriptures be not the word of God, able to make a man wise
unto salvation, ^ Tim. 3, 15.
except only then, when they are pronounced and expounded by a Minister? And
whether the places of Scripture that we (which are no Ministers) allege in any
case, be not also the word of God, as true and of as much sorce as if they were
pronounced by a Minister?

23. Whether the writings of Eminent and approved Divines may not be read in
the Church, when there is no Sermon? Nay whether they may not prove more
profitable then the Sermons of some schismatic or other unworthy Ministers?

24 Whether our English Common Prayer (having never yet been called in) may not
be read in the Church, such things being altered or left out as have bin
doubtful or offensive to good Christians? Or whether it is so faulty that it
may not be used at all? Because they will not suffer it to be read at all
where they preach; and as I hear, intend to abolish the reading of it quite.

25 Whether they will permit any other book of Common Prayer used in any other
Reformed Church, or some other that may be framed, or that no set form at all
may be used but such prayers only as the Minister does then conceive, nor any
thing read, no not out of the Scriptures, but what the Minister does then
expound?

26 How long it is they mean when they say a few days, that they would have
men that would be converted or receive a further degree of grace to exercise
themselves in humiliation, before they shall partake of those enlightnings and
comforts they speak of? and after what manner this is to be done, and from what
ground of Scripture?

27 What Covenant it is which they persuade so much all the members of this
Church to enter into at their admittance (and which as is thought is already
begun) whereby they must be bound one to another? and how far forth they
must assist and defend one another? what are the particular parts and
circumstances of this Covenant, and how it shall be confirmed, whether by
subscription or by some solemn vow?

28 Whether he which has entered this Covenant, shall still remayn as he was,
a true member of the Church and Common wealth of England, or be of some other
Reformed Church, or of some Separate and Independent Church?

29 We grant there is often mention in Scriptures of a Covenant betwixt God and
the people, etc. but whether there may be any warrant in Scripture for such a
Covenant between all the members of this Church, as they would have? Acts 9. 26.
They allege for it these words, And when Paul was come to Jerusalem, h^
assayed to join himself with the Disciples: where say some, the word join that
is in the original (...), Acts 8. 29.
signifies a joining by covenant; but I find no such thing in my Lexicon. I
find the like word used where it is said, Then the Spirit said unto Phillip,
go near and join thy self to yonder Chariot; where, by joining is meant no
Covenant. Other places they allege, but we would see some to the purpose if
they have any.

30 Whether it be not injurious to the Honorable Assembly of Parliament, to
pretend such Innovations or changes to be according to their mind, which they
have never authorized, nor declared themselves to have any purpose to authorize
or allow?

Many other doubts I have omitted, but by these which I have noted, is may
sufficiently appear, that though they have long preached of these matters, yet
many things remain very uncertain. And if they would take the pains to set
down in writing, as aforesaid, all parts of their intended Discipline and
Government, it would be very profitable to themselves; for it would give them
occasion more thoroughly to consider it, and more wisely to order it. Is there
cause then that they should be so incensed against those that make question of
these things in a moderate and Christian way? or whom they fear will oppose
any of them, as to threaten them with the judgments of this life, and of the
life to come; yea, to assign them the lowest places in hell, as if themselves
were well acquainted, and had such power in disposing places there, as the Pope
pretends to have in purgatory? Surely we learn in our first entrance into
learning, Qui dubitat, qui saepe rogat, mea dicta tenebit; Is qui nil dubitat,
nil capit inde boni. Is it just or reasonable they should accuse, censure, and
defame such an one publicly in the Pulpit, where the party accused cannot,
without offending the Congregation, and the Laws, answer for himself, though
he be innocent? Surely in all equity the accusation, especially of one that is
innocent, ought not to be more public then his defense or answer is permitted
to be. Is it suitable to Christian charity to use heavy imprecations or
cursings against such, and when the hand of God is upon such a man in any
affliction, as sickness losses, death, or the like; to set him out in the
Congregation by evident and well known circumstances, as an adversary to God,
and as one whom God was now smiting to destruction for his opposition and
obstinacy against the Kingdom and Government of Christ (as they call this their
intended Discipline.) Doubtless it behooves Ministers to have some fear of
God, and respect of man, and to lay aside these carnal weapons, whereby they
would affright and terrify us, that we should not dare to quitch nor make the
least resistance, whilst in the mean time they set up themselves as Lords over
us in their intended Discipline, calling it the Kingdom and Govenment of
Christ; But if they would indeed set up the Kingdom of Christ, (...) 6. 17.
let them take the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God, and make good
what they deliver, by that. And for us (as many I mean as have care of the
preservation of true Religion) let us hold fast to the word of God, and not be
discouraged; nor let that go, though they upbraid us in a scoffing manner,
saying, Come you Scripturian^, you Scripturemen that must have Scripture for
what you will do; come, I will give you Scripture enough to overthrow your
Religion, turn to Ezekiel etc. These and many other such speeches, what else
do they relish but of a spirit of the old Antichrist, which being now more
discovered and expelled from his former habitation, walks about through dry
places, seeking himself an habitation in some other persons and places, where
in a new disguise he may practice his wonted malice undiscovered. Let us stand
fast in the liberty wherewith Christ ha^h made us free, Gal. 5. 1.
and not be drawn from the Church of England, which we know, to join our
selves with any new separate and Independent Church which we know not; although
we hear many contumelious and reproachful speeches uttered against the Church
of England. They ought to be better affected, and to give that honor which is
due, as they which have sucked her breasts, and received as their natural, so
their spiritual birth there, if ever they were new born.

We ought to acknowledge, with thanksgiving the abundant grace and mercy of
God toward the Church of England; who has made it no less honorable then
any other Reformed Church whatsoever, whether we consider the first Reformers,
being men of fingular Piety, and blessed Martyrs of Christ; Or the purity of
Doctrine there publicly professed even to this present. Or the number of holy
Martyrs, who have advisedly sealed that Doctrine with their blood: Or the
eminent lights in the Ministry successively shining there in great number: Or
the many and sincere Professors and Practisers of Religon there, ever since the
Reformation; Or lastly, if we consider the many great Deliverances which the
Lord has vouchsafed us, from the wicked plots and hostile attempts of the
common adversary, crowning all with much prosperity, and causing the fame and
glory of it to be spread throughout the world. These and the like have not been
seen in their separate and Independent Churches. In the mean time, we deny
not, but that besides our many other grievous sins, there have been also
many gross faults and intolerable in the Ecclesiastical Policy and
Discipline, as it was abused by those that were entrusted with it, and many
foul effects have thence proceeded, which have (especially of late years)
corrupted Religion, eclipsed our glory, and laid it in the dust, caused the
Lord to hide his gracious and loving countenance from us: And was like to have
proved the remediless ruin of Church and Commonwealth: Of which sins
though we all stand guilty before God, as having been Authors or Procurers of
them; yet it becomes not any, that is, or lately was a member of that Church,
to upbraid her with these things in a despightfull manner: Gal. 4. 17.
Such men according to that saying of the Apostle, Are jealous over us amiss,
yea, they would (alienate our affections, and) exclude us (from the Church of
England) that we should altogether love them. But these corruptions as they
have been for the most part forced upon the Church, by the usurped power of
those which were entrusted, and pretended the greatest care of the Church; so
they have been, and we trust will be cast out and Reformed by the present
Parliament.

Now I would not be mistaken, as if I desired to derogate any thing from the
dignity of that most eminent calling of the Ministry; I have no such meaning,
neither do I think a worthy Minister to be unworthy or unfit for other the
most eminent Offices or callings in Church or Commonwealth, were it not that he
has a most eminent calling already sufficient to take up the whole man, and
unmeet to be yoaked with other callings, as the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 2. 16.
who is sufficient for these things; And the Apostles do reject such
employments with a kind of contempt saying, Act. 6. 24
It is not meat that we should leave the word of God to serve Tables, and a
little after, we will give our selves continually to prayer, and to the
Ministry of the Word, intimating that these things would hinder them from
prayer and the ministry of the Word; whereby it appears, they would not be
Deacons, nor take upon them any other Office in or over the Church, but spend
themselves wholly in the word and prayer; the like might be manifested by
sundry other Scriptures. And the evil of it has been so generally observed
in England, that (as I heard) Queen Elizabeth, when she had conferred upon a
Minister authority and power to rule, was wont to say, I have spoiled a good
Preacher to day. And surely (if we observe it) the desire of Superiority and
Dominion in or over the Church, in Ministers and Clergy men, and the readiness
of Princes and people to confer it upon them; has been a principal, if not
the principal cause in corrupting Religion from time to time, and of setting
up the great Antichrist, and many others, as might easily be showed if it were
not an argument too long for this place.

Thus far (through the gracious assistance of God) I have expressed my mind
in this matter, to the intent I might stop, so much as in me lies, the setting
up of a new Discipline and Government of our own framing, seeing we are
already freed of all those things that have usually been burdensome and
offensive to good Christians in England; and that we expect daily the further
determination and decree of the Honorable Assembly of Parliament in these
things, Or if I cannot prevail so far as to stop it, yet that we might look
before we leap, and understand well what we do before we do it. Or if neither
that may be obtained, yet hence it will appear, that my self and some others
deserve no blame, much less such evil speeches as are usually vented against
us by some, because we will not rashly run with them we know not whether. And
lastly, I desire that this may be a public testimony of my judgment in these
things. For to be present, and hear them daily pressed, and to be always
silent, is taken for a sign of consent and approbation.

March 1. 1642. RICH. NORWOOD.

Postscript.
SInce this Advertisement of mine came abroad (though but a month,) what
horrible forespeakings, threatenings, imprecations, and censures have been
publicly denounced against me in several parts of the Country, I shall not
need to repeat, being too well known. Neither will I answer them accordingly
lest I also be like them; I will only in the fear of God, and by the
comfortable assistance of his holy Spirit apply that saying, Numb. 23. 1.
How should they curse where God has not cursed? Or how should they detest
where the Lord has not detested? 2 Samuel 16. 12.
And those words of David, It may be that the Lord will look on mine
affliction, and do me good for his cursing this day. A desperate thing it is
for men to blaspheme against some good light; and what is it, to acknowledge
the good gifts and graces of God in those which they so bitterly preach
against; and to overwhelm them all with most foul and feigned susspicions and
aspersions without cause? As when they say, Satan will not use profane and
wicked men, but he makes choice of those that are of good and able parts, men
of a religious life, of a blameless conversation; these close hypocrites he
makes his instruments to oppose the Kingdom of Christ (that is their intended
Discipline) etc. with other like speeches. I say it is very dangerous for men
thus to give way to wrath and malice. The Scribes and Pharisces did see, and
would no doubt have acknowledged the eminent gifts and graces that shined in
our Savior, if he would have applied them to the establishing of their
Faction. But because he would not do so, they maliciously traduced him, and
said he had an unclean spirit; but he reproves their desperate wickedness,
showing how nearly they did approach, or became guilty of the sin against the
Holy Ghost. And let every man take heed how they do cunningly fasten slanders,
or otherwise show despite unto the spirit of Grace, because it will not be
subordinate unto their ends. I could wish also they would consider the words of
Marsilius Patavinus, in his Book entitled, Defender of the Peace, Where
speaking of those that presume to frame or press Orders, Decrees, and other
parts of Discipline, without license of the true Lawgiver or Prince, and
endeavor to draw people to the observation of them by surreptitious words, as
it were compelling them by threatening eternal damnation to such as transgress
them, or denouncing execrations, reproachful speeches, excommunications,
slanders, revilings, or other maledictions against them, or any of them, in
word or writing; such (says he) are to suffer corporal punishment in a most
high degree, as conspirators, and stirrers up of civil schism, or division in
a Commonwealth. For it is says he, a most grievous kind of treason, because
it is committed directly against the Royal Majesty of the Prince and his
Sovereign Authority; and tends to set up a plurality of supreme authorities
or powers, and so of necessity to the dissolution or overthrow of every civil
Government.

They object also, that I am but a Layman, and therefore should not meddle
with matters of Divinity, applying that Proverb Ne suitor ultra crepidam, and
saying, that even the Sun, Moon, and Stars, wherein he has skill, should
teach him that lesson, which always move in their own spheres, except they
be wandering stars, for whom the blackness of darkness is reserved for ever,
with many other bitter expressions. But this is an old plea of the Popish
Clergy, to hold the people in ignorance and thraldom, and should not be taken
up by those that would seem to be more opposite to Popery then Protestants
are. That eminent and blessed Divine Doctor Sibbes was of another mind, who
speaking in commendation of Mr Sherland (that was no Preacher) disdaines not to
say he had good skill in controverted points of Divinity, and that he was a
good Divine. And surely the calling of a Christian is of that importance, that
he must, if need so require, omit whatsoever calling he have besides, to make
good that one most necessary, neither can he justly be charged to move out of
his sphere whenever he meddles with matters of Christianity and Religion,
especially such points as he is pressed to embrace and submit unto. The Apostle
exhorts us all, that we should earnestly contend for the faith which was once
delivered unto the Saints. And I may fitly answer them in the words of that
renouned Soldier of Christ Doctor Bastwick who being checked by the Bishop of
Canterbury in like sort as I am by these, that he being a Physician, a Layman,
should presume to write of some points in Divinity, answers in Latin, to this
purpose in English.

I writ a Book (says he) not to find my self employment or to stir up
strife, but of a Christian mind and affection, according to my duty to God and
my Prince. The reproach of a Layman touches not me, for he which has vowed
himself to Christ is one of Gods Clergy. The ancient Church does not
acknowledge that surname of a Layman, but reckons it among the Soloecismes of
the Beast. We have given, promised, and vowed unto Christ in Baptism our name
and faith; and have solemnly denounced battle against the flesh, the world,
the devil, herefie etc. against which we must fight unless we put off the
reverence and respect of our Vow. How unseasonable is it then to ask by what
authority we fight against these? (And a little after) shall that be a fault in
me, which is a praise to Divines? They exercise physic, Grazing, merchantdize,
they husband their grounds, plant, gather in their fruits, they all may do all
things, I envy not; yet I wonder we should be so straightened, whilst they have
such liberty. But if some blunt fellow should ask a Divine, Hear'st thou good
man, what have thou to do with the Court, with privy Council, with Seats of
Judgment? what have thou to do with renting lands, with planting vineyards,
with breeding cattle, with money the provocation of all evils? would he not
check such a bold question with some sharp answer? yes doubtless he would.
What then should we do when we are asked, What we have to do with God, with
Christ, with Religion, with the Truth? We will laugh to scorn such envious
questions, and perform with diligence what God calls us to. We will endeavor
with all cheerfulness the defense of the truth, the conservation of Religion*
the observation of our fidelity and allegiance to that Sovereign Authority
which is over us; rendering an account of our endeavors to him, to whom we
have vowed our selves etc. He that desires to see his defense more at large,
may peruse his Apology to the English Prelates.

Now I beseeth you brethren, mark them diligently which cause division and
offenses contrary to the Doctrine which ye have learned, Romans 16. 17.
and avoid them.

18. For they that are such serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own^
bellies; and with fair speech and flattering, deceive the hearts of the simple.

March 30. 1643.
FINIS.

