strained there is in it much of the letter, plain common reading to be
understood see the end of its quoting here, Mat. 12. 20. Christ changed the
great multitude that followed him, that they should not make him known, (He
knew fame made his adversaries malice rise, and so endangered his person to
their wrath before the time.) Now for end, a charge from Christ to them now,
the Evangelist brings a Text ( Esaias 42-beginning) It Is said by Esaias the Prophet
(the mouth of God) Gods servant, chosen, beloved, shall not strive, nor cry,
neither shall any man hear his voice in the streets, a bruised reed shall he
not break, and smoking flax shall he not quench, until he bring forth judgment
to victory. Which I thus understand, Christ shall not make himself known, he
shall not strive, neither like a champion with a shout rush on, and overco^e
vide I^sh. 6. 18. he shall not break a reed already bruised, quench flax
already smoking, as a snuf at the extinguishing of a candle, Esaias 43. 17.
until he shall judge victoriously. vid. Esaias. 42. 4. Rev. 19. 11. 17.

Object. 8. If the men would fairly frame that part remaining of the Question
into an Objection, it should be thus, H^w Ministers should not c^n^est for such
a large and unlimited power to exclude poor Christian brethren from the
Sacram^nt, when not actually excommunicated from the Church, and from other
Ordinances, as some pretend to, since of Christians receive unworthily, the
iniquity (as your selves bold when any hear the word unworthily, unprofitably)
is their own, not the Ministers. And is this most profane? as your Answerer
says the objection is* but I hold the Emperick calls that (now I mind it)
o^j^ction profane, which is of his own compounding, which he answers (briefly)
thus In preaching the word to them who are hardened by it* the Minister seeks
and hopes to do good: but in giving the Sacrament to sc^ndal^us impenitent
persons they know they give that which will certainly bring judgment. Truly,
(in a word) the man has lost the chase, he has forgot (or wilfully mistakes
changes) the Question. For the Querist endeavors nor (as is apparent) to have
scandalous sinners and impenitent receive the Sacrament (he wo^ld have such
actually excommunicated from the Church, and from all other ordinances besides
and as well as this) but would have Christian Brethren (those not
excommunicated) to p^rticipate of this Ordin^nce.

Next the Answerer concludes, (I profess) like himself, as w^nt, he bestows,
on his adversary, Antagonist, Pride; Antechristianisme d^^g^^ous opposition
etc. On his arguments, most absurdity, ^^ationality contrariety to m^nifest
truth. And thus Exit like the creatures of billings-gate ashore -- Railing.

Printed according to Order.

FINIS.

