THE FIRST PART OF AN HISTORICAL COLLECTION OF THE ANCIENT PARLIAMENTS OF
ENGLAND, From the year of our LORD 673, till the end of King JOHN's Reign, Anno
1216.

Wherein is clearly demonstrated by Histories and Records beyond contradiction,
That The Ancient Parliaments, and Great Councels of England, during all this
tract of time, and many years after, were constituted, and consisted only of
our KINGS, PRINCES, DUKES, EARLS, NOBLES, BARONS, SPIRITUAL and TEMPORAL LORDS,
and those we now usually style THE HOUSE OF PEERS; and that both the
LEGISLATIVE and JUDICIAL POWER OF OUR PARLIAMENTS resided ONLIY IN THEM;
without any Knights, Citizens, Burgesses of Parliament, or COMMONS HOUSE, not
known, nor heard of, till of punier times then these.

Published, To inform the Ignorance, and check the insolent Usurpations of
those FEW COMMONERS, who now call themselves not only THE COMMONS HOUSE, But
PARLIAMENT of England; and (as much as in them lies) have most unjustly
excluded both our KING and LORDS from being any MEMBERS, or BRANCHES OF OUR
LATE, OR FUTURE PARLIAMENTS.

By WILLIAM PRYNNE of Swainswick, Esquire.

Pro. 22. 28. Remove not the ancient Landmark which thy Fathers have set.
Great. Cause. 27. Quaest. 2. Etiam quod habuit emittat, qui quod non accepit,
usurpat. LONDON, Printed for Robert Hodges. 1649

THE FIRST PART OF AN Historical Collection of the ancient PARLIAMENTS of
ENGLAND.
THe gross Ignorance of the ancient constitution of our English Parliaments,
and fanatic dream of A Supreme Parliamentary and absolute Legislative
Authority in THE HOUSE OF COMMONS ALONE, (yea, in a mere REMNANT of it, after
its dissolution by the Kings beheading) first broached by Lilburn, Overton, and
their Levelling party, who first suffered under, and now most inveigh against
that USURPED, EXORBITANT POWER; being, in my apprehension, (next to Gods wrath
for our sins) the principal groundwork of all the late unparalleld, insolent
(that I say not monstrous and brutish) proceedings, against the late and
present King, the House of Peers, and secluded Majority of the late Commons
House, by the Army, and those who now presume to entitle themselves THE
PARLIAMENT OF ENGLAND, and by pretext thereof obtrude what Acts and Taxes they
please upon the people, to enslave them to their new erected SOVEREIGN TYRANNY,
to the hazard of our Kingdoms, and of Parliaments themselves; I conceived, I
could not do a more acceptable service to God, the Kingdom, or this new INSANUM
PARLIAMENTUM of NOVICES IN PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS, (to reduce them to their
right wits again (being more then BEDLAM MAD, as their Acts and Actions
testify) then to spend some vacant Hours in gathering into one or two small
Bundles the scattered Histories and Records of our ancientest Parliaments and
Great Councels, (which are strangers and unknown to most) to instruct their
Ignorance, check their Arrogance, rectify their presumptuous Ex^^bitances, and
restore our Parliaments to their ancient constitution, splendour, honor,
limits, and preserve them from utter abolition for the future, through the
over-swelling Greatness, and unsufferable Usurpations upon King, Lords,
Commons and Kingdom by those now sitting and acting alone, beyond and against
all Parliamentary precedents in former ages, to the astonishment of the
present, and wonder of succeeding times.

It is a rule in the Canon Law, Gratian ^aus 11. Quast. 2.
Privilegium meretur amit^ere, qui abutitur potestate; yea, a Canon in Gods own
sacred Law, P^o. 16. 18. Dan. 4. 37.
Pride goes before destruction, and an haughty spirit before a fall: and not
so only; but it is commonly the cause, as well as the forerunner thereof: The
Scripture Canon assuring us, That a man's pride shall bring him low, Prove. 29.
23. Isa. 13. 11. Gen 3. 5.
Adam's and Eve's aspiring pride, to become as Gods knowing good and evil,
degraded them below the primitive condition of man, wherein they were created,
and made them like to the ^sal. 49 12. 20.
very beasts that perish: The 1 Timothy 3. 6. 2 Pet. 2. 4. Isa. 14. 11, 12, 13, 14.
ambitious Angels aspiring to be Gods, tumbled them down from heaven, and
metamorphosed them into Devils: Dan. 4. 29. to 35.
Nebuchad^^zar's overweening pride turned him out of his Royal Throne and
palace, to grase among beasts: And King Acts 12. 22, 23.
Herod's bare acceptance of this slattering applause, The voice of a God, and
not of a man, made him, by the hand of divine Vengeance, a present prey to the
vilest worms, who eat him up alive. But to come nearer home. What overthrew and
destroyed the late be headed King, Strafford, Canterbury? what suppressed,
abolished the Sea the Acts for their suppressio^ 17. Caroli.
Starchamber, High Commission, Councel-Table, and our Prelates with their
Courts, but their encroaching, usurping, exercising of an exorbitant, illegal,
over-swelling, transcendent power and jurisdiction, above, against, and beyond
the rules and bounds of Law? And what abated the Authority, Honor, Esteem, and
real Power of the late two Houses of Parliament, and rendered them vile and
despicable in the peoples eyes and affections, but their surpassing the bounds
of their ancient Parliamentary privileges and Authority, to the grievance of
the people? Which being so far exceeded in all kinds and degrees, by some late
Commons now sitting, stiling themselves, The Parliament, and Supreme Authority
of England, and acting more arbitrari^y and tyrannically in all things, then
ever any Kings or Parliaments in former ages, to the insufferable injury and
oppression both of the King, Kingdom, People, and all sorts and professions of
men, will in conclusion thereby inevitably occasion their own speedy downfall,
and irrecoverable perdition, and (without Gods great mercy) ruin all our
future Parliaments at least wise much eclipse their Honor and Esteem, and much
abridge the Commons former power and Jurisdiction, by bringing all their
encroached Authority, unto a legal scrutiny and debate; which absolute
necessity enforces men to, for their own and the Kingdoms common preservation;
and engaged me principally upon this Historical Collection of the ancient
Parliaments of England, to abate the swelling Tympany, and c^re (if possible)
the exorbitant distempers, and dangerous Insolences of the Levelling sitting
Commons, who have neither precept not precedent, Law nor Canon, nor the least
shadow of authority from God or Man, King or people, or any real privileges
or constitution of our Parliaments to justify their late proceedings in the
least degree.

The Method I observe in marshalling these Collections, is only Chronologicall,
according to their respective Antiquities, beginning with the Reigns of Easewin
and Kentwin, Anno Domini 673. and ending with King John* Anno 1216; containing
in all, the space of 543 years; during which large proportion of time (and many
years after) our Parliaments were constituted and made up only of our Kings,
Princes, Du^es, Earls, Nobles, BARONS, Spiritual and Temporal Lords, and
those who in later ages we style the HOUSE OF PEERS, without any Knights of
Shires, Citizens, Burgesses elected by the people as their Representatives, or
any House of Commons, not known, nor heard of in these elder times, though
those who now style themselves the Commons, endeavor to cashier both King and
Lords from being Members of our Parliaments, contrary to our Laws, Statutes,
Oaths, and solemn League and Covenant, and the practice of all former ages; at
whose Doors and Bar themselves have waited, and stood bare upon all occasions,
till within these few months, as their professed Superiors, and the only
Judges in Parliament, being but so many Grand-jurie men to present the
Kingdoms grievances to their Superior Tribunal and crave their redress and
censure of them: A sufficient refutation of their present usurpation over them.

But to proceed to the intended Subject without any further Prologue.

Mat. West. An. 673. p. 236. Edit. Londini 1570. Florent. Wigorniensis An. 673.
An. Dom. 673. Theodor. Archbish. of Canterbury assembled a Parliamentary
Council at Hertfort, praesentibus EPISCOPIS ANGLIAE AC REGIBUS ( Easewin and
Kentwin) and MAGNATIBUS UNIVERSIS, all the Bishops of England, and the Kings,
and all the Nobles being present; but not any Knight^, Citizens, Burgesses, or
Commons that we read of.

Spelmanni Council. tom. 1. p. 189, 191.
An. 694. there was Magnum Concilium, a great Council (or Parliament) held at
Becanceld, in which Withred King of Kent sat President, nec non Bertuvaldo
reverendissimo Archiepiscopo Brittanniae, simulque Tobia, Episcopo Roffensis
Ecclesiae, caeterisque Abbatibus, Abbaticis, Presbyteris, Diatonibus, DUCIBUS,
SATRAPIS in unum glomeratis; pariter tractan^es, anxie examinantes, de statu
Ecclesiarum Dei, etc. But we find no Knights nor Burgesses present among them.

Ant. Eccles. Brit. p 20.
An. 710. (or near that year) there was a Council held at W^^cester by Pope
Constantines advice, at the desire of Egwin Bishop of Worcester, non
Religiosorum modo, s^d etiam REGNI PROCERUM; but without any Commons.

Will. Mal^esb de Gestis Aug. Pontif l. 1 p. 197. Ant. Eccles Brit. p. 11.
Spelman Council. p. 242. 245.
An. Dom. 747. in the Council of Clyff there were present, besides the Bishops
and many Priests and Ecclesiastical Persons, Aethelbaldus King of Mercians cum
OMNIBUS REGNI SUI PRINCIPIBUS and DUCIBUS; but not one Knight or Burgess
mentioned by Historians.

Spelman. Council. tom. 1. p. 291. 293. 300. Magdeburgens. ^ent. 8 c. c. 9. col.
575.
An. 787. in the Council of Colchuth, consisting of two Sessions; the First,
coram Alfwold^ Northumby^brorum REGE, and MAGNATIBUS SUIS; assidentibus vero
Eanbaldo Eberacensi Archiepiscop^, c^terisque illius Provincia Episcopi^. The
second, Merciorum, coram Offa REGE ibidem, and SUIS MAGNATIBUS, and jam
assidentibus Ja^berth^ Cantuaria Archiepiscop^* caterisque suae Provinc^ae
Episcopis; we meet with none but these Kings, their Nobles, Archbishops and
Bishops present. Convenerunt OMNES PRINCIPES REGIONIS TAM ECCLESIASTICI QUAM
SECULARES, but no Knights nor Burgesses at all. In this Council (no other but
a a Parliament, to which the Kings, Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Dukes and
Earls, subscribed their names) cap. 12. De Ordinatione and honor regum; there
is this notable Canon against killing and putting Kings to death. In necem
Regis, nemo communicare andeat, quia Christus Domini est: and si quis tali
sceleri adhaes^rit, si Episcopus est, aut ullus ex Sacerdotate gradu, ex ipso
detruiatur, and a sancta haereditate dejiciatur, sicut Judas ab Apostolic^
gradu dejectus est: and omnis quisquis tali sacrilegio assenserit, aeterno
anathematis vinculo interibit, and Judae traditori sociatus, sempiternis
cromabitur incendiis, ut scriptum est: Non solum qui faciunt, sed and qui
consentiunt facientibus, judicium Dei non effugiunt. Durnamque E^^uchi Asuerum
Regem interficere cupientes, in patibulum suspensi sunt. Animadvertite quid
fecerit David praefecto, cum es Dominus dixerit, Ego tradam Saul in manus tuas:
eum invenit dormientem, (...) hortatus is milite ut occideres eum, dixit, Absit
a me peccatum ut extendammanu^ meam in Christum Domini. Illum autem militem qui
post mortem ejus venit ad eum, protestans quod ipse occiderat der at Saul
capite tru^cavit: and reputatum est ei ad justitiam, and ^^^ini ejus post
(...). Exemplis namque apud not saepe probatum est, quod quicunque
inter^^cienis Dominorum fuere, in spai^^ vitam (...), and atroque jure
^^^^erunt.

Spelman. Council. p. 310.
An. Dom. 793. King Offa held a Council at Verelam, with Archbishop Humbert,
his Suffragans, and PRIMATIBUS SUIS UNIVERSIS, wherein this King SVORUM
MAGNATVM sane acquiescens consilis presently took a painful and costly journey
to Rome.

Spelman. Council. p. 313, 314.
An. 794. King Offa after his return from Rome celebrated two Councels; the one
at Celchyth, where were present, 9. Kings, 15, Bishops, and 20. Dukes (but no
House of Commons.) The other at Verelam, consisting only of Bishops and Nobles.
Congregato (...) Verelamium EPISCOPORVM and OPTIMATVM Concilio.

Boniface Mogunt. Epiff. 112. M. Seldons Titles of Honor. part. 2. c. 5. p. 632.
About the year 796 Cynewlf King of Westsax, held x Council wherein he writes
to Lullus Bishop of Ment^ touching matters of Religion, and (...) EPISCOPIS
(...), nec (...) catervo SATRAP ARVM, to wit of his lay Dignities.

Spelman. Council p 318. 320. Malmesb. de gestis Regum Angl. l. 1. cap. 4.
An. Dom. 800. Kenulf King of Mercians called to the Council of CloVesha all
the BISHOPS of his Kingdom, DVGES and Abbates, and CV JVSCVNQVE DIGNITATIS
VIROS, wherein the King cum EPISCOPIS, DVCIBVS, and omni sub nostri ditione
DIGNITATIS GRADV, writ a Letter to Pope Leo the 3. about Church affairs
therein concluded, where there is no mention of any Commons.

Spelman. Council p. 328.
An. 816. in the Council of Celichyth, Wulfred Archbishop, with Diverse other
Bishops were present, so was Coenulf King of Mercia cum suis PRINCIPIBVS,
DVCIBVS, and OPTIMATIBVS, but not a syllable of his Commons, Knights, or
Burgesses presence.

Spelman* Council. p. 333. 334.
About the year 822. in the Council of CloVesh^, wherein Beornulf King of
Mercians sat President, Wulfrid Archbishop with the rest of the Bishops and
Abbots OMNIVMQVE DIGNITAIVM OPTIMATIBVS, ECCLESIASTICARVM scil and SECVLARIVM
PERSONARVM were present, but no Knights of Counties nor Burgesses: And An. Dom.
824. there was another Council held under the same King at the same place:
Assidentibus EPISCOPIS, ABBATIBVS, and PRINCIPIBVS Merciorum VNIVERSIS: but no
Commons for ought appears; the King, Archbishop, Bishops and Dukes subscribing
their names to the Decrees there made, but no Knight nor Burgess.

Ingulphi Hist. p. 855. Spelman Council. p. 336.
An. 823. There was Concilium Pan-Anglicum, a Parliament or Council of all
England celebrated at London praesentibus Egberto REGE West-Saxoniae and
Wethlusis REGE Merciorum, utroque ARCHIEPISCOPO, caeterisque Angliae Episcopis
and MAGNATIBVS, who subscribed it.

Spelman Council. p. 342.
An. Dom. 838. I read of Concilium Pan-Anglicum a Council or Parliament of all
England held at Kingston, where King Egbert and his Son Ethelwalf presided; una
cum Ceal^^tha the Archeipiscope Doroberniae, caeterisque Anglia EPISCOPIS and
OPTIMATIBVS: Wherein the manner of Mallings, which King Baldre^ had sometimes
giVen to Christ-Church in Canterburis, and afterward subtracted from it:
Eo-quod MAGNATES (...) donationem illam ratam fore: Et quia ille Rex CVNCIIS
PRINCIPIBVS non placuit, nolu (...) donum ejus per (...) was now again resetled
and confirmed to that Church by King Egbert, and his Son A^helwolf
consentientibus demum MAGNATIBVS. A clear evidence of the Noble-mens Negative
voice in Parliaments to hinder the King from disposing any Lands of the Crown
to pious or other uses without their consents in Parliament, where we find not
a word of the Commons or of their assent or dissent in that age.

Spelman. Council. p. 344.
An. Christi 850. There was a Council kept at Benningdon, a PRAELATIS ET
PROCERIBVS Regni Merciae under King Bertulph, where Lands were settled and
confirmed on the Abbie of Crowland, by the King, Bishops and Nobles, without
the assent or mention of any Commons.

Spelman Council. p. 344.
An. Dom. 851. There was a Council held at Kingsbury, under King Bertulph;
praesentibus ^eolnotho ARCHIEPISCOPO Do^oberniae, caeterisque Regni Merciae
EPISCOPIS and MAGNATIBVS; (without Knights or Burgesses) which settled the
affairs of the Realm, and confirmed this Kings ample Charter to the Abbey of
Crowland, subscribed by the King, Archbishop, Bishops, Abbots, Dukes and Earls.

Malmesh. de Gestis Regum Angl. l. 2. c. 2. Ingulphi Hist. Matthew. Westminster. Anno
854. Wigorniensis An. 855. Spelman Council. p. 348, 350. Seld. Titles of Honor,
p 2. cap. 5. sect. 6. p. 633.
An. 855. There was a Parliament or Council of all England held at Winchester,
where Ae^helwolf King of West-sex, Beorred King of Mercia, and Edmund King of
East sex were present, together with the Archbishops of Canterbury and York,
caeterisque Angliae Episcopis and Magnatibus, wherein King Aethelwolf, omnium
PRAELATORVM AC PRINCIPVM SVORVM gratuito consilio: (without any Knights or
Burgesses there expressed) gave the tithes of all the lands and goods within
his Dominions to God and the Church, there styled, Concilium salabre, which
has continued ever since in force till now.

About the year of our Lord 930. Will Malm^b. de Gest. Reg. Angl. l. 2. c. 6. p.
52.
King Aethelstan by his Charters gave diverse lands to the Abbey of Malmsbury,
in one whereof there was this Subscription or Postscript, S^iant Sapicutes
Regionis nostrae, no^ ha^ ha^ prata^^s terras me injuste rapuiss^, rapinam Deo
d^diss^, sed sic (...) accepi QUEMADMODUM JUDICAVERUNT OMNES OPTIMA^ES REGNI
ANGLORUM, to wit in a full Parliament, which then consisted only of the King,
and all the Nobl^s of England, (as these words insinuate) who adjudged these
(...) to be the Kings and not Elfreds; which E^fred forwearing himself before
the A^tar of Saint Peter at Rome in the presence of Pope John, and there
falling down dead as soon as he had forsworn himself, and dying within three
days after; the Pope thereupon sent to King Ethelstu^, to advise him what he
should do with his body, and whether he should be buried with other
Christians? Whereupon OPTIMATES REGIONIS NOSTRAE humbly desired of the King,
that he might have Christian burial, which he assented to; the Nobles only
being then the only great Council of the Kingdom, assembled (it seems) upon
this occasion to advise the King what Answer to return to the Pope concerning
Elfreds but all, whose lands they then adjudged to be forfeited to the King for
his Treason against him in his life time, in ^ndeavouring to dis^n^^^ it him of
his Crown, and to imprison and put out his eyes.

Will. Malmsb. de Gest. Reg. Angl. l. 2. c. 7. p. 53, 54.
Anno Dom. 944. Indict. 1. King Edmond granted many large Liberties, and the
Manor of Gl^stenbury to the Abble thereof, by his Charter (made it seems in
Parliament as most of such Charters were) which begin^ thus: In nomine Domini,
etc. Ego Edmundus Rex Anglorum (...) que Gentium gubernat^^ (...) Rector, CVM
CONSILIO ET CONSENSV OPTIMATVM MEORVM, conced^ Ecclesiae Sanctae D^i Gini^ri^^^
Muriae Glastoniae* etc. A clear evidence that the Nobles in that age were the
Kings great Counsel and Parliament without any Knights, Citizens or Burgesses;
of which we find no mention in Charters or Story.

Ingulphi Histor. p. 874. Spelman. Council. page 428. Mr. Seldeno Titles of
Honor, part. 2. chapter 5. p. 633.
An. 948. There was a Parliament or Council held at London under King Ed^^d, on
the Feast of the Nativity of the Virgin Mary, cum universi MAGNATES REGNI per
Reg^^m Edictum summoniti tam Archiopiscopi and Episcopi and A^^ites, quam
caeteri totius Regni PROCERES ET OPTIMATES Londoni convenissent, ad tractandum
de^n^go^is publicis (...) ^egni, Where we read of no Knights, Citizens or
Burgesses, bu^ only of Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, and all the Nobility of
the Land summoned to this famous Parliament, to consult of the public affairs
of the whole Kingdom.

Anno 965. (so Malmsbury, Malmsb^ de Gest^s Reg. Angl. l. 2. cap. 8 p 56, 57.
or 970. So Spelman) King Edgar called a Council at London, where himself, his
Mother, Cli^^ his Successor, ( t)Spelman. Council. p. 483.
the King of Scot^, the Admiral (...), both the Archbishops, cateriq^^
Episcopis, and (...) Prop^^bus were present, and subscribed his Charter therein
granted to the Abbey of Glastenbury, COMMUNI EPISCOPO^UM, A^^ATUM, PRIMORUM QU^
CONSI^^O GENERALI, AS^INSU PONTI^ICUM, A^BATUM, OPTIMATUM (...); and CONCI^^O
OMNIUM PRIMATUM ^^ORUM, without any Commons present, or mentioned to be there.

Spelman Council. p. 490.
An. 975. King Edgar and his Queen, Elf^^us Prince of M^^^ia, (...) Duke of the
East-^^gles, Elfwol^ his kinsman, Archbishop Dunstan cum caeteris Episcopis,
Abbatibus, Brick^^tho COMITE cum NOBILITATE TOTIUS R^GNI held a Council at
Winchester without any Commons.

Huntingdon Hist. l. 5. p. 357 Matthew. West. An. 755. usque 1002.
An. 977. in the Counc^l of Cal^e under King Edward OMNES ANGLORUM OPTIMATES
were present together with the Bishops and Clergy (but no Knights and Burgesses
for ought is recorded) where the floor sinking under them, all but Danstan fell
down some of them being grievously hurt, others slain, upon which Henry
Huntind^^ makes this memorable Observation applicable to our times. Signum
scilicet Dei excelsi fuit, quod Proditione and Interfection^ Regis sui ab amore
Dei cas^ri assent, (...) diversis Gentibus digna contrition^ conter (...). For
King Ed^ard being soon after ^lain, (...) Gentis sua p^rsida, who, i^ici^ias,
qu^ viventi ingess^^ant, (...) protelantes, s^p^lier^^^ (...) ^ine Regis (...)
apud War^^^, ut s^cut vitam Regis extinxorant, it^ and ^amen ejus extinguer^^^.
Hi^ vero comp^rtum est, contra divina^ providenti^^^ non (...) pravu^ cor
^^inis and ins^^^^abile. Quam enim (...). Deus coelo glori^^e susc^pit, and
memoria (...) Dominu^, ^^jus (...) Pr^d^tores ^bnubil^^^ (...). Ind^ Domin^^
i^^rum (...) prov^catus est, and plus (...) irritat^^ g^n^i ^^ssi^^ (...)
i^extricabile confer cogita^^t^ Et quod fa^^re paraverat non distulit, (...)
multis parlib^^ and (...) Anglia^ quasi ^^bes c^eli, etc. till they had
miserably spoiled, enslaved and conquered the Kingdom; and what particular
judgments befell the chief Authors of his murder, you may read in Anno 978.
979.
Matthew. Westminster and others. God of his infinite mercy now prevent the like
National judgment upon us, for the like pers^^ious practice and bloodshed
cowards ou^ King, against our public faith, O^ths, Covenants and Engagements.

Spelman Council. p. 510, 513, 525, 529.
Anno Christi 1009. by King Ethelr^d^ Edict ^^iversi Auglorum OPTIMATES di^
sancto Pentecostes ad locum ab indig^nis Eanham nominatum, acciti sunt
conveni^e, where they debated and decreed many things touching the Reformation
of the Church and Gods worship, and of the Common wealth; which General
Council Sir Henry Spelman assures us was no other but a Parliament being
summoned by the Kings Writ, and determining of State affairs as well as
Ecclesiastical matters. Adding, that it was the ancient custom of our Kings,
at the Feast of the Nativity and at Easter to call together Proceres utriusque
ordinis, the Peers of both Orders (Ecclesiastical and Temporal, not the
Commons) both to adorn their Royal State, and constlia regn^ in^unda to their
Parliaments. So as the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in those ancient times,
were the only Parliament and great Council of the Kingdom, without any Knights
of Shires, or Burgesses of Parliament, not known nor heard of in that and
former ages for any thing clearly appearing in Histories or Records.

Brampton Hist. Journall M. S. p. 77, 78. Mr. Seldens Titles of Honor. part. 2.
c. 5. p. 634. See William Malmsb. de Gestis Reg. Angl. l. 2. c. 1. page 81, 82.
Anno 1052. Earl Godwin having had a Trial CORAM PROCERIBVS REGNI, before the
Peers of the Realm touching the death of Alfred under King Hardicnut, and
flying out of the Realm, and afterward returning in hope of King Edward the
Confessors favor, he solicited the Lords to intercede for him to the King,
when the Parliament sat at London, Rex and OMNES REGNI MAGNATES ad
PARLIAMENTUM tunc fuerunt: The King as soon as he saw him called him Traitor,
and appeached him, that he had traitorously slain his Brother Alfred; which he
denying and putting himself upon the consideration (or trial) of the Court,
The King thereupon said, Clarissimi DOMINI COMITES ET BARONS t^^rae qui estis
homines mei ligii modo hic congregati, and appellum ^eum, responsumque Godwini
audistis, volo quod inter NOS in ista appellation^ rectum judicium d^cernatis,
and debitum justitiam faciatis. COMITIBUS vero and BARONIBUS super hoc ad
invic^m tractantibus, after much debate resolved to present the King with as
much gold and silver as they could carry between their arms to beg and
purchase the pardon; which they did: quorum consideratione Rex contradicere
nolens, quicquid JVDICAVERANT per omne ratificaVit.

A little before this, there was another Parliament summoned by the King at
Will. Malmes. De Gest. Reg. Angl. l. 2. c. 13. p. 81.
Gloucester, concerning Godwin: Quocirca TOTIVS REGNI PROCERES jussi Glocestriam
conVenire ut ibi MAGNO CONVENTV res Ventilaretur. Venerunt eo etiam Northumbri
COMITES tunc famosissimi, Sywardus and Leofricus OMNISQVE ANGLORVM NOBILITAS:
only Earl Godwin and his Sons, qui se suspectos scierant, sine praesidio
armorum Veniendum non arbitrati, staid at Burfarston with a strong band of
armed men, as Malmesbury relates. So as in this age the King, and his Lords and
Barons only made up the Parliament, without any Knights or Burgesses; and the
Lords had the right of Judicature vested in them (which discovers Modus tenendi
Parliamentum, pretended to be compiled in this Kings Reign, to be but a
forgery.) These 27 Councels and Parliaments before William the Conquerors Reign
(besides others which might he added) being made up and consisting only of
Kings, and their Spiritual and Temporal Lords and Nobles, and enacting Laws,
Canons for the Reformation and Government both of Church and State without any
Knights, Citizens or Burgesses summoned to assist or advise with them, or
concurrent assents to ratify what they enacted or ordered.

To these I shall annex some pregnant Precedents, both in, and since the
Conquerours Reign, or Parliaments consisting of the King, and his Spiritual
and Temporal Lords, and making and enacting Laws and Statutes without the
Commons presence or consent: some few of them now presuming to arrogate to
themselves the sole power and title of the Parliament in England, and absolute
Legislative power without the King or Lords, without and against all precedents
in former ages.

About the year of our Lord 1060 King Edward the Confessor CONSILI O BARONUM
suo^m, Legem. 167. annis sopitam excitavit, excitatam reparavit, reparatam
decoravit, decoratam confirmavit, and confirmata vo^ata est Lex, Sancti Regis
EDWARDI, as the Manuscript Author of the ancient Chronicle of Litchfield
records, and Ad Eadmemerum Notae. p. 171.
Mr Seldom out of him.

Hoveden. Annal. pars 1. page 600. 601. M. ^elde^ Ti^^es of Honor. par. 2. c.
5. sect. 20. p. 701. and Notae ad E^dmerum p. 1^1. etc. Spelma^. Council. p. 619.
Anno Dom. 1070. King William the First (commonly called the Conqueror)
Consilio BARONVM SVORVM; by the counsel of his Barons (in Parliament) caused
twelve noble and wise Englishmen, skillful in the Laws, to be summoned out of
every County, that he might hear their Laws and Customs from them; who meeting,
and showing what their Laws and customs were, reduced into writing by Aldred
Archbishop of York, and Hugh Bishop of London, who copied them out with their
own hands; they were with the ASSENT OF THE SAME BARONS, for the most part
confirmed in that assembly, which was a Parliament at that time. Annal. pars
Post p. 600.
Hoveden writing de Legib^^ Angliae, and statutis Willi^lmi, servans post
Conquestum, has this expression. Hic intimatur quid Willielmu^ Rex Anglorum
Cum PRINCIPIBVS SVIS CONSTITVIT, post conquisitio^em Angliae: And King Matthew.
Pa is in Hen. 1. p. 53. Edit. Tiguri. 1589.
Henry the First, in his Laws uses this expression, Legem Regis Edwardi Vobis
red^^ cum illis emendationibus, quibus Pater meus (...) emendaVit CONSILIO
BARONVM SVORVM: a clear evidence and proof, that the King, and his Nobles and
Barons alone, were the only Parliament and Legislator^ in those days; without
any Knights, Burgesses or Commons.

Wigerniensis An 1070 Mat. Paru^^n 10, 5. p 20. Seld. Tit. Hon. p. 701.
An. 1070. In a Parliament or Council held at Pedreda; the controversy between
Thomas Archbishop of York, and V^stan Bishop of Worcester touching certain
Lands, was determined quietly in Concilio celebrat^ coram REGE and Do^ebernens.
atque PRIMATIBVS TOTIVS REGNI ADJVDICANTIBVS, terminata est, as Wigorniensis
and Matthew Paris testify.

^adner. Hist. Nov. l. 1. page 9. Seldmi Notae ad Eadme^. pa. 197. etc. 199.
^eld. Tit. of Hon. p. 702.
An. 1071. In the first year of King William the first his Reign at Pinnedene
there was held PRINCIPVM CONVENTVS, an assembly of the Nobles (or Parliament)
by the Kings command, wherein the controversy between Laufran^ Archbishop of
Canterbury, and Odo Earl of Kent, concerning diverse Lands and Manners belonging
to the church of Canterbury was determined: which the King when he heard,
commended; Laudans CVM CONSENSV OMNIVM PRINCIPVM SVORVM CONFIRMAVIT, etc. The
King, Spiritual and Temporal Lords and Barons (without any Knights, Burgesses
or Commons for ought is recorded in our Histories) being then the Parliament,
and they the Seld. Notae ad Eadmerum. p. 190, 191.
COMMUNE CONSILIUM TOTIUS REGNI NOSTRI, mentioned in his Laws.

About the same time this King William commended and corrected the Episcopal
and Ecclesiastical Law^ of the Realm, 2 Rich. 2. membr. 12. nu. 5. Seld Notae
and Eadm. p. 167, 168.
COMMVNI CONCILIO and consilio ARCHIE^ISCORVM, and caeterorum EPISCOPORVM and
ABBATVM and Omnium Principum Regni me^ (...) Judicavit, as is manifest by his
Rescript to Remigi^s Bishop of Lincoln. And in the Libel exhibited by the
Clergy to King Edward the first in Parliament, there is this Recital of this
act of Reformation: Cum Willi^^^us dudum Rex Angliae de COMMUNI CONCILIO
ARCHIEP^^COPORUM, ABBATUM and OMNIUM PROCERUM REGNI SUI, leges Episcop^^s, quae
non been ne^ secundum sanctum canonem praecepiae ^^crant, in ^eg^o Angliae
observand^^ in^^^cusse judicaverit; which manifests the Parliament and Common
Council in his reign be to the King, and the Spiritual and Temporal Lords of
the whole Kingdom, without any House of Commons at all, divided from or
an^^oxed with them. In the year book of 21. Edw. 3. f. 60. We read that the
Abbot of Bury by an Ordin^m^ in the reign of William the Conqueror, m^de in
Parliament by the King, the Archbishop of Canterbury, and BY ALL THE OTHER
BISHOPS, EARLS and BARONS of the Land, was ex^^pted from all Episcopal
jurisdiction.

And in his Seldom. Notae ad E^dmerum p. 165.
Charter to the Abbie of ^atth (^^de in Parliament) there is this clause: N^tum
sit ^obis, me (...) and confirm^ss^, asso^^^ La^franci Archiepiscopi (...) and
Stigandi Episcopi (...), and CONCILIO ^tiam EPISCO^ORUM and BARONUM MEORUM, ^s
Ecclesia s^ncti (...) de Bello etc. (...) ac qui^tu in perpet^^^ (...), etc. So
as in his Reign there appears no evidence for any Knights of Shires, or
Burgesses sitting or voting in Parliament, but only the King and his Lords,
Spiritual and Temporal (...), judged and determined all public affairs.

In the seventh year of King (...) Nov. l. 1 p. (...) ^eldon^ (...) of (...),
p. ^02.
William (...) (ann. 1035) at the instance of Archbishop Anselm to end the
controversies between the King and him, there was a Parliament summoned at
Rochingham Castle, quatenus Episcopis, Abbatibus Cunctisque Regni Principibus
una cocuetibus communi assensu defiruretur, ut^um salva reverentia and
obedientia sedis Apostalicae, Anselmus possit fidem terreno Regi servare,
annon? Fit itaque conventus omnium, etc. Anselmus autem Episcopis, Abbatibus
and Principibus ad se a Regio secreto vocatis, eos and assistentem Monarcham,
etc. numero am multitudinem hac voce alloquitur: The Bishops and Proceres Regni
did all in this great council.

Eadmarus Nov. l. 2. p. 38. 39 40.
About the ninth year of King William Rufus, anno 1097, in the month of August,
cum de statu Regni acturus Rex Episcopos, Abbates, and quosque Regni Proceres
in unum praecepti sui sanctione egisset, and dispositis quae adjurationis
illorum causae fuerant, writes Eahmerus; Anselme renewed his request to the
King* where Rex Episcopi and Principes, and Quique Proceres, are brought in as
the only Members of, and actors in the Parliament, without any Commons at all.

M^tt Paris p. 52, 53. Seld. Tules of Hon^, p. 702, 703.
Anno Dom. 1100 William Rufus dying without issue, and Robert his elder brother
being absent, Henry the First was chosen and crowned King Clero and Pagnetibus
cunctis, by the Clergy and all the Nobles, upon condition that he should
willingly grant, and by his charter confirm those Liberties and ancient
customs, which flourished in the Kingdom in the time of Saint Edward the King:
which he did accordingly, reciting in his Charter; Sciatis, me Dei
Misericordia, and Communi Cons^li^ Baronum Regni Regem esse coronatum. Forestas
Communi Consilo Baronu^ ^eorum in manu mea retinui, and Legem Regis Edwardi
vobis reddo, cum illis emendationibus quibus Pater meus eam emendavit Constl^o
Baronum ^uorum: His testibus Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, ^omitibus, Baronibus,
Vicecomitt^bus and Optimatibus totius Regni Angliae, quando coronatus fui.

Eadm. Hist. Nov l 3. p. 67. Will. Malmes. de Gestis Pon. Angliae. l. 1. p.
228. Hoved. Ann l. pa^s 1, p 469. Matthew. Westminster. Anno 1102. page 23. An^iq
Eccles. (...) page 104. 10^: ^eld. Tit. of Hon p 703.
Ann. Dom. 1102. in the third year of King Henry the first, there was a Council
held at Westminster. Huic conventui affuerunt Anselmo Archiepiscopo petente a
Rege Pr^nates Regni; quatenus quicquid e^usdem Concilii authoritate
decerneretur Vtriusque Ordinis concordi cura and solicitudine ratum servaretur,
write Eadmerus and Malmesbury in the self-same words. In this Council diverse
canons were made and published Communi Consensu Episcoporum and Abbatum, and
Principum totius Regni: Principes Regni sui Omnes tam Ecclesiastci, quam
Secularis Ordinis, were present with the King in this Council, writes Hoveden.

Math. Paris. Hist. Angliae p. 59.
Anno Dom. 1106. King Henry the first, Magnetibus Regni ob hoc Londonium Edicto
Regio convocatis, made a flattering Speech unto them, promising to ratify King
Edwards Laws, both by his Charter and Oath if they desired it, so as they would
assist him against his Brother Robert and the Normans, which they did.

Math. Paris. p. 60. Eadmerus Hist. Nov. l. 4. p. 91. Hoveden Annal. pars 1. p.
471.
Anno 1107. There was another Parliament and Council held at London under this
King. Factus est Conventus Episcoporum and Abbatum pariter and Magnatum (or
Procerum Regni, as Eadmerus) Londoniis in Pal^tio Regis. Wherein there was an
accord made between the King and Anselm, touching investitures of Bishops, per
concilium Ans^lmi and Procerum Regni. In this Council Anselm, coram Rege,
Regnique Episcopis and Principibus exacted obedience and subjection from Girald
Archbishop of York.

Hoveden. Annal. pars 1. p. 472. Eadmer. Hist. Nov. l. 4. p. 94, 95.
Anno 1108. to redress the incontinency of Priests, King Henry the first,
adunatis ad curiam suam in sol^^nitate Pentecostes apud Londonium ^unctis
^a^orthus Regni, de negotio cum Anselmo Archiepiscopo, and caeter^^ Episcopis
Angliae tractavit: Diverse Laws and Canons were there enacted for this purpose,
which were thus prefaced. Haec su^t Statuta de Archdiaeonibus, Presbyteris,
etc. quae statuerunt Anselmus Cantuariensis Archiepiscopus, Thomas Eboracensis
Archiepiscopus, electus cum eo, Omnesque al^ Episcopi Angliae in praesentia
Gloriosi Regis Henri^i Assensu Comitum and Baronum suorum etc. Or, Assensu
Omnium Baronum suorum, (as Eadmorus renders it) Statutum est, etc.

Eadmerus Hist. Nov. l. 5. p 114.
Anno 1114. H^nricus Rex jussit Omnes Episcopos and Principes totius Regni ad
curiam suam sub uno venire Itaque ut R^x jusserat XVI. Kal. Octobris Conventus
O (...) apud Westmonasterium in Palatio Regis factus est: Where the Popes
Letter concerning the Bishops of England was read and debated.

Hoveden Annal. pars 1. p. 473. Eadn^erus Hist. Nov. l. 5. p. 519
Anno 1115. XIII. Kal. Aprilis factus est Conven^us Opiscoporum, porum, Abb^t^n
and Principum totius Regni ap^d Serberiam, cogente eos illuc Sanctione Regis
H^nrice, writes E^dmerus: Which Hoveden thus expresses; Comites and Barons
totius Angliae, apud Salesberiam decimo qu^rto Calendas Aprilis convenerunt. In
this Parliament the King substituted his Son William to succeed him as his
Heir. Igi^ur ^gnita Regis volunt^te, mox ad nutum ejus Omnes Principes homines
ipsius Willielmi: And in this Parliament the controversy between Ralph
Archbishop of Canterburi^, and Thurstan Archbishop of York concerning obedience
to the Sea of Canterbury was debated and Thurstan ordered to submit, whereupon
he renounced his Archbishopric in a Pet.

E^dmerus Hist Nov. l. 5. p. 118.
The same year in A^^ust following one Anselme came from R^me to King Henry
the first being in Normandy, bringing Letters from the Pope authorizing him to
be his Legate in England, which in a short time being made known in ENGLAND,
Admirats erg^ Episcopi, Abb^tes and Nobiles Duique Londoniae adun^ti snut super
his, and quibusdam a^^s praesente Regina, Communi Concilio tractaturi, where
they resolved to prevent this Innovation, and sent the Archbishop of
Canterbury to the King to prevent and inhibit this Legates entrance into the
Kingdom. After which one ^admerus* Hist Nov l. 6 p 137, 138.
Peter obtaining a Power Legatine from the Pope over England and Ireland; this
King returned him this Answer, Legationis illius st^bilem authoritatem, non
nisi per conniventiam Episcoporum, Abbatum and Procerum ac totius R^gni
Co^ventum roborari posse constare^. These respective Presidents clearly
manifest that our Parliaments and great Councels all his Reign, consisted only
of the King with all the Spiritual and Temporal Lords and Barons without any
Commons, Knights or Burgesses at all, of whom we find no mention.

Math. Pa^is. p. 71. Huntindon Hist. l. 8. p. 386.
Anno 1137. King Henry dying leaving, Maude the Empress his right Heir; Stephen
contrary to his Oath invaded the Crown: Congregatis enim Londoniis Regni
Magnatibus, meliorationem l^gum promisit, juxta voluntatem and arbitrium
singulorum; whereupon OMNES tam PRAESULES quam COMITES and Barons qui filiae
Regis, and suis Haeredibus juraverant fidelitatem, cons^nsum Stephano
praebuerunt, dicentes fore nimis turpe, si tot Nobil^s faeminae subderentur,
etc.

Continuatio^d Florent. Wigorniense^ p. 519.
Anno 1138. King St^phen on the fourth of April, held a Council at Northampton*
in which the Archbishop of York sat President, the Prelates, Abbots, Earls,
Barons and all the Nobility ^f England being there present.

Hen. Huntindon, hist l 8. p. 395.
1150. T^cohall Archbishop of Canterbury held a General Council at London in
Midlent* where King Stephen and his son Eustace, ET ANGLIAE PROCERES
interfuerunt, and the Nobles of England were present, but no Commons that we
read of.

Math West. An. 1153. p. 42
Anno 1153. King Stephen having no Heir but Duke Henry recognovit in Conventu
Episcoporum and aliorum Regni Optimatum; acknowledged in an Assembly of the
Bishops and other Lords (or Nobles) of the Realm, that Henry had an hereditary
right to the Kingdom of England, and the Duke peaceably granted, that Stephen
should quietly enjoy the Kingdom during his life. Ita tamen confirmatum est
p^ct^m. quod ips^ Rer and Episcopi tunc praesentes, cum caet^ri^ R^gni
Optimatibus jurarent, quod Dux Henri^us post mortem Rogis, fi illum super
viveret, r^gn^misine aliqua contradictione obtineret.

Gul. Nubrigensis Rerum Angl. l. 1. cap. 32.
An. 1154. King Stephen about the feast of Michael the Archangel cum Episcopis
and Nobtlibus A^glie Conciltum Londoniis col h^aturus tum pro Rigni Negotiis,
tum etiam n^g^tio vacant (...) Ecclesiae Fibor^consis; writes Nu^^gens^s. By
which passages it is evident that the Parliaments of his Reign consIted only of
the King, Bishops, and other Spiritual and Temporal Lords, without any Commons
for ought appears by Story.

Math. Paris. Hist p. 96, 97.
An. Dom. 1164. King Henry the Second held a Parliament at C^arendon, wherein
John (...) Oxoni^ sat President, is (...) Regi^, (...) etiam M^chiepistop^s
(...), Prloribus, Comitibus, B^^onibus and (...) Regnie where there (...)
Recognition made of a certain part of the Customs and Liberties of his
Ancestors, to wit, of Henry his grandfather and others, which ought to be
observed in the Kingdom, (...) to be (...) by all, by real^ of the dissentions
and discords often happening betw^en the Clergy, and the Pemporall Justices and
great men of the Kingdom. Among these Customs this is one; Aro^^^piscopi,
Episco^^, and universae person^ Regni qui do Rege^ra^^^^ (...) pess^ssiones
(...) (...), (...) and Regis, and (...). intur and fa^ano owner consur^^di^es
Reg^^ (...) CAETERI BARONS DEBENT interesse JUDICIIS CURIAE CUM BARONI BUS
quousque pervematur ad deminutionem membrorum, vel ad mortem. This Recognition
the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Clergy, tum Comitibus, Baronibus, and
Proceribus Cundis, with all the Earls, Barons and Nobles swore unto, and firmly
promised in the word of truth viva voce to keep and observe to the King their
Sovereign, and to his Heirs bona fide, and without male eng^n for ever. So
Math. Paris informs us An. 1164 And Antiq. Eccl. Brit. page 122.
Math. Westminster thus briefly expresses it. Apud Claredonum coram Rege and
Magnatibus Regni f^cta est recordatio Regnorum Libertatum and consuetudinum.
Annal pars posterior. p 490.
Hoveden thus records it. Eodem Anno R^x Magno Congregato Concilio, and omnibus
Archiepiscopi^ and Episcopis Angliae, coram illo congregatis, retiit etc. The
Commons for ought appears, were no Members of this Parliament.

Anno 1165. There was a Parliament held at Nonthampton Castle, wherein as
William Fitz Stephens, and Titles of Honor. part. 2. c. 5 sect 2^. p. 705.
Mr. Seldom out of him; Secunda die consul^ntibus Episcopis, Comitibus and
Baronibus Anglir Omnibus, Archbishop Becket was accused of Treason, and
thereupon the King demanded judgment against him. All of them accorded, that
for his contempt in not coming upon the Kings summons, and sending no excuse,
all his goods and movables should be at the Kings mercy. Whereupon there grew
a difference between the Bishops and Barons, which of them should pronounce the
sentence against him, the Barons excusing themselves and putting it off to the
Bishops, and the Bishops putting it off from themselves to the Barons.
Whereupon the King moved with the controversy about pronouncing the sentence,
thereupon the contoversie ceased, and Henry de Bloyes Bishop of Winchester, was
at last enjoined to do it, and pronounced it against his will.

Hoveden Annal. pars poster p. 561. to 566 Math. Patis p. 127.
Anno 1176. There was Council. generale, a Parliament, or General Assembly of
all the Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Earls, and Barons of England held at
Westminster, for the determination of the great contention between Alfonso King
of Castile, and Sancho King of Navarre, touching diverse Castles and Territories
in Spain, submitted to the determination of our King Henry the second, who all
meeting together, their Advocates being fully heard in prasentia nostra, and
EPISCOPORVM and COMITVM and BARONVM NOSTRORVM, King Henry the second, habito
cum EPISCOPIS, COMITIBVS, and BARONIBVS NOSTRIS cum Del^beratione consilio, did
accordingly determine it: COMITES and BARONS Regalis Curiae Angliae
ADJVDICAVERVNT Blevariam, urrique parti supra dictorum, quae in jure petita su
rant fieri restitutionem, writes Hoveden, whose judgment the King ratified by
his Charter under the great Seal of England.

Hoveden Annal pars posterior p. 556.
Anno 1173. Lewis King of France, cum Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Comitibus and
Baronibus Regni sui, bringing with them our King, Henry the 2d. his 3. sons,
and Henry their Father, King of England, cum Archiepiscopis, Episcopis,
Comitibus, and Baronibus terra suae, met between Gisort and Try on the seventh
of October, and there treated of an accord between the King of England, and
Henry his son.

Hoveden Annal. pars poster. p. 544.
Anno 1175. King Henry the second, and the King his Son went to York, where
they met William King of Scots and David his brother, with almost all the
Bishops, Abbots and great men of their Kingdoms, where the agreement made
between the King of Scots and King Henry the Father was read and confirmed
before the King his Son, Roger Archbishop of York, Hugh Bishop of Durham, and
Comitibus and Baronibus Angliae, and coram Episcopis and Abbatibus, Comitibus
and Baronibus Regni Scotiae in Ecclesia sancti Petri Eboraci. So as the Kings,
Bishops, Abbots, Earls and Barons of England and Scotland too, (without any
conjunction or mixture of Knights and Burgesses) were the only Parliaments to
conclude peace or war, or enact Laws in this Kings reign.

Hoved. Annal pars poster. p. 546. Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 94, 95.
The same year 1175. King Henry the second, Magnum Congregavit Concilium apud
Windeshores in octavis S. Michaelis, praesentibus and Rege filio Richardo Cant.
Archie^isc. and Episcopis Angliae, and coram Laurentio Dublinensi Archiepisc.
prasentibus etiam Comitibus and Baronib^s Angliae: In which Council the
Catholic Archbishop of Tuaman and Cantoris Abbot of S. Brandon, and Master
Laurence Chancellor of Roderic King of Conact, made a final concord with King
Henry the Father on the behalf of Roderit King of Conact, recorded at large by
Hoveden: At this great Parliament upon this occasion, we read of none but the
King Archbishops, Bishops, Earls and Barons of England to be p^esent, not any
one Knight of a Shire, or Burgess.

H^v^den Ann^ pars post. p. ^4^.
Anno 1176. King Henry the second held a Parliament or Concil^um mog^um at
Notting^am, de S^^tutis Reg^i sui, and coram R^g^filio suo, and coram
Archiepiscopo Episcopis, Comitibus and Baronibus Regni sui Communi omnium
Concilio d^v^sit Regnum suum in s^x part^s; per quarum singulas, tres
justiciarios itinerantes const^tuii; After which, he records the Justices
names, and the Counties allotted to each of their divisions; by which testimony
it is most evident, that the King and the Spiritual and Temporal Lords and
Barons were the only members of Parliament in this Kings rai^n, and did order
and make Laws for the whole Kingdom without the Commons, of which there is no
mention in any Parliament or Council in this Kings life, that I can find; nor
in Annal. pars p^st. p. 653.
A^^o 1189, when there was a peace concluded between King Henry the second and
Philip of Fr^n^, thus expressed by Hov^den. Convenerunt igitur prae^cti ^ex
Franciae, and R^x A^g^ae and Richard^^ comes Brittannicorum, cum
Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Comitibus and Baronibus suis, circa festum
Apostolo^um Petri and Pauli ad co^oqutum inter Turonem and Aras. etc.

Hove^en. Annal. p. (...) post. p. 5^6. (...) p 94, 95.
Anno Dom. 1189. King Richard the first after the death of King Henry the
second, on the third day of S^ptember was crowned at W^stminst^r by B^ldwin
Archbishop of C^nterbury, diverse other Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors and
the EARLS and BARONS of England, being assembled together at London, and
present at it, quorum consilio, by whose advice he was crowned. That same year
Philip King of France sent Ambassadors to King Ri^hard of England to acquaint
him, that the King of France in a General Council at Paris, and all his Nobles
had sworn upon the holy Evangelists, that God willing they would immutably be
at Vizels by the end of Easter in their voyage toward the Holy Land, desiring
that he and his Earls and Barons would do the like and meet him there at that
time. Hinc factum est quod Richardus Rex Angl. and Conutes and Barons sui, qui
crucem suscepe^unt in general Concilo apud Londonias, juraverunt tacti^
Sacro-sanctis Evangeliis, etc. to meet them there at the time appointed; and
both the King of Fr^^^ his Ambassadors and others on the behalf of the King of
England, juraverunt in eodem Concilo etc. and mifit inde Chartam suam Regi
Francia.

Hoved. Annal. pars poster. p 735.
Anno 1194. During the captivity of Richard the first, a little before his
release and return into England, John his brother endeavoring to usurp the
Kingdom from him, sent one Adam a Clergyman into England with Letters, to
fortify all his castles against the King his brother; who was apprehended
together with his Letters by the Mayor of London, who delivered all his Letters
to Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury, Qui in crastino convocatis coram to
Episcopis, Comitibus and Baronibus Regni, ostendit eu literas Comitis Johannis,
and earum tenorem: and statim per commune Conclitum Regni de^initum est, quod
Comes Johannes dissaisiretur de omnibus tenement^ suis in Anglia, and ut
Castella sua obsiderentur: and ita factum est, writes Hoveden.

Mat. West. an. 1194. p 68. Mat. Paris. p. 169.
Ann. 1194 King Richard the first, Concilio Procerum suorum, by the advice of
his Nobles, was crowned the second time at Winchester, though with some
reluctance. Hoved. An. pars posterior. p. 736 737.
On the 3^. day of March 1195, he celebrated primum Consilii sui Die^n, the
first day of his Parliament at Nottingham; at which Queen Elenor his Mother,
both the Archbishops (one of them sitting at the Kings right hand, the other at
his left) and sundry Bishops and Earls (named by Hoveden) were present. On the
31 day of March, the second day of the Parliament, the King demanded judgment
against Earl John his brother, who against his fidelity sworn to him, had
seized and wasted his Castles and Lands on this side and beyond the Seas, and
entered into a covenant against him with the French King his Enemy. He likewise
demanded judgment against Hugh de Novant Bishop of Coventry, who being privy
to his secrets had deserted him, and adhered to the King of France, and Earl
John his Enemies, plotting all mischief to the destruction of his Kingdom. Et
judicatum est, That Earl John and the Bishop should be peremptorily cited, if
they appeared not within forty days, nec juri steterint, judicarunt, Comitem
Johannem demeruisse Regnum, and Episcopum Coventrensem subjacere judicio
Episcoporum, in eo quod ipse Episcopus erat; and judicio Laicorum, in eo quod
ipse Vicecomes Regis extiterat. The third day of the Parliament the King
demanded Aids and Taxes, which were granted. The fourth and last day of the
Parliament, all the Clergymen and Laymen that would, made their complaints
against the rapines and exactions of the Archbishop of York; and Gerard of
Camvilla was impeached, for harboring and receiving Thieves, and of Treason,
for ayding and adhering to Earl John and the Kings Enemies; who denied the
Charges: and those who accused him, put in sureties to prosecute, and he
sureties to answer. And this day the King appointed when he would be crowned:
which done, this Parliament ended.

Hov^d. p. 7^1 78^. 784. See page 743. 744. 745.
Anno 1197. This King made a Law concerning the assizes of Measures, and
concerning Legal Proceedings and Pleas of the Crown and Forests: Haec est
Assisa Domini Regis, and haec sunt praecepta de Forrestis suis in Anglia facta,
per Assensum and Confilium Archiepiscop. and Episc. Abbatum, Comitum and
Baronum, and Militum totius Regnisui, writes Hoveden: That these Milites were
Knights of Shires chosen by Writ, appears not; I conceive them to be rather
Barons that were Knighted, who were usually called Knights, as Inst. 1 p. 5. ^.
11. ^. 3. (...). ^. B^cl. 473. M. Seld. ^itles of H^ no^, p. 7^6. 737. 770. 771.
Sir Edward Cook and others write: As for Burgesses and Citizens, there is no
mention of them; so as in King Richard's Reign it is evident, that Se^ M. Seld.
T^. of Honor. p^r. 2. cap. 5. p. 706. 707.
our Parliaments were held without any Commons or Burgesses, by the King and
his Spiritual and Temporal Lords only; the proceedings in Parliament being
still acted by and before the Barons, as M. Seldom observes.

In the first year of King John's Reign ( Ann. 11^9) on the ninth of June the
King came to London, where Congregatis Angliae Nobilibus, he was crowned by
Archbishop Hubert. So Ann. 1^99. p 76.
Matthew W^stminster; Congregatis itaque in adventu ejus Archiepiscopis,
Episcopis, Comitibus and Baronibus, atque aliis omnibus qui coronationi ejus
interesse debuerant: So H^st Angl. p. 189.
Matthew Paris: And that year I find in Annil. (...). pa^. 796. 797.
Hoveden, Statuta quaedam Johannis Regis, beginning thus: Eodem anno Johannes
Rex Angliae Statuit, concerning the price of Wines: Sed hoc primum Regis
Statutum vix inchoatum, statim est adnihilatum, quia M^rcatores hanc Assisam
sustinere non poterant.

Hoved pars poster. p. 803.
Ann. Dom. 1200. the great controversy touching the Barony that William of
Mowbray ^laimed against William of Statvile, which had long depended in suit in
the Kings Court, ^andem Conci^to Regni, and Voluntate Regis, pax and finalis
concordia facta est, by way of composition. It seems, there was a Parliament
held that year. and that the King and his Barons determined this controversy
touching this Barony in Parliament.

Mat. Paris. Hist. Angliae, page 201. Matt. Westminster. An. 1204. p 80.
Anno 1204, in the fifth year of King John' s Reign, in crastino Circumcisionis,
convenerunt ad colloquium apud Oxoniam Rex and Magnates Angliae, ubi concessa
sunt Regi auxilia militaria, de quolibet scuto scilicet terrae duae Marcae and
dimidia. Nec etiam Episcopi and Abbates sine promissione recesser^nt. And the
same year there was Rot. Parl. 5. Jo^n. Reg. Membr. 1. Number 3. Seld. Tit. of
Hon. page 707.
Commune Concilium Baronum Nostrorum, at Winchester, as appears by the Rolls of
that year.

Dor Par. 6. Joh R Memb. 2 4 Dors. Claus. 3. Seld. Titles of Honor, par. 2.
cap. 5. p. 707.
Anno 1205. certain Laws in the sixth year of his Reign, were made for the
defense of the Kingdom, communi asse^su Archiepiscoporum, Episcoporum, Comitum
and Baronum, and omnium Fidelium Nostrorum Angliae: who these Fideles were,
appears not; certain it is, they are styled neither Knights, Citizens,
Burgesses, nor Commons; and therefore may be well intended of those who adhered
to the King against his Enemies, or others specially summoned to assist the
King and Lords* as the Judges and others now are; or else all the Kings privy
Council.

The ancientest Writ of Summons to Parliament extant on record (as Tit. of
Honor, p. 708. Dors Claus 6. Joh. R Memb. 3.
Mr. Seldom informs us) is in this sixth year of King John directed to the
Bishop of Salisbury; Ma^damus vobis, Rogantes quatenus omni occasion and
dilatione postposita, sicut Nos and Honorem Nostrum diligitis, ad Nos apud
London die Dominica proxime ante Ascentionem Domini Nobiscum tractat^ri de
magnis and arduis ^^gotiis Nostris, and communi Regni utilitate. Quia super his
quae a Rege Franciae per Nuncios nostros and suos Nobis mandata sunt, unde per
Dei Gratiam bonum speramus provenire, vestrum expedit habere consitium and
A^^o^um Magnatum Terrae Nostra^, ^uo^ ad ^le^ illum and locum fecimus
con^ocari. Ves etiam ex part nostra et vestra (...) and Priores Conventuales
totius Diocaesis citari faciatis, ut Concilio praedicto intersint, sicut
diligunt Nos, and Communem Regni utilitatem. By which it is apparent, that the
Peers Spiritual and Temporal of the Realm were the only persons summoned to
treat with, and advise the King as his great Council, and the other fideles but
their assistants, not any Burgesses, Knights or Commoners elected by the people.

Matt. Paris (...). p. 21^.
Ann. 1209. King John requiring Hostages of William de Brause, a Nobleman, for
his sidelity, as he had done of others, had this answer returned to the
Messengers, Si ipsum (Regem) in aliquo offendi, paratus sum, and ero, Domino
meo and sine obsedibus satisfacere, secundum judicium Curiae suae, and Baronum
Parium meorum, certo mihi assignato die and loco. So that the Judgment of
Parliament then resided in the Peers alone, who together with the King and
Spiritual Lords, made up the Parliament.

Matt. Paris p. 225. 230. 231.
Anno Dom. 1213, on the 13 day of May, King John, Pandulph the Popes Legate, cum
COMITIBUS and BARONIBUS, assembled at Dover, and concluded a form of Peace
between the King and the Pope, there mentioned at large. The same year there
was a Parliament held at S. Albans, there described by Matthew Paris.
Interfuerunt Concilio apud Sanctum Albanum Galfridus filius Petri, and
Episcopus Winton, cum Archiepiscopo and Episcopis and Magnatibus Regni, ubi
cunctis pace Regis denunciata, ex ejusdem Regis part firmiter praeceptum est,
quatenus Leges Henrici avi sui ab omnibus in Regno suo custodirentur, and omnes
Leges iniquae penitus enervarentur, etc. And the same year on the eighth of
September there was a Conference or Parliament assembled at London, which he
thus expresses; Convenerunt in Civitate Londoniarum apud Sanctum Paulum,
Stephanus Cantuar. Archiepiscopus, cum Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus, Decanis
and Baronibus Regni. Where the Archbishop produced the Charter of King Henry
the First, (of the Liberties of England) which he caused to be read, beginning
thus: Henricus Dei gratia Rex Angliae, etc. Sciatis, me Dei misericordia, and
Communi Concilio Baronium Regni Angliae, ejusdem Regni Regem esse coronatum,
etc. Toward the latter end thereof there is this clause; Legem Regis Edwardi
vobis reddo, cum illis emendationibus, quibus Pater meus eam emendavit Coneflio
Baronum suorum. When this Charter had been read, and Baronibus audientibus
intellecta fuisset: and understood by the Barons that heard it, they
exceedingly rejoiced with great joy, and all of them swore in the Archbishops
presence, that when they saw a fit time, they would (if need were) fight for
their Liberties even unto death. By which passages and Charters it appears most
clearly, that the Parliaments of England both in King William Rufus, King Henry
the First, and King John's Reigns, consisted only of the King, and Spiritual
and Temporal Lords and Barons, without any Knights of Shires, Citizens and
Burgesses elected by the people; and that they were the sole Lawmakers in
those times.

Anno 1114. being the fifteenth year of King John's Reign, this King (writes
Titles of Honor, part. 2. chapter 5. p. 710.
Mr. Seldom) summoned A KIND OF PARLIAMENT to Oxford, by this STRANGE WRIT of
Summons, that for ought that I have seen, is without example, and seems to
point to that distinction of Tenants by Knights service, which I call here
BARONS MINORES of that time, from the MAJORES* or such as were properly
BARONS. The words of it are,

Dors. Claus. 15. Joh. Reg. part. 2. Mem. 7.
Rex Vicecomiti Oxon salutem: Praecipimus tibi, quod OMNES MILITES Ballivae
tuae qui summoniti fuerunt esse apud Oxoniani ad NOS, a die Omnium Sanctorum ad
15 dies, venire facias cum Armis suis; Corpora vero Baronum sine Armis
singulariter: and Indiscretos Milites de Comitatu tuo illuc venire facies ad
Nos, ad cundem terminum, ad loquendum Nobiscum de negotiis Regni Nostri. Test
Meipso, apud Witten. 11. die Novembris.

E^dem modo scribitur omnibus Vicecomitibus.

This President seems to prove that there were Knights of Shires summoned to
Parliaments in King John's reign.

To which I answer.

First, that it appears not by any History or Record, that there was any
Parliament held this year by King John; and Mr. Seldom calls it not a
Parliament simply, but only a kind of Parliament, or something like it, being
in truth rather a Council of War, then a Parliament, as the Writ import^ it
being against the rules and Cook 4. Instit. p 15.
Custom^s of Parliaments, for men to come armed to it. Secondly, The History
of that year imports, that the King received a great overthrow in France about
this time; Upon receipt of the tidings whereof, he was much dejected and used
this Speech to those that stood about him, Math. Paris. p. 242.
Since the time I subjected my self and my Kingdoms to the Church of Rome,
alas for grief, nothing has happened prosperously, but all things contrary to
me; and therefore it is probable, that this Summons was only of such Knights
and others, who Math. P^^is. p 231. M. Sel^ens Titles of Honor, p. 71^.
held by Knights service of him, and were bound to assist him in his wars by
their Tenures, to aid him with their Arms and counsel in this distress, he
having done the like before Math. Paris. p. 198, 200, 201 204. 224.
by his Writs, and fined those who disserted, or refused to assist him in his
Wars, two or three times over before this year, there being diverse Writs and
Presidents of this Nature, cited in the late Exact Collection p. 850. etc.
discourses about the Commission of Array. Thirdly, The Writ it self manifests
that this was no summons to a Parliament. For first, omnes Milites in the first
clause of the Writ formerly summoned to appear, and now again with their Arms,
seem rather to be Soldiers, or Tenants holding by Knights servic^, then
Knights by order: And these are only summoned to appear with their Arms at
Oxford, but not to consult or advise with the King concerning the affairs of
the Kingdom, therefore not summoned to a Parliament. Secondly, The Sheriff is
here to summon the Barons without Arms, to appear only in person: If those
Barons were Barons of Parliament, and summoned to a Parliament, there ought to
have been a Cook. Inst. p 1, 2 etc. Mr. Sel^en^ Titles of Hono^ part 2. c 5.
sect 21 22, 23, 24, 25.
Writ of Summons directed to every of them in particular, not to the Sheriff
to summon them in gross, without any writ to them, and they much rather then
Knights or any others should have appeared in arms to aid the King, by reason
of their tenures and great revenues. Therefore these Barons without Arms, whose
bodies only were to appear, I conceive to be such poor Tenants, who were either
not obliged, or not able to find arms of their own; the word Baron being often
used for a Tenant; and a married man, whom our Law Books style BARON; and that
which persuades me hereunto is this clause in a like Writ of this King but two
years before, when he feared an Invasion from France, whereby he commanded all
the Math. Paris. p. 224.
Sheriffs of England to summon by good Summons, Comites, Barons, Milites, and
omnes liberos homines and servientes, vel quicunqu^ sint, and de quocunque
tencant, Qui arma habere debent, vel arma habere possint, and qui Homagium
nobis vel ligantiam fecerunt; quod sicut Nos and seipsos and omnia sua
diligunt, sint apud Doveram ad instans clausum Pascha, been parati Cum armis
and equis etc. Et quod nullus rem^ntat qui arma portare possit sub poena
Culvertagii and perpetuae servitutis. Et unus quisque sequatur Dominum suum,
and qui terram non habent and ARMA HABERE POSSINT, illuc veniant ad capiendum
solidatas nostras; which writ is an excellent Commentary upon this. Thirdly,
There are only 4. discrete Knights (or Soldiers rather) of every County
summoned to come to the King to confer with him about the affairs of his
Kingdom in the last clause of this Writ, which only savours of a summons to a
kind of Parliament. But these certainly were no Knights of the Shire for a
Parliamentary Assembly as is evident, 1. By their number, 4. out of every
County, when the Knights for Parliament were never but two at most for one
County, and but one for some Counties. 2. They were not to be elected by the
Freeholders and people, but summoned only by the Sheriff himself at his
discretion. 3. They are summoned only ad loquendum nobiscum, to speak with the
King of the affairs of his Kingdom; not ad tractandum faciendum and
consentiendu^ his quae tunc ib* de communi consilio dicti regni nostri
contigerint ordinari super negotiis antedictis, as Knights of the Shires are in
all Writs for their Election. 4. There is no mention in this Writ of any
Parliamentum nostrum appointed to be held at Oxford, or of any conference or
treaty to be there held cum Praelatis, Magnatibus and Proceribus Regni nostri,
nor yet of Duos Cives de qualibet Civitate; nor of Duos Burgesses de quolibet
Burge Com. illius to be elected, summoned, returned, as in all writs of
Election for Knights of Shires and Burgesses for a Parliament: Therefore this
Writ was certainly no summons to a Parliament, nor this meeting at Oxford any
Parliament at all, but only a Council of War or State upon a special
occasion: and so no proof at all of any Knights of Shires (much less of
Burgesses) in the Parliaments of this Kings reign; which the next President in
his time will unanswerably clear.

In the 16 year of Mat Paris. p. 243. to 252.
King John's Reign, Anno Dom. 1215. Convenerunt ad colloquendum apud Sanctum
Edmundum Comites and Barons Angliae: Where the Charter of King Henry the First
(containing certain Liberties and Laws of King Edward, granted both to the
Church and Magnatibus Regni) was again produced: which read, they all swore
upon the high Altar in S. Edmonds Church, that if the King refused to grant the
said Laws and Liberties, they would wage war with him, and withdraw their
Allegiance from him, till he did by his Charter under his Great Seal, confirm
all things which they requested; resolving all to repair to the King after the
Nativity of our Lord, to get those Liberties confirmed. Whereupon, after
Christmas, Anno 1216. in the seventeenth year of this Kings Reign, they
repaired to the King to London, requiring him to confirm these Laws and
Liberties: the King deferred them till after Easter, promising them to satisfy
them in all things; At last, after some encounters, and castles taken by the
Barons, who had raised a very great Army against the King, REX and MAGNATES,
the King and his Nobles came to a Treaty; the 15 day of June in a Meadow
betwixt Stains and Windsore; where he granted and confirmed them such a
Charter of their Laws and Liberties as was desired: In which Charter there is
this clause concerning Parliaments and Summons to them, and for Aids and
Assessements, Math. Paris. p. 247. Seldens Titles of Honor, p. 709.
and ad habendum COMMVNE CONSILIVM REGNI de Auxiliis assidendis nisi in tribus
casibus praedictis; and De Scrutagiis Assidendis summoneri faciemus
Archiepiscopos, Abbates, Comites and Majores Barons Sigillatim per Literas
nostras; and praeterea faciemus summoneri per Vicecomites and Ballivos nostros
omnes alios qui in Capite tenent de Nobis ad certum diem, scilicet ad terminum
quadraginta dierum ad minus, and ad certum locum, in omnibus Literis
submonitionis illius, causam submonitionis illius exponentibus, and sic facta
submonitione, negotium praecedat ad diem assignatum, secundum consilium eorum
qui praesentes fuerint, quamvis non omnes submoniti venerint. By which clause I
conceive it evident; that in King John's reign, none but Bishops, Abbots,
Earls, great Barons and lesser Barons, who held Lands of the King in Capite,
were summoned to our Parliaments; who were to be all summoned of right, and
none of them omitted or secluded: But for any Knights, Citizens or Burgesses
then summoned or sent unto our Parliaments by any Writs of Election, or of any
House or Parliament of Commons, I find no proof, nor example in any History or
Record.

I should now proceed to prove, that in all King Henry the Third his Reign, at
least till 49. Henry 3. if not in some ages after, our Engli^h Parliaments were
composed only of the King, Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Peers and Barons
of the Realm; and that after the Commons were first summoned and admitted to
our Parliaments in the Reign of Edward the First, and made an House in Edward
the Third his Reign, the Legislative Power for diverse Kings Reigns, and the
ordinary Judicial power or Judi^atory of our Parliaments till this very day
resided and continued in the King and House of Peers; But the precedents of
this nature, and proofs to evidence it, being large and numerous, I must
reserve them for a second part, and another particular Tract, which (if God
send liberty and opportunity) I intend to compile and publish; this being
already swollen to a just vendible proportion in these necessitous times; and
something of this nature having been already published by me in my Plea for the
Lords, my Ardua Regni, and Legal vindication of the Liberties of England
against Illegal Taxes and pretended Acts of Parliament, p. 5. 6. (which they
who desire present satisfaction may peruse) its speedy publication may be the
better respited till a fitter season.

FINIS.

