THE FALSITIES AND FORGERIES OF THE ANONYMOUS AUthor of a late Pamphlet,
(supposed to be Printed at Oxford but in truth at London) 1644. ENTITLED The
Fallacies of Mr. William Prynne, discovered and confuted, in a short View of
his Books entitled; The Sovereignty of Parliaments, the Opening of the great
Seal. etc. Wherein the Calumnies, and Forgeries of this unknown Author in
charging Mr. Prynne with false Quotations, Calumniating Falsehoods, wresting of
the Scriptures, points of Popery, gross absurdityes, mere contradictions
heinous Treasons and plain betraying of the Cause, (not one of which is in the
least degree made good by the Calumniator) are succinctly answered, refuted. By
William Prynne of Lincolnes Inn, Esquire.

PROVERBS, 12. 19. The Lip of truth shall be established for ever, but a lying
tongue is but for a moment. Printed at LONDON, for Michael Spark, Senior. 1644.

THE FALSITYES AND FORGERIES OF AN Anonymus Author.
IT is an easy matter for any person of a brazen face, and seared Conscience to
be a slanderer, and by a fallacious misreciteing, perverting, dismembring,
other men's works, to become a seeming Refuter of them. The fairest natural or
artificial Bodies, may soon be metamorphozed into the most misshapen Monsters,
if torn into confused fragments, and then patched up together into a
disorderly Chaos, where all the parts and members shall be dislocated,
disunited, confounded and put into Hotch-Potch. This cobling kind of Artifice
has that Botcher used, who composed the Pamphlet entitled, The Fallacies of
Mr. William Prynne discovered and refuted: who instead of discovering and
refuting any Fallacies, or Falsities of Mr. Prynnes, in an orderly or
Scolasticall manner, has taken much unnecessary pains, to cull out here and
there a word or line, out of his wrightings on several subjects, and then
patched them up together into inferences and arguments of his own forging;
fighting only with his own shadow, and mangling, misreporting, perverting
all the passages he recites, (as the Reader may at first view discern) instead
of answering, or refuting any thing which he has written.

Wherefore I shall desire the ingenious Reader, only seriously to peruse the
several Quotations this Cobbler has botched together, in my Books themselves,
as they are there urged, applied, connected with the precedent and subsequent
discourses to which they have relation, and then the Fallacies, Falsities, and
Calumnies of this Anonymous Patcher, (who is so penurious of matter, substance,
that he produces not one text or Author of his own) will be so apparently
discovered, as they will need no further Refutation.

This is not mine own solitary opinion, but the judgment of other intelligent
men, who have read this Pamphlet, to which I was minded to give no answer, as
unworthy anything but contempt. Yet being desired by some friends to reply
somewhat to it, least this Champion should deem his Patched Fardle
irrefragable, and overmuch abuse the Reader and my self with his slanderous
falsehoods, I shall return no other answer to his charge of Calumniating
falsehoods, wresting of the scriptures, Points of Popery, gross absurdities,
mere contradictions, heinous Treasons, and plain betraying of the Cause, but
only this, that the Pamphletter is most grossly mistaken, and has most falsely
aspersed me in all these particulers, as the mangled pages of my books, which
he recites by fragments, will manifest to all who shall do me so much justice
as to appeal unto, and seriously peruse them, without diminution or prejudice.

There are only two or three more considerable Calumnies he would fix upon me,
that need some answer, and in answering them alone, you may clearly discover,
both the palpable Falsities, Forgeries, Fallacies of this Slanderer, who is
ashamed to set his name to his shameful work.

The first and principal charge against me is, false Quotations, witness the
title page; Wherein is laid open his false quotations, etc. and p. 2. to 9. he
does deliver in an heavy imputation in the plural number; of false quotations.
Yet when he brings in his Catalogue of them, among those thousand quotatio^s I
have produced in my wrightings, he can charge me but with one, no more p. 3. I
will not (says he) undertake to examine his false Quotations, being deterred
by their magnitude and multitude. I will produce but One Quotation. A strange
kind of Calumny, to charge me in the Title and Book with a magnitude and
multitude of false quotations, and yet to be able to instance but in one alone.

But this one is, at Leonem ^a rare one. Ex ungue Leonem. Guess at the Author
by this example, It is out of Bodine, that (as he styles him) Learned French
Lawyer, Mr. Pryn. Append. p. 18.
and Statesman, De Repub. l. 2. c. 1. p. 222. Bodine says, it always has and
shall be lawful for subjects to take wicked Princes out of the way: Can a
sentence be quoted more plain and full against our cause, and for their cause,
then this of Bodine? But if Bodine speaks no such thing, but more plainly and
fully for our cause, against their cause, what may we think of Mr. Prynne the
quoter, etc. First, In the place quoted l. 2. c. 1. there are no such words,
etc. So he p. 3 Here is a great cry indeed, but little wool, for in the very
same page, we have confitentem reum, in these most positive terms. Secondly, I
(writes he) confess the words quoted are in the fifth chapter of the 2 book
(and that in page. 222. which I quoted:) where then is the false quotation? The
words are there; but not in the first but fifth Chapter of the second Book:
what then? they are in the same Book and Page I quoted, but the Printer
printed the first chapter instead of the fifth in some Coppies, Contrary to my
Written Coppie, and Quotations in Print in other Coppies, and places. Ergo my
Quoquotation is false; Grant this, yet it is not false, neither in the matter,
page, book, but Chapter only, which the Printer, not I mistook? Surely a
very grand offense if reduced into a Logical Argument. The Printer misprinted
the chapter in some coppies; But Mr. Prynne misquoted not the words, book,
page, nor chapter of Bodine in any kind: Ergo he is guilty of a multitude of
false quotations, at least of one, at Leonem, but a rare one. So he disputes.

A rare one indeed, such as was never heard of in the world before, a true
Quotation in every particle, yet slandered for a false one: which gives me just
occasion to repay him with his own coin. p. 3. Ex ungue Leonem, guess at the
(truth of this) Author by this example, the sole misquotation he charge me
with.

Yea but he subjoynes p. 3. Note what a fair inference Mr. Prynne here makes.
These Reguli or little Kings of the Cities of the Gauls, might be put to death
by the Nobility to which they were subject. Appe^. p. 17. So Bodine, by whose
words it is clear; that the Ancient Kings of France were inferior in
jurisdiction to their whole Kingdoms and Parliaments; yea censurable by them
to deposition or death This indeed is my inference, which he neither does nor
can disprove, since the Ancient Gauls had no other Kings but these their
Reguli; who might be put to death: and no universal absolute Monarchs, as
Bodine and all French Historians acknowledge.

Yet his greatest quarrel with me is behind. p. 4. for leaving out part of
Bodines words with an, etc. Appendix, p. 18. viz. But if the Prince be an
absolute Sovereign, as are the true Monarchs of France, etc. Where the Kings
themselves have the Sovereignty, without all doubt or question not divided
with their subjects. In which etc. I omitted these words, of Spain, England,
Scotland, Turkey, Moscovy, Tartary, Persia, Aethiopia, India, and of almost all
the Kingdoms of Africa and Asia, which interveene between, where the Kings
themselves have the soverainty, and, the true Monarchs of France, and for this
omission though with an, etc. he cries out thus, Fie, fie, holy Mr. Prynne, can
your sanctified pen, Volens vidensque, wittingly, and willingly, abuse so
perversely a learned French Lawyer, and so pernitiously our gracious King of
England?

But I pray you Sir, what cause is there of such an exclamation for this
omission, with an, etc? In that place of my Appendix I had nothing to do with
the Kings of England, Spain, or any other Kingdoms there named by Bodine, but
with the Kings of France alone, whom from p. 17. to 51. I prove by undeniable
histories and Authorities, to have been inferior to their Kingdoms, and
Parliaments. To recite all these other Kings there upon this occasion, when I
discoursed of the Fench kings alone, had been an impertinency, a Tautologie, In
the 1. 2. 3. 4. part and the Appendix.
since I distinctly handled the several jurisdictions of the Kings of England,
Spain, Scotland, etc. in their proper places and refuted the error of Bodine
(though I truly cite his words) that neither the Kings of Spain, nor France,
nor England, nor Scotland, are such absolute Sovereigns as he would make them.
The omission therefore of Spain, England, and Scotland, with an etc. which
pointed to, not concealed them, can no ways be charged on me as a false
quotation, or as a witting or willing abuse of Bodines words, as will appear by
turning this accusation into arguments.

Master Prynne in reciting Bodines words, concerning the Kings of France alone,
omits his mentioning of the Kings of Spain, England, Scotland, etc. with an,
etc. (as this very Momus himself in his Censure omits Turkey, Moscovy,
Tartary, Persia, etc. rather to be ranked among absolute Tyrants than Kings,)
Ergo he has falsely quoted, and wilfully perverted Bodine.

Master Prynne recites and refutes Bodines opinion, of the absolute Sovereignty
of those Kings, in the objected and other places. Ergo he misrecites Bodine. If
these be not most absurd Arguments, and calumniating falsehoods, let the world
judge.

In fine, Mr. Prynne has Part. 1. p. 39. 50. 93. 104. 105. 106.
frequently quoted Bodine, and this very Chapter of his, in sundry pages of his
Books, but misquoted him in no place whatsoever: Ergo this Botcher has
misquoted, misreported Mr. Prynne, and must cry peccavi for it. Part. 2. p. 9
10. 22. 23. 24. 25. 40. 41. 45. 46. 47.
And for his odious subinference p. 4. it is his own alone, not mine.

This Champion having thus manfully played the slanderer in this one Quotation,
which he in vain labors to prove false, would willingly proceed to others, p.
7. but he there ingeniously confesses, he wants his tools to do his work,
and I have not (quoth he) the books cited by him. Certainly if he wants his
Books, and the Books I cite, to examine my quotations by, it must needs be an
impudent apparent slander in him, Apendix. p. 4. 10. 11. 23. 89. 100
to tax me of misquotations of those Authors he confesses, he never saw nor
read: the rather, because he writes in the same page, that my Quotation out of
Speed seems somewhat amiss; yet presently confesses of himself in the same
page; I never saw it, nor heard it, till I read it in Mr. Prynnes Book, and
that he never read Mr. Speed, How dares he then term it, a seeming
Misquotation?

Is this man (think you) likely to refute or convince me of false Quotations,
who thus confesses, that he neither has, nor has read, nor heard of the
Books and Passages which I cite? Seneca Medea.
Si judicas, cognosce, was the Ancient rule: I pray therefore get and read my
quoted Authors hereafter, before you presume to charge me with misquotations,
else all must censure you for the grossest slanderer that ever put pen to paper.

For the pretended Falsehoods, Paradoxes, Absurdities and Absurd opinions he
would fasten on me, p. 8. to 14. they are most of them his own misrecitals,
not my assertions; and so far as any of them are really mine, my Pages whence
they are transcribed, will sufficiently manifest them to be neither Falshods,
Paradoxes, Absurdities, nor absurd opinions.

The Popery he would asperse me with page 14. 15. is easily wiped of.

For first, both the text and Comment of Roomes-master piece, is neither a
Fiction, nor pia fraus, unless he will make it so in the Archbishop of
Canterbury, Sir William Boswell, Habernfield, and the King himself, under
whose hands it is extant, and has been represented to the Parliament. If this
suffice not, the Preface to the second Edition of Roomes-master piece, will
either satisfy or silence this Father of falsehoods.

Secondly, the visions and Revelations of King Edward the Confessor, cited in
my Remonstrance against Shipmoney* p. 22. and of one of the Monks of Clervaulx,
Opening of the great Seal, p, 5. 6. are not recited by Mr. Prynne, as real
verityes, or convincing arguments against Shipmoney, and Lordly Bishops, but
only, de been esse, to manifest what opinion the Monks and Historians who
record them, had of Danegeld and Prelacy. And Mr. Prynnes other Arguments,
Authorityes against Shipmony cited in that Remonstrance, and against Lordly
Prelates and Prelacy, registered in his Vnbishoping of Timothy and Titus, his
Breviate Catalogue of Authors of all ages, and Antypathy of the English Lordly
Prelacy, to Unity and Monarchy, are so sollid and Copious, that no man has
hitherto attempted to return the least answer to them, nor indeed can do it,
so that he needed not the help of Visions, Revelations, or popish pious
Frauds, to satisfy or delude his Readers in these points debated by him.

For the other pretended points of Popery, perverting of the Scripture, of
Laws, Treasons, and betraying of the Cause, they are so abundantly answered,
refuted in my Books at large, in the pages quoted by this Author, that I shall
wholly appeal to them, and the indifferent perusers of them, both for my
Purgation and Justification, in all particulars; which books having both the
special licenced and good Approbation of the high Court of Parliament, and of
thousands of all sorts both at home and beyond the Seas, (who have highly
approved them, and recieved good satisfaction by them, in the present unhappy
controverted differences that distract us,) need no further Apology against
this Namelesse Slanderer and Depraver, to whom I only wish more verity,
honesty, ingenuity, for the future, then he has here discovered for the
present.

FINIS.

