Mr. Prinns Charge Against the KING, SHOWING That the Kings Design, Purpose,
and Resolution, his Endeavors, Practice, and Conversation, have always been
engaged, biased, and tended to settle, establish, confirm, Popery, Tyranny,
and Slavery, in, among, over his Dominions, Subjects, People, and in order to
that Design, end, and purpose, he writ to the Pope of Rome (stiling him HIS
MOST HOLY FATHER, CATHOLIQVE MAJESTY, THRICE HONORED LORD and FATHER) engaging
himself to the said Pope, to endeavor to settle the Popish Religion only in
his Dominions; And since his coming to the Crown, has extented extraordinary
favors upon, and protecti-on of notorious Papists, Priests and Jesuits,
against all prosecution of Laws enacted against them; notwith-standing all his
Protestations to the contrary, has raised up a most horrid, unnatural, and
bloody War, arming his Roman Catholic Subjects to Massacre, Plunder,
Torture, Imprison, Ruin, his loyal, faithful pious Protestant Subjects to
burn, sack, and spoil their Cities, Towns and Villages, Collected from the
books written. By William Prinne of Lincolns Inn, Esquire. BEING But a very
small taste from that main Ocean of that which he has written concerning the
King, and his ill beheaviour, since his coming to the Crown; As also with
references unto clear, satisfactory, convincing Answers unto several
objections, concerning resisting, censuring, suspending, depriving Kings for
their Tyranny, yea capitally proceeding against them, By the said Author.

London, Printed in the Year 1648

Several Objections concerning the lawfulness of opposing, resisting,
censuring, suspending, depriving, and (in some cases) capitally proceeding
against Emperors, Kings, and Princes, for their oppression, tyranny, cruelty,
clearly, fully, learnedly, and sufficiently answered, by the foresaid Author,
Mr. WILLIAM PRINNE.
WHich Objections are taken, Vide the 3d. part of the Soveraigue power of
Parliaments and kingdoms Page 83.
1. Out of the Old Testament. 2. Out of the New Testament. 3. From Reason. 4.
From the Example of Primitive Christians.

1. From the Scriptures of the Old Testament.
Object. 1. Numb. 16. Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, for their insurrection, of
that very divine Authority which God himself had delegated to Moses and Aaron,
without any injury and injustice at all once offered to them, or any assault
of them, ibid.
etc, Answered, Page 84.

Object. 2. Exodus 22. 28. Thou shall not revile the Gods, nor curse the Ruler
of the People. Eccle. 10. 20. Curse not the King, no not in thy thought, etc.
Prove. 17. 26 It is not good to strike Prines, ibid.
etc. Answered, Page 84.

Object. 3. Deuteronomy. 32 35. Vengeance is mine, etc. Answered, Page 85.

Object. 4. Eccl. 8. 2, 3, 4. I counsel thee to keep the Kings commandment,
and that in regard of the oath of God; be not hasty to go out of his sight;
stand not in an evil thing, for he does whatsoever pleases him: where the
word of a King is, there is power, and who may say unto him, what do thou?
Answered, ibid.
Page 85 86.

Object. 5. Psalm. 105 14. 15. Touch not mine Annoited, answered, page 89. 90.
91. 92, 93.

Object. 6. 1 Samuel, 24, 6. 10. David's words concerning Saul; The Lord forbid
that I should do this thing unto my master the Lords Annoynteed, to stretch
forth my hand against him, seeing he is the Lords anointed; I will not put
forth my hand against him, for he is the Lords anointed. And so of David to
Abishai, 1 Samuel 26, 9. 11. 23, And David said to Abishai, destroy him not, for
who can stretch forth his hand against the Lords anointed, and be guiltless?
The Lord forbid, that I should stretch forth my hand against the Lords
anointed; the Lord delivered thee into my hand to day, but I would not stretch
forth my hand against the Lords anointed; how wast thou not afraid to stretch
forth thine hand against the Lords anointed: thy blood shall be upon thy head,
for thy mouth has testified that thou have slain the Lords anointed:
answered very learnedly and divinely, page 93. 94. 95. 96. 97. ibid.


Object, 7: 1 Samuel 8. 11. Samuel tells the People how they should be oppressed
under Kings, yet all that violence and injustice that should be done unto them,
is no just cause of resistance, for they have no remedy left them but crying
unto the Lord: answered page 98. ibid.


Objest. 8. This was Doctor Ferns, Sect, 2. 3, None of the Prophets in the old
Testament, reprehending the Kings of Israel and Judah, for their gross
Idolatry, cruelty, oppression, did call upon the Elders of the people for the
duty of resistance, neither do we find the people resisting, or taking up
Arms against any of their Kings, no not against Ahab or Manasseh, upon any of
these grounds, Ergo, Resistance is unlawful: answered, page 99. 100. 101. 102.
ibid.


Ob. 9. Out of the New Testament, Romans 13. 1, 2. Let every soul be subject to
the higher powers, for there is no power but of God, the powers that be are
ordained of God: whosoever therefore resists the power, resists the
ordinance of God; and they that resist, shall receive to themselves damnation,
etc. with Doctor Fernes enforcement of this Text from the Context answered very
strongly, Page 103. 104. 105. 106. 107. 108. 109. 110. 111. and that passage of
Tertullian much insisted upon, Colimus ergo and imperatorem sic, quomodo and
nobis licet, and ipsi expedit, ut hominem a DEO SECUNDUM, and quicquid est a
Deo consecutum, SOLO DEO MINOREM hoc and ipse volet, sic enim OMNIBUS MAJOR
EST, DUM SOLO VERO DEO MINOR EST, ibid.
sic and ipsis diis major est, dum and ipsi in potestate sum ejus, answered,
page 11. 12, etc.

Again, From Dr. Fern, That the efficient cause of Royal and Monarchical
power is only from God, not the people; that Kings receive no Regal authority
or power from the people, but from God alone; that the power of Kings is not a
humane, but a divine power, of which God only is the efficient cause; that the
people do not make the King, but God properly and absolutely; this power, right
and authority he has from God; that the King has no dominion and poer from
his Subjects by way of trust, but from God, from whom he has his kingdom and
power, so that by Idolatry and oppression, he breaks not the trust reposed in
him by his Subjects, because the people have committed nothing to his charge,
but God only; proof whereof see, Prove. 8. 15. By me Kings reign. Dan. 2. 21.
God removes Kings, and sets up Kings. Dan. 4. 17, 25. The most high rules
in the Kingdom of men, and gives it to whomsoever he will, and sets up
over it the basest of men. Hosea 13. 11. 1 Samuel 10. 1. Jer. 27. 5, 6, 7. Isai.
45. 1 2. and other Texts answered with very great pain, good distinctions, and
clear satisfaction, page 115. to 128. ibid.


Object. 10. 1 Pet. 2. 13. 14. 15. 16. Submit your selves to every ordinance of
man for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King as Supreme, etc. answered,
page 128. 129. 130. 131. Thus for the answers of Scriptures from the Old
Testament and from the New.

The next are objections from Reason.
Object. 11. As first, Kings are the Fathers, Heads, Lords, Shepherds of the
Commonwealth, therefore the sons, members, vassals, s^ooks, must not r^sist
them, answered, page 131. 132.

Object. 12. The invasions and oppressions of evil Kings and Tyrants are
afflictions and punishments inflicted on us by God, therefore we ought
patiently to submit, and not forcibly to resist, answered, page 133.

Obj^ct. 13. Saints forcible resistance of Tyrants begets civil wars, great
disorders and many mischiefs in the state, ergo, it is unlawful and
inconvenient, answered, page 134.

The last, and grand Obj^ction is the testimony of Fathers, as

First, that speech of Saint Ambrose, lib. 5. orat. in Auxentium, Coactus
rapugnare non audeo, dolere potero, potero flere, potero gemere, adversus arma,
milites Gothos lachrymae meae arma sunt, talia enim sunt munimenta Sacerdotum,
ALITER NEC, DEBEO, NEC POSSUM RESISTERE, answered, page 135. 136. ibid.


The second is that of Nazianzen, Oration 2. in Julianum, answered, page 137.
138. ibid.


The third, that of Bernard, Epist. 121. to King Lewis of France, answered, page
138. 139.

The fourth authority, was the Example of Prrimitive Christians, who submitted
themselves willingly to their persecuting Governors, without resistance in
word or deed, answered, pa. 140. 142. 143.

After all which he concludes the said third Part Of the Sovereign power of
Parlioments and Kingdoms, etc. with personal, natural, and public
authorities, proving the same, which Mr. Prinne had maintained in the said Book
from Page 143. to the end thereof.

If any man desires more satisfaction of this nature and subject, he may be
very richly and plentifully furnished herewith from several other Books and
labors of the said author, Mr. William Prin, who has more engaged and
endeered his Country unto him, by detecting the King and his ill Government,
clearing the scruples, answering of questions, touching the lawfulness of
opposing and resisting Kings and Rulers in their tyranny and cruelty, then any
Lawer, Divine, Gentleman, or other, in the whole Kingdom besides, as his four
large and learned Books, concerning the Sovereign Power of Parliaments and
Kingdoms, Romes Masterpiece, The Popish Royal Favou^ite, and other of his
Writings do witness.

Popish Royal Favorite page 40.
1. That the present King Charles (King of England, Scotland, etc.) when he was
Prince of Wales, did maintain correspondency with the then Pope of Rome, by
letters wherein, he styled him the most holy Father, chatholick Majesty, thrice
honored Lord and Father, professing that he did not esteem it a greater honor
to be descended from great Princes, then to imitate them in their great piety,
having exposed their Estates and lives, for the exaltation of the holy Cheir,
esteeming the protestant Religion, but a novelty and faction, engaging himself
by promise to the Pope, that he would employ himself for the time to come to
have but one Religion, viz. the Roman Catholic, and that he would spare
nothing that he had in the world, but that he was resolved to suffer all manner
of discommodities, even to the hazarding of his Estate and life, for a thing so
pleasing unto God, as the advancement of the Romish Religion. Popish Royal
Favorite page 50.


2. That the said King has taken two solemn Oaths upon both his Treaties of
Marriage with Spain and France, to protect and maintain to the utmost
throughout his Dominions, the Romish Catholic Church and Religion; yea, to
suspend and abrogate all Laws against them, and is thereby deeply engaged by
virtue of these Oaths, to protect favor and defend the same, ibid. p. 50
and in Conscience of these Oaths and Articles (consented unto in the said
matches) he holds himself bound (what ever his outward Protestations and
pretenses be) to side with the Roman Catholic Subjects, both in England,
Ireland, and Scotland, and arm them against his Protestant Subjects and
Parliaments in all the 3. Kingdoms, of purpose to make good these his Oaths and
Articles.

ibid. p. 41
3. That the said present King Charles, since his coming to the Crown (in
prosecution of the aforesaid engagements to the Pope and Church of Rome) has
raised most bloody and unnatural War against the Protestant cause and party
in his Dominions, in which he has sustained many incommodities, hazarded both
his Estate, Life, and Realms for the reducing all his Subjects to one Religion,
viz. the Roman Catholic, and upon this ground he has issued out
Proclamations, Declarations, Remonstrances against the Scots; ibid. p. 51
the former, and present Parliament, proclaimed them Traitors, Rebels, no
Parliament, a faction, he brake up all former Parliaments since his Reign, by
discontinuance, and endeavored to dissolve this Parliament, by the sword of
Papists and Athiests, against the very Act of Parliament assented unto by
himself, ibid.
and the aforesaid engagements of the King to the Pope, etc. are the real
ground of the late horrid Irish Conspiracy, Massacre, Rebellion, pacification,
toleration, and the said Kings connivance at, if not approbation of these
horrid bloody execrable practices, as also the extraordinary favor lately
indulged to these carsed barborous Rebels by the King, and his most gracious
entertainment of them, not only into his royal favor, but Court, Army, and
Realm of England, as his securest Guard.

ibid. page 58. 57.
4. The said King did permit the Papists, Priests, and Jesuits, during the
Scottish troubles (a little before the beginning of this Parliament) to call a
Parliament and general Council of state among themselves, even in London;
wherein the Popes own Nuncio sat president, in which Parliament the chief
papists out of all parts of England and Wales assembled, made several Laws
and Ordinances for imposing taxes, and raising moneys upon all Roman
Catholics for maintenance of the Scottish Wars, which were seconded with
the Queens own letters and instructions to the Catholics, reciting what
great liberties and favors her Highness had procured for them from his
Majesty, exciting them to a liberal contribution toward those Wars, and
this popish Parliament was permitted without interruption, when the Protestants
and Kingdom might hold none at all, or, at least, are presently dissolved in
discontents, and the Popes own Nuncio sit Lord President to rule the roast,
which Parliament was thus openly tolerated to be held to make and maintain a
War against the religious Protestant Subjects, EVEN WITH THE KINGS OWN
ACTUAL CONSENT.

Epistle to the Reader before the popish Royal favourit.
5. That the said King (dissembling with God and men, opposing Papists in words,
yet cherishing and protecting them (all he may) in deeds, exhibited many
royal orders, ^xpresses, letters of grace, protection unto popish Recusants,
seminary Priests, during all his reign, to stay all manner of proceedings and
executions of the Law against them, contrary to the Judges and Justices Oaths,
and since this, unhappy civil War, the Papists both in England and in
Ireland, have been armed against the Parliament by the said Kings Commission,
yea put into places of great Command and trust, admitted free access to his
Camp, and Court, where they have bin in favors, and preserved from all
violence, injury, etc. notwithstanding his many printed Declarations,
Proclamations, Protestations, Vows against Popery and Papists, to blind and
delude the over credulous vulgar; and notwithstanding his brave, real, royal,
defense of the Protestant Religion so often promised, the best and most zealous
Protestants, Ministers, people, both in England and Ireland, have bin every
where most cruelly massacred, plundered, tortured, imprisoned, ruined by the
blood-thirsty Popish Cavaliers, many of their Houses and almost whole Towns,
fired, sacked by his special Commission. Romes Masterpeece, p. 31.


6. That the said King did admit Can, the Popes legate, and that under the very
name, notion, and Authority of the Popes Legate, into familiar access to, and
conference with him, by all Arts, Policier, and Arguments, to pervert and draw
him with his 3. Kingdoms, to a new subjection to the sea of Rome, as Cardinal
Pool, the Popes Legate, extant in England before this in Queen Mary's Reign,
reconciled her and the Realm to Rome, to their intolerable prejudice, an act so
inconsistant to the Laws of this Realm, with the Kings ancient and late
Remonstrances, Oaths, Protestations to maintain the Protestant Religion; as may
ever amaze the World, which ever looks more at real actions, then verbal
Protestations.

Rooms Masterpeece. p. 33
7. That the King (after Endimian Porter, had gained the Custody of the great
Seal of England) did issue out diverse Proclamations under the great Seal,
proclaiming the Parliament Traitors and Rebels, yea, did grant Commissions to
Irish and English Papists, contrary to his former Proclamations, to raise
Popish forces both at home and in foreign parts for his defense, as his
trustiest and most loyal Subjects, and did send letters and Commissions of
favor to the Irish Rebels, and hinder all supply from hence to the Protestant
party there.

Popish Royal Favorite. 35.
8. That the said King (after the bloody Irish Rebels had destroyed the
precious lives of above a hundred and forty Thousand Protestan^s in Ireland,
and were like to be overcome by the Parliaments Forces (sent from hence and
from Scotland to relieve the Prot^stant party) condescended to Articles of
pacification with these Rebels, contrary to an Act of Parliament, and both
Houses consents, wherein the said wicked Rebels are declared his Majesty's
good Catholic Subjects, and no Rebels at all.

ibid.
9. That the said King did send for many thousands of the said Rebels into
England to massacre the Protestant English here, and fight against the
Parliament, as they did in Ireland heretofore.

Whereas it flies up and down in the mouths of the over-credulous vulgar that
Mr. Will. Prinne (since his admission into the Honorable House of Commons) has
most petulently exclaimed against the Armies late Remonstrance; wherein they
desire Justice may be done against the King (as the grand Delinquent of the
Kingdom,) and furiously env^ighed against the same, as if he was newly become
the Kings Advocate: these therefore are to stop the current of such reports,
and to desire that men may deffen their ears thereunto, considering that not
only their tender care of the privileges of Parl. (requiring no notice to be
taken of any man's Speech within these walls) but also their respects and love
unto Mr Prinns (that has written so much of the peoples and Kingdoms interest
and power to call their Kings and Governors to account for their unjust wicked
and tyrannical Government) does require the same, for if occasion be offered
the present proceedings of the Army in requiring justice to be done upon the
King, and all other Delinquents, as those that lately fomented. second War,
invited the Scots into this Kingdom to that end etc. shall be clearly, fully,
convincingly, asserted, argu^d, and maintained from the several labors,
pains, and writings of the said Anthem, M^. William Prinne.

FINIS.

