THE FOVRTH PART OF THE SOVEREIGN POWER OF PARLIAMENTS and KINGDOMS. Wherein
the Parliaments Right and Interest in ordering the Militia, Forts, Ships,
Magazins, and great Offices of the Realm, is manifested by some fresh Records
in way of Supplement: The two Houses Imposition of moderate Taxes and
Contributions on the People in cases of extremity, without the Kings assent,
(when wilfully denied) for the necessary defense and preservation of the
Kingdom; and their imprisoning, confining of Malignant dangerous persons in
times of public danger, for the common sa^ety; are vindicated from all
Calumnies, and proved just.

Together with an APPENDIX; Manifesting by sundry Histories and Foraine
Authorities, that in the ancient Kingdom of Rome; the Roman, Greek, German
Empires; the old, the present Grecian, Indian, Egyptian, French, Spanish,
Gothish, Italian, Hungarian, Polonian, Behemian, Danish, Swedish, Scottish,
with other Foraine Kingdoms; yea in the Kingdoms of Judah, Israel, and other
Gentile Royalties, mentioned in Scripture; the Supreme Sovereign Power
resided not in the Emperors, or Kings themselves, but in the whole Kingdom,
Senate, Parliament, State, People, who had not only Authority to restrain,
resist, yea call their Emperors, and Kings to an account, but likewise, when
they saw just cause, to censure, suspend, deprive them for their Tyranny,
vices, mis-government; and sometimes capitally to proceed against them. With a
brief Answer to the contrary Objections; and ten material Observations,
confirming all the Premises.

By WILLIAM PRYNNE, Utter-Barrester, of Lincolnes Inn.

Olaus Magnus l. 8. c. 32. De Iniquis Consiliariis, etc. 33. Iniqui Consiliarii
aiunt, Regem nihil injuste facere posse, quippe omnia omniunt ejus esse, ac
homines etiam ipsos-Tantum vero cuique esse proprium, quantum Regis Benignitas
ei non ademerit, etc. Vtcunque sit, multi Principes, his and similibus
consiliis and consiliariis, facti sunt enules, miseri, infames, and inhabiles
in se and posteritate sua, amplius gubernandi. Principis itaque Officium est,
ut non secus curet subditos, quam fidelis Pastor oves, ut dirigat, foveat,
conservet.

It is this tenth day of July, Ordered by the Committee of the House of Commons
concerning Printing, that this Book Entitled The fourth Part of the Sovereign
power of Parliaments and Kingdoms, etc. be Printed by Michael Spark senior.
John White.

Printed at London for Michael Spark Senior. 1643.

To the READER.
Courteous Reader,
I Here present thee with the last Part, of The Sovereign Power of Parliaments
and Kingdoms, and An Appendix in pursuance of it; abundantly manifesting, from
the very fundamental Constitutions, Laws, Customs, Resolutions,
Remonstrances, Oaths, Inaugurations, Elections, Ceremonies, Histories,
public Transactions, Treaties, Agreements, Wars, of Forain Empires, Emperors,
Realms, Kings, States, Senates, Diets, Parliaments, in all Ages, and the most
judicious foraine Authors of all sorts; That whole Kingdoms, Parliaments,
Senates, States, Nations, collectively considered, have ever constantly
enjoyed, in all Ages, Nations, the most Sovereign Jurisdiction, and Authority,
and been Paramount their Kings and Emperors, who were and are subordinate,
accountable for their actions to them; and copiously refuting the fond
erroneous fancies of all illiterate flattering Court-Doctors, Theologasters,
Lawyers, Statists, who, without any shadow of Truth or Reason, audaciously
aver the contrary, not so much to flatter or seduce their Princes, as to
advance themselves; against whom the contrary constant practice and resolutions
of most lawful Kingdoms, that either are or have been in the world from
Adams days till now, shall unanimously rise in judgment, and pass a most
Catholic irreversible sentence on them, for their notorious flatteries and
Impostures.

For mine own particular, as I have always been, and ever shall be an
honourer, a defender of Kings and Monarchy (the best of Government, whiles it
keeps within the bounds which Law and Conscience have prescribed;) So, I shall
never degenerate so far beneath the duty of a Man, a Lawyer, a Scholar, a
Christian, as to mis-informe, or flatter either; nor yet (out of any popular
vainglory) court either Parliaments or People, to the prejudice of Kings just
Royalties; but carry such an equal hand between them, as shall do right to
both, injury to neither; and preserve, support their just, Legal several
Soveraignties, Jurisdictions, Rights, within their proper limits, without
tyrannical invasions, or seditious encroachments, upon one another, to their
mutual and the Republickes prejudice.

It fares with Regal and Popular Powers, usually, as with Seas and mighty
Rivers, if they violently break down, or swellingly overflow their fixed
banks, they presently cause an Inundation, and in stead of watering, surround,
and drown the Countries round about them, for a season, (sometimes for sundry
years) ere they can be perfectly drained, and their bankers repaired, to
confine them to their ancient proper Channels,; of which we have present sad
experience, written in Capital red Bloody Letters, throughout the Realm. To
redress* prevent which overflowing mischief for the future, I have without
fear or flattery of any humane Power, or party whatsoever, by Public
Authority divulged this last, and the three preceding Parts of this Discourse:
together with the Appendix, (all hastily collected, and more confusedly
compacted through want of time, and sundry interrupting Avocations, then I
desired) wherein I have impartially, according to my judgment, conscience,
defended naught, but ancient, undoubted, universal Truths of real
State Policy, and true Theology, (almost forgotten in the world, yea cried,
Preached, Printed down for erroneous, seditious Paradoxes, if not Treasons, by
Sycophants and Malignants in these later ages;) out of a cordial affection as
much as in me lies, to restore and settle the weal, tranquillity, and safety
of my bleeding, dying Country, now miserably distracted, wasted, consumed every
where: (through the long fore^plotted conspiracies of Romish Priests and
Jesuits, to subvert the Protestant Religion and our Realms) upon a pretended
quarrel unhappily raised by them, between the two much mistaken Grand
Sovereign Jurisdictions, of King and Parliament, Crown and Kingdom, now
miserably clashing one against the other, through ignorance and mistakes, and
trying their Titles in the open field BY BATTLE, in stead of Law; by the
Sword of the Soldier, not of the Spirit, the only proper peaceable Judges in
these Quarrels, by which alone they can and must be finally resolved, settled;
else neither King nor kingdom, can be ever quiet, or secure from dangers, and
Commotions.

I dare not presume to arrogate to my self, a Spirit of in-errability in the
grand Controversies here debated, wherein I have traveled in no beaten common
road; No doubt See the 21. Article of the Church of England, and Rogers ibidem.
General, National Counsels, Parliaments, Popes, Kings, Counselors,
Statesmen, Lawyers, Divines, all sorts of men, both may, and usually do err
from Truth, (especially in Questions which concern their own Jurisdictions,
Honors, Profits;) and so may I. But this I darewith safe conscience protest to
all the world, that I have not willingly erred in any particular; and if I have
casually failed in any thing, out of humane frailty, I shall (upon better
information) acknowledge and retract it. In the mean time, I trust, I have
here sufficiently discovered, refuted, many common impostures and erroneous
gross mistakes in Law, Policy, Divinity, Antiquity; which have in later ages
been generally received as indubitable verities, by most men; yea professedly
defended by sundry injudicious Lawyers, and ignorant Divines (though perchance
reputed learned, solid in their own, and others opinions) who never took the
pains to dive into the true original fundamental creations, institutions,
public Laws, Reasons, Policies, Jurisdictions, compositions, Rights,
Customs, Histories of Kings, Kingdoms, Parliaments, States, Magistrates,
People; the ignorance whereof, has made them confidently vent many grand
absurdities, and untruthes, to the prejudice, imbroyling, and almost utter
ruin of diverse Kings and States; which now, I hope, they will ingenuously
acknowledge and recant with real grief and shame, that they have so grossly
cheated, seduced Kings, Kingdoms, People, and often times stirred up civil
wars, to maintain their idle lies, crazy fictions, as just Royal Rights,
and indubitable Prerogatives, when as they are nothing less.

I shall not beg any man's belief, of any Truth here newly discovered,
further than his own judgment and conscience, upon serious consideration,
shall convince him of it; and himself discern it fully ratified by
substantial precedents and Authorities in the body and close of the Treatise
and Appendix: Only this I shall request of every Reader, to peruse over all the
Parts of this Discourse with a cordial Love of Truth and Peace; and when he is
convinced what is Truth, then to live and dye in Paul's resolution, 2 Cor. 13.
8. We can do nothing against the Truth, but for the Truth. It was our Saviors
own reply to Pilate, John 18. 37. For this end was I borne, and for this cause
came I into the world, THAT I SHOULD BEAR WITNESS UNTO THE TRUTH; O then let
it now be every ones end, and practice too; since it is the Joh. 8. 32.
Truth (and nothing else) that shall make (and keep) us free: Free, from
Errors, Troubles, Tumults, Wars; Slavery, Tyranny, Treachery, Popery,
dangers, fears: Wherefore, Zech. 6. 19.
love the Truth and Peace, and then through Gods mercy we shall speedily
regaine, retain them both.

Farewell.
THE Fourth Part of the Sovereign POWER of PARLIAMENTS and KINGDOMS.
The Parliaments Interest in the Militia, Forts, Navy, and Officers of the
Kingdom.
IN the preceding Parts of this Discourse, I have with as much perspicuity and
sincerity as I could, waded through those deep and weighty differences of
greatest importance, which have lately (to our great unhappiness) I know not
by what Judge 9. 23.
evil spirits solicitation, unexpectedly risen up by insensible degrees,
between the Kings Majesty, and the present Parliament; (whose primitive sweet
agreement, made us not so happy, as their subsequent Divisions in place,
affection, opinion, have rendered the whole three Kingdoms miserable,) in point
of Royal Prerogatives only, which I have dispatched: I should now proceed to
other Controversies between them, principally concerning the Subjects
Liberties; But before I pass to those particulars; I shall present you with
some few Records of special note (casually omitted in their proper place,
through overmuch haste, and want of time) which will very much clear the
Parliaments just right, and ancient Jurisdiction In ordering the Militia of the
Realm, by Sea and Land; in disposing the Ships, the Forts of the Realm for
the public safety in times of danger; in concluding matters of War and
Peace; in placing and displacing the great Officers, the Privy Counselors of
the Kingdom; yea regulating the Kings own household, and meniall servants often
times; when there was occasion; which may serve as a supplement to the second
part.

It it the determination of Henricus Rauzovius, a Noble Dane, a great Statesman
and Soldier in his Commentarius Bellicus, Dedicated to Christierne the fourth,
King of Denmark, Anno 1565. lib. 1. c. 3. That All Kings and Princes in most
Republickes, rightly and lawfully constituted, are obliged by their paction
entered into before their Inauguration, Plato ^ege hoc sanxit. li. 12 de Ll. Si
qui^ privatim sine publico scito, pacem bellumve secerit, capitale esto.
Not to begin or move any War without the consent of all the Estates and
Nobles. Thus in my hearing, Philip King of Spain, when he demanded and took
an Oath from his Subjects in the Netherlands, promised by a mutual Oath to the
Estates, That he would make no wars in those parts without their privity. The
same also (most Noble King) is received and observed not only in your Kingdoms
and Dominions, but likewise is in use almost in all Europe. Therefore Frederick
your Father of most famous memory, knowing himself to be bound hereunto by
compact, before he would be involved in the Swedish War, communicating the
whole business faithfully to his people, as well to the Senators of the
Realm, as to the Nobles of the Dukedomes, maturely advised with them about the
manner of waging it. Wherefore, lest the War which is undertaken be accused
as unjust by the States, because it was undertaken without their advice,
contrary to custom and agreements, all ought to be assumed into the Counsel
and care of War. For thus it will come to pass, besides, that things very
well thought on and deliberated by many, have for the most part better
successes, than those things which are rashly begun by some one; that the
Subjects, who not unwillingly bring their estates and lives into danger, will
less fear the loss of both, will fight more valiantly, and will put forth
all their strength in prosecuting and ending the combat of war, even for
this reason, that themselves have been the advisers of the war. Upon this
reason, not only the Kings of the Jews, Arragon, France, Navarre, and others,
(as I have manifested in the Page 141. 22, 23, 95, 72. and elsewhere.
Appendix) but even of this our Realm, have usually undertaken all their
wars, and ordered all their Military affairs, both by Sea and Land, by the
advice and direction of their Parliaments, as the Grand Council of War, both
for King and Kingdom. This I have plentifully manifested in Part 2. and 3.
the premises, by sundry examples, and shall here only briefly ratify with
some few new Precedents.

In the first Parliament of 13 Ed. 3. after Proclamation made, Number. 2. That
none should come armed with weapons to the Parliament, Number. 3. The causes of
summoning the Parliament were showed to the Lords and Commons, to have their
counsel and advice therein, what was best to be done; and expressed to be
three. First, that every one, great and small, should consider, in what manner
the peace might most surely be preserved within the Realm. Secondly, how the
Marches of Scotland, and the Northern parts might be best defended and kept
against the enemies of Scotland. Thirdly, how the Sea should be guarded against
the enemies, that they should do no damage, nor enter the Realm for to
destroy it. After this. Number. 4. The Bishops and Letters from the King then in
France, relate to the Houses the Estate of the Kings Army, wars, and
proceedings in France, and the great debts the King stood engaged in for the
maintenance of his Army; for discharge whereof and the Kings further relief in
the easiest way, to support his wars, the Lords condescended to grant the
ninth sheafe of all their corn, and the ninth fleece and Lamb of all their
flocks to the King, for the two next years, so as the custom of Mal-tolt,
newly imposed on Wools, should be released, and this grant not drawn hereafter
into custom, as a precedent to their prejudice. Who acquainting the Commons
therewith, they after deliberation; As to the Kings supply; returned this
Answer. Number. 8, 9. That they thought it meet the King should be supplied, and
were ready to aid him, as they had always formerly been, but yet as the aid
was granted in this case, they durst not assent to it, until they had
consulted and advised with the Commons in the Country; for which end they
craved time to go into their Counties, and that Writs might issue to summon
another Parliament on the Octaves of Saint Hillary, of the richest Knights in
every Shire at a short day to come, (which, was Number. 22, 23 24, 25.
condescended to.) After which, Number. 9, 10, 11. they gave this answer in
writing concerning the three Articles propounded to them: First, As to the
keeping of the peace of the Realm, that the Justices of the Peace had
sufficient power already to that purpose; only they add, that disturbers of
the peace should not be let out of Prison, but upon sufficient Bail, and that
no Charters of pardon should be granted to Felons, but by common consent in
Parliament, and all other pardons held as void. To the second they answered,
That the King before his going beyond the Seas had taken so good order, and
appointed such sufficient Guardians to defend the Marches of Scotland, who were
best able to guard those parts, that the enforcement of them by the Kings
Council would be sufficient, without any charge to the Commons; Only, they
ordered, that every man who had Lands in the Marches of Scotland, of what
condition soever they were, should reside upon them to defend them (as it had
been formerly ordained) without charge to the Commons. To the third,
concerning the guard of the Seas: The Commons prayed that they might not be
charged to give Counsel in things of which they had no conisance (or charge;)
and that they were advised, that the Barons of the Ports which at all times
have honors before all the Commons of the Land, and are so enfranchized to See
Cambdens Britannia, p. 318. accordingly.
guard the Sea between us and strangers, (if so be it falls out, that they will
enter and assail our Land) that they contribute to no aids nor charges on the
said Land, but receive profits without number arising by the Sea, for the Guard
aforesaid. Wherefore the Commons are advised, that they ought to maintain a
guard upon the Sea, as the Sea 19 E. 3. pars 1. M 14 and pars 2. m. 14. Judge
Crockes Argument against Shipmony, p. 69. to 74.
Commons do upon the Land, without taking or demanding wages. Likewise, there
are other great Towns and Havens which have a Navy, that are in the same case,
and are bound to guard the Sea. And as for the safeguard of the Watch-houses
upon the Sea by Land; let the guard of them be made by the advice of the
Knights of the Shire, where the said Guardians are assigned, in the safest
manner that may be, without charge of the Commons: And that the people of the
Land, of what condition soever, which have lands on the Coast, shall keep
residence upon those Lands, the better to repulse the enemies from the Land, so
that for their abiding there, they shall be discharged to give any aid toward
the same guard elsewhere. Number. 13. The Commons frame and demand a general
pardon, upon grant whereof they promise to aid the King with moneys. Number. 14.
They make an Ordinance for increase of moneys in the Realm. Number. 15. Because
the ships of England went not out together in Fleetes, to trade, but severally,
out of desire of gain and covetousness, and so many of them were taken by the
Enemies of the King, and the men slain and murdered, to the dishonor of the
King and the whole Realm; it was agreed, and assented in full Parliament, that
all the Navy should stay and be arrested, till further order were given to the
contrary. Number. 16. It was accorded and assented in Parliament, that the Bishops
and Lords in the Parliament, should send Letters to the Archbishop of York,
and the Clergy of his Province, under their Seals, to excite them to grant a
convenient aid for the guard of the Marches of Scotland, for the defense of the
Church, the Realm, and themselves, as the Clergy of the Province of Canterbury
had done. Number. 17. It is accorded, that Master Robert de Scardeburgh shall be
put into the Commission which shall be sent into the Country of York, to
survey the Array of the people, which shall be chosen for the defense of the
Realm, in lieu of Sir Thomas de Blaston. That Sir Richard Chastell shall be
put in the Commission to survey the Array in the Counties of Notingham and
Denby, and John Feriby in the County of Lancaster. Number. 18. It is assented that
the people of Holdernes shall be Arrayed, taxed, and make aid for the guarding
of the Marches of Scotland, and other businesses of the King in those parts,
notwithstanding the Commission made to them to guard the Sea, Number. 21. The
Lords who have Lands toward the Marches of Scotland, are commanded and prayed
by writs and Letters to repair thither for defense thereof, namely the Lords
of Ros, Wake, Mowbray, Clifford, and Master William Daubeny Steward of the
Earl of Richmond, and that those who could not in this case go in proper
person, should send their people to the Lords in the Marches.

In the second Parliament held this year, by appointment of the first (Octabis
Hilarii, 13. Ed. 3. Number. 2. 5. Edward Duke of Cornwall, Guardian of England (in
the Kings absence) being hindered by other businesses to be present in this
Parliament, by Letters Patents under the Kings great Seal, appointed the
Archbishop of Canterbury, and others to supply his place, and hold the
Parliament. Number. 6, 7, 8, 9. The Commons for the defense of the Realm, Sea,
and Marches of Scotland, granted the King thirty thousand sackes of Wool, and
the Earls and Barons, the ninth sheafe, Fleece and Lamb, within their Demesne
Lands; and agreed to raise a great sum of money presently, to set out a fleet
of Ships to Sea, fraught with men of arms, and archers for defense of the
Realm. Number. 10. All the Merchants of England, were summoned by writ to appear
at Westminster in proper person, to confer upon great businesses concerning
the Kings honor, the salvation of the Realm, and of themselves. Number. 11. The
Mariners of the Cinque Ports upon their departure promised to make their ships
ready by Mid-Lent; and were to receive a sum of money to help defray their
charges herein; and the men of the Cinque Ports, promised to defray the moity
of the costs; and the Kings Counsel the other moity, but not in name of wages,
but out of special grace; and the Sea Cambaens Britan. p. 318.
Cinque Ports were to find 21 ships of their own, and nine ships of the River
of Thames. Number. 12. The Mariners toward the West promised to find 70. ships
of an hundred Tun and upwards, and to make them ready by the same day; and to
defray the charges of them as far as was requisite; and for the residue, the
Kings Counsel were to send them a sum of money for their aid, but not as
wages, but of special grace; and a Clerk was ordained to survey the charges
of the Mariners of the West; and of the Cinque Ports. Number. 23. All the ships of
Portsmouth, and the West, were to meet at Dartmouth at the day assigned; and
the Earl of Arundell was assigned their Admiral; And the ships of the
Cinque Ports and the River of Thames, were to meet, and assemble at Winchelse,
and the Earl of Huntindon, appointed their Admiral; and that all these ships
should be ready by the middle of Lent, Number. 19. The Admiralls of all parts were
commanded to arrest all other ships, that might pass the Seas, for fear of
being surprised by the enemies, and that 200. men should man those to whom the
smaller ships belonged, to bring them in to such havens where they might be
safest from the Enemies. Number. 15. Writs were directed to all Sheriffs of
England to make Proclamation, that all those who had Charters of pardon, should
repair toward the Sea, in the service of the King, and at his wages by the
middle of Lent, upon pain of losing their Charters, and being put to answer
the things contained in them, in case they should not go. Number. 16. It was
accorded and assented in Parliament, that Master Richard Talbot ordained to
guard the Town of Southampton, which he had undertaken to do, should have a
company of men at Arms, and Archers at the Kings wages, which he might
increase if there were cause; that he and they should have their wages paid
them monthly, from the second Sunday in Lent, and so forwards whiles they
continued in that Services, and that he should receive 200. pounds in money,
and 200. marks in Wool, in respect of his said service, and to defray his
ancient debts. And he had power given him to assesse and levy moneys upon the
said Town, toward its defense; and if the Town were not able to defray all
the charge, the King should aid them for the residue.

Number. 18. The Bishop of Winchester, the Prior of St. Swithin of Winchester, and
the Abbot of Winchester, were commanded to have the people of their Manners
next the Town of Southhampton well armed and arrayed, that they might be ready
to their power to defend the said town, upon summons of the Guardians thereof,
that no peril might happen thereunto, Number. 19. That two Pinaces, one of
Melbroke, and the other belonging to Roger Normand, should be assigned to
remain in the port of Southampton, at the appointment of the said Mr. Richard,
for the safety thereof. Number. 20. All the Burgesses and Seamen of the Town
which had departed thence, were ordered to go and abide therein for the
defense thereof, and of their own possessions; and in case they refused, that
their Lands and Possessions should be seized into the Kings hands, and the
profits of their Lands which should be found elsewhere. Number. 21. That a
Commission should be made to Stephen Butterly, and William Weston, Sergeants at
Arms, to take Timber, Bords, and other things necessary for the safety of the
said Town at certain prises, upon endenture made between them and the owners
of the said goods; and that the King should pay, or give them other
satisfaction. Number. 22. 23. That all the Arms, Engines, Ammunition, Iron and
Lead in the said Town, should be delivered to the Guardian of it by Indenture;
who should have the same power in all things within that Town, as the Earl of
Warwick had, when he was Governor. Number. 24. That the Sheriff should have a
Writ of attendance, to be attendant on the said Mr. Richard, with Victuals, and
all other things necessary for the safeguard of the said Town. Number. 25. 26. 27.
Certain Merchants are appointed and take upon them to the Parliament, to buy
great proportions of Corn, Peace, Oats, Hay, and other provisions, (the
quantities whereof are particularly expressed) at certain rates, to victual
Barwicke, the Castles of Edenburg, and Strivelyn, (which Castles Mr. Thomas
Rokeby, Guardian thereof, promised to keep till Saint John's day then next to
come, upon condition to receive his wages formerly due, out of the first moneys
granted to the King in this Parliament,) by a certain day; provided they shall
carry no victuals to the enemies of the King and Realm, and that they should
be paid out of the first moneys arising out of the aid granted to the King.
Number. 28. 29. The inhabitants of the Isle of Wight were respited of the aid
granted to the King, according as their good carriage should be during the war;
and it was agreed in Parliament, that no Commandment nor Ordnance, or license
granted under the great or privy Seal, to any of the said inhabitants bound to
defend the said Isle, should license any to absent himself from it during the
war, unless it were for fear of disinheriting or other great necessity, with
which the Council should be acquainted, or upon in quests. Number. 30. 31.
Provides, that the Castle of Careshroc in the I Will of Weight should be furnished
with a certain proportion of Wine Corn, Peace, Oats, Hey, Coals, Iron, Salt;
and that a Commission should be granted to Robert Vandalym Sheriff of
Southampton, and to William of Kekenwich jointly and severally, to purvey and
deliver the same provisions over by Indenture, to the Constable of that Castle;
and a Writ directed to the Kings Botteller, to deliver the Wines assigned (to
wit ten Tonne) out of the Wines then in, or which should first come into his
hands. Number. 32. Mr. Thomas Ferrers undertakes to the Parliament, to send
without delay a sufficient man to the Castle of Iernsey, to survey the defaults
and state of the said Castle, to certify the Council fully of them; and in
the mean time to find the ways of those remaining there in garrison, to the
sum of an hundred pounds; and a Writ is directed to the Sheriff of
Southampton, to furnish the said Thomas with a convenient quantity of Powder,
and Iron, and other necessaries for the defense of that Castle. And because
Thomas Pain, one of the Jurates of that Isle was gone to the enemies, contrary
to a defense made, that a Writ should issue to the Bailiffs and Jurates of the
same Isle to choose another sufficient man in his place, and to seize his
Lands, goods, and Chattels into the Kings hands, and answer the mees^e profits
of them. Number. 34. dorso. There is an exact Array or List of all the Captains
and men at Arms, and archers under their several commands for defense of the
borders of Scotland, amounting in all to 4715. Number. 35. Those of the Counties
of Nottingham, Derby, York, were to go to Newcastle upon Tine, at the
Countries charges, and then to receive the Kings wages: and those of
Westmerland, Cumberland and Lancashire, to marth to Carlisle at the Counties
charges, and then to receive the Kings wages; and that the Commanders, great
men, and all the host when they assembled should lie and travel in the Land of
Scotland, and not in the Marches of England. Number. 36. 37. A fit and trusty
Clerk is appointed to pay the Soldiers wages by the advice and survey of the
Lords Percy and Nevill, and Merchants are ordered to return moneys for the
exploit, and to furnish the King of Scotland with moneys sufficient to
maintain twenty men at Arms. Number. 38. Because Mr. Richard Talbot had
discharged himself of the government of Barwicke, the Lords in Parliament
earnestly entreated Sir Walter Creake to take upon him the custody of Barwicke,
and to certify the Lords within a short time, how many men at Arms and
Archers would suffice to guard it, and whether he would accept of the charge or
not; and if not, they would provide another. Number. 39. A Commission is granted
to Master Thomas Wake and others to muster the Horse and Foot arrayed for this
expedition in Yorkshire and the other Counties, and to conduct them toward
Newcastle. Number. 46. It is accorded and assented, that Writs shall be made to
the arrayers of the Men of Arms, Hoblers, and Archers, in the County of
Oxford, for the guarding of the Sea, for the Prior and Canons of Burnacester,
to surcease their demand which they made to the said Prior and Canons to find
a man at Arms and two Archers to make such a guard at Portsmouth; and also for
the payment of certain moneys for this cause, until they have other command
from the King; by reason that the Prelates and other great men in the
Parliament are informed, that all the possessions of their house will hardly
suffice for their sustenance, and that they cannot find such charge without
very great oppression of them and their house.

Lo here in these two Parliaments (the Rols whereof I have recited more
largely, because rare and memorable) all businesses concerning the Wars,
Militia and Array both by Land and Sea, were particularly consulted of,
ordered, and determined in and by the Parliament only; in a far more ample
manner then this present Parliament at first petitioned, desired they should
have been ordered and settled now.

In the Parliament rolls 14 E. 3. Number. 19. Certain men are appointed to guard
the Islands and Seacoasts against the enemies. Number. 42. The Lord Mowbray is
appointed keeper of the Town of Barwicke. Number. 53. 54. 55. etc. Commissions of
Array in several Counties are made by Parliament to the Earl of Angoyes and
others, for defense of the Kingdom.

In the Parliament of 50 E. 3. Number. 15. A Commission is granted in Parliament
to the Lord Percy and others, to appoint able persons for defense of the
Marches of the East Riding.

In the Parliament Roll of 1 R. 2. Number. 51. Because that the Lands of
Gascoigne, Ireland, the Seigniory of Artoyes, and the Marches of Scotland are
in peril to be lost through default of good Officers, the Commons petition,
that it would please the Lords to ordain good and sufficient ministers, which
may be sent to govern in the same Lands in the most hasty manner that may be,
by reason of the great need that requires it. And that all the chief guardians
of the Ports and Castles upon the Sea, as Dover, Bannburgh, Carlisle, and other
Marches, may be put in the form aforesaid: And that these Guardians of the
Castles and keys of the Realm may be sufficient men, who may forfeit their
inheritance if any mischief shall happen by reason of them, which God forbid.
And that in all other, sufficient persons of your Leiges be placed who may
forfeit in the same manner for the salvation of the Realm. To which the King
answers. The King wills it, and will do that which shall belong to him by
the advice of the Lords of His continual Council.

In 2 R. 2. Rot. Parliament. Number. 37. the Admiralty is disposed of by the
Parliament: and Number. 39. a Schedule of Orders for the defense of the North sea,
is confirmed by the Parliament.

In the Parliament of 7 and 8 H. 4. Number. 26. The Parliament gave power to the
Merchants to name two meet persons to be Admirals, to guard the Seas.

In the Parliament rolls of 2 R. 2. pars 2. Number. 37. The Commons supplicate,
how the enemies of France, with great Armies, and many Vessels of war have
been continually, and yet are in the Northern parts, and namely about the
coasts of Scarburrough, which Town is dangerously seated upon the Sea, open to
the assaults of the said enemies, and that the people of the said Town had
within two years last past paid above one thousand pound ransom to the said
enemies, and yet were destroyed and carried prisoners into Boloigne and other
places, where they were yet kept prisoners, and that the Town was upon the
point to be burned and destroyed, and all the coast about it in short time, if
hasty remedy were not provided. That therefore it would please the King and his
most sage Council, considering the great damages and perils the said Town
and coasts about it had sustained, and were yet apparently like to sustain, to
ordain and assign certain Vessels of war upon the said coasts, to guard
them against the malice and power of the said enemies; and that during the
wars, for saving of the said Town, and the Kings Castle there situate, and
all the Country about it. The Answer is: This matter is in part touched by the
Merchants of the said coast which are at this Parliament, and by their advise
and others who are to pass their Merchandise in these Marches by Sea, remedy
has been ordained in such sort as the Earl of Northumberland and the Major
of London, who were assigned in Parliament to treat of this business know more
fully to declare.

In the Parliament of 6 R. 2. pars 2. Number. 11. The Bishop of Norwich offered
before the King and Lords, that if the King would grant him the quindisme and
disme of the Laity and Clergy; and the 6 pound and 2 shillings on the Tonne of
Wine, lately granted to the King for the safeguard of the Sea; that he would
within 20 days after the receipt of the last payment, transport into France
3000 Archers well armed and mounted for the aid of Gaunt; and would defray all
the charges of shipping them: And that if he might have the attendance of the
West-Admirall, he would find on the Sea for the safeguard of it, between this
and Michaelmas next, ten great ships, and ten Barges armed; in which besides
Mariners necessary, he would find at least 500 fighting men for the said
term.

In the Parliament of 15 R. 3. Number. 15. It is to be remembered, that the Commons
said in full Parliament, that if a treaty of peace or truce should be
entertained between their Lord the King and his adversary of France, that they
thought it expedient and necessary, if it should please the King, that Mounseur
de Guyen, because he is the most sufficient person of the realm, shall go to
the same Treaty. And the King said, that he liked it well, if it pleased the
said Lord de Guyen: and thereupon Mounseur de Guyen said, that he would with a
very good will travel and do any thing which might turn to the honor and
profit of the King and of his realm.

In the Parliament of the 14 H. 6. Number. 10. The Kings grant of the custody of
the Town and Castle of Calice, the Town of Risbanke, the Castles of Hamures,
Mark, Oye, Stangate, Bavelingham, and of the Castle and Dominion of Guynes in
Picardy, to be made to Humfrey Duke of Gloucester his uncle, in the presence of
the Lords spiritual and temporal then being in the present Parliament, was on
the 29 day of October read before them: which being understood, and mature
deliberation taken thereupon, the several reasons of the said Lord being
heard, it was at last by their assent and consent agreed and ordered, that the
said Duke should have the custody of the said Town, Castles, and premises, to
the end of nine years then next ensuing, which Charter was subscribed by all
the Lords there present.

In the Parliament of 31 H. 6. Number. 41. pro custodia Maris, it was enacted: For
as much as the King, considering that as well diverse His Clergy men of this his
realm inhabiting nigh the coast of the Sea, and others His Subjects using the
Trade of Merchandises, have been oftentimes grievously imprisoned, distressed,
put to great sufferances and ransomes; and their Ships, Vessels, and
Merchandises of great value taken upon the Sea by his enemies; and also
Merchant strangers, being under his leageance, amity, safeguard, or safe conduct
upon the Sea, have been robbed and spoiled, against the form and contents of
such truces, and safe conducts signed; His Highness willing and intending
sufficiently to provide for the remedy of such inconveniences, and to eschew
and avoid all such robberies and dispoylers, HAS BY THE ADVICE AND ASSENT OF
THE LORDS SPIRITUAL AND TEMPORAL in his high Court of Parliament assembled,
desired certain great Lords of this realm, that is to say, Richard Earl of
Salisbury, John Earl of Shrewsbury, John Earl of Worcester, James Earl of
Wiltshire, and John Lord Sturton with great Navies of Ships and people
defensible in great number purveyed of abiliments of war, to intend with all
diligence to their possibility the safeguard and keeping of the Sea. For which
cause the subsidies of Tonnage and Poundage granted to the King for his
natural life this Parliament, that they might be applied to such uses and
intent as they be granted the King BY THE ADVICE AND ASSENT OF THE LORDS
SPIRITUAL AND TEMPORAL, AND COMMONS IN THIS PARLIAMENT ASSEMBLED, AND BY
AUTHORITY OF THE SAME, were granted to the said Earls and Lord Sturton, and
the survivers of them for three whole years; with power for them to appoint
Collectors to receive and collect them in every Port, without rendering any
account; so as they kept the covenants and endentures made between the King and
them for the safeguard of the Seas; with a proviso, that this Act during the
three years should not be prejudicial to the custom of the Town or Castle
of Calice or Rishbanke, for the payment of the wages and arreares of the
Soldiers there. And over that, if the goods of any of the Kings liege-people,
or any of his friends, be found in any Vessel of the Kings enemies without any
safe conduct, that then the said Earls and the Lord Sturton shall take and
depart it among them and their retinue without any impeachment, according to
the Statute thereupon made.

In the Parliament of 33 H. 6. Number. 27. the said Lords were discharged of the
custody of the Sea by the Parliament, in these words: For as much as the Earls
of Salisbury Shrewsbury, and Worcester, and the Lord Sturton besought the Kings
Highness in this present Parliament, that it might like his Highness and
Excellency of his Noble grace to have them clearly discharged of the keeping
of the Sea; the King therefore and for other causes moving his Highness, BY
THE ADVICE OF THE LORDS SPIRITUAL AND TEMPORAL IN THE SAID PARLIAMENT
ASSEMBLED the 30 day of July, the 23 day of the same Parliament, admitted their
desire, and would that the said Earls and Lord Sturton, or any other THAT HAD
THE KEEPING OF THE SEA BY AN ACT MADE IN THE LAST PARLIAMENT begun and holden
at Redding, and ended at Westminster, be from the 30 day of July fully
discharged of the keeping of the same, and that IT SHOULD BE ENACTED OF RECORD.

In the Parliament of 39 H. 6. Number. 32. The King BY THE ADVICE OF THE LORDS
SPIRITUAL AND TEMPORAL, AND COMMONS IN THIS PARLIAMENT ASSEMBLED, AND BY
AUTHORITY THEREOF, ordained and established, that his dearest cousin Richard
Duke of York rightful heir to the Countries of England and France, and of
the Lordship and Land of Ireland, have and take upon him the power and labor
to ride into the parts of England, and Wales, where great rebellions, murders,
riots, spoylings, executions, and oppressions be used, committed and attempted,
to repress, subdue, and appease them. And also to resist the enemies of France
and Scotland within the realm. And further granted, ordained, and established
by the said advice and authority, that every Sheriff, with the power and might
of his Sheriwicke, and every Major, Bailiffe, Officer, Minister, and Subject of
the said realm of England and of Wales, shall attend upon his said cousin for
the said intent, as the case shall require; and to the same intent be ready at
the command of his said cousin; and the same obey and perform, in like case as
they ought to do at his commandment after the course of the Laws of England,
and in Wales after the customs there etc.

And to cite no more presidents in so clear a case: in the Parliament of 21
Iacobi chapter 33. The Temporalty having granted three entire Subsidies, and three
Fifteenes and tenths, to King James, toward the maintenance of the wars that
might then suddenly ensue upon the breach with Spain, and more particularly
for the defense of the realm of England, the securing of Ireland, the
assurance of the states of the united Provinces, with the Kings friends and
allies; and for the setting forth of the Navy-royall: did by that Act, for the
better disbursing of the said aid and mannaging that war according to the
Parliaments true intention, by that very Act wherein they gave the Subsidies,
did especially appoint eight Aldermen and other persons of London Treasurers to
receive and issue the said moneys; and appointed ten Lords and Knights
(particularly named in the Act) to be of the Kings Council for the war; by
whose warrant (under five of their hands at least) all the moneys they granted
were to be issued and exported, for and toward the uses expressed in the Act
to such person or persons as the said Council of war should direct: and that
both those Treasurers, and this Council of war, and all other persons
trusted with the receiving, issuing, bestowing and employing of those moneys or
any part thereof, their heirs, executors and administrators, should be
answerable and accomptable for their doings and proceedings therein to the
Commons in Parliament, when they shall be thereunto required by Warrant under
the hand of the Speaker of the House of Commons for the time being; and thereby
they and every of them according to their several places and employments shall
give a true and ready declaration and account of their several respective
dealings, doings and proceeding therein; and that the said Commons in
Parliament shall have power by this Act, to hear and determine the said
account, and all things thereto appertaining; And withal they in this Act
prescribe a special oath to the Treasurers, Not to issue out any moneys
without the Warrant of the Council of war under their hands. And another oath
to the Council of war, To make no Warrant for any moneys issued, which are
given by this Act but for some of those ends which are expressed therein, and
that to the best of their means they should employ the said moneys
accordingly; and that freely without requiring any reward or allowance
whatsoever.

Which presidents with others forementioned, made His Majesty return this An
exact collection of all-Remonstrances, etc. p. 66, 67.
Answer to the Petition of the Lords and Commons touching the Articles
delivered February 2. 1641. For the securing you from all dangers or jealousies
of any; His Majesty will be content to put in all the places both of FORTS and
MILITIA, in the several Counties, such persons as both Houses of Parliament
shall either approve or recommend unto Him; so that you declare before unto His
Majesty the names of the persons whom you approve or recommend; unless such
persons shall be named against whom He shall have just and unquestionable
exception. And thus much by way of supplement touching the Militia.

Concerning the Parliaments interest and right in electing and removing the
Officers of the realm, and the Kings meniall servants, I shall only add
these Precedents to the Part. 1. p. 89, 90. part. 2. p. 41. to 74.
forementioned.

In the Parliament rolls 4 E. 3. Number. 1. Four Bishops, four Earls, and four
Barons were assigned to the King, without whose consent, or of four of them,
no great business was to be transacted.

14 E. 3. Number. 36. in the Parliament rolls, The Parliament agrees, that the
Duke of Cornwall be Custos of England during the Kings absence in the wars of
France.

In the Parliament rolls of 1 R. 2. Number. 18. and 19. The Commons requested
first, that it would please the King to ordain, and nominate to them now in
this present Parliament, some sufficient persons of diverse estates to be
continually resident of his counsel for the affairs of the King and of the
realm, and to have the Officers of the King of such persons who best knew, and
would and might most diligently travel for the redress of the foresaid
mischiefs, and the good government and salvation of the realm, so that the
Commons may be clearly ascertained of the names of those Counselors which
shall be disbursers and orders of that which they shall grant for the wars,
and thereby to have greater encouragement to do to our Lord the King that
which they have in charge concerning him, as if aforesaid. Also that it would
please them to ordain and nominate in this Parliament the persons which shall
be about (or have the custody) of the person of our Lord the King himself, who
is of such tender age, and that those persons shall be of the most virtuous,
honestest, and sufficientest of the Realm; so that our said Lord, who is a
person sacred and anointed, be nobly governed, and brought up in good virtues
and manners to the pleasure of God, whereby all the Realm may be secured and
amended; and that it be likewise ordained, that our Lord the King and his house
be governed with good moderation, and defray his expenses only out of the
revenues of the Realm, and other rights and seigniories of his Crown. And
that all that which shall be granted to our Lord the King in maintenance of his
wars, shall be applied and expended in the wars, and no part thereof
otherwise, in aid and discharge of his said commonaltie.

In the Parliament of 11. Richard 2. Number. 23. The Commons pray, That no person,
of what state or condition he be, should meddle with any manner of governance
about the person of our Lord the King, nor with the businesses of the Realm,
nor yet to council our Lord the King, but those Lords which are assigned and
ordained in this present Parliament, if it be not by ordinance of the
continual Council, and by assent of our Lord the King, upon grievous pain.
And the same Lords, which shall be about the person of our Lord the King and
of his Council, shall cause to remove all the persons which they think fit to
remove in the household of our Lord the King, without showing favor to any, and
to put others in their places, whom they shall think sufficient and virtuous.
And that the said Lords of the Council be charged to keep and sustain the
estate of our Lord the King in 'its regalty, and to do and use that which may
turn to the honor and profit of our Lord the King and of his Realm to their
power, according to the form of the Oath contained in a Schedule made in this
present Parliament annexed hereunto; to the intent that it may be notoriously
known thorowout all the Realm, that good and sufficient Council is about the
person of our Lord the King, to the comfort of all his Commons, and firm
assurance and establishment of the Realm aforesaid; the which Oath was made in
form ensuing. You shall swear, That you will not assent, nor yet suffer, as
much as in you lies, That any Judgment, Statute, or Ordinance made or given
in this present Parliament be any way annulled, reversed, or repealed in any
time to come; and moreover, That you shall keep the good Laws and usages of the
Realm before these times made and used; and shall firmly keep, and cause to be
kept, good peace, quiet, and tranquillity in the Realm according to your
power, without disturbing them in any manner. So help me God and his Saints.
The Answer. As to the first point of this Article, the King wills it: And as to
the second point, If there be any Lord of the Council, or other Lord of the
Realm, which will inform the King, That he has any person about him not
sufficient, nor honest, he wills, that it being proved, he shall be outed and
removed, and another sufficient, by his advice, put in his place.

In the Parliament of 5. Henry 4. Number. 16. Upon certain prayers and requests
made before by the Commons, diverse times touching the removing of diverse
persons, as well aliens and others, by reason of diverse destructions by them
moved, and for certain Articles appointed by the Lords upon the charges given
to them by our Lord the King in Parliament, and by the said Lords it was
specially accorded, That four persons, to wit, the Kings Confessor, the Abbot
of D^ne, Master Richard Derham, and Crosseby of the Chamber, shall be quite
ousted and voided out of the Kings house; whereupon the ninth of February, the
said Confessor, Master Richard, and Crosseby came before the King and Lords in
Parliament, and there the King in excusing the said four persons said openly,
that he knew not by them any cause or occasion in special for which they ought
to be removed from his household; notwithstanding our said Lord the King well
considered, that what the said Lords and Commons shhall do or ordain, Nota.
was for the good of him and of his Realm, and therefore he would conform
himself to their intentions, and did well agree to the said Ordinance, which
charged the said Confessor, Master Richard, and Crosseby to avoid his said
Court, and like charge should have been given to the said Abbot, had he been
present. And our Lord the King said further, That he would do the like with
any other which was about his royal Person, if he was in hatred or indignation
with his people. And Numb. 37. To the end that good and just government and
remedy may be made of diverse complaints, grievances, and mischiefs showed to
our Lord the King in this Parliament; our Lord the King, to the honor of God,
and upon the great instances and requests to him diverse times made in this
Parliament by the Commons of his Realm, for the ease and comfort of all his
Realm, has ordained certain Lords and others underwritten to be of his great
and continual Council, to wit, the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishop of
Lincoln Chancellor of England, the Bishops of Rochester, Winchester, Bath,
and Bangor, the Duke of York, the Earls of Some merset and Westmerland, the
Lord Roos Treasurer of England, the Keeper of the Great Seal, the Lord
Berkley, the Lord Willoughby, the Lord Furnevall, the Lord Lovell, Mounsier
Pierce Courtney, Master Hugh Waterton, Master John Cheyne, Master Arnald
Savage, John Northbury, John Doreward, John Cawson.

In the Parliament of 7. and 8. Henry 4. Numb. 31. The 22. day of May, the
Commons came before the King and his Lords in Parliament, and then John
Tibetot, their Speaker, reheased, how they had prayed the King in the beginning
of the Parliament, and after, to increase the number of his Council for the
better government of the Realm, and prayed the King to put it in execution;
and further rehearsed how that the Archbishop of Canterbury had reported to
them, That the King would be counseled by the most sage Lords of the Realm,
the which ought to have the survey of all that which shall be done for the good
government of this Realm, which thing the King agreed to do and rehearsed
with his own mouth, That it was his entire will. And thereupon a Bill made by
the King himself, by his own will was delivered, containing the names of the
Lords which shall be of his Council, the tenor of which Bill ensues. It is
to be remembered that our Lord the King, considering the great labors,
occupations, and diligence which he ought necessarily to employ about the good
government of his Realm, and other his possessions, as well on this side the
Sea as beyond it. First of all for the preservation of our Lord the King, and
of his Crown, and that the revenues of the same may be the better collected to
his profit and increase, as much as a man may justly do, to the end that he
may the better sustain his honorable estate. And secondly, for the
confirmation of the Laws and Statutes of the Realm, to the end that equal
right may be done to every one, as well poor as rich; Our Lord the King, of his
proper and good will, desirous to be supported in the foresaid causes, because
that he cannot attend thereunto in proper person so much as he would, for the
great love and good affiance which he has among others, in the most revered
Fathers in God, the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishops of Winchester and
Excester, the Duke of York, the Earl of Somerset, the Lord Roos, the Lord
Burnet, the Lord Lovell, the Lord Willoughbie, the Chancellor, Treasurer, and
Keeper of the privy Seal, the Steward and Chamberlain, Master Hugh Waterton,
Master John Cheyney, and Master Arnald Savage, has chosen and charged them to
be of his counsel, praying and commanding them, that in all the foresaid
causes they will put to their entire diligences for the profit of our said Lord
the King, and likewise for the confirmation of the Laws and Statutes aforesaid.

In the Parliament of 2. Henry 6. number. 15. After diverse special requests of
the Commons of the Realm, being in the present Parliament, made to my Lord of
Gloucester Commissary of the King, and to other Lords Spiritual and Temporal
there, for to have notice and conusance of the persons assigned and elected to
be of the Kings Council, to their great ease and consolation. By advice and
assent of all the Lords Spiritual and Temporal aforesaid, were elected and
named certain persons, as well spiritual and temporal, to be Councillors
assistant to the governance of the Realm, whose names here ensue; The Duke of
Gloucester, the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishops of London, Winchester,
Norwich, Worcester, the Chancellor, Treasurer, and Keeper of the privy Seal,
the Duke of Excester, the Earl of March, the Earl of Warwick, the Earl
Marshall, the Earl of Northumberland, the Earl of Westmerland, the Lord
Cromwell, the Lord Fitzhugh, the Lord Bourchier, the Lord Scroop, Master
Walter Hungerford, Master John Tiptoff, Thomas Chaucer, William Allington.

In the Parliament of 29. Henry 6. number. 16. Upon the Petition of the Commons
against diverse Lords, Bishops, Knights, Esquires, and others, to the number of
29. who mis-behaved themselves about the royal Person of the King, and in
other places, by whose only means it was suggested, the Kings possessions had
been greatly diminished, his Laws not executed, the peace of the Realm not
observed, to the great hurt and trouble of the liege people of the Realm, and
likely subversion of the same, of which misbehaviour, universal noise and
clamor was openly received thorowout all the Realm, upon the same persons
specified in the Petition; all of them, except the Lords and some few others,
without further evidence against them, were by the King now removed from his
presence and Court for a whole years space, within which time any man that
could and would object against any of them should be patiently heard and
intended to.

These few fresh Presidents added to the precedent, and to such foreign
examples of this nature cited in the Appendix, will abundantly clear the
Parliaments right and Kingdoms interest in nominating, placing, and displacing
the great Officers of the Kingdom, and in regulating the Kings own meniall
servants in some cases, when they either corrupt or mis-counsell him. And thus
much touching the unhappy differences between the King and Parliament,
concerning matters of his own royal Prerogative.

The Parliaments Right and Jurisdiction to impose Taxes and Contributions on
the Subjects for the necessary defense of the Realm, Laws, Liberties without
the King, in case of the Kings wilful absence from, and taking up Arms against
the Parliament and Kingdom, briefly vindicated from the calumnies against it.
THe several grand Objections of consequence made by the King and others
against the Parliaments pretended usurpations upon the just Rights and
Prerogatives of the Crown, being fully examined and refuted in the Premises,
so far (I hope) as to satisfy all ingenuous men, in point of Divinity, Policy,
Law, Reason, Conscience. I shall next proceed to the remaining material
Accusations which concern the Subjects only, in regard of Property and
Liberty: wherein I will contract my Discourse into a narrow compass; partly
because the debate of the foregoing Differences between the Kings Prerogative
and the Parliaments Sovereign Jurisdiction, has in some sort overruled the
Controversies betwixt the Subjects and both Houses, representing them: party
because these accusations are not so universally insisted on, as the former
which concern the King; the justness of them being generally acknowledged,
willingly submitted to by most, except such, who calumniate and traduce them,
either out of covetousness only to save their Purses, or from a groundless
Malignity against the Parliament, or out of a consciousnesse of their own
Delinquencies, subjecting them to the Parliaments impartial Justice, or out of
some particular interests which concern them in their gains, honors,
preferments, or such who by their restraints for not paying Parliamentary
Assessements, hope to save their purses for the present; or to gain favor and
preferment by it for the future. If these private sinister ends were once laid
by, this second sort of accusations would speedily vanish, especially with men
of public spirits, who prefer the Commonweal before their own particular
interests.

The first of these Cavillatory Objections against the Parliaments proceedings
is, Object. 6.
That both Houses, See the Kings Declarations and Proclamations against this
and other Assessements.
without the Kings Royal Assent, have contrary to Magna Charta, the Petition
of Right, the Statues De Tallagio non concedendo, and other Acts, by their
Ordinances only imposed late Taxes on the Subjects, amounting to the twentieth
part of their estates, and since that monthly or weekly Assessements, to
maintain a war against the King; a grand incroachment on the peoples
Properties, contrary to all Law and justice.

This Objection seems very plausible and cordial to covetous Earthworms,
Answer.
being politikely contrived to Court the close-handed niggardly party, by those
who are guiltiest in themselves of that they thus object against others. But it
will easily receive an answer, as to the Parliament, and recoyle with infinite
disadvantage on those that make it.

First then I answer, That the Parliament is the absolute Sovereign power
within the Realm, not subject to, or obliged by the letter, or intendment of
any Laws, being in truth the sole Lawmakers, and having an absolute Sovereignty
over the Laws themselves (yea, over Magna Charta, and all other objected Acts)
to repeal, alter, determine and suspend them when there is cause, as is
undeniable by its altering the very common Law in many cases, by repealing,
changing many old Statute Laws, and enacting new ones every Sessions as there
is occasion, for the public safety and defense. This the practice of all
Parliaments in all ages (yea the constant course of all Parliaments and
Assemblies of the Estates in all foreign Kingdoms too) abundantly manifests.
The Parliament therefore never intended by all or any of these objected Acts,
to bind its own hands, but only the Kings and his Ministers, with inferior
Courts of Justice, neither is the Parliament within the letter, words, or
meaning of them; therefore not obliged by them.

2. The King, with his Officers, Judges, and inferior Courts of Justice only
are included, and the Parliament, is directly excluded out of the very letter
and meaning of all these Acts; as is apparent. First in general, from the
occasion of enacting all these Laws, which was not any complaints made to the
King of any illegal taxes, imprisonments, or proceedings of our Parliaments,
to the oppression of the people; but only the great complaints of the people
and Parliament against the illegal taxes, See Sir Edward Cooks institut. on
Mag. Charta, and these Laws Articuli super Chartas, Confirmatio Chartarum,
part. 1.
impositions, imprisonments, and oppressions of the Subject by the King, his
Officers, Judges, and inferior Courts of Justice, as all our Histories, with
the Prefaces and words of the Acts themselves attest; to redress which
grievances alone these Laws were made by the Parliaments and peoples earnest
solicitations, much against the Kings good will. The Parliament then (who would
never solicit the making of a Law against, or to restrain it self) being
clear out of the original ground and mischief of enacting these Laws, and
the King, with his Ministers, and inferior Courts only within them; they can
no way extend to the Parliament, but to them alone.

3. The Parliament, ever since the making of these Acts, has always
constantly enjoyed an absolute right and power, without the least dispute, of
granting and imposing on the Subjects whatsoever Taxes, Subsidies, Aids
Confiscations of Goods, or restraint of Liberty by temporal or perpetual
imprisonment, it thought meet and necessary for the public defense, safety,
and tranquillity of the Realm, as the several Taxes, Subsidies, and Poll-monies
granted by them in all ages, the many Statutes enjoining confiscation of Lands,
Goods, corporal punishments, banishments, temporary or perpetual
imprisonments, for diverse things not punishable, nor criminal by the Common
Law, or when Magna Charta, and the ancient Statutes in pursuance of it were
first enacted, abundantly evidence past all contradiction: none of all which
the King himself, his Officers, Judges, or inferior Courts of Justice can
do, being restrained by the objected Acts. Therefore it is altogether
irrefragable, that the Parliament and Houses are neither within the words or
intentions of these Acts, nor any ways limited or restrained by them, but left
as free in these particulars (in order to the public good and safety) as if
those Acts had never been made, though the King, with all other Courts,
Officers, Subjects, remain obliged by them.

4. This is evident by examination of the particular Statutes objected: The
first and principal of all the rest is Magna Charta, cap. 29. But the very
words of this Law: Nor We shall not pass upon him, nor condemn him, but by
the lawful judgment of his Peers, or by the Law of the Land: We shall deny
nor defer to no man either Justice or Right, compared with the Preface to,
and first Chapter of it, Henry, etc. know ye that We, etc. out of mere and
free will, have given and granted to all Archbishops, Bishops, E^rles Barons,
and to all free men of this our Realm of England, and by this our present
Charter have confirmed FOR US AND OUR HEIRS FOR EVERMORE, these liberties
underwritten, to have and to hold to them, and their Heirs, OF US AND OUR HEIRS
FOR EVERMORE, etc. (together with the whole tenor and title of this Charter,
and the two last Chapters of it;) All those customs, and liberties aforesaid
which we have granted to be holden within our Realm, as much AS APPERTAINS
TO US AND OUR HEIRS, WE SHALL OBSERVE. And for this our gift and grant of those
Liberties, etc. our Subjects have given us the fifteenth part of all their
movables: And We have granted to them on the other part, that NEITHER, WE NOR
OUR HEIRS shall procure or do any thing, whereby the Liberties in this Charter
contained shall be infringed or broken; We confirm and make strong all the
same FOR US AND OUR HEIRS PERPETUALLY. (not the Parliament) All these, I say,
infallibly demonstrate, that this Statute of Magna Charta, did never extend
unto the Parliament to restrain its hands or power, but only to the King, his
Heirs, Officers, Courts of Justice, and particular subjects. So that the
Parliaments imprisoning of Malignants, imposing Taxes for the necessary defense
of the Realm, and seizing men's goods, or imprisoning their persons for
non-payment of it, is no ways within the words or intent of Magna Charta, as
Royallists and Malignants ignorantly clamor; but the Kings, Rastall Accusation
5, 6, 7, 8.
his Officers, Councillors, and Cavalliers proceedings of this nature are
clearly most direct violations of this Law. And that which puts this past
dispute are the several Statutes of 25. Edward 3. cap. 4. Statute 5. 37.
Edward 3. cap. 18. 38 Edward 3. cap. 9. 42. Edward 3. cap. 3. 17. Richard 2.
cap. 6. and the Petition of right it self, all which expressly resolve, that
this very objected Law of Magna Charta, extends only to the King himself, his
Privy Council, Judges, Justices, Officers, and inferior Courts of Justice,
but not unto the supreme Court of Parliament, which no man (for ought I find)
ever yet held, to be absolutely obliged by it, before the Kings late recesse
from Parliament.

The next Statute is that of 34. Edward 1. cap. 1. No tallage nor aid shall be
taken or leavied BY US AND OUR HEIRS (not the Parliament) in our Realm,
Rastall Tenths, Taxes, etc. 1.
without the good will and assent of the Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, Barons,
Knights, Burgesses, and other free men of the Land; which the Statute of * 25.
Edward 1. thus explains, But by the common consent of the Realm. The Statute
of 14. Edward 3. cap. 21. and Statute 2. cap 1. thus, If it be not by common
consent of the Prelatos, Earls, Barons, and other great men and Commons of our
said Realm of England, AND THAT IN PARLIAMENT. The Statute of 25. Edward the
third, cap. 8. thus. If it be not BY COMMON CONSENT AND GRANT IN PARLIAMENT.
The Statute of 36. Edward the third, cap. 11. thus, That no Subsidy nor other
charge be set nor granted upon the Woolls by the Merchants, nor by NONE OTHER
from henceforth WITHOUT THE ASSENT OF THE PARLIAMENT. The Statute of 45. Edward
3. cap. 4. thus, It is accorded and stablished, That no imposition or charge
shall be put upon Woolls, Woollfels, or Leather, other then the custom and
subsidy granted to the King, WITHOUT THE ASSENT OF THE PARLIAMENT, and if any
be, it shall be repealed and holden for none. And the Petition of Right, 3.
Caroli, thus, By which Statutes, and other good Statutes of this Realm, your
Subjects have inherited this freedom, that they should not be compelled to
contribute any Tax, Tallage, Custom, Aid, or other like charge, not set BY
COMMON CONSENT IN PARLIAMENT. Now it is as evident as the noonday sunshine,
that these Acts only extend to the King, his Heirs, Council, Officers,
inferior Courts, and private Subjects only, and that the Parliament is
precisely excepted out of the very intent and letter of them all, having free
power to impose on the Subjects what Aids, Taxes, Tallages, Customs, and
Subsidies they shall deem meet, by the express provision of all these Laws,
concerning the granting and imposing of Subsidies, Therefore by the direct
resolution of these Acts, the Kings, his Counselors present contributions,
assessements, and ransoms imposed on the Subjects are illegal, against the
letter and provision of all these Acts; but the Parliaments and Houses lawful,
approved and confirmed by them.

True, Object.
will Royallists and Malignants answer (who have no other evasion left but
this) If the King were present in Parliament, and consenting to these
contributions and taxes of the twentieth part, there were no doubt of what you
allege; but because the King is absent, and not only disassents to, but
prohibits the payment of this or any Parliamentary Assessments by his
Proclamations, therefore they are illegal and against these Laws.

1 To which I answer, Answer.
First, that the King by his Oath, duty, the ancient custom and Law of the land
ought of right to be always present with his Parliament (as he is now in point
of Law) and not to depart from it but in cases of urgent necessity with the
Houses free consents, and then must leave See 8. H. 5. c. 1
Commissoners, or a Deputy to supply his absence. This is not only confessed,
but proved by a Book lately printed at Oxford 1642. (with the Kings
approbation or permission) entitled, No Parliament without a King, page 5. to
16. where by sundry presidents in all Kings Reigns it is manifested, That
Kings were, and ought to be present in their Parliaments, which I have Part 1.
page 42, 43, 44.
formerly cleared. If then the King, contrary to these Presidents, his Oath,
Duty, the Laws and Customs of the Realm, the practice of all his Progenitors,
the rules of nature (which prohibit the head to separate it self from the
body) and will (through the advice of malignant Councillors) withdraw himself
from his Parliament; yea, from such a Parliament as himself by a special Act
has made in some sort perpetual, at the Houses pleasure; and raise an Army of
Papists, Delinquents, Malignants, and such like against it, and that purposely
to dissolve it, contrary to this very Law of his for its continuance: why this
illegal tortious act of his (paralleld in no age) should nullify the
Parliament, or any way invalid its Impositions or Proceedings, for their own,
the Kingdoms, Peoples, and Religions preservation (all now endangered)
transcends any reasonable man's capacity to apprehend.

2. The right and power of granting, imposing, assenting unto Assessements,
Taxes, Subsidies, and such like public charges in Parliament, for the
public safety, rests wholly in the Commons and Lords, not King; and is their
own free act alone, depending no ways on the Kings assent, nor necessarily
requiring his personal presence in Parliament.

This is evident: First by the express letter of the forecited Acts; No
Subsidy, Tax, Aid, Talleage, or Custom shall be set, granted, taken or
leavied, but by common consent and grant of the Prelates, Earls, Barons,
Knights, Burgesses, and other free men of the Realm in Parliament; or without
the assent of the Parliament: so that their See part. 1. p. 47, 48, 49, 50.
grant and assent in Parliament, (not the Kings) is the only thing that makes
them legal and binding to the subject. Now both Houses have granted, ordered,
and assented to this Assessement, exceeding not the twentieth part of men's
estates; and given order for the leavying of it, and that for the Parliaments,
Kingdoms, religions, necessary defense and preservation. Therefore it is
obligatory and legal, though the King himself consent not, or disassent
thereto, (especially as the present condition of things stands) even by the
very letter of these acts.

Secondly, this is apparent by the letter of all our public Acts, for the
granting of Subsidies, Ayds, Tenths, Fifteenes, Taxes, Customs, Tonnage,
Poundage, or any such like impositions in and by Parliament, either by the
Temporalty or Clergy: which Acts run usually in this manner. 12 E. 4. c. 3.
The Commons of this Realm HAVE GRANTED FOR DEFENSE OF THE SAID REALM. and
especially for the safeguard and custody of the Sea, a Subsidy, a Subsidy
called Tonnage, etc. 14 E. 3. c. 20. The King then absent in France.
The Prelates, Earls, Barons, and all the Commons of the Realm willingly and
with one assent HAVE GRANTED the ninth Lamb, ninth sheafe, and ninth fleece,
etc. And of Cities and Buroughs the ninth part of all their goods and
chattels, etc. in aid of the good keeping the Realm as well by Land as by
Sea, etc. 1 E. 6. c. 13. 1 Mar. 1 E. c. 19. 1 Jac. c. 33.
We your poor Commons desire your excellent Majesty willingly to accept and
receive these OUR POOR GRANTS hereafter following, as GRANTED of free hearts
and good wills, as the first fruits of our good wills and hearts, etc. by the
advice and Assent of the Lords spiritual and temporal, GIVE and GRANT, for
the defense of your realm, and the keeping and safeguard of the seas, etc. one
Subsidy called Tonnage, etc. 21 Jac. c. 32. 1. Carc. c. 5.
The Prelates and Clergy, etc. as a special and significant testimony of their
loyal affection, etc. with one affection and uniforme consent HAVE GIVEN and
GRANTED four whole and entire Subsidies. 1 Car. c. 6. 21. Jac. c. 33.
We your Commons assembled in your high Court of Parliament, humbly present
your Majesty with the FREE and CHEERFUL GIFT of two entire Subsidies, etc. All
Subsidies and Taxes then being the free gift of the Commons, Clergy and Peers
in Parliament, and that only for the defense of the Kingdom by sea and land;
it is infallible, that they do, may and can oblige themselves, and those they
represent, to pay such public Taxes, to this end, without the Kings
concurrence.

Thirdly, this is clear by considering, that the Commons and Lords in
Parliament have always had: See Rastall. Taxes, etc. throughout.
1. An absolute right and power to grant or deny Taxes, Subsidies, aids and
assistance as they saw occasion. 2. To proportion the aids and Subsidies
granted. 3. To limit the certain manner, ways, and times of paying and
levying them; and the persons who shall either pay, assesse, collect, receive,
or disburse them. 4. The ends and uses to which they should be employed when
leavied, debarring the King often times (when they saw cause) of any power at all
to receive or dispose of them, appointing Collectors, and Treasurers of their
own to receive and issue them out again, by the advice and directions of
these, as themselves prescribed; for which I shall give you some few instances
of note, in lieu of many more, that might be remembered. Matthew. Paris, Hist.
Angl. p. 420, 421, 562, 563. Daniels Hist. p. 157.
Anno 1237. being the 21 year of Henry the third, The Parliament after many
contestations with the King for his fraud, oppressions, favoring of Aliens,
etc. to the Kingdoms detriment; the King by Oath promising amendment, granted
unto him the thirtieth part of all their movables (excepting ready Money,
Horse, and Armor) to be employed for the Common wealth, and benefit of the
Realm; with this condition often annexed, that the King should leave the
Counsel of Aliens, and only use that of his natural Subjects. And for more
security it was ordained, that four Knights of every Shiere, and one Clerk of
the Kings in every several Shiere, shall upon their oaths collect, receive
and deliver the said Subsidy either into some Abbey or Castle, to be safely
reserved there, and disposed of for the benefit of the King and Kingdom, by
the view and counsel of the Earl Warren or others, when there should be need:
Or otherwise if the King failed in performance of His promises and grants, it
ought to be faithfully restored and distributed to the Country whence it was
collected. Walsingham. Hist. Angl. p. 88. Holinshed, Grafton, and Daniel, p.
211.
In the 11. year of King Edward the 2. Anno 1318. The Parliament (not daring
to trust this prodigal mis-counselled King with moneys) instead of Subsides,
granted him an aid of armed men against the Scots: London set forth 200.
Canturbury 40. Saint Albanes 10. and so all other Buroughs and Cities
according to their proportion, whereby a great Army was leavied. The
Parliaments of 14 E. 3. c. 20. 21. Stat. 1. and Stat. 2. c. 1. 18 E. 3.
Parliament 2 and 3. (forecited at large, part. 2. p. 8. 9.) 31 H. 6. Number. 41.
21 Jac. c. 33. particularly direct how the Subsidies granted shall be disposed
of by certain Nobles and others, whom they nominate, and appoint Treasurers to
receive and issue them to the ends for which they granted them, prescribing
them an oath to issue none of them to other purposes, or in any other manner
then they prescribed. Yea the Acts of former Parliaments, and this present
concerning Tonnage, Poundage, Polemoney, and Subsidies, frequently do the like.
Therefore the granting and disposing of those Taxes, Aids, Subsidies rests
wholly in the Commons, and Lords; and no ways on the King, who commonly
desires the Parliament to grant them.

Fourthly, this is further evidenced, by the Kings usual answer and assent
unto such Bills as these: Mr. Hackwels manor of passing Bills, sect. 8. p. 78.
Le Roy remercy ses Loaulx Subjects accept LOUR BENEVOLENCE, and auxy le veult;
taking it wholly as a free grant from them; which assent in this case is rather
formal then substantial, it being the Commons and Lords own consent only to
Bills of this nature, not the Kings, that make the Taxes and Impositions binding
as the forecited Statutes, the Petition of Right 3 Caroli; See part. 1. p. 37,
38, 39, 46, to 53.
Fortescue, and our Lawbookes resolve, and I have elsewhere manifested more at
large. Therefore the want of the Kings assent, or disassent to the Parliaments
present assessement for the Kingdoms necessary defense in the present
extremity (when the King not only wilfully absents himself from, but has
raised Arms against the Parliament) is not material nor simply necessary in
point of Law, though usually requisite and necessary for formality sake, at
other seasons, to complete such Acts; since Sepenumero Necessitas vincit legem,
and quod necessarium est, licitum est (as this assessement now is) though all
formalities be not punctually observed; as is resolved in Dormers case. Cook
l. 5. f. 40. b.

Fifthly, it is undeniable, that the Knights, Citizens, Burgesses, and Commons
in Parliament, elected by the suffrages of the several Counties, Cities, and
Buroughs of England, do See part. 1. p. 39. 17.
really and legally represent all the Commons; and the Lords and they the whole
Realm, and all the people of England: so that what ever Tax is imposed and
assented to by them, or by both Houses only without the King (who represents
no man but Himself alone) is in point of Law imposed and assented to by all
the Commons, and whole Realm of England, (as the recitals in all our Statutes,
and Law-bookes resolve) though the King assent not to it, If therefore (as our
Fitzh. Assise 413. Auowry, 74. Prescrip. 67. Br. Custom. 31. Kitchen. 45. 73.
80. Co. 5. Rep. 63. to 69. See Rastal. title Corporations.
Law Books clearly resolve without dispute, and the experience of all
Corporations, Parishes, and Manors evidenceth past contradiction) all
Ordinances and Bylaws made for the common good of Corporations, Parishioners,
Tenants of a Manor, and the like, by all or the greater part of the
Corporations, Parishioners, Tenants, and Taxes imposed by them for the Common
good (as repairing of Churches, Highways, Bridges, relief of the poor, and
the like) shall bind the rest: even in point of Law, without the Kings assent.
Then by the same, or better reason, the impositions and Taxes now laid upon the
subjects by the assent and Ordinances of both Houses of Parliament,
representing the whole Commons and Realm of England (who actually assent
likewise to these Taxes and Assessements in and by them) must and ought in
point of Law to oblige all the Subjects in this case of necessity, (at least as
long as the Parliament continues sitting, and this their representation of them
remains entire;) especially being for the necessary defense of the Parliament,
Kingdom, Religion, all our lives, estates, liberties, laws, against an
invading Army of Papists and Malignants, in a case of extraordinary extremity.
This I shall further clear by some ancient and late judgments in point.

Mich. 14 Ed. 2. rot. 60. in the Kings Bench William Heyborne brought an Action
of Trespass against William Keylow, Judge Crookes argument against Shipmoney.
p. 24, 25
for entering his house and breaking his chests, and taking away 70 pounds in
money; the Defendant pleading, Nor guilty, the Jury found a special Verdict:
that the Scots having entered the Bishopric of Durham with an Army, and making
great burning and spoils, thereupon the Commonalty of Durham, whereof the
Plantiffe was one, met together at Durham, and agreed to send some to compound
with them for a certain sum of money to depart the Country, and were all
sworn to perform what compositions should be made, and to perform what
Ordinance they should make in that behalf; and that thereupon they compounded
with the Scots for 1600 Marks. But because that was to be paid immediately,
they all consented, that William Keylow the Defendant and others, should go
into every man's house to search what ready money was there, and to take it for
the raising of that sum and that it should be suddenly repaid by the
Communalty of Durham: And that thereupon the Defendant did enter into the
Plaintiffs house, and broke open the chest, and took the seventy pounds, which
was paid accordingly toward that composition. And upon a Writ of Error in the
Kings Bench, it was adjudged for the Defendant against the Plaintiff, that the
action did not lie, because he himself had agreed to this Ordinance, and was
sworn to perform it, and that the Defendant did nothing but what he assented
to by Oath; and therefore is accounted to do nothing but by his consent, as a
servant to him and the Commonalty of Durham; therefore he was no trespasser.
Which case was agreed for good Law by all the Judges, in the late Case of
Ship Money argued in the Exchequor Chamber; though neither King nor Parliament
consented to this Tax or Composition.

This is the Parliaments present case in effect: The King having raised an Army
of Papists, Delinquents, Forraigners, Irish Rebels, disaffected Persons, and
actually invading the Kingdom and Parliament with it; Hereupon the Parliament
were enforced to raise an Army to defend themselves and the Realm against these
Invasions; For maintenance whereof, they at first made use only of voluntary
contributions and supplies; proceeding only from the liberality of some
private persons, May 5. 1641.
best affected to the public service; Which being xehausted, The Lords and
Commons considering what a sol^mne Covenant and Protestation themselves had
made and taken, and the Subjects likewise throwout the Realm, to maintain and
defend, as far as lawfully they might WITH THEIR LIVES, POWER AND ESTATES,
The true Reformed Protestant Religion, etc. As also THE POWER AND PRIVILEGES
OF PARLIAMENT, THE LAWFUL RIGHTS AND LIBERTIES OF THE SUBJECT, And every
person that makes this Protestation, in whatsoever he shall do in the lawful
pursuance of the sam^ etc. as in the Protestation (made by both Houses consents
when fullest:) And considering that the whole Commons and Kingdoms assents were
legally and actually included in what they assented in Parliament, for the
necessary defense of the Realm, the Subjects, Parliaments Privileges, Rights,
and the Reformed Religion (all actually invaded, endangered) by an Ordinance of
both Houses, without the Kings consent (then absent from, and in open
hostility against them) impose a general Assessement upon all the Subjects,
NOT EXCEEDING THE TWENTIETH PART OF THEIR ESTATES; And for non-payment
prescribe a distress, etc. Why, this Assessement in this case of necessity,
being thus made by assent of both Houses (and so of all the Kingdom in them) in
pursuance of this Protestation, should not as legally, yea more justly o^lige
every particular subject, though the King assented not thereto, as well as that
agreement of the men of Durham, did oblige them even in point of Law, Justice,
Conscience, transcends my capacity to apprehend: and if the first Case be Law,
as all the Judges then, and of late affirmed, the latter questionless must be
much more Legal, and without exceptions, Cook 5. Report. fol. 62, 63.
M. 32. and 33. Eliz. in the Kings Bench, in the Chamberlain of Londons case,
it was adjudged, That an Ordinance made by the Common Council of London only,
that all Clothes should be brought to Blackwell-hall, to be there veiwed,
searche^, and measured, before they were sold, and that a penny should be paid
for every Cloth for the Officer that did the same, and that six shillings eight
pence should be forfeited for every Cloth, not brought thither and searched;
was good to bind all within the City, and that an Action of Debt would lie at
the Common Law, both for the duty, and forfeiture, because it was for the
public benefit of the City and Commonwealth, Cook 5. Report f 62.
M. 38. Eliz. in the Common Pleas, it was adjudged in Clerks Case; That an
Ordinance made by assert of the Burgesses of Saint Albanes, whereof the
Plaintiff was one, for assessing of a certain sum of Money upon every
Inhabitant, for the erecting of Courts there (the Term being then adjourned
thither from London, by reason of the Plague) with a p^nalty to be^l^^yed, by
distress, for non-payment of this Tax, was good to bind all the Inhabitants
there, because it was for the public good. (...)
Mich. 31. and 32. Eliz. in the Kings Bench, William Jefferies Case, and Pasch.
41. Eliz. Pagets Case, it was resolved; That the Churchwardens with the
greater part of the Parishioners assents, may lay a Tax upon all the
Parishioners, according to the quantity of their Lands and Estates, or the
number of Acres of Land they hold (the Tax there was four pence an Acre for
Marsh-Land, and two pence for Earable) for the necessary reparation of the
Church; and that this shall bind all the Inhabitants, so as they may be
Libelled against in the Spiritual Court for non-payment thereof, and no
prohibition lies. The like has been resolved in sundry other Cases. And, by
the Common Law of England where by the breach of Register. fol. 127. Fitz.
Nature. Br^u. fol. 113. Cook, l. 10. fol. 142.
Sea-Walls, the Country is, or may be surrounded, every one who has Lands
within the level or danger, which may have benefit, or loss, by the
inundation, may and shall be enforced to contribute toward the repair, and
making up of the Sea-walls, and a reasonable Tax assessed by a Jury, or the
Major-part shall bind all the rest, because it is both for their own private,
and the common good. If the Law be thus unquestionably adjudged in all these
Cases, without the Kings assent, then much more must this Assessement imposed
by both Houses be obligatory, in point of Law and Justice, though the King
consented not thereto, since the Houses, and whole Kingdom consented to it, for
their own defense and preservation.

Sixthly, This is a duty inseparably incident by the Fundamental Law, and
original compact of every Kingdom, City, Corporation, Company or Fraternity
of men in the World; that every Member of them should contribute proportionably
upon all occasions (especially in Cases of imminent danger) toward the
necessary charges, defense, and preservation of that Kingdom, City,
Corporation, Company, or Fraternity, of which he is a Member, without which
contribution, they could be neither a Kingdom, City, Corporation, Company,
Fraternity, or have any continuance, or subsistence at all; Which
Contributions are assessed by Parliaments in Kingdoms, by the Aldermen, or
Common Council in Cities, by the Master and Assistants in Fraternities, and
what the Major part concludes, still binds the Residue, and the dissent of
some (though the Major, or Master of the Company be one) shall be no obstacle
to the rest. This all our Acts concerning Subsidies, Aids, Tonnage and
Poundage the daily practice and constant experience of every Kingdom, City,
Corporation, Company, Fraternity in the World, manifests past all
contradictions; which being an indubitable verity, I think no reasonable man
can produce the least shadow of Law or Reason, why the Parliament representing
the whole Body of the Kingdom, and being the supreme Power, Counsel, in the
Realm; bound both in Duty and Conscience, to provide for its security, may
not in this Case of extremity legally impose this necessary Tax, for their
own, the Kingdoms, Subjects, Laws, Religions preservations (of which they are
the proper Judges, Gardians) and should not rather be credited herein then a
private Cabinet Court-Counsell of persons disaffected to the Republike, who
impose now far greater Taxes on the Subjects, and plunder, spoil, destroy
them every where directly against the Law, of purpose to ruin both Parliament,
Kingdom, Religion, Laws, Liberties, and Posterity.

Seventhly, It is confessed by all, That if the King be an Infant, Non-Compos,
absent in Foreign remote parts, or detained prisoner by an Enemy, that the
Kingdom or Parliament in all such Cases, may without the Kings actual,
personal assent, create a Protector or Regent of their own Election, and not
only make Laws, but grant Subsidies, impose Taxes, and raise Forces for the
Kingdoms necessary defense, as sundry domestic and foreign Presidents in the
preceding Part. 1. p. 5^. 50. 99. 100, 101, 102 part. 2. p 98, etc. Francis,
Then his Catalogue of Protectors, in Holinshed, p. 1073 etc.
Parts, and Appendix, evidence; And De Iure Belli and Pacis, l. 1. c. 3 nu. 24.
p. 69.
Hugo Grotius, Vindiciae contr. Tyrannos, qu. 3, 4.
Junius Brutus, with other Lawyers acknowledge as a thing beyond all dispute.
Nay, if the King be of full age, and within the Realm, if a foreign enemy come
to invade it, and the King neglect or refuse to set out a Navy, or raise any
Forces to resist them, The Lords and Commons in such a Case of extremity, may,
(and are bound in Law and Conscience so to do) for their own, and the Kingdoms
preservation, not only in and by Parliament, but without any Parliament at all
(if it cannot be conveniently summoned) lawfully raise forces by Sea and Land,
to encounter the Enemies, and impose Taxes and Contributions to this purpose on
all the Subjects by common consent, with clauses of distress and imprisonment
in case of refusal, as I have elsewhere proved. And if in Case of invasion,
even by the Common Law of the Realm, any Captains or Soldiers may lawfully
enter into another man's ground and there encamp, muster, or build Forts to
resist the Enemy, or pull down the Suburbs of a City, to preserve the City it
self, when in danger to be fired or assaulted by an Enemy, without the special
consent of King, Parliament, or the Owners of the Lands, or Houses, without 13.
H 8. 16. 9. E. 4. 35 b. 8. E. 4 23. Br. Custom 145. Trespass 406. Dyer. 36.
Trespass or offense, because it is for the public safety, as our Law Books
resolve; Then much more may both Houses of Parliament, when the King has
through the advice of ill Counselors wilfully deserted them, refused to return
to them, and raised an Army of Papists and Malignants against them and the
Realm (now miserably sacked and wasted by them, as bad as by any foreign
Enemies) both take up Arms, raise an Army, and impose Assessements and
Contributions by Ordinances, unanimously voted by them, against which no Lover
of his Country, or Religion, no nor yet the greatest Royallist, or Malignant,
can with the least shadow of Law or Reason, justly except.

Eighthly, If they shall now demand what Presidents there are for this? I
Answer: First, That the Parliament being the Sovereign Power and Counsel in
the Realm, is not tied to any Presidents, but has power to make new
Presidents, as well as new Laws, in new Cases and mischiefs; where there are no
old Presidents, or vary from them though there be ancient ones, if better and
fitter Presidents may be made; as every Cook 4. Rep. f. 93, 94. Ash. Title
si^^nts.
Court of Justice likewise has Power to give new Judgments, and make new
Presidents in new Cases, and may sometimes swerve from old Presidents, where
there were no ancient Presidents to guide them; even as Physicians invent new
Medicines, Chyrurgions new Emplaisters for new Diseases, Ulcers, or where old
Medicines and Balsomes, are inconvenient, or not so proper as new ones. And as
men and women daily invent and use new Fashions at their pleasure, and
Tradesmen new Manifactures without license of King or Parliament, because they
deem them better or more comely then the old. Secondly, I might demand of them,
by what old domestic lawful Presidents, His Majesty's departure from the
Parliament, His Levying War against it, His proclaiming many Members of it,
See the Remonstrance of the rise and progress of the Irish Rebellion and Romes
Masterpiece.
Traitors, and now all of them Traitors and no Parliament; His unvoting of
their Votes in Parliament, out of Parliament; His imposing of Taxes and
Contributions in all Countries where His Forces are, beyond men's estates, and
annual revenues; His burning, sacking, pillaging, murdering, ruining, of His
own Kingdom, Subjects, both by Sea and Land, and putting them out of His regal
Protection; His raising of an Army of English, Irish, Scottish, French, and
Germane Papists to maintain and settle the Protestant Religion among us, (which
they have plotted totally to extirpat^, as appears by their proceedings in
Ireland, England, and the late plot discovered among the Archbishops Papers)
and the like, are warranted? (which questions I doubt would put them to a
nonplus, and silence them for eternity:) yet to satisfy their importunity,
and stop their clamorous mouths; I shall furnish them in brief, with some
Presidents in point in all States, and Kingdoms of note in former, in latter
times, and in our own Realm too; In all the civil wars between Kings and
Subjects, in the Roman and Germane Empires, France, Spain, Aragon, Castile,
Hungary, Bohemia, Poland, Denmark, Scotland, and other Kingdoms mentioned in
the Appendix; They shall find that the general Assemblies of these States,
Lords and Commons, without their Emperors or Kings assents, did both raise
Forces, impose Taxes, yea, and seize on the Imperial and Royal Revenues of
the Crown to support their wars, against their Tyrannical oppressing Princes.
In See M^tranus and Grimstons general History of the Netherlands.
Flaunders heretofore, and the Low Countries of late years, they have
constantly done the like; as their Excises long since imposed, and yet on foot
by common consent (without the King of Spains good liking) to preserve their
Liberties, Religion, Estates, from the Spanish Tyranny, witness; which every
one willingly at the very first imposition, and ever since has read^ly
submitted to, being for the public preservation. The like has been done in
former ages, and within these five years in the Realm of Scotland; the same is
now practiced even without a Parliament by the Popish Rebels both in Ireland
and England, who have laid Taxes upon See the Relation and proceedings of the
Iri^h Assembly at Kilk^^y The Parliaments Remonstrance of the rise and
progress of the Irish Rebellion.
all Ireland, and all the Romanists in England, for the maintenance of this
present Rebellion; and yet neither King, nor his Counsel, nor Royallists, nor
Malignants (for ought I can read or hear) have ever so much as once written or
spoken one syllable against it, when as many large Declaration; Proclamations,
Inhibitions in His Majesty's Name, and at least forty several Pamphlets have
been published by Malignants against this Assessement of the Parliament, and
the Levying, or paying thereof, strictly prohibited under pain of high Treason;
such a grand difference is there now put by the Royal Courtpartie (to the
amazement of all intelligent men) between the Irish Rebels, (now the Kings best
Subjects as it seems) who may do what they please without censure or restraint;
and the English (now un-Parliamented (Parliament, though perpetuated by an Act
of Parliament) who may do nothing for their own, or the Kingdoms safety, but it
must be high Treason at the least. O tempora; o mores: Quis (...) fando temp
ret a lachrymis? Add to this, See the Irish excise.
That the Lords Justices and Council in Ireland, the twenty nine of June,
1643. have without authority of Parliament or King, for their present
necessary defense, against the Popish Rebels there, imposed an Excise upon most
commodities in that Realm, here lately Printed; which no man can deem Illegal
in this case of absolute necessity. But to come close home unto our selves;
who is there that knows ought in history and policy, but must needs
acknowledge, That the Britains and Saxons wars of this Realm, against their
oppressing Kings, See Part. 1. p. 7, 8, 9 etc.
Archigallo, Emerian, Vortigerne, Sigeb^rt, Osred, Ethelred, Beornard,
Leowulfe, Edwine, (whom they deposed for their Tyranny and mis-Government;)
That our Barons long-lasting bloody wars against King John, Henry the third,
Edward the second, Richard the second, and others forementioned; were
maintained by public Assessements and Contributions made by common consent,
even without a Parliament, and with the Revenues and Rents of the very Crown,
which they seized on, as well as the Castles and Forts? This being a true rule
in Law, Qui sentit commodum, sentire debet and onus; All the Kingdom had the
benefit, of regaining, preserving, establishing their Fundamental Charters,
Laws, Liberties, by those wars; therefore they deemed it just, that all
should bear a share in the charge and burden, by voluntary Assessements
without King or Parliament.

During the absence of King Edward the third in France; The 14 E 3. c. 20, 21.
^^rec. p. 2, 3, 4, 5.
Lords and Commons in Parliament, for the defense of the Realm by Sea and Land,
against foreign Enemies; granted an aid of the ninth Sheaf, Lamb, and Fleece,
besides many thousand Sacks of Wool, and the ninth part of other men's Estates
in Towns and Corporations, and disposed both of the Money and Militia of the
Realm, for its defense, as you heard before: The like did they during the
Minorities of King Henry the third, King Richard the second, and King Henry the
sixth, as the premises evidence, without those Kings personal assents. Matthew
Paris. p. 952. 953. Speed. p. 636.
Anno Dom. 1259. Richard King of Romans coming with a great Navy and Army of
Germans, and forraigners, to aid his Brother, King Henry the third, against the
Barons; thereupon, the Barons sent out a fleet to encounter them by Sea, and
prepared a strong Army of Horse and Foot by Land, that if they prevailed
against them at Sea, (which they feared not,) yet they might valiantly and
constantly entertain and repulse them, on the shore and dry Land; which the
King of Romans being informed off, disbanded his forces, and came over
privately with three Knights only attending him. This was done without the
Kings assent, and yet at public charge. When Reges Hoveden, Annal part post,
p. 726. D^nial. p. 121.
King Richard the first was taken particular by the Emperor in his return from
the holy Land, by Authority of the Kings Mother, and the Kings Justices alone
(without a Parliament) it was decreed, that the fourth part of all that years
Rents, and of all the movables, as well of the Clergy, as of the Laity, and
all the Woolles of the Abbots of the Order of the Cistersians, and of
Semphringham, and all the Gold and Silver Chalices, and Treasure of all
Churches should be paid in, toward the freeing and ransom of the King; which
was done accordingly. If such a tax might be imposed by the Queen Mother, and
Justices only, without a Parliament, for ransoming the King alone from
imprisonment, may not a tax of the twentieth part only of men's estates be
much more justly imposed on the Subjects by an Ordinance of both Houses in
Parliament without the King, for the defense and perservation, both of the
Parliament and Kingdom to, when hostily invaded by the King?

In few words, the King and his Council, yea his very Commanders, (without his
special Commission or advice) have in many Countries imposed large monthly,
weekly Contributions and Assessements on the People, beyond their abilities and
estates; yea, upon the very Speaker and Members of the Commons, and Lords
House, (notwithstanding their Privileges of Parliament, which they say they
will maintain) to the utter impoverishing, and ruining of the Country; yea,
they have burned, sacked, plundered, many whole Towns, Cities, Counties, and
spoiled thousands of all they have, contrary to their very Promises, Articles,
Agreements, which they never faithfully observe to any in the least degree; and
all this to ruin the Kingdom, People, Parliament, and Religion; yet they
justify these their actions, and the Parliament, People, must not control,
nor deem them Traitors to their Country for it: And may not the Parliament then
more justly impose a moderate in-destructive necessary tax without the King,
for the Kingdoms, Religions, and Peoples defense and preservations, against
their barbarous Taxes, Plunderings, and Devastations, then the King, or his
Commanders, Soldiers play such Rex, and use such barbarous oppressions
without, yea against the Parliaments Votes and consents? Let them therefore
first cease their own most detestable unnatural, inhumane practices, and
extortions of this nature, and condemn themselves, or else for ever clear the
Parliament, from this unjust Aspersion.

The last Objection against the Parliament is, Object. 7.
That they have Illegally imprisoned, restrained, plundered some Malignants,
and removed them from their habitations, against Magna Charta, the Fundamental
Laws forenamed, and the Liberty of the Subject, contrary to all Presidents in
former Ages.

To which I answer, Answ. 1.
First, That the Objectors and Kings party are far more guilty of this crime,
then the Parliament, or their Partisans, and therefore have no reason to object
it, unless themselves were more innocent then they are.

Secondly, For the Parliaments imprisoning of men pretended to be against Magna
Charta: I answer first, That the Parliament is not with in that or any other
Law against imprisonments, as I have formerly cleared; Therefore is not obliged
by it, nor can offend against it: Secondly, That it has power to imprison,
restrain the greatest Members of their own Houses See Cromptons Jurisdiction of
Courts, f. 7, 8, 9, 10. Hollinshead. p. 1584. Ferrers Cas^. Dyer. 275 39. E. 3.
7. 8. H. 4. 12, 13.
though privileged men, exmept from all other arrests; and public persons
representing those that sent them thither: Therefore much more may they
imprison, or restrain, any other private persons, notwithstanding Magna Charta.
And the Parliament being the supreamest Judicaturo paramount all other Courts,
their commitments can not be Legally questioned, determined, nor their
prisoners released by Habcas Corpus, in or by any other inferior Court or
Judicature whatsoever. 3. The Parliament has power to make new Laws for the
temporal and perpetual imprisonment of men, in mischievous cases, where they
could not be imprisoned by the Common Law, or any other Act before or since
Magna Charta; and so against the seeming letter of that Law which extends not to
the Parliament; and what persons they may restrain, imprison by a new enacted
Law, though not restrainable before by Magna Charta, or the Common Law, without
breach of either, they may whiles they sit, in case of public danger,
restrain, imprison, by their own Authority, without, or before a new Law
enacted. In how many new Cases, by new Statutes made since Magna Charta, the
Subjects may be lawfully imprisoned, both by Judges, Justices, Majors,
Constable, and Inferior Courts or Officers; whereas they could not be
imprisoned by them, by the Common Law, before these Acts, without breach of
Magna Charta, and violating the Subjects Liberties, you may read in the Table
of Rastals Abridgements of Statutes, and in Ashes Tables. Title Imprisonment,
and False-Imprisonment; Yea, by the Statutes of 23. H. 8. cap. 1. 31. H. 8.
cap. 13. 33. H. 8. cap. 12. 5. Eliz. cap. 14. 1. and 2. Phil. Mary, cap. 3. 5.
and 6. E. 6. cap. 1. 1. Eliz. cap. 2. with other Acts, perpetual imprisonment,
during life, is inflicted in some cases, for which no imprisonment at all could
be prescribed before these Acts, and for crimes, for which the parties were not
formerly punishable; yet for the public weal, peace, safety, and prevention
of private mischiefs, even against the Letter (as it were) of the great Charter
the Parliament has quite taken away all liberty, the benefit of the Common
Law, and of Magna Charta it self, from parties convicted of such offenses,
during their natural lives; and if they bring an Habeas Corpus in such cases,
pretending their perpetual imprisonment, and these latter Laws to be against
Magna Charta, they shall notwithstanding be remanded and remain prisoners all
their days, because the Parliament is above all Laws, Statutes, yea Magna
Charta; and may deprive any Delinquents of the benefit of them, yea, alter or
repeal them, for the common good, so far as they see just cause; Though
neither the Fortescue, l. 1 c. 9, 10. 14, 15. Cromptons Iurisdict f. 14. 11 H.
4. f. 73. 76.
King, nor his Counsel, nor Judges, nor any Inferior Officers, or Courts of
Justice, have any such transcendent power, but the Parliament alone, to which
all men are parties, really present, and allowing all they do; and what all
assent to, decree for the common good and safety, Brook Poerag. 15.
must be submitted to by all particular persons, though never so mischievous to
them; this being a Fundamental Rule even in Law it self Littleton and Cook
Institutes 1 H. 7. 15 a 17. b. 21 H. 7. 8. a.
That the Law will rather suffer a private mischief, then a general
inconvenience. Seeing then the Parliament to prevent public uproars, sedition,
treachery, in or against the Kingdom, Cities, Houses, or Counties, where
factious persons live, has thought meet to restrain the most seditious
Malignants, (especially these about London and Westminster where they sit) and
to commit them to safe custody, till they receive some good assurance of their
peaceable behavior; they must patiently suffer their private restraints for
the common safety, tranquillity, till the danger be past, or themselves
reformed; who if they reform not their own malignity, not the Parliaments
cautelous severity, themselves must be blamed, since they detain themselves
prisoners only by not conforming, when as the Parliament desires rather to
release, then restrain them, if they would be regular; and so they must blame
themselves alone, not clamor against the Houses. All Leprous persons by the
Levit. 13. and 14.
Leviticall and Register. par. 1. f 267. Fitz. Not. Bre. f 234
Common Law, were to be sequestered and shut up from others, least they should
infect them; and so all persons visited with the Plague by late 1 Iac. c 31.
Statute Laws may be shut up, without breach of Magna Charta. Why then not
Malignant, seditious ill affected persons, who infect others in these times of
Commotion and Civil Wars, as well as Leapers and Plague sick persons,
removed into Pest-houses, for fear of spreading the Infection upon the
self-same grounds, by the Houses Authority? The Parliament by an Ordinance,
Act, or Sentence, has Power to banish men out of the Kingdom in some cases
(which no other Court, nor the Sea M^gna (...) c 29. (...) Cook Ibid.
King himself can lawfully d^, as was expressly re^olved in Parliament, upon the
making of the S^atute of 35. Eliz. cap. 1.) as is evident by the case of Thomas
of Weyland, An. 19. E. 1; Of S^^e W^lsi^g (...) in the 6. and 7. E. 2. (...) 1.
p 20. 21, 22. (...) E. 3. cap 2. Walsi^g. hist. (...) Speed, p. 674
P^irce Gavaston and the two Spencers in King Haward the second his reign. Of
the Lord 10. E 3 53. Cooks Instit. f. (...).
Maltrav^rs in Edward the third his reign; Of (...) Speed, Grafton, (...) in 10
and 11 R. 2. 1 H. 4 1. b. 2 H 4 7. a. 31 (...)
B^lknap and diverse, over Judges in the 10 and 11 y^ers of Richard 2. his
reign, by the Statutes of 33. El. c. 1. S^paratist^, (...) 39. El. c. 5. R^gues
are to be banished: and in Regist fol. 312. b Cooks. (...) f. 123.
Calice heretofore, a woman might be justly banished the Town for adult^ry; and
a scould at this day after three convictions is to be banished out of
Westminster, and rowed ov^r the Thames from thence thorough the water at the
tail of a Boat, for the quiet of the City. Then much more may any private
seditious turbulent Malignants ^e justly restrained to some safe places where
they may do no harm, till the wars and troubles be ended, or themselves
re^laimed. Fifthly, By the (...)
Common and Statute Law of the Realm, yea by (...)
Magna Charta it self, cap. 30. the Lands, Rents, Goods, and Persons of Priors,
and other aliens, Merchants, or others, residing in England may be, and have
been usually seized or, and s^cured, or else their persons banished the Realm,
and borders of England, during the wars with others of that Nation, l^ast
they should assist them in the wars with their Estates, persons, or
intelligences, or betray the Kingdom, or pl^ces where they resided to the
Enemy; And upon this ground by the express Statutes of 2. H. 4. cap. 12. 20.
1. H. 4. cap. 7, 8. 3. H. 5. cap. 3. 4. H. 5. cap. 6. 1. H. 6. cap. 3. the
Irish, Britains, Welshmen, and Scots, because we had frequent war, with
them, were not permitted to purchase either Houses or Lands, or to remain in
any Fort, Town, or City, near the Borders of Scotland, or W^l^s, but banished
thence, and their Goods and persons, seized on in times of war, to prevent
treachery, intelligence, and assistance of the Enemy. A thing generally
practiced and warranted in all States and Kingdoms, (as well as in England,) by
the very Law of Nations, as just and necessa^y in times of wars; as Martinus
Laudensis de R^praesaliis and de Bello, Henricus Ranzovius his Commentarius
Bellicu^, Ge^rgius Obbrectus: Disput: Juridca de Bell^, Henri^us Boc^rus de
Jure Pr^gnae* Hung^ Grotius, and Albericus Gentilis, in their Books de Jure
Belli, and all Historians evidence: Therefore lawful for the Parliament to
practice at this present, as well as the King, or any others. Sixthly, In times
of Foreign Invasions, the Parliament has enjoined all Inhabitants near the
Seacoasts or Marches of Scotland and Wales, to repair to their Houses and
Lands there, with all their Families, for the defense and saf^tie of the Realm,
under pain of imprisonment, and confiscation of their Goods, and Revenues
there, and elsewhere, as is evident by 13. E. 3. nu. 21. Parl. 1. and Parl. 2.
n. 20. 23. Eliz. ^4. the 35. Eliz c. 2 3. Iac. c. 3, 4, 5.
Statutes confining Papists to their Houses* and sundry other Presidents.
Therefore by like reason they may confine Malignants in times of war, for the
public peace and safety, and disarme them to for a time; a Constables may by
the Law, disarme and imprison peace-breakers, fray-makers, riotors, and others
to prevent bloodshed, quarrels, and preserve the public peace.

Thirdly, For the plundering of Malignants, and sequestring their Estates; I
answer, that, I think the Parliament never yet approved the plundering (or in
plain English, robbing) of any man, by any of their forces; they having
plundered no places taken by assault, for ought I hear; though the Kings forces
on the contrary, have miserably plundered all the Kingdom almost, (except the
Papists who are most exempted from this rapine, and some few, chief
Malignants,) yea, those very Persons, Soldiers, Cities, Towns, which by their
very Articles of surrender, were not to be plundered; (witness, Taunton,
Bridgewater, Bristol, Gainsborow, where many have been pillaged to their naked
skins, notwithstanding their Ariticles of agreement, solemnly sworn, to depart
quietly with bag and baggage, without interruption, and the Towns to be free
from plunder) contraty to the very Alber. Gent. de Iure Belli, l. 3. and Hugo
Gro^ius, de Iure B^l^i. l 3 cap 9. 10. 11. etc.
Law of war, and Arms; which may instruct all others not to trust them
henceforth. If any of the Parliaments forces have misbehaved themselves in
plundering any Malignants or disaffected persons, more then by seifing of their
Arms, distraining their Goods for imposed Assessements; or sequestring their
Plate, Moneys, Estates, for the public service upon promise of repayment and
restitution; I know the Houses have publicly, by express Ordinances,
inhibited, disavowed the fact, and exposed the disorderly Delinquents to
condign punishments, even to the loss of their lives, if any please to
prosecute them by way of indictment or Martial Law. For my part I abhor all
violence, plunder, rapine, and disorders in Soldiers, as contrary to the Law
of God, Obadiah 10. to 16. Luke 3. 14. and leave those who are guilty of them
to the severest public justice, as offenders against the Sea Albericu^
Gentilis, de Iure Belli, l. 2. c. 16. 2. 3. l. 3. c. 2. and 19. Hugo Grotius,
de Iure Belli, l. 3. c. 11. to 23.
Law of Nature, of Nations, of the Land, yea, of War it self: But God forbid
the Parliament should be unjustly charged with all the misdemeanors of their
Soldiers, which they prohibit, detest, censure; more then the King with all
the barbarous rapes, murders, cruelties, rapines, and monstrous insolences,
which his Cavaliers every where perpetrate without punishment or restraint;
especially the blood-thirsty Irish Popish Rebels among them: who having shed so
much English Protestants blood in Ireland, ere they came over hither, of which
they vaunt, is such an high dishonor to God, and the English Nation, if their
own blood be not shed for it by the hand of vengeance here; that I wonder with
what face or spirit, His Majesty or any English Protestant can patiently
suffer these Irish Rebels to shed any more Protestant English blood, breath in
English air, who have cut the throats of so many thousand innocent English,
both here and elsewhere, and are like to cut all our throats ere long (as they
have designed) unless their throats be first cut by us. But yet for the
plundering of such Malignants goods, and houses, who are opposite to the whole
Kingdom and Parliament, and will not join with them in the common cause, which
concerns us all; as it has sundry See Part. 1. p 22. Part. 2. p. 18, 19, ^0
Fa^ia^. part. 7. p. 78 92.
patterns in the Barons Wars, against the Poictovines and their faction, in
Henry the third his reign, and afterward against the Spensers, in Edward the
second days formerly touched; so it has one observeable general resolution
of the whole body of the Lords and Commons, warranting it in King John's reign,
even then when they all took up Arms to enforce him to confirm the great
Charter it self, which our Opposites cry out to be violated by the Parliaments
moderate seisures, only by way of distress or sequestration: Matthew. Paris,
Hist. p. 243. to 255. Daniel p. 142, 143, 144. Part. 1 p 9. 10.
For the Barons, Knights, and Commons, with their whole Army being m^t t^gether
in London, which joined with them to gain this Charter from the King; sent from
thence Letters to all the Earls, Barons, and Knights throughout England, who
seemed (though but fainedly) to adhere to the King, exhorting them with this
Commination; That as they loved the indemnitie of their Goods, and possessions,
they should d^sert a perjured King, and adhearing faithfully to them, should
with them inviol^bly stand, and effectually contend for the Liberties and Peace
of the Kingdom; which if they contemned to do, thy would with force of Arms,
and Banners disslayed, MARCH AGAINST THEM AS PUBLIC ENEMIES, SUBVERT THEIR
CASTLES, BURN THEIR HOUSES AND EDIFICES, AND NOT CEASE TO DESTROY THEIR PONDS,
PARKES, AND ORCHARDS. Whereupon all the Lords, Knights, and People, d^serting
the King, who had scarce seven Knights in all left with him, confederated
themselves to the Barons in the Common Cause. (wherein to be a Neuter, was to
be an enemy, and no member of the politic body, in which all were equally
engaged.) Whereupon the King thus deserted by all, condescended speedily to
their demands, and confirmed the great Charter much against his will. A very
apt President for these times, which would make the people more unanimous,
faithful, and courageous for the Common Cause, if but imitated in the
commination only, though never put into actual execution; he being unworthy
once to enjoy any privilege of a freeborn Subject in the Kingdom, who will
not join with the Parliament and Kingdom, to defend his Liberty, and the
Kingdoms privileges, in which he has as great a common share, as those who
stand, pay, and fight most for them. It is a good Cause Cook 11 Repub. f. 97,
98, 99 James Bags Case.
of disfranchising any man out of any City, Corporation, or Company, and to
deprive him of the Privileges of them, if he refuse to contribute toward the
common support, defense, or maintenance of them, or join in open hostility,
contributions or suites against them. There is the same and greater reason of
the general City and Corporation of the whole Realm, to which we are all most
engaged; and therefore those who refuse to contribute toward the defense and
preservation of it, if able; or by their persons, purses, intelligence, or
counsel, give any assistance to the common enemy against it, deserve to be
disfranchised out of it, to have no privilege or protection by it, and to be
proceeded against as utter enemies to it, Christ's rule being here most true,
Matthew 12. 30.
He that is not with me, is against me; and he that gathers not with me,
scatters abroad. The ^iero de Offic^^^, l 1, 2 Aristot. Poli^. l. 1.
Commonwealth of which we are members, has by way of original contract for
mutual assistance and defense (seconded by the late Protestation and Covenant)
a greater interest in our Persons, and Estates, then we our selves, or the
King; and if we refuse to aid the republike, of which we are members in times
of common danger, with our Persons, Abilities, Goods; or assist the common
enemy with either of them; we thereby betray our trust and fidelity, violate
our Covenants to the Republike, and expose our bodies to restraint, our estates
to consiscation, for this most unnatural treachery, and sordid nigguardlinesse
(as well as for Treason, Felony, or other more petty injuries against the
State, or humane society, made capital by the Laws) most justly, for the
public service of the State, which has a general Sovereign Interest in them
in all times of need, paramount our private Rights, which must always submit
to the public: and lose all our formerly enjoyed Privileges, either of Laws,
Liberties, or freeborn Subjects, if we refuse to defend, or endeavor to
betray them, as the Laws and common practice of all Nations evidence. In the Sea Part. 2. p. 16. to 24.
Barons wars against King John, Henry the third, and Edward the second, in
defense of their Liberties, and Laws, they seized upon the Castles, Forts, and
Revenues of the Crown, and upon the Moneys, and Goods of the Fabian. part. 7.
p 78.
Priors aliens, and malignant Poictovines, which they employed in the Kingdoms
service Matthew. Paris p 943.
: Eodem tempore Castellanus de Dovera, Richardus de Gray, vir fidelis and
strenuus, qui ex part Baronum ibidem constituebatur, omnes transeuntes and
transituros, diligenter considerabat, cuncta prud^nter perscrutando, and
invenit NON MODICUM THESAURUM paratum, dictis Pictaviensibus clanculo
deferendum; qui TOTUS CAPTUS EST, IN CASTRO RESERUANDUS. Similiter Londini apud
novum Templum THESAURUS MAXIMUS, de cujus quantitate audientes mirabantur quem
reposureunt Pictavienses memorati, licet contradicentes reniterenter
Hospitelarii, CAPTUS est; AD ARBITRIUM REGIS ET BARONUM IN UTILES REGNI USUS
UTILITER EXPONENDUS, writes Rishanger the continuer of Matthew Paris; a good
President for the present times: After which the Matthew. Par^^ hist. Angl p.
959. Gra^^on, p. 140, 141.
Barons banished all the Poictovine Malignants, who miscounselled and adhered
to the King, out of England, Anno 1260; who Anno 1261. were all ba^ished out of
London, and other Cities, and Forts. Matthew. Paris. hist. Angl. p 380.
An. 1234. The Earl Marshall having routed John of Monmouth his forces (which
assisted King Henry the third against the Barons) in Wales, he wasted all the
said John's Villages and Edifices, and all things that were his, with sword and
fire, and so of a rich man, made him poor and indigent. In the very Christmas
holy days, there was a grievous war kindled against the King and his evil
Counselors. For Richard Suard conjoyning other Exiles to him, entered the Lands
of Richard Earl of Cornwall, the Kings brother, lying not far from Behull,
and burned them, together with the Houses, and the Corn, the Oxen in the
Ox-stalls, the Horses in the Stables, the Sheep in the Sheep-cots: they
likewise burned Segrave the native soil of Stephen, Justiciar of England, with
very sumptuous Houses, Oxen, and Corn; and likewise brought away many horses
of great price, returning thence with spoils, and other things. They likewise
burned down a certain village of the Bishop of Winchesters, not far from
thence, and took away the spoils, with other things there found. But the
foresaid Warriers had constituted this laudable general rule among themselves,
that they would do no harm to any one, nor hurt any one BUT THE WICKED
COUNSELORS OF THE KING, by whom they were banished; and those things that were
theirs, they burnt with fire, extirpating their Woods, Orchards, and such like
by the very Roots. This they did then de facto; See 2. R. 2 c. 7. 1. H. 5 c. 6.
2 H. 5. c. 8.
de Jure, I dare not approve it, though in Cases of Attaint and Felony, the
very Common Law to terrify others, gives sentence against perjured Juries,
Traitors, and Felons, in some Cases, that their houses shall be raced to the
ground, their Woods, Parkes, Orchards, Ponds, cut down and destroyed; their 4.
Ass. 2 6. Ass. 7. 30. Ass. 24 50. Ass 4. 6 E 4. 5. Fitz. Attaint. 14.
Meadows, and Pastures, plowed up and defaced, though not so great Enemies to
the State, as evil Counselors. Matthew. Paris, p. 961.
Anno 1264. the forty eight years of Henry the third his reign; The King
keeping his Christmas with the Queen, Richard King of Romans, and many others
at London, Simon Montford the Captain of the Barons at the same time, preyed
upon the Goods of these who adheared to the King, and especially those of the
Queens retinue, brought by her into England, whom they called Aliens. Among
others, some of the Barons forces took Peter, a Burgundian, Bishop of Hereford,
in his Cathedral Church, and led him prisoner to the Castle of Ordeley, and
divided his treasure between themselves; and took diverse others of the Kings
party prisoners. Who thereupon fearing least he should be besieged in the
Tower by the Barons army, by the mediation of timorous men, he made peace with
the Barons for a time; promising inviolably to observe the Provisions of
Oxford, that all the Kings Castles thoroughout England, should be delivered
into the custody of the Barons; that all Aliens within a certain time should
void the Realm, except those who should be thought faithful thereunto by the
unanimous consent of the Kingdom, and that faithful and profitable natives of
the Realm, should thenceforth dispose of the affairs of the Kingdoms under the
King. But THE QUEEN instigated with foeminine malice, contradicted it all she
could, which made the people revile, and cast dirt and stones at her, as she
was going to Windsore, enforcing her to retire again to the Tower. How William
Longshamp Bishop of Ely, Lord Chancellor of England, Earl John, and others,
when they disturbed the peace of the Realm, and turned Malignants, were
apprehended, besieged, imprisoned, excommunicated, and their Goods, and
Castles, seized on by the Lords and Commons, one of Parliament, yea, during the
time of King Richard the first, his absence and captivity, you may read at
large in Annal. pars ^osterior p. 702. 703. 705 706. 734 735.
Roger de Hovedon, In the life of (...) the first.
Holinshed, Daniel, and others. Why then the Lords and Commons in Parliament
may not now much more do the like, for their own, and the whole Kingdoms
safety, I can yet discern no shadow of reason. I will not trouble you with
Histories, showing what violent unlawful courses, Kings and People have
sometimes used to raise moneys in times of war, by sacrilege, rapine, and
all manner of indirect means; I rather wish those Presidents, and their
occasions, buried in eternal silence, then reduced into practice; and verily
persuade my self, that every ingenuous true born Englishman, who bears a real
natural affection to his Country, or a Christian love to his Brethren, the
Parliament, and Religion, will according to his bounden duty, the
Protestation, and Covenant which he has taken, rather freely contribute his
whole estate, if need so require, toward the just defense of his Country,
Liberty, Religion, and the Parliament, against the treacherous Conspiracies of
the Pope, Jesuits, foreign Catholics, Irish Rebels, English Papists, and
Malignants, who have plotted their subvertions, then repine at, or neglect to
pay any moderate Taxes, which the Parliament shall impose, or enforce the
Houses to any extraordinary ways of Levying Moneys, for want of ordinary
voluntary supplies, to maintain these necessary defensive wars.

I shall close up all in a few words. The Parliament has much against their
wills, been enforced to this present defensive war, which they have a most
just, and lawful power to wage and manage (as I have See Part. 2. and 3.
elsewhere evidenced) by the Fundamental Laws of the Realm, yea, by the Law of
God, of Nature, of Nations.

This war cannot be maintained without Moneys, the sinews of it; wherefore
when voluntary contributions fail, the Houses may by the same Laws which
enabled them to raise an Army without the King, impose necessary Taxes for the
maintaining of it, during the wars continuance, else their Legal power to
raise an Army for the Kingdoms defense, would be fruitless, if they might not
Levy Moneys, to recrute and maintain their Army, when raised: which Taxes if
any refuse to pay, they may for this contempt, be justly imprisoned, as in
cases of other Sudsidies; and if any unnaturally war against their Country,
or by way of intelligence, advise, or contribution, assist the common Enemy, or
seduce, or withdraw others (by factious slanderous speeches against the Power
and Proceedings of the Parliament,) from assisting the Parliament in this
kind, they may for such misdemeanors (upon conviction) be justly censured,
confined, secured, and their estates sequestered, rather then the Republike,
Parliament, Religion, or whole Kingdom should miscarry: It is better that one
should perish, then all the Nation; being the voice John 11. 5^. 51. c 18. 14.
of God, Nature, and resolution of all Laws, Nations, Republikes, whatsoever.
If any heretical, scismaticall, or vicious persons, which may poison others
with their pernicious false doctrines, or vicious wicked lives, appear in the
Church, they may after admonition, if they repent not, yea, and de facto, are,
or ought to be 1 Cor. 5. 1 Timothy 1 20. (...) Brook and Ash, Title Excommengment.
Summa Angelica, Rosella and others, Tit. Excommunication.
excommunited, the Church, and society of all faithful Christians, so as none
may, or ought to converse with them till their repentance. If this be good Law
and Divinity in the Church; the banishing and confining of pestilent
Malignants in times of war, and danger, must by the self-same reason be good
Law and Divinity in the State.

I have now (by Gods assistance) notwithstanding all distracting Interruptions,
Avocations, Remoraes incountring me in this service; ran through all Objections
of moment, which the King, or any opposites to this Parliament, have hitherto
made against their proceedings, or jurisdictions; and given such full answers
to them, as shall, I trust, in the general, abundantly clear the Parliaments
Authority, Invocency, Integrity, against all their clamarous malignant
Calumnies, convince their Judgments, satisfy their consciences, and put them
to everlasting silence, if they will without prejudice or partiality,
seriously ponder all the premises, and ensuing Appendix, which I have added for
their further satisfaction, information, conviction; and the confirmation of
all forecited domestic Laws, Presidents, by foreign examples and authorities
of all sorts. And if any shall yet continue obstinate and unresolved after so
many convincing Reasons, Presidents, Authorities, or still retain an ill
opinion of the Parliaments proceedings; I shall desire them only seriously to
consider, the most execrable conspiracy of the Pope, Jesuits, and Popish party
in all His Majesty's three Realms to extirpate the Protestant Religion, subvert
the Government, Parliament, and poison the King himself, (if he condescend not
to their desires, or cross them in their purposes,) whom they have purposely
engaged in these wars, still continued by them for this very end, to enforce
the King to side with them, and so gain possession of his person, to accomplish
this design of theirs, (as is clearly evidenced to all the world, by Romes
Masterpiece, the English Pope, the Declaration of the Lords and Commons,
concerning the Rise and Progress of the Irish Rebellion,) and then advisedly
to consider in what great present danger the Kingdom, King, Parliament, and
Religion are, when the Popish Party, and forces now in Arms have gained the
Kings, Princes, and Duke of York^s persons into their custody, the Cities of
Chester, and of late Bristoll, the Keys of England, with other Ports, to let
in all the Irish Rebels upon us, to cut our throats in England, as they have
cut above an hundred and forty thousand of our Protestant brethrens throats
already in Ireland, it being one part of their design, now presently to be
executed, as appears by sundry Examinations in the Irish Remonstrance; for
which end, some thousands of Irish Rebels (who have all embrued their hands
there in English blood,) are already landed here, and are in great favor and
command about the King; To which, if they add the omnipotent overruling power
of the Queen (the Head of that party) with the King, and his Council, in
disposing all Officers, all places of command and trust under him: The
Confederacy and Contributions of foreign Popish States, to maintain this
war to ruin the Parliament, Kingdom, Religion, and re-establish Popery in
its universal extent; with the large progress the Papists have lately made in
Ireland, Scotland, and England, to accomplish this their long-agitated
Conspiracy; and the late strange proceedings in Ireland, where the best
Protestants are displaced, disgraced, restrained; the Popish Rebels advanced,
and a truce negotiated, if not fully concluded with the Rebels, to the end that
all their forces may be speedily transported hither to ruin our Religion, and
cut all our throats (enough to awake the most stupid English spirits, and rouse
them, up to a speedy unanimous resolution to unite all their purses, and forces
to the Parliament, against the Popish Conspirators, and these bloody Butchers
now ready to devour us:) and then I dou^t not, if they have any true love to
God, Religion, King, Country, themselves, or their Posterities, they will soon
change their former opinions and practices against the Parliaments just
proceedings and join hearts, hands, forces, yea, their uttermost endeavors
with them, to prevent and ward off that imminent destruction which now hangs
over our heads, and will in short time wholly ruin us, if God open not our
eyes, and unite not all our hearts and minds unto the Parliament, with one
unanimous resolution to oppose these cursed Confederates, who have plotted,
occasioned all these wars and miseries, under which our Kingdoms now groan
and languish; which long plotted Treachery in humane probability can no ways
be prevented, nor a settled peace, and Reformation established, but with the
total suppression of the Popish party now in Arms, and by rescuing His
Majesty's person, Children, forces out of their Trayterly hands and power,
whose death they have conspired long ago, if he refuse to grant them an
universal open toleration of their Antichristian Religion, in all His
Kingdoms, and then to seize upon the Prince, and train him up in their
Religion; which how easy it is for them to effect, now they have the King,
Prince, the Kings Ports, his Forces in their power, yea potent Armies of their
own in the field here, and such a force of Irish Rebels now ready to be shipped
over to Chester, Milford, and Bristoll, for their assistance, and enforcement,
to overpower the Protestant party in the Kings Armies, no understanding man
can without fear and trembling, consider.

O then, if ever we will show our selves faithful, valiant, courageous,
magnanimous, bountiful, really cordial, and loyal to our King, Kingdoms,
Country, Parliament, Religion, Laws, Lives, Liberties, Kindred, Families,
Posterities; Let all who profess themselves Protestants lay aside all
causeless jealousies and prejudices against the Parliament, or any others; and
now speedily unite all their Prayers, Hearts, Hands, Purses, Forces, Counsels,
and utmost endeavors together, to defend, secure them all against these
foreign and domestice Jesuiticall Romish Confederates; and if any prove
traitorous, fearful, cowardly, unfaithful, base, or faint-hearted in this
public Cause, as too many, (who deserve to be made spectacles of treachery and
cowardice to posterity, and cannot without injustice or dishonor to the
Parliament and Kingdom, be suffered to escape scot-free, without severe
exemplary punishment,) have done, to their eternal infamy, and betraying of
their Country; the present generations shall abhor them, posterity curse,
and declaim against them, as most unnatural Monsters, unworthy to breath in
English air, or enjoy the name, the privileges of English men, or
Protestants. There is a double kind of Treachery in Soldiers, both of them
adjudged Capital. The first proceeds from a sordid pusillanimous fear,
unworthy the spirit of a Soldier: and this is C^pitall, both by the Civil and
Common Law. By the D. L. amne delictum 6. sect. qui in acie Rebuffas in
L^liberorum sect. etenim. Henricus Bocerus, lib 1. de Bello, cap. 13. p. 49, 50.
Civil Law; The Soldiers who first begin to fly, or but fain themselves
sick, for fear of the Enemy, are to be adjudged to death for this their
cowardice. Yea Lacaena and Dametria, two magnanim^us Women, slew their timorous
sons, who fled basely from the battle, with their own bands, disclaiming tbem
as degenerous Brats, and not their sons; the latter of them inscribing this
Epitaph on her sons Tomb.

Hunc timidum Matter Dametriam ipsa peremit,
Nec dignum Matre, nec Lacedaemonium.
Indeed Diodorus Sie^dus Bibl. hist. l. 12. sect. 15, 16. p. 420.
Charondas and the Thurians, enacted, That cowards who basely fled or refused
to bear Arms for their Countries defense, should set three days one after
another in the open Marketplace, clad in Woman's apparel; (a punishment far
worse then death it self, writes Diodorus Siculus) whereas all other Lawyers
made it Capital; yea, our See Her^. part. 2. p. 24.
Common Law adjudgeth it Treason: Witness the notable Cases of Gemines and
Weston, 1. R. 2. number. 38, 39. who were adjudged Traitors in Parliament* for
surrendering two Castles in France, only out of fear, when they were strongly
besieged, and battered, sooner then they needed, without any compliency with
tbe enemy: The Case of Walsingham. hist Angl. page 337.
Jobn Walsh Esquire, accused of bigh Treason in Parliament against the King and
Kingdom, for yielding up the Castle of Cherburg in France, to the enemy, when
as he might have defended it. And the Case of Dani^ls hist. p. 81.
Henry Earl of Essex, in the second year of Henry the second, accused of high
Treason, by Robert de Monfort, and vanquished by him in a Duel, waged
thereupon; for throwing down the Kings Standard (which he bare by inheritance)
and flying, in xpassing a straight, among the Mountains, when fiercely
encountered by the Welsh. For which, though his life was pardoned, yet he was
adjudged to be shorn a Monk, put into the Abbey of Reading, and had his Lands
seized into the Kings hands. And as for D. l 3. sect, is qui ad hostem Hemicus
Bocerus de E^llo. l. 1. c. 13. p. 48.
treacherous revolting to, or delivering up Castles to the Enemy, it is
Capital, and high Treason by all Laws, and so resolved in Parliament, 3. R. 2.
in the Case of Walsingham. hist. Angl. p. 245, 246. See Rastall. Captains and
Soldiers. Cook 6. Rep. f 27.
Thomas Ketrinton Esquire, accused of high Treason by Sir John Ann^sley Knight,
for delivering up the Castle of Saint Savior in the Isle of Constantine, to
the French, for a great sum of Money, when as he neither wanted provisions,
nor means to defend it. As for those unnatural Vipers, and Traitors, who shall
henceforth (after this discovery) join with the Popish Conspirators, to ruin
their Religion, Country, and the Parliament, for private ends, as The general
History of Stain, l 5. p. 153, 154.
Count Julian the Spaniard joined with the Mores, An. Dom. 713. whom he brought
into Spain, his native Country, furiously pursuing his own private injury with
the Ruin of the public. I shall only bestow his Epitaph upon them, with
which I shall conclude this Treatise. Maledictus furor impius Juliani, quia
pertinax; and indignatio, quia dura: vesanus furia, ammimosus furore, oblitus
fidelitatis, imm^^or religionis, contemptor divinitatis, crudelis in se,
homicida in vicinos, reus in omnes. Memoria ejus in omni ore amarescit, and
nomen ejus in aeternum pu^^escet.

FINIS.
AN APPENDIX: Manifesting by sundry Histories and Authors, that in the ancient
Roman Kingdom and Empire; in the Greek and German Empires, derived out of it;
in the old Grecian, Indian, Aegytian Realms; in the Kingdoms of France,
Spain, Italy, Hungary, Bohemia, Denmark, Poland, Sweden, Scotland, yea, of
Judah, Israel, and others mentioned in the Scripture; the Supreme Sovereignty
and Power, resided not in the Emperors and Kings themselves, but in their
Kingdoms, Senates, Parliaments, People, who had not only a power to restrain,
but censure and remove their Emperors. and Princes for their Tyranny and
misgovernment.
With an Answer to the Principal Arguments, to prove Kings above their whole
Kingdoms and Parliaments, and not questionable nor accountable to them, nor
censurable by them for any exorbitant Actions.
HAving finished the preceding Treatise; which asserts, The Supreme Authority
and Sovereign Power in the Realm of England, legally and really to reside in
the whole Kingdom, and Parliament, which represents it, not in the Kings
Person, who is inferior to the Parliament: A Doctrine, quite contrary to what
Court Prelates and Chaplains have for sundry years inculcated into our Kings
and People (who preach little else but Tyranny to the one, and Slavery to the
other, to support their own Lordly Prelacy, and hinder an exact Church
Reformation) and directly opposite to the resolutions of many malignant
Courtiers, Lawyers, and Counselors about His Majesty; who have either out of
ignorance or malice, created him a new Utopian absolute Royal Prerogative,
unknown to our Ancestors, not bottomed on the Laws of God or the Realm; for
maintenance of each Punctilio whereof, against the Parliaments pretended
Encroachments, the whole Kingdom must be engaged in a destructive civil
War, now like to ruin it: I could not but conjecture, how in all probability
these Clergy men, Courtiers and Lawyers, out of their unskilfulnesse in true
Divinity, History, Law, and Policy would upon the first tidings of this strange
Doctrine, pass a sentence of Excommunication and death against it, as guilty
not only of Heresy, but High Treason; and judge it such a monstrous
Antimonarchicall Paradox as was never heard of in, much less claimed or
practiced by any Kingdom, Realm, or Monarchy whatsoever: To anticipate which
rash censures, and undeceive both Kings and Subjects whom these gross
Parasites have overlong seduced in this point, to their prejudices, convince
the consciences of all gainsaying Malignants, irradiate this long obscured
verity, whose seasonable discovery, may through Gods blessing, conduce very
much to period the present Differences between King and Parliament, touching
matters of Prerogatives and Privileges claimed by either; I conceived it, not
only expedient but necessary, to back theforecited presidents of our own
Kingdom with paralelled examples in most foreign Realms and Monarchies (in
which it is not mannerly to be overbusie without just cause) which I have
faithfully (though sudenly) collected out of the best approved Authors and
Historians; whereby I shall infallibly prove, that in the Roman State and
Empire at the first, in the Greek Empire since, in the German Empire heretofore
and now; in the ancient Kingdoms of Greece, Egypt, India, and elsewhere; in
the Kingdoms of France, Spain, Hungary, Bohemia, Denmark, Sweden, Poland,
Scotland, and most other Kingdoms in the world, (yea in the Kingdoms of Judah
and Israel, and others mentioned in Scripture) the Highest Sovereign
Authority, (both to elect, continue, limit, correct, depose their Emperors and
Kings, to bound their royal power and prerogatives, to enact Laws, create new
Offices and forms of Government) resided always in these or Princes persons.
I shall begin with whole Kingdoms, Senates, Dyets, Parliaments, People, not in
the Emperors, Kings, the Roman State, as having much affinity with curs, See
Camb. Br. Math. it estm. Polychr. Fabian, Holinsh. Speed, Grafton, Grimston.
which was long under their command heretofore.

After the building of Rome by Romulus and Remus, Livy, Romans Hist. l. 1. Plut.
Romul and Numa Pomp. Dionys. Hal. Antiq. Romans l ^ Munster Cosmogr. l. 2. c. 60.
p. 2^0.
Romulus being elected King, divided the people into two Ranks; those of the
highest quality, he styled Senators, making them a Court of Counsel and
Justice, much like our House of Peers; the other he termed The People, being
the body of the State, and representing our House of Commons. In this
distinction, made by the Peoples consent, the Sovereign Authority to elect
Succeeding Kings, to enact binding Laws, to make war, or peace, and the
like; rested not in the Kings person, but in the Senate and people jointly, if
they accorded; yet principally in the people, in case either of assent or
dissent between them; their very Kings and Laws having their greatest power
and efficacy chiefly from the peoples election and assent.

To begin first with their Kings Election and Authority. Plutarchi Numa Pompil.
Dionys Hal. l. 2. sect.
when Romulus their first King deceased, there arose a great controversy in
Rome about the Election of a new King; for though they all agreed to have a
King, yet who should choose him, and out of what Nation he should be elected,
was then controverted. In the Interim to avoid confusion, the Senators, being
150. divided the Regal power between them, so as every one in his turn in
Royal Robes should do Sacrifice to the Gods, and execute Justice six hours
in the night time, and six hours in the day; which tended to preserve an
equality among the Senators, and to diminish the envy of the people, when in
the space of one night and day, they should see one and the same man, both a
King and a private person. But the people disliking this Interregnum (as
tending to put off the Election of a King, that the Senators might keep the
principallity, and divide it among themselves) Livie Romans Hist. l. 1. l. 14.
15. Edit ^rancofurti, 60^. Dionys. Hal. l. 2. sect. 7.
cried out, that their bondage was multiplied having an hundred Lords made
instead of one, neither would they suffer it any longer, unless they would
admit a King, created by themselves: Hereupon the Senate, thinking it best to
offer the people that, which they were like to lose, to gain their favor,
Summa potestate populo permissa, permitted to the people the chief power of
Electing a King: but yet that they might not give away more right, then they
detained: they decreed, That when the people had commanded and elected a King,
it should be ratified, if the Senators should approve it, or be reputed the
authors of it: Then the Interex assembling the people, spoke thus unto them: O
Romans REGEM ELIGITE, choose yea King: so the Senators think fit, and if he be
one worthy to succeed. Romulus, they will approve him. This was so grateful to
the people, that lest they should be overcome with the benefit, they commanded,
that the Senate should decree who should reign at Rome. At last, Numa
Pompilius was named; and none of the people or Senate daring to prefer any
before him; all of them jointly decreed, that the Kingdom should be conferred
upon him. Whence Canubius the Tribune of the people in his Speech against the
Consuls, long after, used these words Livie Romans hist. l 4. p. 4 p. 145.
Numa Pompilius POPULI JUSSU Patres autoribus, Romae Regnavit. Reges exacti
JUSSU POPULI: which manifests, the chief power to be in the people. Numa
departing, Livie, l. 1. p. 17. Dionys. Hol. l. 3. c. 10.
Tullus Hostilius by the people command, consent and approbation was made King,
which Livy thus expresses; Tullum Hostilium REGEM POPULUS JUSSIT, patres
auctores facti: After him, the people created Ancus Martius King Liviel. 1. p.
25. Dionys. Hal. l. 3. c. 9.
Regem POPULUS CREAVIT; patres fuere auctores: After him Livie l. ^, p, 28.
Dionys. Hal. l. 3. c. 10.
ingenti consensu Populus Romanus Tarquinium REGNARE JUSSIT: The People of Rome
with great consent commanded Tarquin to reign. But hedying; Servins having a
strong Guard to defend him Ibid, p, 32, Dionys Hal l. 4. c. 1, 2.
primus injussupopuli, voluntate Patrum Regnavit, was the first that reigned
without the command of the people, by the Senates consent; yet doubting his
title for want of the peoples votes, and young Tarquin his Competitour, giving
out speeches, Ibid.
se injussupopuli regnare, that he reigned without the peoples command; he
thereupon so courted the Commons, by dividing the Lands he had taken from the
enemies among them, that at last he appealed to the people, Vellent nolerintve
se regnare? whether they would or would not have him reign? tantoque consensu,
quanto hand quisquam alius ante rex est declaratus. But Tarquin the Proud
affecting the Kingdom slew Servius; and Ibid p. 36, 37, ^8, 44. Dionys
Holbicar. l. 4. c. 5 to the end.
Non Commitiis habitis, non per suffragium populi, non auctoribus Patribus:
without the Election of the people or Senate, usurped the Crown; neque enim ad
jus regni quicquam praeter vim habebat, ut qui neque populi jussu, neque
Patribus auctoribus regnaret, writes Livy: Whereupon reposing no hope in the
love of the people, he endeavored to defend his usurped Sovereignty by force:
to which purpose, he of himself, without the Senate or Counsel, took upon
him the conusance of Capital offenses; and by color hereof, not only to
slay, banish, and plunder those whom be suspected or hated, but even those
from whom he could expect nothing but prey. Then he lesseneth the number of
the Senate to diminish their esteem and power, and at last to subvert it. He
was the first of Kings who dissolved the Custom used by all his Predecessors,
De omnibus Senatum consulendi, of consulting with the Senate about all
affairs, and administered the Commonwealth by his domesticke Counsels; making
War, Peace, Truces, Leagues with whom he would, injussu populi and Senatus,
without the peoples and Senates command; which Tyrannical Usurpations of his,
with his ravishing of Lucretia, caused Brutus and the incensed Romans to rise
up in Arms against him; deprive him of His Crown, banish him, his Wife and
Children, utterly to abolish the Kingly Government by a Decree, and to take a
Livie l. 1, p. 45, 47. Dionys. Hal, l, 4, c, 10, l. 5. c. 1.
solemn Oath, (lest afterward they might be overcome by Royal entreaties or
Gifts) That they would never suffer any King to Reign in Rome: Which act of
Brutus and the People is highly magnified by Livie and De officiis l. 3.
Tully. This done, the Livie l. 2. p. 47. Dionys. Halicar. l 5. c. 1, 2.
people created two annual Consuls, who had the Power, but not the name and
continuance of Kings, Annuum imperium consulare factum est: Brutus the first
Consul was slain, whilst he was Consul, and Valerius his Companion being
suspected by the People to affect the Kingdom, because he demanded no new
Companion: Valerius hereupon calls the people together Livy ibid. (...)
Dionys. (...)
lays down his Fasces (the badges of his Sovereignty before them) which was a
grateful spectacle to the people, confessionemque factam; Populi quam Consulis
Majestatem vimque majorem esse; and a confession made, that the People had
greater Sovereignty and Power then the Consul, who yet had regal Jurisdiction.
And then there were Laws enacted, of appealing from the Consul or Magistrate
to the people, and that he should lose both his head and goods, who should but
consult to usurp the Kingdom.

In brief, it is clearly agreed by (...) l. 2. sect 2. p. 13^, 133, 134.
Dionysius Halicarnasseus, Historiae, l: 6, p. 529, 530, 534.
Polibius, Hist. l, 1, and 2, l, 27, p, 3^0,
Livy, Ge, Dierum l, 1, c, 3, l, 4, c, 23, f, 239, 240,
Alexander ab Alexandro, Com. weal, l, ^, c, 10,
Bodin, (and Rosiaus, Godwin, and others: and Munst, Cosmogr, l, 3, c, (...),
p, ^80, 28, and c, 16, p, 3^^,
most who have written of the Roman Republike) that the Sovereign Authority
among the Romans, during their Kings, Consuls, Dictators, and other
Magistrates, was originally vested, not in the Kings, Senate, Consuls, or other
Magistrates, but in the whole body of the Senate, and People; the People had
the chief Sovereign Power of enacting and confirming Laws, (the Senates
Decrees and Laws being of no validity, unless the People ratified them) of
creating and electing Kings, Dictators, Tribunes, and all other great public
Officers; of denouncing war, and making Peace: these Tribunes, and Dictators
might restrain, curb, imprison, censure, depose the Roman Consuls (who had
Regal Power) yea, the Roman Kings, Senators, and highest Officers; and to them
the Live, Hist, l, 8, p, 313, with the other forecited Authors.
last appeal from King, Senate, or other Magistrate might be made, as to the
highest Tribunal: they having power likewise to Nobis eadem vi facitis
i^vitam, qua peperistis, Live, Hist, l, ^, r, ^^0,
change or annull the very frame of their public Government, which they often
times did, as these Authors prove at large, to whom for brevity I refer the
Reader. Yea, after the Roman Empire (the greatest, largest Sovereignty in the
world) was erected, the Supreme Power still rested in the Senate and People,
not in the Emperors themselves, which Common wealth, l, 2, c, 5, and l, 1, c,
10,
Bodin grants and proves. This is clearly evident by these ensuing particulars:
First, the Senate and People had sole right and lawful power both to elect and
confirm their Emperors, and to decree them new Honors, Titles, Triumphs;
which power of election, though some Emperors in a sort usurped, by adopting
their Successors, and the Roman Soldiers too, by presuming sometimes to elect
Emperors without the Senate; yet these adoptions and elections were not held
valid, unless the Senate approved and confirmed them, who usually elected all
their Emperors, as of right, according to that of the Panegyrist, Imperaturum
omnibus ex omnibus elegi debere; Plinius Panegyr. Trajano dictus, and Jacobus
Valdesius, c. 18. This appears by the election and confirmation of most
Emperors from See Mun^, Cosmog, l, 2, c, 63 Grimstons imperial History,
Suetonius, Dion Cassius, Herodian, ^utropius, Zoaaras, Sabellicus, Chronicon
Chron^^rum, Opmeerus, Speed and others in these Emperor lives, and others.
Octavius to Leo the first, and more particularly by the Senates and Peoples
election and confirmation of Nerva Pertinax, Severus, Gordianus, Maximus
Pupienus, Clodius Balbinus, Philip, Decius, Trebonianus, Galienus, Claudius the
second, Ta^itus, Probus, Iovinianus, Aurelius, and others. This right of the
Senate was so clear, that Grim, impe. Hist. in his life, p. 2, (...) Munster
Cosm. l ^. c. (...), p. 296,
after the death of Aurelianus, the Army sent word to the Senate, that (as
reason was) they should choose and name an Emperor, and that they would obey
him. After six months space (during which time the Empire was governed by the
Senate) the Senate made choice of Tacitus, who earnestly refused the same at
first, but in the end accepted thereof, to the great joy of the Senate and
Roman people. After whose decease Grim. impe. Hist. p. 208.
Prebus, being chosen Emperor by the Legions and Army, he presently wrote a
letter to the Senate, excusing himself for having accepted the Empire without
their knowledge and confirmation: whereupon the Senate confirmed his election
with many blessings, gave him the name of Augustus, Father of the Country;
made him High Priest, and gave him Tribunal Power and Authority.

Secondly, This is manifest by the confessions, and Actions of the best Roman
Emperors. Commentar. l. 23. f. 238.
Volateranus writes of Trajan (the Sea Eutropius, Sabellicus, Zonaras,
Grimston, Munster in his life: Paneg. Trojano dictus.
best heathen Emperor that Rome enjoyed, that he used to call the Senate,
Father, but himself their Minister, or Servant of their labor; And that
standing, he did reverence to the Consuls sitting, quia SE ILLIS INFERIOREM EX
LEGIBUS esse REPERIRET, because he found by the Laws he was inferior to them.
Whence In vita Trajani.
Dion, Eccles. Hist. l. 3. c. 25.
Niciphorus, and History of Gr. Brit. p. 95.
Speed record of him; that when he invested any Praetor or Commander, in giving
him the sword, he openly commanded him before all, to use the same even against
his own person, if he governed not the Empire well, or violated Law and
Equity; confessing thereby, that he was subject not only to the Laws, but to
the sword of Justice too, in these Officers hands in case he did offend, much
more then to the Senate. I read of the Emperor Grimstons imperial Hist. in his
life, p. 181 Munst. Cosm. l. 2. c 63.
Decius, elected by the Senate; that he preserved the authority of the Senate,
(who compelled him to make his Son his companion in the Empire) following
their Counsel in all matters of Government, governing all things with great
wisdom and equity, by the advice and consent of the Senate, to the great
contenment of all the Roman People; and going into Thracia against the Goths,
he left the Government in the hands of the Senate; permiting them to choose a
censor at their pleasure, who had Supreme Jurisdiction over all men; which
office some former Emperors had usurped, making themselves Censors. So
Grimstons imperial Hist. p. 196. 205.
Claudius the second, and Tacitus did nothing without the consent, advice, and
counsel, of the Senate, either in matter of War or Peace. And Hist. l. 6. p.
530. 531.
Polybius writes expressly, That the Roman Emperors Counsels and purposes were
efficatious, or invalid, at the pleasure of the Senate, which had power to
remove or continue them, to increase or abridge their power and wealth; to
decree or deny them triumphs, toward which they contributed; and and that they
could neither make war, nor peace, nor truces, without the peoples consent.
Their Emperors in truth, being but their chief Generals in their wars, at
the first, in right.

Thirdly, They had power to create one, two, or more Emperors at once, as
appears in their election of Grimston, ibid. p. 171. tom 176. Munster Cosmogr.
l 2. c. 63.
Gordianus, the Father and Son to be Joint-Emperors at once, and of Maximius
Pupienus, and Clodius Balbinus, and Gordianus, to be Caesar's at once. And those
who could thus create more Emperors then one, when they pleased, no doubt had a
power above the Emperors.

Fourthly, They had a Sovereign power, judicially to convent, censure, yea to
depose, and adjudge their Emperors to death, for their tyranny and
misgovernment: this appears by the case of Nero, that wicked Emperor
Grimston, Suetonius, Eutropius, Zonaras Volateranus, Sabellicus, Math. Westminster.
Polychronicon, Opmetrus Chron, Chronicorum, Speed, and others in his life.
whom the Senate judicially deposed, condemned for his tyranny and
misgovernment, as a public enemy to the State, adjudging him to have his head
fastened to aforke, and so to be publicly whipped to death, and then
precipitated from a rock: upon which sentence he being sought for, and forsaken
of all, to avoid the execution of it, murdered himself with a poinyard. So
when Grimston, Entropius, and others in his life.
Domitian was slain, the Senate assembling the same day, caused all his Statues
to be thrown down, and all the inscriptions and memorials of him to be
cancelled, defaced; and elected Nerva Emperor. Grimstons imperial Hist. p.
160. Munster Cosmog l. 2. c. 63. p. 2, 2.
Didus Julianus who purchased the Empire by bribing the Soldiers, coming to
Rome with an Army, went to the Senate, where assembling such Senators as were
present, by their decree he was proclaimed Emperor, and they presently made
his Son in law Cornelius Repentinus Praetor of Rome, putting Sulpetianus out of
that office, and from thence he was carried to the Imperial Palace, and held
for Emperor, more through force, then good will of any honest men: But the
people hateing, and cursing him; at last, a full Senate being assembled, by the
common consent of all the Senators, it was decreed, that Julianus should be
deprived of the Empire, as a man unworthy to rule, and Severus proclaimed
Emperor; to whom two of the principal Senators were sent to yield him their
obedience, with the Ensigns of the Empire, and Julianus being generally
abandoned, they commanded him to be slain in his palace. Grimston ib. p. 160.
Aelii Lampridii Heliogabalus, Zonares, Sabellic. and others.
Heliogabalus (that monster of wickedness) was slain by the praetorion
Soldiers by the Senates and peoples approbation, who commanded he should no
more be called Antoninus, and that in detestation of him, no other Emperor
should after that be called by this name, and that he should be called
Tiberinus, according to the manner of his death, his body being tied to great
stones, and sunk in Tiber, that it might never be found. So Grimst. in his
life p. 170, to 174. with Jul. Capitol, Sabellicus, Munster, and others.
Maximinus the Emperor oppressing, and Tyrannizing over the people, with great
cruelty, was deposed by the Senate, and he, with his son (though already made
Caesar, and declared Emperor) adjudged enemies and Rebels; and Gordianus with
his Son elected and proclaimed Emperors by the Soldiers, people, and Senate
of Rome. After which they, considering the great power of Maximinus, ^o secure
the City, made great preparations to resist him, and writ letters to all their
Provinces, that Grimston p. 324.
all those Governors that Maximinus had there placed should be displaced;
which direction was generally obeyed, and the Governors most of them slain.
Thereupon Maximinus then in Hungary, posts with his Army, and Son toward Rome;
and young Gordianus being slain and his Father strangled in the interim; the
Senate assembled in the Temple of Jupiter, chose Maximus Pupienus and Clodius
Balbinus Emperors, and to please the people which consented not to their
election, they likewise named young Gordianus Caesar, and raised forces to
resist Maximinus, who lying before Aquilia, his Soldiers hearing that he, with
his Son were proclaimed Rebels at Rome, and new Emperors elected, came bodily
to their Pavilions about noone, slew them, and sent their heads to Rome. By
these, with sundry presidents of like nature, it is apparent, that the
Sovereign power and Jurisdiction, even after the Roman empire erected,
continued still in the Senate and people, to whom the Emperors were
responsible, by whom they were deposed, yea put to death for their
misdemeanors and offenses against the state, and oppressions of their
Subjects: Which power they retained till the Emperors removed their Courts
from Rome to Constantinople, by which means the authority of the Senate, and
dignity of the Consuls was almost wholly lost by degrees, in Justine the
seconds reign.

After the seat of the Empire was translated to Constantinople, the Senate,
People, Soldiers, and Patriarchs of Constantinople, claimed a right, and power
to elect their Emperors, to prescribe conditions, and Oaths unto them before
they were crowned; as also a power in some cases to depose them, yea execute
them, as you may read at large in their See Munst. Cosm. l. 4. c. 59. Zouaras,
Nauclerus, Sabellicus Grimston, and others.
lives; Of which I shall recite some instances. Ioan^es Zonaras, Annal. Tom. 3.
p. 9^. Grimst. p. ^45. Eutropius, l. 1^. p 154. See Munsteri Cosm. l 4. c 59.
throughout.
Julian the Apostate dying, Jovinian, assensu omnium, by the joint assent of
all the Soldiers, Captains, and people was elected Emperor; who absolutely
refused the Empire, saying; that he being a Christian would not be an Emperor
over Infidels: But all men were so pleased with his election, that they cried
out aloud saying; we are all Christians; And for his sake, those which were not
so, resolved to become Christians, upon condition that he would accept the
Empire; which he thereupon accepting, with incredible joy and gladness, they
swore obedience to him, and gave him the Imperial Ensigns. He being casually
smoothered to death; Zonaras ib. Grimst. p. ^47. and Munster, l. 4. c. 59
Valentinian the first was by the joint consent of the Captains and Soldiers,
chosen Emperor: after which, the Empire went by descent till the death of
Valentinian the second and then Zonaras. Tom. 3, f. 123.
Martianus by means of Endoxia, with the Senates and Patriarchs assent, was
elected and crowned Emperor: After whose poisoning Zonara. ib. f. 124. Grimst.
p. 292.
Asper sought to have been his Successor; but being an Arrian, the orthodox
Christians of Constantinople would by no means elect him; whereupon, accepta a
populo potestate, he named Leo Emperor, having received power so to do from
the people. Leo adopting one of Aspars Sons Caesar, the Senate and people
were so much displeased at it, fearing that an Arrian should reign over them,
that they went tumultuously to the Emperor, defiring him to remove him from
that dignity, who soon after flew both him and his father. Zonaras ibid. f.
126.
Basiliseus usurping the Empire against the Senates and peoples consents, who
hated him for his Tyranny; the people sent for Zeno, whom he expelled, received
him into Constantinople, and restored him to the Empire; After whose death
Zonaras ib. f. (...), 127, 128. Grimst. p. 306.
Anastasius, de sententia Senatus and Legionum, was elected Emperor by the
Senates and Legions decree. He dying, Zonaras ib. f. 127. 128. Grimst. p. 306.
Justinus, by the general consent both of the Senate, people, and Soldiers
was elected Emperor, though but a swineheard in his younger days; who creating
Justinian for his Successor, the people gave their consents thereto, with happy
acclamations. So Grim. p. 3^7
Constans the second was made Emperor by the Senate of Constantinople. Zonar.
f. 137
Philipicus usurping the Empire against the peoples and Senates liking, they
rose up against him, deposed him: and as Desex Aetatemundi.
Beda In Philyppico.
Marianus l, 5. c. 15.
Otho Frisingensis and An. 713.
Abbas Vspergensis write; The people of Rome decreed, that neither his name,
nor letters, nor coin should be received. And the Zonaras Tom. 3, f. 137
Senate and people of Constantinople created Anthemius Emperor in his place,
giving him the name of Anastatius. Thus Zonaras, ibid, f. 142
Michael Curaepalata was created Emperor by the Senate in the life of
Stauratius who intended to leave the Empire to Theophanon his wife. So See
Zonaras. ib. f. 168
Theodora, a toto Senatu, populo and sacerdotibus, was elected and saluted
Empress. Nicetae Chroniatae, Annals f. 40.
Isatius Angelus was elected Emperor, and Andronicus deposed, apprehended and
put to death by the people of Constantinople for his tyranny and oppression.
After whose death Munst. Cosmog. l. 4, p. 1109, 1110.
Baldwin Earl of Flanders, a Frenchman, was elected Emperor by the Soldiers
and people, upon condition, the Venetians should elect the Patriarch: in whose
blood the Empire continued Munsteri Cosm. l. 4, c. ^9.
four descents and then returned to the Greeks. And as the Senate and people
of Constantinople had thus the right of electing their Emperors, so likewise
See Bishop Bilsons true difference etc. part. 3. p. 494, to 500.
they and the Patriarch of Constantinople prescribed a conditional
Coronation Oath to diverse of them, which they were to take before they were
crowned, and to deliver it under their hands in writing. Anastatius Dicori,
being chosen Emperor after Zeno his death, Zonaras Annal. Tom. 3. f. 126.
Cuspinian, in Annastatio.
Euphemius the Patriarch of Constantinople before he would crown him, exacted
of him a confession of his faith in writing, wherein he should promise, that he
would innovate nothing in Eclesiasticall Doctrines etc. whereupon he delivered
a writing to the Patriarch, wherein he professed, that he did embrace all the
Tenants of the Church, and that he would keep all the Decrees of the Council
of Chalcedon; which done, he was crowned, and then presently took away the
grievous tribute called Aurargenteum, which much oppressed the people. Thus
when Zonaras Tom. 3. f. 142.
Michael Rungabis was elected Emperor, and came to be crowned, Nicephorus the
Patriarch first required of him a writing, wherein he should promise, that he
would violate no ordinances of the Church, nor defile his hands with the blood
of Christians: which conditions se^ (q) before.
Bishop Bilson grants, the people had power to prescribe, the Empire being
elective, but not the Patriarch alone. And with all these Patriarchs sometimes
presumed to excommunicate and keep their Emperors out of the Church for
murders and such like offenses, as appears by (...).
Polyenctus keeping John Zimis^ea out of the Church, and refusing to crown
him, till he had banished the Empress Theophano and those who slew Nicephorus;
and by Photius his putting by the Emperor Basilius from the Sacrament, when he
came to receive it, for homocidies committed by him.

Fifthly, The Roman Senate and people had power to divide the Empire, and to
create a new Emperor at Rome in the West, distinct from that of Constantinople
in the East: About the year of Christ 456 (...) See Mua. Cousin, l. 2. c. 4.
and l. 4. c, 59.
Gensericus King of the Vandals wasting Italy and sacking Rome whiles Marcianus
the Emperor resided at Constantinople, the Senators and Roman Gentlemen
returning to Rome when Gensericus had lost it, wanting an Emperor to protect
them, chose Avitus by common consent for Emperor of Rome, Italy, and Sicilie,
of which Marcianus was very glad, and approved his Election: And not long
after, whiles Leo the first reigned at Constantinople, the Senate successively
elected Olibrius and Glizerius Emperors of Rome, Italy, and Sicilie; yea, the
very final division of this great Empire into that of the East and West, and
th^e creation of a new Roman Emperor, and Empire of the West, with the
transferring of the Imperial Crown from the Greek to the German line, was
done by the authority, and joint consent of the people, Senate, and Bishop of
Rome, upon this occasion: as Decad, 1. l, 1, 10.
Blondus (...).
Sabellicus and Bp. Bilsons true difference between Christian Subjection and
unchristian (...) Nauclerus vol. 3 Genera^^ 26, An, 753. Sigebert, Chron. An.
801. Aencas Sylvius de Author. Romans Imperii c. 9 Munst. Cosinog, l. 2. c. ^4.
others relate. Aistulfus King of the Lombards invaded and spoiled those parts
of Italy belonging to the Romans; who being unable to resist or pacify him;
the Bishop and City of Rome hereupon sent messengers to their Emperor
Consantine to Constantinople, for aid, assuring him, that unless he sent them
aid the City and whole Country would be subdued by Aistulfus: But whiles Rome
and Italy were ready to sink under those ruins Constantine had no manner of
care to relieve them; and the messengers that were sent to him, signified by
letters, that there was no looking for help from Constantine, either for that
he would not, or could not, and therefore they must seek some other way: In
the mean time Aistulfus sent Heralds to menace the Bishop and people of Rome,
that unless they would yield themselves and their City, he would come and take
them by force, and kill man, woman, and child. Hereupon they being out of hope
to pacify the enemy, or to receive help from Constantine; the Pope, together
with the people of Rome, determined to send messengers to desire aid from Pepin
father to Charles the great, then King of France, who sent them succor,
subdued their enemy, and quieted Italy. After which, Charles likewise ayding
and succouring both the Pope, and Romans against their enemies, and coming in
person to Rome; the Romans (who in heart were long before falen from the
Emperor of Constantinople, because he began to neglect the City of Rome, and
to leave it as a spoil to the Barbarians and others) taking this occasion and
opportunity, and grieving that the Empire of the world, which with their blood
they had gotten, and established by their virtues, should be governed and
ruined by Irene (a lewd woman) Constantines mother (who swayed all at her
pleasure) did thereupon elect and proclaim Charles for their Emperor, and
commanded Pope Leo to crown him. (...) c 3.
Platina, Decad* 2. l. ^,
Blondus, Vol. 3, Genesis 27. An, 800.
Nauclerus, ^nead. ^. ^, 8
Sabellicus, Annal, ^o^^rum, l. 4. f. 344.
Aventinus, Anno ^01.
Sigebert, ^. 5, c, ^9,
^risingensis, and De Author, Rom, Imp. c. 9.
Aeneas Sylvius, all record; that this was done (not by the Popes authority
alone, (as some late Romanists pretend, for he poor man had no such power) but
by THE DECREE, DETERMINATION, ASSENT AND REQUEST OF THE SENATE AND PEOPLE OF
ROME; who, tacito SENATUS CONSULTO PLEBIS CITOQUE DECERNUNT to transfer the
Empire JURE SUO, By their own right, from the Greeks to the Germans, and from
Constantine to Charles the Great: ever since which time it has continued thus
divided in the blood of Clarles, and other French and German Princes. A most
clear demonstration, that the most absolute Sovereign power and disposal of
the Empire resided not in the Emperors themselves, but in the Sen^^e and
people, even from the very first Emperors, till this partition of the Empire
(more then 800 years space,) and that their Emperors neglect to protect, to
aid them against their enemies when they needed, and craved help, was a just
ground for them to reject his Sovereignty; yea, to create a new Empire, and
Emperor of another race, as see Avontine, An, l, 3, f, 344, etc. and Bishop.
Bilson (z) before
Pope Leo with all the Roman Clergy, Senate, and people then resolved; not only
in point of State policy, but of Conscience too: upon which very Jacob Vald. de
dignitate Regum Hisp. c, 18, Munst. Cosm. 1. 2. c, 20. 21.
ground; not only the Spaniards fell off from the Roman Empire, electing them
Kings, and erecting Kingdoms of their own: but likewise our see Speeds Hist.
p, 189 to 212.
Island of Britain (the fairest plume of the Roman Diadem) rejected the Roman
yoke and Government, to which it had been subject almost 500 years; craving
aid against the Scots and Picts from the Saxons, who therereupon became their
Sovereign Lords at last, and disposessed them of the Kingdom: Now, that these
revolts and changes of the Empire in this case were lawful even in point of
Conscience, we have the resolution of Bishop Bilson himself, (in his Book
dedicated to Queen Elizabeth, wherein he professedly defends the Sovereignty of
Kings) in these very words The true difference between Christian subjection and
unchristian rebellion. part. 3. p, 416.
The Roman State and Commonwealth had as good right to dispose the Roman
Empire, as all other Christian and Heathen Kingdoms and Countries had to
settle the sword and scepter that Reigned over them. And since all Cassanaeus
catalogus gloriae mundi pars 5, consid. 29, p, 245 246.
other Nations once members of the Roman Empire, were suffered to plant those
several forms of regiment which they best liked, and when the Right Heirs
failed to elect their own Governors, I SEE NO CAUSE why the Romans might not
provide for themselves as well as other Realms had done before them;
especially if the reports of your stories be true; that they were neglected by
the Grecians, when they were beseiged by the Lombards; and the scepter at
Constantinople went not by descent, or succession, but by violent and wicked
invasion, and usurpation. So he; with whom Cassanaeus in his Catalogus Gloriae
mundi: pars 5 consid. 30. p. 248. accords. and iacobus Valdesius, de Dignitate
Regum Hisp. c, 18. n, 20, 21.

Sixthly, After this division, and translation of the Empire unto Charles the
Great, the Roman Empire for a time, by permission and connivence of the French,
and German States, went by succession till Charles the Gross; after him wholly
by Election, see Munst, Cosm l. 3, c, 22, and Grimstons Imperial Hist.
the power of electing the Emperor residing in all the French and German
Princes, till at last it was by consent, about the year 1001. translated to
the 6, or rather Grimst. Imp. Hist, p, 433, 535. 560, 571. 572. Munst. Cosm, l,
3, p, 410, to 414.
7. Princes Electors: Yet during all this time the Sovereign Power and
Jurisdiction of the Empire resided only in the German Princes, States and Diets
(not the Emperors themselves) who had power, not only freely to elect what
Emperors they pleased, but also to censure, and depose their Emperors upon
just grounds, and to set limits to their Imperial Jurisdictions. Not to
trouble you with the Histories of see Grimst. Abas Vsper gensis, Nauclerus,
Rerum Germanicarum Scriptores, Munst Cosmogr. l3, Bp. Jewels veiw of a
seditious Bull. and others in their lives, and John White his Defense of the
war, c, 6, p 18. to 21.
Ludovicus Pius, Otho the great, Henry the 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Lotharius,
Frederick Barbarossa, Phillip, Otho the fourth and fifth, Frederick the 2, 7.
Albert the 1, Ludovicus Bavarus, Sigismond, and other Emperors, who were much
affronted, persecuted, warred against, and some of them unjustly deposed and
murdered by their Subjects, Sons, and the Princes electors, through the Popes
procurement; I shall pitch only upon such presidents as are pertinent to my
purpose Grinst Imp. Hist p, 104, Munst. cosmog. l. 3, p. ^4. Hermolds Chron.
Slauorum l. 1, ^. 7. Iean Cressin La state de Le (...) p. 263.
Charles the third surnamed the fat, though he came to the Empire by descent,
yet the Princes, Dukes, and Governers of the Provinces of Germany, and France,
seeing his great insufficiency, and unaptnesse to govern (he being grown a
very fool and having lost his understanding) did thereupon deprive him of his
Empire, and other Kingdoms; and elected and crowned Arnolph Emperor in his
stead: He being thus degraded both of Realm, Empire, and forsaken of all the
world, not having so much as an house wherein to shroud himself, retired into
a poor village of Suabe, where he lived some few days in excream misery, and
penury, and soon after dyed; not lamented nor pitied of any man: Which
deposition of his, I have formerly proved lawful; though his subsequent ill
usage was no doubt dishonorable, and unjust. So the Emperor Munst Cos. l, ^.
p, ^15, 416 404 Grimst. Im. Hist. p, 576. 581, 582. Iean Crisp. Le state de Le
g^se. p, 465.
Wenceslaus was deposed by the Princes Electors of the Empire, for his
insufficiency to govern, and the little care he took to suppress and pacify
the civil wars and dissentions in the Empire, giving himself over to vain
pleasures and delights, which made his government dangerous, and unprofitable
for the Empire, and Christian common wealth; and Rupert made Emperor by them
in his room. After this, about the end of Grimst. Imp. Hist p, 736. 737.
Rodulph the second his imperial reign, the Electors called a Diet at
Nurenberg, from whence they sent ambassadors to the Emperor to acquaint him
with the State of the Empire; who told him, that the Electors required above
all things a reformation of justice: That he should make choice of more
faithful officers and Counselors then formerly he had done: That a general
Diet might be called the spring following: That the reason of the bad
government of the common weal was, for that his Majesty did not impart the
important affairs of the Empire unto them, as his Predecessors had done etc.
Whereupon he appointed a general Diet to redress these disorders; but dying
before the day, according to the golden Bull made in the year 1356 the Elector
Palatine, and he of Saxon, were appointed Vicars, Governors, and
Administrators of the Empire until there were a King of Romans chosen to be
Emperor. After which they Elected Mathias, who as Emperor and King of the
Romans Munst. Cos. l. 2. c. 64, p, ^03, l, 3, p. 410, to 418. Grimston. p, 737.
738.
had not any City or Town within the Empire, the whole Territory of Germany
belonging to the Electors, Bishops, Abbots, Princes, Earls, Noblemen, and free
Towns. What power the Princes Electors, and German states had, and yet have in
electing, rejecting, deposing, restraining their Emperors; in calling Diets,
and making Laws, you may read more largely in Consm. l. 3. p, 382, to 418.
Munster, and Imp. Hist. from Charles the great to the end.
Grimston: By all which, and other particulars, which for brevity I shall omit,
it is most evident, that the Supreme Sovereign Authority of the Roman State,
both under their ancient Kings and Emperors, and of the Greek, and German
Empires resided not in the Kings and Emperors themselves, but in their
Senates, Diets, People, States, who prescribed them conditional Oaths at their
Coronations, and to whom they were still accountable for their actions and
misgovernment, This Common wealth, l, 2. c. 5. p. 221. 222,
John Bodin (a famous learned French Lawyer, of great experience in State
affairs, surpassing all who writ before him of Republikes) plainly affirms in
these words. The Roman Emperors were at first, nothing else but Princes of the
Common weal, that is to say, the chief and principallmen: the SOVEREIGNTY
nevertheless still RESTING IN THE PEOPLE AND SENATE, the Emperor having the
Sovereign authority only in fact, not in right: the State being but a very
Principality, wherein THE PEOPLE HAD THE SOVEREIGNTY. So the German Empire at
this day is nothing else, but an Aristocraticall Principality: wherein the
Emperor is head and chief, the POWER and majesty of the Empire BELONGING UNTO
THE STATES THEREOF, who thrust out of the Government Adolphus the Emperor, in
the year 1296, and also after him Wenceslaus in the year 1400; and that BY
WAY OF JUSTICE, AS HAVING IVRISDICTION AND POWER OVER THEM. Bodin Com. l. 1, c,
10, p. 157, etc.
And so properly ancient Romans said: Cicero Oration pro Rabirio, Perd. reo.
Imperium in Magistratibus, Auctoritatem in Senatu, Potestatem in Plebe,
Maiestatem in Populo; Command to be in, the Magistrates, Authority in the
Senate, Power in the Maeniall People, and Majesty in the People in General.
The Senate in Rome did consult, the people command: for Livy often times says:
Senatus decrevit, populus iussit: the Senate has decreed, and the People
commanded; Which he there more largely prosecutes, as you may read at leisure.
To all which Of the difference between Christian subjection, etc. part. 3. p.
513. to 521.
Bishop Bilson himself does fully assent, affirming, that Germany is a free
state, that the Emperor holds the Empire by election, and that but on
condition, which he takes an oath to perform. And if he violate their
liberties, or his oath, they may not only lawfully resist him by force of
arms, but repel and depose him as a tyrant, and set another in his place, by
the right and freedom of their Country. And Catalogue Gloriae Mundi. pars. 5.
Consid. 29. p. 246.
Cassanaus holds, that the people may take away the very name of the Emperor
at this day, degrade him, and resume his royal power. This then being an
unquestionable verity; disproves that palpable common mistake of Resolving of
Conscience sect. 1. 2. 3, A Revindication printed at Cambridge, 1643. and other
late pamphlets.
Dr. Fern with other ignorant Court Doctors and Royalists, who would make the
world and Kings believe, that the Roman Emperors were of greater power and
authority than the Senate, people; the highest powers upon earth to which all
persons, yea the Senate and people collectively considered, ought to submit;
and that it was unlawful either for the Senate or people forcibly to resist
Caligula, Claudius, Nero, and other their wickedest, and most tyrannical
Emperors: much less to depose, take arms against, or call them to a strict,
just account for their Tyranny, Oppression, or Misgovernment, it being directly
contrary to Paul's Doctrine Romans 13. 1, to 6. Let every soul be subject to the
higher powers, etc. which false groundless principle, is the sole foundation
upon which all their late Sermons, Books, and railing Discourses against this
Parliaments proceedings and taking up of defensive arms are built; when as in
truth, the Senate and people were the highest powers, to who^ the Roman
Emperors themselves were to be obedient in all just requests and commands,
under pain of damnation, and subject to the Senates sword of justice in case
of disobedience and misgovernment, as all the premises evidence; yea it
likewise manifestly evidenceth, that whole States and Parliaments are the
highest power and above their Kings, who are subject to the^, since the Roman
and Greek Senates and people heretofore, and the very German States at this day
are the highest power and above their Emperors, though ever reputed of
Cassanaeus Catalog. Gloriae Mundi pars. 5. consid. 27. and Iacobus Valdesius de
Dignitate Regum Regnorumque Hispaniae passim
greater power, Sovereignty and dignity than any Kings, and the greatest
Monarchs in the world: and that therefore Kings, even by Paul's Doctrine Romans 13.
ought to be subject to the higher power and Jurisdiction of their Parliaments,
the Laws and Statutes of their Realms; and to be accountable to them, if not
subject to their censures, as some affirm, in exorbitant cases of
misgovernment which concern the Kingdoms and peoples safety. If Kings
injuriously take away the lands, goods, or imprison the persons of any
particular subjects, the 22, E. 3. 3. Error, 8. Fitzherbert Petition. The
petition of Right 3. Caroli. See Ashes Tables Annuity: 2. Amerciament. 8. entr,
Congeable 84. Entrusion 1, Petition and Traverse des Offices throughout and
Habeas corpus Hieron. Blanca. Aragon. Rerum Comment. p. 188. 589. 590. 724.
747. to 761.
Law gives every one a particular remedy against them by way of Action, or
Petition of Right. If then every private subject may have redress, much more
the whole Kingdom, (in and by Parliaments only not in inferior Courts)
against their Sovereigns which oppress them; who being subject unto the Laws
of God and their Realms, which have Prove. 24 23 Romans 2. 11.
no respect of persons, may as many affirm, be questioned and judged by them
in their Parliaments as well as other princes, great officers of State and
Magistrates who in scripture are called Psa. 82. 1, 2. Exodus 22. 8. Ioh. 10.
34, 35.
Gods, the higher powers and said to be Romans 13. 1, 2 3, 4, 5. Tit. 3. 1. 1 Timothy 2. 2.
^rdained, to rule Prove. 8. 15. Deuteronomy. 1. 17. 2 Chr. 19. 6, 7.
judge by and for God, as well, as Kings and Emperors. It is branded as a
spice of B. Jewels veiw of a seditious Bull. Dr. Crackenthorp of the Popes
temporal monarchy (...) 2, 3, 4, 5. Cassanaeus Catalogus gloriae mun di pars
5. cons 7.
Antichristian pride in Popes and their Parasites, to deem themselves so High
above other men, that they are accountable to none but God for their wicked
actions, though many Popes in former and later times, have been See Balaeus de
vitis Pontificum. Morneys Misterium, and ^ere, part. 1.
questioned, consured, imprisoned and deposed both by Emperors, Kings, and
Councels for their intolerable misdemeanors. And is it not the very self same
crime in Kings, in Emperors, and their flatterers, to hold this Popish
erroneous opinion, that they are in no case responsible to their whole
Kingdoms or Parliaments for their grossest exorbitances? Our Bp. Jewels veiw
of a seditious Bull. Matt. Paris and Speed, in King Iohus life: Bp. Bilsons
true Zifere^ce, etc. part. 3, p. ^09, 10 526. Saxo grammatticus Hist. Daniael,
11. p. 189, 190.
Popish Prelates and Clergy generally heretofore, and some of our Protestant
Bp. Bridges his supremacy of Christain Princes. p. 1034.
Bishops and Divines of late times, from St. Ambrose his practice, have held,
that kings for murders, rapes, and great crying offenses may be Lawfully
excommunicated and censured by the spiritual Law and sword, as sundry
Emperors and Kings have been; then why not likewise by the temporal, when
their Parliaments and whole Kingdoms see just cause, the case of hundreds of
Emperors and Kings in former times, as the Histories of all Nations and ages
prove abundantly, beyond all contradiction? I shall here instance in some few
Kings censures subject to the Roman State and Empire, with whom I shall
conclude this discourse touching the Roman Monarchs Oration pr^ Deiorato Rege. p
629.
Deioratus King of Galatia under the Romans Jurisdiction, and one of their
allies, was accused of Treason, and condemned to lose both his head and estate
for certain offenses against C. Caesar, and the Roman State; as appears by
Tullies Oration to Caesar in his behalf, to procure his pardon; which because
it was the first president of this kind, made his advocate say; tamen it a
inusitatum est, Regem capitis reum esse, ut ante hoc tempus non sit auditum:
yet long before that, Zedechiah King of Judah, rebelling against the King of
Babylon, was brought prisoner to the King of Babylon to Riblah, where he gave
judgment upon him slew both his sons and Princes before his eyes, and then
put out his own eyes, bound him with fetters of brass, and carried him
prisoner to Babylon, where he died. 2 Kings 25. 1. to 8. Ier. 52. 1. to 12.
And after Detoratus Josephus Antiqu. Iudaeorum, l, 15, c, 1. Alexander ab
Alexandro. Genesis Dierum l. 3. c, 5, f. 126.
Antigonus King of the Jews, being taken prisoner by Antonius, for moving
sedition against the Roman State, was beheaded with an axe at Antioch, without
any legal trial, to prevent further seditions, which never befell any King
before that time, writes Alexander ab Alexandro; And Alexander ab Alexandro
abid Strabo Geogr. l, 8, p. 712, 713.
Agrippa, not long after, put Bogus King of the Mores to death, for siding with
Antonius. Of later times, I read that Grimstons Imperial history, p, 389.
Ludovicus Pius the Emperor taking Bernard his Nephew (King of Italy)
prisoner, for rebelling and denying his superiority over him, carried him into
France, to determine what should be done with him according to Justice, for
this his offense; where (though a King) he was condemned to death and
executed, as some, or at least cast into prison, and had his eyes put out, as
others write: So Munsters Geogr. l, 2, c, 76, (...) 16. Gen: hist, of France.
p. 3^.
Charles of France taking Conradine King of Sicily prisoner, publicly
arraigned and condemned him of high Treason, and cut off his head, Anno 1208.
Yea, our own Matthew. Par. Hist. Angl. p. 273, 274, 275. Genesis hist. of France.
p. 119.
King John being a Feudatary to the King of France, was by Philip the French
king in a full Parliament there (during his absence in England) arraigned,
condemned to death, and deposed from his Crown by the sentence of his Peers,
for murdering his Nephew, Arthur, (then a Subject of France) with his own
hands: So Speed, p. 653, 654 Hect. Boethius, l, 14. Walsing, Holins. Fabian,
Grast. and others.
John Bailiol king of Scotland, renouncing his homage for that Crown, to king
Edward the first, was for this offense compelled to resign his Crown with all
his right to the kingdom of Scotland, to King Edward the first, and sent
Prisoner to the Tower of London: and Speed, 1156. 1196. Cambd, Esiz. Holinsh.
Stow, Martin, Buchanon.
Mary Queen of Scots, within many men's memories, after long debate in
Parliament, was condemned and beheaded at Fothringhom Castle, Febr. 8. An.
1587. for laying claim to the Crown of England, and other particulars
mentioned in our Historians. And thus much for the Roman, Grecian, German
Emperors, kings and kingdoms.

I shall now give you a brief Survey of what Greek Authors write concerning
Kings and Kingdoms; and of the power, the kinds of ancient Kings and Kingdoms,
in Greece and other places. That great Father of Learning and policy
Aristotle, (Tutor to the greatest Emperor Alexander the Great) whose Authority
is irrefragable in our Schools; resolves: Polit, l. 3. c. 10. p. 209. 210. and
l. 5. c. 10. p. 367.
That true Kingdoms were erected at first and conferred on the worthiest men by
the free voluntary joint consent of the people, and founded, confirmed by the
customs and Laws of each country, (which Hist. l. 6. p. 621. etc.
Polibius also affirms) Polit. l. 3. c. 10. 11. and l. 5. c. 10, 11.
That there are 4 several sorts of Kings, some of greater, some of lesser
Authority and continuance then others: some elective, some successive, some
during life, some Annual, all of them receiving their distinct jurisdictions,
Forms, Limitations, and different Royalties, from the peoples primitive or
subsequent institutions and consents. For all men being equal by the Law of
nature, can have no dominion nor Supercrity one over another, but by their own
voluntary consents. That the Polit. l. 3. c. 7. 10, 11, 12.
Laws, (not the Kings Princes, or Magistrates be they one or more, or never so
good) ought to be the sole Lords or Rulers of the Commonwealth, and that
Princes and Governors ought to govern by the Laws: who cannot command what
the Laws do not command. That those who command that the Law should rule,
command that God and the Laws should rule: but he that commands a man to be a
Prince, he commands that both a man and beast should be Princes: for
covetousness and the lust of the mind is a certain beast, which poverts both
Magistrates and the very best men; but the Law is a constant and quiet Mind
and Reason void of all motions of lusts and desires. Polit. l. 3. c. 10. p. 19^.
That the power of the greatest things, and greatest power, ought (DE IVRE) of
right to be in all the people, because their wisdoms, resolutions, and
revenues considered altogether, are greater and more considerable then those of
a few wise or honest men placed in the highest offices of Magistracy, who are
but a small particle of the State in respect of all the people. Polit. l. 3. c.
11. p. 217, 218.
That the people ought to be of more power then the King or greatest
Magistrates, to prevent their Tyranny and Oppression; and that a King ought to
govern by his Laws, and not to do any thing against them, according to his
lust; wherefore he ought to have so much power and force wherewith he may
protect the authority of the Laws: yea he must necessarily have forces and
power, yet so much only, as thereby he may be able to curb every particular
man, or many also: yet not so great power but that, a populo autem universo
idem REX ILLE IPSE COERCERI POTEST, the very King himself may yet BE CVRBED by
all the people: such Guards verily the Ancients gave to their Kings when they
would set any Tyrant or Governor over the City: And when Dionysius required
Guards, a certain Syracusan persuaded them to curb such Guards: to which
Hist. l. 6. p. 521.
Polybius also suffragates. According to these Rules of Aristotle, I read in
Antiq. Romans l. 2. sect. 2. p. 133.
Dionysius Halicarnassaeus, and Hist. l. 6 p. 525, 526.
Polybius, that in the Lacedemonian Commonwealth, the Kings had not the chief
Dominion, so as they might do what they pleased, sed summa totius Reipub.
administratio penes Senatum erat: but the chief Government of the whole
Commonweal was in the Senate, from whence the Romans took their pattern.
Genial Dierum. l. 4. c. 23. f. 238. and l. 3. c. 3. f. 117. De Moribus Gentium.
See Xenophon Hist. Grac. l. 5. p. 504 and de Laced, repub. p. 690.
Alexander ab Alexandro, Boemus, and Xenophon write, That the Lacedaemonians
sometimes elected a King out of the Family of the Heraclidae, or of Agis, but
more often two joint Kings of equal Authority out of the stock of Proclus and
Aemisthenes, who yet had not the chief Command as Kings, Quia juris omnis
publici potestas penes Senatum erat, because the power of all public law or
rule was in the Senate (the better to keep their Kings from attempting and
usurping a Tyranny; they being Kings rather in name then Dominion, and like the
Athaean two Annual Praetors; whence Pol. l. 3. c. 11.
Aristotle makes them, the lowest rank of Kings. Commonw. l. 2 c 5. p. 221.
222.
John Bodin informs us, That in the Lacedemonian Aristocracie, the Sovereignty
remained in the State, wherein were two Kings without any Sovereignty at all,
being indeed nothing else but Captains and Regi in exercitu nihil restat
negotii, quam ut rerum divinarum respectu sit Sacerdos, humanarum vero
Imperator, Xenophon Lacede. Resp. ^89.
Generals for the managing of their Wars; and for that cause were by the
other Magistrates of the State, sometimes for their faults condemned to pay
their fine, as was Agesilaus, and sometimes to death also, as was Agis and
Pausanias: Plutar. Apotheg. p. 468.
Agis the last of the Lacedemonean kings (as Plutarch records) being
apprehended and condemned by the Ephori, without an Indictment, and then hanged
in a halter. Finally Polit. l. 5. c. 11. p. 369.
Aristotle himself, and De Agesil. Reg p. 651.
Xenophon inform us; that the Kingdom of the Lacedaemonians flourished very
long, yea longer then any other form of Government, because their Kings power
was but small, and their Kings never desired greater things then the Laws
would bear, by which they had received their Kingdom in the beginning: for in
the beginning that Kingdom was divided between two joint Kings: After which
Theopompus left it more moderated to his successors, and constituted the
Magistracy of the Ephori (who had power even to depose and execute their kings
if they offended, and rose not up out of their seats unto them;) to retain
that moderation; By which means he verily weakened the power of the Kingdom,
but yet certainly settled it more lasting and stable: whence Theopompus gave
this answer to his complaining and upbraiding wife; whether he was not ashamed
to leave the Kingdoms less to his Children then he had received it from his
Father? No truly, says he, for by this means I leave it more stable and
lasting. A Speech well worthy the consideration of the very greatest hereditary
kings These Lacedemonian kings (whose honors, writes Xeno. de Lacedem. Repub.
p. 690.
Xenophon, were not much better then those of private men; Etenim, neque
Regibus animos (...) Tyrannicos voluit, Lycurgus, neque civibus eorum
potestatem invisam reddere, took an Xeno. de Lacedem. Repub. p. 690.
Oath every month, to govern the Kingdom according to the Laws enacted. I
find that the Alexan. ab Alex. l 3. c. 5. f, 126. Calius Rhodig, Antiq. Lect.
l. 7. c. 10.
Cumaeans had a Magistrate whom they called Phylactus, whose office was, to
come into the full Senate, and hold the Kings hands who stood in judgment
before them; until by the Senators decree, their reward or punishment was
appointed. By which it is apparent, that the Cumaean Senate was above their
kings, and did usually arraigne and punish them iudicially, if they saw cause;
as they rose up in Arms against Plutarch de virtutibus mulierum, p, 544, 545.
Aristodomus their king, (who tyrannized over them) by Zenocrita her
instigation, slew him and so recovered their Liberties. The Alex ab Alex, l, ^.
c, 3, f, 117.
ancient Carthaginians had two kings, whom they styled Suffites; who were but
annual, removed every years Yea, the Ibersans and Parthians, had two joint
kings in ancient times, the one to judge the other to govern the people. In
Strabo Geog l. 17. p. 6^ 9. Alex, ab Alex. l. 3. c. 3. Diodorus Siculus Bibl.
hist. l. 3. c 6. p. 140, 141.
Meroe, where they elected their kings by their beauty, strength or wealth;
their Priests had the chief power; who had so great authority, that sometimes
(like the Pope and his Nuncioes) they would send a Messenger and command the
king to be put to death, and make another in his steed. Which custom was after
abolished by one of the kings, who violently assaulted and slew all the
Priests: and in Alex. ab Ale. l. 3. c. 5 f 123. Diod. Sic. Bibl. hist. l. 3. p.
140.
Meroe if the king offended, after the Priests power was abolished, they
inflicted no corporal punishment on him, but all withdrew themselves from him
and avoided his company till he was killed with grief and consumption. The
Strabo Geogr. l 1. p. 148 Alex. ab Alex. l. 3. c. 10. Munst. Cosmog. l. 5. cap.
113. Boe. de moribus Gent. l. 2. c. 8. p. 102.
Indians will not permit their king to sleep in the day time, and if he be
drunken at any time if any woman (of whom he has a guard) kill him whiles he
is drunk she is so far from being guilty of Treason, that for a reward, she
shall be married to his Successor: much like the ancient public institution
of the Selavonians, recorded by Hist. Daniciae, l. 8. p. 40.
Saxo Grammaticus, that the assassinate of evil Kings should succeed them in
their kingdoms; a thing frequently practiced in many kingdoms and Empires,
though very ill enacted in any. The Alex. ab Ale. l. 4. c. 23, f 239.
Sabaeans confined their Kings to their Palaces, and used to stone them if they
went forth of their bounds. The Alex ab Ale. l. 3, c. 11.
Mosseriaes whose kings were elective, used to punish them, when they offended,
by keeping them fasting a whole days space. Among some of the Munst. Cos. l.
5. c. 137. p. 1248.
Indians, if the king dies, having male children of his own, or cosen-germans
or brothers children, they shall not succeed him in the kingdom, but his
sister: son, if there be any; if not, then his next alliance; and that, ex
gentis instituto, by the institution of the Nation; the reason is, because
their Priests used to defloure the Queen, whose issue is held to be
illegitimate. In Munst. Cos. l. 4. c. 53. p. 1089 Boe. de Morib. Gentium. l 3.
p, 209, 210.
Thraciae, the people elect a king who is well qualified, merciful, grave for
his age, and one who has no children: For no Father, though never so well
qualified, is admitted to reign; and if he fortune to have issue while he
reigns, he is deprived, and so kept, lest the kingdom should become
hereditary. Yea, though the king be never so just, yet they will not that he
should have the whole power, but appoint him 40. Governors, lest he alone
should judge in capital causes: And if he be convicted of any offense, be is
punished with death, yet not by laying violent hands on him, but by public
consent, all food is kept from him, so as at last he perishes with famine. The
Alex. ab Ale. l. 4. c. 23. f. 239.
Taprobani had this custom, that no man who had any children should be chosen
king, lest he should claim the kingdom as hereditary, and make it so. The
Genesis Dier. l. 4. c. 23. and l. 3. c. 11.
Athenians, Ionians, Milesians, Marchomanni Quadi, Persians, Sicilians,
Corinthians, Parthians, Meroes, Gordii, Medes, Paphii, Cathians, Aetheopians,
Sydonians, Germans, Swedes, Danes, and other Nations had several Customs,
Laws, Rules, (over-tedious to recite) by which they elected and inaugurated
their kings (of which you may read in Alexander ab Alexandro. Geog. lib.
Strabo, De Moribus Gentium.
Boemus, Ind. Hist.
Peter Martyr, Pilgrimage and Voyages, Merula, Munst. Gotard. Mercator, Nov.
Orbis.
Purchase, and others) and different degrees of power and government derived
from their kingdoms and people, the sovereign Authority still residing in
them to prescribe both Laws and limits to their kings, and call them to public
account for their gross offenses and misgovernment. The ancient Diod. Sicul.
Bibl. hist. l 3. c. 5. p. 140. Boem. de moribus Gent. l. ^. c. ^. p. 27. Fortes
de Laud. Leg. Ang, c. 12.
Aethiopiant elected the most fanatique Priest for their king, whom though they
adored and honored for a God, yet Vitam agere STATVTAM LEGIBVS DEBET iuxta
patrios mores, he ought to live such a life as the Laws appointed him,
according to the manners of the Countey, neither ought he to reward or punish
any man himself, though chief parts of Royalty. The ^oem. demor. Gent. l. 3.
c, 12. p. 341.
old German kings had no free nor infinite, but a restrained and bounded power
by the Laws. Bibl. Hist. l. 1. sect. 70. p. 61, 62, 63. Boem. De Mor Gent. l
1. c. 5. p. 37, 38. Fortes. c. 12.
Diodorus Siculus writes, that the first Egyptian Kings lived not like other
Monarchs, to rule all things according to their wills, Nullis obnoxii censuris,
as ob noxious to no censures; but all things, not only their public actions,
but even the regiment of their daily life, were conformed to the rule of the
Laws (as he there manifests in sundry particulars) both in respect of their
attendants, dispatches, devotions, recreations, moderate spare diet, and the
like; neither was it lawful for them to judge, nor do any thing, nor punish
any man out of petulancy or anger, or any other unjust cause, contrary to what
the established Laws required concerning every of them. Whiles they observed
these things customarily, it was so far that they took it ill, or were
offended in mind, that on the contrary they thought they lived a most blessed
life. For other men rashly giving indulgence to the affections of nature, acted
many things accompanied with losses and dangers; yea some men ofttimes although
they foreknew they should sin, did notwithstanding perpetrate evil things,
being led away with love or hatred, or some other perturbation of mind; but
they, embracing the rule of life approved by the most prudent men, resolved not
to err from their duty in the least degree. Whiles Kings used this Justice
toward their Subjects, they had their Subjects bound unto them in greater
benevolence and love then their very kindred; For not only the College of
Priests, but the whole Nation of the Egyptians, and likewise every one of them
were not so careful of their wives and children and private goods, as of the
safety of their Kings: Wherefore they preserved the estate of the Republike
entire for a long time under the mentioned kings, spending their life in
greatest felicity, as long as this constitution of Laws flourished. And when
these kings dyed, all the Egyptians generally mourned for them in an
extraordinary manner diverse ways, made solemn Orations in their praise,
buried them with great pomp and solemnity, and erected Pyramides to their
eternal honor; all which funeral pompous solemnities many ill kings wanted
after their deaths, ob plebis refragationem, because the people gain-sayed it,
(who together with the Priests and Senates, who were ever present with the
kings to assist, counsel, and direct them, were superior to their kings,
since they could thus decree or deny them these funeral honors) which made
many of their following kings to addict themselves to just actions too, for
fear of contumelious handling and sempiternall ignominy after their decease.
So this Author. To which I shall add Memorabilium, l. 4 p 813. De Laced. Repu.
p. 690, 691.
Xenophons definition of a Kingdom and Tyranny: A kingdom, is an Empire over
men by their free assents according to the Laws of the City: And a Tyranny, is
an unlawful Empire over men against their wills, which depends upon the will
of the Prince. And this observation of Hist, l. 6. p. 118, to 126.
Polybius, That Kings in ancient times did give themselves wholly to do that
which was honest and just, and to suppress the contrary; the very beginning of
all true kingdoms, and the end for which kings were first instituted by the
people. Whiles they thus demeaned themselves, they were subject to no envy,
because they differed not much from others, neither in apparel, nor in meat
and drink, but observed a conversation of life conformable to other men, and
lived perpetually like to others. But afterward, when those who obtained the
principality of succession, and the prerogative of their blood had those things
already provided, which made them able to secure themselves, and to support
their state, following their lusts by reason of their abundance, they then
thought, it belonged to Princes to be better clad then subjects, to exceed them
in costlinesse and variety of meats, and to use venery with whom they pleased:
Hence envy and offense was begotten, and implacable hatred and anger kindled,
and a kingdom by this means changed into a Tyranny: Hence men most generous
and magnanimous bold spirits unable to bear such affronts and insolences of
Princes, seditiously conspire against them; and the people having got such
Captains to make resistance, join with them for the foresaid causes, that the
Princes may be repressed. And thus the form of a Kingdom and Monarchy is
utterly taken away by the roots, and the beginning of an Aristocracy again
laid, the people refusing to set any more a King over them, yet not daring to
commit the Republike to many, fearing as yet the iujustice of Superiors, and
therefore most esteem equality and liberty; So that the Sovereign power of
settling, of changing the Kingdom and form of government resides principally
in the people, who (as he there largely proves by the Lacedemonian and Roman
state) ought to enjoy the Supreme authority, and to be above their Kings; as
it seems the Egyptian did, Munst. Cosmog. l. 6. c. 15. p. l. 298 1299
who deposed and expelled Evergetes their King, for his cruelty, and after him
their King Ptolomaeus Auletes, setting up Cleopatra his eldest child in his
Threne; and as the Roman Senate did, Bodin Commonw. l. ^. c. 1. p. ^73.
who had power to dispose of the common Treasury and revenue (one of the
greatest points of Sovereignty) to appoint Lieutenants and Governors of
Provinces, to grant Triumphs, to dispose of Religion: (for which cause Apolog.
adv. Gentes.
Fertullian says, that never any God was received in Rome without the decree
of the Senate,) See Livy Passim.
and to receive, answer, and dismiss the Ambassadors of Kings and Nations,
which none else did but the Senate; whose Sovereign power was such, that
Tiberius the Emperor in the beginning of his Reign called the Senators
(assembled altogether in the Senate) Indulgentissimos DOMINOS, his most loving
LORDS, (and moved the Senate, to divide the Empire, and not to commit it all to
one man, as we read in Annalium ^. 1. Commonw. l. 3. c. 1. p. 2^6.
Tacitus) though they were his Subjects and inferiors when divided and
severally considered: And such Sovereign power had the Panaetolium or general
assembly of Parliament among the Aetolians, who received and answered all
Ambassadors, determined all affairs of war and peace, it being provided by
the Laws of the Aetolians, that nothing should be entreated of concerning
peace or war, but in their Panaetolium or Pelaicon Council, as Hist. Rom l.
31. and 35.
Livy and Commonw. l. 3. c. 1. p. 261.
Bodin record.

But to leave these ancient, and come nearer our present neighbor Kings and
Kingdoms of greatest eminency and power, which may parallel our own; The
Kings of France (to whom Pars 5. consid. 29, 30, 31. p. 243. etc.
Caessanaeus in his Catalogus Gloriae mundi, gives precedence before all
others, and to the Emperor himself, while but elect, before his Coronation,)
have in ancient times been inferior to their Kingdoms, Parliaments, and
subject to their censures even to deposition, if not more, though Cassan. Ibid.
and Bodin Commonw. l. 2. c. 5. l. 1. c. 10. l. 3. c. 1.
some cry them up for absoluts Monarchs, and make them little better then
Tyrants now.

Commonw. l. 2. c. 1. p. 222.
John Bodin, a learned French Lawyer and Statesman, writes, That in ancient
times the Kings of the Cities of the Gauls were subject to their States; whom
Caesar for this cause oftentimes calls Reguli, little Kings, being themselves
subjects and justifiable to the Nobility, who had all the Sovereignty, causing
them even to be put to death if they had so deserved: And that is it for which
Amphiorix the Captain General, whom they called the King of the Lingeois
said, Our commands are such, as that the people has no less power over us,
then we over the people: Wherein he showed evidently, that he was no sovereign
Prince; howbeit, that it was not possible for him to have equal power with the
people, as we have before showed: Wherefore these sort of Princes, if they,
polluted with wickedness and villainy, cannot be chastised by the Authority and
severity of the Magistrate, but shall abuse their wealth and power unto the
hurt and destruction of good men, IT ALWAYS HAS AND SHALL BE LAWFVLL not for
strangers only, but even for the subjects themselves also, to take them out of
the way: But if the Prince be an absolute Sovereign, as are the true Monarchs
of France, etc. where the Kings themselves have the sovereignty without all
doubt or question not divided with their subjects; in this case it is not
lawful for any one of their subjects in particular, or all of them in general
to attempt any thing, either by way of fact or justice against the honor,
life, or dignity of the Sovereign, albeit he had committed all the
wickedness, impiety, and cruelty that could be spoken: so Bodin, By whose
words it is clear, that the ancient kings of France were inferior in
Jurisdiction to their whole kingdoms and Parliaments, yea censurable by them
to deposition or death: Yet that their kings of late are grown absolute
Monarchs above their kingdoms, Nobles, Parliaments, and so not responsible to,
nor punishable by them for the grossest misdemeanors: But if this their
absolute Monarchy be only an usurpation (as many conceive it,) not of right,
by their Parliaments and kingdoms free grants and consents, they are still, in
truth, of no greater Authority, nor no more exempted from just censures, then
their predecessors. Now it is clear, that in ancient times, Fabian. pa. 5. c.
155. par. 6. p. 154. 160. 164. 243, 244. par. 7. p. 107, 108. 280, 282. Andrew
Favi^s Theater of Honor, l 2. c. 12. Munsteri Cosmog. l. 2. c. 40. p. 139, 140.
Paulus Aemylius, l. 1. Mercators Atlas, p. 254, 255. Bodin Commonw. l. 3. c. 1.
the 3. Estates and great Council of France assembled in Parliament, and their
twelve Peers (or kings as Fabian terms them) were the highest power and
judicature, from which there was no appeal; that the Kings of France could
make no binding Laws but by their Authority (though now of late they do what
they please) and that they have judged the differences between the Crowns of
England and France (as I have formerly proved) and exercised the same, or as
great authority as the Parliament of England has done, which authority it has
lost by certain degrees. To give a few more instances to clear this truth.

Paulus Aemyl l. 1. Gaguinus and the general History of France in his life,
Iean Crispin Lestate de Leglise p. 144. Fabian, par. 5. c. 75. p. 66. Munsters
Cosmog. l. 2. c. 41.
Pharamond, the first King of the Franks, that Reigned in France, An. 420. was
elected King by the unanimous vote and consent of all the people: and by their
advice and consent, in his Reign, the Salique Law was made to Regulate the
descent of the Crown, that no women should be heirs to it, or claim it by
descent; which Law continues of force until this day, as all the French
historians generally accord, who make frequent mention of it; though our
English have much oppugned it, as you may read in 2. H. 5. f. 35. etc.
Hall and Hist. p. 685. 687, 786. 787. etc.
Speed. Fabian. pa. 1. c. 86. Gagui. Emyl. the General Hist. of France,
Crespin, Munst. and others in his life
Childericus the fourth King of France about the year 460. giving himself to
all vice and cruelty in such extreme wise, that he became obible to his
subjects, perceiving the murmur of the people, and fearing his sudden
destruction, by the counsel of Guynemeus, fled out of his kingdom to Beseigne
king of Thuringes. Whereupon the Frenchmen with one assent, chose Gyll a
Roman, for their King and governor: who laying grieveous Taxes upon his
Subjects by the fraudulent counsel of Guynemeus (a fast friend to Childericus)
and using sharp, execution upon some of the Nobles, so far discontented his
subjects that by the help of Guynemeus, they deposed and chased him into
Soysons; and sending for Childerious again, restored and made him King: after
whose death his son Clodovius, was by the people ordained and authorized for
King of France: between whose four sons it was afterward divided Fabian,
pa. 5. c. 122. 126. Gaguyn. Emyl. the Genesis hist. of France.
After the death of Chilpericus, Clotharius being very young, Gunthranus king
of Orleans (his uncle) with the assent of the Nobles of the Realm, was made
his Tutor: who coming to age, he offered to refer the differences between
Sigebert and himself touching Austracy, (to which both laid claim) to an
Assembly of the Lords of that Kingdom: and condemned Queen Brunicheild by the
unanimous consent of the Lords, to be tied by the hair of her head to a wild
horse tail, and so to be drawed while she was dead; for her many murders and
criminous deeds; which was accordingly executed. Fabian. part. ^ c. 132.
Gaguinus, Paulus Aemilius, Crespin, the general Hist. of France.
King Dagobert exercised such tyranny and injustice in pillaging his commons by
Exactions and Tributes, that those who dwelled in the out parts of the Realm
near the Turks, and other strange Nations, chose rather to put themselves
under their government, than under the Rule of their own natural prince:
Poytiers rebelled against him, his Lords murmured so much against him, that
Pipin and Martain (two of his great Lords and agents) to save his Crown,
dissuaded him from his ill counsels: whence a little before his death, calling
a great counsel of his Lords Spiritual and Temporal, he made his will, and
settled his Kingdom by their advice; dividing it between his two sons.
Fabian. part. 5. c. 138, 139, 140. Gaguinus. Aemylius. Crespin, the general
History of France, in his life, and the life of Childericus.
Theodoricus king of France, giving himself to sloth and idleness, committed
the government of the Realm to Ebroyn Mr. of his Palace, who did what he
liked, and vexed and troubled the Subjects grievously; wherefore by assent, the
Lords assembled them, and by authority deprived the King of all Dignity, and
closed him in a Monastery during the residue of his life, when he had borne the
name of a King without executing of the art thereunto belonging, three years:
the cruel Ebroyn they exiled to Luxenbourgh during life; making Childericus
brother to Thesdericus King, Ann. 669. who oppressing his subjects grievously,
and using the Laws of his progenitors after his pleasure, and uniustly causing
a Nobleman called Belin to be tied to a stake and beaten to death, without
guilt or Treaspasse Hereupon the Lords and Commons, fearing like punishment
without deserving, murmured and conspired against him, and slew him and his
wife (then great with Child) as they were hunting in a wood: After which they
restored Theodericus (whom they had deposed) to his former dignity; under whom
Ebroyn getting into place and favor again, used such Tyranny toward the
Nobles and People, that Pipin and Martaine raised a great army against him,
lest he should destroy the Commom-weale, gave him battle, and at last
Hermefreditus slew him: After which Pipin was made Master of the Palace in his
place. Fabian. part. 5. c. 144. 145. Gaguinus, Aemylius, Crespin, the general
Hist of France.
K. Daegobert the second dying without any Issue or known Heir at all, one
Daniel (after named Chilpericke) a Priest, was by the Lords and peoples
general assent chosen King of France, Anno 721. for that by their former
experience of him, they deemed him apt for the rule of the Land. After whose
death, Theodoricus son to Dagobert, (secretly fostered among Nuns within
Nunneries in woman's clothing) was espied and admitted for King: During most of
the forenamed Kings, the grand Master of the Palace swayed the Kingdom at his
pleasure, and executed the Office of the Kings, who had nothing but the bare
name of Kings, and were subject to this grand Officer: Whereupon Theodoricus
dying, Fabian. part. 5. c. 150, 153. general Hist. of France, Gaguinus,
Aemylius, Crespin, Turpin, Chronicon, Chronicarum, Sabellicus, Opmeereus, in
the life of Childericke and Pipin, Aventinus Annal. Poyor. l. 3. Antonini
Chron. Tit. 14. nu. 1. sect. 2. Munst. Cosmog. l. 2. c. 41. (...). Jewels
Reply, p. 341, 342, 343. Bishop Bilson of Christ. subjection etc. par. 3. p.
418 to 423. Blondus Decad. 1. l. 10. Nauclerus, vol. 3. genesis 26. Regino, l. 2.
An. 722. Papyrius Masson, An. in Child. p. 83. (...).
Childericus his son being a Sott, and for his dullness unfit to govern,
Charles Martell Master of the Palace, (who swayed all things in Theodoricus
reign) deceasing, his two sons Charlemaine and Pipin, by the advice of the
Nobles of the Land, considering the insufficiency of the King to rule so great
a charge, divided the Land of France between them, so that either of them
should under the King Rule and Govern such proportion as then there was to
them appointed: Charlemayne soon after renounced his Government and turned
Monk; and Pipin, as only Ruler, took upon him the charge of the whole
Realm. Pipin then considering in his mind in what danger and trouble before
him, his Father, and he now had ruled the Land, and that the King to whom
belonged all the charge, kept his Palaces, and followed all his delights and
pleasures, without taking any pain for reformation of the same; sent an
embassage to Pope Zachary, (asking his advice in point of conscience,) Whether
it were more necessary or wealfull for the Realm of France, that he should be
admitted for King, that did nothing but apply his mind to all bodily
pleasures, without care and charge taken upon him for the guarding of the Land,
and the People of the same; or he that took upon him all the charge and pain
in defense of the Land, and keeping of the people in the due subjection? To
this the Pope answered, and wrote back to Pipin, that he was best worthy, and
most profitable for the Realm, to be admitted for King, that ruled well the
Commonalty by justice and prudence, and the enemies thereof defended and
subdued by his policy and manhood. Annal. Boiorum, l. 3. p. 299.
Aventine relates his answer more largely, in these words; I find (says
Zachary) in the Story of Divine Scripture, that the people fell away from their
wretchlesse and lascivious king, that despised the counsel of the wise men of
the Realm, and created a sufficient man, one of themselves, King; God himself
allowing their doings: All Power and Rule belongs to God, Princes are his
Ministers in their Kingdoms; And Rulers are therefore chosen for the people,
that they should follow the will of God, the chief Ruler in all thing, and not
do what they list. He is a true King that guides the people committed to his
charge according to the Prescript and Line of Gods Law; all that he has, as
power, glory, riches, favor and dignity, HE RECEIVES OF THE PEOPLE, and the
people, MAY WHEN THE CAUSE REQVIRETH, FORSAKE THEIR KING. It is therefore
LAVFVLL for the Franks and Germans, refusing this unkindly Monster
(Childericke) to choose some such as shall be able in war and peace, by his
wisdom to protect and keep in safety their Wives, Children, Parents, Goods
and Lives. Which answer of the Pope (recited and approved in our own King
Lambards Archaion. f. 130 Fox Acts and Mon. vol. 1. Edit. ult. p. 244.
Edward the Confessors Laws, and Childerickes deposition likewise Chap. 17.)
being declared to the Lords, Barons, and Commons of the Realm (whom this Pope
likewise wholly absolved from their allegiance to Childericke) soon after,
they of one assent and mind, proceeded, and deposed, and put down their King
and Governor, Childericke Antonini Chron. Tit. 14. 14. n. 1. sect. 2. f. 102.
Blendus Decad. 1. l. 10. Sabellicus Enead. 8. l. 8. Gaguinus l. 3. in Car.
Martel. Nauclerus vol. 3 genesis 26. Gratian. Cause. 15. qu. 6. Platina in Zach. 1.
Frisin. l. 5. c. 22. Fabian, part. 5^^. c. 132. p, 141. Amonius de gest. Franc.
p. 403.
being a Sott, a fool, a beast, and one unfit to govern, and closed him in a
Monastery, after he had reigned ten years in the Kings room, by name only;
which done, they unanimously elected and crowned Pipin for their King: By
means whereof the Royal Line of Moroveus after 17 discents ended, and the
Crown was translated to Pipins blood. Which act in point of policy, is
determined lawful by Hist. l. 6. p. 521.
Polybius, who Writes, That the reason why some Kingdoms became hereditary,
was only this, because their first Kings being virtuous and worthy men, they
were persuaded their Children would prove like them; but if at any time they
degenerat, and prove otherwise, and the Though that of Plinius secundus,
Panegyr. Traiano dictus, p. 8. be true, Quod aequiore animo ferunt homines quem
Princeps parum faliciter genuit quam quem male elegit.
posterity of the first Kings displease the subjects, they thenceforth make
the Kingdom elective; choosing Kings, not according to their strength of body
and minds attempting great things, but according to the difference of their
will and reason manifested by their actions: And by Part. l 5. ^, ^0.
Aristotle, who informs us, That in Kingdoms confirmed in succession of
blood, this is to be numbered among the causes of their ruin, that the
Kingdoms descend to many contemptible and slothful persons, who although they
obtain no tyrannical but Royal dignity, yet they live lustfully and
proudly; and so the Kingdom easily falls to ground, and becomes a tyranny,
the people being unwilling that such should rule over them; and so either
wholly alter the form of government, or make choice of a fitter King for the
necessary preservation of the State; yea this election in point of Police and
Divinity too, is justified and proved lawful by Buchanan, in his Book de Iure
Regni apud Scotos; by John Mariana, de Rege and Regis Instit. l. 1. c. 3, 5. by
Pope Zachary in his forceited Epistle, by King Edward the Confessor in his Laws
c. 17. by a general Council of all the Peers, and Prelates of France;
Convocato enim Principum et Senatorum Concilio de COMMVNI SENSV ET VOLVNTATE
OMNIVN Childericum solo nomine Regem a regni fastigio deponunt, etc. ac OMNIBVS
GAVDENTIBVS ET VOLENTIBVS, Pipinum super Francos REGNARE FACIVNT; writes Chron.
tit. 14. c. 1. sect. 2. f. 103.
Antoninus: and in a word, our Bishop Of Christian subjection, par 3. p. 420.
Bilson himself, an Anti-Puritane, and great Royalist, affirms, That if the
King be a natural fool, distracted, and altogether unable to govern, as
Childericke was, any Realm, by public consent and advice, may choose another
to govern them: of which more before.

Pipin Fab. par. 6. c. 154. Gaguin the Genesis Hist. of France.
deceasing, Charlemain and Charles the great, his sons, reigned jointly over
the Frenchmen, by their ^oyous admittance. Having now two Kings instead of one
Fab. par. 6. c. 2^4. Grimst. Imper. Hist. p. 390, 391. Gaguin The Genesis hist of
France, Turpin Antoninus, Munst. Crespin, Papyr. Masson, and others.
Jews, surnamed the godly, son of Charles the great, (a pious, yet
unfortunate Prince) by means of his son Lothair, was first imprisoned, and
then by a Council and Parliament held at Compaygne, by authority of the
spiritual and temporal Lords, and of that Parliament, discharged of all rule
and dominion, as well of the Empire, as of the Realm of France; after that
shorn a Monk, and thrust into the Monastery of Saint Mark, where he was
strictly guarded; and when some of the Nobles and people afterward desired
Lothair to release and restore him to his former dignity; he answered them:
That the deposing of him was done by the whole Authority of the Land; wherefore
if he should be again restored, it must be by the same Authority, and not by
him only: After which by the Lords assents he was restored.

Fab. par. 6. c. 175. Gaguin. Genesis hist of France.
Jews and Charles, after Jews Balbus their fathers death, were joint Kings of
France, and being very young, by a Parliament held at Meaux, Jews the
Emperor, their Uncle, was declared to be more apt to rule the Kingdom of
France, then these Infants, or Barnard their Guardian, and these Children held
by some illegitimate. Whereupon, by the greater number of voices an Ambassador
was sent to the Emperor, to come and take upon him the Rule of middle France,
which he coming to do, his Nephews friends compounded with him, and then
caused these Infants to be crowned and proclaimed Kings.

Fab. par. 6. c. 175. Gaguin. Genesis hist. of France, Herma-Schedel, Crispin and
others.
Charles the simple, at his Fathers death, Anno 895. being too young to take
upon him the charge of the Realm, the Lords of France put him under good and
convenient guiding, and of assent they chose Eudo, a man of great fame and
worth, to be King of the Land, for the term of his life, and to guide the
Land, till Charles should come to his lawful age, whom they put under Eudo his
tuition, making him King in his stead, who was crowned of Walter then
Archbishop of Senys. After which when Eudo knew he should dye, he called before
him the Lords and Nobles of France, charging them by solemn Oath, that after
his death they should immediately crown Charles for their King (whom he had
brought up with diligence in learning and all Princely virtues) being then of
age to govern. Charles coming to the Crown, the Danes miserably walled his
Kingdoms; Whereupon his Nobles and people assembled themselves in sundry
companies, and went to the King, showing their misery and blaming his
fearfulness and negligence, that he no more for him resisted the Danes
cruelty; Whereupon (he out of fear belike, lest they should choose another King
to protect them) compounded with Rollo chief Commander of the Danes, giving
him all Normandy, and his own Daughter in Marriage, to purchase peace; Fabian,
p. 6. c. 82, 183, 186, 201. Gaguin. Turpin, General Hist of France
Charles being afterward slain by Hebert Earl of Vermendoyes, Algina his wife
mistrusting the Frenchmen, fled secretly with her young son Jews (Heir to
the Crown) to Edward the Elder into England: Whereupon, that the Land might
not be without a Ruler, the Lords of France assembled at Paris, and there took
Council to elect a new King; where, after long debate, they named and crowned
Raulfe, son to Richard Duke of Burgundy King, as next Heir to the Crown but
young Jews: Raulfe dying after he had reigned 12 years, the Nobles hearing
that Jews was alive in England, sent for him into France and crowned him their
King. Fab. par. 6. c. 201. 202. Gaguin. Turpin, Chron. Chron, Opmerus, Crisp.
Genesis hist. Fran.
Jews the 6. dying without issue, being the last King of Pipens blood (who
enjoyed the Crown 10. discents) Hugh Capet usurped the Crown, putting by
Charles Duke of Loraigne, Uncle and next heir to Jews, whom by the Treason of
the Bishop of Laon, he took prisoner: After which the Crown continued in this
Hugh and his Heirs. Fab pa. 7. c. 243, 244. Gaguin the. Genesis hist. of France.
Turpin Theat. of honor, l. 2. c. 12.
Philip the 2. of France, by a counsel of his Prelates was excommunicated for
refusing to take Ingebert his wife, whom he unlawfully put from him, and to
renounce Mary whom he had married in her stead; And calling a Parliament, they
concluded, that King John of England should be summoned to appear as the
French Kings Liege-man, at another Parliament to be holden at Paris within 15.
days after Easter, to answer to such questions as there should be proposed to
him for the Duchy of Normandy, and the County of Angeou and Poytiers; who not
appearing at the day, Philip hereupon invaded and seized them: After which,
Fab. pa. 7. An. 1259. p. 68.
Jews the 9. and Henry the 3. of England in a parliament at Paris, made a
final composition for these Lands.

Fab. pa. 7. p. 102, 103, etc. Gaguin.
Jews the 10. being under age, was thought of many unsufficient to govern the
Realm; and when he had a mind to go to the holy War* as it was then deemed)
he did not undertake it, but by the advice of his great Council of Spiritual
and Temporal Lords and persons, who assisted him therein. Fab. pa. 7. p. 187,
188. the Genesis hist. of France.
Philip the 4. in the 27. year of his Reign, raised a great Tax throughout
France, (which before that time was never heard nor spoken of) by his absolute
Prerogative, without consent of his Estates in Parliament, which had the sole
power of imposing Taxes: Which Tax all Normandy, Picardy and Champaigne
allying themselves together, utterly refused to pay: which other Countries
hearing of, took the same opinion, so that a great rumor and murmur was
raised throughout the Realm of France, in such ways, that the King for
pacifying the people, was feign to repeal the said Tax.

Fab. pa. 7. p. 187. 188. Gaug. Genesis hist. of France.
Jews 11. of France dying without issue male, left his Queen great with child,
whereupon Philip his Brother reigned as Regent of France, till the child was
borne, which proved a male, named John: who dying soon after, Philip was
crowned King at Paris, albeit, that the Duke of Burgoyn and others withstood
his Coronation, and would have preferred the Daughter of King Jews. But other
of the Lords and Nobles of France, would not agree, that a woman should inherit
so great a Kingdom, it being contrary to the Salique law: This Philip by
advise of evil counsel set a great Tax upon his Commons to the Fifth part of
their movable goods, at which they murmured and grudged wondrous sore, and
before it was levied, he fell into a Fea^^r Quartan and great Flixe, whereof
he dyed* which Sickness fell upon him by prayer of the Commons for laying on
them the said grievous Tax. Bodin. Commonweal l. 3 c. 1. p 2^4. See the
general Hist. of France in his life.
Charles the fifth of France, having a purpose to drive all the English cut of
Aquitaine, and other parts of his Kingdom; and being provided of all things
which he thought needful for the doing of it, yet would not undertake the
war without the counsel and good liking of the Nobility and people, whose
help he was to use therein: Wherefore he commanded them all to be assembled to
a Parliament at Paris to have their advice, and by their wisdom to amend what
had by himself not altogether so wisely been done, and considered of. And this
war being at last decreed by the Council, prospered in his hand, and took
good success. Whereas when the Subjects see things done, either without
counsel, or contrary to the wills and decrees of the Senate or Council, then
they contemn and set them at naught, or else fearfully and negligently do the
command of their Princes; of which contempt of Laws, Magistrates, and
seditious speeches ensue among the people; and so at length most dangerous
rebellion, or else open conspiracy against the Prince, as Bodin observes. This
Fabian. part. 7. p. 192. 193, 263, 274. Speeds Hist. p. 687, 6^4, 786, 787,
788. Halls Chron. 2. H. 5. See the general Hist. of France, and Gaguinus in
the life of John.
Charles dying without Issue May, leaving his Wife great with Child, Philip
Earl of Valoyes, his Nephew, was by the Barons and Lords made Protector and
Regent of the Realm of France, until such time as the Queen was delivered;
who being brought to bed of a Daughter only, hereupon Philip was crowned King.
Between him and King Edward the third of England, and their Counsels, arose
great disputations for the Right and Title to the Crown of France; for it was
thought, and strongly argued by the Council of England, for so much as King
Edward was son and sole Heir to his Mother Queen Isabel, daughter to King
Philip le Beaw, that he should rather be King of France, then Philip de
Valoyes, that was but Cousin German to Philip le Beaw: Of which disputations,
the final resolution of the Lords and Parliament, was, That for an old Decree
and Law by Authority of Parliament long before made, (which the English much
oppugned) that no woman should inherit the Crown of France; therefore the
Title of Edward by might of the Frenchmen, was put by; and Philip by an Act of
the whole French State, (by which his right was acknowledged) admitted to the
Government of the same. After which one Simon Poylet was hanged in Chains,
Headed, and Quartered at Paris, for saying in open audience, that the right of
the Crown of France belonged more rightfully unto King Edward, then to King
Philip; who had long wars about these their Titles to the Crown.

King Fabian. part. 7. p. 280, to 298. Gaguinus, the general Hist. of France,
in the life of this Philip and King John.
John of France, in the fifth year of his reign, had by authority of the three
estates of his Realm assembled in Parliament (to wit of the spiritual Lords
and Nobles, and Heads of Cities and good Towns of his Kingdom) 3000 men waged
for a year, granted to him to defend him and his Realm, against Edward the
third King of England; who the next year following took King John prisoner in
the field: Whereupon Charles Duke of Normandy, his eldest son, and Heir
apparent, assembled the 3 Estates at Paris in a Parliament there held, craving
aid of them to redeem their captivated King; who promised their uttermost help
herein, desiring convenient time to consult thereof: Which granted, the three
Estates holding their Council at the Gray Friars in Paris, appointed fifty
persons among them to take view, and make search of the grievances and evil
guidance of the Realm; who after examination appointed six of themselves to
acquaint the Duke, That the Realm before time had been misguided by ill
Officers, and except remedy for it were shortly found, it should stand in
peril to be lost; wherefore they besought him to discharge all such as they
would name unto him, and over that to forfeit their Goods to the Kings use. And
first they name Peter Archbishop of Roan, Chancellor of France, Sir Simond de
Bury, chief Counselor of the King and Parliament too, Sir Robert de Lorize
before time Chamberlain to the King, Sir Nicholas Brake Master of the kings
Palaces, Engueram Burgess of Paris and under Treasurer of France, John Pryll
Sovereign of the money and King, accounts, and John Channeon Treasurer of the
Kings wars. All which Officers they would should be discharged all royal
Offices for ever: Also they would that the King of Naverne (then imprisoned by
the King of France) should be set free, and that Duke Charles himself would be
contented to be advised and counseled by such as they should appoint unto him;
namely, by four Prelates, twelve Knights, and twelve Burgesses, which eight
and twenty persons should have authority to rule and ordain all things
necessary for the Realm, to set in and put out all Officers appertaining to
the Realm, with diverse other requests which unto the Duke were nothing
agreeable: Upon which requests the Duke gave answer, That he would counsult
with his Council, and thereupon would shape unto them some reasonable answer.
But first he desired to know, what aid the three Estates would give unto him,
for delivery of his Father: Whereunto was answered, that the Clergy had given
a disme and a half to be paid in a year, with that, that they may have
license of the Pope, and the Lords as much to be levied of their lands, and the
Commons the tenth penny of their moveable goods. The morrow following the Duke
and his Council met, and after many Messages between them and the three
Estates, offers to reform some part of the Articles. But the Estates firmly
answered, That unless he would reform all the said faults, and confirm the
said Articles to their mind, for the Commonwealth of all the Land, they should
not aid him with their Goods, like as they showed him. The Duke hereupon
secretly acquainted King John of these proceedings, who wrote to him again,
that in no wise he should agree to the said requests, and to the end that these
matters should not be touched in open Parliament, he deferred the debate of
them from day to day; and at last by advice of his Council, dissolved the
Parliament of the three Estates, and commanded every man to return home
without any effect of their long counsel: Wherewith many of the said persons
were grievously miscontent, saying among themselves, that they perceived well
this was done by the Duke to the intent the requests by them devised, should
not take place, but that the old misgovernance might continue like as before
times it had done: Wherefore diverse of them assembled again at the Gray
Friars, and there made out diverse Copies of the said requests, to bear them
into their Countries, and show them unto the good Towns. And albeit the Duke
after this Council thus disolved, asked aid of the City of Paris, and other
good Towns to maintain his wars; he was plainly answered, Note this.
That they might not aid him, unless the three Estates were again
reassembled, and that the grant of the aid might pass by their authority:
Whereunto the Duke in no wise would agree. In the mean time the 3 Estates of
Languedock assembled in their Province by the Earl of Armenake, the Kings
Lieutenant, to make aid for the Kings deliverance, agreed to purvey at their
proper costs 500 men at Arms, with a furniture to every spear, and a 1000
soldiers on horsbacke, 1000 Arbalestres, and 2000 others called Gunsiers: all
which to be waged for a whole year; and farther ordained, that no man should
wear any furs of great price: that women should leave the rich at tire off
their heads, and wear neither pearl nor gold upon them, nor silver in their
girdles; and that all manner of Minstrelsie should be put to silence, so long
as the King remained prisoner. The Duke and his Counsel after this, proclaimed
at Paris certain coins and values of money, newly ordained by them; with
which Proclamation the Commons of the City were grievously ^moved: And for
reformation, the Provost of the Merchants with others, rode to the Earl of
Angeou the Dukes Brother and Lieutenant, (who was then absent at Meaux)
requesting him to cease the use of that money; And if not they would use such
means, that it should not be suffered to be put forth nor taken within the
City. Whereupon after long debate it was agreed, that the money should be
stopped till the Dukes pleasure was known: Upon whose return, the Dukes
counsel sent for the Provost, and desired him to suffer the said money to run
and be current throughout the said City; Which, the Provost with his company
utterly denied: and after many great and bold words, departed from the Counsel
in great ire, and after their return unto the City, incensed so the
Commonalty, that they set apart all workmanship and Occupation, shutting in
their Shops, and drew unto their Armor and Harnes. The Duke informed of this
murmr of the Commonalty of the City, straightly commanded the Provost, that the
Kings peace were kept within the City; and that he with certain Citizens
should appear at the Palace before him and his Counsel the next day, at an
hour assigned: at which time the Provost with his company came and were
conveyed into the Parliament Chamber, where the Duke and his Counsel were
present. Then the Duke after certain Challenges made to the Provost for his
obstinacy and misleading the Commonalty of the City, said: That, albeit the
King by his So it has been conceived by some, the King by Law might do this in
England but Sir Edward Cook in his Institutes on Magna Charta. f. 575. to 5^9.
has largely proved the contrary; that the King by his Prerogative and
Proclamation cannot alter, enhanse or abase his coin, but in and by the
Parliament only, because it is contrary to sundry Statutes, it is the sinues
and life of trade, and every man's estate consists in it, and so all have a
common interest therein, which cannot be altered out by common consent in
Parliament.
Prerogative, might at his pleasure, and for his advantage, make his moneys
when he would, and so to suffer them to be current through his Realm; yet for
the weal and ease of his Subjects, considering their manifold and late
charges, he was content, that at this season, this new money should be spared;
and that the 3. estates should be again assembled, and that they should
deprive all such persons then bearing Offices as they should think
prejudicial to the Realm, and ^ver that, to ordain such Money as might be
beneficial for the Land: Of all which Grants the Provost, to the intent, that
he might of authority show them unto the Commonalty of the City, desired a
writing: The which the Duke to appease the people, though it were much contrary
to his mind and his pleasure, granted unto his request. The thirtieth day of
January ensuing, the Duke, at the request of the said Provost, sent certain
Officers to the houses of Simon de Burg, and others accused of misgoverning of
the Realm, whose houses the said Officers seized and made Inventories of their
goods: That done, the Duke sent out Commissions, and assembled the Three
Estates again at Paris, the 15. day of February: Where, in the parliament
chamber in the presence of the Duke, Estates, and diverse Nobles, Robert Coke
Bishop of Laon by command of the Duke, made a long Oration, of the misguiding
the King and the Land by means of evil Officers, as well by changing of
money, as other many unlawful Excises and Taxes, to the great impoverishment
of the Commonalty of the Realm, and to the singular enriching and advancement
of the said Officers; Wherefore the Three Estates prayed, that all such
Officers may be removed from their Offices, and other that shall be thought
more beneficial for the King and his Realm to be admitted: Of which Officers
the Archbishop of Roan (then newly made Cardinal) was noted for one, and other
to the number of 21. whereof some were right near to the Duke. After which
Oration, Sir John de Pigquine, in the name of the Three Estates offered, That
the Three Estates should find to the King 30000. men for an whole year, so as
all things might after that day be ordered as the Bishop had before devised:
All which Articles were unto them by the Duke granted, and incontinuently all
such Officers as they before had named were clearly avoided, and other such, as
by the said 3. Estates were thought most necessary, were put and chosen to
their rooms, except that some of the old (as Masters of Accounts and some of
the Presidents and Masters of the Requests) were holden in for a time, to show
unto the new, how they should order and guide their said Offices: And the 26 of
March was a new money proclaimed through Paris, such as the said 3. Estates had
newly devised. The King informed of this, sends the Archbishop of Sennes and
two Earls from Bordeaux where he was prisoner, with a Proclamation, which they
caused to be proclaimed in Paris the 6. of April, That the people should not
pay such Subsidies as the 3. Estates had ordained for the waging of the 30000.
men aforesaid, or for the Kings fine; and also that the 3. Estates after that
day should no more assemble for any causes or matter before touched, till they
had farther knowledge of the Kings pleasure: For which Proclamation the
Citizens of Paris much blamed the said Bishop and Earls, who purchased it, who
as soon as this Proclamation was made, for fear of the people, fled from
Paris. Upon this Proclamation the Commons waxed so mad, that they left their
occupations, drew them to Conventicles and Companies, and used many unfitting
words of the King and his Counsel: Whereupon to avoid inconvenience, the Duke
commanded a Watch to be kept in the City day and night, and certain Gates of
the City to be kept shut. Upon the 9. day of April, another Proclamation was
made all contrary to that other. By virtue whereof, it was charged, that the
foresaid Subsidies should be levied, and also that the 3. Estates should
re-assemble at Paris, the 5. day after Easter, and there to proceed upon all
such matters as were before by them begar. When the Estates meet again there
grew a difference between them and the Duke, about the subsidies for the
finding of 30000. men, the sum assessed for that purpose being too small by
much, the Clergy and Lords then refusing to pay any more then they were first
sessed unto: By means of which difference, the assembly of State was
dissolved. Whereupon strait command was given by the Duke to the Provost of
Paris and others (who bare principal sway within the City, and were great
stricklers and doers in the Assemblies of the 3. Estates, so that much of the
business was ruled by them and their means;) that they should cease their
Authority, and not to deal any more with the rule of the Realm, but only
with the good rule and government of the City of Paris: That done, the Duke
rode about to diverse good Towns, making request to them for aid, and to have
this new money current among them. But he sped little of his purpose. Then
shortly after he assembled at Paris certain person of 20. or 30. Towns next
adjoining, with whom he held a Counsel for sundry days; who in the end showed
him; that they might bring nothing to effect without the assembling the 3.
states, besought him that they might be eft-soon assembled, trusting that they
would then satisfy his mind: Upon which the Duke sent forth Commissions,
charging the said 3. Estates to appear before him at Paris the next Wednesday
after All Saints day; which they did, where the Duke condiscending to their
former Articles he gave the King of Navarre and the 3. Estates full content;
who promised that they would demean themselves to his Father and him, as true
and dutiful Subjects; and advising him to take upon him the Government of the
Realm, they created him Regent of France, during his fathers imprisonment.
After this he assembled the Estates and chief Burgesses of Cities at Paris,
and acquainted them with the King of Englands large demands for his fathers
enlargement; which were so displeasing to all the company, that they answered,
The said Treaty was neither honorable nor profitable: And rather then the
King should bind him and his land to such inconveniences, they would prepare
to make sharp War against England: whereupon they granted to find diverse
thousands of men at Arms, at their own costs, for certain months, to relieve
the King: And at Fabian part. ^. p 305, 306, 311, 312. General Hist. of
France, Gaguin, and others.
another Parliament assembled when John was dead, and Charles came to the
Crown, they granted an excise of every 4 penny of all things bought and sold
for the maintenance of his wars, the spiritualty granted him a disme, and the
Lords and Gentlemen were stinted at a certain. And in the eleventh year of
his reign, he assembled his great Council of Parliament at Paris, where among
many Acts made for the weal of the Realm; he, with the assent of the Lords
and Commons there assembled, enacted for a Law after that day to be continued,
That all Heirs of the Crown of France, their fathert being dead, may be
crownned as Kings of France, so soon as they attained to the age of fourteen
years. And in the fifteenth year of his reign, the Fabin. part. 7 p 307. see
p. 190, 191, 266, 477, etc. ^55, 326, 357, 358, 359, 460. Walsingham, Hist.
Angl. p. 235, 236.
Duke of Flanders granted to those of Gaunt such Articles of agreement, for the
confirmation of their liberties, the repealing of illegal taxes, the electing
of their own Officers, the Dukes Councillors, and the like (which you may
read in Fabian) as plainly manifest this whole Dukedom and people to be of
greater jurisdiction then himself, though invested with regal authority, and
that he had no power to impose any taxes on them, without their grant and
consent; the contrary whereof caused many bloody wars among them.

Charles Fabian. part. 7. p. 324. 355, 356, 357, 358, 363, 364. The general
Hist. of France, Gaguin. and others in his life.
the seventh (after Fabians account, but sixth after the French History) a
Child of thirteen years, by reason of the difference between the Lords who
should be Vicegerent, was by the advice of the major part of the Lords, for the
common good of the Realm, Crowned at Raynes within the age of fourteen years,
contrary to a Law made in the eleventh year of his Father. In the fourth year
of his reign, the Citizens of Paris murmuring and grudging for diverse
impositions and taxes unduely leavied upon them, suddenly arose in great
multitudes, intending to have distressed some of the kings Household: Whereupon
soon after, the Kings Council considering the weakness of the Treasure, and
his great charges and needs; and assembling a Parliament of the Rulers of
Paris, Roan, and other good Towns, exhorted them to grant the King in way of
Subsidy, twelve pence in the pound, of all such Wares at that day current, for
the defense of the Realm and subjects. To the which request, after
consultation taken, it was answered; That the people were so charged in times
past, that they might not bear any more charges till their necessity were
otherwise relived: and so the King and his Council at this time were
disappointed. In his seventh year, by the Duke of Angeau his procuring, a tax
was laid upon the Commons of France (without the three Estates:) Which to bring
to effect, many friends and promoters were made, as well of Citizens, as
others. Whereupon the Commons of Paris and Roan became wild, assembled in
great companies, chose them Captains, and kept watch day and night, as if
enemies had been about the City; utterly refusing to pay that Tax. This
Charles being none of the wisest Prince, ruled by his household servants, and
believing every light Tale brought unto him, Fabian. ibid. General Hist. of
France, p. 216 227, 228, 229.
marching against the Duke of Britain, as he came near a wood, was suddenly
met of a man like a Beggar, which said unto him, Whither go thou Sir King?
beware thou go no further, for thou art betrayed, and into the hands of thine
enemies thine own Army shall deliver thee. With this monition the King was
astonished, and stood still, and began to muse. In which study one of his
followers that bare his Spear, sleeping on Horsback, let his Spear fall on his
fellows Helmet; with which stroke the King was suddenly feared, thinking his
enemy had come unawares upon him; wherefore in anger he drew his sword, slew
four of his own Kinghts ere he refrained, and took therewith such a deadly
fear, as he fell forthwith distracted, and so continued a long season, being
near at the point of death. VVhereupon his brother Jews of Orleans, being but
young, the States of France thought it not convenient to lay so heavy a burden
upon so weak shoulders; wherefore his two Uncles the Dukes of Berry and
Burgaine, BY AVTHORITY OF THE STATES OF THE LAND, specially assembled in
Parliament upon this occasion took upon them to rule the Realm for that
season, it being ordered by a special Law, that they should abstain from the
name of Regent, unfit in this sudden accident, the King being alive, and of
years: And because the Duke of Berry had but an ill name, to be covetous and
violent and was therefore ill beloved of the French, his younger brother Philip
Duke of Burgoyn, had the chief charge imposed on him; and though the Title was
common to both, yet the effect of the author tie was proper to him alone, who
changed diverse Officers. After which the Duke of Orleance was made Regent,
being the Kings younger brother, who pressing the people with quotidian taxes
and tallages, and the spiritual men with dismes and other exactions, he was at
length discharged of that dignity, and the Duke of Burgoyne put in that
authority. After this our King Chron. 2. and. 5. H. 5.
Henry the fifth, gaining a great part of France, and pretending a good title to
the Crown (recited at large by Hist p. 786. to 782.
Hall and John Speed) the Frenchmen to settle a peace, made this agreement with
King Henry: Fabian. part. 7. p. 399, 400, 475. General Hist. of France,
Holingshed. Fabian, Walsinghan, Grafton, Hall.
That he should marry Katharine the French Kings daughter, and be admitted
Regent of France, and have the whole government and rule of the Realm, during
Charles his life, who should be King of France, and take the profits of the
Crown whilst he lived; and that after the death of Charles, the Crown of
France, with all rights belonging to the same should remain to King Henry, and
to his Heirs Kings: That the Lords spiritual and temporal, and the Heads and
Rulers of Cities, Castles and Towns, should make Oath to King Henry, to be
obedient to his lawful commands concerning the said Regency, and after the
death of Charles to become his true subjects and liegemen; That Charles should
in all his writing name King Henry, his most dearest son, Henry King of
England, and inheritour of the Crown of France; That no imposition or tax
should be put upon the Commons of France, but to the necessary defense and
weal of the Realm; and that by the advice of both Councels of the Realms of
England and France, such stablished Ordinances might be devised, that when the
said Realm of France, should fall to the said Henry, or his Heirs, that it
might with such unity join with the Realm of England, that one King might
rule both Kingdoms as one Monarch; reserved always to either Realm all
Rights, Liberties, Franchises and Laws, so that neither Realm should be
subject unto other, etc. Which Articles were ratified and agreed with the
consent of the more part of the Lords spiritual and temporal of France* But
Fabian, part. 7. p. 475, 478. General, Hist. of France, Hall, Holinshed. Speed.
Charles dying, his son Charles the eight, was by some part of France, and
many Lords, reputed and knowledged King, but not crowned whiles the Duke or
Bedford lived and remained Regent, our Henry the sixth, both in Paris and many
other cities, being allowed for king of France. After his death, his son
Fabian, part. 7. p. 479, 480, 481, 488. General Hist. of France.
Jews the eleventh, ((...) Fabian accounts) by strength of friends was crowned
king of France; who refused the counsel and company of his Lords, and drew
unto him, as his chief Counselors, villains and men of low birth, as John de
Lude, John Balua, Oliver Devil, (whose name for odiousness he changed into
Daman) with others, whom he promoted to great honors and places: VVhereupon
the Lords murmured, and were so discontented, that the Duke of Britain, and
others, withdrew them from the king, and refused to come unto his presence when
he sent for them, raising a great power: And when no peace could be mediated
between the king and them, they met in a plain battle at Chartres, where many
were slain on both sides, but the king lost the field. After which an accord
was made between them, but the king continued his old courses, delighting more
in the company of lewd, irreverent persons, to eat and drink with them, and to
hear them talk of ribaldry and vicious fables, then to accompany his Lords,
which might have won him much honor, going liker a Serving man then a Prince:
and being a great oppressor of his subjects to maintain Hiprodigality, for
lack of money, he was driven of necessity to ask a priest of the citizens of
Paris; who, after many excuses, which might not be allowed, they lastly denied
the kings pleasure. VVherewithall he being grievously discontented, removed
diverse from their offices, and put many of the richest and head men of the
city to death, upon surmised causes, without proofs of justice: For which
causes, and many other oppressions, the Lords against assembled their people,
intending to subdue the king, and to set his brother in his place, or to cause
him otherwise to rule the Commonwealth: To which end all the Lords met at a
Town called Stampes, where they continued their Council fifteen days, and
then marched to Paris, sending four several letters unto the city; one to the
Bishops and spiritual men, the second to the Consulls and headmen, the third
to the University, the fourth to the Commonalty, signifying, That neither they
nor any of their company were come thither as enemies to the City, or to war
against it, or the Commonwealth of the Land, but for the increase and
augmentation thereof to the uttermost of their powers. VVhereupon these four
parties sent certain Orators for them to the Lords, who after long
communication with them had, returned to the city with this report; First, the
Lords would that the inhabitants of the City should consider the conditions of
the King, which yearly oppressed his Subjects with taxes and other grievous
servages. Secondly, how he despised the noble blood of his Realm, and drew to
him villains and men of no reputation, by whose counsel only all the
Commonweal of the Land was guided and ruled. Thirdly, how he ruled his
Subjects by force and will without administration of justice, and himself in
all Counsels and Parliaments is Judge of all causes, and calls himself
Counsels and Parliaments more for this singular weal then for the Commonweal
of his Realm. Fourthly, how he enhaunsed men of low birth to great honors,
and caused Noblemen to be obedient unto them, intending to bring the said
ignoble men to be equal with the Princes of the Land. Fifthly, how the Laws
be delayed and bolstered by such as stand in his favor, wherethrough at this
day Law is will, and will is Law, and no man almost in any surety of life or
goods; insomuch that daily many have been banished and put to death for
unlawful causes, and also to any Nobleman at this day no power or room of
honor belongs; so that to the wild Beasts in the Forests appertains more
Liberty and surety then to the more party of the Kings subjects. Sixthly, The
great taxes and sums of money which daily be levied of the Commons be not
spent in the Kings honorable needs, and for the Commonweal of the Realm, but
are spent vainly and riotously, and bribed out of the Kings Coffers; for which
enormities and misgovernance with many other, the said Lords were come thither
in defensible ways for the safeguard of their own persons, as to the head and
principal City of the Realm, for to have aid and Counsel, to reform the
foresaid evils, not intending any harm to the Kings person, or yet to remove
him from his regality or Kingly Majesty; but to induce and advertize him to
that which should be for his honor and the weal of his Realm, and to live in
wealth and honor, as his Noble Progenitors lived before him; For which causes
and considerations, the said Lords, as the Kings true Subjects, and friends to
the Commonwealth of the Land, and of that City, desired to enter there to
refresh them and their people, and to pay truly for all things they should
take, without doing harm or violence to any person. All which requests and
matters of the Lords showed to the Inhabitants of the City, by favor of some
friends they there had, it was with the more party well accepted, and though
convenient they should be received into the City; but by means of the Earl
of Davoise it was respited, till they had further knowledge of the Kings
pleasure: who coming out of Normandy into, Paris after diverse Skirmishes, the
King and Lords fell to a Treaty of peace, whereupon Commissioners on both sides
assembled and communed together by sundry times two days; In which season new
strength of Soldiers came to the King out of Normands. The Treaty hanging
long, and a longer Truce being proclaimed, the soldiers fell to robbing, and
other unlawful acts; and at last, through obstinacy on both parties, all
offers were refused, and the day of the Truces expiration approached, without
hope of accord; whereupon provisions for war were made on both sides. Then
begun grudges and murmures between the kings soldiers and the citizens of
Paris: and shortly after news came to the king, that the Castle and City of
Roan was yielded up to the Duke of Burbon: VVhereupon the King considering what
great advantage the Lords had of him, both by strength and favor of the
Commons, which daily drew unto them by sundry companies, in avoiding of more
danger, concluded a peace: which being proclaimed thorowout all France, the
King and Lords met, to whom the King showed great semblance of kindness,
specially to his brother Charles Duke of Normandy; therein appeared great
dissimulation, Jews being of such conditions, That what he might not overcome
with strength, he would win with dissimulation and treachery. Not long after
the King warred upon Charles his brother, the Duke of Burgundy and Britain,
and a Treaty of peace being propounded between them, Charles answered, That if
a perfect concord should be established between the King and him, it should be
authorized by the whole consent and counsel of the Barons of the Realm. With
which the King being content, at Turon, in the month of April, and tenth year
of his reign, assembled a counsel of his Lords spirtuall and temporal, in
the which the demands of Charles, and offers of the king were showed: And after
the said Council had at length reasoned the said demands and offers, it was
finally determined, That the Duchy of Normandy was so appropriated unto the
King of France, and to his heirs, that in no wise it might be dissevered from
the Crown; but that a perfect unity might be had between the King and his
brother, the King should be instanced to give yearly to his brother in
recompense of the said Duchy, 12000 pounds of Turon money, with certain land
to be assigned with the name of a Duke, and 40000 annual rent of like money
during his natural life, for such portion as he claimed to be his right,
within the Realm. To all which the king agreed, and to pardon the Duke of
offenses against his Majesty, and all such Lordships as he had won from him
in Britain, to restore: which offers Charles refusing, was the year following
contented with the Duchy of Guyan only, and so the war of Normandy ceased.
After Jews his death most of his special and dearest beloved Servants and ill
Councillors (whom he specially recommended to his son Charles the ninth on
his deathbed) came to disgraceful ends: Fabian. part. 7. p. 490, 521, 522,
523.
Oliver Damman was beheaded for Treason, and John Doyacon for trespass and
hatred unto the common people by his desert, was with all shame brought to the
Market place at Paris, and there bereft of both his ears, and then banished the
Court for ever; by reason whereof arose this proverb among the Frenchmen,
Principibus obsequi haereditarium non esse, The favor of Princes is not
hereditary. Phili. de Com. l. 5. c. 18.
Philip de Commines living under Jews the eleventh, and Charles the eighth, by
whom he was made Lord of Argenton, being in high favor with them, and a great
Councellor of State, has this notable passage, against the French Kings power
then to impose any taxes on their Subjects, without their free assents in a
Parliament of the 3. Estates, though the contrary be now daily practiced, to
the intolerable grievance of the subjects; Phili. de Com. l. 5. c. 18.
Is there any King or Prince that has power to leavie one penny upon his
subjects, besides his demains, without leave or consent of those that must pay
it, unless it be by tyranny and violence? A man will say, that sometime a
Prince cannot tarry to assemble his Estates, because it would require too long
time. Whereunto I answer, That if he move a War offensive, there needs no
such haste, for he may have leisure enough at his own pleasure to make
preparation; and further, he shall be much stronger and much more feared of his
enemies, when he moves war with the consent of his subjects, then otherwise.
Now as touching a war defensive, that Cloud is seen long before the tempost
fall, especially when it is a foreign war; and in this case good subjects
ought not to complain, nor to refuse any thing that is laid upon them:
Notwithstanding such invasion cannot happen so suddenly, but the Prince may
have leisure at the least to call together certain wise personages, to whom he
may open the causes of the war, using no collusion therein, neither seeking
to maintain a trifling war upon no necessity, thereby to have some color
to leavie money. Money is also necessary in time of peace, to fortify the
Frontiers, for defense of those that dwell upon them, lest they be taken
unprovided, but this must be done measurably. In all these matters the wisdom
of a sage king suffices, for if he be a just Prince, he knows what he may
do, and not do, both by Gods Laws and man's. To be short, in my opinion, of all
the Seniories in the world that I know, the Realm of England is the Country
where the Commonwealth is best governed, the people least oppressed, and the
fewest buildings and houses destroyed in civil war, and always the lot of
misfortune falls upon them that be authors of this war: Note.
Our King is the Prince in the whole world that has least cause to allege
that he has privileges to leavie what he lists upon his subjects,
considering that neither he nor any other Prince has power so to do; and
those that say he has, do him no honor, neither make him to be esteemed any
whit the mightier Prince thereby, but cause him to be hated and feared of his
neighbors, who for nothing would live under such a government: But if our
King, or those that seek to magnify and extol him, should say, I have so
faithful and obedient subjects that they deny me nothing I demand, and I am
more feared, better obeyed, and better served of my subjects, than any other
Prince living; they endure patiently whatsoever I lay upon them, and soonest
forget all charges past. This (me thinks, yea, I am sure) were greater honor
to the King, then to say, I leavie what I list, and have privilege so to do,
which I will stoutly maintain. King Charles the fifth used no such terms,
neither did I ever hear such language proceed from any king, but from diverse
of their servants, who thought they did their Master great service in uttering
such speeches; but, in mine opinion they misbehaved themselves toward their
Prince, and used such language, partly because they would seem to be good
servants, and partly because they knew what they said. But for a manifest
proof of the French men's loyalty and obedience to their Prince, we need
allege none other example then that we have seen ourselves of late by
experience, when the Three Estates were assembled at Towrs, after the death of
our Master King Jews the eleventh, which was in the year of our Lord, 1483. A
man might have thought this good assembly to be dangerous for the kings estate;
Note.
yea, and diverse there were of mean calling, and less honesty: that said then,
and often said since, That it is Treason to make mention of assembling the
Estates, and a thing tending to the diminishing of the Kings authority; but
themselves are those that work Treason against God, the king, and the
Commonwealth; neither do any use these speeches, but either such as are in
authority without desert and unworthy thereof, or such as are common
Tale-carriers, and accustomed to talk of trifling matters, or such as fear
great assemblies, lest their doings should there be ripped up and reprehended,
etc. Genesis hist. of France. p. 421. 423.
Charles the eighth of France, being but thirteen years of age when the
Crown descended to him; hereupon in the year 1484. a general Parliament was
held at Towrs, with more free access then had been usual, yet not so
effectual as was expected, every one seeking rather to maintain his private
authority then to procure the peoples ease. In this Parliament the pragmatick
sanction was restored, to use it as they had accustomed. The Constables sword
was given to the Duke of Bourgon, the government of the Kings person to his
Sister; a cunning woman, and somewhat of her fathers humor; but the name of
Regent was forbidden to them all, to prevent jealousies: and there was a
Counsel enacted of Twelve, by whom matters should be dispatched in the kings
name; of the which Jews Duke of Orleance should be President. Jews
discontented with the device, seeks to hold his rank; he pretends, that being
the first Prince of the blood, the Regency belonged unto him: he assists at the
Council in Parliament, and in the assemblies in Town, and notwithstanding the
last Will of King Jews, and the Decree of the Estates, yet will he by force
have the name and effect of Regent. VVhereupon discontents arising, he leaves
the Court in discontent, and raised a civil war. However, the Estates settled
the Regencie and affairs of the Realm. Genesis hist. of France. p. 575. to 580.
Grimst. Imper. hist. p. 647, 648.
Anno 1525. Francis the first King of France was taken prisoner by the Emperor
Charles the fifth in the Battle of Pavia; who by mediation of Friends for his
enlargement, sent the Earl of Reux his Lord Steward, to offer the King
Liberty, so as he would resign all the rights he pretended in Italy; restore
the Duchy of Burgongue, as belongs to him by right, with Provence, and
Dolphine for the Duke of Bourbon, to incorporate them with other Lands which he
had formerly enjoyed, and to make all together a Kingdom. Moreover the
Emperor offered to give him his sister in marriage, propounding many other
conditions, so absurd and void of reason, as it is better to let the curious
read them in the Originalls themselves. Amongst all losses, that of Liberty
touches nearest; but Francis having learned to withstand all adversity with a
constant resolution, said, I will dye a Prisoner rather then make any breach in
my Realm for my deliverance, whereof I neither WILL NOR CAN alienate any part
without the consent of the Sovereign Courts and Officers, in whose hands
remains the authority of the whole Realm We prefer the general good before
the private interest of Kings persons. If the Emperor will treat with me, let
him demand reasonable things which lie in my power, then shall he find me
ready to join with him, and to favor his greatness. The Emperor seeing the
King constant in this resolution, in the end yielded to his delivery, upon
these terms, That within six weeks after his delivery he should consigne the
Duchy of Burgengue to the Emperor, with all the dependancies, as well of the
Duchy, as of the County, the which should hereafter be sequestered from the
Soveraigntie of the Realm of France; That he should resign to the Emperor
all his rights pretended to the Estates of Naples, Milan, Genoa, and Ast: That
he should quit the Sovereignty of Flaunders and Arthois, etc. Hereupon the King
being enlarged, and arrived at Beyonne, he was required, to ratify the Accord,
which he had promised to do when he came to a free place: but he delayed it
with many excuses, giving the Emperor to understand, that before he proceeded
to such an act, it was necessary that he should pacify his Subjects, who were
discontented with bonds which tended to the diminution of the Crown of France,
etc. After which, the Pope and the Venetians sending Messengers unto him, he
complained of the Emperor, that he had wronged him in that he had forced him
to make impossible promises, and that he would be revenged if ever occasion
were offered; and that he had often told him, Note.
that it was not in the power of a French King to bind himself to the
alienation of any thing depending of the Crown, without the consent of the
General Estates: that the Laws of Christians did not allow, that he which was
taken in War should be detained in perpetual prison, which was a punishment
proper to Malefactors, and not for such as had bin beaten by the cruelty of
fortune: that all men knew that Bonds made by constraint in prison, were of no
value, and that the capitulation being of no force, the faith likewise which
was but accessory, and the confirmation of the same could not be bound: that by
the oath which he had taken at Rhemes at his Coronation, he was bound
(according to the custom of other Kings of France) not to alienate the
patrimony of the Crown; and therefore for these reasons he was no less free
then ready to abate the Emperors pride. The Emperor growing jealous of the
Kings delays, for ratification thereof sent one unto him, to be certified of
his intent, who found him very unwilling to leave Burgundy; which being very
prejudicall to the Crown of France, he said, was not in his power to observe;
and that he could not alien the Bourguinans without their assents in an
assembly of the Estates of the Country, which he intended to call shortly to
know their minds. By which it is most apparent, that the Kings of France have
no power at all to dispose of their Crown lands or alienate them to others (as
other Subjects may do) because they hold them only in the right of their
Crown for their Kingdoms use and service, the true proprieters of them. Upon
which very ground Matthew Paris, p. 270, 271.
Philip Augustus King of France, Anno 1216. in a solemn Assembly of the States
at Lions, told Walo the Popes Legate (who came to prohibit his Son Jews to
go to receive the Crown of England, because King John had resigned it to the
Pope;) That no King or Prince can give away his Kingdom without the consent of
his Barons, who are bound to defend the Kingdom; and if the Pope decreed to
defend this error, he should give a most pernicious Example to all kingdoms:
Whereupon all the Nobles of France began to cry out with one mouth, That they
would stand for this Article unto death, That no King or Prince by his sole
pleasure could give his Kingdom to another, or make it tributary, whereby the
Nobles of the Realm should be made servants: And the next day Jews his
Advocate alleged, that King John for his homicides and many other enormities,
was justly rejected by his Barons, that He should not reign over them. That
he could not give the Crown of England to any one without the assent of his
Barens; and that when he had resigned it, he presently ceased to be a King, and
the Kingdom became void without a King, and being so vacant could not be
disposed of without the Barons, who had lawfully elected Laws for their King:
who in pursuance of this his Title, (which the Estates of France held just,)
sailed into England, took possession of the Kingdom, received homage of all
the Barons, and Citizens of London, who joyfully received him, taking an Oath
upon the Evangelists, to restore them their good Laws, together with their
lost Inheritances.

The general Hist. of France, p. 6^^. to 690.
Henry the 2. of France being casually slain by the Earl of Montgommery in
running at the Tilt, left the Crown to Francis the 2. being but about 16.
years of age, the Queen Mother, with his wives Uncles the Duke of Guise, and
the Cardinal of Loraigne, hereupon usurped the Government of his person and
Realm, dispossessed the chief Officers of the Crown, kept back the Princes
of the Blood from Court, the true and lawful Governors of the State during
the Kings minority, and plotted the means to raise their race to the Royal
Throne, by displacing all great Officers, substituting others of their own
faction, and endeavoring to extirpate the Protestant party, whom they seared
as most opposite to their treacherous designs; They do and undo, place and
displace in Parliament and Privy Council, like absolute Kings; they revoke
all alienations for life or years made by the deceased King in recompense of
any services, except sales; they caused diverse Protestants to be put to death,
imprisoned, pillaged: Wherewith the princes, Officers and people being
generally discontented, to redress the present and prevent all future
disasters that might ensue, require a general Parliament (as the Sovereign
cure for such d^seases, whereby the Queen Mother might be put from her usurped
Regency, and those of Guise excluded from the King person) who to please the
king persuade him, that their opposites sought only to bridle and make him a
Ward, and that he should hold them enemies to his Authority and GVILTY OF HIGH
TREASON THAT TALK OF A PARLIAMENT. The King of Spain to cross them, by
Letters to the King his Brother-in-law, declares himself (for the good
affection he bare to him) Tutor and Protector of him, his Realm and affairs,
against those that would change the Government of the Estate, as if the King
were not capable of the Government. Pleasant people, which reject so much the
word of lawful tutelage, and yet usurped it against the Laws and Orders of
the Realm, holding it only by tyranny. After this they cast many slanders on
the Protestants, put Anne dis Burge and other Councillors of Parliament to
death, pistol Anthony Minard president of the Parliament, publish sundry
Edicts against those of the reformed Religion, promise great recompenses to
those that discover their assemblies, fill their prisons with them, employ
air, fire and water to ruin them, and kept the king from hearing his Subjects
complaints. The princes were kept back, the greatest of the Realm out of
credit, threatened, and secretly pursued to death, the convocation of the
Estates refused, the parliaments corrupted, the Judges for the most part at the
Guisians devotion, and the public treasure, offices and benefices given to
whom they pleased. This their violent government against the laws, and orders
of the Realm, purchased them wonderful hatred, and caused many which could no
longer endure these oppressions, to consult UPON SOME JUST DEFENSE, to the end
they might preserve the just and ancient Government of the Realm. They demand
advice, Note
TOUCHING LAW AND CONSCIENCE OF MANY LEARNED LAWYERS AND DIVINES: who resolved,
THAT THEY MIGHT LAWFVLLY OPPOSE THEMSELVES against the government which the
house of Guise had usurped, AND AT NEED TAKE ARMS TO REPVLSE THEIR VIOLENCE;
so as the Princes, who in that case are born Magistrates, or some one of them,
would undertake it, being required by the Estates of the Realm, or by the
sounder part of them. They who first thought of this Act of consequence, had
several considerations: Some, moved with a true zeal to serve God, the King
and Realm, thought they could not do a greater work of piety, then to
abolish Tyranny, rescue the State, and to find some means to ease them of
the Religion. There were others desirous of change, and some were thrust on
with hatred, for the wrongs which the house of Guise had done them, their
kinsmen and friends: yet all had one design to suppress this unlawful
government. In these consultations it was held necessary to seize on the Duke
of Guise, and the Cardinal his brother, being advowed by one chief member of
the State, and then to require an assembly of the Three Estates, to the end
they might yield an account of their Government, and provide for the King and
Realm. After which they make the Prince of Gonde acquainted with this their
design, and engage him in this quarrel; which being discovered, produced a
long bloody civil war against the Protestants, under this and the two
succeeding Kings; in which war, those that died, departed this world with
this singular content, to have courageously sacrificed their lives for their
countries liberty: So the general History of France; in which and in Richard
Dinothus you may read at large, both the History and the lawfulness of this
defensive war, over tedious to transcribe.

Francis General Hist. of France, 692, etc. and Richardus Din^thus de Bello
Civili Gallico Religionis causa suscepto. l. 2, 3, 4, 6. Speeds Hist. 1211,
1212 1214. K. James Answer to Cardinal Peron.
dying, the Crown descended to Charles the ninth, being but eleven years of
age, and a Parliament of the Estates being assembled on the three and twentieth
day of December, 1560. the Queen Mother was thereby allowed and confirmed
Regent during the Kings minority: In several Parliaments contradictory Acts
are made, some restraining, others granting the free exercise of the Reformed
Religion thorowout the Realm. The Guisian Popish faction, being the strongest
party, most powerful at Court, and intimatest with the King, notwithstanding
all Acts for the Protestants immunitie and liberty of conscience, impose
diverse illegal restraints upon them, commit many outrages and massacres on
them, for which they could have no redress; whereupon for their own defense
and preservation, after many fruitless Petitions, and delusory promises, they
take up Arms; whereupon many bloody civil wars ensue. Many propositions and
overtures of Peace were made by the Guisian royal party, not one of them
real, but all to get advantages, and overreach the Protestants, against whom
they had the most mischievous designs in agitation, when they seemed most
earnestly to desire Peace. Four or five several conclusions of Peace were
solemnly made and ratified between them, but no sooner made and proclaimed,
but presently violated of the King and Popish party, by massacres, and new
treacherous Plots to extirpate the Protestant party; so that every
accommodation proved but a seminary of a new and more bloody war, almost to
the utter ruin of France. In the year 1592. when a public peace was made,
and all differences to outward appearance, buried in eternal oblivion: the
King, contrary to his faith and oath, caused the Admiral of France, (the
Protestants chief pillar) as he departed from the Council to dinner, to be
shot with a Harguebuze, which carried away the forefinger of his right hand,
and wounded him in the left arm The king to color this treachery, swears
with an execration to the King of Navarre, and others who complained of this
outrage, to take such exemplary punishment on the offenders, as the Admiral
and his friends should have cause to rest satisfied, commands them to be
pursued, appoints three of the Parliament to make information against them,
protests after this again and again, to be exceeding sorry; that this act
touched his honor, that he will be revenged for it, so as the memory thereof
should remain for ever; writes to the governors of the Provinces, chief
Towns, and Magistrates, That he would take such order as the Authors of so
wicked an act should be known and punished: And to his Ambassadors to
foreign Princes, That they should make it known to all the world, that this
outrage did displease him. And for the Admirals safety, he commands the
Captains of his Guards, to give him as many of his Guard as he pleased, to
suffer no Papist to enter his lodging; and advises all the Gentlemen
Protestants then in Paris to lodge about the Admirals lodging. But all this
Court Holy Water was only to keep every Bird within his own nest, and a
Pitfall to entrap the chief of the Protestants: For the same day after dinner,
the King and Queen Mother, the Duke of Guise, and others, take counsel to
murder the Admiral, and all the chief Protestants, the night ensuing, not
only in Paris, but thorowout all France, whiles they were sleeping in their
beds. Which most tyrannical barbarous Tragedy was accordingly acted, the
Admiral slain in his lodging, and his head cut off, carried to the King and
Queen Mother, who causing it to be embalmed, sent it to the Pope and Cardinal
of Lorrain, for an assurance of the death of their most capital enemy: all the
Protestants, Noblemen and Gentlemen, lodging in the Admiralls Quarter, undergo
the like Butchery; the Streets of Paris are strewed with Carkases, the
pavements, market places and river dyed with Protestant blood, about ten
thousand of them being thus treacherously massacred in their beds, at such a
season when they thought themselves most safe, and that on the Lords own
sacred day, a very unsuitable time for such a bloody, profane, infernal
sacrifice. No sooner was this matchless treachery of this king against his
own natural subjects executed, but he avowes and justifies that which he but
the day before so solemnly and openly disclaimed, as a means to cut off all
commotions for time to come. But this bloodshed begat new wars, and made the
Protestants in Languedoc, Rochell, and other parts, to take up Arms in their
own defense, and stand more strictly on their guard than ever before: And Genesis
hist. of France. p. 744. Fox Acts and Mon Vol. 3. p. 1026, Edit. ult.
God himself out of his Divine justice, after this horrible Butchery committed
by this dissembling, cruel, blasphemous King, smote him with an answerable
disease, causing him to wallow in his own blood, which he pitifully vomited
out in great abundance, by all the conduits of his body, for diverse hours,
till he dyed: (A just judgment for him that barbarously shed blood thorowout
all the Provinces of the Realm) he in the mean time tossing in his bed, and
casting out many horrible blasphemies. A notable spectacle for all unnatural
fidifragous Princes to look on, who imbrue their hands in the blood of their
Christian subjects. Which crime (as the Author of the Genesis Hist. of France,
p. 764.
French History observes) made his reign cursed in the City, and cursed in the
field; cursed in the beginning, and cursed in the ending; mortality, sword,
famine, cursing, fear, and desolation, following it even unto the end. I shall
conclude his reign with the words of the French History; Doubtless God loves
not the Prince that thirsts after his subjects blood, for the subjects blood is
the very blood of their Prince.

General Hist. of France, p. 765, etc.
Charles dying without Heir of his body, the Crown descended to his Brother
Henry the third, then king of Poland, Anno 1574. his first design was to
extirpate the Huguenots and Protestant Religion thorowout the Realm, though
the Emperor Maximilian told him, There is no sin so great as to force men's
consciences, and such as think to command them, supposing to win heaven, do
often lose that which they possess on earth. His pernicious Cabinet
Counselors, to effect this design, cause him first to protest by sundry
Proclamations, his love to the good of his subjects, and to abolish what was
past, so as they lay aside arms, de^iver him all his Towns, and live quietly
in their houses, without any search, constraint, or molestation for matter of
conscience. A policy practiced only to bring the Protestant party into
slavery, all those Proclamations making no mention of liberty of their
Religion, neither of a Parliament for the public Government, nor of a
national Council for matters of Conscience: hereupon the Protestants stood
the more upon their guards they are full of jealousy, distrust, doubt, fear;
the King and his Popish Council endeavoring by this wile to keep the
Protestant party at a gaze, whiles they in the mean time made great
preparations underhand to put a mighty army into the field, to ruin them
without hope of rising: So they arm on all sides, especially in Poictou; the
Protestants are besieged, assaulted in many places, and so manfully repulse
their assa^lauts, that they are willing to hearken to a Treaty of peace;
wherein the Protestants demanding free exercise of their Religion thorowout all
France, new Chambers in the Parliament for the execution of justice, punishment
of the murderers of them, ease of imposts, a free assembly of the general
Estates, and an assurance for the entertainment of the pretended peace. The
King after fifteen days conference, promises to content them all, but he
will have them to refer these demands to his will; and so the Treaty vanished
into smoke, and new wars sprung up in every place with new Court-designes to
undermine and circumvent the Protestants, who are aided by a German Army, Anno
1576. The Queen Mother seeing the Protestant party prosper in their wars,
makes a peace between the King and them; who grants the Protestants all their
former demands, restores diverse of them to their goods, offices, honors: avows
by a solemn Declaration the Massacres of them, Anno 1572. to have been
committed against all right and law of Arms; He ordained that the children of
such Gentlemen as had been murdered, should be restored to their parents
goods, and freed from all charges of war, yea, he a vowed their ^aking up of
Arms, as taken for his service, etc. Which Articles, with the Kings Edict
thereon, were allowed by the Parliament at Paris. But no sooner were their
Forces disbanded, but they began to find this peace to be counterfeit, being
only made to dis-arme them, and divide their Commanders: none of the premises
being really performed. In the mean time the house of Guise and their faction
send their Agents to Rome, and Spain, to join with them in a Catholic
league, and under pretense of extirpating Heresy, and establishing the Roman
religion thorowout France, endeavor to settle the Crown upon themselves:
their chief designs were, to overthrow the succession of the Crown brought
in by Hugh Capet, in the full assembly of the Estates, and to make the naming
of a Successor subject unto the said Estates, to cause the Princes of the blood
that should oppose against the Decrees of the Estates to be declared incapable
of succeeding unto the Crown; to make the Estates protest to live and die in
the faith set down by the Council of Trent; to cause it to be signed in the
open Parliament; to revoke and anull all public Edicts in favor of the
Protestants and their associates, and to pursue them to the death, that should
hinder the extirpation of Heresies, etc. These Articles of Association were
first drawn at Peronne in Picardy, but disguised with goodly shows, to blind
those that would examine them more exactly, as being only to maintain the
Law, and restore the holy service of God; to preserve the King and his
Successors in the estate, dignity, service and obedience due unto them by
their subjects; to reserve unto the Estates of the Realm, their rights,
preheminences and ancient liberties. And for the execution of these Articles, a
certain form of Oath was propounded, insticting pains of eternal damnation
to the associates, that for any pretext whatsoever should withdraw themselves
from this league; and a Bond for such as should be enrolled, or employ their
goods, persons, and lives, to punish, and by all means to ruin the enemies
and perturbers thereof, and them that should fail, or make any delays, by
authority of the Head, as he should think fit. Soon after a Parliament of
the three Estates is assembled at Bloyes, where the Catholic Leaguers, after
much consultation, caused the last Edict of pacification, in behalf of the
Protestants to be revoked, and procured an Edict for the exercise only of one
Religion (to wit the Popish) to be tolerated within the Realm. The King of
Navarre, the Prince of Conde, the Marshall of Montmorancy, with diverse other
Noble men of both religions, foreseeing these practices, and refusing to assist
at this pretended Parliament, concluded a (...) of all that should be decreed
to prejudice the former Edict of Pacification; protesting, that they were
resolved to maintain themselves in the Rights, Liberties, and freedoms which
the Edict had granted them. That the troublers of the public quiet, and sworn
enemies of France should find them in a just^d fence, and they should answer
before God and men for all the miseries that should ensue thereby: Yea the
Prince of Conde answered more sharply, That he did not acknowledge them
assembled at Bloys for the Estates of the Realm, but a Conventicle of persons
corrupted by the sworn enemies of the Crown, who have solicated the abolition
of the Edict, to the ruin and subversion of the Realm: That if they had been
lawfully called, he would have assisted, for the sincere affection he bears to
the Kings service and the quiet of his Country; that he with never give his
consent to the counsels of the Authors of so many confusions which he foresee,
etc. Hereupon a sixth civil War begins between these Catholic Leaguers, and
the Protestants, whose good success caused the King, An. 1580. to make a new
peace with the Protestants, and grant them their former immunities. The
Leaguers discontented herewith, begin to cast forth Libels against the King,
disgrace him in companies as a Sardanapalus, and idle Chilpericke, sit to be
shaved and thrust into a Cloister; They cause the Preachers publicly in all
places, to term him a Tyrant, an Oppressor of his people by Taxes, and a
favourer of Heretics: And under a pretense of suppressing Heretics,
reforming public oppressions; and settling the succession of the Crown in
case the King should die without Heir, they, contrary to the Kings command,
(who disavows them, and forbids all leavyes of war) raise a great Army, and
so enforce the king to publish a Declaration in his own justification, and to
procure his peace with them, to revoke all Edicts made in favor of the
Protestants, and make open war against them. Hereupon the King of Navarre
(next Heir apparent to the Crown) for preservation of his own interest and
the Protestants, complains against the kings proceedings, lays open the
mischievous Plots of the Leaguers: and then with the Prince of Conde and other
Nobles, Gentlemen, Provinces, Towns, and Commonalties of both Religions, He
protests, by a lawful and necessary defense to maintain the fundamental
laws of families, and the Estates and liberty of the King, and Queen his
Mother. The Leaguers hereupon procure Pope Sextus the fifth, to excommunicate
the king of Navar, and Prince of Conde, to degrade them and their Successors
from all dignities, from their pretentions to the Crown of France, and to
expose their Countries and persons in prey to the first that should seize on
them. The Court of Parliament declares this Bull of the Pope to be void, rash,
insolent, strange, far from the modesty of former Popes, pernicious to all
Christendom, and derogating from the Crown of France: The Princes likewise
protest against, and appeal from it, as abusive and scandalous, to the next
free and lawful Council. The Leaguers pursue their begun wars against the
King of Navarre and Protestant party; who protest to use all lawful means to
resist the violence of their enemies, and cast all the miseries that shall
ensue upon the Authors thereof. Fresh wars are hereby prosecuted against the
Protestants by the Leaguers, German Forces come in to aid the Protestants;
after macombates the King desires peace, but the Leaguers will have none; and
assembling at Nancy, they endeavor to force the King to make his Will, and
allow the Regency unto them; to which end they conclude, That the King should
be urged to join his Forces effectually with the League, To displace such from
their Offices as should be named, To bring in the in the Inquisition of Spain,
and publish the Council of Trent, but with a moderation of such things as
derogate from the privileges of the French Church; To consent to the
restoration of the goods sold by the Clergy for the charges of the war, To
give them Towns to be named and fortified as the time and necessity required,
To forfeit the Huguenots bodies and goods, and to entertain an Army upon the
frontiers of Lorraine against the Germans. After which the Duke of Guise
approaching to Paris, enters it against the Kings command, who was jealous of
him; mutinies the Citizens against the King, who thereby is forced to retire
from thence for fear of being surprised by the Duke, who plotted to seize his
Person. After which the Duke by the Queen Mothers mediation, is reconciled to
the King; who for fear of his power, by an Edict of reunion, admits no
religion but the Popish, promises never to make Peace nor Truce with the
Heretics nor any Edict in their favor; binds his subjects to swear, never
to yield obedience after him, to any Prince that shall be an Heretic, or a
favourer of Heresy; degrades from all public charges, either in peace or war,
those of the Reformed Religion; promises all favor to the Catholics,
declares them guilty of High Treason who shall refuse to sign to this new
union, and shall afterward depart from it, But signing this forced Edict, he
wept. To establish which Edict, and work their further ends, the Leaguers cause
the King to summen a Parliament of the 3. Estates at Bloyes, procuring those of
their faction to be chosen of this Assembly: where establishing the former
extorted Edict, they thereby exclude the King of Navarre, (an Heretic as they
deemed him) from the Crown of France, to which he was next Heir: An Heretic
cannot reign in France, it is an incompatible thing with the Coronation and
Oath which he ought to take; hurtful to the honor of God, and prejudicial to
the good of the Realm: Then they declare the King an enemy to, and oppressor
of his people, a Tyrant over his Realm, that so the people should presently
resolve to confine him unto a Monastery, and install the Duke in his throne.
And at last, the King being certainly informed of the Dukes traitorous designs
to surpize him and usurp his Throne, caused the Duke and Cardinal of Burbon
(the chief Heads of the League) to be suddenly slain, and others of them to
be imprisoned. Hereuppon the Parisiens mutiny, and take up Arms a fresh; The
College of Sorbone concluded by a public Act of the seventh of January, 1589.
That the people of France are freed from the Oath of obedience and fealty which
they owed to Henry of Valoys, and that lawfully and with a good conscience they
may arm against him, receive his Revenues, and employ it to make war against
him. After which the Assembly of the Estates dissolving the Parisiens imprison
the Court of Parliament at Paris, till they condescended to their pleasures,
and confirmed a general Council of the union, consisting of forty choice men
of the three Estates, to dispose of the public affairs, and confer with the
Provinces and Towns of the League. To which many Assistants were afterward
added by the Nobles, and a Declaration (in manner of an oath) for the
entertainment of the Union, made, sworn, and subscribed to by many; one of
which pricked his own Arm, to sign it with his own blood, and became lame
thereby. The people condemn, imprison, spoil, ransom of their absolute power,
and sell the goods of any that bears not the mark of their enraged faction.
Hereupon the King turning his lenity into fury, Proclaims them Rebels and
Traitors, if they come not in and submit by a day, and reconciles himself to
the King of Navarre: They go on with greater insolency then before, set out a
great Army under the Duke of Mayenne; crave assistance from the Pope and king
of Spain; surprise diverse towns, rob Churches, ravish Wives and Virgins,
murder men of all sorts even before their Altars, commit all the outrages,
wickednesses which irreligion and impiety could invent in madd Soldiers. The
King at last besieged Paris, takes some of the Outworks, and was like to master
the City; but in the midst of this attempt he was stabbed in the belly with
a Knife, by James Clement, a Iacobin Friar of two and twenty years old, (sent
out of Paris to act this Tragedy on the kings person) who vowed to kill the
Tyrant, and to deliver the City besieged by Sennacherib. The murderer was
presently slain by those who came in to assist the king, who within few hours
after died of this wound, which he received in the self-same chamber wherein
the Counsel for the Massacre of the Protestants was held on that fatal day of
Saint Bartholmew, 1572. A notable circumstance of Divine justice upon this
Prince, who being ever a zealous promoter of the Romish Religion, was murdered
by a Zealot of it, and had his own blood shed by those who spurred him on to
shed the blood of Protestants, in the very Chamber where the most babarous
Massacre of Protestants that ever the world beheld, was contrived. Genesis Hist.
of France, p. 834, 835.
Henry when the pangs of death seized on him, declared Henry the fourth, King
of Navarre (his brother in law) the lawful Successor of the Crown of France,
as in Truth he was, notwithstanding the Edict of Bloys to exclude all Heretics
from the Crown. The Parisiens and holy Union refuse to accept him for their
Sovereign, proclaiming Charles the tenth for their King, and triumphing
exceedingly at Henry his death. The Parliament at Bourdeaux commands all men
under their jurisdiction, by a Decree of the nineteenth of August, 1549. To
observe inviolably the Edict of Union in the Catholic, Apostolic and Romish
Church; and Declarations are hereupon made. The Parliament of Tholousa is more
violent; they decree, That yearly the first day of August they should make
processions and public prayers for the benefits they had received that day, in
the miraculous and fearful death of Henry the third, whereby Paris was
delivered, and other Towns of the Realm; forbidding all persons to
acknowledge Henry of Burbon, the pretended King of Navarre, for King; declaring
him incapable ever to suceed to the Crown of France, by reason of the
notorious and manifest crimes contained at large in the Bull of Excommunication
of Pope Sixtus the fifth. The Court of Parliament at R^an, no less violent and
presumptuous then that of Tholousa, pronounced them guilty of High Treason,
both against God and man, and the Estate and Crown of France, that had opposed
themselves against the holy Union, and all Royalists and their Successors
deprived of all prerogatives of Nobility; their Offices to be void, not to be
recovered, and all their Goods forfeited: Anno 1592. they renew this Edict
every eight month. Thus the league kindled afresh the fire which the siege of
Paris had somewhat quenched: the King raising his siege before it, and
returning to Arques, the Leaguers Army followed him, and are there defeated:
after which the King with a small Army gains many great Conquests, which amaze
the Leaguers; he besieges Paris above three months, where more then one
hundred thousand people died of famine, yet they force the Parliament to
publish a Decree the fifteenth of June, 1590. For bidding upon pain of death
all men to speak of any composition with Henry of Burbon, but to oppose
themselves by all means, yea, with the effusion of their blood. But the Belly
has not Ears, the people are not fed with paper, or promises, they mutiny and
demand peace; whereupon Deputies are sent to the King to treat a peace; who to
defeat the Spanish Army called in by the Leaguers, raises his siege, and routs
the Spanyard, with other Forces of the League in sundry places, which makes
many desire peace; yet by means of Pope Clement the eighth his Bull, the Duke
of Mayenne, and the Popes Legate, they intend to summon a Convocation of the
Estates of Paris to elect a new King, desiring the Cardinal of Placentia to
assist and confirm this their intended future electior. The Parliament of
Paris removed to Chaalons gives sentence against the Popes Bull, and nulls it:
The King sets out a Declaration against the Leaguers as Traitors and Rebels,
declares this Assembly of the Estates without his Authority, to be against the
Laws, against the good and quiet of the Realm, and all that should be treated
or concluded therein, abusive, and of no force. On the contrary, the Popes
Legate, by a public exhortation full of injuries, labors to persuade the
French, that the King, long since dismembered from the body of the Church, was
most justly pronounced incapable of the Crown. The Spaniyards laboring the
Estates to elect the Infanta of Spain king; the Parliament of Paris by a Decree
of the eight and twentieth day of July, declare all Treaties made or to be made
to that end, void, and of no validity, as being made to the prejudice of the
Salique Law, and oath fundamental laws of State. The king to quiet these
differences, and gain peaceable possession of the Crown; most unworthily
deserts his Religion, reconciles himself to the Church and Pope of Rome; yet
one Peter Barriere, seduced and persuaded by a Capuchin of Lions, Aubry a
priest of Paris, and father Varide a lesuite, was apprehended at Melua, and
executed, for attempting to murder the King with a sharp two-edged Knife,
which fact he confessed. After this the Towns subject to the League, return
by degrees to the obedience of the Crown; the king is solemnly Crowned at
Chartres, Rhemes shutting the gates against him. This done, he surprises Paris,
and notwithstanding their former rebellions, grants them all free pardon upon
their submissions. The Parliament at Paris disanuls all the Decrees of the
League, and pretended assembly of Estates, as void, and done by private
persons, without due election; grants Process against the Jesuits, as chief
pillars of the League, disgracing the new Kings Majesty, and the memory of the
deceased King in their Sermons; and persuading the execrable attempt of Peter
Barriere to stabbe him: the Cardinal of Burbon, the Duke of Nevers with
others, protect and (...) for them; who soon after suborne John Chastle, one
of their Novices, (of the age of eighteen years) to stabbe the king; who
creeping into the kings chamber at the Kouure in Paris, among the press,
December 27. 1594. and thinking to stabbe the king in the belly, as he
resolved, struck him on the upper Lip, and brake a Tooth, as he stooped to
takeup some Gentleman who saluted him; for which fact he was condemned by the
Parliament as guilty of High Treason, his body adjudged to be torn in pieces
by four horses, then burnt to ashes and cast into the wind, and all his Goods
confiscate to the king: All the Jesuits, with their scholars, were hereupon
banished the Realm, as corrupters of youth, troublers of the public quiet,
enemies of the Kings State, and none of them to remain above fifteen days,
nor any to harbor them within the Realm under pain of High Treason. I have
heard from a Gentleman of credit, which served this king, that when he was
thus stabbed in the mouth by Chastle, one of the Mounsieur Daubern.
Religion gave him this Christian admonition, Sir, you have denied God already
with your mouth, in renouncing the protestant faith, which you once professed;
now God in his justice has permitted this Jesuit, of that Religion you
revolted to, thus to stabbe you in the mouth: O take heed you deny him not in
your heart, lest the next stroke they give you be to the heart. Which fell out
accordingly, for The general Hist. of France, p. 976, 977, 982.
after four or five more several attemps of the Jesuits and Papists to
murder him, which were discovered and prevented, he was stabbed to death with
a Knife by one Francis Ravillac, (a Papist at the Jesuits instigation) as he
was riding in his Caroch near to Innocents church in Paris, for suffering two
religions in the Kingdom, as the Traitor professed. This Villain stabbed him
first in the left Pap, and next between the fifth and sixth Ribbe, cutting
asunder the vein leading to the heart, and entering into the Cava vena; and
being dead the Jesuits of his royal College at la Fletche (whom he Genesis
Hist. of France, p. 914 915, 1070, 1071 1072, 1094, 1095, 1110, 113^, 1172,
1173, 1174, 1175, 1181, 1182, 1183, 1196, to 1220.
restored and favored exceedingly, notwithstanding their former Treasons, and
banishments of them out of France, causing the Pyramid erected by sentence of
Parliament as a monument of their Treasons to be rased, and yet were found to
have a chief hand in this his death) begged and procured his heart to be there
interred: O the admirable passages of Divine Justice, that those two Henry's,
who most advanced the Popish Religion, and abandoned the Protestant faith to
humor the Jesuits and Papists, thereby to secure their Crowns and lives, as
they believed, should thus fatally perish by those of that Religion, and their
unlawful revolts thus used to preserve their lives; whereas our noble. Queen
Elizabeth continuing constant in her Religion, notwithstanding all allurements
menaces and attempts upon her person, to withdraw her from the truth, was
miraculously preserved from all the bloody assaults of this infernal
generation of Romish Vipers, and went to her grave in peace.

But to return to this kings actions, Genesis Hist. of France, p. 887. 888.
Anno 1596. king Henry calls a general assembly at Roan in form of a
Parliament, where he speaking to the assembly, told them, That at his coming to
the Crown he had found France not only ruined, but almost all lost for the
French, but by the grace of Almighty God, the prayers and good counsel of his
subjects, the sword of his Princes, and brave generous Nobility, and his own
pains and labor, he had saved it from loss; let us save it now from ruin,
participate with me, my dear subjects in this second glory, as you have done in
the first; I have not called you as my Predecessors did, to make you approve my
will, I have caused you to assemble, TO HAVE YOUR COVNSELS, TO BELIEVE THEM,
AND TO FOLLOW THEM; finally, TO PVT MY SELF INTO YOUR HANDS: A desire which
seldom commands Kings that have white hairs and are Conquerours; But the love
I bear unto my subjects, and the desire I have to add these two goodly
Titles to that of king, makes me to find all easy and honorable. After this
the King and Parliament set forth diverse Genesis Hist. of France, p. 1009, 1022,
1023, 1124, 1154, 1156, 1157.
Edicts, against the transportation of Gold and Silver, the wearing of Gold and
Silver, excessiveusurie, Advocates extortions, Duels, Bankrupts, and the like.
This Genesis Hist. of Fr. p. 1173, 1174, 1200.
Martial King being murdered by Ravillac, as aforesaid, the Crown descended
to Jews his Son, not then ten years old: The Court of Parliament at Paris
having notice of his death, made this Decree in Parliament, May 14. Anno 1610.
Whereas the Kings Attorney General has informed the Court of Parliament, and
all the Chambers thereof assembled, that the King being now murdered by a most
cruel, inhumane and detestable Paricide, committed upon his most sacred
Person, it were very necessary to provide for the affairs of the present King,
and for his Estate, and has required that there be present order given
concerning the service and good of his Estate, which cannot be well governed by
the Queen, during the minority of the King her son; and that it would please
the said Court to declare her Regent, that the affairs of the Kingdom may be
governed by her: Whereupon having consulted, THE COURT HAS DECLARED AND DOES
DECLARE THE QVEEN (mother to the King) REGENT OF FRANCE, for the governing of
the State, during the minority of her son, with all power and authority.
The next day the King himself sitting in the Seat of Justice in Parliament, by
the advice of the Princes of his blood, Prelates, Dukes, Peers and Officers of
the Crown, according to the Decree made by the Court of Parliament, declared
and did declare the Queen his Mother Regent in France, and to have the care of
bringing up his Person, and the Government of the affairs of his Kingdom
during his minority; commanding the Edict to be enrolled and published in all
the Bayliweeks, Senescaushes, and other jurisdictions depending upon the said
Court of Parliament, and in all other Parliaments of the Realm; so that the
Queen Mother was settled in the Regency by the Parliament and whole State of
France. After which Genesis Hist. France, p. 1207.
Pasquier, Counselor and Master of Requests, writ her a large Letter touching
the Government of the State, wherein he informed her, That she must not forbear
to assemble the Estates, for the reason that some would suggest unto her, that
they will be some blemish to her greatness; it is quite contrary: The Estates
having confirmed it by public authority, will settle it fully. Commonly the
Estates assemble to provide for the present and future complaints of the
general of this Monarchy, and to reduce things to their ancient course; the
people being the foundation whereon this Realm is built, and the which being
ruined, it is impossible it should subsist: take away these new Edicts,
Impositions and Subsidies: it is better to gratify a people, than to entreat
them roughly. Above all things beware that you follow not your own opinion
alone, in managing the affairs of the Realm. Hereupon four and fifty Edicts
and Commissions were revoked, wherewith the Subjects had been oppressed. The
continuation of the life of Jews the thirteenth, p. 2. (...) 7.
When the King was to be Crowned, the Prelates made this request to him at the
Altar before his Coronation; We pray and require that you would grant unto
every one of us, and the Churches whereof we have the charge, the Canonical
privileges, good laws, and justice; and that you will defend us, as a king
ought all his Bishops and their Churches. Whereunto the king answered; I
promise to preserve you in your Canonical privileges, as also your Churches;
and that I WILL GIVE YOU (in the future) GOOD LAWS, and do you Justice, and
will defend you, by the help of God, according to my power; as a king in his
Realm OUGHT TO DO IN RIGHT AND REASON, to his Bishops and their Churches. After
which having been acknowledged their lawful Prince, BY A GENERAL CONSENT OF
ALL THE ORDERS, the Cardinal of Ioyeuse presented unto him the Oath of the
Kingdom, (the sacred Bond of the fundamental Laws of the State) the which he
took publicly in these words, with invocation of the Name of God, having his
hand upon the Gospel, which he kissed with great reverence.

I promise in the Name of Jesus Christ, these things to the Christians subject
unto me; First, I will endeavor that the Christian people shall live peaceably
within the Church of God: Moreover, I will provide, that in all vocations,
theft, and all iniquity shall cease: Besides, I will command, that in all
judgments equity and mercy shall take place; to the end that God, who is
gentle and merciful, may have mercy both on you and me. Furthermore, I will
seek by all means in good says to chase out of my Jurisdiction and the Lands
of my subjection, all Heretics denounced by the Church; promising by Oath to
observe all that has been said: So help me God, and this holy Evangell.

After this Ibid. p. 95 26. 29. 30. 31. 46. 49. 50. 74. 75
Bellarmines Book of the Popes power in temporal causes, Becanus, and Scoppius
Books, Marianaes Book de Rege and Regis instatutione, Suarez his Book, with
others, which taught, That the Pope was above Kings in temporal things, and
that it was lawful for private subjects by the Popes authority to murder
kings that were Heretics, and that the murders of Henry the third and fourth,
by Chastle and Ravillac were lawful and commendable; were prohibited and
condemned to be burnt by Edicts of Parliament.

Ibid p. 17. 18 24.
Anno 1611. the Reformed Churches of France, at their general Assembly at
Samure by the Kings permission, made a general Union, which they did swear to
keep inviolably for the good, quiet, and advancement of the said Churches, the
service of the King, and Queen Regent, and preservation of the Estate; and
appointed six Deputies therein, for the dispatch of all their affairs, Ibid p.
59. to 120.
Anno 1614. the Prince of Conde with diverse other Princes, Dukes, Peer,
Noblemen, and Officers of the Crown retinued from the Court in discontent, and
meeting at Meziers, writ several Letters to the Queen, Parliament, and others,
complaining therein of diverse grievances and disorders in the government, which
they desired might be redressed, by summoning a general Assembly of the three
Estates to be free and safe, to be held within three months at the furthest,
protesting, that they desired nothing but peace and the good of the Realm,
that they would not attempt any thing to the contrary, unless by the rash
resolution of their enemies, (who covered themselves with the Cloak of State
under the Queen Regents authority) they should be provoked to repel the
injuries done unto the King and State BY A NATVRALL, JUST AND NECESSARY
DEFENSE. After which with much ado Articles of Peace were concluded on at
Saint Manehold, between the King, Queen Regent, and these Nobles; wherein it
was among other things accorded, That the general Estates of the Realm should
be assembled at Sens by the four and 20. day of August, in which the Deputies
of the three Estates, may with all liberty propound what soever they shall
think in their consciences to be for the good of the Realm and case of the
subject; that thereby the King with the advice of the Princes and Estates might
make some good Laws and Ordinances to contain every man in his duty, to
fortify the Laws and Edicts made for the preservation of the public
tranquillity, and to reform the disorders which may give just occasion of
complaint and discontent to his good subjects: That the Kings Marriage with
Spain, formerly concluded on, should be respited and not proceeded in during
his minority: that all Garrisons put into any places of the Realm by reason of
the present motions, should be discharged that Letters Patents be directed to
all Courts of Parliament to be verefied, by which his Majesty shall declare,
that the said Princes, Nobles, and others of what quality and condition soever,
which have followed and assisted them in these alterations, had no bad
intentions against his service, with all clauses necessary for their safeties
and discharges, that they may not be called in question hereafter, and that
they shall be restored to their Offices, Estates and Dignities, to enjoy them
as they had formerly done. And in like manner his Majesty shall write to all
Princes, Estates, and Commonwealths allied to the Crown, and men of quality
shall be sent expressly to them, to let them understand what he had found
concerning the innocence and good intention of the said Princes, Officers, and
Nobles. After which the three Estates were published, Deputies elected; and the
King (by his Council and Parliament of Paris) was declared of full age,
according to a fundamental Law made by Charles the fifth, ratified by the Court
of Parliament: That the Kings of France, having attained the full age of
thirteen years, and entering into the fourteenth, they should take upon them
the Sovereign Government of the Estate: Whereupon the Queen Mother in the
Parliament resignes the Regency and reigns of the Empire into his hands. After
which the three Estates assembling abolished the sale of all offices of
judicature, and others which tend to the oppression and ruin of the People,
suppress Duels; the Commons and Deputies of the three Estates present a
Petition of all their grievances to the King, consisting of several natures,
and pray redress: And for the securing of the Kings Crown and person against
the Popes usurpations and attempts, they desired, that it should be declared by
the said Estates, and set down as a fundamental Law, That the King did not
hold his Realm of any but God and his sword, and that he is not subject to any
superior power upon earth for his temporal estates, and that no Book should
be printed containing any Doctrine against the person of Kings touching the
question too much debated by presumptuous men, whether it be lawful to kill
Kings? The Clergy of France except against this Article, as a point of doctrine
and conscience (not of State policy, as the Commons pretended, fit only for
the Clergies determination, not the Commons or three Estates,) as a means to
engender a schism and offend the Pope, and after much debate prevail and
suppress it: In fine, after many debates the three Estates brake up without
any great redress of their grievances, or full answer to their Petitions,
which was defaced: hereupon the Parliament at Paris the seven and twentieth day
of March, 1615. decreed, under the Kings good pleasure, That the Princes,
Dukes, Peers, and Officers of the Crown, having place and deliberate voice
therein, being then in the City, should be invited to come into the Court,
there (with the Chancellor and all the Chambers assembled) to advise upon the
propositions which should be made for the kings service, the ease of his
subjects, and good of his estate, and to draw up a Remonstrance to this affect.
Some Court Parasites presently acquaint the King and Queen Mother with this
Decree; as if it were an apparent enterprise against the Kings Authority, and
did touch the Queens Regency which they would control; and objections are made
against it in Council, whereupon the Parliament are sent for to the Court
several times, and ordered to revoke this Decree; they excuse and justify it,
then draw up a Remonstrance to the king, consisting of many Heads; wherein
among others they affirm, That the Parliament of Paris was borne with the
State of France, and holds place in Council with Princes and Barons, which in
all ages was near to the Kings person. That it had always dealt in public
affairs: that some Kings which had not liked of the Remonstrances of the
Parliament at Paris, did afterward witness their grief. That Popes,
Emperors, Kings, and Princes had voluntarily submitted their controversies to
the judgment of the Parliament of Paris, etc. To which I shall add some
passages out of Andrew Favine, Lib. 2. c. 12. p. 179. to 187.
in his Theater of Honor, touching the dignity, power, and honor of the
Parliaments of France: In the Register of the Acts of Parliament, beginning,
1368. there is one dated the twenty seventh of June 1369. for matter of murder
and assassinate committed on the person of Master Emery Doll, Councellor of the
said Parliament; whereby it was approved, That it was a crime of High Treason,
to kill a Councellor of Parliament. And in Anno 1475. on the eleventh day of
November, Mounseir the Chancellor came to advertise the Court for going to hear
the confession of the Constable of Saint Paul, to whom for his rebellions and
disobediences king Jews the eleventh directed his Process. And the said
Parliament, declared, That there was not a Lord in the Kingdom so great,
except the King and Mounsiour le Daulphine, but ought to come and appear at the
said Parliament in person, when it was ordained for him. And this is witnessed
by a Lion abasing his tail between his Legs, exalted over the gate and entrance
of the great Chamber, by the Parquet des Huisiers thereof. So that by this
illustrious and Sovereign Parliament are ordered and determined the principal
affairs of the kingdom. And in Anno 1482. the second day of April, king Jews
the eleventh, sent unto the Parliament the Oath which he took at his sacring,
exhorting the said Parliament to perform good justice, according as the King
had promised to do by his said Oath, which he purposed to keep; and the Oath
is there Registered down. The Parliaments of France are Oaks with exalted
Heads, under whose Branches the people are covered from the very strongest
violencies, which constrains them to yield obedience to their Prince: But
when Princes (by bad council) misprize the authority of them whereof they
ought to be zealous defenders, as being exalted to the Royal dignity, to rule
and govern their Subjects by justice, they cut off the right hand from the
left: If they refuse the holy Remonstrances of their Parliaments under color
that they are not to meddle with affairs of State, Note.
but only with the Act of justice, and lend a deaf ear when they are
advertised of evil Government, it is an assured Pronostick, forewarning of the
entire decadence of the Kingdom. Strange and foreign Princes have sought and
submitted themselves to the judgment of their Parliament, even in their
affairs of greatest importance. The Chronicle of Laureshime, under the year
803. (followed by the Monk Aimonius in the fourth Book of his History of
France) reports, that king Jews the Debonnaire, holding his Parliament in
May, there came thither from strange Provinces, two Brethren, kings of Vvilses,
who with frank and free good will submitted themselves to the judgment of the
said Parliament, to which of them the Kingdom should belong: Now albeit the
custom of the said kingdom adjudged the Crown to the eldest, according to the
right of Prerogative allowed and practiced by the Law of Nature, and of late
memory in the person of the last dead king Liubus father commune to these two
contendants; yet notwithstanding in regard of the subjects universal consent
of the Kingdom, who (for the cowardice and want of government in the Elder) had
given the Crown to the Younger, for valliancie and discreet carriage; by
sentence the Kingdom was adjudged to him: and the Eldest did him homage, with
Oath of allegiance, in the said Parliament. Under the third Ligne, in the reign
of Philip Augustus, Pope Innocent the third, and the Emperor Otho the fourth,
being in variance for the form and terms of the Oath of fidelity with the
said Emperor should make to the Pope; they referred it to the judgment of
king Philip in his Parliament, furnished with Peers. Otho made some exception
concerning the form and terms of the Oath; And not being able to agree of
themselves, both parties submitted to the judgment of king Philip Augustus and
of his Court of Parliament, furnished with Peers: So that by order given at
Melum in July, 1204. the form of the said Oath was prescribed, and registered in
the Parliament Register, at request of the said parties, and sent unto Otho to
render it to the said Pope Innocent, who sent this assurance and Certificate to
the said Parliament for Registring it, being performed.

Innocentius Episcopus, servus servorum Dei, charissimo filio nostro Philippo
Francorum Regi charissimo, salutem, and Apostolicam benedictionem; absque
dubitatione noveritis, quod secundum formam a vobis and Curiae Regni vestri
paribus praescriptam, habetur apud nos jusjurandum charissimi Filii nostri
Othonis Romanorum Regis illustris aurea Bulla munitum, nobis and Ecclesiae
praestitum.

Ego Otho Romanorum Rex and semper Augustus, tibi Domino meo Innocentio Papae,
and Ecclesiae Romanae spondeo, polliceor, and juro, quod omnes possessiones,
honores, and jura Romanae Ecclesiae, proposse meo, bona fide protegam, and
ipsam ad eas retinendas bona fide juvabo. Quas autem nondum recuperavit adjutor
ero ad recuperandum, and recuperatarum, secundum posse meum, ero fine fraud
defensor; and quaecunque and manus meas devenient, sine difficultate restituere
procurabo. Ad hanc autem pertinent tota terra quae est de Radicafano, usque ad
Ceperanum, Exarcatus Ravennae, Pentapolis, Marchiae, Ducatus Spoletanus, terra
Conitissae Mathildis, Comitatus Bricenorij cum alijs adjacentibus terris
expressis in multis privilegijs Imperatorum, a tempore LVDOVICI PII FRANCORVM
ET ROMANORVM IMPERATORIS CHRISTIANISSIMI. Has omnes pro posse meo restituam,
and quiet dimittam, cum omne jurisdictione, districtu, and honor suo.
Veruntamen cum adrecipiendam Coronam Imperij, vel pro necessitatibus Ecclesiae
Romanae ab Apostolica sede vocatus accessero, demandato summi Pontificis ab
illis terris praestationes accipiam. Praetere^ adjutor ero ad retinendum and
defendendum Ecclesiae Romanae REGMVM SICILIAE. Tibi etiam Domino meo Innocentio
Papae and Successoribus tuis omnem obedientiam and honorificentiam exhibeo,
quam devoti and Catholi^^ Imperatores consueverunt Sedi Apostolicae exhibere.
Stabo etiam ad consilium and arbitrium tuum de bonis consuetudinibus populo
Romano servandis and exhibendis, and de negotio Tusciae and Lombardiae. Et si
propter negotium meum Romanam Ecclesiam oportuerit in^urrere guerram, subeniam
ei sicut necessitas postulaverit in expensis. Omnia vero praedicta tam
juramento, quam scripto firmaho, cum Imper^^ Coronam adeptus fuero. Actum
Aquis-Grant Anno Incarnationis Dominicae Millessimo Ducentessimo Quinto, mense
Marcij, Regni nostri septimo.

William Rishanger Monk in the Abbey of Saint Albane in England, continuer or
the History of Matthew Parts, observes under the year 1263. that the king of
England, Henry the third, and the Barons of England, who made warreupon him,
committed their whole difference and quarrel to be judged by the Parliament of
France; Vt pax reformaretur inter Regem Angliae and Barons ventum est adistud,
ut Rex and proceres se submitterent ordinationi Parliamenti Regis Franc^ae (in
the time of Saint Lewis) in praemissis provisionibus Oxoniae. Nec non pro
depraedationibus and damnis utrobique illatis. Igitur in crastino S. Vincentij,
congregato Ambianis populo pene innumerabili, Rex Franciae Ludovicus coram
Episcopis and Comitibus, alijsque Francorum proceribus solemniter dixit
sententiam pro Rege Angliae, contra Barons statutis Oxoniae provisionibus,
ordinationibus, ac obligationibus penitus annullatis. Hoc excepto, quod
antiquae Chartae Joannis Regis Angliae universitati concessae per illam
sententiam in nullo intendebat penitus derogare. In this Parliament at Amiens
were present the King of England, Henry the third, Queen Elenor his wife,
Boniface Archbishop of Canterbury, Peter Bishop of Hereford, and John Maunsell;
and on the Barons of Englands side a very great number of choice elected Lords;
who the same year repasted back into England after the Parliament, as the same
Monk speaks. Thus Favino in the behalf of the French Parliaments, concerning
whose power and privileges you may read much more in him and others.

But to return to the former History. Continuation of the Genesis Hist. of
France, p 13 to 150.
The Queen Mother was much discontented with this Remonstrance of the
Parliament, pretending that they had an intent to call her Regency in question,
which all had commended; that they could not speak of the Government of the
affairs of the Realm, without touching her, etc. Whereupon she commanded the
Chancellor to give them this answer in the kings name: That France was a
Monarchy wherein the king alone commanded, helding his Realm Soveraignly from
God; That he had Laws and Ordinances by which to govern them, for the which
he was not to give an account to any man; That it did not belong unto the
Parliament to control his Government; That they neither could nor ought to
complain of the Queens Regen^^ which had been so happy; That the Queen was not
to give an account of her Regency, but to God only; That no man could
prescribe unto the King what Councellers he should entertain, etc. with many
other such big words. After which there was a Decree made in the Council of
State against the Decree and Remonstrance in Parliament, disanulling and
revoking them as void, and forbidding the Parliament hereafter to meddle with
affairs of State. The Court of Parliament in general complained much of this
Decree; the kings learned Council refuse to carry, or cause it to be read in
Parliament, because it would cause an alteration of the good affections and
devotions of the Kings good subjects, and the disunion of the greatest
companies of the Realm, who administer justice, which makes kings to Reign:
After which this controversy was compremised, and the Decree of the Council
against the Parliament suspended, and not enrolled. Soon after the prince of
Conde, with diverse others, seeing all things disordered at Court, and little or
no reformation of their former grievances, desert Paris, expressesse their
grievances in sundry letters and Articles of complaint, wherein they complain
of the want of freedom and redress of their grievances presented in the last
assembly of the three Estates; of the Decree and proceedings against the
Jurisdiction, Remonstrance and proceedings of the Parliament of Paris; Of
suffering some Counselors of State to usurp all the power of the Kingdom, to
pervert the Laws, and change all things as they list; with sundry other
particulars: In these they entreat and exhort all men of what condition or
quality soever, that call themselves Frenchmen, to assist and aid them in SO
JUST A CAUSE; conjuring all Princes and foreign Estates to do the like, and
not to suffer such good and loyal subjects to be suppressed by such a
conspiracy. Upon this the king and Q. Mother, through advise of these ill
Counselors, raise an Army, declare these Princes and Nobles, Rebels and
Traitors, if they submit not by a day: whereupon they Arm, raise Forces in
their own and the publikes defense, and being at Noyon, concluded, That as
their Arms were levied for the maintenance of the Crown, so they should be
maintained by it; to the which end they seized on the kings Rents and Revenues
in sundry places. Mean while the Protestants being assembled in a general
Synod at Grenoble, Marsh. Desdiguires makes an Oration to them, to dissuade
them from opposing the marriage with Spain; wherein he has this memorable
passage to justify the lawfulness of a necessary defensive war for the
preservation of Religion and Liberties: We have leisure to see the storm come,
and to prepare for our own preservation: Finally, having continued constant in
our Duties, if they seek to deprive us of our Religion, and to take that from
us wherein our liberty and safety depends, purchased by the blood of our
Fathers and our own, and granted unto us by that great King Henry the fourth,
the restorer of France; we shall enter into this comerce full of justice and
true zeal, find again in our breasts the courage and virtue of our
Ancestors: We shall be supported IN OUR JUST DEFENSE by all good Frenchmen,
assisted by all Princes and Estates which love the true Religion, or the good
of this State; and in a word, we shall be favored of the blessings of God,
whereof we have hitherto had good experience in our Arms, and which will be to
the glory of his Name, and the spiritual advancement of our Churches. After
which the Duke of Rhoan and Protestants, in defense of their Religion and
Liberties, join with the Princes and Nobles: At last both sides came to
Articles of agreement made at Luudun, Anno 1616. whereof these were a parcel,
That the grievances of the general State should be speedily answered; That
Sovereign Courts should be preserved in their authority, and the Remonstrances
of the Parliament and Peers considered of; That such as had been put from their
Offices, should be restored; That all moneys they had taken out of the kings
Revenues, should be discharged; All Edicts of pacification granted to them of
the Reformed Religion, observed; The prince of Conde and all those of either
Religion, who had assisted him in this war, held for the Kings good and loyal
subjects; all illegal Imposts removed; and all prisoners taken on either side,
set at liberty. Anno 1617. the King and Queen Mother seizing upon the Prince
of Conde his person, and sending him to the Bastile, upon false pretenses of
disloyalty and treason, caused new insurrections, wars, and tumults; and the
Princes hereupon meeting at Soyssons, resolved to make open war, to seize on
the Kings Revenues, and to fortify those Towns and Castles which they held in
their Government; which they executed; and withal set forth a Remonstrance of
their grievances unto the king, complaining especially against the Marshall of
Ancre and his Wife, with their adheronts, who were the causes of all their
miseries; who having drawn unto himself the whole administration of the
Realm, made himself master of the Kings Councels, Armies, and Forts; thereby
suppressed the lawful liberty and Remonstrances of the Parliament, caused the
chief Officers to be imprisoned, and was the cause of the violence done to the
Prince of ^onde, first Prince of the Blood: To the end therefore that they
might not be reproached to have been so little affected to his Majesty, so
ungrateful to their Country, and so unfaithful to themselves and their
posterity, as to hold their peace, seeing the prodigious favor and power of
this stranger; they beseech his Majesty to provide by convenient means for the
disorders of the Estate, and to cause the Treaty of Loudun to be observed, and
to call unto his Councels the Princes of the Blood, with other Princes, Dukes,
Peers, ancient Officers of the Crown and Counselors of State, whom the
deceased King had employed during his reign. Withal they publish a solemn
Declaration and Protestation, for the restoring of the Kings authority, and
preservation of the Realm. against the conspiracy and tyranny of the
Marshall of Ancre, and his adherents: Who finding no safety in the settling of
justice, resolved to make trial of his power, by violating the public faith,
thereby to plunge the Realm into new combustions, conspiring to destroy the
princes of the blood, of Peers, and chief Officers of the Crown, and to
oppress them altogether, with the State, who might be an obstacle to his
ambitious designs. To which end he raised false accusations against them, as
if they meant to attempt the Kings and Queen Mothers persons; and caused the
King to go in person to his Court of Parliament to publish a Declaration,
whereby they were declared guilty of Treason; though at last being better
informed, he declared them to be his good Subjects, and caused De Ancre to be
suddenly slain in the Louure, and his Wife to be legally condemned and
executed: Upon which the new Counselors and Officers advanced by him, were
removed, the old restored, the Princes reconciled to the King, and by him
declared for his good and loyal subjects: Upon which followed a general
assembly of the Estates, wherein diverse grievances were propounded, and some
redressed; the King therein craving their advice for the settling and ordering
of his Privy Council. Ibid. p. 220. 3^ 306.
Anno 1620. there happen differences between the King and Queen Mother, who
fortified Towns, and raised an Army against the king; at last they came to an
agreement, and were reconciled. The two following years were spent in bloody
civil wars between the King and those of the Religion, who avowed their
defensive wars lawful; which at last concluded in peace: that lasted not
long, but brake out into new flames of war, by reason of the great Cardinal
Richelieu, who of late years See the Synopsis of his life.
proved the greatest Tyrant and Oppressor that France ever bred, reducing both
Nobles, Gentlemen, and Peasants into absolute slavery and vassallage, to make
the King an absolute Monarch of France, and himself both Pope and Monarch of
the world: But he lately dying by the of Divine Justice of filthy Vicers and
Diseases, and the King since being (some say) poisoned by the Jesuits, who
murdered his two immediate Predecessors: wise men conjecture the French will
now at last revive and regain their ancient, just, hereditary freedom, rights
Liberties, and cast of that insupportable yoke of bondage under which they have
been oppressed for sundry years, and almost brought to utter desolation.

I have the longer insisted on these Histories of the Kings and Kingdom of
Frances (which clearly demonstrate the Realm, Parliament and three Estates of
France to be the Sovereign Power in that Kingdom in some sort, paramount their
kings them selves, who are no absolute Monarchs, nor exempted from the Laws,
jurisdiction, restraints, censures of their Kingdom and Estates assembled, as
some falsely aver they are) because our Royalists and Court Doctors parallel
England with France, making both of them absolute Monarchies; and our greatest
malignant Counselors chief Design has been to reduce the Government of
England to the late model and new arbitrary proceedings of France; which how
pernicious they have proved to that unfortunate Realm, what infinite
distructive civil wars and combustions they have produced, and to what
unhappy tragical deaths they have brought diverse of their Kings, Princes,
Nobles, and thousands of their people, the premises and other Stories, will so
far discover, as to cause all prudent Kings and Statesmen, to steer the Helm
of our own and other Kingdoms by a more safe, steady, and fortunate compass.
Thus I have done with France, and shall recompense any prolixity in it, with
greater brevity in other Kingdoms, when I have overpassed Spain.

From France I shall next steer my course to the Kingdoms and Kings of Spain,
whom Iacobus Valdesius Chancellor to the King of Spain in a large Book de
Dignitate Regum Regnorumque Hispaniae printed at Granado, 1602. professedly
under takes to prove, to be of greater dignity, and to have the Precedence of
the Kings and Kingdoms of France, which Catalogue Gloriae mundi, pars. 5.
Consid. 29, 30. Andrew Favine Theater of Honor, l 2. c. 12. See Caemillus
Barellus de Regis Catholici Praestantia, etc General Hist. of France, p 90^.
Cassanaeus and all French Advocates peremptorily deny. The first Kings of
Spain, overrun by the Goths and Wisigoths, are those their Writers call the
Gothish Kings, who as Michael Ritius de Regibus Hispaniae, L. 1, and 2.
Iohannis Mariana de rebus Hispaniae, L. 2, 3. the General History of Spain,
and oaths affirm, were elected by, and had their authority from the people:
You may read their lives and successions at large in these Authors, and find
See Ioannis Mariana de Rege and Regis, Iustit. l. ^. c. 3. p. 33. Hieron.
Blanca Rerum Arag Comment. See council. Toletanum. 8. Surius, Con. T. 2. p ^64.
^65.
some of there dis-inherited and deposed by their subjects, others of them in
ward during their minorities to such as the State appointed; others murdered,
but all of them subject to the Laws of their Realms, as it is evident by the
express ancient Law of the Wisigoths, having this Title; Ioannis Pistorius
Hispaniae illustratae Tom. 3. Leges Wisigothorum, L. 2. c. 2 p. 859.
Quod tam Regia potestas quam populorum universitas Legum reverentiae sit
subjecta; by other laws thereto annexed, by Iohannis Mariana De Rege and Regis
institutione, L. 1. c. 9. Iacobus Valdesius de dignitate Regum, Regnorumque
Hispaia* pars. 1. c. 11. p. 135. Michael Ritius de Regibus Hisp. l. 2. Genesis
Hist. of Spain, ^^6. p. 168, 169.
Those whom they properly call Kings of Spain, had their royal authority
derived to them, conferred on them by the people; upon this occasion. Spain,
being a Provincesubject to the Roman Empire, was spoiled, over-runne and
possessed by the barbarous Moors for many years; in which time the Spaniards
often solicited the Roman Emperors for aid to expel the Moors, but could gain
none. Whereupon to free themselves and their Country from slavery, they chose
one Pelagius for their Captain, by whose valor they conquered the Moors, and
thereupon by unanimous consent Elected and Crowned Pelagius King of Oviedo,
whom the Spanish Writers mention as the first King of Spain: And this their
desertion by the Emperors, the Spanish Writers generally hold (and (g) Iacobus
Valdesius proves it largely) to be a sufficient lawful ground for the
Spaniards; even by the general law of Nations, to cast off their subjection to
the Roman Empire, and to elect a King, erect a Kingdom of their own, exempt
from all subjection to the Emperor, since they purchased their own liberty and
Country from the Goths by conquest, of themselves alone without any aid or
assistance from the Roman Emperors, to whom (for this reason) they hold
themselves and their Kingdom no ways subject; yet for all this they deem their
Kings inferior to their whole Kingdoms, and censurable, yea deposable by them,
as is clear by the (...) p. 879. 810.
forecited passage of the Bishop of Burgen, (Ambassador to the King of Spain,
in the Council of Basil, and by Johannis Mariana the Jesuits Book, de Rege
and Regis Institution, dedicated to Philip the third, King of Spain, printed at
Madrit in Spain, by this Kings own special privilege, Dated at Madrit,
January 25. 1599. and after this reprinted at Mentz in Germany, Anno 1605. Cum
privilegio sacrae Caesariae Majestatis, (to wit, of the Emperor Radulph the
second) and permissu Superiorum; who certainly would not thus specially
approve, authorize this Book for the Press, had it maintained any Positions
contrary to the Laws, or derogatory to the Prerogative Royal of the Crowns
and Kingdoms of Spain, though other States cannot so well digest it. In this
very Book the Author (who has likewise written a large History of the
affairs and Kings of Spain) professedly maintains (in a special Lib. 1. De
Regum, Instit. cap. 8. p. 68, etc.
Chapter, wherein he debates this Question, Whether the power of the Republike,
or King be greater?) That the whole Kingdom, State and People in every lawful
Kingdom, and in Spain it self, are of greater power and authority then the
King: His reasons (which I have for brevity digested into number in his own
words) are these: First, because all Royal Power that is lawful, has its
original from the People, by whose grant the first Kings in every Republike
were placed in their Royal Authority; which they circumscribed with certain
laws and sanctions, lest it should too much exalt it self to the destruction
of the Subjects, and degenerate into a Tyranny. This appears in the
Lacedaemonians long since, who committed only the care of War and
procuration of holy things to the King, as Aristotle Writes. Also by a later
example of the Aragonians in Spain, who being incited with an earnest endeavor
of defending their liberty, and not ignorant how the hights of Liberty are
much diminished from small beginnings, created a middle Magistrate, like the
Tribunal power (commonly called at this time Aragoniae Iustitia, the Justice
of Aragon) who armed with the laws, authority and endeavors of the people,
has hitherto held the Royal Power included within certain bounds; and it was
specially given to the Nobles, that there might be no collusion, if at any time
having communicated their counsel among themselves, they should keep
assemblies without the Kings privity, to defend their Laws and Liberties. In
these Nations, and those who are like them, no man will doubt, but that the
authority of the Republike is greater then the Kings. Secondly, because in
other Provinces where the people have lesser and the Kings more power, and all
grant the King to be the Rector and supreme Head of the Commonwealth, and to
have supreme authority in managing things in times of war or peace; yet
there the whole Commonwealth and those who represent it, being chosen out of
all Estates, and meeting together in one place, (or Parliament) are of greater
power to command and deny, than the King, which is proved by experience in
Spain, where the King can impose no Taxes, nor enact no Laws if the people
dissent or approve them not: Yea, let the King use art, propound rewards to the
Citizens, sometimes speak by threats to draw others to consent to him, solicit
with words, hopes, and promises, (which whether it may be well done we dispute
not:) yet if they shall resist, their judgment shall be preferred and ratified
before the Kings will. Thirdly, because when the King dies without Issue or
Heir, the Kingdom and people, not the Prince deceased, ought to choose the
succeding King out of another Family. Fourthly, because if the King vex the
Republike with his evil manners, and degenerate into an open tyranny, the
same Commonwealth may restrain him, yea, deprive him of the Principality, and
of his life to, if need be; which it could not do unless it were of greater
Power then the King. Fifthly, because it is not likely that the whole Kingdom
and Commonweal would ever strip themselves of all Power and Authority, and
transfer it to another, without exception, without counsel and reason, when
they had no necessity to do it, that so the Prince subject to corruption and
wickedness, might have greater Power then they all, and the Issue be more
excellent then the Father, the River than the Spring (the Creature than the
Creator of it:) And although perchance it be in the pleasure of the Commonweal
to take away the plenary Power from it self and give it to the Prince, yet the
Commonwealth should do unwisely to give it, and the Prince rashly to receive
it; by which the subjects, of Free men should become Slaves, and the
Principality given for their safety, should degenerate into a Tyranny, which
then only is Regal, if it contain it self within the bounds of modesty and
med^critie; which Power whiles some unwisely labor daily to augment, they
diminish and utterly corrupt it, that Power being only safe which puts a
measure to its strength; for a Prince ought to rule over those who are willing,
to gain the love of his subjects, and seek their welfare; which Power if it
grows grievous, takes the King off his peoples love, and turns his power into
weakness: Which he proves by the forecited Saying of Theopompus: For Princes
who impose a Bridle on this greatness, more easily govern themselves, it, and
their subjects; whereas those who forget humanity and modesty, the higher they
climb, the grea^er is their fall: This danger our Ancestors, wise men,
considering how they might keep their Kings within the limits of mediocrity and
modesty; so as not to lift up themselves with overmuch power, to the Public
prejudice, have enacted many things wisely and excellently; among others, this,
That nothing of great moment should be decreed without the consent of the Peers
and people; and to that end they had a custom to assemble Parliaments chosen
out of all orders of men, as Prelates, Lords, and Burgesses of Cities; Note.
which custom at this time is still retained in Aragon and other Provinces; and
I wish our Princes would restore it: For why is it discontinued for the most
part in our Nation, but that the common consent being taken away, and
Parliaments excluded, wherein the public safety is contained, both public and
private affairs may be turned into the Princes pleasure, and the lusts of a few
corrupt, vicious, and voluptuous Courtiers and Parasites may domineer and order
all things. Sixthly, because many great and learned men held, that the Pope of
Rome, who is of greater Power then any King, is yet subject to the whole Church
and a General Council; therefore the King must much more be inferior to his
Kingdom. Seventhly, because the whole Commonwealth has greater strength and
forces than the Prince, be he never so great in Power; and therefore if they
disagree their Power will be greater: Yea, Aristotle wisely would have the
Commonweal, not only to be of greater authority, but likewise to have stronger
Forces then the King; which he proves by Aristotle's forceited words, by the
practice of the Ancients, and those of Syracuse, who did moderate their Tyrants
and Kings Guard so, that they might be able to overpower and master them upon
any occasion. How great the authority of our Republike and Nobility was in
the times of our Ancestors, I will give you but one example, and so conclude:
Alfonso the eight King of Casteil besieged Concha, a City seated in Rockie
places, and the most firm Bulwark of the Moors territories on that part:
wanting money to pay his soldiers, and thereupon provisions failing, the King
hastens to Burgon; and in a national assembly, he demands, that because the
people were wearied with Taxes for supporting the War, the gentlemen would
give five Muruedines a Poll to his treasury; that this opportunity of blotting
out the name of the Mores was not to be omitted. Dieglius then Governor of
Cantabria, assented to this Counsel, Peter Earl of Cara withstood this motion,
and gatherieg a band of Nobles, departed from the assembly, readily to defend
with Arms the Liberty gotten by their Ancestors with Arms and valor;
affirming, that he would neither suffer a beginning to be made of oppressing
and vexing the Nobility with new Subsidies, from this entrance or occasion;
That to suppress the Mores was not of so great moment, that they should suffer
the Commonwealth to be involved in a greater servitude. The King moved with the
danger, desisted from that purpose. The Nobles taking advice, decreed to
entertain Peter with a banquet every year, as a reward to him and his
Posterity of this good service, a monument so posterity of a thing well done,
and a document that they should not suffer the right of liberty to be
diminished upon any occasion. Let it be a fixed resolution therefore to provide
for the safety of the Commonwealth, for the Authority of the Prince yet so as
to retain their royal principality in order with certain bounds and limits,
and that those vain talking parasites and decevers may not ruin both, who
exalt the Princes Power without measure, of which we may see a great number in
Princes Courts, excelling in wealth, favor and power, which plague shall
always be accused and complained of, but shall ever be and continue. Thus
Mariana, who in his next Chapter (worthy reading) proves at large by invincible
arguments, De Rege and Regum Instit. (...). c. 9.
That all Kings and Princes (among others the Kings of Spain) are, and ought to
be bound by Laws, and are not exempted from them; that this doctrine ought to
be inculcated into thy minds of Princes from their infancy, and to be
believed, yea often considered of them; that they are more strictly obliged to
observe their Laws than subjects, because they are sworn to do it; they are the
Conservators of the Laws, the Avengers of those that infringe them, and their
examples are the best means to draw subjects to obey them. Where he again
affirms, That the whole Kingdom is above the King, and may not only bind him
by Laws, but question him for the breach of them. Before both these, in his
first Book De Rege and Regum institutione, Chap. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. he affirms the
like; adding moreover, That in many other Realms more, where the Crown is
hereditary, the whole Commonwealth, not the King has and ought to have the
chief power to design by a Law (which the King himself may not alter, but by
their consents) who shall be the next Heir, to avoid questions and commotions
about the Title to the Crown: That where the Right of the Crown is in
controversy the whole Kingdom and State ought to decide the right, and settle
it where they see best cause: That if the right Heir in Hereditary Kingdoms,
yea in Spain, be an Idiot, Infant, Woman, or a person unmeet or not so fit to
Govern^ as others of the blood, he may be lawfully put from the Crown, and
another of their Race lawfully substituted King in his place by the whole
State, especially when the good or safety of the Commonwealth requires it;
because the safety of the people is the supremost Law, and what they by common
consent have Enacted only for the public safety, they may without any
obstacle alter, when things require it, by like common consent; especially,
because the hereditary Rights of reigning are for the most part made, rather by
the dissimulation of the People, not daring to resist the will of former
Princes, then by their certain will, and the free consent of all the Estates:
That he which is thus settled by consent of all the Estates has a just Title
against the next Heir of the Blood and his Issue, who are put by the Crown;
else diverse Kings and Princes now reigning in Spain and elsewhere, should be
usurpers and want good Titles to their crowns, they or their Ancestor^ being
not the next right heirs of the Royal Stock (for all which particulars he
gives sundry instances in the Kingdoms of Spain) as in Berengaria, Blanch,
the Mother of Jews of France, Ferdinand, Sancho the younger son of Alfonso,
Henry the Bastard, John King of Portugal, Fardinand, and John the 2. of
Aragon, etc. concluding. That if the King degenerate into a Tirant, by
subverting Religion, Laws, Liberties, oppressing, murdering, or deflowring
his subjects; the whole Kingdom may not only question, admonish, and
reprehend him, but in case he prove incorrigible after admonition, deprive him,
and substitute another in his place; which (says he) has been done more then
once in Spain: Thus King Peter was publicly rejected for his cruelty to his
subjects, and Henry his Brother (though of an unclean Mother) obtained the
Crown: so Henry his Nephews Nephew for his slothfulness and evil manners
was deposed by the Nobles suffrages, and Alphanso his Brother, though but a
young child proclaimed King. After his death Elizabeth, (Henry his sister) had
the chief government of the Realm leaving Henry. And for a conclusion he
adds, That such a Tyrannical King continuing incorrigible after public
admonitions of the whole State, if there be no hopes of amendment, may not
only be deposed, but put to death and murdered by the whole State, or any
particular persons by their appointment; yea without it, (a note somewhat above
Ela) if he be declared a public enemy by the whole state; and in case the
whole states cannot publicly assemble by reason of such a Princes known
notorious tyranny, he writes, That then in such a case it is lawful for any
private man to murder him, to free the Country and Kingdom from destruction.
Adding, that it is a wholesome meditation for Princes to be persuaded, that if
they oppress the Commonwealth, if they become intoller able through vices and
filthiness, The general Hist. of France, p. 833, 834, 1178 1179.
that they live in such a condition, that they may not only be slain of
right, but with laud and glory. Peradventure this fear ^^^retard some Princes
that they give not themselves wholly to be corrupted with vices flatterers, and
cast bridles upon their fury. That which is the chief, let the Prince be
persuaded, that the authority of the whole Commonwealth is greater then his,
being but one, neither let him believe the worst of men, affirming the contrary
for to gratify him, which is very pernicious. All these positions of Mariana
(however other Kings and Kingdoms may relish them, especially the last
touching private Subjects, which few can approve, the Parliaments of France
doing public execution on this Book, as they had just cause, for extolling and
justifying the barbaro^s murder of their King Henry the 3. by James Clement a
Dominican Friar, l. 1. c. 6. p. 51. to 57. and justifying the Guises Rebellion)
are yet authorized as Catholic and Orthodox by the most Catholic King of
Spain, and the Emperor of Germany, in whose Kingdoms they pass for current
coin, the most dangerous of them being seconded, not only by Hieronymus
Blanca in his Aragonensium Rerum Commentariis, Iohannis Pistorius Hispaniae
Illustratae, etc. and other Spanish Historians collected by him, but likewise
by See Doctor John White his Defense of the way, c. 6. where their words are
quoted for tyranny and misgovernment. The Genesis Hist. of France, p. 847 914,
915. 1179, 1180, 1181, 1182, 1183, 1190.
Alvarius Pelagius, Cardinal Tolet, Capistranus, Dominicus Bannes, Franciscus
Victoria, Simancha Patensis, Gregory de Valentia, Suarez, the Doctors of
Salamancha, Becanus, Bellarmine, with other Spanish Jesuits and Writers, who
most heretically affirm, That even the Pope alone either with or without a
Council, for heresy (as they deem it) and obstinacy against the Sea of Rome,
may excommunicate, censure, depose, kill, or murder any Christian Princes,
depose them from their thrones, dispose of their Crowns to others at their
pleasures, absolve their subjects wholly from their allegiance, and give
subjects power to rise up in arms against and murder them by open force or
secret treachery; which Bishop Bilson truly affirms to be far more dangerous
and derogatory to Princes, then to attribute such a power, not to any
particular persons but to their own whole Kingdoms and Parliaments only: who
being many in number, of the same Nation and Religion with, and having many
dependances on, and many engagements by oath, duty, favors, benefits to their
Princes, less malice against them, judging only according to the fundamental
Laws of the Realm, and former presidents of their Ancestors, and aiming at
nothing but their Kingdoms safety, are like to be more just indifferent Judges
of their Princes action when questioned, then the Pope, a mere enemy and
forraigner; who proceeds by no other authority, but what he has unjustly
usurped from Kings, and by no other rules but his own will, pride, malice,
honor, or profit. I have thus given you an account of the Kings of Spaines
subordination to their whole kingdoms and Laws in point of Thesis and
positive Doctorine approved by themselves, professed by their eminentest
Writers, I shall now proceed to Historical examples to confirm it in point of
practice.

Munst. Cos. l. c. 20. p. 75. Roderici Arc^^^p. Toletani De Rebus hisp. l 4. 2.
l. 5. c. 1, 2. Genesis hist. of Spa. 16
Ordogno the 14. king of Castile, summoned 4. Earls of Castile to appear
before him, who refused to go to the wars against the Saracens, promising
them safe conduct, not withstanding he commanded them to be apprehended,
imprisoned and slain; for which bloody Treachery those of Castile rebelled
against him, rejecting his government, and providing for the safety of them and
theirs, Duos Milites, non de potentioribus, sed de prudentioribus eligerunt,
quos and Iudices statuerunt, etc. They elected two prudent Knights of their
own to be their Magistrates and Judges, to govern them, to manage their
wars, and administer justice to them: the one was named Flaevius Calvus, the
other Nunius, surnamed de Rasura, whose Son Gondesalvus after his Fathers
death, was substituted in his place, made General of the Militia; (Principatum
Militiae addiderunt) and his son after him, tam a Magnatibus and Militibus,
quam AB UNIVERSE IS POPVLIS CASTELANIS, made Earl of Castile, and all submitted
themselves to his government, rejecting the Dominion both of Ordogno and his
brother King Froila after him, for their tyranny and treachery. Rodericus
Toletanus de Rebus Hisp. l. 4. c. 19.
Alphonso the great King of Gallecia about the year of Christ 918. imprisoning
his eldest son Garsias, laying him in irons and exercising other cruelties,
was by the practice of his own Queen Semena and his other sons and Nobles,
so prosecuted and put to such streights; that they enforced him to resign his
Crown to his son Garcias, and to deprive himself of his government in the
presence of his sons and the grandees of his Realm; after which he requested
his son to raise and grant him an Army to go against the Sarazens, who
condescending thereto, he gained a glorious Victory over them, and so dyed
Roder. Tol. l. ^. c. 4, 5. Munst. Cos. l. 2. c, 20. Genesis hist. of Spain. l. 7.
Alphonso son of Ordogno, King of Castile, after 5. years reign, out of
levity rather then Religion, resigned his Crown to Ramire his younger Brother,
and then turned Monk about the year 939. but not long after, casting off his
Coul and leaving his Monastery, he began to raise forces, and to aspire to the
Crown again which he had resigned; whereupon Ramir raised an Army against him,
and after 2. years waries took him prisoner, put out his eyes, and thrust him
into a Monastery. Munsterii Cosmogr. l 2. c 20. p 78. Genesis Hist. of Spain.
John the first, the 35 King of Castile after the death of Ferdinand King of
Portugal claimed that kingdom in right of Eleanor his wife and next Heir,
but the Portugals elected John, a bestard, a Knight of the blood Royal for
their King, and excluded Eleanor. Henry the 4. the 38. King of Castile, having
no children lawfully begotten, would have made Elizabeth his bastard daughter
heir to the Crown; but the Nobles would no ways permit it, and resisting him
with all their might, preferred his own sister Elizabeth to the Crown, and
married her to Ferdinand the 6. son to John King of Arragon, rejecting his
spurious daughter. And Friar John de Teixera i^ his Book of The Original of
the Kings of Portugal, affirms, that the Kings of Portugal were usually
ELECTED BY THE SVFFRAGES AND FREE CHOICE OF THE PEOPLE, who had power to
confer the Kingdom on whom they pleased: averring, that Alfonso 1. 3. and 5.
John the 1. Emanuel and Antonio, Kings of Portugal, were thus elected. Which
though Censurae in F. Joseph Teixerae libelli^ c. 75. to 83. De vera Regum
Portugalium Geneologia, lib. in the 2. Tom. of Ioannis Pistorius Hispaniae
illustratae.
Duardus Nomus Leo, a Portugois Lawyer denies, and seems to refute; yet he
grants freely, that the Parliament or Assembly of the Estates in Portugal have
usually determined the Title, Right, and ordered the Succession of that Crown
in the Cases of these Princes, and determined of their Legitimate or spurious
birthes: That when the Kings of Portugal have dyed without Heirs, they have
BY THE LAW OF ALL NATIONS freely elected whom they thought meetest for their
King: And that after the death of King Ferdinand, they put by John and
Ferdinand the sons of King Peter, begotten of Agnes de Castro his Concubine,
from the Crown, because they were bastards; and moreover enemies to the name
and Realm of the Portugois, entering with Henry and Peter Kings of Castile, in
an hostile manner with an Army into the Confines of Portugal wasting them
every where, and doing great damages to, and committing many murders among
their Citizens; for which reason, the States assembled at Coimbri, resolved,
that although they were legitimate, yet THEY COVLD NOT OBTAIN THE SVCESSION OF
THAT KINGDOM, quod se hosts and alienos a Portugalia declarassent, because
THEY HAD THVS DECLARED THEMSELVES ENEMIES AND ALIENS TO PORTVGALL. And
therefore believing the Kingdom to be void for want of a right heir to
succeed, in which case, BY THE LAW OF ALL NATIONS THEY MIGHT LAWFVLLY ELECT
THEM WHAT KING THEY PLEASED, they chose John the Bastard, King. After which he
shows, that Philip the 2. his Title to the Crown, was long debated by, and
resolved in the Assembly of the States of Portugal in the life of king Henry,
who summoned all the Pretenders to the Crown to come and declare their Titles
to it in a Parliament held at Almierin, upon the Petition of the Senate and
People, who earnestly pressed him, that the Title of the crown might be settled
and discided during his life, to prevent division and civil wars after his
death: By which it is apparent, that the Assembly of the Estates of Portugal,
is the most Sovereign power and above their kings themselves.

It is clear, that the Gothish kings which reigned in Spain were not
hereditary, but elective, yea, censurable, excommunicable, and desposable by
them for their Maleadministrations. Live. 5. p^ 146. Ioannis Mariana, De Rebus
Hisp. l. 6. c. 4. 6. See Procopius, Vand. 1. Aimon^ l. 2. c. 20. l. 4. c. 35.
The General History of Spain is express, that among the Goths they did not
reign by right and succession from Father to Son, but those were chosen
Kings among them, which were held worthy; which election was made by the
Nobility and People, and if any one did affect that dignity by any other
unlawful means, he was excommunicated and rejected from the company of
christians; as appears by the 5. Council of Toledo. Thus Vallia the 1. king
of the Goths, An. 418. Agila the 11. king An. 546. Luiba the 13. king An. 565.
Gundamir the 18. king An. 610. Suintilla the 20. king An 621. Gen hist. of
Spain, l. p 12^. 140, 145, 146, 147, 14^ Ro^an hist. Hisp. pars 2. in their
lives, Joan Mariana de Rebus Hisp. l. 5. and 6.
Tulca the 23. king An. 642. Bamba the 26. king of Goths, an. 672. to omit
others, were elected by the Nobles and people, though now and then the Crown
went by succession through usurpation rather then right,

Genesis hist. of Spain, l. 5 p. 139 140. 145. Rod. sanct. hist. Hisp. pars 2. c.
15. 22.
Theodiscle the tenth king of the Goths in Spain, giving himself to lusts and
adulteries, polluted great and honest families, corrupted Nobles wives, and
committed many murders; whereupon the chief of the Goths conspiring against
him, strangled him at Sevill ^^oting in his banquets, and elected Agila for
their king: So Victrix the 17. king of the Goths, a vicious base unworthy
Prince, was miserably slain by his own people for his vitiousnesse, as he sat
at Table. Genesis hist. of Spain, l. 5. p. 146
Suintilla the 20. king of the Goths, in the beginning was a good Prince, but
in the end he grew exceeding covetous and cruel; wherefore the Goths made him
resign his Kingdom about the year 630. and deprived him of the crown, he was
likewise excommunicated by the Bishops (whose power at that time began to
equal that of Kings) at the Council of Toledo; which interdicted him, with
Geilands brother, their wives and children, the communion and fellowship of the
Church, and the possession of their goods gotten by violence and tyrannical
means; and Sisenand his adversary, with the consent of the people, obtained
the Kingdom. The 6. Genesis hist. of Spain, l. 5 p 147 Council. Toletanum 6. c. 3.
Suris Council. Tom. ^ p. 742.
Council of Toledo under Cinthilla the 22. king of Goths, about the year 686.
decreed, and by a perpetual law imposed on the Kings of Spain, not to suffer
any one to live within their Dominions which was not a Catholic; the which
their kings should solemnly swear before they were crowned; and if any king
should go against that Law which he had thus sworn he should be excommunicate
and accursed in sight of the eternal God and made the fuel of eternal fire:
which Canon was made, not only by the assent of this king and his Bishops (...)
with the consent and deliberation of his Nobles and great men. In the Surius
Council. Tom. 2 p. 739 740. Mariana de Reb. hisp. (...).
5. Council or Toledo under this king it was decreed Genesis 2, 3 4 5, 6, 7 That
the kings children and faithful servants after their deaths, should not be
deprived of the lands, honors, and just rewards by the ^ucceeaing kings, which
had been conferred on them in their lives; That no man should aspire to the
crown licentiously, under pain of excommunication and a divine Anathema, whom
neither THE ELECTION OF ALL, nor the Nobility of the Gothish Nation had no,
advanced to this top of honor. That none should, auring the kings life
endeavor or use means to succeed him after his death; nor yet revile the
Prince, under pain of excommunication. All which particulars were ratified by
new Surius Council. tom 2. p. 744 745. Mariana de Rebus Hisp. l. 6. c. 9.
Canons in the 6. Council of Toledo under this king, Can. 14, 15 15, 17, 18.
with this addition; That the king being dead, none should usurp the kingdom by
tyrannical presumption; that none who had been sh^^ven a Monk, or dishonestly
bald, or descended from a servile stock, or a man of a foreign Nation,
unless worthy both in respect of his Pedigree and manners, should be promoted
to the Throne of the Kingdom; nor no man attempt the Princes destruction,
life, or usurp his Crown tyrannically, under pain of being (...) with a
perpetual Anathema, and eternal condemnation, for breach of any the premises.
These Councels, as Mariana observes, were in truth General Assemblies of the
Estates, where they handled not only matters of Religion, but likewise of the
Commonweal by common consent of all. Bamba the 26. king of the Goths (after
Genesis hist. of Spain, l. ^. p. 129 150 Roder. san. hist Hisp. par. 2. c. 32.
Surius Council. tom. 3. p. 3. Mariana de Rebus hisp. l. 6. c. 12, 14, 17.
Jews de Mayern Turquets computation which I follow but 3^. after Roderick
Sancho) was elected king by the Goths, as he was plowing with his Oxen in the
field, being a plain country man. Some say, that he would never have received
this honor and charge, but by constraint, and that refusing absolutely, a
Noble man of the Goths drew his sword, and threatened to kill him if he did not
yield to the Goths entreaties, and that his Goad wherewith he drove his Oxen
did suddenly in his hand bring forth leaves, fruit, and roots; whereupon he
took this dignity upon him, more for fear than for any desire to reign. Anno
672. After which Eruinge ambitious of command, poisoned king Bamba, so as he
became mad; for curing whereof many natural and superstitious medicines were
applied, but to small effect; so as Bamba coming a little to himself again, and
finding his disabilitie to govern, willingly quit the Crown, and retired
himself into a Monastery at Pampliga, where he lived seven years and one
month, and Sarius Council. p. ^^4. Mariana de Reb. Hisp. l. 6. c. 17.
Eruinge was chosen king in his place, whose Election was confirmed and allowed
lawful in the 12 Council of Toledo, Can. 1. as Elected thereto by God, and
ALL THE PEOPLES DESIRES; whom this Council absolved from their Oath of
allegiance formerly made to King Bamba, whiles he held the Kingdom. In the
General Hist. of Spain. l. 5. p. 151.
thirteenth Council of Toledo under this King Eruinge. Anno 684. it was
decreed, That neither the King nor any other should marry the Widow of the
deceased King, upon pain of excommunication, and to be damned to Hell fire.

Vitiza Genesis Hist. of Spain, l. 5. p. 152, 153. Rod Sanct. Hist. Hisp. pars. 2.
c. 35 Mariana de Rebus Hisp. l. 6. c. 19.
the nine and twentieth King of the Goths, at his first coming to the Crown,
showed himself mild, liberal and religious, but soon after became the infamy
and dishonor of Kings, being full of all excess of lust, impiety, hypocrisy
and dissimulation, and exceeding in all vices without shame; he filled his
Palace with many Wives, which he married, and Concubines too; he publicly
allowed to all men, Nobles, Commons, Priests and Clergy, to marry as many
wives, and keep as many Whores as they pleased; he used great cruelty to many:
flattered the Clergy, lest by their censures they should draw the people from
obeying so filthy and unchaste a king. To prevent all rebellions (under the
color of peace which Spain did then enjoy) he caused all the Towns of Spain to
be dismantled, except Leon, Toledo, and Asturica; he disarmed the people,
disanulled all the immunities of the Church; he recalled the banished the Jews,
and granted them great privileges; he advanced a most wicked wretch to great
honors, execrable to all the people, that so he might not say, himself was the
worst of men: Finally, as a presage of his future miseries, he showed (in all
sorts of excess and violence, contrary to the Laws of God and men) what
Princes ill instructed and ignorant of true piety could do: A Buffone asking
him me^rily, Why do you being a King and the son of a King do thus, you may
lose your Kingdom? Hereplyed like another Dionysius, My Father left me his
kingdoms, not fortune. In fine, Genesis Hist. of Spain, l. 5. p. 153, 154, 155
Rod. Sanctius, Hist. Hisp. pars. 2. c. 37. Mariana de Rebus, Hisp. l. 6. c. 21,
22, 23. Illustratae,
Rodorick obtained the Corwn; who soon after exceeded Vitiza in all manner of
vices, cruelty, and tyranny, and ravished the daughter of Julian Earl of Cava,
whiles he was in embassage in Afric for the affairs of the kingdom; Who to
revenge this indignity, and cast out this wicked Monster, Anno 713. called the
Mores into Spain, who overran and conquered the Kingdom, destroyed Rodorick,
and put a Period to the Goths kingdom in Spain. Thus Tyrannical vicious
Princes ruin at last both themselves and their Realms.

Among the In Iohannis Pistorius, Hisp. Tom. 3. p. 859, 860.
Laws of the Wisigothes, Lib. 2. c. 2. 6. I find not only an Act declaring
their Kings to be subject to their Laws as well as subjects, but likewise a
Law restraining their Kings excesses, and dis-inabling them to alien their
Crown lands or revenues to their own Children or others, but only the Lands
which themselves shall purchase; which was likewise decreed in the eighth
Surius Council. Tom. 2. p. 864, 865.
Council of Toled^, under king Rec^^ni^thus, where in there was this complaint
made. Quosdam conspeximus Reges, post quam fu^rint regni gloriam assequuti,
ex^^nuatis viribus populorum, rei propriae congere^e lucrum; and (...), quod
reges sunt vocati, defensionem in vastationem conversunt, qui vastationem
desensione pelle ^ debuerunt; illud gravius inn^ctentes, quod ea quae videntur
acquirere, non regni deputant honori, vel gloriae, sed ita malunt in suo jure
confundi, ut voluti ex debito descernant haec in liberorum posteritatem
transmitti: Resolving, that non personae sed (...) subdi debere, non habenda
parentali successione, sed possidenda regali congressione; regem terrenum jura
faciunt, non persona, etc. I likewise find another (...) l. ^. c. 28. p. 869.
and l. 6. (...) p 936.
Law, nullifying all unjust judgments and sentences given by Judges through
fear or command of the King. And another Law, giving the King power over all
offenders against himself, but denying him power to pardon any Delinqu^rts
against the Nation or Country. All which considered, prove the whole State,
Kingdom and Councels among the Spanish Goths, to be about their kings, who
were liable to their restraints, excommunications, Laws, Proco^ Vand. (...) c.
20. l. 4. c 35. Grotius de Enc. Belli, l. 1. c. 3. Sect. ^1.
Censures, Depositions, for their male-administrations, vicious lives, and not
successive but elected by them.

Genesis Hist of Spain, l 6 p. 63 171, 172, 173, 174, 175, 177. Ma^^ana de (...)
His^. l. 7.
P^lagius the first king of Oviedo, was elected king, and that kingdom erected
by the general consent of the people oppressed by the Moors, about the year,
618. during whose reign there were several Vice-royes of the Moors in Spain,
as Alcazazin, and Alhatan and others. His son king Fasila was slain by a Bear
which he pursued in the mountains: I doubt his Subjects would have resisted him
as well as the Bear, had he made war upon them. Froila the fourth king of Ovedo
treacherously slew his own brother Vtmaran a gallant Knight, generally beloved,
(out of jealousy) lest he should usurp the Crown; in revenge of whose death
he was soon after slain by his own brother Aurelius, Anno 767. who succeeded
Froila in the Realm, notwithstanding he le^t a son called D Alphonso the
chaste; but the hatred that the Noblemen did bear unto his father, was the
cause of his rejection, being then also very young; whereby it appears, that
the right of succession was not in those days practiced in Spain; S^ll^ his
brother-in-Law succeeded him; after whose death by general consent, the
kingdom was given to Alphonso. (...) l. 6. p. 183
Ramir the tenth king of Oviedo did that which all other Princes abhor, for he
received his son to be companion with him in his kingdom, and caused his
brother Garcia to reign with him, so as there were now two kings and Courts in
Oviedo, both agreeing well together. Anno 894 Froila dying without issue,
because his children were too young to reign, the Nobles conferred the Kingdom
on Alphonso the fourth, who after five years turned Monk. Genesis Hist. of l. 7.
p. 211. 226. Mariana de rebus Hi^p l. 8. c. 8.
Ramir the third, twentieth king of Leon, abandoning himself to a voluptuous
life, contemned all good counsel, so as the Earls and Noblemen of Gallicia
seeing his folly, * Joan Vasael Hisp Chron. An 809. p. 714.
and discontented with his vices, scorned him, and would no more acknowledge
him to be their king, electing Bermund for their Sovereign, and entitled him
king of Gallicia, which title he enjoyed ten years: About which time the Moors
in Spain which had one king reigning at Cordova, after the death of king
Mahomet, made so many petty kings, as there was scarce any good town in Spain,
but had a particular King, which made strict alliances among themselves, for
the preservation of their estates. ^en. Hist. ^f Spain, l. ^. p. 242. Mariana
de rebus Hisp. l. 9. c. 8. 9.
Anno ^07^, Garcia king in Gallicia growing a tyrant, spoiled and ill entreated
his Subjects, governing himself after the appetite or a base woman, who put the
Nobility and Gentry in favor or disgrace with the king as she pleased, so as
in the end growing insupportable, certain Knights slew her in the kings
presence; His brother Sancho taking advantage of the peoples hatred, entered his
Realm with a great Army; who thereupon being deserted generally by his people,
fled to the Moors for aid, and fell to spoil his own Country, after which he
was defeated, taken prisoner, and so kept in the Castle of Lune with a good
Guard till his death.

I read in De rebus Hisp. l. 9. c. 5.
John Mariana, that in the Council of Florence under Pope Victor the second,
Anno 1055. Hildebrand a Cardinal Deacon Ambassador to Henry the second,
Emperor of Germany, complained in the Council against Ferdinand king of
Spain, in the Emperors Name, That against the Custom of his Ancestors and
prescript of Laws, he did with incredible arrogance and levity hold himself
exempt from the power of the Roman Empire, which injury himself could gladly
suffer, if there were no other loss but of his own honor; But since the
estate of Christendom could not well subsist, and the Popes Authority would
likewise be impaired, unless all Christian kingdoms were united and knit
together under one temporal head the Emperor, whom they should obey; they
ought to suppress the springing temerity in the Womb, lest by their neglect
spreading it self into other Provinces, animated with the sweet, and oft-times
deceitful name of liberty, the sacred Majesty of the Empire and Popedom
should be reduced to an empty title; wherefore he desired them to interdict all
Spain, and excommuniate the King; which if they did, he would be assistant to
the Churches honor and Republiks safety then endangered: But if they refused
it out of fear, he would not be wanting to the honor of the Empire, and would
certainly look to himself in private. The Pope after some deliberation,
approved this motion as just, and thereupon sends Legates to Ferdinand in his
own and the Councils name, to satisfy the Emperors demands forthwith, under
pain of present excommunication. The King doubtful and fearful whether to
obey or not, summons a general Assembly of the Estates of the Realm: The
Clergy and religious sort of men persuaded submission, for fear of the Popes
excommunication; the fearfuller sort concurring with them, by reason of the
Emperors power and their own weakness and distraction, and the Kings desires
of peace, inclined most to their opinion. But some heroic spirits thought that
a most grievous yoke should thereby be laid on the liberty of Spain; which
being once admitted on their necks, they should hardly shake off again; that it
was better to die fighting, then that the Republike should be involved in so
great a mischief and indignity. Rodoricus Diacius, a noble Spaniards opinion
(then absent from the assembly) being required by the king and it, answered.
That this was no matter of Counsel: that what was gotten with Arms was to be
defended with Arms; that it seemed most unjust, that the fruit of others valor
should return to those who in their lost condition had not communicated in the
labor and danger which recovered it; that it was better to die valiantly, than
to lose the liberty gained by their Ancestors, to become a mocking-stock to a
barbarous and cruel nation, who contemned all men but themselves; whose ears
were proud, whose speeches contumelious, whose access difficult, riotings new,
cruelty inhumane; Shall we who have yet hardly escaped the servitude of Moors,
undergo a new bondage prepared from the Christians? They will deride both us
and ours. Does the whole world, as far as Christianity extends it self, obey
the German Emperors? Shall all the grace, power, honor, riches, gained by
ours, and our Ancestors blood, give place to the Germans? Shall they leave
dangers, repulses, iudgemen, want to us? Shall Germany again lay on us the yoke
of the Roman Empire, which our Ancestors have shaken off? Shall we be a vulgar
people without grace, without Empire, without authority, obnoxious to those, to
whom if we had vigorous minds, if we were men, we might be a terror? But it
is difficult to resist the Emperous endeavors, not to obey the Roman Pontifs
commands; verily it a basnesse of spirit, for an uncertain fear of war, to
involve the Commonwealth in most certain dangers: many things are effected by
trial, which seemed difficult to slothful men. I know not what stupidity has
seized on many, whom neither glory moves, nor the infamy of the wretchedness,
thinking it great liberty enough if they be freed from scourges? I suppose the
Popes ears will not be so averse to our affairs, that he will not be moved with
our most just prayers, and the equity of the cause; Let some now be sent, who
may boldly defend the cause of our liberty before him, and teach him, that the
Germans demand unjust things. Mine opinion is, that the liberty gained by our
Ancestors, is to be defended with arms against the attempts of all men, and
with this my sword I will maintain, THAT THEY ARE MOST WICKED TRAITORS TO THEIR
COUNTRY, who out of a simulation of a fond Religion, or show of preposterous
caution, shall give contrary advice, neither shall resolve, that servitude is
to be repudiated with greater care by us, then domination is affected by them.
So far forth as every one shall addict himself to the liberty of his
Country, so far shall I be a friend unto him, or a deadly enemy. This opinion
of Roderic prevailed, in pursuit whereof they raise an army of ten thousand
men, whereof he was made General; they send Ambassadors to the Pope and
Council, whereof Roderic was chief; and upon a full hearing of the cause
before Rupert Cardinal of Saint Sabria, the Popes Legate, at Toulouse,
judgment was pronounced for the liberty of Spain, and it was decreed, That the
German Emperors should from thenceforth have no power nor jurisdiction over the
Kings of Spain; which was afterward confirmed by the customs of the people,
the consent of other Nations, the public resolution and judgment of Lawyers;
as Iacobus Valdesius in his Book de dignitate Regum Hispaniae printed 1602.
Cap. 18. proves at large.

Lib. ^. p. 240
The General History of Spain, records, that the Council of Florence
resolved, that seeing the Kings of Spain had defended and conquered their
Realms by Arms, without any aid from the Emperors, they were free and exempt
from all subjection and acknowledgement to the Emperors; whereof we may read
the Gloss upon the Chapter Adrianus P^pa, distinct. 63. The like privilege
have the Kings of France, the State of Venice, the Kings of England, and some
others; Which clearly demonstrates, the Sovereign power of Kingdoms and Nations
even over their Kings and Princes, and that they may justly defend themselves,
and Elect other Princes, when they are deserted or destroyed by them.

Genesis Hist. of Spain, l. 8. p. 243
Anno 1083. Sacho Ramires king of Aragon, to supply the charges of his wars
against the Moors, was sometimes forced to use the revenues of his Clergy, his
Treasure being not able to furnish so great a charge; but the Bishops of his
Country, who affected nothing more but to enrich their own Order and State,
opposed themselves against him, and afflicted him in such sort, as putting him
in a vain fear, that he was damned for this cause, They made him do Penance in
the Church of Roda before Saint Vincents Altar, in the presence and at the
pnrsuite of Raymund Dolmare, Bishop of that place, the Bishop of Jarca, and
others, and to confess publicly, that he had grie^ously offended. Thus these
good Fathers publicly insulted over their Sovereign.

Genesis hist. of Spain, l. 8. p. 256.
Anno 1091. king Alphonso granted this privilege, among other, to Toledo. That
the City of Toledo might never be alienated from the Crown, nor given upon any
Title whatsoever, to man, woman, or child.

Anno 1076. Sancho King of Navarre was slain in battle by his brother Raymond
thinking to reign after him, Hyeron. Blancae Arogen. Rerum. Com. in Sanct. 4.
p. 625. Genesis Hist. of Spain, l. ^ p. 243.
but the Navarroyes expelled him out of their confines, disdaining that he
should reign over them, who had embrued his hands in his kingly brothers
blood, and sending to Sancho Ramires, 4. king of Aragon, called him to reign
over them, because their slain kings sons were too young to reign, and
protect them from their enemies; by which means the kingdoms of Arragon and
Navarre were united. Gen ^ist. l. 9. p. 2^4. to 279 Joan Mariana de Rebus Hisp.
l. ^0. c. 8. Rod. sanct. hist. Hisp. pars 3. c 30.
Veracha Queen of Castile, a most lascivious open Adultresse, by her unchaste
life so fa^re provoked her husband Alphonso, that he was divorced from her,
made war against her and confined her: After which she still continuing in
her lewdness, the Nobility and States of Castile and Leon, revolt from her,
take arms against her, depose her from the Crown, and elect and crown her
son Alphonso the 8. king An. 1122. allowing her only a pension to support
her life. Genesis Hist. of Spain, l. 9. p 281 28^ to 287. Rod. Sancti hist Hisp
pars 3. c. 30. Mariana De Reb. Hisp* l. 10. c. 5.
Alphonso King of Arragon by his last Will and Testament, most solemnly
ratified, for the expiation of his sins, gave diverse crown Lands, Tenements,
Revenues, and Legacies to Religious houses and persons, An. 1132. but being
prejudicial to the Crown, his Will after his death was held void and not put
in execution: he being slain by the Moors An. 1134. the States of Arragon
elected one Peter Tares for their King: who growing exceeding proud of his new
dignity, began to despise the Nobles, and abrogate the Laws and customs of
the Country: And the Nobles (being assembled at a general Assembly of the
States) going to visit him, he commanded his Porter to shut them out, saying,
that Mounsieur was busy about matters of great importance, but they understood
afterward, that the great affairs causing him to exclude his friends were, his
Barbar was trimming him: which so incensed the Nobles and great men, that the
next day they held their general Assembly of the Estates without the King;
where they first of all decreed to depose their new king, because being ^n
honor he had no understanding of himself, and because they found he would
grow more proud and insolent afterward: whereupon expelling Peter, the Estates
assembling at Boria, elected Ramier a Monk, brother to king Alphonso, for
their King; who was much derived of his Nobles for his Monkish simplicity, and
at last turned Monk again: But those of Navarre thinking a Monk to be better
acquainted with the matters of a Monastery then how to govern a Kingdom, and
being jealous that the Arragonoys by choosing a King of the blood Royal of
Arragon, would by this means aspire to the chief places of honor and favor
in Court, it was concluded, that the Estates of Navarre should assemble at
Pampelone, where they chose Garcia Remires their King of Navarre; and so the
Realms of Arragon and Navarre which had been united 58. years, were separated
in these two Kings. The Kingdoms of Spain being often before and since this
time united and divided, as the people and Realms assented or dissented
thereunto. Genesis hist. of Spa. l. 10. p. 307. to 312. 315. 321, 326.
Not to mention the troubles of Castile by reason of the nonage of their king
Alphonso the fourth, of whose custody and tuition the assembly of the Estates
disposed; or how some Knights of Castile slew a Jew, with whom this king was so
enamoured, that he forgot his new Spouse, and almost lost his senses. Anno
1179. king Alphonso assembled the Estates of Castile at Burgon, to leavie a
Tax upon the people, whereto the Nobility, as well as the rest, should
contribute, imposing 5. Maravidis of gold for every person; but it took no
effect: for all the Gentlemen of Castile being discontented, that he sought to
infringe their Liberties, fell to arms, and being led by the Earl Don Pedro
de Lara, they were resolved to resist this tax, and defend their Liberties with
the hazard of their live^. Whereupon Alphonso changed his opinion, and let
them understand, that from thenceforth he would maintain their immunities; and
that whatsoever he had then propounded, was not to continue, but only to supply
the present necessity of affairs, which he would seek to furnish by some other
means. For the great resolution which Don Pedro de Lara showed in this action,
the Nobility of Castile did grant to him and his successors, a solemn
breakfast in testimony of his good endeavor in a business of so great
consequence, and thereby the Lords of Lara have the first voice for the
Nobility in the Court of Castile. Genesis Hist. of Spain, l 10. p. 339. Mariana de
Reb. hisp. l. 11. c. 23.
(z) An. 1204. King Alphonso the Noble called a Parliament of the Lords,
Prelates and Deputies of the Towns of his Realm at Toledo, to advise and
assist him in his wars against the Moors; where they concluded to crave aid
from all Christian Princes, and a Crossado from the Pope against the Moors,
and made diverse Laws to restrain the supersluities of the Realm in feasts,
apparel, and other things.

Genesis hist of Spain, l. 10. p. 346, 347. l. 11. p. 350, 351. 352. 353. 354,
355, 356.
James the 8. King of Arragon being young at the time of his Fathers death, it
was thereupon after ordained in the assemblies of the Estates of Mencon and
Lirida, that Don Sancho Earl of Roussilon should govern the Realm during the
Kings minority; but they gave him limitation: The Kings person they recommended
to Friar William of Moncedon, Mr. of the Templers: After which An. 1220. this
young kings Uncles seeking to wrest the Realm from him instead of governing it,
by the fidelity of the Estates and their authority, his interest was preserved,
and three Governors with a superintendent of his Provinces were appointed by
them; and to prevent the continual practices of the Earls of Roussillon and
Fernand the kings Uncles, the states and justice of Arragon declared the King
of full age when he was but ten years old, and caused the Earl of Roussillon
to quit the Regencie; the authority of the justice of Arragon being then great
for the defense of the public liberty.

An. 1214. Alphonso the Noble king of Castile dying, his son Henry being but
11. year old, the Prelates, Nobles and Commons assembled at Burgon, having
declared him king, and taken the oath, made Queen Eleonora his Mother,
Governesse of his Person and Realms: after whose death, the custody of him was
committed to the hands of the Lords of Lara: This king afterward playing with
other young children of Noble Houses at Palenca in the Bishops Palace, one of
them cast a tyle from the top of a Tower, which falling on the covering of an
house, beat down another tyle, which fell on the young kings head, wherewith he
was so grievously hurt, that he dyed the eleventh day after, An. 1217. yet
this his casual death (for ought I find) was neither reputed Felony nor
Treason in the child that was the cause of it. After whose death Fernand the 3.
was proclaimed and made King by the States of Castile, to prevent the
pretentions of the French: after which his Mother Queen Berenguela in the
presence of the Estates, renouncing all her right to the Crown, resigned it up
to her son Fernand: About this time the Moors in Spain rejected the
Miraluminis of Africa, and created them several Kings and Kingdoms in Spain,
being never more united under one Crown after this division, which they thought
it lawful for them to make.

An. 1228. the Estates of Arragon assembling at Barcelona, (b) Genesis hist. of
Spain. p. 363, 366, 367, 368.
they consenting and requiring it according to the custom of the Arragonians
and Cattelans, (these Estates having authority to make War and Peace, and
Leagues) a war was resolved against the King of the Moors and Majorkins.
Anno 1231. the Realm of Navarre being very ill governed, by reason their King
Sancho retired to his chamber, did not speak with any man but his Household
servants, and would not hear of any public affairs; thereupon the State
began to think of electing a Regent to govern the Realm during his
retiredness; to prevent which, Sancho made an unjust accord with the king of
Navarre, and confederated with James King of Arragon, by the assents of the
states of the Realm to leave his Kingdom to him if he survived him; yet after
his death Thibault Earl of Champaigne was by the states of Navarre elected and
proclaimed King. And anno 1236. The Estates of Arragon and Cateloigne assembled
at Moncon for the continuance of the war with the Moors and conquest of
Valentia, without whom it was not lawful for the King to undertake any matter
of importance. For maintenance of this war, a custom called Marebetine, and
an exaction of impost for cattle was by the Estates imposed on the People; it
was likewise decreed, that all pieces of Gold and silver coined should be of
one goodness and weight, to the observation of which Edict for coins, all
were bound to swear that were above 18. years of age.

Genesis hist. of Spain, l 11. p. 370.
Anno 1236. James King of Arragon, revealing to his Confessor the Bishop of
Girone, that before his marriage with Queen Yolant he had passed a matrimonial
promise to Theresa of Bidame, she sued him thereupon before the Pope, who gave
sentence against her for want of sufficient witness, notwithstanding his
Confessors testimony: The King hereupon grew so angry with the Bishop for
revealing his secrets, that sending for him to his chamber, he caused his
tongue to be cut out: For which outrage committed on the Bishop, though
faulty, the Pope in the Council of Lions complained, and in the end
interdicted all the Realm of Arragon, and excommunicated the king. Hereupon to
take off this interdiction and excommunication, the king sent the Bishop of
Valentia with his excuse and humiliation to the Pope; wherewith he being
somewhat pacified, sent two Legates into Arragon; who having assembled a Synod
of Bishops at Lerida, they caused the King to come thither, and to confess his
fault upon his knees before these fathers, with great submission and tears,
who gave him absolution, upon condition he should cause the Monastery of
Boneface to be built, and endowed with an hundred and forty pounds of silver,
of annual rent; endow an Hospital for the poor with four hundred pounds
silver per annum, and give a Prebendary in the great Church of Girone, for the
maintenance of a Mass Priest. About which time the Genesis hist. of Spain, l. 11.
p. 372. 408.
Moors in Spain erected many new Kings and Kingdoms by mutual consent, and
Mahumad Aben Alamar for his valor, was by the Inhabitants of Mariona, elected
and made first King of Granado.

Genesis hist. of Spain, l. 11. p. 377, 378.
Anno 1243. all was in combustion in Portugal by the negligence and baseness
of their king Don Sancho Capello, who was wholly given to his wives humors,
hated of the Portugales, and himself disliked for her sake: for many
Malefactors and insolent persons were supported by her, who grew daily more
audacious in their excess, without fear of Justice, which was trodden under
foot, for their respect. For these considerations, and her barrenness too, all
the Noblemen of the kingdom desired to have the Queen (called Mencia)
separated and sent out of Portugal: for effecting whereof, they made a great
instance at Rome, but neither exhortation, admonition nor commandment, nor
censure could prevail, the king so doting on her, that he would not leave her:
Which the Portugals perceiving, some of them presumed to seize on her in the
City of Coimbra, and conducted her into Gallicia, from whence she never more
returned into Portugal. Not content herewith, they sought to depose the King
from his Royal dignity too, for his ill government, and to advance his Brother
Don Alphonso to the Regal Throne, in his place; whom the Estates assembled
made Regent of Portugal, leaving only the Title of King to his brother; which
fact of the Estates, the Pope in the Council of Lions, authorized by his
Apostolic power: with which the King being displeased, abandoned his Realm,
and retired into Castile.

Genesis Hist. of Spain, l. 11. p. 379.
Anno 1247. The Laws and Customs of Arragon, were reduced into writing by
King James his appointment, and compacted into one body, having till that time
been observed only by tradition: which Volume was coufirmed by the Estates
held at Hu^f^a: And the same year the King of Castile erected a kind of
Chancery and standing Court of Parliament of 12. learned men, which followed
the Court.

Genesis hist. of Spain, l. 12 p. 385, 386, 387.
Anno 1254. Thibald the 2. king of Navarre being but 15. years old at the
descent of the crown unto him, was at 25. years of age, declared of full age,
and crowned King in the great church of Pampelone, where he did swear, TO
PRESERVE AND AUGMENT THE PRIVILEGES OF THE COUNTRY: Afterward he doing homage
to the king of Castile for the Realm of Navarre, as his predecessors had done
before him, and making such a peace with him as the prelates, Knights and
Commonalties of the Realm in the States had approved, yet diverse knights and
the Inhabitants of the Borough of St. Iermin of Pampelone disallowed this
homage, this peace, and would not subscribe to it, as tending to the kings
dishonor; whereupon the king did punish them by fines; but his choler being
past, some few days after, considering they were good and faithful subjects,
loving his honor and greatness, and that they resisted his will out of true
love and zeal which they owed to the Crown and their Country, he caused
their Fines to be restored.

Genesis hist of Spain, l. 12. p. 390, 397.
Alphonso the 3. fifth King of Portugal putting away his first wife Mahault
without cause after he had children by her, and marrying Beatrix; hereupon when
by no entreaties of Friends or the Pope he would entertain his first wife
again, he was excommunicated by the Pope, and his Realm interdicted 10. or 12.
years space, continuing still obstinate till his first wife dyed, after which
he was absolved.

Genesis hist. of Spain, l. 12. p. (...). 400, 401.
Anno 1260. and in some year following, there were diverse controversies
concerning the Crown Lands, and settling of Portions for the King of Arragons
younger children, moved and determined in the Assembly of the Estates of
Arragon: and the Nobility complaining, that their King James did break their
privileges, made many Leagues and Factions. This matter being debated in the
Estates at Saragossa, and then at Ex ea in the year 1265. for pacifying these
troubles they enacted, That no honors nor military fees should be given to any
but to Gentlemen of race, and born in the Country. That no Gentleman should be
subject to the tribute of Cattle, nor to any other. That in all controversies
which the Nobility might have against the king or among themselves, the
Magistrate called the Justice Major of Arragon should be Judge, being assisted
by the Council. That the King should not give the fees and Military rewards,
allotted to them that do him service, as a recompense of their virtue and
valor, to any of his lawful children, who by right have their portions in the
Realm. Anno 1274. James King of Arragon coming to the Council of Lions,
desirous there to be crowned by the hands of Pope Gregory; (a ceremony whereof
he made great account:) the Pope refused him, unless he would acknowledge
himself vassal to the church of Rome, and pay the arrerages of the rent which
the deceased King Don Pedro his Father had promised: the which King James would
not do, holding it an unworthy thing so to debase the greatness of his
Crown, and restrain the Liberty of his Realm in any sort. And this year
there were great and continual Tumults in Arragon, the Nobility opposing
themselves against the King: for composing which differencs the Estates of
Arragon assembled in Parliament at Exea, where king James took the government
and managing of the affairs of the Realm from his son Don Pedro: and
diverse great Dons were there condemned of contumacy, and their Lands
confiscated by the Justice Major of Arragon: In this Assembly the Nobility
pleaded the Privileges of C^^teloyne; That the Nobility might quit the Kings
obedience in case of controversies and suites, especially if there were
question of their Liberties, and to protest it publicly.

Genesis Hist. of Spain, l. 13. p. 397, 398.
Anno 1265. Denis the infant King of Portugal desired his Grandfather Alphonso
King of Castile to discharge the Realm of Portugal of the homage and
vassallage it ought to the King of Leon, who thinking it would be taken ill by
the Noblemen his Subjects, advised the infant to propound it in an open
Assembly, called to that end. The opinion of Don Nugno de Lara was, that by no
means he should diminish the authority and greatness of his Crown, which he
should do, if he did quit this homage to the King of Portugal: For which
opinion the King growing angry with him, the residue fearing the kings
displeasure, advised him to do it: Whereupon the Realm of Portugal was freed
from all homage and subjection due to the Kings of Leon and Castile: For which
prodigality the other Nobles and D. Nugno were so much discontented, that they
made a League with the King of Granado against their own King, for dismembring
Portugal from the Crown of Leon; to pacify which differences the King used
many mediations, and at last called an Assembly of the Estates at Burgos, the
which was held without the Town for the safety of these Confederates.

That great Astronomer Genesis Hist. of Spain, l. 12. p. 412. to 426.
Alphonso King of Castile, (who presumed to control the Author of Nature,
saying; That if he had been at the Creation of the world, he should in many
things have been of another opinion, and amended Gods workmanship;) was a most
wilful, indiscreet, unfortunate Prince; for his eldest son Fernand dying in
his life time, leaving Alphonso and other issue males behind him, Don Sancho
his second son resolved to dispossess his Nephews of the kingdom, saying; That
it was fit* that he who was a Knight, and learned to govern a Realm, were it
in war or peace, should reign after his Father, rather then his Nephews,
sons of his eldest brother who were every young, having need of Regents and
Governors, charges which were affected by great personages, who by reason
thereof grew into quarrels one with the other, to the oppression of the people,
and hazard of the Estate. After which, Don Lope Diaz of Haro pressed the King
to declare Don Sancho his son his successor in the Realms of Castile,
Toledo, Leon, and other places, being his eldest son then living; to which he
giving a cold answer at first, having afterward assembled the Estates in
Segobia, he was by the King and the Estates consent declared and received as
heir to the Crown after his Fathers decease, Fernands children being
disinherited of their right, which fact was then excused and justified, because
there was no law at that time which did bind the King, much less the Estates,
to leave the Realm more to one son then to another: since which there was a
law made and received in the time of Fernand the 5. in the City of Taro; where
it was decreed by the Estates upon this difficulty, That the Children of the
elder brother deceased, representing their fathers person, should in that
respect be preferred before the Uncle: Hereupon Queen Violant, and Blanch
widow to Fernand were so much discontented with the Decree of the Estates,
disinheriting the eldest brothers sons, as taking the young children with
them, they departed out of Castile to Don Pedro King of Arragon; where Don
Sancho caused his Nephews to be imprisoned, whom king Alphonso laboring under
hand to get released* Don Sancho advertised hereof, made a league with the
Moors of Granado, against his Father, and by assent of his confederates took
upon him the Title of Regency of the Kingdom of Castile and other his Fathers
dominions, refusing the Title of King, during his Fathers life time; who was
forced to pawn his royal Crown and Jewels to Jacob Abin Joseph a Moore, King
of Morocco, who aided him willingly against Don Sancho. After which in an
Assembly of the States at Cordova with the advice of the Noble men and knights
of Castile thereupon sent, by a Decree pronounced by the mouth of Don Manuel,
in the name of the whole Nobility, Alphonso was deprived of all his Realms,
for murdering his brother Don Frederick, and burning Don Rues unjustly without
any form of justice or orderly proceedings, the breach of the rights and
privileges of the Nobility, and the excessive wasting of the treasure of the
Realm. Upon this there arose bloody Wars between the Father and son; and
in the year 1282. Alphonso was so vexed with his sons proceedings, that he
pronounced in the presence of many men of rank both Clergy and Laity in the
City of Sevill, The curse of God and his upon Don Sancho, a son, said he,
disobedient, rebellious, and a par^cidie, declaring him incapable and unworthy
to reign, depriving him of his successions, inheritance, and discharging the
subjects, as much as in him lay, from all oath and homage which they had done
unto him. But these were but words which Don Sancho did not much esteem;
enjoying his Fathers kingdoms after his decease in Title, as he did before in
act, and dying king of Castile, his heirs succeeded him in that Realm, as
lawful heirs thereunto.

Hieron. Blanca. Rer. Arragon. Com. p. ^60. Genesis Hist. of Spain, l. 12. p. 419,
421, 422.
Don Pedro the third, king of Arragon about the year 1283. had many
controversies with his Nobles and knights who complained much of his sower
disposition, and tyrannous manner of Government, insulting over the greatest,
yea against his own blood, contrary to all Law and nature. Wherefore being ill
entreated by him in their freedoms, whereof the Towns and Commonalties of his
Countries did also complain, the Nobility, Knights and Gentry, for preservation
of their Liberties made a Union together among themselves and with the people;
promising and swearing to let the King and his son Don Alphonso (who was his
Lieutenant General) understand, that if they did not contain themselves within
the limits of the Laws of the Country, they would withdraw themselves from
their obedience, and declare themselves enemies, and pursue them by arms that
should seek to break them. The king hereupon called the Estates to Tarrasone,
and afterward to Saragossa, where he entreated, promised and did all what he
could to break this Union: but he was forced to yield, and granted to the
Arragonians the privilege they call General, whereby their Liberties which
had been somewhat restrained, were again restored, the ancient manners of the
Country, and customs of their ancestors put in practice. And moreover there
were Laws made for their Kings, which they should be bound to obey; and for
that they were in a mutiny in some places, by reason of certain Impositions
laid upon salt, the traffic thereof was made free by the Estates. And the
king refusing the judgment of the Justice Mayor of Arragon, deposing Pedro
Martines Artassone (who then exercised it) from his Office, the Estates soon
after at an assembly at Zutaria, fortified it with stronger Laws, deeming the
Justice of Arragon to be a lawful Judge, (whom the King himself could not
displace) even in Cases commenced against the King; who being cited and not
appearing, there were Decrees made against him in many instances. In the end
the King confirmed the Decrees of the Justice Mayor, and whatsoever should be
concluded by the Estates, the Deputies and Counselors having given their
suffrages.

I read in Rerum Arragonens. Comment. in Pet. 2. p. 6^0.
Hieronimus Blanca, that about the year 1212. the Arragonians taking it ill
that their Liberties gotten with their blood, should so many ways be
subverted, as then they were by King Pedro the first, raised up the Name and
forces of a Union, that with one force, and the consent of all, one mind as it
were being made out of all, they might more easily propulse so great injuries;
but what was then done hereupon, is not recorded; But the two memorable
Privileges of the Union under King Alphonso the third, are said to spring from
thence.

Don Alphonso Genesis Hist. of Spain, l, 13. p. 431. Hyeron. Blanca Arrag. Rerum
Com. in Apph. 3. p. 661, 662.
king of Aragon succeeding Pedro, Anno 1286. he was admonished by the Estates
Ambassadors, to come speedily to the Assembly at Saragossa; where having sworn
and promised the observation of the Customs, Rights and Privileges of the
Country, and received the Oath of fealty from the Deputies, he might lawfully
take upon him the Title of the King of Aragon; the which they said, he might
not use before this Act and Ceremony, according to the ancient customs of
Aragon. Upon these summons he came to the Assembly of the Estates to Saragossa,
took the Oath aforesaid, after which he was Crowned: Which done there grew in
this assembly a great contention, touching the reformation of the manners of
Courtiers, and the ordering of the Kings house; the Noblemen and Deputies of
the Estates of Aragon maintaining; that the conusance thereof was incident to
their charge; the King, and his household servants on the other side, denied,
that there was either Law or custom which tied the King or his followers to any
such subjection. In the end it was concluded, that the reformation of the Court
should be made by twelve of the principal Families, the like number of
Knights, four Deputies of Saragossa, and one of either of the other Cities, the
which should give their voices in that case. This Union of Aragon obtained
likewise a Decree, that the King should have certain Counselors chosen, to
wit, four of the chief Nobility, four Knights of noble and ancient races; four
of his household servants, two Knights for the Realm of Valencia, two Citizens
of Saragossa, and one of either of the other Cities (whom they particularly
name) with a condition, that whilst the King should remain in Aragon,
Ribagorca, or Valencia, two of those Noblemen, two of his servants, two Knights
of Aragon, one of Valencia, and the four Deputies of the Realm of Aragon,
should follow and reside in his Court, AS COVNCELLORS APPOINTED BY THE UNION;
who protested by solemn Deputies sent to the King to that end, that if he did
not receive, observe, and maintain those orders, THEY WOULD SEIZE UPON ALL HIS
REVENVES, and on all the fees, Offices, and dignities of such Noblemen as
should contradict them. Thus were the Kings of Aragon entreated in those times
by their subjects, who entered into a Union between themselves resolving, That
for the common cause of liberty Non verbis solum, SED ARMIS CONTENDERE LICERET;
that it was lawful for them to contend not only with words, BUT WITH ARMS TO;
and determined in this assembly of the States, A Comitijs intempestive
discedere REGI NEFAS ESSE, That it was unlawful (yea, a grand offense) for the
king to depart unseasonably from his Parliament, before it was determined. Our
present case.

Genesis Hist. of Spain, l. 13. p. 436, 465.
James the second of Aragon being in Sicily at the death of King Alphonso, Don
Pedro his brother assembled the Estates at Saragossa, to consult, lest the
State in his absence would receive some prejudice; where James arriving, having
first sworn and promised the observation of the Rights and Privileges of the
Country, was received and crowned king. About the year 1320 James, by advice
of his Estates held at Tarragone, made a perpetual Union of the Realms of
Arragon and Valencia, and the Principality of Cat^lone, the which from that
time should not for any occasion be disunited. In which assembly Don James
eldest son to the Crown, being ready to marry Leonora of Castile, suddenly, by
a strange affection, quitting both his wife and succession to the Realm of
Arragon, told his Father, That he had made a vow neither to marry, nor to
reign; so as notwithstanding all persuasions of the King and Noblemen, he quit
his Birthright to his Brother Don Alphonso, after the example of Esau:
discharged the Estates of the Oath they had made unto him, and presently put on
the habit of the Knights of Jerusalem; Whereupon his second brother, was by
the Estates of Arragon acknowledged and sworn heir of these Kingdoms, after the
decease of his father. At this time the Authority of the Justice of Aragon was
so great, That it might both censure the King, and the Estates, and appoint
them a place, and admit them that did assist, or reject them.

Genesis Hist. of Spain, l. 13. p. 440 to 476.
Ferdinand the fourth, king of Castile, being but a child when his father
Sancho died, was in ward to his mother Queen Mary, his Protectresse; he had two
competitors to the Crown, Alphonso de la Cede, and Den John, who making a
strong confederacy, were both crowned Kings, against right, by several parts
of his Realm, which they shared between them. The States assembled at Zamora
granted great sums of money to Ferdinand to maintain the wars with his enemies,
and procure a dispensation of Legitimation and marriage from the Pope, who
would do nothing without great fees. After which he summoning an assembly of
the Estates at Medina, they refused to meet without the express command of the
Queen Mother, who commanded them to assemble, and promised to be present, After
this diverse accords were made twixt him and his competitors; and at last
calling an assembly of the Estates to assist him in his wars against the
Moors; he soon after condemned two Knights, called Peter and John of Caravajal,
without any great proofs, for a murder, and caused them to be cast down
headlong from the top of the Rock of Martos; who professing their innocence at
the execution, they adjourned the king to appear at the Tribunal Seat of
Almighty God within thirty days after, to answer for their unjust deaths; who
thereupon fell sick and died, leaving his son Alphonso the 12, very young; for
whose Regency there being great competition, the inhabitants of Avila, and
their Bishop resolved, not to give the possession and government of the Kings
person to any one, that was not appointed by the assembly of the Estates;
Whereupon the Estates assembling at Palence, committed the government of his
person to Q. Mary his Grandmother and Queen Constance his mother; who dying,
another Assembly of the Estates was called at Burgos, Anno 1314. who decreed,
that the Government of the King, and Regencie of the Realm should be reduced
all into one body betwixt Q Mary, Don Pedro, and Don John, and if any one of
them should dye, it should remain to the two other that did survive, and to one
if two dyed. After this, Anno 1315. these Tutors and Governors of the Realm
of Castile were required by the Estates in an Assembly at Carrion to give
caution for their government, and to give an account what they had done. Who
often jarring and crossing one another; diverse Assemblies of Estates were often
called to accord them. Anno 1320. The Estates assembling, appointed new
Governors of the King and Realm, who discharging their trust very lewdely and
oppressing the People, Anno 1326. they were discharged of their Administration
at a Parliament held at Vailledolet: in which the king did swear, to observe
the fundamental Laws of the Realm, and to administer justice, maintaining
every one in his Estate goods and honor: Which done, the Deputies of the
Estates swore him Fealty. Gen Hist. of Spain, l. 13. and 14. passim.
This King afterward proving very cruel and tyrannical, his Nobles and
Subjects often times successively took up defensive arms against him, his
Tyranny augmenting their obstinancy, and procuring him still new troubles;
Whereupon at last discerning his errors, he became more mild, and often
assembled the Estates in Parliament, who gave him large Subsidies to maintain
his wars against the Moors. Gen Hist. of Spain, l. 14. p. 487, 488, 489.
The Province of Alava had a custom to choose a Lord under the Sovereignty of
Castile, who did govern and enjoy the revenues appointed by the Lords of the
Country; for the election of whom they were accustomed to assemble in the
Field of Arriaga; those of this Election being called Brethren, and the
Assembly of the Brotherhood. Notwithstanding in the year 1332. the Brotherhood
and Estates of this Province sent to K. Alphonso diverse Articles, which they
beseeched him to confirm, promising for their part, that this should be their
last Assembly, and that the name and effect of their Brotherhood should remain
for ever extinct, and the Province be for ever united to the Crown of Castile,
if he would confirm those Articles to them, being 17. in number, which he did.
The chief were these, That the King nor his Successors should not alien any
place of his Demesnes. That the Gentlemen and their goods should be free and
exempt from all Subsidies as they had been heretofore. That they and others of
the Country should be governed according to the customs and rights of
Soportilla; And that diverse Towns and Villages therein specified should be
free from all Tributes and Impositions.

Genesis Hist. of Spain, l. 13. p. 455. 460, 472.
About the year 1309. Mahumet King of Granado, becoming casually blind, was
soon after deposed by his own Brother, and the great men of his Realm, who
were discontented and disliked to be governed by a blind King, who could not
lead them to the wars in person. Which Kingdom went by Election commonly, as
is evident by his three next successors, and Mahumet the sixth King of Granado.

Genesis Hist. of Spain, l. 13. p. 452. 462. l. 14 p. 477, 778.
Anno 1307. Jews Hutin was crowned King of Navarre at Pampelone, where he
swear, to observe the Laws and Rights of the Realm. After which, Anno 1315.
Philip the long was elected by the Estates of Navarre to be their king in right
of his wife, but it was upon conditions drawn in writing which they tendered to
him and the Queen to subscribe and swear to, before the solemnities of their
Coronation, in the Estates assembled at Pampelone, which they yielded willingly
unto; whereof the principal Articles were these:

1. First, to the Estates to maintain and keep the Rights, Laws, Customs,
Liberties, and privileges of the Realm, both written and not written, whereof
they were in possession, to them and their successors for ever, and not to
diminish, but rather augment them.

2. That they should disannull all that had been done to the prejudice thereof
by the king^ their Predecessors, and by their Ministers, without delay,
notwithstanding any Le^.

3. That for the term of 12. years to come they should not coin any money,
but such as was then current within the Realm, and that during their lives
they should not coin above one sort of money, and that they should distribute
part of the revenues, profits and commodities of the Realm unto the Subjects.

4. That they should not receive into their service above four strangers, but
should employ them of the Country.

5. That the Forts and Garrison of the Realm should be given unto Gentlemen
borne and dwelling in the Country, and not to any stranger, who should do
homage to the Queen, and promise for to hold them for her, and for the lawful
Heir of the Country.

6. That they should not exchange, nor engage the Realm for any other Estate
whatsoever.

7. That they should not sell nor engage any of the Revenues of the Crown,
neither should make any Law nor Statute against the Realm, nor against them
that should lawfully succeed therein.

8. That to the first son which God should give them, coming to the age of
twenty years, they should leave the kingdom free and without factions, upon
condition, that the Estates should pay unto them for their expenses an hundred
thousand Sanchets, or other French money equivalent.

9. That if God gave them no children, in that case they should leave the
Realm after them free with the Forts, in the hands of the Estates, to invest
them to whom of right it should belong.

10. That if they inf^inge these Articles or any part of them, the Subjects
should be quit of their Oath of subjection which they ought them.

These Articles being promised and sworn by the king and Queen, they were
solemnly crowned, and the Deputies of the Estates, Noblemen and Officers of the
Crown took their obedience to them. Genesis hist of Spain, l. 14. p. 497, 498.
Upon this agreement, all the Castles and places of strength in Navarre were
put into the hands of the Estates, who committed them unto the custody of
faithful knights, in whose keeping they continued; a Catalogue of which
Castles with the names of the knights that guarded them, by the Estates
appointment, in the year 1335. you may read at large in the General History
of Spain.

Before this Genesis hist. of Spain, l. 14 p. 476.
Anno 1328. the Estates of Navarre assembled at Puenta la Reyna, to resolve
without any respect, TO WHOM THE REALM OF NAVARRE BELONGED, whether to Edward
king of England, or to Jane Countess of Eureux. The Estates being adjourned to
Pampalone, the chief Town of the Realm, their opinions were diverse; many
holding that king Edward should have the Realm, as Granchilde (born of the
daughter) to Queen Jane, daughter to King Henry, rather then the Countess of
Eureux, in regard of the Sex; others, with more reason, held for the Countess,
who was in the same degree, but daughter to a Son, and Heir to Queen Jane.
These prevailed, drawing the rest to their opinion; whereupon the Countess was
declared true and lawful Queen of Navarre, the Realm having been vacant above
four Months. And until that she and Count Philip her husband should come and
take possession of the Realm, they declared the Regent and Viceroy Don John
Corberan of Leet, Standard bearer of the Realm, and John Martines of Medrado.
Lo here a Parliament of the Estates of Navarre, summoned by themselves, without
a King, determining the Right of succession to the Crown, appointing a
Vicegerent, and prescribing such an Oath and Articles to their king, as you
heard before.

Genesis Hist. of Spain, l. 14. p 479. l. 15. p. 539.
Anno 1331. king Philip of Navarre, to administer justice, erected a new Court
of Parliament in Navarre, which was called New, to distinguish it from the old;
HE AND THE THREE ESTATES of the Realm NAMING MEN WORTHY OF THAT CHARGE. Queen
Jane and Philip deceasing, their son Charles the second, surnamed the Bad, for
his cruelty and ill manners, was called by the three Estates of Navarre to
Pampelone, and there crowned in their Assembly after the manner of his
Ancestors, swearing to observe the Laws and Liberties of the Country. After
which a far Which you may read at large, Gen hist. of Spain, l. 17. p. 625 626
stricter Oath was administered to Charles the 3. An. 1390.

Genesis Hist. of Spain, l. 14. p. 480.
Anno 1325. In a general assembly of all the Estates of Arragon, Don Pedro son
to the Infant Don Alphonso, was sworn presumptive Heir and Successor to the
Crown, after the decease of his Grandfather and Father, the which was there
decreed and practiced, for that Don Pedro Earl of Ribagorca did maintain, that
if his brother Don Alphonso should die before then Father, the Realm did belong
to him by right of propriery, being the third brother, rather then to his
Nephew the son of the second brother. In this Assembly the Articles of the
general privileges were confirmed, and it was ordained for a Law, That no
Freeman should be put to the Rack, and that confiscations should not be
allowed, but in Cases of Coining and High Treason.

Gen Hist. of Spain, l 14. p. 483, 484, 485, 486, 493. to 498 504. Dr Beards
Theater of Gods Judgments. Marian^ and others.
Anno 1328. Alphonso King of Castile, treacherously murdering Don John the
blind, his Kinsman, in his own Court, when he had invited him to dinner on all
Saints day, and then condemning him for a Traitor, confiscating his lands (a
fact unseemly for a King, who should be the mirror of Justice:) Hereupon Don
John Manuell stood upon his Guard, fortified his Castles, revolted from the
King for this his Treachery, allied himself with the Kings of Arragon and
Granado, overran the Countries of Castile, from Almanca unto Pegnafield; the
Prior of Saint John's, Don Fernand Rodrigues, hereupon caused the Cities of
Toro, Zamora, and Vailledolit, to rebel and shut their gates against the King;
and many others likewise revolted from him: At last he was forced to call an
Assembly of the Estates, who gave him Subsidies to aid him in his wars against
the Moors) and to conclude a peace with Don Manuel and his other discontented
Subjects; whom he afterward spoiling of their lawful inheritances, and
pursuing them in their honors and lives by Tyrannous cruelty, extending his
outrageous disdain even to women of his own blood, he thereby so estranged most
of his Princes and Nobles from him, that they revolted from him, and joined
with Mahumet king of Granado, and the Moors in a war against him, which
lasted three or four years, putting him to infinite trouble, vexations and
expenses, enforcing him to make a dishonorable peace with the Moors, to
release the Tribute which they paid him formerly; and after much mediation he
concluded a Peace thorowout all the Realm with his discontented Subjects. This
Prince thinking to reign more securely, had taken a course of extreme severity,
showing himself cruel and treacherous to his Nobility, whereby he was feared,
but withal he lost the love and respect of his subjects, so as he was no
sooner freed from one danger, but he fell into another worse then the first,
his Nobles holding this for a Maxim, That a Tyrant being offended will at some
time revenge himself, and therefore they must not trust him upon any
reconciliation, who to pacify the troubles which had grown by his own error,
had made no difficulty to sacrifice (upon the peoples spleen) his own Mignions,
degrading, and in the end murdering, condemning them as Traitors after their
death, yea, the Princes of his own blood, taking their goods, estates, and
depriving the lawful Heirs, seeking to reign over free men, and generous
Spirits as over beasts, entreating them as base and effeminate slaves, who
might not speak their opinions freely in matters of State and Government, of
which they were held dead members and without feeling. Whereupon D. Manuel and
other Nobles, as men endued with understanding, reason, and not forgetting the
nature of Alphonso, who was proud, a contemner of all laws, and treacherous,
they proceeded so far as to withdraw themselves from his subjection by
protestation and public act, and entered into a league with the King of
Portugal, incensing him to take up Arms for their defense: Where upon King
Alphonso having some feeling, that cruelty was too violent remedy for men that
were Nobly borne, he sought by all mild and courteous means to divide them,
and to draw some of them to his service, which he effected, and so more easily
conquered, and reduced their companions.

Genesis Hist of Spain, l. 14. p. 506.
An. 1337. was founded the Town of Alegria of Dulanci, in the Province of
Alava, and many Villages thereabout, the which obtained from the King the
privileges and Laws of the Realm, whereby the inhabitants should govern
themselves, with liberty to choose their own Judges.

Genesis Hist. of Spain, l. 15. p. 532 to 576.
Don Pedro the first, king of Castile, surnamed the cruel, most tyrannically
murdering and poisoning diverse of his Nobles and subjects without cause,
banishing others, quitting Blanch his espoused wife within three days after
his marriage, to enjoy the unchaste love of Donna Maria de Paedilla, by whom
he was enchanted, which much troubled the whole Court; divorcing himself
without color, by the advice only of two Bishops, without the Popes assent,
from Blanch, and marrying Jane of Castro in her life time; Hanging up diverse
Burgesses of Toledo causlesly, for taking the Queens part too openly, and among
others a Goldsmiths son, who offered to be hanged to save his fathers life;
causing his own brother Don Frederick, and diverse Nobles else to be suddenly
slain, Anno 1358. poisoning and murdering likewise diverse Noble Ladies, among
others Don Leonora his own Aunt; after which Anno 1360 he murdering two more
of his own brethren, executing diverse Clergy men, and Knights of Castle,
banishing the Archbishop of Toledo, putting diverse Jews (as Samuel Levy his
High Treasurer, with his whole family) to death, to gain their Estates and
causing his own Queen Blanch to be poisoned, after she had long been kept
prisoner by him. Anno 1361. Hereupon his cruelties, rapines and murders growing
excessive, and the Popes Legate denouncing him an utter Enemy to God and man,
Henry Earl of Transtamara, his brother, with other Fugitives getting aid from
the King of Navarre, entered Castile with an Army, where by the Nobles
importunity he took upon him the title of King of Castile and Leon; which
done, the whole Kingdom (long oppressed with D. Pedro his Tyranny) immediately
revolted from him, so that in few days Henry found himself King of a mighty
great kingdom, almost without striking stroke, the people striving who should
first receive him, such was their hatred to the Tyrant Pedro: who being
doubtful what to do, fled with two and twenty Ships out of his Realm to
Bayon, craving aid of the English to revest him in his Kingdom; mean time king
Henry assembling the Estates at Burgon, they granted him the tenth penny of all
the Merchandise they should sell in the Realm, to maintain the wars against
Pedro; who getting aid from the English upon conditions, accompanied with the
valiant Black See Mr. Soldens Titles of Honor, part. 1 chap. 8. page 165. to
171.
Prince of Wales, entered with a great Army into Spain, where the Prince writing
to Henry, voluntarily to resign the Crown to Pedro his Brother, to avoid the
effusion of Christian blood; he made answer, That he could not hearken to any
accord with him, who had against the law of nature taken delight to murder so
many of the blood Royal and other great personages of Castile, who had no
respect of the Laws of the Country, and much less of God, falsifying his
Oaths and promises, having no other rule in his actions, but his Tyrannous
passions. Whereupon, battle being joined, Henry was conquered, and Pedro
restored; But he discontenting the English and others, who had reseated him in
his Kingdom, by his insolency and Tyranny, and the Biscaniers refusing to be
under the command of strangers, whom they would never consent to be put in
possession of their Country; and withal falling to his former cruelties, and
courses contrary to the advice of his friends and Astrologers; he so estranged
the hearts of all from him, that the English returning, and Henry receiving new
forces from the French, entered Castile, suddenly, and conquered the Tyrant; who
being betrayed into King Henry his hands as he was taking his flight by night,
King Henry stabbed him with dagger in the face, and at last getting him under
him, slew him with his dagger for his excess and tyranny, Anno 1368. and
reigned quietly in his steed.

I might prosecute and draw down the Histories of all the Spanish Kings and
Kingdoms from his days till this present, which are full fraught with
presidents of this nature, to prove all the Kings of Spain inferior to their
Kingdoms, Assemblies of the Estates, Laws, resistible, deprivable for their
Tyrannyes; but because those who desire satisfaction in this kind, may read
the Histories themselves more largely in the general History of Spain, in
Joannis Pistorius, his Hispaniae Illustratae, (where all their chief
Historians are collected into several volumnes:) and in Meteranus and
Grimstons Histories of the Netherlands: I shall for brevity sake pretermit them
altogether, concluding with one or two brief observations more touching the
Gothish and Arragonian Kings in Spain, which will give great light and
confirmation to the premises.

First, for the Ancient Kings of the Goths in Spain, Lib. 2. c. (...). l. 4.
c. ^5.
Aimoinius, (...) belli and pa^is, l. 1 c 3. sect. 11 p. 8.
and Hugo Grotius out of him, (d) Vandal. 1. Grotius, ibid.
confess; that they received the Kingdom from the people, revocable by them at
any time; and that the people might depose them as often as they displeased
them; and therefore their acts might be rescinded and nulled by the people who
gave them only a revocable power: which the premised Histories experimentally
evidence: such likewise were the Kings of the Vandales, removable at the
peoples pleasure as Procopius writes: such the Kings of the (...). Goth. 2.
Heruli, Excerpt. Dionis, and Grotius. De Iure Be^li. l. 1. c. 3. Ad notata
sect. 11. p. 72.
Quadi, Iazyges, Paulus Wiarnafred l. 4. and 6.
Lombardes, Ammiannus lib. 28. Loan cus (...)
Burgundians Joan, Leo li. 7
Moldavians, General History of Spain l. 7. to 20. passim.
Africans, thel Moors in Spain, the Solinus l 13. Grotius de Iure Belli l c.
3. sect. 9. p 57
two annual Kings of Carthage, the Tacitus de mor. Germ Grotius Ibid. Dionis.
Hal l. 2 and 5.
ancient Germane Kings the Kings of Sparta; and most other Kings of Greece, as
Historians and Authors of best credit relate.

Secondly, for the Kings of Arragon, and original constitution of the Kingdom,
I find this memorable passage in Hieronymus Blanca his Rerum Arragonensium
Commentarius, page 586. 587. 590. and 72^. 724. in the third Tom, of Ioannis
Pistorius his Hispaniae illustratae, Sancho the fourth King of Arragon dying
without issue, the Estates and people advising together what course they should
take for their security and future good administration of the Commonweal,
about the year of our Lord, 842. elected twelve principal men to whom they
committed the care and government of the Republike during the Inter-regnum
These because they were very ancient men, were called Elders, from whence those
who by birth are styled Rici-men, drew their original; And this manner of
governing the Commonwealth continued long: But the great incursions of the
Arabians pressing them, they imagined it would not continue firm and stable:
Yet notwithstanding, taken with the sweetness of Liberty, they feared to
subject themselves to the Empire of one man; because verily they believed that
servitude would proceed from thence. Therefore having considered and rightly
pondered all things, and reasons, they made this the result of all their
Counsels; that they should consult with Pope Adrian the second, and the
Lombards; what course they should take by their advise, which should be most
meet for the perpetuating of the Empire: to whom, as reports go, they returned
this answer. That preordaining certain Rights and Laws, ratified with the
previous religion of a cautionary oath, they should set up one King over them;
but yet should reject a foreign Dominion; and that they should take heed, that
he whom they adopted to be King, should be neither of the superiors, nor
inferiors; lest, if superior he should oppress inferiors, or lest, if
inferior, he should be derided by superiors; To which counsel and sentence
they submitting, founded that ancient Suprarbian Court: For according to the
answer given, all decreed, That they ought to elect one man excelling in virtue
for their King; But yet, lest the pleasure of Kings, like as in other Princes,
should likewise even among us become Laws, they first of all enacted some
Laws by which they might heal this inconvenience. These Laws they afterward
called the Suprarbian Court, which we should largely prosecute, but through the
injury of time, the knowledge of them is buried, and some fragments of them
only are extant, observed by Prince Charles himself, and some other Writers,
which we shall verily remember; because they are as the first elements of our
Republike, and contain in them, the institution of the Magistrate of the
Justice of Arragon, which is the chief thing of our institution; therefore in
the beginning of that Court it was provided, that the King which should be,
since the Kingdom, lately taken from the Moors, was freely and voluntarily
conferred on him, should be bound both by the Religion of an Oath, as likewise
by the force and power of Laws, to observe the Laws and Liberties of the
Kingdom; Now the Laws were these,

Govern thou the Kingdom in peace and righteousness, and give us better
Courts of justice.

The things which shall be gained from the Moors, let them be divided not
only between the Rich-men, but likewise between the soldiers and infantry; but
let a stranger receive nothing from thence.

Let it be unlawful (or a wicked act) for the King to enact Laws, unless it
be by the advice of his Subjects first given.

Let the King beware, that he begin no War, that he enter into no Peace,
conclude no Truce, or handle any other thing of great moment, without the
concurring assent of the Elders.

Now lest that our Laws or Liberties should suffer any detriment, Let there be
a certain middle Judge at hand, to whom it may be lawful to appeal from the
King, if he shall wrong any one, and who may repel injuries, if peradventure
he shall offer any to the Commonweal.

With these Laws therefore and sanctions, those our Ancestors confirmed the
enterprise of new moulding and reforming the Commonwealth: But verily this was
the chiefest garrison for to retain their liberty, whereby they ordained the
Presidentship of a middle Judge; placing the power in such sort in the King,
that the temperating of it should be in the middle Judge: out of which things,
the moderate and musical state of the Commonweal which we enjoy, is molded
and made up. For from the very beginning of things even to these later times,
we see by force of this intermediate Magistrate, and by the goodness and
clemency of most peaceable Kings, that both our pristine liberty, and ancient
Privilege has been always retained, and due loyalty and reverence to the
Kings Majesty, observed: Neither has the Kingdom only emplored the help of
this Magistrate against Kings, but the Kings themselves oft-times against the
Kingdom; by which means, many intestine evils have been appeased without any
tumult, which unless they had been civilly suppressed, seemed verily to have
been likely to have broken out to the common destruction of all men; so as we
may rightly affirm, that in this alone, the sum of preserving civil concord
both to Kings and the Kingdom has consisted. This Magistrate was at first
called THE JUSTICE MAYOR; afterward assuming the name of the Kingdom it
self, it was called THE JUSTICE OF ARAGON: By these (formentioned) prescribed
Laws, the will of him who desired to be King of Aragon, was wholly to be
directed and formed; and unless he would first suffer his faith to be obliged
in most strick bonds for keeping of them, any future soliciting was to be
preposterous. Having therefore laid the foundations of their Countries liberty,
all of them began to dispute among themselves about electing a King: to which
end, they all assembled together at Arahvest to choose a King; where they were
suddenly besieged by the Arabians: which Junicus Arista King of the
Pompelonians hearing of, came with an Army and rescued them; whereupon they
elected him for their King with unanimous consent, and calling him unto them,
showed him the Laws they had pre-established; one whereof, concerning the
middle Magistrate, seemed most hard unto him: But having more deligently
considered the matter, and that they voluntarily offered him the Kingdom
gained from the enemies; He not only ratified the Laws themselves, but
likewise added this new Law, or privilege to them: Si contra fora^ a^t
libertates reg^u^^ a sepren^i in futurum contingeret, alium sive fidelem, sive
in^ide^em Regem ad sciscendum (...) Reg^o aditus, (...)
That if the Kingdom should happen hereafter to be oppressed by him against
the LAWS, (Justice) or Liberties, the Kingdom it self should have free
liberty to elect another King, whether a Christian or an Infidel; which clause
of an Infidel King, they refused to have bestowed on them, because they judged
it shameful and dishonorable: After which Iunicus taking an oath to observe
the former Laws, was advanced to the Throne and made King of Aragon about the
year 868. Moreover, to establish all these Laws and Constitutions, our
Ancestors themselves adjoined the accession of a public Union; ordaining, that
it should be lawful and just for them, to meet all together, ET RE (...)
OBSISTERE ARMIS ET VI, and to resist the King with arms and force, as often as
there should be need to propulse any assault of him or his, made against the
Laws; which form of assembling together for the common cause of liberty, they
called a Union; (or Association:) Neither did they anciently less think all
their Liberties to be preserved by this Union, then humane bodies themselves
are by nervs and bones. And although it were not prescribed in that Suprarbian
Forum, yet they thought it deduced from the very beginnings of things, and
deeply fixed and impressed in the sense of all men, and to be established by
our common Law, as by another Law of Nature, and that its force was enough and
more then sufficiently known and discerned by use and reason. For they said, it
would be but a thing of little profit for them, to have good Laws enacted, and
the very Judiciary Presidentship of a middle Judge, if when there should be
need, AD EARVM DEFENSIONEM ARMA CAPERE NON LICERET, cum jam tunc satis non
esset pugnare consilliis; it should not be lawful for them to take up Arms in
their defense, when as then it would not be sufficient in such a case to fight
with Counsels.

Neither verily did that seem altogether impertinent from the matter, for if it
should be so, all things long ere this had been in the power of Kings
themselves. Whence our people reputed these two privileges of the Union
obtained from Alphonso the 3. (to wit, See Ioannis de Laet Hispan. Deser. p c.
5. p. 107.
That it shall be lawful for the Estates of the Realm, if the King shall violate
the Laws of the Country, To create a new King in his place; and without the
crime of Treason, to make confederacies among themselves, and with Neighbor
Princes To defend their Liberty; which King Ferdinand, upon the petition of the
Castilians, refused to revoke, because he had taken a solemn Oath to observe
them.) not as new favors or benefits, but as things done out of Office, etc.
Therefore in those ancient Rulers of which we treat, the Liberty of our Country
was hedged about by our Ancestors with three most strong fences; namely, with
the Prefecture of this middle Judge, with the most ample power of the Rici-men
(or Palatines) and with this most fierce force of the Union; of which the first
seemed to be Legal and civil; the other domestical and of greatest moment;
the last warlike and popular. Neither ought it then to be enclosed with a
lesser hedge, that so we might rejoice, that it has thereby come safe and sound
to us now. But of these garrisons or fences the ancient inventers of them, and
those who next succeeded them, conferred more assistance and labor upon the
two last, namely the domestic and popular, then on that Court presidentship:
For they would always retain in themselves a power of moderating and governing
the most loose reins of the Royal Dignity, which they might restrain or
enlarges as there was need. Page 664, 665, 667, 716, to 812.
The fore they assigned those 12 elders to him elected out of the greatest men,
by whose Counsels the Kings ought to be hedged in on every side: the place of
which Elders, the Rici-men afterward possessed; who were the chief of our
Nobles; who in times past were second to the Kings in such sort, that they
might seem to be their Peers and Companions. These called that public union to
the aid of Liberty, and out of them were chosen those who should always be
the prime and principal conservators of it: for thus they called the
presidents of the Union. Finally, they sustained on their necks all the Offices
and burdens of peace and war, if not with the same power as the Kings, yet I
may truly say with very little less; for the Rici-men, as long as they
flourished, relying on the Forces of the Union, did always hover over the
Royal Empire, and by the entire power of their offices, if the violence or
assaults of Kings were unjust, did from inordinate reduce them into order, and
as it were into a circle of Law and Justice. In which thing verily their grave
censorious and domestical authority had sufficient tight and moment with our
ancient Kings, who were well mannered: but if peradventure they could not with
their fitting counsels bridle the exulting royal Forces, they did constantly
repel them from their necks with the force of the raised Union. Thus and much
more this Spanish Author, in whom you may read at large the Power and Authority
of the Justice of Arragon, of the General Assembly of the Estates or
Parliaments of that Kingdom, of their Rici men, Peers, Magistrates,
Counselors, and in Ioannis de Laet. his Descriptio Hispaniae, cap. 5. cite.
Ioannis Mari. and De Rebus Hisp. l. 8. c. 1. and Genesis hist. of Spain, l. 17. p.
618.

To which I shall only add this most notable custom and ceremony used at the
Coronation of the Kings of Arragon, recorded (r) t Quaest. 3. p. 162, 163.
by Iunius Brutus, (r) (v) Franco. gal. c. 10. p. 75. 76. De Iure Magist. in
subditos, p. 282, 283.
Franciscus Hotomanus, and others. The Arrogonians when as they create and
crown their King in the Assembly of the Estates (or Parliament) of Arragon, to
put the King in mind, that the Laws, the Justice of Arragon, and Assembly of
Estates are above him, act a kind of Play that he may remember it the better:
they bring in a man on whom they impose the name of the Justice of Arragon,
whom by the common Decree of the people, they enact to be greater and more
powerful then the King: to whom, sitting in an higher place, they make the
King do homage; and then having created the King upon certain Laws and
conditions, they speak unto him in these words, which show the Excellent and
singular fortitude of that Nation in bridling their Kings: NOS QVI VALEMOS
TANTO COME VOS, Y PODEMOS MAS QVE VOS, VOS ELEGIMOS REY, CON EST AS Y EST AS
CONDITIONES INTRA VOS Y NOS UN QVE MANDA MAS QVE VOS: that is, We who are as
great as you, and are able to do more then you, have chosen you King upon
these and these conditions: Between you and us there is one greater in command
then you; to wit, the Justice of Arragon; Which Ceremony (lest the King should
forget it) is every three years repeated in the General Assembly of the
States of Arragon; which Assembly the King is bound by Law to assemble, it
being a part of the very Law of Nations, which sacred Liberty of Parliaments,
and Assemblies if any Kings by evil arts restrain or suppress, as violaters
of the Law of Nations, and void of humane Society, they are no more to be
reputed Kings, but Tyrants, as Hotoman hence determines.

I have now given you some what an over large account of the two See Mr.
Seldens Titles of Hon. par. 1. c. 8. sect. 6. p. 256. to 271.
greatest and most absolute hereditary Kings in Christendom, France and Spain,
and, proved them to be inferior to the Laws, Parliaments, Kingdoms, People,
out of their own Authors and Historians: in which points, if any desire
further satisfaction, I shall advise them to read but Junius Brutus his
Vindiciae Contra Tyrannos, De jure Magistratus in ^ubditos, and Francisci
Hotomani his Franco-Gallia; and Controvers. Illust. for France: Ioannis
Mariana, de Rege and Regum Instit. l. 1. with his History of Spain, Hieronimus
Blanca, Rerum Arragonensium Commentarius, Ioannis (...) Laet Hispaniae descrip.
c. 5. and Vasquius, Contr. illust. for Spain, at their leisure, and then both
their judgments and consciences will be abundantly satisfied herein.

I shall now very cursorily run over other foreign Kings and Kingdoms of
less power and Sovereignty with as much brevity as may be.

For the Kings of Hungary, Bohemia, Poland, Denmark, Sweden, as they have been
usually, and are at this day for the most part, not hereditary, but merely
ellective by the Nobles and people; so their Laws, which they take an Oath
inviolably to observe, and their Parliaments, Nobles, people, are in Sovereign
power and jurisdiction paramount them, as much almost (if not altogether) as
the State of Venice is above their Duke or the States of the Low Countries
superior to the Prince of Orange; and may upon just occasion not only
forcibly resist them with Arms, but likewise depose (if not adjudge them unto
death) for their Tyranny, as Commonweal, l. ^. c. ^0. l. 2 c. 5.
John Bodin, the Histories of Hungary, Poland, Bohemia, Denmark, Sweden,
Iunius Brutus, De Iure Magistratus in Subditos, Munster in his Cosmography, and
those who have compiled the Republikes of these Realms attest; who further
evidence, that most of these Realms have sometimes elected them Kings, other
times only Dukes, and made their republikes, Principalitis, Dukedoms or
Kingdoms at their pleasure. To give only some brief touches concerning these
Realms and their Kings.

Hungary.
THe Kings of Hungary are merely elective by the States and Senators, in their
Parliaments or assemblies of the Estates, without whom they can neither make
Laws, impose Taxes, leavie War, nor conclude Peace; and the grand Officer of
the Realm, to wit the great Palatine of Hungary (who has the chief Command
both in Peace and War, and power to judge the King Himself in some cases) is
elected only in and by their Parliaments, as the Rerum Vnga^ica^um Scriptores,
Nicho^^us ^sthuan^^^ de ^ebus Vngarie. Hist. l. ^ p 84, 85. ^od. n. de Reg. l.
1. c. 10. (...); Decades rerum Vngar carum, Mun^t Cosmog. l 4 c. 4 18. 9.
Respub and slatus Hungariae, An. 1634. De I^re M^gist. (...) Subditos.
Marginall Writers manifest at large. For their Realms and peoples deportment
toward their ill Kings (since they became Christians) when they have
degenerated into Tyrants, and otherwise misdemeaned themselves; take this
brief Epitome. Peter the second Christian King of Hungary, growing very
insolent, Tyrannical, and lascivious, ravishing maids, matrons; in the third
year of his reign all the Nobles and people thereupon conspiring together,
deposed and banished him the Realm, electing Alba in his place; who growing
more insolent and Tyrannical then Peter, was in the third year of his reign
slain in war, and Peter restored to the Crown: who proceeding in his
tyrannies, sacrilege, and cruelty, he was the third year after his
restitution, taken prisoner by his subjects, his eyes put out, and imprisoned
till he dy^d. Solomon the fifth King of Hungary, was twice deposed and thrust
out of his Kingdom, first by King Bela, next by King Gysa, elected Kings by the
peoples general consent and acclamation; after whose death the Hungarians
refused to restore Solomon, and elected Ladislaus for their King; whereupon
Solomon became an Hermit, and so dyed. Ladislaus dying, left two sons, Almus
the younger, whom they elected King and Coloman the eldest, to whom Almus out
of simplicity surrendered the Crown, because he was the elder brother, whom he
would not deprive of his primogeniture; but repenting afterward, by the
instigation of some of his friends, he raised war against his brother: But
the Hungarians to prevent a civil war and effusion of blood, DECREED, that
these two brethren should fight it out between them in a single duel, and he
who conquered in the duel, they would repute their King; Which Combat Coloman
being purblinde, lame and crookback'd, refused; after which Coloman
treacherously surprising his brother Almus, contrary to agreement, put out his
and Bela his sons eyes, and thrust them into a Monastery. King Stephen the
second son of Coloman, refusing to marry a wife, and following Harlots, the
Barons and Nobles grieving at the desolation of the Kingdom, provided him a
wife of a Noble family, and caused him to marry her. After which making a war
to aid Duk-Bezen John de Th^^recz. Hungar. Chron. c. 36^, p. 71.
without his Nobles consent in which Bezen was slain: the Nobles of Hungary
assembling themselves together in Council, said: Why, and wherefore dye we? if
we shall claim the Dukedom, which of us will the King make Duke? therefore
let it be decreed that none of us will assault the Castle, and so let us tell
the King, Because he does all this without the Council of his Nobles: They did
so, and added further, that if he would assault the Castle, he should do it
alone; but we (say they) will return unto Hungary and choose another King.
Whereupon, By the Command of the Princes, the Heralds proclaimed in the Tents,
That all the Hungarians should speedily return into Hungary: wherefore the
King when he saw himself justly deserted of his subjects aid, returned into
Hungary. Stephen the third coming to the Crown, did nothing without the
Authority and advise of the Senate. Stephen the fourth son of Bela usurping
the Crown, was soon after expelled the Kingdom. Emericus being elected King,
was very likely to be deprived by the Nobles and people for his sloathfulnesse,
but that he appeased them with good words and promises. King Andrew going to
Jerusalem, his Queen, Elizabeth, in the mean time delivered the Wife of
Bauchan a Nobleman, being very beautiful to her brother who doated on her, to
be abused, which Bauchan hearing of, slew the Queen: the King upon his return
examining this business, acquitted Bauchan, and judged her murder just, being
for so lewd a fact. Ladislaus the fourth, giving himself to all effaeminacy,
luxury, and Harlots, became odious to his Barons, Nobles, People, for which he
was excommunicated by Firmanus the Popes Legate, that he might live Christianly
and Chastely; but he reforming not, was soon after (in the year 1^90.) slain
by the Cumans and his Kingdom infested with civil wars. Mary the daughter
of K. Jews, being received as Queen by the Hungarians for her fathers merits,
after his decease, being yet young, was married to Sigismond, who was admitted
into partnership in the government of the Realm, and being governed by her
mother and Nicholas de Gara, who persuaded them to carry a strict hand over the
Nobles of the Realm, which they did: thereupon the Nobles seeing themselves
despised, sent for Charles King of Naples into Hungary; forced Mary and her
Mother to resign their rights to the Crown, and crowned Charles King at Alba
Regalis. When he was crowned the Bishop of Strigonium, according to the
custom, demanded of the people thrice, with alowd voice; Whether it were their
pleasure that Charles should be crowned King? who answered, Yes: which done he
was crowned, and soon after murdered by the two Queens treachery; Who were
shortly after taken prisoners by John de Horrach, governor of Croatia; the
Queen Mother Elizabeth drowned, Queen Mary kept prisoner, and at last released
upon oath given, not to revenge her Mothers death: who contrary to her oath
caused Hornach, and 32. Nobles more to be beheaded by Sigismond her husband,
whose kindred and children thereupon conspired against King Sigismond, took
and detained him prisoner Anno. 1401. till they should proceed further against
him, and in the mean time the Nobles of Hungary elected Ladislaus King of
Apulia for their King, and at last deposed Sigismond for his misgovernment,
cruelty, love of women. After See Grimstons Imperial History, p. 606 Chytraeut
Chron. Saxoniae.
Sigismonds death, the Nobles and people were divided in the choice of their
King; one part electing and crowning Vladislaus King of Poland, the other party
Ladislaus an infant, for their King: but Vladislaus his party prevailing, he
was not long after slain in a battle against the Turks; and the government of
the Realm committed to that Noble Soldier Huniades, during the Minority of
Ladislaus, who at his ripe age, was received and declared King by all the
Hungarians. Ladislaus deceasing, the Hungarians elected the Emperor Frederick
King, who delaying to come and take the election, they thereupon chose Mathias
King, who enjoyed the dignity, notwithstanding the Emperors opposition. Anno.
1608. Mathias King of Hungary denied the Protestants in Grimston Imp. Hist. p.
730. 731.
Austria free exercise of their Religion, they thereupon were forced to take up
Arms, and assembling together at Horn made a Protestation, and sent to the
States of Hungary requiring them to assist them with the succors that were
promised by the offensive and defensive league: after which they obtained a
peace, and part of what they demanded. Grim. p. 739
Anno 1613. In an Assembly of the Estates of Hungary, the differences
concerning the defense and Militia in the borders of Hungary against the Turk
were ordered and settled. And Grim. p. 748.
An. 1618. After many slow proceedings, they elected Ferdinand of Bohemia for
their King of Hungary; but with these conditions, That he should Religiously
observe, and cause to be immovably observed all the Liberties, Immunities,
Privileges, Statutes, Rights and Customs of the Kingdom, with the
Conclusions and Freaties of Vienna, and all the Articles comprehended therein,
and all other concluded both before and after the Coronation of the Emperors
Majesty, in the years 1608. and 1609. Which Articles being ratified by the
Emperor under his Letters Patents, they proceeded to the Coronation, according
to the accustomed manner. Such is the Sovereign power of the States of Hungary
to this very day. And in one word, so odious were Saxagr^uma ^icus Danicae
Hist. l. 8 p. 140
Tyrants anciently to the Slavonians and Hungarians, that by a public Law of
their Ancestors, he who slew a Tyrannical King, was to succeed him in the
Kingdom.

Bohemia.
For the Kings and Kingdom of Bohemia, M. Paulus Stranskius in his Respublica
Bohemiae. c. 5 and 12. informs us out of the Fundamental Laws of Bohemia See
Bartholdus Fontanus Bohemiaepiae l. 5. 6. and Pauli Geschinii Majestas
Caroli^^^.
That the power of the Kings of Bohemia, who are Elected by the general Votes
of the States, is so far restrained in that Realm, that they can determine
nothing concerning the Kingdom or great Affairs of the Realm, but in their
Parliaments, or general Assemblies of the Estates, by the general consent of
the people; which are Summoned by the king himself and held (just like our
Parliaments) in the kings Regency, and during the Interregnum by the Senate of
the Realm, as often as there is occasion; there being this clause in the Writ
of Summons; That whether all those who are sommoned come at the day or not, the
king with those who appear, will proceed to decree what shall be just and
beneficall for the Republicke, and that those who neglect to appear shall be
bound thereby; all Laws and Acts are therein passed by public consent. The
king cannot alien or morgage any of the Crown Lands, nor release not diminish
the revenue: and Liberties of the Realm, nor promote any strangers to the
custodies of Castles or public functions; impose no Taxes, charges; nor altar
the ancient manner of the Militia of the Realm, nor make war or peace,
without the Parliaments advise and consent. And Pauli Stransbii. Respub.
Bohemiae c. 5. Sect. 14. 15. p. 174. 175. 178 179.
before the king is Crowned, the Burgrave and Nobles, in the Name of all the
Realm, demand of him to confirm and ratify both with his especial Charter,
and public Oath, the Ancient and laudable Privileges, Immunities, Liberties,
Rights, Laws, Customs, and Institutions, as well private as public, of all
and singular the inhabitants of the Realm, and to govern them according to
the rule of the Laws after the example of his predecessors kings of Bohemia.
Which done, he seals and delivers them a special Charter, takes such a
solemn Oath, and then is Crowned upon these Conditions. The Munst. Cosm. l. 3
c. 492. 499. Burcholdus Pontanus Bohemiae Piae. l. 1. 2.
Archbishop of Prague after the Letany ended, demands of the king, kneeling on
his knees: Will thou keep the holy faith delivered to thee from Catholic men,
and observe it in just works? He answering, I will: He proceeds, and says:
Will thou Govern and defend the Kingdom granted thee from God, according to
the Justice of thy Fathers? He answers, I will, and by Gods Assistance promise
that I will do and perform it by all mean^s. After this kneeling on his
knees, the Archbishop holding the New Testament open, and the Burgrave reading
the words first; the king takes this Oath in the Bohemian tongue. We swear to
God (the mother of God and all Saints) upon this holy Gospel, that we will and
ought to keep immovably to the Barons, Knights, and Nobles, also to those of
Prague and the other Cities, and to all the Commonalty of the Realm of
Bohemia, the Institutions, Laws, Privileges, Exemptions, Liberties, and
Rights, and also the ancient, good and laudable customs of the Realm; Genesis
Hist. of Spain. l. 17. p. 626.
and not to alienate or morgage any thing from the same Kingdom of Bohemia,
but rather to our power to augment and enlarge it; and to do all things which
may be good and honorable to that Kingdom: So help me God (touching the
book with two of the fingers of his right hand) and all Saints. (The Kings of
Navarre take the like Oath.)

How Paulus Strans. Repub. ^ohem. c. 6. de Principibus Regibusque (...).
this Realm has been altered from a Principality to a Dukedom, and from it
again to a Kingdom, having sometimes Kings, sometimes Dukes, both elected by
the free choice of the Estates, to whom they were inferior in Sovereign
power, accountable for their mis-government, and removeable from their Throne:
you may read in the (...) pontanus qua.
marginall Authors. Not to mention the Bohemians deposition of Libussa a Noble
Virago, who governed them for a season, reputing it a dishonor to the Nation
to be ruled by a woman, and electing Przemys^^s for their Prince; their
deposition and banishment of Prince Borzinegius, because he became a Christian,
and renounced their Pagan Religion, though they afterward twice restored him:
Of Boleslaus Rufus, of Borzinogius the 2. thrice deposed banished by the Nobles
and people, or Sobe^slaus, and other Princes. Wladislaus first King of Bohemia
in his old age, by the assent of the Estates associated his son Frederick
(Anno 1173) with him in the Regality. Henry King of Bohemia using the Council
of the Germans rather then the Bohemians, and looking more after his own
private gain then the Kingdoms, was deposed in a general Assembly of the
Estates Anno 1310. and the son of the Emperor Henry the 7th. chosen King,
upon this condition, if he would marry the youngest daughter of King
Winceslaus. King Wenceslaus the drunken, for his drunkenness, negligence and
cruelty, was twice imprisoned and severely handled by his Nobles, and upon
promise of amendment, restored to his liberty and dignity: in his and Sigismond
his successors raigns See Aeneas Silvius Hist. Bohem Fox Acts and Monuments
vol. 1 p 848. to 852. Pontanus Bohemiae piae, l. 1. 2.
Zizca and the Taborites in defense of their Religion against the Popish party,
who most unjustly against their promise and safe conduct, caused John Hus, and
Jerome of Prague to be put to death, waged great wars and obtained many
victories against the King and Emperor, and gained free liberty of professing
their religion publickely much against the Popes good will; which liberty they
have ever since maintained by the sword, both against the Popish Emperors and
Kings, by means of which civil wars, the kingdom suffered some Interregnums.
During the Minority of king ^c Ladislaus, Anno 1439. this kingdom was governed
by two Presidents, appointed by the Estates.

Grimstons Imperial Hist. p. 735.
Anno 1611. the Emperor Rodulph being willing to settle the kingdom of
Bohemia on his Brother Matthias in an assembly of the States of Bohemia called
for that purpose, the Estates thereupon drew many Articles which Matthias was
to swear to, before his Coronation, with 49. Articles of complaints and
grievances for which they craved redress: and the inhabitants of Prague
required the confirmation of 8. Articles, which concerned the private
Government of their City: All which the Emperor and Matthias were constrained
to Grant and swear to, before they would admit Matthias to be their King; who
had nothing in a manner but the Title, some of the flowers of the liberty of
the Crown, being parted with by his assenting to these Articles. Grimstons
Imperial Hist. p. 744. 745.
Anno 1617. Matthias resigning the Crown of Bohemia, and renouncing his right
thereunto, recommended Ferdinand Arch. Duke of Austria, to them or his
successor. The States would not admit him king but upon Conditions, the which
if he should infringe, The States should not be bound to yield him Obedience.
Moreover it was added, That he should confirm: to the States before his
Coronation, to maintain all the Privileges, Charters, Immunities, Municipall
Rights, Constitutions and Customs, of the Realm and people, as the Emperor
and his predecessors had done, by his Oath, and Charter in Writing. All which
assented to, he was proclaimed and crowned king. Soon after the Archbishop of
Prague causing some of the Protestant Churches to be ruined, and those who
complained of it to be put in prison; and plotting the extirpation of the
Protestant Religion, through the Jesuits instigation, contrary to their
Liberties and the Provincial constitution; hereupon the Protestant States of
Bohemia assembled at Prague, fortified the Town, binding the three Towns of
Prague to them by an Oath; entered into a solemn League, promising to fight
against the Common enemies of God, the King and Religion, and in that cause to
live and dye: to which end they levied a great Army; banishing the Jesuits out
of Bohemia, as the Authors of all the miseries which had happened in that Realm,
and many other Realms and States of Christendom, and inciting murderers to
kill Kings who would not live after their manner, and meddling with affairs of
State, and who had drawn the whole Country into the hands of certain
perfidious Catholics, by whose practices the Country was in danger of ruin.
For which causes they banished them for ever out of the Realm of Bohemia,
enjoining them to depart within 8 days, never to return. After this, the
Protestants hearing that the Emperor and Popish party raised Forces against
them, possessed themselves of many Towns and places within the Realm, and
raised two Armies; All the Protestant Princes and States of Germany. Morauia
and Silesia (except the Elector of Saxony) assisted them with men, money or
Council, publishing a Declaration to justify their action, being for the
Common cause of Religion, the^ endangered. The Prince of Orange and States of
the united Provinces promised them assistance of men and money, other
Protestant Princes and the Protestant States of Lower Austria, did the like.
The Protestant Armies after this had many victorious incounters with the
Imperialists and Popish Forces, and took many Towns. King Ferdinand in the
mean time, being newly chosen Emperor, the States of Bohemia being assembled
together at Prague, which the Deputies of the incorporated Provinces, Anno.
1619. Concluded and protested by Oath, never to acknowledge Ferdinard for their
King who had violated his first Covenants; resolving to proceed to a new
Election; and on the 26. of August Elected Frederick the Prince Electer
Palatine of Reine to be their King; who accepted the dignity, and was afterward
Crowned king accordingly. After which the States of Bohemia in sundry
Declarations justified their rejection of Ferdinand, their Election of
Frederick, and his Title to be just and lawful, with their preceedent and
subsequent wars in defense of Religion. Yea Frederick himself by sundry
Declarations maintained his own Title: and the lawfulnes of these wars; which
passages and proceedings being yet fresh in memory, and at large related by
Grimston in his Page 745. to 250.
Imperial History, I shall forbear to mention them. By this brief account,
you may easily discern the Sovereign power of the Realm and States of Bohemia
over their kings and Princes, most of the Pauli Strankii Resp. Bohem. c. 10.
13. 14, 15.
great Offices of which Realm are hereditary, and not disposable by the King,
but States who Elect their Kings themselves, and their greatest Officers too.

Poland.
For the Kings and Kingdom of Poland. See Munst. Cosmog. l. 4. c. 2. 4. 5.
Martinus Chromerus in his Polonia lib. 2. De Republica et Magistratibus
Poloniae, informs us; that the Princes and Dukes of Poland, before it was
advanced unto a Kingdom, and the Kings of it ever since it became a Realm,
were always elected by the chiefest Nobles and States, unanimous suffrages;
That after the Kings of Poland became Christians, their power began to be more
restrained then it was at first, the Clergy being wholly exempt from their
royal Jurisdiction: That the King cannot judge of the life or fame of a knight
(unless in some special cases) without it be in the assembly of the Estates
with the Senate, nor yet publicly make War or Peace with any, nor impose
Taxes or Tributes or new Customs, nor alienate any of the goods of the Realm,
nor yet do or decree any greater thing pertaining to the Commonwealth without
the Senate or Parliaments assent. Neither can he make new Laws, nor publicly
command money in an extraordinary manner, nor coin money, nor nominate a
Successor not with the Senate, without the consent of the Nobility, whether of
Knights or Gentlemen's Order; By, or out of whom all public Magistrates and
Senators almost are chosen: so as now the sum or chiefest power of the
Republicke is residing in them. So that the Kingdom and Republicke of the
Polonians does not much differ in reason from that of the Laced^monians in
ancient times, and of the Venetians now. An Oath is exacted of the new King
when he is crowned, to this effect. That he shall reign according to the Laws
and institutes of his Predecessors; and will safely conserve to every order and
man his right, privilege, and benefit, confirmed by former Kings; nor will he
diminish any of the borders or goods of the Realm, but will according to his
power recover those that are lost from others: After all which the Senate
swear fealty to him, etc. The Revenues, Tributes, and Customs of the King are
all reduced to a certainty; the Nobles and Clergy are exempted from Taxes. The
king by the Laws of King Alexander, is prohibited to alien to any one the
Lands of the Crown. No new Laws can be made, nor old ones repealed but by the
king, Senate and Nobles assembled in Parliament. And because there is wont to
be in highest power, a slippery and ready degree to Tyranny, certain Senators
and Councillors are adjoined to the King, who may direct his Counsels and
Actions to the safety of the Commonwealth, and his judgments according to the
Rule of justice and equity, and with their wholesome monitions and Counsels,
may as there shall be occasion, as it were with certain living Laws, both
inform his mind and moderate his power. This Royal Senate, much greater now
then in times past, consists of a certain number of men, which we call the
Senators or Councillors of the REALM; who are not admitted to the Council
without an Oath: and this Office is perpetual during life, having certain
Honors and Magistracies thereto annexed, partly Ecclesiastical, partly
Civil; It consists of 96. persons in all, some of them Bishops, others
Palatines, Knights, Castellanes, and other Officers of the Realm. The
Chancellor of the Realm may sign many things without the Kings Privitie, and
may deny to seal those things which are contrary to Law, though the king
command them. Most of the great Officers and Magistrates are chosen in
Parliament, and cannot be displaced but in Parliament, and that for some great
offense. Their Parliaments or General Assemblies of the States are held (much
like ours) once every year at least, and some times every fifth or sixth
month, if there be occasion; and then they are kept constantly at one place,
to wit at Petricow, or Warsavia in the midst of the Kingdom, unless it be
upon some extraordinary just occasion, and then the king by advice of this
Council may sommon the Parliament at another place. It is provided by a Law
within these 20. years; That it shall not be lawful to the King to make a
war without the assent of his Parliament and Great Council; and that the
Nobles as often as there is occasion, shall at their own costs without wages
defend the borders of the Realm, yet not without the King, unless it be
during the Interregnum; but they may not be compelled to go out of the Realm
to any Foreign war without wages: the Soldiers wages are reduced to a
certainety, and asseased by public consent in Parliament, which Orders all
Military and Civil Affairs. So Cromerus.

For their carriage toward their ill Kings, I shall give you only a short
account. Munst. Cosm. l 4 c 7. 10. Martinus Chrom^rus de Rebus Polonorum.
Heylius Geeg. ^ 378 (...)
Miesco their second King, being unfit to govern, a man given wholly to his
belly, ease, sleep, pleasure, and governed by his Queen, thereupon most of
his subjects revolted from him; and he dying, the Polonians at first for many
years, refused to choose Cazimirus his Son King, least he should follow his
fathers step* till at last after a long Interregnum, when he had turned Monk,
they elected him King. Boleslaus his son, a man of a dissolute life, given to
lust, and the p^st of the Realm, was excommunicated by the Bishop of Cracow
for his wickedness; for which cause he slew him: Whereupon the Pope deprived
him, and Poland of the Crown, and absolved his Subjects from their obedience
to him, who expelled and forced him to flee out of the Realm into Hungary,
where he became mad and died. My^zlaus the 10. King of Poland, exercising
tyranny every where upon his people by reason of his power and allies, was
deposed by his subjects, and Caz^mi^us elected King in his stead; He was three
or four times deposed and put by the Crown; Boleslaus who succeeded Henry,
was deprived of the Monarchy; Henry was surprised and most strictly imprisoned.
Boleslaus was slain by his Nobles; and Vladislaus Locktect, elected King in
his stead, ravishing virgins, Matrons, and not reforming things according to
promise; the Nobles hereupon assembling together An 1300. abrogated his
election, as pernicious and chose Wenceslaus King of Bohemia, King in his
place: And not to recite more ancient histories of such like nature, David
Chytraus, Chron. Sax. l. 23. p. 690. 693. 694 695. 696 Grimstons Imperial
history. p. 694. 695.
King Henry the third of Poland was elected and sworn King upon conditions
which he was to perform Anno 1574. After which he secretly departing out of
Poland, without the assent of the Nobles, to take possession of the Crown of
France, within 3. months after his Coronation in Poland: the Polonians sent
Messengers after him to F^rrara, June 16. 1574. who denounced to him, that
unless he returned into Poland before the 12. of May following, they would
depose him, and elect another King: Which he neglecting, they in a general
assembly of the Estates at Warsauia, deprived him of the Crown, and elected a
new King: the Chancellor and greatest part of the Counselors elected
Maximilian the Emperor; Some others, with the greater part of the Nobility,
desiring to have one of the Polish blood, elected Anno sister of their deceased
King Sigismund, giving her for husband Stephen Battery Prince of Transylvania,
and proclaimed him King. The Emperor making mary delays, Stephen in the mean
time enters Poland, marries Anne, and is crowned King by general consent,
February 8. 1576. who took this memorable Coronation Oath prescribed to him by
the Nobles. I Stephen by the grace of God elected King of Poland, great Duke of
Lithunia, etc. Promise and sacredly swear to Almighty God, upon these holy
Evangelists of Jesus Christ, that I will hold, observe, deford and fulfill in all. conditions, criticles, and points therein expressed all Rights, Liberties,
Securities, privileges public and private, not contrary to the common Law,
and Liberties of both Nations, justly and lawfully given and granted to the
Ecclesiastickes, and seculars, Churches, Princes, Barons, Nobles, Citizens,
inhabitants, and any other persons of what state and condition so ever by my
godly Predecessors, Kings, Princes or Lords of the Kingdom of Poland, and of
the great Dukedom of Lithuania, especially by Casimir, Lewis the great, called
Loys, Vladislaus the first, called Iagiello and his brother Withold great Duke
of Lithuania, Vladislaus the 2. Casimyr the 3. John Albert, Alexander,
Sigismund the first, and 2. Augustus, and Henry Kings of Poland, and great
Dukes of Lithuania; or derived and granted from them, together with the Laws
enacted, and established or offered by all the States during the Interregnum,
and the pacts and agreements of my Orators, made with the States in my name.
That I will defend and maintain peace and tranquillity between those who differ
about Religion; neither by any means, either by Our Jurisdiction, or by any
authority of Our Officers or states, permit any to be troubled or oppressed,
neither will we our Self injure or oppress any by reason of Religion. All
things any way whatsoever unlawfully alienated, or distracted, either by war
or any other means, from the Kingdom of Poland, the great Dukedom and their
dominions, I will reunite to the propriety of the said Kingdom of Poland, and
great Duchy of Litluania. I will not diminish the lands of the Kingdom and
great Dukedom, but defend and enlarge them. I will administer justice to all
the inhabitants of our Kingdom, and execute the public Laws constituted in
all my Dominions, without all delays and prorogations, having no respect of
any persons whatsoever. And if I shall violate my Oath in any thing (which God
forbid) the Inhabitants of my Realm, and of all my Dominions of what Nation
soever, shall not be bound to yield me any Obedience: Yea, I do ipso facto
free them from all Faith and Obedience which they owe unto me as King. I will
demand no absolution from this my Oath of any one, neither will I receive any,
which shall be voluntarily offered, So help me God. To this notable Oath (an
unanswerable evidence of the States of Polands absolute Sovereignty over their
Kings) this King within 4. days after his Coronation, added a confirmation of
their Privileges, containing the same heads, enlarged with a few more words;
which he confirmed with his solemn deed and Royal Seal, and delivered the
same to the Chancellor, and Vice Chancellor of the Realm to give out Coppies
of them, under the great Seal to all the States of the Realm; who meeting
Chytraeus Chron. Sax. l. 25. p. 765. 766. l. 27. p. 809. 810. and l. 28 29. and
p. 948. 949.
afterward in a Parliament at Warsauia, Anno 1562; there was much debate about
settling of the Premises, and nothing concluded.

Chytraeus Chron sax l. 28. 29. 30. Grimst. Imp. Hist. p. 698. 699.
Anno 1587, the States of Poland questioned and opposed K. Stephen, for
violating their Privileges, and those of Riga took up arms in defense of
them; refusing after his death to repair to the Assembly of the States at
Warsauia, Anno 1587. unless their Privileges might be preserved and
rectified, as you may read at large in Chytraeus. King Stephen dying the
Estates of Poland, and Lithuania, assembled at Warsauia, Anno 1587. where they
made Laws for preserving the Peace during the Inter regnum; and enacted, that
no new King should be elected, but by the unanimous consent and agreeing
Suffrages of all the Estates, and that he who shall nourish factions, or
receive gifts or rewards, or use any other practices about the election of a
new King, should be reputed an Enemy of his Country. After which they
proceeding to an Election; there were diverse competitors named: and after many
debates; One part chose Maximilian Duke of Austria, the other Sigismund the
King of Swethland his Son, both of them upon express articles and
conditions, which they both sealed and swore unto, the chief whereof were
these; To preserve all their Rights, Laws, Privileges, and Immunities public
or private, inviolably; To keep all former Leagues and Truces; To bestow no
Offices upon strangers nor harbor any about them, (except some few Private
servants) but native only, and to be conselled and advised by them alone. To
maintain a Navy, Garrisons, and build diverse Castles in the Frontiers at their
own costs for the Kingdoms preservation; To redress all grievances,
maintain the Privileges, Rights and Peace of those who differed in Religion;
To procure and augment the weal, peace, Privileges and safety of the Realm;
and perform all Articles mentioned in the Oaths of King Henry and Stephen; In
fine, this competition coming to be determined by the sword: Maximillian was
taken prisoner by Sigismund, and forced to release his right to obtain his
liberty: And a Decree passed in Parliament, That no man hereafter should in the
Election of the King of Poland, presume to name, or recommend any of the house
of Austria to the Crown, and if any did he should be ipso facto infamous: Which
decree the Emp. Rodolph desired might be abolished, as being a disparagement to
that family, yet prevailed not. After which this King managed all things
concerning War, Peace, and the Government of the Realm, by advice of his
Parliament, as Chytraeus at large relates; and his Successors to this present
have done the like, taking the Crown upon such conditions, and making such
conditional Oaths at their Coronations, as Steven did at his.

Denmark.
For the Kings of Denmark, I have Part 4. p. 1, 2 Henricus Ranzovius, Comment.
Bellicus. l. 1. c. 3.
formerly proved, That they can make no War, Peace, Laws, nor lay any
impositions on their subjects, but by common consent of the Estates in
Parliament; their Kings being elective by the people, and crowned Kings upon
such conditions, Oaths, Articles, as their States, (in whom the Sovereign power
resides,) shall prescribe unto them; who as Commonweal. l. 1. 4. 10. l. 2. c. 5.
Bodin clearly determines, have a lawful power to question, censure, and
depose them for their Tyranny and misgovernment, they having no greater
Authority then the Kings of Bohemia or Poland. To run over the Histories of all
their ill Kings would be overtedious, for which you may peruse Danicae. Hist.
Chytr: Chron: Saxoniae, Munsteri Cosmogr. l. 4. c. 8, 9, 10, to 19. Iohannis
Magnus, Hermoldi Chron. Slavorum, Io, Isac. Pontanus Rerum Danicorum, Hist.
Saxogrammaticus and others; I shall give you in brief how some of their later
kings have been handled by their subjects for their Tyranny and misgovernment.
Not to mention the murders of Canutus in Iutland in the very Church, or of
Magnus or Nicholas, slain by their subjects; King Humblus was deprived of his
Crown: and king Harold deposed by his subjects for his insolency. Suano waxing
proud, Tyrannous and oppressive to his people, became so odious to them, that
his Nobles adjoined Canutus and Waldemar to him in the royal government, and
divided the kingdom between them; who thereupon being much displeased, slew
Canutus and wounded Waldemar, being impatient of any Peers in government; for
which being soon after vaquished by Waldemar, he was beheaded by the people.
Able slaying and beheading his brother king Ericus, and usurping his Crown, the
people rose up in arms against him, took him prisoner, and the Peasants in
Frisia slew him. King Christopher spoiling Waldemar of his Dukedom of
Schleswick, thereupon the Earls of Holsatia rose up in arms against him, took
him prisoner, and detained him so at Hamburgh, till he paid a great ransom for
his liberty. King Ericus was slain by his own servants, Anno 1286. king
Waldemar was expelled the Realm by his Subjects, and afterward restored upon
his friends mediation; who not long after denying Merchants their ancient
liberties in the Realm, the maritine Cities conspiring against him, entered
Denmark with a great Army, expelled him the Realm, took his Castle of
Coppenhagen, and had the land of Scania assigned to them for 16. years, by the
Nobles, in recompense of their damages sustained. Ericus seeing his subjects
every where rise up in Arms against him, sailed into Poland, An. 1438. and
deserted his Kingdom and Sovereignty, the people denying him liberty to name a
Successor, and electing Christopher Duke of Bavaria for their king. After whom
they elected Christierne the first king, against whom the Sweeds rebelling for
want of administration of justice, and the oppression of his Officers,
vanquished Christiern in battle, and set up a new king of their own, named
Charles, who An. 1455. abandoned the Royalty; the Swedes after that would
neither create any new king, nor obey Christierne, nor yet King John who
succeeded him, whose Queen they took and detained prisoner two years, and
maintained war against him. Chytr. Chr. Sax. l. 10. 13. p. 301. to 312, 387
388, 389. Olaus Magnus, lib. 7. c. 8 p. 229. De Iure Magist in Sub p. 2^5.
Bucanon de Iure Regni apud Scotos. Or Beards Theater of Gods Judgments. l. 2.
c. 10. p 4 4, 4^5.
Christierne the second, King of Denmark, was thrust out of his kingdom for
his Tyranny, and breach of his subjects Privileges; which he endeavoring to
regain, was taken prisoner by his Uncle Frederick Duke of Scleswick and
Holstein, and committed prisoner to Sunderburge in Holsatia, where he dyed in
chains: Frederick was elected king in his place, (upon certain Articles and
conditions which he was sworn unto before his Coronation) in a general
assembly of the States held at Hafnia, An. 1524. in and by which assembly
Christierne was solemnly deposed, and a Declaration made, printed and published
in the name of all the States of Denmark, wherein they express the cause why
they renounced their faith and obedience to Christierne, sworn unto him upon
certain conditions which he had broken, and elected Frederick: Which
Declaration because it is not common perchance to every ordinary Shollar, and
contains many things touching the frame and liberty of the kingdom of
Denmark, the Articles to which the kings do usual swear at their Coronations,
and the Tyrannnies of Christierne, for which he was deprived. I shall here
insert, as I find it recorded in Chron, Sax. l, 10, ^, 303, to 312,
David Chytraeus.

OMnibus Christianis Regnis, principatibus, regionibus and populis, notum est,
in orb Christiano, celebre regnum DANIAE suum esse, quod non secus ac caeterae
regna, plurimis jam seculis, Regia sua praeeminentia, dignitate, or namentis
and liberate praeditum fuerit, and adhuc sit; ita quidem ut Regnum Daniae,
ejusque legitime electi Reges nullum unquam superiorem magistratum aut Dominum
agnoverint. Omnibus quoque temporibus, Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Dynastis,
praelatis and nobilitati liberrimum fuit, regem, and Dominum aliquem suo
judicio and arbitrio designare, and in communem regni and Patriae consolationem
and salutem eligere, cujus gubernatione, exemplo, and ductu regnum supradictum,
Christianis statutis and ordinationibus, secundum leges suas scriptas, and
antiquas consuetudines vigere, miseri and oppressi subditisublevari, viduae and
pupilli defendi possent. Qui quidem rex semper hactenus a prima electione
convenienti juramento and obligatione se huic regno devincire coactus est.
Etiamsi igitur nobis omnibus regni hujus ordinibus and consiliariis licuisset
post obitumpotentissimi Regis quondam Daniae Iohannis laudatae memoriae, pro
jure nostro, secundum antiquam, and multis seculis continuatam regni Danici
libertatem, regem aliquempro arbitrio nostro designare and eligere: tamen
virtute, justicia, magnanimitate, bonitate and beneficientia, eorum Daniae
regum, qui ex Holsatorum prosapia originem duxerant, moti; and bona spe freti,
fore utrex Christiernus e vestigiis regiis avis^i Regis Christierni, and R.
Iohannis patris sui non excederet: sed potius ad eorum similitu^ (...) and
exemplum, gubernationem suam institueret: supra-dictum R. Christiernum, (...).
vivo adhuc patre Iohanne in Regem and Dominum totius Daniae designavimu^ and
elegimus.

Quo quidem ipso tempore celfitudo ipsius solemni IURAMENTO, verbis concepti^,
and Deo sanctisque testibus citatis, praestito, Archiepis. Episcopis, Dynastis,
praelatis, equitibus, civitatibus and populo regni Danici se devinxit and
obligavit, cujus juramenti inter alia haec quoque capita expressa fuerunt:
Debemus ante omnia Deum diligere and colere, and sanctam ecclesiam defendere
and amplificare. Omnia Episcoporum, Praelatorum and ministrorum status
ecclesiastici privilegia, a S. Ecclesia and regibus Christianis ipsis concessa,
inviolata conservare. Archiepiscop^s quoque, Londensem et Nidrosiensem, et
praterea Episcopos, praelatos, Equites auratos, and alios ordinis Equestris,
Regni Proceres and Consiliarios, convenienti observantia and honor, pro
cujusque condition and statu prosequi: Si qua nobis controversia sit cum
Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, aut praelatis S. Ecclesiae, eorumque ministris, in
locis convenientibus, nimirum coram senatu regni, cognosci and transigi
oportebit. Si qua nobis ipsis, aut praefectis nostris, controversia, cum aliquo
ex nobilitate, sive is senator regni sit, sive non, incidet; eum coram universo
regni senatu, hoc nomine compellare debemus, sive ea controversia sit de
fundis, sive de aliis quibuscunque bonis aut negotiis.

Et sicuti tenemur unumquemque juvare, ut jus suum consequatur; Ita nos ipsi
quoque obnox^i esse debemus, unicuique coram senatu Regni nos accusanti
comparere, and ad ipsius postulata usitato Iudiciorum more respondere, and
quicquid a senatu regni super ea re decre^um and pronunciatum fuerit, idipsum
exequi, neque hujusmodi legitimas accusationes aut postulationes iuclementi
animo far. Debemus etiam sine ullo praejudicio, gratia, aut muneribus ex
aequo, tam pauperi quam diviti, tam hospiti quam indigenae, jus dicere and
administrare. Nullum etiam bellum incipere, aut externum militem in regnum
introducere debemus, comm^ni senatu Regni non praesciente and consentiente.
Literis quoque and Diplomatis vel nostro, vel etiam patris nostri Regis
Iohannis signo confirmatis, plenam and inviolatam fidem and authoritatem
relinquere, ejusque aes alienum, quod liquidum est, dissolvere debemus. Moneta
quoque, quam cusurisumus, proba and sufficiens esse debet, ita, ut duae marcae
aequivalentes sint uni aureo Rhenano. Item, Nos Christiernus and obligamus nos,
quod omnes and singulos articulos, in quos jurandum nobis est, incolis regnorum
Daniae and Norwegiae, constanter reipsa praestare velimus. Sicuti etiam ex
adverso subditi obligati esse debent ad suum homagium, and auxilia militaria
inviolata servanda and praestanda.

Si vero (quod Deus avertat) contra istos articulos agendo delinqueremus, and
senatorum regni admonitionibus nullo modo locum dare institueremus: tum omnes
regni incolae, Note.
ratione honoris and juramenti sui, conjuctis viribus, fideliter in hoc
incumbere debent, ut hoc avertant. To faciendo, contra sua juramenta,
obligationes, homagia, quo abstricti nobis sunt, nequaquam fecisse censeri
debebunt. Hujus generis plures alii articuli juramento inserti fuerant, qui hoc
loco brevitatis gratia praetermittuntur.

Vt etiam regia ipsius dignitas, post juratos hosce articulos vehementius and
ardentius ad virtutes regias, and Christianarum sanctionum hujus regni
conservationem incitaretur and inflammaretur, eommodas rations and vias
inivimus, tandemque perfecimus, ut illustrissima princeps D. Elizabetha, ex
Hispaniarum regum and Archiducum Austriae illustrissima prosapia oriunda,
matrimonio ipsi conju^geretur. Sperabamus enim dignitatem ipsius regiam,
admonitionibus nobilissimae and excellentis virtute, and summa orbis Christiani
regum familia ortae reginae, and praeterea consideratis tantis and tam eximijs
ac sublimibus tot Regum ac Imperatorum affinitatibus, motum iri, ut omnibus
Christianis and regijs virtutibus, eum clementia and bonitate conjunctis, in
tota gubernatione suaeo diligentius incumberet.

Verum, statim post coronam acceptam, Regia illius Majestas animi acerbitatem,
tyrannidem, rapinas, immanitatem crudelem and sangninariam, declaravit (quod
tamen non injuria ipsum afficiendi animo, sed extrema necessitate, ad
defensionem honoris nostri compulsi, scribere and divulgare volumus, de quo
ipso palam protestamur) imprimis autem amoris and fidei conjugalis nobilssimae
and omni virtute praestanti Reginae praestitae, oblitus est. Quaedam enim
turpis, infamis and peregrina vetula, Syburgis, omni pudore and virtute
destituta, and ad omnem impurit atemprojecta, propriam suam filiam, Regi
prostituit. Quam reginae conjugi suaenobilissimae, status condition, dignitate
and gubernatione Rex praetulit, eique prae omnibus regni consiliariis summam
Imperii in Dania commisit, ex cujus perversa administratione and mandatis,
multae caedes, homicidia and injustae in causis tam capitalibus quam civilibus
condemnationes extiterunt: Et quamvis Regina (quam semper pro Regina and
dominatrice nostra deinceps quoque agnoscere and habere cupimus) ab honestiss.
matrona, Anna Holgeria, Gynecei sui praefecta, moneretur, ut Dominum and
maritum suum amice hortaretur, ut a vita illa flagitiosa, quae Christianum
conjugem, and imprimis regiam dignitatem, nequaquam deceret, desisteret: tamen,
quam primum hoc rex and anusilla resciverunt statim illa, propter Christianam
admonitionem innocens ab officio, suo remota, and miserabiliter regno expulsae,
et omnibus fortunis suis spoliata est.

Eodem modo Tobernum Ochsitum, de veneno, filiae Syburgis propinando, falso a
so insimulatum innocentemque deprehensum, et a senatu quoque regni eo nomine
absolutum, in ignominiam et contumeliam Germanicae nobilitatis, tantum
mendacibus turpissimae illius mulieris sermonibus fidem habens, capite truncari
jussit.

Quamvis etiam R^ipsius Majestas ingens et publicum Bellum, contra datam fidem,
^obis, nobis inconsultis et inscijs, contra Sueco excitavit: tamen ut animum
nostrum fidelem, et regiam ipsius personam et nomen extollendi, imperium
amplificandi, et extera nationes et regna subjugandi cupidum, posset
deprehendere: nos omnes nostra corpora, fortunas, regiones et subditos, in
magna pericula conjecimus: quod bellum septennale, contra potentissimum regnum
Sueciae gessimus: et tandem cum effusione sanguinis nostri, et extrema sere cum
pernicie sloris nobilitatis Danicae, auxilio Dei omnipotentis, contra regnum
jam dictum, victoriam obtinuimus, et Regiae ipsius Majestati Regnum subjicimus.
The Oath of the King of Sueden:
Et autem regnum Sueviae in perpetua fide et obedientia Regiae ipsius
Majestatis maneret in ipsa corononatione SUECUS verbis conceptis, Deoque et
sanctis testibus citatis, juravit, se ipsis antiqua sua jura, immunitates, et
privilegia incolumia relicturum, et omnium quae in bello exorta sint
offensionum, et inimicitiarum memoriam, sempterna oblivione aboliturum esse.
Cumque netum quidem satis Regiae ipsius (...) fiderent Sueci, necesse fuit
nonullis ex Episcopis, Praelatis, et Nobilibus Danicis, pro rege fidem suam
interponere, eamque diplomatibus eo nomine confertis et obsignatis, confirmare.
Qua quidem ipsa in re deesse illi noluimus.

Etiamsi autem Regna et populi armis subjugati, tatummodo jure et justicia in
officio cotineantur: tamen Rex hoc ipso non satis been considerato, et maximis
gravissimisque juramentis posthabitis, triduo post coronatinem Suecicam,
Episcopos, Praelatos, Nobilitatem, una cum consulibus et aliis praefectis
(tanquam ad convivium regium and solennem de impetrata a Deo victoria
gratulationem) invitavit, qui etiam fide and invitatione regia illecti, una cum
amicis, uxoribus and liberis suis, reverenter comparuerunt. Sed tam amice
invitati, admodum hostiliter excepti sunt, ipsorumque plausus in moesticiam
commutatus est. Ex livore enim tyrannico ipsis imputatum est, quod pulvere
tormentario arcem ipsius regiam passim conspersissent, ut ita incendio eum e
medio tollerent. Cum tamen certissimis inaiciis compertum sit, illud a Rege
ipso, eum in finem factum esse, ut speciociore aliquo praetextu, causam mortis
in eos confingeret, quos alias nullo ^ure quaestionibus subjicere potuisset.
Atque ita reverendissimi, strenui, and honestissimi virs, D. Matthias Zu
Strengenisse, and D. Vincealius Scharensis Episcopi, and praeterea sexaginta
Equites aurati and viri Nobiles, aliqui etiam Consules, Senatores, and cives
uno die, sine ullo judicio, ex mera tyrannide, contra datam fidem, decollati
sunt. Quorum etiam cadavera, vestibus nudata, cum in tertium usque diem in foro
Stokholmensi, miserabili alijs spestaculo fuissent, tandem igne comburi jussit;
ac etiamsi illi adhuc vivi more Christiano Confessiones suas edendi cupidi
essent, tamen hoc ipsis animo prorsus malevolo denegatum est.

Eodem modo Reverendum and religiosum D. Abbatem Nyddalensem and quinque
fratres, qui tum in honorem Dei Missas celebrarant, die purificationis Mariae,
sine ullo judicio, aquis suffocari curavit, nullam aliam ob causam, quam quod
durante adhuc bello, una cum aliis se Regi opposuissent.

Sex praeterea ex nobilitate Suecica qui communis inter Daniam and Sueciam
pacificationis nomine, fide publica and regia, and quidem vocati antea
venerant, sibi-ipsi obsides constituit, eosque in durissima vincula conjectos,
tamdiu apud se detinuit, donec regnum Su^ciae sibi subjecisset.

Multos quoque nobiles, inter quos nonnulli ex familia Ribbingia fuere, una cum
duobus pueris adhuc teneris, qui fide and clementia ipsius freti, istuc
venerant, capite plesti: sicuti etiam Tonnum Ericisilium, and Henrichum
Stichum, una cum multis alijs nobilibus in Finlandia, sine ullo judicio
decollari jussit.

Episcepo Finlandiae domum and possessiones suas per violentiam ademit, ita
quidem, ut ille sibi consulens, paulo post tempestate in mari exorta naufragio
Miserabiliter perierit. Brevitatis causa multa alia prava and tyrannica
facinora, in Regno Sueciae contra Deum and omnem aequitatem ab ipso perpetrata,
hic praetermittimus.

Quocirca Episcopi, Dynastae, Praelati, Nobilitas, Civitates and reliqui regni
Suecici incolae, qui crudeles, impuras and sanguinolentas ipsius manus, vita
sua incolumi effugerant, contra eum insurrexerunt, satius et honestius esse
rati, potius in acie pro salute patriae, quam domi sordis and turpissimis
suppliciis innocents excarnificatum, mori. Atque ita (nostro quidem judicio
non immerito) sumptis armis and palam Bello contra Regem suscepto Tyrannicum
illius jugum excutere instituerunt.

Etiamsi igitur nos periculo corporum and fortunarum nostrarum, ipsi, post
auxilium Divinum in regno Sueciae subjugando adjumento fuerimus: tamen non
nostra sed sua ipsius culpa iterum eodem regno excidit. Quocirca denuo ab eo
interpellati, ut Sueci nostro auxilio ad priorem obedientiam adigerentur; ne id
quidem (quamvis nullo jure aut lege teneremur) facere recusavimus, ut vel hoc
modo fidelis animus and voluntas nostra, a Rege perspiceretur, quando quidem
fere supra quam vires nostrae ferrent (cum jam entea nostros equos, arma,
naves, aurum, argentum, Clinodia and insuper nostros amicos, affines and
propinquos in Suecia reliquissemus,) denuo terra marique magnis impensis
militem and naves armare and instruere: propria corpora nostra, possessiones,
pecuniam and facultates omnes impendere: and una cum ipso totam belli molem, in
tertium usque annum sustinere non detrectaremus. Idque optima spe freti,
futurum ut fidelia haec nostra servitia, tandem aliquando a regia ipsius
dignitate cum clementia agnoscerentur.

Verum his omnibus non consideratis, ille intera Episcopos, Praelatos,
Ecclesias, Coenobia, Hospitalia, Sacerdotes, Matronas, virgins, Nobilitatem,
cives, viatores, neg^ciatores, and miseros denique Rusticos, immoderatis and
inauditis exactionibus, vestigalibus and expilationibus oneravit.

Praeterea maximam bonorum nostrorum partem, una cum auro and argento,
exactionibus extorsit, ad se translatam adhuc retinet. Monetam vero nullius
momenti cupream, ex ahenis cerevisiaris usu det^itis cusaem in regnum intrusit,
quam aequo cum argenteis and aureis monetis precio, a milite ipsius acceptare,
and ut in toto regno usurparetur and valeret, coacti sumus tolerare. Cum tamen
illa in finitimis regnis, nationibus and civitatibus nullius valoris esset, res
nostra familiaris, cum omnibus commerciis jacerent: regnum hoc nostrum antiquum
cum suis incolis omnibus suis nervis and viribus plane exhau-iretur, and ad
extremam egestatem and inopiam conniiceretur. Et quamvis haec quo que omnia, ut
bello suscepto optatus tandem finis imponi posset, submisse toleraverimus:
tamen ne hac quidem ratione quidquam apud Regem proficere potuimus, cum ille
palam hominibus fide dignis audientibus diceret, se and corporibus and fortunis
imminutos ita nos debilitaturum, ut passim omnibus contumeliae and ludibrio
essemus. Cujus sui propositi statim etiam exemplum reipsa nobis exhibuit.

Archiepiscopum enim Lundensem D. Georgium Schotburgum quem secretarium quondam
suum hac spead dignitatis illius fastigium rex evexerat, ut quaedam
Archiepiscopatus illius praedia ad se transfer posset; cum regis cupiditati
postea non gratificaretur, quod diceret, juramento se illi ecclesiae praestito,
quod violari a se minime deceret, prohiberi: seque potius turpissimam mortem
obire, aut vitae monasticae etiam durissimae in reliquum vitae tempus mancipare
se velle, quam in perjurii suspicionem vel minimam se conjicere. Cum igitur
aliquot poenarum, quae innocenti irrogabantur, optio illi concederetur; ad
vitam tandem monasticam a rege compulsus est. Quo facto, statim Praelatos and
Canonicos ecclesiae Lundensis per literas ad se accersivit, cumque illi
praestita obedientia comparuissent: jussit eos contra fidem regiam, in infamem
and foetentem carcerem compingi, iisdemque paulo post insulam Borneholman,
Ecclesiae illi Lundensi subjectam and propriam, cum omnibus arcibus, oppidis
and vicis, nullius excusationis ratione habita, vi metuque coactis, ademit.

Reverendissimus quoque Johannes Episcopus Fyoniae, cum literis regiis ad
juridicam vocatus comparuisset; eodem modo miserabiliter, and praeter omnem
culpam captus, and in carcerem conjectus est, and omns collegii illius
ecclesiae bona petulanter ad se transtulit.

Nemo etiam velex Senatoribus regni, vel aliis Daniae incolis sine corporis and
vitae suae periculo ipsum convenire: aut si quis omnino fortunam suam hac in
part perislitari institueret; nequaquam id, nisi p^ius peccata sua sacerdoti
confessus esset, and ad mortem se praeparasset, tentare ausus est, cum
saepenumero in eas angustias coactos nonnullos constaret, ut ne confitendi
quidem spacium illis concederetur. Ex quo ipso hoc quoque consecutum est, ut
regno huic, and communi patriae nostrae, consilio and consolatione nostrae
auxilio esse non possemus. Eodem Praepositum Rotschildensem, and D. Nicolaum
Erici, multosque alios praelatos and viros ecclesiasticos, qui patri and matri
ipsius laudatae memoriae fideliter inservierant, absque ulla misericordia,
bonis suis spoliavit.

Politico quoque and equestri ordini, reliquisque regin inquilinis nequaquam
pepercit. Mandato enim ipsius, vir strenuus and nobilis Magnus Tamassenus, qui
toto vita suae tempore, ab omnibus habitus est homo integer and probus, and
quem nemo unquam quidpiam, quod honestum and nobilem virum non deceret, gerere
aut facere animadvertit; quique etiam in fide Christiana pie mortuus erat, hic
inquam Tamassenus, ex terra iterum effossus est ipsiusque cadaver, in foro
Arhusiano, in singular Daniae nobilitatis Iudibrium and contumeliam, suspensum
est. and insuper Rex omnia illius, viduaeque ipsius relictae, bona, cum omni
auro, argento, and clinodiis, sine ulla postulatione judiciali, ad se and in
suam potestatem redegit.

Strenuo quoque D. Iuggoni Krabbio, equiti aurato and Marescalco, qui ipsi
longo tempore in Dania, Norwegia, and Suecia honest and fideliter, etiam eum
effusione sanguinis, and bonorum suorum jactura inservierat, unum ex pagis suis
Vischbe^um novum una cum multis ad eum pertinentibus fundis and bonis, aperta
vi, and contra religionem jurisjurandi, ademit, and sibi vindicavit, cum
interea ille multis modis ad legitimani causae cognitionem, sed tamen frustra,
provocaverat.

Cum ex ministris ipsius aulicis Nicolaus Daa, quodam vesperi in caupona and
symposio sedens, hospiti ex fenestra rhombos aliquot vitreos fortuito
excussisset; and tamen eo nomine statim sequenti die hospiti pro tantillo damno
abunde satisfecisset: nihilominus tamen, ob causam tam nihili, pater ipsius in
arcem Hafniensem violenter abductus, and tamdiu captivus est detentus, donec
praefectus regius missis in domum ejus satellitibus, omnes ipsius cistas
aperuisset, omne aurum and argentum inde exemisset, and ad quatuor Marcarum
Danicarum millia vi metuque illi extorsisset.

Quinetiam contra juramentum and dotam fidem, Schlos Gelauben Ius electionis,
quod antea senatus regni propium erat, post mortem ad suos haeredes transtulit,
quo ipso antiquum nostrum and liberum regnum, haereditariae oppressioni
subjicitur, and nos libera nostra electione spoliati sumus.

Quid, quod a quolibet, etiam pauperrimo hujus regni incola, binos in singulos
annos florenos, in perpetuum deinceps numerandos, ausus est exigere, cum tamen
multi ex ijs, vix bines solidos snis dominis quotannis exsolvere possent.

Nec tantum Danicae nobilitatis excidio, animus ipsius sangainarius satiari non
potuit, sed in Germanos etiam nobiles ingratitudinem effunderet. Honestum enim
virum Stephanum Weberstedium, in Turingia loco equestri natum, qui longo
tempore, sicuti Ministrum fidelem and nobilem decet, pro supremo Capitaneo
peditum Danorum contra Suecos ipsi inservierat, and qui praeclara fortitudinis
suae specimina, cum Host usque ad sanguinis effusionem dimicans, ediderat, cui
etiam hoc nomine praefecturam Olandensem datis literis concesserat. Hunc inquam
Stephanum, cum diutius praefectura illa carere nollet, ex asylo Coenobij Sp. S.
ab ipsius avo fundati abreptum, decollari jussit, hoc pratextu, quod in domo
publica militi euidam vulnus inflixisset, cum quo tamen ille, amica
transactione interueniente, jampridem in gratiam redierat.

Eodem modo cum conjugis suae regia cubulario Maximiliano egit, qui reginam in
regnum Daniae advenientem comitatus suerat: eum enim cum Regina ad C saream
Majestatem, and Dominam Margaretam, ablegasset, Rex antequam Dania excessisset,
exitinere retrahi, and capitali suppli^io affici jussit.

Adhaec cum fortissimus ipsius capitaneus N. von Hederstorff, nomine
praesidiarioruus Stokholmensium, honestos aliquot milites, pro stipendio suo,
and quibusdam alijs conficiendis, Haffniam misisset; praefectus Haffniensis eo
exceptos Abrumstorpum deduxit, quasi regem ibidem inventuri essent. Eo autem
cum venisset, loci praefectus, eos carceri mancipatos, paulo post sine ullo
judicio, una cum puero quopiam trucidari jussit.

Suum quoque Germanicum Secretarium Stephanum Hopsensteinerum, cujus opera in
gravissimi^ negociis apud (...) saream Maject. Electores and principes Imperij
Romeni, usus fuerat, ad impudentissimae mulieris Syburgis mendacem delationem,
inclementer persecutus, ipsius vitae and bonis insidiatus est. Qui tamen
evidentissimo Dei omnipotentis auxilio, manus ipsius cruent as ex Dania evasi^,
and in Caesaream urbem Lubecam confugit, ubi nihi lominus a Ministro Regio,
ejus vestiga insequente, accusatus, and in custodia aliquandiu detentus fuit,
donec tandem causa probe cognita, ab injusta ejus accusatione and
insimulatione, per sententiam absolutus est.

Praetere a multas quoque exteras nationes, Hollandos, Brabantos, Flandros,
Lubecenses, cum omnibus civitatibus maritimis, contra data privilegia, and
regia diplomata, pecuniis suis emunxit, and quotiescunque illi negociorum
suorum causa in hoc regnum appulerunt, statim navibus and mercibus suis
spoliati sunt.

Et quamvis Norvvegiae quoque regnum semper, ipsi fideliter fuerit subjectum,
and pro viribus omnia sua officia and auxilia praestiterit, et ejusque omnibus
edictis and interdictis cum obsequio paruerit: tamen neq Deo consecrati
Episcopi, neque Nobilitas, neque populus illius inclementem and immisericordem
animum effugere potuit. Episcopus enim Camerensis, licet innocens, in crudeli
admodum carcere captivus est detentus, ita quidem, ut ex foetido and impuro
aere, curis diuturnaque sessione, omnibus suis viribus consumptis, tandem
carcere liberatus, mox diem suum obierit.

Reverendissimus quoque Episcopus Ansloinsis, Andreas eo compulsus est, ut
alteri suum Episcopatum cederet: quod si facere recusaret, submer sionem illi
minabatur.

Reverendissimum quoque Archiepiscopum Nidrosiensem ab Ecclesia sua
Archiepiscapali in exilium expulit, qui postea Romam ad Papam consugiens,
ibidem in magna inopia and miseria mortuus est.

Nobilitati quoque ejus regni nequaquam pepercit, strenuum enim and
praestantissimum equitem auratum, Canutum, Canuti ficto and mentito quodam
praetextu, in carcerem redegit. Cumque ille in jus provocaretur, and causa in
senatu regni cognita and disceptata absolutus esset: tamen jure suo, a Deo and
aequitate sibi concesso, uti non potuit, cum paulo post miserime decollaretur,
and omnia ejus bona, contra omne jus a rege abriperentur.

Etiamsi vero multo plura ipsius impia and tyrannica facinora, and inprimis cum
honestis matronis and virginibus, viduis and orphanis passim in Dania, Suecia,
Nervvegia perpetrata, indicare possemus: tamen illa ipsa, respectu nominis and
dignitatis regiae habito, hoc quidem tempore, in nostra hac querela commomorare
non volumus.

Semper equidem speraveramus futurum, ut crebris, fidelibus and submissis
admonitionibus adductus, sese emendaret, and ab hujusmodi minime regiis aut
Christianis, sed potius tyrannicis inceptis, facinoribus, expilationibus,
vectigalibus, exactionibus, aliisque crudelibus institutis desisteret: sed
tamen admonitiones hae nostrae plane infructuosae aures regias personuerunt:
nostrae sententiae and consilia plane sunt repudiata, nulli ex senatu regni
locus apud regemfuit relictus, imo homines plane contempti and ad nullamrem
idonei habiti and reputati sumus. Atque ita ille in priori sua tyrannide,
seipsum induravit.

Et ut omnino crudeli suo erga nos animo and voluntati satisfieret, milites
peregrinos magno numero, tam pedites quam aequites, contra praestitum
juramentum, quod ex superioribus articulis patet, in regnum induxit, and
majoribus adhuc qu^am antehac factum est, oneribus and exactionibus nos gravare
instituit. Cum autem id non injuria nobis grave esset, hoc tentatum est, ut nos
una cum miseris rusticis, (qui tamen ipsi tempore belli septennalis pene omnem
substantiam nostram impenderamus) vi ad illas praestandas adigeret. Quocirca
missis literis tanquam ad juredicam Ahusium nos evocavit, eo consilio, ut nos
vi militis externi (si modo is ad tam impium facinus a rege perduci potuisset)
adoriretur, and pro lihitu suo imperata facere cogeret. Compertum etiam nobis
est, Regem ad diem praestitutam duorum immanium carnificum, more suorum
satelli^um (ne scilicet res innotesceret) vestitorum operam conduxisse, in eum
finem, si intolerabilibus ipsius edictis and voluntati non assentiremus, ut tum
in corpora and fortunas nostras impetum faceret, and forte non aliud quam in
Suecia, Dynastis, Episcopis, praelatis, nobilitati and civitatibus factum est,
covivium nobis adornaret.

Quapropter justissimo (qui etiam in fortissimos viros cadere potest) metu
compulsi sumus, ut de tantis malis a nobis avertendis cogitationem aliquam
susciperemus, atque ita nostra corpora, vitam and possession^s (quod jure
naturae facere tenemur) defendeve^^us. Compulsi igitur sumus, ut nostra
juramenta, homagia and auxilia militaria per literas illi renunciaremus, id
quod, etiam reipsa a nobis jam factam est, cum plane confideremus, neminem
fore, qui impiis tyrannicis ipsius delictis consideratis, vitio hoc vertere
nobis posset. Nota.
Nos enime status and consiliarios regni Dauici, coram Deo and hominibus
obligatos agnoscimus, ut communi patriae, in extremis hisce periculis and
angustiis, consolationem aliquam offeramus. Siquidem miserorum ejus regni
inquilinorum aeterna, ratione corporum and bonorum, pernicies, matronarumque
and virginum dedecus and contumelia potissimum ab eo quaeritur, a quo illa
omnia merito averti a nobis debebant. Neque ignotum est, propter similia, aut
saepe etiam leviora quam nos (proh dolor) perpessi sumus facinora tyrannica,
saepenumero Caesares Romanos, Reges Vngariae, Bohemiae, Angliae, and Scotiae,
ex suis imperiis and regnis dejectos, nonuullos principes ex ditionibus suis
haereditariis expulsos esse, sicuti id tam ex veteribus historiis, quam ex
nostrae aetatis exemplis satis certo nobis innotuit. Et nisi gravissimus hisce,
quae hactenus commemoravimus, oneribus impelleremur, pigeret and taederet nos,
talem aliquam cogitationem in nostrum animum inducere, multo minus reipsa eam
exequi, sed potius sicuti patri and avo ipsius, ita ipsi quoque libenter
addicti fuissemus.

Etiamsi vero ab electione externi alicuius and Christiani Regis aut Domini
cujus potentia and defensione regnum nostrum gubernaretur non plane fuimus
alieni: tamen considerato diuturno and Christiano regimine, regiis virtutibus,
clementia, bonitate and justitia, quibus and illustriss. princeps and Dominus.
D. Fridericus, verus haeres Nor^egiae, Dux Sleswici, Holsatiae, Stormariae and
Dietmarsiae, Comes Oldenburgi and Delemenhorsti, erga Subditos suos statim a
guber nationis suis exordio pie and landabiliter usut est: eum potissimum
unanimi consensu regene and Dominum nostrum supra totam Daniam elegimus, cum
nimirum cogitaremus, eum ex inclyta regum Daniae prosapia originem ducere, and
praeterea regis filium natum esse, aetque ita jure prae omnibus alis
principibus hunc honorem ipsi, praesertim cum patrimonium quoque ex regno
paterro suae Colsitudine debitum ne nunc quidem accepisset, deberi.

Regomus igitur unumquemque, cujuscunque conditionis aut ordinis sit, si forte
supra dictu^ Rex Christiernus, aut alius quispiam nomine ipsius, vel Scriptis
vel alio modo, nos insimulet, quod contra datam fid^m and juramenta hac in
part egerimus, ut illi, antequam vlteriorem nostram defensionem audiat, fidem
non habeat, sed potius nostras hasce difficultates, corporis and vitae
pericula, impias viduarum and pupillarum oppressiones, matronarum and virginum
violationes, cum clementi, christiana, benevola and humana commiseratione
cognoscat. and nos (qui honorem and existimationem nostram, ut pios nobiles
decet, erga regem illaesam ad huc conservavimus) excusatos habeat. Simulque
aliis queque omnibus and singulis, ob causas jam supra dictas, and alias
complures (quas adhuc in bonorem nominis regii usque ad ulteriores nostras
apologias reticemus) benign nos excuset. Si etiam rex coram logitimo aliquo
judice nos accusandos esse censuerit. hoc ipso scripto nos ad legitimam and
justam causae hujus cognitionem and decisionem offerimus; pollicemur etiam nos
iis, quae hoc modo jure decernentur and sancientur, prompto animo p^rituros
esse. Neque dubitamus, si vel sanctitas Pontificia, vel Romans Caesarea Majestas,
and ludicium Camerae, vel alii quoque Christiani Reges, Electores, Principes,
Comites, Barons and Nobiles, vel inclytae and liberae Imperii civitates
petitionis hujus nostris aequitatem, and ipsius impiam and Tyrannicam nostri
oppressionem cognoverint, quin factum hoc nostrum, ad quod extrema necessitas
nos compulit, nequaquam sint improbaturi. Pro quo ipso singulis, pro ratione
ordinis and conditionis suae, nostra studia, officia, and gratitudlnem, omni
tempore praestandam, deferimus and pollicemur.

Swethland.
NOt to mention the Kings and Kingdom of Norway, long since incorporated into
Denmark, whose lives and Catalogue you may read in Cosmog. lib. 4. cap. 21,
24, 25.
Munster, Ioannis Magnus, Crantzius, and others: Gul. Neubrig. lib. 3. cap. 6.
in which Realm not one King anciently died of age or diseases in above one
hundred years, but of violent deaths; there being this custom, That whosoever
slew a tyrant King, was thereby made a King. The Kings of Swethland have
always been elected upon certain conditions, and subordinate to the power and
censures of their whole States and Parliament, in such sort as the Kings of
Hungary, Bohemia, Poland, and Denmark have been; and often times this Kingdom
has been annexed to the Realm of Denmark, and subject to the Danish Kings,
as they saw occasion: The names and lives of the Swedish Kings before and since
their conversion to Christianity, you may read at large in Cosmog. lib. 4. cap
28, 29, 30, 31, 32. Heyl. Geogr. page 430, 431. Chytraeus Chron. Sax. Hermold.
Chron. Slauorum. Ioannis Magnus hist. Goth. Swedorumque. Guagn. compen. and
Chron.
Munster, Joannis Magnus, Crantzius, Olaus Magnus, and others: I shall give you
a taste only of some of them out of those Authors. Halsten, and Animander his
successor were thrust out of their Thrones and Realms by their Subjects. After
whose death, the Swedes elected one King of their own Nation, the Goths
another, not enduring a foreign Prince to reign over them. King Bugerius
slaying his brother Ericus, who had imprisoned him at a banquet, his Nobles
detesting this his treacherous act, rose up in Arms against him, expelled him
the Realm, and beheaded his Queen and Magnus his son, electing Magnus the son
of Ericus for their King. Magnus the seventh, betrothed his son Aquin to a
kinswoman of the Earl of Holstain upon this condition, That unless Aquin
should receive her a Virgin, all the Nobles of the Realm should be freed from
their Oath of Allegiance to him. The Virgin sailing into Swethland, was taken
prisoner by Waldamer King of Denmark, who betrothed his daughter Margaret to
Aquin: whereupon the Nobles of Sweden denied to yield any more obedience to
their King, deserted Magnus and chose Albert King: Magnus seeking to regaine
his Realm, was defeated in battle and died in exile. Queen Margaret taking
Albert prisoner, and conquering Sweden, left it and two Kingdoms more to Ericus
her adopted son. But the Swedes weary of a foreign yoke, by the help of
Engelbert, denied subjection to him, and waged war so long with him, that he
was forced to place Swedes in all the Castles by agreement, and to receive
only half the revenues of the Realm in his absence, and at last (tired out
with the wars) deserted both Crown and Kingdom. After this the Swedes elected
Charles for their King, who after seven years reign, perceiving that he grew
grievous and displeasing to the States of Sweden, taking his own private goos
only with him, and leaving the treasure of the Realm in a safe place, left the
Kingdom. Whereupon they elected Christierne the first, the King of Denmark
and Norway, for their King; against whom they took up arms, because he had
broken that paction prescribed to him when he took the Crown; whereupon Anno
1499. Christierne came with a great power to subdue the Swedes, but he was
easily conquered, repulsed thence twice one after another by the Swedes united
forces: who elected them a Governor whom they called a Marshall, which had
power to call general Assemblies of the States, and execute the Kings Office,
and might have been elected King upon such conditions as the States
propounded, which he refused to submit to. King John thinking to subdue the
Swedes after Christiernes death, was repulsed by them, and his Queen taken
prisoner. His son Christierne the second, King of Denmark, by the treachery
of Gustavus Archbishop of Vpsalis, after many encounters, upon promise to
continue their Laws, Liberties, and Privileges inviolably, and to remit all
offenses past by a solemn Oath, was elected by the Swedes for their King: who
swearing these Articles and confirming them by his Charter, was upon this
admitted into the Town and Castle of Holme; Chyt. Chron. Saxo-lib. 10. page
311.
where feasting all the Nobles and principal men of Swethland two days
together, suspecting no treachery, he suddenly apprehends them, imprisons,
murders all the Nobles, Gentry, Citizens, Commons, yea Bishops and Monks,
with extraordinary cruelty, spoils their wives and Orphans of all their goods,
and exercises more then barbarous tyranny over them; which Gustavus Erichson,
a noble Swede then in Denmark hearing of, escape thence privily, and comes
into Swethland disguised, raises an Army to revenge this butchery, delivers
his Country from this Tyrant, and for his noble service was by their unanimous
vote elected and crowned King of Sweden in his stead; the Swedes in a public
Declaration manifesting their expulsion and deprivation of Christierne for his
treachery and tyranny to be just and lawful. Chyt. Chron. Saxo. lib. 21, 22.
p. 636, 637, 638, 647, 648, 649, etc.
Ericus the seventeenth King of Sweden, imprisoning his brother, murdering his
faithful Counselors, warring upon his Subjects, playing the tyrant, and
matching himself unworthily to a woman of mean condition, was for these his
misdemeanors taken prisoner, with his Queen, deposed, and his brother made
King in his stead, Anno 1599. And Heyl. Georgr. page 340.
Sigismund King of Sweden, taking upon him the Crown of Poland, after fourteen
years reign, was deposed and dispossessed of his Kingdom Anno 1607. and
Charles his Uncle made King in his stead.

Assyria, Cyprus, Lombardy, Naples, Venice.
I Could now acquaint you with many such like passages and stories in the
Kingdoms of Assyria; as how effeminate Munst. Cosm. lib. 5. cap. 79.
Sardanapalus, for his vices and mis-government was deprived by his Subjects,
burned in his Palace, and Arbactus made King in his stead. In the Kingdom of
Munst. Cosm. lib. 5. cap. 30.
Cyprus, where King Peter murdering his brother and those of Geneva, was soon
after taken prisoner and made a tributary Prince. King John governed by Helena
his wife, and she by his Nurse, which made the people weary of the government,
had a Regent by consent of the Nobles (Ioba of Portugal, whom they married to
his daughter Carlota) set over him and the Realm and all the royal power soon
after put into his hands, who being soon poisoned by Helena, Jews son to the
Duke of Savoy was sent for and crowned King by general assent, and John and
James his sons put by. Match. Hist. Heyl. Geogr. p. 193, 154.
Clephus the second King of Lombardy was so cruel, that after his death they
would have no more Kings, but chose thirty Dukes to govern them, who continued
this government eleven years. Desiderius the last King of Lombardy was taken
prisoner with all his children in Pavia by Charles the great, and so that
Kingdom ceased, Anno 774. Heyl Geogr. p. 166, 167. General H^st. of Spain,
lib. 18 p. 686.
Tancred the fourth King of Naples was deposed by Pope Celestine the third with
his peoples consent. Momfrey Bastard poisoning Conrade the seventh King of
Naples, and usurping the Crown, was deposed by Charles Earl of Aniou, who
enjoyed the Crown till Aragon seized on the Realm. Jone Queen of Naples
married Andrew second son to Charles King of Hungary, whom she hanged at her
window for insufficiency; after marrying James of Tarragou, she beheaded him
for lying with another woman, and was at last driven out of her Kingdom by
Jews of Hungary, and hanged at the same window where she hanged her first
husband. Joan (...) Leglise, page 277.
Peter Duke of Venice was for his tyranny and misgovernment besieged in his
palace by the people, The Venecian History.
which they fired, and then taking him his wife and son, dragged them unto
the butchery, where they chopped them in pieces and threw him to the dogs to be
devoured, notwithstanding all their submissions and entreaties on their knees,
Anno 977. So Duke Falier, and many other Dukes, have been condemned to death
and executed by the States of Venice, and that justly as Com. lib. 2. c. 5.
page 277.
Bodine grants. Multitudes of such like presidents occur, in most other
Dukedoms and Principalities, which I will not name, because they want the title
of Kings, though 4 Distinct. 49. quest. 1. Art. 3. qu. 5.
Aquinas truly holds, That a Kingdom is so called from ruling; therefore he
who has others under his government, is said to have a Kingdom; in reality,
though not in propriety of speech; and so are Kings in verity, though not in
title. I might add to these many more examples, manifesting what miseries and
untimely deaths tyrannical Kings and Princes have undergone in all ages and
States, being commonly deposed, poisoned, murdered; but I shall for brevity
pass over these examples, remitting the Readers to Polit. lib. 5. cap. 10, 11.
Aristotle, Variae hist.
Aelian, and Doctor Beard, his Theater of Gods Judgments, and come nearer home
to Scotland, as having nearest relation to England,

Scotland.
WHat sovereign power and jurisdiction the Realm, Parliaments and Nobles of
Scotland have claimed and exercised over their Kings, (who, says Buchanan, can
neither make Laws, War, Peace, nor conclude of any great affairs of the Realm
without a Parliament, which has there, and in Hungary, Poland, Denmark,
Swethland been oft-times summoned, not only without, but against their Kings
consents;) and how frequently they have questioned, imprisoned, censured,
deposed, yea judicially sentenced their Kings for their tyrannies, oppressions,
whoredoms, murders, (...)* and evil administrations, you may read at large in
George Bucanan (King James his own Tutor) in his Book, De Iure Regni apud
Scotos, and his p. 100, 234, 257 292, 334, 691, 704, 756, 747, 748.
Rerum Scoticarum Historia. Where this their Sovereign power i^ so largely
vindicated, debated, demonstrated, and the chief objections against it cleared
so abundantly, that I shall not add one syllable to it, but present you with
some Historical examples which confirm it.

See Io. Mayor hist. Buchanan. Rerum Scot. l. 4. p. 100, 101. H^cter Bectius ae
Rebus Scoticis Fordon. his Scoti. chrocicum Polychronicon and Fabian; Mattheus
Westminster. Holinsheds history of Scotland.
Fergusius the first King of Scotland dying, and leaving two sons infants,
unable to govern the Realm; the Scots thereupon considering what dangers
might befall them both at home and abroad, during their infancy; at last
concluded after much debate; and settled this for a standing law; that when any
King died leaving his son under age and unfit to govern, the next of their
kindred, who should be esteemed fittest to reign, should enjoy the sovereign
power; and that he being dead, then the succession of the Crown should return
to the children of the deceased King, being of age to rule; which Law continued
constantly for many hundred years, until the reign of Kenreth the third. By
this Law Feritharis brother to Fergusius abtained the Crown and reigned
fifteen years with much justice and modesty; after which his Nephew Ferleg
desiring to reign, demanded his Fathers Kingdom of his Uncle, who being
willing to resign it to him, called an assembly of the estates, made an
Oration in praise of Ferleg proffered to resign the Crown unto him. But such
was all the assemblies love to Feritharis and hatred to Ferleg for this his
preposterous affectation of the Crown, that they detested the act, and denied
the motion both with frowns and verbal reprehentions: Whereupon Ferleg
conspired his Uncles death, which being discovered, they thought him worthy of
death; but for Fergusius his fathers sake, his life was spared, and he only
imprisoned; after which making an escape he fled first to the Picts, then to
the Britous, and in the mean time Feritharis dying, by the treachery of Ferleg
as was suspected, Ferleg by the unanimus sentence of all was condemned and put
from his Crown, being absent, and his brother Mainus created King. Buchanan,
l. 4. p. 101, 102, 103, 104, 105.
Dornadilla the fourth King of Scotland dying, leaving Reuther his son under
age and unfit to reign, the people made Notatus his brother King; who playing
the tyrant, banishing, murdering, and oppressing the people, Donald of
Galloway raised an Army against him, expostulated with him for his tyranny, and
wished him to resign the Crown to Reuther; which he refusing to do, and
justifying his tyranny; hereupon Donald gave him battle, slew him, and made
Reuther King without the peoples suffrages: Upon which the Nobles being
offended, (because the power of the Parliament was by this means abolished,
and the election of the supreme Magistrate made only by one man,) took up
Arms both against Ruther and Donald, gave them battle twice in one day, and
t^oke Ruther their new King prisoner: who afterward dying and leaving There
his son an infant, scarce ten years old, they, according to the Law formerly
made and received in this case, made his uncle Ruther King; who after
seventeene years reign voluntarily resigned his Crown to his Nephew There*
in whose commendation he made an Oration, the people hardly permitting it.
There soon after growing very vicious and flagitious, slaying the Nobles, and
filling the Realm with robberies, the Governors pitying the deplo^able state
of the Realm, resolved to punish him for it; of which he being informed, fled
to the Britains, where he spent his days in contempt and ignominy, not daring
to return; Conan a prudent and discreet man, being elected Viceroy in the
mean time, which office he held almost twelve years till the death of There.
In the reign of Finnan the tenth King of Scotland, that the roots of tyranny
might be cut off, it was decreed, That Kings should command nothing of greater
moment to be d^re, but by the authority of the public Council. Durstus the
eleventh King giving himself to all deboistnesse, first banished his fathers
friends from him as the troublesome reprehenders of his pleasures; and sending
for the most vicious young men to be his familiar companions, gave himself
wholly to luxury and venery. He prostituted his wife, (daughter to the King of
Britains) to his companions, and then banished her. At last the Nobles
conspiring against him, he awaking as it were out cut of sleep, considering
that he should find no place of safety, neither at home nor abroad, being
equally hated of strangers and subjects, thought best to counterfeit repentance
of his former life, Notable Dissimulation.
for so he might retain both his Crown, and in time inflict punishments on
his enemies. Wherefore recalling his wife from exile, he first of all
endeavored to reconcile himself to the Britains: then calling the chiefest of
his subjects to him, he ratified with a most solemn oath the oblivion of his
former courses; he committed every most wicked person to prison, as if he
reserved them for punishment, and religiously promised, that he would do
nothing hereafter, but by the advice of his Nobles. When by these things he had
given assurance of his sincere mind, he celebrated the agreement with pastimes,
banquets, and other signs of public gladness: and now all men's minds being
taken up with joy, he called most of the Nobility to a supper; where, when he
had shut them up (improvident and unarmed) in one room, sending in his
assasinates, he slew them every one. This calamity not so much terrifying as
exasperating the minds of the rest with new flames of anger, they gathered a
great army together, all men conspiring to take away this detested monster;
whom they slew in battle, together with his wicked confederates. After whose
slaughter, the Nobles putting by Durstus sons, lest they should imitate their
fathers vices, elected his brother Even King with unanimous consent; who hating
Durstus his tyranny had voluntarily banished himself among the Picts. Even
dying, leaving a bastard son called Gillo, he procured himself to be elected
Viceroy till a new King should be chosen, and got the Kingdom confirmed to
him; but yet not deeming himself secure as long as any of Durstus his family
remained, he treacherously slew Durstus his two eldest sons, with all his
kindred and familiars: With which the Nobles being much discontented, and
fearing worser things, privily raised an Army against him; who finding himself
generally deserted but by a few flagicious persons, who feared punishment, He
was forced to fly in a Fisherboat into Ireland: whereupon the Scots created
Cadvallus their Viceroy, and after that created Even their King, who
conquering Gillo in Ireland, he was forced to fly into a Cave, where he was
taken and his head cut off.

Bu^han* l. 4. p. 109, 110, 111, 113, 114, 115, 116. Grafto^, part 6. p. 70,
71, part. 7. p. 80, 81, 82, 84, 86, 87, 90.
King Even the third, not content with an hundred Concubines of the Nobility,
made a Law, That it should be lawful for every one to marry as many Wives as
he could keep; and that the King should have the mayden-head of Noble women,
and the Nobles of the Plebeans before they were married; and that the common
peoples Wives should be common for the Nobles. Besides, luxury, cruelty and
avarice were the companions of this his flagitious life; he murdering the rich
to get their wealth, and favoring t^eeves to sh^e in their robberies:
whereupon the Nobles and people conspiring against him and taking up Arms, he
discerned how unfaithful the society of ill men is; for being deserted by his
party as soon as the battle began, he came alive into his enemies hands, and
was committed to pe^petuall prison, his life being spared by the intercession
of Cadalan, who was made Viceroy in his stead; but soon after he was
strangled in the prison by one whom he had formerly injured. King Corbreds
son being within age at his death, the Assembly of the States made Dardan
King, who within three years space rushing into all kind of vices, bannished
all prudent and honest men out of his Court, kept none but flatterers about
him, slew Cardorus, and diverse others virtuous men who advertised him of his
faults; and to take away the feate of succession, plotted the death of Corbred,
Galdus, and others: whereupon the Nobles and people by unanimous consent rose
up against him, slew his evil instruments, routed his Forces, took him
prisoner, whilst he was about to murder himself, cut off his head (which they
carried about for a laughing-stocke) and threw his corpse into a jakes, after he
had reigned four years. Luctacke the 22 King of Scots, giving himself wholly
to Wine and Harlots, sparing the chastity of none though never so near allied
to him, nor their husbands never so great, deflowring his own Sisters, Aunts,
Daughters, joining inhumane cruelty and insatiable avarice to his lust, and
depraving the youth of the Country corrupted by his example, when as no man
durst resist him; was at last convented before an Assembly of the chief men;
where being more freely reprehended for those crimes, he commanded the chief
of them to be drawn away to punishment, as seditious, calling them old doting
fools. Whereupon the people assembling together, slew both him and the
instruments of his wickednesses, when he had scarce reigned three years space.
Mogaldus was elected King in his place, who carefully reforming all the abuses
and corruptions of Luctack in the beginning of his reign; yet fell at last
unto them in his old age, and grew so odious by his vices, to the Nobles and
common people, that they weary of him, rose up against him; he being unable to
resist them, wandered up and down with one or two Companions, in secret places,
seeking to escape by flight; but was at last taken and slain. Conarus his
son and successor giving himself to all manner of luxury, and lust, brought
the Realm in short time to great penury; giving Lands and riches to most vile
and naughty persons, because they favored his corrupt living, and invented new
exactions upon his people. Whereupon summoning a Parliament, he demanded a
Tribute of them to support his State and Court in Honor; who taking time to
deliberate, and understanding at last, that this his hunting after money
proceeded not from his Nobles, but from the inventions of Courtflatters, they
resolved to commit the King to ward, as unfit to govern, until he renouncing
the Crown, they should elect another King. Whereupon the next day, he who was
first demanded his opinion, Declaimed sharply against the Kings former life,
his bauds and companions, as unprofitable in war, troublesome in peace, full
of shame and disgrace: showed, that the Kings revenues were sufficient to
maintain him if he lived within compass; that the rest might be supplied out
of the estates and by the death of those on whom he had bestowed the public
patrimony; and that the King in the mean time should be committed to custody,
as unfit to rule, till they elected another, who might teach others by his
example to live sparingly and hardly, after their Country custom, and might
transmit the discipline received from their ancestors to posterity. With which
free speech he growing very angry, instead of pacifying their discontented
minds, inflamed them more with his cruel threatenings; whereupon the King being
laid h^nds on by those who stood next him was s^ut up in a Hall with a few
attendants: his Courtiers, the authors of ill counsel were presently brought
to punishment, and A^g^^us a Nobleman made Viceroy till the people should meet
to elect a new King; after which C^na^^ spent with grief and sickness, died
in prison. King Eth^d^us his son being an infant ^i brother Tetra^ell was
chosen King, who murdering his nephew, cutting off diverse of the Nobles, and
spo^ling the common people, to establish the Kingdom in himself, he grew so
edicus and so much d^minished his authority in a short time, that he stirred up
diverse seditions; which he not daring to go abroad to suppress^, b^ing
generally hated, was at last strangled by his own fellowers in the night, in
his own House. Ethedius the 2. being a stupid man, and of a duller wit then was
suitable to the government of so fierce a people, the Nobles hereupon
assembling together o^t of their respect to the family of Fergusius, would not
wholly deprive him of the name of a King, though he were slothful being guilty
of no crime, but assigned Him governors to execute Justice in every County: at
last he was slain in a tumult of his familiars. King Athirco his son
degenerating from his former virtues, and growing extremely covetous, angry,
luxurious, sloathfull, and leaving the company of all good men, was not ashamed
to go openly in the sight of the people playing upon a Flute, and rejoicing
more to be a Fi^ler, then a Prince; whereby he became very odious to the
people: at last ravishing the daughters of Nathalocus a Noble man, and then
whipping and prostituting them to his lewd companions lusts; thereupon the
Nobles rising up in Arms against him, when he had in vain endeavored to
defend himself by force, being generally deserted by his own people, who hated
him for his wickedness, he murdered himself, and his brother Donus was
enforced to fly with his little ones to the Picts to save his life. Nathalicke
succeeded in his Realm, governing it ill by indigent ordinary persons, who
would attempt any wickedness, and treacherously strangling diverse of the
Nobility, who were opposites to him, in the prison to which he committed them,
to establish his Kingdom; thereupon their friends with others, being more
enraged against him, raised an Army to suppress him; which whiles he
endeavored to resist he was slain by one of his own servants, or as some say,
by a Sorceresse with whom he consulted to know his end. King Findocke being
treacherously slain through the conspiracy of Carantius his second brother,
Donald his third brother was elected King. Donald of the Isles, usurping the
Realm by violence, so far oppressed the people by ill officers and discords
raised amongst them, that he durst seldom stir abroad; he never laughed but
when he heard of the discord and slaughter of his Nobles: for which he was at
last surprised and slain by Crathilinthus, who was unanimously elected King,
and slew all th^s tyrants children. After the death of Fircormarch there were
great divisions and wars for the Crown between Romach and Angusian, two
brethren; Romach at last conquering his brother and chasing him into Ireland,
gained the Crown rather by force, then love of the people; which to preserve,
he showed himself very cruel to the adverse party, reduced capital causes to
his own arbitrament, and putting many to death, struck a general fear in
all good men: Upon this he grew so generally odious to all estates, that they
conspired against, and suppressed him before he could collect his Forces; and
cutting off his head, carried it about (...) Poll, as a joyful spectacle to
the people.

Buch. l. 5. p. 146. 147. 156. 160. 17^. Graft. part 7 p. 94. 125.
Constantine the first, of Scotland, as soon as he obtained the Crown, loosed
the reins to all Vices: he was cruel and covetous toward his Nobles, kept
company with men of the basest Rank; gave himself only to the rapes of
maids, matrons, and immoderate feasts, having fiddlers, Stage Players, and
ministers of all sorts of pleasures almost about him: with which vices the
Nobles of Scotland being offended, admonished him of his duty. But he proudly
contemning them, wished them to look after other matters, saying, he had
council enough from others, and that they should lay aside their false hope,
that they could reclaim the King by their Council. On the contrary he was of
so poor a dejected Spirit toward his enemies, that he not only granted them
peace, but remitted them injuries, and restored them Castles as soon as they
demanded them. Which caused the Picts and Scots to consult together to depose
him by force of Arms; from which Douglasse dissuaded them for the present, by
reason of their foreign wars with the Britans and Saxons: In the end, he was
slain for ravishing a Noblemans daughter in the 15. year of his Reign. King
Goran was slain by the people for favoring Towers chief Inquisitor or judge
of capital causes, who much oppressed the people; his children being young,
Hugonius succeeded to the Crown; and afterward his brothers Congalus and
Kumatel, after whom Ardan the son of King Goran reigned. Ferquhard the 52.
King of Scots a crafty man, desiring to turn the Kingdom into a tyranny,
nourished great divisions among the Nobles; but they discovering his malice
privily enter into an accord among themselves, and calling a Parliament,
sommoned him thereunto: who refusing to appear, keeping within his Castle;
they thereupon took it by force, and brought him to judgment against his
will; where many and grievous crimes, among others, his cruelty and negligence
in the affairs of the Commonwealth; the Pelagian Heresy, with contempt of
Baptism, and the other Sacraments, were objected against him; of none whereof
he being able sufficiently to purge himself, was cast into prison; where, out
of shame and sorrow, he slew himself. Ferquhard the second, a man polluted
with all kind of wickedness, an unsatiable desirer of wine and money,
inhumanely cruel toward men, and impious toward God, when he had every where
vexed others with cruelty and rapines at last turned his fury against his own,
slaying his own wife, and ravishing his own daughters: for which wickednesses
he was excommunicated: but the Nobles willing to assemble together to punish
him, Grafton part. 7. ^. 125. 126. 130. 131. Buch l. 5 p. 162. ^63. 165. l. 6.
p. 1^^. ^75 176. 183 18^, 186. 187 188. 189. 196 197 198. etc. 200. 201.
were diswaded by holy Bishop Colman, who told the King openly, that some
Devine judgment would shortly seize upon him, which fell out accordingly, for
falling into a Fever, and not abstaining from his intemperance, he was eaten
up of lice. Maldwin 55. King of Scotland was strangled by his Queen, for
suspicion of Adultery with an Harlot; for which fact she her self was burned 4
days after. Amberkelethus a vicious wicked king, was slain by one of his own
men, with an arrow in the night, when he was marching against the Picts;
whereupon, lest the Army should be dissolved or left without a General,
Eugenius the 7th was presently chosen King in the Tents: who making peace with
the Picts, his wife being slain in his bed by two conspirators who sought his
life, the king being suspected of this murder was thereupon imprisoned; but
before his trial set at liberty, by the apprehension of the Murderers. King
Eugenius the 8th, rushing into all Vices, and neither regarding the admonitions
of his Nobles or Clergy, was for his filthy lusts, covetousness, and cruelty,
slain in the assembly of his Lords by their general consent, and his
companions in wickedness and villainy hanged, which was a grateful spectacle
to the people. Fergusius the third succeeded him both in his Crown and Vices;
he was a foul drunken glutton, and so outragiously given to Harlots, that he
neglected his own wife, and brought her to such poverty, that she was forced
to serve other Noble women for her living; wherefore to expiate this disgrace,
she murdered him in his bed, and afterward slew her self also. Donald the 70
King of Scotland, gave himself wholly to his pleasures, keeping none but
Hunters, Hawkers, and inventors of new lusts about him, on whom he spent the
revenues of the Realm, by which he corrupted the youth of the kingdom: which
the ancients of the Realm discerning, assembled and went to the King,
admonishing him of his duty; which he notwithstanding neglected, till the wars
roused him up. Which being ended, he returned to his pristine courses;
Whereupon the Nobles fearing, lest this filthy and sloathfull man, who would
neither be amended by the councels of his friends, nor calamities of his
people, should lose the remainder of the Kingdom which was left, cast him into
prison; where for grief of his inhibited pleasures, or fear of public shame,
he laid violent hands upon himself Constantine the second was inhibited by his
Senators to make war before he had reformed the corrupted youth of the Realm
by good Laws; after which he was slain in battle by the Danes. King Ethus his
brother and successor polluting himself with all vices, and drawing all the
youth of the Country (prone to wickedness) with him, he was the reupon seized
on by the Nobles; who making a long Oration to the people, wherein they related
the wickednesses of his whole life, he was forced to renounce his right in the
kingdom, and dyed in prison of grief, within three days after. Gregory being
made King in his stead. Constantine the third turning Monk, Malchombe was
elected king, who was slain by the conspiracy of thieves; whose son Duffus
being an infant, Indulfus enjoyed the Crown; to whom Duffus succeeding, was
murdered by Donald: whereupon a Parliament was assembled to choose a new King,
which elected Culenus: who at last degenerating into all licentiousness,
ravished Virgins, Nuns, yea his own sisters and daughters, and set up a
kind of public stews. For which being reprehended by the Nobles, he excused
part by reason of his youth part by reason of fear, and acknowledgeing his
sorrow for the residue, promised a ^endment. But he not reforming upon their
admonitions, they departed from Court, that they might neither be witnesses nor
partakers of his vices: The king freed of their troublesome company gave
himself wholly to feasting and venery, spending nights and days in dishonest
sports and pleasures with his dissolute companions; and to maintain his
luxury, he pillaged and oppressed his Subjects, especially those who were
rich; and by his disorders fell into a grievous sickness, which made him a
deformed carcass, fit for nothing but to suffer the penalties of his vicious
life, his Courtiers and companions spoiling the people every where in the mean
time. Whereupon the Nobles were enforced to summon a Parliament at Scone, where
the king was commanded to be present, that together with the rest he might
consult how to provide for the public safety in his precipitate State of
things: with which sommons being awaked, he began to consult with his
companions, what was best to be done for his own safety in these exigents:
being unable to resist or flee, he resolved to go to the Parliament, hoping to
find some mercy there for his good fathers sake, to preserve him from falling
into extreme misery; but in his way thither he was slain by the Thane of the
Country for his violent ravishment of his daughter; his death was acceptable to
all, because it freed them of such a monster with less labor then they
expected: and Kenneth the third was made King in his place: who poisoning his
Nephew Malcolme, heir to the crown after his decease, to settle on his own
posterity, he caused the Lords in Parliament to repeal the ancient Law whereby
the Crown descended to the next of kin during the minority of the right heir;
and to enact, that the son should from thenceforth inherit the crown next
after his father, through a Minor; that the Realm during his Minority should
be governed by a Viceroy elected by the Parliament and Nobles till he came to
14 years of age; and after that by a Guardian elected by himself; that if the
Kings eldest son dyed having issue, the issue should inherit, before the
second brother, etc. After which, the King generally hated for the poisoning of
Malcolme, was slain by the practice and command of Fenella. He thus cut off
Constantine surnamed the bald, son of Culen, pretending the new Law
concerning the descent of the Crown to be unjust, obtained by force, and
contrary both to the public liberty and safety; to wit, that an infant
(commonly governed by a woman) being unable to govern, or repulse an enemy in
times of danger, yea a curse of God upon a Realm, and therefore not to be
endured or settled by a Law, especially in those time of war, when they had so
many enemies) should be preferred before a Kinsman of full age, fit to reign;
so ambitiously sought the Crown and made so many friends, that he procured
himself to be proclaimed King at Scone; which Malcolme son of Kenneth (for
whose sake this new Law was enacted) understanding, presently raised all the
Forces he could, which being conducted by his brother Kenneth, Constantine and
he in the second encounter were both slain one of another. After whose death
Grame the son of Duffus usurping the Crown, when he and Malcolme were ready
to encounter with their Arms, this agreement was made between them by
Forthred a Bishop, that Grame should retain the Kingdom, and the new Law of
succession be suspended during his life; and Malcolme succeed him after his
death. After which Grame giving himself to all dissoluteness, covetousness
and oppression, and warring upon those Nobles and Counselors, who advised him
to reform his evil courses, with greater cruelty than any foreign enemy,
destroying both men towns, cattle, fields, and making all a common prey;
hereupon they called in Malcolme out of Northumberland to assist them, who
encountering Grame, on Ascension day, took him prisoner, being deserted of his
people, wounded in the head, and then put out his eyes; who soon after dying
of sorrow and his wounds; Malcholme thereupon summoned a Parliament at Scone,
and would not take the Crown till the Law concerning the succession made in his
fathers reign, was ratified by all their consents: against which Law Buchanan
exceedingly inveighs in the beginning of his seventh Book, as the occasion and
increase of all those mischiefs both to King and Kingdom, which it was
purposely made to prevent. This Malcolme, after he had reigned long
victoriously with much honor, in his declining age, growing very covetous,
took away the lands he had formerly given to his Nobles for their good service
in the wars, and punished diverse of the wealthiest men so severely, that he
brought many of them to death, others to extreme poverty; which injuries lost
him all his love, honor, and so far exasperated the people, that partly out
of revenge, partly to prevent further oppressions and to provide for their own
security, corrupting his servants with money, they sent their agents into his
chamber in the night, and slew him. Not to mention the murder of King Buch. l.
7. p. 213. to 230.
Duncan by Machbed, who usurped his Crown through his pusillanimity; this
Machbed, Heyl^^s G^^gr. ^. 507. 508.
omitting no kind of libidinousnesse, cruelty, and tyrannizing over the people
for 18 years space together, trusting to the predictions of certain wisards,
that he should neven be overcome till Bernane wood did come to Dunsinane
Castle, and that he should never be slain by any man borne of a woman. At last
Mackduffe governor of Fiffe joining himself to some few patriots who had
escaped this Tyrants sword, met at Bernane wood, and early in the morning every
man bearing a bough in his hand, the better to keep them from discovery, took
Dunsinane Castle by scalado: whence Machbed escaping was pursued, overtaken,
and urged to fight bp Mackduffe, to whom the Tyrant replied in scorn, that in
vain he attempted his death, for it was his destiny never to be slain by
any man borne of a woman: Now then said Mackduffe, is thy fatal hour come,
for I never was borne of a woman, but violently cut out of my mothers womb,
she dying before I was borne; which words so daunted the Tyrant, though
otherwise valiant, that he was easily slain, and Malcolme Conmer the true
heir of the Crown, seated in the Throne. King Donald being odious and cruel
to his subjects, they sent for Duncan Malcombes bastard, who expelled him the
Realm, and was created King in his steed; who proving harsh, cruel, and
Imperious to his Subjects, fell into their hatred, and was beheaded in the
night by Marpender Earl of Murry, corrupted with money by Donald to murder
him. Donald permitting the Isles to be taken and possessed by Magnus King of
Norway, and suffering his Realm to be wasted by a secret agreement; thereupon
the Scots sent for Edgar Malcombes son, to take possession of the Crown, who
entering into Scotland with small forces, Donald being deserted by his people,
betook himself to flight, but being apprehended and brought back to Edgar,
he was cast into prison, and not long after dyed. King Malcolme the fourth, at
a Parliament at York parting with diverse of his Crowne-lands to King Henry
without his peoples consents so far incurred their hatred, that upon his
return they beseiged him at Barwick, and almost took him prisoner, but by the
mediation of some of his Council, who informed the Nobles, that the King was
by violence and fraud circumvented by the King of England, of the ancient
patrimony of the Crown land, they resolved to recover it by war: the Scottish
Nobility affirming, that the king had not any power to diminish or part with
any lands appertaining to the Crown without all their consents in Parliament.
This King after some encounters making a peace with the English upon unequal
terms, wherein he parted with some of his ancient territories, out of his
pusilanimity, against his Nobles consent* hereupon he grew so odious and
contemptible to them, that they were all weary of his government, and caused
many to take up Arms and Rebel against him.

(...). p. 25^. (...) ^abian Holin. Sp^ed, Graft. Daniel in the life of K. Edw.
the 1. Walsingham ^podigma p. 79.
After the death of King Alexander the third there was a Parliament summoned at
Scone to consult about the creating of a new King; and the government of the
Realm, during the Inter-regnum; where first of all they appointed fix men to
rule the Realm for the present, and then heard and discussed the several
Titles pretended to the Crown, the final determination whereof, they referred
to King Edward the first of England as to the Supreme Sovereign Lord of the
Realm: who selecting 12. Scottish, and 12. English Counselors to assist him;
After full hearing, by general consent of all, adjudged the Crown to John
Baylioll, husband to King Alexanders nightest Kinswoman: The Scots considering
his simplicity and unaptnes to govern them, and scarce confiding in him being
an Englishman, and elected by the K. of England, co^stituted them 12. Peers,
after the manner of France, to wit, 4. Bishops, 4. Earls, and 4. Lords, by
whose advise the King and all the affairs of the Realm, were to be governed
and directed: He was taken and kept prisoner by the English. Buchanan l. 9. 10.
11. 12. p. 291. 334. etc. 412. 413.
After the death of Robert Bruce, the Scots before their King was crowned,
created a Viceroy to govern the Realm, who suppressed the thieves, and
Robbers: Edward Bayliol son to John Bayliol succeding Bruce, was afterward
rejected and deposed by the Scots, for adhereing too closely to the English and
K. Edward, and David Bruce elected K. in his place. Robert the 2d. of Scotland
when a peace was propounded between France, England, and Scotland by the Pope,
willingly consented thereunto, but his Nobles being against it, his assent
alone was in vain; because the King of Scotland alone, can make no firm peace
nor truce, nor promise which shall bind, but by public consent in Parliament.
King Robert the 3d. dying of grief, for the captivity and imprisonment of his
Son James, taken prisoner by our King Henry the 4th. as he was going into
France, the Scots hereupon appointed Robert his uncle, by common consent, for
their Viceroy, till James the (first of that name) right heir of the Cowne,
were enlarged. James being freed and Crowned, summoned a Parliament, wherein an
aid was granted him to pay his ransom, with much difficulty: he had many
Civil wars with his Subjects, and at last was murdered by Robert Grame and
his confederats, from whom he received 28. wounds in his Chamber in the night,
whereof he presently died. James the 2. his son, being but 7. years old at his
death, Alexander Leviston was chosen Protector, and William Crichton made
Chancellor by Parliament; Which the Earl Douglas storming at, committed many
insolences in a hostile manner. After which, Alexander and his faction
opposing the Chancellor, and commanding that none should obey him, the
Chancellor thereupon fortified Edenborough Castle, and as the King was hunting
early in the morning seized upon him with a troop of Horse, and brought him to
Edinburgh Castle, where he detained him from the Protector till the peace of
the Kingdom, and present divisions should be settled: which lasting very long by
reason of Earl Douglas his ambition, power, and covetousnes, who raised many
grievous civil wars, he was at last stabbed to death by the King himself,
Anno 1452. contrary to his promise of safe conduct to the Court, under the
Kings and Nobles hands and seals: Whereupon his brethren and Confederats,
meeting at Sterling, resolved to revenge his death, and tied the Kings and
Nobles writing of safe conduct to an horses tail, which they led through the
streets of Sterling, railing at the King and his Council as they went, and
when they came into the market place (where they had 500. trumpets sounding)
they by an Herald, proclaimed the King and all that were with him, fedifragus,
perjured, and enemis of all good men: and then spoiled and burned the Town,
Co^ntry, with all places else that were firm to the King; between whom and
the kings party, a bloody civil war (to the spoil of the Country)
continued above two years space with various success; till at last with much
difficulty this fire was extinguished and the King casually slain with the
breaking of a Cannon: whose son James the 3. being but 7. years old, was
proclaimed king in the Camp, and the Queen Mother made Regent, till a
Parliament might be called to settle the government; but when the Parliament
assembled, upon the Buchanan l. 12. p. 417. to 430. 441. to 456. Heylin p. 510.
Oration of Kenneth Archbishop of Saint Andrews showing the Inconveniences and
unfitness of a woman's Government, they Elected 6. Regents to govern the King
and Realm during his minority. After which Bodius was made Viceroy: This king
being seduced by ill Courtiers and Counselors which corrupted him, thereupon
diverse of the Nobles assembling together, resolved to go to the Court, to
demand these ill Counselors and seducers of the King and then to execute them;
which they did accordingly, and that with such fury, that when they wanted
cords to hang some of them, they made use of their horses bridles, and every
one strave who should be forwardest to do this execution. The king promising
reformation, was dismissed; but in steed of reforming he meditated nothing but
revenge, blood and slaughter in his mind; and plotting secretly to murder the
Nobles in Edenburg, by the help of Earl Duglasse; he detesting the fact and
revealing the Treachery, thereupon the Nobles who formerly desired only his
reformation, took up Arms to destroy him, as one incorrigible and implacable;
whereupon they made the Kings son Viceroy, and knowing the kings
perfidiousnesse, would yield to no terms of peace, unless he would resign up
his Crown to his son: which he refusing, thereupon they gave him battle and
slew him, as a common enemy. After which calling a Parliament, they created
his son James the fourth king; who coming under the power of the Duglasses,
rescued himself at last from them: and invading England, Anno. 1542 when he
proclaimed Oliver Sincleer his favorite, General, the Scottish Nobility took
it in such indignation, that they threw down their weapons and suffered
themselves to be taken prisoners; whereupon the king growing sick with grief
and anger, soon after dyed. Buch. l. 16. to the end of 12. Holin. Chytr.
Chron. Saxor. l. 21. p. 640 641. 642. 836. Speed, in the life of Queen Mary,
and Queen Elizabeth Cambdens Elizabeth, and others. See Knocks his History of
Scotland.
Anno. 1555. Mary the Daughter of king James the sixth of Scotland, and heir
to the Crown, being within age, her mother Queen Mary, by common consent was
made Regent, and she by common consent and council of the Nobles, married to
Francis Dolphine of France. In the mean time there happening some troubles and
wars about the reformed Religion, which many of the Nobles and people there
contented for; the Queen Mother, granting those of the Religion, a
confirmation of their liberties and Religion by way of Truce for 6 months, she
in the mean time sends for Soldiers out of France, wherewith she endeavored
to suppress Religion, with the remaining liberty of the Scots, and to subject
them to the French. Whereupon the Nobles of Scotland who stood for the defense
of their Religion and Liberties, by a common decree in Parliament, deprived the
Queen Mother of her Regencie, make a league with our Queen Elizabeth, being
of the reformed Religion, and receiving aid both of men and money from her,
besieged the Queen Mother in Edinburgh Castle, where she dyed of grief and
sickness. After which they expelled the French, and procured free exercise of
the Reformed Religion. In the mean time Francis dying, the Queen sends for
Henry Steward out of England, where he and his Father had been Exiles; marries
and proclaims him king, July 29. 1564. which done, she excluded the Nobility
from her Counsels, and was wholly advised by David Ritzius, a Subaudian, whom
she brought with her out of France, and did all things by his Council;
wherewith the Nobles being much discontented, finding him supping with the
Queen in a little Chamber, commanded him to rise out of the place, which did
little become him, and drawing him out of the Chamber, stabbed him to death,
Anno. 1565. The Queen soon after was delivered of a son and heir, James
the 6. and then admits James Hepburne Earl of Bothwell into most intimate
familiarity with her, setting him over all affairs of the Realm, granting
nothing to any petitioner almost but by him; and her husband Steward being
dead, (whether of a natural death or poison is yet in controversy) she
married Bothwell openly, without the Lords and Parliaments consents. Hereupon
the Nobles took up arms against Bothwel and the Queen, besieged the Queen
till she rendered her self prisoner, upon this condition; that she should
adjure and resign her interest in the Crown and Kingdom to her infant son;
which they compelled her to perform, and appointed James Earl of Morton
Viceroy, and Protector during the Kings Minority. In the mean time the Queen
was committed prisoner to the Castle of the Isle of the Lake Leuine; where
corrupting Duglasse her keeper, the Earl of Mortons Nephew, and a shipmaster,
she escaped to the Hamiltons in safety, who having raised Forces to free her,
waited her coming on the shore: But the Viceroy scattering these forces
soon after, the Queen thereupon fled into England. Anno. 1568. Where Queen
Elizabeth taking her expulsion ill, labored that she might be restored to the
Crown, which could not be effected, but by Arms; or mediation; and neither of
them without knowledge of the cause. Whereupon the Queen sent for the Viceroy
and Council of Scotland into England, to answer the complaints of their
Queen against them; which they did in a writing, (composed by Buchanan, and
afterward Printed both in Latin and English,) wherein they showed the grounds
and order of their proceedings against their Queen; wherewith the Queen and
Council were satisfied, that they had proceeded rightly and orderly: yet to
keep both sides in suspense, she pronounced no definitive sentence: The
Viceroy departing into Scotland, was afterward murdered by the Hamiltons,
and Matthew Steward Earl of Leseux made Viceroy in his steed. The Queen in
the interim treated with Thomas Howard Duke of Northfolke, about a match with
him, and to seize upon the Realm of Scotland, whereupon he was committed to the
Tower, and she restrained; after which she was solemnly arraigned and condemned
to death by the Parliament of England for conspiring Queen Elizabeth's death,
etc. and for it beheaded at Fotherringham Castle. Feb. 8. 1587. The History of
which Queens life is more at large related by Rerum. Scot. Hist. l. 15. 16.
17. 18. 19. 20.
Buchanan and others; and her imprisonment and Deposition professedly justified
as lawful by his Treatise, De Iure Regni apud Scotos (compiled for that
purpose) to which I shall refer the Reader.

What the Lords and Realm of Scotland have done within these 5. years last past
in defense of their Religion Laws, Liberties, by holding general Assemblies,
Parliaments, taking up arms, seizing the Forts and Ammunition of the Realm,
and marching into England, against the Kings consent and Proclamations, is so
fresh in memory, so fully related in the Acts of Oblivion and Pacification,
made in both Parliaments of England and Scotland, ratified by the King
himself; and in particular Histories of this Subject, that I shall not spend
time to recite particulars, but will rather conclude from all the premises with
the words of Rerum Scot. l. 20. p. 746. 747.
Buchanan; The Ancient custom of our Ancestors in punishing their Kings,
suffers not our forcing of the Queen to renounce her right unto the Crown to
her son, to seem a Novelty; and the moderation of the punishment, shows it
proceeded not from envy: for so many Kings punished with death, bonds,
banishment by our Ancestors, voluntarily offer themselves in the ancient
Monuments of Histories, that we need no foreign examples to confirm our
own act: For the Scottish Nation, seeing it was free from the beginning,
created it self Kings upon this very Law, that the Empire being conferred on
them by the suffrages of the people, if the matter required it, they might take
it away again by the same suffrages; of which law many footsteps have remained
even to our age: for in the Islands which lie round about us, and in many
places of the Continent, wherein the Ancient language and constitutions have
continued, this very custom is yet observed in creating Governors: likewise
the Ceremonies which are used in the Kings inauguration have also an express
image of this Law; out of which it easily appears, that a Kingdom is nothing
else, but the mutual stipulation between the people and their Kings: the same
likewise may be most apparently understood out of the inoffensive tenor of the
ancient Law, preserved from the very beginning of reigning among the Scots even
unto our age; when as no man in the mean time has attempted, not only not to
abrogate this Law, but not so much as to shake it, or in any part to diminish
it: Yea, whereas our Ancestors have deprived so many Kings as would be tedious
to name, of their Realm; condemned them to banishment, restrained them in
prisons, and finally punished them with death, yet there was never any mention
made of abating the rigor of the Law; neither perchance undeservedly, since it
is not of that kind of Laws which are obnoxious to the changes of times, but
of those engraven in the minds of men in the first original of mankind, and
approved by the mutual consent well-nigh of all Nations, which continue
unbroken and sempiternall together with the Nature of things, and being subject
to the commands of no man; domineere and rule over all men. This law (which in
every action offers it self to our eyes and minds, and dwells in our breasts
will we, nill we) our Ancestors following, were always armed against violence,
and suppressed the unrulinesse of Tyrants. Neither is this Law proper only to
the Scots, but common to all well-ordered Nations and People: as the Athenians,
Lacaedemonians, Romans, Venetians, Germans, Danes: which he there manifests
by examples. So that I may hence infallibly determine, the Realm, Parliament,
and Nobles of Scotland, collectively considered, to be the Sovereign power in
that Realm, superior to the Kings themselves: from whom I shall proceed to
Scripture Presidents, in the Kings and Kingdoms of the Gentiles, Israel, and
Judah, recorded in Scripture.

The Kings of the Gentiles, Israel, and Judah.
Now least any should object, that all the forecited Examples and Authorities
are but humane, and no convincing evidences to satisfy the Conscience, That
whole Kingdoms, States, and Parliaments are above their kings, and of greater
power then they, I shall therefore (to close up this Posterne Gate of Evasion)
conclude with Scripture Presidents, ratifying this truth beyond all
contradiction. To begin with Heathen kings and States therein recorded. I read
in the 1 Samuel 29. and 1 Chro. 12. 19. That when David with his men offered to
go with Achish and the Philistines against King Saul (his Sovereign) and the
Israelites to Battle, and passed on in there reward with Achish; the Princes
of the Philistines seeing it, said, What do these Hebrews here? To whom Achish
answered, Is not this David the servant of Saul King of Israel, which has been
with me these years, and I have found no fault in him since he fell unto me
unto this day? Hereupon the Princes of the Philistines were wroth with him, and
taking advice together, said to their King Achish, Make this fellow return
that he may go again to his place which thou have appointed him, and let him
not go down with us to Battle, lest in the Battle he be an adversary to us;
for wherewith should he reconcile himself to his Master? should it not be with
the Heads of these men? Is not this David, of whom they sang one to another in
dances, saying, Saul slew his thousands, and David his ten thousands? Then
Achish called David, and said unto him, Surely as the lord lives, thou have
been upright, and thy going out and coming in with me in the Host is right in
my sight, for I have not found evil in thee since the day of thy coming;
nevertheless the Lords favor thee not; wherefore now return and go in peace,
that thou displease not the Lords of the Philistines,. And when David replied,
What have I done, etc. that I may not fight against the Enemies of my Lord the
King? Achish answered him, I know thou art good in my fight as an Angel of
God, notwithstanding the Princes of the Philistines have said, HE SHALL NOT GO
UP WITH US TO BATTLE; wherefore rise up early in the morning with thy Masters
servants that are come with thee, and as soon as ye have light, depart;
whereupon they returned. Here we see the Lords of the Philistines did
peremptorily overrule their king against his will, who durst not contradict
them; therefore they had a Power superior to his: as will further appear by 1 Samuel 5. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. and chapter 6. 1, to 13. where when the Ark of God was
taken by the Philistines, the Lords and People of the Philistines (not the
King) met, consulted, and ordered, how it should be removed from place to
place, and at last sent it back again. So Ahasuerus the great Persian Monarch,
was advised, overruled by his Council of State, as appears by the case of
Queen Vashti, Ester 1. and what his Princes thought meet to be done, that he
decreed and proclaimed, verse 19, 20, 21, 22. So Artaxerxes king of Persia did
all things of moment, by the advice of his Counselors and Princes, Ezra 7. 28.
and Chap. 8. 25. Great Nabuchadnezzar King of Babylon, (Dan 3. 2, 3. 24. chap.
4. 32, to 36.) was for his pride driven from men, put to eat grass with Oxen
for aspace, till he knew that the most High rules in the Kingdoms of men.
After which his understanding and reason returned to him, and the glory of his
Kingdom, and his Counselors and Lords sought unto him, and established him in
his Kingdom, he being overruled and counseled afterward by them. So Daniel
6. Darius King of the Medes and Persians, was overruled by his Lords and
Princes, even against his will, to Sign a Decree, and to cast Da^iel into the
Lions Den for breach of it; and though the King were sore displeased with
himself for Signing this Decree, and set his heart on Daniel, and labored till
the going down of the Sun to deliver him; yet the Princes assembling and
telling the King, Dan. 6. 14. to 20.
Know O King, that the Law of the Medes and Persians is, that no Decree nor
Statute which the King establishes, (by the advice of his Nobles) may be
changed, (to wit, by the king alone, without their advise: a clear evidence,
that the greatest Persian Monarchs were subject to the Laws of their Kingdoms,
as well as other Princes;) Whereupon the King commanded, and they brought
Daniel and cast him into the Den of Lions, and a stone was brought and laid
upon the mouth of the Den, and the King Sealed it with his own Signet, and with
the Signet of the Lords, THAT THE PVRPOSE MIGHT NOT BE CHANGED concerning
Daniel. Here this great king was even against his will constrained to be
subject both to his Laws and Lords The like we read of Pharaoh king of Egypt,
Exodus 1. 8, 9, 10, 11. who consulted with his people how to oppress the
Israelites, as being unable to do it without their consents And Exodus 10.
Pharaohs Counselors and Lords, (after sundry Plagues on the Land) said unto
him, How long shall this man (Moses) be a snare unto us? Let the men go that
they may serve the Lord their God; Know thou not that Egypt is destroyed?
Whereupon Moses and Aaron were brought before Pharaoh, who said unto them, Go
serve the Lord your God. And Esaias 19. 11. to 16. Surely the Princes of Zoan are
fool^ the counsel of the wise Counselors of Pharaoh is become brutish: They
have also seduced Egypt, even they that are the stay of the Tribes thereof.
They then had an overruling power above their kings. So the great King of
Nineveh, Jonah 3. 7, 8, 9. proclaimed and published a general fast thorowout
the City, by the Decree of the King, and of his great men, making no public
Laws, but by their advice and assents. In like manner we read in the 2 Samuel 5.
3, 4, 5. That the Princes of Hanun King of the Ammonites co^selled and
overruled him (out of overmuch suspicion) to abuse David's messengers sent to
him in love. And in the 1 Kings 22. 47. There was then no King in Edom, a
Deputy was King; the kingdom appointing a Deputy then to rule them in stead of
a king, and giving him royal authority: And in the 2 Kings 8. 22. 2 Chronicles. 21.
8. In the days of Ioram, Edom revolted from under the hand of Judah (which had
conquered it) and MADE A KING OVER THEMSELVES: and though Ioram smote the
Edomites, who encompassed him, yet they revolted from under the hand of Judah
till this day: The electing and constituting of a king being in their own
power. See Genesis 23. 3. to 20. and c. 34. 20. to 25. to like purpose.

These being all Pagan Kings and States, I come to the Israelites themselves;
wherein for my more orderly proceeding, and refutation of the many gross
erroneous Assertions of * Court Doctors and Royallists touching the estate and
Sovereignty of their Kings, whom they would make the world believe to be
absolute Monarchs, subject to no Laws, to derive all their royal authority
from God alone, and no ways from the people; to be merely hereditary and
elective, to be above all their people, irresistible in their Tyrannical
wicked proceedings, and no ways subject to their Realms and Congregations
overruling control, much less to their defensive oppositition or deprivation;
I shall digest the whole History of their Kings and Kingdoms Jurisdictions and
power into these ensuing propositions, which I shall clearly make good out of
Scripture, as I propound them in their order.

First, That the original Creation and Institution of the Israelites Kings and
Kingdoms proceeded only from the power and authority of the people, and that
solely by Divine permission, rather then institution: This is most apparent by
Deuter. 11. 14, 15. When thou art come unto the land which the Lord thy God
gives thee, and shall possess it and dwell therein, and shall say, I WILL SET
A KING OVER ME, like as ALL THE NATIONS THAT ARE ABOUT ME; THOU SHALL in any
wise SET HIM KING OVER THEE, whom the Lord thy God shall choose; one from among
thy brethren SHALL THOU SET OVER THEE, THOU MAY NOT SET A STRANGER OVER THEE,
which is not thy Brother. Where God himself by way of See Cunaeus de Repub.
Heb. l 1. c. 14.
prophecy of what afterward should come to pass, expressly declares, first,
that the primary motion of changing the government of the Jews from Judges and
an Aristocracy into a Kingdom, should proceed from the peoples inclination, as
the words, and shall say, I will set a King over me, etc. import. Secondly,
that the authority to change the Government into a Regality, to creat and make
a King, resided in, and the authority of the King proceeded merely from the
people, as the words, I will set a King over me, Thou shall set him over thee;
(four times recited in two Verses;) manifest beyond dispute. Thirdly, that all
Nations about them who had Kings, had the like power to create and make their
kings, as the words, Like as all the Nations that are about me, witness. All
which is evi^ently confirmed by Josephus, Antiqu. Iudaeorum, l. 4. c. 8. by
Carolus Sigonius de Repub. Hebraeorum, l. 7. c. 3. Bertram, Cunaeus, Ius.
Regium Heb.
Schikardus, and See Steph. Iunius Brutus, Vindic. Contra Tyranno^, q. 3. p.
83. ^0. 92. De Iure Magistr. in Subditos. p. 272. 273.
diverse Commentators on this Text: The History of the change of their State
into a Kingdom, and of their Judges into kings, added to this Prophecy and
precept, will leave no place for any scruple. We read in the 1 Samuel 8. that the
people growing weary of Samuels government who judged them, by reason of the
ill government of his sons, who took Bribes, and perverted judgment;
thereupon ALL THE ELDERS OF ISRAEL GATHERED THEMSELVES TOGETHER, and came to
Samuel unto Ramah, and said unto him, Behold, thou art old, and thy sons walk
not in thy ways, now MAKE US A KING TO IVDGE US LIKE ALL THE NATIONS: But the
thing displeased Samuel, when they said, Give us a King to judge us; and Samuel
prayed unto the Lord; And the Lord said unto Samuel, HEARKEN UNTO THE VOICE OF
THE PEOPLE IN ALL THAT THEY SAY UNTO THEE; for they have not rejected thee, but
they have rejected me that I should not reign over them; According to all the
works that they have done since the day that I brought them out of Egypt, even
unto this day; wherewith they have forsaken me, and served other gods, so do
they also unto thee: Now therefore hearken to their voice; howbeit, yet protest
solemnly unto them, and show them the manner of the King that shall reign over
them. And Samuel told all the words of the Lord unto the people that asked of
him a King; and he said, This will be (not ought to be) the manner of the King
that shall reign over you, he will take your sons, and appoint them for
himself, etc. and ye shall be his servants: and ye shall cry out in that day
because of YOUR KING WHICH YE SHALL HAVE CHOSEN YOU, and the Lord will not hear
you in that day. Nevertheless, the people refused to obey the voice of Samuel,
and they said, Nay, BUT WE WILL HAVE A KING OVER US, that we also may be like
all the Nations, and that our King may judge us, and go out before us, and
fight our battles. And Samuel heard all the words of the people, and rehearsed
them in the ears of the Lord: And the Lord said unto Samuel, Hearken unto their
voice, and make them a King. After which, when God had appointed Saul to be
their King, 1 Samuel 12. 12, 13, to 20.
Samuel called the people together unto the Lord in Mizpeh, and recapitulating
the great deliverances God had done for them, added, And ye have this day
rejected your God, who himself saved you out of all your adversities and
tribulations, and ye have said unto him, Nay, BUT SET A KING OVER US, etc. And
Samuel said unto all the people, See ye him whom the Lord has chosen, that
there is none like him among all the people? And all the people shouted and
said, God save the King. After which he 1 Samuel 12. 12, 13. to 20.
expostulated again with them thus, And when ye saw that Nahash King of the
Children of Ammon came against you, ye said unto me, Nay, BUT A KING SHALL
REIGN OVER US, when the Lord was your King; Now therefore behold the KING WHOM
YE HAVE CHOSEN, AND WHOM YE HAVE DESIRED, etc. that ye may perceive and see
that your WICKEDNESS is great which ye have done in the sight of the Lord, IN
ASKING YOU A KING. And all the people said unto Samuel, Pray for thy servants
unto the Lord thy God that we die not, for we have added unto all our sins this
evil, TO ASK A KING. Which compared, with Hos. 13. 10, 11. I will be thy King,
where is any other that may save thee in all thy Cities? and thy Judges of whom
thou said, GIVE ME A KING AND PRINCES? I gave thee a King in mine anger, and
took him away in my wrath: with Acts 13. 21. And afterward THEY DESIRED A
KING, and God gave them Saul the son of Cis, by the space of forty years. All
these concurring sacred Texts will infallibly demonstrate, that this change of
the Judges into Kings, and the original creation of their Kings and kingdoms
proceeded only from the importunity and authority of the people, who would not
be gainsaid herein, not from Gods institution, or Samuels approbation, who
censured and disavowed this their motion, though they at last condescended to
it; all which is elegantly related, confirmed by Josephus, Antiqu. Iudaeorum,
l. 6. c. 4, 5, 6, 7. By all this it is apparent, that the congregation and
people of the Jews had the Sovereign power in themselves, as well as other
Nations, because the authority to alter the whole frame of their former
Aristocraticall Government into a Monarchy, resided in them, though they were
taxed forchanging it in Samuels days, who had so justly, so uprightly judged
them.

Secondly, it is apparent, that the Judges and kings of the Israelites were not
properly hereditary, but often elective by the people: and though God did
sometimes immediately nominate the persons of those that should reign over
them, as is apparent by Saul, David, Jeroboam, John, others; yet the people did
constantly confirm, make them kings, and gave them their royal authority, none
being made kings by Divine appointment, but such as they willingly accepted,
approved, confirmed for their kings; Gods previous designation being but a
preparative to their voluntary free (not restrained or limited) election. The
first king among the Israelites (though but over part of them) was Abimelech
the son of Ierubbaal, who was made king by the peoples election, Judges, 9. 1,
to 7. who having persuaded those of Sechem to elect him for their king,
thereupon ALL THE MEN of Sechem gathered together, and ALL THE HOUSE of Millo
went and MADE ABIMELECH KING: whence Iotham thus upbraided them and him, Verse
14. to 19: Then said all the trees unto the Bramble, come thou and reign over
us: And the Bramble said unto the trees, If in truth ye anoint me king over
you, then come and put your trust in my shadow, etc. Now therefore if ye have
done truly and sincerely in that YE HAVE MADE Abimelech KING, etc And that ye
have risen up against my fathers house this day, and have MADE Abimelech king,
etc. We read Judge. 8. 21, 23. that after Gideon had slain Zebah and Zalmunna,
with the Midianites, The men of Israel said unto Gideon, Rule thou over us,
both thou and thy sons, and thy sons son also, for thou have delivered us from
the hand of Midiar. And Gideon said unto them, I will not rule over you,
neither shall my son rule over you, the Lord shall rule over you. Where we
clearly see, the power and right to elect a Ruler, and to limit the government
to him and his Issue, for three Generations only, to reside in the peoples free
election. So Judges 10. 17, 18. and Chap. 11. 1. to 12. When the Children of
Ammon were gathered together and encamped against Gilead, the people and
Princes of Gilead said one to another, What man is he that will begin to fight
against the children of Ammon, he shall be Head over all the Inhabitants of
Gilead. And the Elders of Gilead went to fetch Iephthah out of the Land of Tob,
and said unto him, Come and be our Captain that we may fight with the Children
of Ammon, and be our Head over all the inhabitants of Gilead: Upon promise of
which dignity, he went with them to Gilead; and THE PEOPLE MADE HIM HEAD AND
CAPTAIN OVER THEM. That the election and making of their Kings belonged of
right to all the people, is past dispute, being so resolved by God himself,
Deuter. 17. 14, 15. When thou art come into the land, etc. and shall say, I
WILL SET A KING OVER ME, like as all the Nations that are about me, THOU shall
in any wise SET HIM KING OVER THEE whom the Lord thy God shall choose; one from
among thy Brethren shall THOU SET OVER THEE, THOU MAY NOT SET A STRANGER OVER
THEE: Where the power of creating and electing the King, is left wholly to the
peoples free choice, with these general restrictions, that he should be one of
their brethren, not a stranger, and particularly qualified as is there
expressed. And though God did sometime design and nominate their Kings, yet he
left the power of approbation and ratification of them free to the people, as
is apparent by 1 Sa. 8. 18. And ye shall cry in that day, because of the King
WHICH YE SHALL HAVE CHOSEN you. Hence Saul their first King, though nominated
and designed by God and Samuel, was yet approved, confirmed and made King by
the People. Who shouted and said, God save the King, when Samuel presented him
to them; 1 Samuel 10. 24. 1 Sa^. 11, 12, 13, 14.
But the children of Belial despising and bringing him no presents, Verse 27.
after Saul had conquered the Ammonites, who besieged Iabesh Gilead; The people
said unto Samuel, who is he that said, Shall Saul Reign over us? bring the men
that we may put them to death. Then Saul said, There shall not a man be put to
death this day; for this day the Lord has wrought salvation in Israel. Then
said Samuel to the people, Come let us go to Gilgal, and renew the Kingdom
there. And ALL THE PEOPLE went to Gilgal, and there THEY MADE SAVL KING before
the Lord in Gilgal: Where Samuel uses this speech to the people, concerning
Saul, 1 Samuel 12. (...)
Now therefore behold THE KING WHOM YE HAVE CHOSEN, and whom Ye have desired,
the Lord has set a King over you: (So that the choice and election of him, was
as well theirs as Gods:) And Verse 25. he calls him Your King, because chosen
and made by, as well as for the people.

Saul being slain by his own hands, the Crown descended not to his son by
way of descent, but David succeeded him by Gods designation, and the Peoples
election too; by whose authority he was made and crowned king, being formerly 1 Samuel 16. 1. to 14.
anointed by Samuel to succeed Saul. This is irre^ragable by the 2 Samuel 2. 4.
Where David going up to Hebron by Gods direction, the men of Judah came, and
there They Anointed David King over the House of Judah. After which 2 Samuel.
5. 1.

105. ALL THE TRIBES OF ISRAEL came to David to Hebron, and spoke saying,
Behold we are thy bone and thy flesh. Also in time past, when Saul was King
over us, thou wast he that leddest out and broughtest in Israel; And the Lord
said to thee: Thou shall feed my people Israel, and thou shall be a Captain
over Israel. So ALL THE ELDERS of Israel came to the King at Hebron, and King
David made a League (or Covenant) with them before the Lord; and THEY ANOINTED
DAVID KING OVER ISRAEL. And in the 1 Chronicles. 12. 23. to 40. We have a
particular recital of the numbers of the bands that were ready armed to the
War, and came to David to Hebron to TVRN the Kingdom of Saul TO HIM; and
came with a perfect heart to Hebron TO MAKE DAVID KING OVER ALL ISRAEL; and ALL
THE REST also of Israel were OF ONE HEART TO MAKE DAVID KING: Whose title to
the Crown being afterward shaken by his son Absalom, who cunningly usurped
it, (and that by the election of the people too; as is evident by Hushai his
speech unto him, 2 Samuel 16. 18. Nay, but whom the Lord, and THIS PEOPLE, AND
ALL THE MEN OF ISRAEL CHOOSE, his will I be, and with him I will abide,
compared with 2. Sam. 29. 9, 10. And all THE PEOPLE were at strife through all
the Tribes of Israel, saying; Absalom whom WE ANOINTED OVER US is dead, etc. A
clear evidence the kingdom was then held elective, and that the people had
the Sovereign power of electing and creating their kings;) 2 Samuel 19. 9. to 43.
all the people throughout all the Tribes of Israel and the men of Judah, to
re-establish David in his Throne, being fled out of the Land, sent this Message
to him; Return thou and all thy servants: Whereupon the King returned, and all
the Tribes went as far as Jordan to meet and bring him back again to Gilgal.

David growing old, his son 1 King. 1. 5. to 13.
Adonijah, against his consent, accompanied with some great Officers and
Courtiers of his party, usurped the Crown, and was by them saluted King; but
David hearing of it, by Gods election and choice, commanded Solomon (though not
his eldest son) to be anointed and proclaimed King, and to sit upon his
Throne in his life time: As soon as he was anointed and the Trumpet blew; ALL
THE PEOPLE said, 1 Chronicles. 23. 1. c. 28. 5, 6, 7, 8. c. 29. 1, 2.
God save king Solomon. And ALL THE PEOPLE came up after him, and piped with
fluits, and rejoiced with great joy, so that the earth rent with the sound of
them; So that all Adonijah his company forthwith deserted him, and he and Ioab
were glad to flee to the horns of the Altar for shelter. After which, David
assembled all the Princes of Israel, the Princes of the Tribes, the Captains
of Companies, thousands and hundreds, the Stewards, Officers, and mighty men,
with all the valiant men of his kingdom, to Jerusalem; then he declared to all
the Congregation, 1 Chronicles. c. 28. and 29.
that God had chosen Solomon to sit upon the Throne of the kingdom of the Lord
over Israel, and to build him an house, etc. exhorting them to contribute
liberally toward this building, which they did; and when they had blessed the
Lord, and offered Sacrifices to him ALL THE CONGREGATION MADE Solomon the son
of David KING THE SECOND TIME, AND ANOINTED HIM unto the Lord, 1 Chronicles. 29. 20.
to 26.
TO BE THE CHIEF GOVERNOR (his first Coronation being but private without the
presence and consent of the whole Realm, but of those only then present in
Jerusalem:) Then Solomon sat on the Throne of the Lord, as king, instead of
David his Father, and ALL ISRAEL OBEYED HIM; and all the Princes, and mighty
men, and likewise all the sons of David submitted themselves to him as th^^r
king: after he was thus generally elected and crowned king the 2. time by all
the Congregation. And after David's death, he was 2 Chronicles. 2. 1. 1 King. 2. 46.
established and strengthened in his kingdom by the peoples voluntary
admission and free submission to him. From which History of Solomon it is
clear. 1. That though David caused Solomon to be first crowned King privately
to prevent Adonijah his usurpation; yet he thought that title not sufficient
without a second Election, admission, and Coronation of him by all the People
and general Congregation. 2. That till this his second inauguration by all the
people, he was not generally acknowledged, nor obeyed by all as their lawful
king. 3. That Gods and David's designation of Solomon to the Crown, did not take
away the peoples liberty, right and power, freely to nominate, make, and choose
their kings; their preuious designation being thus accompanied with this tacit
condition, that the people likewise should freely elect, constitute, and crown
him for their king, else what need of this their subsequent concurrent
acceptance and second coronation of him for their king, by all the
congregation, if their consents and suffrages were not necessary? or how could
he have reigned over them as their lawful king, had not the people generally
chosen, accepted, admitted him for their Sovereign?

Solomon deceasing, 1 King. 12. 2 Chronicles. c. 10. v. 11.
Rehoboam his eldest son went up to Sechem: (what to do? not to claim the
crown by descent from his Father, but by election from the people, as the
following History manifests;) FOR ALL ISRAEL were come to Sechem TO MAKE HIM
KING: if to make him king, then he was no king before they had made him, as
many Divines most sottishly aver against the very letter of the Text Antiq.
Iud. l. 8. c. 3.
and Josephus; (who writes, That it pleased the Assembly of the Israelites
there held, that HE SHOULD RECEIVE THE KINGDOM BY THE PEOPLES CONSENT.) And
Jeroboam and ALL THE CONGREGATION OF ISRAEL came and spoke unto Rehoboam,
saying, Thy Father made our yoke grievous: now therefore make thou the
grievous service of thy Father, and his heavy yoke which he put upon us
lighter, AND WE WILL SERVE THEE: (because naturally subjects delight in mild
Kings, who will somewhat descend from their altitudes, says Antiq. Iud. l. 8.
c. 3.
Josephus.) This was the condition they propounded to him before they would
accept him for their king, and upon this condition only would they admit him to
reign over them; therefore doubtless the disposal of the Crown and
limitation of the kings royal power resided in all the congregation, who had
authority to prescribe their kings what equal and just conditions they
pleased. And he said unto them, depart yet for three days, then come again to
me; and the people departed. Hereupon Rehoboam consulted with the old men that
stood before Solomon his Father, while he lived, and said, how do you advise
that I may answer this people? And they spoke unto him, saying; If thou will be
A SERVANT unto this people this day, and wilt SERVE THEM and answer them, and
speak good words to them THEN THEY WILL BE THY SERVANTS FOR EVER; But he
forsook the Counsel of the old men, which they had given him, and consulted
with the young men that were grown up with him, and which stood before him, and
following their ill advise: when Jeroboam and all the People came to Rehoboam
the third day, as he had appointed; the King answered the people roughly; and
forsaking the old men's Counsel, he spoke unto them after the Counsel of the
young men, saying; My Father made your yoke heavy, and I will add to your
yoke; my Father chastised you with whips, but I will chastise you with
scorpions. Wherefore the King HEARKENED NOT UNTO THE PEOPLE, for the cause was
from the Lord, etc. SO WHEN ALL ISRAEL SAW THAT THE KING HEARKENED NOT UNTO
THEME the People answered the King (through indignation with one voice, writes
Josephus, saying; What portion have we in David; NEITHER HAVE WE INHERITANC)
IN THE SON OF IESSE, (that is, we have not intailed our Subjection nor the
inheritance of this our Realm to David and his seed for ever, but are still
free to elect what King we please;) to thy Tents O Israel. Now see to thine
House, David: so Israel departed to their Tent. But as for the children of
Israel which dwelt in the Cities of Judah. Rehoboam reigned over them: (the
Tribes of Judah and Benjamin CHOOSING HIM THEIR KING BY THEIR COMMON SVFFRAGES,
writes Josephus.) Then King Rehoboam sent Adoram who was over the Tribute (to
excuse says Josephus, the petulancy of his young tongue, and to appease the
minds of the enraged vulgar:) And all Israel stoned him with stones that he
dyed: therefore King Rehoboam (imagining truly, that himself was stoned in his
servant, and fearing lest the once conceived hatred should be poured out on his
own head, tremblingly getting up into his chariot, as hastily as he could) made
speed to flee to Jerusalem. 2 King. 20. 1. to 7.
So Israel fell away from the house of David unto this day. And it came to
pass when ALL ISRAEL heard that Jeroboam was come again, that they sent and
called him unto the Congregation, AND MADE HIM KING OVER ALL ISRAEL, etc. (it
being so preordained by God, 1 King. 12. 26. to 41.) Lo here the whole
Congregation, or Parliament of Israel, if I may so style it, had full and free
power to reject Rehoboam from the Crown, for refusing to subscribe to their
conditions; to elect Jeroboam for their lawful King, and erect a new Kingdom
of their own, divided ever after from that of Judah: which action I shall
prove anon to be lawful, warranted by Gods own divine authority, and no
sin, nor rebellion at all in the People; who never admitted Rehoboam for, or
submitted to him as their lawful Sovereign. So Iehu having slain King Ioram,
Ahabs eldest son, sent a Letter to Samaria where his other 70. sons were
brought up, to the Rulers and Elders there, wishing them to look out THE BEST
AND MEETEST of their Masters sons, and set him on his Fathers throne, and
fight for their Masters house: But they being exceedingly afraid, said; two
Kings could not stand before him, how then shall w^ stand? and sent word to
Iehu, We are thy servants, and will do all that thou shall bid us; WE WILL NOT
MAKE ANY KING. A clear evidence that the kingdom was then elective, and that
they had power to choose the meetest man (not eldest brother) for their king.

After this, 1 King. 16. 15, 16, 17, to 24.
Zimri slaying Baasha king of usrael, and usurping the Crown, the people then
encamped about Gibbethon hearing of it, that Zimri had conspired and also slain
the King; Wherefore ALL ISRAEL MADE OMRI Captain of the Host king over Israel
that day in the Camp, who burnt Zimri in his Palace: then were the People
divided into two parts: half of the People followed Tibni to make him king,
and half followed Omri: But the people that followed Omri prevailed against
the people that followed Tibni; so Tibni dyed, and Omri Reigned, being made
king only by the peoples free election, without any divine designation. So 2
King. 11. 2 Chronicles. 22. 10. and 23. Iese^^us Antiq Iud. l. 9. c. 7.
Ioash the son of Ahaziah, when Athaliah had usurped the Crown and kingdom
of Judah near seven years space, was MADE KING, anointed and crowned by
Iehoiadah the High Priest, the Captains of hundreds, and ALL THE PEOPLE OF THE
LAND, (who rejoiced at it) when he was but 7. years old, and Athaliah was
apprehended, deposed, and murdered by them as an Vsurpresse.

2 Chronicles. 25 27. 28. c. 2. 61. 2 King. 14. 19. 20, 21.
So Amaziah King of Judah being slain by a Conspiracy at Lachish ALL THE
PEOPLE OF IVDAH took Vzziah who was but 16. years old, and MADE HIM KING
instead of his Father. 2 King. 15. ^ 2 Chronicles. 27. 21:
Vzziah king of Judah being smitten with Leprosy unto the day of his death,
dwelt in a several house, Iotham his son (in the mean time by common consent)
was over this house, judging the people of the Land: 2 King. 21. 23. 2 Chro.
35. 25.
Ammon king of Judah being slain by his own servants, the people of the Land
slew all them that had conspired against Ammon: And THE PEOPLE OF THE LAND MADE
Josiah his son King in his stead. And after 2 Chronicles. 36. 1. 2 king. 23. 30.
Josiah his death, the PEOPLE OF THE LAND took Iehoabaz the son of Josiah and
MADE HIM KING in his Fathers stead in Jerusalem. From all which sacred Texts
and Presidents; as likewise from Hosea 8. 4. THEY HAVE SET UP KINGS, But not by
me; THEY HAVE MADE PRINCES, and I knew it not; it is most apparent, that the
kings of Israel and Judah, were usually elected by, and derived their Royal
authority from the people, who made them kings, and received not their
kingdoms and Crowns immediately from God himself by a divine right: which may
be further conmed by the 1. Macab. 9. 28. 29. 30. After the death of Judas
Maccabeus; all Judas his friends came unto Jonathan his brother, and said unto
him, since thy brother Judas dyed, we have none like to him to go forth
against our enemies: Now therefore WE HAVE CHOSEN THEE this day TO BE OUR
PRINCE and Captain in his stead, that thou may fight our battles. Upon this
Jonathan took the Government on him at that time. After Ionathans death, the
People said unto Simon his brother with a loud voice, 1 Mac. 13. 8. 9. Thou
shall be our Leader instead of Judas, and Jonathan thy brother; fight thou our
battles, and whatsoever thou command us, we will do. And the Jews and
Priests were well pleased that Simon should be their Governor, Captain, and
High Priest; and Simon accepted thereof, 1 Mac. 14. 41. to 49 Hence Carolus
Sigonius de Repub. Hebraeorum, l. 7. c. 3. writes, That the kings of the
Israelites were created by the Suffrages of the People; that the Kingdom of
Israel was translated to diverse Families for their idolatry; that although the
kingdom of Judah were in some sort hereditary, yet it was confirmed by the
Suffrages of the People (which he proves by the example of Rehoboam and others)
and that they obtained the Royal dignity not only by inheritance, but
likewise by the Suffrages of the People, as every one may clearly know, who
shall but consider the Histories of their kings; Which plainly refutes the
wild, impudent, false assertion of the Author of An Appeal to thy Conscience,
newly published, p. 13. where thus he writes: Observable it is, that thorowout
the whole Scriptures we read not of Any King (I doubt he never read the
Scriptures, else he could not be so grossly mistaken) THAT WAS CHOSEN BY THE
VOICE OF THE PEOPLE: Nor of an Aristocracy, that is, where the Nobles govern,
nor of a Democracy, that is where the people govern. And therefore let them
consider how they can answer it at the last day, who shall endeavor to change
an hereditary kingdom into an elective, or any other form of Government
whatsoever: that the people do properly and absolutely make a king is false,
etc. But had this illiterate ignoramus seriously perused the precedent or
subsequent Texts here cited, with the best Commentators on them, or read over
advisedly, Josh. 22. Judges 17. 6. c. 18. 1. c. 19. 1. c. 21. throughout; with
the Books of Ezra, Nehemiah, Judges, Esther, Maccabees, the four Evangelists
touching Christ's arraignment and death, Acts 4. 5. 22. 23. 24. and 25 chapters
or consulted with Josephus, Philo, Paul Eber, Godwin, Cunaeus, Sigonius,
Bertra^, or any others who have written of the Jewish Antiquities of Republike,
he could not have had the impudency to have published such gross untruths, and
should have found not only diverse kings in Scripture created by the voice of
the people, but an hereditary kingdom often changed into an elective, yea into an
Aristocraticall and no Royal government; and an Aristocracie and Democracy to,
even among the Jews themselves, whose government before their kings: was merely
Aristocraticall, as Josephus Antiqu. Jud. l. 4. c. 8. Carolus Sigonius de
Repub. Hebr. l. 1. c. 5. Cunaeus, Schickardus, Bertram, Paul Eber, and all Dee
Iure Magistratus in subditos: and Iunius Brutus Vindicia contr. tyrannos qu. 1.
2. 3. passim.
others that I have seen, except this Animal irrationale risibile, punctually
determine, they having no kings of their own before Saul, nor any after
Zedekiah. Therefore I shall spend no more waste paper to refute this palpable
error, so confidently asserted by parisiticall Court Doctors, who make no
conscience of writing any, though the grossest untruths, which may advance the
absolute Sovereign Arbitrary tyrannical government of kings, to oppress and
inslave the people.

Thirdly, 3.
that the Kings of Judah and Israel were See (...) Brutus Vindic. Contr. Tyran.
qu. 3. 4. p. 46. to 66. 194, 165, 166. where this is largely manifested; and de
Iure Magistratus in S^bditos qu. 6. p. 272. 273, 274.
no absolute Sovereign Princes, but took their Crown with and upon such Divine
conditions, for breach whereof they and their posterities were often times by
Gods command, just judgment, and speeiall approbation deposed, disinherited,
destroyed, and the Crown translated to other families.

This is evident by direct Scriptures, Deuter. ^7. 14. to the end. Thou shall
in any wise set him King over thee whom the Lord thy God shall choose; one from
among thy Brethren shall thou set King over thee; thou may not set a stranger
over thee, which is not thy Brother. Here is an express limitation and
condition in respect of the person of the King; the conditions in regard of his
royal administration follow, which are partly Negative, partly positive, But
he shall not multiply Horses to himself, nor cause the the people to return to
Egypt, etc. Neither shall he multiply wives to himself, that his heart turn not
away; neither shall he greatly multiply to himself silver and gold. And it
shall be when he fitteth on the throne of his Kingdom, that he shall write him
a Copy of this Law in a Book, out of that which is before the Priests the
Levites; and it shall be with him, and he shall read therein all the days of
his life, that he may learn to fear the Lord his God, to keep all the words of
this Law, and these Statutes to do them; That his heart be not lifted up above
his brethren, and that he turn not aside from the Commandment to the right hand
or to the left, to the end that he may prolong his days in his Kingdom, he and
his children in the midst of Israel. Here all the kings of the Israelites when
their kingdoms should be erected, are strictly bound by God himself to negative
and positive conditions, upon performance whereof, they and their children
should prolong their days in the kingdom, and perpetuate their thrones in the
midst of Israel, and upon breach whereof they and their posterity should lose
both their lives and kingdom to; as the last clause insinuates, and the
subsequent Texts in direct terms aver. But what if the king should violate
these conditions, might the people lawfully resist him? Antiqu. (...) 8.
Josephus in his paraphrase on this very text, which I shall cite at large,
resolves they might; Truly the government of the best men (or Aristocraticall
government) is best; and to live in a Republike thus administered, nor is there
cause why you should desire any other kind of government, but it is best, that
contenting yur selves with this, you continue within the power of your Laws and
of your selves: But if the desire of a king shall possess you, let there be
none unless he be of your stock, and blood, and one to whom justice, with
other virtues, are cordial: He whosoever he shall be, let him attribute more
to the laws and unto God, than to his own wisdom, AND LET HIM DO NOTHING
WITHOUT THE HIGH PRIESTS AND SENATES ADVICE; neither may he nourish many wives,
nor possess very much money, and many Horses, with the plenty of which things
he may easily become a contemner of the laws; and if he shall addict himself to
these things more then is meet, OBSTANDVM EST, ne potentior fiat quam rebus
vestris expedit, HE IS TO BE RESISTED, lest he become more potent then is
expedient for your affairs: So he. Yea Explanat. Artic. 42. Tom. 1. f. 84.
Zuinglius with True Difference between Christian Subjection, etc. part. 3. p.
513, 514.
B. Bilson expressly resolve, that the people were bound to resist, question and
depose their kings for their idolatry, and breach of these conditions; and that
God himself justly punished them for Manasses sins and wickedness, because
they resisted and punished him not for them, as they were obliged to do; as I
have Part. 3 p. 99 100.
elsewhere manifested, to which I shall refer you.

This condition most clearly appears in other Texts; as in the 1 Samuel 12, 13,
14, 15, 25. Where when Saul the first king of the Israelites was crowned at
their earnest importunity, against Gods and Samuels approbation, Samuel used
these speeches to them, Now therefore behold the King whom ye have chosen, and
whom ye have desired, etc. If ye will fear the Lord and serve him, and obey his
voice, and not rebel against the commandment of the Lord, then shall both ye
and also the King that reigns over you continue following the Lord your God.
But if ye will not obey the voice of the Lord, but will rebel against the
voice of the Lord, then shall the hand of the Lord be against you, as it was
against your fathers, etc. But IF ye shall do wickedly, ye shall be consumed
both ye and your King. After this Saul being distressed by the Philistines,
weary of staying for Samuel, and presuming to offer sacrifice without him,
hereupon 1 Samuel 1^. 13, 14.
Samuel said to Saul, Thou have done foolishly, for thou have not kept the
Commandment of the Lord thy God, which he commanded thee, for now would the
Lord have established thy kingdom upon Israel for ever; but NOW THY KINGDOM
SHALL NOT CONTINVE, for the Lord has chosen him a man after his own heart, and
the Lord has commanded him to be captain over his people, BECAUSE THOU HAVE
NOT KEPT THAT WHICH THE LORD COMMANDED THEE, Lo here the breach of Gods
conditions by king Saul, forfeited his Kingdom, and disinherited his posterity
of it. So when he performed not Gods command, in utterly destroying Amalek,
sparing Agag and the best of the things; Samuel sharply reprehending him for
this offense, said unto him, 1 Samuel 15. 22, 23, 26, 28, 29, 30.
Behold, to obey is better then sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of Rams;
for Rebellion (namely, king Saul's rebellion against Gods command, not subjects
rebellion against their Prince, not so much as once dreamed off in this Text as
Court Doctors grossly mistake, and so miserably pervert this Scripture contrary
to the sense and meaning, translating it from kings to subjects, from king
rebellion against God, to subjects rebellion against men) is as the sin of
Witchcraft, and stubbornness is as iniquity and Idolatry. BECAUSE thou have
rejected the Word of the Lord, he has also REJECTED THEE FROM BEING KING: I
will not return with thee, for thou have rejected the word of the Lord, and the
Lord HAS REJECTED THEE FROM BEING KING over Israel; the Lord HAS RENT THE
KINGDOM of Israel FROM THEE this day, and has given it to a neighbor of
thine, that is better then thou. Also the strength of Israel will not lie nor
repent, for he is not as men, that he should repent; (to wit, of renting the
kingdom from him) though he repented that he had made Saul king over Israel,
because he turned back from following him, and performed not his Commandments,
1 Samuel 15. 11. 35. After which 1 Samuel 16* to 14.
God said to Samuel, How long will thou mourn for Saul, seeing I have rejected
him from Reigning over Israel? Fill thine horn with Oil, and I will send thee
to Iesse the Bethlemite, for I have provided me a king among his sons;
whereupon he went and anointed David, who succeeded him in the kingdom, Saul's
posterity being utterly disinherited for his recited sins.

After this when God settled the kingdom upon David and his seed after him, it
was upon condition of obedience, and threatening of corrections even by men, if
they transgressed: 2 Samuel 7. 11. to 17. Ps 89. 32. to 47. 1 King. 8. 20.
The Lord tells thee, that he will make thee an house; and when thy days be
fulfilled, and thou shall sleep with thy fathers, then I will set up thy seed
after thee, which shall proceed out of thy bowels, and I will establish the
Throne of his kingdom for ever; I will be his father, and he shall be my son;
If he commit iniquity, I will chastife him with the Rod of men, and with the
Stripes of the Children of Men: (that is, I will not chasten him immediately by
my self, but by men my instruments, even by Jeroboam, and his own subjects the
ten Tribes, or other enemies whom I will raise up against him and his
posterity, 1 Kings 11. 9, to 41.) But my mercy shall not depart away from him,
as I took it from Saul, whom I put away before thee: And thine house and thy
kingdom shall be established for ever before thee: yet still upon condition of
obedience, as is most apparent by David's speech to king Solomon, 1 Chronicles. 28.
5, 6, 7, 8, 9. And the Lord has chosen Solomon my son, to set him upon the
throne of the kingdom of the Lord, over all Israel; And he said to me, etc.
Moreover, I will establish his kingdom for ever, If he continue constant to do
my Commandments, and my ^udgements, as at this day. Now therefore in the sight
of all Israel, the Congregation of the Lord, and in the audience of our God,
keep, and seek for all the Commandmens of the Lord your God, that ye may
possosse the good land, and leave it for an inheritance for your Children after
you for ever. And thou Solomon my son, know thou the Lord God of thy father,
and serve him with a perfect heart, and with a willing mind; for the Lord
searches all hearts, and understands all the imaginations of the thoughts,
If thou seek him, he will be found of thee, but if thou forsake him, he will
cast thee off for ever; notwithstanding the former Covenant and establishment,
which was but conditional, not absolute, as the renting of the ten Tribes from
his son, and the determining of the very 2 Chro. c. 10. and 11. and 36. (...)
de Repub. Hebr. l. 1. c. 9. 15. Joseph. Antiq. Iud l. 10 and 11. Paul Eber.
Lestate de la. Religion and Repub du peopl. Iudaeique.
kingdom of Judah it self in Zedekiah, (after which it never returned any more
to David's Line) infallibly evidence. Hence we read in the 1 Kings 11. that
Solomon's idolatrous wives, turning away his heart from following the Lord, and
drawing him to commit idolatry in his old age; hereupon the Lord grew angry
with Solomon; Wherefore the Lord said unto him; for as much as this is done of
thee, and thou have not kept my Covenant and my Statutes which I have commanded
thee, I will surely rend the Kingdom from thee, and will give it to thy
servant; Notwithstanding in thy days I will not do it, for David thy fathers
sake; but I will rend it out of the hand of thy son: Howbeit I will not rend
away all the kingdom, but will give one Tribe to thy Son, for my servant
David's sake, and for Jerusalems sake which I have chosen. In pursuance whereof
the Prophet Ahijah rending Ieroboams garment into 12 pieces, said to Jeroboam,
Take thee ten pieces, for thus says the Lord the God of Israel, Behold, I will
rend the kingdom out of the hand of Solomon, and will give ten Tribes to thee;
BECAUSE THAT THEY HAVE FORSAKEN ME, and have worshipped the Goddess of the
Zidonians, etc. AND HAVE NOT WALKED IN MY WAYS, to do that which is right in
mine eyes, to keep my Statuts and my judgments, as did David his Father;
howbeit I will not take the whole Kingdom out of his hands; but I will make
him Prince all the days of his life, for David my servants sake whom I chose,
because he kept my Commandments and my Statutes: But I will take the Kingdom
out of his sons hand, and give it unto thee, even ten tribes. And unto his
son will I give one tribe, that David my servant may have a light always
before me in Jerusalem, the City which I have chosen to put my name there. And
I will take thee, and thou shall reign according to all that thy soul
desires, and shall be King over Israel. (But what, without any limitation or
condition at all think you? No such matter:) And it shall be IF THOU WILT
HEARKEN UNTO ALL THAT I COMMAND THEE, and wilt walk in my ways and do that is
right in my sight, to keep my Statutes and my Commandments, as David my
servant did, that I will be with thee, and build thee a sure house, as I built
for David, and will give Israel to thee: And I will for this afflict the seed
of David, but not for ever. Lo here both Kingdoms of Judah and Israel, are
given and entailed on David, Solomon, and Jeroboam only upon condition of good
behavior; which not performed, they shall be rent from either: And was this
only a vain idle condition, as some deem the Covenants and Coronation oaths of
Kings to God and their Kingdoms? Surely no, for we read experimental
verifications of them in King Rehoboam; 1 Kin. 12. 2. Chron. 10 and 11.
Who answering all the people and Jeroboam when they came to Sechem to make him
King, roughly, according to the Counsel of the young men, and threatening to
add to their yoke, instead of making it lighter; and harkening not unto the
people, (FOR THE CAUSE WAS FROM THE LORD, that he might perform his saying,
which he spoke by Abijah the Shilomite unto Jeroboam the son of Nebat;)
thereupon, when all Israel saw, that the King hearkened not unto them, the
people answered the king, saying; What portion have we in David; neither have
we inheritance in the son of ^esse; to your tents O Israel; now see to thine
own house David; so Israel departed to their tents, stoned Adoram who was over
the tribute, whom Rehoboam sent to appease them; Whereupon Rehoboam made speed
to get him into his Chariot to flee to Jerusalem: So all Israel fell away from
the house of David to this day; and calling Jeroboam unto the congregation,
made him King over all Israel: there was none that followed the house of David,
but the tribe of Judah only. Upon this revolt, when Rehoboam was come to
Jerusalem, he assembled all the House of Judah, with the tribe of Benjamin, an
hundred and fourscore thousand chosen men which were Warriers to fight against
the house of Israel, to bring the Kingdom again to Rehoboam the son of
Solomon: But the Word of God came unto Shemaiah the man of God, saying, speak
unto Rehoboam the son of Solomon King of Judah, and unto all the house of
Judah and Benjamin, and to the remnant of the people, saying: Thus says the
Lord; Ye shall not go up, nor fight against your brethren the children of
Israel: return every man to his house, For this thing is done by me. They
hearkened therefore unto the Word of the Lord, and returned to depart, according
to the Word of the Lord. Behold here an experimental for feiture of a
kingdom, and translation of the major part of it to another family, for
Solomon's idolatry, executed by the people through Gods appointment; which being
fore-threatned in the general by God himself to David, and by David to
Solomon in case he transgressed, predicted by way of menace to Solomon and
Jeroboam, by God himself and his Prophets after Solomon's transgression,
executed by the people by Gods special direction and approbation; and thus
owned and justified by God in the peoples behalf after the execution, when
Rehoboam would have made war against them for this revolt, must certainly be
acknowledged, not only a just and warrantable action in respect of God
himself, but likewise of the people, unless we will make God himself the
Author and approver of rebellion. By all which it is apparent, that Solomon and
Rehoboam held their Crowns only upon condition from God, the breach whereof
might and did forfeit them to the people in some measure: And so did Jeroboam
too, hold the kingdom of Israel newly erected by the people after this revolt,
upon the conditions of obedience, already mentioned, which being violated by
his 1 King. c. 12. and 13.
setting up 2 calves in Dan and Bethel, out of an unwarrantable policy to keep
the people from returning to Rehoboam if they went up to Jerusalem to worship;
this thing became sin to the house of Jeroboam, even to cut it off and destroy
it from off the face of the earth, 1 King. 13. 34. For Jeroboam committing
idolatry with the Calves, Ahijah the Prophet sent him this sharp message by his
wife, 1 K. 14. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Go tell Jeroboam, Thus says the Lord God of
Israel, for as much as I exalted thee from among the people, and made thee
prince over my people Israel, and rent the Kingdom away from the house of
David, and gave it thee, yet thou have not been as my servant David, who kept
my Commandments, and who followed me with all his heart, to do that only
which was right in mine eyes, but have done evil above all that were before
thee; for thou have gone and made thee other gods, and molten images, to
provoke me to anger, and have cast me behind thy back; Therefore behold I
will bring evil upon the house of Jeroboam, and will cut off from Jeroboam him
that pisseth against the wall, and him that is shut up and left in Israel, and
will take away the remnant of the house of Jeroboam, as a man takes away dung
till it be gone: Him that dies of Jeroboam in the the City shall the dogs
eat, and him that dies in the field shall the fowls of the air eat, for the
Lord has spoken it. Moreover, the Lord shall raise him up a King ^ver Israel,
who shall cut off the house of Jeroboam in that day. Neither was this an
unexcuted commination, for Jeroboam dying, and 1 King. 15. 25. to 31.
Nadah his son succeding him both in his kingdom and idolatri^s, wherewith he
made Israel to sin, Baasha (by Gods just judgment) conspired against him,
slew him, reigned in his stead; and when he reigned he smote all the house of
Jeroboam, so that be left not to him any that breathed; according to the saying
of the Lord which he spoke by his servant Abijah; because of the sins of
Jeroboam which he sinned, and which he made Israel sin, by his provocation
wherewith he provoked the Lord God of Israel to anger. After which 1 ^ing. 15.
34. c. 16. 1, to 14.
Baasha walking in the ways and sins of Jeroboam notwithstanding this
exemplary judgment of God on him and his posterity, the word of the Lord came
to Iehu son of Hannani, against Baasha, saying, Forasmuch as I exalted thee
out of the dust, and made thee Prince over my people Israel, and thou have
walked in the way of Jeroboam, and have made my people of Israel to sin, to
provoke me to anger with their sins; behold, I will take away the posterity of
Baasha, and the posterity of his house, and will make his house like the house
of Jeroboam the son of Nebat; him that dies of Baasha in the City shall the
dogs eat, and him that dies in the field shall the fowls of the Air eat:
which judgment was actually executed upon his evil son king Elah, whom
Zimri the Captain of his Chariots slew, as he was drinking himself drunk in the
house of Arza Steward of his House, and reigned in his stead; and as soon as he
sat in his Throne, he slew all the house of Baasha, he left him none that
pissed against the wall, neither of his kinsfolks, nor of his friends. Thus did
Zimri destroy all the house of Baasha, according to the word of the Lord, which
he spoke against Baasha, by Iehu the Prophet, for all the sins of Baasha, and
the sins of Elah his son, by which they sinned, and by which they made Israel
to sin, in provoking the Lord God of Israel to anger with their vanities. 1
King. c. 1^. to 22.
King Omri and Ahab his son going on in the sins of Jeroboam, serving Baal
to boot, persecuting Gods prophets, putting Naboth most injuriously to death
for his Vineyard, by Iezabels instigation, and setting himself to work evil in
the sight of the Lord, above all that were before him: Hereupon the Prophet
Elijah tells him, 1 King. 21. 19. to 25.
Thus says the Lord, Behold, I will bring evil upon thee, and will take away
thy posterity, and will cut off from Ahab him that pisseth against the wall,
and him that is shut up and left in Israel, and will make thine house like the
house of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, and like the house of Baasha the son of
Ahijah, for the provocation wherewith thou have provoked me to anger, and made
Israel to sin: And of Iezabel also spoke the Lord, saying, The Dogs shall eat
Iezabel by the wall of Iezreel; him that dies of Ahab in the City the Dogs
shall eat, and him that dies in the field shall the Fowls of the Air eat.
Neither was this a vain threatening, for Ahab being slain at Ramoth Gilead, 1
King. (...). 19. c. 22. 37. 38.
the dogs licked up his blood in the place where they licked the blood of
Naboth; and Iehoram his son succeeding him, both in his Throne and sins, 2 King
c. 9. and 10.
God himself anointed Iehu King over Israel, of purpose to execute this his
vengeance against the house of Ahab and Iezabel; who in execution thereof slew
both King Iehoram, Ahaziah King of Judah, Iezabel, and all Ahabs sons and
posterity, his great men, Nobles, with all the Priests and worshippers of
Baal, till he left none of them remaining: For which severe execution of Gods
Justice, the Lord said unto Iehu, 2 King. 10. 30.
Because thou have done well in executing that which is right in mine eyes, and
have done unto the house of Ahab according to all that was in mine heart, thy
children of the fourth generation, shall sit on the Throne of Israel. Which
action of Iehu being thus specially commanded, commended, and remunerated with
such a temporell reward by God himself, must questionless be lawful, and no
Treason nor Rebellion in Iehu, unless we will charge God to be both the
Author, Approver and Rewarder of those sins. After this 2 Kings c. 12, to 16.
Iehu walking in the sins of Jeroboam, though God deprived him not for it, yet
he stirred up Hazael to spoil and waste his Country, during all his reign,
and the reigns of King Iehoahaz his son and Ioash his Granchilde, who succeeded
him in his idolatries; and Zechariah the last king of Iehu's Race, going in his
Ancestors sins, was slain by Shallum, who reigned in his stead. 2 Kin. ^6.
Shallum, Pekahiah, and Pekah three wicked idolatrous kings of Israel, were by
Gods just judgment, successively slain one of another, and by Hoshea. So that
all the Kings of Israel, who violated Gods Covenants and conditions annexed to
their Crowns, did for the most part lose their lives, Crowns, and underwent
the utter extirpation of their posterities, being totally cut off by the sword,
neither succeding their Parents in their Crowns nor inheritances. And though
the royal Crown of Judah continned in David's Line till the Captivity of
Zedekiah, the last king of his Race; yet when ever they infringed the
conditions which God annexed to their Crowns, and turned Idolaters or
flagitious persons, God presently (by way of revenge) either brought in
foreign enemies upon them, which mastered, conquered them, and sometimes
deposed and carried them away Captives, or made them Tributaries, as the
examples of King 1 King 13. 21. to 31.
Rehoboam, afflicted by Shishak King of Egypt, for his sins and idolatry,
and by Jeroboam all his days, 1 King 15. 3. 7.
of Ahijam, 2 Chronicles. 21
Iehoram, 2 Chronicles. 22.
Alaziah, 2 Chro. 24. 17. to 27.
Ioash, 2 Chro. 25.
Amaziah, 2 Chronicles. 28.
Ahaz, 2 Chronicles. 33. 2 King. 23 and 24. and 25.
Manasseh, 2 Kin. 9. 27, 2^. 2 Chronicles. ^2. c. 24. 24. 26. c. 25 27. 28. 2 Chronicles.
33. 22, to 28.
Iehoahaz, Iehoiakim, Iehoiachin, and Zed^chiah, (whose Histories, troubles,
capti^ities and punishments you may read at large) with others witness: or
else caused their own servants, subjects, enemies to rise up against them, to
slay them, as is evident by (e) King Ahaziah, Ioash; Amaziah, Ammon, and
others. All which are unanswerable evidences and experimental demonstrations,
that the Kingdoms of Judah and Israel were both held of God upon conditions,
and that for the breach of these conditions they might be, and often times were
(by Gods Justice on them) both lawfully deprived of their Crowns, and their
posterities, disinherited, yea, totally cut off for ever; and in conclusion,
both these most eminent Kingdoms, for the sins of kings and people, were
invaded, destroyed, and both Kings with people carried away captives by their
enemies, into foreign Countries, from whence the whole Nation never
afterward returned, nor ever after attained to a king and kingdom of their
own: So fatal is it for Kings, or Kingdoms to break those Covenants, Laws,
Conditions which God himself has prescribed them; and so far are any Kings
from being exempted from all Laws, and left at liberty to do what they please,
that the breach of them proves destructive to them and theirs.

I shall only add to this by way of Corollary, that all the Israelites
Rulers, Kings, People did jointly and severally for Deuteronomy. 29. 1. to ^6. Josh
21. 14, to 29. 2 Chr. 15. 9 to 17. 1 Samuel 12. 13. to 2^. Chr c. 28, and 29, 2
Chr. 23. 3. 16. 17.
themselves for the whole Nation in general, and every of them in particular,
frequently enter into solemn Vows and Covenants with God, to serve the Lord,
to be and conttnue his people; to seek the Lord God fo their fathers with all
their heart, and with all their soul; that whosoever would not seek the Lord
God of Israel, should be put to death, whether small or great, whether Man or
Woman. (not the King or Queen excepted;) and they swear unto the Lord with a
loud voice, and with shouting, and with trumpets, and with Cornets, and all
rejoiced at the Oath, for they had sworn with all their hearts. Witness the 2
Chr. 15. 9. to ^.
Covenant made by Joshua and all the people, To serve the Lord; by Samuel,
Saul, and all the people at Saul's Coronation, and by king Asa and all his
people, To seek the Lord, etc. (who in pursuance thereof removed his mother
Maacha from being Queen, because she had made an idol in a Grove, and cut down
her idol, and stamped it, and burnt it at the brook Kidron, 2 Chronicles. 15. 16. of
King David, 1 Chr. c. 28. and. 29.
Solomon, and all the people at Solomon's Coronation; between 2 Chr. 23. 16 17.
2 King. 11. 4 17. 18.
King Iehoash; Iehoiada and all the Congregation at his inauguration, that they
should be the Lords people: in pursuance whereof all the people went to the
house of Baal, and brake it down, and brake his altars and images in pieces,
and slew Mattan the Priest of Baal before the altars; between 2 Chr. 29. 10 c.
30. 19. to 27. c. 11. 1.
Hezekiah and all his subjects and God; between 2 Chr. 34. 30. 31. 32. 33.
Josiah and all that were present in Jerusalem and Benjamin and Gad, who made a
covenant before the Lord, to walk after the Lord, and to keep his Commandments,
and his Testimonies, and his Statutes, with all their heart, and with all their
soul, to perform the words of the Covenant formerly written in the Book of the
Covenant that was found in the house of the Lord; in execution whereof Josiah
took away all the abominations out of all the Country that pertained to the
children of Israel, and made all that were present in Israel to serve the Lord
their God, and not to depart from following the Lord God of their Fathers all
his days: Together with the like solemn public Covenants made by Ezra 10. 3.
4
Ezra, Nehem. 9. 38. 6. 10. 1, to 39.
Nehemiah and all the People unto God; which Covenant the Princes, Levites,
Priests and all the people sealed, and entered into a Curse and into an Oath to
walk in Gods Law, and to observe and do all the Commandments, ^udgements and
Statutes of the Lord, etc. And that God himself expressly commanded them, Deuteronomy
13. and 17.
That if any Prophet or Dreamer of dreams, or thy Brother or son of thy Mother,
or thy daughter, or the wife of thy bosom, or thy friend which is as thine own
soul, should secretly entice them to commit idolatry, or serve other gods, they
should neither consent nor hearken to, nor pity, nor spare, nor conceal him,
but shall surely kill him; thy hand shall be first upon him to put him to
death, and after the hand of all the people, and thou shall stone him with
stones, that he die, only for this secret inticement to idolatry: And all
Israel shall hear, and fear, and do no more such wickedness as this is. And if
they should hear, that the inhabitants of any City were seduced to serve other
gods, then they must diligently search and inquire after it; and if it be truth
and the thing certain, that such abomination was wrought among them, then they
shall surely smite the inhabitants of that City with the edge of the sword,
destroying it utterly, and all that is therein, and the cattle thereof with
the edge of the sword; and gather all the spoil of it into the midst of the
street thereof, and burn the City with all the spoil thereof every whit for
the Lord their God, and it shall be an heap for ever, and shall not be built
again: In pursuance whereof the Josh. 22. 9. to 34.
ten tribes and a half, assembled to war against the Reubenites, G^dites, and
half Tribe of Manasseh, for their supposed idolatrous Altar; and Judge. 20, and
21.
all the children of Israel assembled together as one man, and made war
against the men of Gibeah and the Benjamites, for not punishing the gross Rape
of the Levites Concubine, destroying the City utterly, and the Tribe of
Benjamin too welnigh. And upon this ground, the City of 2 Chr. 21. 10 11.
Libnah revolted from under the hand of Iehoram the idolatrous King of Judah,
Because he had forsaken the Lord God of his Fathers. And as some learned men
conceive 2 King. 19. 20. 2 Chro. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21.
the people made a Conspiracy against King Amaziah in Jerusalem, and he fled
to Lachish, but they sent after him to Lachish and slew him there; De Iure in
Magistratus in subditos, p 272. to 275.
not privately but openly, as acted by public authority, consent, and
medicated deliberation, not out of any private hatred, but for his impiety,
whereby he violated the chiefest part of his Oath and Covenant; whereupon we
read not of any complaint, or inquisition, or proceedings, or punishment
inflicted on those that slew him after his death, either by the people, or his
children, as there was upon those who slew King Ammon; but being slain, they
brought him back on horses, and he was buried at Jerusalem with his Fathers in
the City of David, out of reverence to his royal dignity and family; And All
the People of Judah took Azariah, and made him King in stead of his father
Amaziah; which plainly shows, that what was formerly done by the greater part
of the States at Jerusalem, was afterward confirmed by common consent, as done
upon a just cause, and executed by command of those who might lawfully do it.
Whence they conclude. That the Orders or States of the People of Israel had
right to choose what King they would themselves, out of the family of David; and
being elected, afterward to correct and punish him as there was cause: that
they were obliged by this Covenant made to God, both to reprehend, resist,
oppose, yea, depose, if not put to death their King for his open incorrigible
idolatries and sins, by common consent, as their king was obliged to punish and
put them to death for their idolatries and crimes, their kings being included
within their Covenants; and Gods inhibition of idolatry under pain of capita^
punishments, extending to Kings, as well as others, if not more then to any,
because their examples were most pernicious; and they were as far forth bound
by their joint Covenants made to God with their Kings to hinder their Kings
from, and to proceed against them for their idolatries, as their kings were to
impedite and punish them for their breach of Covenant, and because God himself
did punish them for their Kings idolatries, as is evedent by Ier. 15. 1, to 6.
and the History of the Kings, and Chronicles every where, which God would not
in justice have done, had not the people both just right and power to resist,
hinder, censure, punish, depose their Kings by public consent of the State and
people for their idolatries and breach of Covenant, as Explanatio Artic 42. and
lib. 4. Epist. Zuing and Oecol. f. 186.
Zuinglius, Vindiciae contra Tyrannos, quaest. 2. p. 43 to 70.
Stephanus Iunius Brutus, the author of the Treatise Page 271. to 275.
De Iure Magistratus in Subditos, with others, prove at large, and Instit. l.
4. ^. 20. sect. 31.
Master Calvin, yea The True Difference, etc. part. 3. p. 513, 514.
Bishop Bilson himself, assents to. Such a Sovereign power had the whole State
and Congregation of Israel and Judah over their kings themselves, whose estates
in their Crowns and Kingdoms by Gods own institution, was not absolute, but
only conditional, and subject unto forfeiture, upon breach of these Covenants
and Conditions by which they did enjoy them.

Fourthly, The Kings of Judah and Israel were no absolute Sovereign Princes
paramount their whole Kingdoms, the general Congregation of the people, Senate
or Sanhedrin, but inferior to them in power, and not only counseled, but
overruled usually by them in matters of public concernment: This is evident
not only by Josh. 22. 11. to 34. and Judges 20. and 21. where the whole
Congregation of Israel, as the Sovereign power, in the days of Joshua and the
Judges assembled about the great causes of the Reubenites, Gadites, and half
the Tribe of Manasseh, concerning their Alter, and of the Gibeonites and
Benjamites, concluding both matters of public war and peace; But likewise by
the peoples rescuing Jonathan out of the hands and power of King Saul his
father, that he died not, though Saul had twice vowed that he should be put to
death, 1 Samuel 14. 38. to 36. And the people said unto Saul, Shall Jonathan die
who has wrought this great salvation in Israel? God forbid; as the Lord lives
there shall not one hair of his head fall to the ground, for he has wrought
with God this day: So the people rescued Jonathan that he died not. By the 1 Chronicles. 13. 1. to 7. where thus we read: And David consulted with the Captains
of thousands and hundreds, and with every Leader, and David said unto all the
Congregation of Israel, If it seem good unto you, and that it be of the Lord
our God, let us send abroad unto our brethren every where that are left in all
the land of Israel, and with them also to the Priests and Levites which are in
their Cities and Suburbs, that they may gather themselves unto us; and let us
bring again the Ark of our God to us, for we enquired not at it in the days of
Saul. And all the Congregation said, that they would do so, For the thing was
right in the eyes of all the people. And David went up and all Israel to
Baalah, to bring up thence the Ark of God the Lord. Compared with the 1 Samuel
18. 2, 3, 4. where when David sent out the people to battle against Absalon
under three Commanders, the King said unto the people, I will surely go forth
with you my self also: But the people answered, So 2 Samuel 21. 17, 18. David
being like to be slain by Ishbi^enoh the Giant whom Abisha^ slew. The men of
David swear to him ^^ying Thou shall go no more out with us to battle, that
thou quench not the light of (...).
Thou shall not go forth; for if we flee away, they will not care for us,
neither if half of us die will they care for us; but now thou art worth ten
thousand of us, therefore now is better that thou succor us out of the City:
And the king said unto them, Whatsoever seems you good that I will do; and
thereupon stayed behind in the City, as they advised him. So he likewise
followed Ioabs advice, to go forth and sit in the gate, and speak comfortably
to the People after his mourning for Absalons death, else not one of the People
would have tarried with him that night, 2 Samuel. 19. 1. to 20. and by this
means All the people came before him though they had formerly fled every man to
his tent; and he so engaged them to him, That all the people were at strife
thorowout all the Tribes of Israel, to bring the King back again to Gilgal,
whence Absalon had chased him. Add to this the 1 Kings 12. 1. to 25. and 2 Chronicles. c. 10. and 11. where we find, that after Solomon's death, All Israel
came to Sechem to make Rehoboam King; and all the Congregation of Israel spoke
unto Rehoboam, saying, Thy father made our yoke grievous, now therefore make
thou the grievous service of thy Father, and his heavy yoke which he put upon
us, lighter, and we will serve thee. And he said unto them, Depart ye for three
days, and then come again; and the people departed. In the mean time he
consulted first with the old men, after that with the young men about him, what
answer he should return; who giving contrary advice, Jeroboam and all the
people coming to him again the third day, the King answered the people roughly,
after the counsel of the young men, saying, My Father made your yoke heavy,
and I will add to your yoke; My Father chastised you with whips, but I will
chastise you with scorpions: So when all the people saw that the King hearkened
not to them, the people answered the King, saying, What portion have we in
David? neither have we inheritance in the son of Iesse, to your tents o Israel;
now see to thine own house David: So Israel departed to their Tents, and fell
away from the house of David unto this day: And all Israel called Jeroboam unto
the Congregation, and made him King over all Israel: And the Text expressly
adds this memorable observation, Wherefore the King hearkened not unto the
people, for the cause was from the Lord, that he might perform his saying,
which the Lord spoke by Abijah the Shilonite to Jeroboam the son of Nebat.
Where we see the Kings not harkening to the people and congregation of Israel
in their just request, and giving them an harsh answer, was a sufficient ground
and occasion for them, to cast off his government, and elect another King to
reign over them, and that with Divine approbation from God himself: Such was
the whole peoples and congregations Sovereign power over their Kings. We read
in the 1 Kings 20. 1. to 10. that when Benhadad king of Syria gathered a great
Host, and sent to Ahab king Israel, to resign up all his silver, gold, Wives,
Children, and pleasant things into the hand of his servants: Then the king of
Israel called all the Elders of the Land, and said, Hark, I pray you, and see
how this man seeks mischief, for he sent unto me for my Wives and for my
Children, for my silver, and for my gold, and I denied him not: And all the
Elders, and all the people, said unto him, Hearken not unto him, nor consent.
Wherefore he said unto the messengers of Benhadad, tell my Lord the King, all
that thou did send for to thy servant at first, I will do, but this thing I
may not do. Where the Elders and people both advise and overruled the King in
this matter of great importance both to the Kingdom and King, who returned no
answer to this public case without the congregations public advise. So 2 Chronicles. 30. 1, to 6.
Hezekiah king of Judah sent to all Israel and Judah, and wrote Letters also to
Ephraim and Manasseh, that they should come to the house of the Lord at
Jerusalem, to keep the Passover unto the Lord God of Israel; For Hezekiah had
taken counsel, and his Princes, and all the Congregation in Jerusalem, to keep
the Passover in the second month, for they could not keep it at that time,
because the people had not sanctified themselves sufficiently; neither had the
people gathered themselves together at Jerusalem; and the thing pleased the
King And all the Congregation, So they established a Decree, to make
Proclamation throughout all Israel, from Bersheba even to Dan, that they should
come to keep the Passover unto the Lord God of Israel at Jerusalem, for they
had not done it of a long time, in such sort as it was written. So the Posts
went with the Letters from the King and the Princes, throughout all Israel, and
Judah, etc. verse. 12. Also in Judah the hand of God was to give them one heart
to do the Commandment of the King and of the Princes, by the word of the
Lord; and verse. 23. And the whole Assembly took Counsel to keep other seven
days; and they kept other seven days with gladness; 2 Chronicles. 31. ^8. 1.
and All the Congregation of Judah and Israel rejoiced: verse. 25. When all this
was finished All Israel that were present, went to the Cities of Judah and
brake the images in pieces, and cut down the Groves, and threw down the high
places and the Altars out of all Judah and Benjamin, in Ephraim also and
Manasseth, until they had utterly destroyed them all. Then all the Children of
Israel, returned every man to his possession into their own City: In the 2 Chronicles. 32. 3. When Hezekiah saw that Senacherib was come, and that he was
purposed to fight against Jerusalem; He took Council with his Princes and his
mighty men, to stop the waters of the Fountain which were without the City,
and they did help him, and there was gathered much people together, who stopped
all the Fountains, etc. Add hereunto that notable Text, Jer. 38. 4. to 28.
Where when the Prophet Jeremy had prophesied, that Jerusalem should be given
into the hands of the King of Babylons Army which should take it; Therefore the
Princes hereupon said unto the King; we beseech thee, let this man be put to
death; for thus he weakneth the hands of the men of War that remain in this
City, and the hands of all the people, in speaking such words unto them; for
this man seeks not the welfare of this people, but the hurt: Then Zedechiah
the King said; Behold he is in your hand; For the King is not he that can do
any thing against you. And Jer. 26. 8. to 29. Now it came to pass when
Jeremiah had made an end of speaking all that the Lord had commanded him to
speak unto all the people, that the Priests, the Prophets, and all the people
took him, saying; thou shall surely dye, etc. So Ezra 10. 1. to 20. There
assembled unto Ezra a very great Congregation of men, etc. And they said unto
Ezra, we have trespassed against our God, and have taken strange wives of the
people of the land; yet now there is hope in Israel concerning this thing. Now
therefore let us make a Covenant with our God to put away all the strange wives,
etc. and let it be don according to the Law: and All Israel said that they
would do according to this word. And they made Proclamation throughout Judah
and Jerusalem unto all the children of the Captivity, that they should gather
themselves unto Jerusalem; and that whosoever would not come within 3. days
According to the Council of the Princes and the Elders, all his substance
should be forfeited, and himself separated from the Congregation of those that
had been carried away: Then all the men of Judah and Benjamin gathered
themselves together unto Jerusalem, within three days, and all the people sat
in the street of the house of God trembling, because of this matter and for the
great rain. And Ezra the Priest stood up and said unto them, Ye have
transgressed and taken strange wives to increase the trespass of Israel; Now
therefore make confession unto the Lord God of your fathers, and do his
pleasure, and separate your selves from the people of the Land, and from the
strange wives. Then All the Congregation answered and said with a loud voice;
As thou have said, so must we do; but the people are many, and it is a time of
much rain, and we are not able to stand without, neither is this a work of
one day or two; for we are many that have transgressed in this thing: let now
our rulers of all the Congregation stand, and let them which have taken strange
wives in our Cities, come at appointed times, and with them the Elders of every
City and the Judges thereof, until the fierce wrath of our God for this
matter, be turned from us: And the Children of the Captivity did so. Where we
see the whole Congregation determine and direct all that was done in this grand
common business: And Esther 9. 17. to 32. the Jews (upon Mordecaies and
Esthers Letters, after the slaughter of their Enemies) Ordained and took upon
them and upon their seed, and upon all such as joined themselves unto them, so
as it should not fail, that they would keep the 13. and 14. day of the month
Adar, and make it a day of feasting and gladness, according to their writing,
and according to their appointed time every year: And that these days should
be kept and remembered thorowout every generation, every Family, every Province,
and every City, and that these days of Purim should not fail from among the
Jews, nor the memorial of them perish from their seed: And the Decree of
Esther confirmed those matter of Purim, As they had decreed for themselves and
their seed.

From all these Texts (compared with Prove. 11. 14. c. 15. 22. c. 25. 5.) it is
most apparent; that the Kings of Judah and Israel were no absolute Sovereign
Princes paramount their whole Kingdoms, or the general Senate and
Congregation of the people, or their Sanhedrin, but inferior to them in power;
and not only counseled but overruled usually by them, in all matters of
public concernment. A truth so pregnant, that The third part of the True
difference between Christian Subjection, etc. p. 513. 514.
Bp. Bilson himself from some of these Texts confesses, That it is a question
among the learned; what Sovereignty the whole people of Israel had over their
Kings; And that these Scriptures have persuaded some, and might lead Zuinglius
to think, that the people of Israel, notwithstanding they called for a King,
Yet reserved to themselves sufficient Authority to overruled their King, in
these things which seemed expedient and needful for the public well^fare,
else God would not punish the people for their Kings iniquity, which they must
suffer and not redress. Hence that eminent lew Antiqu. Iud. l. 4. c. 8.
Josephus (a man best acquainted of any, with his own Nations Antiquities,
Laws, and the Prerogatives of their kings) resolves in direct terms; that
their King, whosoever he were, ought to attribute more to the Laws, and to
God, then to his own wisdom, And to do nothing without the advice of the
High Priest and Senate; and that if he multiplied horses, and money more then
was fitting They might res^st him, lest he became more potent then was
expedient for their affairs. Hence Petrus Cunaeus de Repub. Hebr. l. 1. c. 12.
p. 101. 102. writes thus of the Sanhedrin or Parliament among the Jews. Thus
the Prophets, who grievously offended, were no where else punishable but in
this Assembly; which (Quod summae potestatis est) as it is an Argument of The
Supremest power) did both constitute the King: ac de Bello gerendo deque
hostibus profligandis and de proferendo Imperio del^beraba^t. Sed quoniam haec
ejusmodi erant in quibus salus omnium, and summae Reipublicae vertebatur,
Consultatum de his plerumque cum populo est; indictae enim Comitiae sunt, in
quibus solis populus partem aliquam caperet regendae reipublicae, etc. De Rege
igi^ur deque Bello, ut dixi, decreta facta interdum Populi auctore sunt.
Caetera omnia Senatores Sanhedrin Per se expedivere. So that the Sanhedrin and
Congregation of the people were the highest Sovereign power, and principal
determiners of public matters concerning war and peace, by Cunaeus his
resolution: Who debating this weighty controversy, Cunaeus de Repub. Heb. 6.
1. c. 9. p. 75. 76. 77*
What the Scepter of Judah was (prophesied of Genesis 49. 10.) and what and whose
the Majesty of the Empire was? determines thus. I suppose the Scepter to be
nothing else, but the Majesty of the Empire or Government, to wit that, Quae
ipsi Reipublicae assidet, which belongs to the Republike it self. Wherefore
whose the Republike is, the Scepter ought to be said theirs. Now the Hebrew
Republike from Moses his time till the Kingdom of Rehoboam, was not of the
Jews (or tribe of Judah) but of the twelve Tribes, from whence it follows,
that even the Scepter for all those times was of all the Israelites. Now of
this Scepter, which was long common to all the twelve Tribes, the divine
Patriarch spoke not in that most famous Oracle: for he looked at latter years,
and future ages, when as the Tribe of Judah, the people being divided into
contrary parts, began to have its Republike apart from the Israelites, which
God approved and loved; and would have to be called Jewish, from the Tribe of
Judah alone, until he (to wit Christ) should be given to the assemblies of
men, to whom not only the Empire of the Jews, but Gentiles also was
destinated. And verily this Majesty of the Scepter, from the time it once began
to be of the Jews, we say continued to be theirs, although the state of the
Commonweal was sometimes changed, and the sovereignty of the Empire was
sometimes in the Elders and High Priests, sometimes in the Kings and Princes.
They do too foolishly, who here dance in a narrow compass, and suppose that
the honor of this name appertains not but to Kings? For what people soever,
uses its own Republike and its Laws, Is recte Gloriari de Imperio deque
sceptro potest, it may rightly boast of Its Empire and Scepter. It is recorded,
that at Jerusalem even at that time, when not the Princes but the Elders
governed the people, in the midst of the great Council, which they called the
Sanhedrin, there hung a Scepter, which thing verily was a certain Ensign of its
Majesty; which Marcus Tullius in a particular Oration, says, Esse magnitudinem
quandam Populi, in ejus potestate ac jure retinendo, quae vertitur in imperio,
atque omnis populi dignitate. Not Kings, not Princes, but Consuls and the
Senate managed the Roman Commonwealth; whence this Law of Truce was given to
the Aetolians, which Livy reports, That they should conserve The Majesty of the
People of Rome without mal-engin: And the very same thing was commanded all
free People, who by any league, but not equal, would come into the friendship
of the Romans, as Proculus the Lawyer witnesses, in l. 7. F. de Captiu: and
Post. reversis. Neither think we it material to our purpose, of what Nation or
Tribe they were, who moderated and ruled the Jewish affairs; for although the
Hasmonaean L^vites held their Kingdom for many years, yet the Republike was
of the Jewish people. That most wise Master Seneca said to Nero Caesar, That
the Republike was not the Princes, (or of the Prince) But the Prince the
Republikes. Neither verily was the opinion of Vlpian the Lawyer otherwise; for
he at last ^aith, that That is Treason* which is committed against the Roman
People, or against their safety, l. 1. s. 1. F. ad Legem Iul. Majest. Now
Vlpian lived in those times, when the people had neither command nor suffrages
left them, but the Emperors held the Empire and Principality; and yet he who
is wont most accurately to define all things, says, That Majesty is of the
People; From all which it is apparent, that not only in the Roman Empire and
other Kingdoms, but even among the Jews themselves; the Majesty, and
Sovereign Power, and Scepter resided not in the Kings, but in the whole State
and People. Hence Will. Schickardus in his Ius Regium Hebraeorum, Argent. 1625.
p. 7. determinesthus. The state of the Jewish Kingdom was not Monarchical (as
our Court Doctors falsely dream) but mixed with an Aristocrcie, for the King
without the assent of the Sanhedrin Could determine nothing in great causes.
They constituted not a King but in it, etc. attributing the Soveraignest power
to the Congregation and Sanhedrin, who had power to create, elect, and in some
cases to resist, and depose their Kings. Hence Explani^ Artic. 42. Tom 1 Oper.
Tiguri, 1581. f. 84, 85.
Huldericus Zuinglius writes expressly, That the Kings of the Jews and others,
when they dealt perfidiously, contrary to the Law of God and the rule of
Christ, might be lawfully deposed by the People. This the example of Saul
manifestly teaches, whom God rejected, notwithstanding he had first elected
him King: Yea, whiles wicked Princes and Kings were not removed, all the people
were punished of God; as is evident by Ier. 15. 1. to 6. where they were
punished with four judgments and plagues for Manassehs sins. In sum, if
the Jews had not permitted their King to be so wicked without punishment, they
^ad not been so grievously punished by God. By what means he is to be removed
from his Office, is easily to conjecture; thou may not slay him, nor raise
any war or tumult to do it, but the thing is to be attempted by other means,
because God has called us in peace, 1 Cor. 7. If the King be created by common
suffrages, he may again be deprived by common Votes, unless they will be
punished with him; but if he be chosen by the election and consent of a few
Princes, the people may signify to them the flagitious life of the King, and
may tell them, that it is by no means to be endured, that so they may remove
him, who have inaugurated him. Here now is the difficulty* for those that do
this, the Tyrant will proceed against them according to his lust, and slay whom
he pleases; but it is a glorious thing to die for justice and the truth of
God; and it is better to die for the defense of justice, then afterward to be
slain with the wicked by assenting to injustice, or by dissembling, Those who
cannot endure this, let them endure a lustful and insolent Tyrant, expecting
extreme punishment together with him; yet the hand of the Lord is stretched out
still, and threatens a stroke: But when with the consent and suffrage of the
whole, or certainly of the better part of the multitude a Tyrant is removed,
Deo fit auspice, it is done by God approbation. If the Children of Israel had
thus deposed Manasseh, they had not been so grievously punished with him. So
Zuinglius. Hence Quaest. 3. p. 94, to 97.
Stephanus Iunius Brutus in his Vindiciae contra Tyrannos, in answer to
Machiavels Princeps (a most accursed mischievous Treatise) and justification of
the Protestant defensive wars in France to preserve their Religion and
Liberties, Anno 1589. determines positively, That as all the people are
Superior to the King, so are those Officers of State and Parliaments, who
represent them, Superior to Kings collectively considered, though every of
them apart be inferior to them. In the Kingdom of Israel, which by the
judgment of all Politicians was best instituted, by God, there was this order,
The King had not only private Officers who looked to his family, but the
Kingdom likewise had 71 Elders and Captains elected out of all the Tribes, who
had the care of the Commonweal both in time of peace and war, and likewise
their Magistrates in every Town, who defended their several Cities, at the
others did the whole kingdom. These when ever they were to deliberate of
greatest affairs, assembled together, neither could any thing be determined
without their advice, which much concerned the commonwealth: Therefore 1 Chro.
29. 1.
David called these all together when he desired to in vest Solomon in the
Kingdom, when he desired the policy restored by him should be examined and
approved, 1 Chr. 13. 1.
when the Ark was to be reduced, etc. And because they represented all the
people, all the people are then said to have assembled together. Finally, the
same 1 Samuel 14. 45
rescued Jonathan, condemned to death by Saul's sentence; from whence it
appears* that an appeal lay from the King to the people: But from the time the
Kingdom was divided, through the pride of Rehoboam, the Synedrin of Jerusalem
consisting of 71 men, seems to be of that authority, 1 Chronicles. 10. 1.
that they might judge the King in their assembly, as well as the King judge
them when they were apart. The Captain of the House of Judah was Neh. 11. 9.
President over this assembly, that is, some chief man chosen out of the Tribe
of Judah, as even the chief man for the City Jerusalem, was chosen out of the
Tribe of Benjamin: This will be made more evident by examples. Ier. 26 9. 17
Jeremy being sent by God to denounce the overthrow of the City Jerusalem, is
for this, first condemned by the Priests and Prophets, that is, by the
Ecclesiastical judgment or Senate; after this, by all the People, that is, by
the ordinary Judges of the City, to wit, by the Captains of thousands and
hundreds; at last by the Princes of Judah, that is, by the 71 men sitting in
the new Porch of the Temple, his cause being made known, he is acquitted. Now
they in that very judgment expressly condemn King Iehoiakim, who a little
before had most cruelly slain the Prophet Uriah, threatening like things. Also
we read Ier. 37. and 38
elsewhere, that King Zedekiah, did so much reverence the Authority of this
Sanhedrin, that he durst not free the Prophet Jeremie, thrust by these 71 men
into a filthy prison, but likewise (...) dared to translate him into the Court
of the Prison from thence; yea, when they persuaded him to consent to Jeremiah
his death, he answered, that he was in their hands, and that he could not
contradict them in any thing; Yea, he fearing lest they should enquire into the
conference which he privately had with Jeremy, as if he were about to render
an account of the things which he had spoken, forgeth a lie. Therefore in this
Kingdom the States or Officers of the Kingdom were above the King; I say, in
this Kingdom which was instituted and ordaintd, not by Plato or Aristotle, but
by God himself, the Author of all order, and the chief institutor of all
Monarchy: Such were the seven Magi in the Persian Empire, the Ephori in the
Spartan Kingdom, and the public Ministers in the Egyptian Kingdom, assigned
and associated to the King by the People to that only end, that He should not
commit any thing against the Laws. Thus, and much more this Author, together
with Con. Superantius Vasco, who published this Treatise to all pious and
faithful Princes of the Republike, giving large Encomiums of its worth; as
also the Author of the Treatise De Iure Magistratus in Subditos. p. 253, 254,
255, 256. 268, to 275. whose words for brevity I pretermit; Bp. Bilson in his
forecited passages: and Hugo Grotius De Iure Belli and pacis, l. 1, c, 3. sect.
20. p. 63, 64. where he confesses, That if the King of the Israelites offended
against the Laws written concerning the Office of a King, he was to be
scourged for it; and that the Sanhedrin had a power above their king in some
cases.

Finally, 5.
the Kings of Israel and Judah were not superior to, nor exempted from the
Laws, but inferior to and obliged by them, as well as Subjects: This is
evident, not only by the premises, but by sundry impregnable Texts, As Deuteronomy.
17. 18. 19. 20. where God himself in the very description of the office and
duty of their King, prescribes this in direct terms, as a part of his duty.
And it shall be when He sits on the Throne of this Kingdom, that he shall
write him a Copy of This Law in a Book, out of that before the Priestic and
Levites: And it shall be with Him, and He shall read therein All the days of
his life, that he may learn to fear the Lord his God, To keep all the words of
the Law, and these Statutes to do them, that his heart be not lifted up above
his brethren; and that He turn not aside from the Commandment, to the right
hand or to the left: seconded by Josh. 7. 8. This Book of the Law shall not
depart out of thy mouth, but thou shall meditate therein day and night; that
thou may observe to do according to all that is written therein: turn not
to it from the right hand, or to the left, for then thou shall make thy way
prosperous, and then thou shall have good success. Hence it was, that as soon
as ever Saul was elected and made King by Samuel and the people, he being the
first of their Kings) Samuel told the people the manner of the Kingdom, and
wrote it in a Book, and laid it up before the Lord: which Book, contained not
the exorbitances and oppressions that their Kings would exercise over them,
mentioned in the 1 Samuel 8. 11. to 19. as Josephus mistakes; but as Petrus
Cunaeus and Iun. Bru^us Vindic. Contr. Tyrannos qu. 3. p. 121, 122. Albericus
Gentilis de Iure Belli, l. 3. c. 15. p. 612.
others more rightly observe, the Law of God concerning Kings, prescribed by
him, Deuteronomy. 17. 14. to the end; and such Laws which commanded Kings to use
Justice and equity; to govern the Commonwealth well, for the peoples benefit;
to abstain from fornication and lusts; to retain modesty in a great fortune,
etc. Hence Samuel enjoined both Saul and the People, to fear the Lord, and
serve him, and obey his voice, and follow him, and not rebel against his
Commandment, etc. 1 Samuel 12. 14, 15. 20. to 25. Hence King Ps. 1. 1, 2. Ps.
19. 10. Ps. 119 throughout.
David did always meditate in the Law of God, day and night, accounting it
more dear unto him then thousands of Gold and silver: And withal pronounces
from Gods own mouth; 2 Samuel 23. 3.
The Gods of Israel said, the Rock of Israel spoke to me, he that rules over
men must be just, ruling in the fear of God. Hence the 1 King. 10. 9. 2.
Chron. 9 8.
Qu. of Sheeba used this speech to king Solomon, Because the Lord loved Israel
for ever, therefore made be thee King (what? to domineere at his pleasure? no
verily, but) To do Judgment and Justice. Upon this ground, 2 Chronicles. 34. 31.
King Josiah made a covenant before the Lord, to walk after the Lord, And to
keep his Commandments, and his testimonies and his statutes with all his
heart, and with all his soul; And King 2 Chronicles. 15. 12. to 17. Ezra 10. 3. etc.
Neh. 9. 38. c. 10. 1. to the end.
Asa, with other Princes and Governors did the like, as the premises evidence:
From all which, Isay 9. 7. c. 16. 5. c. 32. 2. 2 Samuel 5. 12. Ezekiel. 45. 8, 9.
and infinite other Scriptures, obliging Kings to reign in righteousness, to
do justice and judgment to all, and Isay ^. 23. c. 12. 14, 15. Zeph. 33.
Mich. 3. 9. to 12. Ezekiel. 22. 6. to 28. Isa. 14. 4. to 23. Object. 1.
reprehending them exceedingly for their injustice, tyranny, oppressions,
idolatries, and other sins; it is irrefragable; that their kings were as
much, if not more obliged to keep both Gods and the kingdoms Laws, as the
Subjects; and had no arbitrary power to do what they pleased.

All that is, or can be colourably objected to the contrary, to prove the kings
of Israel absolute Monarchs, exempt from Laws, and paramount their Sanhedrin
or people collectively considered, is, First, that passage of Psalm. 51. 4.
where king David confessing his sins of Adultery and Murder to God, uses
this expression; Against thee, Thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in
thy sight: Of which Com. in Ps. 50. and Epist. ad Rusticam.
Hierom renders this reason, Quod Rex erat and alium non timebat: alium non
habebat super se: which Ambrose thus seconds, Rex erat, Nullis ipse legibus
tenebatur, quia liberi sunt Reges a vinculis delictorum: Neque enim ullis ad
poenam vocantur legibus, Tuti Imperii potestate, In Psalm. 50.
Homini ergo non peccavit, cui non tenebatur obnoxious In Psalm. 50.
Arnobius and Cassidor, add, De populo si quis erraverit, and Deo peccat and
Regis quando Rex delinquit, Grotius de Iure Belli and Pacis, l. 1. c. 3. sect.
20. p. 63, 64 77.
soli Deo reus est: Merito ergo Rex, Deo Tantum se dicit peccasse; quia solus
erat qui ejus potuisset admissa discutere. The like we find in Isiodor. Epist.
383. which some Jewish Rabbis back with this saying of Barnachmon, titulo de
Iudicibus Nulla creatura judicat Regem, sed Deus benedictus: Therefore the
Jewish kings were above all Laws, and not subject to the censures of their
Congregations, States, or Sanhedrin.

To this I answer first, Answ.
That no doubt, David by his adultry and murder (being sins against the
second Table) did sin not only against God, but 1 Samuel 2. 25. 2 Chronicles. 6.
22. Deuteronomy. 22. 23. 24. Ezekiel. 18. 6. 7. 11
against Vriah and his wife too, their children and kindred; yea Prove. 20. 2. 1
Cor. 6. 18.
against his own soul and body, though he were a king; That of Iustus
Eccardus, De Lege Regia, being an itrefragable truth, granted by See Grotius de
Iure Belli, l. 2. 6. 14. s. 20. Marius Salamonius de Principatulib. Rebuf
Praesat. ad Rubr de Collationibus, p. 583.
all Lawyers and Divines whatsoever, that the absolutest Emperors, Monarchs,
Kings, that be, are subject to the Laws of God, of Nature, of Nations, and
cannot justly do any thing against them to the hurt of piety, chastity, fame,
life, or what is contrary to good Manners. Secondly, No doubt every king is
bound in conscience by the Law of God and man, to give satisfaction and
recompense to his Subjects against whom he sins in this nature, as David
himself determines in this his own case, 2 Samuel 12. 5, 6, 7. Thirdly, For this
very sin against Vriah God threatens, that the sword should never depart from
David's house; that he would raise up evil against him out of his own house,
that he would take his wives before his eyes and give them unto his Neighbor,
who should lie with them in the sight of the Sun, before all Israel, 2 Samuel
12. 10, 11, 12. which was actually fulfilled in and by Absalom his son, 2 Samuel 16. 22. The gloss therefore of these Fathers, that David was exempt from
all Laws being a King, and that he could not sin against a Subject, is
point blank against the History, and Text it self; and manifested to be
apparently false by all the premised Scriptures and Authorities. Fourthly, the
true reason of this speech of David, Against thee, Thee only have I sinned,
and done this evil in thy sight, as Augustine In Ps. 50. Marlorat. Mollerus,
Musculus, Calvin, Bredenbachus, Brentius Bucunus, Brero, Bugenbag. Fernerius,
Haymo, Gualter, Rolloc, Savanoerola, Scultetus, Gilbert Cognatus, Westhemerus,
Zegodinus Wolfg. Seberius in Psalm. 51.
and others truly observe was: 1. Because David had plotted and contrived the
murder of Vriah, and abusing of his wife so closely, that no man did or could
take notice of it; whence Nathan the Prophet tells him, 2 Samuel 12. 12. Thou
did it Secretly, but I will do this before all Israel: sed forte erat quod
homines latebat, and non inveniebant illi quod erat quidem, sed manifestum non
erat, writes Augustine: 2. Because Vriah being slain, and his wife a party
consenting to David's sin, his sin now might in this sense be said, to be
against God alone. 3. sin, quatenus sin, and as it deserves eternal
punishment, is properly committed against none but God, whose Law and
prohibition only makes it sin; therefore in this regard, David now confessing
his sin to God himself, uses this expression and rhetorical ingemination,
Against thee, thee only have I sinned. 4. Because none was free from sin, and
so sit to be his Judge in that respect but God only. 5. Only, is many times
taken for principally or especially; as we usually say, such a one is the only
man; Romans 2. 12. 14. 15. c. 3. 20. c. 5. 13. c. 7. 7. 1 Cer. 15. 56. 1 Ioh. 3.
4.
such a salve or medicine, is the only remedy; and the Scripture uses this
phrase in this sense in David's own ease, 1 King 15. 7. David did that which
was right in the eyes of the Lord, and turned not aside from any thing that he
commanded him all the days of his life, save ONLY in the matter of Vriah,
that is principally, 2 Samuel 24. 10. to 20.
for he committed diverse sins besides, as in numbering the people, in giving
Mephibosheths land to Ziba upon a false suggestion, himself confessing Psalm.
40. 12 Psalm. 38. 3, 4.
that his iniquities were gone over his head, Sam. 16. and 19. 28, 29.
and his sins more then the hairs of his head: but yet this was his ONLY, to
wit, his principal sin: so in diverse others Texts, only is used for
principally; as Josh. 1. 7. 18. Only be thou strong; 1 Samuel 18. 17. Only be
thou valiant: So here, against thee, thee only have I sinned; that is, I have
principally sinned against thee alone, not excluding his sin against
himself, Vriah, and others, whom he injured thereby. 6. This sin against See
De Iure Magistratus in su^di^os p. 301, 302.
Vriah was but a personal and private injury, into which David fell out of
humane frailty, it was the first and only sin of this kind that ever he
committed, for ought we read; he made no trade of it, he repented for it, and
never relapsed again into it: in this regard therefore these Fathers
interpretations may be Orthodox, that for such a private sin of infirmity
only, David was not responsible nor punishable by the Congregation or
Sanhedrin: But had he made a common trade of murdering his subjects, ravishing
their wives, and the like; or giving himself over to the open practice of
gross Idolatry, (a sin only against God himself) and not repented of, or
humbled himself solemnly for it, as he did for these sins here, no doubt the
Congregation or Sanhedrin might upon complaint, have questioned, reprehended,
and censured him for it, as the premises plentifully manifest, notwithstanding
the privilege of his regalitie, which, as it exempted him not from the guilt,
so not from the punishment due unto such Crimes, whether temporal or eternal:
not from the Isay 30. 33. Romans 6. 15. 16.
eternal, which is the greatest, that is certain, therefore not from the
temporal, which is the less. Finally, God himself threatens, that 2 Samuel 7.
14 Psa. 89. 30, 31, 32.
If Solomon or any Kings of David's Seed should forsake his Law, and not keep
his Commandments, but commit ini^^^ity against him, he would chasten them with
the Rod of Men, and the Stripes of the Children of Men; whence the Hugo Grotius
de Iure Belli and pacisl. 1. c. 3 sect. 20. p. 64.
Rabbis write, That if their Kings transgressed against the Law of the King,
they were and might be scourged for it, without dishonor, by a man whom
themselves made choice of: Therefore they might be justly censured and punished
by men for their transgressions against God alone, notwithstanding this gloss
of these Fathers, true only in some sense in private cases, and sins of
infirmity against private men, not of public habitual transgressions.

The second Objection, Object.
is that Speech of Samuel to the people, 1 Samuel 8. 11. to 19. This will be the
manner of the King that shall reign over you; He will take your sons and
daughters, and appoint them for himself, etc. And he will take your fields, and
your Vineyards, and your Oliveyards, even the best of them, and give them to
his servants. And he will take the tenth of your seed, and of your Vineyards,
and give to his servants: And he will take your manservants, your maidservants,
your goodliest young men and your Asses, and put them to his service; he will
take the tenth of your sheep, and ye shall be his servants; And ye shall cry
out in that day, because of the King whom ye have chosen you, and the Lord
will not hear you in that day. Therefore their Kings were absolute Monarchs,
not bound to Laws, nor responsible to their subjects for their oppressions, nor
yet resistible by them.

To which I answer, that this is a direct description of a Tyrant, and not of a
lawful King; as is evident,

First, Answ. 1.
by the very occasion of the words; Uttered purposely by Samuel to dissuade the
People from electing a King, and changing their former Aristocraticall
Government, into a Monarchical; because their kings would many of them prove
more oppressive, Tyrannical and burdensome to them then their Judges or his
sons were, whose bribery and perverting of judgment, moved the people thus
earnestly to affect a change of Government, as is evident by the 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
6, and 9 Verses; Antiqu. Iud. l 6. c. 4.
Josephus, and the consent of all Expositors.

Secondly, 2.
by the introduction to, and the words themselves, This will be the manner of
the King that shall reign over you, He will take, and he will do thus and thus;
not this ought to be the manner, he ought to do, or lawfully may do thus and
thus.

Thirdly, by the things themselves which he would do, which are directly
contrary to Deuter. 17. 14. to the end; and all other Scriptures, expressly
enjoying Kings 2 Samuel 23. 3 Ps. 67. 4. Pro. 31 9. Isay. 32. 1. 2 Chronicles 9. 8.
to judge their people righteously, to do justice and judgment, and not any
ways to oppress or spoil them. I shall instance only in two particulars.

First, the law of God expressly prohibits Exodus 20: 17. Deuteronomy. 5. 21.
all men (and Kings as well as others) to covet their neighbors House, his
menservants, his maidservants, his Ox, or his Ass, or any thing that is his
Neighbors: If their Kings then might not lawfully so much as desire or covet,
much less might they lawfully take away their Houses, Sons, Daughters,
Manservants, Maidservants, Asses, Sheep, Corn, Vineyards, or any thing else
that was theirs, without their free consents, as Samuel tells them their King
would do; this therefore must need, be only a declaration of what their Kings
would Tyrannically do, not of what they might lawfully or justly execute.

Secondly, it is Gods express Edict, Ezekiel. 46. 18. The Prince shall not take
the Peoples inheritance by oppression, to thrust them out of their possessions,
but he shall give his Sons inheritance out of his own possession, that my
people be not scattered every one from his possession. And Ezekiel 45. 8, 9. The
Land shall be the Princes possession in Israel, and my Princes shall no more
oppress my people, and the rest of the Land shall they give to the house of
Israel according to their Tribes: Thus says the Lord God, Let it suffice you,
O Princes of Israel; remove violence and spoil, and execute judgment and
justice; take away your exactions (or expulsions) from my people, says the
Lord. Whence 1 King. 21. 2 to ^5.
Ahab King of Israel for coveting, and unjustly depriving Naboth of his
Vineyard, which he refused to sell him, because it was the inheritance of his
Fathers, and taking possession thereof after his unjust condemnation, had a
most severe judgment denounced against him, even the utter extirpation of
himself, Q. Iezabel, and their posterity, afterward executed: Which punishment
God would never have inflicted on them, had it been lawful for the Kings of
Israel to take the peoples Fields, Vineyards, Oliveyards, etc. and possess or
give them to their servants, as Samuel here tells them their Kings will do: This
clause then of taking their Fields, Vineyards, etc. from them, by the King,
without their consents, being thus diametrally contrary to these Texts of
Ezekiel, and such a capital Crime in King Ahab, (yea, contrary to the practice
of Joseph, and the Egyptian Heathen King Pharaoh, who took not away, but
bought the Egyptians Cattle and Lands for Corn, Genesis 47. 14. to 27.) can no
ways be warranted as a just royal prerogative lawful for their Kings to use,
but must needs be branded for a Tyrannical Oppression.

Fourthly, this is evident by the consequences of it, Ye shall be his servants,
(not subject^;) And ye shall cry in that day because of your King which ye
have chosen you, and the Lord will not hear you in that day, Verse 17, 18.
Certainly the people neither would nor ought to cry to god against the
proceedings of a just upright King, but only of a Tyrant and Oppressor;
therefore this Text must needs be meant of such a one, who should be a scourge
and punishment to them, as Tyrants are, not a blessing as good Kings always be.

Fifthly, consult we with all Politicians whatsoever, this description suites
only with a Tyrant not with any lawful King: and that it is meant of such a
one, we have the testimony of Antiqu. Iud. l. 6. c. 4. 5.
Josephus, the general concurring suffrage of all Commentators and Expositors
one the place (see Lyra, Hugo de Sancto Victore, Carthusian, Angelomus
Lexoviensis, Calvin, Brentius, Bugenhagius, Beda, Bertorius, Martin Borrhaeus,
Peter Martyr, Zanchius, Piscator, Serrarius, Strigelius, Doctor Willet,
Deodate, the English Bibles notes, with others) and of sundry who descant on
this Text in other writings; by name, of M. John Calvin, Instit. l. 4. c. 20.
sect. 26. Bishop Ponet his Political Government. p. 44. Iunius Brutus
Vindiciae contra Tyrannos, qu. 3. p. 121. 122. 134. 135. 153. 154. 155. 159. De
Iure Magistratus in Subditos, p, 270. 271. Bucholceri Chronichon. p. 208.
Petrus Cunaeus, de Repub. Hebraeor. l. 1. c. 14. Bertrami, Politia Iud^ic. p.
53. Shickardus jus Regium Iudae. p. 64. Albericus Gentilis de jure Belli, l. 3.
c. 15. p. 613. Hugo Grotius de jure Belli and Pacis, l. 1. c. 3. Adnotata. p.
72. Governado Christiano, p. 87. Georgius Bucanus de jure Regni apud Scotos, p.
44. Dole-man, p. 68 70. Haenon. disp polit. p 432. Weemse 2 Vol. 2. Part. p.
14. Hotomani, Franco. Gallia, c. 10. Amesius de Casibus Conscienciae, p. 306.
and (to name no more in so plain a case) of Doctor Fern himself, in his
Resolving of Conscience, sect. 2. p. 10. where he writes, That Samuel here
tells the people, how they should be oppressed under Kings; yet all that
violence and injustice done unto them, is no cause of resistance, etc. This
Text then being clearly meant of their Kings Oppression, violence, injustice
against Law, right, and a clear description of a Tyrant, not a King; I may
safely conclude from all the premises, that even among the Israelites and Jews
themselves, their Kings were subject to the Laws, and that the whole
Congregation, Kingdom, Senate, Sanhedrin, not their Kings, were the Supreme
Sovereign power, and Paramount their Kings themselves, whom they did thus
freely elect, constitute, and might in some cases justly censure, resist,
depose, (if not put to death) by common consent, for notorious gross
Idolatries and public multiplied crimes, as the forecited authors aver. All
which considered, eternally refutes, subverts, confounds the erroneous false
Positions and Paradoxes which Doctor Fern, Griffith Williams Bishop of Ossery,
the Author of The necessity of Subjection, with other late ignorant
Pamphletters, have broached to the contrary, without either ground or
presidents to warrant what they affirm, touching the absolute Sovereignty,
Monarchy, irresistibilitie, incorrigibility of the Kings of Judah and Israel by
their whole States, Congregations, Kingdoms general assents, and utterly takes
away those sandy fabulous foundations upon which their impertinent Pamphlets
against the Sovereign Power of Parliaments, Kingdoms, and the illegality of
Subjects taking up defensive Arms against Tyrannical Princes, bent to subvert
Religion, Laws, Liberties, the Republike, are founded; which must now needs
vanish into nothing, before this Catholic, irrefragable clear-shining verity,
abundantly ratifyed by innumerable presidents in all eminent Kingdoms, States,
Nations, that either have been in any former ages, or are yet extant in the
world; which must and will infinitely over-sway, swallow up the inconsiderable
contrary opinions of some few privadoes, who (either out of flattery, hopes of
getting, or keeping undemerited preferments, fear of displeasing greatness, or
inconsiderates following of other reputed learned men's mistakes, without due
examination of their erroneous Tenants) have engaged themselves in a Polemicall
blind Combat against these infragable transparent Verities; whose defense I
have here made good against all their misprisions, and bootlesse assaults.

Having now Historically ran over the most eminent Empires, Kingdoms of ancient
and present times, in a kind of confused method; their copious vastness and
variety being so boundless, and my time to collect them so small, that I
could hardly marshall them into any comely distinct Regiments, or reduce them
to the particular Heads debated in the premises; I shall therefore for a
conclusion deduce these distinct Conclusions from them, to which the substance
of all the recited Histories may be aptly, reduced, and are in truth abundantly
confirmed by them beyond all contradiction, annexing some new punctual
Authorities of note, to ratify and confirm them.

First, Observe. 1.
it is undeniably evident from all the premises, That all Monarchies, Empires,
Kingdoms, Emperors, Kings, Princes in the world, were originally created,
instituted, ordained, continued, limited, and received all their jurisdiction,
power, Authority both from, by, and for the people, whose Creatures,
Ministers, Servants they are, and ought to be. If we survey all the several
Lawful Monarchies, Empires, Principalities, Emperors, and Kings, that either
have been, or yet are extant in the world; we find all sacred and profane
Histories concur in this, that they had their original erections, creations
from, by, and for the People; Yea, we read the very times when, the most
Monarchies of note were instituted, the Names of those on whom the first
Monarchies were conferred, (by the peoples free election only) yet extant on
record in most Histories, and withal express relations, of many different
kinds of Kingdoms, Kings, in respect of succession, continuance, Power,
jurisdiction, scarce any two kingdoms, or their Kings, being alike in all
things in regard of Prerogatives and jurisdictions; all Histories and
Politicians concurring, resolving with Pet. 2. 13.
Peter, that Kings are humane Creatures or Ordinances, instituted, diversified
thus by men, and the people alone, out of Gods general or special providence,
not one of them all being immediately or directly ordained by God, as the only
efficient cause, without the free concurrence, consent and institution of the
people. This truth, is not only ratified by Lex Regia, whereby the Roman
Emperors were created, yea, invested with all their power; registered by Iustus
Eccardus de Lege Regia, and Marius Salamonius de Principatu, l. 6. Part. 3. p.
110, 111.
formerly transcribed; by Plato, Aristotle, Xenophon, Berosus, Polybius,
Cicero, Livy, Justin, Pliny, Strabo, Plutarch, Dionysius Hallicarnassaeus,
Diodorus Siculus, Pausanias, Solinus, Alexander ab Alexandro, Hermannus
Schedell, Herodotus, Boemus, Pomponius Mela; forecited, and generally by all
Historians, Chronologers, Antiquaries, Lawyers, Politians whatsoever; but
directly averred and proved by Franciscus Hotomanus (a famous Lawyer) in his
Franco-Gallia, c. 1. 6. 10, 13. the Author of De Iure Magistratus insubditos,
Quaest. 5. p. 239. 240, etc. Thomas Garzonius Emporij Emporiorum, Pars 1.
Discursus 1. de Dom. p. 13. Vasquius Controvers. Illustrium, 12. n. 133. 59. n.
8. 61. n. 22. 80. n. 4. 108. n. 29. 141. n. 2. Covarunius, Quaest. Illust. T.
2. 396. n. 2. 4. Hugo Grotius de Jure Belli, l. 1. c. 4. sect. 7. l. 2. c. 14.
sect. 11. and elsewhere: Marius Salamonius de Principatu; Eccardus de lege
Regia, with others cited by them: Hookers Ecclesiastical Polity. l. 1. sect.
10. p. 69, 70, 71. (a pregnant place) Albericus Gentilis de Iure Belli, l. 3.
c. 10. 15. Ioannes Mariana de Rege and Regum Instit. l. 1. c. 1. to 10.
Sparsim, and Iunius Brutus, Vindiciae contra Tyrannos, Quaest. 3. p. 83. to 94.
with whose words I shall close up this observation, (having Part 3. p. 115, to
122.
elle where particularly proved the verity thereof, and answered all Objections
against it from misinterpreted Scriptures:)

We say now (writes he) that the people constitute Kings, deliver Kingdoms,
approve Kings elections, with their suffrages; which God would have to be thus,
that so whatsoever authority and power they should have, they should, next to
him, refer it to the people, and therefore should bestow all their care,
thoughts, industry for the peoples profit; neither verily should they think
themselves advanced above other men for their excellency of nature, no
otherwise then men are over Herds and Flocks, but should remember, that being
born in the same condition with others, they were lifted up from the ground
unto that condition by the suffrages, as it were, by the Shoulders of the
people, upon whose Shoulders the burden of the Commonweal should for a great
part rest. After which he proves by Deuteronomy. 17. and diverse forecited presidents
in Scripture, that God gave the Election and Constitution of the kings of
Israel to the people; and that notwithstanding the succession of the kingdom of
Judah was by God entailed afterward to the Lineage of David, yet the Kings
thereof actually reigned not before they were ordained by the people. Whence we
may conclude, that the Kingdom of Israel, if we respect the stock, was
certainly hereditary, but if we regard the persons, altogether elective. But to
what end was this, if the Election appear, as it is confessed, but that the
remembrance of so great a dignity conferred by the people, should make them
always mindful of their duty: So likewise among the Heathens we read, that
Kings were constituted by the people; for when they had wars abroad, or
contention at home, some one man, of whose fortitude and justice the multitude
had a great opinion, was by common consent assumed for King. And among the
Herod. l. 1. Cicero, l. 1. Offic.
Medes, says Cicero, Deioces was of an Arbitrator made a Iugde, of a Judge
created a King; and among the Romans the first Kings were elected. Therefore
when Romulus being taken away, the Inter-regnum of the hundred Senators was
displeasing to the Romans, they accorded, Livius, l. 1.
that afwards Kings should be chosen by the Suffrages of the people, the Senate
approving it: And Tarquin the proud was therefore reputed a Tyrant, for that
being created neither by the people nor Senate, he held the Empire only by
force and power: Wherefore Caesar although he invaded the Empire by force, yet
that he might cosen the people at least with some pretext of Law, would seem to
have received the Empire from the Senate and people: But Augustus although he
was adopted by Caesar, yet he never bare himself as heir of the Empire, by
divise; but rather received it as from the Senate and people; as did also
Caligula, Tiberius, Claudius; whereas Nero, who first invaded the Empire by
force and wickedness without any color of Law, was condemned by the Senate.
Since then no man could be born an absolute King, no man can be a King by
himself, no man can reign without the people: Whereas on the contrary, the
people may both be, and are by themselves, and are in time before a King; it
most certainly appears, that all Kings were first constituted by the people.
Now albeit that from the time that Sons or Nephews imitated the virtues of
their parents, they seem to have made kingdoms as it were hereditary to
themselves in certain Countries, where the free power of Election may seem in
some sort to have ceased, yet that custom has continued in all well
constituted kingdoms, that the children of the deceased kings should not
succeed until they were as de nono, newly constituted by the people, nor
should not be acknowledged as heirs to their Fathers, but should only then at
length be reputed kings, when they had as it were received investiture of the
Realm from those who represent the Majesty of the people, by a Scepter and
Diadem. In Christian kingdoms which at this day are said to be conferd by
succession, there are extant most evident footsteps of this thing. For the
kings of France, Spain, See here, par. 1. p. 53. to 78.
England, and others are wont to be inaugurated, and as it were put into
possession of the Realm by the States, Senators, Nobles and great men of the
Realm, who represent the universality of the people, in the same manner as the
Emperors of Germany are by the Electors, and the kings of Poland by the
Vaynods or Palatines, where the entire right is only by election, neither, is
royal Honor yielded to them in the Cities of the kingdoms, before they have
been duly inaugurated: Neither also heretofore did they compute the time of the
reign, but from the day of the inauguration, which computation was accurately
observed in France: And that we may not be deceived by reason of any continued
stories of succession; even in those very kingdoms, the States of the Realm
have often times preferred a kinsman before a son, the second son before the
eldest; is in France, Analas Cilly.
Lewis, the brother, before Robert Earl of Dreux; also Henry, the second
brother, before Robert Capet the Nephew, with others elsewhere: Yea, and the
same kingdom by Authority of the People, has been translated from one Nation
and Family to another, whiles there were lawful heirs extant; from the
Merouingi to the Carlingi, from the Carlingi to the Capets; which has been
likewise done in other Realms, as it sufficiently appears out of the truest
Histories. And that we may not recede from the kingdom of France, which has
ever been reputed the pattern of the rest, in which, I say, succession seems
to have obtained greatest strength: We read that Pharamond was elected, Anno
419. Pipen, An. 751. Pipens sons, Charles the great and Charlemain 768. not
having respect of the Father; Charlemain being at last taken away 771. the
Brothers part did not immediately accrue to Charli the Great, as is usually done
in inheritances, but by the determination of the people and public Council:
and by them Ludovicus pius was elected, An. 812. although he were the son of
Charles the great. Yea, in the very Testament of Charles, which is extant in
Nauclerus, he Entreats the People by the Common Council of the Realm to elect
one of his nephews who^ they pleased; as for his Uncles he bids the^ rest
satisfied with the Decree of the people. Whence Charles the bald, Nephew by
Lewis the godly and Judith, professes himself An elected King in Aimoinius
the Historiographer. In sum, all kings whatsoever, from the beginning were
Elective; and those who at this day strive to come to the kingdom by
succession, must of necessity be First ordained by the people. Finally, albeit
the people by reason of certain egregious merits, has in certain Realms used
to choose kings out of the same stock, yet they choose the stock it self, nor the
branch; neither do they so choose it, but if it degenerates, They may elect
another: But even those who are nearest of that stock, are not so much born, as
made kings; are not so much accounted kings as the Attendants of kings; which
Franciscus Hotomanus in his Franco-Gallia, cap. 6. 7. and 10. prosecures more
at large, and manifests by sundry pertinent Presidents and Authorities.

Secondly, Observe. 2.
that it is apparent by all the premised Histories; That in all Empires,
Monarchies, the whole Empire, State, Kingdom, with the Parliaments, Senates,
States, Diets, public Officers and general Assemblies which represent them,
are the Supreamest Sovereign power, superior to the Emperors, Kings and
Princes themselves; who are subordinate Ministers and servants to them,
elected, created by them for their common good; and not absolute Sovereign
Lords or Proprietors to rule and domineer over them at their pleasure: Which
conclusion you shall find abundantly ratified, and professedly maintained by
Marins Salamonius, de Principatu, in six several Books; by John Mariana, de
Rege and Regis Instit. l. 1. c. 8. Stephanus Iunius Brutus, his Vindiciae
contra Tyrannos, throughout, especially p. 91. to 110. the Treatise, De Iure
Magistratus in Subditos, throughout: Iustus Eccardus, de Lege Regia: Henricus
Ranzovius; Commentarii Bellici, lib. 1. c. 3. and elsewhere: Georgius Obrechtus
(an eminent Civil Lawyer) Disputationes Iuridicae, de Principiis Belli, sect.
115. to 200. where he thus resolves, Number. 127, 128, 129.
The inferior Magistrates, as in Germany the Electors, Princes, Earls,
Imperial Cities; in France the Peers of France, in Poland the Vayuodes or
Palatines, and in other Kingdoms the Nobles, Senators, and Delegates of the
Estates, as they are severally inferior to the Emperor or King, Ita Vniverst
Superiores existunt, so collectively They are superior to them; as a General
Council is above the Pope, the Chapter above the Bishop, the University above
the Chancellor; The Prince, says Peneg. Tr^ian. di^tus.
Pliny the second, even the greatest, is obliged to the Commonwealth by an
Oath, as its servant, ac ipsa Republica seu Regno Minor est, and is less then
the Republike or Kingdom it self:) by Franciscus Hotomanus a learned French
Lawyer, in his Franco-Gallia, c. 6, 7. 10, 11. 14, 15, 16, 18, 20. Aquinas, de
Regimine Principum, c. 6. by Hemingius Arnisaeus, De Auctoritate Principum in
populum, etc. and De Iure Majestatis, Sebastianus Foxius, De Regni Regisque
Institutione; Vasquius Controvers. Illustrium passim, Cavarnuius Contr.
Illustr. T. 2. 505. n. 1. 399. n. 6. Haenon Disp. Polit. p. 179. etc. Alhusius
Polit. c. 4. p. 146. to 154. with John Calvin Instit. l. 4. c. 20. sect. 31.
and Barclay l. 3. adver. Monarc. c. 8. l. 6. c. 23. 24. quoted by Grotius.
diverse others forecited: Hear Vindiciae Contr. Tyranne. printed 1589. Quaest.
3. p. 9. 91. to 111.
Iunius Brutus instead of all the rest to this particular, being a Frenchman by
birth, and writing his mind herein both freely, accutely and ingeniously, in
these words:

Now verily, since Kings are constituted by the people, it seems necessarily to
follow, populum universum Rege potiorem esse, That all the people are better
and greater then the King. For such is the force of the word, that whoever is
constituted by another, is reputed less then him; he who receives authority
from another, is inferior to his Author. Genesis 39. 4.
Potipher the Egyptian appointed Joseph over his family, Dan. 2. 48.
Nebuchadonozer set Daniel over the Province of babylon; Dan 6. 1.
Darius set an hundred and twenty Princes over the Kingdom. Verily Masters are
said to appoint servants; Kings Ministers; so likewise the people appoints the
King, as the Minister of the Commonweal; which title good Kings have not
contemned, and ill Kings have affected, so that for some ages, none of the
Roman Emperors, but an apparent Tyrant, such as Nero, Domitian, Caligula,
would be called LORD. Moreover it appears, that Kings were instituted for the
peoples sake; neither will thou say, that for an hundred Homuncices more or
less, (for the most part far worse then the rest) all inferiors whatsoever
were created, rather then they for them. Now reason requires, that he for whose
sake another exists, is to be accounted lesser then he. Thus the Governor of a
Ship is instituted by the owner for the Ships sake, who sits at the Helm,
lest the Ship should be broken on the Rocks, or ill hold her course. And verily
whiles he intends this business, the other Mariners serve him, and the owner
himself obeyes him; and yet he is a servant of the Ship, as well as any
mariner, neither differs he from a mariner in gender, but in kind: In the
Republike, which is usually compared to a Ship, the King is in place of a
Master, the people of an Owner: Threfore to him seeking the public safety, the
people obey and submit; when notwithstanding he is, and ought no less to be
accounted a servant to the Republike, as well as any Judge or Captain, neither
differs he from those in any thing, but that he is bound to bear greater
burdens, and undergo more dangers: Wherefore verily what things soever the
King acquires in war, or when he gains adjoining Coasts by right of war
or by sentence of Law, as those things which are brought into the Eschequer, he
acquires to the Kingdom not to himself; to the people, I say, which constitute
the kingdom, no otherwise then as a servant (purchases) to his Lord; neither
can any obligation be contracted with him, but by their authority. Furthermore,
innumerable people live without a king, but thou can not conceive a King
without a people, so much as in thy mind. Neither have some attained a Royal
Dignity because they differed in kind from other men, and ought to rule over
others by a certain excellency of nature, as shepherds do over their Flocks;
but rather, the people created out of the same Mass, have advanced them to
that degree, that so if they enjoyed any authority, any power, they should
acknowledge it received from them, and possess it as during their pleasure;
which the ancient custom of the French aptly shows, who Hotemani France
Gallia, ^. 6.
lifting their King up on a Buckler, proclaimed him King. For why, I pray, are
Kings said to have innumerable eyes, many ears, long hands, most swift feet?
what, because they are like to Argus, Gerion, Midas, or to those whom fables
have feined? verily no, but indeed because all the people whom it concerns,
lend all their eyes, their ears, their hands, feet, and faculties to the king
for the use of the Republike. Let the people recede from the King, he who even
now seemed eyed, eared, strong and flourishing; will suddenly wax blind, deaf,
and fall to nothing; he who erewhile did magnificently triumph, will in one
moment become vile to all: he who even now was adored almost with divine
honors, will be compelled to play the Schoolmaster at Corinth: Over-turn only
the basis of this Giant-like heap, and like the Rhodian Colossus, it will of
necessity fall, and be broken into pieces. Since therefore a King exists by and
for the people, and cannot consist without the people; to whom may it seem
strange if we conclude, That the People are greater then the King.

Moreover, what we say of all the People, we will have spoken also, as in the
second Question, of those also who lawfully represent all the people in every
kingdom or City, who verily are commonly reputed the Officers of the Kingdom,
not King. The Officers of the King, are created or discharged by the King at
his pleasure; Moreover, when he dies they are out of place, and are in some
sort accounted dead men. Contrarily, the Officers of the kingdom, receive
their authority from the people, to wit, In a public Council, or at least,
Heretofore were wont to receive it, neither can they be casheered without the
same. Therefore those depend on the King, these on the kingdom: they, from the
Supreme Officer of the kingdom, who is the king himself; these, From the
Supreme Dominion of the People, from whom the king himself, as well as they,
ought to depend. Their Office is, to take care of the king: these men's duty, to
take heed that the Commonwealth receive no detriment any where: Theirs to be
present and serve the King, as any domestic servants do their Masters; these
men's, to defend the rights and privileges of the people, and diligently to
provide, that the Prince himself commit, or omit nothing to their destruction.
Finally, those are the Kings servants, Ministers, domestics, instituted only
to obey him; these contrarily, are as the kings Assessors in judging according
to Law and Consorts of the Royal Empire; so as all these are bound to govern
the Commonweal, no otherwise then the king is; yet he, as a president among
them, may only hold the first place. Now as All the People are superior to
the King; so even these, although single, every of them be inferior to the
King, yet All of them are to be deemed superior to him. How great the power of
the first kings was, appears sufficiently from this; that Ephron king of the
Hittites, durst not grant the right of a sepulcher to Abraham without the
peoples consent; Genesis 23. and 34.
nor Hamor the Hiuite king of Sechem, make a league with Jacob, the more
weighty affairs being usually referred to the people. And vetily in those
kingdoms, which at that time were circumscribed almost with one City, this was
easy: But from that time kings began to enlarge their Territories, neither
could all the people assemble in one place without confusion, Officers of the
kingdom were appointed, who should ordinarily defend their rights; yet so, as
when there should be need, either all the people, or at least a certain Epitome
of them should be extraordinarily assembled. We see this order to have been in
the kingdom of Israel, which by the judgment almost of all politicians, was
best of all constituted. The king had his Bakers, Butlers, Chamberlaines,
Masters and Stewards of his House, who overlooked his Family; the kingdom had
likewise its Officers, 71. Elders and Captains chosen out of every tribe, who
might take care of the Republike in time either of peace or war: and finally
its Magistrates in every Town, who were every one to defend their Rites, as the
others the whole kingdom (which he proves to be above their kings, and to
overrule them, in the Har. p. 143. 144.
forecited passage.) Such were the 7. Esther ^.
Magi, or wise men in the Persian Empire, being as it were Consorts of the
Royal Honor, and who were called the kings eyes and ears, with whose
judgment we read the kings rested satisfied: Such were the Ephori in the
Spartan Realm, to whom they appealed from the king, and who did likewise judge
the kings themselves; as it is in Aristotle; In the Egyptian kingdom the
public Ministers were elected and assigned to the king by the people, only to
this end, that he should commit nothing against the Laws. Now as Arist. Polit.
l. 5. c. 11. and 6. 3. c. 7.
Aristotle every where calls those lawful kings, to whom such Officers are
adjoined, so likewise he fears not to say, where they are wanting, that there
is not a Monarchy, but either plainly a barbarous tyranny, or a domination
next to Tyranny. In the Roman State the Senators obtained this place, and the
Magistrates usually chosen by the people, the Tribune of the Consuls, the
president of the City, and the rest, so as there lay an appeal from the king
to the people, which Seneca cites out of Tullies Book of the Republike, and the
History of Horatius Tergeminus, condemned by the Royal Judges for the murder
of his sister, and absolved by the people, sufficiently evidenceth: But under
the Emperors, the Senate, Consuls, Pretors, Pretorian Perfects, Presidents of
Provinces, which were given to the people and Senate, were therefore all called
the Magistrates of the people of Rome. Therefore when as by the Decree of the
Senate, Maximinus the Emperor was judged an enemy of the Republike, Herodian.
l. 8. in Orat Maximi and Albini (...) Milites.
and Mazimus and Albinus were created Emperors by the Senate against him, the
Soldiers took an oath, that they would Fathfully obey the people of Rome, the
Senate and Emperor, howsoever this law might be violated under tyranny. As for
the Empires at this day (as the Turkish and Muscovitish, and others of this
kind, which are rather great Robberies, then Empires) there is not one of them,
which if not at this time, was not at least in times past governed in this
manner. But if it be come to pass through the Magistrates fault and
sloathfulnes, that in some places posterity have received a worser Commonweal,
notwithstanding those who at this day possess these Offices, are bound as much
as in them is, to revoke all things to their ancient state. In the German
Empire which is conferred by election, there are Princes, and Electors, as well
Laics as Ecclesiastics, Earls, Barons, Cities, Ambassadors of Cities, who as
they have the care of the Commonweal in their several places, so likewise in
general Assemblies (or diets) when there is needs, they represent the Majesty
of the whole Empire, where they are bound to care, that the Republike sustain
no detriment by the private endeavors or hatreds of the Emperor. Therefore
there is one Chancellor of the Empire, another of the Emperor; other and
different Officers besides, both of the one, and other: diverse Exchequers,
diverse Treasurers; and therefore it is a common saying, that the Empire is
preferred before the Emperor, so as Speculum ^axonicum.
the Emperor may be every where said to do homage to the Empire. Likewise in
the Realm of Poland, the Bishops, Palatines, Castellans, Nobles, Deputies of
Cities and Counties are extraordinarily assembled; in whose assembly only new
constitutions are made, and wars decreed. But ordinarily the councellers of the
Realm of Poland, the Chancellor of the Polish Repub. etc. although the King in
the mean time has his own Chamberlains, Stewards, Ministers and Domestics.
But he who will dispute among the Polonians, whether the King or the whole
people of the Kingdom, represented by the Estates of the Realm, be greater:
does just like him who should dispute at Venice, whether the Duke or the
Republike were the superior? But what shall we say of those kingdoms which are
wont to be carried by succession? Verily the thing is no otherwise there. The
Realm of France, which not long since was preferred before the rest both for
the excellency of Laws and Orders, was thus constituted in times past; and
although those who hold that place do not sufficiently discharge their duty,
yet they are not thereby the less obliged to do it: The king verily has his
great Master, or Arch-Steward, his Chamberlains, Hunters, Guard, Butlers, and
the rest, whose Offices heretofore did so depend on the King that he dying,
themselves seemed also to die in their Office; so that even yet, after the end
of the mourning royal, the great Master or Arch-Steward, is wont to pronounce
certain conceived words, wherewith he dismisseth the royal family, and bids
every one provide for himself: Yet notwithstanding the Kingdom of Aimenius, l.
5. c. 16. in Carolo Caluo. See H^lomani Franco gall^a, c. 5, 6, 10. etc.
France has its Officers, the master of the Palace, who afterward was styled
the Earl of the Stable, the Marshals, Admiral, Chancellor, or great
Referendary, Secretaries, Treasurers, and Officers, who verily heretofore WERE
NOT CREATED, BUT IN THE GREAT PUBLIC COUNCIL of the three Orders of the
Clergy, Nobility and people; but since the standing Parliament was ordained
at Paris, they are not thought settled in their Offices, before they be received
and approved by the Senate of Paris, P. Filius. sam. Inst. quibus mod. in
P^triae pol. solvitur.
neither can they be casheer'd without their consent and authority: Now all
these, first plight their faith TO THE KINGDOM, that is, to all the people,
after that to the King, as the Guardian thereof; which is perspicuous even from
the very form of the Oath. But especially the Earl of the Stable, when he is
girded by the King with the Liliated sword (as appears by the words which he
pronounces,) is girded to that purpose, THAT HE MAY DEFEND AND PROTECT THE
REPVBLIKE. Moreover the Realm of France has its Peers, as Consuls of the King,
or its Senators, as the Fathers of the Republike, every of them denominated
from the several Provinces of the Kingdom, to whom the King, being to be
crowned, is wont to plight his faith, as to the whole Kingdom: from whence it
appears, THAT THEY ARE SVPERIOR TO THE KING: These again likewise swear, that
they will defend, not the King, BUT THE ROYAL CROWN; that they will assist THE
REPVBLIKE with their council, and that for this end, they will be present in
the sacred Council of the Prince in time of Peace or War, as manifestly
appears out of the formulary of the Peership: Therefore by the Law of Re^atus,
chappinus.
Lombardy; in giving sentences, they did not only sit with the Lord of the Fee
as Peers, but likewise heard the Causes ofttimes between the Superior Lord and
his Vassal. We likewise see these Senators of France to have ofttimes judged
between the King and Subjects, so that when Charles the 6. would have
pronounced sentence against the Duke of Britain, they withstood him, and said,
THAT THE JVDGEMENT WAS NOT THE KINGS, BUT PEERS, FROM WHOSE AVTHORITY HE COVLD
DEROGATE NOTHING. Hence even at this day the Parliament at Paris, which is
called the Court of Peers or Senators, is in some sort constituted a Judge
between the King and People, yea, between the King and every private man, and
is bound, as with an obligation to right every one against the King Procurers,
if he invades any thing against Law; Besides, if the King determines any thing,
or makes any Edict at home, if he make any compact with neighbor Princes, if
any War be to be waged, if any Peace be to be made, as of late with Charles
the fifth, The Parliament ought to approve, and be Author of it, and all
things which appertain to the Commonwealth, ought to be registered among its
acts; which verily are not ratified, until they shall be approved by it. Now
that the Senators might not fear the King, heretofore none could be preferred
into that Order, but such who were nominated by the Senate, neither could they
Lawfully be removed, but by its Authority, for a lawful cause.

Finally, even the Kings Letters, unless they be subscribed by the Kings
Secretary, and rescripts, unless they be signed by the Chancellor, (who has
a power of cancelling) have no authority. There are likewise Dukes, Marquesses,
Earls, Vicounts, Barons, Castellanes; also in Cities, Majors, Deputies,
Consuls, in Sindeches, Auditors, and the like, to whom some particular Region
or City are severally commended, that they may defend the People so far forth
as their jurisdiction extends, although some of these dignities at this day
are reputed Hereditary: And besides this, yearly heretofore, at leastwise as
often as necessity required, there was held an Aimonius.
Assembly of the three Estates, wherein all the Countries and Cities of any
note, did send their Deputies, namely Commons, Nobles, Ecclesiastics in each
of them apart; where they publicly determined of those things which
appertained to the Republike: Now such was evermorethe authority of this
Assembly, that not only those things which were therein accorded, were reputed
sacred and holy, and whether Peace were to be concluded, or War to be waged, or
the Guardianship of the Realm to be committed to any one, or a Tax to be
imposed, was there concluded; but even Kings themselves for their luxury,
slothfulnes or tyranny, were thrust into Monasteries, and by their authority,
even all their Ofsprings deprived of the succession of the Kingdom, no
otherwise then at first, when as they were called to the kingdom, by the
peoples authority: verily those who^ consent had advanced, dissent did pull
down again; those whom imitation of paternall virtues had as it were called
into that inheritance, a degenerate and ungrateful mind, as it had made then
incapable and unworthy, so it did make them to be disinherited: From whence
verily it appears, that succession truly was tolerated to avoid competition,
succession, an interregnum, and other incommodities of Election; but truly
when greater damages would follow; where Tyranny should invade the Kingdom,
where a Tyrant the Throne of a King, the lawful Assembly of the people
Perpetually reserved to themselves an Authority of expelling a Tyrant or
slothful King, and of deducing him to his Kindred, and of substituting a good
King in his place. Verily peradventure the French received this from the Gauls,
Caesar, l. 5. and 7. de Bello Gallico.
Caesar in the fifth Book of the Gallic War, being the Author; For Ambiorix
King of the Eburoni, confessed, that all that time the Empires of the Kings of
Gallia were such, that the people duly assembled, had no less authority over
the King, then the King over the people; which also appears in Vercingetorix,
who pleaded his cause before an assembly of the people. Note.
In the Kingdoms of Spain, especially in Valentia and Catteloigne of the
Arragonians it is even thus, for the Sovereignty of the Realm, is in the
Justice of Aragon, as they call it; therefore the great men, who represent the
people, fear not to tell the King in direct terms, both in his very Coronation
it self, and likewise every third year in the general assembly of their
Estates, Tantum valemus nos, quantum vos; We are as powerful as you, but the
Justice of Aragon is above us both, who rules more than you. Yea, oftentimes
what things the King has asked, what he has enjoined, the Justice has
prohibited; nay, he never dares to impose any tribute without the authority of
that Assembly. In the Realms of England and Scotland, the Supreme power is in
the Parliament, usually wont to be held almost every year. Now they call a
Parliament, the Assembly of the Estates of the Realm, where the Bishops,
Earls, Barons, Deputies of the Cities and Counties by common suffrage determine
of the Republikes affairs, whose authority is so sacred, that what things
soever it shall once establish, it is unlawful (or a wicked act) for the king
to abrogate. Likewise all the Officers of the Realm are wont to receive their
Offices from that Assembly, and those who ordinarily assist the King or Queen
in Council. In brief, other Christian Kingdoms, as Hungary, Bohemia, Denmark,
Sweden, and the rest, have all their Officers of the Realm, or Consuls of the
Royal Empire, who by their own Authority have sometimes used even to depose
their Kings themselves, as Histories teach, or fresh memory sufficiently
manifests: Neither is there verily any cause that we should think the Royal
Authority to be thereby deminished, or that Kings should hereby suffer as it
were a diminution of their heads; Truly, we deem not God the less potent for
this, because he cannot sin by himself, nor his Empire more restrained, because
it cannot be ruined, nor grow worse; therefore not a King, if that he who may
offend by himself, be sustained or kept from sinning by another help; or if
peradventure he had lost any Empire by his own negligence or fault, that he may
retain by another prudence. What? do you think any man less healthy, because
Physicians sit round about him, who dehort him from intemperance, who interdict
him the eating of hurtful meats, who likewise oft-times purge him against his
will, and resisting? Or whether do thou think those Physicians who take care
of his health, or flatterers who obtrude the most unwholesome things, to be more
his friends? Therefore this distinction is altogether necessary to be
adhibited: Some are friends of the King, others of Caesar; those are friends of
Caesar, who serve Caesar; those friends of the King or Emperor, who serve the
Kingdom: For since any one is called a King, Note.
for the Kingdoms sake, and the Kingdom consists in the people; but the Kingdom
being lost or decayed, the King must altogether cease to be a King, or, at
least, be less a King: those verily who shall study the profit of the Kingdom,
are truly the Kings friends; those who neglect, or subvert the profit of the
Realm, are truly his Enemies: and as thou can by no means separate the
Kingdom from the people, nor the King from the Kingdom; so neither the friends
of the King from the friends of the Kingdom or people; yea verily, as those who
truly love Caesar would rather have him to be a King then a private man, nor
can they have him a King without a Kingdom, in good sooth those shall be the
Kingdoms friends who are Caesar's; and those who would seem to be more the
friends of Caesar, then of the Kingdom or people, are truly to be reputed
Flatterers and most pernicious enemies. But and if they be truly friends, is
it not manifest, that the King will become more powerful and stable, (as
Theopompus said of the Ephori when instituted) by how much those shall be more,
and more powerful, to whom the profit of the people or Realm shall be
commanded and committed?

But perchance thou will say, You tell me of the Senators, Peers, and Officers
of the Realm, but I, on the contrary, see nothing but Ghosts, and as it were
ancient Cote-Arms in Tragedies, but I scarce any where discern any footsteps
of ancient liberty and authority. Finally, you may see most men every where
to look to their own affairs, to flatter kings, to cheat the people; scarce any
where may thou find one who takes pity of the mascerated people, much less
who will give help to the miserable; but if there be any who are truly of that
mind, or thought to be so, they are judged Rebels, or Traitors, they are
banished, and they are compelled to beg even their very food. Note.
What? the thing is thus: It seems almost always and in every place the
audacitie of Kings, or partly the prevarication, partly the slothfulness of
the Nobility has been such, that kings may seem to have usurped that
licentiousness wherewith most of them at this day seem to wax insolent, by a
long prescription of time, but the people may seem to have determined their
Authority, or to have lost it by not using it: For so it happens for the most
part, that no man takes care for that which all are bound to take care of, that
which is committed to all, no man thinks it is commended to him. Yet
notwithstanding, against the people, neither this prescription nor
prevarication does any thing. It is a vulgar saying, that no prescription can
hurt the king, or Exchequer, much less all the people, who are potenter then
the King, and for whose sake the Prince has this privilege; for why else is
the Prince only the administrator of the Exchequer, but for the people, the
true proprietors as shall be after proved? Furthermore, is not this a known
truth, that no violence, no not in the longest lasting servitude, L.
proponebatur, -6. D. de ^ Iud. ciis, l. qui res suas 98. paragr. ult. de
solat^on ^inter stipul 93. parag. Sacram. D. de Verbor, oblig. Vlpian. de Reg.
Iuris, l. 54.
can be prescribed against liberty? But and if thou objectest, that Kings were
constituted by the people, who perchance lived above five hundred year since,
not by the people extant at this day; I answer, that although kings do die,
the people in the mean time (as neither any other Universitie) never dies; for
as flowing waters make a perpetual river, so also the vicissitude of birth and
death an immortal people: Therefore as the Rheine, Seine, Tyber, is now the
same as it was above a thousand years ago, so likewise the Germane, French,
Roman people are the same, (unless Colonies shall have casually intervened)
neither can their right be any ways changed, either by the flux of water, or
change of individuals. Besides, if they attribute the Kingdom received, not to
their people, but to their Father, and he to his Grandfather, and so upwards,
could he transfer more right to another then himself first had? But and if he
could not, (as it is certain he could not) is it not manifest, whatsoever he
shall arrogate to himself besides, that he cannot any more usurp it then any
thief? But on the contrary the people have a right of perpetual eviction.
Therefore that the Nobles have been for a long space oppressed in any Kingdom,
can no way prejudice the people; but rather, as the servant should not be
heard, who in that he has a very long time detained his Lord captive, should
boast, that he was not only a Freeman, but would likewise arrogate to himself
a power of life and death over his Lord: nor yet a Thief, who because he has
robbed 30. years, or is the son of a Thief, should think himself to be
without fault, yea rather, by how much the longer he has been such a one, the
more severely should he be punished: So likewise a Prince is not to be heard or
endured, who because he has succeeded to a Tyrant, or has for a long time
used the people like a bondslave, from whom he has received his kingdom, or
has offered violence to the Nobles, should think that what ever ^e lusted
should be lawful to him, and ought to be granted of right. Neither do years
substract any thing from the peoples right, but add to the injury of the King.
But what, if the Nobles themselves have colluded with the King? what, if in
betraying the cause, they have betrayed the people as it were bound, into the
hands of a Tyrant? shall the authority of the people by this prevarication or
treason seem to be plainly transferred upon the King? whether I say, by this
fact is any thing taken away from the liberty of the people, or adjoined to the
licentiousness of the Prince? You will say, they may impute it to themselves,
who made choice of such men of perfidious faith. But yet these are as patrons
to patronize the public profit, and the peoples safety and liberty: Therefore
as when an Advocate shall make a compact with the adversary of his Client,
concerning the value of the suit as they speak, if he had betrayed his cause,
he should not hurt him at all; so this conspiracy of the Nobles, as it were
made to the damage and destruction of the people, cannot verily detract any
thing from their right; but even they themselves shall fall into the penalty of
the Law, which is promulged against prevaricators, and the Law permits the
people to choose another patron, and to prosecute their right again: For if the
Roman people condemned their Emperors to punishment, who at the Caudine
Gallows had dishonourably contracted with the enemies, although by compulsion,
and reduced to greatest straits; and judged that they were no ways obliged by
that paction; shall not the people be much less bound to suffer that yoke,
which not by force, but willingly; not for fear of death, but out of desire of
gain, has been thus treacherously put upon them? Or if those who ought to
shake it off shall impose it, or those who might do it, shall tolerate it?
Observe. 3.
He has many other pertinent passages to the same effect, which brevity
enjoynes me to omit; those that please may read them at their leisure in the
Author himself; whose opinion is fortified by Alphonsus Menesius his poems,
annexed to his Treatise.

Thirdly, it is abundantly manifest from all the premises; That Kings and
Emperors always have been, are, and ought to be subject to the Laws and
Customs of their Kingdoms, not above them, to violate, break, or alter them
at their pleasures, they being obliged by their very Coronation Oaths in all
ages and Kingdoms inviolably to observe them. This verily is confessed In his
speech in Parl. in his works, p 531 c. 9
by K. James, by our A Collection, etc. p. 320, 321. and elsewhere.
K. Charles himself in his late Declarations to al his Subjects; resolved by l.
1 c. 8. l. 3. c. 9.
Bracton l. 1. c. 17.
Fleta, c. 9. to 15.
Fortescue, our See Cooks Epist. to the 5. Report. and Calvin's case.
Common and Statute Laws par. 1. and 2.
forecited; by the Year Book of 19. H. 6. 63. a. where Fray says, That the
Parliament is the highest Court which the King has, and the Law is the highest
inheritance which the King has, for by the Law he himself and all his
Subjects are ruled; and if the Law were not, there could be no King nor
inheritance; This is proved by Fox Act. and Mon. Edit. 1. in one Vol. p. 741.
Stephen Gardener Bp. of Winchester in his Letter to the Lord Protector; where
he writes, That when he was Ambassador in the Emperors Court he was feign
there, and with the Emperors Ambassador to defend and maintain, by
Commandment From Henry the eight and his Council.
in a case of Jewels, That the Kings of this Realm were not above the Order of
their Laws, and therefore the Jeweller although he had the kings Bill signed,
yet it would not be allowed in the Kings Court, because it was not obtained
according to the Law; and generally granted by all our own Ponet. P. lit.
Government, p. 22. Dolman. p. 72. and others.
English Writers, is copiously asserted, and professedly averred by Aristotle,
Polit. l. 3. c. 11. 13. Marius Salomonius de Principatii. in six special
Books to this purpose, by Justus Eccardus de Lege Regia, Thomas Garzonius
Emporii, Plinius 2. Panegyr. Traiano, d^ct Eccardus, de Lege Regia.
Emporiorum, Pars 1. Discursus 1. de Dominiis sect. 6. p. 9, 10. Joannis
Carnotensis Episc. lib. 4. Policrat. c. 1. Bochellus Decreta, Eccles. Gal. l.
5. Tit. 1. Cap. 6. 15, 16. Haenon. Disput. Polit. p. 428. to 442. Fenestella de
Magistratu, p. 149. Ioannis Mariana de Rege and Regis Instit. l. 1. c 9. (an
excellent discourse to this purpose) Petrus Rebuffus, Praefat. ad Rubr. de
Collationibus, p. 583, 584. Sebastianus Foxius de Rege, etc. part. 1. p. 108,
109 part. 2. 192 etc. Buckanon de Iure Regni apud Scotos passim, Iunius Brutus
Vindiciae contra Tyrannos, quaest. 3. p. 116. to 139. (an accurate discouse to
this effect) Grimalius de Optimo Senatore, p. 33. 201, 205. Vasquius contr.
Illustr. 16. n. 15. 19. 21. 17. n. 1. ^3. 20. n. 3. 44. n. 3. 73. n. 12. 13 15.
72. n. 7. and elsewhere. De Iure Magistratus in subditos, passim, Polanus, in
Ezech. p. 824. 854. Pareus in Romans 13. p. 138. Francis. Hotomani, Franco
Gallia. c. 6. to the end of Cap. 20. Sparsim, Governado Christiano, p. 108.
Cunaeus de Republ. Hebr. l. 1. c. 1. 14. Schickardus Ius Regium Hebrae p. 54.
Hugo Grotius de Iure Belli, l. 1. c. 4. f. 7. l. 2. c. 14. and elsewhere
thorowout his second Book, with infinite others of all sorts: This all good
Emperors and Kings in all ages have professed, as these Authors prove. Thus
the good Emperor Trajan practiced and professed; That the Prince was not above
the Laws; Hence In Phil^^^rato, l. 8. and Eccardus de Lege Regia.
Apollonius Thyanaeus writing to the Emperor Domitian, says, These things have
I spoken concerning Laws, which if thou shall not think to reignover thee,
then thy self shall not reign: Hence Dionys. Hall car. l. 1. Eccardus de Lege
Regia Iunius Brutus p. 122.
Autiochus the third, King of Asia is commended, that he writ to all the Cities
of his Kingdom, if there should be any thing in his Letters he should write,
which should seem contrary to the Laws, they should not obey them. And
Anastatius the Emperor made this wholesome sanction, admonishing all the
Judges of his whole Republike, that they should suffer no Rescript no
pragmaticall sanction, no sacred adnotation which should seem repugnant to the
general all Law or the public profit, to be produced in the pleading of any
suite or controversy; enough eternally to shame and silence those flattering
Courtiers, Lawyers, Divines, who dare impudently, yea, impiously suggest the
contrary into Princes Ears, to excite them to Tyrannize and oppress their
subjects against their express Oaths (inviolably to observe and keep the
Laws) their Duties, the very Laws of God and man; of which more in the seventh
and eigth Observation.

Fourthly, Observe. 4.
That Kings and Emperors can neither anull nor change the Laws of their
Realms, nor yet impose any new Laws, Taxes or Impositions on them, without the
consent of their People, and Parliaments: This I have largely manifested in the
first Part of this Discourse, and the premised Histories, with the Authors here
quoted in the three precedent Observations, attest and prove it fully; for if
the whole Kingdom, Parliament, and Laws themselves be above the King or
Emperor, and they receive Ioannis Mayor Distinct. 24. qu 3. Lau. Bochellus
Decreta Eccles. Gall. l 5 Tit. 4. c. 3. p. 728.
their Sovereign Authority from the People, as their public servants: It
thence infallibly follows, that they cannot alter the old Laws which are above
them, nor impose new Laws or Taxes to bind the whole Kingdom, people, without
their assents, they being the Sovereign Power. This point being so clear in it
self, so plentifully proved in the premises, I shall only add this passage
out of Vindicae contra Tyrannos qu 3. p. 124, 125, 126.
Iunius Brutus, to ratify it; If Kings cannot by Law change or extenuate Laws
once approved without the consent of the Republike, Innocentius ad Regen.
Tarrat. in c. quando de Iure I^^ando.
much less can they make and create new Laws; therefore in the German Empire,
if the Emperor think any Law necessary, he first desires it in the general
assemblies; if it be approved, the Princes, Barons, and Deputies of Cities
subsigne it, and then it is wont to be a firm Law: Yea, he swears, that he
will keep the Laws Enacted, and that he will make no news Laws but by common
consent. In the Kingdom of Poland there is a Law, (renewed, An. 1454, and
1538.) That no new Laws or Constitutions shall be made, but only by public
consent, or in any place but in Parliament. In the Realm of France, where yet
commonly the authority of Kings is thought most ample, Laws were heretofore
enacted in the Assembly of the three Estates, or in the Kings ambulatory
Council; but since there has been a standing Parliament, all the Kings Edicts
are void, unless the Senate approve them; when as yet the Arrests of that
Senate or Parliament, if the law be wanting, even obtain the force of a Law: So
in the Kingdoms of England, Spain, Hungary, and the rest, there is, and of old
has been the same Law: For if Kingdoms depend upon the conservation of their
Laws, and the Laws themselves should depend upon the lust of one Homuncio,
would it not be certain, that the Estate of no Kingdom should ever be stable?
Would not the Kingdom necessarily stumble, and fall to ruin presently, or in a
short space? But if as we have showed, the Laws be better and greater than
Kings, if Kings be bound to obey the Laws, as servants are to obey their Lords,
who would not obey the Law rather then the King? who would obey the King
violating the Law? who will or can refuse to give aid to the Law thus infringed?

Fifthly, Observe. 5.
that all public great Officers, Judges, Magistrates, and Ministers of all
Realms, are more the Officers and Ministers of the Kingdom, than the Kings, and
anciently were, and now ought to be of right elected only by the Kingdom,
Parliament, people, and not removable but by them: which is largely proved by
Iunius Brutus Vindiciae contr. Tyrannos, qu. 1, 2, ^. De Jure Magistratus in
Subditos, qu. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. with others, the Histories forecited, and Hotomani
Francogallia, c. 6, 11, 12, 13, 14.

6. Observe. 6.
That Kings and Emperors have no absolute power over the lives, See Henricus
Eocerus lib. 2. Le Duello, c. 4 5. that the Civil Law concerning Iusts, is
contrary, yet the Canon Law prohibiting Iusts, upon pain of excommunication,
accords with the common Law.
liberties, goods, estates of their subjects to dispose of them, murder,
imprison, or strip them of their possessions at their pleasure; but ought to
proceed against them in case of Delinquency according to the known Laws and
Statutes of their Realms: This truth is abundantly evidenced by all the
premises; by Magna Charta, c. 29. and all Statutes, Law Books in affirmance of
it; by resolution of the Judges in Henry 8. his reign, Brook. Corone 29. That
it is Felony to slay a man in justing, and the like, notwithstanding it be done
By command of the King, for the command is against the Law; and of Judge
Fortescue, 19. H. 6. 63. That if the King grant to me, that if I kill such a
man, I shall not be impeached for it, this grant is void and against Law. By
Junius Brutus, Vindiciae contra Tyrannos, Quast. 3. p. 136, to 137. and the
Treatise De Jure Magistratus in subditos in sundry places, where this
undeniable verity is largely proved, confirmed, and by others forecited.

Seventhly, Observe. 7.
That Emperors, Kings, Princes are not the true Proprietory Lords or Owners of
the Lands, Revenues, Forts, Castles, Ships, Jewels, Ammunition, Treasure of
their Empires, Kingdoms, to alienate or dispose of them at their pleasures; But
only the Guardians, Trustees, Stewards, or Supervisors of them for their
Kingdoms use and benefit, from whom they cannot alien them, nor may without
their consents or privities lawfully dispose of them or any of them, to the
public prjudice; which if they do their grants are void and revocable. This
proposition Part. 1. p. 102. part. 2. p. 1^ to 17.
formerly ratified by many reasons, authorities, and sundry Historical
Passages in this Appendix, is not only evident by the Metropolitans usual
speech to all elected Kings, (prescribed by the Roman Pontifical, ratified by
the Bull of Pope Clement the eight, Romans 1611. f. 62. ^^3. and transc^ in M.
Seldens Titles of Honor, first Part. Chap. 8. p. 197, 198.
where the Metropolitan, when any King is presented to him to be Crowned, first
demands of the Bishops, who present him; Do you know him to be worthy of and
profitable to this dignity? to which they answer, We know and believe him to
be worthy and profitable to the Church of God, and for the Government of this
Realm: After which the Metropolitan among other things, uses this Speech unto
him, Thou shall undeniably administer Justice, without which no society can
continue toward all men, by rendering rewards to the good, punishment to the
evil, etc. and shall so carry thy self that thou may be seen to reign not to
thine own, but to all she peoples profit, and to expect a reward of thy good
deeds, not in earth but in heaven; which he immediately professes with a
solemn Oath, to perform to the uttermost of his power and knowledge;) but
likewise professedly maintained by Iustus Eccardus de Lege Regia, Marius
Salamonius de Principatu, Hugo Grotius de Iure Belli, and Pacis, l. 1. c. 4
sect. 10. Lib 2. c. 13. 14. Hotomani Franco-Gallia, c. 6. 10. 14. Ruibingius,
l. 2. Class. 11. c. 8. n. 26. Ioannis Mariana, Hist. l. 10 c. 16. l. 27. c. 11
l. 35. c 16. Albericus Gentilis, de Iure Belli, l. 3. c. 15. Cuiacius, c 33. de
Iure Iurando, Decius, Cons. 564. 689. Cephalus, Council. 618. Alciatus, l. 3. de
v. s. l. 15. C. de pact. Baldus Proaem. Digest. and by Iunius Brutus Vindicia
contra Tyrannos, qu. 3. p. 136. to 256. who handles this question professedly,
Whether that the King be the proprietory Lord of the public Royal Patrimany
of his Kingdom, or the Vsufractuary of it? determining clearly that he is not.
I shall transcribe the most of his Dicourse; This Head we must handle a little
more accurately. This is first to be observed, that the Patrimony of the
Exchequer is one thing, of the Prince another thing; I say, the things of the
Emperor, King, Prince are one thing, the things of Antonine, L^bene a Zenone
c. dequad. praest. l. vivis, de quaest. Mag. l. 12 c. l. fiscus D^de Iure fisci.
Henry, Philip another: The things of the King are those, which he as king
possesses; the things of Antonine, those which he has as Antonine, and those
verily he received from the people, the other from his Parents. This
distinction is frequent in the Civil Law, wherein the patrimony of the Empire
is said to be one thing, of Caesar another, the Exchequer of Caesar one thing,
the Treasury of the Republike another, the Treasurer of Caesar one person, of
the Imperial Exchequer another, the Courts of sacred donations, others from
those of private things; so that he who as Emperor is preferred before a
private man in a pledge, may sometimes be placed after him as Antonine.
Likewise in the German Empire, things of Marimilian of Austria are one kind of
things, of Maximilian the Emperor another; the Treasurers of the Empire
others, and of himself other from them; Likewise by another Law, the hereditary
possession of Princes are different, from those which are annexed to the
dignities of the Electorship. Yea, even among the Turks the Patrimoniall
Grounds or Gardens of Selymus are one thing, the fiscall Ground another; and
those verily are spent on the Princes Table, these only in sustentation of the
Empire. Yet there are Kingdoms, as the French, English, and the like, wherein
Kings have no private Patrimony, but only the Republike received from the
people, in which therefore this distinction is not used. Now as for the private
goods of Princes, if there be any, there is no doubt but they are the
proprietors of them, no otherwise then private Citizens; and by the civil Law
they may sell and divide them at their pleasure; But verily of the Exchequer,
Kingdom, Royal Patrimony, which is usually called Demesnes, L. Cum servis 3^.
to ult. D. de Leg. ^. l Vniversi 9 x. l. seq. C de sundo patrimon.
they can with no reason be called the proprietory Lords. For what? whether
because one has made thee a Shepherd for his Flocks sake, has he delivered
it thee to fley, divide, do with it, and strike it at thy pleasure? whether
because the people have constituted thee a Captain or Judge of some City or
County, have they given thee power of alienating, selling destroying that City
or County? And surely there is made an alienation of the people together with
the Region or County, have they therefore given thee authority of severing,
prostituting, enslaving them to whom thou will? Furthermore, is the Royal
dignity a possession, or rather a function? If a function, what community has
it with a propriety? If a possession, whether not at least such an one, that
the same people by whom it is delivered, may perpetually retain the propriety
to it self? Finally, if the patrimony of the Eschequer, or demaines of the
Republike, be truly called a Dower, and truly such a Dower, by whose
alienation or delapidation both the Republike it self and Kingdom, and king
himself finally perishes; by what law at last, shall it be lawful to alienate
this Dower? Therefore let Wenceslaus the Emperor be infatuated, let Charles
the sixth king of France be distracted, and give or sell the kingdom or a part
thereof to the English; let Malchom king of Scotland prodigally spend the Crown
land, and royal Treasure, what will follow? Those who have chosen a king
against the invasions of Forraigners, by the folly or madness of the king
shall be made the servants of Forraigners; those who by this means would
severally desire to secure their Estates, shall all of them together be exposed
to a prey; those things which every one shall take from himself or from his
pupils, as in Scotland, that he mightendow the Commonwealth, some Bawd shall
riotously consume. But if, as we have already often said, kings be created for
the peoples use, what use at all shall there be, if not only the use, but even
the abuse be granted? To whose good are so many evils? to whose benefit so many
losses, so many perils? If, I say, whiles I desire to look after my liberty or
safety, I make my self a slave, I expose my self to the lust of one man, I
put my self into Fetters and Stocks? Therefore we see this Law, as it is
infused by nature, so likewise it is approved by use almost among all Nations,
that it is not lawful for the king to diminish the Commonwealth at his
pleasure; and he who does contrary, is censured to play not the king, but
Tyrant. Certainly where kings were created, there was a necessity to give them
some Revenues, by which they might both support their Royal State, but most
principally sustain the Royal burdens, for so both honesty and profit seemed
to require. It pertained to the Royal Office to see Judges placed every where,
who should not take gifts, and who should not prostitute the Law to sale;
Moreover, to provide a force ready at hand which should assist the Law when
ever there should be need; to preserve the ways safe, Commerce safe, etc. but
if war were feared; to sortifie Cities with a Garrison, to inviron them with
a Trench against enemies, to maintain an Army, to furnish Armories. Now this is
a know proverb, that peace cannot consist without war, nor war without
soldiers, nor soldiers without wages, nor wages without tribute: Therefore to
sustain the burdens of Peace, the demesne was instituted, (which among the
Lawyers is called Canon) to defray the charges of war, tribute; yet so, as if
some more heavy charge should accrue, an extraordinary aid given by Parliament
should supply; the end of all which verily, is the good of the Commonwealth, so
as he that converts it to his private use, is plainly unworthy the name of a
king. For a Prince, Romans 13.
says Paul, is the Minister of God for the peoples good, and Tributes and
Customs are paid to him, that he may continually attend thereto; And truly
heretofore almost all Customs of the Romans seem to have had this Original,
that the precious Merchandise used to be brought out of India, Arabia,
Aethiopia might be secured against piraticall invasions, Pliny, l. 19. c. 4.
for which cause a Navy was furnished; of which kind was the tribute of the
Red Sea, Archid. in Can. si quis Romipetas and peregr. 24. qu. 3. Baldus in c.
1. sect. Commen. de paceiure infir. l. 2. D. ne quid in loco pub. Viarum l.
magis puto D. de rebus ^orum.
Pedatica, Navigia, Portoria, and the rest; that the public ways, (which were
therefore called Pretorian, Consular, Royal) should be rendered safe from
thieves plain and easy; which charge even now lies upon the kings Attorney;
that the public Bridges should be repaired, as appears out of the Constitution
of Jews the godly; twelve over Seyne; that Ships should be ready at hand to
transport men over Rivers, etc. There were no Tributes of Saltpits, yea, most
of them were in the Dominion of private men; because what things nature did
voluntarily give, they thought ought no more to be sold, then Light, Air,
water. And whereas a certain King named Lycurgus, had begun to impose a Tax on
Salt pits, as if nature would not suffer her liberality to be restrained, they
are said to have been presently dried up; although at this day, If we believe
Palphur or Armilot,
Whatever good, Iuvenal.
or fair thing can be got
Out of the Whole Sea, in each Realm it flows,
Some custom to the Kings Exchequer owes.


He who first instituted this custom at Rome, was Livius Censor, whence he
obtained the surname of Salinator, which he did for the most present necessity
of the Commonwealth. For that very cause truly, King Philip obtained it only
for five years, whose continuation what commotions it has produced, every man
knows: Finally, that tributes were instituted to pay Soldiers wages in
wars, appears even from this, that to make a Province stipendary or
tributary, is the selfsame thing indeed. 2 King. 9. and 12. Postellus l, 3. de
Rep. T^r.
Thus Solomon imposed Tributes to fortify Cities, and to furnish a public
Armory, which because they were finished, the people under Rehoboam desired to
be eased thereof: Yea, the Turks themselves call the Tribute of Princes, The
sacred blood of the People, which profusely to spend, or to convert to any
other use, but to defend the people, is a cursed act. Therefore what things
soever a King acquires in wars in every Nation, because he gains it by the
common treasure, he acquires it to the people, not to himself, as a factor
does to his Master: Moreover if perchance he gain any thing by marriage (which
I say, is pure and simply his wives) he is thought to acquire it to the
Kingdom, because he was presumed to marry that wife, not as he is Philip or
Charles, but as he is King. On the contrary, as Queens have part of those
things which their husbands not yet coopted into the Kingdom have gained
during the marriage; so plainly they have no part of those things they get
after they have obtained the Kingdom, because they are reputed gained to the
public Treasures, not to the private means of the King, which was judged in
the Realm of France, between Philip Valoyes and Joan of Burgundy his wife.
Now, lest the moneys should be extorted to some other use, the Emperor
swears, that he will impose no customs, nor enjoyne no taxes, but by the
Authority of a public Assembly. The Kings of Poland, Hungary, Denmark,
England do the like out of the Laws of Edward the first. The French Kings
heretofore demanded Tributes in the Assemblies of the three Estates; Hence also
is that Law of Philip Valoyes; That impositions should not be imposed but upon
great and urgent necessity, and that by the consent of the Three Estates:
Moreover in times past those taxes were laid up in Castles throughout every
Diocese, and delivered to selected men (they even now call them Elected) to be
kept, by whose hand the Soldiers enrolled in every Town, should receive their
wages, which was also usually done in other Countries, as in the Belgic; At
this day at least, whatsoever things are commanded, are not confirmed, unless
the Parliament consent. Now there are some Provinces, which are not bound by
covenant, but by the consent of the Estates, as Languedoc, Britain, Province,
Dolphenie, and some others; and in the Netherlands clearly all. Finally, lest
the Eschequer, swelling like the spleen, whereby all the other Members do pine
away, should draw all things to it self, every where a due proportion is
allotted to the Eschequer. Since therefore at last it appears, that the
tributes, customs, demesall, that which they call demesnes, (under which names
Portages, Imposts, Exposts, Royalties, wrecks, forfeitures, and such like are
comprehended) which are ordinarily or extraordinary given to Kings, were
conferred on them for the benefit of the people, and supportation of the
kingdom, and so verily; that if these nerves should be cut in sunder the
people would fall to decay, these foundation being under-mined, the Kingdom
must needs fall to the ground; it truly follows, that he who to the prejudice
of the people burdens the people, who reaps a gain out of the public loss,
and so cuts their throat with their own sword, is not a King, but a Tyrant:
contrarily, that a true King, as he is a survey or of the public affairs, so
likewise an Administrator of the public riches, but not a proprietary Lord,
who can no more alienate or dissipate, the Royal Demesnes, then the kingdom
it self; but if he shall demene himself otherwise; verily as it is
behoovefull to the Republike, that every one should use his own proper goods
well, much more is it beneficial for the Commonweal, that every one should use
the public estate well. And therefore if a Lord who prodigally spends his
Estate, is by public authority deduced to the Wardship of his kinsmen, and
Family and compelled to abstain from his possessions; then truly much more
justly, the Guardian of the Republike, who converts the public Administration
of all wealth into the public destruction, or utterly subverts it, may justly
be spoiled, by those whom it concerns, and to whom it belongs out of Office,
unless he desists upon admonition. Now that a King in all lawful Empires is
not a proprietary Lord of the Royal patrimony, is easy to be manifested. That
we may not have recourse to those most ancient ages, whose Image we have in the
person of Ephron king of the Hittites, Genesis 23.
who durst not verily sell his field to Abraham, without the peoples consent;
that very law is at this day used in all Empires. The Emperor of Germany
before he is Crowned, Sleiden, l. 1. and ^ulla aurea.
sacredly swears, That he will alienate, distract, or morgage nothing of those
things which appertain to the Empire, and the patrimony of the Empire; but if
he recovers or acquires any thing by the public Forces, that it shall come to
the Empire, not to himself. Therefore when Charles the fourth, that Wenceslaus
his son might be designed Emperor, had promised an 100000 Crowns to every one
of the Electors, and because he had no ready moneys, had obliged to them by way
of pawn to this end, the Imperial Customs, Tributes, Towns, Proprieties and
Rights; there arose a most sharp dispute about it, and the most judged the
morgage to be void; which verily had not availed, unless that morgage had been
gainful to those very men, L. 1. and passim, c de Com. Rev. alienat.
who ought to defend the Empire, and principally to oppose that morgage: Yea,
therefore Wenceslaus himself was compelled, as incapable, to deprive himself of
the Empire, Nauclerus in Chron. Genesis 46. C. intellecto de Inreiurando in Decret.
because he had suffered the Royal Rights, especially the Dukedom of Millain
to be taken from him. In the Polish kingdom there is an ancient Law, of not
alienating the Lands of the Kingdom of Poland, renewed An. M.CCCLXV by king
Jews: There is the same Law in the Realm of Hungary, where we read, that
Andrew king of Poland, Polydor Virgil. In Cod Hispan. par. 5 1. Consent. 9.
about the year M. CCXXI. was accused before Pope Honorius the third, that
neglecting his Oath, he had alienated the Crown Lands. The like in England in
the Law of K. Edward, An. M.CCXCVIII. Likewise in Spain by the Constitution
made under Alphonso, renewed again MDLX in the Assembly at Toledo; which Laws
verily were enacted, when as custom for a long time before had obtained the
force of a Law. But verily in the kingdom of France, wherein, as in the
pattern of the rest, I shall longer insist, this Law was ever sacrosanct: It is
the most ancientest Law of the Realm, I say, the Law born with the Kingdom it
self, Of not alienating the Crown (or demesne) Lands, Papon Ar. stor. l. 5.
Tit. 20. art. 4.
renewed in the year M, D, 66. although it be ill observed. Two cases only are
excepted, Panage or Apennage (aliments) to be exhibited to his children or
brethren, yet so as the clintelary right be always retained; again, if warlike
necessity require it, yet with a pact of reddition, Yet in the interim both of
them were heretofore reputed void, Paragr. 11. and 16. Legis Regiae Latae. 1566.
unless the Assembly of the three Estates had commanded it; but at this day,
since a standing Parliament was erected, it is likewise void, unless the
Parliament of Paris, which is the Senate of Peers, and the Chamber of public
accounts shall approve it, and the Presidents of the Eschequer also by the
Edict of Charles the 6 and 9. Aimoi etc. Aimoi. l. ^. c. 41.
And this is so far forth true, that if the ancient Kings of France would
endow any Church, although that cause then seemed most favorable, they were
bound to obtain the consent of the Nobles; as king Childebert may be for an
example, who without the consent of the French and Normans, durst not endow the
Monastery of S. Vincents in Paris, as neither Clodoveus the second, and the
rest. Moreover, they cannot release the Royalties, or the right of nominating
Prelates to any Church; but if any have done it, as Jews the eleventh in
favor of the Church of Sennes, and Philip the fourth of Augiers, Philip
Augustus of Naverne, the Parliament has pronounced it void. The king of
France, when he is to be Crowned at Rheimes, swears to this law, which if he
shall violate, it avails as much as if he contracted concerning the Turkish or
Persian Empire. L. Petr. 69. par^g. praed^umi. D. de Oy. 2.
Hence the Constitutions, or as they callit, the Statutes of Philip the sixth,
John the 2d, Charles the fifth, sixth, eight, of resuming those things which were
alienated by their Ancestors, (of which resumptions there are many instances
cited by Hugo Grotius de Jure Belli and Pacis, l. 2. c. 14. n. 12. 13. and
Adnotata Ibid.) Hence in the Assembly of the three Estates at Towers (An. 1323.
1360. 1374. 1401. 1483.) An. 1483. 15^2. (...). Ares^is Curiae. 1^60.
in which Charles the eight was present, many Towns of the alienation of Jews
the eleventh his Father, which he had by his own Authority given to Tancred
Castellan, who demerited well of him, were taken from his Heirs; which even in
the last assembly of the three Estates held at Orange, was again decreed. Thus
concerning public Lands. But that it may the more evidently appear, that the
kingdom is preferred before the king, that he cannot by his private Authority
diminish the Majesty which he has received from the people, Paulus Aemil. l.
3.
nor exempt any one from his Empire, nor grant the right of the Sovereign
Dominion in any part of the Realm; Charles the great once endeavored to
subject the Realm of France to the German Empire; but the French vehemently
withstood it, An. 1195, 1200, 1269, 1297, 1303, 1325, 1335. An 1360. An. 1465,
and 1525.
a certain Vascon Prince making the Oration: The matter had proceeded to Arms,
if Charles had proceeded further. Likewise, when some part of the Realm of
France was delivered to the English, the supreme right was almost perpetually
excepted; but if Force extorted it at any time, as in the British League,
wherein king John released his Sovereign Right in Gascoigne and Poytiers, the
king neither kept his Contract, neither could or ought he more to keep it, then
a Captain, Tutor or Guardian, as then he was; who that he might redeem
himself, would oblige the goods of his Pupils. By the same Law the Parliament
of Paris rescinded the agreement of the Flusheners, wherein Charles of Burgundy
extorted Ambian, An. 1420. Mons^re^et c. 225.
and the neighbor Cities from the king; and in our time the agreement of of
Madrit, between Francis the first a Captive, and Charles the fifth the Emperor,
concerning the Dukedom of Burgundy was held void; and the Donation of Charles
the sixth of the kingdom of France by reason of death, conferred on Henry king
of England, may be one apt argument of his extreme madness, if others be
wanting. But that I may omit other things which might be said to this purpose,
L. Liber homo 103. D. de verbo. obligat. l si Emp. 34. 1. D. de contra
Empil^pe-C. de oper. libert.
by what right at last can a king give or sell his kingdom or any part thereof,
seeing they consist in the people, not in the walls? now there is no sale of
free men, when as Landlords cannot so much as constrain their free Tenants,
that they should settle their Household in any other place then where they
please; especially seeing they are not servants, but Brethren; neither only
are all kings Brethren, but even all within the Royal Dominion ought to be so
called.

But whether if the king be not the proprietorie of the Realm, An lex sit
Regni usis fructuarius?
may he not at least be called the usufructuary, or receiver of the profits of
the Crown Lands? Truly, not so much as an usufructuary. A usufructuary can
Pawn his lands, but we have proved, that kings cannot morgage the Patrimony of
the Crown. A fructuary can dispose or give the profits at his pleasure;
contrarily, the great gifts of the king are judged void, His unnecessary
expenses are rescinded, his superfluous cut off; what ever he shall convert
into any other but the Public use, he is thought to have violently usurped.
Neither verily is he less obliged by the Cincian Law, then any private Citizen
among the Romans, especially in France where no gifts are of force without the
consent of the Auditors of the Accounts. Hence the ordinary Annotations of the
Chamber under prodigal kings; This Donation is too great, and therefore let it
be revoked. Now this Chamber solemnly swears, that whatsoever rescript they
shall at any time receive from the king, that they will admit nothing which may
be hurtful to the kingdom and Commonweal. Finally, the Law cares not how a
Fructuary uses and enjoys his profits; contrarily, the Law prescribes the
king in what manner, and unto what use he ought to put them. Therefore the
ancient kings of France were bound to divide the Rents into four parts; one
part was spent in sustaining the Ministers of the Church, and the poor, another
upon the kings Table, the third on the Wages of his household servants,
Mon^retus in Carolo 6.
the last in the repair of royal Castles, Bridges, Houses; the residue, if
there were any, was laid up in the Treasury. Verily what stirs there were about
the year 1412 in the Assembly of the three Estates at Paris, because Charles
the sixth had converted all things into his and his Officers lusts, and that the
Domestic accounts, which before had not exceeded 94 thousand French Crowns in
such a miserable estate of the republike, had increased to the sum of five
hundred and forty thousand Crowns, is sufficiently evident out of Histories:
Now as the rents of the Crown were thus lessened, so also the oblations and
subsidies were spent upon the War, as the taxes and tallages were only
destinated to the stipends of Soldiers. In other Realms the King verily has
not any more Authority, yea, in most he has less, as in the Germane and
Polish Empire: But we would therefore prove this to be so in the Realm of
France, lest by how much any man dares to do more injury, Ex Council. Valent.
in c. de his quae finit. a Prelatis absque cons capit.
by so much also he might be thought to have more right. In sum, what we have
said before, the name of a King sounds not an inheritance, not a propriety, not
a perception of profits, but a function, a procuration. As a Bishop is
instituted for the cure and salvation of the soul, so the King of the body, in
those things which pertain to the public goods; as he is the dispenser of
sacred goods, so the King of profane, and what power he has in his
Episcopal, the same, and no greater has the King in his dominicall Lands; the
alienation of the Episcopal Lands without the consent of the Chapter, is of no
validity, so neither of the Crown Land without a public Parliament or Senate
of the Estates; Of sacred revenews one part is designed to aedifices, another
to the poor, a third to Companions, a fourth to the Bishop himself; the same
verily almost we see the King ought to do in dispensing the revenewes of the
Kingdom. It hinders not, that the contrary every where is at this day usurped:
For the duty of Bishops is not any way changed, because many Bishops sell those
things from the poor, which they spend upon Bawds, or wast all their Manors
and Woods; nor yet that some Emperors have attributed all kind of power to
themselves, for neither can any one be judge in his own Cause. But if any
Cararalla has said, That so long as his sword remains, he would want no money;
Adrianus Caesar will also be present, who shall say, That he would manage the
Principality, Florus l. 2 Livy l. 70. Tacitus l. 14.
so as all should know, that it was the peoples goods, or inheritance, not his
own; which one thing almost distinguishes a King from a Tyrant: Not, that
Attalus King of Pergameni, ordained the people of Rome Heirs of his Realm;
that Alexander bequeathed the kingdom of Egypt, Ptolomie of the Cyrenians, to
the people of Rome, or Prasutagus of the Iceni to Caesar; verily this great
power cannot debilitate the force of the Law, yea, by how much the greater it
is, by so much the less it hurts our law; for what things the Romans seized
upon by pretext of law, they would notwithstanding have seized on by force, if
that pretext had been wanting: Yea, we see almost in our times, the Venetians,
by pretext of a certain imaginary adoption, which without force had been
plainly ridiculous, Volaterum, lib. Greg 3.
to have taken the Kingdom of Cyprus. Nor yet does the Donation of Constantine
to pope Sylvester hinder, for this Chafe seemed absolete long since to
Gratian, and is damned to the fire. Not the donation of Jews the godly to
Paschall, to wit, of Rome, with part of Italy, because Pius gave that which he
possessed not, and no man resisted; But Charles, his Father, willing to subject
the Realm of France to the German Empire, the French resisted him by law; 1
King c. 9. 2 Chronicles. c. ^.
and if he had gone further, they prepared to resist by sorce Not, that Solomon
as we read, delivered twenty cities to Hiram King of Tire, for he did not give
them, but pawned them as a Creditor till he paid him, and within a short time
recovered them, which appears out of the Text; Moreover also they were barren
grounds, tilled by Relics of the Heathens, which he receiving again from
Hiram, gave them at last to the Israelites to be tilled and inherited. Neither
can this more hinder, that in certain Kingdoms this condition perchance does
not so expressly intervene between the King and his people; L. 2. paragr^ius
rei D. de administ. rer ad cui. part. 1. Lut^r 27. D. de admin. tutor. l. fi
Fundum. ^arag. fi tutor D. depositi and express. Extrauag. dear Iudicat c.
intellecto. l. 2 and passim c. de interdict Com^er, alien.
for albeit it were not at all, yet it appears by the law of Nations, that
Kings are not subverters, but Moderators of the Republike, that they cannot
change the right of the Commonwealth by their pactions; that they are Lords
only when they take care of their Pupils, that they are to be accounted no
other then Guardians; and that he is not to be esteemed a Lord, who spoils the
City with liberty, and sells it like a slave. Not finally, that certain
Kingdoms are gained by Kings themselves, for they acquired not Kingdoms by
their own, but by public hands, forces, treasures; now nothing is more
consonant to reason, then that those things which are gotten by the public
riches, and common dangers of the Citizens, should not be alienated without
common consent, which holds place even amongst Thieves themselves; he
destroys humane society, who does the contrary: Therefore though the French
have by force seized on the German Empire, and they also on the Realm of
France, yet the same law holds in both. In sum, at last we ought to determine,
that Kings are not Proprietors, nor Fructuaries, but only Administratours; and
since it is so, that verily they can much less attribute to themselves the
propriety and profits of every man's private Estate, or of the public wealth
which belongs to every Town. Thus and much more this accute learned Lawyer,
to the conviction and refutation of all opposite Ignoramusses in this case of
grand concernment, which will put a period to our unhappy controversies
concerning the Militia, ( Part. 2. p. 1. to 41.
formerly discussed) without further debate. Observe. 8.


Eighthly, That Emperors and Kings are most solemnly obliged by a Covenant and
Oath, usually made to, and before all the people at their Coronations, to
preserve their peoples laws, liberties, lives, estates; by breach whereof in a
wilful excessive manner, they become perjured Tyrants, and the people and
Magistrates are in some sort thereby absolved from their Allegiance, and all
obedience to them.

This is evidently and plentifully confirmed by the Part. 1. p. 51. to ^8.
forecited Coronation Oaths, and Covenants of our own English Kings to their
subjects, by De Jure Magistratus in Subditos, quaest. 10. p. 321. 322. and
quaest 6. p. 260. to 300. Andrew Favine his Theater of Honor, lib. 2. c. 11.
24. Francisci Hotomani Franco-gallia, cap. 6. 10. etc. Hugo Grotius de Jure
Belli and Pacis, l. 2. c. 13. 14. Pontificale Romanum, Romae 1611. fol. 162,
163. Descripti^ Coronationis Maximiliani Imperatoris, Anno 1486. inter reruns
German Scriptores, Tom. 3. p. 32. Olaus Magnus de Gent. Septentrionalibus Hist.
l. 14. c. 6. Laur. Bochellus decreta Ecclesiae Gallicanae, l. 5. Tit. 2. c. 1.
p. 703. M. John Seldens Titles of Honor, part. 1. chapter 8. sect. 5. p. 198. 214.
225. 226. (where the Coronation, Oaths of the Emperor, French King, of all
the Northern Kings, and of most Elective and Successive Kings and Queens to
their Subjects, are at large recorded:) Alhusius Polit. c. 4. Justus Eccardus
de Lege Regia; Thomas Aquinas de Reg. Principis, c. 6. and 2. qu. 2^. 12. art.
2. John Ponet Bishop of Winchester in his Political Government. Arnisaeus de
Authoritate Principum, p. 50. to 123. Sparsim. Vasquius contro. Illustr.
passim. Ioannis Mariana de Rege and Regis Instit. l. 1. c. 6. 7. 9. Georg.
Buchanon de Iure Regni apud Scotos. Simancha Pacensis de Catholica. Instit.
Tit. 23. n. 11 p. 98. Franciscus Tolletus in summa l. 5 c. 6 Huldericus
Zuinglius; Explan. Artic. 40. 41. 42. And, to omit all others, Iunius Brutus in
his Vindiciae contra Tyrannos, quaest. 3. p. 156. to 167. with whose words I
shall fortify and irradiate this position: We have said, that in constituting
a King a double Covenant is entered into; the first between God, the King and
people, of which before; the second, between the king and the people, of which
we are now to treat. Saul being ordained king, the royal law was delivered to
him, Deuteronomy 17. 1 Sa. ^0. 25. 2 Samuel ^. 3. 1 Chronicles. 11. 3. 2 King. 11. 17. and
12. 2 Chronicles. 23. 3. 2 King. 23. 3.
according to which he should rule. David made a Covenant before the Lord in
Hebron; that is, calling God to Witness, with all the Elders of Israel, who
represented all the people, and then at last he was anointed king. Ioas also
made a Covenant with all the people of the land in the house of the Lord,
Iehoiada the high Priest going before them in words: Yea, the testimony is said
to be imposed on him together with the Crown; which most interpret the Law of
God, which every where is called by that name. Likewise Josiah promised, that
he would observe the Precepts, Testimonies and Statutes comprised in the book
of the Covenant; by which names we understand the Laws which appertained as
well to piety as to justice. In all which places of Scripture, a Covenant is
said to be made with all the people, the whole multitude, all the Elders, all
them ^n of Judah; that we may understand, which is likewise severally
expressed, not only the Princes of the Tribes, but likewise all the Chi^arkes,
Centurions, and inferior Magistrates were present, in the Name of the Cities,
which every one a part by themselves made a Covenant with the king. In that
Covenant they consulted of creating the king, for the people did make the king,
not the king the people. Therefore there is no doubt, but the people made the
Covenant, and the King promised to perform it. Now the part of him that makes
the Covenant is reputed the ^etter Law: The people demanded of the King,
whether he would not rule justly and according to the Laws? He promised that
he would do so: whereupon the people answered, That he reigning justly, they
would faithfully obey him. Therefore the King promised absolutely; the people,
but upon condition; which if it were not fulfilled, the people by the Law it
self should be reputed absolved from all obligation. In the first covenant or
Pact, Piety comes into the obligation, in the second, Justice: In that, the
king promises, that he will seriously obey God; in this, that he will justly
rule the people* in that, that he will take care of the glory of God; in this,
of the benefit of the people; in that there is this condition, If thou shall
observe my Law; in this, If thou shall render Justice to every one: Of that, if
it be not fulfilled, God properly is the avenger; of this, lawfully all the
people, or the Peers of the Realm, who have taken upon them to defend all the
people. Xenoph. lib Pa.
Now in all just Empires, this has been perpetually observed. The Persians
having duly finished their sacrifices, made this agreement with Cyrus, Thou
first. O Cyrus, if any make war with the Persians or violate the Laws, do
thou promise to aid thy Country with all thy might? And as soon as he had
promised. We Persians, say they, will be aiding to thee, if any will not obey
thee, defending thy Country: Xenophon. de Repub. Lacedaem.
Xenophon calls this agreement (...), that is, a Confederation, as Socrates an
Oration of the duty of Subjects toward their Prince (...): Between the kings
of Sparta and the Ephori, a Covenant was renewed every month; and as the kings
did swear, Dionys. Hallicar. lib. 1.
That they would reign according to the Laws of the Country; so the Ephori, If
they did so, that they would establish the Kingdom in their hand. Likewise in
the kingdom of the Romans, Romulus made this contract with the Senate and
people, That the People should make Laws, that the king himself would keep
the Laws made; That the People should decree War, himself wage it. And
although many Emperors obtained the Empire of the Romans rather by force and
ambition, then by any right, and by the Royal Law, as they call it, arrogated
all kinds of power to themselves; yet the* See Ec^ardus de Lege Regia and
M^rius Salamonius de Principatu l. 6. where this Law is recorded.
fragments of that Law, which are extant as well in Books as in Roman
inscriptions, sufficiently teach; that a power was granted them, of caring for
and administering, not of subverting the Commonweal and oppressing it by
tyranny. Moreover, even good Emperors professed, that they were bound by the
Laws, and acknowledged their Empire received from the Senate, and referred all
the weightiest affairs to the Senate, and they judged it unlawful to
determine any thing of great public concernment without their advice. But if
we behold the present Empires, there is not one of them which may be thought
worthy of that name, wherein there is not some such Covenant intervening
between the Prince and Subjects. In the German Empire, not long since, the King
of Romans being to be crowned Emperor, was wont To make Fealty and Homage to
the Empire, no otherwise then a vassal (or tenant) to his Lord, when he
received investiture of his Lands. And although the conceived words, to which
he swear, Speculum Sa^on, l. 1. art. 54. See Descript. Coronations Maximiliani
Imper An. 1486. in Rerum Germ. scrip. Tom. 3 p. 32.
be a little changed by Popes, yet the same thing remains perpetually.
Therefore we know that Charles the 5. of Austria was created Emperor upon
certain Laws and conditions, as likewise others, who have succeeded him; of
which the sum was; That he would keep the Laws enacted; That he would make
no new Laws, without the Electors consents; that he would determine public
affairs in a public Counsel; that he would alienate or pervert none of these
things which pertained to the Empire; with other things which are severally
recited by Historiagraphers: And when as the Emperor is crowned at Achen, the
Archbishop of Colen first demands of him; Sleidan, l. 1. c. 2.
Whether he will not defend the Church, administer justice, preserve the
Empire,, protect Widows, Orphans, and all worthy of pity? which when he has
solemnly sworn to perform before the Altar, the Princes and those who represent
the Empire, are demanded, whether they will promise to fealty him? Neither yet
is he first anointed, or receives a sword, (of purpose to defend the
Republike) or other Ensigns of the Empire, before that he shall have taken
that Oath. From whence verily it is manifest, that the Emperor is purely
obliged, the Princes of the Empire upon condition only. See Pontifical.
Romanum Romae 1611. f. 161. 162. Mr. Seldens Titles of Hon. par. 1. c. 8. p.
196. to 206.
No man will doubt but that the same is observed in the kingdom of Poland, who
shall understand the ceremonies very lately observed in the Election and
Coronation of Henry of Angiers: especially, the condition propounded to him of
conserving both Religions, as well the Evangelicall as Roman, which the Nobles
thrice demanding of him in set form of words, he thrice promised to perform.
In the Hungarian, Bohemian, and other kingdoms, which would be overlong to
recite, the very same is done. Neither only, where the right of Election has
continued yet entire hitherto, but likewise where mere succession is commonly
thought to take place, the very same stipulation is wont to intervene. When the Sea Bochellus Decreta Eccles. Gallicanae l. 55 tit. 2 c. 1. and Mr. Seldens
Titles of Hon. par. 1. ch 8. p. ^41. to 256.
King of France is crowned, the Bishops of Laudune and Belvace ecclesiastical
Peers, first demand of all the people that are present, Whether they desire and
command him to be King? Whence even in the very form it self of inauguration,
he is said To be elected by the People. When the people Seem to have consented,
he swears: That he will universally defend all the Laws, Privileges, and
Rights of France, that he will not alienate his demesnes, and the like (I shall
here insert the Oath out of Bochellus, Mr. Seldom, and others entirely, thus:

Archiepiscopi Ammonitio ad Regem dicendo ita (in the name of all the Clergy.)
A vobis perdonari petimus, ut vnicuique de Nobis and Ecclesiis nobis Commissis,
Canonicum privilegium, and debitam legem atque justitiam conservatis, and
defensionem exhibeatis, sicut Rex in Regno suo debet unicuique Episcopo, and
Ecclesiae sibi Commissae.

Responsio Regis ad Episcopos.

Promitto vobis and perdono, quia vnicuique de vobis and Ecclesiis vobis
commissis Canonicum privilegium, and debitam legem atque justitiam conservabo,
and defensionem quantum potuero exhibebo, Domino adjuanente, sicut Rex in suo
Regno unicuique Episcopo and ecclesiae sibi commissae per rectum exhibere debet.

Item, haec dicit Rex, and promittit and firmat juramento.

Haec populo Christiano and mihi subdito, in Christi nomine, promitto: In
primis, Vt Ecclesiae Dei, omnis Populus Christianus veram pacem nostro arbitrio
in omni tempore servet; and superioritatem, jura, and Nobilitates Coronae
Franciae inviolabiliter custodiam, ET ILLA NEC TRANSPORTABO NEC ALIENABO. Item,
ut omnes repacitates and omnes iniquitates omnibus gradibus interdicam. Item,
ut in omnibus judiciis aequitatem and misericordiam praeoipiam, ut mihi and
vobis indulgeat per suam misericordiam clemens and misericors Dominus. Item, de
terra mea ac jurisdictione mihi subdita universos Haereticos Ecclesia
denotatos, pro viribus bona fide exterminare studebo. Haec omnia praedicta
firmo juramento.

Tum manum apponat Libro and librum osculetur) These things, though they have
been altered, and are far different from the ancient form of the Oath which
is extant in the Library of the Chapter of Belvace, to which Philip the first
is found to have sworn; yet notwithstanding they are plainly enough expressed:
Neither is the King girt with a sword, anointed, crowned by the Peers (who
even themselves are adorned with Coronets) or receives the Scepter or rod of
Justice, or is proclaimed King, See Hot^mani Franco-Gallia c. 6. 7. 10.
before THE PEOPLE HAVE COMMANDED IT; Neither do the Peers themselves swear
fealty and homage to him, until he shall have given his faith unto them, That
he will exactly keep the Laws: Now those are, that he shall no^ w^ste the
public Patrimony: that he shall not impose nor enjoin customs, Taxes,
Tributes at his own pleasure, Nor denounce war, or make peace; Finally, that
he shall determine nothing concerning the public affairs, but in a public
Council: Also, that the Senate, the Parliaments, the Officers of the Kingdom
shall constantly enjoy their several authorities; and other things which have
been always observed in the Realm of France. Yea verily, when he enters into
any Province or City, he is bound to confirm their privileges, and he binds
himself by Oath to preserve their Laws and Customs: Which custom takes
place by name among those of Toulouse Dolphenie, Britanny, Province and Rochel;
whose agreements with Kings are most express; all which should be frustrate,
unless they should be thought to hold the place of a condition in the
contract. De Iure Magist. in Subditos, 290, 291, 292. See the French Hist. in
his life.
Yea Charles the 7. made a peace with Philip Duke of Burgundy (whose Father
John he had treacherously slain) with this express clause contained in it, (*)
Bodin Com. ma^w. l. ^. c. ^. p. 632. 633.
confirmed with the Kings own Seal; That if he should break this Agreement,
his Tenants, feudataries, and subjects present and to come, should not be
thenceforth bound either to obey or serve him, but rather the Duke of Burgundy
and his Successors, and that they should be freed and absolved from all the
fealty, Oaths, promises, obligations and duties whatsoever, under which they
were unjustly obliged by Charles. The like we read between King Lewis and
Charles the Bald. Yea, Pope John the 22. in the Treaty between Philip the long
of France, and the Flemmings, caused it to be set down, That if the King did
infringe the Treaty, it might be lawful for his Subjects to take Arms against
him; And if was usual among the first Kings of France in their Treatises with
other Princes, In Annal. Burg.
to swear, that if they brake the Treaties made by them, their Subjects shall
be free from their obedience, as in the Treaty of Arras and others. The Oath of
the ancient kings of Burgundy is extant in these words, I will conserve Law,
justice, and protection to all men. In England, Scotland, Sweden, Donmarke,
there is almost the same custom as in France, and verily no where more
directly then in Spain. For in the Kingdom of Arragon, many ceremonies being
dispatched between him who represents the justice of Arragon, or public
Majesty, who sits in an higher Throne, and having read the Laws and
conditions, which he is to observe who is to be crowned King. Who does fealty
and homage to him, the Nobles at last speak thus to the King in their own
language; We, who are as powerful as you (for so the Spanish Idiom imports)
and can do more then you, have chosen you King upon these and these
conditions, Between you and us there reigns one greater then you; (to wit, the
Justice of A^ragon.) Now lest he should think he had sworn those things only
perfunctorily, or only for to observe the old custom, these very words are
wont to be repeated every third year in the public Assembly: But if he shall
grow insolent trusting to his Royal power, shall violate the public Laws,
finally, shall neglect the Oath he has taken; then verily by the Law it self,
he is deemed excommunicated with that grandest excommunication (or Anathema)
wherewith the Church in former times excommunicated Julian the Apostate; whose
force truly is such; that no more prayers may be conceived for him, but against
him; and they themselves are clearly absolved from their Oath and Obligation by
that Law, whereby a vassal out of duty ought not to obey an excommunicated
Lord, neither is bound to do it by his Oath; In Council Tol. 4. c. 7. and Tol.
6. l. 2 feud. tit. 28. par. 1.
which is ratified among them by the Decree both of a Council, and of a
Parliament or public Assembly. Likewise in the kingdom of Castle an Assembly
being summoned, the King that is to be crowned, is first publicly admonished
of his duty; after which, most express conditions are read, which pertain to
the profit of the Republike: Then the King swears, that he will diligently and
faithfully observe them; then at last the great Master of the Knights b^nds
himself to him by Oath, whom the other Princes and Deputies of Cities
afterward follow every one in his order; La ioyeuse en^^r.
which also is in like manner observed in Portugal, Le^n, and the other
kingdoms of Spain. Neither verily, were lesser principalities instituted by
any other Law. There are extant most express agreements of the Brabanders, of
the other people of Belgia, Austria, Carintha, and other provinces, made with
their princes, which verily have the place of conditions; But the Brahanders
expressly, that place might not be left to any ambiguity, have expressed this
condition. For in inaugurating their Duke, in ancient conventions, wherein
there is almost nothing wanting for the preservation of the Republike, they
being all read over before the Duke, Ludovic. Guic.
they protest openly and plainly to him, that unless he shall observe them
all, That it shall be free for them to choose another Duke at their pleasure:
Which conditions he embracing and willingly acknowledging, he then binds
himself by Oath to observe them, which was also observed in the inauguration
of Philip the last King of Spain. In sum, no man can deny, but that there is a
mutual binding contract between the King and subjects, to wit, That he
reigning well, shall be well obeyed: Which verily is wont to be confirmed with
an Oath by the King first^, afterward by the people. Now verily I demand here,
why any man should swear, but that he may show that he speaks from his heart
and seriously? whether truly is there any thing more agreeable to nature, then
that those things which have pleased us, L. 1. D de pact. l. non minorem. 20 D
de transact.
should be observed? Moreover, why does the King swear first, at the peoples
stipulation or request, but that he may receive either a tacit or express
condition? But why is a condition annexed to a contract, but only to this end,
that if it be not fulfilled, the contract should become void in Law it self?
But if through default of performing the condition, the contract be void in
Law it self, who may call the people perjured, who shall deny obedience to a
King, neglecting that condition which he might and ought to fulfill and
violating that law to which he has sworn? Yea, who on the contrary would not
account the King saedifragous, Lib. 2. feudor. 2. 26. 4. a. tit. 47.
perjurious and altogether unworthy of that benefit? For if the Law freeth the
Vassal from the bond of his Tenure, against whom the Lord has committed felony
or perjury, although the Lord truly does not properly give his faith to his
Vassal, but his Vassal to him: if the Law of the twelve Tables commands a
Patron who defrauded his Client to be detestable: if the civil laws permit a
villain enfranchised an action against the outrageous injury of his Lord; if in
these cases they free a servant himself from his Masters power, whereas yet
there is only a natural not civil obligation therein, (I shall add out of
Dionys. Hal. l. 2 page 303. 304.
Dejure Magistratus in subditos. ^f in Matrimony, which is the nearest and
strictest obligation of all other between men, wherein God himself intervenes
as the chief Author of the contract, 1 Cor 7. 15.
and by which those who were two are made one flesh, if the one party forsakes
the other, the Apostle pronounces the party forsaked to be free from all
obligation, because the party deserting violates the chief condition of
marriage, etc.) Shall not the people be much more absolved from their Allegiance
which they have made to the King, if the King, who first solemnly swears to
them, as a Steward to his Lord, shall break his faith? Yea verily whether if
not these Rights, not these Solemnities, not these Sacraments or Oaths should
intervene, does not nature it self sufficiently teach, that Kings are
constituted by the people, upon this condition, that they should reign well?
Judges, that they shall pronounce Law? Captains of war, that they should
lead an Army against enemies? But and if so be they rage, offer injury, so as
themselves are made enemies, as they are no Kings, Cic. 1. Offic^*
so neither ought they to be acknowledged by the people. What if thou shall
say, that some people subdued by force, the Prince has compelled to swear to
his commands? What, say I, if a Thief, a Pyrate, a Tyrant, with whom no
society of Law or Right is thought to be, should with a drawn sword violently
extort a deed from any one? Is it not known, that fealty extorted by force
binds not, especially if any thing be promised against good manners, against
the law of nature? Now what is more repugnant to nature, then that a people
should lay chains and fetters upon themselves, then that they should lay their
own throats to the sword? then that they should lay violent hands upon
themselves? (or which is verily the same thing) promise it to the Prince?
Therefore there is a mutual obligation between the King and people, which
whether it be only civil or natural, tacit, or in express words, can be
taken away by no agreements violated by no Law, re^^^nded by no force: Whose
force only is so great, that the Prince who shall contemptuously break it, may
be truly called a Tyrant, the people who shall willingly infringe, it
seditious: So this grand accute Lawyer determines. I shall close up this with
the unanimous resolutions and notable decree of the United Netherland
Provinces. Anno Dom. 1581. declaring Philip King of Spain to be fallen from the
Seigniorie of the Netherlands for his Tyranny and breach of Oath, which is thus
recited by Grimstone, and recorded in his general History of the Netherlands,
page 658, to 667.

In the alterations which happen sometimes in an Estate betwixt the Sovereign
Prince and a people that is free and privileged, there are ordinarily two
points, which make them to aim at two diverse ends: The one is, when as the
Prince seeks to have a full subjection and obedience of the people, and the
people contrariwise require, that the Prince should maintain them in their
freedoms and liberties, which he has promised and sworn solemnly unto them,
before his reception to the principality. Thereupon quarrels grow: the Prince
will hold a hard hand, and will seek by force to be obeyed; and the subjects
rising against the Prince, oftentimes with dangerous tumults, rejecting his
authority, seek to embrace their full liberty.

In these first motions there happen sometimes conferences, at the instance of
neighbors, who may have interest therein, to quench this fire of division
betwixt the Prince and his subjects. And then if any one of the parties grows
obstinate, and will not yield, although he seem to be most in fault, it
follows of necessity, that they must come to more violent remedies, that is
to say, to arms. The power of the Prince is great, when thee is supported by
other Princes, which join with him for the consequence of the example, else it
is but small: but that of the people (which is the body, whereof the Prince is
the head) stirred up by conscience (especially if the question of Religion be
touched) the members ordained for their function, doing jointly their duties,
is far greater. Thereupon they wound, they kill, they burn, they ruin, and
grow desperately mad: but what is the event? God (who is an enemy to all
tyranny and disobedience) judges quarrels, weighs them in his balance of
justice, helping the rightful cause, and either causes the Prince for his
rigor and tyranny to be chased away, and deprived of his estate and
principality; or the people for their contempt and rebellion are punished and
reduced unto reason; which causes the alterations to cease, and procures a
peace: whereof we could produce many examples, both ancient and modern, if the
relation of this history did not furnish us sufficiently.

So the general Estates of the united Provinces, See Meteranus (...). l. 11.
seeing that King Philip would not in any fort (through his wilfulness) yield
unto their humble suite and petitions; and notwithstanding all the offers they
could make to purchase a good, firm, and an assured, peace, (notwithstanding
all the intercessions both of the Emperor, the French King, the Queen of
England, and other great Princes and Potentates of Christendom) yet would he
not give ear to any other reason, but what himself did propound: the which
the said Estates did not only find unjust and unreasonable, directly repugnant
to their liberties, constitutions, and freedoms of the Country; but also
contrary to their consciences, and as it were so many snares laid to catch
them, which were in no sort to be allowed of, nor received, considering the
quality of their affairs and his, according to the time. In the end,
rejecting all fear of his power and threats, seeing they were forced to enter
into all courses of extremity against a Prince, which held himself so
hainously offended, as no reconciliation could be expected, relying upon the
justice and equity of the cause, and sincerity of their consciences (which
are two brazen bulwarks) they were fully resolved (without dissembling) to take
the matter thus advanced in hand, and opposing force against force, means
against means, and practices against practices, to declare him quite fallen
from the Seigniorie, pre-eminence, and authority, which before the troubles,
the breach of their privileges, rights, freedoms, and immunities, so often
and so solemnly sworn by him, and dispensation of his Oaths, he had or was
wont to have in the said Provinces respectively. Whereof they made open
declaration by a public Edict, the tenor whereof follows.

The General Estates of the untited Provinces of the Netherlands, The Edict of
the general Estates declaring the King of Spain to be fallen from the
Seigniory of the Netherlands.
to all those that these presents shall see, read, or hear, greeting As it is
well known unto all men, that a Prince and Lord of a Country is ordained by
God, to be Sovereign and head over his subjects, and to preseveve and defend
them from all injuries, force, violence, even as a shepherd for the defense of
his sheep, and that the subjects are not created by God for the Prince, to obey
him in all he shall command, be it with God, or against him, reasonable or
unreasonable, nor to serve him as slaves and bondmen; but rather the Prince is
ordained for his subjects (without the which he cannot be a Prince) to govern
them according unto equity and reason, See Meteranus and others.
to take care for them, and to love them even as a father does his children, or
a shepherd his sheep, who puts both his body and life in danger, to defend
and preserve them. If the Prince therefore fails herein, and in stead of
preserving his subjects, does outrage and oppress them, depriving them of
their privileges and ancient customs, commands and will be served of them
as of slaves, they are no longer bound to respect him as their Soveragn Prince
and Lord, but to esteem of him as a Tyrant; neither are the subjects
(according unto Law and season) bound to acknowledge him for their Prince; Note.
so as without any offense, being done with deliberation and the authority of
the Estates of the Country, they may freely abandon him, and in his place
choose another for their Prince and Lord, to defend them: especially, when as
the subjects by humble suit, entreaty, and admonitions, could never mollify
their Princes heart, nor divert him from his enterprises an tyrannous designs:
so as they have no other means left them to preserve their ancient liberty,
their wives, children and posterity, for the which (according to the laws of
nature) they are bound to expose both life and good; as for the like occasions,
we have seen it to fall out often in diverse Countries, whereof the examples
are yet fresh in memory. The which ought especially to be of force in these
Countries, the which have always been and ought to be governed, according unto
the oath taken by their Princes, when they receive them, conformable to their
privileges and ancient customs, having no power to infringe them: besides
that, most part of the said Provices have always received and admitted their
Princes and Lords upon certain conditions, and by sworn contracts; the which
if the Prince shall violate, he is by right fallen from the rule and
superiority of the Country. So it is, that the King of Spain (after the
decease of the Emperor Charles the fifth, his father of famous memory, from
whom all these Countries were transported unto him) forgetting the services,
which as well his father as himself had received of these Countries, and the
inhabitants thereof, by the which especially the King of Spain had obtained
such glorious and memorable victories against his enemies, as his name and
power was renowned and feared throughout all the world; forgetting also the
admonitions which his said Imperial Majesty had heretofore given him: and
contrariwise, has given ear, belief, and credit unto them of the Council of
Spain which were about him; the said Council having conceived a secret hatred
against these Countries and their Liberties (for that it was not lawful for
them to command there, and to govern them, or to merit among them the chief
places and offices, as they do in the Realm of Naples, Sicilie, Millaine, at
the Indies, and in other Countries which are subject to the Kings command,
being also moved thereunto by the riches of the said Countries, well known to
the most of them:) the said council, or some of the chief of them, have
oftentimes given the King to understand, That for his Majesty's reputation and
greater authority, it were better to conquer the Netherlands anew, and then to
command absolutely at his pleasure, than to govern them under such conditions,
which he at his reception to the Seigniory of the said Countries had sworn to
observe. The King of Spain following this counsel, has sought all means to
reduce these countries (spoiling them of their ancient Liberties) into
servitude, under the government of Spaniards: having under pretext of Religion
sought first to thrust in new Bishops into the chief and greatest Towns,
indowing them with the richest Abbeyes, adding to every Bishop nine Chanons to
serve him as Counselors, whereof three should have a special charge of the
Inquisition. By which incorporation of the said Bishops, being his creatures,
and at his devotion (the which should happily have been chosen as well of
strangers, as of them which were born in the Country) they should have the
first place and the first voice in the assemblies of the Estates of the
Country. And by the adiunction of the said Chanons, had brought in the
Inquisition of Spain, the which had also bin so abhorred, and so odious in
these Countries, even as slavery it self, as all the world does well know: So
as his Imperial Majesty having once propounded it unto these Countries, upon
due information given unto His Majesty, ceased from any more speech thereof,
showing therein the great affection which he bare unto His Subjects. Yet
notwithstanding diverse Declarations which were made unto the King of Spain, as
well by the Provinces and Towns in particular, as by some other of the chief
Noblemen of the Country, namely, by the Baron of Montigny, and afterward by
the Earl of Egmont, who by the consent of the Duchess of Parma (then Regent
of the said Countries) by the advice of the Council of Estate, and of the
Generalty, had to that end been successively sent into Spain: And
notwithstanding that the king had by his own mouth given them hope, that
(according to their petitions) he would provide for the contentment of the
Country; yet that he had since by his letters done the contrary, commanding
expressly, and upon pain of his indignation, to receive the new Bishops
presently, and to put them in possession of their new Bishoprics and
incorporated Abbeyes, to effect the Inquisition, where they had begun to
practice it, and to observe the Decrees and Canons of the Council of Trent,
the which in diverse points do contradict the privileges of the Country. The
which being come to the knowledge of the Commons, has given just occasion of
so great an alteration among them, and greatly diminished the love and
affection, the which (as good subjects) they had always borne unto the King,
and to his predecessors. For they called chiefly into consideration, that the
King not only pretended to tyrannize over their persons and goods, but also
upon their consciences, whereon they held themselves not to be answerable, nor
bound to give account to any one but to God only. For this cause, and for the
pity they had of the poor people, the chief of the Nobility did in the year
1566. exhibit certain admonitions by way of a Petition, beseeching him, that
for the pacifying of the Commons, and to avoid all tumults and seditions, it
would please his Majesty, (showing the love and affection, which as a mild and
merciful Prince he bare unto his Subjects) to moderate the said points, and
especially those which concerned the rigorous Inquisition, and punishments for
matters of Religion. And to inform the King more particularly thereof, and
with more authority, and to let him understand, how necessary it was for the
good and prosperity of the Country, and for the maintenance of peace and
tranquillity, to abolish and disannull those innovations, and to moderate the
rigor of public Edicts, for matter of Religion; the said Marquess of Berges
and Baron of Montigny, at the request of the said Lady Regent, the Council of
Estate, and the General Estates of all the Countries, went into Spain as
Ambassadors: whereas the King, instead of giving them audience, and to prevent
the inconveniences delivered by them, (the which, for that they were not
redressed in time, as urgent necessity required, began in effect to discover
themselves throughout the whole Country) by the persuasion and advice of the
Council of Spain, he has caused all them to be proclaimed Rebels, and guilty
of high Treason, and to have forfeited body and goods, that presented the said
Petition. And moreover (thinking himself to be fully assured of the Country,
by the Forces of the Duke of Alva, and to have reduced them under his full
power and subjection) he had afterward, against the Laws of Nations, (the
which have been in all ages inviolably observed, yea among the most barbarous
and cruel Nations, and most tyrannous Princes) imprisoned, and caused the said
Noblemen Ambassadors to be put to death, confiscating all their goods. And
although that all this alteration (which had happened in the year 1566. upon the
foresaid occasion) was in a manner pacified by the Regent and her council, and
that the greatest part of them which had presented themselves unto her for the
Liberty of the Country, were retired, or chased away, and the rest brought
under obedience: yet not to lose the opportunity which the Council of Spain
had long expected (as it appeared plainly the same year 1566. by Letters
intercepted, which were written by the Ambassador Alana to the Duchess of
Parma) to have means under some pretext to overthrow all the privileges of
the Country, and to govern them tyrannously by the Spaniards (as they did the
Indies and other Countries which had been newly conquered by them) he by the
advice and council of the said Spaniards (showing therein the small affection
which he bare unto his Subjects of these countries, contrary unto that
whereunto he was bound, as their Prince, protector and good Shepherd) sent
into these countries the Duke of Alva, very famous for his rigor and cruelty,
and one of the chief enemies of these countries, with a council of the same
Humor and disposition. And although that the said Duke of Alva entered with his
Army into this country, without any let or opposition, and was received of the
poor Inhabitants with all reverence and Honor, expecting all mildness and
clemency, according unto that which the King had so often promised by His
Letters fainedly written; yea, that He was resolved to come himself in person
into the Country, and to order all things to every man's content; the said King
having besides all this (at the very instant of the Duke of Alva his departure)
caused a fleet of ships to be armed in Spain, to bring him hither, and another
in Zeeland to go and meet him (as the brute was) to the great charge of the
Country, the better to abuse his poor subjects, and to draw them more easily
into his snares: notwithstanding, the said Duke of Alva presently after his
arrival (although he were a stranger, and not any way of the blood Royal)
gave it out, that he had a Commission from the King, of Governor General of
the Country, the which was quite contrary to the privileges and ancient
Customs thereof: and discovering his designs plainly, he suddenly put
garrisons into the chief Towns and Forts of the Country, and then he built
Citadels in the richest and strongest Towns, to keep them in subjection. And
by commandment from the King (as they said) he friendly called unto him, as
well by letters, or otherwise, the chief Noblemen of the Country, pretending,
that he had need of their council and assistance, for the service of the King,
and the good of the Country: who (having given credit to letters) were come
unto him, whom, contrary to the privileges, he caused to be carried
prisoners out of Brabant, where they had been apprehended, causing their
process to be informed before him and his Council (although they were no
competent Judges;) and before any due proofs were made, and the Noblemen that
were accused, fully heard in their defenses, they were condemned to have
committed Rebellion, causing them to be publicly and ignomiously put to death.
Others, who for that they were better acquainted with the Spaniards
dissembling, were retired and kept out of the Country, were declared Rebels,
and guilty of high treason, and to have forfeited bodies and goods: All which
was done, to the end the poor inhabitants should not aid themselves in the
just defense of their liberty, against the oppression of the Spaniards and
their forces, by the help and assistance of these Noblemen, and Princes.
Besides, an infinite of Gentlemen and rich bourgers, whereof some he has put
to death, others he had chased away and forfeited their goods, oppressing the
rest of the good inhabitants, as well by the insolence of the soldiers, as by
other outrages in their wives, children, and goods; as also by diverse exactions
and taxes, forcing them to contribute for the building of new Citadels and
fortifications of towns, which he made to oppress them, and also to pay the
hundredth and twintieth penny, for the payment of soldiers, whereof some were
brought by him, and others newly levied, to employ them against their
Countrymen, and themselves, who with the hazard of their lives sought to
defend the liberties of their Country: to the end that the subjects being thus
impoverished, there should be no means to frustrate his designs, for the
better effecting of the instructions which had been given in Spain: which was,
to use the Country as new conquered. To which end, in some places and chief
Towns, he changed their form of government, and of justice, and erected new
Consuls after the Spanish manner, directly contrary to to the privileges of
the Country. And in the end (thinking himself free from all fear) he sought
to bring in by force a certain imposition of the tenth penny, upon all
merchandise and handi-works, to the absolute ruin of the Commons, whose good
and prosperity consists chiefly in traffic and handi-works; notwithstanding
many admonitions and persuasions made to the contrary, as well by every one of
the Provinces in particular, as by all in general. The which he had effected
by force, if it had not been that soon after by the means of the Prince of
Orange, (and a good number of Gentlemen, and others borne in these Countries)
banished by the Duke of Alua, following the party of the said Prince, and being
for most part in service, and other inhabitants affected to the liberty of
their Country, the Provinces of Holland and Zeeland had not revolted, and put
themselves under the Princes protection. Against which two Provinces the Duke
has since during his Government, and after him the great Commander of Castile
(sent in his place by the King, not to moderate any thing of his Predecessors
Tyranny, but to pursue it more covertly and cunningly than he had done) force
those said Provinces, who by their Garrisons and Citadels, were made subject to
the Spanish Yoke, to employ their persons and means to help to subdue them:
yet no ways easing the said Provinces, but entreating them like enemies,
suffering the Spaniards under the color of a mutiny, in view of the said
Commander, to enter by force into the Town of Antuerpe, and there to continue
six weeks, living at discretion at the poor Bourgers charge; sorcing them
moreover (to be freed from their insolences) to furnish four hundred thousand
florins, to pay the said Spaniards: which done, the said Soldiers (growing
more bold through the sufferance of their Commanders) presumed to take Arms
against the Country, seeking first to surprise Brussels, and in the place of
the ancient and ordinary seat of Princes, to make it a nest and den of
thieves. The which not succeeding according to their design, they took A lost
by force, and soon after forced the Town of Maestricht. And since being
violently entered into Antuerpe, they spoiled it, sacked it, and wasted it with
fire and sword, in such sort, as the most barbarous and cruel enemies could
not have done more, to the unspeakable loss, not only of the poor
inhabitants, but in a manner of all the Nations of the world, who had their
Merchandise, debts, and money there. And although the said Spaniards by a
Decree of the Council of Estate (to whom the King by the death of the great
Commander, had conferred the general Government of the Country) were in the
presence of Ieronimo de Rhoda, proclaimed enemies to the Country: yet the said
Rhoda of his own private authority (or as it is to be presumed, by virtue of
some secret instruction which he had from Spain) took upon him to be the head
of the said Spaniards, and their adherents, so as without respect of the
Council of Estate, he usurped the kings Name and Authority, counterfeited his
Seal, and carried himself as a Governor, and the Kings Lieutenant in the
Countries. The which moved the Estates at the same instant to agree with the
Prince of Orange, and the Estates of Holland and Zeeland: which accord was
allowed by the Council of State (as lawful Governors) that they might
jointly with their common forces, make war against the Spaniards: Omitting
not as good subjects, but by diverse humble petitions, to beseech the King to
have regard unto the troubles, oppressions and insolences which had happened,
and were like to follow: and that he would be pleased with all convenient
speed possible, to command the Spaniards to depart out of the Country, and
especially those which had been the cause of the sack and ruin of the chief
Towns of the Country, and other innumerable insolences and violences which his
poor subjects had endured, to the comfort and ease of them which had endured
them, and to the example of others: yet notwithstanding; the King (although
that he made show by words, that what had happened, displeased him, and was
against his will, and that he had an intent to punish the heads and authors,
and to provide for the quiet of the Country with all clemency, as it behoved a
merciful Prince) has not only neglected to punish the said Heads and
Authors: but contrariwise, (as it appears) all was with his consent and
former resolution of the council of Spain, as certain letters of his,
intercepted soon after, do plainly show: by the which it was written unto
Rhoda, and to the other Captains, authors of all the mischief, That the King
did not blame that action, but did allow thereof, and commend it, promising to
recompense them, especially the said Rhoda, as having done him a singular
service: The which, at his return into Spain, and to all other ministers of
the oppressions that were used in these Countries, he did show by effect. At
the same time, the King thinking the better to blind the eyes of his subjects,
sent into these Countries for Governor General, Don John of Austria, his base
brother, as being of his blood: who (making show unto the Estates, that he did
allow of the Pacification of Gant, promised to send away the Spaniards, to
punish the authors of all insolences and disorders which had happened in the
Country, and to take an order for the general peace, and the restoring of
their ancient liberties) sought to divide the Estates, and to subdue one
Country after another. By the permission and providence of God, who is an
enemy to all oppression, he was discovered by the intercepting of certain
letters, where he was commanded by the King to govern himself in these
Countries, according to the Instructions that should be given him by Rhoda: and
to cover this practice, the King had forbidden Don John to speak with him,
commanding him to carry himself unto the chief Noblemen with all mildness
and courtesy, to win their loves, until that by their assistance and
means, he might reduce Holland and Zeeland, and afterward work his will of
the other Provinces. Whereupon Don John, notwithstanding that he had solmnly
sworn in the presence of all the Estates of the Country, to observe the said
Pacification of Gant, yet contrary thereunto he sought by means of their
Colonels (whom he had already at his devotion) and great promises, to win the
Germane soldiers who were then in Garrison, and had the guard of the chief
Towns and Forts of the Country, whereof by that means he made himself
master, holding himself assured of those places they held, and so by that
means to force them that would not join with him, to make war against the
Prince of Orange, and them of Holland and Zeeland, and so to raise a more boody
and intestine war, than had been before. But as all things that are treated
cunningly and with dissimulation, cannot be long kept secret, Don John's
practices being discovered, before he could effect what he had designed, he
could not bring his conceptions and enterprises to the end that he pretended:
Yet he revived a new war, the which continues unto this day, in stead of rest
and an assured peace, whereof he did so much vaunt at his coming. Which
reasons have given us great occasion to forsake the King of Spain, and to seek
some other mighty and merciful Prince, to help to defend these Countries, and
to take them into his protection: and the rather for that these Countries have
endured such oppressions, received such wrongs, and have been forsaken and
abandoned by their Prince for the space of twenty years and more; duduring the
which the Inhabitants have been entreated not as subjects, but as enemies,
their natural Prince and Lord seeking to ruin them by arms. Moreover, after
the death of Don John, having sent the Baron of Selles, who (under color
propounding some means of an accord) declared sufficiently, That the king
would not avow the Pacification made a Gant (which Don John notwithstanding had
sworn to maintain) setting down more hard conditions. Yet for that we would
discharge our selves of our duties, we have not omitted to make humble suite
by writing, employing moreover the favor of the greatest Princes of
Christendom, seeking by all means without intermission, to reconcile our
selves unto the King; having also of late kept our deputies long at Cologne,
hoping there (by the intercession of his imperial Majesty, and some Princes
Electors) to have obtained an assured peace, with some moderate tolleration of
Religion (the which does chiefly concern God and men's consciences) as the
estate of the affairs of the Country did then require: But in the end we found
it by experience, that nothing was to be obtained from the King, by the
Conference at Cologne: and that it was practiced and did only serve to
disunite and divide the Provinces, that they might with the more facility
vanquish and subdue first one, and then another, and execute upon them their
first designs. The which has since plainly appeared, by a certain
proscription, which the King has caused to be published, whereby we and all
the Inhabitants of the united Provinces, and Officers that hold their party,
are proclaimed Rebels, and to have forfeited lives and goods: Promising
moreover, a great sum of money to him that should murder the said Prince,
and all to make the poor Inhabitants odious, to hinder their Navigation and
Traffic, and to bring them into extreme despair. So as despairing of all
means of reconciliation, and destitute of all other succors and aid we have
according to the Law of nature (for the defense of us and other Inhabitants,
the Rights, privileges, ancient customs, and liberty of the Country, and
the lives and honors of us, our wives, children, and posterity, to the end
they fall not into the slavery of the Spaniards, leaving upon just cause the
King of Spain) been forced to seek out some other means, such as for the
greater safety and preservation of our Rights, Privileges, and liberties, we
have thought most fit and convenient.

We therefore give all men to understand, That having duly considered all
these things, and being pressed by extreme necessity, We have by a general
resolution and consent, declared, and do declare by these presents, the King
of Spain, ipso jure, to be fallen from the Seigniory, Principality,
jurisdiction, and inheritance of these Countries: And that we are resolved,
never to acknowledge him any more, in any matter concerning the Prince,
jurisdictions or demeanes of these Netherlands, nor to use hereafter, neither
yet to suffer any other to use his Name as Sovereign Lord thereof. According
to the which we declare all Officers, private Noblemen, Vassels, and other
inhabitants of these Countries, of what condition or quality soever, to be
from henceforth discharged of the Oath which they have made in any manner
whatsoever, unto the King of Spain, as Lord of these countries, or of that
whereby they may be bound unto him. And for the abovenamed reasons, the most
part of the said united Provinces, by a common accord and consent of their
Members, have submitted themselves under the command and government of the high
and mighty Prince, the Duke of Aniou and Alanson, etc. upon certain conditions
contracted and accorded with his Highness: and that the Archduke of Austria,
Mathias, has resigned into our hands the government general of these
Countries, the which has been accepted by us. We enjoin and command all
Judges, Officers, and all others, to whom it shall appertain, That hereafter
they forbear to use any more, the name, titles, great seal, or signet of the
K. of Spain: and instead thereof, whilst that the Duke of Anjou, for his urgent
affairs, concerning the good and welfare of the Country, shall be yet absent,
for as much as shall concern the Provinces which have contracted with his
Highness, and touching the rest by way of provision, they shall use the title
and name of the chief and Counsel of the Country. And until that the said
heads and Counselors, shall be named, called, and really established in the
exercise of their charges, and offices, they shall use our name, except Holland
and Zeeland, where they shall use as they have formerly done, the name of the
Prince of Orange, and of the Estates of the said Provinces, until that the
said Council shall be in force, and then they shall govern themselves as it is
agreed, touching the instructions given for the said Counsel, and the accords
made with his Highness. And instead of the Kings seals, they shall hereafter
use our Great Seal, counter Seal, and Signet, in matters concerning the
government general, for the which the Council of the Country, according to
their instructions shall have authority. And in matters concerning the policy,
administration of Justice, and other private acts of every Province, the
Provincial Councels and others, shall respectively use the name and Seal of
the said Province, where the matter shall be in question, and no other, upon
pain of nullity of the said Letters, or Dispatches which shall be otherwise
made or sealed. And to the end these things may be the better observed and
effected, we have enjoined and commanded, and do enjoin and command by these
presents, That all the King of Spaines Seals, which are at this present with
these united Provinces, shall be dilivered into the States hands, or to him
that shall have commission and authority from them, upon pain of arbitrary
punishment. Moreover, We ordain and command, that from henceforth the names and
arms of the King of Spain, shall not be put nor stamped in any coins of these
united Provinces: but there shall be such a figure set upon them, as shall be
appointed for the coining of new pieces of Gold and Silver. In the like sort we
enjoin and command the president and Lords of the privy Council, and all other
Chancellors, presidents, Provincial Consuls, and all Presidents and chief
Masters of accounts, and others of all chambers of accounts, being respectively
in these countries, and also all other Judges, and Officers (as holding them
discharged of the oath which they have made unto the King of Spain, according
to the tenor of their Commissions) that they shall take a new oath in the hands
of the Estates of the Province where they are, or to their Deputies, by the
which they shall swear to be faithful to us against the King of Spain, and his
adherents, according to the form set down by us: and there shall be given to
the said Counselors, Masters of accounts, Judges and Officers, remaining in
the Provinces which have contracted with the Duke of Aniou, in our name, an act
of continuance in their Offices, containing in stead of a new commission, a
cessation or disannulling of their former, and that by way of provision, until
his coming. And to Counselors, Masters of accounts, Judges, and Officers,
being resident in Provinces, which have not contracted with his Highness, a
new Commission shall be given under our name and Seal, if the petitioners were
not found faulty, to be of bad behavior, to have done against the privileges
of the Country, or to have committed some other disorder.

We also command the President and them of the privy Council, the Chancellor
and Council of Brabant, the Governor, Chancellor, and Council of Gueldres,
and the County of Zutphen, the President and council in Flanders, the
President and council in Holland, the Governor, President and Council in
Friseland, the President and Council at Vtricht, the Bailiff at Tournay and
Tournesis, the Receivors or chief Officer of Beooster cheldt and
Bewesterscheldt Zeeland, the scout of Macklyn, and all other Judges and
Officers whom it shall concern, their Lieutenants and every of them, presently
without any delay, to publish this our Decree in all places of their
jurisdictions, and wheresoever they are accustomed to make proclamations, to
the end that no man may pretend any cause of ignorance: And that they may keep
and observe, and cause to be kept and observed inviolably this our Decree,
without any favor, support, or dissimulation; for we have so thought it fit
and convenient for the good of the Country. For the effecting whereof, we give
to every one whom it shall concern, full power and authority, and special
Commission. In witness whereof, we have caused our seal to be hereunto
annexed. Given at the Hage in our assembly the 26 of July 1581. Underneath was
written, By the ordinance and decree of the said Estates, and signed I. Tan
Asseliers.

According unto this declaration of the Estates, there was a new form of an
Oath drawn, in manner of an abjuration of the King of Spain, and promise of
duty and obedience which every one should owe unto the said Estates, by the
public Officers, and Magistrates of every Town and Province, as follows.

I swear, The form of the oath of abjuration of the King of Spain.
That hereafter I shall not serve nor yield obedience to Philip King of Spain,
nor acknowledge him for my Prince and Lord, whom I do renownce by these
presents, and do hold my self freed from all Oaths, and bonds, by the which I
might be formerly tied unto him: whereof finding my self presently delivered
I swear a new and bind my self to the united Provinces, and namely, to them
of Brabant, Gueldre, Holland, Zeeland, and their allies, and to the sovereign
Magistrates that are appointed, to be faithful and loyal unto them, to yield
them all obedience, aid, and comfort, with all my power and means, against
the King of Spain and his adherents, and against all the enemies of the
Country. Promising as a good vassal of the Country, to carry my self
faithfully and loyally, with show of all obedience to my superiors; So help me
the Almighty God.

This decree being thus proclaimed, all the seals, counter-seals, and secret
signets of the King of Spain, were broken and cancelled with solemnity, by all
the consuls of the said Provinces, and others new made, by order of the
general Estates, for that which concerned the Government, and the affairs of
the generality. And as for matters of justice and policy, they used the
seals, names, and titles of private gogernours, and Provincial consuls. From
that time there was no coins of gold, silver, or copper made with the name or
titles of the King of Spain, but upon stamps which the Estates had caused to
be made in every Povince. All governors, superintendents, Presidents,
Chancellours, Councillors, and others Officers, were discharged and absolved
from their precedent oaths, and did swear fidelity to the general Estates,
against the King of Spain and his adherents, according to the form above
mentioned, to whom an act was sent for the continuation of the Commissions.

Ninthly, Observe. 9.
it is evident from the premises; That if Emperors and Kings shall degenerate
into Tyrants, violate their Oaths and Covenants made unto the people, invade
their Laws, Liberties, persons with armed violence, and instead of protecting,
make war upon them; that the Nobles, Magistrates, Estates, Parliaments and
people in such cases, may without any guilt of Treason, Rebellion, Sedition,
not only disobey, but Lawfully resist them with force of Arms, both in point
of Law and conscience and are obliged under pain of treachery and
perfidiousnesse to their Country, thus to resist; and in cases of
incorrigibility for the public weal, and preservation, may justly if they see
it necessary, depose them from their Royal Dignities as Enemies, or Traitors
to their Kingdoms and people. De jure Magistratus in subd^to. p. 2^3. ^^4 295.
Hugo Grotius de (...) l. 1. c. 4 (...) p 85.
The reason is, Because no Kingdom or Nation under Heaven, ever elected or
voluntarily submitted themselves unto any Emperor or King whatsoever (for
ought can be proved or imagined) but upon this tacit condition; that they
should justly govern, defend and protect them for their good, not tyrranize
over, pillage, murder, oppress, or make war upon them at their pleasures,
contrary to the Laws of God, nature, nations; Nor yet actually obliged
themselves under pain of Treason, Rebellion, death, or damnation, not forcilly
to reobsist or deprive their Princes in any wise, though they with open
violence should set themselves to subvert their Religion, Laws, Liberties, and
Republike; to which unreasonable condition, no Natian certainty would have
consented, had it been propounded to them by their Kings at first, as Grotius
well observes. This point of greatest difficulty and concerment, I have largely
debated and confirmed already, in the third part of this Discourse, where all
contrary Objections against it, are refuted; Yet because it still seems a
seditious unchristian Paradox to many Malignants and Royallists, I shall
ratify it with such new Authorities, of all sorts, which may happily convince,
if not convert them from their inveterate wilful error.

My first Authority of this kind, is that passage of Sozomon (an ancient
Ecclesiastical Historian) Eccles. Hist. l. 6. chapter 2. recited and approved by
Nicephorus Callistus Eccles hist. l. 10. chapter 34. where he thus writes of the
death of Julian the Emperor (who turned both a Tyrant, Apostate, and Persecutor
of the Christians) reputed to be slain by a Christian Soldier of his own
Army, for his Tyranny and impiety. Whereas Libanius writes in this manner; He
seems to say, that the slayer of Julian the transgressor was a Christian,
which peradventure was true; Neither is it incredible, that some one of the
Soldiers who marched under his colors, had considered these things thus in
his mind: That not only the Heathens, but likewise ALL OTHERS are wont to
applaud those even unto our Age, who slew Tyrants heretofore, as those who for
the liberty of all, feared not to undergo the danger of death, and likewise
for the safety of their Citizens, Kindred and friends, with willing minds. And
verily he CANNOT WELL BE REPREHENDED BY ANY MAN, especially since he should
show himself so valiant and sirenuous FOR GOD AND that RELIGION which he did
approve, etc. However it is certain that he was taken away by Gods divine
judgment. (...).
Nicepherus adds, that his death was predicted by the Christians, and that his
death WAS ACCEPTABLE AND PLEASANT TO ALL CHRISTIANS, especially to those of
Antioch, WHO FOR THIS HIS MVRTHER, INSTVTED A PVBLIKE TRIVMPH, Wherein they
also reproached Maximus the Philosopher, singing thus, Where are thy
divinations O foolish Maximus? A pregnant evidence, that even the Primitive
Christians (on whose examples and practice our Antagonists so much depend,
though to no purpose, as I have Part 3. p. 13^. to 143.
elsewhere manifested) held it not only lawful for them to resist, but even in
some cases to slay a persecuting Apostatized Tyrant, bent ^o subvert Religion,
Laws, Liberties; as may be further evidenced by Eusebius. lib. 2. vita Constan.
and Ecclesist. Hist. l. 8. 9. 10. Scorat. Scholast. Hist. l. 1. Sozomon.
Niceph. Ca^l. Eccles. Hist l 7. c. 29. 37. 39. 44. 45. Grimston Eutropius
Zonara Sabellicus Valate^anus in the Lives of Constantine Maximinus and
Maxentius.
Constantine the great his ayding the oppressed Christians, and Romans against
the Tyranny and Persecution of the Emperors Maxentius, Maximinus and Licinius,
even with force of Arms, with which he Conquered these Persecutors in sundry
open battles fought against them, at the Christians earnest importunity.

To descend to later Authoritities, it is the received Doctrine of all Popish
Schoolmen, Doctors, Lawyers, That tyrannical Princes who oppress and invade
their subjects persons, liberties, estates, or religion, may both lawfully with
good conscience be forcibly resisted by their Subjects, and likewise by the
major part of their People, Nobles, Parliament, for preservation of the
Republike and Religion, be justly deposed, and put to death; yea, as some of
them add, even murdered by private men, though the generality of their
Writers justly deny it. Their St. Thomas of Aquin, in his Book, De Regimine
Pricipum (dedicated to the King of Cyprus) Operum. Aut verpiae. 1612. Tom. 17.
s. 163.
cha 6. determines thus, If it belong to the multitude to provide themselves of
a King, the King made by them, may not unjustly be removed, destroyed, or his
power restrained, if he abuse the power of the Realm tyrannically; Neither is
such a multitude to be esteemed, TO DEAL DISLOYALLY IN DEPOSING A TYRANT
ALTHOUGH THEY HAD PERPETUALLY SUBJECTED THEMSELVES TO HIM BEFORE, BECAUSE
HIMSELF HAS DESERVED IT, in not carrying himself faithfully in the
Government of the people, as the Office of a King required, because herein he
kept not his Oath and Covenant with his subjects. And he further affirms, 2
Distinct. Art. 44. qu. 2. 2. 5m. 1. 2ae. Did. 44. qu. 2. 2. 5m. 1. 2ae. qu.
79. 4. 3m. 22ae. qu. 12. art. 2. and qu. 42. 2. 3m. Opusc. 10. l. 4. co. 1.
That in every Country, Cities are governed politikely; the power of Kings and
Emperors being circumscribed by the Laws and people, That a Tyrannical
Prince, if he invade his Subjects, may lawfully beresisted and slain even of
private persons in their own necessary defense, and in reference to the public
safety; but much more by the Nobles and peoples general consent: And that the
deposition or perturbation of the regiment of a Tyrant, HAS NOT THE REASON (or
nature) OF SEDITION, unless it be done by private persons, or so disorderly,
that a greater detriment should ensue, BUT IT IS THE TYRANT RATHER WHO IS
SEDITIOVS. The same Doctrine is taught by Dominicus Soto, de Iustitia. l. 5.
quaest. 1. art. 3. Ludovicus Molina Tom. 4. De Iustitia and Iure Tract. 3. disp
6. to 20. Dominicus Bannes, 2a. 2ae. quaest. 64. Art. 3. Dub. 2. Petrus de
Aragon. 2. 2ae vu. 64. art. 3. Explicatio. art. p. 248. Michael Bartholomaeus
Salon, de Iustitia and Iure in 2. 2ae Tom. 1. qu. 64. art. 3. cont. 1. page
385. Petrus de Lorca in 2. 2ae D. Thomae quaest. 40. art. 3. sect. 3.
throughout, specially Disput. 50. n. 2. and Disp. 52. 53. Azorius, Tom. 2. l.
21. disp. 5. qu. 8. and. 5. Franciscus Victoria. Relectio De Iure Belli. n. 9.
14. Alphonsus Salmeron in cap. 13. Epist. ad Romanos. Disp. 5. Fran. Suarez. in
Defensione fidei l. 3. cha. 3. and l. 6. chap. 4. throughout* specially, number.
5. 6. 13. 14. 15. 16. Joan Gerson de Auferibilitate Papae; where also he avers
(consid. 6.) that one who is truly Pope may lawfully be bound, imprisoned, and
put to death for his offenses, (though the head of the Church as Papists hold,
as well as Kings the head of their Realms.) Dionysius Cathusianus de Regim.
Polit. Artic. 19. Franciscus Tollet, in summa, l. 5. c. 6. Leonardus Lessius de
Iustit. and Iure, c. 9. dub. 4. Tannerus, Tom. 3. disp. 4. qu. 8. dub. 3.
Emanuel Sa. in Aphorism. Verb. Tyrannus, n. 2. Iohannis Mariana: De Rege and
Regis Instit. l. 1. c. 5, 6, 7, 8. Alvarus Pelagius de Plan. Eccles l. 1. c.
21. Simancha Pacensis, de Cathol. instit. tit. 23. n. 11. p. 98. tit. 45. n.
25. p. 209. Gregory de Valencia, Tom 3. p. 444. Cardinal Bellarmine, de
Pontif. Romans l. 5. c. 6. 7. 8. and Tract de Potest. Sum. Pontif. advers. Gul.
Barcl. p. 97. Iac. Gretzerus Pharetra Tertulliana, and Vespertilio
Haeritico-Politicus, Ludovicus Richehom. Expostulatio Aplogetica pro Societate
Iesiu. Vincentius Filiucius Tra. 28. p. 2. dis. 4. prae. Dec. n. 12. Mart.
Becanus Anglicana de Potestate Regis and Pontificis, Caspar. Schoppius. Alexi
Pharmacum Regium, and Collyrium Regium. Valentine Jacob. An. 1524. and John
Tanquerel. Anno. 1561. whose opinions are recorded by Bochellus Decreta.
Eccles. Gal. l. 5. tit 4. c. 6. 8. the Cardinal of Como his Letter from Rome,
30. January, 1584. to Doctor Parrey to murder Queen Elizabeth; Franciscus de
Verona Constant. in Apolog. pro Io: Chastel, p. 133. Bonarscius the Jesuit,
Amphith p. 101. Barclay l. 3. advers. Monarch. c. 8. l. 6. c. 23. and 24.
erarius in c. 3. Iudicum. Hieronymus Blanca Rerum Aragonens. Commentarius,
passim. Cajetan: upon Aquinas his forecited Sums. the Doctors of Salamancha
in their Determination, Anno 1602. recorded by G. Blackwell, qu Bip. p. 56. and
Doctor John White his Defense of the Way, c. 6. p. 16. Governado Christiano. p.
43. Antonius Massa Tract. contra Duel. n. 78. 79. Baldus 3. Consid. 313.
Cavarruvias Quaest. Illustr. T. 2. 505. n. 1. 399. n. 6. Vasquius contro.
Illustr. 16. n. 15. 19. 21. 17. n. 1. 23. 20 n. 344. n. 3. 73. n. 12. 13. 5.
72. n. 7. and elsewhere Hemingius Arnisa us de Authoritate Principum p. 18. 50.
77. 80. 83. 95. 122. Fran. Hotomani Franco-Gallia, c. 6. 7. 10 13. 15. 18. 19.
etc. To which I might add our English Priests and Jesuits, as Doctor Nicholas
Saunders, Visib. Monarch. p. 70, 71. Doctor Allen, Parsons, Creswell,
Philopater, Rossaeus, Doleman, p. 32. to 74. sparsim, with sundry others, all
professedly averring Aquinas his Doctrine, and the premises, yea, far
exceeding them in sundry particulars; many or most of them attributing
sufficient Authority and power to the Pope and Prelates alone, without the
Parliaments, Nobles, Peers, or Peoples assent, to depose, adjudge Haereticall
or tyrannical Kings to death, and devote them to assassination, which all
Protestants unanimously disclaim. But we need not fish in these unwholesome
Romish Streams of Tyber, or make use of these Popish Champions, whom I have
only named, to stop the mouths of all Papists, Priests, Jesuits, who now
much exclaim against the Parliaments present defensive War, condemning all
for Rebels and Traitors who assist the Parliament against their invading
traitorous, Rebellious armed Forces both in Ireland and England, they being in
verity such themselves, yea, the original contrivers, fomenters, the
principal abettors of the present bloody, destructive, civil Wars in both our
Realms. (...) which most confirms me in this belief, is a particular late
Discovery of the horrid Conspiracy of Con the Popes late Nuncio here, and his
Iesuited Popish Confederates, to undermine and extirpate the Protestant
Religion, to raise the Scottish, and succeeding Irish, and English Wars,
thereby to engage the King to resort to them for assistance; and under pretense
whereof to rise up in arms, and work him to their own conditions, or else to
poison him with a Indian poisoned Nut after the example of his Father, and then
seize upon the Prince, and train him up in their Antichristian Religion, as you
may read at large in Romes Masterpeece, to which I shall refer you for
fuller satisfaction, from one of the chief Conspirators own Confession. But
passing by all these, I shall proceed to Authorities of Lawyers and Divines,
professing the Protestant Religion. Georgius Obrectus, a public Professor of
Law, and Advocate to the City of Strasburge in his Disputatio Juridica, 1. De
Princ^piis Belli, lays down these several Positions for Law, Number. 125. to
139. That all the Inferior Magistrates in the Empire or other Kingdoms,
collectively considered, are above the Emperor and Kings themselves; that if
they be unjustly assaulted with unjust violence by any whomsoever, they may by
a necessary and just war, defend both themselves and theirs, and repel and
prosecute the unjust assailants. That if the Superior Magistrate neglect to do
his duty, (as if the Turk should invade any Country, and the Supreme
Magistrate would not resist him.) the inferior Magistrate may call the people
to Arms, raise an Army, and exercise all forces policy and devices against the
common enemy of Christians: Or if the Supreme Magistrate should exercise
manifest Tyranny, it is verily lawful to the Inferior to undertake the care
of the Republike, which he endeavors to oppress with all his power: That
those who represent all the people, as the Electors, Palatines, Nobles,
Parliament, may admonish the Prince of his duty, and ought to seek by all means
to divert him from his Tyrannical and impious purpose; but if he proceeds, and
repents not, being frequently admonished, but wilfully subverts the
Commonwealth, obstinately perverts Laws; has no care of faith, covenants,
justice, piety; and tends only to this, that he may perpetrate any thing with
impunity, and impiously reign over men's consciences, then verily he is
accounted a Tyrant, that is, an enemy of God and man; whence, if he has
proceeded to that hight of malice, that he cannot be expelled but by armed
force, It is Lawful for the Electors, Palatines and others, to call the people
to Arms, and not only to defend themselves and others against such a one, but
plainly to deject him from his Throne: For the entire Government of the Realm
is not committed by the people to the Prince alone, as neither the Bishopprick
of the whole Church to the Pope, but to every one of the Nobles or Magistrates
according to his power: For the Nobles, as they are called into part of the
honor, so of the burden of the Commonwealth; which is committed to the
Prince, as to the Supreme Tutor, but to them as Fellow-tutors, he having the
first, they the second place in governing the Republike. The Prince swears that
he will seek the good of the Realm, and all the Nobles promise the same:
therefore if he does ill, they ought not to do so likewise; if the Republike go
to ruin, they shall not continue: For the Commonwealth is no less committed
to them, than to the King, so as they ought not only to do their duty, but
also to contain the Prince within the limits of his duty: For if the Prince
does ought against his Oath, they are not absolved from their Oaths, but rather
then especially ought to manifest their fidelity, when the Republike requires
it, because they were specially instituted for that end, as the Ephori, and
every thing ought to be reputed just, when it attains its end. Hence Brutus the
Tribune, and Lucretius the Governor of the City, called the people to Arms
against Tarquin the proud, and by their authority expelled him the Ringdom. So
the Roman Senate judged Nero an enemy of the Republike, and condemned him to
the Gallows; punished Vitellius with death, ignominiously mutilated and
dragged through the City, and spoiled Maximinus of the Empire, setting up
Albinus in his place. Thus the French by Authority of a public Council,
through the care of the Officers of the Realm deprived Childericke the first,
Sigebert, Theodoric, and Childericke the third of the government of the Realm.
Neither is it impertinent to pronounce the same sentence of such a one, as was
given of Manlius Capitulinus, Valerius Maxim. l. 6. c. 7.
Thou wast Manlius whiles thou did cast down the Senons headlong; Now
because thou art become one of the Senons, thou thy self art to be
precipit^ted from whence thou did cast them down. But if perchance most of
the Nobles collude and connive, and being unmindfull of their duty, take no
care of the people; let there at least be one who may admonish and detest the
invading Tyrant, and take care that the Republike sustain no detrimen; For the
care of the Republike is no less committed to him, than to the Prince and his
Colleagues, and he has plighted his faith to the Republike no less than they.
If many have promised the same thing, the obligation of the one is not taken
away by the negligence or perjury of the other. If there be many Trustees,
Executors, or Guardians, the negligence default or fraud of some of them, does
not discharge or disingage the rest; yea, unless they to their power discharge
their trust and Oath, they become perfidious, yea guilty of the same crime, and
are subject unto actions for their neglect as well as the others: Therefore
those who are bound to the whole Kingdom and Empire, as the Peers of France,
the Electors, or to some certain Countey or City which makes a part of the
Realm, as Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Constables, Admirals, and the like, are
obliged to aid the whole Commonwealth, or that part committed to them,
against the tyranny of the Prince, if they be able, etc. Thus and much more
this Lawyer, almost verbatim out of Iunius Brutus.

I might add to him the like determinations of Henricus Bocerus, De jure
pugnae, hoc est, Belli and Duelli, Tractatus Methodicus, Tubingae, 1591. lib.
1. cap. 5. and 29. p. 141 Justus Eccardus, De Lege Regia, the last Edition.
Alhuseius Polit. c. 4. p. 146. to 153. Haenon, Disputat. polit. The Treatise De
Iure Magistratus in Subditos; (where this Position is largely and learnedly
debated, confirmed, both from Law, History, Theology, Reason) Hugo Grotius de
Iure Belli and pacis, lib. 1. c. 4. sect. 7 to the end. p. 87. etc. Albericus
Gentilis de Iure Belli, l. 1. c. 11. p. 84. c. 25. p. 205. l. 3. c. 9. 22. p.
546. 686. with others. But since Iunius Brutus compriseth the quintessence of
all the rest, I shall trouble you only with his Discourse. Vindiciae C^ntr.
Tyrannos, Quaest. 3. p. 177. to 106. To pass by his Discourse concerning the
resisting of Tyrants, who usurp a Dominion without any Title, whom every man
may justly resist and suppress, and are bound in duty so to do, as he there
proves at large; I shall only transcribe what concerns them who have a lawful
Title. First (says he) we ought to consider, that all Princes are born men. We
cannot therefore expect to have only perfect Princes, but rather we ought to
think it well with us, if we have gained but indifferent ones. Therefore the
Prince shall not presently be a Tyrant, if he keep not measure in some things,
if now and then he obey not reason; if he more slowly seek the public good;
if he be less diligent in administering Justice, or less fierce in propulsing
war. For seeing a man is not set over men, as if he were some God, as he is
overbeasts; but as he is a man, born in the same condition with them; as that
Prince shall be proud, who will abuse men like Beasts; so that people shall be
unjust, who shall seek a God in a Prince, and a Divinity in this frail Nature.
But truly if he shall willingly subvert the Republike; if he shall wilfully
pervert the Laws, if he shall have no care of his faith, none of his promises,
none of Justice, none of piety; if himself become an enemy of his people, or
shall use all or the chiefest notes we have mentioned, then verily he may be
judged a Tyrant, that is, an enemy of God and men. Therefore we treat not of a
Prince, less good; but of the worst; not of one less prudent, but of a
malicious and subtle one; not of one unskilful in Law, but of a contemner of
Law; not of an unwarlike one, but of an enemy of the people and waster of the
Realm. A Senate may assist him with prudence, a Judge with the knowledge of
the Law, a Captain in the skilfulnesse of war; but this man wishes the
Nobles, Senators, Captain^ of War one neck, that he might cut them off at one
stroke, neither hates he any more then them. The first verily, though he may
lawfully be removed, yet however he may be tolerated; the latter contrarily, by
how much the longer he is tolerated, the more intolerable he becomes.
Moreover, as every thing is not lawful to a Prince; so often times, that which
is lawful to the people, is not expedient. For frequently it may fall out,
that the remedy which is used, may be worse than the disease. Therefore it
becomes a wise man to try all things, before he use the hot Iron; and use all
remedies, before he take up arms. If therefore those who represent the people
perceive any thing to be done against the Republike by force or fraud, let them
first admonish the Prince, neither may they expect, till the mischief grow
heavy, and acquire forces. Tyranny is like an heptick Fever, which at first
is easy to be cured, difficult to be discerned; afterward it becomes easy to
be known, but very difficult to be cured. Therefore they shall withstand the
beginnings, neither should they pretermit any thing, though the smallest. But
if he shall proceed, and not repent though frequently admonished, but tend
only to this, that he may commit any thing without punishment; then verily he
is really guilty of Tyranny, and they may act against him, whatsoever they may
use against a Tyrant, either by Law or just force. Tyranny is not only a
crime, but the head, and as it were, the heap of all crimes. A Tyrant subverts
the Republike, makes a prey of all, lies in wait for the life of all, violates
faith to all, contemnes all the Religion of a sacred Oath. Therefore is he so
much more wicked then any Thief, murderer, sacrilegious person, by how much
it is the more grievous, to offend many and all, then particular persons. Now
if all these be reputed enemies, if they be capitally punished, if they suffer
pains of death, can any one invent a punishment worthy so horrid a crime?
Moreover, Not^.
we have proved, that all Kings receive their Royal Dignity from the people;
that all the people are better and higher then the King, that the King is only
the superior minister and Ruler of the kingdom, the Emperor of the Empire,
In Trastat. de Tyranno, and in Tract. de reg. Civit.
but the people are the true head. Therefore it follows, that a Tyrant who
commits felony against the people as the Lord of the fee, hurts the sacred
Majesty of the Realm and Empire* Becoms a Rebel, and therefore falls into the
danger of the same Laws, and demerits more grievous punishments. Therefore,
says Bartolus, he may be deposed by a Superior; or be most justly punished by
the Julian Law, for public violence. Now all the people, or those who
represent them, as Electors, Palatines, Nobles the Assembly of the Estates,
etc. are his Superior. But and if he shall proceed so far, that he cannot be
expelled but by armed violence, then verily it shall be lawful for them, to
call the people to Arms, to raise an Army, and to practice force, policy,
stratagems, as against an adjudged enemy of his Country and of the
Commonweal. Neither shall the Officers of the Realm in this case fall into
the crime OF SEDITION; For in a sedition there must needs be two points, which
when for the most part they contend about contradictories, it follows, that
the cause of one is just, the other unjust; That cause must verily be just
which defends the Laws, which protects the common good, which shall preserve
the Realm, especially by this means; contrarily, that cause is unjust, which
violates the Laws, defends the breakers of the Laws, protects the subverters
of the Country. Bartolus Tract. de Guelphis and Gibell A^g. l. 3.. cum igitur
D. de vi and viar. Thom. Aquinas in 2. 2ae qu. 12. Art. 11. in fine l. 1. D. ad
leg. Iul. magist. Ci^. ^arid 4.
That is just which will destroy tyrannical government, that unjust which
would abolish just government. That lawful which tends to the public good,
that unlawful which tends to the private. Therefore, says Thomas, because a
tyrannical kingdom which is not ordained to the common good, but principally
for the benefit of the Governor, is most unjust; therefore the disturbance of
this Kingdom Has not the reason of Sedidition, nor do they fall into the
crime of Treasor. This crime is committed against a lawful Prince; Now a
lawful Prince is nothing but a living Law: therefore he who kills the Law as
much as in him lies, cannot be called by that name; therefore those who take
up Arms against him shall not be guilty of that crime. It is likewise committed
against the Commonwealth, but because the Repub. is there only where the
authority of the Law prevails, not where the private lust of a Tyrant
swalloweth the Republike, a Tyrant shall be guilty of that crime which offends
the public Majesty, and those be Vindicators of the Republike, who shall
oppugn a Tyrant Ex Officio, supported with their own authority. Neither in
this case, I say, does every one, but all the Subjects, but the Lords seem to
require an account of the government from their agent: no more shall they be
accounted perfidious for doing it; there is every where between the Prince and
people a mutual and reciprocal Obligation; he promises, that he will be a
just Prince: they, that they will obey him, if he shall be such a one.
Therefore the people are obliged to the Prince under a condition: the Prince,
purely to the people: Therefore if the condition be not fulfilled, the people
are unbound, the Contract void, the Obligation null in Law it self: Therefore,
the King is perfidious if he reign uniustly; the people perfidious, if they
obey not him who reigns justly: But the people are free from all crime of
perfidiousnesse, if they publicly renounce him who reigns uniustly; or if
they endeavor to evict him with Arms who desires to retein the kingdom
unlawfully. L. 160. D. de reg Iur.
Therefore it is lawful for all or many of the Officers of the Realm to
remove a Tyrant. Neither is it only lawful; but it lies so upon them of
duty, that unless they do it, they can no way be excused. Neither may
Electors, Palatines, Senators, and other Nobles think, that they were created
and instituted only for that end, that they should show themselves once
peradventure in the Kings inauguration, attired after the ancient manner, that
they might act a certain palliated Fable, or put on the person of Rowland,
Oliver, Renald, and other Nobles on that day, as if in a Scene, they should in
some show represent the Round Table of Arthur, as they call it; so as after
that the multitude is dismissed, and Calliopus has said, Farewell, they should
think they had excellently played their parts. These things are not spoken in
jest, these things are not perfunctorily done; these things are not the
pastimes of children, who as it is in Horace, Vlp. l. 3. D. de adm. and peric.
Tut. and curat.
created a King in a Play; but rather of Nobles, and Magistrates, who as they
are called unto part of that honor, so likewise of the burden, and show, that
the Republike is committed and commended to the King, as to the supreme and
chiefest Tutor, so also to them as fellow Tutors (even Honorari) assigned to
him as observers of his actions who has the chief tutelage, who may daily
exact an account of him, and diligently take heed, in what manner he reverseth;
so even these, that they might observe the King (who, L. 27. D. eodem.
as to his tutelary providence, is only reputed in the place of a Lord) that
he do nothing to the detriment of the people. Therefore as the fact of him who
acts the Guardian, is imputed to the Co-gardians, unless where they ought and
are able, they suspect and likewise take care to remove him; to wit, when he
communicates not the administration with them, L. 14. D. de admin. and peric.
tut.
if he do not faithfully manage the tutelage or care, if he admits fraud, if
he does any thing sordidly or perniciously to the Pupil, L 3. de suspect. tut.
and cur.
if he intercept any of the Pupils goods, if he become an enemy to the Pupil;
finally, if he be over rude, sloathfull, unskilful, etc. So even the Nobles
shall be held guilty of the Princes deed, unless they remove, or prevent his
tyranny, or supply his sloathfulnesse, with their vigilance and diligence.
Finally, as often as the Guardian does not do in the name of the Pupil, that
which any fit Master of a family would do, he may not seem to be defended;
but that he may be the better defended, his Co-gardians are bound to foresee:
So much more justly, if the Prince does not act the householder but the Enemy,
L. 10. and 33. D. de admin. and peric. tutor. and Curat.
the Nobles may and ought to act against him, since they are bound by his deed,
no less then by their own. Moreover the Nobles may consider, that the King in
governing the Republike, holds the first part, but they the second, third, and
every one in his place. Therefore if he does his part ill, they may not follow
him: if he destroy the Republike, they may not connive; for it is committed to
them, as well as to him; and in such sort truly, that not only they themselves
ought rightly to execute their office by themselves, but to contain the Prince
within the bounds of his office. Finally, as the King promises, that he will
take care of the benefit of the Commonweal, so also do they. Therefore if he
breaks his oath, they may not think, that they are absolved from theirs, no
more then Bishops, if the Pope should defend heresy or destroy the Church:
yea, they should think themselves so much the more obliged to perform their
oaths, by how much the more he shall violate his. Therefore if they collude,
they are reputed in the number of prevaricators; if they connive, of desertors;
and TRAITORS, if they vindicate not the Republike from the tyranny of tyrants:
as finally they become Patrons, Defenders, little Kings, if they by all means
protect and defend the Republike, which they have undertaken to protect. These
things, Judge. 5.
though they are sufficiently firm of themselves, yet they may be demonstrated
by examples. The Canaanitish Kings, who oppressed the people of Israel with
hard servitude, as well corporal as spiritual, (interdicting them both
commerce and arms) were true tyrants, I say in practice, yet not without a
title; for Eglon and Jabin reigned quietly almost twenty years: Now God
extraordinarily stirred up Ehud, who slew Eglon craftily; and Debora, who
routed the army of Jabin; and by that means freed the people from tyranny:
This was not verily, because it was less lawful to the ordinary Magistrates
and Princes of the Tribes, and the rest to do it, but Debora rather objecteth
their sloathfulnesse and carelessness to them, and curses some of them for
this cause. But truly God, pitying his people, 2 Chronicles. 10 and 11.
extraordinarily supplied the negligence of ordinary officers. Rehoboam the
son of Solomon, refuses to ease the people of unnecessary Tributes, being
entreated to do it in a general Assembly of all the people, he grows
insolent, and assisted with the counsel of flatterers, even arrogantly
threatens more grievous burdens; August. l. 1. 7. de Civit. Dei. c. 22.
No man doubts, but that according to the covenant first made between the King
and people, the Nobles might have restrained this pride: But the sin was in
this, that they did by secession, which was to be done in the Assembly; and did
a just and lawful thing unjustly. Frequent examples of this thing occur in
other Kingdoms: he instanceth in Tarquin the proud, expelled by Brutus and
Lucretius; who confiscated his goods, and would have publicly sentenced
himself, had they apprehended his person, because he consulted not with the
Senate as former Kings usually did, because he made war, peace, and truces at
his pleasure without the Senates and peoples advice, violated the Laws which
he should observe, and neglected the covenant established between the King and
people: in Nero the Emperor, publicly sentenced by the Senate, Vitellius,
Maximinus; and the speech of Trajan (forecited): Likewise the Sea Hotoman.
Francogallia. c. 6. to 14.
French, by authority of a public Council through the care of the Kingdoms
officers, expelled Childericke the first, Sigibert, Theodoricke, Childericke
the third, from the Crown, for their tyranny, and set up others of another
stock in their places. Yea, for sloathfulnesse, negligence, madenesse, as also
for injuries to Forrainers, and yielding to the impotencie or lust of
flatterers, or women, they have deposed some, and as it were taken away the
reins from Phaeton, lest all men should be burnt with the same fire; as
Theodoricke for Ebroines sake, Dagobert of Plectrude, and Theobald his
Mignions, with others; reputing it to be all one, whether a woman or an
effeminate Prince reigned; or whether a tyrant, or petite tyrants under a
sloathfull Prince domineered: or finally, whether he himself were a Devil, or
possessed by the Devil himself. Thus not long since they compelled Jews the
eleventh, a most imperious Prince to receive 36. Governors, by whose counsel
he was bound to govern the Republike. Yea, what other right had either the
Carlingi, adopted into the Kingdom in place of the Meruingi; or the Capets who
at this day hold it, preferred before the Carlingi by the Decree of a public
Council; ^^^issard. l. 1. c. 1. and seq^. A^t. de But. Consil. quod positum
inter Consil. Paul. de Castro vol Antiqu. nu 412. in cip. Viso puncto. Martini.
Laudensis in Tract. de Cardin in 2. qu. 35. Phil. De iniquodam consilio, cujus
verba faerunt Andr. Barbar. in D. cons. 1. l. ^. c. 6. Bald. in l. Olim. col.
peri. de res^ri. in Decretal. Bonifac. 8 de May. and obed.
but from the people, represented as it were in an Epitome, by the Council of
the Realm, which they call an Assembly of the three Estates, who might
lawfully of right both depose those, and by their own authority establish
these in the Throne? In the same manner we read Adolphus deprived of the German
Empire, An. 1296. because corrupted with money, he had made war with France, in
favor of the English: and Wenceslaus, An. 1400. although these may be called,
not so well evil, as less good Princes. Thus in the Realm of England, Edward
the second, for his tyranny to his Subjects, especially the Nobles, whom he
destroyed without hearing their cause, was at his Queens request, adjudged
unworthy of his Crown by the Parliament. Not long since, Christierne in
Denmark, Ericus in Sweden, Queen Mary very lately in Scotland, were deprived:
which Histories worthy credit testify, has been frequently done in the
Kingdom of Poland, Hungary, Spain, Portugal, Bohemia, and the rest. But what
concerning the Pope himself? The Cardinals, they say, because they have chosen
him, or if they do not their duty, the Patriarks, who are Primates next after
the Cardinals, may against his will, for certain causes call a Council, and
in it judge the Pope, if he shall scandalize the Church by his notorious
offenses; if he be incorrigible, if reformation be necessary as well in the
head as members; if contrary to his Oath he will not assemble a Council, and
the like; and de facto, we read that many Popes have been deposed by authority
of a Council. But if (says Baldus) they be pertinaciously abused; at first
they must use words, secondly, herbs, that is, medicines; lastly, stones; and
where the truth of virtue suffices not, there the defense of weapons ought to
prevail. But and if by the suffrages almost of all learned men, the Decrees of
Councels, and the Acts themselves done, it be proved, that a Council, as they
speak, may lawfully depose the Pope, who yet boasts himself to be the Kings of
Kings, and claims as much to be above the Emperor, as the Sun is above the
Moon; yea, also arrogates to himself an authority of deposing Kings and
Emperors at his pleasure; who at last can doubt, but that by the public
Council of every Realm, not only a tyrant, but a King, pernicious to his
Kingdom for his madness or folly, may be deposed or removed?

Go to now, in this our politic Ship, the Master gluts himself with wine;
most of his assistants either asleep, or drunk with mutual cups sportingly
behold an imminent Rock. The Ship in the mean time, either holds not that
course which is expedient for the owner, or seems speedily to be wracked; what
think thou is here to be done under the Master, by one who is vigilant and
sollicitous? Shall he pull those by the ears who are asleep, or only jogge
them by the sides? but in the mean time, Plato. l. 8. and 9. de Repub.
lest he should seem to do ought without their command, shall he not afford
his help and assistance to the endangered Ship? Truly what madness, or rather
impiety will this be? Seeing then (as Plato says) tyranny is a certain
frenzy and drunkenness, the Prince may utterly subvert the Republike, the
most of the Nobles may collude, connive, or at least are fast asleep: the
people who are Lords of the Republike, by the fraud or negligence of these
ministers, which is their fault, are reduced into greatest straights in the
mean time there is one of the Nobles which considers the incroaching tyranny,
and detests it from his soul, what think thou is now to be done against him
by this man? Shall he only admonish his Colleagues of their duty, who
themselves do as much hurt as they may? But, besides, as it is perilous to
admonish, and in that state of things it may be deemed a capital crime, shall
he do like those, who contemning other helps, casting away their arms, shall
cite Laws, and make an Oration concerning justice among thieves, L. 3. and l.
omne delictum. Sect. ult D. de re milit.
in the midst of a wood? but this truly, is that which is co^moly said, to be
mad with reason: What then? shall he grow deaf at the peoples groans? shall
he be silent at the entrance of thieves? or shall he finally grow lasie, and
put his hands into his bosom? But if the Laws appoint the punishment of a
Traitor against one wearing buskins on his legs, who counterfeits sickness for
fear of the enemies, what punishment at least shall we decree against him, who
either through malice, or sloathfulnesse, shall betray those whom he has
undertaken to protect? But rather he shall command those things that are
needful to such as are wary by a Mariners shout; he shall take care lest the
Commonwealth receive any detriment, and shall preserve the Kingdom even
against the Kings will and resistance, by which he himself becomes a King; and
shall cure the King himself as a frantic man, by binding his hands and feet,
C. nullus in Carthagin. Council. Doctores Pontificii.
if he may not otherwise do it. For, as we have said, the universal
government of the Realm is not committed by the people to the King, as neither
the oversight of the whole Church to the Pope, but to every one of the Nobles
according to his power. But certainly, because concord proceeds from unity,
that there should be no emulation among Peers, a King was instituted, who
should hold the supreme place in the administration of the Commonwealth. The
King swears that he will seek the safety of the Realm; the Nobles swear every
one the same by himself: whether therefore the King or most of the Nobles
neglecting their oath, shall either destroy the Common weal, or desert it being
in danger, ought the rest therefore to desert the Republike, or at least be
less bound to defend it, as if they were absolved from their oath? But rather
then especially they ought to show their fidelity, when as others neglect it,
especially since they were principally instituted for that end, like the
Ephori; and every thing may then be reputed just, when it attaines its end:
whether truly if many have promised the same thing, is the obligation of the
one dissolved by the perjury of the other? whether if many be guilty of the
same sin, are the rest freed by the fraud of one? Whether, if many
Co-gardians ill defend their Pupil, shall one good man be less bound with the
burden of the wardship through their default? But rather, neither can they
avoid the infamy of perjury, unless they endeavor to satisfy their trust as
much as in them lies; neither can those exempt themselves from the danger and
judgment of a Gardianship ill administered, unless they implead the other
Gardians suspected; L. 3. D. de administ and peric. tutor. and cur. l. 3. D.
desuspect. tut. and curat.
when as verily one Guardian may not only implead the rest suspected, and take
care of those to be removed, but also remove them. Therefore those who have
promised their aid and assistance to all the Realm or Empire; such as Earls
of the stable, Marshals, Senators, and the rest; or those who have done it
specially to any County or City which may make a part of the Realm; as Dukes,
Marquesses, Earls, Majors, and the rest, are bound to aid the whole
Commonweal oppressed with tyranny, or that part thereof, which the people have
committed to them next after the King. And these truly ought to vindicate the
whole Commonweal from tyranny, if they be able; those as Gardians assigned
throughout Counties, that part of the Realm whose defense they have
undertaken: These I say, are bound to restaine a tyrant, those to drive him out
of their coasts. Therefore Mattathias as one of the Nobles, Maccab. lib. 1. c.
3. v. 45.
the rest partly conniving, partly colluding; when Antiochus tyrannically
oppressed the Kingdom of Judah, speaks thus to the people ready to take up
arms: Let us restore the state of our people; let us fight for our people, and
our holy places: whence it plainly appears, that we may not only lawfully
fight for Religion, but for our Country; for an hearth I say, no lest justly
then for our Altars, and take up arms against such a tyrant as he was: neither
are they blamed by any, for recovering the Kingdom, but that they claimed the
royal dignity to themselves, Justin. l. 1. Diodor. l. 2. c. 37.
which pertained to the Tribe of Judah. Many pertinent examples to this purpose
occur in Historians. Arbactus governor of Media, slew Sardanapalus spinning
among women, and spending the royal treasure among whores. Vindex President of
the French, and Galba of the Spaniards revolted from Nero, together with all
France and Spain, the Senate conniving at his tyranny. But especially that
Laconick judgment is observable, which verily proceeding from that Senate,
ought to pass into a thing adjudged among all Nations. When the Lacedaemonians
possessed Byzantium, they made Clearches Captain of the Army, Governor of the
City, who taking corn from the Citizens, distributed it to the foreign
soldiers; but in the mean time the families of the Citizens perished with
famine. Anexilaus therefore, one of the Magistrates of the City, moved with
that tyranny, agreed with Alcibiades about the yielding up of his Country to
him, and he soon after is received into the City. Anexilaus being accused at
Sparta for yielding up of Byzantium, pleaded his cause himself, the Spartanes
absolved the man; because they said, wars were to be waged with enemies, not
with the nature of things; now nothing is more repugnant to nature, then, if
those who are bound to defend a City, became more unjust then the enemies. Thus
the Lacedaemonians determined justly, to whom scarce any good Kings will not
assent; verily those who desire to rule well, care not at all what is
determined concerning tyrants, or what the Nobles or people themselves may do
by Law. But we must yet proceed further. Every one of the Mariners is bound, if
the Ship be endangered through the default or negligence of the Ship-master, to
put to his helping hand: every one of the Nobles is bound, if the Republike
perish by the wickedness or carelessness of the Prince and his Colleagues, to
help it, being like to fall, and to vindicate the whole Kingdom, or at least
that part thereof which is committed to him, from tyranny. But then shall it be
lawful for every ordinary slave to do the like? or peradventure shall it be
lawful to Herdonius Sabinus, Euno Surianus, Spartacus the fencer, or, I say,
to any private man to enfranchise servants, to stir up Subjects to arms,
finally to combat with the Prince, if tyranny urge them? No verily. The
republike is not committed to single or private men, yea they themselves are
committed to the care of the Nobles and Magistrates no otherwise then Pupils.
Therefore they are not bound to defend the Republike, who cannot defend
themselves. The sword is not committed to every man neither by God, L. 1. c. de
Seditiosis.
nor by the people; therefore if they draw the sword without command, they are
seditious, although the cause may seem to be just. Finally, private men do
not make the Prince, but all. Therefore they ought to expect the command of
all, or of those, I say, who represent all in a Realm, Country or City, which
may make a part of the Realm, or at least of one of them, before they attempt
any thing against the Prince. L. I. l. 9. D. de author. and consil. tutor. and
curat.
For as a Pupil cannot bring an action without authority of his Tutor,
although the Pupil be truly a Lord, and the Tutor only is reputed for the
Lord, as far forth as appertains to his tutelary providence: So neither may
the people do ought, but by the authority of those, on whom they have
transferred their authority and power; whether they be ordinary Magistrates, or
extraordinarily, created in a public Assembly; whom, I say, they have guirded
with the sword for this purpose, to whom they have delivered themselves up to
be governed and cared for; Seneca l. 8. de Benefic.
who finally like that Praetor of Rome, who judged between servants and
masters, are truly constituted in that place, that if any contention arise
between King and Subjects, they may show themselves Judges and Redressors,
lest the Subjects themselves should pronounce sentence in their own cause.
Therefore if unjust customs or grievous taxes be imposed, if things be done
against pacts or fraudulently, and yet not one of the Nobles speaks against or
resists it, let them think they must then sit still, and think, that the best
Physicians to prevent or take away a disease, do oft-times prescribe the
opening of a vein, the evacuation of humors, yea and scarification. For such
is the nature of things, that scarce any mischief can be cured without
another; scarce any good may be acquired without diligent labor. They have the
example of the people under Solomon, who refused not the grievous tributes
imposed on them for the building of the Temple, and fortifying the Kingdom;
because they judged those things to be imposed by the public Council, to the
glory of God, the beauty and ornament of the Republike. They have likewise the
example of Christ our Savior, who although he were the King of Kings, yet
because he then sustained a private person, he paid tribute willingly. If the
Nobles and Magistrates themselves favor apparent tyranny, John 34 ^. 30.
or at least oppose it not, they may remember, that for the sins of the
people, God suffers Hypocrites to reign; whom unless they turn themselves to
God with all their heart, cannot be overturned with any engines. Therefore
there is no need of feet or hands, but bended knees. Finally, they must suffer
evil Princes, wish for better, and think, they must bear that tyranny with a
patient mind as they do hail; storms, tempests, and other natural
calamities, or change their habitations. David retired into the Mountains, and
spared Saul a tyrant, because he was none of the Nobles of the people: Christ,
because he was not of this world fled into Egypt, to avoid Herod's tyranny.
Paul, because he describes the office of private Christians, not of
Magistrates, teaches that they must obey Nero himself. But if all the Nobles,
or most of them, or at least one of them endeavor to restrain apparent
tyranny, or the Magistrate to drive it from that part of the Realm which is
committed to him, if he be such a one, as under pretext of expelling it, may
not introduce another tyranny; then verily assembling together, they may run
who shall go fastest to this choice man, they may earnestly assist with their
feet and hands, and as if God himself had given a sign from Heaven, of a
fight against tyrants, endeavor to free the Kingdom from tyranny. For as God
punishes and chastises the people by tyrants, Eccles. 10.
so likewise tyrants by the people: and that is a perpetual truth which Syrach
says; that Kingdoms are translated from Nation to Nation, for the iniquities,
injuries, and wickedness of Princes* and that every tyranny continues but a
short space. Thus the Captains and soldiers carefully executed all the
commands of Iehojada the High Priest, in revenging the tyranny of Queen
Athaliah: Thus all the godly men of Israel went to the Maccabees, partly that
they might defend the true worship of God, partly that they might free the
Republike against the impious and unjust attempts of Antiochus; yea God
favored their just endeavors, and gave them prosperous success. What then?
May not God likewise out of private men themselves raise up some avenger of
tyranny? Cannot the very same who raises up tyrants out of the people, backed
with no title, no pretext, to punish the people, likewise raise up deliverers
also out of the lowest of the people? Cannot the same who enthralled the people
to Jabin and Eglon, deliver the same people by Ehud, Barac, Deborah, and as it
were manumit them when they were deserted by the Nobles? What therefore should
now hinder, thou will say, but that the same God who has sent Tyrants on us at
this time, should likewise extraordinarily send revengers of tyrants? Why, if
Ahab rages against good men, if Jezabel suborne false witnesses against
Naboth, shall not there be also a Iehu, which may extirpate the family of Ahab,
who may avenge the blood of Naboth, who may cast down Iezebel to be torn in
pieces of Dogs? Verily, what I have answered before, as nothing has departed
from the justice of God at any time, so not from his mercy. But yet since those
evident signs, by which God was wont to confirm these extraordinary vocations
of those Worthies, are for the most part wanting to us in this age, let the
people take heed, lest whiles they seek to pass over Sea with a dry foot,
some Impostor being their Captain, they fall not headlong into a gulf, which
we read sometimes to have happened to the Jews: lest whiles they seek a
revenger of tyranny, they perchance follow one, who, that tyrant being
expelled, will translate the tyranny it self unto himself: lest finally
whiles they seek to deserve well of the Commonwealth, they militate to the
private lust of any; so as that may fall out which has happened to many
Republikes, especially the Italian, whiles that they endeavor to remove the
present evil, they bring in a far greater. I shall close up this with three
Authorities more; the first, of Mr. John Calvin, who pleads as much for
obedience to Tyrants and unjust Magistrates as any man: Instit. lib. 4. c. 20.
sect. 31. I always speak of private men: For if there be any popular
Magistrates constituted to moderate the lust of Kings (such as heretofore were
the Ephori, who were opposed to the Lacedaemonian Kings, or Tribunes of the
people against the Roman Senate; or the Demarchi against the Athenian Senate,
and which power peradventure, as now things stand, The three Estates in all
Kingdoms enjoy, when they assemble) I am so far from inhibiting them to
withstand the raging licentiousness of Kings, according to their duty: that if
they connive at Kings outragiously encroaching upon, and insulting over the
inferior common people, I shall affirm, that their dissimulation wants not
nefarious perfidiousnesse, because they fraudulently betray the liberty of the
people of which they know themselves ordained protectors by Gods ordinance. The
second is, Huldericus Zuinglius: Explanatio Artic. 42. Quando vero perfide and
extra Regulam Christi (Principes) egerint, possint cum Deo deponi, consensu and
suffragiis totius, aut certe potioris partis multitudinis. Quaeris quando id
fiet, ut major pars populi bono consentiat? Ad hoc dico quod antea; si non
consentiunt ut malum tollant, ferant jugum Tyranni, and demum cum eo pereant.
Nec querantur sibi fieri injuriam, cum sua culpa id mereantur ut quidvis
patiantur. Quis ergo miretur si populus ob flagitia and scelera Principum
paenas luat? Primum, cur non juxta naturae regulam cum proximo agimus? Sic enim
omnes fratres essemus, and Principe nullo esset opus. Deinde, cur non summo
studio justitiam sectamur, and exosam habemus injustitiam omnes? Sic enim
facile fieret ut unanimi consensu tyrannum officio moveremus. Nunc cum tam
tepidi sumus in tuenda justitia publica, sinimus ut impune vitia Tyramorum
body regnent. Merito ergo ab illis conterimur, and tandem cum illis luimus.
Non ergo desunt viae per quas tyranni tollantur, sed deest publica justitia.
Cavete vobis, O Tyranni, Evangelium enim Jesu Christi late sparsum vitam
multorum innovabit ut innocentiae and justitiae plurimi studeant, cui and si
vos studueritis, summo bonore vos prosequantur, sin furere and vim facere
perrexeritis, omnium pedibus conculcabimini. So he

The last is the general Union of the States of the united Provinces, to
defend their Liberties and Religion, made at Brussels, the tenth of January
1577. thus related by Grimston in his History of the Netherlands l. 10. p. 492.
493.

The States seeing themselves engaged in war on all sides against the
Spaniards, (who were proclaimed enemies to the Country) fearing some disunion
amongst themselves, by the enticing persuasions of such as sought to dismember
them, they resolved, before that Don John should enter into the Country, to
make a general union among themselves, as well Prelates, Noblemen, and Towns,
as of others of the seventeene Provinces: which was allowed by the Lords of the
Council of State, deputed by the King, for the government general of the said
Countries; whereof, the Original remains in the custody of the States of
Brabant. Of which Union, the Tenor follows.

A general Union of the States.
WE who have signed these presents; Prelates, Churchmen, Noblemen, Gentlemen,
Magistrates of the King, Towns, Castles, and others, making and representing
the States of the seventeene Provinces, being presently assembled in this Town
of Brussels, and others, being under the obedience of the most high, mighty,
and famous Prince, King Philip, our Sovereign Lord and natural Prince; we
give all men to understand, both present and to come, That seeing our common
Country afflicted by a more then barbarous and tyrannous oppression of
Spaniards, we have been forced and moved to unite our selves together, and
with Arms, Counsel, Men, and Money, to assist one another against the said
Spaniards, and their adherents; being declared Rebels to his Majesty, and our
enemies. And that this union and conjunction has been since confirmed by the
Pacification last made; and all by the authority and consent of the Council of
State, committed by his Majesty for the general government of the said
Countries: And as the pretended end of this Union requires all fidelity,
constancy, and natural assistance for ever; and that we would not by any
misprision have cause of jealousy or mistrust, and much less of any bad
affection or disposition of any of us; but contrariwise, to have the affairs
of the said Union effected with all the sincerity, fidelity, and diligence that
may be, so as not any of the subjects and inhabitants of the said Countries and
Province may have any just cause to be discontented, or to doubt of us:

For these considerations and reasons, and that nothing may be treacherously
done, to the prejudice of our common Country, and just defense; or that
omitted by negligence, which shall be necessary for our just and lawful
defense; We have by virtue of our power and commission respectively, and
otherwise for us and our successors, promised and do promise, by the faith of
Christians, of honest men and true Contrymen, to keep and entertain
inviolably for ever the said Union and Association; so as not any one of us may
break or fall from it, by dissimulation, secret intelligence, or in any sort
whatsoever. And that for the preservation of our holy, Catholic, and Romish
Faith, and the accomplishment of the Pacification, as also for the expulsion of
Spaniards and their adherents (with all due obedience to his Majesty) for the
good and quiet of our Country, and the maintenance of our Privileges, rights,
Freedoms, Statutes, Customs, and ancient uses: For the effecting whereof, we
will use all means possible; employing both Money, Men, Counsel, and goods,
yea and our lives, if it were necessary. And that none of us may in private
give any counsel, advice, or consent, nor have any secret conference with them
that are not of this Union, nor yet reveal unto them in any sort what has or
shall be treated of in this Assembly, or resolved; but shall wholly conform
himself according to our general and common resolution.

And in case, that any Province, Estate, Country, Town, Castle, or House,
were besieged, assaulted, invaded, or oppressed in any sort whatsoever: yea, if
any of us, or any others (having endeavored himself for his Country and the
just defense thereof, against the Spaniards, or for other causes depending
thereon, as well in general as particular) should be sought after, imprisoned,
ransomed, molested, or disquieted in his person, and goods, honor, and estate,
or otherwise; we promise to give him assistance by all the said means; yea,
and to procure the liberty of them that shall be imprisoned, either by force,
or otherwise; upon pain to be degraded of their Nobility, Name, Arms, and
Honor, and to be held perjured, disloyal, and enemies to our Country, before
God and men, and to incur the note of Infamy and cowardice for ever. And for
the strengthening of this our holy Union of Association, we have signed these
presents the tenth of January, 1577.

Underneath were the signatures of the Deputies of every Province, Prelates,
Noblemen, and Commissioners for Towns; and underneath them, was written the
agreation of the Council of State, as follows: The Deputies of the general
Estates here underwritten, having required them of the Council of State,
committed by his Majesty for the government of the Netherlands, to consent unto
and allow of that which is contained in the Union above written: The Council,
in regard of the said request, and the reasons therein contained, have as much
as in them lay, allowed, and do allow by these presents, the said Union,
according to the form and tenor. Made at Brussels in the State-house, in the
Assembly of the said States, the tenth of January, 1577. And underneath was
written:

By the commandment of the Lords of the Council of State: Signed; Berrii.

If any shall here object; Object. 1.
that Chassanaeus in confuetud. Burg. Rebuffus ad constit. Reg. Tom. 2. and
Bonefic. art. 2. Bodin. de repub. l. 1. c. 10.
Kings are of divine institution; whence, Dei gratia, (By the grace of God) is
peculiarly annexed to their Titles; and not communicated unto Subjects.
Therefore though they prove never so flagitious or tyrannical, they may in no
wise be forcibly resisted, or questioned by their Nobles and Parliaments for
their crimes.

I answer briefly (because I have Part. 3. p. 115. to 123.
elsewhere largely dissipated this objection) First, that Kings are no more of
divine institution, then any other inferior Magistrates, Officers, or Princes
whatsoever; as the Romans 13. 1, 2, 2, 4, 5, 6. Prove. 8. 15. 16.
Scriptures abundantly evidence. But all other inferior Magistrates, Officers,
and Princes whatsoever are resistible, questionable, censurable, and deposible
for their tyranny, wickedness, and misgovernment by the Parliaments censure,
as I Part. 2. p. 44. 45.
have proved, notwithstanding their divine institution; therefore such
degenerating Kings too, as well as they in such cases.

Secondly, all Ephesians. 4. 11. 1 Cor. 12. 28. c. 4. 1. 2 Cor. 3. 6. c. 11. 23. 2 Timothy 4. 6.
Ministers of the Gospel, are as much, (if not far more) Jure divine, and by
Gods own ordination, as Kings are; a truth undeniable. But they for their
offenses and misdemeanors contrary to their function, may be both forcibly
resisted, censured, deprived, degraded, yea and executed, notwithstanding their
divine right and institution; as the Canons of most Councels, the practice of
all ages, yea, the express letter of the 26. Article of the Church of England,
with all our Episcopal Canons and Canonists attest: Therefore tyrannical
degenerating Kings may be so too, by the selfsame reason, in some cases.

Thirdly, this Title of Dei gratia, in public Writs, anciently has been, and
yet is common to Bishops, Prelates, inferior Magistrates and Subjects, as well
as to Kings; as sundry precedents Ragister. part 2. f. 3. 23. 60 62. 303. 7.
31. 33. 35. 38. 44. 54. 55. Pars ^. 286. 302, 303. 305. 306, 307. Pars 3. f 5.
22. 26. 29 31. 35. 42. 47. Fitz. Not. Bre. 132.
in our Law books, Willielmus Dei GRATIA Eliensis Episc. etc. Mattheus Pars.
p. 155.
Matthew Paris, Proaem. Relect. in leg. Taurin. 36. Object. 2.
Salon, with others attest, and Mr. John Seldom in his Titles of Honor, part.
1. chap. 7. Sect. 2. p. 123. professedly proves at large, to whom I shall
refer you: But these both lawfully may be, and always have been forcibly
resisted, questioned, convented, deprived, censured for their tyranny and
misdemeanors, notwithstanding this their style of Dei gratia, or pretense of
divine institution: yea, we know that Bishops have been lately thrust out of
many Churches, notwithstanding their long pretended Ius Divinum to support
their Hierarchy; and John Gerson a Papist, has writ a particular Treatise De
Auferibilitate Papae, notwithstanding the Popes pretended Divine Title to his
Monarchy, which may be now, and one day shall be totally abolished. Therefore
tyrannical degenerous Kings, may be justly resisted, censured, deprived, as
well as they, and royalties changed into other governments, by the peoples and
kingdoms common consents, if they see just cause.

If any secondly object: See Mr. Seldens Titles of Honor, part. 1. c. 8. sect.
1.
That Kings are anointed at their Coronation; Therefore their persons are
sacred, irresistible, unquestionable, unpunishable, for any tyrannical or
exorbitant actions whatsoever.

I briefly answer: first, that every Christians Baptism, (being a Sacrament of
Christ's own institution) at least his spiritual unction and sanctification,
(as I have Part. 3. p. 89. to 94.
formerly proved) makes a person as sacred, yea more holy, then Kings
annoynting (being no Sacrament) can, or does of it self make the person of any
King whatsoever. A truth which no Christian can without blasphemy deny. But
Baptism, and the inward unction of the spirit of grace and sanctification,
exempts no Christians from resistance, censure, punishments of all sorts, in
case they commit any exorbitant or capital crimes; as experience tells us:
Therefore Kings Coronation annoyntings cannot do it.

Secondly, Part. 3. p. 92. 93. (...) Cun^us de Republ. Hebrae. l. 1. c. 14.
Pontif. and Ceremoniale Romanum.
Priests anciently were and at this day too in the Roman Church, are anointed
as well as Kings; and so are children and sick persons (that I say not Altars,
Bells, etc.) with Chrisme and extreme Unction: But these Unctions confer no
such immunity to Priests, children, sick men, others, etc. Therefore neither
can this annoynting do it to Kings, especially now, being no divine
institution.

Thirdly, The annoynting of Kings, is not common to all Christian Kings (many
of them especially in former times, having been crowned without any annoynting
at all) but peculiar to Emperors, and to the Kings of Jerusalem, France,
England, and Sicily, the four anointed Kings, only, as Ad Tit. de S^at Ho^.
l. 1.
Albericus, De Imp qu. 18. and 10.
Restaurus Castaldus, De Potest. Regia. part. 4. Sect. 16.
Antonius Corsetus, Moral. Justit. pars 2. l. 10 c. 5.
Azorius, Catalogus Gloriae mundi, p 5. Consid. 35.
Cassanaeus, and See Mr. Seldens Titles of Honor, part. 1. c. 8. Sect. 1.
sundry others affirm, out of the old Roman Provincial: though some other
Kings have now and then been anointed when they were crowned, as Mr. Seldom
proves. Since therefore all Kings persons are reputed sacred, as well as these
four who are anointed; and these Kings as soon as the Crown descended to
them, even before their Unctions and Coronations were deemed as sacred and
inviolable as before; it is certain, that their very enoyling of it self
makes no addition to their personal immunities from just resistance, public
censures, or deprivations for gross unsufferable public crimes.

Fourthly, 4.
the annoynting of Christian Emperors and Kings is not very ancient; Charles
the great being the first anointed Emperor if we Titles of Honor, part. 1.
c. 8. Sect. 1.
believe Mr. Seldom. The first anointed King in France, was Pipin about the
year 750. the annoynting of their See Seldom, Ibid. p. 148. 149.
Clovis the first, about the year 500. with that holy Vial of never-decaying
Oil (reserved at Rheimes to annoint their Kings) which they say a Dove brought
down from Heaven to annoint him with, (a ridiculous Monkish fable, much
insisted on by Decreta Eccles. Gal. lib 5. Tit. 2. c. 1. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Mr.
Seldom Ibid. p. 148. 149.
Bochellus and other Frenchmen, who relate the grand solemnity used in the
carrying and recarrying of this fabulous Vial, at the French Kings Coronations)
being not at his Coronation, as many fondly mistake, but only at his baptism,
as Mr. Seldom manifests by pregnant authorities; The annoynting of Kings is
far more ancient in England then in any other Realm, Ibid p. 149 150, 151,
152.
as Mr. Seldom notes out of Gildas; yet Egfert is the first of whose annoynting
there is any intimation in our Histories, about the year 790. To add to the
holiness of which ceremony, some of our Tho. Walsingham. in Initio, H. 4. See
Seldom. Ibid. p. 153.
Monks in latter ages have forged a Legend (as good as that of the holy Viol
at Rheimes) that the Virgin Mary gave to Thomas Becket, Archbishop of
Canterbury (during his exile under Henry the second) a golden Eagle full of
precious Oil, enclosed in a stone vessel, commanding him to preserve it:
foretelling him, that the Kings of England anointed with this Oil, should be
Champions of the Church, and bountiful, and victorious as long as they had
this Eagle, and oil. How late the Unction of Kings began in other Realms, you
may read at large in Titles of Honor, part. 1 c. 8 Sect. 11.
Mr. Seldom; and how the later Kings of Judah were anointed, and with what
unguent or Oil, the curious may read at leisure in De Republ. Hebrae. l. 1. c.
14
Cunaeus. This annoynting therefore of Kings being not of divine institution,
of such puny date in most Realms, and no ways necessary nor essential to the
constitution or Inauguration of any Christian King; can add no immunity, or
privilege at all to the persons of Kings, much less exempt them from all
forcible resistance, just censures, or deprivation it self, if there be just
and real cause to proceed criminally against them in case of incorrigibility,
as I have elsewhere more fully demonstrated, and therefore shall no further
expatiate in this particular here: only I shall conclude with one notable
History which proves it.

I read in Rerum Anglicarum, l. 3. c. 6. See Saxo grammaticus Dan. Hist. l. 8.
p. 14^
Gulielmus Neubrigensis; that for an hundred years space and more, though
there were a numerous succession of Kings in Norway, yet none of them ended his
life by old age or sickness, but all of them perished by the sword, leaving
the sovereign power of the Realm to their murderers, as to their lawful
successors, so as to all those who are known to have reigned there for so long
a time, that which is written might seem to have reference; Have thou slain,
and also taken possession? The Nobles of this Land out of a pious endeavor,
desirous to heal this infamous mischief, obteining now the vigor of a Law as
it were through long custom, decreed, That the new King should be solemnly
anointed with a mystical unction, and crowned, so as no man should dare from
thenceforth to lay hands on the Lords anointed: For till that time none in
that Nation has ever been consecrated King after an Ecclesiastical manner,
but whosoever had Tyrannically slain a King, put on the person and power of a
King thereby, and left the same likewise after a little fortune to his
murderer, by a law of inveterate custom, which verily, out of a certain
Christian simplicity, was thought by many to have been therefore so frequently
done, because none of the former Kings had deserved to be initiated with the
solemnity of a Royal Unction. Therefore Haco being slain who had succeeded
King Jnge slain by him, when the succession of the Crown seemed to belong to
one Magnus a child, Nephew to Jnge, the Wisemen and Nobles of the Realm by a
common Decree, caused the said child to be solemnly consecrated to be the Lords
anointed, and crowned with a Diadem. By which deed they thought that they had
a Prince made sacred to them, and that the disgrace of the ancient custom was
thereby abolished. But when Magnus had reigned some few years in great
prowess and happiness, a most infamous Priest Suerus, surnamed Birkebain,
usurped a Tyranny, twice defeated Magnus by warlike stratagems, and at last
utterly routed and slew him in battle; (notwithstanding his annoynting) and
usurping the Crown, renounced his holy orders, married a wife, and would have
been crowned by the Archbishop of that Land; but he being a great man, would
neither be moved with prayers nor threats, to annoint an exectable head with
sacred Unction, for which he was banished the Country: at last after two great
victories against two competitors who were slain, Suerus obtained the Royal
Crown, with mystical Unction, by the hands of a certain Bishop compelled
thereunto under pain of death, as it were secure by his frequent successes,
from the uncertain end of a long prospering tyranny, etc. By which History it
is evident, that it is but a childish simplicity to believe, that the ceremony
of annoynting Kings can of it self make Kings persons sacro-sanct, or preserve
them from violence or assassinations, since it no way prevented this mischief
in this Realm, (nor yet in any other) the very first King for whose personal
safety this ceremony of annoynting and crowning was introduced among the
Norwegians and Danes, being not long after slain by his Subjects and
competitor in battle.

I shall close up this with the notable sentence of deprivation solemnly given
and executed against Wenceslaus the Emperor, notwithstanding his annoynting.

The sentence of Degradation and Deprivation of the Emperor Wenceslaus King of
Romans, Chronico Jacebi Con^shanti, and Germaniae Historicorum. Tom. 2. p. 180,
181, 182.
pronounced by the Electors of the Empire in the year of our Lord. 1400.
IN the name of God Amen: We John by the grace of God, Archbishop of the Church
of Mentz, Arch-chancellor of the sacred Roman Empire throughout Germany, make
known to all men present and to come. What various, manifold, and grievous, as
well incommodities as discords, have for many years since been brought into
the holy Church continuing even to this present, and daily sprouting up more
abundantly to the most grievous convulsion, imminution, and dissipation of the
sacred Roman Empire, (which ought to be a Garrison to the Church of God and the
Christian world) as they cannot be all written, so the mischiefs daily
increasing do manifestly enough teach and confirm. And for this cause the
Lords Electors of the sacred Roman Empire, the ardent petitions of the holy
Church, Princes, Nobles, Cities, Provinces, and Subjects of the sacred Empire,
entreating, desiring a prudent Moderator, have long agone very often and
seriously, together with us admonished the most illustrious Prince Lord
Wenceslaus King of Bohemia, both by their own and their friends labor, and
finally by letters; and have diligently set before his eyes, privately and
publicly, his unbeseeming and detestable manners and actions in governing, as
also the defects, incommodities and discords of the said Church and Christian
world, likewise the most grievous avulsions and diminutions of the members of
the sacred Empire, hurtfully done, and permitted to be done, against the
dignity of his name: to wit, that he has not promoted peace in the Church,
although the great necessity of the Christian world, as likewise his office of
Advocate and Defendor of the Church, earnestly required it, and he has also
been frequently desired, required, and admonished to do it: he
notwithstanding perniciously mutilated the Empire, and permitted it to be
maimed in some members. In the number whereof are Millain, and the Province of
Lombardy, which were of the right of the same Roman Empire, most ample
emoluments returning thence to the Empire: in which Dominion the Millainer,
like a Minister, enjoyed it as a part of the Roman Empire; when as He, contrary
to that which became his sublimity and dignity, receiving money, created a Duke
of Millain, and an Earl of Papia. Moreover, he has alienated diverse Cities
and Lands belonging to the Empire, as well in Germany as in Italy, some whereof
had returned to the same, having little consideration, that he ought to retain
them with the sacred Empire.

Moreover, he has sold for money to his friends, very many naked and unwritten
Parchments, ratified notwithstanding with the Seal of his Majesty; wherein it
was lawful both for them and others into whose hands these Parchments came, to
write what things they pleased under the royal Seal. Out of which thing, for
the hurtful diminution and dissipation of the rights and emoluments of the
sacred Roman Empire, great complaints are risen up. Moreover he never had any
care of the controversies and wars, which (alas for grief!) have miserably
afflicted and ruined Germany, and other lands of the sacred Empire. Hence
spoylings, burnings, and robberies have sprung up, with such lamentable
increases even at this day, that none, neither Clarks nor Laics, neither
hasbandmen nor Merchants, neither men nor women, whether by land or sea, may
converse in safety. Temples, Monasteries, and religious houses, which the
sacred Empire ought with its hand to assist and defend, are exposed to rapines,
and burnings, and reduced to destruction. Things are gone to this pass, that
every one might have handled, and may even now handle another at his pleasure,
against the reason of right and equity, without any fear of the sacred, and
long despised Imperial authority, so as even the place of conventing any one,
where the defense and patronage of right may be undertaken in the name of the
Empire, is altogether unknown. Finally, which is horrible and dreadful to be
spoken, both with his own hand, and the hand of other wicked instruments he
has with him, he has put to death, drowned in the waters, burned in the fire,
miserably and cruelly destroyed, the reverend Bishops of holy things, Priests,
and spiritual Pastors, likewise many other men of honest note, against the
rule of right, otherwise then became the King of Romans. Which mentioned things
verily, and many other grievous wickednesses and damages are so divulged and
openly known, that they can be no ways excused or concealed. Therefore we, as
we have fore-written, have frequently very earnestly beseeched, admonished, and
required him, that renouncing this unbeseeming kind of life, he would take the
study and labor to himself, whereby he might recover to the holy Church,
oft-times imploring his aid, as King of Romans, and her Advocate, peace and
tranquillity, and to the sacred Empire, its prestine honors, Dominions, and
finally its emoluments; to the assistance and consolation of the Christian
world, grievously debilitated and oppressed in this regard.

Now albeit we have most clearly explicated to the foresaid Lord Wence^^aus,
and exhibited to him in writing, these and other more grievous defects,
concerning him as King of Romans, and the Empire; yet having heard his answers,
and having reiterated our serious exhortations, moreover having communicated
the business to the sacred Roman Sea, we have never as yet found him, to have
amended his manners as became a King of Romans; namely to recover peace to the
Church, principally necessary to the Christian world; also to the sacred
Empire, its dignities, lands, and Dominions: a thing which is most notoriously
known throughout all the Provinces of the Empire.

Therefore because we could no longer neither conceal, nor endure the
remembered and many other defects, touching the sacred Church and Empire, with
grievous loss and mourning; by reason of the instant petitions of the persons
aforesaid, but especially by reason of the Oath wherewith we are obliged to the
same, as the next superior members of the sacred Empire; therefore as of
bounden duty, we were to advise and endeavor how the sacred Empire might be
more rightly and wholesomly provided for, (by whose mad and negligent
administration those inconveniences have crept in) to the safeguard and
consolation of the Christian world. And verily as He in obeying us, had
performed an acceptable thing, so we have sufficiently and seriously called and
cited him, so as we have signified to him; that unless he should be present
at the place and day appointed, it would come to pass, that both in respect of
the petitions exhibited to us, as likewise in respect of our Oath, we should be
compelled to take and enter into such counsels, whereby the sacred Empire might
be better settled: most clearly attesting it in our letters. For this purpose
we appeared at the place and time prescribed, together with our Coelectors
sufficiently summoned, also with the other Princes and of the sacred Empire,
expecting from day to day, whether the foresaid Lord Wenceslaus would appear,
to apply a remedy to the foresaid diseases, and from thenceforth more rightly
to consult about the affairs of the sacred Empire. But he neither vouchsafed
to appear, nor yet to send any one to us in the name of a Proctor. Wherefore
when as by reason of so many pregnant and pernicious defects, we had admonished
and reproved him very often in private and in friendly manner, but after that,
when we could do no good, before the Princes and Nobles, and Cities of the
Empire, in diverse Assemblies, not without great and grievous expenses, yet
without any fruit; therefore we referred all the forementioned things to the
sacred Roman Sea. But when as neither then, he no whit regarded all those
things, we could conjecture nothing else from thence, but that he had laid
down the care both of the Church and Christian world, but especially of the
sacred Empire. Therefore resolving, that this mischief, destructive to the
whole Christian Republike, was by no means to be any longer borne and
tolerated, with a mind well confirmed, after many and various debates and
consultations, both between our selves, as also with other Princes and Nobles
of the sacred Empire, seriously had, for the safety of the Church, the
consolation of the Christian world, the honor and profit of the sacred Empire,
we have thought meet, that the foresaid Lord Wenceslaus, should at this time be
wholly removed from the Roman sacred Empire and all its dignity, as one that is
negligent and a destroyer of the Empire, and unworthy of it.

Therefore we John, Archbish. in the name of the foresaid Lords Coelectors of
the sacred Empire, and our own, moved both with the commemorated, as also with
many other notable defects and causes, by this our sentence, which we give and
pronounce by this our present writing, DEPRIVE and REMOVE the foresaid Lord
Wenceslaus, a^ an unprofitable, negligent waster, and unworthy Defender of the
sacred Empire, from the foresaid Roman Empire, and from all his degree,
dignity, and Dominions appertaining to the same: denouncing to all the Princes,
Nobles, Knights, Gentlemen, Cities, Provinces and Subjects of the sacred Roman
Empire, that they are altogether free from all homage and Oath made to the
person of Wenceslaus in the name of the Empire: requiring and admonishing them
under the faith of the Oath, wherewith they are obliged to the sacred Empire,
that they do not henceforth, obey, and submit to the said Lord Wenceslaus, as
the King of Romans, nor exhibit or suffer to be exhibited to him any right,
obedience, tribute, rent, or any other revenue, b^ what name soever it may be
called; but reserve the said duties, for a profitable and idoneous King of
Romans, hereafter to be substituted by Gods gracious assistance.

In assurance and testimony of all which things, We John Archbishop of Mentz,
have caused this present Instrument to be made by the subscribed Notaries, in
this patent form, and our great Seal to be affixed thereunto. This premised
sentence was read and pronounced by us John Archbishop of Mentz, in our name,
and the names of the Lords, Coelectors before remembered, under the Castle
Lonstein at the Rhene, in the Diocese of Triers, reaching toward Brubachium,
out of a public Throne, erected for the use of a Tribunal, the Lords
Coelectors sitting there in judgment, in the year of our Lords Incarnation,
1400. the eight indiction, on Saturday the twentieth day of the month of
August, a little before the time of the Nones; in the eleventh year of the
Papacy of our most holy Father and Lord in Christ, Lord Boniface the ninth,
Pope, by divine providence; in the presence of the most illustrious Princes and
Lords, John, son of the most illustrious Prince and Lord Rupert, Duke of
Bavaria and Count Palatine of Rheine, Frederick Burgrave of Norimberge, the
Noble Philip Lord of Nassau, and Sarbrucke, Emichon of Luringen, John of
Zigenhaim, Cunrade Burgrave, our Canon of Mentz, Earls: Bernhard of
Westerburg, John of Limpurge, Rinehard of Honowe, Barons: Mr. Nicholas Berwin
of the sacred Page, John of Witenburg, and Nicholas Burgman, of the Decrees;
Mr. Herman President of Saint Gerion of Colen, Doctors of the Law likewise the
valiant Knight Sigfride of Lindow, our Vice-Commander in Ringaugia; John Bossen
of Waldeck, our Buggrave Beckelnheim; and our trusty Henry Rulman, of
Dadenberg, Gerard of Emerberg, Lord in Lantscron, Frederick of Sachenheim,
Culman of Coneren, John of Dalburg, Rudolfe of Zeissikon, as also many other
Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen, spiritual and secular* standing by in great
member, called and requested to the things above written.

And I Nicholas Berchtoldi Fridberg, Clerk, public Notary of the Diocese of
Mentz, by Episcopal and Imperial authority, and sworn Scribe of my foresaid
most gracious Lord, Lord John Archbishop of Mentz, because at that time I was
personally present when this sentence which we have fore-writ, was given and
pronounced, together with the public Notaries and witnesses commemorated, and
saw and heard all these things to be done; therefore at the command and request
of my foresaid most gracious Lord of Mentz; have reduced this public
instrument faithfully put in writing, into public form, and have subsigned
and ratified it with my accustomed sign of Notariship, having likewise annexed
the great Seal of my foresaid Lord of Mentz, in assurance and testimony of all
th^^ premises.

The names of the Notaries are, Nicholaus Berchtoldi Fridburgensis. Joannes
Meier junior Gasterveldensis. Conradus a Leiborn, Clericus, Padebornensis
di^cesis. Henricus Stalberg Rotenbergensis. Tilmannus a Honberg. Conradus Coler
Zustensis, Coloniensis diaecesis.


Finally, it is evident; that the Nobles, Magistrates, Parliament, and
representative body of the people, or some part of them in default of the rest,
may lawfully take up defensive arms to resist their Princes, endeavoring to
abrogate the Law of God, to waste the Church, and extirpate the true Religion
settled among them by the Laws, and usher in Idolatry. And, that in such a case
as this, neighbor Princes and States lawfully may, yea and ought in point of
conscience, to aid the Subjects of other Princes, afflicted for the cause of
pure Religion professed by them, or oppressed by open Tyranny.

These propositions are largely and professedly debated by Junius Brutus in his
Vindiciae contra Tyrannos: quaest. 1. 2. and 4. throughout, in the Treatise
entitled De Jure Magistratus in Subditos, spent wholly in this Theme.
Georgius Obrectus. Disput. Jurid. de Principiis Belli. Number. 125. to 199. by
Vasquius. Contr. Illustr. 36. n. 30. and elsewhere, by Albericus Gentilis, and
sundry others forecited: I shall only fortify the later part thereof, with
the observation of the Interest of Princes.
Duke of Rhoan, who acquaints us; that it is, and has been of later years
the very true interest, honor, and greatness of the Kings and Queens of
England, both in point of policy and Religion, to protect^ and assist with
arms all Princes of the Reformed Protestant Religion, in France, Germany, and
other parts; as it is the true interest of the Kings of Spain, to protect and
releeve all oppressed or grieved Roman Catholics under the Dominion of other
Princes: and that their honor, safety, and greatness principally consists in
the observation and maintenance of this their interest: and with the words of
Junius Brutus; who thus states and debates the Question.

An Jure possint, Vindiciae contr. T^rannes, qu. 4. ^. 207. etc.
aut debeant Vicini Principes auxilium far aliorum principum subditis,
religionis causa afflictis, aut manifesta tyrannide oppressis?

In defining this question (says he) there is more need of conscience, then
science, which would be altogether idle, if charity obtained its place in this
world. But because as the manners of the times are now, there is nothing more
dear or rare among men, then charity it self, we think meet briefly to
discuss it. The Tyrants as well of souls as bodies; as well of the Church as
Commonwealth of Realm, may be restrained, expelled, and punished by the
people. Both these we have already proved by reasons. But, because such is the
fraud of Tyrants, or such the simplicity of subjects for the most part; that
they are scarce known before that they have spoiled; or these scarce think of
their safety, till they have almost perished, and are reduced into those
straits, out of which they cannot get out with their own forces, so as they
are compelled to implore the aid of other; it is questioned, Whether they
defending the cause of Religion or of the Commonwealth, of the Kingdom of
Christ, or of their own Kingdom, other Christian Princes may lawfully assist
them? And truly many, whiles they have hoped to increase their wealth by ayding
the afflicted, have presently judged it to be lawful. For thus the Romans,
Alexander the great, and many others, under pretext of suppressing Tyrants,
have frequently enlarged their Dominions: and not long since we have seen Henry
the second, King of France, to have made war with the Emperor Charles the
fifth: and that under pretext of succouring and defending the Princes of the
Empire, and of the Protestants too; as also Henry the eighth, King of England,
was ready to aid the Protestants in Germany, to make work for Charles the
fifth: But if any danger may be feared from thence, or little gain may be
expected, then verily they must hear most Princes disputing, whether it be
lawful or no? And as those under a pretext of piety, did cover either ambition
or gain; so these pretend justice for their sloathfulnesse; when as verily
neither did piety exhort them, which seeks only the good of others, nor yet
justice ought to dehort these, which looks wholly abroad, and is as it were,
cast out of its own doors. Therefore, discharging both these, let us see
first in the cause of Religion, what true piety, and what true justice may
persuade. First, let it be agreed, that there is but one Church, whose head is
Christ, and whose members so cohere and agree among themselves, that none of
them; even the smallest can suffer violence or hurt, but the rest are hurt and
suffer grief, as the whole Scripture teaches. Therefore the Church is
compared to a body. Now the body is oft-times affected not only with the hurt
of the arm, or leg, but even of the very the least finger, or perishes with
its wound. Therefore in vain may any one boast, that he is cordially affected
with the safety of the body, who when he may defend the whole, yet suffers it
to be torn and mangled limb after limb. It is compared to a building: Now,
where mines are made against any part of the building, the whole building
oft-times falls down to the ground; and the flame which invades any part
thereof endangers the whole. Therefore he should be ridiculous, who because he
dwells in the cellar perchance, should delay to drive the flame from the top of
the house: He should be scarce in his wits, who would not prevent mines with
countermines, because they are made against this wall, not against that. It is
also compared to a Ship: Now the whole Ship is endangered together, the whole
perishes together: Therefore those are equally safe who are in the fore part,
as those who are in the puppe; those who are in keel, as safe as those in the
shrouds, if the storm rage: when verily even in the common proveb, those who
are conversant in the same danger, are said to be in the same Ship: These
things laid down, verily he who is not moved with its grief, burning,
tossing, is not of that body, is not accounted of the family of Christ, has no
place in the Arc. Yet he who is but a little moved, ought no more to doubt,
whether he ought to aid the afflicted members of the Church, then whether he
may help himself, since in the Church all are one; but rather every one is
bound in his place to afford his help and assistance to them; and so much the
more help, by how much the more riches he has received from God, not so much
to be possessed, as expended.

This Church as it is but one, so likewise it is universally and entirely
committed, commended to all Christian Princes severally: For because it had
been dangerous to commit the whole Church to any one; and to commit the
several parts thereof to particular persons, had been clearly contrary to
its unity; God has committed all of it to every of them, and its particular
parts to any of them: Nor yet so, as that they should only defend it; but
also, that they should have a care to propagate it, as much as they are able.
Therefore if the Prince of the Country, takes care of one part thereof,
perchance the German or English; but yet deserts and neglects the other
oppressed part, if he be able to relieve it; he is judged to have deserted the
Church, since the spouse of Christ verily is but one, which he ought to defend
and protect with all his might, lest it should be violated or corrupted any
where. The instauration of this universal Church as private men are bound to
promote with bended knees, so Magistrates, I say, are obliged to do it with
their feet, hands, and all their strength. Neither is the Ephesian Church one,
the Colossian another, and the rest; but all these particular Churches are
parts of the universal; now the universal is the Kingdom of Christ, which
all private men ought to desire; but Kings, Princes, Magistrates, are bound to
amplify, dilate, defend, and propagate every where, and against all
whomsoever. Therefore among the Jews there was one only Temple built by
Solomon, which represented the unity of the Church. Now he should be a
ridiculous Churchwarden, and to be punished, who should take care only to
preserve one part safe and sound, but suffer the rest to fall to decay;
likewise all Christian Kings when they are inaugurated, receive a sword, of
purpose to defend the Catholic or universal Church; which taking into their
hand, they point out all the quarters of the world, and brandish it toward the
East, West, South and North, lest any part thereof should be thought excepted.
Since then they receive the protection of the Church in this manner, without
doubt they understand the true, not false Church. Therefore they ought to do
their endeavor to defend, ^ Chron. c. 31.
and to restore entirely, that Church, which they profess to be true and pure.
Now that thus it was observed by pious Princes, examples may teach us. In the
time of Hezekiah King of Judah, the Kingdom of Israel was long before
enthralled to the King of Assyria, to wit, from the time of King Hoshea:
therefore if that Church of God only which is in the Kingdom of Judah, and
not also the universal, had been committed to Hezekiah; and if the bounds of
the Realms had been to be kept in defending the Church, in the same manner as
they are in imposing tribute; without doubt Hez^kiah, especially at that season
wherein the Assyrians enjoyed the Empire of the world, would have contained
himself: But we see that he invited by posts all Israel, the subjects, I say,
of the King of Assyria, to celebrate the passover in Jerusalem; and moreover
that the godly in Israel helped them in pulling down the high places, even in
the territories of Ephraim, Manasses, and the rest. So likewise we read that
King Josiah, a most godly Prince, purged not only his own Kingdom, but the
Realm of Israel likewise, 2 King 22.
then wholly subject to the King of Assyria, from the worship of Idols. 2*
Chron. 34. 6. 7. and 35.
Verily where the glory of God, where the Kingdom of Christ are in question,
no limits, no bounds, no railes ought to exclude or keep off the zeal of
pious Princes. But if peradventure some greater fear hangs over their heads,
they may remember by the example of these, that those who truly fear the Lord,
can fear no man. These examples of pious Princes, since the time that the
Church, which was first circumscribed in Palestina, has been spread over all
the world, many Christian Princes have followed: Constantine and Licinius were
both Emperors, he of the East, this of the West: they were likewise colleagues
endued with equal power: Now it is known, what is commonly spoken; That one
equal has no Empire over another equal: Yet notwithstanding Constantine made
war with Licinius: who being vexed, slew the Christians, and among them many
of the Nobles, either for the cause, or for the pretext of Religion; by force
obtaines free profession of Religion for the Christians; and finally breaking
his faith, and reverting to his pristine cruelty, he commanded him to be put to
death at Thessalonica. This I say did Constantine the great, whose piety is so
much celebrated by the Divines of that age, that some of them will have that
spoken of him, written in the Prophet Esaias; That Kings should become nursing
fathers and Pastors of the Church. He being dead, the Roman Empire was divided
between both his sons by equal right, no prerogative being annexed to either
of them. Of them, Constans fostered the Orthodox, Constantius the elder, the
Arrians; and he verily expelled Athanasius the enemy of the Arrians, out of
Alexandria. Truly, if any rules of bounds ought to have been kept, it ought to
have been between brethren: Yet in the mean time Constans threatened his
brother, if he restored not Athanasius; being ready to do it by force, unless
Constantius had speedily restored him entirely; Now if so be he doubted not to
do this, only for the restoring of one Bishop, might he not much more justly
do it, where some part of the people is oppressed, when they implore
assistance, when they desire to defend their Religion by the Nobles
approbation? Sozom. l. 7. c. (...)
So likewise Theodosius, by the persuasion of Bishop Atticus undertook a war
against Chosroes King of Persia, that he might releeve the Christians
persecuted for Religion sake, although they were truly private men, which surely
those most just Princes, who enacted so many Laws, and who had so great a care
of Law, had never done, if they had imagined, that by this their Act others
territories and the Laws of Nations had been violated. Yea, to what end were
so many expeditions of Christian Princes into Syria against the Saracens; to
what end were those Saladinian Dismes so often imposed; to what end so many
sociall wars against the Turks, so many Crossadoes indicted against them, if
it be not lawful for any Christian Princes, even the most remote, to free the
Church from Tyranny, and Christian captives from the yoke of bondage? Now with
what arguments were they impelled to the war, with what reasons were they
urged unless these, that the Church was one? that Christ called all whatsoever
from all quarters to this service? that common dangers were to be repulsed with
common arms? all which likewise do plainly suite with this our cause. Now
and if this were lawful for them against Mahomet; yea, not only lawful, but
likewise as a reward was appointed to the industrious, so a punishment both to
the sloathfull, and delayers; why not also against the enemy of Christ? If I
say, against the Graecians besieging our Troy; why not also against Sinon the
incendiary? Finally, if it be a pious act to free Christians from bodily
servitude, (for the Turks compel no man to it) is it not much more so, to
manumit the souls of miserable men, and to restore them to liberty? And verily
these so many examples of pious Princes may be instead of a Law. But now hear
what God himself by the mouth of his Prophets does every where threaten
against those, who promote not the instauration of the Church, or neglect its
affliction. The Gadites, Reubenites, Numb. 32.
and half Tribe of Manasses, desire of Moses that their portion might be given
to them and their families on this side Jordan: Josh 4. 7 12.
and Moses truly gave it them; Deuteronomy. 3. 20.
but with this Law and condition; that they should not only help their
brethren, the other Israelites, in conquering the Land of Canaan, but, because
they had first obtained their portion, that they should go before them, and be
placed in the forefront of them: Which if they should not do, he accurseth
them, smites them with anathema, and compares them to those who had been
judged Rebels at Cadesbernea: For what? says he, shall your brethren go to
war, and you in the mean time sit still here? But rather you shall pass
over Jordan, neither shall you return again hither to your houses before that
God has expelled his enemies from before his face, and given rest to your
brethren, as he has given unto you: Then verily you shall be innocent before
the Lord of Israel; verily those on when the great and good God has bestowed
so great a benefit, unless they assisted their Brethren, unless they were
companions of their labors, unless they went before them, should without
doubt receive most grievous punishments.

Likewise, Judge. 5.
when under the conduct of Deborah, those of Nephthali and Zebulon had taken up
arms against the Tyrant Jabin, and in the mean time the Tribe of Reuben,
which ought to be first in Arms, delighted themselves with the Pipes among the
Pastures of the flocks, Dan boasted of the Empire of the Sea, Asher finally
trusted in the asperity of Mountains, all of them are most expressly condemned
by the Spirit of God, speaking by the Prophetess; Curse ye Meroz, says the
Angel of the Lord, curse ye bitterly the Inhabitants thereof, because they came
not to the help of the Lord against the mighty. 2 Samuel 11. 11.
But blessed above women shall Jael the Wife of Heber the Kenite be, who
(although she might have pleaded a truce with the heathens) yet notwithstanding
she slew Sisera, the Captain of the enemies Host. Therefore piously spoke
V;riah, The Arc, and Israel, and Judah abide in tents, and often times pass the
night without sleep in the open fields; shall I then feast with my Wife, eat,
drink, and follow my pleasures? As the Lord lives, I will never do this.
Amo^ 8.
Contrarily the Princes of Israel did impiously, who trusting in the difficulty
of the mountains of Samaria, and in the munition of Sion, flowed with luxury,
feasted, drank, slept on beds of Ivory, anointed their heads; but in the mean
time wonderfully despised contrite, cruciated, afflicted Joseph, neither were
any way moved with his affliction. Therefore says the Lord of Hoasts, I
abhor the excellency of Jacob, and hate his palaces; I have sworn by my
soul that I will deliver up the City; and all that is therein, yea, these who
so greatly rioted shall soon go with the first into captivity. Impiously also
did the Ephramites, who did not only not gratulate Gideon and Jephtha, Judge.
8. ^ 12.
attaining the victory and triumphing, but likewise envyed them, though yet
they deserted them when they were in danger. Likewise the Israelites, who when
David reigned, cried out; saying: Behold we are thy flesh and thy bones; 2 S^^.
5.
when he was reduced into straites, said: We have no part in David, nor in the
Son of Jesse. Impiously do all those Christians only in name, who will
communicate in the sacred feasts of the Church, and yet will not so much as
taste the cup of bitterness with their Brethren, who seek salvation in the
Church, and yet take no care for salvation and safety of the Church and of its
Members. Finally, they acknowledge one Father, God; one Family, the Church;
profess themselves to be one body in Christ; yet neither yield any aid to
Christ afflicted in his Members, or bestow their wealth on him being poor.
What think we shall be the future punishment of their impiety? Numb. 31.
Moses compares the deserters of their Brethren, to the Rebels at Kadesbarnea:
now none of those by Gods own decree, entered into Canaan. Therefore they can
seek no place for themselves in the celestial Canaan, who assist not Christ
most miserably crucified, and dying a thousand times every day, and implores as
it were their help from door to door. Christ himself condemns those to
eternal fire, who harbored him not when he was a stranger, who fostered him
not when he was a cold, who clothed him not when he was naked, Matthew. 25.
who relieved him not when he was poor, who freed him not when he was captive.
Therefore they ought to know, that eternal fire is prepared for them, who
pass him by with a deaf ear daily, suffering such things, as though in the
mean time they may seem to work great miracles; and therefore verily it
shall be easier for certain infidels, than for them; For what do the Jews,
the Scribes and Pharisees properly crucify Christ? Do the Ethnickes, Turks,
finally some Christians, persecute, crucify, vex Christ in his Members? The
Jews profess and believe him an Imposter; the Ethnickes a malefactor; the
Turks an Infidel; others an Heretic. Therefore if they consider the mind
of them all, from whom we commonly measure the crime, they all seem to
persecute noxious, impious men deserving punishment, not properly to slay
Christ; But they only do truly prosecute, truly slay him, who willingly
suffer him whom they profess their Me^siah, Redeemer, God, to be tortured and
crucified in his Members, when they might hinder it. In sum; he who delivers
him not from death, August. in Psalm. 82. Ambr. l. 1. de Offic Gratian in Decret.
when he may, is equally guilty with him that slayes him: For because he would
not help him, he willed he should be slain; Now in a crime the will it self
ought to be regarded. But certainly, the murder, especially of Christian
Princes, who help not those who are persecuted for Religion, is so much the
more grievous, by how much the more they slay, whom they might set free, and by
how much it is more wicked to slay a brother, than any other person. A
wickedness more horrid than that of the Tyrants themselves; by how much it is
worse to slay a good, just, pious, innocent man, than a Thief, imposter,
sorcerer, Heretic; more flagitious to assault God, than any man: and finally,
by how much perfidiousnesse in an equal fact exceeds ignorance.

But whether shall it be lawful to determine the same of those, who give no
assistance to those who are oppressed with Tyranny, or defend the Republicke
against Tyranny? since a reason cannot be given of so strait an alliance, of
so strict a Covenant; when as, I say, we do not here discourse of the Church,
which is but one of all men; which being one and universal, is committed to
every one; But of the Republicke, which may be different from that of others;
and being different, is committed severally to others? A Neighbor, says
Christ, is not a Jew to a Jew only, but to a Samaritan, and to any man. Now we
ought to love our Neighbors as our selves. Therefore a Jew, if he would
discharge his duty, is bound to deliver from a thief, if he be able, not a Jew
only, but likewise every stranger, yea likewise one unknown. Neither will any
one dispute, whether it be just to defend himself; seeing verily it is more
just to defend another than himself in this respect, wherein things are more
just, which mere charity does, than those which either anger, or revenge, or
other perturbation of the mind do: and no man holds a mean in revenging his
own injuries; but in other men's, although more grievous, ^icero l. 1 and 3.
Offic.
even the most immoderate may hold a mean. But we may learn from the heathens
themselves, what humane society, and what the common nature of all men require
of us in this thing. For Cicero says, there is one nature of all men; that
even nature it self prescribes this, that a man ought to take care of a man,
who ever he be, even for this very cause, that he is a man. If otherwise, all
humane consociation must necessarily be dissolved. Therefore, as there are two
foundations of justice: first, that no hurt be done to any; next, that the
profit of all, if it may be done, be advanced: So also there are two kinds of
injustice; one of those who offer injury; the other of those who propulse not
wrong from those to whom it is offered, if they be able. For he who does
unjustly against any one, incited either by anger, or other perturbation, he
seems as it were to offer violent hands to his companion; but he who does not
defend, or resist an injury if he can, is as much in fault, as if he deserted
either his Parents, or Friends, or Country. So that what the one does, anger is
judged to do, which is reputed a short fury; what the other, an evil mind
truly, which is a perpetual tyranny. And however his fury may be excused, the
others destinated counsel can by no means be excused. Thou will say, I fear
that while I repulse an injury from him, I should do an injury to the other.
Yea verily, thou will cover thine injustice with a pretext of Justice; Whereas
if thou consultest with thy self, not justice moves thee to desert thy duty,
but rather some other cause. For as he says in another place, either thou will
not undertake enmities, or labor, or cost; or else thou art so hindered with
negligence, sloathfulnesse, idleness, or with thy studies, or certain
employments, that thou suffer those to be deserted, whom thou ought to
protect. But while thou say, thou do thine own business, lest thou
might seem to do wrong to any, thou runnest into another kind of
injustice. For thou desertest the society of life, because thou bestowest on it
nothing of thy study, nothing of thy pains, nothing of thy goods. These things
Ethnickes, Philosophers, and Politicians hold, truly more piously than many
Christians in this age. (...). Sic. ^. 2. c. 2.
Hence a neighbor is bound by the Laws of the Romans, to take away a servant
from a cruel Master. But among the Egyptians, he who had casually found a man
to be beaten by Thieves, or to suffer any injury, and had not re^cued him, if
he could, was guilty of death: if not, he was bound to accuse the Thieves
before the Magistrate: Which if he had neglected, he was beaten with a certain
number of stripes, and punished with a three days fast. Now if this verily be
lawful in one neighbor toward another, yea, lies upon him out of duty to
assist every one he meets against a Thief; shall it not be much more lawful
to a good Prince, not only to aid and patronize servants against a raging
Master, or children against a furious Father; but a Kingdom against a Tyrant,
a Republike against the private lust of one man; a people, a Lord, I say,
against a public servant and agent? Yea, verily, if he shall neglect it, shall
not he merit the name and punishments of a Tyrant, as the other of a thief?
Hence Thucydides says, Thucyd. ^. 2.
Not only those are tyrants who reduce others into servitude, but much rather
those who when they may repulse that violence, take no care to do it: but
especially those who will be called the defenders of Greece and the Common
Country, but yet help not their oppressed Country: and rightly; for a Tyrant
is in a sort compelled to retain violently the Tyranny which he has violently
invaded; because, as Tyberius said, he seems to hold a Wolf by the ears,
which he cannot retain without force, nor yet let go without danger.
Therefore that he may extinguish one crime with another, he commits many
wickednesses, and is compelled to injure others, lest he should be injurious to
himself. But that Prince who idly beholds the wickednesses of a tyrant, and
the ruin of the blood of innocents which he may hinder, because he does as it
were take pleasure in the gladiatory sport, is by so much more criminous than
the Tyrant, as he who sets sword-players to fight, is guiltier than the
man-slaying Gladiator; as much as he who slayes a man for pleasure sake, is
more criminous than he who does it by constraint, Object.
or out of fear or necessity. If some oppose; But it is a fault for any to
intermeddle with, or thrust himself into another business: Answ.
Terentian Chromes may answer; I am a man, I think no humane thing strange
unto me. If others (that they may seek lurking holes for their impiety)
object; Pompon de reglur degrees. 36.
that there are distinct limits, distinct jurisdictions; now it is not lawful
to thrust a sickle into another Corn: Neither truly do I advise, that by
this pretense thou should invade another territories, usurp another
jurisdiction to thy self, draw thy neighbors corn into thine own floor,
which most do under this pretext. Cic. 2. Offic.
I do not say, that by the example of that arbitrator, of whom Cicero, thou
thy self should judge the thing controverted to thy self; but rather that
thou should restrain a Prince invading the Kingdom of Christ, contain a
tyrant within his limits, stretch out an helping hand to an afflicted people,
and a prostrated Commonweal; But thou must do it in such sort, that thou
may not look after thine own profit, but the good of humane society
altogether. For since Justice wholly looks abroad, injustice only regards it
self, thou shall at last do this justly, if thou shall have no regard of
thine own profits. Briefly, if a Prince violently passes over the fixed
limits of piety and justice, a neighbor may piously and justly leap over his
limits, not that he should invade another, but that he should bid him be
content with his own: yea, he shall be impious and unjust, if he neglect it.
If a Prince exercise tyranny over the people, he may no less, or less slackly
assist them, than him, if the people should move sedition: yea, he ought to do
it the more readily, by how much it is more miserable, that many suffer, than
one. If Porsena reduce Tarquin the proud to Rome, much more justly may
Constantine, sent for by the people and Senate of Rome, expel Maxentius the
Tyrant out of the City. Finally, if a man may become a Wolf to a man, nothing
truly forbids, but that a man may be a God to a man, as it is in the Proverb.
Therefore antiquity has enrolled Hercules among the number of the gods,
because he punished and tamed Procrustes, Busyris, and other Tyrants, (the
pests of mankind, Cic lib. 2. Offic.
and monsters of the world) in every place. So also the Roman Empire, as long
as it stood free, was often called, The Patrocinie against the Robberies of
Tyrants, because the Senate was the haven and refuge of Kings, People, Nations.
So Constantine sent for by the Romans against Maxentius the Tyrant, had God the
Captain of his Army, whose expedition the Universal Church exalted with
powerful praises; when yet Maxentius had the same authority in the West, as
Constantine in the East. Likewise Charles the Great, undertook a War against
the Lombardes, being called by the Nobles of Italy to their aid, when as yet
the Kingdom of the Lombards was long before established, and he could claim
no right to himself over them. Likewise, when Charles the Bald King of France,
had by Tyranny taken away the President of that Country, Joan. Avent. in Anal.
Boyorum.
which lies between Seine and Liger, Duke Lambert, and Jamesius, and the
other Nobles of France had fled to Lewis King of Germany, Charles his Brother
by another mother, to crave aid against Charles and his mother Judith, a most
wicked Woman: He in a most ample Assembly of the Germane Princes, heard these
suppliants, by whose unanimous Counsel, a war was publickely decreed against
Charles, for to restore the exiles. Finally, as there have been some Tyrants
in every place, so likewise among all Historians there are every where examples
extant, of tyranny revenged, and people defended by neighbor Princes; which
the Princes now at this day ought to imitate, in curbing the tyrants both of
bodies and Souls of the Republicke, and of the Church of Christ, unless they
themselves will be named Tyrants, by a most deserved right. And (that we may at
last conclude this Treatise in one word) piety commands the Law of God to be
observed, and the Church to be defended justice, that Tyrants and the
subverters of Law and the Republike should be curbed; charity, that the
oppressed should be releeved, and have a helping hand extended. But those who
take away these things, take away piety, justice, charity from among men, and
desire them to be altogether extinguished. So he:

If this then be an irrefragable verity, that foreign States and Princes are
so far obliged to assist and relieve those of the same Religion, and all
others whose liberties, rights, privileges, are forcibly invaded See Speed and
Cam^dens History of Queen Eliz. Metormus and Grimstons Histories of the
Netherlands. The Noble Acts of Prince Maurice of Nass^u and the Bills of
Subsidies in Qu. Eliz. King James, and King Charles his reign.
(which our Parliament and State by their assistance, if the Netherlands and
other Protestant States, both in Quaene Elizabeth's, King James, and King
Charles his reign, approved and justified both by words, Acts of Parliament,
and real performances) then certainly those of the self-same Church, Nation,
Kingdom, and fellow Subjects, under the self-same Prince, between whom there
is a far nearer relation, much stricter obligation, and more strong
engagements, ought mutually to aid and assist each other to the uttermost of
their abilities, when their Religion, Laws, Liberties, be violently invaded,
their dearest native Country wasted, sacked, plundered, burned, ruined, in a
hostile warre-like manner, with open force of Arms, either by the King
himself, or a prevailing Malignant Popish faction, who have surreptitiously
possessed themselves both of his person and affections which they have gotten
into their own overruling power. How much then it now concerns every real
Protestant within this Realm of England, and all other his Majesty's Dominions
to unite all their common forces together, unannimously to protect, defend,
maintain, and propagate our established reformed Religion, fundamental Laws,
Liberties, the very Privileges of Parliaments, their estates, liberties,
lives, the peace, welfare, and common good of their dearest native Country,
and our three united Realms against all Popish Malignant forces now in arms
to invade, eclipse, impair, subvert, sack, ruin them; and how monstrously,
unnaturally, unchristianly, and detestably impious, treacherous, perfidious,
all those English, Irish, and Scottish Protestants proclaim themselves to the
present and future age, who now traitorously join their forces with the
Malignant Popish party, or prove uncordiall, false, treacherous, and perfidious
to their Religion, Liberties, Country, and the Parliment (who have not only
waged, employed, but confided in them) and contribute their uttermost
endeavors to betray, enslave, undermine, and to sack, burn, and totally
overturne them (as many we find have done to their eternal infamy) I here
refer to every man's judgment and conscience seriously to determine.
Certainly such unnatural monsters, such traiterous Judasses, such execrable
infamous Apostates as these, can expect no other real remuneration of this
their treachery and perfidiousnesse, but the ruin of their credits, the
detestation of their persons, memories; the confiscation of their estates, the
extirpation of their families, the execrations of all good men, the severest
judgments of God, and utter confusion with horrors of conscience tormenting
them constantly day and night, whiles they continue languishing under all these
miseries here, and the sharpest torments, the very largest dangers, the hottest
flames in hell for ever hereafter: and those Antichristian Papists who now are
and have been so faithful, active, zealous, courageous, industrious,
liberal, bountiful, if not prodigal to prosecute their own interests,
designs, to maintain and propagate their false, erroneous, detestable
Religion, superstitions, idolatries, both in England and Ireland with the
effusion of their blood, expense, and forfeiture of all their estates, and
never yet deserted, or became treacherous to their false execrable cause or
Religion in the least degree, shall all jointly rise up in judgment against
them both here and hereafter to their sempiternall infamy, reproach, and most
just condemnation. O consider this all ye who now so much forget, neglect,
betray both your God, your Christ, Religion, Laws, Liberties, Country,
Parliament, yea your very selves, your souls, bodies, and posterities;
Consider with your selves the bitter curse denounced by God himself against
Meroz, Judge. 5. 23. Consider the fatal, dismal end of treacherous Juda^,
Matthew. 27. 3. 4, 5. Acts 1. 18. 19, 20. Consider that dreadful speech of our
Savior Christ, Mark 8. 35* 36, 37, 38. Whosoever will save his life shall
lose it, but whosoever shall lose his life for my sake and the Gospels shall
save it. For what shall it profit a man if he shall gain the whole world and
lose his own soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul?
whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of me and of my word, in this adulterous
and sinful generation; of him also shall the son of man be ashamed when he
comes in the glory of his Father, with the holy Angels. 2 Timothy 2. 12.
If we suffer with him, we shall also reign with him; if we deny him, he will
also deny us: If we be but fearful in the cause of Christ, we shall be sure to
have our part in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone, Rev. 21. 8. O
what then will be our portion, if we be unzealous, negligent, perfidious to it,
or professed enemies (especially in open arms) against it, when it cries out
to us for our necessary assistance every where? If Jesus Christ will render
tribulation to them which do but trouble his people; yea, and shall be very
shortly revealed from Heaven, with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire, taking
vengeance on all them that (only) know not God, and that obey not the Gospel
of Jesus Christ, who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the
presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power, 2 These. 1. 6. to 10. O
where shall all those ungodly sinners, Rebels, and Traitors appear, who now
every where murder, plunder, persecute, extirpare Gods dearest Saints; and not
only refuse to own, but even desert, betray the cause of God and their
Country? who refuse not only cordially maintain the very truth of God, the
Gospel of Christ, and which themselves in show not only pretend to know, but
profess; but also join with Papists, and Malignants openly to fight against,
and totally to suppress it? Certainly if judgment shall begin at the house
of God it self, as now it does, and if the righteous who defend the cause of
God and the Kingdom shall scarcely be saved, what these men's dreadful end,
and judgment at last shall be, transcends my thoughts to conceive, my
expressions to relate; all I can say is this, it will be superlatively
miserable and grievous, that eternity of incomprehensible torments will only
be able to demonstrate the infinity and execrablenesse of their sin. O then
let all of all sorts consider seriously of this, and all the premises, and the
Lord give them understanding and grace to keep a good conscience, and
discharge their several trusts and bounden duties faithfully, cheerfully to
their God, Religion, King, Country, and the Parliament in all things, that so
they may enjoy the honor, comfort, benefit, of all their faithful endeavors
to defend, promote, and propagate Religion, Laws, liberties, and the public
welfare here; and the Crown, the full guerdon of them hereafter; and poor
bleeding, dying England and Ireland may now at last attain that speedy, holy,
lasting, honorable, blessed peace and unity, which all good men cordially pray
for and endeavor; which doubtless had been easily effected long ere this,
had we all been faithful, true, real to the public cause of God and our
Country in our several places, and not faithlessely betrayed, but sincerely
discharged the several trusts reposed in us to the uttermost of our powers:
the readiest mean to re-establish and perpetuate our pristine tranquillity:
which I humbly beseech the God and Prince of peace effectually to accomplish in
his own due season, before our whole three Realms become a desolate
Wilderness, an Accheldama, a Golgatha, as many places of them are already, and
more like to be, if the extraordinary mercy of our ever-gracious God, prevent
not the mischievous long plotted conspiracies, malice, rage, treachery, of
unnatural, and deceitful men.

FINIS.
This Oath should have come in the Appendix, page 73. line. 17.

The Oath of CHARLES, King of Navarre at his Coronation, An. 1390. recorded in
the general History of Spain, l. 17. p. 625. 626.
WE D. CHARLES by the grace of God, King of Navarre, etc. do swear unto our
people of Navarre upon the holy Evangelists touched by us, and to the Prelates
and rich men of the Cities and good Towns, and to all the people of Navarre,
for all your Rights, Laws, Customs, Freedoms, Liberties, and Privileges,
that every one of them as they are, shall be maintained and kept to you and
your successors, all the time of Our life without corrupting them; bettering,
and not impairing them, in all, or in part: and that the violence and force
which has been done to your Predecessors, whom God pardon, and to you by Us,
or Our Officers, We shall hereafter command it to cease, and satisfaction to be
made according unto right as they shall be made manifest by good men of credit.
After which the Deputies of the State swore, in their own names, and for all
the Realm; faithfully to guard and defend the Kings person, and their
Country; and to aid him, to keep, defend, and maintain the Laws and
Customs, with all their power.

Errata, and Omissions in some Copies.
Part. 4. p. 1. l. 26. it, is, p. 9. l. 39. c. 33. p. 27. l. 13. private,
public, p. 28. l. 7. other 31. pugnae.

Appendix p. 2. l. 3. parallel, p. 4. l. 14. them, the people, l. 34. and p. 5.
l. 29. Maximus, p. 8. l. 1. Polieuctus, p. 39. l. 26. dele, in the, p. 41. l.
41. other, p. 44. l. 40. retired, p. 50. l. 44. the hand, p. 54. l. 1. Cara,
Lara, p. 55. l. 41. Pacensis, p. 59. l. 27. dele the, p. 66. l. 34. years, p.
79. l 12. dele cite, l. 3. Mariana, p. 129. l. 2. add 2 Chronicles. 22. 1. And the
inhabitants of Jerusalem made Ahaziah his youngest son King in his stead, l.
18. confirmed, p. 145. l. 2. not from it to, p. 147. l. 20. in some sense in
private ^ases, p. 150. l. 23. pem, patu, p. 153. l. 14. Canarvanius, p. 162 l.
7. received, renewed, p. 162. l. 28 Horomani Francogal. 38. Vindiciae, p. 163.
l. 2. revocable, l. 3. Historical, l. 19. Cuiacius, l. 23. usufrvctuary, l. 35
dele the, p. 166. l. 14. to, do, l. 19. dele to, l. 21. foundations, p. 167.
l. 7. is an, p. 169. l. 26. Caracalla, p. 170. l. 41. 2. secun. qu. p. 171. l.
22. in Law, p. 172. l. 27. fealty to, p. 173. l. 8. adjuvante, l. 15.
rapacitates, p. 174 l. 4. if, it. p. 177. l. 15. preserve, l. 32. and. l. 35.
goods, p. 186. l. 15. 16. forcibly resist, p. 187. l. 2. so, to, p. 190. l. 31.
206. p. 193. l. 1. converseth, p. 196. l. 33. less.

In the Margin. p. 42. l. 2. Dauleny, p. 60. l. 4. Leges, l. 9. Aimoin. l. 12.
Jure, p. 85. l. 2. 850. p. 152. l. 1. Arnnales, Gil. p. 168. l. 19. Rex.

part 1. p. 12. l 15. third. read, second, p. 29. l. 44. through, p. 45. l. 24.
l. 3. p. 48. l. 15. Britan^^ (...). 26. privatave, p. 56. l. 16. reputing them,
p. 75. l. 25. responum, p. 93. l. 38. Duairus, p. 100. l. 33. Raynerius l. 3. 8
Albericus.

Part 2. p. 59. l. 3. perfidum.

Part 3. p. 143. l. 25. natural, national.


