Conscientious, Serious THEOLOGICAL AND LEGAL QUAERES, Propounded to the
twice-dissipated, self-created Anti-Parliamentary Westminster Juncto, AND ITS
MEMBERS.

TO Convince them of, humble them for, convert them from their transcendent
Treasons, Rebellions, Perjuries, Violences, Oppressive illegal Taxes, Excises,
Militiaes, Imposts; destructive Councils, Proceedings against their lawful
Protestant hereditarie Kings, the old dissolved Parliament, the whole House of
Lords, the Majoritie of their old secured, secluded, imprisoned Fellow Members,
the Counties, Cities, Boroughs, Freemen, Commons, Church, Clergy of ENGLAND,
their Protestant Brethren, Allies; contrary to all their Oaths, Protestations,
Vows, Leagues, Covenants, Allegiance, Remonstrances, Declarations, Ordinances,
Promises, Obligations to them, the fundamental Laws, Liberties of the Land; and
Principles of the true Protestant Religion; And to persuade them now at last to
hearken to and embrace such counsels, as tend to public Unity, Safety,
Peace, Settlement, and their own salvation.

By William Prynne Esquire a Bencher of Lincolns Inn.

Levit. 19. 17. Thou shall not hate thy brother in thy heart, thou shall in any
wise rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him; or, bear not sin for
him.

1 Timothy 5. 20. Them that sin openly, rebuke before all, that others may fear.

Prove. 9. 8, 9. Rebuke a wise man, and he will love thee; give instruction to a
wise man, and he will yet be wiser.

Jude 11, 12. Woe to them, for they have gone in the way of Kain, and perished
in the gainsaying of Core. They are trees whose fruit is withered, TWICE DEAD,
plucked up by the roots.

London Printed, and are to be sold by Edward Thomas at the Adam and Eve in
Little Britain, 1660.

Conscientious, Serious Theological and Legal Quaeres, etc.
THe Wisest of Men, and God only wise, informs all Sons of Wisdom capable of
Instruction; that Prove. 27. 5, 6.
open rebuke, is better than secret love; because faithful are the wounds of a
friend, but the kisses of an enemy are deceitful: whence Prove. 28. 23.
he that rebukes a man, for his exorbitant transgressions, afterward shall
find more favor, than he that flattereth with the tongue; by extenuating,
excusing or justifying his Offenses. Upon this consideration, I reputed it both
a seasonable and Christian duty incumbent on me in this day of the late
Anti-Parliamentary Junctoes dissipation, humiliation, confusion, and
Army Officers division amongst themselves, to reminde them fully of, and Tit.
1. 13.
rebuke them plainly, sharply, for their manifold Treasons, Perjuries, and
other exorbitant Offenses against their lawful Protestant Kings, Kingdom, the
late dissolved Parliament, the whole House of Lords, the Majoritie of their
Fellow Members, the whole English Nation, Church, Ministry, their Protestant
Brethren, and Allies, against all their sacred and civil Obligations to them,
in a serious, impartial, convincing, least-offensive manner, by way of Quaeres
drawn from Gods word, and plain sacred Scripture-Texts, and our known Laws,
which they have most presumptuously trodden under foot, and Jer. 22. 21. c. 5.
5. Ezech. 22. 27.
would not hearken to, in the days of their late self exaltation and
Prosperity, like their Predecessors of old among the Jews: when I minded and
reminded them over and over, not only in my Speech, Memento, Collections of our
ancient Parliaments, and other publications in the years 1648, 1649. in my
Epistle to, and first Part of My Historical Collections, and Legal Vindication;
1655. My Republicans Spurious Good Old Cause briefly and truly Anatomized; My
True and Perfect Narrative, and Concordia Discors in May, and June last, and
Brief Necessary Vindication of the old and new secluded Members, in September
following; (wherein I truly predicted their former and present dissolutions by
those very Army Officers with whom they confederated) which they would not
credit, till dissolved by them; being in good hopes, that they will now at last
Hear counsel and receive instruction, that they may be wise in their latter
end, as God himself advises them, Prove. 19. 20.

1. Whether their Speaker Mr. Lenthall and those confederate Members of the
Commons House, who against their duties, upon pretext of the unarmed London
Apprentices tumult at the House in July 1647. (though they secured, secluded no
Members, but only kept them in the House, till they had read, answered their
Petition, and then quietly departed) went away privily to the Army, by the
invitation, instigation of some swaying Army Officers, without the leave or
privitie of the House; brought up the whole Army to Westminster and London to
conduct them in triumph to the House, caused them to See a Collection of the
Armies Engagements, Remonstrances, etc. p. 106, ^0 145.
impeach, declare against, suspend, imprison sundry Members of both Houses;
nulled all Votes, Orders, Ordinances, Proceedings in their absence, by reason
of a pretended force upon the House by the Apprentices during that space, and
declared them merely void to all intents, by the Speakers Declaration, and an
Ordinance of 20 Aug. 1647. when as there was no force at all upon the Houses
during that time, and these Members might have freely, safely returned to the
House alone, had they listed, without the Army, or any one Troop to guard them:
and afterward mutinied and brought up part of the Army again to Westminster,
to Animadversions upon the Armies Remonstrance, Nov. 20. 1648. p. 10, 11, 12.
force the Houses to pass the Votes for No more Addresses to the King,
(contrived in a General Council of Army Officers, and seconded with their
Declaration when passed by force and surprise in an empty House) After that
most traitorously and perfidiously See the 2. Part of the History of
Independency.
confederated with the Army Officers to break off the last Treaty with the
King in the Isle of Wight; to seize the Kings person by a party of the Army
and remove him thence against both Houses Orders, notwithstanding his large
Concessions and consent to their Propositions; to secure, seclude all the
Members of the Commons House, who after many days and one whole nights debate,
passed this Vote according to their judgments, consciences, duties (carried
without dividing the House, notwithstanding the Armies march to Westminster,
and menaces to prevent it) That the answers of the King to the Propositions of
both Houses, were a ground for the House to proceed upon for the settlement of
the Peace of the Kingdom: which Vote of the whole House when there were above
300 Members present, about 40 of them only soon after repealed, expunged, (the
manner of carrying on of which design against the King and Members, was
concluded by a Committee at Windsor, consisting of 4. Army Officers, whereof
Col. Harrison (their chairman, and a Member) and Col. Rich were two; 4. Members
of the Commons House, whereof Cornelius Holland yet living was one, the 3.
others since dead, 4. Independents, and 4. Anabaptists of London; wherein a
List was made by them what Members should be secluded, secured, and who
admitted to fit; this Committee resolving to dissolve both Houses by force, and
to try, condemn, execute the King by a Council of War, if they could not get
40 of the Common See the Republicans spurious good old Cause briefly and truly
anatomized. p. 1, to 6.
House to sit and bring him to Justice, as John Lilburn one of that Committee
has published in print;) approved, abbetted the Armies forcible, treasonable
securing of many Members, secluded the Majoritie of the House by their vote of
Jan. 11. 1648. upon the Armie-Officers false and scandalous printed Answer to
them, Jan. 3. touching the grounds of their securing and secluding them,
contrary to their Protestation, Covenant, the Privileges, Rights of
Parliament, the Great Charter, the Fundamental Laws and Liberties of the
Nation; And not content therewith, by their own Anti-Parliamentarie,
antichristian Usurpers, to out-act the old Gunpowder Traitors many degrees, by
the Armies assistance, and 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4.
opposing, advancing themselves against all that is called God and worshipped,
they most traitorously set aside, voted down, suppressed the whole House of
Lords, as dangerous, useless, tyrannical, unnecessary; usurped, engrossed the
style, power of the Parliament of England, and Supreme Authority of the Nation,
to themselves alone, without King, Lords, or Majoritie of their fellow secluded
Members; created a new Monstrous High Court of Justice, (destructive to all our
fundamental Laws, Liberties and Justice it self) wherein (beyond all presidents
since the creation) they most presumptuously condemned, murdered, beheaded
their own lawful Hereditarie Protestant King (against all their former Oaths,
Protestations, vows, Covenants, Remonstrances, Declarations, Obligations,
Allegiance, the Laws of the Land, the principles of the Protestant Religion,
and dissenting votes, Protestations, Disswasions of the secluded Lords,
Commons, Scots Commissioners, London Ministers; the intercessions of foreign
States, and our 3. whole Kingdoms,) together with 3 Protestant Peers soon
after: After that, close imprisoned my self, Sir William Waller, Sir William
Jews, Major General Brown, with sundry other Members diverse years in remote
Castles, without any hearing, examination, cause expressed, or the least
reparatio^ for this unjust oppression; exercising far greater Tyranny over the
Peers, their old fellow Members, and all English Freemen, during the time of
their Regality in every kind, than the beheaded King or the worst of his
predecessors; were not by a most just, divine retaliation and providence (when
they deemed themselves most secure and established) even for these their
transcendent Treasons, Perjuries, Tyrannies, violations of the rights,
privileges of parliament, their own sacred Oaths, Protestation, League,
Covenant, suddenly dissolved, dissipated, thrust out of doors, Apr. 20. 1653.
by Cromwell and the Armie-Officers in a forcible shameful manner, with whom
they confederated all along, though they received new Commissions from, and
engaged to be true and faithful to them without a King or House of Lords, and
branded by them to posterity in their printed Declaration, b See their
Declarations and Papers of April 20. And August 12. 1653. And true State of the
Commonwealth of England p. 8, to 12.
April 20. 1653. as the corruptest, and worst of men; intollerably oppressing
the people, carrying on their own ambitious designs, to perpetuate themselves
in the Parliamentarie and Supreme Authority, the archest Trust-breakers,
Apostates, never answering the ends which God, his people, and the whole Nation
expected from them, etc. Col. Harrison himself (the Chairman at Windsor
Committee to secure us) being the very person employed by Cromwell to pull
their Speaker Lenthall out of the chair, and turn him with his Companions out
of doors; Cromwell himself then stigmatizing Sir Henry Vane, Henry Martyn, Tom
Challoner and others of them by name, with the Titles of Knave, Whoremaster,
Drunkard, etc. And not long after to requite his good Services, he suddenly
turned Col. Harrison, Rich, and their party out of the Com-House by Force,
dissolved their Anti-Parliamentarie Conventicle (elected only by the Army)
Dec. 11. 1653. whiles they were seeking God for direction; and soon after
cashiered both these As he did Col. overton, Okey, and sundry others.
Colonels, (his former greatest Instruments) out of the Army, sent them close
Prisoners to remote Castles guarded with Army Troops; And as they and their
Troops when they seized Major General Brown, with other Members, and conducted
them to Windsor Castle, and other Prisons, refused to acquaint them whither
they were to be sent: So M. Jossop the Clerk of their Council of State, (who
brought these Colonels to the Coach at Whitehall garden door, when they were
conveyed prisoners to remote Castles) and their Conductors denied to inform
them to what places they were committed; whereupon they cried out to the
Troopers which guarded them; Gentlemen, is this the Liberty you and we have
fought for, to be sent close Prisoners to remote-Garrisons from our wives and
families, they will not tell us whither? Will you suffer your own Colonels,
Officers, who have fought for Laws, Liberties, and have been MEMBERS OF
PARLIAMENT TO BE THUS USED? To which they answered, as themselves did in the
like case to other secured Members, conducted by them: We are commanded, and
must obey, not dispute our Orders; and so were hurried away: as an eye and ear
witness of the old Parliament, related to me within one hour after. Yea young
Sir Henry Vane himself (the bold prejudger of our Debates and Vote in the House
touching the Kings concessions, if not a promoter of our unjust seclusion for
it,) was-unexpectedly and suddenly, not only thrust out from all his
Employments, as well as out of the House, but sent close Prisoner by Cromwell
to Carisbrook Castle in the Isle of Weight, the very place where he betrayed
his trust to the King and Parliament at the Treaty, to gratify Cromwell, who by
an extraordinary strange providence, sent him close Prisoner thither for sundry
months, to meditate upon this divine Retaliation. Whether may not all this
dissolved Juncto and its Members, from these wonderful Judgments, providence,
now conclude and cry out with that heathen cruel Tyrant Adonibezeck, Jud. 1. 7.
As I have done, so God has requited me? And acknowledge the truth of Gods
Comminations against all treacherous betrayers and potent oppressors of their
Brethern; Obad. 15. As thou have done, it shall be done unto thee, thy reward
shall return upon thine own head. Ps, 7. 15, 16 He made a pit and dug it,
and is fallen into the ditch which he made; his mischief shall return upon his
own head, and his violent dealing upon his own pate. Rev. 13. 9, 10. If any man
have an ear to hear, let him hear; He that leads into Captivity, shall go
into Captivity; He that kills with the Sword, shall be killed with the Sword.
Here is the patience, and faith of the Saints. O that all real and pretended
Saints, in the dissolved Juncto and Army, would now consider and believe it: as
I lately pressed them to do, in the cloze of my Good Old Cause truly stated,
and the false Uncased; yet they would not regard it.

Whether their illegal forcible wresting the Militia of the Kingdom totally out
of the Kings hands into their own; as their only security to sit in safety; and
perjurious engaging all Officers, Soldiers of the Army in England, Scotland,
and Ireland, to be true, faithful and constant to them without a King or House
of Lords (by subscriptions in Parchment Rolls returned to them under all their
hands) contrary to their former Votes, Declarations, Remonstrances,
Protestations, Oaths, Vows, Covenants, Trusts, yea the very writs, returns
which made them Members, their own Soldiers, Army Officers first Commissions,
Declarations, Remonstrances, Proposals; and depending on this Jer. 17. 5.
arm of flesh, or broken Isay 36. 6.
reed of Egypt, as a most sure invincible Guard, security, from all forces,
and enemies whatsoever that might assault, dishouse, dethrone them from their
usurped supreme Regal and Parliamental Authority over the three Nations, and
their Hereditary Kings, Lu. 19. 27.
whom they would not have to reign over them; has not been most exemplarily
and eminently requited by Gods avenging providence, in making the very
self-same Army most treacherous and perfidious to themselves, to rise up, rebel
against them several times, and turn them out of House, power on a sudden when
they deemed themselves most secure; to make themselves more than Kings and
Lords over them and our whole 3. Kingdoms; and Isay 2. 4.
An host of the High ones that are on high upon the earth: reviving that
Ataxie, which Solomon complained of as a great error in Government, and a
divine judgment upon the Authors of State-Innovations. Eccles. 10. 6, 7, 8, 9.
Folly is set in great dignity, and the rich sit in low place; I have seen
servants on horseback, and Princes walking as Servants upon the earth. He that
diggeth a pit shall fall into it, and who so breaks an hedge a Serpent shall
bite him: Whosoever removes stones shall be hurt therewith, and he that
cleaves wood shall be endangered thereby? Whether that curse and judgment,
Jer. 17. 5, 6. Thus says the Lord, cursed be the man that trusts in man, and
makes flesh his arm, and whose heart departs from the Lord; For he shall be
like the heath in the desert, and shall not see when good comes; but shall
inherit the parched places in the wilderness, a salt land, and not inhabited:
has not justly befallen them and our Nation, for relying on and trusting to an
arm of flesh, Jer. 9. 2. etc.
an * Assembly of treacherous men, whom themselves taught, encouraged to be
treacherous, perjurious to the King, Parl. Lords, their Fellow Members, and
Isay 33. 1. Jer. 9, 2, to 22.
thereby to themselves; yet voted, cried them up for their faithful Army,
Saviors, Deliverers, Protectors, Shields, and only Safeguard, after they had
dealt treacherously with themselves, and all their other Superiors; and proved
like Isay 36. 6. Ezeck. 49. 6, 7.
Egypt to the Israelites who trusted on them: When they took hold of thee by
the hand, thou did break and pierce through the hand, and rent all their
shoulder, and when they leaned upon thee, thou brakest and made all their
loins to be at a stand; yea, dissolved, and n Isay 30. 14.
broke them in pieces like a potters vessel, so that there shall not be found
in the bursting of it, a sheard to take fire from the hearth, or water out of
the pit. And may we not then take up this Song of the Lamb? Rev. 15. 3, 4.
Great and mavelous are thy works Lord God Almighty; Just and true are thy
ways thou King of Saints; who shall not fear thee, o Lord, and glorify thy
name, for thy Judgments are made manifest?

May 7. 1659. upon the Army Officers invitation and Declaration, (who formerly
turned them out of it with highest infamy, contempt and desamation April 20.
1653.) after about 6. years dissolution, and 4. intervenient Vnparliamentary
Conventicles, (wherein many of them sat as Members, and acted as in
Parliaments) by pretext of their old Writs and Elections as Members of the long
Parliament, actually and legally dissolved by their traitorous beheading of the
King near 11. years before, as I have In Prynne the Member reconciled to Prynne
the Barrester. A Legal Vindication against illegal Taxes, A True and perfect
Narrative, p. 24, to 34. A brief necessary Vindication of the old and new
secluded Members, p. 5.
elsewhere proved; without any new writs of summons, resummons, elections, or
the privitie of their former electors or Fellow Members: Their forcible
secluding of my self, Sir George Booth, Mr. Ansly, and all other formerly
secluded Members, and others not fitting with them from 1648. til April 20.
1653. by Army Officers and Guards of Soldiers placed at the door for that end,
and their justification, and continuing of this new seclusion as well as the
old: Their usurping to themselves the Title, power of the Parliament of the
Commonwealth of England, Scotland and Ireland, and Supreme Authority of the
Nation: their exercising both the Highest Regal, Parliamental, Legislative,
Tax-imposing Power over our Nations, (the worst, highest of all other
Treasons;) their creating new unheard of Treasons, Exiles by their bare
Proclamations, imposing New intolerable Taxes, Excises, Militiaes on the whole
Nation, against all Laws, and our Fundamental Liberties, Franchises. Their most
injurious, illegal, unpresidented proclaming of Sir George Booth, Sir Thomas
Middleton, with other old and new secluded Members of the long Parliament, and
all their adherents, Traitors, Enemies to the Commonwealth, and Apostates, not
only in all Counties and Corporations, but Churches and Chapels too throughout
the Nation, to abuse both God and men, only for raising forces by virtue of
Ordinances and Commissions granted them by the long Parliament (which
themselves pretended to be still continuing) to defend the Rights and
Privileges of Parliament, to call in all the surviving Members of both Houses
to fit with them, or procure a free and full Parl duly summoned, aecording to
the Protestation, Vow, League, Covenant, and Laws of the Land, being their own
and the whole Nations Birthright, for defense whereof the Army it self was
both raised, continued, and themselves in their Proclamation of May 7. 1659.
and Declaration of March 17. 1648. promised inviolably to maintain; which their
own consciences knew to be no Crime nor Treason at all, but an honest, legal,
honorable, necessary undertaking, justified by all their former Votes, Orders,
Ordinances, Commissions for raising forces against the Kings party for the
self-same end: And themselves greater Traitors, Enemies to the Kingdom and
Republike, than Strafford, Canterbury, or the beheaded King, in proclaming
their defense of this undoubted Inheritance of all English Freemen against
their Tyrannical usurpations thereon, to be Treason and Apostasy: Their sending
out Major Genesis Lambert, (who invited them into the House May 6. conducted them
into it, but secluded Sir G. Booth and other Members out of it, May 7. took a
new Commission from them afterward in the House, and promised with many large
expressions, to be true, faithful, constant, and yield his utmost assistance
to them, to sit in safety and support their power) with great forces against
Sir George Booth and all his adherents in this cause, being the Majority of the
old Parl. and of the people of the Nation, and the true old Parliament if
continuing, to levy actual war against them; declared Exact Coll. p. 576,
613. A Collection of Ordinances, p. 13. 219, 220
high Treason by sundry Votes and former Declarations, and so resolved by
themselves in their Impeachments against the beheaded King, the Earl of
Holland, Lord Capel, and sundry others; who accordingly levied war against
them, routed their forces, reduced their Garrisons, imprisoned their persons,
sequestered, confiscated their estates as Traitors; secured, disarmed Sir Will.
Waller, Mr. Holles, with sundry other old Members, promised rewards for
bringing in the persons or heads of others they endeavored to secure, against
all rules of Law, and Christianity; kept a public humiliation for their good
success against Sir George Booth and his adherents, and after their defeat a
public thanksgiving through Westminster and London, to mock God himself ( Gal.
6. 7.
who will not be mocked) to his very face, and ordained a public thansgiving
throughout the whole Nation, to abuse both God and them, for their Great
Deliverance from the most Dangerous Plot and Treason of Sir George Booth, and
his party; (to bring in all the old Members to sit with them, without turning
those then sitting out, or to procure a free Parliament,) that so their
Anti-Parliamentary Conventicle, by this pretext, might exercise a Perpetual
Tyranny, and Parliamental Authority over them; and none thenceforth dare
demand a full and free Parliament for the future, under pain of highest
Treason, Apostacy, and the loss of their very Heads and estates? Whether all
these their transcendent High Treasons, with their former 1648, against the K.
secluded Members, Lords, Parliament, people, were not by a most signal
miraculous Providence and Justice of God himself recompensed immediately after
upon their own, Lamberts, and other Armie-Officers heads, by making their
routing of Sir George Booth and his party, after their first thanksgiving for
it, before the next day of general thanksgiving came, the very occasion of
their sudden unexpected dissolution: 1. By over-elevating Lamberts, his
Officers and Brigades Spirits, (notwithstanding the signal Marks and Rewards of
their Favors toward them, for the present, and future promises of advancement
for their Fidelity to them in this Service) to enter into contestations with
them by their Petition and Representations. 2ly. By raising the differences and
jealousies between them to such a height and open enmity, notwithstanding all
their large Votes and compliances to satisfy them, all means, mediations of
Friends, and the Londoners public Feast on their thanksgiving day, to
reconcile them; as to incense the Juncto to vote Major Harrison (a chief agent,
Chairman for the old Members first seclusion) incapable of any public Trust or
Office: a See the Armies Plea and Declaration, 27 october.
to vote Lambert, Disbrow, Creed, and 6 more field Officers out of their
commands, null their Commissions, and dispose of their Regiments to the next
Officers, without any hearing or examination; The printed Votes, Diurnals, and
Parliaments Plea.
if not threatening to commit Lambert to the Tower as a Traitor; to repeal
Fleetwoods Commission and Knack to be Lieutenant General of their Forces in
England and Scotland; and put the command of the Army and new Militia under 7.
Commissioners, to wrest the power of them both into their own hands. 3ly. By
exasperating Lambert and his confederates by these Votes so far against them,
and giving them such favor with the Army, as to draw up the greatest part of
the forces about London in battle array against them; and notwithstanding their
party in the Army, whereof they had made many of themselves Colonels, their
interest in the Militia of Westminster, London, Southwark, and Sir Henry Vanes
two Regiments of Gathered Churches (who were disgregated and kept their
Chambers all that day, not one of them appearing in the sield, because their
valiant Colonel took a Clyster pipe into his fundament, instead of a Lance
into his hand in the day of battle, and durst not hazard a broken pate in the
quarrel;) and then in a hostlle warlike manner to besiege many of them in
Whitehall, block up all passages to the House, seize upon their old Speaker
with his Coach, Mace, and new General (without a Sword, Army, Troop or
Company) from whose hands they had freshly received their Commissions, turning
him back from whence he came; to charm all the Junctoes forces so, as to march
away without drawing one sword, or shooting one bullet in their defense, so
true, faithful, were they to their good old cause, as well as to their New
Protectors, as to deem neither of the^ worth one bloody nose. 4. By engaging
Lambert and his party, notwithstanding all endeavored and seeming
accommodations between them, to seize upon their House, and their provisions of
ammunition and victuals in it: to lock up the doors, and keep constant Guards
upon the stairs to seclude all these their new Lords and Masters, as they did
on May 7, 9. and afterward seclude their Fellow Members; and not content
herewith, by a printed Plea for the Army, and Declaration of the General
Council of the Army, sitting at Wallingford House, which called them in, and
thus shamefully not long after turned them out of doors, (usurping to
themselves both a Regal Authority to call and dissolve Parliaments, (as they
repute and style them) and a Parliamental too, in making and repealing Acts of
Parliament (as they deem them) at their pleasure;) they not only justify this
their forcible ejectment, seclusion to all the world by Lex talionis, even
their own abetting, approving, justifying the Armies former seclusion of the
Major part of their fellow Members, who were the House, and the whole House of
Lords, and securing the leading Members, when overpowred by them, and appealing
to the Armies Judgments therein: but also put a period to their Assembly:
branded, nulled, repealed, declared their last Votes, Acts, Proceedings void to
all intents and purposes whatsoever, as if they had never been made; Censured
them as imperfect, ineffectual, irregular, unparliamentary, illegal,
pernicious, rash, inconsiderate; branding each other in several printed Papers,
for Traitors, Trust-breakers, Treacherous, Perfidious, Faithless, Unrighteous,
Ambitious, Self-seeking usurpers of the Soverain Power, Oppressors of the free
people of England, and invaders, betrayers of their Liberties and Birthrights:
thereby declaring the old secluded Members, the only honest, faithful,
constant, conscientious Men, adhering to their good old Cause, Oaths, Covenant,
Principles, and the public interest; and Sir George Booth himself to be No
Traitor, but truer Patriot of his Country than any of themselves, as dying
Purefoy openly acknowledged before his death, and others of them confess in
private, since even Lambert himself has done and exceeded that work, they
feared he would do, by dissolving their Conventicle, and turning the^ out of
house and power, which Sir George did not design. Whether all these strange
unparalleld, sudden, unexpected animosities, divisions between themselves;
their uncommissioning, dissolving, cashiering, disofficing one another, (which
I truly predicted to them from Scriptures and former Providence, in My Good
Old Cause truly stated; My True and Perfect Narrative, p. 94. 98. a Exodus 8.
19. Psalm. 118. 23.
and Vindication of the old and new secluded Members, p. 61, 62.) be not the
very finger of God himself, the Lords own doing, truly mavelous in all our
eyes; yea the very particular Judgment menaced by God himself against all such
Traitors and Innovators, as most audaciously and professedly violate, with the
highest hand this divine Precept, Prove. 24, 21, 22. My Son fear thou the Lord
and the King, and meddle not with those that are given to change; for their
Calamity shall soddenly arise, and who knows the ruin of them both; and a
verification of Prove. 29. 1? If not a divine infliction of the very Confusion
and punishment denounced by God himself against Egypt of old for their crying
sins, Isay 19. 2, 3 etc. I will set the Egyptians against the Egyptians, and
they shall fight every one against his brother, and every one against his
neighbor, City against City, and Kingdom against Kingdom: And the Spirit of
Egypt shall fail in the midst thereof, and I will destroy the Counsel thereof.
Surely the Princes of Zoan (the Juncto, and Armies General Council) are become
fools; the Princes of Noph are deceived; they have also seduced Egypt, even
they that are the stay of the Tribes. thereof. The Lord has mingled a spirit
of Perversities amongst them, and they have caused Egypt, (yea England,) to
err in every work thereof, as a drunken man staggereth in his vomit; Neither
shall there be any work for Egypt, which the head or tail, branch or root may
do; to defend or establish themselves or their pretended yet unformed
Free State. And may not they all then and others too upon the consideration of
all the premises, justly cry out with the Apostle in an holy admiration, Romans
11. 33. O the depth of the Riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how
unsearchable are his Judgments, and his ways past finding out?

4. Whether the Juncto and their High Court of Injusticemen, who had any hand,
vote, in the Traitorous, Perfidious beheading of their late Protestant King,
the head of the Parliament; dissolving and blowing up the whole House of Lords,
the Majoritie of the Commons House, the whole old Parliament, Kingdom,
Kingship; the Prince of Wales, next heir and successor to the Crown; the
rights, privileges, freedom of Parliament, the fundamental Laws, Liberties,
Government of the Nation, and our established Protestant Religion, against all
their Oaths, Allegiances, Trusts, Duties, Votes, Declarations, Remonstrances,
Protestations, Vows, Solemn Leagues, Covenants obliging them to the contrary;
can with any faith, boldness, confidence, piety, or real devotion appear
before the presence of God, Angels, Men in any of our Congregations on the 5 of
November, the 3 Jac. c. 1, 2.
joyful day of our deliverance, from the Popish Gunpowder Treason, publicly
celebrated every year; to render public thanks to Almighty God, and ascribe
all honor, glory and praise to his name, for his great and infinite mercy in
delivering the King, Queen, Prince, Lords-Spiritual and Temporal when assembled
in the Lords House, Nov. 5. An. 1605. (from this plot of malicious, divellish
Papists, Jesuits and Seminary Priests, who maligning the happiness and
prosperity of our Realm, Church and Religion under a Protestand King, and its
promising continuance to all posterity, in his most hopeful, royal, plentiful
Progeny, intended to blow them all up suddenly with gunpowder, but were through
Gods great mercy miraculously delivered from this sudden horrid Treason, by a
wonderful discovery thereof some few hours before it was to he executed;) when
as themselves have outstripped them by many degrees in executing, accomplishing
far more than what they only intended, but could not effect; yet reputing
themselves Protestants, and the eminentest of all Saints? Whether they can
without the greatest horror of conscience, confusion of face, spirit,
consternation of mind, and grief of heart, henceforth presume to appear before
the presence of God, or any English Protestants at any time, especially on this
day, before they have publicly lamented, confessed, repented, and made some
open eminent satisfaction, for those transcendent new Gunpowder-Treasons, far
worse than the old of the Jesuits and Papists, by whom they were acted in this;
especially if they consider Gods expostulation with such sinners. Ps. 50. 16,
17. What have thou to do to declare my Statutes, or that thou should take my
Covenant in thy mouth? Seeing thou hate Instruction, and have cast my words
behind thee. When thou saw these Powder-Traycors, thou consentest with them,
and have been partaker with these Murderers, and Adulterers. And that of Romans
2. 1, 2, 3. Therefore thou art inexcusable, O man, whoever thou art that
judge: for wherein thou judge another, thou condemnest thy self: For thou
that judge, do the same things. But we know that the judgment of God is
according to Truth, against those who commit such things. And think thou
this, O man, that judge them which do such things, and do the same, (nay
worse) that thou shall escape the judgment of God, etc.?

5. Whether those turn-coat Peace-abhorring, self-seeking, resolved, that the
Vote passed in a full House July 28. 1648. That a Treaty should be had in the
Isle of Wight, with the King in Person, by a Committee appointed by both
Houses, upon the Propositions presented to him at Hampton Court: was highly
Dishonorable to the proceedings of Parliament, and destructive to the Peace of
the Kingdom. And that the Vote of 5. December. 1648. (passed without dividing the
House when there were 300 Members in it) That the answers of the King to the
Proposition of both Houses, are a sufficient ground for the House to proceed
upon, for the settlement of the Peace of the Kingdom: is highly dishonorable to
the Parliament, and destructive to the Peace of the Kingdom, and tending to the
breach of the public faith of the Kingdom. And in their Declaration of 15.
January 1648. expressing their Reasons for annulling and vacating these Votes
in this manner; declared them to be highly repugnant to the glory of God,
greatly dishonorable to the proceedings of Parliament, and apparently
destructive to the good of this Kingdom: (adding) Yet we are resolved, and that
speedily, so to settle the peace of the Kingdom by the Authority of Parliament,
in a more happy way than can be expected from the best of Kings; Which they
never since performed in the least degree, but the direct contrary, embroiling
us in endless Wars, Seditions, Tumults, Successions, Revolutions of
new-modelled Governments, and Anti-Parliamentary Conventicles ever sithence.
After that suppressed our Kings and Kingly Government, as the Instruments,
Occasions of Tyranny, Injustice, Oppression, Luxury, Prodigality and Slavery to
the Commons under them; together with the whole House of Lords, as Dangerous,
Vselesse, Dilatory to the Proceedings of Parliament, etc. in their Votes of
Febr. 6. and Declaration of 17 Martii 1648. expressing the grounds of their
late Proceedings, and settling the Government in way of a Free State. Next,
prescribed, subscribed an Engagement to be true and faithful to the
Commonwealth established by them without a King or House of Lords. Yet
afterward in their New modelled Parliament (as they reputed it) April 1657. by
their Petition and Advice, (as first penned, passed and presented to Cromwell
for his assent:) Declared the revival of Kingship and Kingly Government,
absolutely Necessary for composing the distractions, and settling the peace and
tranquillity of our Nations; advised, petitioned, and pressed him to accept the
Name, Title, Power and Sovereign Authority of a King, over our three Kingdoms,
and the Dominions thereunto annexed; Voted him to be King thereof, with a
constant revenue of no less than Twelve hundred thousand pounds a year in
perpetuity, and five hundred thousand pounds more for 3. years space, out of
the peoples exhausted purses, after most of the ancient lands and Revenues
sold, when as they themselves affirmed and published in their Declaration of
March 17. 1648. p. 19. that the justisiable, legal Revenue of the Crown under
King Charles (besides the Customs and some other perquifites, charged with the
maintenance of the Navy and Forts) fell short of one hundred thousand pounds
per Annum. This new-augmented Revenue for their New King Olivers support being
above 3. times more than any of our lawful Kings ever enjoyed. And when
Cromwell pretended dissatisfaction in point of conscience, to receive the
Kingship and Kingly Government on him; the very Lawyers, Members, Officers, who
drew the Declarations and Reasons for abolishing Kingship, Kingly Government
and House of Lords, were the Committee appointed to confer with him 3. several
times, and draw up reasons to satisfy him, why he might and ought in reason,
law, policy, conscience to accept the Kingship and Kingly Title, for his own
and the public Safety. Which he refusing (against his desire) they voted him
their Royal Protector, took an Oath to be true and faithful to him, and to his
Son Richard after him, and to act nothing against their Persons or Power;
created themselves Another House, assumed to themselves the Title of Lords, and
THE HOUSE OF LORDS, notwithstanding their Engagements against is under all
their hands. Yet soon after dethroned their young Protector, nulled all his
Conventions wherein they sat, with all Lordships, Knightships, and Offices
granted by their Protectors, as illegal; revived their Anti-Parliamentary
Juncto, after it had layen buried in oblivion above 6 years space, in May last;
and in July following prescribed a New Oath and Engagement to all Officers, and
others who would enjoy the benefit of their Knack of Indemnity; To be true,
faithful and constant to their Commonwealth (though yet unborn) without a
Single person, Kingship, or House of Lords? Whether such double-minded men,
unstable in all their ways, Jam. 1. 8. can ever be deemed chosen instruments
ordained of God, to settle the Peace, or Government of our Nations? Whether the
Prophet Isay chap. 59. and the Apostle Paul, Romans 9. 10. etc. have not truly
characterized them: There is none righteous, no not one; there is none that
understands, there is none that seeks after God; they are all gone out of
the way, they are all together become unprofitable, there is none that does
good, no not one: their throat is an open Sepulcher, with their Tongues (yea
Oaths, Protestations, Declarations, Covenants) they have used deceit, the
poison of Asps is under their lips: Their feet are swift to shed blood, (the
blood of their Protestant King, Peers, Brethren, Allies, Fellow Subjects, by
Land and Sea, at home and abroad, in the field, and in new Butcheries of
Highest Injustice,) destruction and misery are in their ways, and the way of
peace they have not known; there is no fear of God before their eyes: they have
made them crooked paths, whosoever goes therein shall not know peace.
Therefore is judgment far from us, neither does Justice overtake us; we wait
for light, but behold obscurity; for brightness, but we walk in darkness: we
grope for the wall like the blind, as if we had no eyes, we stumble at
noonday, as in the night; we are in desolate places like dead men: we roar all
like Bears, and mourn sore like doves; we look for judgment, but there is
none; for salvation, but it is far off from us.

6. Whether God himself has not given the Anti-Parliamentary Juncto, and
General Council of Army Officers hitherto, in their Jesuitical Project of
bringing forth a misshapen monstrous Commonwealth, and whymsical Freestate, to
establish things amongst us, a miscarrying womb, and dry breasts; so as we may
justly say of them as the Prophet did of Ephraim, Hos. 9. 12, 14, 15. 16.
Ephraim is smitten, their root is dried up, it shall bear no fruit; yea, though
they bring forth, yet will I even slay the beloved fruit of their womb: their
glory shall fly away like a bird, from the birth, and from the womb, and from
the conception; as their Commonwealth whimsies have done? Whether Gods signal
over-turning, and forcible dissolving the Juncto by the Army Officers, twice
one after another in the very generation of this Jesuitical brat, before it was
formed in the womb, to disinherit our ancient hereditarie legitimate Kings and
Kingship, and their turning of all things upside down (our Kings, Kingdoms,
Parliaments, Lords House, Laws, Liberties, Oaths, Church, Religion, to make
way for its production) has not been like the Potters clay, (a rude deformed
Chaos, without any lineaments, or shape at all;) so as the work yet says of
him that made it, he made me not; and the thing formed says of him that formed
it, he has no understanding, Isa. 29. 16? Whether these new Babel-builders,
whiles they have been building this new City and Tower, to keep them from being
scattered upon the face of the whole earth, Gen, 11. 3, to 10.
have not like the old Babelbuilders, been confounded in their language by God
himself, that they might not understand one another speech, and scattred
abroad thence upon the face of the earth, though guarded by their faithful
Army, on whom they relied for protection, so that they left off to build their
Babel, like them? Their City of Confusion is broken down, and every house (yea
their own Parl. House) shut up; In the City is left desolation, and the gate is
smitten with destruction. Isay 24. 10, 12. It shall lie waste from generation
to generation, none shall pass through it for ever and ever; But the Cormorant
and the Bittern shall possess it; the Dwl also and the Raven shall dwell in it,
and he shall stretch out upon it the line of Confusion, and the stones of
emptiness? Whether their and the Armies endeavors to set up an Vtopian
Commonwealth, instead of our old Hereditarie Kingship, is not a Acts 5. 39. c.
23. 9.
direct fighting against God, and the express precepts, ordinances of God
himself, Prove. 24. 1, 2. c. 22. 28. c. 8. 15, 16. Romans 13. 1, 2. 1 Timothy 2. 1,
2, 3. Tit. 3. 1. 1 Pet. 2. 13. 17? Yea against the good providence, mercy,
favor of God toward our Kingdoms and Nations for their establishment; the
want of a lawful, hereditary King, to reign over a Kingdom and Nation, and a
multiplicity of Governors, Kings, (especially of inferior rank) and reducing
the people to such a confused sad condition; That they shall call the Nobles
thereof to the Kingdom, but none shall be there, and all her Princes shall be
nothing; so that she has no strong rod left to Rule, being a matter of present
and future lamentation, a severe judgment of God for their sins, * See my True
and perfect Narrative, p. 92, 93.
and wickedness, yea an occasion of all wickedness, licentiousness, villainies,
confusion, and an immediate forerunner or concomitant of tha kingdoms and
Nations desolation, ruin by Gods own resolution, Hos. 3. 4. c. 10. 3. 7. Ezech
49. 11, 12. 14, Isa. 33. 11, 12, 13. Judges 17. 6 etc. c. 18. 1. etc. c. 21.
25. Prove. 28. 2. c. 3021, 12. Hab. 1. 10. 14, 15. And is it not so now of ours?

7. Whether the late Peition and Advice 1657. to reduce W. Lenthal, Mr.
Speaker, Whitlock, and many others of the dissolved Juncto assented, as it was
first penned, voted, passed by them and many Army Officers, as the only means
to settle us in peace, honor, safety, prosperity; be not a convincing
Argument, that in their own Judgments, Conscience; Kings and Kingly
Government, are Englands only true Interest, to end our wars, Oppressions,
distractions, prevent our ruin, and restore our pristine unity, peace, honor,
safety, prosperity, trade, glory? And whether it be not a worse than Bedlam
Madness, and gross error both in policy and expeperience in our Republican
Juncto and Army Officers, to endeavor to erect Utopian, Jesuitical Republike
among us, (which has produced so many sad public changes, confusions, and
made us a mere floating Island, tossed about with every wind of giddy-brain
Innovators) as the only means of our firm, lasting happiness; and to prevent
all future relapses to Monarchy after King Charles his beheading; which this
notable censure of the incomparable Philosopher De Beneficiis, l. 2. c. 20.
Seneca passed against that great Republican and Anti royallist, M. Brutus,
will abundantly refute. Cum Vir magnus fuerit in aliis, M. Brutus, mihi videtur
in hac re vehementer errare, qui aut Regis nomen extimuit, cum optimus
Civitatis Status sub Rege justo sit: aut ibi speravit Libertatem futuram ubi
tam magnum praemium erat, et imperandi et serviendi; futuramque ibi
aequalitatem civilis juris, et Staturas suo loco Leges, ubi viderat tot Millia
hominum pugnantia, non ne serviret, sed utri: (our present condition between
the ambitious, usurping Antiparliamentary Juncto, and divided Army-Commanders,
all contending which of them shall be the greatest, and who shall most oppress,
enslave our Nations to their Tyranny, far more exorbitant than the very worst
of all our Kings) Quantum vero illum, aut rerum natura, aut vrbis suae tenuit
oblivio Qui uno interempto (Rege) defuturum credidit alium qui idem vellet; Cum
Tarquinius esset inventus post tot Reges ferro et fulmine occisos; even in Rome
it self, and we in England since the beheading of King CHARLES, and voting down
Kings, Kingship, with the old House of Lords, and Engagements against them,
have soon after found, a more than Royal Protector OLIVER, usurping the
Wardship of our poor Infant Commonwealth, aspiring after a Kingship and Crown
whiles living; and crowned in his Statue, Hearse, Scutcheons as both KING and
CONQUER OR of our three Kingdoms after his death; bearing Three Crowns upon
his sword, as an emblem of it: a momentanie Protecter Richard after him; a new
self created other House, assuming to themselves the Title of LORDS and THE
HOUSE OF LORDS; after an old Lords House suppressed; since that, a CHARLES
FLEETWOOD, and JOHN LAMBERT, aspiring after the Sovereign Power, as their late
and present actions, Declarations more than intimate, and dissolved Juncto
affirm: and an exiled Hereditarie KING CHARLES, with a numerous ROYAL
POSTERITY after him, claiming the Crown and Kingship by lawful indubitable
Right, declared, ratified by the Unrepealed Statutes of 1 Jacobi, c. 1. 3
Jacobi, c 1, 2, 4, 7 Jacobi c. 6. the Sea my Concordia Discors
Oaths of Supremacy, Allegiance, Fealty; of all Mayors, Recorders, Freemen of
every Corporation and Fraternity, of all Justices, Judges, Sheriffs, Officers
of Justice, Graduates in Universities or Innes of Court, Ministers, Incumbents,
all Members of the Commons House of Parliament, and all other Freemen sworn in
our Leets; who by the powerful assistance of their foreign Friends and Allies,
and domestic, oppressed, discontented, divided, ruined Subjects, will in all
probability be restored to the Crown, sooner or later, (as Aurelius Ambrosius
after the murder of his Father and Brother by the Usurper Vortigerne,) was
called in, restored and crowned King by his own British Subjects, to deliver
them from Vortigerns and his invading Saxons Tyranny, after 21 years
usurpation; and Edward the Confessor, called in and crowned King by his Nobles
and Subjects, after 25. years dispossession of his right by the Danish
Usurpers, and all the Danes expelled, without any effusion of blood; as I have
See my Legal Historical Vindication, etc.
elsewhere evidenced at large out of our best Historians.

Irish, Scots, Hollanders, Worcester-fight, and League with Spain by their own
General Cromwell April 20. 1653. without one drawn sword or drop of blood, 2. Of
Protector Isay 14. 20. The seed of evil doers shall never be renowned.
Richard (and his Brother Henry too, Deputy of Irel.) by his Brother Fleetwood,
Uncle Disbrow, and other Army Officers, after all their Oaths, and Addresses to
him from them and all the Officers, Soldiers, Navy, most Counties, Corporations
in England, Scotland, Ireland to be true, faithful, loyal, obedient to, and
live and die with him, in the midst of his Parliament, declaring, voting for,
and complying with him; when most men thought it impossible to overturn or
depose him. 3ly, Of the revived Antiparliamentary Juncto, after Sir George
Booths, and all their visible Opposites total rout and disappointment, when Ps.
30. 6, 7.
themselves and others esteemed them so well rooted, guarded, that there was no
hopes nor possibility left of dissipating, dissolving them, or abolishing their
usurped Regal and Parliamental power, even by the very instruments that called
them in, and routed their Enemies; be not a real, experimental verification of
Ezech. 21. 26, 27. by way of Allusion to our own Governors and Kingdom, Thus
says the Lord God; Remove the Diadem, and take off the Crown; exalt him that
is low, and abase him that is high: I will Overturn, Overturn, Overturn it,
till he shall come whose right it is, and I will give it him?

Junctoes and Army Officers doubling, trebling, quadrupling of our Nations
Monthly Taxes, Excises, Militiaes, Grievances, Oppressions of all kinds by
their usurped power; their consumption, devastation of all the Crown Lands,
Rents, and standing Revenues of the Kingdom; of Bishops, Dean and Chapters
lands, and many thousands of Delinquents real and personal estates, and
greatest part of most men's private estates, only to make them greater Bondslaves
to them than ever they were to any Kings; without benefiting or easing them in
any kind; and to murder one another by intestine, unchristian wars,
Butcheries: And their Monstrous Giddiness, Intoxication in all their premised
Councils, New Models, and Rotations of Government, ever since they turned the
Head of our Kingdoms (which should rule, direct the whole body) downwards, and
the Heels uppermost, to animate and steer it, against the course of nature, the
rules of Law, Policy, Christianity: and Gods Hos. 2. 6, 7.
hedging up all their new By-ways with thorns, and making a wall cross them,
that the people are not able to find their paths: nor to overtake, nor find
their New Lovers they have hitherto followed and sought after, and those mad
new whymfies the Jesuits infuse into their Pates from time to time, to make
them and our Nation ridiculous to all the world till utterly destroyed: may not
justly engage our three distracted Nations, and themselves too now, at a total
loss; to resolve and say with the Israelites, (when revolted from their
rightful Kings of the House of David in the like case) Hos. 2. 7. I will go
and return to my first Husband, for then was it better with me than now: And to
imitate the Israelites in the case of King David when expelled his Realm by his
usurping son Absoloms rebellion, after his rout and slaughter, 2 Samuel 19. 9.
etc. And all the people were at strife throughout all the Tribes of Israel,
saying; The king saved us out of the hands of our Enemies, and he delivered us
out of the hands of the Philistines; and now he is fled out of the Land for
Absalom, and Absalom whom we anointed King over us, is dead in battle (as their
Pro. Oliver, Richard and dissolved Juncto are in a moment) now therefore why
are ye silent, and speak not a word of bringing back the King to his House: And
Zadok and Abiathar the Priests, spoke unto the elders of Judah saying; Why are
ye the last to bring the King back to his House; seeing ye are his brethren, of
his bone and his flesh? And Amasa bowed the heart of all the Men of Judah, even
as one man, so that they sent this word unto the King; Return thou and all thy
servants. So the King returned to Jordan; where all the people of Judah, and
half the men of Israel met him, and conducted him safe to Gilgal; and the men
of Judah c^ave unto their King from Jordan even to Jerusalem; and
re-established him in his Kingdom. Whether this be not the only safe, true,
legal, prudential, Christian, speedy and ready highway to their present and
future Peace, Ease, Safety, Settlement, Wealth, Prosperity, both as Men and
Christians, without any further effusion of Christian blood, expense of
Treasure; not other new Vertiginous Models, Army Councils, Treaties, tending to
further confusions; (out of which the Nobility, Gentry, Ministry, Freeholders,
Citizens, Burgesses, Merchants, Commons, Seamen, Parliaments of our 3. Nations
are totally secluded, like mere Ciphers, by the Juncto and Army-usurpers, as if
they were mere Aliens, and wholly unconcerned in their own Government,
Settlement, who will never acquiesce in any thing, but what themselves in a
free Parliament shall resolve on.) Judges 19. 30.
Consider of it, take advice, and speak your minds, without fear, hypocrisy,
or partiality. And whether we be not a people marked out and fitted for
inevitable destruction (having all the symptoms, forerunners of it and sins
that hasten it now lying upon us) if we Understand ye brutish among the people:
O ye fools, when will ye be wise? Ps. 94. 8.
brutishly reject this only means of our preservation, and follow the
destructive whymsies of those Giddy-pated usurping raw Stears-men? of whom we
may justly say with the Prophet Isay 3. 1, 4, 12. Behold the Lord of Hosts does
take away from Jerusalem and Judah the stay and the staff, the Honorable man
and the Counselor: And I will give Children (in State Affairs and
understanding) to be their Princes, and Babes shall rule over them. And the
people shall be oppressed every one by another, and every one by his neighbor:
the child shall be have himself proudly against the ancient; and the Base
against the Honorable (as now they do;) O my people, they which lead thee,
cause thee to err, and destroy the way of thy paths; and they that are led of
them (in their new Jesuitical By-ways) are destroyed, by intestine divisions
and foreign invasions, as in Isay 9. 12. to 21. A sad emblem of our present
condition, and approaching destruction, worthy our saddest meditations.

by their own Knack of the 12. of October, and paper printed by their special
permission and command since their dissolution; entitled, The Parliaments
Plea; declaring, resolving, p. 5, 6, 7. That the people of England are of
Right, a Free people, to be governed by their own elected Deputies and Trustees
in Parliament; it being owned on all hands, both by Parliament and Army, and
all the good people engaged with them. That the people under God are the
original of all just Authority; and other original and foundation no man may
lay. That to deprive or deny the people of this Inheritance, is Treason,
Rebellion and Apostasy from the Good Did Cause of the English Nation; for as
much as a people free by Birth, by Laws, and by their own Prowess, are thereby
rendered and made most absolute vassals and slaves, at will and power; and
greater Treason than this no man can commit. That to levy money upon the people
without their consent in Parliament is Treason, for which every man that so
Assesses, Collects, or gathers it, is to be Indicted for his life, and must dye
as a Traitor; not only by their late Knack, but by the Fundamental Good Did
Laws of the Land, against which no By-law is to be made: this being a
Fundamental law, and one of the main birthrights of England; That no Tax or
Levy is to be laid upon the people but by their consent in Parliament; Be not
guilty of the greatest, highest Treason, Rebellion and Apostasy from the Good
Old Cause of the English Nation, (and the Army Officers too confederating with
them) by depriving and denying the free people to be governed by their own
elected Representatives and Trustees in a free Parl. by secluding four parts of
five of the Knights, Citizens, Burgesses, and Barons of Ports out of the long
Parl. whiles in being Dec. 1648. with armed power: by usurping to themselves
the Royal, Parliamentary Legislative supreme Authority over the people, and
laying, assessing, levying, intolerable excessive Taxes, Excises, Militiaes
upon them, without, yea against their consents and protestations; and without
the consents of the far greater part of the Commons House, the King or House
of Lords, which they forcibly secluded, suppressed, destroyed, against their
fundamental Laws, Liberties, Privileges, Birthrights, Protestations,
Declarations and solemn League and Covenant; by making them most absolute
slaves, vassals from 1648. till their dissolution in April 20. 1653. and
invading, inslaving, destroying their Protestant brethren of Scotland, and
Allies of Holland by Land and Sea, to the undermining, endangering of the
Protestant Religion; by imposing New Oaths and engagements on them
diametrically contrary to the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance (which they
all solemnly took as Members before they entered the House) and disabling all to
sue in any Court, or enjoy the benefit or protection of the Laws for which they
fought, and to which they were born heirs, who refused to take their
Treasonable, perfidious Engagements; by securing, imprisoning thousands of
Freemen, close imprisoning sundry Members of the old Parliament, (my self
amongst others) diverse years in remote Castles, and keeping us from Gods
public ordinances, without any accusation, hearing, trial, or legal cause of
commitment, expressed in their warrants.

By presuming upon the Army and Officers sudden invitation after the old
Parliaments dissolution by the Kings death, and their above 6. years
dissipation by the Army, without the election or privity of the people, to sit
and act as the Parl. and supreme power of the Nation; to seclude at least 3.
parts of 4. of the old surviving Members by force, and proclaiming Sir George
Booth, Sir Thomas Middleton and other Members and Freemen of England Traitors,
and levying war against them, only for raising forces to induce them to call in
all the old secluded Members, or to summon a new free Parliament, and for
opposing their new illegal Taxes, Excises, Militiaes, imposed and levied on the
people, without their Common consent in Parl. deserve not to be all indicted,
executed, and their estates confiscated as Traitors, for these their successive
reiterated high Treasons by their own resolutions, and Sir George and his
adherents totally acquitted from the least imputation or guilt of Treason?
Whether their branding, sequestring them for Traitors, Apostates, Enemies to
the public against Law and Conscience too, has not justly brought that woe and
judgment upon their conventicle, Isa. 5. 20, 23, 24. Woe unto them that call
evil good, and good evil; that put darkness for light, and light for
darkness; that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter; and take away the
righteousness of the righteous from him. Therefore as the fire devoureth the
stubble, and the flame consumes the chaff, so their root shall be rottenness,
and their blossom shall go up as dust; because they have cast away the Law of
the Lord, (and of the Land too) and despised the name of the holy one of
Israel. For all this his wrath is not turned away, but his hand is streched out
still.

Whether the Anti-Parliamentary Junctoes and Army Officers, England; their
banishing, expelling his Royal Protestant Heir, Successor to the Crown, with
all the rest of his Children (professing the reformed Religion) out of all
their Protestant Realms and Dominions; their invading of their Protestant
Brethren in Ireland and Scotland, in an hostile manner with potent Armies, and
waging war against them in their own Countries, and after that against their
own Protestant Brethren in England, as professed Enemies, Traitors, Apostates;
slaying diverse thousands of them in the field; imprisoning, banishing,
disinheriting, sequestring many thousands more of them, only for owning,
crowning, assisting their own hereditary Protastant King (according to their
Oaths, Covenants, Laws, Homage, Allegiance, duties, and principles of the
Protestant Religion) to regain and retain his Royal Authority and Kingdoms.
Their waging of a most bloody destructive war with our ancient Protestant
Allies of Holland above 3. years space together, to the slaughter of many
thousands of their and our gallantest Protestant Seamen, Admirals,
Sea-Captains, of purpose to banish their own exiled Protestant King, his
Brethren and followers out of the Netherlands from the Society and charitable
relief of their Protestant friends where they lived as exiles, enjoying the
free prosession of the Reformed Religion, and Communion, prayers, contributions
of the Protestant Churches; on purpose to drive them into Popish Quarters
amongst seducing Jesuits, Priests, Papists, to cast them wholly upon their
Alms, Mercy, Benevolence, and by these high indignities, and their pressing
necessities, to enforce them (if they can) to renounce the Protestant Religion
and turn professed Papists: Their most unhuman, unchristian barbarism, in
depriving them totally of all means of Subsistence, by seizing all their
revenues without allowing them one farthingout of them toward their necessary
relief; yet enacting it High Treason for any of their Protestant Subjects,
Friends, Allies within their Realms or Dominions, to contribute any thing
toward their support, to hold the least correspondency with, or make any
public prayers unto God for them: as if they were worse than Turks, Jews,
Infidels, and most professed Enemies; for whom we are not only commanded,
obliged to pray, but also to love, feed, cloth, relieve, harbor them in their
necessities, overcoming their evil with goodness, by Christ's own example and
expressprecepts, under pain of everlasting damnation; be a conscientious
Saint-like performance of and obedience to, or not rather an Atheistical
obstinate, presumptuous rebellion against the 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2, 3. Mat. 5. 44,
45. c. 22. 21. c. 25. 34, to 46. Luke 6. 35. to 39. c. 10. 30. to 38. c. 23,
34. Acts 7. 60. Romans 10. 13, 19, 20, 21. c. 13. 1, to 12. c. 15. 26, 27. 1 Cor.
16. 1, 2. Jam. 2. 13. and other sacred Texts? A religious, zealous observation
of their See My Concordia Discors.
sacred solemn Protestations, Vows, Covenant, Remonstrances, Declarations,
Oaths for the maintenance, defense and propagation of the true Reformed
Protestant Religion, the Profession and Professors of it, against the bloody
Plots, Conspiracies, attempts, practices of the Jesuits, and other professed
Popish Enemies and underminers of them? Or not rather a most perfidious,
treacherous violation, abjuration, and betraying of them? A loving of their
Protestant Brethren, with a true heart, fervently, and laying down their lives
for them, and being pitiful, merciful, compassionate toward them, according
to these Gospel-precepts, Ephesians. 4. 32. c. 5. 1, 2. 1 Pet. 1. 22. c. 2. 17. c. 3.
8. 1 John 3. 11. 14. 33. c. 4. 7, 11, 12. 20, 21. John 13. 34. c. 15. 12. 17.
Or not rather a shuting up their bowels of compassion toward them; a grieving,
offending, persecuting, murdering of their bodies and souls too; and an
infallible evidence, that they are yet no real Saints or children of God, but
the very children of the Devil, abiding in death, having no true love of God,
nor eternal life abiding in them, by Christ's own resolution, John 8. 44, 45. 1
John 2. 10. to 18? A professed Antichristian contradiction to the reiterated
command and voice of God from heaven, Isay 52. 11. 2 Cor. 6. 17. Rev. 18. 2, 3,
4, etc. Depart ye, depart ye, Come ye out of (mystical, Romish Babylon, (the
mother of whoredoms, the habitation of Devils, and of every foul spirit, and
the cage of every unclean and hateful bird) O my people that ye be not
partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues: by their
forcible driving of their own Protestant King, Brethren into Babylon, and
keeping them therein, to have their habitation among Devils, foul spirits, and
unclean birds of every kind, that so they may participate both in her sins and
plagues; instead of calling the^ out from thence into their own Protestant
Dominions and Churches? 1 Pet. 4. 18, 19.
Verily, if the righteous shall scarcely be saved, where shall these most
transcendent, unpresidented, unrighteous, ungodly sinners (who obey not, but
contradict all these Gospel Texts) appear? and what shall their end be? Verily
the Gospel it self resolves: (and O that they would with fear and amazement of
spirit now seriously consider it) when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from
heaven with his mighty Angels in flaming fire to take vengeance on them, they
shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord,
and from the glory of his power, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7, 8, 9. Jam. 2. 11.
and shall receive judgment without mercy, because they have showed no mercy,
but the utmost extremity of malice and cruelty to the Souls and bodies of their
Protestant King and Brethren?

Whether the Junctoes and Armies late Proceedings against the King and
Kingship, were not the direct Plot of the Spaniolized Priests and Jesuits, who
contrived and promoted it to their power; as I evidenced in my Speech, Memento,
Epistle to my Historical Collection, My true and perfect Narrative, and
Vindication of the old and new secluded Members at large, and shall further
clear by this ensuing Letter, the original whereof I have twice read, found by
Mr. Sherman a Bookseller in Little Britain, (in whose hands it is) amongst the
Books of Mr. Patricke Carre (Priest to Don Alonso de Cardenas the Spanish
Ambassador) which he bought of him at this Ambassadors house, when he was
departing hence upon the breach with Spain, 1653. within a year after this
Letters date, which he soon after showed to diverse Gentlemen, one of them (who
took a copy thereof) promising to show it to Cromwell himself. The
Superscription of it is in Spanish directed (as is conceived and the Letter
imports) to this Patricke Carre (an Irish Priest and Jesuit) under the name of
Don Pedro Garsia: the Letter it self is in English, written it seems by some
English or Irish Priest or Jesuit, sent as an intelligencer, by the Spanish
Ambassador into Holland and France, (with whom the English were then in
hostility) but the direction for Letters to him is in French. In the cloze
whereof the Jesuitical and Spanish party in Paris, expected our
Anti-Parliamentary Juncto (whom they style, our brave Parliament, as set up by
and acting for them) should espouse their quarrel and act their parts against
the French; and join with the Prince of Condie, to cut off the King of France
his head, and all Kings else, as they did the King of Englands, by their
instigation, such Antimonarchists, Traitors are these Jesuits, and Spanish
Freers to all Kings and Monarchy.

Paris, 10. of January, 1652.
SIR,
I Was no sooner in Holland, then I writ to you, but hearing nothing from you I
concluded, either you were very sick, or that you received not my Letter; I
came hither in an ill time, for the Kingdom is in great disorder, upon the
Kings recalling the Cardinal, against all his Declarations. This Town ready to
declare in favor of the Prince and the Duke of Orleance, who is now treating
with the Duke of Lorrain for his Army. If your dull Leopold.
Archduke make no more advantage of this, than of the disorders of the last
Summer, it is pity but he were sent to keep Sheep. WE EXPECT HERE OUR BRAVE
PARLIAMENT WILL NOT LET THE GAME BE SOON PLAYED OUT: I could wish Gallant
Cromwell AND ALL HIS ARMY WERE WITH THE Condie.
PRINCE: for I BEGIN TO WISH ALL KINGS HAD THE Execution he means.
SAME THE KING OF ENGLAND HAD: I Will say no more until I hear from you, but that
I am

Your unfeigned Friend, T. Danielle.
I pray remember me to both my Cozens. Direct your Letters A Monsieur Monsieur
Canell demurant chez Mons: Merchant a la rne de pulle.




The Superscription is thus, viz.

A Don Pedro Garsia en Casa de Embaxador de Espanna que This intimates he was a
Priest or Jesuit who writ it,
Dios guard.

En Londres 9d.

There were many Papers and Notes written in Irish, some concerning the affairs
and transactions of the late wars in Ireland, found amongst these Books, whence
I conceive this Patrick Carre was an Irish Priest and Jesuit; and that the
Spaniard had a great hand in that horrid Rebellion. From the cloze of this
Letter let all consider.

Whether it can be safe for any Popish, as well as Protestant Kings to harbor
such Jesuitical Antimonarchists and Regicides in their Kingdoms, Courts, who
thus wish ALL KINGS beheaded and brought to Justice, as well as the late King
of England, by Cromwell and his Army, or their own Subjects? and how much they
ought to detest his president (of the Jesuits contriving) let them now
cordially and timely advise for their own security.

Whether the Great swarms of Jesuits and Popish Freers in and about London, by
the Junctoes, and Army Officers tolleration and connivence (whose Jesuitical
Antimonarchical Plots, Counsels they have vigorously pursued) be not the
principal contrivers, fomentors of all our changes of Government, New Sects,
Opinions, Mutinies in and Usurpations of the Army, (in whose Councils most
intelligent Protestants have just cause to fear they have been and still are
predominant) there being multitudes of them in and about London, under several
masks; some of them saying Mass in their Pontificalibus in Popish Ladies
Chambers one day; and speaking to and praying with their Soldiers in the Army,
or in Anabaptistical or Quaking Conventicles the next day, of which there are
some late particular Instances; I shall relate one only more general and worthy
knowledge.

Two English Gentlemen of quality (one of them of mine acquaintance) traveling
out of England into France in May 1658. and hiring a vessel for their passage,
three strangers (who came from London) desired leave to pass over with them;
which they condescending to, suspected one of them at least, to be a Jesnit, by
his discourse; and during their stay at Paris, saw all three of them there
walking often in the Streets in their Jesuits habits. In August following, they
being at Angiers in France, there repaired to their lodging an Englishman, in
his Friars weeds, who informed them, That he was an Englishman by birth, but a
Dominiean Freet by profession, newly come from Salamanca in Sapin, and bound
for England; that he had been at Rome, where he had left some goods with an
Irish Jesuit, who promised to return moneys on them in France, but had failed
to do it; whereupon he was in present distress for money to transport him to
England, desiring their favor to furnish him with moneys, which he would
faithfully repay in London, and if they had any Letters to send to their
friends in England, he would see them safely delivered. The Gentlemen finding
him to be an excellent Scholar of very good parts and education, entertained
him 5. or 6. days at their lodging, till they could furnish him with moneys,
and upon his Account as a Freer, had a very good intertainment in the Monastery
at Angiers by the Freers thereof: During his stay there they had much discourse
with him: He told them he had been formerly a Student in Kings College in
Cambridge; after that at Salamanca in Spain, for 8. years. Being demanded by
them, Whether there were not many Jesuits and Freers then in England? He
assured them upon his own knowledge, they had then above five hundred Jesuits
in London and the Suburvs; and that they had at least four or five Jesuits and
Popish Priests in and about London, to every Minister we had there. Whereupon
they demanding of him; How so many Jesuits and Priests were there maintained?
He answered, That the Jesuits and every Order of Freers had their several
Treasurers in London, who by Orders from their Provincials furnished them with
what ever Moneys they wanted by Bills of Exchange returned to them; That all
the Jesuits and Priests in England were maintained according to their
respective qualities; A Lords Son, like a Lord, and a Knights Son like a
Knight; and if they chanced to meet him in London at their return, though he
were now in a poor weed, they should find him in Scarlet, or Plush, and a
better equipage than what he was in. He would not discover his true name to
them, but upon discourse on a sudden, he mentioned His Cozen Howard in England,
which made them suspect he was of that family. He told them further; that
though we were very cunning in England, yet the Jesuits and Priests there were
too crafty for us, lurking under so many disguises that they could hardly be
discovered: That there was but one way to detect them; which they being
inquisitive to know. He said, it was for those who suspected them to be Priests
to feign themselves Roman Catholics, and upon that account to desire the
Sacrament from them, which they could not deny to give them (after Confession
to them) being bound thereto by Oath, by which means some of them had been
betrayed. He further informed them: That himself had been at all the several
Gathered Churches, Congregations and Sects in London, and that none of them
came so near the Sea Mr. Smiths 2. New Books against the Quakers, and Dell,
proving them to be Papists.
Papists in their Opinions and Tenants as the Quakers, among whom himself had
spoken. This relation one of the Gentlemen (a person of honor and reputation,
the other being dead) has lately made to me three several times with his own
mouth, and will attest it for truth, having related it to sundry others since
his return into England. Which considered, Whether it be not the very Highway
to our Churches, Religions, Ministers, Nations ruin and destruction to list so
many Quakers, Anabaptists, Sectaries, in the Army and New Militiaes in most
Counties, where they bear the greatest sway; and to disarm the Presbyterians
and Orthodox Protestants, as the only dangerous persons, and put all their arms
into Quakers, Anabaptists, and Sectaries hands (headed, steered by Jesuits,
Popish Priests and Freers) as they have done in Gloucester, Colchester,
Cheshire, Lancashire, and endeavor to do in other parts, to cut all true
Protestants throats, and set up Popery by the Army (which has so much advanced
it of late years) before we are aware? Let all true zealous Protestants timely,
seriously consider, and endeavor speedily to prevent (and the Council of
Army Officers, with their new Committee of Safety too, if they have any care of
their Native Country, or Protestant Religion) before it be over-late.

Junctoes and Armies unparalleld Exile of their Protestant King and Royal
posterity into Popish Territories; and yet permitting such swarms of Jesuits,
Monks and Romish Vermin to creep in and reside amongst us; may not give up the
dissolved Juncto, Army, Council of Officers, Soldiers, and their posterities,
with our whole three Nations, as a prey and spoil to these seducing, dividing,
ravening, all-devouring Wolves; yea to the combined forces of our Spanish and
French Popish adversaries, to the utter desolation, extirpation, ruin of our
Protestant Religion, in the midst of our present divisions and distractions,
under a just pretext of restoring the exiled Royal issue to their hereditary
rights, and avenging the manifold indiguities to them and their relations,
unless timely and wisely prevented by a prudent, voluntary clozing with, and
loyal, christian restoring them, by common consent our selves, upon just, safe,
and honorable terms, becoming us both as Men, Christians, and Professors of
the Reformed Religion? And whether we be not ripe for such a universal
desolating judgment as this, if we consider, Is. 24. 16, 17, 18. c. 33. 1, 2.
c. 59. 1, to 19. 2 Chr. 3. 6. 15, to 21. Mich. 2. 2, 3, 4, 5. Ezech. 35. 14,
15. Joel 3. 6, 7, 8. or the late and present sufferings of most other
Protestant Churches abroad, not half so Treacherous, Perfidious, Wicked,
Exercrable as we, who are now become the very Monsters of Men, the scandal,
shame, reproach of Christianity, and humanity in the repute of all the world?

Whether the Juncto and Army Officers who have (like Is. 58 3, to 8.
Hypocritical Israelites) very frequently ordered, celebrated many Hypocritical
irreligious Mock-facts from time to time, to fast for strife, and debate, and
to smite with the fist of wickedness; never yet observing, practicing that
fast which God himself requires, to loose the bands of wickedness, to undo
the heavy burdens, to let the oppressed go free, to breakevery yoke, to deal
their bread to the hungry, to bring the poor (exiled Protestant Royal issue and
their English followers) that are cast out (by them) to their Houses, to cover
the naked, and not hide their selves from their own flesh: who have hitherto
made their public and private days of Humiliation, a constant Prologue to
their ambition, pride, Psa. 66. 7.
and rebellious self-exaltation; their days of praying to God, a preface to
their preying upon their brethren; their seeking of God for direction and
assistance in their designs, a means to color and promote the very John 8 44,
45. Ephesians. 5. 19, 20, 21.
works of their father the devil; their pretended following the secret impulses
of the spirit of God, the sole justification of Ephesians. 2. 2, 3.
walking according to the Prince of the air, the spirit that now works in the
Children of disobedience: their making, taking of solemn Oaths, Vows,
Protestations, Covenants, Engagements to be true, faithful, oonstant, loyal,
obedient to their Lawful Kings their heirs, successors, superiors, the
Privileges, Rights of Parliament our Fundamental Laws, Liberties, Religion,
etc. a mere engine and diabolical stratagem, more cunningly, boldly,
audaciously, perfidiously to betray, undermine, supplaut, subvert them; have
not now just cause to keep many public, private Fasts, and days of
Humiliation, to confess, bewail, repent, renounce, and reform these their
transcendent-crying, wrath-provoking sins and abominations: together with their
Micah 3. 10. Hab. 2. 12.
building up of Zion (their New Republike, Free State, Churches, Kingdom of
Jesus Christ) with blood, and establishing Jerusalem with iniquity, Micah 2. 1,
2, 3, 4, 5.
their devising iniquity and working evil upon their beds, and practicing it
when the morning is light, because it is in the power of their hand, and
swords: their coveting (other men's) fields, houses, and taking them away by
violence; so they oppress a man (yea their Protestant King, and thousands more
of their Protestant brethren) and his house; yea a man and his inheritance: for
fear they incur the fatal inevitable Woes, evils, Judgments, denounced by
God, against such crying Sins, oppressions, violences, to the utter
desolation, extirpation of them, their families, yea of our English Zion and
Jerusalem, Mic. 2. 1, to 6. Is. 32. 1, 2. c. 3, throughout: with that of Hab.
2. 7, 8. Shall they not rise up suddenly that shall bite thee, and awake that
shall vex thee, and thou shall be for booties unto them? Because thou have
spoiled many Nations, all the remnant of the people shall spoil thee: because
of men's blood, and for the violence of the Land, of the City, (Army) and all
that dwell therein?

Magna Charta, c. 29, 30. the Petition of Right and all other Laws, Statutes
which concern the preservation of the Lives, Free-holds, Liberties, Properties,
Franchises of the Subjects, the inheritance and succession of the Crown, the
Rights and Privileges of Parliament) their ending the last Easter Term, with
very little Law, and no conscience at all; their beginning Trinity Term with
very little Conscience (monopolized in their conscientions Speakers breast
alone) without any Law at all; and their holding part only of Michaelmas Term
without any Chancery or Conscience (voted by some to be both useless and
dangerous) or any real Law in the judgment of understanding Lawyers, and
breaking it off, without any Law or Conscience, to the undoing of many poor
oppressed Clients left without relief; with their manifold transcendent
obstructions, subversions both of Law, Equity, Justice, Conscience, Property,
Liberty, in their most arbitrary lawless Committees of Indemnity, and Courts
of High Injustice; be not a transcendent violation of all their former
Remonstrances, Declarations, Votes, Protestations, League, Covenant; and a mere
Jesuitical design (as I have My true and perfect Narrative, p. 58, to 64.
elsewhere evidenced) to work our utter dissolution (the Laws being the only
Ligaments to unite, and Pillar to support our State and Kingdom; whereby not
only the Regal and Parliamental authority, but the peoples security of Lands,
livings, lives, privileges both in general and particular are preserved,
maintained, by the abolishing or alteration whereof, it is impossible but that
present Confusion will fall upon the whole State, Frame of this Kingdom and
Nation: as the Statute of 1 Iac. c. 2. resolves, and we find by woeful
experience? Whether the Army Council of Officers, have not most exemplarily and
satisfactorily performed this part of their last printed Declaration, 27 October.
1659. p. 28. We earnestly desire and shall endeavor, That a full and through
Reformation of the Law may be effected; by their new Committee of Safeties
imperious Order sent to Mr. Dudley Short (a Citizen of London) whom Mr. Thurlo
(whiles Secretary) committing close Prisoner to a M^ssenger several weeks, so
as neither his wife nor friends could have any access unto him, upon a mere
Trepan, and supposed matter of Account between him and a Scotsman with whom he
traded, and enforcing him at last ere released to enter into a Bond of 6000 l.
with sufficient security for appearing before the Council of State, and to go
in person into Scotl. when ever he should be required, and ordering him to go
into Scotland soon after (under pain of forfeiting his 6000 l. bond) upon his
own expense, where after many weeks attendance, and frequent, examinations
before the Council there, touching this account, the Scotsman appeared to be
indebted to him above 120l. whereupon he was dismissed thence. For which most
unjust vexation, oppression and false Imprisonment against the Great Charter,
c. 29. the Petition of Right, with other Acts, and the late Statute of 17
Caroli, c. 10. For Regulating the Privy Council, (to Mr. Shorts great expense,
loss of trade, reputation, and his damage of Ten thousand pounds, as he
declared) he brought his Action at law in the Common Pleas Court, which was set
down to be tried at Guildhall, the 12. of this November. Whereupon Mr. Thurlo
procured an express Order from the new Committee of Safety, wherein they
presume to indemnifie him (by their exorbitant arbitrary power) against this
action of false Imprisonment, and to enjoin the Plaintiff both to surcease and
release his suit, and never to prosecute it more; and command his Counsel,
Attorney, Solicitor, the Judge himself, and all other Officers, not to proceed
therein at their utmost peril, upon this ground; because if this Trial should
proceed, any others of the late and present Council of State might have actions
brought against them for illegal commitments and imprisonments: Upon this the
Officers of the Count refused to seal his Record for the Trial, and his
Attorney and Counsel durst not proceed for fear of being laid by the heels.
Whereupon he complained against this abuse, and moved for a trial in open
Court, urged these Statutes with the Statutes of 2 E. 3. c. 2. 20* E. 3. c. 1,
2. and the Judges Oath, That it shall not be commanded by the great Seal, nor
little Seal, to disturb or delay common right; And though such commandments do
come, the Justices shall not therefore cease to do right in any point: And that
the Justices shall not deny nor delay to no man common Right by the Kings
Letters, nor none other man's, nor for none other cause. And in case any Letters
come to them contrary to Law they shall do nothing by such Letters, and go
forth to do the Law, notwithstanding such Letters: And pressing the Judge to
do him right accordingly, and to give him an answer in open Court; yet their
Order countermanded these Statutes and Judges Oath: So that no man, though
never so unjustly committed, oppressed, grieved by the Old and New Council of
State, to his ruin; shall have any remedy at all against them: since they may
thus indemnify each other against all Actions commenced. And if they bring an
Habeas Corpus for their enlargement, and be bayled according to Law by the
Judges; the new Gardians of our Liberties, Preservers of our Safety, and
Thorough Reformers of our Laws, (by extirpating them root and branch) will
even in the very face of the Court, as soon as they have put in bayl, in
contempt of Law and Justice command Soldiers and their Sergeant at Arms, by new
Orders to arrest and carry them to other Prisons, as they did Mr. Nuport and
Mr. Halsey on the 18. of this instant November: notwithstanding they had put in
bail of ten thousand pounds a piece for their peaceable deportment: Yea if any
henceforth move for Habeas Corporaes they will remove them unto New Prisons, or
Gards of Soldiers, or send them into Foreign parts to prevent their returns and
enlargement by our Laws; as some have been newly dealt with, by these New full
and through Reformers of the Laws, Whether these very first fruits of their
full and through pretended Reformation of our Laws, proving so bitter,
trampling all Law and Justice under foot, with greater scorn, contempt,
impudence than ever any Kings, Old Council Table Lords, Strafford or Canterbury
were guilty of: And their leaving not so much as one Judge or Justice to act
under them in any one Court of Justice at Westminster, nor no face of any real
or pretended Legal Authority in England or Ireland to execute Justice between
man and man: and dismounting all those Judges, Grandees of the Law who formerly
complied with them, and acted under them in all their Innovations, (a just
reward for their temporizing against their Judgments, Law and Conscience)
their future harvest of our Laws Reformation will not probably prove so
lawless and exorbitant, that the whole English Nation (and Army too, if they
have not abandonned all humanity, christianity, charity, justice) will revive
this prayer in our ancient Liturgy, against such a full and through Deformation
and Deformers of our Laws. From all evil and mischief; from all blindness of
heart, from pride, vainglory and hypocrisy, from envy, hatred, and all
uncharitableness, good Lord deliver us. And exhort their fellow brethren of
Scotland and Ireland in the Apostles words, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 1, 2. Finally,
brethren, pray for us, that the word of the Lord (and good old Laws of the
Land) may run and have free course, and be glorified; and that we may be
delivered from absurd, (or unreasonable and wicked men, who thus reform and
purge out the Laws very bowels) for all men (and such reforming Saints
especially) have not faith: whatever they profess, who under pretext of a most
transcendent Reformation and purgation of the Gospel and Law, would reduce us
into the condition of the Israelites, 2 Chronicles. 15. 3. Now for a long season
Israel had been without the true God, and without a teaching Priest, and
without Law? And why so? The Apostle resolves us in direct terms, 1 Timothy 1. 4.
etc. The end of the Law is charity out of a pure heart, and of a good
conscience, and of faith unfeined: from which some having swerved have turned
aside to vain jangling: desiring to be teachers, (yea Reformers) of the Law,
understanding neither what they say, nor what they affirm. But we know that the
Law is good, if a man use it lawfully; knowing also that the Law is not made
for a righteous man; but for the lawless and disobedient for the ungodly and
for sinners. For Murderers of Fathers and murderers of Mothers, for
manslayers, etc. for men-stealers, for liars, for perjured persons, and every
other thing that is contrary to sound doctrine: And our Army-Grandees, Juncto,
and new Reformers being such; would abrogate all Laws, and Lawyers too, least
they should restrain and punish them for these their Capital crimes: Forgetting
this lesson, that though they null all the Laws and Courts of Justice in
Westminster Hall, and elsewhere; yet they shall never abrogate nor escape the
Law, Judgment, Execution, Justice and vengeance of Romans 2. 2, 3, 8, 9, 12.
God himself, who will render indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish to
every soul of man that does evil, whether Jew or Gentile. For as many who have
sinned without Law, shall also perish without Law, and as many as have sinned
in the Law, shall be judged by the Law Enough to dissuade them from their
intended Reformation, to reform their own and the Armies lawless exorbitances,
before they reform our Laws, or others far better than themselves.

Whether all the old conscientious, faithful, public spirited, secured,
secluded, and re-excluded Members, who to the uttermost of their powers
opposed, voted, protested against all the late dismal Jesuitical
Powder-Treasons, Violences, Innovations, Exorbitances of the dissolved Juncto
and Army, and have 2 Pet. 2. 7, 8.
vexed their righteous souls, from day to day, yea Psalm. 119. 136
shed rivers of tears from their mournful eyes, because of these their heinous
transgressions against the Laws of God and the Land, may not with much comfort
apply this promise of God to themselves, and their uncharitable brethren, who
secluded all, and imprisoned sundry of them. Isa. 66. 5, 6. etc. 26. 11, 13,
14. Hear the word of the Lord, ye that tremble at his word: Your brethren that
hated you, that cast you out for my name sake, said, Let the Lord be (thereby)
glorified, but he shall appear to your joy, and they shall be ashamed. (by
reason of their own double ejection, dissolution in a strange unexpected
manner) A voice of noise from the City; a voice from the Temple; a voice of the
Lord that renders recompense to his enemies. Lord, when thy hand is lifted up,
they will not see; but they shall see, and be ashamed for their envy toward
the people; yea the fire of their Enemies (their very fiery Guards and
Powder-men) shall devour them. O Lord our God, other Lords besides thee (our
New Supreme Lords, Powers, Protectors of the dissolved Junctoes counsel and
the other House have had dominion over us, but by thee only will we make mention
of thy name: They are dead, they shall not live; they are deceased, they shall
not rise: therefore have thou visited and destroyed them, and made all their
Memory to Perish: Even Judges 5. 31.
so let all thine Enemies (and the public impenitent, malicious Enemies of our
Churches, Kings, Kingdoms, Parliaments, Peoples Liberties) fall and perish, O
Lord: but let them that love thee (and the public peace, welfare, settlement,
prosperity of our Churches, Kings Kingdoms, Nations) be as the Sun when he
goes forth in his might; That so the Land may have rest forty years together:
as the Land of Israel had, after Judges 4 15.
the Lord had discomfited Sisera, and all his Chariots, and all his host with
the edge of the Sword, before Barak and Deborah, Amen.

Trustbreakers, and the whole House of Lords, for whose defense they were
raised, waged, commissioned; and their subsequent dissolving, dissipating with
high scorn, their own Anti-Parliamentary Junctoes from whom they received
their new Commissions, end engaged several times, to yield their utmost
assistance to them to sit in safety, to be true, faithful and constant to
them, and to live and die in their defense: be a conscientious saint-like
performance.

1. Of John Baptists Evangelical Injunction to all Soldiers, Luke 3. 14. Do
violence to no man, neither accuse any falsely, and be content with your
allowance. 2ly. Of St. Paul's description of a good Soldier of Jesus Christ 2 Timothy 2. 3, 4. Thou therefore endure hardness: No man that warreth, intangloth
himself with the affairs of this life, that he may please him who has chosen
him to be a Soldier. (not disobey, betray, supplant or destroy him) 3ly. Of
Paul's and Peter's express commands to all Officers, Soldiers whatsoever, as
well as others, Romans 13. 1, 2, etc. Let every soul be subject to the higher
powers: for there is no power but of God: the powers that be, are ordained of
God. Whosoever therefore resists the power resists the Ordinance of God:
and they that resist, shall receive to themselves damnation, etc. Wherefore ye
must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake. Tit.
3. 1, 2. Put them in mind to be subject to Principalities and Powers; to obey
Magistrates, to be ready to every good work: To speak evil of no man; to be
gentle, showing all meekness unto all men. Ephesians. 6. 5, 6, 7. Col. 4. 22, 23,
24. Servants (and such are all Mercenary Officers, Soldiers, under pay to the
old Parliament and Kingdom) obey in all things, your Masters according to the
flesh, in fear and trembling, in singleness of heart, as unto Christ, Not with
eye service, as men-pleasers; but as the servants of Christ doing the will of
God from the heart. With good will doing service, as to the Lord, and not to
men; for ye serve the Lord Christ. 1 Pet. 2. 13, to 20. Submit your selves to
every Ordinance of man for the Lord sake, whether it be to the King as supreme,
or unto Governors, as unto those who are sent by him for the punishment of evil
doers, and for the praise of them that do well; for so is the will of God, that
with well-doing ye put to silence the ignorance of foolish men. As free, and
not using your liberty, as a cloak of maliciousness, but as the servants of
God. Honor all men, (in lawful authority) Fear God, Honor the King.
Servants, be subject to your Masters with all fear, not only to the good and
gentle, but also to the froward. For this is thank-worthy, if a man for
conscience toward God endure grief, suffering wrongfully. Whether by their
former and late rebellions against the King, Parl. and all their lawful
Superiors, and exalting themselves above all their former Lords and Masters,
they have not given Christ himself the lie, and falsified his reiterated
Asseveration, Resolution. Mat. 10. 24. John 13. 16. c. 15. 10. Verily, Verily I
say unto you, the Disciple is not above his Master, nor the Servant above, or
greater than his Lord; neither he that is sent, greater than he that sent him.
If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them! And whether they will not
prove bitterness and damnation to them in the latter end?

Whether the Juncto and Army Council, upon serious consideration of all the
premises and their former miscarriages, public confession in the Book of
Common Prayer. Almighty and most merciful Father, we have erred and strayed
from thy ways like lost sheep. We have followed too much the devices and
desires of our own hearts; we have offended against thy holy laws; we have left
undone those things which we ought to have done, and we have done those things
which we ought not to have done, and there is no health nor truth in us. But
thou O Lord have mercy upon us miserable Offenders. And grant that we may
hereafter live a godly, righteous, and sober life, to the glory of thy holy
name. Amen. Which if these Workers of iniquity shall still refuse to do, as if
the Lord did neither see nor regard it; and thereby provoke our 3. Nations to
cry out with united prayers to God against them; Psalm. 12. 1, 2.
Help Lord, Psalm. 94. 1.
for the godly man cease, for the faithful fail from among the children of
men. O Lord God of revenges, O Lord God to whom vengeance belongs, show thy
self; lift up thy self thou Judge of the Earth, render a reward to the proud:
Lord, how long shall the wicked, how long shall the wicked triumph: how long
shall they utter hard things, and all the workers of iniquity boast themselves?
They break in pieces thy people, O Lord, and afflict thine heritage; they slay
the widow and murder the fatherless; They gather themselves together against
the soul of the righteous, and condemn the innocent blood. Whether they must
not then expect that inevitable doom of God himself, ensuing after such
practices and Prayers, Psa. 94. 23. And the Lord shall bring upon them their
own iniquity, and shall cut them off in their own wickedness; yea the Lord our
God shall cut them off? Ps. 37. 38, 39. 40.
The transgressors shall be destroyed together, the end of the wicked shall be
cut off: But the salvation of the righteous is of the Lord, he is their
strength in the time of troble. And the Lord shall help them, and deliver them,
he shall deliver them from the wicked, and save them because they trust in him.

Jer. 36. 3, 7. It may be they will (now) present their supplications before
the Lord, and return every one from his evil way, that God may forgive their
iniquity and their sin; for great is the anger and the fury that the Lord has
pronounced against this people.

An Exact Alphabetical List of the Old and New secluded Members of the Commons
House in the long Parliament, surviving May 7. 1659. when the dissolved Juncto
began their new Session.
Baronets, Knights and Viscounts.
LOrd Ancram, Sir Ralph Ashton, Sir John Barrington, Sir Thomas Barnardiston,
Sir Robert Benloes, Sir George Booth, Sir Humphry Bridges, Sir Ambrose Brown,
Sir John Burgoin, Sir Roger Burgoin, Sir Henry Cholmley, Sir John Clotworthy,
Sir John Corbet, Sir John Curson, Sir Thomas Dacres, Sir Francis Drake, Sir
William Drake, Sir Walter Earl, Sir Charles Egerton, Sir John Evelin of Surry,
Sir John Evelin of Wiltes, Sir John Fenweck, Sir Edmund Fowel, Sir Gilbert
Gerard, Sir Harbotle Grimston, Sir Richard Haughton, Sir John Holland, Sir
Anthony Irby, Sir Martin Knatchbull, Sir John Leigh, Sir William Lewis, Sir
William Lister, Sir William Litton, Sir Samuel Luke, Sir Nicholas Martyn; Sir
Thomas Middleton, Sir Robert Nappier, Sir Robert Nedham, Sir Dudly North, Sir
John Northcot, Sir Richard Onslow, Sir Hugh Owen, Sir John Palgrave, Sir Philip
Parker, Sir Thomas Parker, Sir Edward Partridge, Sir John Pellam, Sir William
Platers, Sir Nevil Poole, Sir John Pots, Sir Robert Pie, Sir Francis Russel,
Sir Beauchamp Saint-John, Sir John Seymor, Sir Thomas Some, Sir William
Strickland, Sir John Temple, Sir Thomas Trever, Sir Humpy Tuston, Sir William
Waller, Thomas Viscount Wenman, Sir Henry Worsly, Sir Richard Win, Sir John
Young.

In all 64.

Esquiers, Gentlemen and Lawyers.
John Alford, Arthur Ansley, Mr. Andrews, William Ardington, John Arundle, Mr.
Ascough, Francis Bacon, Nathaniel Bacon, Edward Bainton, Col. John Barker,
Maurice Barro, Mr. Bell, James Bence, Col. John Birch, Edward Bish, John
Bowyer, John Boys, Major Brooks, Major General Brown, Samuel Brown, Serjant at
Law, Francis Buller, John Bunkly, Hugh Buscoen, Mr. Button, Mr. Camble, William
Carrent, Col. Ceely, James Chaloner, Mr. Clive, Commiss. Copley, John Crew,
Thomas Crompton, Mr. Crowder, Thomas Dacre, John Dormer, John Doyle, Mr. Drake,
Robert Ellison, Mr. Erisy, Mr. Evelin, Edward Fowel, William Foxwist, John
Francis, James Fyennis, Nathaniel Eyennis, Samuel Gardener, Francis Gerard,
Thomas Gewen, William Glanvil, John Glynne Serjant at Law, Samuel Got, Thomas
Grove, Elias Grymes, Brampton Gurdon, Edward Harby, Col. Edward Harley, Major
Harley, John Hatcher, John Haidon, James Herbert, John Herbert, Mr. Hobby,
Thomas Hodges, Denzel Hollis, Francis Hollis, George Horner, Edmund Hostins,
John Hungerford, Col. Hunt, Mr. Jennings, William Jones, George Keckwich,
Richard Knighly, Col. Lassels, Henry Laurence, Col. Lee, Mr. Lewis, Col Walter
Long, Mr. Lowry, Col. John Loyde, Mr. Lucas, Mr. Luckin, John Mainard,
Christopher Martin, Major Genesis Edward Massey, Thomas Middleton, Thomas Moore,
William Morris, George Mountague, Mr. Nash, James Nelthrop, Alderman Nixon,
Mr. North, Col. Norton, Mr. Onslow, Arthus Owen, Henry Oxinden, Mr. Packer, Mr.
Peck, Henry Pellam, William Peirpoint, Jervase Pigot, Mr. Potter, Mr. Poole,
Col. Alexander Popham, Mr. Povy, Mr. Prisly, William Prynne, Alexander Pym,
Charles Pym, Mr. Rainscraft, Mr. Ratcliffe, Charles Rich, Col. Edward Rossiter,
Mr. Scowen, Mr. Scut, Col, Robert Shapcot, Col. Shuttleworth, Mr. Spelman, Mr.
Springats, Henry Stapleton, Robert Stanton, Edward Stephens, John Stephens,
Nathaniel Stephens, Mr. Stockfield, John Swinfen, Mr. Temple, Mr. Terwit, Mr.
Thistlethwait, Mr. Thomas, Isaac Thomas, Mr. Thynne, Mr. Tolson, John Trever,
Thomas Twisden Sergeant at Law, Mr. Vassal, Mr. Vaughan, Thomas Waller, Mr.
West, Henry Weston, William Wheeler, Col. Whitehead, Henry Wilkes, Captain
Wingate, Mr. Winwood, Thomas Wogan, Mr. Wray, Richard Win.

The Total Number, 203. besides the House of Lords.

An Alphabetical List of all Members of the late dissolved Juncto.
JAmes Ash, Alderman Atkins, William Air, Mr. Baker, Col. Bennet, Col. Bingham
Daniel Blagrave, Mr. Brewster, William Cawly, Thomas Chaloner, Mr. Cecil the
self-degraded Earl of Salsbury, Robert Cecil his son, John Corbet, Henry
Darley, Richard Darley, Mr. Dixwell, John Dove, Mr. Downs, William Else, Mr.
Feilder, Mr. Fell, Col. Charles Fleetwood, Augustine Garland, Mr. Gold, John
Goodwin, Robert Goodwin, John Gurdon, Mr. Hallowes, Sir James Harrington, Col.
Harvy, Sir Arthur Hasilrig, Mr. Hayes, Mr. Herbert the self-degraded Earl of
Pembrook, Roger Hill, Cornelius Holland, Col. Hutchinson, Col. Ingolsby, Philip
Jones, Mr. Leachmore, William Lenthall Speaker, John Lenthall his son, John
Lisle, Philip Viscont Lisle, Thomas Lister, Nicholas Love, Col. Ludlow, Henry
Martyn a prisoner in execution, Mr. Main, Sir Henry Mildmay, Gilbert
Millington, Col. Herbert Morley, Lord Viscont Munson, a prisoner in execution,
Henry Nevil, Robert Nicholas, Michael Oldsworth, Mr. Palmer, Alderman
Pennington, Sir Gilbert Pickering, John Pine, Edmond Prideaux, William Purefoy,
Thomas Pury, Robert Reynolds, Col. Rich, Luke Robinson, Oliver Saint-John,
Major Saloway, Mr. Say, Thomas Scot, Major General Skippon, Augustine Skinner,
Mr. Smith, Walter Strickland, Col. Sydenham, James Temple, Col. Temple, Col.
Thompson, Serjant Thorpe, John Trencher, Sir John Trevor, Sir Henry Vane, Col.
Wait, Mr. Wallop, Sir Thomas Walsingham, Col. Walton, Sir Peter Wentworth,
Edmond Weaver, Mr. White, Sergeant Wild, Sir Thomas Witherington, Sir Thomas
Wroth.

The total Sum, -- 91.

Note, That of these Members there entered only 42. into the House at first;
that the rest came in to them by degrees, either to keep their old preferments,
gain new, or regain the places they had formerly lost (especially the Lawyers,
who notwithstanding their former complyances, are turned quite out of Office,
and dis-Judged;) that 8. or more of them, came in by New Writs issued in the
Name of the Keepers of the Liberties of England, after the Kings beheading, and
were no Members of the long Parliament; That there were never 60. of them
together in the House at once whiles they sat: and but 57. on the 11. and 12.
of October last upon the great debate between them and the Army Officers: And
some that sat formerly with them (as the Lord Fairfax, John Carry, and others)
refused to sit with them now, as having not the least color of Law, to sit or
act as a Parliament. Yea, their Speaker Mr. Lenthal, told the Officers of the
Army and Members, who came to invite him to sit again, May 6. That he had a
Soul to save; and that he was not satisfied in point of Law, conscience or
prudence that they could sit again: But at last when he considered, he had an
estate to save (as he told another Friend) that over-ballanced all his former
Objections: and made him, and other Members act against their judgments,
consciences, and to forget our Saviors sad Quaeres, Mat. 16. 26. What is a man
profited if he should gain the whole world and lose his own Soul? Or, what
shall a man give in exchange for his soul?

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 4. Usurpers, read usurpation. page 17. l. 31. read Romans 3. 9, 10.


