A Prospect of bleeding IRELANDS miseries: Presented in a Brief Recitement to
the eyes and hearts of all her commiserating friends in England and Scotland,
as one maine Motive to move their Christian courage for her assistance, when we
consider there has been at the least two hundred thousand Protestants slain
and most inhumanely massacred by the barbarous and blood-thirsty Rebels,
putting them to the most cruel kinds of death that they could invent, as you
may read by this following Relation. Diligently Collected from the most certain
Intelligence.
Recompense unto them double what they have done unto others.
IRELANDES LAMENTATION


REader what passages of cruelty thou shall here peruse thou have not the least
cause to suspect of truth, they being such as by clear evidence have bin made
manifestly true by faithful Intelligence of eye and ear witnesses.

1. Within the County of Fermanagh great cruelties have been acted upon the
poor English Protestants where multitudes of men women and children have been
killed in cold blood.

2. In the Castle of Lisgoole there were above one hundred and fifty men,
women, and children, burnt there when that Castle was set on fire.

3. At the Castle of Moneah about one hundred English were slain by the
Barbarous Rebels.

4. The Castle of Tullah being yielded upon composition with promise of fair
quarter from the Rebels, but as soon as ever they entered the same they put all
to the sword without exception.

5. At Lissenskeah they murdered near one hundred of the Scotch Protestants,
which they use in every place as cruelly as the English.

6. One Mr. Middleton they compeld to hear Mass and after ward they caused him
his wife and children to be hanged up and murdered.

7. In the Countys of Armagh and Tirone great and Barbarous cruelties have been
exercised.

8. At one place there were carried out at several times in Troops one
thousand Protestants, which were drowned at the bridge of Portnedown, which for
that purpose was broke down in the midst.

9. And within the County of Armagh four thousand Protestants have in several
places been drowned.

10. The Protestants have been driven naked before these Barbarous Butchers in
several companies like sheep appointed for the slaughter, to the places of
execution.

11. And if any faynted or grew weary on the way, they pricked them forward with
their sword points whereby they killed many on the way.

12. With their Pikes and swords they ^st the poor stripped Christians into the
wa^rom of the Banks, or Bridges.

13. Those that assay by swiming to save their lives, they shoot or beat out
their brains.

14. Sir Phellim Oneal has proved the chief actor of these Barborous and
bloody massacres.

15. He having caused all the Protestants in Armagh and there abouts under
prerence of conducting them murdered of young and old five hundred persons.

16. He caused the Town of Armagh, and Cathedral Church to be fired which were
burnt down.

17. At a town called Killaman, forty and eight families were Murdered by his
directtion.

18. In the same town there were twenty too English Protestants Burnt in one
house.

19. Within two miles of the same the Rebels murdered of English two hundred
Families.

20. They have been so eager at their prey, that they would not suffer the poor
Protestants to say their prayers before they murdered them.

21. They have imprisioned some in noisome dungeons of dirt and mire, with
bolts on their legs where they were starved to death by Leisure.

22. At Cassell the Rebels cruelly murdered fifteen English Protestants using
the rest most barbarously.

23. They have most Barbarously mangled many Protestants and left them
languishing in their pain in the high ways half dead accounting it to
favorable to end them of their pain by a sudden death.

24. They have buried many alive both men women and poor harmless infants.

25. At one time at a town called Clownis, they buried seventeen persons which
they had half hanged which were heard to send forth Lamentable groans.

26. After they had cruelly wounded some they hung them upon tenter hooks.

27. Others when they had put rops about their necks they dragged through the
water.

28. Some they dragged through the woods and Boggs till they dyed.

29. They have put ropes about the necks of many and cast them several times
into the water, whereby to cause them to confess where their moneys were.

30. They have hanged up some a small time, and then taken them down again, to
make them confess where their money was, which when they told them, then they
hanged them outright.

31. When they have stripped the Protestants naked, they bid them go look for
their God, and bid him cloth them again.

32. They have hung up English by the arms and then hackt them with their
swords to try how many blows they would endure before they dyed.

33. Some have had their bellys ripped up and so left with their Intrails taken
out.

34. They have ripped up women big with child, and the young Infants has falled
out, which the Rebels have often given to dogs, and swine to eat or cast into
ditches.

35. The Rebels robbed, stripped, and murdered a great company of Protestants
in the County of Armagh, some they burnt, some they slew by the sword, and some
they hanged, others they starved and put to death more cruelly.

37. They have hanged some by the heels, and then with their skeans cut them in
pieces

38. Some young Infants have been found in the field, Sucking the Breasts of
their murdered Mothers.

39. A great number of Protestants especially of women and children, they
haveslasht and mangled in many places of their bodies, and not killed outright,
but left them wallowing in their blood.

40. Denying to kill them outright, till two or three days after, and then they
would dash out their brains with stones.

51. A woman that leapt our of a window to save her self from burning was
murdered by the Rebels, and the next morning her child found sucking at her
breast which they also murdered.

42. The Rebels stabbed one Jane Addis, left her sucking child alive by her,
and putting the breast into its mouth said suck English bastard, so the child
perished for want, of which Act they bragged.

43. Many young Infants have been stifled in vaults and cellers, or starved in
caves which have cried to their mothers rather to send them out to dye by the
Rebels then to starve so miserably there.

44. Multitudes of men, women, and children were drowned, cast into ditches,
boggs, and turf-pits.

45. Many have been enclosed in their houses which have been set on fire and
burnt with their houses to ashes in a most miserable manner, and if any
attempted to escape they threw them into the fire again.

46. They have dragged out some from their sick beds to the place of execution.

47. In the parish of Loghgall to the river of Toll they forced children to
carry their aged parents out of their beds to drown them in that river.

48. They have enforced children to execute their parents, and wives their own
husbands by hanging and other ways.

49. The wife of Florence Fitz Patrick was outrageous with her husbands
soldiers because they brought not the grease of a Protestant woman whom they
had cruelly murdered for her to make candls withal.

50. The Irish men some of them detestnot the cruelty of those bloody queans
that follow their camp, that cry our spare neither man woman nor child.

51. They have boyld children to death in Cauldrons.

52. They hanged a woman and her daughter in the hair of her own head.

53. In a frosty night they stripped a woman big with child which presently after
fell in labor, and both child and she dyed at the instant.

54. The Rebels often utter threatenings out to cut off all that have a drop of
English blood in them, and their women cry out that the English are only meat
for dogs.

55. Near the Town of Monaghan, they most cruelly murdered one Mr. Foord in
his own Garden, most inhumanely tortured his wife, Laying hot Tongs to her
hands and feet (to make her tell where his money was) that with the pain
thereof she died.

56. They have most villanously ravished Virgins and women, and afterward have
bin so bloody and hard-harted, as to dash their childrens brains out.

Thus have you heard of some part of the miseries and tortures inflicted upon
the poor Protestants in Ireland, by the bloody Rebels; many more inhumane
murders they have committed, which I forbear for brevity sake: But such is the
care and wisdom of the Parliament to put an end to the bleeding miseries of
Ireland, that they have chosen that renowned, faithful, and valiant Commander
Major General SKIPPON to be Field-Marshal over their Forces, and Major General
MASSEY is chosen Lieutenant General of the horse, the Lord crown their
endeavors with victory over those inhumane blood-thirsty Rebels, that so dying
Ireland may yet live to praise him.

London, Printed for J. H. and are to be sold in Popes head Alley. 1647.


