A FVLL REPLY To certain brief Observations and Anti-Queries ON Master
PRYNNES twelve Questions about Church Government: Wherein the Frivolousnesse,
Falsenesse, and gross Mistakes of this Anonymous Answerer (ashamed of his
Name) and his weak grounds for Independency, and Separation, are modestly
discovered, refelled. By William Prynne of Lincolnes Inn, Esquire.

Socrates Scholasticus Eccles. Hist. l. 5. c. 20. Ecclesia cum semel esset
divisa, non una divisione acquievit, sed homines ab se mutuo aversi, al^er ab
altero denuo scesserunt; atque adeo EXIGVAM LEVICVLAMQVE OCCASIONEM nacti,
mutuae communionis consociationisque vincula disruperunt. Mark 9. 50. Have salt
in your selves, and have peace one with another. John 18. 37. To this end was I
born, and for this cause come I into the world, that I should bear witness
unto the truth. Gal. 4. 16. Am I therefore become your enemy, because I tell
you the truth? LONDON, Printed by F. L. for Michael Spark Senior, and are to
be sold at the Blew-Bible in Green-Arbour. 1644.

A full Reply to certain brief Observations and Anti-queries to Mr Prynnes
Twelve Questions about Church Government.
OF all the vanities and vexations of spirit, enumerated by the royal
Preacher, this is one of the principal, Eccles. 4. 4.
That for all travel, and every right work, a man is envied (yea, many times
hated, oppugned) by his neighbor. This has been always my condition
heretofore and now; my best actions and public services for the common good,
have been misconstrued, traduced, nay censured in an high degree, as evil, by
many; though (blessed be God) approved, yea gratefully accepted by the
best-affected to the felicity, tranquilliry of Church and State.

The importunity of some Reverend friends, lamenting the deplorable
distractions of our Church, which threaten disunion, and so ruin to us, in
these unhappy times of intestine wars, prevailed so far, as to induce me to
compile and publish Twelve considerable serious questions touching
Church Government; out of a cordial desire (as much as in me lay) to close up,
not widen our divisions. Which though they have given ample satisfaction to
many truly religious, of all ranks and qualities, who have returned me
special thanks; yet they have found very harsh entertainment from others, who
of Friends Gal. 4. 1^.
are become my professed Antagonists (if not enemies) in print, because I have
told them the truth: to whom I should have returned no Reply but silence (there
being naught in these Observations worthy answer) but only to rectify some
mistakes therein, and show the opposite party those common errors whereby they
deceive themselves and others.

The first thing this namelesse Respondent quarrels with, is Page 1. 2.
For my writing by may of Quere; To which I answer, that I had both Presidents
and Reasons for it.

Presidents, from our Savior himself, who both instructed, refuted, convinced
his opposites and auditors by demanding Questions only, Luke 2. 46, 47. Matthew.
11. 1, to 20. c. 12. 3, to 13. 26. 27. 29. c. 21. 23, to 43. c. 22. 18, to 23.
c. 16. 26. Presidents from Philosophers, Fathers, Schoolmen, and all sorts of
Writers, ancient* modern, over-tedious to recite.

Reasons: 1. I conceived the Questions touching church government were not
rightly stated by most; and that the right stating of them by way of Question,
would be the best and speediest means to decide them. 2. The Independent party
had neither then, nor since (to my knowledge) dogmatically resolved or
discovered in print, what that church government is they so eagerly contend
for, and pretend to be so plainly set down in the Word of God: and therefore I
conjectured such Queries to be the only means to discover and refute their
concealed Platform. 3. The controversies concerning church government, were
then and now in agitation in the Synod and high Court of Parliament, the
properest Judges of them; therefore I thought it better became me in point of
modesty and good manners, to express my opinion of them by way of Question,
then Decision. Finally, I found all Independents guilty of Petitio principii,
in their Writings, Sermons, Discourses, peremptorily concluding their form of
church government, to The Apologeticall Narration, Mr Sympson. A Reply of two
of the Brethren, with others.
be the only Government instituted by Christ, the ONLY WAY OF GOD, which has
more of God and Christ in it then any other; the Kingdom, Scepter, and Throne
of Christ himself, and no other way beside it; A Reply of two of the Brethren
to A. ^. p. 111.
That by the beauty and perfect consonancy of this Government with the Word of
God, it may very reasonably (yea, and upon higher terms then of reason) be
thought, THAT IN TIME IT CANNOT BUT OVERTHROW ALL SORTS OF ECCLESIASTICAL
GOVERNMENT, (and I fear civil too by the selfe-same-reason) AND STAND UP IT
SELF IN THEIR STEAD; which they close up with a, Faxit Deus and festinet: and,
that writing or disputing against this Government, or opposing it in any kind,
yea in thought, is no less then Master John Goodwins theomachia.
A FIGHTING AGAINST GOD, which will bring certain ruin on our Realm in
general, and all private, open opposers of it: yet not one of them (nor this
Respondent) has hitherto fully discovered to us, what this WAY or Government
is; nor produced any one Scripture or Reason to warrant these superlative
Encomiums of it, but we must take all they say as Gospel, upon their own bare
words, without examination or dispute: And therefore I proposed these, with 12
other subsequent Questions to them; to induce them to make good these
transcendent (that I say not arrogant) Positions touching their Way; since I
seriously profess before God, Angels, and men, that I could never yet discover
the least footsteps of it in Scripture, or Antiquity, nor defery this their
Pattern in the Mount, which no age till ours had ever the happiness to behold;
if it be worth the viewing, when unvailed by them to us.

Having thus given this Respondent the true grounds of my writing by way of
Question, I shall briefly answer all his material Observations and
Anti-queries upon my twelve Questions, pretermitting his Impertinencies.

1. To the first Question the Respondent gives no Answer at all to the things
demanded, but only misrecites the Question, without my limitations; and then
seems to refute, what himself propounds, not I: He should have demonstrated
by direct Scriptures, That Christ has prescribed one set immutable form of
Government to all Christian Nations, Churches in the World, from which none
must vary in the least degree, without sin, schism, or being no true
Churches of Christ, with whom good Christians may with safe conscience
communicate; that nothing herein is, or can be left free to humane prudence:
And then have positively delineated, exactly proved the model of this
pretended Government, Discipline, in every particle thereof, by Gospel-Texts,
so far as to satisfy men's erroneous judgments, consciences herein, that so
they might either submit thereto without dispute, or propound their objections
against the same. But in this maine point (whereon the hinge of the
controversy turns) the Respondent is wholly silent, and I shall expect his
answer ad Graecas Calendas. Only lest he might seem to say nothing, he
endeavors to prove, that there is a set form of Church Government prescribed
by Christ in the Gospel, not by direct Texts, but from pretended absurdities of
his own fancying, (for which he can produce no Text nor Reason) wherein he
has prevaricated, and shows himself absurd.

First, (writes he) if this were granted (that there is no such set form of
Church Government prescribed to all) the Gospel would be He should say ^^eer,
where the government is left arbitarry.
straiter then the Law, Christ more unfaithful then Moses. If we deny these
absurd consequences, you shall have these sound proofs of both subjoined; God
set a pattern to Exodus 25. 40 Heb. 8. 5.
Moses of a carnal Temple, (you mistake good Sir, it was a Tabernacle, and
that not carnal) which he charged him not to vary from in a tittle: (well, I
grant it, because you produce * two full Scriptures for it) Ergo, he has
prescribed a set pattern of Church Government and Discipline to all Christian
Nations, Churches in the new Testament, from which they must not vary in one
tittle. If he (or any other) can show me such a pattern as he contends for, so
clearly delineated to us in the new Testament, as that pattern of the
Tabernacle God showed Moses was in the old, and then produce as direct precepts
enjoining all Christians, Republikes, Churches, not to vary from it in one
tittle, as Moses had not to vary from his, I shall believe his sequel; till
then I shall deem it a true Independent argument, and as gross a Non-sequitur
as this, which necessarily follows upon the concession of it.

God showed and prescribed to Moses the express pattern or fashion of Aarons
and his Sons garments, ornaments, under the Law, Exodus 28. Ergo he has
likewise showed and prescribed the express pattern, fashion, and color, of
all Bishops, Presbyters, Ministers garments, ornaments under the Gospel, (most
likely in the Roman Ceremonial and Pontifical.) If the one consequence be
ridiculous, the other must needs be so.

But to quell this your principal Argument, First, the pattern in the mount
was meant only of the materials, form, vessels and utensils of the
Tabernacle, not of the Government and Discipline of the Jewish church;
therefore very impertinent to prove a settled Church Government, Discipline,
under the Gospel. Secondly, it was showed only to Moses, the temporal
Magistrate and chief Ruler of the Israelites; not to Aaron, or any private
Independent Priest or Synagogue of the Jews; yea Moses (not they) was to make,
or see all things made according to the pattern in the mount; Ergo (if there be
any consequence from this pattern) not the Independent Minister or
congregation, but Kings, chief temporal Magistrates, and Parliaments (the
supreme civil Powers, Councels, are likewise (under the Gospel) to prescribe
and set up such a church government as is agreeable to Gods Word: as Moses,
Joshua, David, Solomon, Hezekiah, Josiah, Nehemiah, and other godly Princes,
Governors, with their Parliaments or general Assemblies did under the Law:
And then what becomes of your Independent Ministers, Congregations claims to
this Sovereign temporal jurisdiction, (a part of Christ's Kingly office,
delegated only to Kings, and highest temporal powers) which was never
conferred on them? In fine, if there be any such express unalterable divine
pattern of church government under the Gospel, I pray inform me, why it was
not as punctually, as particularly described in the new Testament, as the form
of the Tabernacle, of its materials, with all the services, ornaments,
appurtenances of it, and of the Temple were under the Law? Nay, why was the
Tabernacle altered into a 2. Chron. c. (...)
Temple, different from it? and why did the second Ezra 3. 10. 12. Hag. ^ 3. to
10.
Temple vary from the first, and that in the self same Church and Nation? If
these were patterns of the church government under the Gospel, and yet varied,
altered successively in this manner; then by consequence the Government,
Discipline under the Gospel is variable, alterable too, and so not fixed, nor
immutable.

His second Argument, That Christ should neither be faithful as a husband,
head, nor King of his Church, if he should give others power to order it as
they pleased to their own civil Government, not setting down his own Laws
for them to walk by, is both a fallacy and absurdity. There is no man doubts
but that Christ in the Scriptures (which some of you refuse to hear read in
our Churches, though Exodus 24. 7. Deuteronomy. 31. 11. Josh. 8. 34. 2 Kings 23. 2. 2
Chro. 34. 30 Neh. 8 2, 3, etc c. 9. 3. c. 13. 1. Ier. 36. 6. to 24 Luke 4. 16.
Act. 13. 15, 27 c. 15. 21, 31. Col. 4. 16. 1 These. 5. 27.
public reading of them be Gods own ordinance) has prescribed to us all
necessary Rules and Laws both for our faith and lives, either in a general or
special manner; but that Christ has punctually and particularly set down any
exact unalterable form of church government, for all Christian Nations,
Churches to follow, under pain of being unfaithful in all the former respects;
and that the Independent Model alone is that very pattern (the only point in
question) remains on your part to make good. A man may be a faithful husband,
King, Master, Father, though he prescribe not distinct particular Laws, to
regulate each particular action of his Wife, Subjects, Servants, Children: 1
Cor. 14. 40
Let all things be done decently and in order, (a general rule for
church government) is sufficient to excuse Christ from these your presumptuous
reproaches* and regulate all particulars, though left indefinite.

His third Argument, that Rev. 11. 1, 2. we read of a Belike the Reed by which
he measured it was Independency.
measuring of the Temple; and Rev. 21. 1, 2. of the new Jerusalem coming down
from God out of heaven prepared as a bride adorned for her husband; Ergo there
is a settled divine church government universally prescribed to all Christians
in the new Testament; is no better a proof of this assertion, then the Angel
of the Church of Ephesus, is of our Prelates Lordly hierarchy jure divino. He
might as well, yea more properly have concluded thence, That the Altar was
measured as well as the Temple, Revelat. 11. 1. (referring only to the Ezech.
40. and 41.
Jewish not christian Church, which has no Rev. 21 22. 1 Cor. 9. 13, 14.
Temple nor Altar:) Ergo we ought to have an Altar, yea and one set form of
Altars in all christian Churches under the Gospel: which I hope you dare not
aver.

After these three Independent Arguments, Heb. 7. 13.
he pretends my third Quere contradicts the first, because I suppose a
church government may be consonant to Gods Word in the general, which is not
particularly prescribed in it: A pretty fancy! As if nothing could be consonant
to Gods Word, which is not particularized or verbally enjoined in it: Are not
our material churches, garments, temporal Magistrates, Majors, Corporations,
Parliaments, Courts of justice, Laws of all sorts, yea Festivals, Covenants,
monthly Fasts, etc. consonant to Gods Word, because not literally prescribed in
it? Are your private church-covenants, unmixt Communions (as you phrase them*)
erections of Independent congregations without the license of temporal
Magistrates, not consonant to the Word in your own opinions, though no where
extant in it? If not, then all your divine pretenses for them vanish and you
yield your cause: If yea, you must then recant this pretense of a
contradiction, till you are able to prove it better then yet you have done.

Having played the Logicians and contradictors part so well, he next betakes
himself to his Anti-queries to prove a set church-modell: which are three.

1. If no preseript form (of church government) in the Word, why not
Episcopacy (especially regulated and moderated) as well as Presbytery?

I answer, if you mean it of Lordly Episcopacy, there are abundant pregnant
Texts against it, to prove it opposite to Gods Word. If of moderated or
regulated Episcopacy, the same with Presbytery: if the Parliament by the Synods
advice unanimously establish it, as most consonant to the Scriptures, and most
agreeable to the civil Government, I shall readily submit unto it without
opposition, and why not you and all others?

2. If church government be suited to States, whether Politicians are not more
fit to consult about establishing it? Why is an Assembly of Divines called to
search the Word about it?

I answer, that my position is, That every church government ought to be
suitable to Gods Word, as likewise to the civil State; Therefore Politicians
and Statesmen are fit to be consulted with, to suit it best to the civil
State; and an Assembly of Divines, to square it likewise by and to the Word:
the true reason why in this our Realm, and all other Christian States (as I
can abundantly manifest if need be) Ecclesiastical Laws and forms of
government have ever been settled by Parliaments, with the advice of Synods,
Counsels, wherein Statesmen and Churchmen have jointly concurred in their
deliberations and votes, using both the Bible and the Law to settle it, and not
throwing either of them aside, as incompatible, as ignorant or lawless persons
deem them, but joining both together.

To his third Anti-quere I answer, That it is more reasonable the But very
unreasonable that Christ, the Church, State, Synod, Parliament, should be
subject to your dictates, not you to theirs.
State should be subject to Christ's rule, then Christ to its direction: But
this Quere is quite besides the Question, till you prove infallibly, That
Christ has prescribed a set unalterable divine government, to which all
churches, Nations, States, must necessarily conform; and clearly manifest what
this Government is in all its particulars. Till this be done the sole question
is, Whether christian Princes, Parliaments, States, Synods, under the Gospel,
have not a lawful power to prescribe Ecclesiastical Laws and forms of
Government, not repugnant to the Word, not to Christ himself, (as you pretend)
but to all particular churches, congregations, subjects under their respective
jurisdictions? and whether the whole representative Church and State of England
in Parliament, have not sufficient authority by Gods law to overruled and bind
all, or any particular members or congregations of it, as well as the major
part of an Independent congregation, power to This Rule holds firm in all
Church Assemblies, Synods, Parliaments, elections by suffrages whatsoever.
over-vote and rule the lesser part, and to order, yea bind any of their
particular members? A truth so clear, that no rational man good Christian or
Subject can deny it. As for the latter part of this Querie, That the Saints
think Christ is King alone over his Churches, and has not left them to
substitutes, and the politic considerations of men to be governed by; If he
means it only of matters of Faith, or of internal government over the souls
of men, it may pass as tolerable; but if he intends it of external
Ecclesiastical Government, Discipline, or order in the Church, or State as
Christian, he must renounce his Oath of Allegiance, his late Protestation,
National Vow and Covenant, and make Romans 13. 1, to 6. 1. Pet. 2. 13, 14. Tit.
3. 1. 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2, 3. to be Apocryphal; the Confessions of all Protestant
Churches heterodox; and deny christian Kings, Magistrates, and highest civil
powers, to be Christ's substitutes, Vicars, in point of Government, (to whom
Christ has delegated his Kingly power) as truly as Ministers are his deputies
in point of instruction, admonition, to whom he has bequeathed his
Prophetical office.

Quere, he first wilfully misrecites it, then infers Your party are most guilty
of it, who without discovery or proof of your New-way, will have us blindly to
submit unto it as the only way of Christ.
a blind obedience from it to all superiors commands, be they never so unjust
or contrary to Gods Word; whereas my Question speaks only of lawful decrees,
etc. consonant to Gods Word, and to the civil Laws, Government, and manners
of the people; to which every Christian in point of conscience is bound to
submit, (without any danger of blind obedience) by the express resolution of
Romans 13. 1, to 6. 1 Pet. 2. 14, 15. Tit. 3. 1. Ezra 7. 26. Josh. 1. 16, 17, 18.
Heb. 13. 17. If any man deny this verity, he must renounce not only his
Christianity, but his Allegiance and Humanity too. But suppose (says he) the
whole Parliament and Synod should err in commanding a Government that is
erroneous or untrue, must we then submit unto it? I answer, first, such an
oversight is not to be presumed before it be actually committed; and it is
neither 1 Cor. 13. 5, 7.
christian, charitable, nor any way of Christ, thus to prejudge their
resolutions. Secondly, if the Decrees or Government they establish be not
directly against Gods Word, nor pernicious to our souls, though not altogether
such as we could wish, yet we ought contentedly to submit unto it without
opposition: If contrary to the Word, we must then passively submit thereto for
the present, and expect a redress in Gods due time. But if it be such a
Government and Discipline, under which we may freely enjoy the sincere and
powerful preaching of the Word, the due administration of the Sacraments, and
all other Ordinances of God necessary for our salvation and edification, (as we
may doubtless do under a Presbytery, and that government our pious Parliament
intends to settle) we ought cordially and cheerfully to submit thereto; yea
thankfully to embrace and bless God for it, and can neither waiwardly oppugn
nor refuse submission to it, without arrogance, contumacy, and apparent
schism. As for his question concerning my own and fellow-brethrens
sufferings, (which we deem our Honor, not our Shame) I answer, that none of
us suffered for opposing, writing, or speaking against the Bishops legal
authority, or any ceremonies established in our Church by Act of Parliament;
but only against their pretended divine right to their Episcopal Lordly
power, diametrally contrary to Scripture, Fathers, Councels, the best
Protestant and Popish Authors, the 37. H. 8. c. 17. 1. E. 6. c. 1. 1. Eliz c.
1. See my Breviate against Bishops Encroachments, etc. The Vnbishoping of
Timothy and Titus. The Catalogue of authors in all ages concerning the parity
and identity of Bishops and Presbyters. The antipathy of the English Lordly
prelacy. The Quenchcoale, etc.
Statutes of our Realm; and against their Innovations in doctrine, discipline,
ceremonies, canons, etc. contrary to the Laws of the land, Articles, and
Homilies of our Church; as the Parliament has resolved, yea all our Books
demonstrate, and Dr Bastwicke in direct terms, in the Preface of his
Flagellum: And therefore it could be neither pride, arrogance, nor schism, but
mere conscience and duty in us, to oppose them in these their usurpations and
innovations only, contrary to the Laws of God and the Realm: If he and his
would contain themselves within these our bounds, our Church should enjoy more
peace, their persons more honor, then now they are likely to gain, by
opposing, prejudicating both the Parliaments and Synods proceedings, though
never so pious, conscientious, religious.

3. His pretended contradiction of the third Quere to the first, is formerly
answered; I shall only add, that things may be consonant to the general
Rules of Gods Word, though not precisely prescribed in it: Yea, Independent
Ladies and Gentlewomen, (and you I hope) will grant, that their different
fashions, habits, colors, attires, are all agreeable to Gods Word, (if modest)
and warranted by this general precept 1 Timothy 2. 9. Let women adorn themselves
in modest apparel, though not particularized in the Text: So may a
church government or Dress be consonant to Scripture, though not precisely
delineated or enjoined by it.

Independency examined, till it be disproved.

that Independency will overthrow all National Churches and Synods; Nota.
and the two Independent Brethren assure us in their Reply to A. S p. 111 that
in time it cannot but overthrow all other sorts of Ecclesiastical governments:
Is it not then a turbulent, dangerous, schismatic, unquiet (that I say not
insufferable) Government, by your own confessions, which will admit no equal
nor corrivall; nor yet any National Church, Synod, Parliament, Prince, or
temporal Magistrate, to exercise any, Ecclesiastical, Legislative, or
Magisteriall authority over any of their Conventicles, members, persons,
liberties, estates, much less their consciences, as they are Christians? Will
any Parliament, State, or Nation, (think you) suffer such a Government to take
root among them, which will un-King, un-Parliament, un-church, un-Nation them
altogether, and make each several congregation an absolute Monarchy, Church,
Republic, Nation, within it self, depending on, subordinate wholly to it
self, as if it and they were no part or members of the public? The Lord
preserve us from such a dividing and overturning Government. As for his
invectives against the Formality, Tyranny, and enslaving of men's judgments in
the Presbyteriall way, as inconsistent with spiritual liberty and State
privileges, they are mere groundless calumnies, to draw an odium on it,
(some of your male-contented party professing they would rather set up Lordly
Episcopacy, which they have abjured, then it) whereas these aspersions suit
better with your independent model, which is more rigid, uncharitable,
unsociable, Papal, tyrannical, Anti-monarchicall, Anti-synodicall, yea
Anti-parliamentall, (as I have elsewhere manifested) then any other
church government whatsoever. As for my pretended bitter expressions, they are
so suitable to the effects and real consequences of this New way, (as you
style it) that I could not express my self in other language, without injury
to the truth: and if any of my best Friends, who stood by me in my sufferings,
deem themselves injured or reproached by them, (as you pretend, though none of
them have yet complained to me) it is (I hope) only scandalum acceptum, non
datum; and I presume my Friends are so ingenuous, as not to be offended with me
for Lev. 19. 17 Gal. 4. 16. c. 2. 11. 14. Tit. 1. 13, 14. Rev. 3. 13. will
justify me herein.
reproving only their errors with ingenuous freedom, in which I manifest my
self their greatest Friend, because I neither spare not flatter them in their
mistakes: However, though I really honor all my Christian Friends, as well
Independent as Presbyteriall, (whom you most scandalously traduce as Episcopal
and time-servers heretofore) yet I prefer the Pro. 23. 23. Maxim ami^^
veritas.
truth of God, the peace, and safety of my Native, bleeding, dying Church and
Country, (now much endangered by our unhappy divisions) before all Friends or
earthly comforts whatsoever. As for your pretended unsubjection of Pre^byterian
Synods and Churches to the Parliament in settling Ecclesiastical matters, I
neither know nor plead for any such* and our present Assembly being both
appointed, directed by, and submitting all their determinations wholly to the
Parliament, (as they are obliged both by Orders, Protestation, Covenant, and
profess they ought to do) arms me sufficiently against any such improbable
untrue surmise.

Quere he returns no answer, but plainly yields, that there was never any
Independent Church in any age or Nation whatsoever, totally converted to the
christian faith, till this present; nor any one Author that maintained it, till
Mr Ainsworth (a Separatist) from whom the Apologists profess their dissent in
some things. As for any reverend godly persons who now contend for this new
Model, though I reverence their persons, judgments too in other things, yet I
cannot subscribe to them in this new dangerous By-path, which is not yet so
beaten as to deserve the name of Christ's Road-way. For the new supposed light*
discovered in these days, touching church government, if you mean it only of
your Independency, (which you borrowed from the Brownists, or Low Country
Anabaptists, the first inventors of this Government) I doubt when brought out
to the light, and examined by the word of light, it will for the most part
prove but twilight, if not darkness: If you mean it of any other light, that
is truly such, we bless God for it, and desire to walk brotherly and
unanimously in it.

that the Law of Nature, which instructs men to unite themselves into one
National State, or civil Government, does likewise teach them to join
themselves into, subject themselves unto one National Church, and to National
Synods, Parliaments, in point of church government; in which every particular
man has his Vote, though not in proper person, (since all cannot possibly
assemble) yet in their deputies, Knights, Burgesses, or selected Commissioners:
and though it be true that Christ has not given Magistrates such absolute
authority over men's consciences as bodies, (as you object) yet he has enjoined
us to be Romans 13. ^. 1 Pet. 2. 14.
subject to the higher powers, and to every lawful ordinance of man (not
repugnant to his Word) EVEN FOR CONSCIENCE SAKE, and THE LORDS SAKE too. For my
passage, That there is no example of gathering independeut congregations, not
of Infidels but of men already converted to, and settled in the Christian Faith,
unless derived from the private conventicles of Arrians, Novatians; Donatists,
and other Heretics, who yet were not independent among themthemselves; it is
not a bitter speech, (as you phrase it) but a true one, and only bitter to you
because undeniable: For as it was the Justinian Codicis. l. 1. tit. 8.
Socrates. scholast. Eccl. Inst. l 7 c. 5. l. 5. c. 4, 5, 15, 20, 21 23. l. 4.
c. 12, 13. l. 2. c. 33.
common practice of those seducing Heretics, Sectaries, to gather private
Conventicles of their own, and labor to draw other orthodox Christians from
their proper Ministers, to incorporate themselves into their private separated
congregations, as Historians inform us: So no such practice of alluring and
stealing away other Pastors sheep from their proper Shepherd, who first
coverted them to, and edified them in the faith and grace of Christ, can be
produced, but only in these Heretics and Sectaries, whose practice your
Independents imitate. * See 35. El^z c. 1.
As for those private conventicles (as he phraseth them) for which he says I
may bless God, that I was remembered in them with tears, when others durst not
name me; as I do really bless God for them, and those who remembered me
effectually in them, so I dare not style them Conventicles in an ill sense,
since not See 35. Eliz. c. 1. None are Conventiclers but Heretics or
Schismatickes, who wholly separate themselves from our public Assemblies
established by Law.
such by Law, being only lawful Assemblies of private Christians to seek unto
God by prayer and fasting upon extraordinary occasions, which all good
Christians cannot but approve: But all these meetings were far from being
then styled, reputed Independent Churches, or having any affinity with them; so
as they make nothing for his cause.

To the eighth Quere he gives a negative Answer, First in general, next in
particular to some instances. First he grants, that there was a National
Church (yea National assemblies, Parliaments, determining church-affaires,) of
the Jews, but these (says he) cannot be a pattern for its now, because the
covenant of the Gospel is not made with any one particular Nation, as with the
Jews, but to all Nations that embrace the Gospel, and believe in Christ; you
have no promise nor prophecy of any Nation to be holy to God but the Jews
Nation, when they shall be called again.

to walk in the ways of God, etc. but only 2 Chro. 15. 8, to 16. c. 34. 29,
to 33 8. 29 10. Ezra 10. 3. Neh. 9. 38. c. 10. 1. etc.
in the old Testament, and Church of the Israelites, and that no private
congregationall, but public National covenant, prescribed by the supreme
temporal Magistrate and Assembly, not by the Priests or private Synagogues;
yea the principal precepts, presidents for public or private fasts,
sanctifying the Sabbath, etc. you likewise derive from the old Testament and
that Church; why then should not their National Church be a pattern for us,
and you to imitate, as well as their National covenant, fasting,
sabbath-keeping; the Church of God being all one, (as it is a Church) both
under the old Testastament and new; and the pattern of it under the Law a
better pesident for the Church under the Gospel, (of which it was a type and
fore-tunner) then the pattern of the Tabernacle showed in the Mount (so
frequent in your Lips and Books) a president for your Independent Model, to
which it has no analogy. 2. This reason is most absurd and false, the Covenant
of the Gospel extending not only to particular persons, but to Psalm. ^.. 8, 9.
Psalm. 72. 8, to 18. Ps. 82. 8. Ps. 86. 9. Ps. 65 ^. Ps. 67. 2, 3. 4. 5. Isa. 2.
2, 3. c. 9. 22, 23. c. 11. 9, to 16. c. 54. 1, 2, 3. c. 60. 3. to 22. Mich: 4.
1. to 5 Mal. 1. 11. Zach. 8. 22. Act. 13. 46; 47 48. Matthew. 28. 19, 20. Mar.
14. 15. Romans 10. 18, 20. c. 11. 4. Isa. 62. to the end. 1 Pet. 2. 9. 10.
all Nations and people whatsoever, who are both prophesied and promised to
become Christ's own inheritance, possession, people, spouse, church, and to be
an HOLY NATION, A PECVLIAR PEOPLE etc. to the Lord, in infinite Texts both of
the old and new Testament, which I wonder the Respondent should either not see,
or forget, being ten thousand fold more clear and visible then his Independent
platform, which few or none can yet espy in Scripture, History, or Politiques.

2. He adds, that I cannot show any Nation, every member whereof is qualified
sufficiently to make up a church, which is Christ's body, unless I will take in
Drunkards, Whore-masters etc. to be members of a church, whereas the Word
says, they must be visible Saints, and this cannot be avoided in a National
church.

I answer that I dare not be wiser then my Master Christ who Informs me, that
there will, and must be always in the visible church on earth (be: it
National, parochial, presbyteriall, or congregationall) Matthew. 3. 12 c. 13.
24. to 52 c. 25. 32. 33.
goats among the sheep, chafe among the wheat (which must grow together till
the harvest, at the end of the world, to wit the day of judgment) and good fish
mixed with the bad in the churches Not. 2. I find a Joh. 6. 70, 71
Judas, a Devil, among the Apostles, many See Judges, Samuel, Kings
Chronicles, Nehemiah, Ezra, and all the Prophets.
gross sinners idolaters, and corruptions in the Jewish church; many abuses,
Epicures, Drunkards, Whoremasters, Libertines, unclean persons, and false
Teachers, in the churches of Galatia, Ephesus, Colosse, Pergamus, Smynna,
Thyatira, and Laodicea; yet the Scripture expressly styles them See Paul's and
John's, yea Christ's Epistles to them, Rev. 2, and 3. 1. Cor. 11. 13 to 34. c.
12. 12. 27.
the body and churches of Christ and rep^tes such, members (though corrupt
ones) of those Churches; who do not actually cease to be members when
excommunicated or suspended for a season, after they are baptized, and profess
the Christian faith: nor did any separate from these churches, though they had
some corruptions and evil members. For you therefore to separate from, and
unchurch such National or Parochial churches, which have such members in
them, is to unchurch all churches both in the old and new Testament and the
world it self, yea your own churches too. 3. The Scripture is express, Mat.
24. 14. 15. c. 26. 16. Luke 14. 23, etc. c. 13. 23, 24.
that many are called, but few chosen and saved; that all must be compelled to
come into the church, though they want the wedding garment: There never was,
nor shall be here on earth, any one visible church compacted wholly of real
elected Saints, without any mixture of Reprobates; such a church we shall meet
with only in heaven, I am sure you can gather none such on earth. 4. Are there
no corrupt or drunken members in your independent churches, but only real
visible Saints? are there no usurers, oppressors, corrupt dealers, covetous,
proud, malicious, uncharitable, censorious persons; no apparent hypocrites or
dissemblers? yea, are there not many sins and corruptions in the best, the
choicest of all your members; (who cannot depart away, or quite separate
themselves from their own bosom corruptions,) as there is and will be in the
best of men during their mortality? If your Independent congregations consist
of such members as these, of men subject to like passions, sins, infirmities
as others in Presbyteriall churches, what then is become of this your reason
and principal ground of Independency, or rather, Separation, or Brownism, its
ancient proper title? you may lay it up in Lavander for another world, but can
make no use of it in this, where you cannot so much as dream of a church of
real Saints, without any mixture of corruption.

3. For his answers to that of Acts 15. all ages, churches, till this present,
have held it both an express warrant and president for the lawfulness*,
usefulness of National and Provincial Synods to determine differences in
Religion, (which particular churches, persons cannot decide) and making
necessary Canons for church-affaires; neither can all his shifts elude it: To
his first and second reasons, or rather evasions I answer, it is clear by Act.
15. 2. that the church of Antiech it self could not decide the question, nor
Paul nor Barnabas satisfactorily determine it, so far as to quiet all
parties; and therefore they sent Delegates to the Apostles and Elders at
Hierusalom, there to decide it: None is so ignorant but knows, that there are
many controversies now on foot concerning doctrine, discipline, and
church government, which no particular congregations, (nay hardly an whole
Synod and Parliament together) are sufficient to settle and determine;
therefore there is a kind of necessity of National Synods as well as of
Parliaments, whence all ages, churches, have used them. To his third reason I
reply, that it is evident by express words verse. 2. 5. 6. 7. 10. 19. 20. 24.
that the principal end why the Apostles went up to Jerusalem, and why this
Synod assembled was not to prove the false Apostles liars, (as he assirmeth)
but to debate and consider THIS QVESTION AND MATTER, whether the Gentiles ought
to be circumcised? To his fourth, I say, that though this meeting was
occasional, yet it i^ a sufficient warrant for general meetings, which are
usually called, only upon special occasions of moment: In it there was a
general assembling of all the Apostles, Elders, and Brethren at Jerusalem,
(where there were then diverse particular congregations, as, our Assembly long
since resolved from Acts 2. 6. 41, 42. 46, 47. c. 4. 4. c. 5. 14 15, 16, 42. c.
6. 1, to 9. c. 8. 2, 3, 4. c. 11. 1, 2. c. 12. 12, 13. c. 21. 17, 18 23, 22.
which if Independents deny, then they must prove, that all the Apostles and
Elders at Jerusalem were Pastors but of one and the self-same individual
congregation; and then what becomes of their Independent churches, which have
no Apostle, and only one Pastor, but scarce any Elders in them) who upon this
special and some other public occasions met all together, and that not to
advise only, but determine and resolve, as is evident by verse. 6. to. 32. c.
16. 4. c. 21. 25. which compared with the Texts of the old Testament in the
Margin of my Quere, where we find frequent National general Assemblies,
Synods, or Parliaments (if I may so style them) among the Israelites
(prescribed, appointed by God, and no ways contradicted, revoked under the
Gospel) determining ^ Chro. 13. ^^ to 14. c. 28, and 29. 2 Chro. 5. 2, etc. c.
6, and 7. c. 15. 9, to 29 c. 17 7, 8, etc. c 20 3, 4. 5. c. 24. ^, to 16. c.
29. 3, to 36. c. 30. v. 31. c. 31. 29, to the end. c. 35. 1, to 19. Ezra and
Neh. throughout. Esth. 9. 17. to 32.
all Ecclesiastical controversies, settling, ordering all churchaffaires,
matters concerning the Arc, Temple, Sacrifices, Passover, Priests* National
covenants, Fasting-dayes, Festivalls, suppressions of Idolatry, false-Worship,
Relics of Idolatry, and the like; are an impregnable evidence of the
lawfulness of National Synods, Parliaments, Assemblies, in all Christian
Kingdoms, Republikes, upon the like occasions, and that they are endued with
equivalent authority; there being no one Text in the old or new Testament, nor
any shadow of reason, (but mere shifts or obstinacy of spirit against public
government, order, and authority) to control it. If any pretend they do it
only out of conscience, if they will but seriously gage their own deceitful
hearts, I fear their conscience will prove but wilfulness, having neither
precept, president, nor reason to direct it: So as I may truly retort his own
calumny against me on him and his, that his and their own name, will, or
opinion, is their only argument against this shining truth, which all ages,
Churches, have acknowledged, ratified, practiced, without the least dispute.

Quere, and arguments in it, he returns nothing worthy Reply, but upon this
Petitio principii, or begging of the thing disputed; that the Scripture and
Apostles have prescribed a set form of Government in all after ages for the
Churches of Christ, which he neither can, nor endeavors to prove; and that
Churches in the Apostles days were Independent, though doubtless all Churches
were then subject to the Apostles Laws, Orders, Edicts, Decisions, though no
immediate Ministers or Pastors of them, (as appears by their Epistles to them)
therefore not Independent: so as my arguments hold firm, and his answers weak.
As for his retorted argument; That the Scriptures were writ in the infancy of
the Church: Therefore wiser and better Scriptures may be writ now; it is a
blasphemous and absurd conclusion, they being all writ by the spirit and
inspiration of God himself, the very Dan. 7 9, 13 ^^.
Ancient of days, who has neither infancy nor perfection, as the Church has.

To his second, that I would needs make a National Church, State, more
perfect, understanding, and wise, th^n a congregationall: I fear not to aver
it, since your selves must grant, that the Church under the Law was more
perfect then that before it; the Church under the Gospel more perfect then that
under the Law; and the Churches under the Gospel, at the end of the Apostles
days, when furnished with more divine knowledge, Scriptures, Gospels,
Officers, and rules of Faith, Manners, Discipline, more complete and perfect
then at their beginning to preach: No man doubts, that though a 1 Cor. 13, 11,
12. c. 14. 20. c. 3. 1. 1 Pet. 2. 2. Heb. 5. 12, 13, 14. 1 Ioh. 2. 11. to 15.
Ephesians. 4. 15. 16
newborn infant and Christian have all the parts and members of a man and
Saint, yet they have not so much perfection, understanding, knowledge, judgment,
strength of grace, or spiritual wisdom, as grown men and Christians. An aged,
expetienced, grown Minister; Christian, is more complete and perfect theu a
new converted 1 Timothy 3 6.
Novice, or Babe in grace; Ergo a grown and National Church, then one but in
the Embryo. Your Independent Churches, in their primitive infancy, when they
had but two or three members only in them, and wanted both Elders, Deacons,
and other necessary church officers (as Mr. Sympsons church first did) I am
certain in your own opinion were not so complete and mature as you intended to
make them afterward by degrees: a Village is not so complete a Republike or
Corporation as a City, nor a City as a Ezekiel. 16. 13
Kingdom, nor a Family as a County, nor a Consistory as a Synod, nor a court of
Aldermen as a common council, nor that as a Parliament: Therefore an
Independent singular congregation not so complete as a National church, being
often enforced to pray in the aid of other churches for advice, assistance etc.
(as your selves confess) which an whole National Church need not to do. In
fine, himself confesses, that the Apostles made new rules for government and
discipline as occasion served; and that as God fitted occasions, so he made
known new rules successively by degrees, not at once; and added new Officers,
as Evangelicall Bishops, Elders, Deacons, Widows, Evangelists, Doctors,
Pastors, Teachers (which some distinguish from Presbyters, and define to be
several offices:) Therefore the infant Church in the Apostles days was not so
complete, perfect in all parts, as the multiplied and grown churches
afterward.

Quere he wilfully misrecites, as he does the rest; else he had not the least
shadow of exception against it, as I propounded it, and then returns an answer
by way of dilemma to it: To which I reply, That if the Parliament and Synod
shall by public consent establish a Presbyteriall church government, as most
consonant to Gods Word, the Laws and Reiglement of this Kingdom, Independents
and all others are bound in conscience to submit unto it, under pain of
obstinacy, singularity, etc. in case they cannot really prove it diametrally
contrary to the Scriptures, and simply unlawful in point of conscience, not by
fancies, or remote inconsequences, but by direct Texts and precepts, (which
they can never do;) and that because it is thus commanded, established by the
higher powers, to which in all lawful or indifferent things we are bound to
render all cheerful obedience, without resistance, even for conscience sake,
by express Gospel Texts, Romans 13. 1, to 7. Tit. 3. 1. 1 Pet. 2. 14, 15. which
I wish you would practice better, and make make more conscience of then now you
do. As for his cross Interrogatories, I answer, 1. That if the Popes Councels
command lawful things to those who are subject to their power they are as well
to be obeyed as the commands of Rom 13. 1, to 7. 1 Timothy 2 1, 2, 3. Tit. 3. 1 1
Pet. 1. 2. to 24 c. 3. 1. 1 Cor. 7. 1, to 18. Ephesians. 5. 22. 23. c. 6 1. to 10
Col. 3. 18, to 25.
heathen Emperors, Magistrates, Parents, Husbands, by Christian Subjects,
Wives, Servants, living under them are. 2. That there is a great difference
between matters of opinion only, and of practice; That his instanced points,
Whether Lordly Episcopacy be jure divino; or their making out Process under
their own Names and Seals be agreeable to the Law of the Land, are matters
only of opinion simply in themselves; and if a Synod and Parliament should
have determined the first, and the Judges resolved the last, affirmatively,
their resolutions could not bind my judgment absolutely, so far as to
subscribe their opinions as undoubted truths, unless they could satisfy my
arguments and authorities to the contrary; but yet they should and ought to
bind me for the present so far as to submit to their authority and Process in
their own names in things within their legal cognizance: So if the Parliament
and Assembly shall establish any Churchgovernment, as most agreeable to the
Scriptures and our Laws, though this binds not all Independents to be simply
of their opinion, unless the reasons and arguments produced for it be
sufficient to convince their judgments, yet it binds them in point of practice
and obedience, outwardly to submit thereto, and not to separate from it, under
pain of arrogance, faction, schism, unless they can clearly manifest it to be
absolutely unlawful and repugnant to the Scripture. As for my own objected
challenge to the Bishops and Judges* about the jus divinum of Lordly Prelacy,
and Bishops Process in their own names; when I made it I was certain I had
both See my Catalogue, etc. The unbishoping of Timothy and Titus. A Breviate,
and Antipathy of the English Lordly Prelacy.
Scripture, Fathers, Councels Acts of Parliament, the suffrages of all
foreign Reformed Churches, Writers, and our own learnedest Bishops, Authors
in all times against the first; and direct Acts, Resolutions of Parliament,
Patents, unanswerable Law-authorities, and Reasons against the latter:
Therefore a few Lordly Prelates opinions in their own case or the subitane,
forced, extrajudiciall resolution of the Judges (not then published) could no
more conclude my judgment, nor make me guilty of arrogance, obstinacy, or
schism then, than their forced judgments for the lawfulness of Loanes and
Ship Money, against express Acts and judgments of Parliament, oblige me or
others, then or now, not to deem that tax illegal: and when you can produce
as many good authorities, Reasons from Scripture, Antiquity, Acts of
Parliament, Writers of all sorts, against the lawfulness of Presbytery, as I
have done against Lordly Episcopacy by divine right Bishops making out Process
under their own Names, Seals and See my humble Remonstrance against Shipmoney.
Ship-mony, neither of which were ever settled by any former Parliament, and
have all bin expressly voted against in this: I shall then excuse you from
arrogance and schism, but till this be done, (as I presume it will never be)
the guilt of both these will stick fast upon you, if you readily conform not in
outward practice to that Government the Parliament shall establish. If they
should settle Independency, I am certain you would then write and preach for
universal obedience to it, (which you now publicly call for so eagerly
without authority or proof of its Divinity, because thus settled) without
dispute: therefore by like reason you ought to submit to a Presbytery, or such
other Government as shall be resolved on by those Entrusted with this care.

Quere he gives only a negative answer and then declaims against Presbytery
without ground or reason: But because I have proved the truth of what he denies
in my Independency examined and in some following pages, I shall not trouble you
with any further proof, except these two particulars: 1. That Independency is
in reality mere Separation and Brownism, lately christened with this new title,
to take off its odium: and if so, I doubt not but it is a nursery of schisms,
Sectaries, etc. 2. That we find by woeful experience, what bloody divisions,
wars, schisms, the toleration but of one Religion and Sect in our Realms
contrary to that established, (to wit Popery and Pupists) has produced in all
our Dominions, to their imminent danger, and almost utter ruin; what then will
the free permission of many Independent different forms of Churches, Sectaries
do? will it not produce many more troubles, dangers, wars, schisms, then we
have hitherto felt? Yea, if every man ought to have freedom of conscience, to
vent what opinions, and set up what Governments he deems most conformable to
the Word in his own private fantie, you must indulge Papists this liberty as
well as others: and then how soon will they overrun us for the future, how
justly can we take up arms to suppress them for the present? Consider
seriously of those and other publike-mischiefes of your way, and that liberty
of conscience you so much contest for, (which in truth is nothing but mere
lawlesnesse, or licentiousness, to do Deuteronomy. 12. 8. Judges 17. 6. 1. 21. 25.
what seems good in your own eyes, as if there was no King in Israel, without
respect to the public peace or weal) and then happily you may in time
discern, recant your error.

Quere he only answers, that I fall a jeering of my brethren, (a palpable
untruth) and that I put a nickname on them, to make them odious; to wit, the
title of Independents, which they disclaim* not answering one syllable to the
substance of the Question. To which I reply: First, that the title of
Independency (of which you are now ashamed) was at first assumed, approved by
your selves, and many of your party do still own, though some disclaim it, of
purpose to evade the titles of Separatists and Brownists, with whom you really
concur in practice: Besides, you very well know that this title was imposed
on, and owned by you long before I writ; therefore I could not father this brat
upon you: But if you be offended with this name, I desire you in your next
Pamphlet to discover to us your own Christian name, with the true title of
your party, and the government you plead for as the only way of Christ's
institution (all which you have hitherto concealed) and then (God willing) I
shall give you a further answer to this cavil, or retract this title; till
then I must inform you that it most proper for your party, who will have every
of your own private congregations, a complete absolute corporation, exempted
from; unsubjected to independent on any other, be it a National Synodall,
Provincial, Parochial assembly, Parliament or Kings themselves in any
Church-affaires: You must therefore still retain this Title, while^ you
maintain such Paradoxes both in opinion and practice as justly appropriate it
to you, Convenient rebus nomina saepe suis, being never more exactly verified
then in this your suitable name.

But you object, first, That you are accountable for your actions to every
neighbor Church, that shall in the name of Christ require it. Secondly, That
you stand not independent from, but hold communion with all other Churches,
both in the Ordinances, and in asking counsel and advice mutually.

To the first I answer, 1. That if you are accountable for your actions to
every particular neighbor Church, then why not much more to a Synod or
Parliament, whose ecclesiastical jurisdiction over you or your Churches is
denied by you? Secondly, if you are thus accountable to every neighbor Church,
do you intend it of Parochial, Episcopal, or Presbyteriall Churches, as well
as Independent; or of Independent only? If of Independent only, as I suppose
you do, then you appeal only to Churches of your own party, frame,
judgment, and make one of them subordinate, accountable to another, but not to
any other Church; which is an apparent schism, separation from all other
Churches, and contradicts your second objection: If of all other sorts of
Churches as well as Independent, you must either grant them true Churches of
Christ, and then you have no ground to sever from them; or if false, or no true
Churches of Christ, (as you in truth repute them) then by your own principles
they are no competent Judges of Ecclesiastical affairs, nor you accountable
to them. Thirdly* How (I pray) do you hold your selves accountable to every
neighbor Church? by way of subordination, or correction? that I am certain you
will deny: or only by way of voluntary information and satisfaction, when
required, which I conceive you mean? If so only, then this is properly no
account at all* or but arbitrary at most, which you may deny if you please; and
if you err or prove faulty, this neighbor Church can but admonish, not
enforce you to correct your errors or injustice: and so this will prove but a
mere mockery in stead of an account.

To the second I answer, That if you stand not Independent from other Churches,
but hold communion with them in Ordinances, and in mutual counsel and advice,
Then 1. why do you separate from them as no true Churches, and oppose their
way of Government with so much bitterness? Secondly, why do you refuse to
administer Baptism and the Lords Supper to those who are their members, in
your Churches, unless they be professed members of some Independent
Congregation? Thirdly, why do you not follow their advice, counsel, or the
Parliaments, Synodes, and submit thereto; who now earnestly dissuade you from
your way of separation, division, in these distracted times? the end of
demanding good counsel and advice being but to follow, not reject it, where
there is humility, ingenuity, or sincerity in those who ask it. You must
therefore either disclaim these objected concessions, or become more tractable
for the future. 4. You tell us in the next succeeding lines, That neither I,
nor Synods, nor this Synod, are infallible, but as subject to errors as
others; and that never Yea, never more dangerous errors refuted, suppressed,
then in the 4. first general Councels, and some Synods since, as that of Dort,
and other Protestant Synods in the Harmony of Confessions: Where therefore they
determine rightly, you must submit unto them; where they confirm apparent
dangerous errors, there you may vary from them when proved such.
more dangerous errors have been confirmed then by Synods: and therefore men
are not bound in conscience to their decrees upon penalty of sin, arrogance,
etc. But pray Sir may not you and your Independent Ministers Churches err as
well as others? Is infallibility annexed only to your private Chaires,
conventicles? If not, then why may not your new-minted Way be a mere erroneous
By-path, and no way of Christ as well as other ways, and you err herein as
well as Synods in other things? Why will you have the major vote in your
congregationall decisions to overruled and bind the rest to obedience; (as your
practice and opinions intimate) since the major part may possibly be mistaken,
as well as the less dissenting? Shall nothing bind in any Churches, but what
is unanimously voted nemine contradicente? or shall one or two dissenting
voices overruled the rest, or not be bound by the most? or where all consent
may not all yet be in an error, and not discern it* through self-love to
their own ways and opinions, till others of contrary judgments discover and
convince them of their error? Away then with this fond argument and evasion;
Synods and Parliaments may err in some things, Ergo they must bind us in no
thing: Is this good Logic or Divinity? Good Ministers may and do err
sometimes in some points of Divinity, Ergo we will believe them in none, no
not in those things in which they do not err. Will you throw away all the
Apple because^ one part of it only is rotten? or reject Communion with the best
of men because they have some infirmities? Deal then with the Ecclesiastical
decrees of Synods and Parliaments as in wisdom, in conscience you are bound to
do: Where they are just, equal, not opposite to the word, embrace, submit
unto them; when erroneous or contrariant to the express word (not to your own
fancies, inferences or opinions) you may differ from them in judgment, but you
must patiently suffer under them in point of practice and obedience (if merely
practical) till a further season, and not disturb the Churches peace by
opposition or schism: which is as good, as seasonable Christian advice, as that
you conclude with unto me, which I heartily wish your self had first followed*
who have more defamed the ways of Christ and u^ed more personal unchristian
betternesse then I am guilty of. You wish indeed, O that a spirit of love were
maintained among those that are brethren: though they differ in judgment* must
they needs differ in affection? I say the same. But O then why separate you
from us, yea pass uncharitable censures on us as if we were not your Brethren?
One Kingdom, one City, House, does now, one heaven shall heareafter contain us
both: why not then one church government, one Church Militant, as well as one
Triumphant? If you deem not your Th^^e are the true grounds of all s^parations.
Esa 65. 5. Luke 18. 10, to 16. Jude 18. 19. witnesses the Novatians, Donatists,
of old: The several orders of Monks, Nuns* Eremites, Anchorites, in the Church
of Rome, and their new order of Jesuits, ^^th of them pret^nding; more sanctity
and strictness then anoth^r, and so severing in their different orders,
habits, Monasteries, rules, covenants, one from another.
selves more holy then your brethren, or be not swelled up with spiritual
pride (as your stiling your selves Mr. Good^^ns Theomachia p 24, 25. The Reply
of two of the Brethren passion.
Men of rich anointing from God, the most religiously affected, and best
conscienced people of the land, the most precious men, etc. with your
separation from us, and harsh censures of us, make most men suspect) then why
refuse you to close with us now, as you have done heretofore? Could our
Ministers, Churches, when more corrupt, convert, regenerate. edify, save you,
and yet not now so much as hold you, when more refined and reformed? If yea,
then let us both shake hands without any more encounters; if nay, then fairly*
chalk out your yet concealed independent way and platform in all its several
lineaments, and beautiful native colors; produce your several punctual
Scriptures, Arguments, to maintain it, (there being none of them extant in
these your Observations for ought I can find) that so I may see the frame and
grounds of this new Fabric, in as large or narrow a Model as you please: and
then doubt not but an Answer shall be given to what ever you modestly set
forth, (if worthy answer) in case it be not satisfactorie; or else a friendly
embrace thereof, if agreeable to the Spirit and Word of truth, by him who has
learned Paul's peremptory resolution, 2 Cor. 13. 8. We can do nothing against
the truth, but for the truth; in which resolution (God assisting) I resolve to
live and die.

Certain brief Animadversions on Mr John Goodwins Theomachia, in
Justification of some passages in My Independency, Examined, Unmasked etc. and
of the Parliaments Ecclesiastical power.
IT is not my intention to repeat or refute all the unseasonable offensive
passages in the Epistle or Body of this Treatise, which ^^citly reflect upon
the present Religious Parliament and Assembly, raising needless feats and
jealousies of them both ( in matters of RELIGION and Church Government) as if
they really intended Epistle to the Reader, and p. g. 11. 33. 4^. to 52.
to increase our misery and bondage, by rejecting and oppressing truth; to
conjure all men's gifts, parts industry into a Synodicall Circle; and that
there is almost as little hope of gathering grapes from thorns, or figs of
Thistles, as of having the joy of our faith helped, or increased, or any
decrease, but rather increase of evils by them; the resolutions of Counsels,
and Synods themselves upon the matter and just account, being but the fruits,
or puttings forth of the learning and judgment of a very few men, not always
of the most conscientious etc. I shall only select some few particulars worthy
consideration; to fill up my vacant Pages.

First, it may be justly questioned, whether the maine doctrine prosecuted in
it Page 18. 22. 52. and else*
That it is the greatest imprudence under Heaven, for any man or rank of men
whatsoever to appear, or so much as to list up an hand, or thought, against
any way, doctrine or practice whatsoever clayming origination or descent from
God, till we have security upon security, evidence upon evidence, yea all the
security that men in an ordinary way are capable of, Gamaliell Himself no
Apostle, nor Christian, from whose words you yet take your text as Gospel, was
not altogether of this opinion.
and foundations as clear as the noone day, that such ways, Doctrines and
practices, only pretend unto God as the Author of them and that in truth they
are not at all from him, but either from men, or from baser Parentage; that
they are but counterseits and pretenders only, and stand in no relation at all,
but that of emnitie and opposition unto God; and that we are not to act the
value of one hair of our head against them, until we see their condemnation
written with a beam of the Sun by the finger of God Himself; until he has
disclaimed or renounced it from Heaven, either by giving such wisdom unto
men, whereby to detest the vanity of it, or else has quite rased it out of
the flesh and Tables of the hearts of his servants, etc. Be Orthodox or
tolerable? For these ensuing reasons.

First, because it opens a wide gate to the reviving of all old, the spreading
and propagating of all new Heresies, Errors, Schisms, Sects, and opinions
whatsoever, without the least timely opposition or prevention, to the
endangering of infinite souls, and disturbance of the Churches, Kingdoms
peace. For there is See Epiphanius, Basil, Augustine, and all the Books of or
against any Heretics and Sectaries.
no Heretic, Schismaticke, or Sectary whatsoever (though never so pernicious,
gross or detestable) but pretends his way, doctrine, practice, opinions to be
the way and truth of Christ, clayming their origination and descent from God,
yea, Matthew. 4 6.
producing perverting the Scripture it self to justify them, as the Mat. 24.
11. 23. to^ 27. c. 7. 15. 2 Cor. 11 13. 14, 15. Ephesians. 4. 14. 2 These. 2. 9. 10.
Rev. 13. 2. to 18. 2 Ioh 10. 11.
Devil cited and wrested Scripture to tempr Christ: yea, our Savior and the
Scripture inform us, that many false Teachers shall arise, and do great
Miracles, Signs and Wonders, insomuch that they shall deceive many, yea the
greatest part of the World, and if it were possible the very Elect; * That
Satan and his Ministers also transform themselves into Angels of Light: That
false Teachers usually come to seduce men in sheeps clothing, with all
deceiveablenes and crafiines, whereby they lie in wait to deceive; and advise
us frequently to beware of such, and not admit them into our houses, etc. And
must we therefore not speedly oppose, resist, avoid, suppress them or any of
them now, because they thus pretend they are of and from God Himself; but stay
till we see their condemnation written with a beam of the sun by the finger of
God himself, and till he has disclaimed, renounced them from Heaven, by some
visible judgment or destruction? If Arrianisme, Pelagianisme, Socinianism,
Anahaptisme, or any anciently exploded Heresies, or Schisms should revive and
sprout up among us (as some have lately done) should we use such indulgence as
this toward them, because they pretend their origination and descent from
heaven; and their opinions not disputable only, but warranted by the Scripture?
Alas what confusion, what inundation of heresies, schisms, and monstrous
opinions would this presently introduce into our Church to its destruction,
ruin, if such a Paradox were once admitted?

Secondly, Because it is contrary to these express precepts and presidents
both of the Old and New Testament, which you may peruse at leisure, Deuteronomy. 13.
1. to 18. Levit. 19. 17. Joshua. 22. 9. to 24. Psalm. 119. 104. 128. 2 Kings.
22. 8. to 27. Ier. 4. 30. 31. (a pregnant place) c. 14. 14. to 18. cap. 23. 13.
to 23. cap 27. 15. to 19. c. 29. 8, 9. Ezra. 13. throughout Matthew 7. 15. cap.
24. 11. 23. 24. 25. 26. Mark, 13. 5, 6. 22, 23, 24. Acts 13. 6. to 14. cap 15.
1. to 33. cap. 17. 11. Romans 16. 17. 18. 2 Cor. 11. 13. 14, 15. Galath. 1. 6. 7.
8, 9. 10. c. 2. 4. to 18. (a noted place) c. 3. 1, 2. 3. Ephesians. 4. 14, 15.
Phil. 3. 1. 2. 3. Coloss. 2. 8. 18. to the end 1 These. 5. 21. 2 These. 2. 1. to
16. c. 3. 6. 7. 1 Timothy 4. 1. to 7. chap. 1. 20. chap. 5. 20. 21, 22. 2 Timothy 2.
16. 17, 18. 23, 24, 25, 26. c. 4. 1. to 6. Titus. 1. 9. to 15. chapter 3. 9.
10, 11. 2 Pet. 2. 1. 2, 3. c. 3. 17. 18. 1 Ioh. 4. 2. 3. 2 John 10. 11. Jude 3.
4. etc. Revel. 2. 14. 15. 20. 21. compated together. Gal. 2. 4. to 1^
Paul would not give way to false Apostles NO NOT FOR AN HOUR, that the truth
of the Gospel might continue among the Galatians, and resisted Peter to his
face, at soon as ever he walked disorderly, and gave the least countenance to
false Teachers, though a chief Apostle; and did not demur upon the matter; yea
the Churches Romans 19. 15. 16, 26.
of Porgamus, and Thyatyra, are sharply blamed for suffering some among them to
hold the doctrine of Balaans, and the Nicolaitans; and to suffer Jesabell the
Prophetess to teach and seduce: And shall we permit them, now, without
restraint?

Divinity, Policy, and Morality. Principijs obstare: Venienti occurrere
morbo, to withstand the very beginnings of Errors, Heresies, Mischiefs;
Schisms: to crush these Cockatrices in the shell; rather to keep then cast
them out, Turpius ejicitur quam non admittitur hostis. All wise men hold
preventing Physic best for their bodies, states, and why not for their souls
and Churches? since, Sero medicina paratur, cum mala per longas invaluere moras.

contrary to the Sea Justinian Cod. l. 1. Tit. 8. 1. Eliz. c. 2. 35. Eliz. c.
1. 2.
Policy practice of most Godly Magistrates, Princes Ministers, Churches in all
Ages, Nations, which never indulged such liberty to opinions, new ways,
practices, especially to new Church-governments, Schisms, and Conventicles,
(which he here pleads for) set up only by private spirits in opposition to the
public established Church-regelment. Indeed in some matters mearly of opinion
which are not dangerous or schismatic, some latitude may and must be left to
men; but matters of Government are such tender things, as differences and
varieties therein cannot be tolerated in one and the self same Church and
State without infinite inconveniences and disturbances, especially where every
Church shall be Independent, subject to no other Canons, rules, but its own
peculiar arbitrary Dictates.

Independent way he there so earnestly pleads for, be the way of Christ, or
not? since he neither discovers to us what it is, nor produces any one text to
prove it Christ's own way, nor one example to warrant it in any age: but gives
us good grounds to suspect it none of his without much scrutiny.

1 For first, he comeneth, Page 21. 1
that this way is every where spoken against, even by some that would be
thought prime men and pillars in the temple of God; and insinuates; that the
Parliament, Assembly and generality of the Sea the London Ministers Petition
against it.
Ministers and people of the Realm, are bent against it; Therefore being a new
way, never yet heard off in the world in any age, or Church of Christ, and thus
generally opposed by our whole Church and State even in these times of
Reformation; we may See 1 Cor. 21. 26. ^ 10. 32, 33.
justly suspect it is no way of Christ, till we see its approbation written in
a beam of the Sun with the finger of God himself, and till he has justified
and owned it as his, from heaven.

2 He tacitly acknowledges it a See p. 30. to 52.
Government set up by a few private men, not only without but against the
authority and commands of the Parliament and supreme temporal Magistrates:
yea, which not only denies but oppugnes the temporal Magistrates, Parliaments,
Synods directions or coercive power in Ecclesiastical affairs; directly
contrary to the Scriptures, as I have largely proved by many Texts, in my p. 3,
4. 11. 12.
Independency examined. Only I shall add, that not only the Kings and
temporal Magistrates of the Israelites; but even heathen Ezra 1. 1. to the
end. c. 4. 17. to 24. ^. 6. 2. to 17. c. 7. 12. to 28. Neh 2. 1. to ^7. 2 Chronicles. 36. 22, 23. Isay 44. 28. Dan. 3. 29. c. 6. 25, 26, 27. Jonah 3. 5, 6, 7.
Kings and Princes (as Cyrus, Artaxerxes, Darius, Nebuchadnezzars the King and
Nobles of Nineve etc.) enacted good and wholesome Laws, for the worship, honor
and service of the true God, and to further his people in the building of his
temple; who thereupon were enjoined to * pray for their prosperity, as the
marginall Scriptures evidence. Yea, Acts, 24, etc. (...). and 26, and 27, 28. 2 Timothy 4. 10. 17.
Paul himself even in matters of Religion pleaded his cause before Festus,
Felix, King Agrippa, and at last appealed unto Caesar an heathen Emperor,
herein; yea he enjoins all Christians ^ Tim. 2. 1, 2. 3. Romans 13. 1. to 7. Tit.
3. 1
to pray even for heathen Kings, Magistrates, and to submit to all their
lawful commands for conscience sake, to whose judicature and tribunals, Matt.
10. 17, 18. 21. c. 26, 27.
Christ himself and his Apostles willingly submitted themselves upon all
occasions when brought before them, q Tim. 2. 1, Jer. 19. 7.
without demurring to their jurisdictions. Therefore Christian Princes and
Magistrates, who were long since predicted to become nursing Fathers to the
Church under the Gospel, have much more power and jurisdiction in
Church Government and affairs within their own Dominions.

3 For that it appears to be away that will breed infinite confusions,
disorders, by confounding Page 38. to 40.
the bounds of parishes renting Congregations, families, and most relations
assunder; and giving way to every sect to choose Ministers, erect Churches of
their own. without control, in point of position (though their practice be
quite contrary where they have power, they admitting no other kind of
government but Independency in New England, and excommunicating or banishing
those who will not submit unto it:) Amos 13. 9. a. 15. Acts 4. 1. to 24. c. 5.
17. to 4. c. 6. 12, 13. c. 9. 1, 2. 3. c. 11. 2, ^, 4. c. 16. 10. to 40. c. 18.
12.
a government inconsistent with Royalty, and the civil government; and so none
of Christ's who never erected any Church-gouernment to clash with or control
the civil.

4 Whereas he pretends, that Page 30. 31
persons of one family or parish may be members of several Churches without
any inconvenience schism, or distraction; as well as members of several
companies and trades; and therefore Ind-pendency is no occasion of divisions.

I answer 1, That Amos 3. 3.
two cannot walk peaceably and-lovingly together unless they are agreed,
especially in matters of Religion; and those who in point of conscience cannot
communicate or agree together in one Church, will never questionless accord
well together in one family, bed, parish, kingdom, as experience manifests.

2 There is a great difference between several trades and Halls in one City
parish, kingdom and several forms of Church Government, in these particulars
which occasion unity in the one but schisms in the others 1. All trades
societies hold one another lawful, useful, necessary, agreeable to the laws
of God and the Realm without dispute; and so they breed no contrariety of
opinions or disaffection: but each different Church deems the other unlawful,
and in no way of Christ so as they cannot with safe conscience join or
communicate together; and thereupon they fever one from another. 2. Every
several trade and society, even in their very trade is subject to the general
Government, Laws of the City and Realm wherein they are to which they appeal
and have recourse upon all occasions of difference, none craving an exemption
or Independency from the whole Corporation, Parliament or supreme Magistrate in
matters which concern their government, but deriving their Corporations
Charters, Laws and privileges from them: which subordination keep: them all in
peace and unity. But Independent Churches deny any subordination, subjection to
the Ecclesiastical Laws and Edicts of Parlements, of temporal Magistrates or
Synods, and will be regulated, obliged only by their own peculiar Edicts:
which must needs occasion infinite Schisms and disorders: therefore the cases
are far different from one the other.

Thirdly, Christians, as Christians, are all of one and the self-same society
and profession, as those of one Trade or Calling are; therefore they should
have all but one common Church and government, as these Trades have: To set
then the comparison upright, we must state it thus; If some of one Fraternity
in London (suppose the Merchant-taylers, Sadlers, Mercers, or the like) should
fall out among themselves, and one would have one form of government, another
another, and thereupon divide themselves into several conventicles and petty
meetings in corners, not at their common hall, and one choose one Government,
Master, or Warden, another another, and so sever the company, and continue
independent; this (no doubt) would prove an apparent schism, and seminary of
infinite divisions, to the distraction, destruction of the whole Company and
Fraternity. This is the true state of your Independency; yea Mr Goodwins
present case in his own Parish, miserably divided, disordered by his
Independent way: which has induced him to refuse to administer the Lords
Supper, (yea Baptism to some children of Parishioners) for a years space or
more, though they offer to be examined by him; esteeming them none of his
Flock, (preaching but seldom to them, though he receive their tithes:) and
instead thereof to gather an Independent congregation to himself out of diverse
Parishes and his own, to whom he prescribes a Covenant ere they be admitted
members of it; preaching, praying, administering the Sacrament to them alone in
private conventicles, neglecting his Parishioners: which has engendered such
discontents and rents in his Parish, even among the well-affected and truly
religious, that he must either desert it or his Independent way. What schisms
and discords this New war has raised in other Parishes, is so well known to
the World, that I need no other evidence to prove it a schismatic By-path,
and so no way of Christ the Esa. 9. 6. See my twelve Questions p. 7, 8.
Prince of peace, who prescribes naught else but precepts of peace and unity to
his Churches, and is most offended with their schisms.

Finally, I cannot think this way a way of Christ because I find it a Pioner
and underminer of Parliamentary authority, devesting Parliaments of all manner
of jurisdiction in matters of Religion and Church Government; witness the
passage of the Two independent Brethren recited in my Independency examined p.
3. (which certainly wears a Mask as yet, since she never appeared barefaced
to the world, not one of her Parrons hitherto presenting us with her in her
native colors, Page 48, 49, 50. This he ^ore ^^fly expressed in a Sermon in
Febuary last.
or lineaments) whose guilt this Author by his explanation, to make it good,
rather aggravates then extenuates. He writes, That the Brethren in the
mentioned period and expressions, reflected only upon the generality of the
Land, who according to the Laws, yea according to the principles of all reason
and equity have the right of nominating persons unto Parliamentarie trust and
power, Note.
but HAVE NO AVTHORITY OR POWER FROM CHRIST TO NOMINATE OR APPOINT WHO SHALL BE
THE MEN THAT SHALL ORDER THE AFFAIRS OF CHRIST'S KINGDOM, Gamaliell and your
Text never taught you any such Anti Parliamentary Doctrine.
OR INSTITVTE THE GOVERNMENT OF HIS CHVRCHES: These are that secular root, out
of which the Brethren conceive AN IMPOSSIBILITY that a spiritual extraction
should be made; that is THAT A LEGITIMATE ECCLESIASTIC POWER SHOULD ACCORDING
TO THE MIND OF CHRIST, OR ANY PRECEPT OR PRESIDENT OF SCRIPTVRE, BE BY THEM
CONFERRED UPON ANY MAN. And this IMPOSSIBILITY conceived by them they only
illustrate and declare by that parallel expression in Job Who can bring a
clean thing out of an unclean? etc. Note.
But to hold, that the persons so elected as has been said, have a power by
virtue of such nomination or election to enact Laws and Statutes in matters of
Religion, and to order under mulcts and penalties how men shall worship and
serve God, as it is a means to awaken the eye of jealousy upon them, and so
is seven times more destructive unto, and undermining not only of their power,
but of their honor, peace, and safety also, then any thing that is found in
the way so ill entreated; so it is a settling of a power upon the electors of
such persons, I mean the promiscuous multitude of the Land, yea of a greater
power then ever Jesus Christ himself had, at least then ever he exercised; For
as dare Regem, argues a greater power then esse Regem; as he that builds an
house has more honor then the house, Hebr. 3. 3. so to nominate and appoint
who shall have power to umpire in matters of conscience and of God, The people
having power to elect Princes, Magistrates, Ministers, Parliaments, Synods have
likewise authority to nominate such who by the rule of Gods Word may limit
these particulars, though not by their own bare authority, without or against
the Word.
to determine what shall be preached, and what not; what shall be believed, and
what not, is a branch of a greater root of power, then the exercise of the
power that is committed to others in this behalf. Now though Jesus Christ had
a power, and was authorized by God to be a Lawgiver himself unto his Churches
and Saints in their spiritual Republike, yet it is hard to prove, that he ever
he invested any other with such a power: His Apostles themselves were no Lords
over the faith of the Saints, nor had they any power or authority to impose
any thing upon men, as Every Magistrate, Parliament, and Synod, have power to
declare and enjoin what is necessary to be believed, practiced, by or according
to Gods Word, not without or contrary to it.
necessary either to be believed or practiced, but what they had in express
commission and charge from Jesus Christ himself to impose upon such terms,
etc.

The sum of this large passage is, that there is not only an
improbabilitie, but absolute impossibility that the Parliament should have any
power at all to enact Laws and Statutes in matters of Religion,
church government, Gods worship or service, because the people who elect them
have no such power, and so an impossibility of deriving any such authority to
them; and to affirm the contrary, is not only to awake the eyes of jealousy
upon them, but exceedingly destructive to, and undermining of not only their
power; but honor, peace, and safety also. Whether this be not directly to
undermine the authority of Parliaments and temporal Magistrates in all
church affairs and matters of Religion, contrary to your late Covenant and
Protestation, and that in the most transcendent manner that ever any have
hitherto attempted in print, let all wise men judge: I am sorry such ill passages
should fall from so good a pen.

But to give a short Answer to this extravagant discourse: First, this
objection might be made against the general Assemblies, Parliaments, Kings of
the Israelites, who See my Appendix to the sovereign power of Parliaments and
Kingdoms p. 122. to 131.
were chosen by the people, yet they made Laws and Statutes concerning
Religion, and Gods worship, with his approbation, without any such exception,
as I have elsewhere proved. Secondly, God himself (as I formerly touched) used
the ministry, assistance of Cyrus, Artaxerxes, Darius, with other heathen
Princes and Magistrates, for the building of his Temple, and advancement of his
worship, for which they made Decrees, Statutes; notwithstanding this objected
reason reflects more upon them and their electors, Twelve considerable Queries
p. 4, 5. Independency examined p. 2, 11, 12.
then on such who are Christians by external profession. Thirdly, most
Christian Kings and Magistrates in the World, (even those who claim to be
hereditary, as the yet continued forms of their Coronations and instalments
manifest) come in by the peoples election, as well as such members of
Parliament who are eligible, yet you cannot without disloialty and absurdity,
deny them authority in matters of Religion and Churchgovernment. Fourthly,
your self do not only grant, but argue, Page. 25, 26
That every private man has, yea ought to have power to elect and constitute
his own Minister: and no doubt you will grant, that private men have power
likewise to set up independent Congregations, which have authority to prescribe
such Covenants, Laws, and Rules of Government, Discipline, Worship, as
themselves think most agreeable to the Word: If then they may derive such an
Ecclesiastical authority to independent Ministers and Churches, why not as
well to Parliaments and Synods likewise by the self same reason? Fifthly, it is
clear by sundry instances in Scripture, and your own Text, that God does often
times make use of unsanctified persons, and the rude multitude, (whom you so
much under-value) to advance his glory, propagate his Gospel, promote his
Worship, vindicate his Truth, and edify his Church: He can pour a spirit of
prophecy upon Number. 22. 35 c. 23, and 24. 1 Samuel 10. Act. 5. 34 to 40 Joh. 11.
49, to 53.
a Baalam, a Saul, a Gamaliel, a persecuting High Priest; he can make a Ioh. 6.
70, 71 Mar. 6. 7. to 14
Judas an Apostle, yea send him to preach and build his Church, as well as a
Peter: We read in the Evangelists, that none were so forward as the vulgar
Matthew. 5. 1. c. 13. 1, 2. c. 8. 18. c. 9. 36. c. 14. 14, 19. c. 11. 32, 33 c.
21 8, 9, 10. Luke 8. 17, 19. c. 8. 44, 45. Joh. 6. 2, 5. Mar. 12. 12, 37. Luke
13 17. c. 18. 43. c. 2^. 38. c, 22. 1. Joh. 7 40 43. etc. c. 8. 2. Act. 2. 47.
multitude to believe, follow, profess Christ, and embrace the Gospel, though
many of them did it out of sinister ends. Therefore they may well have power to
choose such persons who shall and may make Laws to promote the Gospel, and
Government of the Church of Christ. Sixthly, those who have no skill at all in
Law, Physic, or Architecture, have yet judgment and reason enough to make
choice of the best Lawyers, Physicians, Architects, when they need their help.
Those who are unfit, or unable to be members of Parliament themselves, (as most
of the electors are) have yet had wisdom enough in all ages, and especially at
this present, to elect the most eminent and ablest men for such a service:
Those who are unmeet to be Kings, Magistrates, Commanders, or Ministers, have
yet skill enough to choose able persons for such offices, and power to delegate
to them such Parliamentary, Royal Magisteriall, Pastoral authority, as is
necessary for their several offices, which those who elected them never had
actually, but only originally or virtually in them, not to use, but derive
them unto others: why then may not our freeholders, who have voices in
electing the members of our Parliaments, and the Commonalty to the Land, (whom
you scandalously term, the vilest and most unworthy of men, though there be a
degree of vulgar people viler and unworthier then they in all respects, who
have no votes in such elections) have sufficient authority in them to elect and
nominate such fit, persons, who by virtue of such nomination or election
shall have right and power to enact Laws, Statutes, in matters of Religion,
Worship, and Church Government, not dissonant from Gods Word, to which
themselves and others by Gods own ordinance must submit? If the common people,
who neither are nor can be Parliaments, Emperors, Kings Judges, Magistrates,
Ministers, have yet a lawful power to make others such by their bare election
and to give them such authority and power as themselves never actually were or
can be possessors of, then why by the self, same reason may they not likewise
delegate a lawful Ecclesiastical legislative authority in church affairs, to
their elected Parliamentary and Synodall Members, which was never actually in
themselves, as well as Mr This he confessed, and appeared by a writing before
the Committee of plundered Ministers.
Goodwin delegate the power of determining who should be fit persons to receive
the Sacrament, and to become members of his independent Congregation, to eight
select substitutes, which was never actually vested in himself, nor
transferrible thus to others by any Law of God or man? why may not a man bring
an ecclesiastical or spiritual extraction out of a secular root, (contrary to
your Paradox) as Or as well as himself extracts many spiritual Doctrines out
of Gamaliels secular speech in these very sermons.
well as a Regal, Magisteriall, Parliamentall, Mnisteriall extraction, out of
a mere popular or servile root? or the best strong waters out of the vilest
Lees; the richest Minerals out of the coursest earth? the most orient Pearls
out of the basest Oisters? In one word, the very choice these your vilest and
most unworthy of men have made this Parliament, may for ever refute this
childish reason, the cornerstone of your Independent fabric, fastened
together with independent crochets, unable to abide the test. Therefore
notwithstanding this your reason, our present Parliament may and ought, in
point of right and duty to make binding Laws for regulating church government,
restraining heresies, schisms, innovations, erroneous doctrines, unlawful
conventicles, and for settling the purity of Gods worship and Religion,
notwithstanding this objection; and with as much reason, justice, raise, and
establish a new churchgovernment, suitable to Gods Word and the civil State,
as reform or repeal the old, (which grew to burden some and offensive) till
Independents can show us better grounds against it then any yet produced: and
inform us, why our whole representative Church and State should not of right
enjoy and exercise as great or greater ecclesiastical jurisdiction, over all
particular persons and Churches who are Members of our Church and Realm, as
any independent Minister or Congregation challenge or usurp unto themselves,
over their own Members (this being the true state of the question and not
whether Therefore your principal Argument; that the seven particular Churches
in Asia had no Jurisdiction one over another, (being under different civil
Dominions, and not members of the self same Christian Republike,) Ergo the
whole Parliament and Church of England have no Jurisdiction over particular
parish Churches or Independent Congregations in England; is a mere
Independency.
one particular Church, or parish, has superiority or Jurisdiction over
another? as some mistake it) without yea against both Law and Gospel for ought
they yet have made appear? I shall say no more in so clear a case, but refer
the Author to the high Court of Parliament, (whose undoubted privileges he
has presumptuously undermined by the very roots) to crave their Pardon, or
undergo their justice for this and other his Anti-parliamentany passages,
diametrally contrary to his, our, their late National Vow and Covenant, which
they cannot without highest Perjury permit any wilfully thus to violate in the
most public manner.

FINIS.

