Mr. PRYNNES Demand of his Liberty to the GENERAL, December. 26. 1648. with his
Answer thereto; and his Declaration and Protestation thereupon:
For the Honorable Lord Fairfax, General of the present Army.
THese are to acquaint your Lordship; That I being a Member of the Commons
House of Parliament, a Freeman of ENGLAND a great sufferer for, and an assertor
of the Subjects Liberties against all Regal and Prelaticall Tyranny, and no
way Subject to your own, your Council of Wars, or Officers Military power
or jurisdiction, going to the House to discharge my duty on the sixth of this
instant December, was on the stairs next the Commons House door, forcibly
kept back from entering the House, feized on, and carried away tbence, (without
any pretext of Lawful Authority or cause assigned) by Col. PRIDE and other
Officers and Soldiers of the Army under your Command. And notwithstanding the
Houses demand of my enlargement both by their Sergeant and otherwise, ever
since unjustly detained under your Marshalls Custody, and tossed from place to
place, contrary to the known Privileges of Parliament, the liberty of the
Subject, and fundamental laws of the land, which you are engaged to maintain
against a^^ violation. And therefore do hereby demand from Your Lordship my
present enlargement, and just Liberty, with Your Answer hereunto.

From the Kings head in the Strand, December 26 1648. WILLIAM PRYNNE;

This was delivered to the Generals own hands at his House in Queenestreet,
about three of the clock, the same day it bears date; by Doctor Bastwicke, who
returned this answer by him, upon the reading thereof: That he knew not but Mr.
PRYNNE was already released, and that He would send to his Officers to know
what they had against him. Who it seems act all things without his privity,
and steer all the Armies present Counsels and Designs, according to their
absolute wills.

The Public Declaration, and Protestation of William Prynne of Lincolnes Inn
Esquire, against his present Restraint: and the present destructive Counsels,
and Iesuitical Proceedings, of the General, Officers and ARMY.
I William Prynne, a Member of the House of Commons and Freeman of England; who
have formerly suffered 8. years imprisonment (four of them close, three in
exile) three pillories, the loss of my Ears, Calling, Estate, for the
vindicating of the Subjects just Rights and Liberties against the arbitrary
Tyranny and Injustice of King and Prelates, and defense of the Protestant
Religion here established; spent most of my strength and studyes in asserting
the Peoples just Freedom, and the Power and Privileges of Parliament, against
all Opposers, and never received one farthing (by way of damages, gift, or
recompense) or the smallest benefit or preferment whatsoever, for all my
sufferings, and public services, Do here solemnly declare, before the most
just and righteous God of Heaven and Earth, (the searcher of all hearts) the
whole Kingdom, English Nation, and the World, that having according to the
best of my skill and judgment, faithfully discharged my trust and duty in the
Commons House, upon real grounds of Religion, Conscience, Justice, Law,
Prudence and right reason, for the speedy and effectual settlement of the
Peace and safety of our three distracted, bleeding dying Kingdoms, on Monday,
the 4th. of December, I was on Wednesday morning following (the sixth of this
instant) going to the House to dischage my duty, on the Parliament stairs next
the Commons door, forcibly seized upon by Col. Pride, Sir Hardresse Waller,
and other Officers of the Army (who had then beset the house with strong Guards
and whole Regiments of Horse and Foot) haled violently thence into the Queens
Court, notwithstanding my Protestation of breach of Privilege, both as a
Member and a Freeman, by a mere usurped tirannicall power, without any lawful
Authority, or cause assigned; and there forcably detained Prisoner (with other
Members there restrained by them) notwithstanding the Houses double demand of
my present enlargement to attend its service, by the Sergeant, and that night
[contrary to faith and promise] carried prisoner to Hell, and there shut up all
night, (with 40 other Members) without any lodging or other accommodations,
contrary to the known Privileges of Parliament, the fundamental Laws of the
Realm, and Liberty of the Subject; which both Houses, the three Kingdoms, the
General with all Officers and Soldiers of the Army, are by solemn Covenant
and duty obliged inviolably to maintain. Since which I have, without any
lawfvll Power or Authority, been removed and kept prisoner in several places,
put to great expenses, debarred the liberty of my person, calling; and denied
that Hereditary Freedom, which being to me of right, both as an Freeman, a
Member, an eminent sufferer for the public, and a Christian, by these who have
not the least shadow of Authority or Justice to restrain me, and never yet
objected the least cause of this my unjust restraint:

I do therefore hereby publicly protest against all these their proceedings,
as the highest usurpation of an Arbitrar I and tyrannical Power, the greatest
breach of Faith, Trust, Covenant, Privileges of Parliament, and most dangerous
encroachment on the Subjects Liberties, and Laws of the Land, ever practiced
in this Kingdom by any King or Tyrant, especially by pretended Saints, who
hold forth nothing but Justice, Righteousness, liberty of Conscience, and
public freedom in all their Remonstrance; whiles they are tryumphantly
trampling them all under their armed Iron feet. And do further hereby appeal
to, and summon them, before all the Tribunalls and Powers in Heaven and Earth
for exemplary Justice against them, who cry out so much for it against oaths,
less Tyrannical, Oppressive, unjust, and fedifragus to God and men, then
themselves: And do moreover Remonstrate, that all their present exorbitant
Actings against the King, Parliament, present Government, and their New-modled
Representative, are nothing else but the designs and projects of Jesuits,
Popish Priests, and Recusants, [who bear chief sway in their Councels] to
destroy and subvert our Religion, Laws, Liberties, Government, Maiestracy,
Ministry, the present and all future Parliaments, the King, his Posterity, and
our three Kingdoms, the General, ye Officers, and Army themselves, and that
with speedy and inevitable certainty; to betray them all to our foreign
Popish Enemies; and give a just ocasion to the Prince and Duke, now in the
papists power, to alter their Religion, and engage them, and al foraign Princes
and Estates to exert all their power to suppress and extirpate the Protestant
Religion and Posessors of it through all the world, which these unchristian,
scandalous, treacherous, Rebellious, Tyrannical, Jesuiticall, disloyal, bloody
present Counsels and Exorbitances of this Army of Saints, so much pretending to
Piety and Justice have so deeply wounded, scandalized, and rendered detestable
to all pious, carnal and moral men of all conditions. All which I am, and
shall always be ready to make good before God, Angels, Men, and our whole
three Kingdoms in a free and full Parliament, upon all just occasions; and seal
the truth of it with the last drop of my dearest blood. In witness whereof, I
have hereunto subscribed my Name:

at the sign of the Kings head in the STRAND: December. 26. 1648. WILLIAM PRYNNE.


