Accommodation Cordially DESIRED, AND REALLY INTENDED. A MODERATE DISCOVRSE:
TENDING, To the satisfaction of all such, who do either Wilfully, or Ignorantly
Conceive that the PARLIAMENT is Disaffected to PEACE.

WRITTEN Upon occasion of a late Pamphlet, pretended to be Printed at Oxford;
entitled a REPLY to the Answer of the LONDON. PETITION for PEACE.

LONDON, 1643.

ACCOMMODATION Cordially DESIRED, AND REALLY INTENDED.
A Moderate Discourse, tending to the satisfaction of all such who, etc.
A Petition for Peace is presented to the Parliament by some thousands of
Citizens; the Petition finds a peaceable answer; and that Answer (as I shall
now set forth) is opposed by an unpeaceable Reply, but that time may be the
better husbanded, and indifferent Readers the better satisfied, before I
undertake the Replication it self, I desire all men to be preadvertised of
some few things.

Scholars have been very active in this unnatural war, both in raising and
fomenting it; the tongue has made some wounds as well as the hand; and the
sword had never bin so keen, had it not been whetted by the Pen: but Scholars
are not active on both sides alike (to show their partiality, and interest in
this cause) it is only on the Kings side, where the Pen and the Lance are both
brandisht in the same hand. And it is wisely ordered, for the Kngs interest will
be the more hopefully pursued when Scholars second it with their Arts, and the
Scholars Interests will be the easier gained, when the King seconds them with
his Arms. But of all kinds of Learning Oratory is most relied on: and of all
kinds of Oratory, that is most made use of, which is most want only painted and
dressed, and borrowes most from ostentatious Art, and is therefore most unfit
for business, either of Law or State, because it is most fit to inveagle, and
deceive with its false graces and flourishes. The tongue of Cyneas was very
advantageous to Pyrrhus in subduing Towns and Cities, but it is likely more of
manly Logic then of effeminate Rhetoric flowed from that tongue of his, or
else Towns and Cities in those days were governed by very illiterate men.
None but the duller sort of people are to be caught by pure oratory, the wiser
sort are well enough instructed, that when the Fowlers pipe plays most
melodiously, the snare is coucht most pernitiously. That man is very unworthy
to judge of Papers that cannot distiguish between foundations and
superstructions, reasons and Assumptions; that cannot discern between prooving
of premises, and pursuing of conclusions: and yet the chiefest fraud of the
Orator is to pass over that part of the business which requires most proof,
without proof at all, and that which is most dark without light at all, and
that which is most important without mention at all. It Is enough for the Orator
to blazon the bloody shield of war in general, when it is his sole charge to
dispute who are the guilty causers and promoters of this particular War: It Is
enough for him to take it for granted, or at most upon his own credit to
affirm it, That the Kings party of Papists and Arminian Clergy men and
delinquents were first assailed by this Parliament, without cause or danger;
and so presaltum to proceed to ve^emous invectives, and cursed censures against
the Parliament: when his main task is to prove either that a Parliament may in
no case whatsoever defend it self, or that this war in the Parliament is not
defensive. If we peruse all the papers which have come out in the Kings
behalf, under his name, or otherwise; we shall find nothing proper to be
insisted on but these two points, That defensive war is unlawful in
Parliaments, or that this war in the Parliament is not defensive; and yet
nothing less has been insisted on; nay though the Fabric be vast that is
built and raised thereupon, yet that which ought to support all the fabric is
utterly neglected; so in this reply (now to be examined) if much be affirmed,
yet little is prooved, and if any proof be made it is of sequels, not of
premises; it is of assumptions deduced, not of Theses deducing: and it is plain
and obvious to all that the Replicant here pleads not as if he stood at the
bar, but pronounces sentence, as if he sat on the Bench: We may justly
therefore suspect that he aims not at the satisfying of wise men, but the
dazelling of simple men, and that he would not daube with his fucusses every
line, and embellish with his Caressing Phrases every sentence, if he did not
affect the pomp of Mr Rhombus the Pedant, rather then the gravitie of a
Statist. The next Art of our Replicant is to impose those his nude averments
which are most false and improbable, with most boldness and assurance,
assaling as it were thereby the belief of other men with armed violence. That
it may pass for current that Franham Castle was surprised contrary to the
faith, and Treaty of Sir William Waller (with whom no Treaty was ever
entertained nor spoken of,) it must be further averred, That our side was false
at Winchecter, false in York shire, false every where; but these things eadem
facilitate negantur, qua affirmantur. Another advantage of the Kings party is
by multitude of writings, invective and Satyricall: both the Universities are
become mints of defamatory disgraceful papers, the Regiments of the Kings
Pen-and-Inkhorne men, are more and fuller then of his swordmen; and though too
many papers are scattered of both sides, yet those of the Kings are most of
them serious, and done by able men, whereas those of the Parliaments side for
the most part are ridiculous done by Sots, or prevaricators to the disadvantage
of the party. After these premonitions I come to the Replication it self. The
substance of the Petition was That the Parliament would tender such
Propositions for Accommodation, as might be accepted with honor to his
Majesty, and safety to the Kingdom. The substance of the Answer was that the
Parliament was truly and heartily desirous of a safe and honorable
Accommodation, and for an instance of that their desire would seek nothing
from the King, but to enjoy the due essential Privileges of his highest Court
of Law and policy, which privilege must needs qualify and fit them rather to
judge, then to be judged by any other inferior party. That a total
submission to the King, he being so far addicted to a faction of Papists and
haters of Parliaments, could neither be safe nor honorable. That to submit to
the Kings party were to submit to the foes of Religion and Liberty: foes
irreconcilable, and such as ever had been dangerous, and were now made more
furious by blood against the Parliament. That if the Petitioners being but a
part of London, and that but a part of England, should in stead of an
honorable safe Accommodation press the Parliament to a dishonorable unsafe
submission to the Kings party, it were a breach of public trust in the
Parliament to yield therein, the Parliament being trusted by the whole
Kingdom, that if a just fit Accommodation be intended the King ought to trust
the Parliament in part, as well as the Parliament ought in part to trust the
King. That both parties being equally disarmed, the Protestants being less
countenanced by the King, and more obliged in Conscience by oaths and
agreements, would be more obnoxious to disadvantages, then that party wherein
so many Papists are predominant. That though the Parliament might submit, yet a
fair Accommodation it could not obtain, except the King would equally
condescend thereunto. That if the Petitioners had found out a more safe and
honorable Accommodation then the Parliament had yet discovered; (for that was
possible) the Parliament would embrace it; That if none such could be found
out, the affections and judgments of the Parliament ought not to be censured
or distrusted. That it behooved the Petitioners to address themselves by the
like petition to the King, if no want of affection to peace were apparent in
the Parliament, as certainly none was.

In contradiction and opposition to all the several points in this Analysis,
what the Replicant has set forth, we shall now see in the same order.

1. The great contrivers of our sad divisions, which abuse the weak reason of
the people, to keep up an unfortunate misunderstanding between King and
Subject are not named by the Replicant; but they are clearly pointed out to be
the Chief Lords and Commons in Parliament: for he says, Every new Vote of
late has been a new affliction: and he makes Pennington and the City
Lecturers to be but Iourney-men Rebels under them: and even this Hellish
slander he venteth under the name of the Petitioners, whom he styles the most
considerable persons of the City: and at the same time affirms, that the
people generally are of honest affections. And the Answer to the Petition in
which, the words (he says) are softer then oil, though the matter of it be
poison of Aspes, he attributes only to some Chief Engineers of mischief in
the House, though it carry in it the Authority of the whole House. Here is a
wonder beyond all wonders. A few factious persons in Parliament overawe the
major, better and wiser part in Parliament; and by a few factious Instruments
in City and Country abuse the major, better and wiser part there also into
the most miserable distempers and calamities that ever were; and though the
honest generality begin to grow wiser and are instructed by the sense of their
miseries, and by other advertisements from loyal Papists and Prelates, and
other pious Courtiers and soldiers to shake off their few Tormentors: Nay, and
though the King himself has not only published the most eloquent and subtle
Declarations to disabuse the people, that ever were (himself being the most
beloved and honored Prince that ever was for his indulgence to Liberty and
Religion) but ha^h also advanced a most puissant and victorious Army to releeve
these undeceived wretches; yet the incantation holds, no humane force either of
Arms or Arts can dissolve it. The miracles of Moses had an impression of
divine virtue upon them, and did therefore triumph over all the Egyptians
spells: but in this case, Mr Pym, with I know not what infernal engines distors
and wrests all the Orbs of a Kingdom from their natural motions; and yet no
divine Art can resist him. 'Twas never believed before that any but God could
work contrary to nature, but now it must be believed. But is it so apparent
that the Parliament is averse from peace? yet says the Replicant, For withdraw
the fuel, and the fire is soon extinguished: Let the Parliament not foment the
ill humor (by supplies of men, Arms and Ammunition) and the wound will heal
of it self. In the petition, nothing but an Accommodation, safe and honorable
was pretended, but now we see a mere submission is intended in this
replication.

It Is not prooved: That the Arms of the Parliament are unjust; it is not
prooved, that it may be safe for the Kingdom to prostrate, and subject
Parliaments to the discretion of that faction which now has bereaved us of the
Kings presence and favor, yet because the Replicant will take upon him to
condemn Parliaments; we must also allow of his Judgment.

But 'its further said by the Replicant, that even Accommodation it self is
not pleasing in Parliament, witness that speech of one, I like not daubing:
and that of another, I hate the name of Accommodation. He which hates the name
of an Accommodation as it has been used of late to signify a total
submission, may love a true Accommodation in it self: and he that likes not
the daubing of those which under the color of Accommodation aim at nothing
but division and dissension amongst the people, may more heartily affect a
safe, and honorable agreement, then the Replicant himself.

Can the Parliament express zeal to peace better then by contracting all its
rights and privileges into one compendious proposition, for the settling of
union? To purchase true peace, the Parliament desires nothing but to retain the
mere being of a Parliament; that is, to be the supreme Court of King and
Kingdom. And if it can stand with the essence of such a Court to be arraigned,
tried and sentenced by a faction of Papists, Prelates, Delinquents, and
Soldiers, the Parliament will submit to that Condition also.

2. When we express our fears of the Kings party, and therefore deny
submission thereunto as dangerous and dishonorable, the Replicant tells us
further, we are required not to submit to our fellow subjects, but to the King
only: and he tells us further, that the Laws are the best security, and those
we shall enjoy, and to claim any higher security is to assume the power of
Kings. How far the Laws of the Land have been sufficient to preserve to
Parliaments, and the be^ter part of loyal Protestant subjects their rightful
portion and interest in the Kings favor, for these 17. years last past, is
known to all; The Laws of Scotland could not secure the better and greater
part there; The Laws of Ireland have not saved the Britains and Protestants
from Massacres there: and yet certainly both those Kingdoms are entitled to
Laws of as ample benefit, and vigor as ours now is. But what speak we of
Common Laws, when even at this instant such a free subjects house is burnt and
plundered by the Kings party, in derision and despite of the Kings own
Proclamation and particular Placard granted for the safeguard of himself and
his family? As our Judges preyed upon us heretofore in matters of State, and
Divines oppressed us in matters of Religion: so our Martialists now have a
power of spoiling above the general Law, or any particular protection. If the
King think fit to grant safety to such a person, or such a Town, it must be
provided always that such a Dutch or Scotch Commander, who conceives himself
more skillful in war then the King give his approbation withal; for my part I
conceive it more honorable for the King to say that he cannot, then that he
would not save his people from all those cursed indignities and cruelties which
have been multiplied upon us during this war, and before by his adherents. As
for Laws therefore we must take notice that they may be employed either to the
benefit or prejudice of any Nation, and that they themselves do require to be
regulated by further Laws. No Nation can be free without a threefold
privilege: The first is in the framing and passing of Laws. The second is in
declaring and interpreting Laws. And the third is in executing and preserving
Laws enforce. Where the King is sole Lawmakers all things are subject to his
mere discretion, and a greater bondage then this never was nor can be; the
English lie not under such base servitude, their King claims but a part in the
Leg^slative power: and yet nevertheless of late by discontinuing of Writs for
the summoning of Parliaments, and by the right of a Negative voice in
Parliaments, and an untimely dissolving of Parliaments, the peoples interest in
this Legislative power has been much abridged and suspended. In the like manner
also if the sole power of declaring Laws were so in the King as that he might
himself give Judgment, or create Judges at his pleasure without imposing
Oaths of trust on them in behalf of the people, or should deny redresses upon
Appeals from them, our Legislative power would be vain and uneffectuall to
us. For my part I hold it an equal thing, whither just men make Laws and
unjust interpret them, or unjust men make Laws and just interpret them. When
it was just in the King of late to impose what taxes he pleased, and as often
as he pleased upon us for the preparing of Armadoes all over England. Our
Nation was fallen into a most desperate thraldom, yet the fault was not then
in the Laws, but in the Judges, and such as had a power over the Judges, Laws
as they are deaf, and by a strict inflexibility more righteous then living
Judges, so they are dumb also, and by their want of Language more imperfect
then the breasts of men. And indeed since the Laws of God and Nature, though
known to all, yet do not utter to all the same sense, but remain in many
plain points strangely controverted, as to their intent and meaning; how can
we hope that any humane Laws should satisfy all men's understanding in
abstruse points, without some living Key to open them? the vast Pandects and
digests of the Law sufficiently testify, that in the clearest Law, which
mankind could ever yet discover there are dark and endless Labyrinths, wherein
the weaker sort of lay men are presently lost, and the learned advocates are
tediously perplexed.

In the last place also if the sole power of enforcing and executing Laws were
so vested in the King, as that he might use it to the cessation or perversion
of all justice, and the people were in such case remediless, the interest in
making and declaring of Law were invalid, and frustrate in the people, and the
King might still inslave or destroy them at his pleasure. The Replicant says,
That under a Monarchy much must be trusted to the King, or else it will be
debased into Democracie. It Is confessed much must, but all must not be trusted:
the question then is, how far this much extends in a Monarchy of such a mixed
nature as ours is, in such times as ours now are?

In absolute Monarchies all is trusted to the King: in absolute Democracies all
is vested in the people: in a mixed Monarchy more is trusted to the King, then
is reserved to the people; and in a mixed Democracie more is reserved to the
people, then is derived to the Prince. In all forms of Government the people
passes by way of trust, all that power which it retains not, and the
difference of forms is only in degree, and the degrees are almost as various
as the several states of the world are, nay the same state admits of often
changes many times, sometimes the people gains, and sometimes looses,
sometimes to its prejudice, sometimes not; and sometimes injuriously, sometimes
not; but the degrees of ordinary power consist in the making, declaring and
enforcing Law, except when foreign war is, and then it is expedient that a
greater and more extraordinary trust be reposed in one, and this we see in
Holland, the most exact Republicke, and in England the most exact Monarchy in
the world. But it is a lewd conceit of our Royalists now adays to attribute to
our King an absolute power over the Militia of this Land at all times alike,
not distinguishing between Civil wars, wherein he may be a party, and
suspected; and between a foreign war, where he is neither a party nor
suspected: for if our Kings will plead such a trust to our disadvantage, it is
just that they produce some proof for it, and rely not upon mere Common use,
it is true in case of Foreign invasion, it is expedient that the King be far
trusted, and yet even so, if the King should conspire with foreign forces, or
neglect to protect us against them, contrary to the intent of his trust, we
might resume the common native Posse, or Militia of the Land, for our own
defense without his consent. And much more reasonable is it in time of Peace,
or Civil war, if the King will deny his influences, or withdraw his
presence, to obstruct Law, or will by his Negative voice, or by force seek to
disable his highest Courts and Councels, and reduce all to arbitrary
government: more reasonable is it, that the people secure to themselves the
Law, their chiefest portion and best patrimony. For as the King cannot by Law
deny to the people their undoubted interest in passing of Laws; so neither can
he defeat the same interest, or destroy the benefit thereof by
misinterpretations, or by mis-executions of the same Laws. No Nation can enjoy
any freedom but by the right and share which it has in the Laws, and if that
right and share do not extend to the preservation of Laws in their true
vigor and meaning, as well as to the Creation of them, it is empty and
defeasible at the Kings mere pleasure, Much is to be trusted to the King:
true, but all is not (we see) trusted, some power we see is of Necessity to be
reserved in free Nations, such as the King allows us to be, and there is a
difference also in the word Trust: for there is an arbitrary, and there is a
necessary Trust, and the one may be resumed; the other not upon mere pleasure.
Without all question, the wiser and juster Princes are esteemed, the more the
people ever trust them, but this makes no difference in the Legal and
fundamental Trust of the Kingdom, nor can infirm credulous, and easy
Princes pretend always to the same degree of power as their Ancestors have
held, unless they can prescribe to their virtues also. Queen Elizabeth might
with safety and expedience be trusted further then King James, even in those
things where the Law did not trust her: but this is the misery of subjects, all
goes from them, but nothing must return: The Court of a Prince is like the
Lions den in the Fable, all the beasts leave prints and steps advorsum but none
retrorsum. But the Replicant further assures us, That it is very easy to assign
the bounds of these several trusts: for the Laws and Customs of the Land
determine both: nor will his Majesty (he sies) require any new trust to
himself, or deny any old trust to us. Our great Divines were to be admired
for their profound knowledge in the mysteries of Law were they not Courtiers:
but now the King is presumed to comprehend omnia jura in scrinio Pectoris: and
so they by their residence at Court discern all the secrets of Law and State
in speculo Imperii, just as our heavenly Saints do read all things else in
speculo Trinitatis. Our gravest Sages of the Law are much divided in points of
less moment and intricacie, and as for the precise metes and bounds, where
Sovereignty and Liberty are severed, and the direct degrees of public trust in
all cases, and at all times, they look upon them as grand difficulties, scarce
fit to be debated but in the sacred Court of Parliament; and yet Clergymen
think them but the first rudiments of all knowledge, obvious to very A. B. C.
Darians. They always boast of the known Laws of the Kingdom, in all
disputes they refer us to the known Laws and Customs of the Land, as if
Judges were things utterly needless, and the study of Law merely superfluous.
The Treshault Court of Parliament, of whose determination our learned Judges
will not think dishonourably, cannot pierce into thief known obvious Laws,
and yet every Sophister can: the Fountains of Justice are now exhausted, and
yet the Cisternes remain full. But says the Replicant, If you seek further
security then the known Laws, the people will see, that under the name of
free subjects, you take upon you the power of Kings. Sir, we desire to have our
Laws themselves secured to us, which you may turn like our own Canons
against our selves, if righteous and prudent Judges be not granted us, and all
over-awing violence so prevented, as that the fruit of their Judgments be
clearly and entirely conveyed to us. And such securance is not incompatible
with Monarchy; for it is no more impeachment to Monarchy, that the people
should enjoy then make laws; that they should be sharers in the power of
declaring and executing, then in the power of passing and framing laws: but it
is on the contrary an evident impeachment to liberty, if an equality of these
three Privileges be not at least shared with the people.

3. As for the diametricall opposition in Religion and State betwixt us and our
irreconcilable enemies of the Kings party. The Replicant maintains diverse
things: and of the Papists and Delinquents he says, That we have nothing
against them, but State Calumnies: That the same justice may govern both, if
we will submit to Law. He beseeches us to tell what Religion we would have: if
that which the Martyrs sealed with their blood, our Adversaries practice it,
and desire severe punishment upon all such as transgress it: he imputes to us
a new Creed: he says the King is to look upon friends or enemies in a Law
notion only, that Subjects must not give Laws to Princes courtesies: That our
enemies, if they be Traitors, are to be tried at the Kings Bench, the house of
Commons having no right of Judicature.

The major part of our enemies are certainly either Papists, or else such as
are either overawed or outwitted by Papists. It Is true, some part of our
enemies knows the truth of the Protestant Religion, and the desperate
antipathy of Papistry; yet having in them the true power of no Religion, but
serving Mammon only, for their worldly interests sake, (with which severity of
Parliaments will not square) they adhere to Papists, little regarding what
Religion stands, or what falls. Another part out of mere ignorance is carried
away with the name King, and the Professions of the King, not at all looking
into reason of State, nor being able to judge of the same: but the last sort of
men are not so considerable, either for their number, or power, or malice; and
therefore I shall not insist upon them.

The maine Engineers in this Civil War are Papists, the most poisonous,
serpentine, Iesuited Papists of the world. All the Papists in Europe either
pray for the prosperity of this design, or have contributed some other
influence and assistance to it. This war was not the production of these two
last years; nor was England alone the field wherein the Dragons teeth were
sowd. Scotland was first attempted, but the Protestant party there was too
strong for the Papists, and such of the English as joined with them. The
conspiracies next broke out in Ireland, where the Popish party being too strong
for the Protestants, the Tragedy has been beseeming Papists, it had proved
beyond all parallel bloody; and if shipping were not wanting, they might spare
some aids for their fellow Conspirators here in England.

England is now in its agony, bleeding and sweating under the sad conflict of
two parties, equally almost poized in force and courage. The Papists themselves
in England amount not to the twentieth arithmeticall part of Protestants, and
yet one papist in geometrical proportion may stand against twenty Protestants,
considering the papists with together with their adherents, and considering
also what they are that act over them, and who they are that act under them.
What power the Romish Vice-god has in the Queen is known, and what power the
Queen has in the King, and what power the King and Queen have in the
prelaticall Clergy, and the Clergy in them reciprocally, and what power the
King, Queen and Clergy have on a great number of irreligious or lukewarm
protestants (now made Delinquents and so further engaged) as also upon all
papists, and how all these have interests divided and intwined and how
restlesly active they al are in pursuing their interests is not unknown.

Besides Ireland is a weakness, and Scotland is no strength to us: all popish
countries France, and Spain etc* are likely to annoy us, and the protestants in
Denmark, Holland etc. have not power to restrain their Princes from combining
further against us. In this deplorable condition we have no friends to complain
to, and yet this Replicant tells us, we have no enemies to complain of; our very
condoling against papists and delinquents, he terms State calumnies, and
slanders that have lost their credit by time, and are confuted by experience. O
thou black mouth, more black then thy coat, have thou no more remorse for all
that protestant blood, which delinquent have enabled papists to shed in
Ireland, and for all that protestant blood which armies of papists and
delinquents are now ready to shed in England? if all this blood find no pity
in thee, yet is it an offense to thee, that it extorts tears and lamentations
from us? O thou unbowelled sanguinary wretch, if God be the God of protestants,
he will judge these cruelties of papists, and their abettors: and if he be the
God of papists, we know our slanders and calumnies cannot deceive him; we
submit our selves and our cause to his revenging hand. But thou will say, the
Kings party in this war are good Protestants, and we are Anabaptists, etc.
The tyranny and superstition of Bishops has driven some of our tender and
strictor protestants into utter dislike of Ceremonies, and that pompous, or
rather superstitious form of Church discipline which has been hitherto used
in England. Some of us desire an alteration of some things in our Lyturgy, by
advice of a learned and incorrupt Synod: others perhaps scruple Church music,
and any set form of divine service, to be imposed of necessity, liking better
the single order of Scotland. What new Creed is there in all this, or what
change of Religion were this, if there were any great numbers of men so
opinionated? But it is well enough known to our Adversaries, that there is not
one man of both Houses of Parlialiament that is violent against all public set
forms of prayer, or that form which is now in use, or that desires any
alteration of Doctrine in Essentialls, nay nor of Discipline, except in things
very few and inconsiderable. And it is well known that the Parliament, as it
would loosen the rigor of Law in some scruples for the ease of tender
consciences, so it abhors utterly all licentious government in the Church, and
all by-ways of confusion. In the City the King has instanced in Pennington,
Ven, Foulk, and Mannering, as notoriously guilty of Schism, and doubtless
they were named for want of worse: try these men now by the old Creed, or by
the nine and thirty Articles; nay, examine them concerning the Common prayer
Book, and it will soon appear how far they are strayed into Brownisme, or
any other Schism: it will appear how they are wounded in schismatic, and all
protestants in them, and the true Religion in us all: it may be they have not
put pluralities, or the Parliamentary Votes of Bishops into their Creed; it may
be they have reserved no implicit faith for Convocation acts, and Canons,
which the Replicant may perhaps judge very irreligious; but they hope this
never had any anathema pronounced against it in the old Church by any Council
before Antichrists days. Let not railing pulse for impleading and condemning,
and we will all be tried in the same manner, and if any new Creed be found
amongst us, differing in substance from the old, let our adversaries themselves
give and execute sentence upon us. If Brownists could be as well distinguished
and nominated in our Army, as papists are in the Kings, or were really as many
and as far countenanced, we would distrust our cause; whereas we now beg no
otherwise the blessing of God upon our Armies, then as we are enemies both to
Popery and Brownism. Dares our Replicant make such a prayer? no, sometimes he
owns Papists, and sometimes he seemingly disowns them: speaking of the Kings
party, once he says, As for the established religion we will become suitors to
you, that you will severely punish all persons whatsoever that transgress
against it. Papists certainly have transgrest against our religion; if the
rebellion in Ireland be a transgression, or if the instant taking up of arms
here against the parliament be a transgression; yet see at the same time, when
they call us to punish the papists, they themselves arm and enable papists to
punish, nay to destroy us, is this all the ingenuity we shall expect? well, to
our law notion: it is argued in the next place, that a Papist fighting for the
King, though in a notion of Theology, he may be accounted an enemy quatenus a
Papist, yet in understanding of Law, he was accounted the Kings friend, as to
his fighting: Priest squires Doctrine just, he that fights for the King, or
rather at the Kings command, let the cause be what it will, he is the Kings
friend.

When Saul gave a furious command to fall upon the Priests of Jehovah; amongst
all his servants, he had no entire loving friend but Doeg: so when his
unnatural rage incited him to take away the life of Jonathan* the whole Army
that defended Jonathan were his foes, and if it had proceeded to parties (as it
had, if Saul had had as many Idumeans in his service as King Charles now has)
those only which had been the execrable instruments of the Kings Tyranny, had
been the Kings friends, and had fought for their King: so those six hundred men
which adhered to David, out of a pious intent, to preserve his innocent soul
from the bloody hands of Saul, and his three thousand impious murderers; and
the Keilites also, if they had been faithful to David (as they ought to have
been) were guilty of Treason and drew their swords against their master. But I
expect now that the Replicant insist upon the Justice of the Kings cause, as
not taking arms to master the Parliament, but to defend themselves against the
Parliament: this if it could be proved, would overruled all, but it being in
question, and as resolutely denied by one side, as affirmed by the other; the
Replicant must evince by reason all that he expects to gain from us. It Is not
so probable that a Parliament should invade a King, as a King a Parliament:
It Is not so probable, that a Parliament should be misled, and have ends to
enrich it self by oppression as a King. It Is not so probable, that that Army
which consists all of Protestants, should be so adverse to the reformed
Religion, as that which admits and favors all Papists and Delinquents: It Is
not so probable, that that Army which is raised and paid by Parliament, that
is by the flower of all the English Nobility and Gentry, should fight for
Arbitrary government, and against propriety, liberty and privilege of
Parliament; as that which has nothing considerable, but rapine and pillage to
maintain it. If many evidences of facts, many pregnant proofs, and many lively
circumstances of time and place, did not absolve the Parliament of traiterous
conspiring against the Kings Crown, Dignity, and person; and convince Digby,
Percy, Iermin, and diverse of the Kings and Queens party, of conspiring against
the privileges of Parliament, and the lives of many of our noblest Parliament
men. If all other arguments did fail, the very invitation of Papists to the
Kings Standard, and the rising of the Papists with such general consent now,
that all Ireland is almost lost to the papists, and some hopes were else to
recover it, would sufficiently assure me, that religion and liberty stand in
more danger of the Kings party, than of the parliaments.

I could not with more clear and cheerful confidence die for the truth of the
protestant Religion, then for the Justice of the parliaments cause in this
war, noscitur ex Comite, etc. Let the papist plead for the Delinquent, and
the Delinquent for the papist, those ends which have so closely cemented, and
kindly incorporated both together, make a sufficient discovery to me, as well
what the papist, as what the Delinquentis. And this age must prove monstrously
unnatural, in producing a wonder never heard of in all former ages, If Justice
do now rest in the Kings side; For surely, no King ever till now, having a
just cause, was opposed therein by the mayor and better part of his subjects;
much less was it ever seen or heard of, that any King in a just cause was
deserted by the maiority of his Orthodox subjects, and supported by the
unanimous aid of such, as hated his true protested Religion. God send the King
to lay these things seriously and pensively to heart, for since none of his
wise and worthy Ancestors ever yet had cause to wage war either with the
Collective or Representative Body of the People: so none at all ever in any
war sided with a false Religion, or against the true, till this unhappy day;
in the King Charles is the first, and I hope will be the last, and therefore
this is worthy to make a sad impression upon his soul. But our Replicant will
tell us, That the Kings Justice may yet govern and awe both parties by the same
Law, whatsoever their antipathy be. The King has Law, and power by the Law to
protect the better party, and to provide for the peace of both parties: But
notwithstanding that Law and that power the poor British Protestants in
Ireland have been left unprotected, and lamentably exposed to a general
Assassination: And had they not been betrayed by their vain confidence in the
Law, and in the Kings protection, they perhaps might have found other means to
defend themselves; therefore it is no refuge or comfort to them now, to hear
the name of Law proclaimed and reiterated, when as things happened there, it has
been the very shelfe and rock whereon the Protestants have been miserably
bulyed and wricked; then pardon pray, if the same name of Justice also sound
but harshly at this time in our ears: when papists which have destroyed our
religion in Ireland, are raised to preserve it in England; and protestants
which were sending succors and supplies into Ireland, are in the instant
invaded here in England for the better suppression of Popery both here and in
Ireland; It Is a strange kind of assurance or joy to us, to see the names of
Religion* Liberty, and parliamentary privilege, stamped upon our coin, or
interwoven in our Standard, when at the same time, we see the same Coin
imprested for the entertainment of a Popish Army: and the same standard
marching against the representative body of our Nation, and the supreme Court
of Justice in our State. Nay, and the strange time that is taken for the
righting of Religion, Law and Liberty amongst us, makes our assurance, and joy
the less triumphant, for we plainly see, that as the season now is, no one
Protestant falls here by the Kings sword; but by the same stroke three
Protetestants at least are cut off in Ireland. And lastly, the manner of
rightting Religion* Law and Liberty, is most strange of all, for open war is
not now sufficiently destructive, though it be spread all over the face of the
Kingdom; subterranean plots are brooded further in the dark, and by privy
intelligence, the whole City of London is to be engaged in a tragical
conspiracy, to murder it self in one night: What the benefit: therefore is of
Law and Power, and Justice for the disabling of Papist and Delinquents, and for
the safe guarding of loyal Protestants we all know: But when papists and
delinquents find countenance, and the true religion is abandoned, and left
obnoxious to mischief by the perversion of Law, Power and Justice; the names
alone will not avail us, but our Replicant further says, Subjects must not
give Laws to Princes courtesies. In matters of a private nature Princes are
absolute, but not so in public affairs, where the public safety or liberty
is touched. In their own palaces Princes may dispose of Offices, but in the
State if they make Patents prejudicial to their revenues, to their
prerogatives, or to the peoples interest; the Judges shall pronounce them
deceived in their grants, and make the deeds void and null in Law: Princes
cannot alien any parcells of their Crowns* Hull may not be transferred to the
King of Denmark, nor Portsmouth to France, nor Falmouth to Spain, for Kings
have no sole propriety in such things, and the same reason is in the super
intending Offices of Royalty it self; they are not transferible at pleasure:
Some Princes (to use the words of Tacitus) are so infirm and credulous, that
they remain jussis alienis obnoxii, and non modo Imperii sed libertatis etiam
indigent, they are so enslaved sometimes to their basest flatterers, that their
very Diadems are as it were aliend and made prostitute to seducers, and these
their flatterers and seducers (in the expressions of the same Tacitus) Minore
metu and majore praemio peccant.

The unhappy Protestants in Ireland were of late undone by the vaste power
which was put into the hands of the Earl of Strafford, and all the
Ecclesiastical, if not Civil disturbances and distractions which have of late
infested these three Kingdoms, were in great part caused by excess of power
over the Church, delegated to the Archbishop of Canterbury: Without doubt when
the foundation of Popery was first to be laid, it did not prosper and advance
so much in sixscore years under the first Popes, as it did in six years here
under Canterbury: And Nero himself in his first three years did not attain
to so much insolence and tyranny as Strafford did in one year.

The Kings freedom therefore in favors will never justify the preferring of
such men, to an unquestionable command, nor the subjecting the lives,
liberties, and souls of so many millions of Religious Protestants to their
corrupted disaffected wills: Nevertheless, for ought I can see we have since
but changed one Strafford for another, and one Canterbury for another: Only to
stop our complaints: This Replicant tell us, That the courtesies of Princes are
not to be questioned by subjects. The Queen has now attained to a great height
of power as formidable as she is to us, in regard of her sex, in regard of her
Nation, in regard of her disposition, in regard of her family, in regard of her
Religion, and lastly, in regard of her ingagments in these present troubles;
some think she has an absolute unlimitable power over the Kings sword and
Scepter; which if it be so, no end of our fears and calamities can be, no
propositions can profit us, no Accommodation can secure us. If the King
himself were a Papist, he would yet look upon us as his natural subjects, but
when his regal power is secondarily in the hands of a Papist, to that Papist
we appear but as mere heretics without any other relation of subjects: By
secondary power also, a stroke is given with more secrecy and security; so
that there is the less fear in the party striking to break and retard its
violence: It issues like a bullet, whose line is not direct, but with some
elevation in the air, or with some windings in the barrel of the gun, whereby
it does more execution at a further distance. Therefore our Kings many and
dreadful Oaths and Vows of sincerity in the Protestant Religion are not
satisfying, if in the mean time any of his Kingly prerogative be shared with
such as are not sincere in the Protestant Religion; it were far safer for us
that he would swear for his party, then for himself.

But our Replicant will never have done with the Law, he still tells us, That
every man is to be tryde by his Peers the Lords in the Lords House, and the
Commons at the Kings Bench, and though the House of Commons have no right of
Judicature, yet there is another trial for Treasons, and our maine point in
difference at this time is concerning Treason.

The Parliament is nothing else but the whole Nation of England by its own
free choice, and by virtue of representation united in a more narrow room, and
better regulated and qualified for consultation then the collective body
without this art and order could be. The Lords and Commons make but one entire
Court, and this Court is vertually the whole Nation: and we may truly say of
it, that by it consent Royalty it self was first founded, and for its ends
Royalty it self was so qualified and tempered, as it is; and from its supreme
reason, the nature of that qualification and temperature ought only to be still
learnd, and the determination thereof sought. For who can better expound what
Kings and laws are, and for what end they were both created, then that
unquestionable power, which for its own advantage merely gave creation to them
both? If Kings and national laws had any humane beginning, if they be (...),
as the Scripture says they are, they had not their being from themselves: and
from nations collectively taken they could not have their being; for nations so
are not congregable, nor consultable, nor redeemable from confusion (pardon the
hardness of words) and therefore it must follow, that both Kings and laws were
first formed and created by such bodies of men, as our Parliaments now are;
that is, such Counsels as had in them the force of whole Nations by consent
and deputation, and the Majesty of whole Nations by right and representation.

The enemies of Parliaments seeing this not to be gainsaid, and seeing that it
must needs follow, that that cause which first gave the being, and prescribed
the end of that being, must needs have most right and skill to limit, and
direct the manner of that being: they seek to divide the coactive from the
representative body of the people: they seek to divide between the two houses
of Parliament: and these seek to divide between the head and the body of the
Parliament. They persuade the multitude, that they have entrusted the
Parliament only with their purses to give away subsidies, and replenish the
Kings coffers; but not to settle their rights and franchises, and to make
known the bounds of Prerogative, and restrain the unnatural encroachments or
erruptions of the same. If the community have been agrieved, to complain, or
almost accuse, is a sufficient privilege of the house of Commons, and this,
but to avoid further repining, shall not be granted them. It Is pity that our
Doctors do not study the Law further; for with a little more industry, they
might perhaps find out, that every private man as well as the house of
Commons, or the whole Community out of Parliament, as well as our Knights, and
Burgesses in it, may give the King money, and if occasion be, prefer an
accusation against such a tyrrannicall Lord or favorite; well, if such
Rabbis, and expounders can satisfy any of the unworthy vulgar, and some
Gentlemen, and Lords who have spirits below the Yeomanry of England (for such I
have seen too many since. 3. November. 1640, they shall be no further disabus'd
by me. In the next place, They attempt to work a disunion between the Houses,
the Lords shall have a power of Judicature over their Members so they will
exclude the Commons from any part therein; and upon condition that they will so
far disclaim them, as to leave them obnoxious for trials at the Kings
bench; This sitting of the Lords and Commons in several Houses, does not prove
them several Courts, nor does the observance of particular Privileges in
either House, and not laying all things common between both, prove any
independance of either: doubtless they are like the twines of Hippocrates,
they both must live and die together. In former ages judgment was so given
upon the greatest Delinquents, at that the Commons were parties in the
judgment: And sure, whilst they were Judges over Lords, themselves were not
subjected to inferior Courts: the Lords then knew they could not endure any
indignity to fall upon the Commons being but distinct parts of the same Court,
but it would reflect upon themselves; and the Commons knew that the honor of
the Lords was an addition to themselves, whilst the Curiatii stand close
together, their three adverse Combatants are too weak for them; but when they
are divided by unwariness in the encounter, they prove all three too weak for
one of their enemies, I will not make any comparisons, or say whither the Lords
or Commons deserted by the other suffer more; I will only say, that nothing but
fatal want of policy, can divide or diminish their mutual love and
correspondence.

In the last place, division also is raised betwixt the King and Parliament;
there is a generation of men which seek not the good of King and Parliament;
nor could prosper if the King and Parliament were united as they ought to be.
These men because their suggestions cannot prevail to alienate the Parliament
from the King, apply all their indevours to alienate the King from the
Parliament: their perpetual suggestion are, That the greatness of Kings is
eclipsed by Parliaments, That there is in Laws themselves a kind of enmity,
and something that is inconsistant with royalty, That Kings are bound to seek
nothing but themselves. That Kings can seek nothing in themselves, so nobly as
the satisfying of their wills, especially when their wills are fixed upon things
difficult and forbidden. Nevertheless, there is nothing but falsety in all
these suggestions. For Princes are the Creatures, and natural productions of
Parliaments, and so are their Prerogatives as has been set forth, and every
rational and natural thing loves its own offspring, and that love is rather
ascending then descending, it is liker the sap of the root, then of the branch,
viz. The people are more inclinable to love Princes, then Princes to love the
People; There is likewise a near consanguinity, and reflexive benevolence of
aspects between Laws and Princes, they are both of the same descent, and tend
to the same end, and both are inviolable* whilst they are assistant each to
other; the enemy of both has no hope to prevail, Si attribuat Rex legi, quod
lex attribuit ei. It Is retrograde also to nature, that Princes whom God has set
to feed his people, and not without the creation of the people, should think
themselves more valuable then that people; or that they should confine their
thoughts to themselves as Gods, despising the universality, when God has called
particular subjects their brethren, and forbidden them to lift up their hearts
above any of them.

Lastly, that Princes which have as other men, sinful affections, and are
subject more then other men to sinful temptations, and are accountable to God
therefore, in a higher degree then other men, should think it inglorious to
deny their own irregular wills, and to submit to Laws, Parliaments, and the
Public prayers and advice of their subjects, it is a thing scarce credible. The
most expert Navigator preferres the guidance of his Needle before his own
conceit; the most tried Engineer wholly relies upon the certainty of his rule.
All Artists how rare soever apply themselves to their Instruments, absolutely
renouncing their skill and experience in comparison of Mechanic directions.
Only Princes choose rather to err with their own fancies and fancy feeding
flatterers, then to go right with public advice, and no mischief, which can
happen to themselves, and millions of others by their error, seems so unkingly
to be suffered, as a retractation from error. But our Replicant has more
particular objections against Parliaments, As first, That they have no
cognizance of matters of State: secondly, That in matters of grace and pardon
they have no power or right: the King in those, has an Arbitary sole authority.

Laws aim at Justice, Reason of state aims at safety; Law secures one
subject from another, Law protects subjects from insolence of Princes, and
Princes from sedition of Subjects, so far as certain rules may be given and
written; but reason of State goes beyond all particular forms and pacts, and
looks rather to the being, then well-being of a State, and seeks to prevent
mischief foreign as well as Domestic, by emergent Counsels, and unwritten
resolutions. Reason of State is something more sublime and imperial then Law:
it may be rightly said, that the Statesman begins where the Lawyer cease: for
when war has silenced Law, as it often does; Policy is to be observed as the
only true Law, a kind of a dictatorian power is to be allowed to her;
whatsoeever has any right to defend it self in time of danger is to resort to
policy in stead of Law, and it is the same thing in the Replicant, To deny to
Parliaments recourse to reason of State in these miserable times of war and
danger, as to deny them self-defence.

Many men, especially Lawyers, would fain have Law alone take place in all
times, but for my part I think it equally destructive to renounce reason of
State, and adhere to Law in times of great extremity, as to renounce Law, and
adhere to Policy in times of tranquillity. Nothing has done us more harm of
late, then this opinion of adhering to Law only for our preservation: and the
King and his party though they are too wise themselves to observe Law at all,
yet have wrought much upon the simpler sort of our side by objecting against us
neglect of Law. Certainly as our dangers now are, it would be good for us to
add more power to the Earl of Essex (if he be thought the worthiest man of
Trust amongst us, as he has deserved no less estimation) for till I see him
looked upon, and served as a temporary Dictator, and the bounds of his
Commission to be only this; ne quid detrimenti capiat Respublica cavere: I
shall never think the Parliaments safety sufficiently provided for.

To frame any Arguments, or reasons, or to offer proofs, that the
Representative body of the Kingdom is a Counsel of State, rather then a Court
of Justice, would show me as foolish as the Replicant: it is impossible any man
should doubt of it, that does think the being is to be preferred before the
well being; or that whole Nations have any interests either in their own being
or well being. Let our Adversaries triumph in their own conceits, and when in
the same case there is both matter of Law and State (as in the case of Hull,
where the King had an interest rather in State then Law) let them upbraid us
for declining of Law: I shall like that best which they dislike most in us: I
wish we had not observed Law too far, for they would never so far recommend
it to us, did they not know it might be sometimes unseasonable.

As for acts of grace and pardon. I shall not much quarrel thereabout, the
Parliament can best advise the King how far it is fit to pass a Law of
oblivion in these general times of confusion: And the Answerer of the London
Petition affirmed nothing, but that their advise therein was likely to be most
wholesome, which can hardly be contradicted.

And the Law is clear enough that though the execution of Law be far
entrusted to the King, and there is a dispensing power in Him, so far as he
is supposed to be damnified or to be interested in the penalty; yet where
crimes have been committed against the whole State, the King ought not, and
where particular men have been injured, the King cannot suffocate, frustrate,
or deny Justice. It Is against his Oath, it is against public Liberty to deny
satisfaction by stopping execution.

4. But London is the most considerable part of the Kingdom and the
Petitioners the best part of London; and the most to be valued in other parts,
are inclined to the same request for peace, therefore the Parliament ought to
yield.

When our Adversaries please, they can allege numbers for their advantage, as
if the Major part of the people were cordially on the Kings side: when they
please they can give you reasons why the major part of the people are
enchanted, and therefore cannot be on the Kings side; yet we all know the major
part cannot be both for and against the King at the same time in the same case.
Besides divide England into 3. parts, and we do not allow London to be the
major of those three, and divide London into 3. parts, and the Petitioners
cannot make it appear, that they are full one third part; this must be
attributed to our Replicants boldness merely. That which is manifest, is, that
most of the faulty, and decayed Nobility, and Gentry, are of the Kings party,
and so are the Lees of the people; but almost all of the Yeomenry (which is the
most considerable rank of any Nation) and a very choice part both of Nobility
and Gentry at this time side against the King and the Papists: And it is
impossible for any rational man to imagine, that the King has not infinite
advantages against the Parliament, if his cause be generally apprehended, as
the more just: But sense teaches us the contrary, that no King in the unjustest
cause that ever was, had a weaker party then this King, considering what
courses he has taken. The King has an Army, and such an Army as is able to
force and overawe all places where they lie, with swords drawn over the
Pesants: but cursed be that man for my part, that next after God, would not
refer the arbitration of this difference to the public vote of the people.
And yet we know that there is a great deal of servilty in the people, and that
for the most part, they look no further then to present grievances; like Esau
in his Pottage bargain, choosing rather to die for ever of a Lethargy then to
sweat for a time under a Fever.

5. All Controversies are determined either by the Dye of Force, and chance of
War (for so Nations have ever censured that kind of trial) or else they are
concluded by Laws justly interpreted, or else there is a middle way (which we
call Accommodation) and that is commonly when to avoid the mischief of the
Sword, and the uncertain intricacie of Judgment, both parties by mutual
agreement condescend equally to depart from the rigor of their demands on
either side, and so comply, accommodate, and meet together upon terms as
equal as may be. Whersoever then the word Accommodation is pressed, (as it is
now with us in the London Petition, for the word Submission is not at all used)
it is most absurd and contradictory to exclude a yielding and compliance of both
sides. See then the manifest unjustice of our Replicant, who when the matter of
Accommodation only is in Treaty, yet urges us to a mere submission, and
taking it for granted that he is Judge, and that he has determined the matter
for the King; therefore the King ought not to condescend, or comply at all, or
leave any thing to the Parliaments trust, but must wholly be trusted in every
point.

6. The King requires to have preserved to him for the future that compass of
Royal power which his Progenitors have been invested with, and without which
he cannot give protection to his Subjects.

The Parliament desires to have preserved to the Subject, peace, safety, and
all those privileges which their Ancestors have enjoyed, without which they
cannot be a Nation, much less a free Nation. Now the Militia and Posse of the
Kingdom must be so placed, and concredited, and that the King may be as
equally assured of it, as the Parliament, or else without all Accommodation the
King must be left to the Fidelity and duty of Parliament, or else the
Parliament must be wholly left to the Kings discretion, or rather to the Kings
party. In this case what shall be done, the Parliament pleads that the King has
resigned himself too far into the hands of Papists and Malignants, from whom
nothing can be expected but perfidie and cruelty; The King objects that the
Parliament is besotted with Anabaptists, Brownists, Familists, and Impostors,
from whom nothing can be expected but disloyalty and confusion. If the King
here will grant any security against Papists and Malignants, the question is
what security he will give; and if he will give none, the question is how he
can be said to seek an Accommodation; so on the contrary, if the Parliament
will undertake to secure the King, as that is granted, then what must that
securance be. I will now take it for granted, that the King ought to abjure for
the future the giving of countenance to Papists, or being counseled or led by
them in State matters; as also to disband his Forces, and that the Parliament
will do the like, and abjure all dangerous Schismatics and Heretics. But for
a further tie to strengthen this abjuration, and for a securance against
Malignants, who are not yet so perfectly distinguished on either side, what
shall be the reciprocal caution or engagement? Shall the King have all Forts,
Ships, Arms, and Offices in his dispose? Shall the King assign to what Judges
he pleases, the division of our quarrels? or shall he trust his Parliament in
the choice and Approbation of persons entrusted? I will not dispute this, I
will only say, that the nature of an Accommodation requires some condescending
on both sides, and it is manifest injustice in the Replicant to prejudge the
same, as unbeseeming the King more then the Parliament, and in all probability
the Parliament is likely to condescend upon more disadvantageous terms then
the King; and is less liable to be missed, and less apt to break a trust,
then any one man.

7. To show that the Parliament is disaffected to an Accommodation, and the
King not, and that therefore a Petition to the Parliament is more proper and
seasonable then to the King. The Replicant bitterly reviles the Parliament as
having punished some for seeking peace, and as having rejected the Kings
gracious offers of peace with terms of incivility below the respect due to a
King. What more damnable crimes can any man load the Parliament with, then with
rebelling against the King first, and after rejecting officers of peace with
foul and scandalous language? Yet this the Replicant freely grants to
himself, and as if he were placed in some tribunal above the Parliament,
where all allegations and proofs were utterly superfluous, he proceeds to
sentence very imperiously. For ought I know I am as venerable and
unquestionable a judge in this case as he is, yet I dare condemn nothing, but
rash and presumptuous condemning of authority without proofs; and for that I
have Scripture it self for my proof. As for the Kings coming to Brainford in
a mist, and during a Treaty, and there surprising men unprepared, and retiring
again upon the drawing up of our forces, that these are instances of seeking
peace, and showing favor to the city is not so clear to my understanding as
to the Replicants.

8. But says the Replicant, you grant that the people may perhaps find out a
better way of Accommodation then you have done, and you allow them to petition
when you fail of your duty: And this must needs overthrow the strongest and
most popular argument of your innocence, and authority.

The Parliament did never assume to have an absolute freedom from all fails
or Errors, nor does detract from other men's knowledge, it vindicates nothing
more then to be less obnoxious to deceit and perverseness then other Courts,
and that the rather because it disdaines not any advise or reason from any
parties whatsoever.

9. The Answerer demanded from the Petitioners a model of an Accommodation to
be framed by them, for the better help and instruction of the Parliament. The
Replicant satisfies that Demand* He makes two propositions thus; 1 That the
Parliament shall as readily consent to the Kings Rights as the King consents to
theirs. 2. That the Reign of Queen Elizabeth: may be the measure to determine
those rights. In this the Replicant is very reasonable; for we freely submit to
both his propositions: but he is not so Politic as he thinks; for a submission
to these general propositions, will not determine any one of our Particular
debates. Let us be safe, as we were in Queen Elizabeth's days, and let us be
secured of our safety by the same means, as Queen Elizabeth secured us; That
is, by showing no countenance to Papists (much less admitting them as
Counselors, least of all as Governors in her highest Counsels) let wise men
generally loved and revered sit at the Council Table, and let the Public
advise of Parliament sway above all private; let our Laws be in the Custody of
learned, and incorrupt Judges, and let our Militia be under the Command of such
renowned Patriots, as she preferred in her days; and our Accommodation is
more ample, and beneficial, then any we have yet desired. But our Replicant
will suggest, Be you such Subjects as Queen Elizabeth ruled, and King Charles
will treat you, as Queen Elizabeth did her Subjects: do you right first to the
King and the King will not fail to do right to you. Here is now the maine
Question indeed, which rightly solved, would solve all, whether these
deplorable miseries, which have of late vexed and grieved our three Nations,
have rather happened from the Change of the People, or from the Change of the
Prince.

And most certain it is future Ages will conceive no great doubt, or
difficulty to be in this Question: but now it is mortal to dispute it: it is
scarce lawful to suppose any thing herein, Though supponere be not ponere but
by way of supposition, I will only plead thus: if the three Nations have by I
know not what fatal posture, and Congresse of stars, or superior Causes,
declined from their allegiance, and degenerated into unnatural obstinacy, and
turned recreant, and contrary to the sweet Genius, which was ever in their
Ancestors, they are bound to submit to the King and to put in him as full and
absolute a Trust, as our Parents did in Queen Elizabeth: but on the contrary,
if miscarriages in government, and the pernicious Counsels whereby our Princes
have been guided, have overwhelmed us in these inundations of blood, and
mischiefs; the Alteration, and Reformation, ought to begin first in the King,
and He cannot expect that we should trust him so far as we did Queen
Elizabeth until we are assured as fully of his protection as we were of Queen
Elizabeth's; but suppose there have been faults on both sides, can nothing but
the sword rectify our faults? I never yet heard that any Prince was forced to
a war with any considerable part of his own Subjects, but that he had an
unjust cause, or might have determined the strife without blood by some
Politic Compliance if he pleased. It is not so common or probable in nature,
for Nations causlesly to rebel, as for Princes wickedly to oppress: and when
arms are taken up on both sides, it is not so safe for Subjects to yield, as
for Kings; nor can Subjects so easily reduce Kings to a peaceable agreement,
and cessation of Arms, as Kings may Subjects for the sparing of blood. Kings
can make no composition almost dishonorable, or disadvantagious; but Subjects
being fallen into the indignation of revengfull Princes are necessitated
commonly to this choice, either to come forth with halters about their necks,
or to fight upon great disadvantages* as Rebellious as the Subjects of Rehoboam
were, a kind, nay, a Civil Answer might have retained them in their
allegiance, and yet if their terms had been full of insolence, and their
Capitulations more unreasonable, yet Salomon's Counselors would have persuaded
Rehoboam to yield to necessity, and to master that multitude by some finenesse
of wit, which he could not Tame for the present by violence; And certainly he
showed not himself the Son of Solomon, that would not purchase an hereditary
Empire over a gallant Nation by being a Servant for one day, that would quit
his own policy, because the multitude had quitted their civilitie, that thought
that Compliance which should gain a scepter more dishonorable, than that
Contestation which should absolutely forfeit one. How easy had it been for the
great, the wise, the terrible Philip of Spain, to have prevented the total
defection of so many goodly Provinces in the Netherlands: and if it could not
have been done without something which is ordinarily accounted below, a K.
would not that have been more honorably done by him, then the casting away of
so brave a Dominion, and the casting after that so much blood and treasure?
That King of France was far wiser, and sped better, which satisfied himself in
his struggling through many difficulties with this Maxim, That a Prince can
loose no honor by any Treaty, which adds to his Dominion. Infinite instances
might here be alleged, but they are needless. God send our King truly to
represent these things to himself, and rather to trust plain, then pleasing
advice. God open his eyes, that he may see how honorably, and easily he might
heve prevented these calamities, and may yet stanch our bleeding wounds; and
how much m^re difficult it is and u^safe for the Parliament to compose things
unless he or rather his Party be equally disposed to hearken to peace. Hen.
the 4. was as wise, as valiant, and as just a Prince as ever was Crowned in
England, and no Prince ever had by experience a more perfect understandi^g of
the English Genius: yet he in his death bed (where dissimulation uses to be
laid aside) in his last advice to his own son and heir (whom it was not likely
he would willingly deceive) deciphered the English Nation to be generally
observant of their Princes, and whilst they were well treated, and preserved in
Peace and plenty, most incomparable for their perfect inviolable loyalty, but
of all nations the most unquiet under such a harsh rule, which should render
them servile, poor and miserable

This he had abundantly prooved, and found true by the woeful deposition of his
unpolitick Kinsman and predecessor Rich. the 2. and his own prosperous, and
glorious Reign, and many strange traverses of Fortune, which throughout his
whole Reign. He was forced to encounter withal. His scope therefore was to
recommend to his sons charge this Nation both as dutiful, and as generous, of
whose loyalty he needs not to doubt, so long as his Justice was not to be
douhted. O that this most Excellent Prince could be again summoned from his
peaceful Monument to repeat the same advertissements in our Sovereigns
ears, and to justle out of his presence these blood thirsty Papists and
Malignants, which use all possible art to stain the peoples loyalty, and to
candy over all his actions, intending thereby not to reconcile the people by
procuring grace from the King, but to confound both King and people, by
fostering enmity between both? I will only add this by such instigations, as
our Replicant and his fellow Courtiers use, the King cannot be happy, but by
the uncertainty of war, that is by making his subjects miserable: but such
Traitors as I am, if our advise be entertained, propose to the King a more
certain way to happiness by Peace that is by making his subjects yet more
happy; but our Replicant says, the King is willing to condescend to any thing,
but you will admit of no reconciliation, except the King will remove those
servants, whom he had found most honest and faithful in his afflictions, and
prefer you undeserving in their place. Here is the grand knot indeed, we oppose
such as have been the Counselors or instruments of such and such designs: the
King, says, they are his friends, and he cannot abandon his friends: it is
confessed, the King ought not to abandon his friends, but the King may err in
the knowledge of friends: and as he ought to protect his friends, in whom he
cannot err; so he is not bound to protect such as he merely thinks his friends,
and in whom if he will believe the voice of the people, he is very much
deceived. We have as much interest in the Kings friends and Counselors as we
have in our Laws, Liberties, life's, any thing, for we know we can enjoy nothing
if the King shall own those for his friends, whom we know to be our enemies,
and account of these as good Counseils, which we know to be treasons against
the State, that Prince that will be arbitrary and rely upon his own mere
opinion, and discretion in the employment of Counselors and Ministers of
State, having no regard to public approbation therein, is as injurions
altogether as he that will admit of no other Law, judge, nor rule in the
propriety and liberty of his subjects, but his own breast only.

It will be replied, not fancy, but sense teaches this, that he that obeyes the
Kings commands, and fights under the Kings Standart is more a friend than he
that disobeyes, and fight against the King: this is demonstration, no error can
be in it.

I answer no, it is most false, Scripture and reason manifest it to be most
false.

Doeg did obey Saul, when all his other servants denied obedience, yet even in
that obedience he made himself culpable, and his master abominable, whereas
the other servants of Saul were dutiful in withholding an unlawful duty.

So those 3000 Soldiers which marched out after Saul to take away the life of
just and uncondemned David, they were instruments in a base disservice to Saul,
they are not to be justified for this service; whereas those 600 valiant men
which accompanied David in his dangers and afflictions and were ready with
their sword drawn to guard that innocence, which Saul himself should have
guarded are not to be accounted false to Saul but true to David.

And the mere presence of Saul on the one side, did not make the cause injust
on the other side, nor if himself had fallen by rushing oftentimes, upon
defensive weapons, could that horrid guilt of his death, have been imputed to
any but to himself. Cursed therefore, yea thrice cursed be these miscreants,
which engage the King in this war against the Parliam not without hazard of his
sacred Person, if they be private persons and have not sufficiency to decide
this great controversy betwixt the King and Parliament.

For my part I dare not pronounce sentence, neither for nor against the
Parliament, as the Replicant without all scruples does in all places; but I may
safely say, that if the King does, though in person, unjustly wage war against
the Parliament; the E. of Essex and his Army may far more lawfully fight in
defense of that supreme Court, than David and his followers did for the
protection of one innocent private man.

And taking the controversy as undecided, it is not apparent who fight for or
against the King, and the King may himself as lawfully claim to be sole
supreme judge over all single and universal persons, and over all Laws and
Courts, and in all cases whatsoever, as to claim any man a Traitor for serving
the Parliament in this war; and this if he claims, what Privilege remains to
Parliament, what limits remain to the Prince: what liberty remain is to the
Subjects?

It Is not only then traiterous, but ridiculous in the Replicant to assume that
supremacy to himself which is denied to the King by condemning the Parliament
and justifying the Kings party in all passages of this War, we when we except
against the Kings party, asperse not at all the Kings person, and the Law it
self makes ever a distinction betwixt the King and his agents: though our
Replicant will not allow any such feverance: but betwixt the Parl^am. and its
instruments no such feverance is except for the worse, for there pejor est
author quam actor, but says the Replicant. It Is the unhappiness of the King
that he has a par^y, it is the fault of the Parliament, he desires and ought to
have the whole. See here it is the Parliaments fault that Percy, Digby, Winter,
Mountague, Crofts, Killegrew, and many other of the Queens devoted Creatures
are preferred in the Kings favor before the Parliament. And it is the
Parliaments fault, that Rivers, King. and the Titular Court of the Palatinate
with some other Irish Papists latly come over have the honor of the Court,
command of the Camp, and spoil of the Kingdom to reward them, whilst
Manchester, Hambden, Hellis, ^im, Strod, Haselrig, are designed for the block,
and that upon such charges, as shall entangle almost all the most eminent
Gentry and Nobility, as well as them, That this is the Kings unhappiness is
aggreed, but that this is the Parliaments fault is not proved by the Replicant,
and we are not bound always to abate him proofs in matters of this
consequence. Doubtless we are likely to expect great performances from
Parliaments hereafter if it shall be guilt in them that they are rejected, and
if they shall be rejected only because other more favoring Courtiers pretend
better affection to the Kings private advantage.

The actions of Popish and Malignant Courtyers, cannot represent them more
friendly to the K. than the Parliaments. No honor or prosperity has followed
hitherto thereupon all their difference is that their single professions of Love
are more credited, than such as are credited by the Votes of the Generality,
and attestations of Parliament.

Howsoever though many men do think, private advise and testimony, to be more
valuable, and fit for Princes to hearken too, then public, I never till now
heard, that it was a fault or blame in Parliaments to be less valued or
accepted then private persons.

To what purpose is it said? that the King ought to have the whole: it is our
complaint that the King will not accept of the whole: and it is the Replicants
complaint, that the King is not suffered to enjoy the whole. This shall
reconcile all: let the whole be received as the whole; and every part as it is
Major, or Minor be entertained in grace and equipage proportionably, and this
difference is composed.

10 But says the Replicant, the Kings party is the more just, and therefore to
be preferred, and this is to be judged of by rule; as thus; the Parliament
intrenches upon our Liberty by imprisoning without cause, according to pleasure
and claims to be unquestionable therein: The Parliament intrenches upon
Religion by committing our best Professors, and planting Sectaries in their
stead, the Parliament proceeds according to reason of State, not Law: and this
places an arbitrary power in them, and makes ordinances equal to acts of
Parliament.

Hear in a brief sum all that ever has been spoken, or can be spoken against
the Parliament; and all this is grounded upon an ungranted proposition, that
the Parliament has no right to defend it self: For if it be lawful for both
Houses of Parliament to defend themselves, it must of necessity follow, that
they may and must imprison, levye moneys, suppress seditious preachers, and
make use of an arbitrary power according to reason of State, and not confine
themselves to mere expedients of Law. Enough has been said of this, it is
impossible that any wise man should be opposite herein, and the Kings party
have more recourse to reason of State, and arbi^rary power by far than we have.

But if it be said, that the Houses abuse arbitrary power in imprisoning,
levying moneys etc. causelessly; this is a false calumny, and not to be granted
without particular and pregnant proofs, of which the Replicant produces none
at all, were it not for this great noise and boast of Arbitrary power, our
Academians would want matter to stuff their in numerable pamphlets withal:
and the sillyer sort of Malignants would want fuel to feed their enmity.

And yet we know, Arbitrary power is only dangerous in one man or in a few men,
and cannot be so in Parliaments at any time; much less in times of public
distress: for then it is not only harmless but necessary.

The House of Commons without the other States has had an arbitrary power at
all times, to dispose of the treasure of the Kingdom, and where they give away
one subsidy, they may give 20, and where they give 50000l at one subsidy they
may give fifty times so much, and all this whether war or peace be.

Yet when did either King or Subject complain of this arbitrary power? Nay if
any parts of the Kingdom have repined at the abuse of this arbitrary power, and
refused to pay subsidys assessed by the house of Commons, what Kings would
suffer it? when was it not held a good ground of War? so both Houses have an
arbitrary power to abridge the freedom of the Subject, and to enlarge the Kings
prerogative, beyond a measure; they may repeal our great Charter, the Charter
of Forests, and the petition of right if they please, they may if they please
subject the whole Kingdom for ever to the same arbitrary rule as France groans
under, nay, and they have often been with force and all manner of
solicitations almost violented into it: and yet notwithstanding all this, we
are neither terrifyed nor endangered at all by this arbitrary power in both
houses.

To have then an arbitrary power placed in the Peers and Comm. is natural and
expedient at all times, but the very use of this arbitrary power, according to
reason of State, and warlick policy in times of general dangers and distress
is absolutely necessary and inevitable: but it is a great offense, that both
Houses should make ordinances generally binding.

They, which would take from us all means of defense; if they could dispute us
out of the power of making temporary Ordinances had their wills upon us, for
defense without some obliging power to preserve order, and to regulate the
method of defense, would be vain and absurd; but this is but one branch of
arbitrary power and reason of State, and to wast time in proving it necessary
in times of extremity, if defense be granted lawful, were childish and
ridiculous.

I have now done with the Replicant, so far as he has spoken to the matter, I
shall now come to his emergent, strange, calumnious speeches, against the
persons of such and such men, but this were Caninos rodere dentes. I forbear
it, only rehearsing some raylings, which need no answer but themselves.

The two houses are generally railed at, as guilty of Rebellion against the
King. All adherents to Parliament are railed at, as Anabaptists, Separatists,
etc. The Lord Major is railed at, for preventing bloodshed in the City, when
the Petitioners under the pretense of seeking for Peace, had many of them
plotted dissension, and this his Office is styled the stiffling of peace in the
womb.

The City Preachers are railed at, for satisfying our Consciences in the
justifiablenesse of a defensive war, for this they are charged to fight against
the King in the fear of God, and to turn the spiritual Militia into weapons
of the flesh. The framer of the Answer is rayled at for giving the Petitioners
just satisfaction in peaceable language. Though his words be confessed to be
softer than oil, yet 'ts said, that the poison of Aspes is under his lips; he
is called a Cataline, the firebrand of his Country, whose sophistry and
eloquence was fit to disturb a State, but unable to compose or setle it.

The judgment of all these things is now submitted to the world, what the
intent of the Petition was, in some master-plotters and contrivers of it, will
appear by the arguments of this fell Replicant. Whereby it is now seconded.
That the name of an Accommodation was pretended to force the two Houses under
color thereof, to cast themselves upon a mere submission, or to be made odious,
and looked upon as foes to peace, which was a Scilla on one side, and Charybdis
(on the other) is here manifested. Whether the Answer to the Petition savor of
so much malice and enmity to peace, as this Replication does, let indifferent
men censure,

Lastly, whether the soul of that man which thirsts for a firm Peace, may not
dislike these practices of pretending to it; and the soul of that man which
hates peace, may not make advantage of the name of peace, let all wise men
proved and examine.

FINIS.

