AN ANSWER TO THE POYSONOVS SEDICIOVS PAPER of Mr. DAVID JENKINS.

By H. P. Barrester of Lincolnes Inn.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Bostock dwelling at the sign of the Kings head in
Paul's Churchyard, 1647.

AN ANSWER TO THE POYSONOVS SEDICIOVS PAPER OF Mr. DAVID JENKINS.
MR. David Jenkins in his Paper of the 29 of April last, lays most odious
charges upon the Parliament: and consequently upon all that have adhered to the
Parliament in this War; and least these his desperate infusions should not
work powerfully enough upon the Vulgar; he being an ancient practiser in the
Law, and promoted to the title of a Judge: he cites Book cases against the two
Houses, and seems forward to lay down his life in the cause.

His 1. Argument runs thus. The Parliament not having the Kings writ, patent or
commission, cannot do so much as examine any man: But the Parliament has not
the Kings Writ, etc. Ergo: his minor is confirmed thus. If the Kings power
remain solely in himself, and be not vertually present in the two Houses,
then they cannot pretend his Writ, Pattent or Commission. But the Kings power
is in himself, and not vertually in the two Houses, ergo, that the Parliament
has no vertuall power, he prooves thus.

1. If the Parliament had in them the Kings vertuall power, they needed not
desire the Kings ratification: they needed not send any Propositions to him;
but now they send propositions, ergo, this vertuall power is but a mere
fiction.

2. To affirm that the Kings power is seperable from his person, is by the Law
adjudged high Treason: but if the Parliament say the Kings power is vertually
in them, then they separate it from his person. Ergo,

3. If none can pardon Felony or Treason except the King, none has the virtuall
power of the King, but none can pardon except the King. Ergo,

4. If the King be in no condition to govern, then he is in no condition to
derive virtuall power, but etc.

5. If none can sit in Parliament but he must first swear that the King is the
only Supreme Governor over all Persons in all Causes, then, no member of the
Parliament, nor the whole Parliament, can suppose him or themselves superior to
the King. but none can sit in Parliament, etc. Ergo,

6. If no Act of Parliament bind the subject without the Kings assent, then
there is no vertuall power in the Parliament without the Kings assent. but no
Act binds etc. Ergo,

Out of these premises which this grave Gentleman judges to be irrefragable, he
concludes that the Parliament denies the King to be Supreme Governor, nay to
be any Governor at all, in as much as there is no point of government, He
says but the Parliament for some years past have taken to themselves using the
Kings name, only to abuse and deceive the people. He says further, the
Parliament pretends against the King, because that he has left the great
Counsel, and yet the King desires to come to his great Counsel, but cannot
because he is by them kept prisoner at Holmby.

Lastly, he says the Houses are guilty of perjury as well as of cheating the
people and rebelling against the King, in as much as at the same time they
swear him to be only Supreme Governor, and declare him to be in no condition
to govern.

How easily these things may be answered and refuted let the world see.

For 1. It cannot be denied; but the Parliament sitts by the Kings Writ, nay if
Statute Law be greater then the Kings Writ, it cannot be denied but the
Parliament sits or ought to sit by something greater then the Kings Writ, And,
if it be confessed that the Parliament sitts by the Kings Writ, but does not
Act by the Kings Writ then it must follow that the Parliament is a void vain
Court, and sitts to no purpose, nay it must also follow, that the Parliament is
of less authority and of less use then any other inferior Court. Forasmuch as
it is not in the Kings power to control other Courts or to prevent them from
sitting or Acting.

2. This is a gross non sequitur the Kings power is in himself, Ergo it is not
derived to nor does reside virtually in the Parliament. For the light of the
sun remains imbodied, and unexhausted in the Globe of the sun, at the same
time as it is diffused and displayed through all the body of the air, and who
sees not that the King without emptying himself, gives commissions daily of
Oier and Terminer to others, which yet he himself can neither frustrate nor
elude? but for my part I conceive it is a great error to infer that the
Parliament has only the Kings power, because it has the Kings power in it: for
it seems to me that the Parliament does both sit and act by concurrent power,
devolved both from the King and Kingdom; And this in some things is more
obvious and apparent then in others. For by what power does the Parliament
grant subsedyes to the King? if only by the power which the King gives, then
the King may take subsedies without any grant from the Parliament: and if it be
so by a power which the people give to the Parliament. Then it will follow that
the Parliament has a power given both by King and Kingdom.

3. The sending propositions to the King, and desiring his concurrence, is
scarce worth an answer, for Subjects may humbly petition for that which is
their strict right and property. Nay it may sometimes beseem a superior to
prefer a suite to an inferior for matters in themselves due. God himself has
not utterly disdained to beseech his own miserable impious unworthy creatures:
besides it is not our Tenet that the King has no power, because he has not all
power, nor that the King cannot at all promote our happiness, because he has
no just claim to procure our ruin.

4. We affirm not that the Kings power is separated from his person so as the
two Spensers affirmed, neither do we frame conclusions out of that separation
as the two Spensers did, either that the King may be remooved for misdemenours,
or reformed per aspertee; or that the Subjects is bound to govern in aid of
him; we only say that his power is distinguishable from his person, and when he
himself makes a distinction betwixt them commanding one thing by his Legal
Writs Courts and Officers, and commanding another thing extrajudicially by word
of mouth, letters or Ministers we are to obey his power rather then his person.

5. We take not from the King all power of pardoning Delinquents, we only say
it is not propper to him quarto modo. For if the King pardon him which has
murdered my son, his pardon shall not cut me off from my appeal: and it is
more unreasonable that the Kings pardon should make a whole State which has
suffered remediless, then any private man. So if the King should deny
indemnity to those which in the fury of war have done things unjustifiable by
the Laws of Peace, and thereby keep the wounds of the State from being bound
up, it is equitable that an Act of Indemnity should be made forcible another way.
And if this will not hold, yet this is no good consequence the King is absolute
in point of pardons, therefore he is absolute in all things else; and the
Parliament has no power to discharge Delinquencyes, therefore it has no power
in other matters.

6. The Parliament has declared the King to be in no condition to govern: but
this must not be interpreted rigidly, and without a distinction: for if the
King with his sword drawn in his hand, and pursuing the Parliament and their
adherents as Rebels be not fit for all Acts of Government, yet it is not hereby
insinuated that he is divested of the habit or right of governing. If he be
unqualified now he is not unqualified for the future. if he may not do things
distructive to the Parliament he is not barred from returning to the
Parliament, or doing justice to the Parliament. This is a frivelous cavil,
and subterfuge.

7. We swear that the King is our supreme Governor over all Persons and in all
causes; but we do not swear that he is above all law nor above the safty of
his people which is the end of the law and indeed Paramount to the law it
self* If he be above all law, or liable to no restraint of our law, then we
are no freer then the French or the Turcks and if he be above the prime end of
law common safty. Then we are not so free as the French or the Turks. For if
the total subversion of the French or the Turk were attempted: they might by
Gods law imprinted in the book of nature justify a self-defence; but we must
remedilesly perish when the King pleases to command our throats. Besides, how
acheived the King of England such a Supreamacy above all law and the community
it self, for whose behoof law was made? if Gods donation be pleaded, which is
not special to him or different from what other Kings may pretend too, then to
what purpose serve our laws, nay to what purpose serve the laws of other
Countries, for by this general donation, all nations are condemned to all
servitude as well as we. If the Law of this Land be appealed to, what Books
has Mr. Jenkins read, where has he found out that Lex Regia whereby the people
of England have given away from themselves all right in themselves? Some of our
books tell us that we are more free then the French, that the King cannot
oppress us in our persons, or estates, by imprisonment denying justice, or
laying taxes without our consents: other books tell us that the safety of the
people is the supreme law, and that the King has both God and the Law for his
Superior. but all this is nothing to learned Mr. Jenkins.

8. We admit that no Acts of Parliament are complete or formally binding with
out the Kings assent* yet this is still to be denied that therefore without
this assent particularly expressed the two Howses can do nothing, nor have any
vertuall power at all no not to examine Mr. Jenkins, nor to do any other thing
of like nature, though in order to public justice and safty. I have done and
wish Mr. Jenkins would call in and lick up again his black infamous execrable
reproaches so filthily vomited out against the Parliament.

FINIS.

