Propositions of Accommodation For the composing of the present Differences
between His Majesty and the Parliament.
IN these unhappy distractions, and misapprehensions between His Majesty and
this present Parliament, fomented and originally occasioned by the malignancie
of an adverse party within this Kingdom, and the unadvised Councels of many
ill-affected persons near unto the King; there yet remains a general
Concurrence of loyal and affectionate hearts unto His Majesty, who with all
their souls desire, both by their public endeavors, and their private
prayers unto God, (by whom all Kings do reign, and from whom only all power is
derived) to reconcile and accommodate these Differences; thereby to reinvest
His Majesty in the entire and hearty affections of all His Subjects, and to
possess themselves again of His gracious favor and good opinion, that so
there may be a blessed reconcilement of all such Differences as have unhappily
violated the long settled peace and quiet Government of this flourishing Nation:
And for the more effectual and speedy consummation of this generally desired
blessing of peace and prosperity to His Majesty and His People, these few
Propositions are here humbly presented to the considerations of both Houses of
Parliament, by him that daily prays for the honor, safety, and prosperity of
His Majesty, and the peace of the whole Kingdom.

I. IT plainly appearing by the late Declaration made in Parliament, That the
Commission of Array is against the Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom, and that
His Majesty is graciously pleased to declare His resolution, to govern His
people only by the Law; That His Majesty would be now pleased, for the more
apparent expression of that His Royal purpose, to re-call His said Commission,
and all Instructions and commands which have been given therein.

II. His Majesty having acknowledged, That in these times of danger the
Proposition made unto Him by both Houses of Parliament for the settling of the
Militia was very fit, thereby to put the Kingdom into a posture of defense, and
has also approved of such persons for the ordering of the same, who have been
nominated by the Parliament, That he would be graciously pleased to give His
Royal assent to an Act of Parliament for the establishing thereof for two
years, which after may be continued or laid down again, as the necessity of the
times shall then require.

III. That all such persons so nominated by the Parliament, and approved of by
His Majesty to be Lieutenants in every County for the ordering of the Militia,
may receive their Commissions only from His Majesty, with a Proviso that they
shall not be displaced, nor their power taken from them, but by consent of
Parliament, thereby to preserve the Honor of His Majesty, and to remove also
all doubts and fears from His Subjects.

IV. That no Commissions either for the Array or Militia, which have been made
or given by the King or Parliament, may be further executed, but that all Arms
shall be laid down until the Militia be serled by Act of Parliament.

V. That a general Pardon may be granted in such manner as His Majesty has
been most graciously pleased to offer unto all His Subjects.

VI. That a particular Declaration in that Act may be made, that neither Sir
John Hotham, nor any other person shall be questioned for any act done in
obedience to the directions and command of both Houses of Parliament, or which
has been since allowed and approved of by them.

VII. That the Town of Hull, with all the Arms and Ammunition removed from
thence, may be delivered into the actual and peaceable possession of His
Majesty, and that His Majesty would be then pleased to commit the government
thereof, with the said Arms, unto such other person which both Houses of
Parliament shall nominate; and that no such Governor shall be displaced, nor
the Arms removed, but by consent of Parliament, And that Newcastle, and all
other Towns of strength may be in like manner disposed of.

VIII. That all the Lords and Members of the House of Commons that are now with
the King, shall presently repair to their several houses, and not be
questioned for their absence.

IX. That His Majesty would be pleased to return again to Whitehall, or some
other place near His City of London, there to make His residence as formerly He
has done, thereby to revive the dejected hearts of His afflicted Subjects, who
have thus unhappily been deprived of the comfort and honor of His Royal
presence.

X. That all distractions and misapprehensions may be removed by the happy
concurrence of his Majesty with the Parliament, whereby such good Laws may be
made, as may conduce to the establishing of a settled peace in the whole State.

XI. That the relief of the distressed Protestants, his Majesty's faithful and
loyal Subjects in Ireland, may be speedily resolved on, and their wants
supplied, for the suppressing of the Rebellious Papists in that Kingdom.

XII. That all abuses in the Church may be removed in a more perfect
Reformation in Discipline and Ceremonies, by an assembly of such learned
Divines as shall be named to that purpose by both houses of Parliament.

And the God of Heaven and Earth bless His Majesty in this happy Union with
His Parliament, and all His people, that we and all our posterity may ever
bless His name, from whom only every good and perfect gift proceeds.

London, Printed by Luke Norton and John Field for C.F. July 9. 1642.


