A CHECK TO BRITTANICUS, FOR HIS Palpable Flattery and Prevarication, in
justifying condemned NOT: FIENNES. Published for the present Necessary
Vindication of his traduced Judges, Prosecutors, and of Truth and Public
Justice, till an exact Relation of all the Proceedings in that Trial be set
forth by the Council of War, and his Antagonists for their further
justification, and satisfaction of the World, so miserably abused with
Mis-reports of that Action, for which he was condemned.

IER. 9. 3. And they bend their tongues like their Bow for LIES, but they ARE
NOT VALIANT for the Truth, upon the Earth; for they proceed from evil, to
evil. ISAIAH 28. 15. 16. 17. Because ye have said, We have made a Covenant
with Death, and with Hell are we at agreement, when the Overflowing scourge
shall pass through it shall not come unto us, for we have made Lies our
Refuge, and under falsehood have we hid our selves;

Therefore thus says the Lord, judgment also will I lay to the line, and
righteousness to the plummet: and the hail shall sweep away the refuge of lies,
and the waters shall overflow the hiding place; And your covenant with death
shall be disanulled, and your agreement with hell shall not stand.

LONDON, Printed by John Dawson for George Hutton, 1644.

A Check to Brittannicus, for his palpable Flattery, and prevarication in
justifying condemned NATH. FIENNES.
WE are informed that Brittannicus during his last weeks silence, has been
visiting Nath: Fiennes late Governor of Bristoll since his condemnation, at
the Lord Cottingtons Country House; who now not daring to show his head in
London for fear of losing it, and despairing of his own credit, after so many
false Relations wherewith he has deluded the world; instead of giving in an
Account of his Receipts at Bristoll, and craving pardon of the Parliament and
Kingdom in a penitent Recantation, and acknowledgement of his former grand
disservices to the State, has bribed Brittannicus, to trumpet forth his
unknown eminent deserts, and public virtues to the people; to acquit him
from the least imputation of Treachery or Cowardice, in his ignoble surrender
of the famous strong City and Castle of Bristoll, in less then three days
Seige, to the Enemy, upon very dishonorable conditions, without the least
necessity, (there being not one Out-Fort taken, nor one shot made against the
City or Castle walls) upon the entry only of 150. Enemies within the line, who
might have been easily cut off; notwithstanding his many promises, to dispute
every inch of ground, to hold out the City, and the Castle to the utmost, and
when he could no longer keep it, then to lay his bones therein. For which most
unsouldierly and unworthy action, (carrying Cowardice and Treachery in its very
Front, were there no other evidences, as there were store produced at the
hearing;) he had this ensuing Judgment pronounced against him, by that very
Council of War to which himself appealed from the Parliament, after nine
days full defense, and seven days deliberation; which will sufficiently
proclaim his guilt, and justify his Judges.

29. December. 1643.
Colonel Nath: Fiennes, you have been arraigned and convicted before this
honorable Council, for surrendering the Town and Castle of Bristoll, with the
Forts, Magazine, Arms, Ammanition, Victuals, and other things thereto
belonging, and for not having held the same to the utmost extremity, according
as to your duty you ought to have done. For which offense, this honorable
Council has adjudged you to be executed according to the tenor of the
Article of War, by having your head cut off. God have mercy on your Soul.

Yet Brittannicus (the professed Advocate of this Champion) to the unsufferable
slander of his Excellency and that honorable Council (which showed him more
Favor, then ever any Malefactor of that nature received, though he has most
ungratefully requited them, in appealing from their sentence, and raising many
ignominious reports against their justice) has now proclaimed it in print (I
know not upon what occasion, it being no ways pertinent to his weekly
Intelligence;) That neither the Sentence of death, nor his Pardon do in the
least impeach him, either of Treachery or Cowardice; and thereupon styles his
pretended Pardon, (of which the Parliament which must grant it, is wholly
ignorant) a noble Act of his Excellencies Justice. (Oh strange Iusticiary!
whose very Treason, ex condigno, demerits Pardon,) not of his indulgent mercy.
Pity is it, but that he should receive Justice in the highest degree, who
esteems his undemerited free Pardon a mere act of Right, not Favor. Were not
Nath: Fiennes now grown past grace, as well as shame, (as his strange
prevarications, and underhand proceedings in this business apparently
discover,) he durst not presume so impudently to justify this his
dishonorable action in print, even after judgment passed against him, in such
a braving manner, as makes some of his best friends conjecture, he has
already lost the best part of his head (his brains) since his Judgment; and
must even in point of justice lose the residue of it, unless he will so far
under-value not only his well-deserving Prosecutors, and the Council of War,
whom he causelessly asperseth, but even the High Court of Parliament, and his
Excellency, as frantickly to opine, they will all now voluntarily hazard their
own Honors, Justice, and the whole Kingdoms safety, (inconsistent with his
over-daring practices) to keep his unworthy head upon his shoulders, and
uphold his sunk Reputation, to do the Republike more ill offices.

Mercy it self will not, cannot save an impenitent, obdurate, capital
Delinquent, who will neither confess, nor recant his offenses, but still
justify them to the world in despite of Justice.

But Brittannicus, out of his foolish pity, pleads thus for him. That it is
pity we should bury the eminent deserts, and public virtues of that
Gentleman, (in surrendering Bristoll to the loss of the West, the hazard of the
Kingdom, and seeking to f^ment, if not raise differences between his
Excellency, and Sir William Waller, on whom he would translate this damage) in
the Sepulcher of an unfortunate action: I am sorry to see his Advocate, put to
so poor a shift, as thus to transform him into a Roman Catholic, and make
him plead Eminent Merits, yet undiscerned; and public virtues (not hitherto
visible,) to save h^s Head-pe^ce: Its ill pleading Justification by such
works, as have already condemned their Author, in a Court of Justice. His
ensuing shift is yet more miserable; That we should put a difference in
Offenses, and sooner pity then prosecute the faylings of the best, and not
make our sufferings the only Argument of his. For is it not a far grander
and more capital crime actually to surrender such a place as Bristoll to the
Enemy, without necessity, to the Kingdoms incomparable prejudice, then only
to practice its surrender without success, before it was either fortified or
stored? with what justice then can Fiennes (not yet proved the best who put
Col: Essex from the government of that place, upon a groundles pretense he
would not keep it, and actually executed Yeomans and Butcher only for plotting
Bristols surrender before it was fortified, or ammunitioned, though their
project proved successeles) expect a Pardon, when as himself actually
surrendered it, withal the Arms, Ammunition, Magazines, Cannons, Colors in it,
before any extremity enforced him, or the Enemy had so much as battered the
City or Castle walls? If they by his own sentence (though penitent) endured the
halter, I am certain he still stouting it, much more deserves the Axe: And for
the latter part of his Apology it is so irrational, that every man who has
but common sense or honesty will conclude; that he who has caused many
thousand Innocents, and the whole Kingdom to suffer in the loss of such a
place of consequence as Bristoll, deserves not to go Scot-free, but to suffer
more then the Governor of Beeston Castle, and others put to death for losing
places of less importance.

If he conceit, the Noblenes of his blood may apologize for his impunity;
though he has forfeited it in this ignoble action: all understanding men will
conclude, that as it aggravates his guilt, and heightens his offense; so it
pleads most effectually for his execution: since an exemplary President of
justice upon an eminent offender of Noble extraction, will strike more terror
into, and do more good upon other Governors, then twenty Laws, or a thousand
executions of inferior persons, for sleighter offenses; And seeing he has
given the Parliament and Kingdom incomparably the most fatal blow, and the
enemy the richest booty they ever yet received, in the loss of Bristoll; there
is little reason or justice, that he should escape after such a public
trial, and judgment of his own seeking; the best service he can now do for
the Common wealth, being this* to become a spectacle and Monument of public
Justice to Posterity in a military way, as Strafford was in a Politic. We
read in Meteranus, Grimston, Thuanus, and other Historians a memorable history
of justice in this kind upon a young Nobleman of as good or better descent then
himself, Van Hemert a Dutchman, who was condemned and lost his head with two
of his Captains in the year 1587. by the Earl of Leicester and Queen
Elizabeth's direction, notwithstanding the Nobility and greatness of his family,
the powerful mediation of his friends, and the confession of his Errors, with
promise to expiate it by serving the Queen by Land or Sea at his own charges,
only for surrendering the Town of Grave, (of far less consequence and strength
then Bristol) to the potent enemy, after full 3. months (not 3. days) siege,
and that upon honorable terms punctually observed, (the soldiers marching
out with their arms and baggage, and the Citizens with their goods) and that
when the walls of it with many batteries of the Canon were levelled to the
ground, and the town threatened with a present general assault, which made most
of the Soldiers and Inhabitants to importune him upon their knees with tears,
to parley with the Enemy, and to yield the Town upon good conditions. This
sentence and execution was thought over-severe by some, but the Earl of
Leicester, and the wisest men deemed it necessary to reform the ancient
neglects of military discipline then much decayed; and to preserve other Forts
from over-sudden surrenders before utmost extremity: and the wisest Statesmen,
soldiers have affirmed, that the loss of this great man's head was more
advantageous to the States in regard of the President, then the saving of his,
or a thousand men's lives of his rank, in such a case could be. The story needs
no application: he who will not adventure his life, to defend his charge, and a
place of such importance as Bristoll for the Kingdoms safety, and keeping out
of the Irish Rebels, now actually possessed of it, deserves at least to lose
his head for such a Cowardice, and cannot do the Kingdom greater service, nor
Justice more Right, then to suffer for it, and become a President for the
benefit of Posterity, especially when he grows so obstinatly perverse as
neither to acknowledge nor lament his Error.

Certain considerable Queres of public concernment touching Colonel FIENNES.
Fiennes being actually attainted and condemned of high Treason against the
Kingdom, by a reference from the Parliament, can or may be permitted in Law or
Equity to go at liberty, or to continue a Member of the Commons house?
Whether the House Ex officio mero, ought not in Honor and Justice to expel
him, as well as other lesse-Capitall Delinquents? to enquire diligently where
he now hides his forfeited Head, and to exact the forfeiture of it, to prevent
future Cowardice and Treachery in others?

Bristol?

Council of War, openly traduced by him and his, for their just Sentence
against him after nine days full hearing, by order from the Parliament, ought
not to demand and receive such public satisfaction for this high affront; and
his un-voluntary Prosecutors, engaged by himself, such reparation for the
slanders raised of them, as may deter others from such bold daring attempts
against Justice?

Excellency and Sir William Waller, and their Officers? Seeing his manifold
malicious aspersions cast upon Sir William, with his impudent loud-lying
averrement to the Council at the trial, That the prosecution of this Bristoll
business against him (proceeding only from his own braving motions in
Parliament, and public Summons posted up at Westminster, upon hopes to make
his prosecutors cry peccavi, or else to come off with Honor by the Potency of
his friends, not Honesty of his Cause) came by the instigation and confederacy
of Sir William Waller and his Lady, who set it on merely for the great
affection, which he and his family did bear, and the good services they had
done to my Lord General, his Officers and Army: (a most parasiticall seditious
calumny) do more then intimate as much.

Bristoll, that so he may not escape Count-free though Head-free; and so prove
a gainer by his very capital censure?

William Pryn appointed an Auditor for the grand long-deferred Accounts of the
Kingdom by the House of Commons, to be raised out of the list of Auditors, in
the House of Peers, and upon what just grounds of exception (besides his known
integrity and impartiallity for the public weal,) for which he has gratis
done and suffered much without any pay, or recompense for his losses?) And
whether it be just or meet, that Accountants should have a Negative or
Affirmative vote in the Election of their Auditors?

Nath: Fiennes since his good service in surrendering Bristoll, and bestowing it
on the King beyond expectation, with all the fortifications, Cannons, Arms,
Magazines, Colors, Wealth, Ships, and Provisions in it, be not far better
beloved, and befriended at Oxford, then Sir William Waller? The extravagant
testimony of Captain Temple (his own Kinsman and witness) at the trial, with
others of that nature, clearly intimating as much? And whether the sparing of
his head will not be far more pleasing and advantageous to the King, and his
Malignant Cavaleers, then to the Kingdom and well affected party?

England, ruined the Parliament, yea enslaved us and our Posterity for ever in
less then one months space, had the Governors of other beseiged Towns
(especially Manchester, Gloucester, Hull, Plimmouth, Lime, Namptwich, and Warder
Castle) made no better or longer resistance of his forces, progress, or showed
no more valor, Resolution, and Fidelity, to their Country then Fiennes did at
Bristoll, (more strong and tenable then most, and of greater consequence then
all the forenamed Towns,) which he held not 3. whole days, and most cowardly
yielded up before any one Outfort taken, or the Town or Castle walls once
battered or assaulted?



Fiennes since the wars began, did ever personally for all the pay received by
him, perform the least piece of Martial service for the state, except his
fortifying and furnishing of Bristoll for the Enemy? And whether any credit can
be given to his words, or reports, who contrary to his own knowledge and
Printed Papers, denied Collonell Essex or himself to be ever Governor of
Bristol, or that ever he had a Commission to keep it, or sought for any
Commission, though his own witnesses proved, and himself thereupon at last
confessed, he has writ, sent Letters for, and received an Independent
Commission? which made him so Independent both on the Parliament, His
Excellency, and Gods Protection, as without their privity, and beyond their
expectation to surrender up Bristoll to the Enemy, when they gave themselves
for dead men, and many of them retreated thence, with a resolution never to
come on again.

FINIS

