AVRORATA. BY THOMAS PRVIE AN, Student of Gonvile and Caius College in
Cambridge.

Carmen amant Musae, carmen Apollo beat.
Nec decrit musae Coelia pulchra me a.
Ad Patrem suum charissinium
Franciscum Prujean Med. Drem,
Officium dicat snums cum hoc T. P.
Numina carmen habent. Tu praestas, ni mihi fallor
Dicatur libro hoc carmen and Officium.
LONDON, Printed for Hugh Perry near Ivy Bridge in the Strand, 1644.

TO THAT FAVOVRER OF ARTS, The Right Honorable, the Countess of Dorset,
Governesse to our most Illustrious Kings Children, etc.

THO. PRU. tenders with his humblest service these few endeavors.

To the true Pattern of Beauty and Virtue, the quintessences of all
Perfection, my most honored Cousins Mistress Margaret St. George, Mistress Mary
St. George, Mistress Katherine St. George,
Of Hatley St. George, Health and Peace.
Honored Cousins,
IT is the nature of a Marygold to open its leaves to none but the Sun,
despising all other lights; And he, pleased with so true a servant, (though
poor in all things else) shines more graciously upon it then any other. The
poorness of my merit may well parallel me to this flower: And the rich
portion of your favors (whose beams excel that radiant Monarchs of the sky)
you to him. My willingness to serve you, your commands shall never deny to be
equal to my Presidents devotion to its Deity. These endeavors you have been
pleased to style worthy a welcome at your fair hands, when they were tendered
to kiss them. Doing so now, you will add to the engagements of him who is

Your cousin and servant Thomas Prujean.

POEMS.
To the memory of Sir Philip Sidney.
SInce that the world, owing so much to thee,
Has paid so little, and thy memory
Shines not with Rays fit for it, Justice may
Call us ungrateful; but blessed Sidney stay,
Thou playd'st the subtle thief, and with thy wit
Have stolen the rich'st gems of Phoeb's Cabinet.
We court Minerva, and the nine Maids too,
But they all bid us unto Sidney go,
Helicon is drunk up, Elixars spring
Has now no Jove, but Sidney for its King.
When we think for to wash in Thespia,
It bids retreat, and to thee make our way.
How can we deck thee with a verse that will
Make thy fame be more glorious, sound more shrill?
'Twere a presumption, for to hope to be
So great an artist in sweet Poetry.
Can an earths Genius, as thou did, command
The governors of blessed Elizium's Land?
If not, then Iet our Fancies humbly sing
Of Tamarisk's, not the only Sylvian King.
All I desire is but to be a statre,
That may be in thy rule, though n'ere so far:
Let loftier minds, a higher pitch to be,
Coope all their fancies in cares misery.
Whilst, thinking to make their forms so divine,
They suddenly to chaos may decline.
Yet this I will, which my ability
Affords, admire, adore thy vuit and thee.
And this I cannot do, unless thy light
Makes me for to adore, admire thee, right.
Rest let thy foul, pardoning what my muse
May in thy vast Elysium pick and choose:
For what strickt doom thou for it may please to give
Me, will not escape those, who best Poets live.
To the Right Honorable, the Countess of Dorset, Governesse to our most
Illustrious Kings Children, on the opening of the New-yeare.
THe new yeare's come, and wished for Sol appears
Claspt in Aurora's arms: His radiant Spheres
Want nothing (Madam) for to make them give
Their perfect luster, but your saying live.
If you but frown, it is enough to bring
Deformed Chaos to be natures King.
And for that cause it is not resolved on yet,
Whether a night or day shall finish it.
The fate is in your power. I fear 'twill be
Our sable Monarch, gets the victory:
Since the other in its very infant rise
Does offer here so poor a sacrifice.
What can be rich, if that it wants your eye
To guide it to so blessed a treasury?
Where lies a Poets fame, but in the hearse,
Whilst (Madam) you be pleased to read his verse,
And smile upon it? it is you can only raise
The tender sprigge, and make it a flourishing baise.
Then let your beams shoot forth. Let sullen night
Presume no more upon your happy light.
Break through all clouds, and in my being blessed
Sol in his or be enjoyes a happy rest.
To Coelia a Rapture.
1.
Smile Coelia,
And give the world a Robe of light, that day
may glide away,
And crave of night to let her have a cloud
To be her shroud;
Blushing in envy for to be
excelled by thee.
2.
Make the Sun's Priest
Forsake his beams, and turn to where thou be.
Force him to nest
Himself within a shade, to which his love
A Foe did prove.
That then the heavens may take it and place
It where he was.
3.
Make Atlas fear
The Burden is on earth, that he should bear,
When you appear.
Make all the Gods descend to court your shrine
With that one shine;
And when they are come, say this is my
Felicity.
To my Book going to Coelia.
Go Book, enjoy thy happiness,
It Is Coelia's hand, that thou must kiss:
It Is Coelia's eye, that now will shine
Upon thee; what is more divine?
Some Momus, or some envious brat
May say thy master is a chat,
And not a Poet; tell'em then
That Coelia likes my Rugged Pen;
And who dares show a rigid Front,
When cheerfully she looks upon it?
Her ear perhaps may let thy verse
Into it, then my love rehearse.
Whisper my sighs, whisper my tears,
Which guide the minutes in their spears.
Whisper my wounds, and tell her how
Much in her sending Balm she is slow:
Yet whisper not her cruel, she
May answer that my destiny
Equals not hers; and so I am
Not worthy of her servants name.
Tell her, divinenesse strives to be
Companion with blessed Piety;
And if true vows will make me prove
So, she shall have them in my love.
Say to her, Cynthia will give
Rays to base earth; why should I live
Like to a hated shade? say she
Lets, all that freedom have but me;
Though, like the Marygold, I bend
My heart to where she beams do send.
But tell her if I chance to dye,
She loses love, though it lived in me.
On the spring to Caelia.
It Is thee (fair Caelia) on whom nature has
Bestowed that deity, which Flora's was.
Her little young ones haste out of her womb
To take the blessings, which from thee may come.
The morn and her loved Phoebus dare no more
Send them their radiant kisses when the store
Of thy high Luster comes, nor the loved sweet
Of Zephyr fall upon them, when a fleet
Thou sendest from thy breath, their mother dares
Scarce say she gave them being: so appears
Thy greatness in perfection. Glance it will be
More, then these lights can give if it come from thee.
Let one of thy Gales be sent (Caelia)
The perfuming wind for shame will steal away.
Yet my desire is, that thou would not be
Lavish to any in such gifts but me.
Let it suffice, that the bright sun and morn
Shines' ore them, teach them not the south to scorn.
But let me have't twill make me immortal grow,
Thy light, thy sweets, if thou can stoop so low.
To Doctor Gill on calling me his friend
It Is to thee Gill, I send, and though my verse
Has not a Gemme fit for Gustavus hearse:
Yet I can deck a Phillis; and it is
That sure which made me gain the happiness
Of thy rich Friend-ship. Mars did daigne to style
Each light a bliss that came from Venus smile.
Nor can I read that he thought Lemniack Arms
More worthy of him, then the Paphian Charms.
Let it not then beget a blush in thee,
That this thy warlike fancy chose out me.
Thou ador'st Mars, and I the Queen of love.
To imitate him, thou my Friend should prove.
A Pastoral Poem.
SHine (fair Clorinda) let thy Silvius see
No more Eclipses, but of misery.
Shoot forth thy beams, that the proud boasting day
May then confess her every borrowed ray.
Let not the Eastern King forsake thy sight;
For he will (surely) yield thou gave him light.
Why should that face be subject to a cloud.
Which beauty ever yet has made its shroud?
Did nature take such pains? was all this done
To be a prey to base oblivion?
Here is my verse; and though it treats of thee,
The only erectresse of this war in me,
Yet, rather then it should have such a doom,
My fancy, and my self should have a tomb.
An Architect has never a desire
To see his work, as soon as done, expire.
She is the chiefest, and thy self does prove
How much she is with a blessed fame in love.
Thou once could wound, and can thou not again
Appear as glorious, as the appear'dst then?
Thou first do'est captive, but the second time
Thou Wilt mount my fate unto its wished for clime
That is when the holy Rhetoric of thine eye
(Fathomed) shows thou will my Clorinda be.
To Coelia on tendering her trosses.
THe ordour of these is beneath
That which comes from your heavenly breath;
Then not as adders, take and prize,
But as to your breath a sacrifice.
To my worthy Master Mr. Web Master in Music and the Kings servant, etc.
Sir,
THough my juice runs not within a lake
Which from an Orphens may some blessings take;
Though my reed has had the hard fate to play
Dissonant to you; yet my Coelias Ray
Has made me so much happy, as to be
A harbourer of you in my Poetry.
All, I entreat, is that you would but please
To give these warbles of their blushes ease.
My pipe is yet a virgin, and the fear
Of a presumption makes the redds appear:
So much within its notes: say you it is well,
And that's enough the crimson to expel.
On my doubting Coelia had bin dead.
YEt I Will not say death has her; lest that day
Crave an entombing with her, and night sway
The scepter in Elysiums floare; then would
Th'earth-nourishing eye a darker empire hold.
Death would proclaim it only that he might
Graspe in his earthly arms dame natures light.
But if 't be so, give the birds leave to have
The happiness of chirping her to grave,
And not the dull note of one The country bell.
bell: let then
The flowers that lived by her, so dye, that when
They yield their sweets and colors, all may know
They give her hearse but what they to her ow.
I have a debt to pay her for a flame
Which from her eyes unto my poor breast came.
Yet it is not so: would heaven give leave to death
In such a one to make his dart a sheath?
Would they let such a one be vermins food,
Whose beauty, sweetness and whose all over good
They kept so for their palace? if 't be so,
Some gentle fame give me the bliss to know.
I come (my Coelia) death being blessed with thee
Where can I have, but there felicity?
On the death of that beauteous virgin Mistress Eliz: Farmerie, daughter to the
right Worshipful my most honored friend John Farmerie Dr. in Law, Chancellor
of Lincoln, etc.
It Is not enough to weep. for if it were
Nature would be dissolved into a tear:
Fancy would glory, if that it could bring
Pure Helicon to be a briny spring.
Perhaps, dear beauty, thou did only come
To teach how we should know Elysium.
It Is our parts then to joy, not weep, that we
Had the blessed sight of such felicity.
Heaven will not be less glorious, and, to grieve
For thy departure hence, a cause may give
Of kindling wrath in it, because we go
(For thy being theirs) the Pilgrimage of woe.
We saw the Sun, the moon, the Stats, when life
Was pleased to name thy divine self it is wife.
We saw thy eyes, too, in whose every glance
A greater luster, then theirs, seemd to dance:
Beauty we see, which once Apelles drew,
But never such as did appear in you.
We smelt Arabia, yet far beneath
Was it, in our thoughts, thy celestial breath.
We perused virtues actions, but by thee
We thought her excelled in divinity.
In brightness, beauty, sweetness, virtue, all
Might thee their only great example call.
Is it profane to sorrow for thee? How
Will that sin fill the world, when as they know
That thou art gone? though we joy for their bliss,
We must needs sigh, when we knew what it is
That is fled from us. It Is the sweetest fair,
Death gave heaven light, while we here darkened are.
And then my candle went out.
On the death of my most honored uncle William Prujean Doctor in Physic, etc.
THus does our bliss decline; thus does deaths shade
Mufle the luster of each Thespian maid;
Thus does Apollo lose his radiant dress,
Thus Aesculapii loose their happiness.
In thy blessed ash what does not buried ly,
That may give gods and men felicity?
Why are you tardy, when you should appear
And teach me how to bleed a worthy tear?
Or make sweet Ovid burst out of his cell
To bring your grief to fame? me thinks they tell
Me that thou art not dead; proud destiny
Has but thy shroude of flesh, not memory;
It Is only we that lose-thee, now thou art gone
From us, the glory comes to them alone.
But since thy merits so celestial were,
They might have made thy nature a blessed Star:
For what thou had was counted so divine,
That it could nee're in too much glory shine.
Yet, while my verse has life, nothing shall be,
That Is thine, a slave to more obscurity.
On my hearing that Coelia was dead.
What is she dead? 1'st not enough to be
A slave to love, but must such misery
Claim my tears too? help me ye Nymphs to make
My task an end; If your clear crystal lake
Meets but my stream, I may perhaps compose
A sacrifice most fitting for my woes.
But durst fate seize upon thee? could he tell
Thy heavenly body from thy soul so well?
Did it excel earths guilder? did it keep
(As my blessed Coelia did) that light a sleep,
The while it durst appear? As did his eye
When a poor taper would his viewer be?
Did it excel the richest sacrifice,
Which upon Venus alter ever lies?
If so, yet more I can report of her,
That goddess did not such bright beauty wear.
It Is she, her priests did court, they would have had
Venus no more, but (of) this divine maid.
When she is a making ready for to go
To earths rugg'd lodge, this sweet nymphs for me do,
Dress not her hearse with lillies, let no flower
Boast it e're was in my fair Coelias bower.
But make your blushes serve, and for the white
Your glance though sorrows will give more delight:
She has perfume enough still left be hind
(Though thus) to give unto each mournful wind:
Sing in her dirge, that she both loved, and is
(Of him, that loved her) the best gemm of bliss.
On my stealing a kiss from Coelia asleep.
Arapture
NO more let vain Prometheus boasting cry
He stole the fire, which made man perfect be,
For had he but enjoyed such a bliss,
He would have sworn that heat in Coela's lies.
Still let sweet sleep embrace thee, whilst, thus, I
Create my self a second deity.
How they do err, who say a clouded light
Presages nothing but a dismal night!
For that, which on my Coelia's lust're lay,
Guided me to the only truest day.
A day, which, if I always might possess,
Would yield me more, then earthly happiness.
On my Coelia being sick.
Can thou be sick? dares pallidnesse proclaim
Him King, and make the roses lose their name?
Calls he not the lilly queen? and dares he take
Possession of what she her throne does make?
How have thou lost thy beauty, which of late
The gods were pleased to style their only kate?
Thou never wast a wanton unto Jove,
Nor did desire to be Adonis love:
That the two jealous minions might revenge
Thy wicked deed with such a sudden change.
Neither can they report that thou did steal
Celestial fire to make perfection well.
Nor did thou borrow glory. If there be
Ought to be paid, it is by them to thee.
Let me go cavil with the destiny
That durst stir up heavens powers to this decree:
Did not her luster help the radiant Sun,
Still shining bright when as his course was done,
Did not your Cynthia robe her lesser lights,
And her self too with her stolen smiles by nights?
But (ah!) I see the cause. Juno did fear
That Jove had got another lo hear.
Loves mother, hearing of thy worth, was in
A jealous fit, least Cupid should again
Court Psyche in thee: And for this they made
Pandora give thy beauty such a shade.
Poor plotters! think ye, that while you do shine?
Light will not sacrifice to such a shrine?
Can there be flowers, and not a Flora live?
Or can your heaven without her Zephyr give?
What is divine, what good, will strive to be
In the same urne where Coelias ashes ly.
To Coelia in saying she would not love.
VVIlt thou not love? O! can there be
In such a heaven lodged tyranny?
Will Venus, when she burns; not give
Her young Adonis leave to live?
But let his flame consume him? will
She, what she only loves, go kill?
It Is not thy hearts command. In thee
I find a happier destiny.
Perhaps thou feign would bed with Jove,
Or have a Phoebus court thy love:
Celestial powers may only style
Them worthy of fair Coelia's smile.
Can no way make this earth become
A second blessed Elysium?
And man divine? thy selfe's enough
The first of these two for to prove.
Can Coelia live, and the sweet place
Which keeps her be denied its grace?
Holiness makes a God. Can I
Be termed profane that think of thee?
Why did that wanton then above,
Consecrate thoughts to Io's love?
Why did Apollo hunt about
To find the chaste Diana out?
Did not rigid wars God please,
When he thought on the Paphian ease?
This was amongst them all so free,
That 'twas at th'last called piety.
In it I will them equal. My
Thoughts only shall on Coelia be.
Now thou may render love for love,
For I, by this, divine shall prove.
Coelia Lucens, or beauty's glory.
'TWas at that time (when night no Cynthia had,
But of my Coelia's light her spangles made,
And named her governesse of all that sphere,
When to Elysium we both swimming were,
Our oars embraces, thoughts the boat, our love
The Charon to our sweet desires did prove;
When care was lul'd) that in a rapture I
Fancied my goddess in this majesty?
Amidst a troop of Angels was a throne
Placed, which, as I supposed, she sat upon;
A robe she wore stuck all with virgins smiles,
Given, when they hoped to leave Diana's styles.
A crown that did all natural gemmes despise,
Decked with the brightness of true lovers eyes.
Adored by all. Cupid at last came in,
And for to crave her blessing did begin.
Then did he think her straight the lovely she,
To whom he once did yield his deity.
She who the wounder wounded, and again
Felt revell every where another pain:
With that he asked her if she would forgive,
And she Possestesse of his power should live.
His bow he left, and quiver with her, he
Forsook the place, and then the fancy me,
She thought to cosen me, and shot a dart,
(As if another wounded) at my heart.
But then I cried, what is this? A pin? thy eye
My Coelia only can my wounder be.
Then did we kiss, and in this dalliance lay,
Whilst once more night had almost o'rerun day. Psycha.

A Riddleon Coelia.
OF earth I am, yet have a light
Brighter then is shot from Cynthia's sight.
Dame Nature framed me, yet I have
As great report as Fame Gods gave
When once my favors shine, it is
Termed equal with th'AEthereall bliss
For to receive their beam, I give
With smiles felicity, to live
In which diviner powers would be
Earths tenants and pilgrims to me:
All this I am, all this I do,
And they that know me will say so.
An Acrosticke on my most respected Consin, Mistress MARGARET St. GEORGE.
Mirrours delight! Darling to what may be
Astemme in virtue! beauty's treasury!
Rich too in Laurel, and that sacred fame
Grafts envy in the Sisters at your name.
Afraid they be, lest the world for your muse
Romes pride should damn, and you their Primate choose.
Envious at your best fate! it is a she,
That with her fame bedecks your Laurel tree.
See holy Maids, be proud, your lustre's bright,
As if by fame you never had a night.
Enjoy your gemme of happiness, and let
No more base envy over you triumph get:
The glory is sole yours. And you! She,
Graced with true beauty, and Phoebean glee,
Ever shine as you do: And since I did
Overcome all richer fancies, with my speed;
Rehearsing of your too long darkened worth;
Grant me your smiles to deck my verse, and I
Entitl'c dare the best of Poetry.
A Rapture on Coelia.
O! can the gods claim thanks for th'light
They gave us mortals, when the bright
Splendor of Coelia does bestow
Its sparks upon their deities? No,
Their light does only nature guild,
With hers, both it and they are filled.
To Her.
AVrora's blush with n* envy stain
Thy purer Soul, because they feign
It all is example, did they view
Thy cheeks, they would swear they never knew
The lines they writ. Then Fame would say,
Thy earth is an Arcadia.
An Acrosticke on my honored cousin Mistress MARY St. GEORGE.
Mixtures (whose meeting makes Dame natures pain
A greater palm, then that of heavens gain)
Rest in this beauteous mould. All virtues have
Inricht them in her so, that they might crave
Each one a title, being equal to
Such as the gods do give their actions now.
A one she is, whom wonder cannot make
Its seat too much. Such things do harbor take
Nested within her form and mind: He is
Termed above happy, whom her favors bliss.
Graced she is so, that for to be her slave
Each higher power would their palace leave.
O! had loves god once viewed her, he would be
Richer in that then in his deity.
Give her a look, and thou will say all this
Encompasseth not what her merit is.
Another on my Cousin KATHERINE.
Know (Reader) she, whom I sing, has
A beauty, would beget a faith,
That with its charm would make the Gods
Her Courtiers, and with no small ods
Each to be first would strive; Nay give
Rich immortality to live
In her high favor, whilst a day
Nights triumph might become: the ray
Even of Phoebus never does shine
So glorious, as this theme of mine
At his loves sight, such glory never
In Io did Jove see appear.
Not Venus, though she may be said
The beauty of heaven. She has a shade
Gained by her lust, which covers that
Entitled hers; Mine such do hate.
On her chaste breast no thought does lie
Ruled by a foe to piety:
Graced is my Poem that has its frame
Enricht with her c^elestiall name.
To my most honored Cousin Mistress Katherine St. George.
DId nature when she framed you make a scorn.
Of reasons counsel? that thus to adorn
You she has thought it fit, or when your shrine
Had got a being, did not she incline
Somewhat to pride? and therefore let you be
With all her glory? giving n'ere ashee
Ought but her necessaries: she did buy
Her pride at such a rate, as 'twas too high
For her to give. All whom your glorious light
Shoots its first splendor to, are at the sight
Become their smile's whom souls do leave,
Till from a second they themselves receive.
When Io was kept from her wantons wife,
And made with brutes al ways to spend her life,
Sure Nature stole the beauty which she had,
When as she honored the little Maid:
With taking it upon her, to bestow
It on the sex of women: but I know
Not what unless 'twas pride which made her give
It all to you* hoping for to outlive
The gods in fame. And sure what she has done,
Has from them the great palm of glory won.
To a proud ugly girl.
TEmpt not opinions blasts for she will blow
No courtiers phrases, but the world shall know
The naked truth. And thy fine si^ian face
Shall have displayed all its merited grace.
Then shall the tailors being bribed appear,
The barbors ivery, which for teeth you wear.
The painted image which you have to mask
Your countenance with shall then be called to task.
Nothing will escape her trumpet, which to make
Keep silence, it is best you your pride forsake.
Entertain virtue and in that excel
Or thy fame will be worse then hers in hell.
On my most honored cousin Mrs. Katherine St George.
Fool that I am! to think the poets feign
The phoenix. when I see her always reign!
Sprung from the ashes of that glorious dame
Whose dechs the bloods of Greece and Troy became.
Or from the holy relics in the urine,
Where all perfection once was said to burn!
He that can frame a fictions and express
In It the true manner of a beauteous dress,
Enioyes have, for his reward a crown of bay
And is entitled darling of Phoebes nay
What merit I then that can vow a verse
To him, and in it, for faign'd, truth rehearse?
Had but Narcissus, that self-loving boy,
Viewed her, he would have blushed at his fond joy,
Confessing that in her celestial face
He is excelled in a poor atoms place.
Or had the lovely Venus seen this bliss,
She would have loathed at her wantonness;
For did this once shine by her, she would seem
So much deformed, in her own esteem,
As she would think her goddesse-hood was given,
But for a mock to her from th'voyce of heaven;
And that Adonis coopt her in his arms
To make her proud of that, she had not, charms.
Rest here heir to perfection. May thy fire
Never take being: But, when it does, expire.
To Coelia.
LEt not my verse (dear Coelia) pass thy glance,
For fear it should be caught by Ignorance:
It Is not enough to crave the Muses aid,
Nor to mask under great Apolloes shade,
Nor, if my Coelia shine not, can I put
Confidence in Minerva; though sh' unshut
Her Cabinet of favors, and permit
That I enjoy the brightest gemmes of it.
It Is by my Coelia, that I only sing;
It Is from my Coelias smiles my fancies spring.
It Is in my Coelia for to make my muse
^um, or as sweet a voice as any use.
It Is in my Coelia for to Sidney me
It Is in her for to make me Gardner be.
Thy lovely light does all that is good, then let
Me be so happy, as it for to get.
Zephaniah. 32. She obeyed not the voice, she received not correction: she
trusted not in the Lord, she drew not near unto her God.


The Meditation
SEe where thy love is soul: does it of thee
As well, as fair Jerusalem prophecy?
Is Chaos turned so beauteous? can thou come
By Stygian worship to Elysium?
If not, then pause a while; think what it is
To study how thou may despise thy bliss.
Will thy Jehovah court thee to be bright,
When thou so often make a lul of night?
The brute, thou see is sometimes named a dove
Sometimes a lamb* but thou do never prove
Ought but a leopard* wolf, Embracing strife
How to destroy the sweetness of thy life.
Be not so vain a Palinurus; wake,
Wake from thy drousy sleep, and do not make
Fate laugh at thee, let not thy costly ship,
By snorting so, and self to ruin leap.
Give not so much sail to this blustering wind,
But let the sweet south guide thee who is kind,
Hark how it whistles for to have thee come,
Hark how it feign would make it is port thy ho'me.
And give an audience to thy love, the he
Whom thou desir'st to make thy deity.
Hark how they all, who are his servants cry
Wishing them out of his felicity.
Do thou not hear thy very lodge complain
Of being for thy sake slave to so much pain?
Dungeond from heavens lovd life, and for the same,
Which with Elixar should set forth my name,
Furys I have that in their memorys put
My blacker deeds, which time will never rot.
Hear'st thou gods voice? and is it not obeyed?
And does not he let thy reward be paid?
Is not the lord thought worthy of thy trust
Who took thy faith, when thou were almost lost!
And paid thy debt, whenas the sergeant came
A life, A life for thy great sins to claim?
Is he nor worthy of thy heart, nor eye?
Do thou so recompense his army?
Is majesty to have no more esteem,
Then this neglect never to look on him?
Stay giddy tenant: turn, O turn this way,
Behold light once, and then thou wilt wish for day.
Hear and obey, draw near, trust in thy God,
In whom bliss only does enjoy abode
Take not the subtle Grecians promised joy,
It Is but a plot to ruin thy sweet Troy:
Aeneas yet its feeble walls has blessed,
Hectors exceller joys in it to rest,
Crave help of these near wanting destinies
To save thee from the future miseries.
Shake off all Hellens, and let Priams dye:
Let thy sword flesh it on impiety.
Fly out like lightning when thou do espy
A Menelaus offered injury.
When will thou wake, my soul? when will thou give
Night banishment, and under Phoebus live?
O balm thy self with reason, let not sleep
Make thee fall headlong into the Stygian deep:
Obey, believe, draw near unto thy Lord.
Who with heavens bliss thy actions will reward.
The worlds Pilgrimage to himself.
ARt thou not weary yet? do thou not see
How much inglorious the worlds glories be
When once thine eye
Entertaines for an object his
Who owes heavens bliss?
For to admire his sacred deity
Is of more worth, then this to know,
To which thou seem thy only zeal to vow.
2.
Is nature avove him, who gave her birth?
Is the world composed of ought else but earth?
For shame no more,
Had thou but once a holy heart
Thou would not part
With it for all earths Paradises store.
Fades not beauty every day?
Virtues reward will ever with thee stay.
3.
This gone, all joy dies with it that is expressed
By being its landlord: thy heart makes thee blessed.
Jehovah please.
Stay Traveller, make not such have,
See where is placed
The only stock of truest happiness.
It Is here, it is here, enrich thy heart;
Embrace Gods word, and from it never part.
The Penitent.
HOw shall I say, I Have sinned? will not a sigh
Or a true tear a fit expresser be
For (ah!) poor me?
How can I speak when justice stands so nigh?
When conscience my accuser is,
And tells me of sins horridness?
What have I sinned? dare I presume to go
Tell God I am his friend, and prove his foe?
Soul do not so.
God sees my heart, and I will write
In it, I only love his light.
My heart, my secrets cabinet I Will show:
My heart? what secret deeds have I kept in
It, but my sin?
The darkest night can show a beam,
What shall I do with one poor gemme?
What light can the Sun give, when in a cloud*
He Is muffled up? then what is by this allowed?
Yet do not fear,
Gemmes are not hurt, because they foul appear.
The Sun's the brighter at's return,
Then when he did in's glory burn.
Forsake thy sin, and hold sweet virtue dear.
Take off that muddy veil, and thou shall see
How gratefully he will receiv't of thee.
O God, my Lord!
How happy are they that obey thy Word!
O let me range no more, but see
How to know thee.
I do confess, repent, and to thee cry
For pardon Lord. O let me never dye,
But live with thee
Eternally.
Amen.
The Cambridge Mouse.
MY Cat once caught a Mouse, a wondrous one,
That readily could speak the English tongue.
Be merciful, good mistress Gibbe, said she,
Henceforth I nevermore will trouble ye.
Her life and freedom straight was granted her;
Yet once more with her brain she would confer,
Seeing no Friday nights would bless her plot,
She secretly unto my study got.
Viewing a book which I in poetry
Had made, straight witty she desired to be.
Gibbe all this while did watch her, she began
To style me non-sences companion.
Then she had found out something that did make
Me of Dame-follies brood. Thus she did take
A course to spend an hour. 'Faith at the last
My Pus had got her in her clutches fast.
Then cried she, um-what? is my prey become
You my fine gossip? you would feign go home
And lose your fame for these your witty jeares
Given to my master; who now the fool appears?
You said my master was a nonsense grown.
But you, I fear, will call less sense your own.
VVas't not enough, that many a sixpence meal
I suffered thee my morsels for to steal;
But must I hear thee blurre my masters fame?
Is this the recompense that I Am to claim?
Thus will I thank thee; and with that she toare
The Mouse in pieces, which with patience boar
The punishment. Take heed who haunts my house.
For at the last my Cat will catch the Mouse.
SONNETS.
A Sonnet against women by an unknown Author.
COme away, do not pursue
A shadow that will follow you.
Women lighter then a feather,
Got and lost, and altogether.
Such a creature may be thought
To have no soul, a thing of naught.
2.
Come away, let not thine eyes
Gaze upon their fopperies,
Nor thy better Genius dwell
Upon a Subject known so well.
For whose folly, at the first,
Man and beast became accursed.
3.
Come away, thou can not find
One of all that is fair and kind,
Brighter be she then the day,
Sweeter then a morn in May;
Yet her heart and tongue agrees,
As we and the Antipodes.
4.
Come away, or if thou must
Stay a while; yet do not trust
Nor her sighs, nor what she swears.
Say she weeps, suspect her tears.
Though she seems to melt with passion,
It Is old deceit; but in new fashion.
5.
Come away, admit there be
A natural necessity.
Do not make thy self a slave
For that, which she desires to have.
What she will, or do, or say
Is meant the clean contrary way.
6.
Come away, or if to part
Soon from her, afflicts thy heart;
Follow on thy sports a while.
Laugh and kiss, and play, and smile.
Yet, as thou love me, trust her not,
Lest thou becomest a -- I know what.
An Answer to it.
STay, o stay, and still pursue
Bad not such happiness adue.
Know thou what a woman is?
An Image of celestial bliss.
Such a one is thought to be
The nearest true divinity.
2
Stay o Stay. How can thine eye
Feed on more felicity?
Or thy better Genius dwell
On Subjects that do this excel?
Had it not been for her, at first,
Man and beast had lived accursed.
3.
Stay, o stay, has there not been
Of beauty and of love a queen?
Does not sweetness term a she
Worthy it is only shrine to bee^
And where will virtue choose to ly,
If not in such a treasury?
4.
Stay, o stay, where virtue has
A lodge, sure there must harbor faith.
Have not women's tears and sights
Struck pity into de^ties?
Hard-harted shepherd in her passion
How can deceit become a fashion?
5.
Stay o stay; would thou live free?
Then seek a nuptial destiny:
It Is not natures bliss alone,
(She gives) but heavens, and that in one.
What she shall, or do, or say,
Never from truth shall go astray.
6.
Stay, o stay, let not thy heart
Afflicted be; unless to part
Soon from her. Sport, kiss, and play
Whilst no hours enrich the day.
And if thou do a cuckold prove,
Impute it to thy want of love.
To Coelia a Sonnet.
MVst he enjoy loves divine happiness, whose foe he is?
Who never could entertain within's desire
A single fire?
On whose pale heart a flame receives
That, burning, straight its being leaves?
2.
Loves favorites take heat that will endure
Constant and pure*
'Twill make their ashes, lying in the urne,
To fire return,
And when they are in Elysium,
It in their souls will have a room.
3.
Thy eyes (fair Coelia) sent to me a heat, shall never retreat,
But (whilst I live) when most it does expire,
It shall burn higher.
And such a charge I Will to it give,
That though I dye, it still shall live.
A Sonnet.
VVOund not so deep; unless you will
Send me a balm to cure the ill:
Or breath your scorn* that I may die
And rid me of my misery.
It Is better to endure that,
Then live for naught, but shooting at.
2.
I Will not repeat your being fair;
The envy of Cynthia shows you are;
Nor can my heart proclaim you less,
If bleeding wounds, the truth express;
Yet think I do not Gods would let
Nature the greater honor get.
3.
The soul's the purer of the two;
Then how pure must it be in you?
To keep it so, sin not 'twill be
Held then in the inferioritie.
^st not a sin to tyrannize?
Then do not use it, and be wise.
4.
That blush will wear, because it is given
By earths grand artist, not by heaven.
Nor is that graceful stamp of white
Of more endurance. Your delight
Nature styles equal to ours, then
(Since you are loved) faith love again.
An Application of a French Sonnet.
THe pretty birds chirpt in a wood
Whose savage notes to hear, I stood.
O how I did admire the spring,
That such felicity did bring*
2.
My very soul is charmed to see
How blessed they live, who shepherds be.
True love here always harbor has,
Diana's chastnesse treads this path.
3.
O that I had a flock! it nere
Gives an increase to grief or carae.
Happily do they live who keep
Such innocents, as silly sheep.
4.
All Flora's Darlings deck each gown,
That Ceres has in every Down.
False women's smoothed perjurie
Brings never here a misery.
To my self on Coelia a Sonnet.
1.
Back fond lover! court again!
And do not stain
Divinenesse so, saying it can be
Black cruelty.
Though the same may cloud his sight,
Must his flower despair of light?
2.
Once more let her see thy heart,
And never part,
Until the doom of life or death
Falls from her breath.
Fatally she may begin:
Boreas ushers Zephyr in.
3.
Say she frowns, bid her frown still,
They never kill.
It Is policy, that makes her prove
To night a love.
The brightest stars presage a frost,
Think her Eclips inspires hope most.
4.
The Phoenix never did basely burn,
That from her urne,
Should an ignobler spring: then boast
She loves thee most.
Since that Urania gives all bliss,
Thou shall from Coelia have no less.
A Sonnet on Coelia.
Stoop Phoebus! here is one her right claims,
Which is the place, wherein thy beams
Stem themselves. She gives man's sight
Object with a diviner light.
2.
The Marygold, that has made thee
Heretofore her deity,
When she viewes th'lustre of my love,
Will only to her votresse prove.
3.
To Venus beauty all its pure
Essence did sacrifice; but sure
Some want onnesse has made heaven chase
Her out, and set Coelia in her place.
Another.
A Star descended from above
Upon a sudden toward my love,
And (at her sight amazed) it was
In fear it had forgot its place.
For which, lest she should angry be,
It left its flame and straight did dye.
A Sonnet.
O Give me leave to gaze a while
Upon that life-redeeming smile,
Which in my love appears!
Base grief, I now defy thy charms,
Tending to naught but lovers harms
By causing jealous fears.
2.
Did not great Cupids, seeing his dart
Keep such possession in my heart,
(Thinking to pity me)
Cause by his power this? hope to give
That I shall never hereafter live
In less felicity?
3.
Bring that to pass, and then I will
With daily sacrifices fill
Thy lap. O how they err.
Who tell the world pity does fly
Thee as an utter enemy,
And crueltie's thy sphere!
To my self on her Sonnet.
1.
VIew both the Lilly and the Rose;
View both the blushing Pinke, and those
Which Flora holds most dear, yet see
Thy Coelia in her cheeks more be.
2.
View all the beauty, that the love
Of Phoebus calls hers, and 'twill prove
But mean, where Coelia does appear,
Who will not say she heaven does bear?
3.
View Venus, whose pure red and white
The Gods do make their sole delight*
View all that is in the Elysium fields*
All this and more thy Coelia yields.
4.
And will not this beget a flame
Within thy breast? will not this tame
Thy cruel thoughts of women? fie
Sh' has wounded thee, will it scorn, and dye?
5.
No I no more will entertain
Such foes to blisses whose every stain
Makes my soul perish: I Will go and say
I am thy Captive Coelia.
A Sonnet in the praise of Music.
Bless See the 9. Poem.
Buvetia, bless the air,
Breath but once, and it is enough
For to recreate us here,
Making us diviner prove.
2.
Breath my death; For (in thy doom
Though so stern a fate may lie)
Who would not go seek a tomb
If thy voice pronounces dye?
3.
Yet divinenesse gives the best,
And thou art no other sure:
O then send me happy rest,
Ending what I now endure.
4.
Knewst thou what it is to be
Harb' rour of so deep a wound
As I have received from thee,
Then how sweetly love would sound?
5.
Dear, let me that sweetness have,
Name but love, and it will breed
Such a charm, 'twill make thee leave
Naming love, and love indeed.
EPIGRAMMES.
To Dr. Gill.
Thou see my book, but thou will find the wit
To be as hard, as good men are, to get.
To Caelia.
Thou say thou like my verse, and I like thee;
Give me but that, thou shall have poetry.
On Momus
Momus can call another fool, but he
Could never make his brain and wit agree.
On Zoilus.
Zoilus would feign carpe, but that he feears,
'Twill jeer himself, because he is carpt by trh'eares
Woman.
If whence this name had birth, you feign would know
God made the man, but 'twas it, made the woe.
Beauty.
Beauty decays, they say, when age does comes;
But I say no, while paint may have a room.
Omnia fert aetas.
Omnia fert aetas? no, it cannot bring
Mun Salter, but he will with the cuckooe sing
To Erasmus.
That you are a man, each of thy learned works shows.
But yet thy name tells us thou wast a mouse.
To Cornutus.
Such a one is thy wife, you are very kind
To have her for thy self, thy foe, or friend.
To one who said she loved a soldier best of all men.
I like thy choice; for it is not to be feared
But when thou have him, he will stand to his guard.
To Catiline.
Valiant thou were, witness thy death they give;
But I had rather without valor live.
To a beauteous maid being none of the wisest, that disdained a Scholar
because he was not handsome.
You both want something; thou want wit, and he
Is none of the fairest; beauty and wit agree.
To Besse Broughton.
Ben Ionson wished thy pox at Vulcans court:
No doubt but it is, or something better for it.
To a rich man dead.
Living none loved thee worse; now thou art in
Thy grave, none love thee better then thy kin.
Of Poets.
Fame gives a poet's very pretty. Then
Why never loved? for poets are all men.
A Caveat.
It Is true, I never u'sd to ly, but yet
They call me poet, then there is fear of it,
The Proverb.
Never late to repent, the people say;
Yet Wat is hanged; though he repents, to day,
Coelius. Vide Mart.

Coelius says that there is no high power; but I
By Besses voice will prove he tells a ly.
Quinta.
Quinta was whipped for having of a crack;
And yet the Judges daughter broke her back.
The Mounsier.
The Mounsier swears that he must yet be higher.
Take heed, above's the element of fire.
Of Ben Iohnsons death.
Here lies the Fox, then what need we
Fear't, in a glass of sack? be free;
Drink't off. By Jesus Ben does swear
Vulpona never shall hurt us here.
On Shanks.
Shanks swears, he fasts; and always cries for beef.
O how he fasts! that is how fast eats the thief!
A phrase in Poetry.
Fairer then that word fair, why so she must,
Or be as black as Timothies toasted crust.
Of Ponticus.
Ponticus questions me who is a Whore:
I bid him look about, and he will say more.
My antagonist in love.
ONe that was my Antagonest in love
Unto my Mrs. did the favorit prove.
His clothes, his Hair, although it was his fate
To bribe the hangman for that robe on's pate,
Was still commended, which did make me go
Suite my self like him, bribe the hangman too:
All would not do, still he was in her eye,
Still like him did I ever strive to be.
At last he got the pox. Nay then cried I,
Farewell, even take her. And send thee much joy.
To Captain Timorous learning to dance.
Captain, thou needst no teaching to be swift
In the foot, for as I hear, it is natures gift.
A Cobbler.
A fellow asked a Cobbler if he had
The art of making souls good that were bad?
No, answered he, but if your soulebee dry
In Hell, I Will liquer't if you will bring't to me.
To Mons: Lafoole learning to sing.
The note of prickesong is Lasoull, but thou Will make it with thy wit Lafoole I know.
On Cottus.
Cottus e're lying in his bed forsweares.
And why? it has been sold this sixteen years.
On Battus.
Battus swears that he will near be drunk, and still
The pot shall never be from's head by's will.
To Mons: Vertiger.
He that does carpe at others, it is because
He (has no wit) then come thou, into this clause.
To I. Day the scrivener.
My verse is like an old house, 't cannot stand
With credit till it be helped by thy hand.
Thou make it wear out times large running, I
Am bound to thee, and not my poetry.
To Dr. Gill.
To thee great Gill, my fearful muse does fly
To get a guard for her famed Poetry:
When thou but once commendest, not a look
Of envious William will behold my book.
To the Examples of all beauty, my honored Cousins, Mistress Margaret Mary
Katherine
St. George.
Continuance of what they have wishes, T. P.
Honored Cousins,
THe Mariner so lays his Stody, that when his Ship has got into Neptunes
gentle embraces, it may not go out again: Before, I sent a work which you
liked, and with a gentle look was pleased to peruse it, with a fair
acceptance gave it welcome. Should I trust to another fate it might be
dangerous. Therefore since my former have sped so well, I have presumed to
honor with your Names this Dedication. If you but send fair weather this
time, J shall ever be

Your devoted Shipman, Tho. Prujean.

LOVES LOOKING-GLASS DIVINE AND HUMANE. The Divine one in Christ's Birth and
Passion faithfully shown: The Humane one in four Epistles of Iuliets, Romeos,
Lisanders, Calistas.


By Tho. Prujean, Student of Caius and Gonvile College in Cambridge.

LONDON, Printed for Hugh Perry, near Ivy Bridge in the Strand, 1644.

LOVES LOOKING-GLASS.
CHRIST'S BIRTH.
A King of Kings, framer and governor
Of all in all, the all titles meriter;
Who reins the stormy fiend, who calmes the blasts
Of Aeols sons, who roughs and smooths like glass
The Iustie Ocean, when wantoning
With Boreas, she often makes fate to sing
A victory over Nature: He who can
Create, and chaos heaven, earth, sea and man,
All with a breath. A Triple unity
Being one, yet three; three, yet a single he:
Who gives a birth to winter, he whose power
Causes the virgins blush, and every flower
To breath so sweetly. By whom Cynthia's light
Casts such a glorious object to our sight:
Who gives to Ceres all her beauteous glory,
The Muses deity, and of all the story.
Had Virgil sung, for his Aeneas fame,
This Mighties praise, truth had shined in his name;
For all the titles, he could e're have faign'd,
Would not have been with falsety once stained.
Who gave both name, being, and place to nature,
He took a shrine; and once became a creature,
Trod earths poor paths, who could in heaven sit,
Or in a glory for his worth more sit.
Now must we think what pomping should have been,
When such a one to grace earth does begin.
A Kings saluting of the world gives all
Glories attendance exercise. Here call
The towers loud voices men to joy, and here
We see a house burnt for a bonefire.
Now do the terren Phoebuses begin
To strive who first should verse his welcome in.
What does exceed endeavor? Here they dress
A chamber with arts chiefest comeliness
To entertain the mother, with a bed
Worth more, then all the stock that Croesus had.
Besides all this, we here enjoy the noise
Of Wills and Richards balling out Rejoice,
And only that, if nothing else, one ring
Like to a Star) the babe to it is fate does bring.
Of such a one deserves in the memory
Of all to be imprinted with such joy,
Think how much more does his commander, maker,
Merit in hearts: what joy should each partaker
Of such a knowledge have, as does contain
His leaving of the womb, who brought to pain
A period, and so much felicity,
As, not enjoying of it, who is the he
That can describe it? they, who have this bliss
Can say no more, then as it shall be, it is?
Now for a room, now for a downy bed
Neately arted, where the mother must be laid;
Now for the pledges of each joyful heart.
(...), but where is it? where is this desert
^ayd? not in Bethelem: the costly room
Is a base ugly stable now become,
The glorious, bed turned to an oxes stall,
The joy to plots how to bring him to thrall.
This is the entertainment, that they gave
To him, who brought a Corrosine to save
^s from hell's poison. Nor was it any such
^ime dated glory, that he valewd much.
^et him but have, for this most sumptuous room.
(...), heart decked rich with virtue. It will come
More welcome to him. And for all the rest
One that will say in thee I Am only blessed.
LOVES LOOKINGGLASSE.
CHRIST'S PASSION.
Man's only friend by man is doomd to be
An underling to worthless destiny.
He, who even now an endless life could give,
Must now be feign to say, he must not live:
Must not? alas! he will not, and all is
To gain his enemy immortal bliss.
Show me a Gordian Priest so holy bent,
As to submit to such a punishment.
Show me a man too, that would choose to dye
Rather then is brother should thus punished be.
Show me a child, would consecrate his breath
(Rather then is father should be hurt) to death.
Show me a father that would take this doom,
Rather then is progeny should have a toombe.
Show me a Subject that is termed a he,
Devoted so much unto piety,
That, rather then his king should suffer this,
He would forgo all life's sweet happiness.
Show me a mother that would do so much
For her own babe, and all without a grutch.
And is it not worth a wonder, here, that one
Should suffer for's foe such affliction?
It does command thy admiration, man;
For it was caused by thy great Ocean --
Excelling sins; thy king, thy God must do
All this to make thee to forsake thy woe;
To leave thy hunger, and to take thy food;
To make thee only to accept thy good.
And is this all too little? will thou still
Take hunger and leave food, fly good, love ill?
The Pelican can do no more, but leave
Her life, the pretty young ones for to save;
And if they will run from her, how can she
Become their helper in that misery?
The hen but guards, and if the chicke will stray
From under her, it must be the kites prey.
Yet stay fond man; thou have a better guide,
One, that will call thee, when thou go aside.
One, that will rather thy entreater be,
Then have thee banished heavens felicity.
He dies for us, we sin; yet his desire
Pursues us that we to his grace aspire.
The Argument of Romeos and Juliets.
ROmeo and Juliet, issues of two enemies, Mountegue and Capulet Citizens of
Verona, fell in love one with the other: he going to give her a visit meets
Tybalt her kinsman, who urging a fight was slain by him: for this Romeo was
banished and resided at Mantua, where be received an Epistle from Juliet.

LOVES LOOKING-GLASS.
Juliet to Romeo.
FOr health and happiness does Juliet pray
To come to Romeo, and his Mantua.
His Mantua! O in that title blessed
Would my poor fame could have such happy rest.
Once it was so, once could this poor breast boast,
(Rich only then) of being Romeo's host.
No sooner do sleeps charms upon me cease,
But fancy straight disturbes me of my ease.
Her troops she brings, in which me thinks, I see
Most of the horror call its subject thee.
First, here comes Tybalt, tho'onely cause of all,
That styles our misery original.
Fired at thy sight, in's fury, now his breath
Has no issue saving what treats of thy death.
Then say I, what? dares man presume to give
Death that, which heaven has only chose to live?
In thee, sweet Romeo, such perfection lies
As would make up another Paradise!
What has Elysium that is not in thee?
A bliss that will wear out eternity:
Where is that bliss, if not in Romeo's love?
Can Juliet ought else happier then that prove?
When thou do speak, a quire of Angels make
From all their notes thy voice a being take.
Thy eye casts beams, that look as if they were
Contained in one above a natural sphare.
Thy breath is always so delicious,
As if thou had command over Zephyrus.
And before my dream was ended, powers had sent
Thee valor to inflict a punishment
Upon him for his boldness, which was done;
And then, me thought, I did begin to moan.
But then I 'gan to cry, why should these eyes
Pay to a grief, unlawful, sacrifice?
Why should I weep? because my enemy
Became Fates slave, and Romeo from it free.
Is he a friend that would deny to give,
But rather take away by what I live?
My life, my dearest joy, my Romeo?
Yet are my roses overcome by woe.
From thee they had their name, and sure thy love
Their planter, nourisher, blossomer did prove.
From thy sweet lips (when thou did first salute
Me at the Mask) my cheeks did steal this suit
Of crimson, and since thou did kiss more free,
They got what made up their maturitie.
As that celestial His breath.
gale its wonted course
Enjoyed, it was their blossomers sweet nurse.
When I resolved the author of all this,
I straight bethought how many trespasses
I had committed, wasting so away
In grief of his dire foe, so rich a May.
And yet, me thought I a parcaker had
In this my sorrow: pardon if I said
It was thy self. Then quickly thus cried I,
Romeo is one of my society.
Fame growing big with envy, 'cause on me
Are fixed the rays of such a deity.
My Romeo loves me and her snaky twines
Take from that noble wrath their wrinkled lines.
She bursts, and in each ear the poison fly'es,
Carrying of Tibalt's death, the Prince espies
Some murmur for him: he soon questions why
The murmur is, who has this sad reply.
Search soon was made for thee whom in my arms
I caught into my bed. These sudden harms
Struggling to keep from thee, and fearing lest
Thou should be took, all sleep was from me cast.
Then did I close'em, and cried prithee stay.
But thou were gone, alas! to Mantua.
Could no high pow're inspire their wills into
Our great anointed; That my Romeo
His Iuliets bed might still have blessed: could none
Of thy divine parts plead? must thou be gone?
Is Mantua the only place that must
Have of my Romeo the happy trust?
Me thinks I hear the pretty birds begin
To consecrate notes to thy welcome in.
The flowers begin to court thee, that they may
Have both a god and goddess to obey.
But A lovers jealousy eu^ningly expressed.
gentle sweet tell them thy Juliet has
Worth that does all their goddesses surpass.
Parts to be gained, that do deserve a throne
Of happiness, such as the gods sit on.
I will maintain it, since I merited
To be one worth thy love remembered.
Cursed be that Tybalt, that young Phaeton,
Whom valor had bestowed her reins, upon;
That he must needs strive thy world for to burn,
And find by thee preferment for the urne.
That Mantua and not these arms must have
The happiness thy body to receive.
How long of Romeo must I dream, and when
I think I have thee, catch the air again?
Once thou vow'dst by thy self, which I did take
To be a greater then thou e're could make
By heaven its self, to that thy vow did tend,
As in it thou thy love did then commend,
Yet keep it as thou will, all Iuliets cry
Will be with Romeo to live and dye.
LOVES LOOKING-GLASS.
Romeo to Juliet.
THe greet thou sent'st no more belongs to me.
Then when I am sweetly embraced by thee,
Only to that place is ascribed all bliss,
Where Romeo with his fair Juliet is.
Mantua's nothing but a cage of woe
Where thou art not, all countries will prove so.
Where is it that the world forgets not day,
When once it viewes my Juliet is away?
The brighter Cynthia does enlarge her dress,
That she might offer thee a sacrifice
Worthy thy fair acceptance. The infant lights
Forsake our clouds for to bedeck thy nights.
Thy memory should before this complain,
That it does one of such poor worth contain.
Justice should blame thy fancies, 'cause they be
Drawn on no other object saving me.
My riches are all dig'd from Sorrows mine,
Only some favors, that I keep of thine.
There thou have stockt me well, then why do I
Make my self of so little value be?
One glance of thine is able to create
A man, an Angel, or of purer state.
How many crowns stemmed with that influence
Had I the night before I went from thence?
I now give credit to thy words, which treat
Of my being in divinest parts so great.
But Juliet, if in this esteem I live,
How must thou shine, that did all to me give?
And yet thy love has made me raise my pride
So high, that all but thee I have denied.
There Is none does merit, now thou'st shined on me,
My giving love to her, but only thee.
And since it is so, since thou have made me prove
Above the merit of all but thy love,
Let it be thus my Juliet, let me have
The bliss of being thy Romeo to my grave.
What is it to be banished from my earth,
When Juliet to my comfort gives a birth?
When Juliet gives me an Ironick nay,
Blushing entreaties for to kiss and play?
Let Tibalt dye, and Romeo be sent
As a just doom) away to banishment.
What is it to observe so heavy a doom,
When I may call my Juliet my home?
For Iuliet's smile, who would not undergo
The clumsey look of any Prince or more?
Say Juliet that she loves, all this distress
Twill transmigrate into a happiness.
Yet when I name thy cousin grief does view
Some blood of thine in him, and that will sue
To have a tributary brine. The muse
That sings his death, may out of the Laurel choose
As fair a branch as any. It is thee
(When he sings him) shall bless his poetry.
The Destinies grew proud, when as they had
Got so much Juliet within their shade.
And had he thought how much the world he blessed,
His sword would have enjoyed a happy rest.
Had he but harp'd of being thy kinsman borne,
This fire would never have given his ash the urne.
Verona I must leave, law will not let
Me of my sweet enjoying Juliet.
The blessed infusion I did take from thee,
Makes all the birds strive which should welcome me
With the best notes, esteeming Romeo
The god they ought to sacrifice unto.
The flowers do court me, thinking that I am
A priest, that from their Flora lately came,
To give them some rich nature. Here the Rose
Bids the wind kiss her leaves, and straight she strowe^
Them for my foot-step, the Lilly offers up
The richest of her beauty in a cup.
All this I had by the pledge of thy dear love,
Which for to gain a second time, I Will prove
A desperate Leauder: Break through Seas,
So with my Hero I may take my ease.
Let Neptune rage, and throw his curles about,
Dart ruin at me, yet I will get out.
And when I am at Hero's Sestian rowre.
Laugh at the poorness of the Sea-gods power.
Let the poor Spider envy lay her snare.
All is too weak if Iuliets love bids tear,
I Will prove the Swallow, and undo again,
What to make perfect, cost her so much pain.
And fly into thy lap, my wisht-for nest,
If thou wilt give leave that in it I may rest.
Did the devouring gulphs betwixt us lie,
Them would I venture Juliet for to see.
Let Death gape for to catch me as I come;
Yet I Will not turn before I see thy home.
And let not fear wither that rosy bed
Upon thy checkes, nor make the Lilly dead.
Know I am Romeo still, know I am he.
Who vowed what never shall be broke to thee.
My self shall be my self; who dutes, who will
Forsake life for to run to deadly ill?
When I name Juliet, and voice she is mine,
(...) make a boast I equal powers divine.
^'m banished fair Verona, and will be
Banished life, yet never untrue to thee.
The Argument of Lisanders and Calistas.
LIsander in a fight was so wounded, that he could not hold his sword, and so
let it fall: Cleander ( Calistas husband Lisanders Mrs.) was killd with it,
which made him to be tainted with the murder. Berontus Cleanders brother,
knowing of the love between these two, laid Calista in prison as a cause
thereof, but Lisander was out of the way. In this distress, she writes to
him, fearing his having done it, and desiring to know the certainty.

Loves LOOKING GLASS.
Calista to Lisander.
Imprisoned both in body, and in mind
Calista sends some comfort for to find
Of thee Lisander, that with joy she may
Swan it out bravely at her dying day.
Would certainty inform thou were not he
Whose fatal hand enriched destiny
With my loved Lord Cleander: or would death,
When he uncaves my soul, dip every breath
And memory, that has it, in his lake,
His sacrifice I here my self would make.
I honor sons to valor. Though it be
But counterfeit, yet it shows well in thee.
From them, whose tongues would favor no report,
My ears have cane thy merit, all the court
Makes their sole eloquence Lisander's name,
Striving whose wit should bless the wing of fame,
Worth never was adored with such a zeal,
As is Lisanders. All things learn to tell
Us the glad tidings. Every silver Spring
Glories, when that Lisander it may bring
Unto a happy shore. Never a friend
Is there of mine, but does thy valor send
As if it were a Marses. Some did taste
(That were their enemies) of what thou have;
When as the Sylvian gods had left them to *
Ruin, thou conquenedst that fiercer foe.
For strangers thou did hazard out the dye:
Then must Cleander know thy cruelty?
Must friendship have no recompense, but this?
What is in it, that can be happiness?
Each son to Aeol, when they waft away,
What thou have done, will lose their dress of day,
And be turned, with its foul infection,
To cloudy vapors. Is Cleander gone?
And by Lisander has the frown of fate
Lowr'd on him? O unhappy friendships ^^ate!
To what did all the sighs and tears of thine
Tend, when thou did commend thy love in brine?
And sorrows air unto the woods, when each
Of the harbingers thou how to mourn did teach?
When as the mary gould desired no sun,
To show she thy unhappy sat did moan?
Did thou e're hope for to enjoy my love.
When treacherous to Cleander thou did prove?
Thou did not play the Politician right
Enough, to kill him in the dead of night.
A prepared field had better fitted this,
Since thou art termed a Son to nobleness,
One of her chiefest too: thy memory
(Which filled the world) will by this ruined be.
Thus does Lisander give reward (they will say)
For his friends love, his friends life takes away.
It Is false, Lisander did it not. Ye reeds.
That to each gole of wind do bend your heads
Ye feathery waving fancies, ye that do
The falsest always give your credits to.
And thou base rumor that dare stain the worth
Of heavens darling! Thunder will break forth.
And curb thy trumpetting. Though thou be free
A while, the Powers will find their enemy.
Can he, whom great Bellona favored best,
Forsake her deity, and so stain his crest?
Perjured Berontus but Cl^rind^ * more!
Dare ye wipe of Lisanders noble score?
Divinity, should he but go astray,
Would turn into sins night its glorious day.
He surely is the mover of that sphere,
And where his soul directs, it must be there.
Be bright Lisander, show thy innocence,
Let that bright Sun display its influence;
That all may see thee morelesse, all may know
Thou nee're to such an Erinnys did owe
Or any thought, or action. What Is divine
That will not have some clouds before it shine?
Yet I Will disperse all these. And since it is done
Confess to the world, the deed was mine alone,
'Twas mine Lisander. This my right hand did
That which so long and often I denied.
Yet blame me not, young courtier, for 'twas thee
That were the cause of this my cruelty.
Thou sud'st for love, and for to recompense
It with a grant, I attempted this offense,
A sword was found there bloody. All secure
I made when I had done the act: so pure
An essence of rich policy did give
Me leave, that while its harborour to live.
Not for to rage, because I fear to dye;
(More would I undergo sweet friend for thee,
Were I but sure thou would constant prove.
But how can murderers be true in love?
Rage did not make me do this stirred by that.
Fear? it is (alas) the only thing I hate.
Yet me thinks I should pare it with another.
But what thou ere have, I here do smother done.
Live still Lisander. And for all thy vows
Thy signs, thy tears, take this, which love allows.
If thou do the most wretcht Calista see
Yielding to death, as it is the laws decree,
Say to thy self, Lisander, she did dye
Not for Cleanders murder, but for thee.
The Judge shall yield thee guiltless, and for this
Let me but have one tear my dust to bliss. He freed her father and brother
from thieves in a wood.
Her maid who voyc'd abroad the false intelligence.

LOVES LOOKING-GLASS.
Lisander to Calista.
KNowing, by the superscription, whence these came
And that they had the fair Calista's name;
Heaven I invok't to make me worthy to
Enrich my eyes with what the inside show.
How often I adored, how often kissed
The paper where I thought thy hand not mist;
For to recount would puzzle any one,
Though he was an Arithmaticion
In loves sweet merchandise. Why, what can come
(Then said I) from Calista but a doom
To love her whilst I live? and where can bliss
Ly, if not in so great a happiness?
Then I presumed to read. But when I see
A conspiration for my misery,
When I did view my friend Cleanders death,
And me the fatal cause given by thy breath,
My full blown worth began to sade me thought,
My eyes to dimnesse, as they read, was brought.
Thy letter did so gloriously appear,
With thy styled justice, I durst not come near,
For fear the rays should burn me: how dare I
Think my self clear, when thou accusest me?
My martial hazzards did not freez my blood
So much, as when I saw thy nuntio's brood
Stuck with so many of thy angers darts.
Now does Lisander read, and now he starts.
First with a pleasing calm my heart is blessed,
Now comes a Boreas, and denies me rest.
His raging blasts he every where sends, and
Makes my poor soul subject to their command;
Whilst the flame is dispersed through every pore,
Ready to cast me unto Charons shore.
Some words I happily receive of love,
But thousands my ioys enemies do prove.
Neptune, in's fury, never could give such shocks
Unto a ship, as I have by these rocks.
Jove never had with the gyaganticke race
Such trouble, as I have in one lines space.
Their supposed truths I tremble to deny,
Because they feign themselves to come from thee.
Should I deny what is from heaven sent,
How could I look for a less punishment,
Then it is hate to reward me? Sweeting speak,
My part is only no reply to make.
But will the powers no succor to me lend?
Can my poor innocence find never a friend?
Must envy have her will, and justice dye?
Must virtue now be thought impiety?
I must conclude it so, for they confine
From liberty thee, the only stock divine
Of all Elysiums governors. Has he
No pity, whom we call our Deity?
Love in its self being so just a thing,
So holy, should have such a God and King:
How have I been unto my vows untrue
To merit, sweet Calista, this of you?
Or to Cleanders friendship how false have
I been that here my love must find a grave?
Yet have you not the taint as well as I?
Enjoy I not Calista's destiny?
To tender arguments so against me is,
'Twould make me prisoner from my happiness,
Else I could bring (o that I naught could bring
But what would make me with Calista sing!)
My loyalty to valor; who can I taint
Me there? Calista, that never erring Saint,
Yet cannot all these crimson gemmes, I wear,
Pleaders for their Lisander now appear?
They can, but dare not, till Calista's face
Banishes frowns, and takes her candours grace.
My very sword, if that Calista say
It must, its trusty master will betray,
Rather then lose success to its plot, 'twill run
To my foe, and help there to eclips my Sun.
Hot in disputing of a question, sent
Unto me, faint I grew. A banishment
From life I fear, which made me soon let go
My nipping sophister, my sword, my woe.
Which, since I could not find. But (ah!) all this
Rather detracts, then adds to happiness.
Why do I blame my valor? 'cause it veiled
To envies cloudy frowns? could I have sailed
Unto a better shore with my wish? 'twas
'Cause I should take with fair Calista place.
Why do I chide my wounds, because they hid
Themselves, and would not for their Master plead?
Why do I rage, and question thee my sword,
'Cause thou did run from me thy trusty Lord?
Some happy fate* that knew my friend should dye,
And she be doomed the cause, instructed ye
How you should make me blessed. I do accept
What you in store so long have for me kept.
We shall have nothing when you are gone but strife,
Who shall with thee first sacrifice their life.
The Rose, the Lilly, Panciby, what is best
Of natures joy will seek with thee to rest.
The meaner beauties will desire to stay
To gain, when thou art gone, perfections bay.
Both will dye once, both will enjoy one death,
Who will not with Calista lose his breath?
To my Self an Allegory.
ANchor within this port, thy ship has yet
The smiles of Neptune, and no tempests met.
Yet has no Doris rought her brow, nor given
Envious or angry looks; All smooth and even
Gives thee a welcome yet. Yet Englands flood
Curles not her silver maine but for thy good.
Yet has Elysium's calmest breath appeared,
No angry North yet, yet nothing to be feared.
The gods have to thy voyage prosperous been,
Trust not another fortune, here strike in.
O happy shore! when I salute thy sand,
Me thinks my mother has me at command.
Where can an infant think to fare the best,
If at her dugge it is denied to feast?
Thou stretchest forth thine arm to catch thy son
(Sweet Thamesis) with ruin half undone.
Ah! hold me fast, lest a dissembling wave
(With witching charms) makes me thy true love leave.
For when Sh'has got me at her wisht-for state,
I must endure the rigid front of fate.
Keep me close in thine arms, for if I find
Thy friendly pledges, set none else be kind.
The care is taken. Ah! blessed mother, see
On thee depends my only destiny.
Let envy bubble, if there is such a fiend
Against me. Thamesis but prove my friend.
Or let her Dogfish bark, I now am free,
When once thy eye yields that I happy be.
Then go no further, here unsaile thy ship.
She will not hurt, but save, if thou wilt be kept.
FINIS.

