JUS PATRONATUS, OR A Brief Legal and Rational Plea for Advowsons, or Patrons
Ancient, Lawful, Just and Equitable Rights, and Titles to present Incumbents
to Parish Churches or Vicaridges, upon Vacancies.

Wherein the true Original of Advowsons and Patronages, together with their
Justice, Legality, Equity, are demonstrated; and a full Jury of Legal Writs and
Remedies (provided by our Municipal Laws for Defense and Recovery of Patrons
Rights, against all Usurpations or Encroachments on them) produced; as a
seasonable Antidote, against the late Anomolus Vote passed to their prejudice,
without any Hearing of Patrons by their Council, or Lawful Trial by their
Peers. Whose duty is here declared; and our Fundamental Laws defended.

Compiled for the present and future Benefit of our Churches, Ministers, and
all true Patrons of them.

By WILLIAM PRYNNE of Swainswick Esquire

Lam. 3. 35, 36. To turn aside the RIGHT of a man before the face of a
Superior, to subvert a man in his CAUSE, the Lord delights not.

Job. 34. 17. 30. Shall even he that hates RIGHT, Govern? etc. Whether it be
done against a Nation or man only; that the hypocrite reign not, lest the
people be ensnared.

Mich. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Woe to them that devise iniquity and work evil upon
their beds, when the morning is ligh they practice it, because it is IN THE
POWER OF THEIR HAND. And they covet fields and take them BY VIOLENCE, and
Houses and take them away: So they oppress (or defraud) a man and his House,
even a man and HIS HERITAGE. Therefore thus says the Lord, Be old against this
family do I devise an evil from which ye shall not remove your necks, neither
shall ye go haughtily; for this time is evil. etc.

London, Printed for Edward Thomas, and are to be sold by him, dwelling in
Green Arbor. 1654.

To the Unprejudiced READER.
Courteous Reader,
PReventing Physic being ever held more safe then removing, I presume this Jus
Patronatus, and Brief Plea for Patrons of our Churches Rights, though it come
forth some And after its first pening on that occasion.
months after the sudden unexpected Votes against them, without hearing or
summons; will neither seem unseasonable nor unnecessary, seeing it may prove a
Special Antidote and Demurrer to its future execution, or revival to the
prejudice of our Church, Ministers, Religion, Nation in general, and
disinheriting all Patrons of their Ancient, Just and Legal Inheritances, and
Advowsons in particular. I conceive the Power, Animosity, Activity, Hopes of
the Jesuitical and Anabaptistical Contrivers, Prosecutors of that grand Design
and Vote, are not yet so inconsiderable, despicable, dead or languishing, in
these times of sudden great Revolutions, Changes of our Government and
Governors ( three of which we have unexpectedly seen and admired at within the
space of ten whole months) but that they still expect during this running wheel
of our fluctuating State and Church affairs See Hey lins Microcos. p. 125,
165, 166, 168, 218. 219, 227, 406, to 434, 487, 546, 560. to 571, 579, 580,
597, 598 613, 614, 618, 629, 640, 641, 642, 643, 648, 661, 667, 678, 684, 693,
694, 702, 704, 707, 708, 710, 713, 714, 751, 752, 753, 721. diverse presidents
of this kind.
those spokes in few months time may possibly be uppermost, which now are low,
or lowest; and those who now are highest, securest, as low as the very dust.
Peruse but these sac e l Texts, Dan. 4. 29. to 34. Dan. 5. throughout,
specially v. 30, 31. Judges 1. 4. to 8. Exodus 14. and 15. 2 Kings 7. 7, 8, 9.
10. c. 19. 35, 36. Prove. 24. 21, 22. c. 29. 1. Psalm. 90. 5, 6, 7. 2 Samuel c. 15.
and 16. and 18. and 19. Esther c. 5. to 10. Psalm. 73. 18, 19. Job 20. 4, 5.
etc. Psalm. 37. Psalm. 92. 6, 7. Job. 1. and 2. and 42. Mich. 7. 8. 9. Isay 10.
and 13. With other Texts: and consider the sudden great changes, Revolutions
recorded in them both in relation to Kings, Kingdoms, Nations, Armies,
Grandees, Rulers, good and bad, Saints and Sinners, Jews and Gentiles; and then
the Highest and most Secure ( who know not what one day may bring forth, Prove.
27. 1. Jam. 4. 13. etc.) may yet justly fear, expect changes in our Church,
State, and prepare to prevent all Plots and Designs for the ruin of both; long
since laid by Thomas Campanella, De Monarchia Hispaniae. c. 25. 27. etc. the
Jesuit Parsons ( discovered by Watson in his Quodlibets) Carddinal Richelieu,
and others; since vigorously prosecuted by our foreign Common Popish
Adversaries and their Agents under a pretext of friendship, and other specious
ends, to effect our See the excellent prologue of the Statute of 25 H. 8. c. 22.
Desolation in conclusion. The chief Particulars whereof in respect to our
Religion are, b See the excellent prologue of the Statute of 25 H. 8. c. 22.
Watson^ Quodlibets. p. 92. 93. 144 385. William Clark his reply to Persons
Lible f. 74. 75. Campanella De Monarchia Hispaniae. c. 18. 19. 23. 25. 27.
To put all Churches, Colleges, Lands, Rectories, Tithes, Revenues into
Feoffees hands; to allow only arbitrary Pensions out of them to Ministers and
Scholars for their maintenance, and convert the rest to other uses: To erect
Itinerary Predicants fixed to no certain places, instead of Parochial
Ministers, allowed and chosen only by a select Committee, not presented by our
Patrons. To broach old Heresies and new Opinions in Religion by Jesuitical
Emissaries and Seminaries in all places: To sow the seeds of Schisms and
Divisions not only in Divinity but likewise in Philosophy and all other Arts
and Sciences, to distract and divide us: To promote and cry up the study of
Astrology, to alienate men's minds from Religion and Piety. To set up new
Orders, Sects, Religions, and procure a general toleration of all Religions: To
revile and disgrace our ancient Ministry, Ministers: question all ancient
Truths, Principles of Religion, and Articles of the Creed; which Joannis
Baptista Poza and some other English and Spanish Jesuits have done: as you may
read at large, in Societatis Jesu NOVUM FIDEI SYMBOLUM: and in Impia, scelerata
and horrenda ANGLICORUM: and HISPANICORUM JESUITARUM CENSURA IN SYMBOLUM
APOSTOLORUM: printed 1641. at the end of Alphonsi de Vargas, Toletani, Relatio
ad Reges and Principes Christianos. De Stratagematis and Sophismatis Societatis
Jesu ad Monarchiam orbis terrarum sibi conficiendam: out of which all the late
Blasphemous Monstrous Opinions and Heresies broached amongst us, have been
originally extracted and vented by the Jesuits under other Disguises, as those
who compare them may at first discover. What their Designs have been to change
and ruin our Monarchy, Kingdoms, Government, Laws, State; you may read at
large in Thomas Companelle: De Monarchia Hisp. c. 25. 27. Watsons Q^odlibets (
specially p. 309. to 334.) Romes Masterpiece, Hidden works of Darkness
brought to public Light, and my Speech in Parliament. Take the main of all,
in the Politic Instructions of that Arch-Machiavilian, Cardinal Richeleiu:
who after See Romes Masterpiece p. 19. Exact Collection. pa. 206.
he had (by the Jesuits and Popes Nuncioes assistance) raised the first Wars
between England and Scotland Hidden W^rks of Darkness. p. 204. to 217. 130.
131. 138. 232. 233. 234.
, promoted, foment^d the horrid Rebellion in Ireland; and raised an unnatural
Division and War between our King and Parliment, in his life, recommended
these Instructions to the French King ( and Mazerin his successor) at his
death, An. 1642. since published to the World by a noble Italian Earl, Conti de
Galeazzo Gualdo Priorato, in his Historia, part 3. ( printed at Venice in
quarto, Anno 1648. in Italian, and dedicated to the King of Poland) p. 175.
176. Che Sopra, etc. That above All Other Things, HE ( the French King) should
endeavor to keep the Government of GREAT BRITAIN DIVIDED and DISUNITED, That
this was punctually pursued by the French King and Car. Mazerin: appears by the
Lord Digby's Cabinet printed in the Collection of Ordinances of Parliament. p.
849. 858. 862. 863, 867. 868.
by upholding the weakest party, that the other might not make it self over
powerful, Reducing the three Kingdoms of ENGLAND, SCOTLAND and IRELAND, TO BE
DIVIDED; either, BY NOMINATING OTHER KINGS; or, BY REDUCING IT TO A
COMMON^WEALTH; yet with this Caution, that WHEN IT IS REDUCED TO A
COMMONWEALTH, so to order it, THAT IT MAY NOT BE ENTIRELY ONE, BUT DIVIDED. For
Republiques, ever enemies to potent Neighbors, ought to be suspected by the
State of France. How successfully these Plots have been pursued, we all visibly
behold and feel by sad experience. The Lord open our hearts to consider it now
at last and prevent our intended ruin by them before it be overlate.

I confess I have ever met with very poor Encouragements, and See a new
Discovery of the Prelates Tyranny; whom others since have equalled.
manifold grand Discouragements, Affronts, from pretended Christian friends, as
well as Foes, and men of all sorts, for writing, publishing or acting any thing
for the Commonweal, defense, safety of our Church, State, Religion, Laws and
public Liberties, or discovering any Jesuitical Designs to undermine them;
having been so ingratefully requited, so despitefully used, by seizing my
Writings, Papers, Letters, Records, Books; denying me the use of pen, ink,
paper, books, intelligence by letters, or free conference with any; the liberty
of Gods own public Ordinances ( to omit all public Injurious calumnies,
censures, corporal sufferings) and cooping me up for many years close Prisoner
in remotest parts under strictest Guards, of purpose to hinder me from such
good public services, to my great temporal loss and Republikes prejudice.
But the cordial zeal, love, duty, I bear to my great Savior, Deliverer,
Enlarger, his Church, Ministers, People, Truth, Cause, and the Weal of my
Native Country, Religion, Nation, have engaged me to neglect, contemn all
Difficulties, Remoraes, Oppositions, to do them all the Services I can in my
Generation; to adventure my estate, liberty, life, and spend all m^ studies in
their behalf, according to the impulse of my Conscience; expecting my whole
Mat. 5. 12. Luke. 6. 35. 2 Cor. 4. 16, 17.
reward in Heaven above, what ever befalls me for it here. And this, this only,
without private ends, sinister respects, or prejudice against any sincere
Patriots designs, or real public endeavors for our Churches or Nations
settlement upon Prove. 16. 12. c. 14. 34. c. 25. 5. c. 29. 4. Psalm. 72. 1* 2, 3,
4. Psalm. 85. 16. Heb. 7. 2. Job. 34. 17. 2 Kings 20. 19. Isay 32. 17. Zech. 8.
16. 19. Lu. 2. 14.
sure foundations of Justice, Righteousness, Truth, Piety, Sincerity,
restitution of all to their just Rights and Public Liberty) has engaged me
to the compiling of this short (and I hope seasonable useful) Plea for Patrons;
( and occasionally, for our fundamental Laws and Liberties now struck at (which
I humbly submit to thy impartial censure ( being a Theme which few or none have
purposely and particularly handled) and commend, with my prayers, to Gods
Tuition and Benediction alone, to whom I devote it.

Farewell.
JUS PATRONATVS OR A Brief Legal and Rational Plea for Advowsons, etc.
THE present Injurious, that I say not unrighteous Design, of some
Anabaptistical and Jesuitical furies, to abrogate all Advowsons, and strip all
Patrons of their ancient, legal, just hereditary Rights to present any future
Clerks and Encumbents to Ecclesiastical Benefices, or Parochial Churches, by
mere Arbitrary illegal Votes, without any Judicial Sommons, hearing or legal
trial by their Peers, cont^ary to the express letter of the great Charter of
England. chapter 1. and 29. the statutes of 25. E. 3. chapter 4. 28. E. 3. chapter 5. 37.
E. 3. chapter 18. The petition of right. 3. Caroli: the Common Law of England, the
Liberty and Property of the subject, after so many years bloody contests for
their pretended, if not intended defense; has engaged me to compile this short
Apology, and Plea for Patrons just Rights of Presentation to those Churches
whereof they have the Advowsons, against this unparraleld usurpation on them,
for the information of the Ignorant, conviction of the seduced, and Refutation
of the obstinate Promoters, of this destructive project, covertly containing in
its bowels these particulars of great concernment, which should excite all true
Patrons, Lovers of our Religion, Church, Ministers, Ministry, Laws and
publ^que liberty, to abominate and oppugn it.

1. A Jesuitical and John Cann^, his second voice from (...) Temple to to the
higher Powers p^ge 2. 4 5. to 10
Anabaptistical plot, to suppress subvert all our Parochial Ministers,
together with their Ministry, throughout the Nation at once; which will
n^c^ssa^r^ly, easily and speedily be effected, when deprived of the legal
Patronage, countenance, assistance of their Patrons, and exposed to the
arbitrary Injustice of these new Projectors and their Agents.

2. A like design, to J^hn Can Ibid. and page 28, 29.
Abolish all Parochial Congregations; and then to demolish to the ground all
Parish Churches and Chapels (for if they were Dav^d, Isay, Jeremy were of
another mind. Psalm. 74. and 79. I^ay 64. 11, 12 Je^. 52. 13. etc. Lam. (...).
7. and Hag. 1 4.
razed to the ground: IT WOULD BE WELL, writes Can;) or else to dispose of
them otherwise and better to such ( Anabaptists and Jesuits) as will freely
declare the mysteries of the Gospel (or rather of 2 These. 2* ^
iniquity) to the people; for a time, and then fl^ece them afterward.

3. A Sacrilegious project, to Can Ibid. p. 1. 2. 10. to 25.
abrogate all our Ministers ancient maintenance by Tithes, Glebes, Rectories;
and dispose of them to other uses; to starve and famish both them, and their
Successors, by taking away the food and maintenance whereby hither to they have
been nourished, fed and kept alive: They are Cannes very words, such is his
unchristian charity, and Antichristian cru^lty toward our Ministers, and their
Families.

4. A present erection of a new unordained, vagrant, itinerant, irregular,
stipendiary Ministry (if it deserve that title) fixed to no certain place, in
leive of Parochial Ministers; wandering up and down throughout the Nation, (like
the preaching Friars and Jesuits, in foraign parts, and some Anabaptistical
predicants at home) to vent their Anabaptistical, Jesuitical, Monkish Errors,
Heresies, Blasphemies, Innovations, Whim^ies (to divide and distract the people
into endless Sects, Schisms, Conventicles, Heresies, Contentions, Factions in
all Parishes, Places) to the utter desolation of our Church, subvertion of our
established Protestant Religion, and enslaving of our Nation at last to the
Antichristian tyrany of the Pope, Jesuits, and Spanish Monarch. A plot long
since laid for this very purpose, by that Arch-Traytor to our Church and State,
Robert Persons, the English Jesuit, in his Memorial for Reformation, written at
Sevil in Spain, 1596* as you may read at large in William Watson his
Quodlibets, Printed: 1602. p. 92. 93. 144. 289. William Clark, his Reply to
Father Parsons L^ble: published. 1603. fol. 74. 75 (both Seminary Priests) and
Parsons h^s own Manifestation. fol. 56. 57. Yet now eagerly prosecuted by John
Cann^ in his voice. p. 24. to 30. and other Anabap^ists, who are but the Sea
Jubileum, ^^ve sp^cul^m (...) pr^nted 1643. and my ^^dden w^^ks of d^^kness etc.
Jesuits instruments, confederates in all these Designs.

5. A Jesuitical project to draw a general Infamy, Odium, D^testation upon our
Religion and Nation throughout the Christian World for Sacriligious Rapines,
viol^nce, Injustice: and to discourage all Charitable, well-affected people in
our Nation, from all future public works of Piety and Charity; when they
shall behold the Fabrikes, Endowments, Revenues of our Churches, and all the
Bounty, Piety, Charity of our Religious Ancestors to Gods Church and Ministers,
most impiously s^cralegiously dissipated, subtracted, profaned, invaded,
plundered, demolished, perverted to quite contrary uses; and the Heirs,
Successors, Assigns of all such who at their proper costs, first built our
Parish Churches, and endowed them with Rectories, Glebes, Tithes out of their
own Lands and Inheritances, most inju^iously, ungratefully, desp^efully
disinherited and deprived of their anc^ent unquestionable lawful Rights to
present any future Encu^bents to them, when void; disabled ( 2^. ^. 6* 7, 8.
Brook (...) 78* 24 E 3. 72. 7 ^ 4. 11* 12 Brook. (...). 9* 19. 9* E. 3. 26. No.
N^^. Bre^ 33. Cook^ 1. I^st. f. 13. b. Reg^st. t. 218.
contrary to our Laws and com^on ^quity, which resolve, they ought to revert
to the Donors and Founders and their Heirs) to rep^ssesse those Rectories,
Gl^bes, Tithes Endowm^n^s there Ancesters fr^^ly conferred on them; being made a
pry to Strangers, who can pretend no color of Title to them by any Laws of
God or Man; and may by like violence and injustice seize upon their M^ors,
Lands, as well as upon their Advowsons, Rectores, Churches, which are appendant
to them.

To prevent these desperate Plots now strenuously pursued and involved in this
one design against Patrons Rights and Advowsons, I shall briefly relate, the
true original of our Parish Churches and of Patrons Titles to present
Encumbe^ts to them, unknown to most; which will fully discover the equity and
justice of this their Right, which some deem unreasonable, and injurious to the
Parishioners, and then present you with a full Jury of legal writs, and
remedies, provided by the Common and Statute Laws of England for the defense,
and preservation of Patrons Interests in their Advowsons, Churches, against all
Invasions or Usurpations on them to their prejudice.

The Title Advocate (from which the word Advowson is derived, or to which at
least it relates, is attributed to our Savior Jesus Christ himself, 1 John 2.
1. the Advocate general of the whole Church and every particular person unto
God the Father, to plead their cause, and make intercession on their behalf.
Michael 7. 9. Lamentations 3. 58. 1 Samuel 24. 15. c. 25. 39. Psalm. 35. 1.
Psalm. 43. 1. Psalm. 119. 154. Prove. 22. 23. c. 23. 11. chap. 31. 9. Jer. 50. 34.
chap. 51. 36. Job. 16. 2^. Isay 5^. 12. Romans 8. 26. 34. chap. 11. 2. Heb. 7.
25. Which well explain both the Office and D^ty of our Advocates of our
Churches, being the same in substance, with that of known Advocates, Pleaders
or Counselors at Law, for their Cl^rts in Courts of public Justice; for
which you may consult Federicus Lindebrogus, and Sr. Henry* Spelman in their
Gl^ssaries, Calvin's Lexicon Jurid^cum, Summa Angelica, Rosella, Hostiencis,
Antonius Corsetus (his Repertorium) and Thomas Zerulu (his Praxis Episcopalis)
titled Advocatus.

The Title Patronus or Patron of a Church is of the selfsame signification, and
imports the same Office and Duty as Advocatus; and it is somewhat more large
then it; implying not only a Patronage, Protection or Defense of the Incumbents
Churches cause when there is need in Courts of Justice by way of Plea or
Intercession (as Advocate properly does) but also their Defense and Patronage
by the Sword in the field; See Tottles M^gna Char* f. 16^. E^act Collect* p.
268* 290* 29. 706. ^^ 716.
when assaulted by open armed Adversaries, Sacrilegious Church* Robbers or
bloody Persecutors; (as the ancient * Oaths of our Kings and Knights of all
sorts when invested in that Dignity abundantly evidence) by the Pen, when
invaded by Heretics and Shismaticks; (upon which account the Pope bestowed the
Title of See (...) Sa^^ishurien^^ De N^wgis C^r l. 6 c. ^0. 13. (...). Ep. 94*
Car^lus M^nenius Delicia (...) p. 8. etc. G^ldastu^ constit. Tom. 3. p. 400
Pon^^^i. Romanum De Bened^ctione nov^ M^l^^is O^^m. Mag. H^st* sep. l. 14^* c.
6. Mr S^l^^ns Titles of Ho* Edit. ult. p* 443. 446. to 45^. 458. 546. 548. 579*
780, 781, 782.
PATRON or DEFENDER OF THE FAITH, upon our King Henry the Eight, for writing in
Defense thereof (as he conceived) against Luther, and likewise by the purse; by
supporting, repairing the Fabrics of the Churches they, o^ their Predecessors,
first erected, as there is occasion; by endowing them with convenient
maintenance, or increasing their Dowry where incompetent; by providing against
its alienation diminution, substraction; and recovering it when invaded,
diminished or subtracted by others, or alienated, d^lapidated or unjustly
encumbered with Annuities or other charges by the Incumbents without their
privities or assents; and in one word in becoming Nursing Fathers and Nursing
Mothers to the Churches and Ministers whereof they are Patrons, according to
that of Isay, 49. 23. c. 60. 10. Rev. 21. 24. 26. Hence the Sea Mr Seldens
Titles* Honor part 1* chapter 5. sect, 4.
Master and Lord of any servants or enfranchised Slaves was styled Patronus,
their Patron; and they said to be in PATROCINIO EJVS, as you may read at large
in Fredericus Lindebrogus his Glossarium: and Codex Legum Antiquarum. Leges
Wisigothorum. l. 8. Tit. 1. L^x. 3. 4. Leges Longobardorum. lib. 1. Tit. 8.
Lex. 31. Leges Burgundiorum, Addit. 2. sect. 2. and that because they were
bound to protect, defend, maintain, feed, and provide for their servants; for
which by the Roman Law, Libertus PATRONO, donum, munus, operas, d^b^bat.
D^gest. lib. 38. Tit. Cod. l, 6. Tit. 3. as Incumbents ought to instruct, pray
for, express their gratitude to their Patrons in a Christian and civil (though
not i^ a corrupt or Symoniacal) way, and to sow unto them spiritual things,
because they reap their carnal things. 1 Cor. 9. 11. Phil. 3. 10. to 22.
compared with chap. 1. 3. 4. 9, 10, 11. 2 Timothy 1. 16. 17. 18.

Peter M^th. Constit. Pontif. f. 2^7. Adam Co^tzen de Rep^b. ^. 7. c. 6. (...).
2. Mr. ^^ldens ^ities of Honor part 1. chapter 5. (...) 4. p* 48. Ca^cel^^. (...)*
p. 46.
The Emperor of Germany, heretofore was usually st^led, ADVOCATVS and DEFENSOR
ECLESIAE, in his Imperial Title; as Henry the eighth, and the Kings of England
since were styled, Defendor of the fait^. H^nce those two verses over the
Cou^sel-Chamber door in Guilds Hall London.

Carolus, Henricus vivant, DEFENSOR uterque;
Henricus FIDEI, Carolus ECCLESIAE.
The reason of which Title was, because the Emperor Charles, when Crowned at
Bologna by Pope Clement, the seventh, took this solemn Oath. Ego Corolus, etc.
Pollicior, testificor atque juro, me in posterum pro viribus, ingenio et
facultatibus meis Pontificiae Dignitatis et ROMANAE ECCLESIAE PERPETVVM FORE
DEFENSOREM, nec ullam ecclesiasticae Libertati vim illaturam; Sed potestatem,
jurisdictionem et dominationem ipsius, quoad ejus fieri potest CONSERVATVRVM.
And the Emperor Ferdidand the second in the Articles of Capitulation with the
Princes Electors, promised during all his Reign: Vniversam Christianitatem,
etc. Et CHRISTIANAM ECCLESIAM TAN QVAM ILLIVS ADVOCATVS, FIDELI PROTECTIONE
CONSERVARE. Yea some of the old Kings of Sicile used Titles in their style
somewhat like this; as CHRSTIANORVM ADIVTOR, CLYPEVS ET DEFENSOR, as Mr Seldom
observes out of Scipion Mazzella. Descrit. De. Napoli p. 471. These general
Titles of theirs in relation to the whole Church, Faith, Ministers, and
Christians within their Dominions being dirived from the S^les and Titles of
Advocates and Patrons of particular Parish Churches, in use, some hundreds of
Years before them. And this may suffice for the Title, Office and Duty of
Advocates and Patrons, of Churches.

The Sea Cooks 2 Institute. thereon.
Statute of Westminster, the 2. 13. E. 1. c. 1. recites, That before its making
if a man gave Lands to a man, and the heirs of their bodies upon express
condition, that if they dyed without heirs of their Bodies between them
begotten, the Land so given should revert to the giver, or his heir, that yet
the Doners by their Deed and Feofment might disinherit their Issue of the Land,
CONTRARY TO THE MIND OF THE GIVERS, and CONTCARY TO THE FORM EXPRESSED IN THE
GIFT. And likewise bar the Doners of their Reversions, though DIRECTLY
REPVGNANT TO THE FORM OF THE GIFT, which SEEMED VERY HARD TO THE GIVERS, AND
THEIR HEIRS, THAT THEIR WILL EXPRESSED IN THE GIFT WAS NOT OBSERVED and the
like it seemed to the whole Parliament, which to prevent such injury, injustice
and unreasonable dealing for the future, and perceiving HOW NECESSARY and
EXPEDIENT IT SHOULD BE TO PROVIDE REMEDY in the foresaid cases, ordained. That
THE WILL OF THE GIVER, according to the form of the Deed of Gift, manifestly
expressed, SHALL BE FROM HENCE FORTH OBSERVED; So that they to whom the Land
was given under such condition, SHALL HAVE NO POWER TO ALIEN THE LAND SO GIVEN;
TO THE DONOR*
but that it shall remain to the issue of them by whom it was given, after
their death; or shall revert to the Donor OR HIS HEIRS if issue fail. The
substance of which Law, we find thus ratified in the very Gospel, Gal. 3. 15.
Brethren I speak after the manner of men; though it be but a man's Testament,
yet if it be confirmed NO MAN DISANVLLETH IT, or adds thereto. The Justice
and equity, of this Statute, is very pregnant and pertinent to the case of
Patrons Adowsons, and the Fabrics, Lands and Endowments originally given by
them, or their Ancestors to the Church. And Incumbents and their Successors in
these four particulars.

1. It resolves it to be both just, rationable, equitable, that the Founders
and Donors of Lands, Glebs, Revenues and Tiths to Parish Churches or Chapels,
and their Heirs and Grantees after them, should perpetually enjoy the
Patronages, Advowsons, and Reversions of them, which they commonly or specially
reserved to them upon their Original Foundations and Endowments: So as to
present unto them upon every vacancy: as well as the Donors in tail, and their
Heirs enjoy the Reversions of all Lands given and granted by them to others,
and that Cooks 2 Inst. pa. 33^. 1 Inst^^^* 22. Sect. 19.
by general construction of Law, as well as by their own special Reservation.

2. That it is as hard, unjust and injurious to take away, or debar them of
their right of Advowsons and presentations upon voydances, or of the fayl,
Fabric, Rectories, Glebes, and other Endowments conferred by them on Parish
Churches for public Assemblies, and the maintenance of Gods Worship and the
Incumben^s only, and to no other uses, in case all Parish Churches, Rectories,
Glebes, Tithes be voted down and abolished (is many now strenuously endeavor)
as it is to debar, defraud deprive Donors in tail and their Hei^s or Grantees
of the Reversions reserved on their Gifts and Grants, in ^ayl after the decease
of the Tenants without issue) or Founders of Abbeys and other Corporations of
their 7. E. 1 11. 12.
Eschetes, after the Corporations expi^ation or dissolution.

3. That it is as unjust, unconscionable, illegal for any Incumbents to alien
or change their Churches, Rector^es, or Glebes in any kind, to the prejudice of
his Successor, against the will and intention of the Founders, as for a Tenant
in ^ayl, thus to prejudice or disinherit his issue against the Donors express
will, especially without the Patrons consent and concurence. And therefore See
Brook Fitzh^vb^rt. Ash, Natu^a Br^vium Ti^. Juris u^rum Ducit Pars^^ and
Patro^; Contra Formam Collatio (...) ^n nuity. Lit^letan sect 644. 645. 644.
b^ok 1. Instit. f. 341. 342.
all such Alienations and changes are either, void or voydable by our Laws,
either by the succeeding Incumbents by an actual entry, or Juris utrum and the
like; or ^lse by the Patrons, by a writ of contraformam Collationis; in whom
the Right and Inheritance of the Church resides, not in the Incumbent, nor yet
properly in alyance (a mere idle fiction) as our Law Books vainly fancy.

4. That it is both unrighteous, impious, yea Sacrilegious to rob godly
Ministers and people of the Inheritance, Possession, Use, Benefit of those
Churches, Chapels, Rectories, Glebes, Tithes, which our pious Ancestors have
Solemnly devoted, and dedicated to them, against their manifest wills,
intentions, (yea m Solemn Execrations and Anathemaes) mentioned in their
original Charters of Foundation and Dedication, See Mr Seldens H^story of
Tithes c. 11 12.
and to turn them to any other profane uses. Yea a gross injury and indignity
to the Patrons of them, whose original Right to Advowsons and Presentations, I
shall now briefly manifest out of Histories, Canonists and common Law books.

In the beginning of Christianity, the Apostles, and Ministers of the Gospel
next succeeding them, (as is evident by the Acts 2. 3. 4. 5. c. 8. 5. 8. c. 13.
44. c. 15. 21. c. 16. 13, 14. c. 17. 6, etc. c. 18. 1 to 24 ^. 20. 23. See
Math. 10. 23. c. 11. 1. Rev. 2 and 3.
Acts of the Apostles, Paul's several Epistles to the Churches of Rome, Ephesus,
Corinth, Colosse, Philippi, Thessalonica (all famous Cities) Tit. 1. 5. and
Eusebius, Socrates, Scholasticus, Theodoret Nicephorus, Casseadorus, Beda, and
others.
Ecclesiastical Histories) first preached the Gospel, fixed their residence,
planted, gathered, erected Churches both of converted Jews and Gentiles, only
in chief Cities of great resort; from whence the Gospel spreading it self by
degrees into adjacent Country villages, and places more remote, and the
multitudes of Christians so increasing, that the Churches first erected in
these great Cities, could not contain them, nor the Believers in the Country
Villages (by reason of their necessary occasions and remoteness) conveniently,
frequently, and constantly repair to Gods public Ordinances in these City
Churches every Lords day, and on other times after Christian Assemblies, upon
special occasions; See Council. Antioch: c. 103, 104. Syn. Romans c. 5. Walafridus
Strabo de Reb. Eccles. c, 17. Gratian Causa 12. qu. 2. c. 26. etc. Mr. Seldens
History of Tithes c. 6. sect. 3. etc. 9. 11.
thereupon some Christians began to erect Churches, Chapels, and Oratories, in
Country Villages, by public Contributions of well-affected Converts at first,
supplied by such Ministers who resided with the Evangelical Bishops and
Ministers of these Cities, as part of their Families. Which Churches and
Oratories being afterward burnt or Demolished in most places, and in this our
Island, by Dioclesian, and other Persecuting Pagan Emperors; it pleased God to
raise up Eusebius, Eutropius the Imperial History, Zona^us, in vita Constanni;
Spelman: Con^l: p. 37 to 47, etc. Beda Eccles Hist. l. 1. Math. Westminster. An. 3^2.
to An. 341. Mr. Scldens History of Tithes c. 6. sect. 3. and ^. (...). 9. 11.
12.
Constantine the Great (our famous Countryman, born at York, and the first
Christian Emperor) to be an extraordinary Nursing Father (as Helena his
Mother, to be a great Nursing Mother) to his Church; who vanquishing and
putting to death the grand Persecutor Licinius, demolished Pagan Idols,
Temples, Idolatry, throughout the Rom^n Empire; caused the Gospel to be freely
preached throughout his Dominions; and erected diverse stately Churches for Gods
public worship in several places, endowing them with Lands and Revenues, to
support and encourage the Ministers of the Gospel, officiating in them; by
whose pious Munificence and P^, other Christian Kings, Princes, Nobles, and
Landed persons in his Reign, and succeeding ages at their own proper costs and
expenses, built convenient stately Churches, Chapels, Oratories, in all
Christian Realms, and in this our Island, within their respective Manors,
Lordships, Lands, Territories, near their own Manor or Mansion Houses for the
most part, (as we see at this day by ocular experience in most places of
England and other Nations) for themselves, their Wives, Children, Families,
Tenants ease and convenience, where they might constantly meet together to hear
Gods Word, Pray, receive the Sacraments, worship God, and enjoy all public
Ordinances, for the better conversion, edification, consolation, and salvation
of their Souls: And for the encouragement and maintenance of able Ministers
constantly to reside and officiate in them, in all succeeding ages, for the
benefit of their Posterity, and Gods greater glory, they did, out of their own
Lands, and Inheritances, freely endow the Ministers of these respective
Churches, and their successors for ever, with competent and convenient houses.
Rectories, Glebes, Tithes, Rents, Revenues, by special Charters and Instruments
( See Mr. Seldens History of Tithes chapter 9. 10. 12.
many of them yet Extant) with general and special warranties against all
claiming under them, and dreadful execrations against all such persons who
should sacrilegiously endeavor to d^fra^d or deprive God, or his Ministers, in
part or in whole, of what they had thus dedicated and devoted to them. In some
of which foundations and endowments of Charters, Summa Angelica. Tit. Jus
Patronatus Sect. 5. ex Innocentio.
two or more Lords and Landed men concurred, where they had Lands in common or
contiguous, but in most of them, one Lord alone, where the Manors were large
and entire.

Now because both the Soil whereon these Churches were built, together with the
Churchyards thereto annexed for interring the dead; these Fabrics of the
Churches, with the Parsonage Houses, Rectories, Glebes, Revenues, and Tithes
thereto annexed, for the Ministers maintenance, proceeded originally from these
Founders Bounty, Piety, Donation, and no way from the Parishioners, who were
but the Founders Tenants, Servants, or Children, and held their Lands from, by,
or under them, charged with such Tithes as they first granted out of them to
the Ministers, (still allowed to them in their Leases, Fines, Purchases in all
succeeding ages, by a proportionable defalcation according to their ordinary
valuation;) both the Sea Mr. Seldom c. 6. 9 11. 12. Rebessus de Beneficiis.
Cook Institutes. f. 17. b. 119. b. Panormitan in 18. qu. 2. Summa Angelica et
Ros^lla Tit. Jus Patronatus. 38. Ass. 22. 6. H. 7. 14. Westminster. 2. c. 5. 24. E.
3. 72. 3 Jac. c. 5.
Common, Canon, Civil Laws of our own, and other Realms, and the very Dictates
of Reason, Justice, Equity, held it reasonable, just, equitable, that these
pious, bountiful Founders, and Benefactors should reserve the full and
absolute power of bestowing, conferring the Rectories, Benefices, Tithes, and
Profits of these Churches upon every avoydance by death, resignation, cessein,
translation, deprivation, or otherwise, on such incumbent Ministers as
themselves, their Heirs and Assigns should nominate and make choice of for
their Ministers and Chaplains; it being held both unjust, unreasonable,
unconscionable, injurious and ingrate, that the Parishioners, or other
strangers, who contributed nothing toward the Fabrics, Soil, or Endowments of
these Churches, and paid no Tithes but what originally proceeded from the
Patrons grants (allowed to them in their Fines and purchases) should deprive
them of, or intercommon with them in their Right of Presentation upon any
voydances; it being the Founders mere Courtesy, Piety, favor, to admit them
and their Posterities free access at all times to these Churches which they
Founded not, and to reap the spiritual benefit of these Ministers and
Ordinances which they maintained not at their own free cost, but these Founders
and Patrons only: as it is at this day a mere Grace and Favor, in our Inns of
Court, Colleges, and some Noblemen and Gentlemen in the Country, to permit
their Neighbors and Strangers free access to their private Chapels in their
Houses, to the Ordinances there dispensed by their own hired Chaplains and
Preachers.

Angelus de Clavasio, in his Summa Angelica, Tit. Jus Patronatus, Panormitan,
with other Canonists, and Sir Edward Cook in his Institutes upon Littleton f.
17. 6. and 113. informs us, That the Right of presenting an Encumbent to the
Church, was first gained by such as were Founders, Benefactors, or Maintainers
of the Church by their means, viz. Ratione Fundationis; as where the Ancester
was Founder of the Church, or Repairer thereof being quite Demolished; Or,
Ratione Dotationis, where he endows the Church; Or, Ratione Fundi, as where he
gave the Soil whereon the Church was built. Perchance in some cases these three
were distinguished, but for the most part all three concurred in the selfsame
persons, who both gave the Soil, Fabric, and Endowments of the Church for the
maintenance of Gods public worship, out of their pious munificence, now grown
quite out of date, and reputed by many no better than Prodigal superstition,
who would be deemed Saints of the greatest magnitude, though inspired with a
fanatique infernal zeal, only to eat up Gods House; diametrically contrary to
the zeal of our pious Ancestors, yea of holy David, and our Savior himself, of
both which we find it thus recorded in holy writ, Psalm. 69. 9. John 2. 15, 16,
17. The zeal of thine House has eaten me up; as it did the zealous Founders
and Patrons of our Churches, in times of less Light, but far greater heat than
now.

This Right of presenting Encumbents to Churches, thus gained by the first
Founders, Endowers, and Maintainers of them, was by the Common, Canon, and
Civil Law, styled Westminster. 2. c. 5. 7. E. 3. 4. 45. E. 3. 5. B^^tton c. 92. Cook
1. Insti^. f. 17. b. 119. b. Seldens History of Tithes chapter 6. p. 85, 86.
R^bussus de Beneficiis Summa Angelica and Rosella Tit. Jus Patronatus.
Jus Patronatus, Advocatio, Jus Presentandi, etc. and in English, A Patronage,
or Advowson: And he who enjoyed this Right of Patronage, Presentation, or
Advowson, was styled Patronus, or Advocatus, a Patron or Advocate, because he
was to defend, and patronize the Churches, and Excumbents Right and Title upon
all occasions, in all Courts of Justice, as Advocates use to dafend their
Clients Causes, advow, justify them when ever See Brook and Fitzh. Tit. Aid
and Aid le Roy.
prayed in aid, or called upon by the Encumbent for to do it. Hence Bracton l.
4. f. 240. Fleta l. 5. c. 14. and Cook out of them describe a Patron or
Advocate; Advocatus est ad quem pertinet Ius Advocationis alterius Ecclsiae ut
ad Ecclesiam nomine proprio non alieno possit praesentare. And Angelus de
Clavasio, Panormitan, with other Canonists thus define a Ius Patronatus est,
Ius hon^r^ficum, onerosum and utile olicui competens in Ecclesia, pro eo quod
Diocesani consensu eam construxit, fundavit vel dotavit; ipse vel is a quo
causam habuit. Et dicitur honorificum, quia habet honorem praesentandi
Rectorem, quia sine ejus praesentatiane si Episcopus vel alius Prelatus
instituit, ipso lure est nulla. Onerosum dicitur quia Patronus tenetur
defendere Ecclesiam, ne bona indebite dilapidentur, utile dicitur si venirit
etiam, quia sivenerit ad in opiam tenitur Ecclesia ex redditibus ultra
necessaria remanentibus alimentare Patronum pinguius quam alios pauperes. This
Right of Advowson the Bishop in some places confirmed to the Founder, Endower,
or his Heir, by putting a Robe or such like on him at the Dedication; an
example whereof we find in the life of Anonym in vita S. ^d^^rici. c. 7. Mr.
S^ld^as His^^^^ of Tithes c. 6. p 86
Ulrique Bishop of Auspurg, in one of his dedications about the year 950. where
Consecratione peracta, d^teque contradita, comprotato illic Presbytero, Altaris
procurationem commendavit, and ECCLESIAE ADVOCATIONEM FIRMITER LEGITIMO HAEREDI
PANNO IMPOSITO, COMMENDAVIT. This Right of Foundership cannot be eschete or be
forfeited. 24, E. 3. 72. Brook Eschete 9.

This Right of Patronage and Presentation in respect to Churches, is the very
same in reason, equity, justice, substance, with the 24 ^. 3. 72. Cook 1
Instit. s. 344. A Godw^^s Catalogue of ^^s^ops. Antiqu. Eccl^si^ B^t. 6 H. 8.
c. 14 31. H. 8. c. 9. 1 E. 6. c. 8. 8. Eliz. c. 1. Register of (...). f. 29.
165. 290. 291. 31. 34. 40. 41. 43. 47. 280. 303. 304. 19, to 64. (...) rb^rs
N^^ura Brevium and B^^d^m. Titl^. Qu^^e (...). S. A^s. 29 8 E. 3. 64. 13. As^.
2. 11 ^. 4. 12. 84. 27 E. 3. 84. 6. ^. 7. 14. (...). 42. 50. 5 H. 5. c. 1 25 H.
8. 21. 43 E^^. c. 4. 2 H. 7. 14. 3. Jac. c. 5.
F^unders of Bishoprics, Deaneries, Prebends, Abbeys, Priories, Chauntries.
Hospitals, Colleges, Free-Schools. Almes-houses, Fellowships, Schollerships,
And the like Charitable Edifices for public use, who by virtue and right of
their Foundership have the Patronages, Advowsons, and Visitations of them
vested in them and their Heirs in Perpetuity, with power to transfer them unto
such other persons as they think meet to in^rust, and to nominate, present or
collate Bishops, Deans, Prebends, Abbots, Priors, Priests, Masters, Wardens,
Schoolmasters, Scholars Fellows, Almesm^n, and poor People to them upon every
voydance, according to this Maxim in Law, Cujus est dare, ejus est disponere:
And that by as good justice and equity, as he that builded an House upon his
own Land, at his own cost, may justly dispose of it, when it is vacant, to whom
he thinks meet, without the license of any others* who have no interest nor
inheritance therein. And this right is not only ratified by the examples of
King David, and Solomen* in the old Testament, who being the Founders of the
magnificent Temples of the Lord at Jerusalem, appointed, ordered, the Priests,
Levites, Porters, with all other Officers attending therein, and prescribed
Laws and Courses to them. 1 Chronicles. 9. c. 16. 37. etc. c. 22, and 2^, and 25,
and 26, and 28 13. 21. 2 Chronicles. 8. 14, 15. as did Ios^^^ their ^en and
Successor after them 2 Chronicles. 35. 4. But likewise by that saying of Christ
himself, Mat. 20. 15. Is it not lawful to do what I will with my own? Is thine
eye evil, because I am good? and that Expostulation of Saint Paul ( grounded
upon reason, equity, and common practice) 1 Cor. 9. 7, 8. Who planteth a
Vineyard, and eats not of the fruit thereof? Or who feeds a Flock, and
eats not of the Milk thereof? Say I these things as a man? Or says not the
Law the same also? Yea, God himself upon this very ground, that he is the
Founder of the Earth, and all the Kingdoms and Powers therein, claims this
privilege, To give them to whomsoever he will; Dan. 4. 17. 25. Job 1. 21. Psalm.
75. 6, 7. Deu^. 10. 1^. Psalm. 24. 1. Deuteronomy. 32. 8. Prove. 8. 15, 16. And
therefore Founders of Churches by the like reason, in their degree may do the
like, without any wrong or prejudice to the Parishioners or others. See Levit.
27. 14, to 26. Deuteronomy. 20. 5, 6. c. 26. 13. 14. Esth. 1. 22.

These Advowsons of Churches (Founded and Endowed by Lords of Manors for the
most part) were thereupon by the Law of England annexed as 13 E. 3. Fitz. Quare
Imp. 58 117. 59. 43 E. 3. 35. 21 E. 3. 38. 45 E. 3. 12. Fi^zh. ^beri, Brook
Prisentm. al Esglis^ and Q^are impedi^. Ash. Title Advowson Append. Quare
Impedit. Cook 1 Instit. f. 121, 122. 307. 9 ^. 3. 4. 38. 33 H. 6. 12. 35 H. 6.
52. 46 E. 3. 19. 14 H. 6. 15.
Appendant to the Manors and Land^ of the Fou^ders, wherein the Churches stood,
and descended with them to their Heirs or Successors; and in case they sold
these Manors or Lands to which they were Appendant, the Advowsons passed
together with them, by a General Grant of the Manors or Lands, with the
Appurtenances or without them, (unless specially reserved, or severed from
them by special grant before) except only in the Kings case, wherein the
Aavowson could not pass together with the Manor by the general word
appurtenances, unless specially named. And they were such a Lay Inheritance
and Fee, whether Appendant or in Gross, as were descendable to Heirs;
Grantable and Vendable to strangers, yea Fl^ta l. 2. c. 65. Britton f. 135. 5
H. 7. 37: 33 E. 3. Gar. 122. 32 H. 6. 21. Cook Instit. f. 374. 6.
Assets, or things of Price and Value in Judgment of Law, not mere
inconsiderate or worthless Privileges, as the Marginal Law Books resolve. And
by the Canon Law, Ius Patronatus, or Advowsons, were such a Right or
Inheritance which did transire ad Heredes and etiam ad Extraneos, vel
Donatione, vel venditione, either as Appendant or in Gross, unless in cases
of Symonical Contracts, as Panormitan, Summa Angelica and Rosella, Innocentius,
Hostiensis, Lindwood; Antonii Corsiti Repertorium. Thomas Zerula Praxis
Episcopalis. Tit. Jus Patro^atus. Rebussus de Beneficiis.
and other Canonists, in this Title of Ius Patronatus, resolve. Yea an Advowson
in gross, severed from a Manor is such an Inheritance, as lies in Tenure, and
may be held of the King in Capite, and of any other Lord by Homage, Fealty, or
Knights service, as is agreed, resolved, 21. E. 3. 5. 33 H 6. 34. 14 H. 7 26.
24 E. 3. 60. 5 H. 7. 36. Brook Tenures 4. 15 18. 20. 34. Quare Impedit 99. with
other Law Books; yea such an Inheritan^e whereof the Wi^e of the Patron shall
be endowed by Law ( as Fitzherbert in his Abridgment, and Natura Brevium, Title
Dower, with Cook 2 In. stit. 357.
other Books resolve;) and both a Cessavit and Scire facias lie of an Advowson,
43 E. 3. 15. 5 H. 7. 37. Reg^ stes f. 69. Cook 2. Instit. p. 357. In S^ldens
History of Tithes chapter 6. s^ct. 2. c. 9. sect. 4.
elder times, the Founders, and Patrons of Churches had such a full and
absolute Interest in them, and in all the Temporalties, Houses, Gl^bes, Tithes,
Profits, belonging to them, ( proceeding from their original Donation and
Endowment) that upon every Vacancy they conferred them on their new Chaplains
and Incumbents ( without any Admission, Institution, or Induction from the
Bishop or Archdeacon, (introduced by succeeding Canons, and Popes Decretals,
encroaching on the Patrons Right and power) as really, fully, and immediately
in point of interest; by some Ceremony, not differing from our Livery and
Seisin; as delivering them the Ring or Key of the Church door, with these
words, Petrus D^mian: l. 1 Epist. 13. ad Alex. 2.
Accipe Ecclesiam, receive the Church, or the like, as they then and since
conferred the Freehold and interest of any other Houses and Lands to their
Tenants by their own Livery and Se^sin; whence by the phrase of that time, this
kind of giving the Church to the Incumbent by the Patron, was styled
Commendatio Ecclesiae, that is, the Lay Patrons Committing or Livery of the
Church and its endowments to the Incumbent to take care and dispose of as a
usufructuary of what the Patron was Proprietary, or as a Tenant only for life
of that whereof the Patron was in Reversion; which Mr. Seldom proves at large.
The Footsteps of this their Primitive Right, and Jurisdiction, we find yet
remaining in some Free Chapels and Donatives founded by our Kings, or exempted
from Episcopal visitation, and jurisdiction, by our Kings special Charters,
which the Patrons at every Vacancy may fully and freely give, grant, confer to
their Chaplains, without any presentation at all to the Bishop, or other
Ordinary, or any Institution or Induction, and may visit by themselves, or
their Commissaries, when there is occasion, as you may read at large in Cooks 1
Institutes, and the Law Books there quoted f. 344. a. Brook Presentation al
Esglise 43. 6 H. 7. 14. 49 E. 3. Quare Imp. 60. Mr. Seldens History of Tithes
chapter 6. p. 91. But in after ages by the 8 General Council of Constantinople, An.
Dom. 871. Actio. 10. Can. 22. The Council of Rome under Gregory the seventh,
Anno. 1078. The Council of Lateran, Anno. 1119. under Calixtus the second
(chiefly summoned against Investitures) The Council of Lateran under Inn^cent
the second, A^. 1129. and other Popes Decrees registered by Gratian Distinct.
63. 70. and Causa 16. qu. 7. the Right not only of our own and other Kings
Investitures of Bishops in their Bishoprics (whereof they were Founders) only
per Annulum and Baculum, but of all Lay Patrons Investitures of their Clerks to
any Benefices, or other Ecclesiastical Promotions, were by Degrees totally
abolished, and they enforced to present all their Clerks to the Bishops, not
only for their approbation, but also Institution and Induction, without which
there could be no Plavarly; and the Incumbents were incapable to sue for any
Tithes, or receive any profits of their livings; when as at first they received
full possession of their Rectories, Glebes, Tithes, Churches from the Patrons
hands alone, without the Bishops concurrence; who left only the right of
Presentation, and Advowson in the Patrons hands, out of which they could not
extort it by their Canons, as some of them often endeavored. But the Popes and
Prelates Jurisdiction and Canons, depriving Patrons of their ancient, Right of
Investitures, being now exploded and abolished, it is both reasonable, just,
and equitable, that this their Right should now be fully restored, revived, and
they freely permitted to give full possession to their Clerks of the Churches,
Rectories, Glebes, Tithes and Profits, whereof they have the Patronages, by
giving them Livery and Se^sin, of them by the Ring of the Church-door, or
delivering them the Keys of the Church or Rectory without any further Ceremony,
or other institution or induction by any other strangers hands.

The Right of all Patrons and Presentations to Churches at this day, is either
by Inheritance and Descent from the Original Founders and Endowers of them, or
by original grant and purchase from them, upon valuable Considerations. Both
which Tithes, as they See Fitzherbert, Statham, Br^^k, Ash, Title, Presentation
a^ Esglise, Quare Impedit, Grant Advowson, and Droit, West 2. c. 5. and Cooks 2
Institutes. p. 356, 357, etc 3 Jac. c. 5.
are legal, just, reasonable, equitable by the Common, Statute and Canon Laws
of our Nation; So are they likewise by the Law of God, which both approves,
ratifies Rights and Titles by purchase from lawful owners, Genesis 17. 13. 23, 27.
chapter 23. 8. to 19. chap. 33. 19. chap. 47. 10. 22, 23. chap. 49, 30. chap. 50.
13. Exodus 12. 44. Levit. 25. 28. to 52. Josh, 24. 32. Ruth 4. 4. to 13. 2 Samuel*
12. 3. chap. 24. 20. to 26. 1 Kings 16. 24. Jer* 32. 7. to 13. 43, 44. Matthew.
13. 44, 46. chap. 27. 7. Luke 14. 18. 1 Cor. 7. 30. James 4. 13. Prove. 31. 16.
Rev. 3. 18. chap, 13. 17. it being the very Title of Christ to his Church and
Saints which he has bought and purchased with his own blood, Acts 20, 28. 1.
Pet. 1. 18, 19, 1 Cor. 6. 20. chap. 7. 23. 2. Pet. 2. 1. and likewise Rights
and Titles by Inheritance, Heirship or Descent. Deuteronomy. 21. 15, 16, 17. Number. 27.
1. to 12. chap. 36. 1. to 13. Josh. 17. 3: to 7. 2 Samuel 7. 12. to 18. 1 Kings
21. 2, 3, 4. 2 Chronicles. 33. 3. 1 Chronicles. 28. 8. Ezra 9. 12. Prove. 13. 22. Jer. 32.
8. Ezech. 33. 24. chap. 46. 16, 17, 18. Matthew. 2. 2. chap. 21. 38. Mark 12. 7.
Luke 12. 13.

This Right of Patrons being then thus warranted, established, by all Laws of
God and men, cannot be justly lost, forfeited or taken from them (especially
without Sommons, Suit, hearing or Legal trial) without the highest Injustice;
having continued sacred and inviolable hitherto in all ages, and public
revolutions, unless it be through the Patrons own forfeitures, or defaults;
and that either totally or finally, or pro hac vice, for one avoidance only,
in such cases as our Law allows of; as namely.

1. In case of Rastals Abridgement, Fitzherbert, and Brook, Tit. For^eiture,
Escheat Treason.
Legal Attainders for Treason or Felony, for which the Inheritance of Advowsons
Appendant or in Gross are forfeited to the Crown, or Lord by Escheat, as well
as other Inheritances.

2. In case of West. 2. c. 5. Cook 2. Instit. p. 358. and the Law books there
cited. 35. H. 6. 54. H. 60. 64.
usurpation upon a Purchaser of an Advowson and six Months plenarly, without
any action or Quare Impedit brought by him against the Usurper; in which case
the Inheritance of Advowson is utterly lost by the Conrmon Law, And the
Purchaser, or his Heir and Successor left remediless through their own
neglect; and defect of a legal Writ; since a Purchaser who never presented,
cannot have a Writ of Right, nor Darrein Presentment; nor yet a Quare Impedit
after six months elapsed, and a plenarly by usurpation.

3. In case of Recusancy; Cook. 10. Rep. s. 55. etc.
Popish Patrons during their Recusan^y only, being disabled to present or
grant any avoidance of any Churches or Ecclesiastical Livings after
conviction; and their right of Presentation granted to the Universities of
Oxford and Cambridge, by the Statute of 3. Jac. chap. 5.

4. In case of Cook 1. Instit. f. 120. a. See Hostiensis, Summa Angeca,
Rosella, and Thomas zerula. Tit. Simonia.
Symony, which forfeits and voids the Presentation, Institution, and Induction,
for that term only, and transferres them to the Crown; by the Statute of 31.
Eliz. chap. 6. and likewise forfeits the double of one years profits of every
Benefice presented by Symony, to the King, which the corrupt Patron is to pay.

5. In the case of Outlawry; which forfeits Patrons actual avoydances before
or during the Outlawry to the Crown, as some 9. H. 6. 57. Brook Forfeiture 73.
104.
Law Books resolve.

6. In cases of negligence when and where the Patrons neglect to present a
sufficient Clerk to the Church within six months space after the avoidances by
the Incumbents death, without notice, or within six months after notice given
by the Ordinary in cases of resignation, or deprivation. After which time the
Ordinary by Law may present by Lays, to supply the Church through the Patrons
defect, ^^d so deprive him of that Presentation only, but not of the next
avoidance; and that by the Common, as well as Su^ma Angelica Tit. Jus
Patronatus sect. 16
Canon Law.

7. Our Kings and Princes of late times, when they made any Incumbent, a Bishop
used (by color of their Prerogative) to present to the Incumbents Living void
by this Translation, and so deprive the Patron of his right for this time
only; which upon consideration of all See Cook 2 I^st^t. p^ 358, and 4. Inst.
p. 356 357. and the Law books there cited, Brook Presentation al Esglise 3. 14.
48, 50. 61. 17. E. 3. 40. a.
our Law Books, and the arguments pr^ and contra, I always conceived to be a
late injurious usurpation upon the Patrons Right, and no true nor ancient
Prerogative settled in the Crown. As for the Kings, and other Guardians in
Chivalry usual Presentations to the Churches of their Wards, during their
Wardship and Minority, It was no prejudice to their Wards being in affirmance
of their Right, and a Privilege given them by our Laws, during the Wards
Minority and want of discretion to make choice of able Incumbents to supply the
cure. In all other cases but these, our Mag. Charta. c. 13 52 H. 3. c. 12, 13.
E. 1. c. 5.
Parliament and Laws took special care for the security and inviolable
preservation of all Patrons Advowsons and Right in Churches by providing sundry
Writs and Remedies against all Usurpations, Injuries, Prejudices by Ordinaries,
Usurpers, Incumbents, or other persons; a Catalogue whereof, I shall here
subjoyn.

The first is a Westminster. 2. c. 5. Glanvil. l. 6. c. 17. l. 13. c. 20, 21. Bract.
l. 4. f. 246, 247. Brit. c. 94. Fleta. l. 5. c. 12. to 17. Register f. 29. b.
Fitzh. Bruf. 125. Statham, Brook, Fitzherbert, Abridgement, Natura Brevium, and
Ash; Title Droit, and Droit de R^cto. Cook 2. Instit. p. 336. to 365. and the
books there quoted. 38. H. 6. 10. 21 26. H. 8. 3.
Writ De RECTO DE ADVOCATIONE, or DROIT de Advowson, as our Statutes and
Law Books phrase it in English, A Writ of RIGHT OF ADVOWSON. This was a Writ
original at the Common Law, triable by Duel or the grand Assize, which every
Patron of Inheritance was enforced to sue, where any stranger who had no right
to present, presented a Clerk by wrong to his Church, and his Clerk was
admitted thereto by the Bishop, before the Statute of Westminster 2. chap. 5.
which Writ no Tenant in Tail or for life, could sue at the Common Law after any
usurpation suffered by them; nor any Purchaser or Heir in Fee-simple, but such
who could allege a Presentation to the Church in themselves, or their
Ancestors from whom the Advowson descended to them. And this is the form of the
writ. Rex, etc. praecipimus tibi quod sine delatione PLENUM RECTUM TENEAS W. de
2. DE ADVOCATIONE ECCLESIAE de L. quam clamat pertinere ad liberum tenementum
suum: or Praecipe A. quod IVSTE etc. reddat B. Advocationem Ecclesiae de S.
quam ei INIVSTE DEFORCIAT, ut dicit. The very Title and form of which Writ of
RIGHT, undeniably demonstrate, that Patrons of Churches have a most just and
legal Right of Inheritance in their Advowsons of Churches, which the Common
Law takes special care to preserve by a Writ of RIGHT (of the highest nature)
and to restore to the Patrons both justly and speedily, without delay. when
unjustly and forcibly outed thereof by any Usurpers whatsoever.

The Second is West. c. Cook 2 Instit. p. 364. Register f. 29. b. 4. E. 3. 28.
38. E. 3. 13. a. Fitz. Natura Brev. f. 45. Dr. and Student. c. 25. Brook Droit
de recto. 8. 38. H. 6. 19. Brook Prohibition 7.
a Writ DE RECTO DE ADVOCATIONE DECIMARVM; which lies in this case, if there
be two Patrons of two adjoining Parish Churches, and the Incumbent of one of
the Patrons demands Tithes in the spiritual Court, against the Incumbent of
the other, and one of the Patrons sued a Writ of Judicavit to the Bishop to
stop the proceedings in his Court, for that the Right of the Patronage should
come in question to his prejudice, if the Tithes belonging to his Church and
Incumbent should there be given from them by the Bishop, without a legal
trial by Jury at the Common Law: in this case the Patron of the Clerk
prohibited to sue for the Tithes before the Bishop by the Judicavit, shall have
this Writ, by the Statute of Westminster, 2 chap 5. in this Form. Praecipe A.
quod reddat B. ADVOCATIONEM DECIMARUM ( Medietatis, tertiae, quartae partis, or
of a lesser part; as unius curucatae terrae, etc. as some books are) and if the
right be found at the Common Law for the Patron who brings this Writ, his
Clerk formerly barred and remediless by the Judicavit, shall proceed in the
Bishops Court to recover the Tithes against the other Incumbent.

The Third is a Mag. Charta c. 10. 8* E. 1. rat. 26. West. 2. c. 5. Brac. con.
l. 4 f. 216. Fleta. l. 5 c. 17. Regiss. f. 30, 31. S^atham, Fitzherbert, Brook,
Ash Natura Brevium Tit. Assise de Darrein presentment. Cook 2. Instit. p. 357.
Writ of Assise Darrein Presentment; or Assisae ultimae Praesentationis: being
a Writ only of Possession; whereby the Patron who by himself or his Ancestors
presented the last Incumbent to the Church, which was instituted and inducted,
shall recover the possession thereof against the Disseisor or Usurper thereof.
This Writ required the Sheriff to summon twelve free and lawful men of the
vicenage to inquire upon oath: Quis advocatus tempore Pacis praesentavit
ultimam personam quae mortua est, ad Ecclesiam de S. quae vacat etc. and cujus
Advocatio idem A. dicit ad se pertinere. Et Summoneas, etc. B. qui Advocationem
illam ei deforciat, quod tunc sit ibi audiendum illam recognitionem. And this
is a Writ original at the Common Law, not given by Statute, proving a
Disseising of the Patrons Freehold.

The Fourth is, the most usual and common Writ, of Quare Impedit, the form
whereof is this: Register f. 30. 60. and New Natura Brevivium.
Quod permittat a presentare idoneam personam ad Ecclesiam de B. quae vacat,
and ad suam spectat donationem, ut dicit; and unde quaeritur quod praedictus D.
eum INIVSTE IMPEDIT, etc. Which Writ lies for any Heir, Purchaser and Patron of
an Advowson in Fee, Fee tail for life, years; grantees of the next avoidance
only, for Executors, Tenants in Dower, Tenants by the Courtesy, Guardians or
others who have right to present to any Church or Benefice, though they never
presented before; and that either against the Bishop or Ordinary, usurper, and
usurpers Clerk admitted by the Ordinary, or one two or all of them, (as the
case requires) for hindering them to present their Clerks to the Churches,
whereof they are Patrons. By this Writ, the Patron in some cases shall recover
his Presentation, and in some cases two years profits of the Church in
Damages, where he loses his presentation for that time, till the next
avoidance. The Law and learning concerning this Writ being very copious, I
shall refer you to the Statute of West. 2. chapter 5. and Cooks commentary thereon.
p. 356, etc. His first Institutes f. 314. 344. Statham, Fitzherbert, Brook, and
Natura Brevium. Tit. quare Impedit. Register f. 30. Glanvil. l. 6. c. 17. l.
13. c. 20, 21. Bracton l. 4 f. 246, 247. Britton chapter 94. Fleta l. 5. c. 12. to
17. I shall only observe from the words of this Writ; That every Patron by the
resolution of our Statutes and Laws in all ages, has a just and lawful right
to present a fit Person to his Church, when void, that it is injustice in any
to disturb him in his Presentation; for which he shall recover good damages
against him. This is an Original Writ at Common Law, before any Statute.

The Fifth is, a Writ, Register f. 31. Not. Brevium, Statham, Brook
Fitzherbert, Ash. Title. Ne Admittas.
Ne admittas, directed to the Bishop or Ordinary of the Diocese, prohibiting
him (when two or more pretend themselves Patrons to a Church which is void, are
at suit in the Kings Courts one with another about the right of the Advowson (
by writ of quare Impedit, Assise of Darrein presentment, right of Advowson or
the like) not to admit either of their Clerks, or any other to the Church, till
it be determined by Law, to which of them the Advowson or Presentation of right
belongs. This writ is to prevent the Bishop from doing any prejudice to the
rightful Patron, or to present to the Church by Lays pending the suit between
the Pretenders to the Patronage.

The Sixth is, a Writ Register f. 31. 33. Not. Brev. Fitz. Brook Ash Tit. Ne
Admittas 21. H. 7, 8.
De Clerico admittende, directed to the Ordinary; enjoining him to admit the
Clerk of that Patron, who recovers in the Kings Court, notwithstanding the
former Writ of Ne admittas directed to him. The like Writ lies, when the
parties agree amongst themselves which of them shall present, and also when the
Ne admittas was granted upon a false suggestion, that there was a suit
depending between two Patrons, when there was none.

The Seventh is, a Writ of Register f. 32. No. Not. f. 47. old Not. Brook
Statham Fitz. Ash. Tit. quare non admisit. 34. H. 6 41. 38. H 6. 14. 7. H. 4.
25. 21. H. 7. 8.
quare non admisit, directed to the Ordinary, when he refuses to admit the
Patrons Clerk, recovers in the Kings Court his Presentment to the Church in an
assise of Darrein Presentment, quare Impedit, or Writ of Right, upon a Writ De
Clerico admittendo first directed to him. It is grounded on the judgment and
Record in Court: And this Writ is, to summon the Bishop to appear before the
Kings Justices, who gave the judgment for the Patron, to show cause why he
refused to admit his Clerk, in nostri, ac Mandati Nostri praedicti contemptum,
and Executionis Judicii praedicti retardationem, and ipsius. A DAMNUM NON
MODICUM ET GRAVAMEN. If the Bishop show good cause, he shall be excused, or
else fired for his contempt, damage, prejudice to the Patron.

The Eight is the Writ of Register old and new Not. Brevium Ash. Tit. quare
Incumbravit.
quare Incumbravit, directed to the Bishop, summoning him to appear before the
Kings Justices in case when he incumbers and fills the Church, pending any suit
in the Kings Court by a Writ of Assise, Right or quare Impedit contrary to the
Writ of Ne admittas directed to him, by means whereof the true Patrons Clerk
when he recovers cannot be admitted freely thereunto, in ipsius DAMNUM NON
MODICUM ET GRAVAMEN and CONTRA LEGEM and CONSUETUDINEM REGNI NOSTRI. For which
if he can show no good cause, he shall be fined, and the encumbrance removed.

The Nineth is, Register f. 33 34.
a Writ of Prohibition to the Bishop, prohibiting him to hold Plea in Court
Christian, DE ADVOCATIONE Ecclesiae de N. vel Medietatis, vel Tertiae partis,
vel quatiae partis Ecclesiae de N. unde G. queritur, quod R. Episcopus Sarum
trahit eos in placitum coram vobis in Curia Christianitatis: quia placita DE
ADVOCATIONIBUS ECCLESIARUM Spectant ad Coronam and Dignitatem nostram. And if
the Bishop proceed in this Plea to the Patrons or Kings prejudice, an
Attachment shall issue out against him, and he shall be imprisoned and fined
for this contempt, and his temporalities seized.

The Tenth is, a Writ of Register f. 35 36. Westminster. 2. c. 5 Glan vil. l. 4. c.
13. ^racton l. 5. c. 402. b. Brit. f. 260. 4. 6. 3. 27. 7 Ed. 3. 42. 31. H. 6.
14. No. Not. 45. 38. H. 6. 20, 21. 12. E. 4 13. 2 H. 7. 12. Cook 2. Instit. p.
364. 265. Seldens History of Tithes, cap. 14. sect. 3.
Judicavit: where two Incumbents of two neighbor Churches presented by several
Patrons implead one another in the Bishops Court for Tithes, as belonging to
their Churches, amounting to the moity; third or fourth part of the Tithes, (or
any lesser part before Articuli Cleri. c. 2.) then either of the Patrons might
sue a Writ of Judicavit out of the Kings Court to the Bishop, to prohibit and
stay the suit in the Bishops Court, till the right of Tithes were determined in
the Kings Court; because else the Patron as the Writ suggests, jacturam
Advocationis suae incurreret si praedictus C. in causa illa obtineret: For the
Advowson would be so much the worse, as the value of the Tithes formerly
belonging thereto, and recovered from his Incumbent in the Bishops Court
amounted unto. This Writ discovers how careful our Kings Common Laws were to
preserve the right of Patrons from the least prejudice or diminution by their
own Incumbents, or any others.

The Eleventh* is the Writ Ad Iura Regia; which lies where the King is Patron,
or has right to present, or others interrupt or disturb his right of
Presentation, or Incumbent, when presented before or after Judgment given for
him in any Spiritual Court by appeal, etc. or Bulls from Rome, to the dishonor
and prejudice of the King and the rights of his Crown. In which case, the
parties for their contempt shall be attached, committed to prison and
exemplarily punished, as appears by the Register of Writs f. 61, 62, 63, 64. to
which I remit the Reader.

The Twelfth, is a Praemunire, in cases when any shall procure or execute any
Exemptions or Bulls from the Pope (as the Cistertians did) to be exempted from
payment of Tithes to the prejudice of the Patrons in their Advowsons, as well
as of the Incumbents. A severe penalty inflicted on them by the Statute of 2 H.
4. c. 4. which Statute as Printed, because it mentions nothing at all relating
to Patrons; I shall therefore transcribe the Petition in Parliament, and the
Act made thereupon verbatim out of the Parliament Roll it self, which is most
punctual, full and considerable, ^et unknown to most Lawyers as well as
Patrons, whom it concerns.

2 H. 4. Rot. Parl. number. 41. Item a Petition was delivered in Parliament
touching the Ordering of Cistertians or Cisteux, the which by the Kings
commandment was sent to the Commons for to be advised of, and deliver their
advice thereon: of which Petition, the words here ensue.

May it please Our most Gracious Lord the King to consider, that whereas time
out of memory, the Religious men of the Order of Cisteux of your Realm of
England have paid all manner of Tithes of their Lands, Tenements and
Possessions, let to Farm or manured, and occupied by other persons than
themselves, and likewise of all manner of things titheable, being and kept upon
the said Lands, Tenements and Possessions, as fully and entirely, and in the
same manner as the other Leiges (or Subjects) of your said Realm. Yet so it is,
that now of late the said Religious have purchased a Bull of our most holy
Father the Pope, by the which our said most holy Father has granted to the
said Religious and others your Leiges, That they shall pay no tithes of their
Lands, Meadows, Tenements, Possessions, Woods, Beasts, or any other things,
albeit they are or shall be leased or farmed out; any title of prescription or
right acquired, or which may hereafter be acquired to the contrary
notwithstanding. The which pursuit and grant, are apparently against the Laws
and customs of your Realm; by reason that diverse Compositions real and
Indenture are made between many of the said Religious and other your Leiges of
the prise of such Tithes; also, because that in diverse Parishes, the Tithes
demanded by the said Religious by color of the said Bull, exceed the fourth
part of the value of the said Benefices, within whose limits and bounds they
are; and so if the said Bull shall be executed, as well you our most doubted
Lord, as your Leiges, PATRONS OF THE SAID BENEFICES SHALL LOSE YOUR ADVOWSONS OF
THE SAID BENEFICES IN GREAT PART, and the Conusance of them which in this
behalf appertains, and in all times has belonged to your Regality, shall be
discussed in Court Christian, against the said Laws and Customs: and to avoid
the great trouble and commotion which may arise amongst your people by notion
and execution of such novelties within your Realm; May it therefore please your
Majesty, by assent of the Lords and Commons assembled in this present
Parliament, to ordain, that if the said Religious or any other put or shall put
the said Bull in execution in any manner, that then he or those who put or
shall put this Bull in execution, shall be put out of your Protection by Process
duly made in this behalf, and their goods forfeited to you lost, and that as a
work of charity.

Which Petition being read and considered, was answered in these words
following, It is accorded by the King and Lords in Parliament, that the Order
of Cisteux shall stand in the state it was, before the time of the Bulls
purchased comprised in this Petition; and that as well those of the said Order,
as all others Religious and Seculars of what estate or condition soever they
shall be, who shall put the said Bulls in execution, or heretofore have
purchased or shall hereafter purchase other such Bulls, or being purchased shall
take advantage of them in any manner, that Process shall be made against them
by garnishment of two months, by a writ of Pr^em^nire facias. And if they
shall make default, or shall be attainted, that they shall be put out of the
Kings Protection, and incur the penalties and forfeitures comprised in the
Statute of Provisions, made the 13. year of K. Richard. And moreover for to
eschew many mischie^s likely to happen in times to come, It is accorded, That
our Sovereign Lord the King shall send (or write) to our most holy Father the
Pope, for to Repeal and ^ull the said Bulls purchased, and to abst^in himself
to make any such grant for time to come. To which answer, the Commons well
agreed, and that it should be made into a Statute.

Which was done accordingly, as you may read in the Statutes at large, 2 H. 4.
c. 4. From which memorable Petition and Record, as See Mr. Seldens History of
Tithes. chapter 6. p. 120, etc
our Anabaptists and others desiring exemption from Tithes may take notice,
that it is an Antichristian and Papal practice (not to pay as they hold) but to
seek and prosecute an absolute exemption from the payment of any Tithes as
other Subjects do especially by RELIGIOUS PERSONS, condemned in this whole
Parliament, Petrus Bestasis Epist: 82. Joan. Sarisb. de Nugis Curialium l. 7.
c. 21. and sundry others.
both in the Pope and Cistertian Monks (the first contrivers of it) even in
those times of grossest Popery, as contrary to the express Laws and Customs
of the Realm, and prejudicial to the King and all other Patrons, and so
execrable and prejudicious, that they involve all prosecutors of such Bulls and
Exemptions from payment of Tithes in no less penalty than a Praemunire. So
they were exceeding tender and zealous of Patrons Advowsons, which they would
not have impaired in the least degree by any exemptions from paying Tiths,
though by their most holy Father the Popes own special Bulls, nor the
Conusances of them any way drawn into the spiritual Courts, against the Laws
and Customs of the Realm, and the Kings Regalities. In which resolution both
the King, Lords and Commons, even in these Popish times unanimously concurred.

Upon consideration of all which Premises and Writs in behalf of Patrons
Rights and Advowsons, securing them against all violent and injurious
usurpations and encroachments, and likewise of the wisdom of our Laws and
Ancestors, in making the Patrons always parties by way of See Fitzherbert and
Brook, Title, Aid and Quare Impedit, and Ashes Tables.
an de prayer to all Suits and Actions against the Incumbents wherein their
Collusion or Lurches might turn any way to their or the Churches prejudice; All
rational, just, righteous conscientious persons, and encuragers of public
works of Piety and charity toward Gods Church or Ministers, must needs
unanimously conclude, the late Vote (of our New dishoused Legifers) against all
Patrons undisputable, Just, Legal, Equitable, Rights of Patronage, and future
Presentations to Parochial Churches, and other Ecclesiastical Benefices,
without the least legal Process, Hearing, Trial, or Recompense, or any
pregnant satisfactory Reason rendered for it against all sacred Texts, Common,
Civil, Canon Laws, Writs, Records, Prescriptions, time out of mind, and grounds
of Justice, equity, conscience reason here produced for them) to their
perpetual, dishinteritance, loss, and discontent to be both extrauagant,
unrighteous, illegal, injurious to them in the highest degree, if not
destructive to our Churches, Ministers, Religion, and dishonorable to our
Nation, for the Reasons first alleged. And therefore fit to be nulled and
buried in perpetual Oblivion, without the least execution of it to our Patrons
prejudice.



Symony and corrupt Contracts, and a vigilant care of Governors and
Presbyteries, to admit none but able godly, orthodox persons into the Ministry
capable of such cures, whereas the placing of the Right of Patronages and
Presentations in the Parishioners or people would be far more prejudicial
and mischievous; by causing factions and divisions in every Parish upon every
vacancy about the choice of a new minister, yea sundry suits and contests
between them, to the protracting of the vacancies, prevented by our single
Patronages in one person or two, commonly of good quality and better able to
judge and make choice of fitting Ministers than the people. And more especially
must needs prove mischievous upon this consideration, that the generality of
the Parishioners and people of most Parishes throughout England are so
ignorant, vicious, irreligious, injudicious, profane, neglectfull of Gods
public Ordinances, and enemies to all soul-searching, soul-saving Ministers
who would seriously reprove and withdraw them from their sins and evil
courses, that we may sooner find an hundred conscientious religious, godly
Patrons careful to present, protect and encourage such Ministers th^n one such
Parish wherein the generality and swaying part of the people are so well
affected and qualified as such Patrons. And therefore this change and
Translation of the future right of Presentation from the Patron to the
Parishioners, is a remedy far worse than the pretended disease, and an
introduction of a certain greater mischief to prevent a petty inconvenience. In
few words, the Design of the Jesuiticall contrivers, and Anabaptisticall
promoters of this Vote and project is, not to reform any real mischiefs in
Advowsons or our present Patrons, but by Voting of them down, utterly to
subvert and destroy our Parochial Churches, Ministers, Rectories, Tithes
Religion (yea our Universities and Schools of learning) by voting down
Patronages first, whereon they have d^pendance. They all remember that ancient
project and policy of their Tutor Satan, Zech. 13. 7. Matt. 26. 31, 50. Mark
14. 27. 50. John 10 11, 12.
and his old Factors; * Smite the Shepherds (first) and then the sheep will
soon be scattered and devoured by these Wolves: And the readiest way to smite
all the Shepherds and Pastors of our Churches, is first to smite and Vote down
all their Patrons at one sudden unexpected blow, without notice or hearing, and
then both our Shepherds and Sheep will soon be smitten, scattered; devoured by
these Matthew. 7. 15, 16.
ravenous Wolves in sheeps clothing, whose clear professed owned design is,
to subvert, destroy our Parochial Ministers, Congregations, Churches,
Rectories, Glebes, Tithes, Revenues and Advowsons too, under pretext they are
Popish, and Antichristian) and make them a prey and spoil to their malicious
insatious appetites, as is clear by John Cannes second voice (against not from
the Temple) and others speeches and petitions. To effect which Atheistical
plot with greater boldness and security, they make no bones nor conscience to
subvert all our former Laws and Statutes whatsoever for whose defense many of
them say, they so long fought. This Can does in his Voice p. 2, etc. and in a
later pamphlet (wherein he had some hand) said to be published by ALITHORITY in
Capitalls, in the Title. Wherein he publicly and shamelesly, I might say
TREASONABLY asserted, Lilburn tried and cast. p. 39, 40, etc. 142. to 148, 154.
and elsewhere.
that we have no Fundament^ll Laws and Liberties left us by our forefathers,
that may not be altered: the State physicians of our time (who passed the Vote
against Patrons Rights, etc.) being neither bound up to MAGNA CHARTA NOR
PETITION OF RIGHT. (nor Writs of RIGHT OF ADVOWSON, he might have added which
his next words include) nor ANY OTHER PRESIDENTS; but may lay aside either part
or whole (as they see cause) and appoint something else, as more seasonable and
proper to us, and as providence makes way for it. That to plead for such
unalterable fundamental Laws, is nothingelse but to enslave the Nation, for by
such a principle, people not only lose their Liberty* but are brought under
such a kind of Tyranny out of which (as being worse than the Egyptian Bondage)
there is no hope of deliverance, etc. Adding, that every age and generation of
men (to wit the prevailing party in present power) are left free and to
themselves, both for the manner of Election and time of Parliaments: YEA AND TO
LAY ASIDE ALL PARLIAMENTARY WAYS; AND CONSTITUTE SOME OTHER FORM OF
GOVERNMENT, if they see it more conducing to the safety and good of the Common
wealth. With many other such desperate passages, and a worse p. 164.
conclusion against all Malefactors future Trials by Juries. which he
prophecieth to be near an end, and shortly to be swallowed up by the Supreme
authori^ity of the Nation. So as neither the Name nor thing, shall be any more
in the Commonwealth of England. Is not this to exceed Strafford and Canterbury
in High Treason?

To which monstrous passages I shall return these brief Answers.

1. If we have no such Fundamental unalterable Laws and liberties, and those
he mentions be ^ot such, then S^e my sovereign power of Parliaments part 1, 2,
3. Mat Paris, Walsingham, Speed, Daniel, and others, in the lives of king John,
Henry, 3 Edw. 1, 2, 3. Cooksinstitutes on Magna Charta th^gl^ssary, 25 E. 1. c.
1 etc. 28. E. 1. c. 1. Conservatio Chartarum.
all our ancestors were very injurious, unwise, inspending so much blood and
treasure, and contesting for their violation, and new ratification of them in
all former Parliaments, from King John's reign to this present.

2. All our Parliaments in King Charles his reign were exceedingly overseen and
mistaken, in contesting with him for these laws and liberties as fundamental;
and the last of them all in excusable before God and man, for impeaching,
condemning and beheading Laud and Strafford as archtraitors to the King and
Kingdom, and guilty of high treason, Canterburies doom, p. 25. Straffords
Articles and Bill of Attainder, Mr. St. John's Argument at Law at his Attainder.
for endeavoring traitorously to subvert the fundamental laws and government
of the kingdom, etc. And their frequent excitations of the people in their
public Declaration to defend our fundamental laws and liberties, with their
lives and fortunes; and arming them against their lawful King and his
adherents, and putting the Nation to such a prodigal expense of treasure and
Christian blood, for so many years together, for the maintenance of our
Fundamental Laws, Liberties, Government and Parliament Privileges, if there
be no such laws* and things, or they so variable, arbitrary and changable at
every prevailing parties, and new States Physicians pleasures.

3. That our prudent Ancesters reputed not our Fundamental laws such mutable
and repealable toys, as this ignoramus and other Innovators deem them. In the
Parliament held at Merton An. 20. H. 3. cap. 9. All the Bishops instancing the
Lords to give their consent (to alter the ancient Law of the Realm but in this
particular) That all such as were born before marriage should be legitimate, as
well as those that be born within Matrimony, as to the Succession of
Inheritance, for that the Church accepts such to be legitimate. Thereupon,
ALL THE LORDS and BARONS WITH ONE VOICE, answered; That they would not change
the Laws of the Realm, which hitherto have been used and approved. From which
Statutes Sr. Edward Cook in his Second Institutes, (printed by Order of the
Commons House) observes p. 97, 98. That the Nobility (yea G^ntry and People
too) of England have ever had the Laws of England in great estimation and
reverence, as their best birthright; and so have the Kings of England, as the
principal royalty and right belonging to their Crown and dignity: which made
that noble King Henry the first, surnamed Beau-clerk, to write thus to Pope
Paschall. Be it known to your Holiness, that whiles I live (through Gods
assistance) the dignities, laws, and customs of our Realm of England shall not
be violated or diminished. And if I (which God forbid) should so greatly deject
my self, as to attempt it, MY NOBLES and the whole PEOPLE of ENGLAND would by
no means suffer it. And it is worthy observation (adds Cook) How dangerous it
is to change an ancient maxim of the common Law: And it is a Note worthy of
observation; That whereas at the holding of this Parliament, Anno 20 H. 3. and
before and sometime after, many of the Judges and Justices of this Realm were
of the Clergy, and all the great Officers of the Realm, as Lord Chancellor,
Treasurer, Privy Seal, President, etc. were for the most part Clergy men, yet
even in those times, the JUDGES of the REALM (and let those styled such,
remember it, least they prove Iudasses to the Law and Realm, and incur See
Walsingham, Speed, Gra^^on, Holinshed, Stow, Baker in 11. R. 2. and M. St.
John's Speech against the Shipmony, Judges, worthy the present perusal of
grandees of the long Robe.
Tresylians and his Accomplices doom for their treachery) both of the Clergy and
Laity, did constantly maintain the Laws of England, so as no encroachment was
made upon them, nor breach unto them, by any foreign power, or upstart
domestic Authority: Yea so zealously resolute were our noble ancesters in the
defense of our fundamental Laws, Liberties, Royalties, against all violations,
and alterations heretofore, that in the Walsingham Hist. Ang. p. 54, 55. Fox
Acts and Monum. Vol. 1. p. 445, 446. Speeds Hist. p. 657, 658. Cook 2.
Institut. p. 98.
Parliament of Lincoln An. 28. E. all the Nobility of England (by assent of the
whole Commonalty, writ and sent a most famous letter to Pope Boniface, sealed
with the Seals of Arms of 104. Earls and Barons (whose names are recorded in
Speeds history, for their eternal honor and others imitation in such cases)
wherein they thus resolutely express themselves in their behalf. Ad
observationem and defensionem libertatum, consuetudinum and Legum paternarum ex
debito praestiti juramenti astringimur, quae manutenebimus toto posse, totisque
viribus cum Dei auxilio Defendemus. Nec etiam permittimus aut aliquatenus
permittemus, sicut nec possumus nec debemus, praemissa tam insolita ^am
indebita, praejudicialia, and alias in audita (surely the recited passages of
this Pamphettere are as bad nay worse them those they mention) Dominum nostrum
Regem etiam si vellet facere, seu quomodo libet attemptare: Praecipue cum
promissa cederent manifest in Exhaeredationem Iuris Coronae Regni Angliae and
Regiae Dignitatis, ac subversionem Status ejusdem Regni notoriam: Nec non in
praejudicium libertatis, consuetudinum and legum paternarum. All which Nobles
were as zealous in defense and maintenance of the Great Charter and other their
Laws and Liberties, that very year, and 25. Ed. 1. against the Kings
encroachment by Taxes, or otherwise, as against the Popes; which appears by
Walsingam Holinshed, Speed in 32 H. 5. 28 E. 1. and Ypodigma Newstriae Cooks 2.
Instit. p. 225. to 280. Statutes at large.
our Historians, and the Statutes of 25. E. 1. c. 1. and 28 E. 3. c. 1. in both
which they caused the great Charter of England and of the Forest to be
confirmed in all points, AS THE COMMON LAW OF THE LAND both by the Kings Great
Seal, and by new Acts of Parliament, enacting that all Judgments given by the
Justices or any other Ministers that hold plea before them against the points
of this Charter shall be undone and holden for naught. That this Charter shall
be sent under the Kings Seal, to all Cathedral Churches throughout the Realm,
there to remain, and that it shall be read before the people twice a year. That
all Archbishops and Bishops shall pronounce Sentence of Excommunication twice a
year against all those that BY WORD DEED OR COUNSEL DO CONTRARY TO THE
FORESAID CHARTERS, or that IN ANY POINT BREAK OR UNDO THEM: who accordingly by
a solemn form of Excommunication, did Exommunicate and accurse all those that
in any point did resist or break these Charters and Ordinances; or IN ANY
MANNER HEREAFTER procure counsel, or any way assent to, resist or break them;
or go about it BY WORD OR DEED, OPENLY OR PRIVILY, BY ANY MANNER OF PRETEENCE
OR COLOR: and sequester and exclude them from the Body of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and from all the company of heaven, and from all the Sacraments of Holy
Church. Enacting further, that the Great Charters of the Liberties of England,
should be delivered to every Sheriff of England, under the Kings Seal, to be
read four times in the year, before the people in the full County, and firmly
observed in every point. And that there should be chosen in every shire Court
by the Commonalty of the same shire, three substantial Knights, or other
lawful, wise, and well disposed persons, to be assigned Justices under the
Kings Great Seal, to hear and determine (without any Writ but only their
Commission) Such plaints as shall be made against all those that commit or
offend against any point contained in the said Charters, in the Shires where
they be assigned, as well within Franchises as without; and to hear the plaints
from day to day, without any delay or delays which be at the Common Law; and
to punish all such as shall be attainted of any Trespass, contrary to any
point of the aforesaid Charters (where remedy was not before at the Common Law)
by Imprisonment, Fine or Ame^ciament, according to the Trespass. Yea, the
Parliament of 42 E. 3. c. 1. held these great Charters such unalterable
Fundamental Laws and Privileges; that it not only enacts, they shall be
holden and kept in all points; but further, IF ANY STATUTE BE MADE TO THE
CONTRARY IT SHALL BE HOLDEN FOR NONE. Which Law continues yet unrepealed. Yea,
the whole House of Lords and Commons, the last Parliament, were so zealous for
the observation and perpetuation of Magna Charta, and the Petition of Right, as
unalterable Fundamental Laws, not to be repealed, neglected, altered, violated
upon any pr^tence (being so just and absolutely necessary for the peoples
Liberty and safety, the ( Supreme Law) that in their Exact Collection, p. 22,
23. 309, 316.
Remonstrance to the late King, 15. December. 1641. and in their Propositions
sent to him afterward, 2 June 1642* ^hey earnestly pressed the King, that for
the better preservation of the Laws and peoples Rights and Liberties from
Invasion and u^urpation on them; All Counselleu^s and public Officers of
State, Judges, Justices, and Sheriffs should be A thing now quite forgotten
and neglected.
specially sworn to the due Observation and Execution of the great Charter, the
Petition of Right, and all other Laws that concern the Subjects in their Rights
and Liberties: and that the Judges and Justices should be careful, and
particularly Sworn, to give these Laws in Charge to the Grand jury at every
Assizes and Sessions, and likewise every Term in the Kings Bench; and to make
diligent enquiry of the breaches of them in any kind to be presented and
punished according to Law: as the only means to make and preserve us a free
and happy People. It seems a strange miracle therefore unto me, that any person
should be so impudently presumptuous, as to deny these Laws, or any other, to
be Fundamental; to hold them alterable and repealable in part or in whole, at
any prevailing Factions arbitrary pleasure, and to publish it by Authority;
after so many bloody, costly, old and new contests for their Defense and
Perpetuity; when as all expected, rather such Oaths and ways as these
forecited, for their future establishment: And so much the rather, because the
late New-nodellers of our State, and the greatest swaying Grandees amongst us
in their printed Declaration 17 March 1648. Expressing the grounds of their
late Proceedings against the King; and of settling the present Government in the
way of a Free State, without King or House of Lords; have given this high
Encomium of our Laws and Engagement for their inviolable continuance, p. 23,
24, 25. That they are GOOD and EXCELLENT LAWS, enjoyed by our Ancesters long
before the Conquest, and have ever since continued in all former Changes
without abrogation, as the badges of our Freedom. That our Ancesters spent much
of their blood to have them confirmed by the great Charter of our Liberties:
and being duly executed, are the most just, free, and equal of any other Laws
in the world. That the Liberty, Property and Peace of the Subject are most
fully preserved by them. That they known their own particular Interests, and
that they most intended, the common Interest of those they served, was not
possible to be preserved without these Laws: which if they should be taken
away, all industry must cease, All Misery, Blood and Confusion would follow;
and greater Calamities (if possible) then any fallen upon us by the late Kings
misgovernment, would certainly involve all persons, under which they must
inevitably perish. Whereupon they thus conclude. These arguments are sufficient
to PERSUADE ALL MEN (but not this Pamphleter In ^^heir scurrilous, alsurd,
lying pregn^stications; full of railings against our Laws, as well as Ministers
and Tithes.
Culpeper, Lilly, with other Jesuiticall, and Anabaptisticall Furies against
our Laws) to be CONTENTED TO SUBMIT THEIR LIVES and FORTUNES TO THESE JUST and
LONG APPROVED RULES OF LAW, with which they are already so fully acquainted:
and NOT TO BELIEVE, THAT THE PARLIAMENT (so they style themselves) INTENDS THE
ABROGATION OF THEM; BUT TO CONTINUE AND MAINTAIN THE LAWS OF THE NATION:
especially THAT MOST EXCELLENT LAW OF THE PETITION OF RIGHT. The violation of
which, they there charge against the King, as one principle crime for which
they proceeded capitally against him and abolished Kingly Government; as not
governing the people in righteousness ACCORDING TO THE LAWS, but imprisoning
them, and imposing Taxes and Impositions on them contrary to Law, without full
and free consent by Act of Parliament, and taking away the Subjects lives by
Martial Law, without Lawful Trial by their Peers and Juries. All which
things had Can considered, he would have blushed to have published such
Treasonable Passages against our Fundamental Laws, and Liberties, which he
understands not. Whose Excellency, Utility and Necessity, are so largely set
forth of old, by Bracton, Britton, Glanvil, Horn, Fortescue de Laudibus Legum
Angliae, Sir Thomas Smith in his Commonwealth, St. Germin Sir John Davis in
his Irish Reports Preface, and Sir Edward Cook in his Reports and Institutes,
that I need not add thereunto any Panegyric in their behalf.

4. It is recorded by Annalium pars posterior p. 609. Seldeni Notae ad Eadmerum
p. 189. 190. Lamb. Archaion. f. 138.
Roger H^veden and others. That when William the Conqueror (as we style them)
in the 4. year of his reign, by the Council of his Barons caused all the
ancient Laws and customs of the Realm formerly used to be presented to him upon
Oath (by an Inquest of twelve of the Noblest, ablest and learnedest men in the
laws summoned out of every County) without any addition, diminution,
alteration, or prevarication; upon perusal of them, he commanded the Law of
the Danes in case of Amerciaments and forfeitures (used in Norfolk, Suffolk and
Cambridgeshire, differing in some circumstances from that of the Saxons, used
in other Counties) to be used throughout the Realm, because it was the Law of
the Norwegians from whom he and his Normans were descended. But so zealous were
our Ancestors in that age, even under the pretended Foreign Conqueror, for
their ancient settled known, just, and honest laws, that they would not permit
the least alteration in them upon any terms, and never ceased importuning the
King, till he condescended to ratify and establish their ancient Laws (so long
enjoyed) without any alteration, which p. 608.
Hoveden thus expresses. Quo audito mox universi Compatriotae, qui Leges
edixerant, tristes effecti, UNANIMITER DEPRECATI SUNT, quatenus permitteret
Leges sibi proprias and consuetudines antiquas habere. In quibus vixerunt
Patres, and ipsi in eis nati and nutriti sunt. Quia durum valde sibi foret
suscipere leges ignotas, and judicare de eis quas nesciebant. Rege vero ad
flectendam ingrato existente, tandem eum Prosecuti sunt, deprecantes, quatenus
pro anima REGIS EDWARDI qui ei post diem suum concesserat Coronam and Regnum,
and CUJUS ERANT LEGES, nec aliorum extraneorum COGERET, QUAM SUB LEGIBUS
PERSEVERARE PATR^S. Unde consilio habito Precatui Baronum tandem acquievit. Ex
illa vero die, visa autoritate, veneratae Peruniversam angliam, Corroboratae
and observatae sunt prae caeteris patriae legibus LEGES EDWARDI REGIS, quae
prius inventae and constitutae erant in tempore EADGARI avisui. Confirmata
vero, vocata est LEX EDWARDI REGIS: Non quia ipse invenisset eam primus; sed
cum praeter missa fuisset and oblivioni penitus data, a diebus avisui EADGARI,
qui prius inventor ejus esse dicitur, usque ad sua tempora; EDWARDUS quia justa
and honesta erat a profunda abysso abstraxit, and eam revocavit, and ut suam
observandam tradidit. For the inviolable observation of which ancient laws, our
ancesters ever since this King William's reign till now have obliged all our
Kings, by a special clause in their Coronation Oaths Totles Mag. Charta f.
164. Exact Collection p. 268, 290, 291. 706, to 716 The first part of my
Sovereign Power of Parliaments, p. 51. to 71.
To confirm by Oath, grant and keep to the People of England the Laws and
customs granted to the Commons of England, by ancient just and devout Kings to
God; and praesertim, etc. And specially the Laws and customs and liberties
granted to the Clergy and People by (this) glorious King Edward. Whose eight
very first laws confirmed by the Conqueror are for the inviolable preservation
of the Goods, Possessions, Lands, Globes, Rights, Privileges, Peace, Fabrics,
Tithes of the Church, Ministers, Scholars, and Parochial Church assemblies;
which some now make their Masterpiece eternally to repeal, subvert, plunder,
after all our late wars Protestations, Declarations, Vows, Covenants, for the
inviolable preservation of them, and of our ancient fundamental Laws, customs,
liberties, which this Pampheter so slights; and other upstart Legifers (without
the peoples full and free consent in Parliament) endeavor to alter and new
modle at their pleasures, quojure, or qua injuri^, let Straffords and
Canterbu^ies late Impeachments, Romans 2. 8. And think thou this O man, that
judge them who do such things, and do the same that thou shall escape the
judge meant of God?
Judgments, with Mr. St. John's Argument, and Mr. Browns at their Impeachments
resolve; since none of our Kings durst attempt so great a change in any age,
nor yet this Norman Conqueror, as we style him. Yea our great King Henry the 4.
though he came to the Crown by the sword, in nature of a Conqueror; And the
Lords and Commons in his first Parliament granted him as great and large Royal
liberty and Prerogatives, as any of his Royal Predecessors before him had; yet
in that very Parliament ( Rot. Parl. n. 8. and Plac. Coronoe in Parliamento. 1.
H. 4. n. 17.) he declared and granted out of his Royal Grace and tender
Conscience in full Parliament, that it was not his intent nor will to alter the
Laws, Statutes, nor good Customs of the Realm, nor to take other advantage of
them, but to do RIGHT to all people, in mercy and truth, according to his Oath:
The Realm being formerly in danger to be undone for want of good Government,
and by Repealing and breaking the Laws and Customs of the Realm by King
Richard the second. And that it was his will, that none should imagine, that by
way of Conquest, he would disinherit any one of his Heritage, Franchise or
other right, which he ought to have: nor deprive (or out) any man of that he
had or ought to have, by the good laws and customs of the Realm (three Traitors
lands there specified only excepted) being guilty of all the evil which had
happened to the Realm. A President worthy all other pretended Kings,
Conquerours, and Grandees imitation, in this or succeeding ages.

5. I shall close up all with the express resolution of the wise and most
judicious whole Parliament of England (more to be credited than this
Pamphleter) In this notable Passage of the Printed Statute of 1. Jacobi c. 2.
wherein they declare, we have both Fundamental Laws, Liberties, and Customs,
and what sad consequences will ensue upon this Scriblers Doctrine and Practice
for their alteration, which I beseech all real Politicians, wise Statesmen,
Lawyers, and Lovers of their Countries Weal, Safety, Settlement, seriously to
ponder.

Whereas His most Excellent Majesty has been pleased OUT OF HIS GREAT VVISDOME
and JUDGMENT, not only to represent unto us, etc. but also has vouchsafed to
express unto us many ways, how far it is, AND EVER SHALL BE, from his ROYAL,
SINCERE CARE and Affection to the Subjects of England, to alter or innovate the
FUNDAMENTAL (mark the word) and ancient Laws, Privileges and good Customs of
this Kingdom: whereby not only his Regal authority, but the peoples security
of Lands, livings, and Privileges (both in general and particular) are
preserved and maintained. And See the self-same expressions in King Charles
Declaration, December. ber 21. 1641. Exact Collection, p. 28, 29. The Law is the
Inheritance of every Subject, and the only security he can have for his Life,
Liberty, or Estate: and the which being neglected, or disesteemed (under what
specious shows soever) a very great measure of Infelicity, if not irreparable
confusion, must without all doubt fall upon them. And we doubt not it will be
the most acceptable Declaration a King can make to his Subjects, that for our
parts we are resolved, not only duly to observe our self, but to maintain
them against what Opposition soever, though with the hazard of our being.
by the abolishing or alteration of the which, it is impossible but that
present Confusion will fall upon the whole STATE and FRAME of this Kingdom.
His MAJESTY'S humble, loving and faithful Subjects, have not only conceived
The Weight of His Majesty's Reasons, but apprehend to their unspeakable Joy and
Comfort, his plain, clear, and gracious intention to Seek no other Changes or
Alteration, but of such particular, temporary, and indifferent manner of
Statutes, and Customs ( here put in contradistinction to fundamental,
general and perpetual) as may prevent and extinguish all and every future
questions, etc. The Lord grant that these new Projectors and Pamphletors
endeavored Changes and real Alterations of our fundamental, ancient,
standing Laws, privileges Customs, government in relation, both to our
Church and Realm, may not bring such present confusion upon the whole State and
frame of both, and destroy this only security, preservation and Maintenance of
this Nations, peoples Lands, liberties, privileges, Lives, both in general,
and particular, and all our Patronages, Churches, Ministers, Rectories, and
Religion too, which too many public Enemies hope for and design.

Seneca in Medea. Qui aliquid statuerit part inaudita altera, licet recte
statuerit HAVD AEQVVS EST JVDEX.
A Postscript.
CHristian Reader, Exodus 35. 4. to 30. c. 36. 3 to 10. 1 Chronicles. 22. throughout.
c. 26. 26, 27, 28 c. 28. and 29. 2 Chronicles. c. 2. to c. 8. c. 24. 4. to 17. c.
27. 3. c. 29 3. to 21. c. 34. 8. to 15. 2 Kings 12. 4. to 7. Ezra and Neh,
throughout. Isa. c. 1, and 2, Zech. 8 9, 10
when I seriously consider the extraordinary zeal, forwardness and bountiful
liberality of devout and holy Moses, David, Solomon, Joash, Jotham, Hezekiah,
Josiah, Ezra, Nehemiah, and all Gods people under them, in contributing toward
the building, maintaining repairing the Tabernacle, Temple, Houses, Synagogues
of Gods public worship, and furnishing them with all necessary ornaments and
utensils: their care in providing Josh. 21. 2. 2 Chronicles. 6. 64. and c. 9. 10. to
35. c. 31. 3. to 16. Neh. 10. 32. to the end. c. 13. 10. to 15.
liberal maintenance, encouragement, rewards for Gods faithful Priests and
ministers; their transcendent Psalm. 5. 7. Psalm. 23. 6. Psalm. 26. 8. and 27. 4.
Psalm. 42. 1, 2, 4. Psalm. 36. 8. Psalm. 52. 8. Psalm. 55. 14. Psalm. 84. 1, 2, 3,
4, 10, 11. Psalm. 100. 4. Ps. 116. 19. Psalm. 118. 26. Psalm. 122. Psalm. 132. to
9. Psalm. 135. 2. Luke 2. 27. 37.
ardent Love, affectionate longing, hungry, thirsty, earnest, panting desires
after God, and all his public Ordinances in his own House and Temple; with
their cheerfulness, joyfulnesse, pains, diligence in frequenting them therein,
without the least separation from them; expressed in the marginall Texts.
Together with the exceeding Bounty, Munificence, zeal, of Ezra. 1. throughout.
c. 5. 13, 14, 15, 16. c. 6. 1. to 16. c. 7. 11. to 28. c. 8. 24. 25, etc. 33,
34, 35. Isa. 44. 28. c. 45. 13.
Cyrus, Darius, Artaxe^xes, and their Nobles, (though mere heathens) in
repairing Gods Temple and maintaining his public worship therein, expressed in
their memorable Decrees. And when I further meditate upon the Prophesies of
Isa. 2. 1, 2, c. 56. 6, 7. Mich. 4. 1, 2, 3. relating to the times of the
Gospel, predicting, that under it, All nations shall flow and repair by great
Troops to the Mountain and House of the Lord; and thus call earnestly one to
another: COME and LETVS GO UP TO THE HOUSE OF THE GOD OF JACOB; For we will
walk in his ways, and ^e will teach us his paths; and we will love the Name of
the Lord, and b^ his servants; who has promised, TO MAKE THEM JOYFUL IN HIS
HOUSE OF PRAYER: Upon the subsequent Presidents of Christ and his Apostles
(recorded in the John 7. 14, 28. c. 8. 2. 20. c. 18. 20. Luke 20. 1. chap. 24.
3, 5 Matthew. 26. 55. Acts 2. 46, 47. c. 31, etc. c. 5. 42. c. 9. 20. c. 13. 10.
14 44. c. 14. 1. c. 17. 10 c. 18. 4. 19. 26. c. 19. 8. Mark 1, 21, 39. Luke 4.
15, 16, etc. c. 13. 10. Matthew. 12. 9.
New Testament, for our imitation) who repaired to and preached DAILY IN THE
PUBLIC TEMPLE and SYNAGOGUES OF THE JEWS; and of all the zealous Primitive
Believers, Christians, People, who resorted and flocked by Troops EARLY EVERY
DAY to the Temple and Synagogues to hear them preach and pray: CONTINUING DAILY
WITH ONE ACCORD IN THE TEMPLE, there participating of all Gods public
Ordinances in common, without Schism, or Separation from the public
Assemblies therein. And when I further ponder the eminent Liberality, Piety,
Devotion of our ancient Christian Predecessors, both See Spelman Concilia and
Epist. Ded. Dr. Usher de Ecclesiarum Brit. Primordiis.
Britons and Saxons, in erecting magnificent Churches in all places throughout
our Island; (not out of vainglory or superstition, but a pious 1 Chronicles. 22 5.
c, 29, 1.
contemplation of the Greatness of God, for whose honor and service they
built them) in endowing them with competent Glebes, Rectories, Tithes,
Revenues, for the Maintenance of Ministers; and their assiduous care, zeal in
flocking about the Ministers of Christ, to hear Gods Word when and wheresoever
they came amongst them; thus recorded by our venerable Eccles. Hist. Gentis
Angll. 3. c. 26, and l. 4. c. 27.
Beda: Erat quippe moris, etc. It was the manner and Custom of the people of
England in that age, (to wit eight hundred years since and before) when ever a
Presbyter or Minister came into any Country-Town or village, TO FLOCK and
GATHER TOGETHER ABOUT HIM IN ONE, and to make it THEIR CARE and DESIRE, to hear
the word of God from his mouth, gathering together about him for that purpose
IN GREAT MULTITUDES to hear what he should speak unto them; and MORE WILLINGLY
FOLLOWING and DOING THE THINGS THEY HEARD and UNDERSTOOD. And then compare
these premises with the quite contrary practice of many pretended Sacrilegious
Christians, and Anabaptisticall, Sectarian, Jesuiticall (and I fear
Atheistical) Saints in our degenerated times, who repute it the prime part,
the chief character of their Piety and Saintship, to declaim against all our
Churches, Temples, dedicated to Gods Worship; as Antichristian, Popish,
Heathenish, Idolatrous, Profane Steeple Houses, etc. Saying one to another
like the Madianitish impious, Pagan Princes, and their plundering Armies of
old, Ps. 83. 12.
Let us take to our selves, the houses of God in possession: or like the
Barbarian, Edomites, of ancient times, crying out against them, and our
Ministers Rectories too, (in their very words which John Can takes up in his
profane Epistle Dedicatory, and p. 2. 29.
voice, not from, but against the Temple) Raze them, raze them, even to the
Foundations; leave not one stone of them upon a stone unthrown down; for if
THEY WERE RASED TO THE GROUND IT WOULD DO WELL; and would presently effect it,
were their power answerable to their malice; and withal making it their
principal work wholly to separate and withdraw all persons they can from our
godly Ministers, and all Gods public Ordinances in our Churches, as
Antichristian, Popish, Superstitious, Impious, displeasing unto God, etc. I
cannot but stand amazed at this strange Apostasy of theirs from the zeal and
practice of all these Godly Saints both under the Law and Gospel; yea of Christ
himself and his Apostles; as a sad forerunner of some severe sweeping Judgment
of God, ready to seize upon us to our utter desolation, if not prevented by
sincere repentance, or suppression of such unnatural Harpies, Vipers; and as a
most desperate Design of the Jesuits, to demolish our Churches, destroy our
Protestant Congregations and (so our Religion, throughout England, a^ they
burnt, demolished, suppressed, destroyed the Protestants Churches and public
Assemblies of Jubilaeum sive Speculum, Jesuiticum, p. 117. 132, 144 145, 175,
176. 185. Meteranus Hist. l. 27.
late years (viz. Anno 1606. 1614. 1628. and 1639.) in Cracovia, and Posnania
in Poland, in the Dukedomes of Clive, Juliers, Bergen, Newburg, in Vilna in
Lituania; and since that in Austria and Bohemia. Whereupon all true Saints and
Ministers of God have justcause, to pray and complain to God against them, in
the old Churches Lamentation and words against her open, professed Pagan
Enemies, Psalm. 74. 1. to 12. O God why have thou cast us off, etc. Lift up thy
feet unto the perpetual desolations, even all that the ENEMY HAS DONE
WICKEDLY IN THE SANCTUARY. Thy Enemies roar in the midst of the
Congregations, they set up their Ensigns for Signs. A man was famous
according as he lifted up axes upon the thick Trees. But now they break down
all the carved work thereof with axes and hammers: they have cast fire into thy
Sanctuary; they have defiled the dwelling place of thy name, and CAST IT DOWN
TO THE GROUND. They say in their hearts, Let us destroy them together; THEY
HAVE BURNT UP ALL THE SYNAGOGUES OF GOD IN THE LAND. We see not our Signs,
there is no more ANY PROPHET, neither is there any amongst us that knows, How
long. O God, how long shall the adversary reproach? Shall the enemy blaspheme
thy name for ever? Remember this, that the enemy has reproached thee O Lord,
and that the foolish people have blasphemed thy name. Have respect to thy
Covenant, for the dark places of the earth are full of the Habitations of
CRUELTY. O let not the oppressed return ashamed, let the poor and needy praise
thy name. Arise O Lord, PLEAD THINE OWN CAUSE, remember how the foolish man
reproacheth thee daily. Forget not the VOICE OF THINE ENEMIES ( John Cannes
VOICE, not from but against THY TEMPLE, MINISTERS, TITHES) the tumult of those
That rise up against thee, increases continually.

It was the practice of none but malicious Heathens, and professed enemies of
God and his Church, to invade his Inheritance, and Destroy, Defile, Pillage his
House and Temples, Psalm. 79. 1. etc. 2 Chronicles. 26. 18, 19. 2 Kings 29. 5. to 18.
which caused this sad Lamentation and Complaint in Gods Prophets and people,
Isa. 64. 11, 12. Our holy and beautiful House where our Fathers praised thee,
is burnt with fire, and all our pleasant things are laid wast. Will thou
refrain thy self for these things O Lord? Will thou hold thy peace and afflict
us very sore? And can it be then a matter of joy and act of piety in John Can
and his New Saints, to see Gods ancient and beautiful houses erected by our
Ancestors, wherein our Fathers praised God, quite levelled to the ground, and
no more Assemblies kept in them?

It is recorded by all Eusebius, Socrates Sch^lasticus, Theodoret, Niceph^rus,
Fox, Acts and Monu-Eutropius, Grimston and others, in their Lives and Histories
of their Persecutions.
Ecclesiastical Historians, as an act of highest impiety, wickedness,
persecution in Dioclesian, Licinius, and other persecuting Pagan Emperors and
Apostates from Christianity; that they endeavored to destroy all the Churches
and Temples of the Christians, and rased diverse of them to the ground, to the
end they should not assemble publicly in them to pray, hear or worship God in
his sacred Ordinances: and can it then be now an act of eminent Piety, Zeal,
Righteousness, Christianity, and no persecution, wickedness, Apostasy at all
in Can, or his Anabaptistical, Jesuited Saints, to attempt, persuade the
subversion of all our Churches, and sacrilegious rapine of all their Tithes,
Revenues, of purpose to suppress all Parochial Assemblies, Ministers, and
praying, preaching in them, for the future? Surely I doubt the same Satanicall,
Antichristian Spirit which possessed these Persecutors, and Apostates
heretofore, is transmigrated by succession into Can and his Apostate
Confederates against our Churches and Ministers now; which I wish them sadly to
consider in due season, that they may be dispossessed of it, ere it lead them
past recovery into everlasting perdition, or to professed Apostasy and Enmity
against Christ, as it did Licinius and Julian heretofore.

As for those Colonels and Army Officers, who are active in promoting any such
design as this, by their armed power; let them remember, that it is recorded
in the Luke 7. 2. to 10.
Gospel of that Eminent Centurion or Colonel, whose faith Christ commended to
be greater than any he had found in Israel; how the Elders of the Jews gave him
this special Encomium to Christ himself, as a person WORTHY to find favor from
him, THAT HE HAD BUILT THEM A SYNAGOGUE, or Church to serve God in: And
therefore it must needs be an unsouldierly, impious practice in them, to pull
down those ancient Synagogues, Churches which others have built for Gods
public worship, instead of repairing them, or building new where wanting, or
demolished by wars, or other casualties.

And to stop the Jesuits mouths, (the original contrivers, and secret
fomenters of the present plots against our Church Fabrics, Endowments,
Revenues, and Patrons Rights) I shall recommend unto them this resolution of
M^ralium quaestu^num de Casibus Conscientiae.
Vincent. Filiucius (their fellow Jesuit transcribed, approved by Alphonsus de
Vargas, a Spanish Papist, yet anti Jesuit) in his notable Treatise entitled,
Relatio ad Reges and Principes Christianos, de Stratagematis, and sophismatis
Politicis Societatis Jesu, ad MONARCHIAM ORBIS TERRARUM sibi conficienda, c.
41, 42, 49. wherewith I shall countermine them, Po^^ifex and Caesar (and by
like reason all other Princes, Potentates, States) tam ex officio, quam quasi
ex contractu cum iis (fundatoribus) qui bona Ecclesiae reliquerunt OBLIGATUS
EST LEGE DIVINA ET NATURALI, ^am illis, qu^m iis in quorum emolumentum relicta
sunt, NON ALIENARE: adeo ut, si contrarium fiat, INJURIA FIAT FUNDATORIBUS
QUORUM VOLUNTATE LEGITIMA ET RATIONABILI NON STATUR: L^ditur utilitas publica,
Cultusque Religionis: fiat INJURIA Religiosorum successoribus: quae tanto major
est, si praeter jacturam bonorum fortunae, famae quoque periculum adsit: quod
tunc accidit, quando bona ita SINE CAUSA AUFERUNTUR, ut detur aliis probabilis
suspicandi occasio, factum id esse, vel propter ignorantiam, inscitiam,
inertiam, vel propter vitam flagitiosam Successorum. Itaque tenetur EX JUSITIA
REPARARE id quod interest, tam in fama and existimatione, quam in bonis
temporalibus. Caesar vi quidem Juramenti sui, and QVIA EST SUPREMVS ECCLESIARVM
ADVOCATVS ET DEFENSOR, obligatur and cogitur, JURA AC BONA VETERUM ECCLESIARUM
TUERI and AB HOSTIBUS RECUPERARE.

The Right of Patronage of Founders and Endowers of Churches, to nominate,
present or collate Incumbents, and convenient Ministers to them upon every
Vacancy, is as ancient as Parish Churches themselves; and confirmed by the
Canons of Councils, Popes Decrees, Imperial and Regal Constitutions ever
since, as is evident by Concilium Arausicanum, Ann, 441. cap. 10. The Gratian.
Cause. 16. qu. 7 See John Thierye and the Glosses thereon
Decrees of Pope Gelasius, about the year 493. the fourth Council of Aurelia,
an. 547. Can. 7. The Constitution of Justinian the Emperor, about ann. 550.
Novel. 123. Si quis Oratorium extruxerit, volueritque in eo promovere Clericos
vel IPSE vel HAEREDES EJUS, si sumptus ipsi Clericis administrent (as every
Founder was to endow the Church with a competent Glebe, Tithe, and Revenue,
before it was to be consecratd, and to deliver a special Charter of the DOWRY
and subjection thereof to the Bishop of the Diocese, before its consecration,
by the Decrees of the second Council of ^racara Can. 5. Council. Aurelian. 4.
Can. 33. Gregory Epist. l. 12. c. 10. and other Decrees cited by Gratian. Cause.
16. qu. 7.) and dignos NOMINARINT, nominati ordinantur, etc. The Gratian ib.
Surius Council. Tom. 2. Centur. Magd. 6. Col. 607.
fourth Council of Toledo, which decrees, Decernimus ut quamdiu FUNDATORES
ECCLESIARUM in hac vita superstites fuerint, pro iisdem locis curam habeant
solicitam; atque Rectores idoneos in eisdem Basilicis iidem ipsi Episcopo
offerant ordinandos. Quod si SPRETIS EISDEM FUNDATORIBUS Rectores ibidem
praesumpserit ordinare Episcopus, and ordinationem suam IRRITAM NOVERIT, and ad
verecundiam sui alios in eorum loco (QUOS I P S I FUNDATORES CONDIGNOS
ELEGERINT) ORDINARI. The Gratian Ca^s. 16. qu. 2. Surius Council. Tom. 2.
ninth Cuncil of Toledo about the year 660. Can. 1, 2. which Decrees; that
Founders of Churches during life, shall present fit Rectors to them, to be
ordained by the Bishop; which Right descended to their Heirs also after their
death; who were to provide, that neither the Incumbents, nor Bishops should
deprive the Church of her Dowry. Filiis vel Nepotibus ac honestioribus
propinquis ejus qui construxit vel ditavit (it should be dotavit) Ecclesiam,
licitum sit hane habere solertiam, ut si Sacerdotem, aliquid ex collatis rebus
desraudare praeviderint, aut honesta conventione compescant, aut Episcopo, vel
Judici corrigenda denuncient. Quod si talia Episcopus agere tentet,
Metropolitano haec insinuare procurent. Si autem Metropolitanus talia gerat,
Regis haec auribus intimare non differant. Ipsis tamen Haeredibus in iisdem
rebus non liceat quasi pr^prii Juris potestatem praeferre, non rapinam and
fraudem ingerere, non violentiam quamcunque praesumere; sed hoc solum in
salutarem solicitudinem adhihere, quod aut nullam operatio noxam nocens
attingat, aut mulctam vel aliquam partem salutaris mercedis assumat. The
Gratian. Cause. 16. qu. 7.
Synod of Rome, which decreed Monasterium; (vel Oratorium) canonice constructum
A DOMINIO CONSTRUCTORIS EO INVITO NON AU^ERATUR, liceatque illi Presbytero CUI
VOLUERIT pro sacro officio illius Di^cesis, cum consensu Episcopi (ne malus
existat) COMMENDARE. The Gratian ibid.
Decrees of Pope Gregory. Rationis ordo non patitur, ut Monasterium vel
Ecclesias CONTRA VOLUNTATEM FUNDATORUM, ab eorum dispositione, ad arbitrium
suum quis debeat vendicare: whose Heirs, and Coheirs ought to enjoy the
Patronage of them, as he determines Capitula Caroli and Ludovici Imperatorum
(colected by Ansegisus and Benedictus Levita) about the year 800. l. 5. c. 1.
82, 83, 178. l. 7. c. 2 13. Ludovici Imperatoris ad Capit. Additio 3. c. 25.
Addit. 4. c. 36. Legis Longobardorum. l. 3. Tit. 1. c. 44. The Council of Paris
ann. 829. l. 1. c. 22. The Councils of Friburg, Mentz, and Cavailon, cited by
Causa 16. qu. 17.
Gratian. The Council of Lateran under Alexander the third. cap. 13, 14, 17.
and Appendix ad idem Council. p. 15. c. 7. Extravag. de Jure Patronatus c. 4.
10, 11. and de Institutione c. 3. Council. Arelatense sub Car. Mag. c. 4.
Turonense 3. sub eodem c. 15. Cabilonense sub eodem c. 42. Meldense c. 51, 52.
Wormatiense c. 8. with sundry other Decrees, Laws, Councils of later times,
confirming Patrons Rights cited in Great. Causa 16. q. 11. Cause. 17. Bochel.
Decret. Eccl* Gallicanae. l 8. Tit. 12, 13, 14. By some of which it is evident,
See Mr. Seldens History of Tithes, p. 393, 394. 82. to 88.
that Patrons of ancient times, did present their Clerks to the Churches which
they founded and their Heirs after them, and invest them freely in them,
without the Bishops privity; accept of refignations from their Incumbents, and
deprive them upon sufficient cause, till restrained by the Decrees of Councils,
Popes, and Princes Edicts; and that Advowsons, or Rights of Patronage descended
to Heirs, Coheris and Coperceners; who if they agreed not to present, the
Bishop might either shut up the Church doors, or put in a Clerk to supply the
cure, till they presented an Incumbent by joint consent, that so the Church by
presentation of their several Clerks to it at once, might not be divided into
many Fragments, Churches, and so made incompetent: And in France, Mr. Seldens
History of Tithes, p. 394.
Patrons and Founders of Churches, had Droicts Honorifiques allowed them, as
Precedence; Seats and the like. It is therefore great injustice to deprive them
of their Rights and interests in their Patronages now, so long continued,
enjoyed in all revolutions of public affairs and highest impiety to destroy
our Churches Fabrics, or pervert them, their ornaments, Dowries, Glebes,
materials, to profane or other uses, contrary to the Founders pious
intentions, and the very See Hugo Grotius de jure belli, l. 3. c. 5. Sect. 3.
c. 12. sect. 6, 7, 8. and Annotata.
Laws of war it self, which preserve Churches from violence and Rapine, even
in an enemies country; which even barbarous pagan enemies have reputed sacred,
and exempted from spoil, or devastation, though some Anabaptistical Saints
would defile, destroy, devour them now. But let them remember this Gospel Text
(relating to material as well as spiritual Temples) 1 Cor. 3. 17. If any man
defile (or destroy) the Temple of God, him will God destroy: for the Psalm. 5.
7. Psalm. 11. 4. Psalm. 65. 4. Psalm. 79. 1. Psalm. 138. 2. Jonah 2. 7. Mic. 1, 2.
Hab. 2. 20.
Temple of God is holy.

FINIS.
Errata.
COurteous Reader, I shall desire thee before, or as thou read this Plea, to
correct with thy pen these ensuing Presse-Errors, mistakes, which the authors
remoteness from the Press, and the Printers negligence and unskilfullnesse in
Law Terms have occasioned, many of which quite vitiate the sense, and falsify
the Authors true quotations.

Fol. 8. l. 14. in the margent r. Cook Page 16. l. 14. r. 113 9. p. 17. l. 7.
r. Titles. p. 22. 2. Chron. 33. 3. r. 23. 3. p. 18. l. 2. r. plenarly. l. 3. r.
cases. l. 9. r. pleuarly. p. 18. in the margent r. Angelica. l. 19. r. double
value of. l. 20. r. presented to by Simony. l. 38. r. produced pro and contra.
p. 19. l. 14. in the margent, r. 825. l. 23. r. 356. l. 26. in the margent dele
21. l. 27. r. 39 H. 6. 20, 21, 26. p. 20 l. 10. r. should there come. p. 20. l.
1. in the margent, r. West 2. c. 5. r. 21. l. 11. r. Ordinary alone in case he
refuse the Patrons Clerk without cause; or against the Ordinary, etc. p. 22. l.
15. r. who recovers. p. 23. l. 2. r. quartae. l. 6. in the margent, r. 4 E. l.
13. r 365. p. 23. 24. r. and the Common Law. p. 25. l. 3. r. redoubted. p. 27.
l. 31. r. prevented. p. 29. whip, r. which. p. 31. l 32. r. now styled. l. 32.
28 E. r. 1. all. p. 32. l. 8. in the margent, 225. 525. to 280: r. 580. r, 22.
l. 17. r. c. 1, 2, 3.


