Independency EXAMINED, Unmasked, Refuted, By twelve new particular
Interrogatories: detecting both the manifold Absurdities, Inconveniences that
must necessarily attend it, to the great* disturbance of Church, State, the
diminution, subversion of the lawful undoubted power of all Christian
Magistrates, Parliaments, Synods: and shaking the chief Pillars, wherewith its
Patrons would support it.

By William Prynne of Lincolnes Inn, Esquier.

Romans 12. 16. Be of the same mind one toward another: Mind not high things,
but be contented with mean things: Be not wise in your own conceits. 1 Pet.
5. 5. Likewise ye Younger, submit your selves unto the Elder; yea all of you be
subject one to another, and be clothed with humility: for God resists the
proud, and gives grace to the humble. Ephesians. 4. 14, 15. Henceforth be no more
children, tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of Doctrine, by
the slight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive:

But speaking the truth in love, grow up into him in all things, which is the
head, even Christ.

LONDON, Printed by F. L. for Michael Spark Senior, and are to be sold at the
Blew-Bible in Green-Arbour. 1644.

Independency examined, unmasked, refuted, by Twelve new particular
Interrogatories.
COurteous Reader, it being expected by some, that I should (upon second
thoughts) render) a more particular account of my disapprobation of the
Independent Platform, then I have lately done in my Twelve considerable
serious Questions touching Churchgovernment, wherein I propounded my Reasons
against the same, but in a general manner: I shall for thy further
satisfaction, and our Churches peace (most necessary and desirable in these
dangerous times) propose by way of Interrogation, my more particular
Exceptions, against this New form of government, with all ingenuity and
freedom, without reflection upon any particular persons, or just disgust
(unless Gal. 4. 16.
truth displease) to those who are contrary-minded: My only aim being to
convince, reconcile, not irritate or disaffect them. The reason why I thus
write by way of Question, not Descision, is, because (for ought I find) the
Independents have not yet dogmatically, in direct terms* discovered to the
world the full truth of what they assert, but politikely conceal the principal
grounds, and more deformed parts of their Church-platforme, till a further
opportunity, for fear their very discovery at the first should cause their new
building to miscarry. Whereupon I have rather chosen to pump out their
determinations by the ensuing Questions to avoid mistakes then to refute them
upon ba^e conjectures; following the Apostles seasonable advise, 1 These. 5. 21.
Prove all things, hold fast that which is good.

1. Whether the Independent former of Church Government, now so much contended
for as the Reply of two of the brethren to A. S. p. 66.
only Church Government of divine institution, which all (say they) are bound
to submit unto, be any where to be found in the Old or New Testament? What
Texts or Presidents (if so essential and necessary as it pretended) do either
directly prescribe or delineate it unto us? Under what dark cloud or veil has
it layn totally obscured, for hundreds yea thousands of years that it never
appeared in any Church Nation, Republike in the world from Adams days till
ours? And whether it be yet so clearly revealed to those who pretend best
knowledge of it, as to be positively resolved on amongst them what it is, or
what the benefits or mischiefs of it may prove to be? If not, I shall conclude
of this New-government, as our Savior does in his parabolicall speech
concerning New-wine, Luke ^. 37.
No man having drunk old Wine streightway desires new for he says, THE OLD
IS BETTER: Old Presbytery, old unlordly Episcopacy, are (no doubt) far better
for us then New Independency.

2. Whether some Independents do not extraordinarily eclipse, impeach, if not
absolutely deny and subvert the lawful power of Civil Magistrates, all former
Parliaments* and the present too, in all matters of Church-goverment and
Potlesiasticall affairs, contrary to their solemn Covenant and Protestations,
^o defend the ancient Privileges and authority of Parliament, and even quite
blow ^p all their ecclesiastic authority (by a new kind of Gunpowder) at one
breath: yea lay most foul, scandalous, uncharitable censures upon the
honorable Members of this Parliament, who deserve far better language from
them* Witness this most observable dangerous passage, lately dropped from their
pens, in A Reply of two of the brethren to A. S. (newly printed) page 81, 82.
Thirdly, if the Law of the State be the first and most considerable band or tie
upon men, to submit unto the power of your combined Eldership, (as you seem
here to imply, in saying, that all men and all Churches thereof are bound by
Law, etc.) then you must acknowledge, that the root and base of your Government
is I pray inform me why an whole Parliament and Assembly of godly Christians
and Divines, wherein are many of your own chief Independent Ministers,
members, should be more secular, unclean, filthy, or unable to make a
spiritual extraction of Churchgovernment, then one of your Independent
Churches or Conventicles?
Potestas secularis, secular authority: and then how is it Ecclesiastic or
Spiritual? A man may as well bring a clean thing out of an unclean (in Jobs
expression) as make a spiritual extraction out of a secular root. Secondly, it
will rest upon you to prove, that the Civil State has a power to form and
fashion the government of the Churches of Christ. Yea, thirdly and lastly, it
will be demonstratively proved against you, that you resolve the government of
the Churches of Christ (in the last resolution of it) into the humors, wills,
and pleasures of the world,yea of the vilest and most unworthy of men.
Brethren, bona verba quaeso: Is this your printed, public, avowed language of
Parliaments and the Members of it, even to the very face of the most religious,
best-deserving Parliament that ever sat, which has been most indulgent to you
hitherto? Is this your so much boasted A Reply to A. S. p. 85.
preaching, writing, fighting for the privileges and rights of Parliaments,
which ever since the first planting of Religion among us to this present, have
framed and fashioned the government of our Churches in all ages, as I can
demonstratively manifest by good Antiquities? Certainly this language of yours
(with sundry other like passages in this your much-applauded Page 42. to 65.
Reply) cause intelligent men to suspect, that the design of some of your
party is, to hug embrace the Parliament, in show, just as the Yvie does the
Tree, thereby to advance your selves (the only absolute Ecclesiastical
Dictators, lawgivers) and your independent Churches by degrees above the
Parliament, and then to overtop, suppress its power in the end; or else to
ruin it and us for the present, by endeavoring to raise schisms among us,
both in Parliament, City, Country, and our Armies, because they now discern
the major part of both Houses and the Synod inclined against your Independent
novelties. If this be the accursed project of any of you, (for I dare not
harbor so ill a thought of the greatest part) the Lord will both discover and
avenge it to their infamy, in due season: In the mean time, to answer the
substance of this most derogatory scandalous passage against Parliaments; I
sadly refer it to all rational men's judgments in the world, Whether a
Parliament of the most eminent, religious, learned, grave, zealous wisest
Peers and Commons of this Realm (the representative body and grand Council
of the Kingdom) assisted with the advice judgment of an Assembly of the most
orthodoxe pious conscientious* learned Ministers in our Church, specially
selected for this purpose, and of the chiefest of your Independent party* be
not more fit to form, and fashion the government of the Churches of Christ, and
better able to resolve, determine upon long and serious debate, what
Church Government is most agreeable to the Word of God, and fittest for every
particular Parish Church throughout this Island, for the advancement of Gods
glory, the peoples salvation, the general peace and tranquillity of Church and
State then any one or two Independent Ministers, with five or six of their
illiterate, impolitick, and perchance inconsiderate Members (to use no harsher
epithet) assembled in a private Conventicle, can do in two or three hours
space? And whether it be meeter that these should prescribe a
church government, discipline to themselves the Parliament, Synod, and whole
Kingdom to boot; or the Parliament and Assembly to them, who deem themselves
Pro. 2^^^6 cap. 30. 1^. ^^^ 65. 5. (...). 18. 10. to 16.
wiser, holier in their own vain conceits, then a thousand Parliaments,
Synods put together? I doubt not they will all confess, that in their
Congregationall debates about any point of order, discipline government or
doctrine, in any of their Independent Churches, the 1 Chronicles. 13. 4, 5. Act. 15.
22, 23 etc.
major voice or party ought to overruled and bind the less; And if so, let
them yield me a solid reason, when they are able, why the Ecclesiastical
constitutions, Resolutions, Orders, Edicts of the greatest part of an whole
National Parliament, Synod, Kingdom, should not much more bind both them and
all their Independent Churches as well as others, as they have ever hitherto
done? And why a combined Presbytery, of many, learned Ministers, Lawyers,
Gentlemen of best judgment, quality, should not be fitter to decide all
Church-controversies and affairs of moment within their prefixed limits, by
general Laws and Canons settled in Parliament by common consent, then any
Independent or popular Tribunal of lesser judgment and experience, by their
own arbitrary private edicts? Else they must deny what the holy Ghost informs
us, Eccles. 4. 9, 10, 11:
That two are better then one; Pro. 11. 14
that in the multitude of Counselors there is safety: or that the pious 1
Chro. 13 3, 4, 5. etc. 28. (...) 29. 2 Chro. ^. 5 and 6. and 7. c. 23 2, 3. c.
30. 10. to 27. c. 31 ^. ^isth. 9, 20. (...) 31. Ezra 3. 1. c. 10. 1. etc, ^eh.
8. 1, etc.
Kings in the old Testament, or a National Council, or Parliament of their
Princes, Nobles, Elders, Captains, and people of best quality, had any lawful
power to reform or settle all weighty Ecclesiastical Church-affaires; as they
ever did by Gods own command and approbation.

3. Whether it be not the Independents professed Tenet, if truly and
positively laid down, that They should ^owell to define, 1. Of how many
members, every Independent Congregation should consist? 2. Within what
precincts they should live? 3. What set stipends they shall allow them, and how
raised when ascertained? 4. When and where their Churches should assemble? 5.
Who shall prescribe extraordinary (...) of fasting or thansgiving to them upon
just occasions? 6. Who shall rectify their Church-covenants, Discipline,
Censures, Government, if erroneous or unjust? 7. Show us a sufficient
satisfactory Commission from Gods Word for all they do or desire, before they
gather any Churches.
every Minister has a divine right and liberty, to gather to himself an
Independent Church, not of Pagans, Infidels converted by himself alone, but of
all the eminentest Christians formerly converted, and regenerated by the
Ministry of others (especially if rich or potent persons, able to give them
large contributions and support) who shall voluntarily submit themselves to his
Ministry, and such a Church Government as he shall dictate to them: though by
our established laws and customs, (which our solemn Vow and Covenant
obliges us to maintain) they be Parishioners to twenty other godly Ministers,
by whose Ministry they were first regenerated and built up in grace? That every
Christian has a free liberty, by the Law of God, to unite himself to what
Independent Congregation he pleases; the husband to one Congregation, the
wife to another, the children to a third, the servants to a fourth; nay, every
distinct person in a family to a several Church, (and that not only without,
but against the consents of their own Magistrates, Ministers, Husbands,
Parents, Masters, who have no jurisdiction (as some say) over their consciences
herein; so as one great family shall be divided into members of twenty or
thirty several Independent Churches, if they please, and those perchance
different one from another in their government, opinions, discipline,
ceremonies? That those whose consciences or judgments will not permit them to
join with their Independent Churches, (which they Reply of two of the Brethren
64, 65, 66, etc.
profess to be canonical (though guided by no canons) and of divine
assertion, denying all other Church Government to be so) must be wholly
excluded (as Heathens and Reprobates) from being members of any Church; or
rather (by the self-same Christian liberty as Independents plead for) they may
unite themselves into Presbyteriall or Hierarchicall Churches, or what other
form they please to elect: and so we shall have an Independent
Church Government in one part of a Family, Parish, Town, County, Kingdom; a
Presbyteriall in another; an Episcopal in a third: and by this means if the
husband be a great stickler for Episcopacy, and member of a Prelaticall
Church; the wise a fierce zealot for Independency, and a member of such a
congregation; the children or servants stout champions for Presbytery, and
members of such assemblies, what confusion distraction, implacable
contestations, 1 Cor. 1. 11. 12. 13. cap. 3. 3, 4.
schisms, Mat. 12. 51. 52. 53.
tumults this Licentiousness (for I cannot style it Freedom of conscience)
would soon inevitably engender in all Families, Villages, Cities, Counties,
Kingdoms, to their utter ruin and desolation, the meanest capacity may with
ease divine; without the help of an Oracle. However, it would unavoidably
subvert all ancient bounds of Parishes, all settled maintenance for the Ministry
by tithes or otherwise and put all Ministers into the condition of Friars
mendicants, to live (as Independents do) upon the Alms or voluntary
contributions of their several congregations, to whose humors, errors,
opinions, they must either readily conform, or else starve for want of
subsistence, in case of their displeasure, being subject to casheering upon
every small dislike.

4. Whether Independents must not necessarily grant from their own principles,
that as every Minister has free liberty to congregate what Church he
pleases, of men suitable to his own opinions, practice; so also particular
persons have a like liberty to unite themselves together into a Church, to
elect what Minister they think best, and prescribe to themselves what
government they shall conceive to be most suitable to the Scriptures? And if so,
then every man will 2 Timothy 4. 3; 4 A proplaesse which concerns our present
times.
heap to himself Teachers, and erect Churches after his own lusts: mere
Papists* and Popishly affected persons, will set up Popish Churches and
Priests; Arminians, Arminian Churches and Preachers; Anabaptists,
Anabaptisticall Ministers and Assemblies; Arrians, Anti-Trinitarians, such
conventicles and Pastors; Libertines, a licentious Church and Ministry; yea,
every Heretic, Sectary, or guidy-pated Enthusiast, upon pretext of new
Revelations and discoveries of concealed Evangelicall truths, (though when
exactly scanned they may often times prove old errors or mere diabolical
delusions) will erect new Independent Churches of their own (and that for
succession and perpetuity to the perverting of infinite souls), uncontrollable,
unsuppressible by any Ecclesiastical or Civil authority: And thus in few
months, or years space at least, through Satan's instigations, our own
depraved judgments, (a verse to unity, piety, purity, but Gal. 5, 20, 21. c. 2.
11, 12, 14. Act. 15. 39. ^ These. 2. 11. Romans 1. 29. 31 c. 16. 17. 1 Timothy 6. 5,
6. Tit. 3 9.
prone to Error, Heresy, Schisms, lies yea lying fantasies) and through
defect of a severe coercive power, in Ecclesiastical Synods-Parliaments,
temporal Magistrates, (who as Reply of two of the brethren page 52. ^0 61.
some new Independent Lights inform us, have no coercive power to suppress
these springing heresies, but only by a non-communion with or refuting them by
the word to which they will obstinatly 2 Timothy 4 6.
refuse to hearken, as deeming their own opinions most divine:) we shall have
almost as many several heresies, sects, Churches, as there are families,
persons; (Quot homines tot sententiae, tot Ecclesiae:) Yea, if they thus admit
every Minister, or secular person, to have a divine right, freedom, to set up
such an independent Church and government as he pleases; then by the self-same
reason, they must have a like liberty to elect erect, what civil form of
government they please; to set up a new Independent Republike, Corporation
Kingdom, Magistracy, in every family, parish, city, county, and to cast off
all former civil Governors, Governments, Laws at pleasure, as well as
Ecclesiastical; there being the selfsame grounds both of obligation,
obedience to, and exemption from the one as other. And if men by their
Christian liberty shall thus be wholly exempted at their pleasure, as well from
all temporal as ecclesiastical Laws and forms of government, (as grant me
but the one, they must of necessity yield the other; the same Texts, Reasons
obliging us equally in both, and See 1 Chro. 13. 1 to 7. 2 Chro. 5. and 6, and
7. c. 15. 8. to 16 c. 30. 1 to 7. c. 31. 1. c. 34. 31, 32, 33, 34. Ezra 7. 26.
cap. 10. 1 to 7. Esth. 9. 20. to 32.
Kings, Parliaments having the self-same jurisdiction in and over all 25. H. 8
c. 19 21. 37. H. 8. c. 17, 26. H. 8. c. 1 27. H. 8. c. 16. 28. H. 8. c. 10. 1.
E. 6. c. 2. 1. Eliz. 6. c. 1, 2. 8. Eliz. c. 1. 31. H. 8. c. 10, 14. 32. H. 8.
c. 22, 24, 28. 33. H. 8. c. 29, 34. and 35. H. 8. c. 17. 19. 35. H. 8. c. 1. 3.
ecclesiastical matters, which are not positively of divine institution and
injunction, as in and over temporal) what an Anarchy and Ataxy this will
suddenly introduce, to turn all Kingdoms, Republikes, Nations, Corporations,
Churches, Families, and the World it self, quite upside down, and ruin them by
schisms; I tremble to imagine.

5. Whether the Minister alone, or the Congregation without the Minister, or
both conjoined, have power in their Independent Churches to make and prescribe
particular forms of Church-covenants, orders, conditions, to all who are or
shall be admitted members of their new erected congregations? If the Minister
alone, without the people, (which I suppose they grant, because he is the
principal actor in gathering their new Churches to himself, and the sole
person who must first admit them to be members of his Flock, upon his own
conditions:) I would then demand; whether every Independent Minister arrogates
not as much or more power to himself, in making, prescribing laws and
covenants to his congregation by his own inherent authority, without consent of
King, Parliament, Synod, or People, as the Pope himself usurpeth, and far
more power, authority, then Independents either do or dare ascribe to Christian
Princes, Magistrates, Councels, or the Parliament? to all and every of which
they absolutely Reply of two of the brethren p. 52. to 69.
deny any power of making or prescribing ecclesiastical laws, covenants,
canons, to bind them, or their independent Churches or any members of them;
yea any sufficient coercive power to restrain or punish Heretics,
Schismatics, or Broachers of heterodox novell opinions, to disturb the
Churches or Republikes tranquillity. If the people alone without the Minister,
or both conjoined, then you invest every Independent Conventicle, consisting of
never so few inconsiderable ignorant members, with a greater legislative power,
and ecclesiastical authority, then you allow to whole National Parliaments,
Councels, consisting of most eminent, learned, pious persons of all sorts; who
by your New doctrine have no jurisdiction at all to make or enjoyne any form
of church government, covenant, ecclesiastical laws or canons, to any
particular churches: as if the eminentest Ministers and members of churches, by
becoming members of Parliaments or Councels, did thereby forfeit and lose the
right or exercise of that power, in those great representative bodies of the
whole Kingdom and church of England, which you readily allow both them and
others in every private church or Conventicle: A most strange and senseless
whimsie.

6. Whether it be lawful or justifiable by the Word of God, for any
Independent Minister of England, contrary to the Laws of the Realm and
Inhibitions of Parliament, of his own bare authority to congregate and erect
an independent congregation; or to prescribe a particular form of
church government, together with a church covenant (in nature of a solemn
Oath) to which every particular member of his new congregation must subscribe
before admission into his Church? Whether there be any the least precept,
president in Scripture, or Antiquity to warrant such an irregular usurped
authority and power among Christians; which the very Apostles themselves never
claimed? Whether all the particular churches in any Nation, Kingdom, city,
Republike professing the same orthodox Faith, though divided (for more
convenience) into several congregations, be not all members of, and constitute
but As one and the same City, Kingdom, Nation, increased with new houses,
parishes, streets, territories, and generations of people, continue still but
one and the self-same City, Kingdom, Nation: So the first Christian Church
planted in any City, Kingdom, Nation, when spread over all that City,
Kingdom, Nation, and distributed into several particular congregations,
continues but one and the self-same general Church of which all particular
Churches are members, and not Independent absolute in themselves, divided from,
or vnsubjected to the entire common national Church. 1 Cor. 12. 12, to 22.
Ep^^. 2. 19, 20, 21. c. 1. 3, to 17. Acts 2. 47.
one entire National church, or common christian Society, as they did at
first, before thus multiplied, augmented? (even as all the particular houses,
parishes, societies in London are members of and make but one city and
corporation; all the families, parishes, towns, counties in England, but one
Kingdom or Republike; and as all particular and National churches in the
world, make up but one entire catholic militant church:) whence both in
Scripture phrase, and common speech in all Authors. Languages whatsoever, they
are commonly called by the name of One Church, in the singular number; as, the
Church of England, France, Scotland, Ireland; the Eastern, Western, Greek,
Latin Church; the Church of the Jews, Gentiles, etc. And if so, then let our
Independents show me, if they can, the least color of Scripture or reason, why
the Parliament and Assembly (chosen to assist them by public consent)
representing our whole church, State, may not as lawfully set up and prescribe
a new church government, discipline, laws and canons, agreeable to and not
discrepant from Gods Word, to bind all particular churches and persons within
our Realm, as well as pull down and demolish the old, or make temporal laws
and ordinances to bind all persons, societies, members of the Realm, (and
Independents too as well as others) both to obedience and punishment; or else
for ever disclaim their new-minted government, their declamations, arguments
against the power of national Synods Parliaments in Ecclesiastical matters and
church government, as most ridiculous and absurd.

7. Whether the members of every Independent Church, may at their own free
liberty, when ever they please, desert their own particular Church, and become
members of other Independent or Presbyteriall Congregations, without the
license or dispensation of their own Church or Minister first obtained? If
yea, then why oblige they them to the contrary by particular Church-covenants;
or refuse to admit any members of one Independent Church into another, without
such consent or license first obtained; or at least repute it a grand injury in
that Church or Minister who admits them? (especially if they be wealthy
members, for some say poor ones, and persons of meaner condition, are not much
regarded by Independents, no more then poor or contemptible offices.) If nay,
then by what law or conscience do, or can they congregate their Independent
Churches out of twenty or thirty several parishes and congregations, not only
without any authority of the State, or license of the Ministers or whole
Churches in those Parishes; but even against their express wills and desires;
yet think they do God good service; these Ministers, Parishes, no injustice
by it, though it be directly contrary to their own Principles, and these
common dictates of God and Nature; Quod tibi non vis fieri alteri ne feceris:
and, Matthew 7. 12. (...) c. 6. 31.
All things whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, do ye even so
unto them, for this is the Law and the Prophets?

8. Whether Independents peremptory refusal, to admit any to be member, of
their Churches, to receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, or to have their
children baptized among them, unless they will first subscribe to such
particular Church-covenants; Orders as they shall prescribe; and their rigid
Excommunication, rejection of such members who have taken their Covenants, in
case they subscribe not to all their further dictates and opinions, without any
readmission, till they shall promise an universal conformity in opinion and
practice to whatever is required by their Independent Minister or
congregations; be not an usurpation of as great yea greater coercive power over
the consciences, persons of Christians, as Presbyterians, Parliaments claim,
or as the Bishops themselves in the height of their pride and tyranny (as
Bishops) ever challenged or usurped? Notwithstanding Christian liberty of
conscience, in opinions, practice, (which they pretend to leave arbitrary to
every man's free election) be the principal pillar to support, the sweetest
inescating bait to entice men to embrace their Independency? If they say, they
imprison enforce no man's person or conscience, but leave all persons,
consciences free: I answer, that the excluding men from their
church assemblies, sacraments, christian communion, yea their very innocent
infants from baptism itself in their independent Churches, unles they will
conform to their arbitrary Church-covenants, dictates, prescriptions
(warranted by no Scripture or divine examples) is a far greater Psalm. 34. 1.
to 11. Psalm. 120. 3 Psalm. 42. 1, 2. Psalm. 27: 4.
greivance, violence, coertion to the persons, conscience of Christians, then
all imprisonment, Racks and corporal tortures in the world: yea an unjust
exclusion of them from that undoubted right to the ordinances and Church of
Christ wherewith God himself has invested them.

9. Whether Independents refusal to admit such Christians, who are not
notoriously scandalous in their lives, nor grossly ignorant in the Principles
of Religion, to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, when they earnestly desire
to receive it, or profess a cordial present remorse of all their former
sinful courses, with an unfeigned resolution to live a pious holy life for the
future, only upon this suspicion or apprehension, that they are but carnal
men, not truly regenerated or sanctified by Gods Spirit, (though they cannot
certainly judge of their present spiritual conditions, 2 Chro. 6. 30. Ier 17.
19. 20. Act. 1. 24
infallibly known to God alone) be not a very uncharitable, arrogant, yea
unchristian practice, contrary to our Saviors own immediate example, who at
the first institution of this Sacrament admitted M^^^. 26. 20 to 32. Mark 14.
10, etc. Luke 22. 3. to 24. John 6. 70, 71.
Judas to his last Supper as well as his fellow-disciples, though he certainly
knew him to be both a Traitor and Devil; opposite to the injunction of 1 Cor.
11. 17. to 34.
Paul himself, who though he disswades unworthy Receivers from eating and
drinking the Lords Supper without due preparation and examination, for fear of
eating and drinking damnation or judgment to, and drawing down temporal
diseases on themselves; yet he simply excludes none from receiving it, at their
own perils, who are willing, or desirous to participate of it, nor gives any
authority to Ministers absolutely to seclude them from it, unless
excommunicated and notoriously scandalous. And whether their present denial to
administer the Sacrament in their churches to those who are truly religious,
earnestly longing even frequently to receive it for their spiritual comfort,
according to Christ's own institution, only for fear lest some unregenerate
persons should communicate with them, and depriving their whole congregations
of this most comfortable necessary ordinance for sundry months, nay years, (as
some have done) upon this groundless, unwarrantable reason^, refuted by
Christ's own example, who administered the Sacrament to the other Disciples
though there were a Judas amongst them; by the practice, doctrine of Paul
himself 1 Cor. 11. 17. to 34. and the usage of all Christian churches
throughout the Universe, be not an over-rigid, uncharitable, unjust (that I say
not impious) action, injurious to Christ himself, to the souls and spiritual
estates of those good Christians secluded from the Sacrament, and a more
transcendent strain of tyrannical usurpation over the souls, the consciences
of Christians, and ordinances of God himself, than ever our most domineering
Lordly Prelates exercised, or any Presbyterians have hitherto pretended to lay
claim unto? If this proceed not from a domineering spirit, and be not an
excessive 1 Pet. 5. 3.
Lording of it over the Lords inheritance, yea over Christ himself in this his
ordinance, I profess I am much mistaken: Yea, I fear this spiritual pride
and excessive uncharitableness of some, who take upon them by their own
inherent power to erect new Congregations, and set up new forms of
church government, Discipline, etc. in Christian States, Churches, already
planted, without, yea against their Parliaments, or Moses the chief temporal
Magistrate under the Law, together with David, Solomon, and other godly kings,
did by Gods own direction, and approbation, direct, order, and settle all
particulars in and about the Altar, Tabernacle, Arc, Temple, consecrating both
them and the Priests too, appointing all Officers about them, together with the
courses of the Priests, Singers; and that by common advice of the Princes,
Captains, Elders of the people, and not by the votes or directions of the
Priests, who had no ruling voice herein: which authority being no where revoked
nor denied Christian Princes, Magistrates, Parliaments, under the Gospel, they
no doubt enjoy it still. And therefore these Ministers who thus erect new
Churches usurp on their authority.
Christian Magistrates authority, when as the very Apostles did never by their
own ordinary jurisdiction, as private Ministers, but only by their
extraordinary calling, as Apostles; or in and by their Canonical Epistles,
dictated by Gods Spirit prescribe any matters of church government, Discipline,
Rites, or order to the particular Churches first gathered and planted by
themselves alone, as is evident by Acts 7, 1. to 8. c. 14. 22, 23. Tit. 1. 5. 1
Cor. c. 7. and 11. and 12. and 14. c. 16. 1. 2. Jam. 2. 2. 3. c. 5. 13. 14. 15.
16. except in and by a public Synod, Acts 15.) and thus debar others from
the Sacrament, as unmeet Receivers, upon such unwarrantable grounds, do make
themselves far more incapable, unmeet to receive it, than those they thus
exclude.

10. Whether that noted Text of Matthew. 18. 15, 16, 17. If thy brother shall
trespass against thee, go tell him his fault between thee and him alone; if
he will hear thee, then thou have gained thy brother: But if he will not
hear, then take with thee one or two more, that in the mouth of one or two
witnesses every thing may be established. And if he shall neglect to hear
them, TELL IT TO THE CHVRCH; but if he neglect TO HEAR THE CHVRCH, let him be
to thee as an heathen man and a Publican; be meant of any Independent or
ecclesiastical Consistory, excommunication, or church censures properly so
called? or not rather of the Jewish Synedrium, Council, or civil court of
justice, and of a civil excommunication, like to an Outlawry at the common
Law, as De Anno civili, etc Pr^satio p. 6. ^ etc 18. p 83, 84 And D jure Natura
and Gent^um l. 4. c. 8.
Mr Seldom with others more t^uely interp^t^t? Since our Savior speaks there,
1. of a private trespass done to a private person, of which no church,
classes, or ecclesiastical consistory, has proper conusance; not of a
public scandal to the congregation, or any scandalous crime or vice as is
evident by the very first words, and by Luke 17. 3, 4. compared with ^^n* 50.
17. 1 King 8. 31. 2. Of a demand of private satisfaction, first personally,
next in presence of witness, before any complaint to the church or council.
3. Of no censure or judgment passed, but barely of an admonition given by the
church to the party offending; which if neglected and not heard, then 4. Not
the church, council, and all other persons, but only the party offended was
to repute (but not excommunicate out of the church or congregation) him as an
heathen, and a publicane, (which were both odious to the Jews, who had no
civil conversation with them, and were no members of the Jewish church except
Proselites) as the express words, let him be TO THEE (not any others) as an
heathen and a pulican, (that, is converse no more with him, but avoid his
company, 2 These. 3. 14.) resolve, Which Reasons, compared with Matthew. 5. 22,
25. c. 10. 17. c. 12. 14. c. 22. 15. c. 27. 1, 7. Acts 18. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
c. 16. 20, 21. c. 17. 6. c. 23. 1. 14, 15. c. 24. 1. to 7. c. 25. and 26.
infallibly evidence, the Church or Assembly in this Text to be meant only of
the Temporal court, Council, or Sanhedrin of the Jews, not of any
Ecclesiastical or Church-Iudicatory, or excommunication, as Papists anciently,
with some others now determine.

11. Whether the Apostles and members of the first evangelicall Synod, we read
of Acts 15. sat and voted in it as Apostles only, endued with a spirit of
infallibility (which was a peculiar privilege to them alone,) or else in
their ordinary capacity, as Elders and chief members of it? If as Apostles
only, and in that extraordinary capacity, as Reply to A. S. p 70, 71.
Independents assert: then 1. Paul and Barnabas being Apostles as well as they,
might have decided that controversy at Antioch, without sending to Jerusalem
to determine it: 2. The church at Antioch would have sent to none but the
Apostles to resolve their doubts, and not to the Elders at Jerusalem as well as
to the Apostles, as they did verse. 2. Thirdly, Paul and Barnabas would have put
the question to the Apostles only, not to the Elders and church as well as to
them, which they did verse. 4, 5, 6. Fourthly, the Apostles would not have
called a Synod of all the Apostles Elders and Brethren at Jerusalem to consider
of or consult about this thing verse. 6. but have determined it presently by
their infallible spirit without consultation, or a Synods assistance. Fifthly,
Peter and James would not have argued the case so largely, and proved it by
arguments and Scriptures as they did, one after another, verse. 17 to 23. but
have peremptorily resolved it without dispute, had they sat and determined it
by their extraordinary infallible power. Sixthly, the final resolution,
letters, and canons of this Synod had run only in the Apostles names, had they
proceeded only by their Apostolical infallible authority, and not in the
names of the Elders and Brethren too, (coupled together with theirs both in the
letters and canons, verse. 21, 22, 23, 24, 27, 28. c. 16. 4. c. 21. 18. 25.) who
were not all endued with the self-same infallibility and power as the Apostles
were, for ought can be proved; Therefore their assembling in this council, not
in their extraordinary capacity as Apostles only, but as Elders, Ministers; and
the Elders, Brethrens sitting together in Council with them, upon this
controversy and occasion, is an undeniable Scripture-authority for the
lawfulness, use of Parliaments, Councels, Synods under the Gospel, upon all
like necessary occasions; and for their power to determine controversies of
Religion, to make Canons in things necessary for the churches peace and
government, (there being no one place in Scripture against it, but many Texts
in the old Testament to back it, elsewhere quoted) mauger all evasions,
exceptions to elude it.

12. Whether the temporal Magistrate, Parliament, and civil State, have not a
lawful coercive power, though Mat. 10. 17, 18 Mar. 9. 10, 13 Acts 4. 16. to
23. c. 5. 17. to the end.
not to restrain the preaching of the Gospel and truth of God, yet to
suppress, restrain, imprison, confine, banish the broachers of any heresies,
schisms, erroneous seditious doctrines, enthusiasmes, or setters up of new
forms of Ecclesiastical government without lawful authority, to the
endangering of the peoples souls, or disturbance of the Churches, Kingdoms
peace, as well as Ministers and particular Churches Christians, power to 1 Timothy
1. 19, 20. 2 Cor. 6. 14. to 18. Romans 16. 17. Tit. 3. 10, 11. 2 Ioh. 10, 11.
reprove, refute, avoid, excommunicate or anathematize them, notwithstanding
Reply of two of the brethren p. 51. to 63.
some Independents new-minted objections against it: and that by virtue of
Deuteronomy. 13. 1. to 12. Lev. 24. 11. to 17. Number. 26. throughout, Josh. 7. 25. 26.
c. 22. 11. to 34. Psalm. 101. 4 5, 8. 4, 5, 8. 1 King. 18. 40. 2 King. 10. 21,
to 29. c. 23. 5. 20. 2 Chro. 34. 4. 5. Romans 13. 1. to 6. 1 Pet. 2. 14. Gal. 5.
12. Rev. 2. 20. c. 19. 20. 21. cap. 17. 16. And the ten horns (interpreted to
be ten Kings v. 12.) shall hate the whore (with all her Panders) and shall make
her desolate and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and shall burn her with fire:
for God has put it into their hearts TO FVLFILL HIS WILL, Ezra 7. 26. And
whosoever will not do the Law of thy God, let judgment be executed speedily
upon him, whether it be unto death, or unto banishment, or to confiscation of
goods, or to imprisonment, with sundry Matt. 10. 17, 18, 21. c. 26. 47, to 74.
c. 27. 1, to 60. Acts 4. 1, to 24 c. 5 17, to 40. c. 6. 12, 13. c. 9. 1, 2, 3.
c. 11. 2, 3, 4. c. 16. 20, to 40. c. 18. 12. etc. c. 23, and 24 and 25, and 26,
and 27. rightly understood.
other Texts. Hence Justinian. Codic. l. 1. Tit. 8. 10. and our Laws against
Jesuits, Priests and Recusants.
Christian Princes, Magistrates, Parliaments, in all ages and churches in the
world have made severe temporal Laws, Edicts against, and inflicted corporal
punishment, banishment, confiscation of goods, (and in some cases death it
self) upon Heretics, Schismatics, disturbers of the churches peace with
erroneous or seditious doctrines: which lawful power of theirs has ever bin
asserted by the most See the Harmony of Confessions sect. 19.
orthodox Churches, Writers in all ages, and never oppugned by any but
Anabaptists, who deny all civil Magistrates, or such licencious Heretics,
Schismatics, or false Teachers, who would spread their pestilent errors, and
seditious novell positions without restraint; or durst never suffer Martyrdom
for, or seal them with the loss of their Liberties, Lives, Estates, which
godly orthodox Martyrs and Christians have cheerfully undergone, under Pagan,
Heretical, and Popish Kings, Magistrates. And if we either deny, abolish,
eclipse, diminish, or suspend this necessary coercive power (the principal
means under God to suppress, extirpate all growing errors, schisms, which
disturb the churches trantranquilitie, seduce unstable souls) our church and
realms will be soon overgrowne with dangerous errors, heresies, schisms,
and brought to speedy desolation; the contemptible sword of excommunication, or
non-communion, and the bare preaching of Gods Word to obstinate Heretics,
Papists, Schismatics, (who will Psalm. 58. 4, 5. Ier. 30. 19. c. (...). 33. Isa
30. ^, 10. 2 Timothy 4* 3, 1.
contemn the Word, and excommunicate all other churches dissenting from them,
as heretical, schismatic, as fast as they excommunicate or discommon them,
and so propagate, perpetuate their heresies, schisms, without redress) being
unable to suppress such peremptory offenders, without the temporal
Magistrates sword of justice added to them; Who having a lawful jurisdiction
derived to them in the Gospel, Romans 13. 1, (...) 7. 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14, 15. Tit.
3. 1.
to punish and suppress all evil doers, without distinction, have doubtless
an unquestionable authority to punish obstinate Heretics, Schismatics, false
Teachers, with temporal censures, who are the greatest malefactors, sinning
against the Word and Truth of God, disturbing the peace of Church, State,
seducing and destroying peoples souls; a far greater crime then to murder
their bodies, or rob them of their estates. In brief, all Protestant Churches
whatsoever, in their public See Harmony of Confessions Sect. 19.
Confessions acknowledge, that the care of preserving, propagating true
Religion; of suppressing, extirpating htresies, errors, schisms,
superstition, idolatry, and the fautors of them, by temporal punishments and
censures of all sorts, does principally belong to Christian Magistrates, Kings,
Princes: (Which duty they can in no sort execute, if now (with the Anabaptists)
ou deny them this most just coercive power:) That all lawful civil
Magistrates and Powers whatsoever, though instituted by men, are even in the
new Testament expressly resolved, to be the Romans 13. 1, to 8. 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14,
15. Tit. ^, 1, 10, 11. ^ Pet. 2. 10, 11 Jude 8, 9
Ordinances of God, and all their just commands, Laws, Edicts, (not repugnant
to Gods Word) readily to be obeyed and submitted to, EVEN FOR CONSCIENCE, and
FOR THE LORDS SAKE, under pain of sin and condemnation: Therefore what ever
our pious Parliament, the supreme power, by advice of the Assembly, after much
Fasting, Prayer, Disputes, Advice, and serious consultation, shall order,
decree touching Church Government or discipline, as most consonant and not
repugnant to Gods Word, ought in point of conscience to be submitted to by
Independents and all others, as to a Government, Discipline, Ordinance approved
of by God; and if any Heretics, false Teachers, Schismatics obstinately
refuse conformity after due admonition, and all good means used to reclaim them
the Poets Divinity and Policy must then take place, as well in Eclcesiasticall
as civil and natural maladies: Ovid Me(...)
Cuncta prius tentanda, sed immedicabile vulnus
Ense rescidendum est, ne pars syncera trahatur.


Deuteronomy. 12. 8. Ye shall not do after the things that we do here this day,
every man whatsoever is right in his own eyes. FINIS.

