A COVNTERPLEA to the Cowards Apology, manifesting by an ancient Record and
Law; The unlawfullnesse of passing any Vote or Judgment against Law, or
Conscience, for fear of Death, Danger, or any forfeiture, in any Court,
Counsel or Judicature, especially in the Houses of PARLIAMENT.
IN the Parliament of 1. Fabians Chron. part. 7 Aa. 1 H. 4.
H. 4. Some Lords and others excusing themselves from their unjust illegal
actions, and votes in the Privy-Councell, that what they advised and did, was
by constraint of King Richard, and for fear of death; The whole House of
Commons thereupon exhibited this notable Petition to the King in Parliament,
[worthy to be engraven on the walls of both Houses in Letters of Gold] 1 H ^
NVM. 9.
That the Lords, Spiritual and Temporal, and other persons might not be
received in time to come for to excuse them, to say That They durst not to do
or Speak the Law, Nor What they thought For doubt of death; Or that they Were
not Free of themselves: because they are more bound under-Pain of Treason to
keep their Oath [or do their duty] then to Fear death or any Forfeiture. And
hereupon [as Chronicle: part. 7. 1. H. 4.
Fabian writes] there passed this Law in Parliament THAT NO LORD, NOR OTHER
PERSON of no degree should after that day, lay for his excuse, ANY CONSTRAINT
OR COACTING OF HIS PRINCE IN EXECVTING OF ANY VVRONG IVDGEMENT, or other
criminous. or unlawful deeds, saying, THAT FOR FEAR THEY DVRST NONE
OTHERWISE DO, for such excuse after that Day. SHALL STAND HIM IN NO EFFECT.

If no such excuse might be alleged by any Lord or private Person whatsoever;
much less then by the whole or major part of the House of Lords or Commons,
consisting of many hundred persons of greatest Eminency, Honor, and Power,
able not only magnanimously to contemn and withstand to death, the highest
menaces, unlawful violence, and armed forces of the King, (as they have
formerly done to their eternal honor) but likewise much more of their own
distempered Army, with an undaunted and Heroical resolution; to which their
Protestations and Covenant, has more engaged them now, then any of their
Predecessors in former Parliaments.

Let then every Member of either House of Parliament, lay their Hands upon
their hearts, and set themselves seriously in Gods and the whole Kingdoms
presence, (whom they represent) and answer this demand without any
equivocations, or evasions, (as they shall answer it at the great day of
judgment, before the tribunal of Christ, in the view of all the world;)
Whether many of their late Votes, touching the revocation of their Remonstrance
against the Armies Petition; the continuance of the Army under a settled pay
(to the Countries insupportable oppression and charge) after their Votes for
its disbanding; the owning this Army for their own, notwithstanding their
present tumultuous proceedings; the putting of the Militia and all forces of
the Kingdom under Sir Thomas Fairfax his Command [after his and the Armies
refusal to be commanded by the Houses, or to obey their Votes:] the removal
and disposal of the Kings Person as the Army shall direct: the Impeachment,
Charge, dismission from the Houses attendance of the eleven impeached Members,
and Votes for the self accusation of other unimpeached Members, without and
before any particular Charge or accuser; the discountenancing, and dispersing
of such dutiful gallant Officers and Soldiers, who in obedience and
conscience to their votes deserted the ARMY; the Declaration against the
introducing of foreign forces, (without any ground or proof of such a
design intended,) the Purposes to pnt the Tower and Magazins there under the
command and power of Independents and the Army to overawe and enslave the City.
altering of the Militia of London, without petition from Complaynt of, or any
the least consent of the City, or consultation with them (to whom they stand so
much engaged for their constant affection and preservation more then to the
Army) and the like, only upon the Armies proposals (in a strange extrajudiciall
mutinous way;) proceeded not principally, if not solely, from a degenerous
pannick fear and terror of the Army, or low compliance to satisfy them in all
their bold and unreasonable demands, or dread of some strange surmised violence,
Death or other loss, and inconvenience from them, rather then from any real
principles of justice, Conscience, Piety, Honor, Sound Reason, or true
Christian Policy? If yea; as their own consciences can best testify, and some
of their tongues confess (who assure their friends, that they would never have
condiscended to any of these Votes had they not been under the force and power
of the Army:) Let themselves, and the Army judge of the validity of such
enforced, unfree, and timorous Votes; and how well those who gave their assents
unto them, have discharged their Consciences to God and duties to their
Country; Yea, how they have made good their Solemn League, Covenant, and
protestations. And if their Consciences herein condemn them, let them sin no
more (in such a kind as this) lest a worse thing happen to them, and the whole
Kingdom, City, and Country be Enthralled, Ruined, yea the Honor, Prviledges,
and Freedom of this and all future Parliaments betrayed, by their sordid fear
of death or any other loss from an unformidable Army of their own raising: some
of whose Anti-monarchicall, Anti-magistraticall, Anti-parliamentall,
Anarchicall Schismatic dangerous Principles, and High demands, can presage
nothing but Desolation to us, if complied with; and can no ways endanger
Parliament or Kingdom, but by an unworthy condiscention to them; and will soon
vanish into empty vapors, if gallantly denied, or manfully opposed by both
Houses, with an Heroic English resolution to which the many former experiences
of Gods power and protection in sundry desperate exigencies, and that saying of
the Prophet might animate and engage each conscientius Member, maugre all the
Armies power threats, (whose Commissions they may revoke at pleasure), or any
humane force I, Isay 51. 12. 13.
even I, am he that comfort thee, who art thou that thou should be afraid
of a man that shall dye, or of the son of man that shall be made as grass?
And forgettest the Lord thy maker, who stretched forth the heavens, and laid
the foundations of the earth, and have feared continually every day, because of
the fury of the oppressor as if he were ready to destroy: And where is the fury
of the oppressor? Isay 54. 17.
No Weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper, and every tongue that
shall rise against thee in judgment, thou shall condemn. Such a divine
Cordial, as this, cannot but engage all Generous Members really fearing God, or
truly loving their country, Religion, the honor and freedom of Parliaments, to
quit themselves like men, like Englishmen of far Ancienter, and better descent
then most in the Army; Like an undaunted English Parliament; and encourage
every particular Member to resolve with David. Psalm. 27 3. Though an Host
should encamp against me, my heart shall not fear; nor yet my tongue ever
vote or cry, Ay or No against my reason, Justice, Judgment, conscience, or the
Parliaments honor in the least punctilio: Which not to do for fear of an
Army, death, or any forfeiture, the forecited Petition of the whole house of
Commons has resolved, to be no less then Treason to the Kingdom, and those who
have entrusted them, incapable of any excuse, or mitigation through fear of
danger; An argument, which too many now unworthily insist on.

FINIS.

