Provision for the Poor, OR, A brief Representative, to make known the way,
by a Fishing Trade, to employ many thousands of poor people, from eight years
to ninety years Old (although one fifth part of them be Lame and Blind) to
keep them from Begging and Starving by their own Labor; As they do in
Holland, by the said Fishing, as can be proved by many good and sufficient
Merchants, and Mariners in and about the City of LONDON.
Inprimis.
TO Buy Ten Vessels fit for that Trade, some of forty, fifty, sixty, and
seventy Tonne, which will cost (one with the other) 230 l. per Vessel, or
thereabouts (that is to say) all of them fitted and furnished with Sails, etc.
for a Fishing Trade or Voyage) which amounts unto the sum of -- 2300 l.

II. That each Vessel will cost Victualing, and for other necessaries
belonging to the said Voyage about 50 l. per Vessel (one with the other) which
will amount to more, 0500 l.

III. That each Vessel must have a hundred Nets, or thereabouts, and every Net
will cost thirty shillings per Net (one with the other) which will amount to
more, -- 1500 l.

IV. That all the said Vessels completely fitted for the said Fishing Voyage
(with all materials thereunto belonging, as before expressed) will cost the
sum of four or five thousand pounds, or thereabouts.

V. That the said Vessels be employed for the taking of Herrings upon our own
Seas or Coasts, as the Flemings and French do employ every year (they having
more then two thousand Sail upon the said Fishing) beginning in June, and
continue until toward the end of November following; and they come in, and
go out again, every two or three Months in the said time.

VI. That the said Vessels being so employed in the said Fishing Voyage, or
Trade, six or seven Months every year, it will be sufficient to keep many
thousands of poor people from begging and starving (as they do in Holland by
the said Fishing) And moreover bring in much profit to the General Stock, some
years 30 or 30 l. per Cent. besides the making of all sort of Provisions
cheaper in the Land.

VII. That if a Stock be procured, many hundreds of poor people (within a few
days) may be set to work in the City and Suburbs, to keep them from begging
and starving (as now they do daily) and to live comfortably by their own
labors; for it is commonly known (and will easily be made evident) what they
can make of every pound of Hemp, and how much they must have for their labor
in Spinning, upon their re*delivery of it back again.

VIII. That if a Stock be procured (or that some Aldermen or men of Estates
will Adventure upon their own Account for the good of the poor) for their
better encouragement and accommodation, some of the Members of the House of
Commons have promised to get Greenwich-house, being a fit place, in regard it
is near the River of Thames, and convenient for all concernments, and
preservation of all the Materials belonging and appertaining to such an
employment as aforesaid.

IX. That if a Stock be procured (as abovesayd) care must be taken that as few
Officers, and Overseers be employed in Negotiating the said Fishing and
Spinning, as possibly may be; For it is conceived that one Treasurer will be
sufficient to receive and issue forth all the money for the whole employment,
and he to give an account thereof whenever it shall be required.

X. That if the aforesaid business proceed, one Husband also will be
sufficient, that is a knowing Man, and has been an Owner and Master in those
affairs, and has experience in the said Fishing, etc. And that will be
faithful and careful in shipping such Masters and Mariners for their shares,
that will be industrious for the increase and augmentation of the General
Stock.

XI. That care also may be taken, that the said Treasurer and Husband, and
other inferior Officers and Overseers have but reasonable and indifferent
Salaries for their care and diligence in the premises; And that all frugall
means may be used for the good of the poor, and the increase of the General
Stock, as aforesaid.

XII. That for the Encouragement of all that shall Contribute to so Charitable
a work (as the relief and maintenance of the poor) they may remember that
the Lord has promised more then ordinary blessings (both spiritual and
temporal) upon all such person or persons, as shall employ their labors and
Estates in works of that nature.

London, Printed in the Year, 1649.


