THE PROTESTATION Taken by The Commissioners OF CORNWALL and DEVON, at
Stone-House near Plymoth, on the 5. of MARCH. 1642.

WITH Their PROPOSITIONS, REPLIES, and ANSWERS.

Printed in the year 1642.

The Protestation Taken by the Commissioners of Cornwall and Devon at
Stone-house near PLYMOUTH, on the fifth of March. 1642.
With their PROPOSITIONS, REPLIES and ANSWERS.
I A. B. solemnly Vow and Protest in the presence of Almighty God, that I did
not only come a Commissioner into this Treaty with a hearty and fervent desire
of concluding on honorable and firm peace between the two Counties of Cornwall
and Devon, but also will to the utmost of my power prosecute, and really
endeavor to accomplish and effect the same, by all the lawful ways and means
I possibly can; first by maintaining the Protestant Religion established by Law
in the Church of England, the just Rights and Prerogatives of our Sovereign
Lord the King, the just Privileges and Freedom of Parliament, together with
the liberty of the Subject, and that I am without any intention by fomenting
this unnatural War, to gain or hope to advantage my self with the real or
personal estate of any person whatsoever, or obtaining any office, command,
title of Honor, benefit, or reward, either from the Kings Majesty, or both or
either Houses of Parliament now assembled; And this I take in the presence of
Almighty God, and as I shall answer the same at his Tribunal, according to the
literal sense, and meaning of the foregoing words, without any equivocation,
Mental reservation, or Evasion whatsoever, so help me God.

Articles propounded by the Commissioners of Cornwall and Devon.
THat it may clearly appear to all the world, who are the faithful followers
of the Protestation by us taken, and sworn, and by the Evangelist confirmed by
the receiving of the holy Sacrament. And who that breaks, we desire that the
said Protestation, together with the Articles may be freely and truly published
in all the the parish Churches, and all the Market towns upon their Market
days in both counties, without any alteration, either in writing, reading, or
publishing the same.

I.
That the Book of Common Prayer, Administration of the Sacrament, doctrine and
discipline of the Church of England, formerly established by lawful Authority
for the true and sincere worship of God, be duly and truly observed in all
parishes in both Counties, until the discipline be altered by such Authority
as it was first established, and that all the infringers, and depravers of the
same, either Clergy or Laity, be duly proceeded against, and punished
according to the known laws of the land.

II.
That the common and Statute-Laws of the Realm of England be put duly in
execution against all offenders, and violaters of the same in either county,
according to the usual legal course, as has been anciently accustomed.

III.
That all trade, traffic, and free commerce be free, and open between both
counties as heretofore, in the most best and peaceable times has been.

IV.
That no man in his person estate or goods be arrested, imprisoned, detained,
outed or dispossessed, or any be molested by any Power or Authority
whatsoever; without due process or proceedings, according to the known laws
of the land.

V.
That all new erected fortifications and set-guards within the city of Exon,
and in and upon all the Towns, Outlands, Castles, and Passages, within the
county of Cornwall and Devon, be within (...) days removed, and slighed at the
cost and charges of the Erectors and Maintainers of the same: and no wise
maintained to the terror or affrightment of His Majesty's Subjects of either
county, and that His Majesty's Castles, Forts, and other ancient and usual
places of command be put into the same hands, and custody that they were before
these unhappy differences, and assurance given for the maintenance thereof,
without any addition or alteration; and that all Arms and Ammunition of any
person or persons whatsoever in either county, that have been taken not in
fight, battle, or skirmish, be again restored in kind or value to the true
owners.

VI.
That all troops and companies of horse and foot, be within (...) days either
disbanded, or quitted both counties and the city of Exon.

VII.
That all Forces of horse and foot, in the quitting both counties may march and
pass peaceably with their Arms, Ammunition, Artillery, and Carriages through
the same; paying truly and justly for such provision, or other necessaries as
they shall have need of, after the rate of four pence a meal; and be provided
for by the county as they pass, in quitting both counties within the time
limited in the present Article.

VIII.
That all men, both Clergy and Laity, may return peaceably and quietly into
their own houses or places of abode, without let or persecution for any offense
past, expecting a general pardon, or some other conclusion of these unhappy
differences by the King and both Houses of Parliament, and in the mean time to
demean themselves in Speech, Action, and Function, conformably to the laws
established.

IX.
That all plundered goods of whatsoever kind that shall be found not taken in
Battle, be again delivered to the true owners.

X.
That all Gentlemen that have been taken prisoners on either party in Battle
or otherwise, be within (...) days delivered up and set at liberty.

XI.
That we unanimously join together in a Petition to the King, and both Houses
of Parliament for the settling a General Peace throughout the whole Kingdom,
and confirmation of these Articles.

XII.
For the conclusion of Peace.

Answers to the Articles propounded by the Commissioners of Cornwall to those
of Devon.
THe Preamble or the like in substance with some necessary alteration, we will
assent to be used, and put in the head of the Articles that shall be hereafter
agreed between us.

To the first Artile we say, we approve of the use of the Common Prayer, and of
the discipline of the Church of England established by law in such manner as
His Majesty, and the Houses of Parliament have severally declared, and we
assent that all depravers of the same be duly proceeded against according to
the law.

To the second we wholly agree.

The third Article is likewise approved, including the city and county of Exon,
we desire that all things be done according to law, preferring the judgment
thereof to those that ever had and ought to have the power of declaring of it.

To the fifth we say, our fortifications are for defense, and cannot be a
terror to other counties; Exeter and Plymouth make them by Authority of Act of
Parliament, and Charters, other towns do it by Authority of this present
Parliament, His Majesty's Forts are better garrisoned in these
trouble-sometimes by His Majesty's express command, and cannot be safely
reduced to the condition they were in before these differences, until there be
peace in England and Ireland, we are only careful in this cause, that while
we endeavor the peace of both counties, we expose not those places to the
enemies of both works, upon Bridges, and Passages, upon the Borders of both
Counties, we assent to be slighted for Arms, and Ammunition taken, or lent,
there shall be satisfaction given; except for such as have been taken in
War, or from delinquents against the Parliament.

To the sixth we say, that all Forces of horse and foot cannot safely be
disbanded, during the stir and warlike Motion of other counties bordering
upon Devon, and not upon Cornwall.

To the seventh we cannot assent, in regard of our association with other
counties, which we resolve to observe, as we do with you.

To the eighth Article we fully agree, for the Inhabitants of Devon and
Cornwall, and the city of Exon, so as they go with a retinue performed with
their condition in a peaceable manner.

To the ninth, we also agree.

To the tenth, we allow of this delivery of all Prisoners now within both these
Counties, and the City of Exeter, of others we have no power.

To the eleventh, we shall willingly join in a Petition to His Majesty and
both Houses of Parliament, for settling a peace throughout the whole Kingdom.

The reply of the Cornish Commissioners.
We consent to any reasonable necessary alteration in the preamble, if His
Majesty and both Houses of Parliament send all Declarations, you explain to be
any Act or Acts of Parliament, we are satisfied with your Answer; otherwise,
if it be by the King alone, or either or both Houses only, we take it not
sufficient to bind the Subject.

To the second and third we have no cause to reply.

4. Having granted the second, we marvel why you should seem to deny the
fourth, being but a branch of the second, and a part of Magna Charta, the
judgment whereof in point of alteration or declaration can be referred to none,
but an Act of Parliament.

To the fifth, we say that the fortifications and terrors of the neighbors
against law, and prejudicial to the peace of the Counties, we desire to see
the Act of Parliament and Charter you mention, and those commands of His
Majesty, and to know whether His Majesty's Forts be kept for His Majesty's use,
for if otherwise, His Majesty is dispossessed of His right, and the Charter's
wronged; for by the Law no such Fort or Castle can be kept against His Majesty;
we do not know that the Houses have any Authority, any Town, without an Act
of Parliament; we conceive it not sufficient answer for the taking any man's
goods, and say he is a Delinquent against the Parliament, except you show what
law he has broken, and likewise by the ordinary course of justice.

To the sixth, as long as there is an Army in the County, there can be no
assurance of peace to either County; and it is against the Law, the peace of
the Kingdom, and the Oath of Allegiance, for Subjects to be in Arms without
authority derived from His Majesty.

By our dissent to the seventh, you disable your selves to perform that now
which you have taken for the peace of the Counties, and impose us a necessity
of retaining men at Arms amongst us, which, (we desiring the peace of both
Counties) desire to be freed of, and they are likewise willing to pass
thorough your County without the disturbance of the peace thereof, and paying
for what they take, and if by your Association, you have so far engaged your
selves as you cannot make a perfect peace with us, we conceive you therein
brake your Protestation.

To the eighth and ninth we take no exception.

To the tenth we conceive, there is more cause to demand such Prisoners as you
have illegally taken and sent away, then for you to have such from us as have
been lawfully taken in battle, or otherwise offending the laws.

To the eleventh, if the peace of the Kingdom be not settled, though we
heartily wish and pray for it, yet we desire for the peace of these two
Counties, that our conclusion may be confirmed by the King and both Houses of
Parliament.

Replies to the Answers of Cornwall.
To the first, we do willingly embrace the Answer to the first Proposition as
we apprehend it, and if we differ not in the exposition of some words and
clauses we shall fully agree.

To the second, we ^^ferre our selves to the Answer to the tenth Article.

To the third, we say that this Answer differs much from, and comes far
short of your ninth Proposition.

To the fourth, we refer our selves to our Answer to the eighth Article.

To the fifth, we agree according to our Answer to the first Article.

To the sixth, against this we have nothing to reply.

Propositions made by the Commissioners of Devon to those of Cornwall.
I.
THat a mutual assurance be given that they will not invade each other, but
will unite against all invaders whatsoever of either, and that all honest ways
and means shall be used to preserve the peace of both Counties, and to revive
the ancient affection which has been between them, and that what person
soever, under what pretense soever shall strive or endeavor to do contrary
hereunto, shall be held an enemy unto both Counties.

II.
That all Prisoners one both sides taken in, and by occasion of the War in
these Counties, and now remaining in durance of either of these Counties, be
freely discharged, and that no more be hereafter taken, by virtue or color of
this War.

III.
That there be a free discharge of all Ships and goods, now detained in all and
every the houses of these Counties, and hence forth a free commerce and trade
between them, as in times past before these unhappy differences.

IV.
That all the Gentlemen, Ministers, and others, that have been driven from, or
left their habitations in either of these Counties be permitted to return in
safety, and not be molested nor troubled, and the Ministers quietly to enjoy
their places, and go on in their ministry.

V.
That the Sheriffs and Justices of peace in both Counties take care, that no
act of contempt, reproach or scandal be done, or suffered to be done in
opposition or contempt of the King, or this present Parliament, or the book of
Common prayer, contrary to their late Protestation taken by order of the
Parliament, and that if any Minister or other shall do contrary hereunto, he
shall be brought to just punishment.

VI.
That to the utmost of our powers, we shall endeavor to maintain the
Protestant Religion, and oppose all Papists and adherents.

THese Propositions with the Answers and Replies were discussed at Mount
Edgcombe house, adjacent on the farther side of Crimwell passage, about two or
three days after the taking of the foregoing solemn Protestation, confirming
their integrity by the receiving of the holy Sacrament, at a place called
Stonehouse, half a miles distance from Plymouth, Doctor Aaron Wilson preaching
in the forenoone, and one Master Jelinger in the afternoon, but while they
were thus laboring to unite these two disjoynted Counties, Cornwall and Devon,
an unhappy accident intercepted their desires, and abrupted their joyful
meeting, that they could come to no agreement, but adjourned their meeting at
E^on^ on Wednesday the 15. of March, where the Cornish Commissioners, according
to their agreement, repaired: but beyond their expectation were prevented from
their coming into the City, by reason of a Petition presented to my Lord of
Stamford, by a company of zealous, holy, religious women; That Petition being
granted: the place of meeting generally agreed one, was at the sign of the
Ship in Exbridge, where the Commissioners on both sides sat about two days
and debated the same Propositions, but at last broke off, and prorogued their
meeting on Wednesday next at Stonehouse, and on Thursday next to Mount Edgcombe
house, where I beseech God that they may come to a happy agreement, and that
they may settle these unhappy differences, which if not timely prevented, will
be to the ruin of both these Counties. God in his mercy prevent them.

The names of the Commissioners for Cornwall.
Sir Nicholas Flanning. William Curriton. William Scoone. Pearce Edgcombe.
Francis Basset. Charles Trenanian. William Turteny. John Ackland. William
Tothill.
There came hither of these but the four first and the two last.

The names of the Devonshire Commissioners.
Baronet Northcot. Baronet Bampfield. Baronet Poole. Sir Edmond Vowell. Sir
Nicholas Martyn. Colonel Butter. Captain Carew. Master Trefuses.
FINIS.

