New Propositions SENT From His Highness the Prince of Wales, to the Right
Honorable the House of Peers, concerning an Agreement between His Royal Father,
and the Parliament; as also, concerning the Citizens of London, the Scots army,
and the Navy in the Downs. Directed to his beloved Cousin, the Speaker of the
House of Lords, pro tempore; and Signed, CHARLES P.

Likewise the Kings Declaration on Monday last to the Parl. Commsssioners. And
their Letter to both Houses.

FOR portrait of the prince Charles PEACE.



Aug: 11 Imprinted at London, for R.VV. AnnoDom. 1648.

PRINCE CHARLES HIS MESSAGE TO The Right Honorable the House of Peers,
directed to his beloved Couzin, the Speaker of the House of Peers, pro tempore.
HIs Highness the Prince of Wales, having seriously weighed the results and
Proceedings of both Houses of Parliament in relation to a personal Treaty with
his Father, resolved to declare his sense to the Right Honorable the House of
Peers, and to faciliate the same, a general Council was called aboard the
Fleet Royal in the Downs, where was present diverse Lords, Knights, and
Gentlemen, and after some debate in relation to the progress and proceedings
of both houses, concerning a personal Treaty with the Kings Majesty, they
agreed upon these Proposals and Desires following, viz.

1. That the Treaty be in such place and manner as may consist with honor,
freedom, and safety of his Majesty, his Father so that the agreement may not be
blemished with any face of restraint.

2. That the Treaty be between the King and his two Kingdoms of England and
Scotland, that things may go on fairly to all persons concerned therein.

3 That during the Treaty, there be a general cessation of Arms, that the
affection of the People, of this or the other Kingdom be not lessed by acts of
hostility, but may meet in kindness, and nothing disturb the Treaty.

4 That an ordinary moderate substance during the Treaty, may be agreed upon
for all Armies and Forces now on Foot, and particularly, which must in no case
go unmentioned, the Scots Army now in England, and in such a manner as may be
with the least pressure of the Northern parts.

5 That if the two Houses will agree to these things, he will endeavor to his
utmost power with his Father for a good agreement.

6 That He desires some course may be taken to content Him and his ships now in
the Downs, with money and provision, that so he nor they may hinder the City
trade, and discharge the ships he has now in hold.

This Message, from His Highness the Prince of Wales were communicated to the
House of Peers, and read, and

Signed, CHARLES P.

The Kings Majesty's Declaration to the Commissioners of both Houses of
Parliament, concerning a speedy composure of all differences.
ON Wednesday last Aug. 9. Letters were read in both Houses of Parliament from
the Earl of Middlesex, and the rest of their Commissioners, which were sent to
the King with a message for Peace, purporting, That notwithstanding the great
storms) they arrived safe in the Isle of Wight upon Satterday last, and after
some short time of refreshment, went up to Carisbrook to Col. Hammond the
Governor, and after some congratulations, acquainted him, That they had a
Message from both Houses of Parliament to present to the King, in relation to a
safe and well-grounded peace, intimating he limits of their time, etc.
Whereupon, his majesty were acquainted with the arrival of the said
Commissioners, who seemed to be very pleasant thereat, and upon Monday last, in
the forenoon, the Earl of Middlesex, and the rest of the Commissioners were
sent for into his Majesty's Privy Chamber, where they presented unto Him, the
Votes of both Houses of Parliament, for a Personal Treaty with his Majesty, in
honor, freedom, and safety; and after his Majesty had read the same, he seemed
to have a great willingness to comply thereunto who declared, That he liked
very well of the terms of freedom, honor, and safety, but being without
Secretary, or other Assistant, He could not so suddenly give them an Answer as
otherwise, yet before their time limited were expired, He would return an
Answer.

So that it is hoped, there will be a happy composure of al differences between
the King and his People, and the bleeding wounds of this Kingdom healed, and
preserved from future insurrections, and Warlike commotions.

A Declaration of the Kings Majesty's Officers and Soldiers.
IT is notorious enough upon what grounds this war was by us undertaken how the
saults of the Government precedent were laid open and reformation promised,
wherein the true Religion should be advantaged the King made great and
glorious, the just privileges of Parliament the Laws of the Land, and the
liberty of the people maintained. But now how much our expectations have failed
us, and how we have run into those evils which we fought against, is at last
too apparent unto us, who would not at the first believe the things we now see,
insomuch that the errors of the former Government are now so far exceeded
both in Church and Commonwealth, that they are either justified, or at least
so much excused, as that it is desired by the most and best of men, rather to
enjoy the former again, then to suffer such a reformation wherein the Public
good is pretended, and the particular ends of the reformers intended for
although our party have prevailed almost these two years, yet the things
promised to be reformed, and which we fought for, are scarce so much as entered
into or debated, but clean contrary things now acted.

The King instead of coming to his Parliament, to treat personally with his
two Houses imprisoned, instead of being made great and glorious, is become the
most unfortunate in the world, and great and glorious only in piety, patience
and pity: our Religion, Laws, and Liberties trampled upon and destroyed, and
the greatest tyranny and arbitrary power set up over us, that the wit of man,
or malice of the Devil can invent, and all this but to satisfy the avarice of a
few men, who by accusing their brethren, have already gotten too much power
into their hands, and do now labor to disband us not to ease the Country, as
is pretended, but as we are able to prove by their own Letters and words to
bring in other forces, such as may execute their wills, and make the Country
subject to sequestration, enslave the people, and to use their own words, roll
the Country before them, and to establish the Excise, taxes, and other
intolerable charges, not to be avoided without the efffusion of more blood
then ever has yet been shed in this quarrel, unless God of his infinite mercy
please to divert it by some means not apearing unto us, and that they might as
much as in them lies, destroy our souls as well as our bodies. They go about to
put down the Book of Common Prayer in these parts, as they already have done in
the sest of the Kingdom, which will be more wanted here then in other parts,
because the boook of Common Prayer, is the sole comfort of the people here, and
their way to attein the knowledge of the principles of Religion, and to serve
God. These things, though evident in themselves, yet we shall be ready to make
proof as occasion shall require: and therefore that the whole world may see our
in tegrity, as well in our undertrking this war in the beginning and our
carriage hitherto, as of our intentions for the future we do now declare. That
we do still continue firm to our first principles, to bring the King a Personal
treaty with his Parliament, with freedom, honor, and safty that so the just
prerogatives of the King, privileges of Parl. Laws of the Land, and liberty of
the people, may be al established and preserved in their proper bounds. That we
will, as much as in us lies protect the people from injury, and maintain the
Protestant Religion, and the Common Prayer as is established by Law in this
Land, and do therfote crave the assistance of the whole Kirgdom herein.

Signed, R. POWEL.

SIR,
THe Colchesterians has drawn off most of their Ordnance from the Wall, and we
conceive they intend to fortify the streets, that so they may be able to keep
that shorter line with fewer men; others believe, that they will quit the town
and retire to the Castle, where they are building, therefore, to keep all in is
sure the best way; and it is said, they will carry our Committee along with
them into the Castle and cut their throats, if they may not have conditions for
themselves. Yesterday they killed 30 horses to powder up, their Wine and
Raisins are near spent, Rice and Corn begins to grow short. One of their Guards
deserted their trust, and quitted them, and came in to the Lord General, who
says, that they are fortifying the streets, and making great Works about the
Castle, and are resolved, if his Excellency storms, to dispute the town from
the Walls to their inner Works, and from their Works to the Castle.

Yet notwithstanding, we expect a storm every day, for its conceived his
Excellency has some design on foot to shorten the work of Colchester.

Colchester Aug. 10. 1648.
FINIS.

