THE SECOND PART OF A SEASONABLE LEGAL and HISTORICAL VINDICATION, and
CHRONOLOGICAL COLLECTION Of the Good old Fundamental Liberties, Franchises,
Rights, Laws, Government of all English Freemen; their best Inheritance and
only Security against all Arbitrary Tyranny and Egyptian Taxes.

Wherein the extraordinary Zeal, Courage, Care, Vigilance, Civil, Military and
Parliamentary Consultations, Contests, to preserve, establish, perpetuate them
to Posterity, against all Tyrants, Usurpers, Enemies, Invaders, both under the
ancient Pagan and Christian Britons, Romans, Saxons. The Laws and Parliamentall
Great Councils of the Britons, Saxons.

With some General Presidents*concerning the limited Powers and Prerogatives
of our British and first Saxon Kings; the Fundamental Rights, Liberties,
Franchises, Laws of their Subjects, the severe punishments of their Tyrannical
Princes on the one side, and of unrighteous Usurpers, Traitors, Regicides,
Treason, Perfidiousnesse and Disloyalty on the other (recorded in our
Historians) are Chronologically Epitomized, and presented to public View, for
the benefit of the whole English Nation.

By WILLIAM PRYNNE of Swainswick, Esquire.

Prove. 22. 28. Remove not the Ancient Land-markes, which thy Fathers have set.

2 Samuel 10. 12. Be of GOOD COURAGE, AND LET US PLAY THE MEN FOR OUR PEOPLE, and
for the Cities of our God; and the Lord do that which seems him good.

Dan. 7. 25, 26. And he shall think TO CHANGE TIMES AND LAWS, and they shall be
given into his hand, until a time and times and the dividing of times. But the
Judgment shall sit, and they shall take away his Dominion, to consume and to
destroy it unto the end.

London, Printed for the Author, and are to be sold by Edward Thomas dwelling
in Green Arbor, 1655.

ERRATA.
IN the Epistle p. 2: l, 38. r. 1540. p. 5. l. 10. r. secure, p. 9. l. 2. 5. r.
s. p. 10. l, 37. r. Kings, Queens, p. 16. l, 3. dele they. p. 19. l. 2. 1502.
r. 1602. p. 22. l. 1. proceeding, p. 24. l. 20. Oath of Supremacy; p. 25. l,
24. for this: p, 27. l, 4. r. 1653. p. 35. l. 20. r. and our religion from,
etc. p, 47: l, 18: Constantius: l, 26: for, if: p, 51: l, 2: and p, 52: l, 37:
twenty four, r. forty two: Margin. p. 20. l. 1. whether.

In the Book, p. 2. l. 19, 20. r. each single, p. 39. l. 19. Dubricius, p. 41.
l. 11. quod, p. 47. l. 13. Christianismum, p. 53. l. 29. reservations, p. 62.
l. 9. by r. of, p. 64 l. 20. Subditos, p, 67: l, 23: dat, r eat. p. 71. l. 31.
r. School, p. 72. l. 27. dele a. Margin. p. 55. l. 29. r. Eventibus.

To all truly Christian Freemen of England, This Epistle should have been
printed before the first part; but was omitted through have.
Patrons of Religion, Freedom, Parliaments, who shall peruse this Treatise.
Christian Reader,
IT has been one of the most detestable Crimes, and highest Impeachments
against the Antichristian See the several Epistles of Frederick the ^ Emperor
against Pope Gregory the 9, and Innocent the 4 recorded by Matt. Paris, p. 33^.
fol. 690. sparsim.
Popes of Rome, that under a Saint-like Religious Pretext of advancing the
Church, Cause, Kingdom of Jesus Christ, they have for some hundred years
bypast, usurped to themselves (as sole Monarchs of the world in the Right of
Christ, whose Vicars they pretend themselves to be) both by Doctrinal Positions
and Treasonable Practices, See Extrav. de Ma^oritate and Obedientia: Augustinus
Triumphus, Bellarminus, Becanus, and others, De Monarchia Romani Pontificis.
an absolute, Sovereign, Tyrannical Power over all Christian Emperors, Kings,
Princes of the World (who must derive and hold their Crowns from them alone,
upon their good behaviors at their pleasures) not only to Excommunicate,
Censure, Judge, Depose, Murder, Destroy their sacred Persons; but likewise to
dispose of their Crowns, Scepters, Kingdom^ and translate them to whom they
please.

In pursuance whereof, they have most traitorously, wickedly, seditiously,
atheistically, presumed to absolve their Subjects from all their sacred Oaths,
Homages, natural Allegiance, and due Obedience to them, instigated, encouraged,
yea, expressly enjoined (under pain of interdiction, excommunication, and other
censures) their own Subjects, (yea own sons sometimes) both by their Bulls and
Agents, to revolt from, rebel, war against, depose, dethrone, murder, stab,
poison, destroy them by open force, or secret conspiracies: and stirred up one
Christian King, Realm, State, to invade, infest, destroy, usurp upon another;
only to advance their own antichristian Soveraignties, Usurpations, Ambition,
Rapines, worldly Pomp and Ends: as you may read at leisure in the Statutes of
25 H. 8. c. 22. 28 H. 8. c. 10. 37 H. 8. c. 17. 13 Eliz. c. 2. 23 Eliz. c. 1.
35 Eliz. c. 2. 3 Jacob. c. 1, 2, 4, 5. 7 Jacob. c. 6. the Emperor Frederick
his Epistles against Pope Gregory the 9. and Innocent the 4. recorded in
Matthew Paris, and Henricus de Knighton, de Eventibus Angliae, l. 2. c. 14, 15.
others, Aventinus Annalium Boiorum, Mr. William Tyndal's Practice of Popish
Prelates, the second Homily upon Whitsunday; the Homilies against Disobedience,
and wilful Rebellion; Bishop Jewels view of a seditious Bull; John Bale in his
lives of the Roman Pontiffs; Doctor Thomas Bilson in his true difference
between Christian subjection, and unchristian Rebellion; Doctor John White his
Sermon at Paul's Cross, March 24. 1625. and Defense of the Way, c. 6, 10.
Doctor Crakenthorpe of the Popes temporal Monarchy; Bishop Morton's Protestants
Apology; Doctor Beard's Theater of Gods Judgments, l. 1. c. 27, 28. Doctor
Squire of Antichrist; John Bodin his Commonwealth, l. 1. c. 9. The learned
Morney Lord du Plessy, his Mystery of Iniquity, and History of the Papacy. The
General History of France. Grimston's Imperial History. Matthew Paris;
Holinshed, Speed, Cambden, and others, in the lives of Henry the 3. Queen
Elizabeth, and other of our Kings, and hundreds of printed Sermons on the 5 of
November.

The principal Instruments the Popes employed of late years, in these their
unchristian Treasonable Designs, have been pragmatical, furious, active
Jesuits, whose Society was first erected by Ignatius Loyola, (a Spaniard by
Birth, but A See Maffaeus V^gius and Petrus Ribadeniera in vita Ignatii
Loyolae. Heylius Microcosme, p. 179.
SOLDIER by Profession) and confirmed by Pope Paul the 3. Anno 1640, which
Order consisting only of ten persons at first, and confined only to sixty by
this Pope, has so monstrously increased by the Popes and Spaniards favors and
assistance (whose chief Janissaries, Factors, Intelligencers they are) that in
the year 1626. See Lewis. Owen his Jesuits Looking-glass, printed London 1629.
the Epistle to the Reader, and p. 48 to 58. Jubilaeum, sive speculum
Jesuiticum, printed 1644. p. 207 to 213.
they caused the picture of Ignatius their Founder to be cut in Brass, with a
goodly Olive Tree growing (like Jesses root) out of his side, spreading its
branches into all Kingdoms and Provinces of the World, where the Jesuits have
any Colleges and Seminaries, with the name of the Province at the foot of the
branch, which has as many leaves as they have Colleges and Residencies in
that Province; in which leaves, are the names of the Towns and Villages where
these Colleges are situated: round about the Tree are the Pictures of all the
illustrious Persons of their Order; and in Ignatius his right hand, there is a
Paper, wherein these words are engraven, Ego sicut Oliva fructifera in domo
Dei; taken out of Ps. 52. 8. which pourtraictures they then printed and
published to the World: wherein they set forth the number of their Colleges
and Seminaries to be no less, then 777. (increased to 155 more, by the year
1640.) in all, 932. as they published in like Pictures and Pageants printed at
Antwerp, 1640. In these Colleges and Seminaries of theirs, they had then (as
they print) 15591 Fellows of their society of Jesus, besides the Novices,
Scholars, and Lay-brethren of their Order, amounting to near And are there not
some thousands of them here in England under several disguises?
ten times that number. So infinitely did this evil Weed grow and spread it
self, within one hundred years after its first planting.

What the chief employments of Ignatius and his numerous swarms of Disciples
are in the World, his own Society, at the time of his Canonization for a Romish
Saint, sufficiently discovered in their painted Pageants, then showed to the
people, Mercure Jesuit, tom. 1. p. 67. Speculum Jesuiticum. p. 156.
wherein they pourtraied this new Saint holding the whole world in his hand,
and fire streaming out forth of his heart, (rather to set the whole World on
fire by Combustions, Wars, Treasons, Powder-plots, Schisms, new State, and old
Church-Heresies, then to enlighten it) with this Motto; VENI IGNEM MITTERE: I
came to send fire into the world: which the University of Cracow in Poland
objected (amongst other Articles) against them, Anno 1622.

Their number being so infinite, and the Sea Lewis Owen his running Register,
and his Jesuited Looking glass. The Anatomy of the English Nunnery at Lisbone.
Pope and Spaniard too, having long since (by De Monarchia Hispanica, p. 146,
147, 148, 149, 204, 234, 235, 236, 185, 186.
Campanella's advice) erected many Colleges in Rome, Italy, Spain, the
Netherlands, and elsewhere, for English, Scottish, Irish Jesuits, (as well as
for such secular Priests, Friars, Nuns) of purpose to promote their designs
against the Protestant Princes, Realms, Churches, Parliaments of England,
Scotland, Ireland, and to reduce them under their long prosecuted See Thomas
Campanella de Monarchia Hispaniae. Wa^sons quodlibets, Cottoni Posthuma, p. 91.
to 107. Cardinal de Ossets Letters. Arcana Imperii Hispanici Delph. 1628.
Advice a tous les Estat's de Europe, touches les maxims Fundamentales de
Government and disseiendes Espaginols Paris, 1625.
UNIVERSAL MONARCHY over them, by Fraud, Policy, Treason, intestine Divisions,
and Wars, being unable to effect it by their own Power; no doubt of late years
many hundreds, if not thousands, of this Society, have crept into England,
Scotland and Ireland, lurking under several Disguises; yea, an whole College
of them sat weekly in counsel, in or near Westminster, some few years since,
under Conne the Popes Nuntio, of purpose to embroyle England and Scotland in
bloody civil wars, thereby to endanger, shake, subvert, these Realms, and
destroy the late King (as you may read at large in my Romes Masterpiece,
published by the Commons special Order, An. 1643.) who occasioned, excited,
fomented, the first and second intended, (but happily prevented) wars between
England and Scotland, and after that, the unhappy Differences, Wars, between
the King, Parliament, and our three Protestant Kingdoms, to bring them to utter
desolation, and extirpate our reformed Religion.

The Kings Forces (in which many of them were Soldiers) after some years Wars
being defeated, thereupon their Father Ignatius being a SOLDIER, and they his
Military sons not a few of them See my Speech in Parliament, p. 107. to 119.
and the History of Independency.
secretly insinuated themselves as Soldiers, into the Parliaments Army and
Forces, (as they had formerly done into Exact Collection, p. 651, 652, 662,
666, 813, 814, 816, 826, 827, 832, 902, 904, to 920. A Collection of
Ordinances, p. 267, 313, 354, 424.
the Kings) where they so cunningly acted their parts, as extraordinary
illuminated, gifted brethren, and grand Statesmen, that they soon leavened
many of the Officers, Troopers and common Soldiers, with their dangerous
Jesuitical, State-Politicks, and See Putney Projects, the Histo^y of
Independency, and Armies Declarations, Papers, Proposals.
Practices, put them upon sundry strange designs, to new-mould the old
Monarchical Government, Parliaments, Church, Ministers, Laws of England;
erecting a New General Council of Army Officers and Agitators for that purpose;
acting more like a Parliament then Souldidiers. And at last instigated the Army
by open force (against their Commissions, Duties, Oaths, Protestations, and
Solemn League and Covenant) to Impeach, Imprison, Seclude, first eleven
Commoners; then some six or seven Lords; after that, to seclude seclude the
Majority of the Commons House, suppress the whole House of Lords, destroy the
King, Parliament, Government, Privileges, Liberties of the Kingdom and Nation,
for whose defense they were first raised, which by no other adverse power they
could effect. This produced new bloody divisions, animosities, wars, in and
between our three Protestant Realms, and Nations; and after with our Protestant
Allies of the Netherlands, with sundry heavy monthly Taxes, Excises,
Oppressions, Sales of the Churches, Crowns, and of many Nobles and Gentlemen's
Lands and Estates, to their undoing, our whole Nations impoverishing, and
discontent, an infinite profuse expense of Treasure, of Protestant blood both
by Land and Sea, decay of Trade, with other sad effects in all our three
Kingdoms; yea, sundry successive New changes of our public Government, made
by the Army Officers, (who are still ringing the changes) according to
Campanella's and Parsons Platforms. So that if fire may be certainly discerned
by the smoke, or the tree commonly known by its fruit, as the Truth it self
resolves, Mat^h. 12. 33. we may truly cry out to all our Rulers, as the Jews
did once to the Rulers of Thessa^onica, in another case, Act. 17. 6. THOSE
(Jesuits) WHO HAVE TURNED THE WORLD UPSIDE DOWN, ARE COME HITHER ALSO, and
have turned our Kingdoms, Kings, Peers, Monarchy, Parliaments, Government,
Laws, Liberties, (yea, and our Church and Religion too, in a great measure)
UPSIDE DOWN, even by those very Persons, who were purposely raised,
commissioned, waged, engaged by Protestations, Covenants, Vows, Oaths, Laws,
Allegiance and Duty, to protect them from these Jesuitical Innovations and
subversions.

Those who will take the pains to peruse all or any of these several printed
Books (most of them very well worth their reading) written against the Jesuits
and their Practices as well by Papists as Protestants, as namely, Fides Jesu
and Jesuitarum, printed 1573. Doctrinae Jesuiticae praecipua capita, Delph.
1589. Aphorismi Doctrinae Jesuiticae. 1608. Cambitonius, De Studiis Jesuitarum
abstrusioribus. Anno 1609. Jacobus Thuanus Passages of the Jesuits. Hist. l.
69, 79, 83, 94, 95, 96, 108, 110, 114, 116, 119, 121, 124, 126, 129, 131, 132,
134, 136, 137, 138. Emanuel Meteranus his Passages of them. Belgicae Hist. l.
9, 17, 18, 19, 21, 23, 26, to 34. Willielmus Baudartius, Continuation Meterani,
l. 37, 38, 39, 40. Donatus Wesagus, Fides Jesu and Jesuitarum, 1610.
Characteres Jesuiticae, in several Tomes. Elias Husenmullerus, Historia
Jesuitici Ordinis, Anno 1605. Speculum sive Theoria Doctrinae Jesuiticae,
necnon Praxis Jesuitaram, 1608. Pasquier his Jesuit displayed. Petrus de
Wangen, Physiognomia Jesuitica, 1610. Christopherus Pelargus, his Novus
Jesuitismus. Franciscus de Verone, his Jesuitismus Sicarius, 1611. Narratio de
proditione Iesuitarum in Magnae Brit. Regem, 1607. Consilium de Jesuitis Regno
Poloniae ejiciendis. The Acts of the States of Rhetia, Anno 1561, and 1612. for
banishing the Jesuits wholly out of their Territories, NE STATUS POLITICUS
TURBARETUR, etc. mentioned by Fortunatus Sprecherus, Palladis Rheticae, l. 6.
p. 251, 273. Melchior Valcius, his Furiae Gretzero, etc. remissae, 1611.
Censura Jesuitarum, Articuli Jesuitarum, cum commonefactione illis opposita,
Anti-Jesuites, au Roy, par. 1611. Variae Doctorum Theologorum Theses adversus
quaedam Jesuitica Dogmata. The Remonstrance of the Parliament of Paris to Henry
the Great against the Re-establishment of the Jesuits; And their Censure of
Mariana his Book, to be publicly burnt, printed in French, 1610. recited in
the p. 1180, to 1184. and Continuation, p. 26, to 60.
General History of France, in Lewis 13. his life, and Peter Matthew, l. 6.
par. 3. Historia Franciae. Variae Facultatis Theologiae and Curiae Parisiensis,
quam aliorum opuscula, decreta and Censurae contra Jesuitas, Paris 1612.
Conradus Deckerus de proprietatibus Jesuitarum, 1611. Quaerelarum inclyti Regni
Hungariae adversus corruptelas Jesuiticas defensio. Lucas Osiander, his warning
about the Jesuits bloody Plot, Han. 1614. Jesuitarum per unitas Belgii
Provincias Negotiatio, Anno 1616. Rodulphus Hospinianus, Historia Jesuitica,
1619. Bogermannus his Catechismus Jesuiticus. Ludovicus Lucius, Historia
Jesuitica, Basil. 1627. Arcana Imperii Hispanici, 1628. Mercure Jesuit, in
several Tomes, Geneve 1626. De Conscientia Jesuitarum, tractat. Censura sacrae
Theologiae Parisiensis, in librum qui inscribitur, Antonii Sanctarelli
societatis Jesu, de Haeresi, Schismate and Apostatia, etc. Paris, 1626.
Anti-Cotton; Ioannes Henricius, Deliberatio de compescendo perpetuo crudeli
Conatu Jesuitarum, Fran. 1633. A Proclamation of the States of the united
Provinces, Anno 1612. And another Proclamation of theirs: with two more
Proclamations of the Protestant States of the Marquesate of Moravia, for the
banishing of the Jesuits, London 1629. Alfonsi de Vargas Toletani, Relatio ad
Reges and Principes Christianos, De Stratagematis and Sophismatis Politicis
Societatis Jesus, ad Monarchiam Orbis terrarum sibi conficiendam: in qua
Iesuitarum erga Reges and Populos optime de se meritos infidelitas, ergaque
ipsum Pontificem perfidia, contumacia, and IN FIDEI REBUS NOVANDI LIBIDO,
illustribus documentis comprobatur, Anno 1641. Iubilaeum, sive Speculum
Iesuiticum, exhibens PRAECIPUA JESUITARUM SCELERA, MOLITIONES, INNOVATIONES,
FRAUDS, IMPOSTURAS, ET MENDACIA, CONTRA STATUM ECCLESIASTICUM POLITICUMQUE, in
and extra EUROPEUM ORBEM; primo hoc centenario, confirmati illius Ordinis
INSTITUTA ET PERPETRATA, ex variis Historiis, inprimis vero pontificiis
collecta, Anno 1644. (a piece worth perusing) Or else will but cast their eyes
upon our own forecited Statutes, and the Now out of date.
Proclamations of Queen Elizabeth, King James, and King Charles against
Jesuits, and Seminary-Priests. A brief Discovery of Doctor Allens sedicious
Drifts, London 1588. Charles Paget (a Seminary Priest) his Answer to Dolman,
concerning the succession of the English Crown, 1601. William Watson (a Secular
Priest) his Dedacordon or Quodlibets, printed 1602. now very well worthy all
Protestants reading. A Letter of A. C. to his Dis-Iesuited Kinsman, concerning
the Jesuits, London 1602. Romish Positions and Practices for Rebellion, London
1605. The Arraignment of Traitors, London 1605. John King Bishop of London, his
Sermons on November 5. 1607, 1608. King James his Conjuratio Sulphurea,
Apologia pro Juramento fidelitatis: and Responsio ad Epistolam Cardinalis
Peronii. An Exact Discovery of the chief Mysteries of the Iesuitical iniquity:
and, The Jesuits secret Consultations; both printed London 1619. William
Crashaw his Jesuits Gospel, London 1621. William Feak of the Doctrine and
Practice of the Society of Jesus, London 1630. The many printed Sermons of
Doctor John White, Bishop Lake, Bishop Andrews, Doctor Done, Doctor Featly,
Doctor Clerk, and others, preached on the fifth of November. Lewis Owen his
running Register, London 1626. His unmasking of all Popish Monks and Jesuits,
1628. And his Jesuits Looking-Glass, London, 1629. John Gee, his Foot out of
the Snare, etc. London, 1624. with the Jesuitical Plots discovered in my Romes
Masterpiece; and, Hidden works of darkness brought to public Light, London
1645. shall see the Jesuits and their Seminaries charged with, convinced of,
and condemned for these ensuing Seditious, Treasonable, Antimonarchical,
Anarchical Positions and Practices; for which their Society has by public
Acts and Proclamations been several times banished out of Hungaria, Bohemia,
Moravia, Poland, the Low Countries Rhetia, France, Transylvania, Sweden,
Denmark, the Palatinate, Venice, Aethiopia, Japan and Turkey, as well as out of
England, Scotland and Ireland, as most insufferable Pests and Traitors; in many
of which they have yet gotten footing again.

1. That at least fifty several prime Authors of that infernal Society of
Jesus, in several printed Books (which you shall find specified in Doctor John
Whites Defense of the Way, c. 5. 10. Aphorismi Jesuitarum: Jubilaeum, or,
Speculum Jesuiticum, p. 187, 188. and the Appendix to my Fourth part of the
Sovereign power of Parliaments, p. 187, 188.) have dogmatically maintained;
That the Pope has absolute power, not only to excommunicate, but judicially
to suspend, mulct with temporal penalties, depose, dethrone, PUT TO DEATH, and
destroy any Christian Emperors, Kings, Princes, Potentates, by open Sentence,
War, Force, secret Conspiracies, or private Assiassinations, and to give away
their Crowns and Dominions to whoever will invade them, by Treason or
Rebellion, at the Popes command: and that in cases of Heresy, Schism,
Disobedience to, Rebellion against the Pope, or See of Rome,
Maladministration, refusal to defend the Pope or Church against her
adversaries, Insufficiency to Govern, Negligence, Tyranny, Excesses, Abuses in
Government, Incorrigibility, Vitiousness of Life, and Quando eorum malitia hoc
exigit and Reipub. vel Ecclesiae NECESSITAS sic requiri^ Speculum Jesuiticum,
p. 168, 169, 170. Mercure Jesuit, Part 1. p. 884, 885.
NECESSITY OF THE PUBLIC GOOD, OR SAFETY OF THE CHURCH, STATE, OR CAUSE OF
GOD; as Antonius Sanctarellus the Jesuit particularly defines, in his Book De
Haeresibus, Schismatibus, etc. printed in Rome it self, Anno 1625. who affirms
it to be, multum aequum and Reipublicae expediens, ut sit aliquis supremus
Monarcha, qui Regum hujusmodi excessus possit corrigere, and DE IPSIS JUSTITIAM
MINISTRARE: sicut PETRO concessa fuit faultas PUNIENDI PAENA TEMPORALI, imo
etiam, PAENA MORTIS, DICTAS PERSONAS AD ALIORUM CORRECTIONEM and EXEMPLUM.
(Whether the Erection, Title of, and proceedings against our beheaded King, in
the late mis-named High Court of Justice, had not their Original from hence;
and whether the Army Officers derived not their very phrase, See their
Remonstrance from St. Albons 16 Nov. 1648. and other Papers since.
of bringing the King TO JUSTICE, with their pretended NECESSITY OF PUBLIC
GOOD AND SAFETY, for it, from these very Jesuits, or their Agents in the Army;
let themselves, the whole Kingdom, and all Wisemen now consider.) Moreover,
some of these fifty Authors, (as Robert Parsons the English Jesuit in his
Philopater, Sect. 2. and De Officio Principis Christiani, chap. 5. affirm, That
the whole School both of (their) Divines and Lawyers, make it a Position
certain and undoubtedly to be believed, That if any Christian Prince
whatsoever, shall manifestly turn from the Roman Catholic Religion, or desire,
or seek to reclaim others from the same; or but favor, or show countenance to
an Heretic (as they deem all Protestants, and Dissenters from the Sea of Rome
in any punctilio, such) HE PRESENTLY FALLS FROM, AND LOSES ALL PRINCELY
POWER AND DIGNITY; and that BY VIRTUE AND POWER OF THE LAW IT SELF, BOTH DIVINE
AND HUMANE, EVEN BEFORE ANY SENTENCE PRONOUNCED AGAINST HIM BY THE SUPREME
PASTOR AND JUDGE, That thereby his Subjects are absolved from ALL OATHS AND
BONDS OF ALLEGIANCE TO HIM AS TO THEIR LAWFUL PRINCE. Nay, that they BOTH MAY
AND OUGHT ( See Watsons Quodlibets, p. 295, etc.
PROVIDED THEY HAVE COMPETENT POWER AND FORCE) TO CAST OUT SUCH A PRINCE FROM
BEARING RULE AMONGST CHRISTIANS, as an Apostate, an Heretic, a Back-slider, a
Revolter from our Lord Jesus Christ, AND AN ENEMY TO HIS OWN ESTATE AND
COMMONWEALTH; lest perhaps he might infect others, or by his example or
command, turn them from the faith. And that the Kingdom of such an Heretic or
Prince, is to be bestowed at the pleasure of the Pope, with whom the people
UPON PAIN OF DAMNATION, ARE TO TAKE PART, AND FIGHT AGAINST THEIR SOVEREIGN.
Out of which detestable, treasonable Conclusions, most Treasons and Rebellions
of late times have risen in the Christian World; and the first smoke of the
Gunpowder Treason too, as John Speed observes in his History of Great Britain,
p. 1250.

2. That the Jesuits have frequently put these treasonable Seditious,
Antimonarchical, Jesuitical, damnable Doctrines into practice, as well against
some Popish, as against Protestant King, Queen, Princes, States: which they
manifest,

1. By Hist. Gallica and Belgica l. 1. p. 126. Speculum Jesuiticum. p. 46.
their poisoning Ione Queen of Navarre, with a pair of deadly perfumed Gloves,
only for favoring the Protestants in France, Anno 1572.

2. By their suborning and animating See Speculum Jesuiticum and the General
History of France in H. 3.
James Clement, a Dominical Friar, to stab King Henry the 3 of France in the
belly with a poisoned Knife, whereof he presently died, Anno 1589. for which
they promised this Traitor, a Saintship in heaven.

3. By Speculum Jesuiticum. p. 75.
Cammoles the Jesuits public justification of this Clement, in a Sermon at
Paris Anno 1593. wherein he not only extolled him above all the Saints, for
his Treason against, and murder of Henry the 3. but broke out likewise into
this further Exclamation to the people: We ought to have some Ehud, whether it
be A MONK, or A SOLDIER, or a Varlet, or at least a C^w-herd. For it is
necessary, that at least we should have some Ehud. This ONE THING ONLY YET
REMAINS BEHIND: FOR THEN WE SHALL COMPOSE ALL OUR AFFAIRS VERY WELL, AND AT
LAST BRING THEM TO A DESIRED END. Whereupon by the Jesuits instigation, the
same year 1593. one Peter Bariere, undertook the assasination of King See the
General History of France in the life of Hen. 4. and Lewis 13. Speculum
Jesuiticum, p. 77, 80, 126, 235.
Henry the 4 of France, which being prevented, and he executed, thereupon they
suborned and enjoined one of their own Jesuitical Disciples, John Castle, a
youth of 19 years old, to destroy this King: who on the 27 of December 1594.
intending to stab him to the heart, missing his aim, wounded him only in the
cheek, and stroke out one of his Teeth; for which Treasonable Act, he was
justified, applauded, as a renowned Saint and Martyr, by the Jesuits, in a
printed Book or two, published in commendation of this his undertaking. Yea,
Alexander Hay, a Jesuit privy to Castle 's villainy, used to say, That if King
Henry the 4. should pass by their College (which he built for them) he would
willingly cast himself out of his window headlong upon him, so as he might
break the King's neck, though thereby he brake his own. Yet was he punished
only with perpetual banishment. After which Jesuitical conspiracies detected
and prevented, notwithstanding this King Henry (before these two attempts to
murder him) had by their solicitations, renounced the Protestant Religion,
professed himself a zealous Romanist, recalled the Jesuits formerly banished
for the murder of Henry the 3. Speculum Jesuit. p. 102. to 135.
against his Parliament and Counsels advice, reversed all the Decrees of
Parliament against them, razed the public Pillar set up in Paris, as a lasting
Monument of their Treasons and Conspiracies; built them a magnificent College
in Paris, endowed it with a very large revenue; entertained Pere Cotton (one of
their Society) for his Confessor (who revealed all his Secrets to the King of
Spain;) bequeathed a large Legacy of Plate and Lands to their Society by his
will, and was extraordinary bountiful and favorable toward them; yet these
bloody ungrateful villains animated that desperate wretch, See the General
History of France in Hen. 4. and Lewis 13.
Ravilliac, to stab him to death in the open street in Paris, Anno 1610.
Albigni the Jesuit, being privy to this murder, before it was perpetrated.

4. By their suborning, instigating sundry bloody instruments one after another
to murder See Grimstons History of the Netherlands p. 764. Thuanus l 79. p.
186. Speculum Jesuiticum p 60, 6^.
William Prince of Orange, prevented in their attempts by Gods providence, till
at last they procured one Balthazar Gerard to shoot him to death with a Pistol
charged with three Bullets; the Jesuits promising him no less then HEAVEN, AND
A CANONIZATION AMONG THE SAINTS AND MARTYRS, for this bloody Treason, as they
did to James Clement before, for murdering the French King.

5. By Speculum Jesuiticum p. 127.
their poisoning of Stephen Botzkay Prince of Transylvania, See Speed and
Cambden in her life. Bishop Carletons Thankful Remembrance of Gods Mercy London
1624.
for opposing their bloody persecutions.

6. By their manifold bloody Plots and Attempts from time to time, to depose,
murder, stab, poison, destroy our famous Protestant Queen Elizabeth, by open
Insurrections, Rebellions, Invasions, Wars raised against her both in England
and Ireland; and by intestine clandestine Conjurations; from which Gods
ever-waking Providence did preserve her. Amongst other Conspiracies, that of
Patrik Cullen, an Irish Friar (hired by the Jesuits and their Agents to kill
the Queen) is observable. H^spinian Hist. Jesuitica, Speeds History p. 1181.
Cambden, Stow, Holinshed in the Life of Queen Elizabeth. Speculum Jesuiticum,
p. 73
Holt the Jesuit, (who persuaded him to undertake the murdering of her) told
him, that it was not only Lawful by the Laws, but THAT HE SHOULD MERIT GODS
FAVOR, AND HEAVEN BY IT; and thereupon gave him remission of all his sins, and
the Eucharist, to encourage him in this Treason; the chief ground whereof (and
of all their other Treasons against this Queen) was thus openly expressed by
Iaquis Francis, for Cullens further encouragement; THAT THE REALM OF ENGLAND,
THEN WAS AND WOULD BE SO WELL SETTLED, that unless Mistress Elizabeth (so he
termed his Dread Sovereign, though but a base Landress Son;) were suddenly
taken away, ALL THE DEVILS IN HELL WOULD NOT BE ABLE TO PREVAIL, TO SHAKE AND
OVETURN IT. Which then it seems, they See Watsons Quodlibets.
principally endeavored, and often times since attempted, and have now at last
effected, by those who conceit they demerit the Title of Saints (though not in
a Romish Calender) and no less then Heaven for shaking, overturning, and making
it No Kingdom.

7. By their See Speeds Hist. p. 1240. 1242, 1243. John Stow, and How. 1 Jacobi.
Conspiracy against King James, to deprive him of his Right to the Crown of
England, imprison, or destroy his person: raise Rebellion, alter Religion, and
SUBVERT THE STATE AND GOVERNMENT; by virtue of Pope Clement the 8. his Bull
directed to Henry Garnet, Superior of the Jesuits in England: whereby he
commanded all the Archpriests, Priests, Popish Clergy, Peers, Nobles and
Catholics of England, That after the death of Queen Elizabeth by the course of
Nature, or otherwise, whosoever should lay claim or title to the Crown of
England, (though never so directly or nearly interessed by descent) should not
be admitted unto the Throne, unless he would first tolerate the Romish
Religion, and by his best endeavors promote the Catholic cause; unto which by
his Solemn and Sacred Oath he should religiously subscribe, after the death of
that miserable woman; (as he styled Queen Elizabeth.) By virtue of which Bull
the Jesuits, after her decease, dissuaded the Romish-minded Subjects, from
yielding in any wise obedience to King James, as their Sovereign; and entered
into a Treasonable Conspiracy with the Lord Cobham, Lord Gray, and others,
against him, to imprison him for the ends aforesaid; or destroy him,
pretending, that King James was no King at all before his Coronation; and that
therefore they might by force of Arms, lawfully surprise his person, and Prince
Henry his Son, and imprison them in the Tower of London, or Dover-Castle, till
they enforced them by duress, to grant a free toleration of their Catholic
Religion, to remove some evil counselors from about them, and to grant them a
free Pardon for this violence; or else they would put some further Project in
execution against them, to their destruction. But this Conspiricy being
discovered, The Traitors were apprehended, arraigned, condemned, and Watson and
Clerk (two Iesuited Priests who had drawn them into this Conspiracy, upon the
aforesaid Pretext) with some others, executed as Traitors; Cook 3 Institutes,
p. 7. and Calvin's Case 7. Report f. 10, 11. 1 Jac. c. 1.
all the Judges of England resolving, that King James being right Heir to the
Crown by descent, was immediately upon the death of Queen Elizabeth, actually
possessed of the Crown, and lawful King of England, before any Proclamation or
Coronation of him, which are but Ceremonies, (as was formerly adjudged in the
case of See Fox, Holinshed, Speed, 1 Mariae.
Queen Mary, and Queen Jane, 1 Mariae) there being no Interregnum, by the Law
of England, as is adjudged, declared, by Act of Parliament, 1 Iac. c. 1. worthy
serious perusal.

8. By their See 3 Jac. c. 1, 2, 4, 6. Speeds History, p. 1250, to 1256. The
Arraignment of Trayto^s, with others. Prayers for the 5 of November.
horrid Gunpowder Treason Plot; contrived, fomented, by Garnet (Superior of
the English Jesuits) Gerard, Tesmond and other Jesuits; who by their
Apostolical Power did not only commend, but absolve from all sin the other
Iesuited Popish Conspirators, and Faux THE SOLDIER, who were their instruments
to effect it. Yea, the Iesuitical Priests were so Atheistical, as that they
usually concluded their Masses with Prayers, for the good success of this
Hellish plot, which was, suddenly, with no less then 36 Barrels of Gunpowder,
placed in a secret Vault under the House of Lords, to have blown up and
destroyed at once, King James himself, the Queen, Prince, Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, with the Commons assembled together in the Upper-House of Parliament,
upon the 5 of November, Anno Dom. 1605. and then to have forcibly seized with
armed men prepared for that purpose, the persons of our late beheaded King,
then Duke of York, and the Lady Elizabeth his Sister (if absent from the
Parliament, and not there destroyed with the rest) that so there might be none
of the Royal Line left to inherit the Crown of England, Scotland and Ireland;
to the utter overthrow and subversion of the whole Royal Family, Parliament,
State and Government of this Realm. Which unparalled, inhumane, bloody Plot,
being miraculously discovered, prevented, the very day before the execution, in
perpetual detestation of it, and of the Jesuits and their traitorous Romish
Religion, (which both contrived and approved it) the 5 day of November, by the
Statute of 3 Iacobi, chapter 1. was enacted to be had IN PERPETUAL REMEMBRANCE,
that ALL AGES TO COME, might thereon meet together publicly throughout the
whole Nation, to render public praises unto God, for preventing this infernal
Iesuitical Design, and keep in memory THIS JOYFUL DAY OF DELIVERANCE; for
which, special forms of public Prayers and Thankesgivings were then appointed,
and that day ever since more or less annually observed, till this present. And
it is worthy special observation, that had this Plot taken effect, Speeds Hist.
p. 1242. The Arraignment of Traitors, and M. John Vicars History of the
Gunpowder Treason.
it was agreed by the Jesuits and Popish Conspirators beforehand, THAT THE
IMPUTATION OF THIS TREASON SHOULD BE CAST UPON THE PURITANS, TO MAKE THEM MORE
ODIOUS: as now they father all their Powder-Plots of this kind, which they
have not only laid, but fully accomplished of late years against the King,
Prince, Royal Posterity, the Lords and Commons House, our English^Parliaments
and Government, upon those Independents, and Anabaptistical Swordmen, reputed
PURITANS, who were in truth, but their mere under- Instruments to effect them;
When as they See my Epistles to Jus Patronatus, and Speech in Parliament.
originally laid the Plots; as is clear by Campanella's Book De Monarchia,
Hisp. c. 25. and Cardinal Richelieu, his Instructions at his death, to the King
of France. And it is very observable, that as Courtney the Jesuit, Rector of
the English Jesuits College at Rome did in the year 1641. (when the name of
Independent, was scarce heard of in England) openly affirm to some English
Gentlemen, and a Reverend Minister (of late in Cornwall) from whom I had this
Relation, then and there feasted by the English Jesuits in their College,
That they now at last, after all their former Plots had miscarried, they had
found out a sure way to subvert and ruin the Church of England (which was most
formidable to them of all others) BY THE INDEPENDENTS; who immediately after
infinitely increased, supplanted the Prebyterians by degrees, got the whole
power of the Army, (and by it, of the Kingdom) into their hands, and then
subverted both the Parliament, King and his Posterity: So some Independent
Ministers, Sectaries and Anabaptists, ever since 1648. have neglected the
observation of the 5 of November, (as I am credibly informed) and refused to
render public thanks to God for the deliverance thereon, contrary to the Act,
for this very reason, which some of them have rendered; That they would not mock
God in public by praising him for delivering the late King, Royal Posterity,
and House of Lords from destruction then, by Jesuits and Papists, whenas
themselves have since destroyed and subverted them through Gods providence; and
repute it a special mercy and deliverance to the Nation from Tyranny and
Bondage, for which they have cause to bless the Lord: Peforming that for the
Jesuits and Powder-Traytors, which themselves could not effect. The Lord give
them grace and hearts to consider, how much they acted the Jesuits, and
promoted their very worst designs against us therein; what infamy and scandal
they have thereby drawn upon all zealous Professors of our Protestant Religion,
and Jer. 5. 31.
what they will do in the end thereof.

9. (To omit all other foreign instances cited in Speculum Jesuiticum, p. 124.
to 130. where you may peruse them at leisure) By Romes Masterpiece, p. 8 18,
19.
their poisoning King James himself in conclusion, as some of them have boasted.

10. By the Popes Nuntio, and Conclave of Jesuits Conspiracy at London, Anno
1640. Romes Masterpiece, p, 8. to 22.
to poison our late King Charles himself, as they had poisoned his Father with
a poisoned Indian Nut, kept by the Jesuits, and showed often by Conne the
Popes Nuncio to the Discoverer of that Plot; or else, to destroy him by the
Scottish wars and troubles, (raised for that very end by the Jesuits,) in case
he refused to grant them a universal liberty of exercising their Popish
Religion throughout his Realms and Dominions: and then to train up his Son
under them, in the Popish Religion; To which not only heretofore, but now
likewise they strenuously endeavor by all possible means to seduce him; as
appears more especially by Monsieur Militierre his The Victory of Truth, Anno
1653.
late book dedicated to him for that purpose. Surely all these premised
instances compared together, will sufficiently inform the world; that the late
unparellel'd capital Proceedings against our Protestant King, Parliament
Members, Peers House, and forced, dissolved late Parliament too, proceeded not
from the Principles of our reformed Protestant Religion, as this Page 5, 7, 8,
18, 33, 39, etc.
Monsieur in his printed pamphlet, would make his Reader, the young King, to
whom he dedicates it, and all the world believe; but from the Popes and
Jesuits forecited Treasonable Opinions, seconded with their clandestine
Solicitations and Practices, and that they, with some French Cardinals
Jesuits, as well as Spanish and English, (then present in England) were the
chief original Contrivers, Promoters of them, whoever were the immediate
visible Instruments, as I have See my Speech in Parliament, and Memento. The
Epistle to my Jus Patronatus, and Tho. Campanella De Monarchia Hisp. c. 25.
elsewhere more fully demonstrated, for the wiping off this scandal from our
reformed Religion, and the sincere Professors of it, who both abominated and
protested against it in print.

3. That the Jesuits ever since the Establishment of their Military Order, See
the Declaration of the secured and secluded Members, The London^Ministers and
others, Representation to the General, and the second part of the History of
Independency.
under Ignatius their Martial General, have been the principal Firebrands,
Bellows, Instruments of kindling, fomenting, raising, continuing all the
public commotions, wars, seditions and bloody fewdes that have hapened in or
between any Kings, Kindoms, States, Princes, Sovereigns or Subjects throughout
the Christian world; and more particularly, of all the Civil commotions, wars
in France, Germany, Transylvania, Bohemia, Hungary, Russia, Poland, England,
Scotland and Ireland, to the effusion of whole Oceans of Christian blood: which
one poetically thus expresses, Jubilaeum, sive Specutum Jesuiticum Epigramma.
Quicquid in Orb mali passim PECCANTE GRADIVO EST,
Quicquid turbarum tempora nostra vident,
Cuncta Sodalitio mentito nomine JESU
Accepta Historia test, refer licet.
Ite modo and vestrae celebrate Encaenia Sectae,
MILITIS INVENTUM, LOIOLANA COHORS.


Yea, it is well worthy observation, Hasenmullerus Hist. Jesuit. c. 1. Speculum
Jesuiticum, p. 61.
that Jacobus Crucius, a Jesuit (Rector of the Jesuits Novices at Landsberge)
presumed to publish, in his Explication of the Rules of the Jesuits, Anno
1584. in these words: The Father of our Society OUGHT TO BE A SOLDIER; because
as it is the part of a SOLDIER, to rush upon the Enemy with all his Forces,
and not to desist, till he become a Conqueror; so it is our duty to run
violently upon all, who resist the Pope of Rome; AND TO DESTROY AND ABOLISH
THEM, not only with COUNCELS, WRITINGS, AND WORDS; Sed invocato, etiam brachio
seculari, IGNE ET FERRO TOLLERE ET ABOLERE, sicut PONTIFEX ET NOSTRA VOTA
contra Lutheranos suscepta, VOLUNT ET MANDANT. But likewise by calling in to
our assistance the secular Arm (of an Army) to take away, and destroy them with
FIRE AND SWORD, as the POPE, AND OUR OATHS (taken against the Protestants)
WILL AND COMMAND. And may we not then safely conclude, they have been the
Original Contrivers, Fomentors, Continuers of all our late, intestine and
foreign wars, by Land and Sea, with our Christian Protestant Brethren and
Allies, as Exact Collection, p. 12. to 20, 97 98, 106, 108, 207, 461, to 465.
491, 492, 498, 508, 574, 616, 631, to 638 660, to 670. 812, to 828, 832, 834,
849 890, to 918, 651, 652, 653.
sundry Parliamentary Declarations of both Houses aver and attest?

4. That they have endeavored, attempted the convulsion, concussion,
subversion not only of the Empires, Realms, and ancient settled Governments and
States of Germany, Russia, Bohemia, Hungaria, France, Poland, but likewise of
England, Scotland and Ireland, and to new model them into Exact Collection, p.
3, 4, 461, 462, 491, 49^, 497, 498, 617, 631.
other Forms of Government. What mould of Government they intended to cast
England into, is thus long since described by William Watson (a Secular Priest)
in his Quodlibets, Anno 1502. p. 309, 310, 330, 331. England is the main chance
of Christendom at this present, by seditions, factions, tampering and aspiring
Heads: the only But, Mark, White, the Jesuits aim at, as well in intention as
execution of their pretended expedition, exploit and action. I am of opinion,
that no man on earth can tell what Government it is they intend to establish,
ratify and confirm, when they come to their preconceited Monarchy; no not any
of their Plot-casters. No question it is, but their Government sall be as
uncertain as their New-conceited Monarchy; their Monarchy as mutable as their
Reign, and their Reign as variable as the wind, or Proteus in his Complements.
But no question is to be made of it, but that the Government they do directly
intend at this present, is A MOST ABSOLUTE SOVEREIGNTY, DOMINION AND STATE,
CLEARLY EXEMPTED from any Subordination, TO ANY LAW or Legifer divine or
humane; and therefore it is rightly called DESPOTICON in the highest degree of
exemplary immunity, IMPERIALITY AND ABSOLUTE REIGN, RULE AND AUTHORITY, as
convaining in it three sorts of Government; Scil. Monarchical, Aristocratical,
Democratical, in matters of Counsel and managing of Commonwealths causes; not
in point OF REGALITY, HONOR AND INHERITANCE; For there shall be neither Title,
nor Name, nor Honor given, taken or done to any Prince, Duke, Marquess, Earl,
Viscount, Lord, Baron, or the like, (all the Jesuitical Governors being
Puritan-like, Seniors, Elders, Provincials, etc.) neither shall there be any
succession by Birth or Blood, TO ANY HONOR, OFFICE OR MAGISTRACY from the
Monarch, Pater General, to the Minor, Pater Minister, but ALL SHALL GO BY See
the New Government of the Commonwealth of England, Ar. 25, 26, 32, 33, 34, 41.
ELECTION OR CHOICE. Whether our late and present variable floating New-Moulded
Governments have not been cast by this long since predicted Jesuitical Mould,
let wise men, with all our late and present Governors, now sadly consider and
determine.

5. That as the whole House of Commons in their Exact Collection, p. 3, 4, etc.
Remonstrance of 15 December 1641. charge the Jesuits, and late Jesuited
Court-Counsellors, with a Malignant and pernicious design of SUBVERTING THE
FUNDAMENTAL LAWS and Principles of Government upon which the Religion and
Justice of the Kingdom are firmly established. So William Watson a Secular
Priest, charge Father Parsons, the English Jesuit, and his Jesuited
Companions, in their Memorial for Reformation of England, when it should be
reduced under the power of the Jesuits (as Parsons was confident it would be,
though he should not live to see it) written at Sevil in Spain, Anno Dom. 1590.
that they intended to have Magna Charta, with our Common Fundamental Laws and
Liberties, abrogated and suppressed: thus expressed by William Watson in his
Quodlibets, p. 92, 94, 95. Father Parsons and the Jesuits in their deep
Jesuitical Court of Parliament, begun at Styx in Phlegeton, have compiled their
Acts in a complete Volume, entitled: THE HIGH COURT OF REFORMATION FOR
ENGLAND. Quere whethe HIGH COURT of Justice, had not it is Title from hence?
And to give you a taste of their intent by that base Court OF A TRIBE OF
TRAITORS sawcily (like to Cade, Jack Straw, and Tom Tiler) USURPING THE
AUTHORITY OF BOTH STATES, ECCLESIASTICAL AND TEMPORAL IN ALL THEIR REBELLIOUS
ENTERPRISES: these were principal points discussed, set down, and so decreed by
them, etc. He first mentions three of them relating to See W. Watsons Dialogue
between a secular Priest and Lay Gentleman: printed at Rhemes, 1601. p. 96.
Churchmen, Scholars, and Church, and Colledge-Lands: which were to be put
into Feoffees hands, and they all to be reduced into arbitrary Pensions, etc.
And then proceeds thus to the fourth. The Fouth Statute was there made
concerning THE COMMON LAWS OF THIS LAND; and that consisted of this one
principal point, That, ALL THE GREAT CHARTERS OF ENGLAND MUST BE BURNT; the
manner of holding Lands in Fee-simple, Fee-tail, Kings Service, Soccage or
Villanage, brought into villainy, scoggery and popularity, and in few, THE
COMMON LAW MUST BE WHOLLY ANNIHILATED, ABOLISHED, AND TRODDEN DOWN UNDER FOOT,
and Caesar's civil Imperials brought amongst us, and sway for a time in their
places. All whatsoever England yields, being but base, barbarous, and void of
all sense, knowledge, or discretion showed in the first Founders, and Legifers;
and on the other side ALL WHATSOEVER IS OR SHALL BE BROUGHT IN BY THESE
Outcasts of Moses, stain of Solon, and refuse of Lycurgus, must be reputed for
METAPHYSICAL, SEMI-DIVINE, AND OF MORE EXCELLENCY THEN THE OTHER WERE. Which he
thus seconds, Quodlibet 9. Artic. 2. p. 286. First it is plain, that Father
Parsons and his Company (divide it amongst them how they list) HAVE LAID A
PLOT, as being most consonant and fitting for their other Designments, THAT THE
COMMON LAWS OF THE REALM OF ENGLAND MUST BE (forsooth) EITHER ABOLISHED
UTTERLY: or else, BEAR NO GREATER SWAY IN THE REALM THEN THE CIVIL LAW DOES.
And THE And is not this the chief Reason of their late endeavored Alterations?
CHIEF REASON IS, FOR THAT THE STATE OF THE CROWN AND KINGDOM BY THE COMMON
LAWS IS SO STRONGLY SETTLED, AS WHILST THEY CONTINUE, THE JESUITS SEE NOT HOW
THEY CAN WORK THEIR WILLS. Nota.
And on the other side, in the civil Laws they think they have some shreds,
whereby they may patch a cloak together to cover a bloody show of their
Treasons for the present, from the eyes of the vulgar people. Secondly, the
said good Father has set down a course how every Man MAY SHAKE OFF ALL
AUTHORITY AT THEIR PLEASURES, as if he would become A NEW ANABAPTIST, or KING
JOHN OF LEYDON, to draw all the World into Mutiny, Rebellion and Combustion.
And the Stratagem is, how the And was not this the very principal engine lately
used to alter the Government, cut off the King, and div^^^ his Posterity of
their 3 Kingdoms, witn^ss the Armies printed Declarations, and the Junsto^s
Vo^es in ^u^suance of them, Jan. 3. 1648. See Mean Tekel Perez by John Rogers.
Common people may be inveigled and seduced TO CONCEIT TO THEMSELVES SUCH A
LIBERTY OR PREROGATIVE, AS THAT IT MAY BE LAWFUL FOR THEM WHEN THEY THINK MEET
TO PLACE AND DISPLACE KINGS AND PRINCES, as men do their Tenants at will,
hirelings or ordinary Servants. Which ANABAPTISTICAL AND ABOMINABLE DOCTRINE,
proceeded from a turbulent Tribe of Traiterous Puritanes, and other Heretics,
this TREACHEROUS JESUIT WOULD NOW FOIST INTO THE CATHOLIC CHURCH, as a ground
of his corrupt Divinity. And p. 330, 332. He intends TO ALTER AND CHANGE ALL
LAWS, CUSTOMS, AND ORDERS of this noble Isle. He has prejudiced the Law of
Property, in instituting Government, Governors, and Hereditary Princes to be,
AD BENE-PLACITUM POPULI, and all other private possessions AD BENE-PLACITUM
SUI, etc. Whether any such new deep Jesuitical Court of Parliament, and high
Court of Reformation for England, to carry on this old Design of the Jesuits
against our Laws, has been of late years sitting amongst us in or near
Westminster, or elsewhere, in secret Counsel every week, as diverse intelligent
Protestants have informed me, and Hugh Peter's reported to diverse on his own
knowledge (being well acquainted with their Persons and Practices of late
years) it concerns others nearer to them, and more able then I, to examine.
Sure I am, a Greater man by far then Hugh Peter's, in an Assembly of Divines and
others, for reconciling all dissenting parties, not long since This he has
since this Epistle penned, affirmed in a printed Speech before a greater
Assembly, Sep. 4. 1654. p. 16, 17.
averred to them on his own knowledge, That during our late innovations,
distractions, subversions, in Church, State, and overturning of Laws and
Government, the Common adversary has taken many advantages, to effect his
designs thereby IN CIVIL AND SPIRITUAL RESPECTS. That HE KNEW VERY WELL, that
EMISSARIES OF THE JESUITS NEVER CAME OVER IN THOSE SWARMS AS THEY HAVE DONE
SINCE THESE THINGS WERE SET ON FOOT. That DIVERSE GENTLEMEN COULD BEAR WITNESS
WITH HIM, That they had a CONSISTORY AND COUNCIL ABROAD, THAT RULES ALL THE
AFFAIRS OF THE THINGS IN ENGLAND. That they had fixed in England, in the limits
of most Cathedrals (of which he was able to produce the PARTICULAR INSTRUMENT)
an Episcopal power, with Archdeacons and other persons, to pervert and deceive
the people: And all this, whiles we were in this sad and deplorable, distracted
condition. Yea, most certain it is, that many hundreds (if not some thousands)
of them, within these few years, have been sent over from Foreign Seminaries
into England under the disguises of As amongst other, Eleaza^, and Joseph Bar.
Isaiah, 2 cheating Impostors and Villains, who have cheated good people of some
thousands of pounds. The 1 of them would have forcibly ravished a maid in March
last, and fled away in the night to avoid apprehension, from Dursly in
Glocestershire. He confessed in his drink, he was a soldier in Prince Ruperts
Army.
converted Jews, Physicians, Chirurgions, Mechanics of all sorts, Merchants,
Factors, Travelers, Soldiers, and some of them particularly into the Army; as
appears by the late printed Examination of Ramsey the Anabaptized, New-dipped
Jesuit, under the mask of a Jewish convert, taken at New Castle in June 1653.
and by sundry several instances I could name. To pretermit all instances of
particular Jesuits within these few years, yea months, come over and
discovered in England by persons of credit; I shall for brevity acquaint you
only with one, discovering what swarms are now amongst us, under other
disguises. An English Protestant Nobleman (a person of honor) whose Ancestors
were Papists, being courteously entertained within these two years in the
Jesuits chief College at Rome by some eminent Jesuits, was brought by them
into a Gallery having Chambers round about it, with Titles written over every
door for several Kingdoms and Provinces, and amongst the rest, one for ENGLAND.
Upon which, he enquiring of the Jesuits what these titles signified; was
answered by them, That they were the Chambers of the Provincial Jesuits, of
each kingdom and Province (written over the respective doors) wherein they had
any members and Emissaries of their society now residing, who received all
Letters of intelligence from their Agents in those places every week, and gave
account of them to the General of their Order. That the Provincial for England,
lodged in the Chamber over which the title ENGLAND was written, who could show
him the last news from England if he desired to see it. Upon which they knocked
at the door, which was presently opened: the Provincial being informed who and
what he was, read the last news from England to them. Hereupon the Nobleman
demanded of them, Whether any of their society were now in England? how they
could stay there with safety, or support themselves, seeing most of the English
Nobility, Gentry, and Families that were Papists, were ruined in their states,
or sequestered by the late wars and troubles, so as they could neither harbor,
conceal or maintain them, as they had done heretofore? They answered, It was
true; but the greater the dangers and difficulties of those of their society
now in England were, the greater was their merit. And, that THEY HAD THEN ABOVE
FIFTEEN HUNDRED OF THEIR SOCIETY IN ENGLAND, Nota.
ABLE TO WORK IN SEVERAL PROFESSIONS AND TRADES, which they HAD THERE TAKEN
UPON THEM, THE BETTER TO SUPPORT AND SECURE THEMSELVES FROM BEING DISCOVERED.
This Relation I have heard from the mouth of a Reverend Divine more then once;
to whom this Noble Lord, upon his return into England not many Months since,
seriously related the Premises, averring the truth of them upon his Honor. Yet
for all this, since the stupendous pretended repeals and annihilations of the
Oaths, and Allegiance, and that of Abjuration of Popery (consented to by the
late King in the Isle of Wihgt) purposely made for the better detection and
prevention of Jesuits, and their treasonable forementioned practices against
our Church, Kingdoms, Princes, Religion, Parliaments, and Government, by the
wisdom and 1 Eliz. c. 1. 5 Eliz. c. 1. 3 Jac. c. 1, 2, 3, 5. 7 Jac. c. 6.
zeal of our best affected vigilant Protestant Parliaments; I can neither hear
nor read of any effectual means, endeavored or prescribed by any in power, for
the discovery of these Romish ^anizaries, or banishing, feretting and keeping
them out of England, where they have wrought so much mischief of late years,
and whose utter ruin they attempt: nor any encouragement at all given to the
discoverers of their Plots and Persons; but many affronts and discouragements
put upon them, and particularly on my self, mewed up Close-Prisoner under
strictest Guards in remotest Castles, near three years space, whiles they all
walked abroad at large, of purpose to hinder me from any discoveries of their
practices by my pen, whiles they printed and vended publicly here in England,
above 30000 Popish books of several kinds during my imprisonment, without the
least restraint to propagate the Jesuits Plots, and antichristian Romish
Religion amongst us, as you may read at large in the Stationers Beacon fired;
which seasonable book, and Discovery of these Romish Emissaries books and
plots, some T. P. the New Fa^x is first.
Officers of the Army, in their Beacon quenched, publicly traduced in print,
as a New Powder Treason of the Presbyterian Party, to blow up the Army, and
that pretended Parliament (of their own erection) which themselves soon after
blew up and dissolved in good earnest, to carry on their designs against our
Laws. But most certain it is, there has been of late years not only a General
council of Officers of the Army sitting many months together in counsel, to
alter and new model all our ancient Laws and Statutes, in pursuance of Father
Parson's design; but likewise two Conventicles of their own selection and
election, sitting of late in the Parliament House at Westminster, assuming to
themselves the Name, and far more then the Power, of the Parliament of the
Commonwealth of England; together with the transcendent ambitious Title of The
Supreme Authority of the Nation, (in derogation of the Army Officers Supremacy,
who sufficiently chastised them this strange Usurpation) who have made it their
chief business, not only to New-model our ancient Fundamental Government,
Parliaments, Ministers, Universities, much according to Parsons and his
Fellow-Jesuites forementioned Plat-formes, and Thomas Campanella his
Instructions to the King of Spain, De Monarchia Hisp. c. 25. but likewise to
New-mould, subvert, eradicate the whole body of our Laws, and with them the
great Charter of our Liberties it self. And in their last cashiered, unelected
Convention, (as some of their Companions, now in greatest Power assure us in
their And since this in a printed Speech, Sept. 4. 1654.
True State of the case of the Commonwealth of England, etc. London, 1654. p.
15, 16, 17, 18.) there was a strong prevailing Party whom nothing would
satisfy, but A TOTAL ERADICATION of the whole body of the good old Laws of
England (the Guardians of our lives and Fortunes) to the utter subversion of
civil Right and Propriety: who likewise took upon them (by virtue of a supposed
right of Saintship in themselves) to lay the foundation of a New Platform,
which was to go under the Name of A FIFTH MONARCHY, never to have an end, but
TO Has not the Army done this in our 3 Nations?
WAR WITH ALL OTHER POWERS, AND BREAK THEM TO PIECES; baptizing all their
proselytes into this Principle and Persuasion; that the Powers formerly in
being, were branches of the The Monarc^y of England has been, 1. In the
Britons. 2. In the Saxons. 3. In the Dan^s. 4. In the Normans Royal Line, and
now the 5 must be Elective in others.
Fourth Monarchy (of England, Scotland and Ireland) which MUST BE ROOTED UP AND
DESTROYED. And what other Fifth Monarchy this could be, but that projected
universal Monarchy of the Jesuits, which should bring the whole Monarchy of
Great Britain and Ireland, together with France, Spain, and all other Princes,
States in Christendom under the Jesuits subjection, and break all other Powers
in pieces; (mentioned by Watson, in his Quodlibets, p. 306, to 333.) or else,
that Elective New Monarchy of Great Britain and Ireland, projected by De
Monarchia Hisp. c. 25. See the Epistle to my Jus Pa^^^^^tus.
Campanella, and Cardinal Richeleiu, which some Grandees now endeavor by their
Instrument to erect and perpetuate for ever A^t. 1, 2, 12, 25, 32* 33* 41, 42.
without Alteration in themselves and their Successors, (though they thus
expressly brand it in others;) let themselves and wise men resolve? it being
apparent, by the practices and proceedings of all the Propugners of this new
Project, that this Fifth Monarchy they intend to erect, is neither the
spiritual Luke 17 21. Rom 14. 17. 2 Pet. 1. 11. Col. 1. 13. Heb. 12. 28. Rev.
12. 10.
Kingdom of Jesus Christ in their own hearts, mortifying their ambition,
covetousness, pride, self-seeking, unrighteousness, violence, rapines, and
other worldly lusts; nor the personal reign of Christ himself alone, in and
over our three Kingdoms, and all other Realms and Nations for ever; which they
endeavor to evince from Dan. 2. 44, 45. c. 7. 14, 27. Micah 4. 1, 2, 7. Luke
1. 32, 33. but a mere supreme, arbitrary, temporal Authority without Bounds or
Limits, enchroached by and erected in themselves and their confederates,
without any color of Right or Title by the Laws of God or the Realm, and no
ways intended, but refuted by all these sacred Scriptures, and others, which
explain them. This design of the Jesuits, to alter and subvert the whole body
of our Laws, was so far promoted by the Jesuitical and Anabaptistical Party in
this last Assembly, (elected only by the A True State, etc. p. 13.
Army Officers,) that on August 20. 1643. (as our News-books print,) they
Ordered, there should be a Committee selected, to consider of A NEW BODY OF THE
LAW, for the Government of this Commonwealth, who were to new-mould THE WHOLE
BODY OF THE LAW: according to Parsons his mould. And hereupon our cheating
Astrologers (especially Lilly and Culpeper, the Sea Thomas Campanella, de
Monarch. Hisp. c. 23, 25, 27.
Jesuits grand Factors to cry down our Law, Tithes and Ministers) from the
mere visible earthly Conjunctions, Motions, Influences of these New wandering
excentrick Planets at Westminster only, (not of any Celestial Stars, as they
would make Country-Clowns believe) took upon them in their See their Almanacks
in January, February, September, October, December, 1654
Monthly Prognostications, for this year 1654. almost in every Month to
predict, the pulling down of the Laws of the Nation, and of Lawyers, to the
ground: the calling of the great Charter it self into question, with other
Liberties, as not suiting with English men's brains at this time. The plucking
up the Crabtree of the Law BY THE ROOTS, to hinder the future growing of it:
there being no reason we should now be governed by the Norman Laws, since the
Norman Race is taken away by the same instrument (the Sword) that brought it
in: and the like. But these Predicters of our Laws and Lawyers downfals, could
neither foresee nor predict the sudden downfall of these lawless earthly
Westminster-planets from the Firmament of their new-created Power; who should
effect it by their influences. Wherefore, though I look upon these and all
other their Astrological Predictions, as See Sixtus ab Hemminga. Astrologiae
Refutatae Jo. Francus Officius de diu. Astrorum faculitate, in larvatam
Astrologiam. Corn. S^epp^^us contra Astrolog^s. Alexander de Angelis in
Astrologos, Hie^om Savanorola adve^sus Divinatric^m Astrono^iam: and
Apologeticus pro tractatu ejus adversus Astrologos, 1581. Picus Mirandula
contra Ast^ol. Pu thas Pilgrimage, p. 12, 13, 64. Mr. Gatakers Vindication of
his Annotations on Jer. 102. London, 1653. Sixtus Senensis Bibl. Sanct. p. 56,
331, 424, to 429.
mere Figments, Cheats, and Impostures, in relation to the Celestial Planets,
(as are their twelve Signs and Houses of the Heavens, whereon all or most of
their artless Art and Predictions are grounded;) Yet I cannot but take notice
of them, as clear Discovery: of a strange Jesuitical and Anabaptistical
Combination of a predominant party amongst us, to carry on this ancient Plot of
the Jesuits related by Watson, against the great Charter of our Liberties the
whole body of our Laws. And truly, when I seriously consider the late great
Revolutions, Changes both of our Government, Parliaments, Laws, and the
manifold extravagant public Innovations, changes, Proceedings, originally
contrived by the Jesuits, but visibly acted, avowed, by Anabaptists,
Independents, and some Pseudo-Presbyterians in the Army and elsewhere formerly
reputed Puritans; it puts me in mind of 3 memorable, Prophetical Passages of
William Watson in his Quodlibets, printed 52 years since, (Anno 1602.) which I
have frequently thought on of late years, as now experimentally accomplished; I
shall beseech our late and present Grandees, and New State-Mint-Masters
seriously to consider them; which I shall here relate in his very printed words.

1. Quodlibet 5. A^^^^. 4. p. 144.
I make no question of it, if the Jesuits prevail in England, THEY INTEND AND
WILL TURN ALL THINGS TOPSY-TURVIE, UPSIDE DOWN: Cinq shall up, Size shall
under. In Parsons High Counsel of Reformation, ALL THE WHOLE STATE MUST BE
CHANGED: and the Lands and Seignories of CLERGY AND NOBILITY, Universities,
Colleges, and what not, must be ALTERED, ABRIDGED, AND TAKEN AWAY. And is not
all this visibly effected already for the most part; and the rest projected,
and never accomplished?

2. Quodlibet 6. Art. 4 p. 169. See p. 27, 28.
I verily think, that ALL THE PURITANS WILL JOIN WHOLLY WITH THE JESUITS AT
LENGTH, (how far off soever they seem to be, and are yet in external profession
of Religion) there being at least half an hundred Principles, and odd Tricks
concerning GOVERNMENT, AUTHORITY, TYRANNY, POPULARITY, CONSPIRACY, etc. which
THEY JUMPE AS JUST TOGETHER IN, AS IF BOTH WERE MADE OF ONE MOULD. And is not
this really verified of, by sundry Puritan Anabaptists, Independents, some
temporizing Presbyterians, and by many Army Officers Soldiers, (in late or
present Power) if they will but compare their last six years actions with the
Jesuits? O let them consider it seriously in the fear of God; and lament it
with the greatest grief of heart!

3. Quodlibet ^. Artic. 1. p. 26, 27.
The Jesuits without all question, are more dangerous, pernicicus and noisome,
to the Commonwealth of England and Scotland then the Puritans; as having more
singular fine wits amongst them, and many learned men on their side; whereas
the Puritans have none but Grossum Caputs: they many Gentiles, Nobles, and some
Princes to side with them: the Puritans but few of the first; rare, to have any
of the second; and none at all (unless it be one) of the last on their side.
And so by consequent, IF MATTERS COME TO HEARING, HAMMERING AND HANDLING
BETWIXT THE JESUITS AND PURITANS; Nota.
THE LATER ARE SURE TO BE RIDDEN LIKE FOOLS, AND COME TO WRACK. And whether
they have not been ridden, outwitted, wracked by the Jesuits plots, wits,
wiles, instruments both in their late Councels, Innovations of Government,
Forcible dissolutions, subversions of Parliaments, Laws, Liberties, Anomalous
Proceedings, Designs, let our late dis-housed, dis-mounted Puritan Grandees and
Statizers of all sorts, determine at their leisure; and let those in present
Power take heed, they be not ridden by them too like fools, as well as their
Predecessors, yea, wracked by them at the last, when they have served those
turns for which they set them up on horseback, for to ride to death our Kings,
Parliaments, Kingdoms, and utterly consume, devour them, with our Ministers
Tithes, Glebes, Universitie and College Lands by Monthly endless Taxes,
Excises and a perpetual Law, Tythe-oppugning Army.

It is worthy observation, De Monarchia Hispanicia c. 25. p 204, etc.
that Thomas Campanella prescribed the sowing and continual nourishing of
Divisions, Dissentions, Discords, Sects and Schisms among us, both in State
and Church (by the Machavilian Plots and Policies he suggests punctually
prosecuted among us of late years) as the principal means to weaken, ruin both
our Nation and Religion, and bring us under the Spanish and Popish yokes at
last: witness his, JAM VERO AD ENERVANDOS ANGLOS NIHIL TAM CONDUCIT, ^UAM
DISSENTIO ET DISCORDIA INTER ILLOS EXCITATA PERPETUOQUE NUTRITA, Quod cito
meliores occasiones suppeditabit: and that principally by instigating the
Nobles and chief Men of the Parliament of England: UT ANGLIAM IN FORMAM
REIPUBLICAE REDUCANT, AD IMITATIONEM HOLLANDORUM: which our Reipublicans lately
did by the power of the Army- Officers; or, by sowing the seeds of an
inexplicable war, between England and Scotland; BY MAKING IT AN ELECTIVE
KINGDOM (as some now endeavor under another Notion) or, by setting up OTHER
KINGS, of another Race; or, by dividing us into many Kingdoms or Reipublicks,
distinct one from another; and by sowing the seeds of Schisms, and making
alterations and innovations, in all Arts, Sciences, and our Religion. The old
Plots of De Monarchia Hispan. c. 25.
Campanella, See Watsons Quodtibets, p. 286, to 332. A Dialogue between a
secular Priest and Lay Gentleman, printed at Rhems, ^601. p. 93, 94, 95.
Parsons, and late designs of Conte de Galeazzo Gualdo (...), Hist. part 3.
Veneti^s 1648.
Cardinal Richelieu, and the Pope, Spaniard, Jesuits, to undo, subvert our
Churches, Kings, Kingdoms and Religion, as the marginal Authors irrefragably
evidence: all visibly set on foot, yea, openly pursued, and in a great measure
accomplished by some late, nay present Grandees and Army Officers, who cry up
themselves for our greatest Patrons, Preservers, Deliverers, and Anti-Jesuites,
when they have rather been but the Jesuits, Popes, Spaniards and other
Foreign enemies instruments and factors in all the late changes, new-models of
our Government, Parliaments, pretended reformations of our laws and Religion,
through inadvertency, circumvention, or self-ended respects, as many wise and
godly men justly fear.

Certainly, p, 175, 176.
whoever shall seriously ponder the premises, with these passages in William
Watsons Quodlibets concerning the Jesuits, Quodlib. 3 ar 4. p 65, 41.
1. That some of the Jesuits society have insinuated themselves into all the
Princes Courts of Christendom, where some of their Intelligencers reside, and
set up a secret counsel, of purpose to receive and give intelligence to their
General at Rome, of the secrets of their Sovereigns, and of all occurrents in
those parts of the world, which they dispatch to and fro by such ciphers, which
are to themselves best, but commonly only to themselves known, SO THAT NOTHING
IS DONE IN ENGLAND, BUT IT IS KNOWN AT ROME WITHIN A MONTH AFTER AT LEAST, AND
REPLY MADE BACK AS OCCASION IS OFFERED, to the consequent overthrow of their
own natural Country of England, and their native Prince and Realms, by their
unnatural Treasons against them, that Nota.
so the Jesuits might be those long gowns, which should reign and govern the
Island of Great Britain.

2. Quodlibets p. 39, 209, 233, 234, 305, 306, 307, 309,
That the Jesuits hope and endeavor to have England, Scotland, and Ireland
under them, to make these Northern Islands a JAPONIAN ISLAND OF JESUITS, and
one JESUITICAL MONARCHY; and to infeoffe themselves by hook or by crook IN THE
WHOLE IMPERIAL DOMIMIONS OF GREAT BRITAIN with the remainder over TO THEIR
CORPORATION, or puni-Fathers succeeding them, as heirs specially in their
society by a state of perpetuity: PUTTING ALL THE WHOLE BLOOD ROYAL OE ENGLAND
TO THE FORMIDON, AS BUT HEIRS GENERAL, IN ONE PREDICAMENT together.

3. Quodlibets p 11, 12, 14, 16, 17, 42, 45, 50, 283, 285, etc. 332, 333. A
D^alogue (...) a secular Priest and a L^y Gentlem^n. Anno 1601.
That the Jesuits have Magistracy, Kings, Magistrates, Ministers, Priesthood,
and Priests in high contempt; publishing many slanderous, seditious,
traiterous, and infamous speeches, libels, and books against them, to render
them odious and contemptible to the people, full of Plots, exasserations
against the Church and Commonwealth, like rebellious Traitors, to bring all
into an uproar, that they may have all Countries, Kingdoms, Governments,
Successions, States, inhabitants, and all at their pleasure.

4. That the Quo^libets p. (...) ^o 313, ^8, ^86, 287. (...) 1617.
Jesuits have taught the people (^n ^rder to get England under their power,
and in order to God or Religion, as they style it,) That Subjects are bound no
longer to obey wicked or heretical Painces and Kings destecting from the
Catholic Religion, and drawing others with them, but till they be able by
force of arms to resist and depose them. That the popular multitude may upon
these grounds when they think meet, place or displace their Princes and chief
Officers at their Princes and chief Officers at their pleasure, as men may do
their tenants at will, hirelings or ordinary servants, putting no difference in
their choice UPON ANY, RIGHT OR TITLE TO CROWNS OR KINGDOMS, BY BIRTH, OR
BLOOD, See J. ^. his Treatise of the Right and (...) Prelate and Prince,
print^ed 1616. and reprinted 1621, by (...) Jesuits.
OR OTHERWISE, then as these Fathers (forsooth) shall approve it. By this all
things must be wrought and framed conformable to opportunities of times and
occasions; as for example: The people must have a right and interest in them,
to do what they list in choice of their Kings and Supreme Governors, till they
have set such a person or Usurper in the Crown as they for their ends have
designed; and then the times and occasions changing, when such a one is settled
in the Throne, the former doctrine and practices must be holden FOR A
MISTAKING; yet such, as seeing it cannot be helped, the people must beware
hereafter of attempting the like again. By this a check must be given to the
publishers of such paradoxes, (when they have accomplished their designed ends)
after that, a dispensation procured for the offenders, and then all shall be
well ever after; till a new opportunity for their further advantage.

5. That the Jesuits by absurd equivocations, Quodlibets, p. 26.
counterfeited perjuries, Sacriledges, and cousenage, become all things to all
men, that they may gain all; as to be Seminary Priests among Seminaries;
Secular Priests, among Seculars; Religious men, among Religious; Seditious men,
among Seditious; Factious Spainiards, amongst Spaniards; ENGLISH TRAITORS,
AMONG TRAITORS; SCOTTISH VILLAINS, AMONG SCOTS, etc. and amongst all these, to
deny and affirm, to object and answer, to swear and forswear, whatsoever may be
a gain to them, for their pragmatical Commonwealth and Society. No wonder then
if they transform themselves into all shapes, and take upon them all
prefessions, now.

6. That the Quo^libets, p. 62, 69, and elsewhere.
Jesuits by their devices and practices, have brought all to Machiavels rule,
DIVIDE ET IMPERA, in sowing division, breeding of jealousies, and making of
hostile strife, by opposition of King against King, State against State, Priest
against Priest, Peer against Peer, Parents against children children against
parents, sisters against brothers, servants against masters, wives against
husbands, husbands against wives and one friend against another, raising up
rebellions, MVRDRING OF PRINCES, making uproars every where, until they make
those they cannot otherwise win unto them, either yield to be their vassals
to live quiet by them, or force them to flight, or drive them out of their
wits, or otherwise plague them to death.

7. That the Quod (...) p 43. 61. 62. 64. 16.
Jesuits by their cursed positions, and machiavillian practices, have made
religion it self a mere political and atheal device; a pragmatical science of
Figboys, and but an art of such as live by their wits, and the principles of
Machiavel taught by their Robbies; yea, a very ^o^ch potch of omnium gatherum,
religious secular, clergical, laical, ecclesiastical, spiritual, temporal, M.
ARTIAL, civil, Aecomenical, political, liberal, mechannical municipal,
irregular, and ALL W^THOVT ORDER; so that they are not worthy to be called
religious, ecclesiastics catholics, nor temporal mechannical christians; but
rather Machiavillians, Athiests, Apostates; their course of life showing what
their study is; and that howsoever they boast of their perfections, holiness,
meditations and exercises, as if they were all Superlatives, all
M^^^physicians, all entia transcendentia) yet their platform is heathenish
tyrannical, ^athannical, able to set Aretine, Luc^an, Machiavel, yea, and Don
Lucifer in a sort to school.

Those, I say, who shall sadly ponder all these premises, and compare them with
the late practices, policies and proceedings of some swaying politicians of our
age and the constitution of our Church, State, Religion and publi^e affairs,
must necessarily acknowledge, that these pragmatical Jesuits have, been very
active, prevalent-powerful, suc^esful, and not only militant but triumphant,
of late years amongst us, under some disguise or other: that they have
dangerously poisoned us with these their Machiavilian and Atheal pollcies,
practices, positions, and have more real Disciples, Factors, if not Tutors, now
amongst us, then in any former ages: And is it not high time then to endeavor
to detect their persons, and prevent their dangerous designs upon us with
greatest care and diligence? Truly though most others be negligent and careless
herein, yet that text of Ezekiel. 2, 6, 7. And thou son of man, be not afraid of
them neither be afraid of their words, though briars and thorns be with thee,
and thou do dwell among scorpions, be not afraid of their words, nor be
dismayed at their looks, though they be a rebellious house: And thou shall
speak my words unto them, whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear,
for they are most REBELLIOVS; has animated me to exonerate my conscience
herein, and to say with the prophet Isai. 62. 1. For Zions (Englands) sake I
will not hold my peace, and for Ierusalems sake I will not rest, until the
righteousness thereof go forth as brightness, and the salvation thereof as a
lamp that burns. Wherefore.

Upon letious consideration of all these Premises. and of all those Sacred
Solemn Oaths. that Protestation, Vow, league, and National Covenant, which I
have formerly taken (lying still as so many Josh. 9, 19. ^0 and Psalm. 89. 34.
Psalm. 154. Heb 6. 17, 18.
indissoluble Obligations on my Soul, notwithstanding the ingrate, malicious,
unchristian Requitalls of all my former unmercinary services, Sufferings for
Religion Laws, Liberties, and the public, in times of greatest Danger,
recompenses only with long causeless, close imprisonments, injuries, affronts,
losses of all kinds, by pretended friends and Patrons of our Liberties, as
well as by professed causeless Enemies: And notwithstanding all other
Discouragements from the general baseness, cowardice, Sottishness, slavishness
degenerated Spirits of the whole Nation, and their strange fearfulness even
publicly to own, much less cordially, to assist, defend, (according to the
sixth Article of the Covenant) those few courageous Patrons who have hazarded
their Lives, Liberties, Limbs, Estates, and all earthly comforts for the
public defense of Religion the Laws, Liberties, Privileges of our Kingdom,
Chruch, Parliament, against the old and late avowed subverters of them, whose
very, When our Savior himself was a prehended, c^rrie^ away priso^e*, and like
to be crucified, all his D^sc^ples so ^ook him and fled, and Pe^e denied him
with in oath, M^t. 26. 56. 70 to 75. And at Paul's first appearance before (...)
no man stood with him, but all me^ forsook him, I pray God it be not laid to
their charg; 2 Timothy 4. 9. 16. And so i^ is now with most p^blike s^fferers.
Company, visits the generality of their former friends and acquaintance have
declined, (as if they had some plague sores on them;) not only during their
late restraints, but likewise since their enlargments out of them, (enough to
persuade them never to write, speak, act or suffer any thing more, for such
ingrate unworthy, Creatures, but rather to put their helping hands, to make
them and their posterities slaves for ever.) I have yet once more out of pure
zeal, love conscience toward my native Country adventured my life, liberty,
and decayed estate, (considering the lawlessnesse and Danger of the times, not
the justice and goodness of the Common Cause, I plead) for the necessary
defense of the Fundamental Liberties, Franchises, Laws, Rights, Parliaments,
privileges and Government, of our e^slaved Nation, (though every way unworthy
to be beloved by God, or men of noble spirits) in this Seasonable Legal,
Historical vindication and Collection wherein I have with all boldness,
faithfulness, without the least fear or flattery of any Mortals or created
powers whatsoever, argued, evinced, maintained my own particular, with the
whole Nations public right and inheritance in them, and endeavored (as much
as in me lies) to preserve them from the several Jesuitical plots, and our
religion, counsels, specified in the whole Commons House Remenstrance of 13.
December. 1641: exact Collection, pa 3. to 14. (of late years revived, and more
vigorously pursued than ever; and to rescue them out of the Claws of Tyrany and
all usurping arbitrary powers, which have avowedly encroached on, yea trampled
them under feet of late, more than ever the worst of all our Monarchs, or
beheaded King did though declaimed against, as the greatest of Tyrants, by some
who have transcended him in his worst Regal Exorbitances; and particularly in
this, which the Lords and Commons in parliament in their Exac. Collec. p. 492,
497. 494
Declaration of Aug. 4 1642. thus grievously complained of, and objected
against the Kings ill Counselors, That the LAWS, were no protection or defense
of any man's right, all was subject to will and power, which imposed WHAT
PAYMENTS THEY THOUGHT FIT, to drain the subjects purses, and supply THOSE
NECESSITIES, which their ill counsel had brought upon the King, and gratify
such as were isntrumental in promooting most ILLEGAL and OPPRESSIVE COVRSES:
Those who yielded and complied were countenanced and advanced, all others
disgraced and kept under, that so their minds made poor and base (as they were
never so poor and base as now) and THEIR LIBERTIES lost and gone (as they were
never so much as now) they might be ready to LET GO THEIR RELIGION whenever
it should be resolved to alter it, which, was, and still is, the GREAT DESIGN
and all the rest made use of as isntrumental and subservient to it. Upon which
consideration they thus concluded that Declaration: Therefore we the Lords and
Commons are resolved to expose our lives and fortunes for the defense and
maintenance of the true religion, the king, person, honor and estate, the power
and privilege of Parliament, the just rights and liberty of the subject. And we
do hereby require all those who have any sense of piety, honor or compassion,
To HELP A DISTRESSED STATE, especially SVCH WHO HAVE TAKEN THE PROTESTATION,
and are bound in the same duty with us unto their God, their King and Country,
to come in to their aid and assistance.

That which has not a little encouraged me hereunto, is not only this their
public call, but likewise this memorable passage, vow protestation of the
Lords and Commons assembled in parliament, in their printed Exac. (...) p. 650.
659 660
Declaration in answer to his Majesty's of October 23. 1642. Which I fear most
of them since in power, have quite forgotten; and therefore I beseech them now
seriously to remember it. Though we know very well, there are too many of the
Gentry of this Kingdom, who to satisfy the LVSTS OF THEIR OWN AMBITION, are
content, like Esau, TO SELL THEIR BIRTHRIGHT, and CARE NOT TO SVBMIT
THEMSELVES TO ANY ARBYTRARY AND UNLIMITED GOVERNMENT, so they may FOR THEIR OWN
TIME PARTAKE OF THAT POWER, to trample and insult over others: (and have not,
are not some of these declarers and censurers such themselves?)yet we are
assured, that there are of the Gentry many worthy and true hearted patriots,
(but where are those many now?) who are ready to lay down their lives and
fortunes, and of late have given ample testimony thereof, for maintenance of
their Laws, Liberties and Religion; and with them and others of their
resolution we shall be ready to live and die. (But how many of these declarers
have made good this public engagement? yea have not some of them been, and
still are more ready to secure, seclude, disoffice, imprison, kill, slay any
such true hearted patrons, as I have felt by sad experience, then to live and
die with them? And we must own it as our duty, to use our best endeavors, that
the meanest of the Commonalty may enjoy their own Birthrights, Freedom and
Liberty of the Laws of the Land, being Nota.
equally entitled thereto with the greatest Subject. I trust therefore the
Greatest Grandees in late or present power neither will nor can be offended
with me, and that all the Nobility, Gentry, Commons, and true hearted Patrons
in the Nation, who bear any love to the Laws, Liberties, Freedom of the people,
for which their Ancestors and they have so long, so stoutly contended
heretofore, and lately with our Kings; will live and die with me in this their
Vindication and Defense, against any of their Fellow Subjects, who shall
endeavor to subvert or deprive them of the full and free enjoyment of all or
any of them, according to this engagement and Declaration: Wherein there are
these further observable passages, relating to the Parliaments privileges and
its Members, which I desire our Army-Grandees, who impeached, secured, secluded
my self with other Members of the last true parliament, levied war against and
forcibly dissolved it; with the Contrivers of our late New Modelled
Governments, would seriously ponder, who in common justice must be content to
be as freely told of and reprehended for their faults in print (where the
public and every man's private interest, Right, Liberty, Security, is
concerned) as they have censured others, as well their superiors, as equals,
often in print, though perchance less peccant than themselves See h^ (...): old
and new Declarations against the Parliament and Member. Their T(...)e state of
the commonw^alth etc. w(...)h, (...) is but a direct Ar(...)g^n out of
themselves under the name of other.
in that they object against them. Exac. collec. p. 1652. 654. 655, etc.
For the matter of his Majesty's raising an Army against the Parliament
(wherein many Papists, priests, Jesuits were employed) and taking away the
privilege thereof, we shall refer it to the judgment of every ordinary
capacity, whether it be void of sense to say, that this war is raised against
the parliament; But the truth is, that it is not a few persons but the
Parliament it self, is the thorn that lies in these men's sides, which,
heretofore when it was wont to prick them was with much case by a sudden
dissolution, pulled out: But now that is more deeply fastened by the Act of
Continuance, they would force it out by the power of an Army. has not this
been the very practice of some Army-Grandees of late, here objected against the
Kings Jesuiticall and Popish ill Counselors? And whosoever will peruse the
several Speeches and Declarations, made upon the breaking up of former
Parliaments, since the beginning of his Majesty's Reign, will find; the
pretenses of those unjust and illegal Dissolutions, to be grounded upon the
exceptions against some particular Members, under the name of A few factious
and seditious persons: so that the aspersing and wounding of the Parliament
through the sides of a few Members, is no new invention: (And has not this
been the very Army officers practice, since the first year of their reign till
now, to wound the last real parliament (yea, their own lare dissolved Mock
parliaments since, though the sides of a few corrupt Members, or a corrupt
Maiority in the House, as all their printed S^e their decl^r^ti^^s in May,
June, July. Aug. 1647. in November. December. Ian. 1648. Ian: 1652 and 1653. and
(...) of the ca^e of the commonwealth of England, etc. p. 4 c. 35. Anno 1654.
with some other Pa^ers and Speech, since.
Declarations upon their dissolutions attest. And is this then no crime? or no
Jesuiticall practice in them, though such in the late Exac. collec. p. 3. 4, to
16.
King and his ill Counselors?) And for the satisfaction of all indifferent
men, that this war is raised against the parliament, we shall refer them to
former Declarations, issued out in his Majesty's name, being so many invectives
and groundless accusations, not against particular Members only but against the
Vote and proceedings of both Houses. And are not many of the Armies
Declarations in 1647. and 16^^. yea, the late pamphlet of some present
Grandees, (...) A True State of the Case of the Commonwealth of England,
printed 1654. Such; let them now then see whence they took their pattern, even
from the beheaded Kings Exac. collec p. 3. 4. to 16. 651, 952. 653.
Iesuited evil Counselors, whose steps they exactly trace in this.) But if
the truth were, as that Declaration seems to imply, That this Army is raised to
force some (...) one member sister. all the members suffer with it. 1 Cor. 12.
26.
particular Members of this parliament to be delivered up, yet upon that ground
would it follow, that the same is levied against the Parliament. For it cannot
be denied by any ingenious man, but that the Parliament by their See Kooks 4
insti^. ch: 1. p. 15. 1^, 17. 23. 24 25. and (...) for the Lord.
inherent rights and privileges has the power to judge and punish their own
Members: [yet the Army officers took upon them to secure, seclude them without
charge, and their future new minded parliament Members, though only elected by
the people, must be try a judged by the new Whitehall Members, ere they can be
admitted to sit. Article 21. of the New Government.] And we have often declared
to his his Majesty and the world; That we are always ready to receive any
evidence or accusations against any of them, and to judge and punish them
according to their demerits; yet hitherto N^r yet aga^^st my self and other
secured (...) and long in prisoned Members.
no evidence produced, no Accuser appearing: And yet notwithstanding, to raise
an Army to compel the parliament to expose those Members to the fury of those
wicked Counselors that thirst for nothing more then the ruin of them and the
Commonwealth: What can be more evident, then that the same is levied against
the Parliament? For did they prevail in this, then by the same reason, pray
observe it, They might demand twenty more, and never rest satisfied until their
malice and Tyrany did devour all those Members they found cross and opposite to
their lewd and wicked designs [And was not this the practice of the
Army Officers, who levied a real actual War against the parliament? They
first impeached, secluded, XI. Members of the Commons house; and some Lords
soon after, An 1647. then they secured, imprisoned my self, with 44. Members
more, and secluded the greatest part of the Commons House, leaving not above
50. or 60. at first sitting, who confederated with them, in December 1648.
within two months after this, they beheaded the King; then suppressed the
whole Lords House, to carry on their designs since acted: At last they
dissolved their own Mock. Parliaments, when they crossed their ambitious
aspires: What they did in September last since this was first penned, to those
now sitting is, fresh in memory.) Touching the privileges of Parliament, which
the contrivers of that Declaration in his Majesty's name, (and the Contrivers
of sundry Declarations since in the armies name, who imitated them herein,)
seem to be so tender of, and to profess all conformity unto, and deny this army
to be raised in any degree to violate: we shall appeal to the judgment of any
indifferent man, how little truth is contained in this their assertion, (or in
the Army Officers printed papers to the same effect.)

The Parliament is to be considered in three several respects. First, as a
Council to advise. Secondly, As a Court to judge. 3. As it is the body
representative of the whole kingdom, to make, repeal, or alter laws and
whether the Paarliament has enjoyed its privileges in any of these respects
(under the Army Officers and powers, as well as late King) let any that has
eyes open judge.

For the first, We dare appeal even to the Consciences of the Contrivers
themselves, [and to the consciences of the Army Officers, Soldiers, and
Whitehall men themselves) whether matters of the highest importance, (witness
all the public proceedings against the late Parliament, King, Peers,
Government; the wars with Scotland, Holland: their new Magna Charta repealing
the old, entitled, The Government of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland and
Ireland, wherein they take upon upon them such an Omnipotent Sovereign power,
as, To pass a decree upon the waveting humors of the people, and to say to this
nation, yea to Scotland and Ireland too, As the almighty himself said once to
the unruly Sea: Here shall be thy bounds hitherto shall thou come and no
further; as ome most arrogantly if not blasphemously publish in print to all
the world in their True State of the Case of the Commonwealth, p. 34. Their
making of new binding Laws and Ordinances, repealing old Laws and Statutes in
and by pretext of this Instrument, out of Parliament, as their manifold
VVhit-hal Folio new Edicts amounting to near 700 pages attest) have not been
agitated and determined (in and by the Armie-Officers, General-Councel and
other unparliamentary Juncto's,) not only without but even contrary to their
Advice, (and Votes too;) and whether Private, unknown Councels (in the Army,
White Hall, and elsewhere) have not been hearkened unto, approved and followed,
when the Faithful and wholesome advice of the great Counsel has been scorned
and neglected (by the Army Officers and their Confederates.) And (...) can
deny, but it is one of the Principle ends why a (...) called, To Consult the
great Affairs of the Church and State. And what miserable effects and (...)
neglect of the great Council, and preferring of unknown and private Councels
before it, has proved; let the present Distractions of this Kingdom bear
witness. (with all the bloody, unchristian Wars, Taxes, Oppressions,
Distractions, since the Armies force upon the King, Members, Houses; Anno 1647.
and 1648. to this present time.)

Concerning the Second, it sufficiently appears by the making the Kings Court,
by the Force and Power of the Kings Army; the Sanctuary and re^uge of All sorts
of Delinquents against the Parliament and Kingdom, and protecting and
defending them from the Justice thereof: and by admitting such to bear places
of great trust in the Army, and to stand in defiance of the Parliament and the
Authority thereof; (and it is not a far greater crime to make the Parliaments
Army it self, a Delinquent against the Parliament and Kingdom; the fanctuary
of such Delinquents against both, and to continue such Officers in places of
greatest trust in the Army, who have levied actual war against the Parliament,
secluded, secured members of Parliament, kept diverse years under their armed
guards in defiance of the Parliament, refusing to release them, even when the
Sergeant was sent from the House it self, to demand the Members seized?)

By all which it is apparent, how our Privileges have been torn from us by
piece-meals, from time to time. And we might mention many passages, whereby
they were endeavored to be And are they not so now, almost past hopes of any
future replanting.
pulled up by the root, and totally subverted. As the attempt to bring up the
late Army from the North to force Conditions upon the Parliament: His Majesty's
Letters and Commands to the Members of both Houses (which found obedience in a
great many) to attend him at York; and so, By depriving the Parliament of their
Members, destroy the whole body. (And was not the actual twice bringing up of
the Parliaments own Army, by the Army Officers, against the Parliament it self,
to impeach secure some principal members of both Houses; seclude the Majority
of the Commons House, suppress the whole house of Lords; break off the Preaty,
behead the King, (the Modus tenendi Parliamentum. Cook 4. (...) c. 1.
Head of the Parliament) against the Parliaments Votes, alter the government,
force conditions on the Parliament it self, (to omit the 12, 21, 24, 32, 37,
38, 39. Articles of their New government, (with the secluding of all the
Members lately admitted by Armed Soldiers till they took a New Engagement, and
keeping out all others) a taking of the Privileges of the Parliament from them
all by wholesale, and a more desperate pulling up by the Roots, and total
subversion of all the Privileges and whole body of the Parliament, then this
objected against the Northern Army, or the Kings Jesuiticall ill Council?
Which is enough to prove the vanity of the Contrivers of that Declaration (and
of the Army Officers too) to feed themselves with hope of belief, That the
Privileges of Parliament are not Violated, but intended to be preserved, with
all due observance.

Concerning the Allegation, That the Army raised by the Parliament, is to
murder the KING, (often alleged by the Exact Collection p. 550. 595. 321, 322,
364. 618. 894. 895. 919. 920. A Collection of Ordinances p. 28. 39. 116, 117
King and his Party, in many printed PROCLAMATIONS, Declarations before and
after this, here mentioned) We hoped the Contrivers of that Declaration, or
any that professed but the name of a Christian, could not have so little
charity as to raise such a SCANDAL, especially when they must needs know, the
Let those who who took it, remember their violations of it and repent. See
Exact Collect. p. 497, 498
Protestation taken by every member of both Houses (and Army Officers too)
whereby they promise in the presence of Almighty God, TO DEFEND HIS MAJESTY'S
PERSON. The Promise and Protestation made by the Members of both Houses upon
the nomination of the Earl of Essex to be General, and to live and die with
him; wherein is expressed, THAT THIS ARMY WAS RAISED FOR DEFENSE OF THE KINGS
PERSON, Our often earnest and most humble Address to his Majesty to leave that
desperate and dangerous Army, etc. A request inconsistent with any purpose to
offer the least violence to His Person, which has and Was this verified by
many of these Remonstrants?
ever shall be dear unto us.

And concerning the imputation laid to our Charge, of Raising this Army, to
Alter the whole Frame of Government and Established Laws of the Land, (which
the King and his party Exact Collect. p. 262. 282. 284. to 289. 297, 298, 490.
424. 500, 502, 404, 514, 517, 521, 522, 526, 528, 530, 531. 534. 550, 551. 554,
558, 56^, 564, 574. a Collection p. 117. 452, 453.
frequently objected in print) we shall need give no other Answer but this:
That the Army Raised by the Parliament is to no other end, but for the
Preservation of his Majesty's Person, to Defend themselves, the Laws of the
Land, and the true Protestant Religion. After which, they there and elsewhere
conclude. And by this time (we doubt not) but every man does plainly discern
through the Mask and Visard of their Hypocrisy, what their (the Kings ill
Counsels) design is, To Subject both King and Parliament and Kingdom to their
needy Ambitious and Avaritious Spirits, and to the violent Laws, Martial law,
of Governing the People by guards and by the Soldiers.

But alas for grief, how superlatively have many of the Army Officers, and
their confederate members (though parties to these Declarations and
Protestations) violated them, and both Houses Faiths, Trusts, intentions, ends
in raising the Army, in every of these particulars? How have they verified,
justified the Kings Declarations, Jealousies, concerning the Parliaments Army,
in every point, here (and Exact Collect. p. 688, 689. 696, 697.
elsewhere) disclaimed by both Houses? How have they exceeded, out acted the
Kings Jesuiticall Counselors, and most desperate Popish army, in violating,
subverting both the Parliaments Privileges, Members and Parliaments
themselves, together with our So styled Exact Coll. p. 4. 12, 34 61 243. 262
121, 500, ^02. besides the authorities in the 1. Chapter.
Fundamental Laws, Liberties, Government; for whose preservation they were
only raised, paid? How have they pursued the Kings and his worst Jesuited
Counselors ^ootsteps in all the charges here objected against them by both
Houses, in relation to the Parliaments privileges, Members, Constitution,
Rights, Laws, to their utter Subversion, dissolution, and waged war against
them? And does not every man plainly discern through the Mask and Visard of
their Hypocrisy, (to use both houses expressions) that their design is just
the same with that here objected by the Parliament to the Kings ill Jesuited
Counselors, and Popish army; even to subject both King; Parliament and
Kingdom, to their needy, ambitious, avaritious spirits, and to the violent
Laws, marshall Law, of Governing the people (yea parliaments themselves) by
guards and by the Soldiers? and Exact Collect. p. 617, 631, 730.
By Conquest to establish an absolute and unlimited power over the Parliament
and good subjects of this Kingdom; as the Houses elsewhere thrice objected
against the late King, his Army and party: being the very design (as many
wisemen fear) of the 27 Article of their new Government; to settle a constant
Annual revenue for the maintenance of 20000 foot and 10000 Horse and
Dragoones, for the Defense and Security of England, Scotland and Ireland? O
that they would now in the name and fear of God (as they tender the eternal
salvation of their souls, the honor and privileges of all future Parliaments,
the ease, welfare, settlement of our Nation.) Lay all this most seriously to
their Hearts, and make it a matter of their greatest lamentation, and
repentance! Besides this, have they not falsified that memorable Exact Coll. p.
686, to 730.
late Declaration of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, November. 2.
1642. in Answer to his Majesty's (well worthy perusal now) and made good (both
for the time past and all succeeding Parliaments whiles there shall be any
standing Army in England able to over power them) all the odious, scandalous
positions, in relation to the English Parliament, its Members and privileges
(deduced from the Kings Declaration, only by inference, but disclaimed by the
King) summed up by them, in the close of that Remonstrance, and published in
these ensuing terms, as will evidently appear, if applied to the Army, and
their General Counsel of Officers, by adding or exchanging their names, only
for the Kings in a parenthesis?

1. Exact. Coll. p. 729.
That the King (the Army, General, and their General Council of Officers)
when he pleases, may declare the Major part of both Houses, a faction of
Malignant, Schismatical, and ambitious Persons: so that all Parliaments that
have been heretofore and SHALL BE HEREAFTER, AND ALL LAWS MADE IN THEM, may by
this means be called in question at pleasure; yea nulled and repealed for ever,
as some former parliaments have been, when held and overawed by armed power, or
unduly elected, packed, summoned without Lawful Authority, or some of the
Members forcibly secluded, as you may read at large in the Statutes of 21. R. 2
c. 11, 12. 16, 17, 18. 1. H. 4. c. 3. 1 H. 4. Rot. Parl. n. 22, 23, 36, 48, 66,
70, 39 H. 6. c. 1. and 17 E. 4. c. 7. worthy the serious perusal of our present
Grandees, and all illegitimate Parliaments, where they may read the fatal end
of all new unparliamentary projects, laws, devices, wherein many now so much
glory, as if they would continue firm for ever: when as in a few years space,
they will all probably prove nullities, be for ever reversed; yea, branded to
posterity, as most pernicious presidents.

2. That his Majesty (the Army and their General Council) may declare what is
the known Law of the Land, against the judgment of the Highest Court, and
consequently of all his Courts: So that the safety and right of King and
people, and THE LAW IT SELF must deupon his Majesty's (the Army, General and
their Councels) pleasure.

4. That as the King has a property in his Town Forts, and Kingdoms; so he
(the Army and their General Council) may dispose of them as he pleases; and
the Representative body of the whole Kingdom may not intermedle in discharge
of his Majesty's (the Armies Generals, Councels,) trust, though by the advice
of evil Councellers, they see it diverted to the hazard of the public peace
and safety of the Kingdom.

5. That his Majesty (the Army, General, and their Council) or any other
person may upon suggestions and pr^tences of Treason, Felony, or breach of
peace (or of their Trusts, a fourth See their impeachment of the xi. Members,
and the humble Answer of the General Council and Officers of the army, etc.
Jan. 3. 1648.
Army new minted cause) Take the Members of Parliament, without giving
satisfaction to the House, whereof they are Members, of the grounds of such
suggestion or accusation, and without and against their consent (as in the case
of the late secured, secluded Members, and their two Juncto's since) so they
may Have they not lately done so since this was penned, as well as heretofore?
Dismember a Parliament, when they please, and make it what they will, when
they will.

6. That whosoever shall follow the King (Army, General, and their Council)
in the wars (against the Parliament) though it were to destroy Laws, Liberty,
Religion, the Parliament it self, and the whole kingdom; yet he shall be free
from all crime or punishment. And that on the other side, to oppose by force
any such force, though in the most legal way, and by authority of the
representative body of the whole kingdom, is to leavy war against the King
(Army, General) and TREASON (with in the Letter of 25. E. 3. or of their new
Knacks since) So our Lands, Liberties, Lives, Religion, and Laws themselves,
Whereby all the Rights, both of King and people are due to them and preserved
for them, shall be at the sole will and pleasure of the Prince (Army, General,
and General Council of Officers, in their new High Courts of Injustice, or
other martial Judicatories.

O consider, consider seriously by these particulars, to what a sad, low,
despicable condition all English parliaments are now for ever reduced, by the
late Army practices, violences, and rebellions insolences against them, never
to be paralleled in any age which has really verified this clause in the
Declaration of both Houses, Aug. 4. 1642. objected against the King and his
popish Army, in relation to themselves. That if the King (by his army) may
force this Parliament (as the parliaments army both forced and dissolved it)
they may bid farewell to all Parliaments for ever receiving good by them; and
if parliaments be lost, they (the people) are lost, their Laws are lost, as
well those lately made, as in former times, All which will be cut in sunder
with the same sword, now drawn for the Destruction of this Parliament.

Epistola ad solitariam Vitam agentes. Sr. Christopher Sybthorpe his Reply to
an Answer made by a Popish Adversary Dublin 1625. p. 27, 28 29.
Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria (about the year of our Lord 340.) objected
this as a great crime, barbarism, cruelty and violation of the privileges of
Councels to the Arrian Emperor Constantine. That whenever he called a
Council, or Assembly of Bishops, it was but for a show: For he would not permit
them to be guided by the ecclesiastical Canont, but his will alone must be
their only Canon. And when they advised him not to subvert the ecclesiastical
order, nor bring the Arrian Heresy into the Church of God, he would neither
hear nor permit them to speak freely, but grievously bending his brows (for
they had spoken cross to his designs) and shaking his sword at them commanded
them to be taken away. Whereupon he thus infers, What Liberty for persuasion,
or place for advice is there left, when he that contradicts, shall for his
labor lose either his life, or his Country? Why has the Emperor gathered so
great a number of Bishops, partly terrified with threats, partly, enticed with
promises to condescend, that they will not communicate with Athanasius? And
Hilary Bishop of Poictou An. 360. in his first Book against this Tyrannical
Arrian Emperors Constantius, thus censures his violent proceedings of this
kind, to the subversion of the freedom and privilege of Councils and their
members. Thou gatherest COVNCILS, and when they be shut up together in one
City, thou TERRIFIEST THEM WITH THREATS (as the Army Officers did the secluded
members 6 and 7 December. 1648 when they shut them up all night in Hell, on the
bare boards without beds in the cold, and kept them fasting all the next day at
Whit-Hall, till 7 a clock at night) thou pinest them with hunger, thou lamest
them with cold, thou depravest them with Dissembling: O thou wicked one, what a
mockery do thou make of the Church and Councels? Only Dogs return to their
vomit; and thou compellest the priests of Christ, to sup up those things which
they have disgorged, and command them in their confessions, to allow that
WHICH BEFORE THEY CONDEMNED: what Bishops hand have thou left innocent? What
tongue have thou not forced to falsehood? Whose heart have thou not brought to
the condemning of his former opinion? Thou have subjected all to thy will, yea,
to thy violence. And have not some swaying Army Officers, by their frowns,
menaces, frauds, open force upon the Parliament and its members, beyond all the
presidents in any ages done the like, and exceeded this Arrian Tyrant? And is
it not then high time for all friends to Parliaments to protest and provide
against such detestable, treasonable violences for the future, destructive to
all Parliaments if permitted, or silently pretermitted without question,
censure, righting of the imprisoned members, or any provision to redress it
for the future.

Our prudent Ancestors were so careful to prevent all violence, force, arms,
and armed men, in or near any places where Parliaments were held, to terrify,
over Qaw, or disturb their proceedings or members; See the Declaration of the
Lords and Commons June 6 1642. concerning this Statute.
That in the Parliament of 7 E. 1. (as you may read in Rastals Abridgement,
Armor, 1. Provision was made by the King; by common consent of the Prelates,
Earls, and Barons, by a geciall act, That in all Parliaments, Treaties, and
other Assemblies, which should be made in the Realm of England FOR EVER, every
man shall come without Force, and withour Armor, well and Peaceably to the
honor of the King and of the peace of him, and of his Realm; and they together
with the Commonalty of the Realm upon solemn advise, declared. That it
belonged to the King, and his part it is by his Royal Signiory, strictly to
defend wearing of Armor and all other Force, against his peace at all time,
when it shall please him (especially at such times, and in places where such
Parliaments, Treaties, and Assemblies are held) and to punish them which shall
do contrary according to the Laws and usage of the Realm. And hereunto they are
bound to old the King, as their Sovereign Lord, at all seasons, when need shall
be. Hereupon our Kings ever since this statute, by virtue thereof, and by the
Law and Custom of the PARLIAMENT, (as Sr. Edward Cook in his 4 Institutes c.
1. p. 14. informs us) did at the beginning of every Parliament, make a special
Proclamation, prohibiting the bearing of arms or weapons, in or near the
places, where the Parliament sat, under pain of forfeiting all they had; Of
which there are sundry presidents cited by St. Edward Cook in his Margin;
whereof I shall transcribe but one (which he omits) and that is 6. E. 3. Rot.
Parliament. n. 2. 3. Because that before these days, at the Parliaments and
Councels of our Lord the King, Debates, Riots, and commotions have risen and
been moved, for that people have come to the places where Parliaments have been
summoned and Assembled, Armed with privy cotes of plate, spears, swords, long
knives (or daggers) and other sort of arms, by which the businesses of our Lord
the King and his Realm have been impeached, and the great men which have come
thither by his Command, have been affrighted: Our Lord the King, willing to
provide remedy against such mischiefs, defends, that no man of what estate or
condition soever he be, upon pain of Forfeiting all that he may forfeit, to the
King, shall be seen armed with a Coat of Male, nor yet of plate, nor with an
Halberd, nor with a spear, nor sword, nor long knife, nor any other suspicious
arms, within the City of LONDON, nor within the Suburbs thereof; nor any place
near the said City, nor yet within the Palace of WESTMINSTER, or any place
near the said Palace, by Land or Water, under the foresaid pain: except only
such of the kings men, as he shall depute, or by his command shall be deputed
to keep the peace within the said places: and also except the Kings servants,
according to the Sta^ute of Northampton. And it is not the intention of our
Lord the King, that any Earl, or Baron may not have his Lance brought to him
in any place, but only in the Kings Presence, and in the place of Council.
The like Proclamations were made in the beginning of the Parliaments of 9. 13,
17, 18, 20, 25. Ed 3. and sundry others, more necessary to be revived in all
succeeding English Parliaments now, then ever heretofore, since the
unpresidented forces upon the late Members of both Houses, and the Parliament
it self by the Army Officers and soldiers, raised to defend them from
violence: The Treasonablenesse and Transcendency whereof being at large related
in my Epistle to the Reader, before my Speech in Parliament 4 December 1648. I
shall not here criminally press, or insist on, but refer them thereunto:
However for the future security and freedom of our Parliaments from violence;
I must crave liberty to imform these Army Parliament-drivers, forcers,
dissolves, (habituated to this trade) That if the Exact Collect. p. 34. ^6. 66,
67, 98, 76, 77, 198, 200, 201, 202, 246, 695, 723. 729.
late Kings march to the House of Commons accompanied only with some of his
Pensioners and others, armed with Pistols and Swords, merely to demand but five
Members thereof, to be delivered up to Justice, particularly impeached by him
of High Treason some days before: to wit, That they had traterously
endeavored to Subvert the Fundamental Laws and Government of this Kingdom:
To deprive the King of his Royal power: To place over the subjects an
Arbitrary and Tyrannical power, To Subvert the very Rights and being of
Parliaments: and by force and terror to compel the Parliament to join with
them in their designs; for which end they had actually raised and countenanced
Tumults against the King and Parliament.

Or if the Exact Coll. p. 118, 195, 207. to 237. 248, 273, 293, 523, 524, 525,
617, 631, 660, 695.
Kings bare tampering with some Officers of his own Northern Army, to draw a
Petition from them to the Houses, or march toward London from their quarters;
(not to seize upon, force or dissolve the Parliament or its Members, but only
to overaw them, and impeach the freedom of their debates, Votes touching
Episcopacy, Church Government, and the Kings Revenews) were such high
transcendent violations of the Privileges and Freedom of Parliament, and
unsufferable injuries, as both Houses of Parliament seperatly, and jointly
proclaimed them to all the world, in several Exact Coll. in the pages quoted
before.
Declarations, during his life; Or such capital crimes, as those who condemned
and executed him for a Traitor and Tyrant, have published in the Declaration of
17. March 1648. (touching the grounds of their proceedings against him, and
settling the Government in the way of a Free State, without King or House of
Lords) since his beheading, in these very words. But above all the English Army
was labored by the King to be engaged against the English Parliament; a thing
of that strange impiety and unnaturalness for the King of England, that
nothing can answer it, but his being a Forraigner; neither could it have easily
purchased belief, but by his succeeding visible actions in full pursuance of
the same; as the Kings coming in Person to the House of Commons, to seize the
five Members, whether he was followed with some hundreds of unworthy debauched
persons, armed with swords, and pistols, and other arms; and they attending him
at the door of the House, ready to execute what the Leader should command them.
This they charged against the King, as the highest of his unparralleld
Offenses; for which they appeal to all the world of indifferent men to judge,
whether they had not sufficient cause to bring him to Justice? Though neither
he nor his followers then seized, secured, secluded, injured any one Member,
when they thus went to the Commons House; Yea presently retracted and offered
all satisfaction that should be desired by the House for this breach of
Privilege: and though the Northern Army, nor their Officers ever advanced
toward, or offered the least violence to the Houses, or their privileges by
Petition or otherwise.

Then certainly the Parliaments own Army- Officers, Counsels, manifold ^high
printed Declarations of Aug. 18. 1647. Sept. 6. 1648. ^and others before and
since, their professed open Oppositions, Impeachments, against the very
Proceedings, Votes, Orders, Ordinances, Members of both Houses of Parliament,
which first raised them principally for their defense; b See their
Impeachments, printed in their Books of Declarations. The History of Indepency,
and my Speech in Parliament] their Impeachment of eleven Members of the House
of Commons, and sundry Lords at once; their securing of above 40. and secluding
of above five parts of six of the whole House of Commons at once, their avowed
marches with the whole Body of the Army, in Battalia several times to force
the Houses, seize their Members, overaw, affright, dismember, dissolve the
Parliament it self, and their own new erected Junctoes since, and justification
of it to all the world in print [See their humble Answer touching the secured
and secluded Members, Jan. 3. 1648. The free state of the life of the
Commonwealth of England, 1654. and their Declarations concerning their
dissolution of their two Jun after these Misdemeanors of the King without the
least repentance for them, must needs be far more execrable, unwarrantable
and criminal than the Kings, and deserve a severer censure than his
Peccadilioes in respect of their crimes. And if by the whole armies printed
Remonstrance, August 18. 1647. the tumult of some unarmed London Apprentices,
who offered some small force to the Houses to the violation of their
Privileges, (without securing or secluding any one Member) deserved a speedy
and exemplary capital proceeding against the principal contrivers and Actors
in it, as they then declared, and vehemently urged again and again in that
Remonstrance. Nay if by their own late printed Instrument of the Government of
the Commonwealth of England, etc. Articles 14. 16. all and every person and
persons, who have aided, advised, assisted, or abetted in any war against the
Parliament since the first day of January, 1641. (unless they have since been
in the Service, of the Parliament, and given ^ignal testimony of their good
affections thereunto) shall be disabled, and be incapable to be elected, or to
give any Vote in the Election of any Member to serve in the next, or in the
three succeeding trienniall Parliaments, and all Votes and Elections given to
the contrary, shall be null and void. And if any person so made incapable,
shall forfeit one full years value of his real estate, and one full third part
of his personal estate, in case he shall give his Vote for election of
Members, to serve in Parliament: as they there adjudge; though such persons as
they intend thus to disable never waged any actual war against the Parliament
it self, or its Members, immediately, but only against the Forces raised by
the Parliament, and so mediately and indirectly only against the Parliament
(the case of all the late Kings adherents and assistants, not within the
letter, but meaning of these Articles) then doubtless those Army Officers,
soldiers, and their Confederates, who advised, aided, assisted, abetted, in
one or more wars against the Parliament Houses, and Parliament Members
themselves, whom they immediately assaulted, forced, secured, secluded,
dissipated, dissolved, destroyed, and have justified it several times, in
print, without giving signal testimony of their good affections to the
Parliament; and in this their Instrument have laid Article 10, 12, 21, 22, 24,
27, 30. 32, 36, 37, 38, 39.
many Chains, clogs, restraints, on all new future Parliaments, of their own
framing, inconsistent with the Honor, freedom, privileges and being of real
Parliaments, are by their own verdict and Instrument, totally disabled (as much
as the archest Malignants and Cavaliers) by the very letter of these Articles,
to be elected, or give any vote for the election of Members in the four next
succeeding Parliaments; and those who have given their Votes in the late
Elections, have thereby forfeited at least one full years value of their real,
and one full third part of their personal estates; and deserve as high, (if
not an higher) censure, as any sequestered, or other Delinquents condemned
formerly by them, for bearing arms, levying and abetting any war, but only
mediately against the Parliament; and as high an uncapacity to be put not only
on themselves, but their Heir males to serve in Parliament, as the Statute of
21 R. 2. c. 6 imposed heretofore on others, for a far less offense; to
secure the Members and Privileges of all succeeding Parliaments, from such
unpresidented, forcible violences, ruptures, dismembrings and dissolutions as
the last Parliament, sustained by the Armies outrage and confederacy against
them; of which I desire only to make them truly sensible.

And farther to convince the Army Officers, soldiers, of their late great
injustice to, and affronts, contempts, against the Parliament which raised
them, in relation to our ancient fundamental Government and chief Members of
the Parliament; I shall desire them and all their confederates in cold blood,
seriously to consider, whether they have not, by their undutifull, violent
proceedings against them contrary to the Votes, Declarations, Remonstrances of
the PARLIAMENT, endeavored (as much as in them is) to falsify this clause in
in both Houses Declaration Nov. 2. 1642. Exact Collect. p. 696.
Although they would persuade his Majesty, That there is little confidence to
be placed in our Modesty and Duty; yet AS GOD IS WITNESS OF OUR THOUGHTS, SO
SHALL OUR ACTIONS WITNESS TO ALL THE WORLD; that TO THE How much it has been
dishonored by the contrary, let the Army Officers read at leisure in Militiere
his Victory of Truth*
HONOR OF OUR RELIGION, and OF THOSE WHO ARE MOST ZEALOUS IN IT ( so much
stricken at by the contrivers of that Declaration, under odious names) we shall
suffer more for and from our Sovereign, then we hope God will ever permit the
malice of evil Councellers, to put us to: And although the happiness of this
and all Kingdoms depends chiefly, upon God; Yet WE ACKNOWLEDGE, THAT IT DOES
SO MAINLY DEPEND UPON HIS MAJESTY, and THE ROYAL BRANCHES OF THAT ROOT, that
as WE HAVE HERETOFORE, SO WE SHALL HEREAFTER, esteem no hazard too great, no
reproach too vile, but that we shall willingly go through the one, and undergo
the other, That we, and the WHOLE KINGDOM MAY ENJOY THAT HAPPINESS, which we
cannot in an ordinary way of providence expect FROM ANY OTHER FOVNTAIN OR
STREAM, Nota.
then those from whence (were the poison of evil Councels once removed from
about them) no doubt, but we and THE WHOLE KINGDOM SHOULD BE SATISFIED MOST
ABUNDANTLY. And on the contrary, have they not fully and actually verified, in
respect of themselves and their Confederates in the Houses, this Odious
aspersion, then (only in prediction) cast by the KING on the PARLIAMENT, but by
them at that time renounced with greatest detestation; and drawn those sad
consequences on the whole Kingdom, wherewith both HOUSES conclude that
Declaration in these words?)

7. Nota.
That the Representative body of the whole Kingdom (since dissolved by the
Army) is a Faction of Malignant, Schismatic, ambitious Persons, whose
DESIGN IS AND ALWAYS HAS BEEN, TO ALTER THE WHOLE FRAME OF GOVERNMENT, BOTH
OF CHURCH AND STATE AND TO SUBJECT BOTH KING AND PEOPLE TO THEIR OWN LAW^ESSE
^^BITRARY POWER AND GOVERNMENT, and that they DESIGN THE RUIN OF HIS
MAJESTY'S PERSON and OF MONARCHY IT SELF; and consequently that they are
TRAITORS and all the Kingdom with them (for (...) act is the act of the whole
Kingdom) And whether their punishment and ruin may not also INVOLVE THE WHOLE
KINGDOM IN CONCLUSION, AND REDU^^^ INTO THE CONDITION OF A CONQUERED NATION
(as some ARMY OFFICERS, and SOLDIERS openly averred we are now reduced to by
and under them) NO MAN CAN TELL: BUT EXPERIENCE SHOWS V^ and now we find it
most true in the Who in their Letters of July 1. 1647. Propositions of Aug. 2.
and other of their Declarations, professed to all the world, That it was fully
agreeable to all their Principles, and should be their desires and endeavors
to maintain Monarchy the Privilege and Freedom of the Parliament; and the
Rights of his Majesty and Royal Family, that so a lasting Peace and Agreement
might be settled in this Nation, etc. Which otherwises must not be hoped for
nor expected: Let them now consider it?
ARMY OFFICERS, COUNCIL, SOLDIERS) THAT SVCCESSE OFTEN DRAWS MEN NOT ONLY
BEYOND THEIR PROFESSION, but also many times beyond their first intentions.

Surely as the Armies and their Confederates late proceedings in relation to
themselves, (though not unto the forced, dismembered, dissolved Parliament, and
secured Members) have fully verified this charge in every particular, then
reputed most false and scandalous; (which I thus press upon their consciences
at this time, and so largely insist on, not to defame or asperse them to the
world; but to vindicate the Innocence, Integrity of the Majority and secluded
Members of both Houses, against the scandalous printed aspersions of Militiere
and other Papists, to preserve and justify the Honor of our Reformed
Religion, and of the most zealous Professors thereof; to restore, re-establish
if possible, the Privileges, the Freedom of all Future Parliaments, much
impaired, endangered by their heady violent Proceedings, to convince them by
what Jesuitical, Popish, old Court-Principles, Counsels, Practices, they have
hitherto been mis-guided; and to reclaim them, as much as in me lies, for the
future from the like destructive Practices, for the public Safety, Peace,
Settlement of our distracted Kingdoms; and do most earnestly beseech them, as
they are English men, Soldiers, Christians, seriously to repent of and lay to
heart, lest they perish eternally for them at last.) So the Army Officers,
Soldiers, Great Successes in all their Wars, Designs and forcible Proceedings
against the King, Parliament, Kingdom, Government, Laws, and Liberties; as it
has caused them not only beyond their Professions, but also beyond their
first Intentions, Commissions, Protestations, to forget that Gospel-Precept
given to Soldiers, Luke 3. 14. to advance themselves to a more absolute
Sovereign arbitrary Power over them, then ever any Kings of England claimed or
pretended to, (as their late Proceedings, Remonstrances, and transcendent
Instrument of the Government of the three Kingdoms manifest;) so it has been
the Psalm. 37. 7. Psalm. 73. 3, etc. Eccles. 8. 11, 12.
principal Ground whereby they have justified all their unpresidented
forementioned Exho^bitances as lawful, commendable, Christian, and that which
has struck such a stupyfying pannick fear, such a stupendous cowardice,
baseness, sottishness, into the Generality of the Nobility, Gentry, Ministry,
and Commons of our late most heroic English Nation, that there is scarce Ezekiel.
22. ^^.
a man to be found throughout the Realm of any Eminency (though we should seek
after him like Diogenes, with a Candle) that dares freely open his mouth
against the most irregular, illegal, violent, destructive arbitrary
Proceedings, Usurpations, Innovations, Oppressions, Taxes, Projects, to the
shaking and utter subverting of our ancient Fundamental Laws, Liberties,
Rights, Properties, Parliaments, Parliamentary Privileges, Government; and
taking away of the very Lives of some (and thereby endangering the Lives of all
other) English Freemen of all Degrees, in mischristened High Courts of Justice.
Such a strange Charm is there in Success alone, to metamorphise Men into mere
See 2 King. 10. 1, to 12.
temporizing, slavish, sordid sotts and beasts; yea, to cause not only persons
truly honorable, but the very Deuteronomy. 32. 17. 1 Cor. 10. 20. Rev. 9. 20. Ephesians.
2. 2.
Devil himself, and the worst of beasts, to be wondered after, applauded,
adored, not only as Saints, but Gods. We read Rev. 13. of a Monstrous deformed
BEAST, to whom the Dragon (the Devil) gave his Power, Seat and Great Authority;
whereupon, all the world wondered after the Beast, and worshipped not only the
Dragon, that gave him power, but the Beast likewise; saying, Who is like unto
the Beast? WHO IS ABLE TO MAKE WAR WITH HIM? And there was given unto him a
Mouth speaking Great things and blasphemies, and power was given him to
continue and make war forty and two months. And power was given unto him to
make war with the SAINTS, AND TO OVERCOME THEM; and power was given him over
all Kindreds, and Tongues, and Nations, And (HEREUPON IT FOLLOWS) all that
dwell upon the earth shall worship him, whose names are not written in the
Lambs Book of Life. And another Beast (under him) caused the earth and all
that dwell therein to set up the Image of this Beast, and to worship it; and he
caused all both small and great, rich and poor, free and bond to receive the
mark of the Beast in their right hand, and in their foreheads; and none might
buy or sell, but he that had this mark; and as many as would not worship this
Beasts Image, were ordered to be killed. Yet this Blasphemous Beasts reign and
power continued but twenty four Months, Rev. 13. 5. This Beast, (in the height
of his Power and Victories) was by God himself, threatened to go into captivity,
and be killed with the Sword, as he had led others into captivity, and killed
them with the Sword, ver. 10. All his followers and worshippers shall (soon
after) drink of the wine of Gods wrath, and be tormented with fire and
brimstone, etc. Rev. 14, 9, 10, 11. The Saints at last shall get this victory
over the Beast, Rev. 15. 2. And the Beast himself (notwithstanding all his
former Victories, Friends, and great Armies) was at last taken, and his false
Prophet with him; and were both cast alive into a lake burning with fire and
brimstone, and all his Forces were slain with the Sword, and the fowls were
filled with their flesh, Rev. 19. 19, 20, 21. From which Texts I have
frequently silenced, confounded some of our conquering Army Officers and
Soldiers, whiles prisoner under them, when they were vapouring of their Great
Victories, Successes, and concluding from thence, both their Saintship, and the
Goodness of their Actions; saying oft-times like the Beasts followers here, Who
is able to make war with us? And that with these genuine deductions from these
Texts, which they could not reply against; worthy all Soldiers their saddest
meditations.

1. That God may, nay oft-times does give great power to the very worst and
most blasphemous of all Men and Beasts; and that not only over one or two, but
many Tongues Nations, as in this Text, and Dan. 7. 3, to 29. c. 8. 4. to 27.

2. That such Beasts many times may and do not only make war with, but even
overcome the very Saints themselves in battle, as the Babylonians, Assyrians,
and other ungodly Beasts did the Israelites, Gods own Saints and People, Psa.
79. 1, 2, etc. Dan. 7. 21, 23, 24, 25. Isa. 10. 5 etc. c. 14. 16, 17. Jer. 26.
6, 7, 8. c. 25. 9, etc. yet they were but blasphemous Beasts, and wretches
still, not Saints.

3. That if such Beasts have but Great Power and Success in their Wars,
Enterprises, against their Enemies, or the Saints themselves; though their
mouths utter blasphemies against the God of Heaven, his Name, Tabernacle,
Saints; though their Actions, Designs be never so impious, atheistical,
treasonable, detestable, their Power but short and fading, yet whiles they are
in Power and Prosperity, the whole world will wonder* run after, worship,
flatter, Saint, Deifie and Adore them for Gods, (as Plutarch, Arrianus, Qu^ntus
Curtius, Suetonius, Grimston, in the (...) of Alexander, and Julius Caesar.
Balaeus, his Lives of the Popes. Mon^y' s Mystery of Iniquity.
Alexander the Great, and Julius Caesar's friends, flatterers did them; and some
wicked Popes Favorites them too;) yea, set up and worship their very Images,
receive their marks in their hands, foreheads, and extol them to the skies,
saying, Who is like unto the Beast? who is able to make war with him?

4. That such adulatious Speeches, Vaunts, Practices as these, and such
Arguments of Saintship or the Goodness of men's causes, undertakings, actions,
only from their present Power, Victories and Successes, are the arguments,
practices, of worldly, earthly, beastly men; of worshippers of the Beast and
Dragon, of 2 King. 18. 33, 34, 35. c. 19. 17, 18, 19. Isa. 10. 7, to 16.
Assyrians, Turks, Popes, not of the Elect real Saints of God, whose names are
written in the Lambs book of life; who will neither flatter, worship nor adore
such Beasts, nor receive their marks in their hands or foreheads though they be
prohibited to buy or sell, or slain for refusing it, by their instruments, Rev.
13. 8, 15, 17. Dan. 3. 12. to 29.

5. That such Beasts in power, will never want under-Beasts and Instruments,
nor yet Rev. 13. 11, to 18. c. 16. 13, 14. c. 19. 20. 1 King. 22. 6. to 24.
false Prophets to persuade or enforce Obedience and Subjection to them, even
by disfranchisements, death, lying wonders, flattering Prophecies, Speeches,
Sermons, etc.

6. That the Power and Dominion of such Beasts, is given and derived to them
immediately by the Dragon (the Ephesians. 2. 2.
Prince of the power of the air) only by Gods permission, not his approbation,
Rev. 13. 2. Hos. 8. 4. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4, 8, 9. And that in wrath, for the
punishment of the peoples sins, and destruction of the beasts themselves at
last, Hos. 13. 11. Rev. 13, and 14, and 19. Psalm. 64. 23. Jer. 51. 24, etc. c.
52. throughout. Hab. 2. 6, 7, 8.

7. That this their Dominion, Reign and Triumph is commonly very short, like
this Beasts here, for twenty four Months, Rev. 13. 5. which is but three years
and an half. (...), Plutarch, Su^onius, Grimston, and othe^s in his Life.
Jacobus Usse^iue Annabum pars posterior, p. 366, 367.
Julius Caesar that great first Conqueror of this Island and a great part of
the World; usurping the Supreme Power over the Roman Senate, and changing the
Government, lived only FIVE MONTHS A SOVEREIGN LORD IN PEACE, and then was
suddenly stabbed to death in the Senate House, by those friends in whom he
reposed greatest trust; for his Tyrannical Usurpations, and alteration of their
former Government, for endeavoring (as was suspected) to make himself KING OF
THE ROMANS, though he rejected the Title of King when offered unto him by M.
Antonius, saying, That Jove was only King of the Romans, that so he might seem
to be compelled to receive it by the people, being their King in deed, though
not in name: and for saying, That the Commonwealth was but a Voice or Name,
without a Body or Substance. Nullum violentum est diuturnum. See Isa. 10, and
14. Job 20. 4, 5, etc. Psalm. 37. and 73. Psalm. 92. 6, 7. Isa. 17. 13, 14. 2 Chronicles. 23. and Sir Wa^ter Rawlies Preface to his History of the World, worth
serious perusal by the Grandees of these times.

8. That in conclusion such Conquering Usurping Beasts, notwithstanding all
their Power, Friend, Followers, Confederates, Armies, Poli^ies, are usually
conquered, taken, slain on earth, and cast into the lake burning with fire and
brimstone for ever, for their Tyrannies, Blasphemies, Bloodsheds, Oppressions
of the People and Gods Saints: and their Confederates, Arm^es false Prophets,
followers, adorers See (...) A^. 655.
destroyed with them even on earth; and then made to drink the cup of Gods
wrath, fury and torments for ever in hell, Isa. 10, and 14. Jer. 50, and 51.
Rev. 19. 12, 20, 21.

9, That though they continue Conquerors and victorious for many years; and
conquer not only, one, two or three, but many Kings and Kingdoms; cut off not
only the thumbs of their Kings, that they might not lift up a Sword against
them, and their great toes, that they may not run from them, but their Heads
too; Yet God at last (in his retaliating Justice) does usually pay them home in
their own coin, as is e^ident, not only by See the Turkish History in his
life.
Bajazet the Turkish Emperor, our See Huntingdon, Mat. ^est. An 655. Grafton,
Speed, Holinshed, Fabian Brompton, in the life of Penda.
King Penda, and others in profane Stories; but by that memorable History of
Adoni-bezek^; Judge. 1, 2, (...) 8.
who after his Conquest of no less then seventy Kings, (who ever in this later
age, conquered one quarter so many?) and tyrannizing over their persons, was,
by a small party of Judah and Simeon, fought with on his own dung-hil, his
victorious old Army totally routed, ten thousand of them slain, himself forced
to fly, pursued, and taken prisoner by these contemptible Enemies, who cut off
his thumbs and his great toes. Whereupon Adoni-bezek (though an idolatrous
Canaanite) used these memorable words, worthy all Conquerors and Tyrants
memorial; recorded by God himself to all Posterity, Judge. 1. 7. Threescore and
ten Kings having their thumbs and their great toes cut off, have gathered their
meat under my table (like so many Dogs rather then Kings) AS I HAVE DONE, SO
GOD HAS REWARDED ME: and they brought him (Prisoner) to Jerusalem, and there
he died* See the like retaliation threatened, inflicted. Hab. 2. 6, 7, 8. Isa.
31. 1. Dan. 7. 23, to 27. Obad. 15. Ezech. 35. 5, 6, 15. Rev. 16. 5, 6. Jer.
51, and 52. Nah. 3. 1, etc. Rev. 13. 10. Joel 3. 6, 7, 8. 2 Chronicles. 22. 10.
compared with c. 23. 12. to the end.

10. That the Elect Saints of God, do by faith in the Word of God, and upon
consideration of the usual Providence and Justice of God toward such Beasts
and bloody Conquerors, most assuredly foresee their downfall, and with patience
expect it, Rev. 13. 9, 10. If any man have an ear let him hear. S^e Joel 3. 6,
7. M^t. 26. 52. and Sir Wall. Rawleighs Preface to his History of the World; and
Dr. Beards Theater Gods Judgments* on the 6 and 8 Commandm^n^s.
HE THAT LEADS INTO CAPTIVITY, SHALL GO INTO CAPTIVITY; HE THAT KILLS WITH
THE SWORD, MUST BE KILLED WITH THE SWORD: Here is THE PATIENCE AND THE FAITH OF
THE SAINTS. O that we had this Faith and Patience within us now!

11. That upon this Faith and Assurance, the true Elect Saints of God, neither
will, nor do, nor dare to admire after, follow, worship or adore such Beasts,
or their Image, nor receive their marks in their hands, or foreheads, though
all the world else readily do it without opposition; enduring patiently rather
to be warred upon, killed, secluded from buying or selling any thing, then
unchristianly to adore, subject, or enslave themselves unto them, Rev. 13. 2,
15, 17. Esther 3. 1, to 7. 2 Kings 3. 13, 14. John 10. 4, 5. Dan. 3. 4, to 30.
1 King. 19. 18. 2 Chronicles. 11. 13. to 18.

Which serious seasonable considerations, as they should daunt the hearts and
allay the high Presumptious Spirits of the most Successful Conquerours,
Powerful Usurpers over, and violent Invaders of the Liberties, Lives, Estates,
Rights, Properties of their Lawful Superiors or Christian Brethren, and all
Subverters of the Laws, Privileges, Parliaments, Government of their Native
Country, especially against their Oaths and Trusts: So the Meditation on them,
together with the contemplation of the infinite Power, Wisdom, Faithfulness,
Justice, Holiness, Presence, and gracious Promises of God, have at all times
and seasons hitherto, invincibly animated, steeled, fortified my Sonl in the
midst of all my sufferings, both under the domineering Prelates,
Parliament-assaulting Army Officers, the late Tyrannical cashiered Republicans,
and all other self-created oppressing Powers, which (if not already dead and
buried in the dust, with all their thoughts and high aspiring Projects,) yet
shall certainly Isa. 51 6. 12. c. 26. 13, 14. Psalm. 82. 7. Psalm 146. 3, 4.
die ere long like men, and become as dung; yea, they have enabled me by Faith
and Patience, to be Romans 8. 36, 37. Psalm. 3. 6.
more then a co^quering triumpher over them: and to sing aloud with magnanimous
David (a man after Gods own heart) long before their downfall, Psalm. 27. 1, 2,
3. The Lord is my Light and my Salvation, whom shall I fear? The Lord is the
strength of my life, of whom shall I be afraid? When the wicked even mine
enemies and my foes came upon me to eat up my flesh, they stumbled and fell.
Though an Host should encampe against me, (as they did at Westminster, at my
House, and in sundry Garrisons, where I was a Prisoner under Soldiers) my
heart shall not fear: though war should rise against me, in this I will be
confident. I will not be afraid of ten thousands of people that have set
themselves against me round about. And to cry out in Paul's words of defiance
against all Enemies and Perils in the cause of my God and Country (uttered in
his own and all true Elected Saints names) Romans 8. 35, etc. Who shall separate
us from the love of Christ? (or my Native Country, as well actively as
passively considered;) Shall tribulation? or distress? or persecution? or
famine? or peril? or SWORD? (of an whole Army or other Powers) Nay, in all
these things we are more then Conquerors through him that loved us. For I am
persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor PRINCIPALITIES, NOR
POWERS, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any
other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord. And to say with him in all threatened Dangers for my
sincere conscientious public Services, Act. 20. 22, 24. And now I go bound to
Jerusalem, not knowing the things that shall there befall me, save, that the
Holy Ghost witnesses in every City, saying; that Bonds and Afflictions wait
for me. But none of these things move me, neither count I my life dear unto me,
so as I may finish my course with joy, and the Ministry which I have received
of the Lord Jesus, etc. And verily methinks the serious contemplation thereof,
and of all the premises, with that of 2 Samuel 10. 12. Isai. 51. 12. Jer. 1. 8.
Ezech. 2. 2, to 6. Matthew. 10. 26, 28. Isai. 1. 12, 13. coupled with Psalm. 11.
2. If the foundations be destroyed, what can the righteous do? Prove. 24. 22,
23. My Son, fear thou the Lord and the King, AND MEDDLE NOT WITH THOSE WHO ARE
GIVEN TO CHANGE, For their calamity shall rise suddenly (which we have seen
verified in many late Changers, Mock-Parliaments and self-created new Powers,)
and who knows the ruin of them both? should now at last banish all base
carnal fears out of all timorous hearts, rouse up the lan^uishing, fearful,
dead, stuped Spirits of our degenerated English Nation, and engage them all
unanimously, undauntedly to claim, vindicate, regain, re-establish those
ancient undoubted Hereditary Fundamental Rights, Liberties, Privileges,
Franchises, Laws, Government, (purchased with their Ancestors and their own
dearest Blood, Treasures) which belong to the whole Kingdom, to all true
English Parliaments, Freemen in general, and to every of them in particular;
whereof they have of late years been forcibly disseised or hypocritically
cheated by pretended Patrons, Preservers, and Propugners of them, the substance
whereof I have here set before their eyes in ten brief Propositions, and by
Records, Statutes, Presidents, Histories, Contests, Resolutions in all ages,
undauntedly, (as their Common Advocate) asserted, fortified to my power, for
their Encouragement and president in this public work. And if they will now
but courageously second me herein, with their joint, bold, rightful Claims,
Votes, Declarations, and Resolute Demands of all and every of their enjoyments,
and future inviolable Establishments, according to their Oaths, Vows,
Protestations, Duties, manifold late Declarations, Remonstrances, Solemn
League, Covenant, and the encouraging memorable Presidents of their Ancestors
in former ages here recorded; I dare assure them (by Gods blessing) a desired
good-Success, whereof their Ancestors never failed: no mortal Powers nor Armies
whatsoever, having either Impudency or Ability enough to deny, detain them from
them, if they will but See 1 Samuel 8. 4, to 2^. chapter 12. 2. 2 Samuel 18. 2, 3, 4.
Jer. 38. 5.
generally, unanimously, courageously, importunately claim and demand them as
their Birthrights. But if they will still basely dis-own, betray and cowardly
desert both them and their Assertors, and leave them to a single combat with
their combined Jesuitical enemies (whom none take care to discover, suppress or
banish out of our Realms, where they now swarm more then ever) and Armed
Invaders; the Fate of our old English Britons, when they improvidently
neglected to unite their Counsels, Forces against, and fought only singly with
the invading united Armies of the Romans, is like to be Englands condition now;
Tacitus in vna Agri^^^e.
Dum pugnant singuli, vincuntur universi: the single Champions of our
Liberties, Laws, Rights, will be easily overpowered, destroyed, for the
pesent; and all others (by their unworthy Treachery and Basenes^, in not
adhering to, but abandoning their present Patrons) discouraged, disabled to
propugne, regain them for the future: and the whole Kingdom vanquished,
enslaved to them for eternity in all humane probability, to those who have
broken your Jer. 28. 13, 14.
former yokes of wood, but instead thereof have made for, and put upon you
yokes of Iron: and by the Jesuits Machiavilian Plots and Policies, will reduce
you by degrees under a mere Papal yoke at last, having deeply leavened many in
power and arms, with their forementioned most desperate Jesuitical Positions,
Practices and Politics, which will soon usher in the whole body of Popery and
all damnable Heresies whatsoever, to the ruin of our Religion, as well as Laws
and Liberties.

Wherefore, seeing it neither is, nor can be reputed Treason, Felony, Sedition,
Faction, nor any Crime at all, but a commendable bounden Duty, to which our
Protestations, Oaths, Leagues, Covenants, Reason, Law, Conscience, our own
private and the public Interest, Safety of the Nation engage us, for all and
every Freeborn Englishman, jointly and severally to claim, maintain, preserve,
by all just, honorable, public and private ways they may, their
unquestionable Hereditary Birthrights, Laws, Liberties, Parliamentary
Privileges, etc. here asserted and presented to them, after so much Blood,
Treasure, Labor spent to rescue them out of the hands of old and late
oppressing Tyrants; nor any Offense at all, but a praiseworthy fervice now in
me, or any other, publicly to encourage them to this duty, (and the strenuous
defense of our endangered undermined Protestant Religion subverted, with our
Laws and Liberties, and living or dying together with them) at this present, as
I have done heretofore upon all occasions; And seeing none can justly censure
them or me, for discharging our Oaths, Consciences, Covenants, Protestations,
Duties in this kind, but such as shall thereby declare themselves Public
Enemies and Traitors to the whole Nation, Laws, Government, Parliaments of
England, as the Resolutions, Presidents, herein cited, yea their own best
friends, (and our reformed Religion too) have already adjudged them: I shall
therefore exhort the whole English Nation, and all real Lovers of their own or
their Countries Liberties, Peace, Laws, Ease, Safety, Religion, and future
establishment in this common Cause, in the words of the Philistines one to
another in a time of need, when they were greatly afraid, 1 Samuel 4. 9. Be
strong and 1 Cor 16. 13.
quit your selves like men, O ye Philistines, that ye be not servants to the
Hebrews, as they have been to you: quit your selves like men, fight, etc. That
so (as the Apostle writes in the like case, Phil. 1. 27, 28.) Whether I come
and see you, or be absent from you; I may hear of your affairs, that ye stand
fast in one spirit, with one mind, striving together for the faith of the
Gospel; (and the ancient Fundamental Laws, Liberties, Rights, Privileges,
Parliaments, Government and Religion of our Realm, which the Jesuits and their
Instruments make their Masterpiece totally to undermine and subvert) And in
nothing terrified by your Adversaries, which is to them an evident token of
Perdition, but to you of Salvation, and that of God. If the Presidents of your
renowned Ancestors here recorded; the Paterns of Recorded in Livy, Tully,
Plutarch, and others. Recta honesta digna Imp^ri^, digna populo Romano, omnia
pericula pro Republica subire, mori pro Patria. Cicero de Finibus bonorum, etc.
p. 365. and Tusc. Quaest. p. 445.
many Gallant Pagan Romans, Graeoians, who have spent their Lives, for their
Countries, Laws, Liberties; Or if my example and these my Lucubrations shall
provoke you hereunto; I shall think my labor well bestowed; and you and your
Posterities worthy to live like English Freemen. But if you will now neither
manfully demand, speak or contend for them any more, out of a slavish fear of a
prevailing Army raised only for their just defense, or any other humane Powers
whatsoever; nor once adventure with united Spirits now at last so much as
confidently, and boldly to ask these unquestionable Birthrights at the Thrones
of any mortal Grandees, your Fellow Subjects, when God Almighty himself
commands you, to come with boldness to his celestial Throne of Grace, that you
may obtain (not mere right as here, but) Mercy it self, and Grace to help in
time of need, Heb. 4. 16. Qui timide rogat, docet negare; you can neither hope
for, nor ever obtain them for the future, but deserve eternally to forfeit
them, and you and yours to be made slaves for ever: However I (though these
Collections prove successless) shall carry this as a comfortable Cordial with
me to my grave, That I have faithfully discharged my Conscience and b^unden
Duty to my degenerous Native Country, by endeavoring all I could both to make
and preserve it free indeed, to detect and prevent all Jesuitical Plots and
Practices, to undermine, embroyle, divide, subvert, ruin it; and used my
utmost sincerest constant endeavors in my place and calling herein. But if
through the Malice, Tyranny or Injustice of any prevailing Enemies of public
Freedom, or Jesuitical Agents, I shall chance to suffer for it in any kind (as
I have formerly done for most of my public services of this nature) be it
close-imprisonments, Fines, Pillories, Stigmatizings or Death it self; I shall
only say beforehand, as Gregory the Great did heretofore: Indict. 2. Epist.
78. In causa qua Deo placere cupio, homines non formido: and as noble Heroic
Esther did, in a like public case for her endangered captivated Nation, Esth.
4. 16.
If I perish, I perish: and this my unrighteous suffering, shall be a new
Glorious Crown of Martyrdom to my head, both in earth and in 2 Cor. 4. 16. 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8.
heaven it self: when the Crowns, Names, Fames of all my causeless malicious
Enemies, Adversaries, Persecutors, and all Enemies to our Laws, Liberties,
Privileges, Parliaments, Kingdoms, Church, Religion, shall fade, stink, perish
like dung, and be had in perpetual execration in all our three Kingdoms; yea,
my Bonds, Blood, Books, shall (I hope) through Gods own blessing on them, prove
SEMEN ECCLESIAE, REIPUBLICAE, REGNI, LEGUM, LIBERTATUM AC PALIAMENTORUM
ANGLIAE, in future ages, when their carcasses, who are public Enemies to, and
subverters of them, shall lie rotting in their Graves, and their Souls (without
sincere repentance) be scorching, roaring in infernal flames, if not rise up in
Judgment against and condemn them before all the Tribunals in Earth and Heaven,
both now and hereafter, at that Great Judgment-day, when I, they, and all
mankind shall and must 2 Cor. 5. 10, 11. Mat. 25 31, 32.
appear naked, upon equal terms (stripped quite of all armed Guards and earthly
Greatness, to secure them from being brought to Judgment) before the Tribunal
of Jesus Christ himself, (in the view of all the Holy Angels and Mankind) to
give an account of the things done in the body in this world, according to that
I and they have done, whether it be good or evil; When all Hypocritical Maskes,
Disguises, Carnal State-policies of pretended Necessity, Public Safety,
Danger, Justice; with all other Machiavilian unrighteous Practices to guild
over the most unrighteous, impious, oppressing, bloody, Treasonable, Perfidious
public Actions, will prove but so many Aggravations of Politicians Crying
Sins, and of their Eternal Punishments for them.

To draw toward a conclusion; I shall recommend to the whole English Nation
and all cordial well-wishers to the Prosperity, Peace, Settlement of our
distracted Kingdoms, Churches, and endangered Religion, either in or out of
power, these five Considerations more, which have deeply affected my Spirit,
and particularly engaged me in this undertaking, for their better information,
and our common preservation from total and final impendent ruin.

1. That Wa^sons Quodlib^ts 9. Quod. Art. 10. p. 332.
Father Parsons, the traiterous English Jesuit and his Jesuitical society some
years since prophesied, That they have it by revelation, that by special
commandment from God, their ORDER AND SOCIETY, was miraculously instituted for
this end, to work a DISMAL CHANGE amongst us: that the time is come, WHEREIN
ALL LAWS, CUSTOMS AND ORDERS MUST BE ALTERED, AND ALL THINGS TURNED UPSIDE
DOWN: and that they being the only men that have the name, office and
authority of Jesus, BY THEM IT IS, THAT THIS MAVELOUS CHANGE and ALTERATION
SHALL BE WROUGHT in such sort, Nota.
AS FROM THE BEGINNING OF THE WORLD WAS THE LIKE NEVER HEARD OF BEFORE, TO THIS
PRESENT. And may we not then justly suspect, fear, conclude, that all our late
dismal changes and turning all things upside down in our Church, State,
Kingdoms, Parliaments, were originally promoted, contrived by the Jesuits, and
effected by the seduced Officers and Soldiers, as their del^ded instruments?

2. That this Jesuit Parsons in his Books of the Reformation of all the States
of England, as he prescribed Reformations to the Prince, Court, Counselors,
Noblemen, Bishops, Prelates, Pastors, Universities, Lawyers, Laws, in which he
will have STRANGE METAMORPHOSES; so likewise, THE COURT OF PARLIAMENT HE WILL
HAVE BROUGHT TO BETTER FORM, as W. W. (a secnlar Priest) in A Dialogue between
a Secular Priest and a Lay-Gentleman, Printed at Rhemes, Anno 1601. Watson in
his Quodlibets, p. 92. to 96. 320. to 334. William Clark (a secular Priest in
his Answer to Father Parsons Libel, p. 75. etc.) in direct terms attest. And
may we not then justly suspect, that the late New-models and Reformation of our
Kingdoms, Parliaments, Government, Laws, etc. proceeded primarily from the
Jesuits Projections and Plots against them, if the Statutes of 23 Eliz. c. 1.
27 Eliz. c. 2. 35 Eliz. c. 2. 1 Jac. 1, 2, 4, 5, 7. 7 Jac. c. 6. and the
manifold Declarations of both Houses of Parliament, Exact Collection, p. 491,
462, 497, 498, 616, 631, 666, 698, 813, to 828. may be judges?

3. That the Jesuits drift directly is (immediately by means of Do not many
now boast, talk, write, of such a conquest ^y the Army ov^r England?
CONQUEST intended for England) to bring it and all Christendom into an uproar,
FOR COMMON SOLDIERS TO EXAMINE THEIR SOVEREIGNS, WHAT TITLE THEY HOLD BY; that
thereupon themselves by craft, money and multitudes gathered together through
their Policy, may bring England, (and then) Spain, and all the rest under their
subjection and Monarchy: And that principally by this Jesuitical Position, That
every Precopie, or Tartarian multitude, getting once the style and title of a
PUBLIC STATE, or HELVETIAN COMMONWEALTH, may alter, change and innovate the
course of inheritances and succession TO CROWNS AND KINGDOMS, and also to every
private Persons heritage holden in Fee-simple: as Quodlibets, p. 322, 323,
(...), 333.
William Watson assures us in these very terms. And whether the Jesuits have
nor instructed our Army Officers and Common Soldiers upon this pretext, and
for this very end, to examine their Sovereigns, yea, our Parliaments Titles,
Privileges, and Powers too of late, and dispose of them at their pleasure; let
themselves, the whole Nation, with all in present power, in the fear of God,
most seriously consider, without passion or affection, before it be over-late.

4. That the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance specially made and prescribed by
our most wise, zealous, 1 Eliz. c. 1. 5 Eli c. 1. 1 Jac. c. 4. 3 Jac. c. 4, 5.
7 Jac. c. 6. 18 Carloli. The Act for Tri^nnial Parliaments.
Protestant Parliaments, to prevent the Treasonable Plots and designs of Popes,
Jesuits, and Papists, against our Protestant Princes, Realms, Parliaments,
Religion, though confirmed by many Statutes, and containing in them only the
Declaration of such a Duty, as every true and well-affected Subject, not only
by the bond of Allegiance, but also by the COMMANDMENT OF GOD, ought to bear to
the King, his Heirs and Successors; and none but persons infected with Popish
Superstition formerly oppugned, (as the Prologue of the Statute of 7 Jacobi c.
6. positively resolves) have by late State-innovators, not only been
discontinued, suspended, but declaimed against and repealed (as much as in them
lay) as See the printed Edicts repeating them, and enforcing the Engagement An.
1649.
UNLAWFUL OATHS, See the Propositions for the Treaty.
The New Oath for abjuration of Popery, with all Bills against Jesuits and
Papists, presented to the late King by both Houses the last Parliament, and by
him consented to in the Isle of Wight, wholly laid aside, and quite buried in
oblivion. The Solemn Protestation, League and Covenant prescribed by the last
Parliament, and taken by all the well-affected in all the three Kingdoms (to
See the Preface to the Covenant.
prevent the dangerous plots of Papists and Jesuits, and our common enemies to
destroy our Religion, Churches, Realms, Government, Parliaments, Laws,
Liberties) quite antiquated, decried, detested, and a See the Edicts for the
Engagement, An. 1649.
New Engagement forcibly imposed under highest penalties and disabilities upon
all men, diametrically contrary to these Oaths, Protestations and Covenants,
which have been (by a new kind of Papal Power) publicly dispensed with, and
the people absolved from them, to become sworn Homagers to other new
self-created Lords and Masters. And are not all these, to considerate zealous
Protestants, strong Arguments of the Jesuits Predominancy in our late counsels
changes of Government?

5. That the Notion of THE PRESENT GOVERNMENT, (in my weak apprehension)
deriving its original from the Jesuites-late invented Bellarmin de Pontif.
Romano. Sir Humph. Linde his Via devi^.
PRESENT CHURCH, the only Supreme Power, and Judge of Controversies, which all
men must submit unto without dispute by their determination as they must do to
that present Republican Government, and new Optimacity, and Popularity lately
set up instead of our Monarchy. Which two forms of Government, as they were the
inventions of Factious Graecians at first, which put all their Cities into
Combustions, fury, frenzy, and civil wars against each other, to their utter
overthrow in conclusion, witness these verses of See Grotius de ^ure Belli and
Pacis, l. 3. c. 15. p. 537.
Heniochus an ancient Greek Comaedian:

Tum geminae ad illas accesserunt Mulieres (RITAS QUAE CUNCTA CONTURBARUNT:
OPTIMA- Est nomen alieri: alteri POPULARITAS; (RUNT. Quarum incitatu PRIDEM
EXTERNATAE FUso Watsons Quodlibets, p. 320, 321, 312, 332, 333.
Parsons, De Monar. Hisp. c. 25.
Campanella, Conte De Galiazzo, Gualdo Priorato part. 3. p. p, 165, 176.
Prorato Hist.
Cardinal Rech^li^u, designed to introduce and set them up amongst us in
England, Scotland and Ireland, of purpose to divide and destroy us by civil
wars and combustions, and bring us under their Jesuitical power at last, as the
marginal Authorities declare to all the world. And if this be undeniable to all
having any sense of Religion, Peace or public Safety left within their b^ests,
is it not more then high time for us to awake out of our former lethargy, and
sordid, selfish stupidity, to prevent our ruin, by these and other
forementioned Jesuitical practices? Or can any English man, or real Parliament
be justly offended with me for this impartial discovery of them? And for my
endeavors to put all the dislocated Members and broken bones of our old
inverted Fundamental body Politic into their due places, joints and postures
again, without which there is no more See 1 Cor. 12. 12. to 31. 25 H. 8. c. 22.
1 Jac. c. 1, 2. 3 Jac, c. 1, 2.
possibility of reducing it to its pristine health, ease, settlement,
tranquillity, prosperity, or of preserving it from per^ecual pain, inquieration,
consumption and approaching death, ther^of a natural body whose principal
members continue dis-joynted, and bones broken all in pieces, as all prudent
State-Physitians must acknowledge.

These five Considerations, together with the Premises; will I presume
sufficiently justify this my undertaking and impartial discovery of Jesuitical
Plots to ruin our Church, Religion, Kingdoms, Parliaments, Laws, Liberties,
Government, against all malicious Enemies, Accusers, Maligners whatsoever,
before all the Tribunals of God or Men, where I shall be ready to justify them
upon all occasions. In perpetual testimony whereof, I have hereunto set my
Hand, and by God's Grace shall ever be ready to seal them and the truth of God
with my blood, if called out to do it.

Swainswick, Aug. 12. 1654. Will. Prynne.

A Legal and Historical Vindication of the Fundamental, Rights, and Laws of
England.
CHAP. III.
I Have in the two precedent Chapters fully proved, That the Kingdom, and
Freemen of England have some ancient hereditary just Rights, Liberties,
Franchises, Laws and Customs properly called Fundamental, together with a
Fundamental Government, no ways to bealtered, undermined, subverted directly
or indirectly to the public prejudice, underpain of high Treason in those who
shall attempt it, especially by fraud, force or armed power; and given you
likewise the heads of the chiefest of them in X brief Propositions. I shall now
in the third place proceed, in a Chronologicall way, to present you with a
large Historical Catalogue of the several National, Parliamentall, Legal,
Martial public and private contests, great Charters, Laws, Statutes, Votes,
Declarations, Remonstrances, Claims, Records, Evidences, Writs, Oaths, Vows,
Protestations, Covenants, Excommunications, Confirmations, Judgments,
Resolutions, and principal Authorities in all ages, both under the ancient
Britons, Saxons, Danes, Normans and English Kings, till our present times;
plentifully, undeniably evidencing, declaring, vindicating, asserting,
establishing, perpetuating these Fundamental, Hereditary Rights, Liberties,
Privileges, Franchises, Customs, Laws: and abundantly manifesting the
extraordinary zeal, courage, wisdom, and vigilancie of our Ancestors, to
defend, preserve and perpetuate them to posterity, without the least violation
or dimin^tion.

I shall begin with the highest Antiquities extant in our Histories, pertinent
to my Theme, and so descend to those of punier times, relating all of them for
the most part (except here and there where the identity of the subject matter
and desire of brevity occasion me to vary somewhat from this intended method)
according to their Antiquity and Chronologicall series of time, referring such
particulars of them as relate to each of the forementioned X. Propositions in
the second Chapter, only with figures in the margin, designing the several
Propositions unto which they have more immediate reference; without reducing
these Historical Collections to distinct heads under every Proposition in
order, as I have proposed them; which course would have interrupted my
Chronologicall Method, and caused a frequent repetition of sundry passages,
Charters, Acts, Oaths, Records, relating to several of these Propositions for
the most part, not to one of them alone, which I shall now avoid by affixing
the number of single Proposition whereunto they refer in the margin,
eachwherewith the Reader may easily compare them, with more delight, and as
much satisfaction, as if I had marshalled them all in rank and file under those
distinct Propositions whereunto they have relation. As for those Historical
passages which contain the several public Parliamentall or Martial contests
of our Ancestors, with their Kings and other invading Nations, for their
Liberties, Rights, Laws, Customs, and great Charters in the general, I have
annexed no figures unto them, every of them for the most part, referring to all
or most of these Propositions in gross, though not particularly specified in
these contestations for them.

And because I intend for the better confirmation of our ancient Fundamental
Liberties, Privileges, Freedoms, Rights, Laws, Government, and greater
benefit of Posterity, briefly to pass through the several successive Reigns
and Dominions of the Britons, Romans, Saxons, Danes, Normans, as well as of our
English Kings since the Conquest (as we usually style it) whereon I shall
principally insist, as of greatest, nearest concernment to us of this
generation, I shall for order sake, divide this Chapter into distinct Sections:
the rather, because the largeness of it may occasion the Stationer to publish
it (as he did the two first Chapters) in several parts, as they shall be
Printed, the completing of the whole requiring longer time (in respect of my
remoteness from the Press, and the largeness thereof) then the present
usefulness of each part, and the longing desires of some Readers after it,
would willingly allow for its publication in one whole volume, which every man's
purse who desires it, cannot so easily purchase in these necessitous times, as
it may do in parcels.

SECTION I.
Concerning the Ancient Britons contests for their Liberties and Laws, against
Tyrants, and Invaders of their Fundamental Government Rights, and of their
great Councels till the Romans Couquest.
IT is agreed by all our Historians, that the Britons were the original known
Inhabitants of this Island, from whom it was styled Britain; but from what
foreign Nations the Britons descended, our Antiquaries differ in opinion: our
later writers herein dissenting from those of former ages, with whom I must
begin.

Most of our Heur. Huntindon hist. l. 1. p. 1. Galfr. Monum. hist. l. 1. Math.
Westminster. Flores Hist. Aetas 3. p. 23, 24. Ponticus Virunnius hist. l. 1.
Polychronicon, Fabian, and sundry others.
ancient Historians, and the whole famous Parliament held at Lincoln, Anno 28
E. 1. (in the learned Walsingh. Hist. Angl. p. 49, etc.
Letter therein compiled and agreed to be sent by the King to Pope Boniface, to
prove the subjection and homage of the Kingdom and Kings of Scotland from time
to time to the Kings of England Iure Dominii, as Supreme Lords thereof, by
Historical precedents in former ages, collected out of all Histories and
Records then extant) unanimously record, That the Britons originally descended
from the Trojans; that they arrived here in Britain about the days of Ely the
Priest, under Brute their first King, who divided it at his death into three
distinct parts and Kingdoms between his three Sons; leaving that part thereof
now called England (then Loegria) to Loerinus his eldest Son and his Heirs, as
an hereditary, not elective Kingdom, according to the custom of the Trojans;
Tho. Walsingham. Hist. Angl. (...). 1232. p. 50.
Petebal enim Troana consuetudo, ut dignitas Hereditatis primogenito
perbeni^et, as our Historians; and that whole Parliament of 28 E. 1. resolve.
So that an Hereditary Kingdom and Monarchical Government by Kings, was the
original Fundamental Government settled in this Island by Brute; and that as
well in those parts thereof since called Scotland and Wales, as England, which
all our Galfr. Monum. hist. l. 1. c. 11. Math. West. Floreshist. p. 16, 17.
Ponticus Virunn. hist. l. 1.
Historians, asserting this original of the Britons unanimously attest, with
that answer which Diana gave unto Brute before his arrival in Britain, when
she directed him to come and seat himself therein, further evidenceth, if we
may give any credit hereunto.

Brute sub occasu Solis, trans Gallica Regna
Insula in Oceano est, undique clausa mari:
Insula in Oceano est habitata Gigantibus olim,
Nunc deserta quidem, Gentibus apta tuis.
Hanc pete, namque tibi seeds erit illa perennis,
Hic fiet natis altera Troja tuis.
Hic de prole tua reges nascentur, and ipsis
Totius terrae subditus orbis erit.
With this concurreth the more authentic testimony of See Camd. Brit. p. 29,
30.
Cornelius Tacitus; The Britons heretofore were governed by Kings; now they are
divided by petty Princes into Parties and Factions: with that of Pomponius
Mela, Britain brings forth Nations, and Kings of Nations.

The very first act that made their first King Brute most famous before his
arrival in Britain, Galfr. Monum. hist. l. 1. c. 4, to 12. and Math. West. p.
14, 15, 17, 18.
was his delivering of 7000 Trojans, his native Countrymen (with their wives
and children) from their Servitude and Bondage under King Pandrasus and the
Graecians, whom he vanquished and took Prisoner in Battle, and thereby restored
them to their lost Liberty. Proposit. 5, 6, 9.
After which Victory, Brute major^^ na^u convocavit, assembling the Elders of
the People (in nature of a Parliament) demanded their advice, what he should do
with Pandrasus, and what things and conditions he should for their benefit
demand of him, which he would willingly grant being in their power. Whereupon
some advised him to demand a part of his Kingdom for them freely to inhabit:
others counseled, rather to demand of him free liberty for them all to depart
thence, with accommodations for their voyage to seek another habitation
elsewhere; others advised to bring Pandrasus forth and to put him to death, and
seize upon his Realm, in case he refused to grant their demands. At last
Mempritius, a great Counselor standing up said, Regem interficere cupiditate
Dominandi nefas mihi videtur, cum omnibus licitum sit pro patria pugnade; To
slay a King out of a desire of reigning in his stead, seems a wickedness unto
me, seeing it is lawful to all men to fight for their Country: (this was the
Divinity and Morality of the very Pagan Britons in that age) Whereupon I rather
advise, that we should demand his eldest daughter from him as a Wife for our
Captain Brute, and a good sum of Gold and Silver with her for her dowry, with
Ships and all other necessaries for our jouruey, and free license to transport
our selves to some other Country, because we can never hope to live peaceablely
there, seeing the Children and Nephews of those which we have newly slain in
these Wars, would meditate revenge. To the which, Tota Multi^udo acquievit,
all the Multitude assented; and Pandrasus to save his life and gain his
enlargement, willingly condescended to, Proposit. 5. 10.
furnishing them with Ships and Provisions. With which Brute and all his
associates arriving at Totnes in Albion, seating themselves there, Brute from
his name styled this Island Britain, and his Companions Britons, destroying
those few Giants which formerly possessed it; and then building a City which he
styled Troy-Novant (now London) dedicavit eam civibus jure victuris, deditque
legem qua pacifice tractarentur.

In this History of our first British King Brute, we have these 5. remarkable
particulars;

1. A War to shake off Slavery, and recover public Liberty.

2. A kind of General Parliamentary Council summoned by Brute, of all the
Elders of the Britons, to advise of Peace, War, and of their common safety
and affairs.

3. A resolution against killing even a Tyrannical oppressing King, taken in
the field in Battle, out of Covetousness to enjoy his Crown and Dominions, as
a most wicked act.

4. A settling of an hereditary Kingly Government in this Isle upon the very
first plantation of the Britons in it.

5. Laws made and given to the people, whereby they might live peaceably
without injury or oppression.

This Kingdom descended in lineall succession from Brute and his Posterity, to
Galfr. Monum. Hist. Reg. Brit. l. 2. c. 11. Ponticus Virunnius hist. Brit. l.
2. Mat. Westminster. p. 27, 28.
Leir Son of King Bladud, who reigning 60. years, and having only three
Daughters, Consilio procerum Regni, by the Counsel of the Nobles of the Realm
(assembled in Parliament) gave two of his Daughters in marriage to the Dukes of
Cornwall and Albania, with one Moiety only of the Island whiles he lived, and
the whole Monarchy of Britain after his death. After this, Porrex slaying his
elder Brother Ferrex to get the Crown, was slain by his own Mother and her
maids for his Treason and Fratricide; whereupon civil discord arising a long
time, the Kingdom thereby was subjected to five several Kings, who infested
one another with mutual slaughters, till Gildas hist. c. 19. Galfr. Monum. l.
2. c. 17. Math. West. p. 51. 52. Tho. R^dburni Chron. Dr. Usher De Brit.
Eccles. Primordiis. p. 127, 128. Fox. Acts and Monuments Vol. 1. p. 211. 212.
Ponticus Virunmus Brit. hist. l. 2.
Dunwallo Molmutius succeeding his Father Clotho King of Cornwall in the Crown,
slaying the usurping Kings of Loegria, Wales and Albania, reigned alone over
them (about the time of Nehemiah) After which he enacted certain Laws, called
Molmutine Laws; which for many ages after were very famous and generally
observed among the Britons; yea used, commended by the Saxons and English, and
inserted into Edward the Confessors Laws, being famous till William the
Conquerours time. What these Laws were in particular, in relation to the
Liberty and Property of the Subject, appears not; but the issue proves, that
they tended to public peace, and preservation of the Subjects persons and
estates from violence. For in his Reign after these Laws published (for
confirmation whereof he built the Temple of Concord in Troynovant, where he was
afterward buried) Latronum mucrones cessabant, Proposition 2. 4. 5.
Raptorum saevitiae obturabantur, nec l^erat usquam qui violentiam alicui
ingereret; The swords of thieves ceased, the cruelties of Plunderers and
violent takers of men's Goods and possessions were prevented, neither was there
any to be found in any place, who would offer violence to any man. Moreover he
ordained, That the Temples of the Gods, and Cities, and the ways leading to
them, and the Ploughs of Husbandmen should enjoy the privileges of
Sanctuaries, so as every person who fled unto them through guilt or otherwise,
might depart quietly with leave and without arrest before his enemy.

After his death (about 400. years before our Saviors Nativity) his two Sons
Brennus and Belinus, by consent divided his Kingdom between them; till Brennus
the younger Son, (h) Galfr. Monum. hist. l. 3. Ponticus Virunnius. Brit. Hist.
l. 3. Math. Westminster. Aetas 5. p. 53. 54.
aspiring after the Monarchy of the whole Island, was vanquished and expelled by
his Brother into France. In which War Gurthlac King of Denmark, ayding
Brennus, was taken Prisoner by Belinus, Qui convocavit omnes Regni proceres,
etc. who called together all the Nobles of the Realm to York, consilio eorum
tractaturus, to debate by their Council (in nature of a Parliament) what he
should do with Gurthlac, Proposit 5. 9.
who proffered to submit himself with his Kingdom of Denmark to him, to pay
him an annual Tribute, and to ratify this agreement by his Oath, and sureties
for his enlargement and ransom* Proposit 5. 6 9*
Whereupon the Nobles Resolved, that he should be enlarged upon this condition,
which was done accordingly: Convocatis proceribus cum id judicatum fuisset
assensum prebuerunt cuncti; that he should be enlarged upon these conditions,
as the Marginall Authors record. After which King Belinus obtaining the
Government of the whole Island, Confirmed his Father Molmutines Laws, commanding
upright and stable Justice to be done throughout the Land, and the ways to the
Temples to be marked out in all places with stones, that they might not be
ambiguous, being privileged from arrests and violence. This King addicting
himself constantly to Justice, the people thereby became more wealthy in few
years, then ever they had been in former times. After this Brennus arriving
with an Army out of France to recover his right; Belinus being ready to
encounter him in a set Battle, their Mother mediated a Peace between them,
Proposit* 9.
whereupon they lovingly embraced each other: and going to Troinovant, inito
concilio quid agerent; having there hold a Council what they should do, they
Resolved to send a common Army to conquer France, and other Forain parts, which
they put in execution. Here we have matters of War and Peace, and Laws
concluded and ratified in and by a Parliament of Nobles in this age.

King Galfr. Monum. and Ponticus Virunn. hist. Brit. l. 3. Math. West. Aetas.
5. p. 5. 6. Fox Acts and Mon. vol. 1. p. 211, 212.
Guithelin, to whom the Crown lineally descended from Belinus, married Martia a
Noble woman, learned in all arts, who invented the Law which the Britons called
Martiana; which King Alfred approving, translated into the Saxon tongue and
called it Marchen Leage. King Edward the Confessor making use of it in the
collection and compiling of his Laws, hereafter mentioned. Though this Queen
first invented this Law, no doubt it was ratified by public consent of the
King her Husband, and the Nobles in their general Council in that age, else
it could not have the force of a Law, by her bare penning of it. Proposit. 5.
Gorbonius grandchild to Guithelin and Martia coming to the Crown by descent,
governed his people most justly according to these forecited Laws, it being
his continual custom, to give due honor to the Gods in the first place, and
then to administer right justice to the people. He encouraged Husbandmen in
their tillage, and defended them from the injuries of their Lords; and he
enriched his Soldiers with gold and silver, so as none of them had need to do
any injury or violence to any other.

Galfr. Monum. hist. Brit. l. 3. c. 16, 17. Math. West. p. 56, 57, etc.
Ponticus Virunnius l. 3. Fabian, Holinshed, Grafton, Speed in their lives.
Archigallo his Brother succeeding, degenerated from him in all his actions;
for he endeavored every where, Nobiles quosque deprimere, to depresse all that
were Noble, and to advance ignoble persons, to take away rich men's goods and
money by violence, thereby heaping up infinite treasures: which the Nobles of
the Realm refusing to endure any longer, rose up against and deposed him from
his royal Throne, creating his brother Elidurus King in his stead. He, after
five years reign, meeting his deposed brother in a wood as he was hunting, ran
to him, embraced, kissed and brought him to his own royal Bedchamber
privately, and then summoned Proceres omnes et principes, all the Nobles and
Princes of the Realm to come speedily to his City of Alclud; who repairing
thither, he saigning himself to be very sick, commanded every of them one by
one, to come into his Bedchamber to visit him: which they thus doing, he
threatened presently to cut off all their heads as they entered singly, unless
they would consent to submit themselves again to Archigallo as their Sovereign;
which they, through fear of death assenting to, he made an agreement between
them, and then carrying him to York, took the Crown from his own head, and set
it on his brothers Archigallo. For which memorable self-denying pious act to
his brother, he was styled Elidurus pius. Archigallo upon his restitution
corrected his former errors, deposed all ignoble persons, advanced the
Nobility, permitted every man to enjoy what was his own, (l) Galfr. M^num. hist
l. 3. c. 19. Ponticus Virunnius l. 3. Math. West p 67
and administered right justice to his people.

Ennianus his Son (King after him) treating his Subjects ill, was deposed by
them from the Throne of the Kingdom, because he contrarying justice, preferred
Tyranny; Edwallo being made King in his place: who instructed by his
Predecessors oversights, Jus atque rectitudinem colebat, followed Law and
rectitude, as did others of his successors.

Our Galfr. M^num and Ponticus Virunnius hist. Brit. l. 4. Math. West. p. 66,
67. Fabian, Holinshed, Grafton in the life of Cassibelan.
Histories record, that about 54. years before our Saviors birth, Julius
Caesar having conquered France, espying Britain from thence, having learned the
name of the I Will and Nation, sent messengers thence to Cassibelan King of
Britain, exacting with threats an annual Tribute from him and the Britons to
be paid to the Roman Senate, as well as from other Naiions, else he should be
enforced to transport his Army and shed their blood. Whereupon Cassibelan
returned this answer to him in writing.

Cassibelanus King of the Britons to Cajus Julius Caesar, Mavelous, O Caesar,
is the covetuousnes of the Roman people, who thirsting after gold and silver in
all places, cannot suffer us placed beyond the World, within the perils of the
Ocean, to be quiet, but presume to affect our Tribute and Revenues, which we
have hitherto peaceably possessed. Neither verily will this suffice, unless
renouncing our Liberty we shall make subjection to him; and thereby undergo
perpetual servitude; therefore Caesar thou have demanded A shameful thing;
seeing the vein of common Nobility flows from Aeneas, both to the Britons, and
Romans, and one and the same bond of kindred, lives still in both, whereby they
ought to be knit together in firm amity. This therefore should have been
required of us, not servitude, because we have learned, rather to give this
then to bear the yoke of Servitude. For we have been so much accustomed to
enjoy Liberty, that we are altogether ignorant what it is to obey Servitude.
Which Liberty if the Gods themselves should endeavor to take from us, verily
we would strive with all our might to resist them, that we might retain it. Be
it known therefore to thee Caesar, That we are prepared and resolved to fight
for it, and for our Realm, if, as thou have threatened, thou shall begin to come
upon the Isle of Britain.

Hereupon C^sar preparing his Navy and Forces, arrived with his army at the
mouth of Thames: the Britons though at civil wars among themselves before,
upon this necessity, united themselves together to oppose the Romans, and
communi consilio, (as Comment. l. 5. John Stow his Survay of London p. 2.
Speeds Hist. of Great Britain p. 48.
Caesar himself and others write) by common advice and assent, (in a Parliament
of that age) elected Cassibelan for their General, and committed the managing
of the Wars to him: who gathering the whole strength of the Britons together
consilium querens a Principibue Regni, as some, and a proceribus suis,
Proposit. 5. 9.
as others record; taking council with the Princes of the Realm and his
Nobles, how to re^^e the enemies, they resolved to resist their Landing, and to
assault them in their tents, before they had fortified themselves, or taken any
Town, and so to repel them. Which advice they pursuing, opposed their
landing, and forced the Romans that were landed to their ships, and compelled
Caesar to return into France, as our British Historians assert, though Caesar
in his Commentaries, to cover his dishonor, relates the contrary. The year
following Caesar recruiting his Army landed again in Cornwall, and was repulsed
by Cassibelan the second time with great loss. Whereupon Cassibelan joyful of
his victory, returning to Troinovant, Edictum fecit, ut omnes proceres
Britannie Convenirent, made an Edict, that all the Nobles of Britain should
assemble together at Troinovant, to offer public praises and Sacrifices to his
Gods, who had made him to triumph over so great an Emperor as Caesar: At this
assembly, Evelin Nephew to Androgeus Duke of Trionovant, playing with Herelgas
Nephew to Cassibelan, upon a sudain quarrel between them, cut of Herelgas
head; at which the King being very angry, commanded Evelin to be brought before
his presence, and to be ready, sententiam quam proceres Dictarent, Proposit. ^.
or talem sententiam quam proceres Regni judicarent subire, to undergo such a
sentence and judgment as the Nobles and Peers of the Realm should pronounce,
that Herelgas might net remain unrevenged, in case he were unjustly slain.
Androgeus suspecting the Kings mind toward his Nephew, answered, Se^e suam
curiam habere et in illa diffiniri debere, Or, si quis adversus aliquem suorum
querimoniam haberet, as others render it,
quicquid aliquis in homines suos clamaret: Si ergo rectitudinem Evelino
decrevisset appetere, ipsum in urbe Troinovanto ex veterum traditione
recepisset. That he had his own Court, and that in it what ever any one
complained of against his men, ought to be determined, therefore if he decreed
to desire justice against Evelin, he might receive it in the City Troinovant,
according to the custom of the Ancients. Upon this answer, they departing
discontented one from another, Cassibelan threatened to invade and waste
Androgeus his Country withfire and sword, unless he delivered up his Nephew to
justice; which he peremptorily refusing, Cassibelan wasted his Country
accordingly, notwithstanding all his entreaties by his kindred and friends to
divert him from it. Hereupon Androgeus sent messengers to Caesar, complaining
of this ingrate and injurious violence, and craving assistance from him against
Cassibelan, (who endeavored to disinherit him of his Country by whose means
he had inherited his own, and gotten the victory over the Romans) promised to
join his forces with him, and so make him Lord of all Britain, if he would by
his power restore him to his former dignity and possessions: for which he
giving Hostages to Caesar; he thereupon returning into Britain routed
Cassibelan and his whole Army by Androgeus his means, and besieged him in a
steep mountain to which he fled, where he was very likely to be taken prisoner
in a few days by famine. Cassibelan thus destressed, sent to Androgeus, to
remit the former injuries he had done him, and to make his peace with Caesar.
Upon which he returning to himself, taking pity on his own nation, and
Sovereign, though he had done him so much injury, repaired and used these
memorable words to Caesar.

Behold thou have sufficienily revenged thy self upon Cassibelan, and subjected
Britain to thee by my assistance; Noluerunt dii omnipotentes nostri, ut Dominum
meum morte turpissima condemnnari, aut vinculis patiar irretiri. Habeto igitur
misericordiam de eo; Quia me vivente ipse periolitari non poterit, cui auxilium
meum reddere non erubescam, nisi consilio meo parueris. For our omnipotent Gods
will not that I should suffer my Lord and King to be condemned to a most
shameful death; or to be bound in Chains. Have mercy therefore upon him;
because whiles I live he shall not be in danger, to whom I will not be ashamed
to contribute my aid, unless thou will obey my counsel. (O the memorable
faith and Loyalty of this much oppressed, injured Noble Pagan Briton, to his
Sovereign in his distresses, notwithstanding all his former injuries and
oppressions, worthy all heroic Saints and true Christian Loyal English
Subjects imitation, and shaming some strange extravagant contrary practices of
late times!) Upon which speech, Caesar being pacified, made this agreement with
Cassibelan: That he should promise to render to Caesar and the Romans, three
thousand pounds of silver every year, by way of Tribute. And so being made
friends they bestowed mutual gifts on each other. After which Caesar wintering
in the Island, returned in the Spring with his Army into France, and from
thence marched toward Rome against Pompey.

From these few passages of the ancient Britons, before and till the Roman
Conquest, it is apparent;

1. That the ancient Fundamental Government of the Britons in this Island, was
only an Hereditary Kingship and Dominion. And although, about Caesar's time,
they had many petty Kings and Kingdoms, yet those Kings had the style, honor,
power of Kings, within their respective Kingdoms, and were hereditary, as
Tacitus, Dion, and others cited by See Camd. Brit. p. 15, 29, 30, 32, 35, 41,
43, 44, 48, to 53. Speed Hist. p. 47, to 51. Dr. Usher de Brit. Eccles.
Primordiis c. 4.
Mr. Camden attest, as well as our British stories.

2. That the British Kings were obliged to govern their subjects justly, and
righteously, according to the established Laws of those times, which secured
their Liberties, Properties, Goods, Lives against all violence and arbitrary
Tyranny, Rapines, Taxes.

3. That the Sea Ca^nd. Brit. p. 15, 30.
Britons had their national Councels or Parliaments, consisting of their
Kings, Princes and Nobles, wherein they consulted of all weighty affairs,
concluded of War and Peace, and enacted and confirmed public Laws. And the
rarity of these Common-Councels (by reason of their intestine discords) was the
greatest help and advantage the Romans had to conquer them, as Tacitus observes
in the life of Agricola.

4. That they had Legal and proper Courts for trying all differences and
malefactors according to their Laws and ancient Customs and trials by their
Peers.

5. That they were very zealous careful and, courageous to defend their
Liberties, Properties, Laws against all Tyrannical oppressing Kings,
Usurpatio^s and forain Invaders, and to spend their lives in their defense, not
enduring Slavery, Bondage, or Tributes.

6. That their Nobles were persons of greatest power, had in great respect, and
consulted with by their Kings upon all occasions, as their Great Council, they
doing nothing of moment but by their advice and consent.

7. That though they were stout opposers of Tyrannical oppressing Princes, yet
they were very Loyal and obedient to those who were just, and never offered
violence to any of their persons, whom they deposed for misgovernment. And so
much concerning the ancient Britons before and till their begun Conquest by
Julius Caesar, before our Saviors Nativity 54. years.

SECTION II.
Concerning the Britons Contests and Wars against Tyrants and forain Invaders
for their Liberties, Couutry, Laws, and their Great Councels (or Parliaments)
from Caesar's Conquests, during the Romans Dominion, and until the Saxons
supplanted them, and succeeded in their places.
AFter the death of Caesar and Cassibelan the Britons continuing for a time
under the Government of their own hereditary Kings Galfr. Mon. hist. l. 4. c.
11. Ponticus Virun. l. 4. and Mat. West.
Tennancius the next succeeding King, though he was warlike, yet vigorem
Justitiae colebat, he executed Justice vigorously. Kymbelinus his Son succeding
him, being educated by Augustus Caesar, fell into so great friendship with the
Romans, ut cum possit Tributum eorum detinere, gratis impendebat; that he
freely bestowed their Tribute on them, when as he might have detained it, being
imposed on Cassibelan only by power of the invading sword of Caesar without
right, which bound neither him nor the Britons in Justice or conscience, both
Caesar and Cassibelan being dead. In the 5. year of his Reign our Savior
Christ was borne.

In the Galfr. Mon. l. 4. c. 13. to 17* Ponticus Virun. l. 4. Mat. West. ann.
22, 44, 57,
22 year of our Saviors Nativity Guiderius succeeding his Father Kymbelinus,
Anno Dom* 22, 44, 52.
refused to render the accustomed tribute to the Romans, which none of his
Ancestors from the time of Julius Caesar durst to refuse. Hereupon Anno Christi
44. the Emperor ^laudius with a great Army invaded the Island, to conquer and
reduce it under Tribute, who was encountered and routed by Guiderius at the
first, but he being afterward slain by the policy of Laelius Hamo, the Britons
being likely to lose the field, Arviragus the slain Kings brother, putting on
his Arms, encouraged the Britons so, that they forced the Romans to forsake
the field. Claudius afterward besieging Arviragus (who succeeded his brother)
in Winchester, they fell to a treaty. Claudius proffered Arviragus, that he
should marry his daughter, and hold the Kingdom of Britain peaceably from the
Romans under the ancient Tribute; upon which, suaserunt majores natu Arbiago
promissionibus Claudii acquiescere; The elders (assembled no doubt in council
about it) persuaded Arviragus to consent to Claudius his promises, for they
said, it was no disgrace to him to be subject to the Romans, seeing they
enjoyed the Empire of the whole; world: Paruit Arviragus and consilio suorum
Cesari subjectionem fecit: Arviragus obeyed, and by the advice of his council
did homage to Caesar. Anno Christi 52. Arviragus refused to be any longer
subject to the Roman power, or to pay them Tribute. Whereupon Claudius sent
Vespasian to reduce him to obedience; who after one battle fought with great
loss on both sides, came to an agreement. After which John Trivianth, Malmesb.
and others, cited by Bishop Usher de Brit. Eccles. Primordiis c. 4. Mat. Pa^^.
Anti. Brit. p. 3, 4*
Anno 63. Joseph of Arimathea with XI. more of Phillips Disciples arrived in
Britain, and preached the Gospel boldly; to whose Preaching Arviragus (cum
proceribus suis) with his Nobles and People, hearing such new and unaccustomed
things, utterly refused to consent to their Doctrine, neither would they change
the traditions of their Fathers; yet because they came from far, and their
lives held forth modesty and meekness, the King at their Petition, granted
them the Isle of Glastonbury, then horrid and untilled, surrounded with woods,
bushes and lakes, to inhabit. Which grant his two next successors Marius and
Coillus, Mat West. ann. 73. 78. Galfr. Mon. l. 4. c. 17, 1^. Pontiens Virnun.
l. 4.
(who exercised Justice and Law, reverenced the Nobles of the Realm, and paid
the Tribute to the Romans, because all the world was subject to them,) by his
example confirmed; giving to each of them one hide of Land a piece (to this day
called the 12. hides of Glastonbury) confirmed to the Abbey of Glastonbury,
afterward by the Charters of many of our Christian Saxon Kings, ratified in
their great Councels and Parliaments.

By these passages it is clear, That Taxes and Tributes not granted and
assented to in Parliament, though imposed by a Conquering Invader, bind not
the Nation, or succeeding Kings. That matters of Peace and War were
determined in Common-Councels and Parliaments in that age; That no public
change in Religion or Customs could be made without the Kings and Nobles
consents; and that the grant of the King of any Crown Lands without common
consent in Parliament, bound not his successors, unless they specially
confirmed them by their new Charters.

How many bloody Battails with various success the ancient Britons under the
conduct of their Kings and Queens fought against the Roman Emperors, Claudius,
Vespasian, and their Generals, Officers and Forces after Julius Caesar's time,
for defense of their Native Liberties, Rights, Laws, Government, Country, and
to exempt themselves from all Tributes, Taxes, Purveyances, imposed on, or
exocted from them by the Romans. How impatient they were of bearing any Taxes
or Imposts, they never knowing what Servitude was, being borne only for
themselves, and always free unto themselves, free from all contagion of
Tyranny. How often they revolted from, and rebelled against the Romans from time
to time for their Oppressions, Taxes, turning them out of their ancient
inheritances by force, and using them rather like Slaves then Freemen. You may
read at large in Cornelius Tacitus, Annal. l. 14. and in the life of Agricola,
in Mr. Camdens Britannia, p. 24, to 48. Speed, Holinshed and others, and more
especially in the notable speeches of Caractacus and Galgacus, encouraging the
Britons manfully to fight for their Country, Liberty, Laws, etc. recorded in
these Authors; the later of them thus justly taxing the Romans Usurpation,
Ambition, Covetousness, Rapines and Tyranny in these words; Tacitus in vita
Agricolae. Camd. Brit. p. 58
Robbers they be of the world, who having left no more land to spoil, now
search also the Sea. If their enemies be rich, they covet their wealth; if
poor, they seek to gain glory; to Is not this our condition now?
take away by main force, to kill and spoil, they falsely term Empire and
Government: when they lay all wasie as a Wilderness, that they call Peace.
That every man should hold his own children and blood most dear, nature has
ordained: and even those are pressed for Soldiers and carried away to serve as
Slaves elsewhere; our substance they draw from us for Tribute; our Corn for
provision; our very Bodies and Lands they wear out and consume, in paving of
Bogs, and ridding of Woods, with a thousand stripes and reproachful
indignities besides. Slaves yet, which be born to bondage, are bought and sold
once for all, and afterward fed and found at their own expenses. But Britain
daily buyeth, daily feeds, and is at daily charge with her own Bondage. And
as in a private retin^e of household Servants, the fresh man and last comer is
laughed and scoffed at by his other-fellowes, even so in this old servitude of
the whole World, our destruction only is sought, as being the latest and vilest
in account of all other, etc. We as yet were never touched, never foiled, never
subdued; as men therefore that mean to maintain their Freedom, not for the
Present but for ever, let us show straightwayes in the first joining, what
manner of men, Caledonia reserved in store for her self, etc. It is not by
their own virtue, but by our jarrings and discords that yet the Romans are
grown into fame: to our shame be it spoken, many of our own Nation, now lend
their lives to establish a forain Usurper, not out of any loyal affection, but
out of fear and terror, weak linkes and bonds of love. Remove but them once,
those who shall cease to fear, will soon begin to hate. The free Cities are
discontent and in factions, while those who are under them, obey with ill will,
and they that do govern, rule against right. Here is the General, and here is
the Army; there are the Tributes, here be the metal mines, and other miseries
inseparably following them that live under the subjection of others; which
either to continue or endure for ever, it lies this day in this field.
Wherefore as you are going to Battle, bear in your minds, both the Freedom of
your Ancestors, and the Bondage of your Posterity. Upon which Speech they
manfully sought with the Romans, preferring their Liberties before their lives.

About the year of Christ 50. the Romans extraordinarily oppressed the Britons
under Claudius the Emperor. An. Dom. 50. Tacitus Annal. l. 14. Speeds Hist. of
great Brit. ^. 66, to 70. Camd. Brit. p. 49 50
Laetus Decianus their Procurator, renewed the confiscation of their goods,
which Claudius had pardoned. The Roman Colony at Camolodunum, thrust out the
ancient Inhabitants, seating themselves in their possessions, without any other
recompense but reproachful terms, calling them, their drudges, slaves and
vassals, Proposit. 1. 4.
and the Temple there erected in honor of Claudius, was now become an eyesore
to them, as an Altar of their perpetual subjection, whiles the Augusta^l
Priests there attending, wasted all their wealth under pretext of Religion. And
that which was their greatest grievance, Prasutagus King of the Iceni, famous
for his riches, which he had been a long time gathering, by his will made
Claudius and his own two daughters his heir; thinking by his flattery to make
his Kingdom and house sufficiently secure from Injury: which fell out quite
contrary: for his Kingdom by the Roman Centurions, and his house by Slaves was
seized on and spoiled as lawful booty, his wife Boadicia whipped, his
Daughters deflowred, the chiefest persons of that Province dispossessed of
their lawful Inheritance, and the Kings kindred reputed and used as slaves.
Hereupon the Icenians began seriously to discourse of their present bondage and
miseries, made subject to a Lieutenant, which sucked their blood, and to a
Procurator that sought their substance, Is not this Englands condition now?
whiles with a servile fear they yealded to please the meanest Soldier, as
though the Heavens had framed them only for servitude, and the earth appointed
to bear their injuries unrevenged; and meeting together in secret
consultations, they ripped up their wrongs and oppressions, and aggravated them
to the highest, saying, that no other good was to be looked for by their
sufferance, but that more grievous burdens should be imposed upon them still,
as men ready to bear all willingly, etc. That the Roman Soldiers from whose
unsatiable avarice and unbridled lust nothing was free, were but a handful in
respect of the Britons: that if they would but endeavor to follow the prowess
and valor of their Ancestors, and not be dismayed with the doubtful success
of one skirmish or two, they would soon enforce them to recede out of the
Island, etc. In fine they resolved, That Liberty was to be preferred though
bought with their lives, and Bondage to be avoided if not otherwise then by
their deaths. Whereupon choosing Boadicea for their Leader, they suriously fell
upon the insulting oppressing Romans, slew no less then seventy thousand of
them and their confederates, sacked and plundered their free Town Verolamium,
resolving to extirpate and drive them out of the Island. Upon this Suetonius
the Roman Governor collecting all the Forces he could raise against her, She
made a most gallant encouraging Oration to her Britons, thus aggravating their
oppressions. What abuse can be so vile that we have not suffered, or indignity
so contemptible, that we have not borne; my stripes, yet felt and seen against
their own Laws, do witness well what Government they intend. Your wealth is
consumed by their wastfull wantonness, your painful travels upholding their
idleness, do seal the issues of our succeeding miseries, if not timely
prevented by one joint endeavor. You that have known the Freedom of life will
with me confess (I am sure) that Liberty (though) in a poor estate, is better
then fetters of gold; and yet this comparison has no correspondency in us, for
we now enjoy no estate at all, nothing being ours but what they will leave us,
and nothing left us that they can take away; having not so much as our very
heads tole free. Other subdued Nations by death are quit from Bondage, but we
after death must live servile and pay tribute even in our graves. Have the
heavens made us the ends of the world, and have not assigned us the ends of our
wrongs? Or has nature among all her free works created us only Britons, for
bondage? Why, what are the Romans? are they more then men, or immortal? Their
slain carcasses sacrificed by us, tell us, they are no Gods. But you will say,
they are our Conquerors. Indeed overcome we are, but by our selves, our own
factions still giving way to their invasions. Our dissersions have been their
only rising, and our designs been weakened by homebred Conspiracies. We have as
much to keep as birthright can give us, that is, our Island possessed by our
Ancestors from all antiquity; ours by inheritance, theirs by intrusion, claims
so different in the scale of Justice, that the Gods themselves must needs
redress. Whereupon the Britons fighting valiantly, lost eighty thousand of
their lives to redeem their Liberties; and Boadicea seeing her Army routed,
chose rather, out of a noble spirit, to end her life and miseries together by
poison, then to live under the Roman bondage and see her Country languish under
their intolerable oppressions.

About the year of our Lord 179. An. Dom. 185.
(or rather 185.) Mat. West. An. 185. 187. Galfr. Mon. l. 4. c 19, 20. l. 5. c.
1. Ponticus Virun. l. 4, and 5. Lambards Archai^n. Bish^p Jewel reply against
Harding Artic. 3. div^s. 24. p. 141, 142. Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 5, 6. Fox
Acts and M^n. vol. 1. Spelm. Council. p. 32, 34, 35 Haris^ns Desc^ip. of Brit*
l. 1. c. 9. Godwin Conversion of Brit. Dr. Usher de Eccles. Brit. Primordiis c
3, 4* 5. Holinshed, Speed, Grafton* Stow in the life of Lucius.
Lucius King of Britain (who succeeded his Father Coillus by descent) being
converted to the Christian faith with most of his Nobles and Subjects (the
first Christian King and Kingdom in the world) petitioned Pope Eleutherius (as
the marginall Authors testify) Ad Petitionem Regis, et procerum Regni
Britannie (assembled no doubt in a general Council when they made and sent
this Petition) to send a copy of the Imperial Roman Laws to govern the people
by: who returned the King this answer in writing.

You have requested from us, that the Laws of Rome and Caesar might be sent
over, which you desire to use in the Realm of Britain. The Roman and Caesar's
Laws we may always reject, but the Law of God in no wise. You have received of
late through Gods mercy in the Realm of Britain, the law and faith of Christ;
y^u have with you in the Realm both Testaments, out of them by Gods grace, per
consilium Regni vestri sum ^egem, by the Council of your Realm take a Law,
and by it through the patience of God govern your Realm of Britain; For you are
Gods Vicar in the Realm* etc. The Kings children are the Christian Nations who
live and consist in the Realm under your protection and peace, according to
that in the Gospel, As the hen gathers the chickens under her wings; the
Nations and people of the Realm are yours, which being divided you ought to
congregrate into one, Proposit. 5.
t^ reduce to concord and peace, and to the faith and Law of Christ, and to the
holy Church; to foster, maintain, protect, govern and always to defend from
injurious and malicious persons and from enemies. Woe to the Realm whose King
is a child, and whose Princes eat in the morning. I call not a King a child
from his Nonage, but for his fol^y, iniquity and madness, according to the
royal Prophet, Bloody and deceitful men shall not live out half their days,
etc. A King is denominated from ruling, not from a Kingdom. Thou shall be a
King while thou rulest well: which unless thou shall do, the name of a King
shall not appear in thee, and thou shall lose the name of a King, which God
forbid. Almighty God grant you so to rule the Realm of Britain, that you may
reign for ever with him, whose Vicar you are in the Realm aforesaid.

This Epistle shows, Proposit. 5.
that the power of making Laws was vested only at that time, in this Popes
judgment, in the King and his great Council of the Realm, and that Kings only
ought to rule and govern their people righteously, according to the Laws of God
and the Realm, as Gods Vicars upon earth, and to protect them from all
violence, wrong and enemies. Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 6.
Matthew Parker Archbishop of Canterbury, thus comments on this Epistle: That
in condendis legibus, in making Laws, the King needed not the Popes authority
or assistance, having the books of the old and new Testament, out of which
adhibito procerum consilio, by the Counsel of his Nobles, Proposit. 5.
he might take holy Laws, without any error, being sufficiently supported with
his own, not a forain authority he being Gods Vicar in his own Realm; and
representing his power to his people. After which, this King (by advice and
consent of his Princes and Nobles) built and endowed many Churches with Glebes
and Lands, abundantly confirming them with Charters and Muniments, and likewise
ordained, that Churches and Churchyards should be so free, that no Malefactor
or other persons flying to them, should be arrested, or suffer any violence in
them.

King Mat. West. anno 201.
Lucius dying without heir (Anno Dom. 201) thereupon discord arose amongst the
Britons, An. Dom. 201.
which gave great advantage to the Romans; who thought at first they Tacitus in
vita Agricolae. Camd. Brit. p. 43
suffered the British Kings to reign under them, making them the instruments of
their own and their peoples slavery, by their compliance with the Romans; yet
at last perceiving, that diverse of th^se British Kings, Math. W^st. anno 201.
Balaeus Cent. 1. Scrip. Brit. c. 30. Boethius l. 5 hist. Scotorum. Fo^don.
Scotichronicon. l. 2. c. 31. Dr. Usher de Eccles. Brit. Primordiis. c. 3. p.
43, 44. Spelm. Council. p. 35. Camd. Brit. p. 47, 49, 62, 63, 67, Tacit. Annal.
l. 14.
to regain their own and their peoples Liberties, did often times rebel and
raise up wars and seditions against them: Thereupon after King Lucius his
death* to keep the Island in greater quietness and subjection under them, they
made a decree, That none of the British blood or race should from thence forth
be invested with royal dignity in the Isle; (as the principal means to keep
them in perpetual slavery) and instead of one King, they placed over the
Britons in every Province First, a Lieutenant with several Is not this in a
great part our present condition?
Garrisons of horse and fo^t, who disarmed all the Natives they suspected,
sucked the peoples blood, and vexed them with Soldiers and Contributions. Next
a Procurator and Publicans* who like greedy^Cormorants and horse-leeches,
confiscated their goods, preyed upon their estates, and vexed them with
perpetual exactions, extortions and reproachful abuses. Also a Praetor and
Proconsul, with absolute power and commission to govern them after the Roman
Laws, (not permitting them to use the ancient Laws of their Country) and to
minister Justice in all capital matters with great pomp and severity. So that
the Roman Laws were now only in use and force amongst the Britons, which a
learned Poet thus expresses,

Cernitis ignotos Latia sub lege Britannos.

And withal they endeavored, constantly to nourish discord and division
amongst the Britons themselves, and by these wily Policies kept them in
subjection under them, who yet upon all occasions and advantages endeavored to
shake off the Roman yoke, and restore their native Liberties, Laws, Government
with the hazard of their lives, as our Historians largely relate.

About the year of Christ 286. An. Dom. ^^6.
Carausius a Briton, having gotten a Commission from Rome, Mat. West. ann. 292,
etc. Galfr. Monum. l. 5. c. 3, 4, 5, 6. Ponticus Virun, l. 5. Holinshed,
Fabian, Grasion, Stow, Speed.
to defend* the Sea coasts of Britain from the incursions of barbarous Nations,
raising great forces under that pretext, promised the Brit^ns, That if they
would choose him for their King, he would expel the Romans, and free the whole
Island from the Barbarians: Whereupon they all consented and made him King;
upon which he denied to pay the Romans their accustomed Tribute. The Senate
being informed hereof, sent Alectus into Britain to reduce it; who joining
battle with Carausius, slew him, and made a great slaughter of the Britons,
because they revolted from the Roman republic, and subjected themselves to
Carausius; who preferred their liberties before their lives. Alectus taking
upon him the royal Diadem was soon after slain with most of his Roman
Soldiers by Asclipiodorus Duke of Cornwall and the Britons fighting to regain
their Liberties; who crowned Ascl^piodorus King by common consent: He ruled
them for X. years with right justice, restraining the cruelty of Plunderers and
swords of Robbers, and freed them from the Roman tribute. Coel Duke of
Colchester slaying him, and making himself King; the Romans having lost their
tribute for above ten years space, sent Constantius into Britain to reduce it
under obedience: who no sooner landed, but Coel hearing of his great fame, and
victories in other parts, sent Ambassadors to him, craving peace, and promising
subjection, which he accepted of, exacting nothing but the usual tribute. Coel
deceasing shortly after* leaving one only daughter Helena to inherit the
Kingdom, Constantius married and begot upon her that famous Constantine the
Great.

This Emperor Pomponius Laetus, and Speeds History.
Constantius Chlorus, An. Dom. 302.
coming into Britain to govern it about the year of Christ 302. finding the ill
effects of others tyranny and rapine, showed himself very loving, gentle,
affable and kind to the people, little regarding his private profit, Proposit.
1.
but altogether reigning to enrich his subjects: and to that end would often
say, (I would our late and present Tax-imposing Governors would remember it)
That it was more behoovefull for the public, that the wealth of the Land
should be dispersed into the Commons hands, then to lie locked up in Princes
coffers (or in such a Common Treasury, Anno 313.
as our new Projectors have provided for it by the 28, 29. Articles of their
Ill-sounding instrument, after which they would have us henceforth dance.)

The Sea Beda Eccles. hist. l. 1. c. 6. Math. West. ann. 313. p. 131. Gildas.
de Excid. Britan. Zonaras, Paulus, Dia^conius and others in his life
Emperor Constantine the Great, his Son (borne and crowned both King and
Emperor in Britain) amongst other good Laws, made these two memorable ones, for
the relief of poor Christians injuriously banished, and deprived of their
Lands, and Goods by Diocletian, Maximinian, Licinius and other persecuting
Pagan Roman Emperors, about the year 313. wherein he restored the banished
Christians to their native Countries, Lands and former dignities, as the
Marginall Authors witness. Which Laws are recorded in See Eusebius. Eccles.
hist. l. 3. c. 15.
Eusebius de vita Constantini, l. 2. c. 30, 31. The first of them, is
entitled, A Law for fre^ing (or relieving) banished men; to this effect.
Therefore all those who being brought under the cruel sentences of Judges, at
what time soever it befell them, have been compelled to change their Country by
exile, because they neglected not what made for the honor of God and Religion,
to whom they had consecrated themselvos with the whole powers of their souls:
All these, I say, being restored both to their hereditary Possessions, and
their accustomed tranquillity, may give thanks to God the setter free of all
men. Proposit. 2.
And those who having been deprived of their Goods, and oppressed with the
loss of their Estates, have hitherto lived a most contemptible life, these
being likewise restored to their former houses, families and goods, may
cheerfully praise the beneficencie of God, who is best and mightiest. The
second inscribed, A Law reducing those who were banished into Islands, in these
words. Moreover we command, that those who are now detained in Islands against
their wills, shall enjoy the benefit of this our provision and care; to wit,
that whereas hitherto they have been shut up on every side in the narrow cliffs
of mountains, and environed with the raging waves of the Sea, being now freed
from that bitter solitariness, utterly repugnant to the nature of men, they
may return again to their most beloved friends. And whereas they have lived a
long time in a filthy sordid and odious condition, having obtained a return,
as a sudain and unexpected booty, and being freed from cares and troubles, they
may hereafter live a life void of fear, under our Empire.

In the year of grace 376. An. Dom. 379.
Math. West. anno 376, 379.
Octavius King of the Britons dying without issue male; leaving one only
daughter, there fell out a difference among the Britons, to whom they should
marry her, with the Kingdom; Proposit. 5.
at last in the year 379. Magnates Britannie, the Nobles of Britain, that they
might obtain a firm Peace concluded (no doubt in a general Council) to send
Ambassadors to Rome, to tender the Lady with the Crown to Maximian a Roman
Senator, Son of Leolin a^Briton, Uncle to Constantine the Great; Hist. Regum
Brit. l. 5. c. 9, 10, 11, 12.
Geoffry of Monmouth and his Epitomizer Hist. Brit. l. 5. See Fabian,
Holinshed, Grafton.
Ponticus Virunnius thus relate the story. That King Octavius being old and
having one only Daughter, quesivit a consiliariis suis, demanded of his
Counselors, whom they desired to advance to be King after his decease?
Proposit. 5. 10.
Whereupon some of them advised, that he should bestow his daughter, together
with the Realm, on some of the Noble Romans, to procure a firm peace. Others
advised, that Conon his Nephew should be installed in the royal Throne of the
Realm, and his Daughter with gold and silver married to some forain Prince.
Whiles these things were debating, Caradoc Duke of Cornwall came in, and gave
his advice, that they should invite Maximinian the Senator, descended of
British and Roman, as well as royal blood, to come into Britain to marry the
Kings Daughter, and with her the Realm, whereby they should enjoy perpetual
Peace. Which Conan for his own interest opposed, but major pars Laudabat, the
major part of the Nobles approved it, and consented thereunto. Whereupon
Caradoc sent his Son Maurice to Maximinian, who related to him, that Octavius
being aged and sick, desired nothing more then to find out such a person of
honor, on whom he might bestow his Kingdom with his daughter, consiliumque a
proccribus suis quesivit; and that he had demanded counsel from his Nobles, to
whom he might marry his only daughter, with the Crown; That the Nobles in
obedience to his command, Decreverunt ut tibi Regnum et puella concederetur,
had decreed that the Kingdom with the Damsel should be granted to him, and that
they had decreed he should come and give him notice thereof. Whereupon
Maximinian embracing the offer, came into Britain, and landed at Hampton, with
a great train of Soldiers; Proposit. 3.
the King suppofing them to be an Army of Enemies, commanded all the forces of
the Kingdom to be assembled and march against them, under Conan; which
Maximinian admiring at, and unable to resist them, sent Ambassadors to Conan
with olive branches, telling him, they were sent from Rome to the King, and
required peace till they knew his pleasure. And when Conan doubted whether to
give them Peace or Battle, Caradoc Duke of Cornwall and the rest of the
Nobles dissuaded Conan from fighting with them, and advised him to grant them
Peace, which he did: who being brought to London to the King, he, communi
consensu, by common consent of his Nobles gave his Daughter with the Kingdom
to Maximinian.

By which it is apparent, that the King without consent of his Nobles in
Parliament, could not dispose of his Daughter nd their to the Crown, nor of his
Kingdom to another; That the Nobles in that age, were the Kings great Council
and Parliament of the Nation, and that the major part of them swayed all
businesses, in their Councels by the majority of voices: the ends for which I
relate it.

In the year 390. Mat. West. ann. 39^, 391, 392, 420, 4^1, 434, 435. Galfr.
Monum. and Ponticus Virun. l. 5, and 6. Fabian, Holinshed, Speed, Grafton,
Gildas de Excidic Brit. Malmesbur. de Gestis Regum Angl. l. 1. c. 1. Camd. Brit.
Maximus the Tyrant King of Britain, Anno 390, etc.
invading Armoric^ in France, carried such a multitude of Soldiers with him out
of Britain, that he left almost all Britain empty of Soldiers and Forces to
defend it, carrying all the Soldiers and Warlike young men with him, leaving
none but unmanly and country people behind him; and having subdued all
Armorica that year, he styled it little Britain. The next year he sent for one
hundred thousand Britons more to people it, and thirty thousand Soldiers out
of Britain to garrison the Towns, and the next year he sent for eleven
thousand Virgins, and sixty thousand other persons, to be transported into
little Britain; whereby old Britain was almost quite dispeopled, and left
destitute of all defense. Hereupon the Huns and Picts invaded and infested the
Britons very much, slaying the Britons and wasting their Cities and Towns: the
Britons sending to Maximus for assistance, he sent Gratianus a Senator with two
Legions to aid them, who slew many of the enemies, and chased the rest into
Islands. Anno 392. Maximus being slain at Rome, thereupon Gratianus taking upon
him the Crown of Britain, made himself King thereof, after which he exercised
so great Tyranny toward the Britons, that the common geople gathering together
slew him. Whereupon the former expulsed enemies returning, oppressed and
afflicted the Britons very much for a long time. Upon this the Britons, Anno
420, and 421. sent to the Roman Emperors for aid to expel these invaders,
which they sent accordingly, but in small proportion, who chasing away the
enemies for the present, then encouraging and teaching the Britons how to
defend themselves, and make walls and Fortifications to resist their invasions,
returned back again by reason of other Wars: Upon this, their former enemies
infested them more then formerly. As last, Anno 434. in the 8. year of
Theodosius the younger, the Romans by occasion of other Wars withdrew all
their Soldiers out of Britain, leaving the Britons destitute, like so many
sheep without a Shepherd, exposed to the Wolvish cruelty and depredations of
the Picts, Scots, Norwegians, Danes, who forced them to fly from their Cities
and Houses into Woods, Mountains, Caves, Rocks, and there to hide themselves
from their bloody fury. In this distress they sent Messengers to Rome with
this short mournful relation of their lamentable condition. Anno 434.
Agitio ter Consuli, Gemitus Britonum, salutem: Nos mare ad Barbaros, and
Barbari ad mare propellunt: Inter haec autem duo funerum genera oriuntur, aut
enim submergimur, aut jugulamur. The Messengers returning without any aid from
Rome, which was denied them, and relating to their Countrymen their sad
repulse, the Britons taking counsel together, Proposit. 5. 9.
how to redeem themselves in this forlorn estate, withheld the payment of
their ancient Tribute to the Romans, which they had a long time paid them: and
sent Guithelin, Archbishop of London, to their Brethen in little Britain for
aid; Anno 455.
where being honorably received by King Androenus, he acquainted him with the
cause of his coming, and the great miseries and distresses of his Countrymen,
pressing him with many arguments, to go and receive the Kingdom of Britain,
which of right belonged to him, and expelling the Barbarians, to dispose of it
at his pleasure, and restore his Country to it pristine estate, which had
formerly subdued to it Kingdoms far remote. To which the King answered, I
formerly would have accepted of this offer of the Kingdom of Britain, but in
respect of its present misfortunes, it is made more contemptible to me, and
odious to my Princes. But above all other evils, the Roman power has so much
prejudiced it, that no man can enjoy a stable dignity within it, but be must
lose his liberty, and be burdened with a yoke of servitude; and who would not
possess less elsewhere, with liberty, then enjoy the wealth of Britain under
a yoke of bondage? Notwithstanding because my Grandfather and great Grandfather
have enjoyed that Island, I will deliver to you my Brother Constantine with
2000. Soldiers, which by Gods permission will free the Country from enemies,
and being there crowned King, shall possess the Kingdom with glory and
honor. Whereupon Constantine undertaking the expedition, the Archbishop used
these words to him; Christ has conqueted, Christ reigns, Christ commands,
let the grace of Christ be therefore present with our King of Britain, who is
our defense, our hope, our joy, that he may restore the miserable Island to its
pristine liberty. Constantine taking shipping arrived at Totnes with 2000.
Soldiers, to whom the dispersed Britons creeping forth of their holes and dens
where they hid themselves, repaired from all parts; and fighting with their
enemies, obtained a great victory over them by the diligence and valor of
their new King. Proposit. 5.
After which facta in Cicestria concione, calling an assembly at Chichester,
they made Constantine King, and gave him a wife extracted out of the lineage of
the noble Romans educated by Guithelin.

Anno 445. King Constantine being slain by a Pict, An. Dom. 445, to ^98.
(suborned by Vortigerne) as he was hunting, Mat. West. ann. 445. to 498. Will.
Malmesb. de Gestis Regum l. 1. c. 1. Galfr. Monum. and Ponticus Virun. hist.
Reg. Brit. l. 6, 7, 8 H^my Huntind hist. l. 2. Ethelwerdi hist. l. 2. Antiq.
Eccles. Brit. p. 9, 10. Fabian, Holinshed, Speed. Grafton, Stow, in the lives
of Vertigerne and Aurelius Ambrosius.
there arose a dissension among the Nobles, which of them should be made King;
for Aurelius Ambrosius and Other, the Kings Sons, were sent over into little
Britain to be educated, and if they had been present, they could not reign by
reason of their childhood. Whereupon Vortigerne Consul of the Gewis^i, who
aspired after the Crown with all his endeavor, going to Winchester, and taking
Constans a Monk (Son of Constantine) out of his Cloister, brought him to
London, and there made him King, the people scarce consenting to it, because he
was a Mo^k: and acting the part of a Bishop (Guithelin being dead) he set the
Crown on the Kings head with his own hands. The King thus crowned referred the
managing of all affairs to Vortigerne alone Have not others of late times done
the like?
who craftily committed all the Castles and Forts of the Realm to his own
Soldiers, and having gotten all the Forts and Power of the Realm into his own
hands, he cunningly devised, how he might destroy the King and get the Crown
for himself. Whereupon, he seized upon the Kings treasures, augmented the
number of his Soldiers and servants, and persuaded the King to intertain a
Guard of one hundred Picts (who were at his own command, and ready to execute
any Treason and treachery he should prescribe them) to guard his person day and
night from enemies. The King at his persuasion entertaining these Picts,
Vortigerne so enriched them with stipends, and feasted them with most delicate
meats, that they did in a manner adore him, and aryed openly through the
streets, that he was worthy to Reign. When he had thus highly ingratiated
himself in the favor of them all, he made them all drunk on a certain day, and
then told them with tears, that he would depart out of Britain, seeing he had
not enough of his own to maintain 50. Soldiers. After which, departing as it
were sorrowful to his lodging, he left them drinking in the hall; which the
Picts hearing of, murmured one to another, saying, Why do not we slay the
Monk, that Vortigerne may enjoy the throne of the Kingdom? Rising up
therefore, being drunk, they made an assault upon the King, and slew him, and
brought the Kings head to Vortigerne. Which when Vortigerne understood, he
feigning himself to be very sorrowful, brake forth into a weeping, that he
might palliate the treason committed under the veil of tears. Then calling the
Citizens of London together, he acquainted them what had happened, and commanded
those Picts to be slain and beheaded, that he might render his own fraud
exeused from this wicked act. At last when he saw no man equal to himself, he
set the Crown of Britain on his own head and overwent all the Princes. He being
thus advanced, the contagion of all wickedness began to increase: scurrilous
wickedness, hatred of truth, contempt of God, wrangling, contention, riot,
villainy grew outrageous; so as Vortigerne alone might seem to be a vessel of
all wickedness, and that which is most contrary to royal honesty, Nobiles
Deprimens, depressing the Nobles, and advancing ignoble persons both for
manners and blood, he became odious to God and Men. Anno 447. When the iniquity
and levity of mind of King Vortigerne was divulged to all Nations round about,
Anno 447.
the Scots and the Picts (one hundred of whose fellow Citizens Vortigerne had
slain for that Treason which he suborned them to act that he might get the
Crown) rose up against him, and most grievously infested him and impunged the
Realm of Britain: for consuming all things with the sword, fire, preyes and
rapines, they ground to powder the sinful Nation, because it favored this
Usurpers royal estate; and thus the common people contaminated together with
the King, communi percellitur ultione, is pierced through with a common
revenge. And as the sword devoured many on the one hand, so the Pestilence did
more on the other, so as the living were not sufficient to bury the dead. The
King therefore with the desolated people, tired out with warlike incursions,
not knowing what he might do against the irruptions of their enemies, inclined
to desolation; for Vortigerne hereupon awaked with the cries of the people,
assembled a Council (or Parliament) to consult what they should do in this
public distress, requiring the advice of his Nobles therein. Proposit. 5. 9.
Which our Historians thus relate, Super statu publico in medium consulit
sententias magnatum suorum explorans. So William of Malmesbury. Britanni
injerunt consiium quid agendum; so Henry Huntington; and Ethelwerdus, placuit
omnibus cum rege suo Vortigermo; or as Ethelwardus records it, Concessit tota
Nobilitas, etc. At last they all agreed, and all the Nobility together with
King Vortigerne granted and resolved, that they should call in the Saxons and
English out of Germany to their aid, being valiant in arms, and then fixed in
no settled place; by which they conceived they should reap a double benefit:
for being invincible in arms, they would easily repulse their enemies; and
being unsettled, they would reckon it for a very great benefit if they might
receive some barren squalid soil and cliffs to inhabit; and that they would
never attempt any thing against them, or their Country, because the memory of
benefits would mollify the genuine fierceness of their manners. Which advice
appears to be ordered by divine providence (write Matthew Westminster and
others) that evil might come upon these evil Britons and their bloody
Usurper. This Counsel being approved by all, they sent eminent men Ambassadors
into Germany, who might worthily represent the person of their Country. The
Germans hearing the business, which they of their own accords desired,
requested from them with a thousand entreaties, presently sent over Hengist and
Horsa with three Ships fraighted with Soldiers and Arms; Explentes petitionem
Regis Senatusque. The King upon their arrival meets them, bestows rewards and
the people large favors on them: then giving them their faith, they received
the Isle of Tanoth to inhabit. This agreement likewise was made between them,
That the English and Saxons with invincible labors should defend the Country
against their enemies, and that the Britons should pay them their military
stipends, for whose safety they pretended to watch. And thus they received pay
and Lands from the Britons, Quasi pro patria pugnaturi, re autem vera
expugnaturi susceperunt, (as some of their profession and progeny have done of
latter years) These English and Saxons (who arrived Ann. 449.) soon vanquished
and drove the Scots and Picts out of the Realm, Anno 449.
and then taking notice of the Kings and Britons idleness, lewdness, and the
riches of the Isle, Hengist acquainting the rest of his Countrymen therewith,
sent over for more forces by degrees, and for his daughter Rowena (a very
beautiful maid but a Pagan) whom he married to Vortigerne, whereby he incurred
the enmity of his Nobles and Sons, and thereupon favored the Saxons (who
promised to establish him in his Throne against his enemies) more then the
Britons, bestowing all Kent and Northumberland on the English and Saxons. Upon
this the Britons growing jealous lest their new Gardians and Protectors should
utterly supplant, extirpate and disinherit them of their native Country by
degrees (as they did in the conclusion) they all petitioned Vortigerne, to
banish them out of the Realm, being Pagans, who ought not to communicate with
Christians; but he contemning suorum consiliis acquiescere, to follow the advice of his Nobles and native Subjects, Anno 454.
thereupon Magnates Britannie, the Nobles of Britain, Anno 454. deserting, and
then depriving Vortigerne of his Royal Power, Proposit. 5.
made his Son Vortimer King. Qui consiliis suorum in omnibus acquiescens, who
following their Counsels in all things, began to expel the Saxons, and to
restore the Britons to their possessions, which the Saxons had invaded,
repairing likewise the Churches and Christian Religion, which they had almost
quite ruined, till at last he was poisoned by Rowena his Mother in Law, Anno
460.
Anno 460. cum quo simul spes and victoria Brtionum est extincta, and retro
fluxerint. Such an incomparable loss is a good King to a Nation. Vortimer
being thus poisoned, Vortigerne reassuming the Crown, sends privately to
Hen^ist into Germany, to come over to him with a small train, lest coming
otherwise the Britons should resist him with their united forces. Hengist An.
461. lands with 4000 armed men, which being related to Vortigerne and THE
NOBLES OF THE REA^M, they were very angry at it, resolving to give him battle;
of which Hengist being informed by Ro^ena, excused the matter, that he came
with so great a force for fear of Vorti^er, whom he thought to be alive, but
being now (...) of his death, he would commit himself and his people to the
Kings disposal, to return or send away to (...) then as he should direct,
desiring him to appoint (...) and place, Proposit. 9.
UT HAEC (...) CONSENSU, that these (...) by common consent: Whereupon the
(...) appointed a meeting at (...), for the (...) and Saxons to treat: Hengist
(...) all the Saxons that went to the Treaty, to (...) under their Garments,
and upon a Signal given (...), that every one of them should kill the Bri^on
that (...) next him: Whiles they were treating, Hengist took hold of
Var^^iger^^es cloak (which was the signal) upon which the Saxons drawing out
their Knives, suddenly sl^w about 460 of the (...) NOBLES, BARONS, and Whom we
usually now call Earls
CONSU^S, being unarmed, and suspecting no such thing; but Consul El^^^*
beholding the Treachery, took up a Stak^, which he there found by chance, and
with it slew 70. Saxons, till his Stak^ was quite spent, and then saved himself
by flight. The King they took Prisoner, enforcing him to grant them Kent,
Sussex* Suffolk, and Norfolk, which he confirmed to them with an Oath, and
then they rele^sed him: After which they wast^d most of the Ki^gdom with fire
and sword, pulled down Churches, slew the Pr^^sts, burned up the Books of the
holy Sc^ipture, leaving nothing undone, that Tyranny could effect; and forced
Vortigerne, with m^st of the Britons, to retire into Wales for shelter in the
M^^^taines. The Britons thus distressed by the Saxons under this bloody Usurper
(who first called them in, and under hand encouraged them against the Natives)
Anno 464. sent Messengers into Little Britain to Aurelius Ambrosius and Vt^r
Pendragon (then of full age, and right heirs to the Crown) to come speedily
over to them, with what forces they could raise, to expel the Saxons, and the
Usurper Vortigerne, and receive the Crown and Kingdom of Britain, of right
belonging to them: Who thereupon arriving with great forces, Anno 466: the
Britons repaired from all parts to Aurelius Ambrosius (the elder Brother) and
assembling the Clergy, forthwith crowned him for their King. Which done, the
Britons exhorting him, in the first place, to assault the Saxons; the King
mindful of the Treason done to his Father and Brother by Vortigerne, refused
to do it, till he had first destroyed this bloody Traitor: Whereupon marching
with his Army to Gen^rium a Castle in Wales, wherein Vortigerne was, he spoke
thus to his Captains. Consider most noble Captains, if these walls of this
Tower can pr^tect Vortigerne, who has wasted a fertile Country, destroyed holy
Churches, almost deleted Christianity from Sea to Sea, and that which I think
is more to be lamented, HAS BETRAYED MY FATHER and BROTHER. Now most Noble
Countrymen play the Men, and in the first place revenge your selves on him, by
whom all these things have come to pass, and after that turn your arms upon
your Saxon Enemies. Presently upon these words, they endeavored to throw down
the Walls with diverse Engines. At last when other things failed, they put fire
to the wooden Walls, which taking hold on them, burnt both the Tower and
Vortigerne to ashes, as some record: whereas others write, it was done with
fire and lightning then sent from heaven by God upon him. The bloody Usurper
being thus destroyed, this King and the Britons valiantly encountered the
Saxons, slew many thousands of them in sundry battles against Hengist and Ella,
whom they routed and chased throughout the Realm. This King in his march,
finding the Churches every where destroyed to the ground by the Saxons, Anno
468. sent for Workmen, and caused them to be new built, placed Preshyters and
Clerks in them, restored divine Service to its due state, utterly destroyed
the profane Temples and Idols of the Saxons, blotting out their memory from
under heaven: Moreover, he studied and commanded to observe Justice and Peace
to Churches and Churchmen, conferring many Gifts on them, Proposition 3.
out of his Royal bounty, with ample Rents; commanding all to pray for the
prosperity of the Realm and State of the Church. The year following, by his
Letters directed to all the Coasts of Britain, he commanded all who could bear
Arms speedily to repair to him, and to endeavor to exterminate the Pagans out
of the confines of Britain. Whereupon all of them being assembled together, he
marched with them against Hengist and the Saxons; after a bloody battle Hengist
was taken Prisoner by Duke Eldol (forementioned) and his whole Army routed.
Proposition 9.
The King upon this victory, coming to Gloucester, calling his Captains and
Nobles together, commanded them to resolve, WHAT OUGHT TO BE DONE CONCERNING
HENGIST? upon which Eldad Bishop of Gloucester, brother to Duke Eldol,
commanding all to be silent, grinding his teeth for anger, said: Although all
would set this man free, yet I will hew him into pieces. O effeminate men, why
do ye demurre? Did not Samuel the Prophet, when he hewed the King of Amaleck,
taken in war, in pieces, say, As thou have made many Mothers childlesse, so
will I this day make thy Mother childlesse among women? So do ye likewise
concerning this other Agag, who has bereaved many Mothers of their Children.
Upon which words, Eldol drawing forth his sword, led Hengist out of the City,
and cutting off his head, sent him packing to hell. After this CONVOCAVIT REX
CONSVLES ET PRINCIPES REGNI EBORACVM, The King called the Consuls and Nobles of
the Realm together to York, and commanded them to repair the Churches the
Saxons had destroyed, himself building the Cathedral there. Then marching to
London Anno 490. Octa and the other Saxons unable to withstand his power,
submitted to him, confessing his God to be stronger than their Gods; with whom
he made this agreement, that they should leave Kent, and those other places
they possessed, and seat themselves in a Country near Scotland, which he gave
them. Then going to Ambri, he caused great stones (there remaining to this day)
to be set up as a Monument, Proposition 5, 6
for the Noble Britons there treacherously slain. Where he holding A COUNCIL
WITH HIS BISHOPS, ABBOTS and OTHER NOBLES, was Crowned again on Whitsunday, and
granted the Metropolitical Sea of York, then void, to Sampson; and that of the
City of London to Dubritius, and likewise REGNVM DISPOSVIT, LEGESQVE RENOVAT;
set the Kingdoms in order, and renewed the Laws. After this he and the Britans
had many battles with the Saxons, to defend and recover their Country,
Liberties, Laws; till at last he (...) tr^yterously poisoned Anno 497. whose
death the B^itons (...): cum quo simul MILITIA ET (...) B^^TONVM EXPIRAVIT, as
Matthew Westminster, and others write.

From this memorable Story of Vortigerne, Aurelius Ambrosius, and the Britons,
and Saxons, these particulars are observeable.

1. That the British Kings in those times, debated all their weighty affairs,
and concluded all matters touching War, Peace, and the public defense of the
Realm against invading Enemies, in Grand Parliamentary Councils, in which they
likewise made Laws and Edicts.

2. That the Princes, Dukes and Nobles ^ere the only or principle Members of
the Great Councils of the Realm in those days, by whose advice all things were
managed.

3. That Traitors to and Murderers of their lawful Sovereigns, usurping their
Crowns, bring commonly great fearful Judgments on the whole Kingdom and
Nation, in case they comply with them therein.

4. That Vortegernes Treason in murdering his Sovereigns, and usurping their
Crown, was the occasion of, and punished with the long-lasting Wars with the
Picts and Saxons; yea, the original cause of the great revolution of the
Government, Kingdom and Country of Britain from the Britons to the Saxons.

5. That although a bloody usurping Traitor may reign and deprive the right
heir of the Crown of his right for many years, yet his reign is usually full
of wars, vexations, dangers, troubles, his end tragical, and the right heir
called in and restored by the people themselves at last, as her^ Aurelius
Ambrosius was after 21, years usurpation of his right: and Joash in the
seventh year of Athaliah's usurpation. 2 Chronicles. 23.

6. That usurpers are apt to depresse the Nobility, and oppress the Natives of
the Realm, for fear they should oppose their T^ranny and dethrone them.

7. That a^l Heresies, vices, contempt of God and Religion, usually s^^ing up
and overspread the Realm under Usurpers, who give public countenance to them
to please all sides, to suppo^^ u^just authority over them.

8. That it is See Heylins Microcosme, p. 756, 757 718 394, 412, 5^7 177, 178,
642 672, 709.
very dangerous to call in foreign Forces upon any necessity into a Kingdom,
as assistants, who commonly prove worse Enemies in conclusion, than those they
are called in to (...).

9. That all Mercenary Guards and Soldiers (especially Forraigners) are for
the most part very Treacherous and Perfidious, for^ibly suppressing
supplanting, destroying those Princes and Nations they are hired to guard and
protect.

10. That lawful hereditary Kings are the chiefest Patrons of Gods Ministers,
Churches, Religion; and the death of such (then religious, just, valient) the
greatest loss and misery that can befall a Nation.

11. That all Subjects are obliged to defend with their arms and lives, their
Native Country and lawful Kings against Invaders and Usurpers.

12. That the worst of Kings and Usurpers, in cases of extreme danger, are
enforced to all Common Councils, and to crave the advice and assistance of
their Nobles (as Vortigerne did here) as well as the justest Kings.

Aurelius Ambrosius dying by poson, without Issue, Anno Dom. 498.
Anno 497. Galfr. Monum. l. 8 c. 17, 18, etc. Math. Westminster. An. 497 etc. Authors.
Other Pondragon his Brother, and next heir, posting to Winchester, assembled
the Clergy and People of the Realm thither, and took upon him the Crown of the
Realm; which done, PRAECEPIT OTHER CONSVLES SVOS AT QUE PRINCIPES AD SEVOCARI,
VT CONSILIO SVORVM TRACT ARET, QVALITER IN HOSTS IRRVPTIONEM FACERENT:
Proposit. 5, 9.
Other commanded his Consuls and Nobles to be called to him, that by their
advice he might debate, in what manner they should assault the Enemies.
whereupon they all assembling in the Kings presence, upon mature debates, they
all agreed to the advice there propounded by Gorlois; and encountering the
Saxons, slew many of them, routed the rest, took some chief Commanders
Prisoners, and put them in Prison at London, whether the King repaired. The
feast of Easter approaching, REX PRAECEPIT PROCERIBVS REGNI IBI CONVENIRE. The
King commanded all the Nobles of the Realm to assemble TOGETHER AT LONDON, that
wearing his Crown, he might celebrate the holy day with due honor. ALL
PRESENTLY OBEYED, and the King celebrated the Festivity with joy. Among other
Nobles, Gorlois Duke of Cornwall was present. The King not long after being
taken with a great sickness, Octae and Osa, the Saxon Generals, bribing their
Keepers, efcaped out of Prison, and then collecting all their forces, resolved
to extirpate the Britons and Christian Religion out of the Island; in pursuance
whereof, they wasted the Land from Sea to Sea, sparing neither Bishops, nor
Churches, overruning all places without resistance. The Britons deserting their
sick King, fled into Woods and Caves, refusing to follow the Counsel and
Conduct of Consul Lotho, a most valiant man, whom the King had made General of
his Forces. Hereupon King Other being much grieved for the Subversion of the
Realm, the Oppression of the Church, the Desolation of the Nobles, and
Dispersion of the People. Anno 512. CONVOCATIS OMNIBVS REGNI SVI MAGNATIBVS,
Proposit. 5. 9.
calling together all the Nobles of his Realm (in a General Parliamentary
Council) sharply reproved them both for their Pride and S^othfulnesse, and
casting out many bitter words with reproaches against them, informed them, that
he himself would lead them against the Enemies, that so he might reduce the
minds of them all to their pristine state and audacity. And commanding himself
to be carried in his sick bed in a Litter into the Camp, (his infirmity not
permitting him to be carried otherwise) he marched therein with all the
strength of the Kingdom against the Enemies, who scorned to fight with him
being sick in his Litter, and at last forcing them to fight, after many bloody
encounters, utterly routed their forces, and slew Octa and Osa their Generals.

Anno 516. Anno 516.
Galfr. Monum; Hist. Reg. Brit. l. 9. c. 10 to 20. and l. 10. c. 1. to 14 Math.
Westminster. An 525, 537. Walsingham Hist Angliae, p. 50. Speeds History p, 273.
The Saxons treacherously poisoning this Noble King, the Bishops, Clergy and
People of the Realm assembling together, buried him honorably at Ambri, within
the Quire of Giants. The funeral being ended, Dubricus, the Archbishop,
SOCIATIS SIBI EPISCOPIS ET MAGNATIBVS, associting the Bishops and Nobles to
him, magnificently advanced his Son Arthur (a youth but sixteen years old) to
be King; to which Solemnity, CONVENERVNT EX DIVERSIS PROVINCIIS PROCERES
BRITTANNORUM, the Nobles of the Britons assembled out of diverse Provinces to
Ca^rleon, and there crowned King Arthur, who having routed the Saxons in twelve
several Battles; afterward (if we believe our British Fables, as Malmesbury
styles them) conquered all France, and keeping his Court at Paris, CONVOCATIS
CLERO ET POPVLO STATVM REGNI PACE ET LEGE CONFIRMAVIT. Whence returning into
Britain in triumph, about the year 536 Pentecost aproaching, Propos. 5, 6, 9.
he resolved to keep that Solemnity at Caer-^eon, and there to be new Crowned.
Whereupon he sent Messengers into all the Kingdoms and Countries subject to
him, inviting* ALL THE KINGS, DUKES. and NOBLES SUBJECT TO HIM, TO COME
TOGETHER TO THAT SOLEMNITY, that he might ren^e a most firm Peace between them.
Whereupon no less than thirteen Kings, three Archbishops, with sundry
PRINCES, DUKES. CONSULS, EARLS and NOBLES there assembled, whose names you may
read at large in Geoffry Monmouth. The King being solemnly crowned by D^bricius
Archbishop of (...), in the midst of the Feasts, Sports and (...) at this
Coronation, behold twelve men of mature age, of reverend countenance, bringing
Olive branches in their right hands in token of their Embassy, with grave paces
came to the King, and having saluted him, presented him with (...) Luciu,
Tiberius, Procurator of the Roman R^publi^k, to this effect: I exceedingly
admire the frowardness of thy Tyranny, and the Inj^ry thou have done to Rome,
that going out of thy self, thou refusest to acknowledge her, neither do thou
consider what it is to offend the Senate by unjust actions to whom thou art not
ignorant, the whole (...) Service, For thou have presumed to detain THE TRIBUTE
OF BRITAIN, which THE SENATE COMMANDED THEE TO PAY, because Caius Julius and
other Roman Emperors have enjoyed it for a long time, neglecting the command
of so great an Order. Thou have taken away from them the Province of the
Switzers, and all the Isles of the Ocean, whose Kings, whiles the Roman power
p^evailed in those parts, pai^ Trib^te to our Ancestors. Now because the Senate
has diverced, to demand Justice concerning so great heaps of thy injuries, I
command thee to rep^ir to Rome. to answer them on the midst of August the year
following, the time pr^fixed to thee; that satisfying thy Lords, thou may
submit to that sentence, which their Justice shall pronounce. But if thou
refusest, I my self will come in person into thy Quarters, and will endeavor
to restore by the Sword, what ever thy frenzy has taken away from the
Republic. This Letter being read in the presence of all the Kings and Nobles
present, King Arthur went apart with them, Propos. 5, 6, 9.
to consult concerning this business: where craving their unanimous advise and
sense conce^ning these Mandates; He said: That he thought the inquietation of
Lucius was not much to be feared, since ex irrationabile causa, from an
unreasonable cause he exacted the Tribute, which he desired to have out of
Britain: For he says, that it ought to be given to him, because it was paid to
Julius Caesar, and the rest of his Successors, who invited by the divisions of
the old Britons, arrived with an Army in Britain, and BY FORCE and VIOLENCE
SUBJECTED THE COUNTRY TO THEIR POWER, SHAKEN WITH DOMESTIC COMMOTIONS. Now
because they obtained it is in this manner; Vectigal ex ea INIVSTE RECEPERVNT,
They RECEIVED TRIBUTE CUT OF IT, unjustly. Nihil enimu od vi and violentia
acquiritur, just ab ullo prossidetur qui violentiam intulit. Irrationabilem
ergo causam pretendit, qua nos jure sibi tributarios arbitratur, etc. FOR
NOTHING WHICH IS ACQUIRED BY FORCE and VIOLENCE, Nota.
IS JUSTLY POSSESSED BY ANY MAN WHO HAS OFFERED THE VIOLENCE; Therefore he
pretends AN UNREASONABLE CAUSE, whereby he supposes us of right to he
Tributaries to him, Now because he presumes to exact from us, id quod injustum
est, THAT WHICH IS UNJUST, by the same reason let us demand Tribute of Rome
from him, and he which shall become strongest, let him carry away that he
desires to have. For if because Julius Caesar, and the rest of the Roman
Emperors, have in times past subdued Britain, he determines, that Tribute
ought now to be rendered to him out of it; in like manner I think, that Rome
ought now to render Tribute unto us, because my Ancestors have in ancient times
obtained it. For Belinus, that most noble King of the Britons, using the
assistance of his Brother Brennus Duke of the Allobroges, having hanged up four
and twenty of the most Noble Romans in the midst of the market place, took the
City, and being taken, possessed it a long time. Moreover Constantine the son
of Helen and Maximianus, both of them my near Kinsmen, both of them Kings of
Britain, one after the other, obtained the Throne of the Roman Empire. Do ye
think therefore, that Tribute is to be demanded by the Romans? Concerning
France, or the Collateral Islands of the Ocean, I am not to answer to them,
seeing they deserted their defense, when we subtracted them from their Power.
The whole Council of Kings and Nobles present, assenting fully to this his
opinion and resolution, promised him their assistance in this cause against the
Romans. Whereupon he returned Answer to the Roman Emperors by the said
Messengers, Proposition 7.
THAT HE WOULD BY NO MEANS RENDER THEM TRIBUTE, NEITHER WOULD HE SUBMIT
HIMSELF TO THEIR JUDGMENT CONCERNING IT, NOR REPAIR TO ROME; yea, that he
demanded from them, that which they had decreed, by that their judgment, to
demand from him. And hereupon (some say) he writ this Letter unto the Senate of
Rome, in answer of theirs. Understand among you at Rome, that I am King Arthur
of Britain, and FREELY IT HOLD and SHALL HOLD; and at Rome hastily will I be,
not TO GIVE YOU TRUAGE (Tribute) but to have Truage of you. For Constantine
that was Helens Son, and others of mine Ancestors, CONQUERED ROME, and thereof
were Emperors, and that they had and held, I shall have and hold by Gods
grace. Whereupon Lucius Tiberius, by command of the Senate, raising great
forces amongst the Eastern Kings to subdue Britain, was encountered and slain by
King Arthur, with all his Roman forces, in the valley of Soisie in France Anno
Dom. 537. since which this Tribute was never demanded.

This History (whether true or seigned) as it declares by the Resolution of
thirteen Kings, and a great multitude of Princes, Dukes, Nobles, Prelates,
Soldiers, that Titles and Tributes gotten by Force, Violence, Conquest, are
both irrational, unjust and illegal; So it resolves, That the Matters of War,
Peace and other great Affairs of the Realm, were determined in Parliament.
That the Kings, Princes and Nobles were the only Parliaments and Parliament
men of that age: That the Realm and Kings of England are neither tributary, nor
subject, nor responsible to any Foreign Powers, Jurisdictions, or Courts
whatsoever; and that no Tribute or Tax can justly be imposed on, or exacted
from the Inhabitants of this Island, but by their own voluntary Grants and
Consents, even by the Laws and Customs of the Realm in the Britons times; and
that whatever Tax or Possession was then gained by force, conquest, or armed
power without just right and Title, was both unjust and unreasonable. And so
ought to be reputed now. Quod ab initio non valet, tractu temporis non
convalescit, being a Principle in our Law.

I read in the Laws of King Edward before the Conquest, c. 35. in Mr. Lambards
Archaion, fol 135, 136. and Sir Edward Cook his 7 Report; Calvin's Case, fol. 6,
7. That this most famous King Arthur first invented and inacted this Law,
Proposit. 8.
That all the Princes, Earls, Nobles, Knights, and all Freemen of the Realm
of Britain, ought to make and swear fealty to their Lord the King in the full
Folkemote or Leet, in this form (commonly used in Leets till within the six
years last past.) You shall swear, that from this day forward, you shall be
true and faithful to our Sovereign King Arthur, and HIS HEIRS, and truth and
faith you shall bear to him of life, and member, and terrene honor; and you
shall neither know nor hear of any ill or damage intended to him, that you
shall not defend. So help you God. And that by Autherity of this Law, King
Arthur expelled the Saracens (it should be Saxons, for no Saracens ever invaded
Britain) and Enemies out of the Realm. And by Authority of this Law, King
Etheldred in one and the same day slew all the Danes throughout the whole
Realm. Surely such Oaths of Fealty, Loyalty and Homage are very ancient, as
our Histories manifest.

King Arthur being mortally wounded in the battle he fought with his Nephew
Mordred (who usurped the Crown in his absence) Mordred being slain in the
fight, Arthur despairing of life, gave the Crown of Britain to Constantine his
Kinsman Anno Dom. 542. who, together with the rest of the British Kings, Anno
542.
neglecting all Laws and Justice, warring against each other, and degenerating
into Tyrants, Usurpers, Murderers, Perjurious Persons, Oppressors, and the
like, declined daily in their power, the Saxons continually incroaching upon
them in all parts, and about the year of our Lord 586. they were quite driven
out of their Kingdoms, together with their British Subjects, by the Saxons
into Wales, Cornwall, and Little Britain in France, and reduced to the
extremity of all misery, as you may read at large in Gildas, de Excidio and
Conquestu britanniae; and See Holinshed, and Dr. Usher, de Britannicarum
Ecclesiarum Primordiis p. 535 to 547. Speeds History p. 275, 276, 277, 278.
others out of him. Who thus describes the Tyrannies and vices of those times.
Vngebantur Reges non per Deum, sed qui caeteris crudeliores extarent; and paulo
post ab unctoribus, non pro very examinatione TRUCIDABANTUR, ALIIS ELECTIS
TRUCIORIBUS. Si quis vero eorum mitior, and veritate aliquatenus pronior
videretur, in hunc quasi Britanniae Subversorem, omnium odia telaque sine
respectu contorquebantur; and omnia quae displicuerint Deoque placuerint
aequali saltem lance pendebantur, si non graviora fuissent displicentia. Sicque
agebant cuncta, quae saluti contraria fuerunt, ac si nihil mundo medicina a
vero omnium medico largiretur, etc. Ita cuncta veritatis and Justitiae
moderamina concussa ac subversa sunt, ut little, non dicam fastigium, sed ne
monimentum quidem in supra dictis propemodum ordinibus apparent, exceptis
paucis, and valde paucis, etc. Reges habet Britannia, sed TYRANNOS: Judices
habet, sed impios: saepe praedantes and concutientes, sed innocents:
vindicantes and patrocinantes, sed reos and latrones: CREBRO JURANTES, SED
PERJURANTES; VOVENTES, and CONTINUO PROPEMODUM mentientes: belligerantes, SED
CIVILIA ET INJUSTA BELLA AGENTES; per patriam quidem fures magnopere
insectantes, and eos qui secum admensam sedent non solum amantes, sed and
munerantes; in sede arbitraturi sedentes, sed raro recti judicii regulam
quaerentes; innexios humilesque despicientes, sanguinarios, superbos,
parricidas, commanipulares (qui cum ipso nomine certatim delendi sunt) pro ut
possunt efferentes; vinctos plures in carceribus habentes, quos dolo sui potius
quam merito proterunt, catenis onerantes; inter Altaria jurando demorantes, and
hoec eadem ac si lutulenta paulo post saxa despicientes. Cujus tanti nefandi
piaculi non ignarus est immundae Leaenae D^mnoniae tyrannicus Catulus
Constantinus. Hoc anno post horribile juramenti Sacramentum (quo se devinxit
nequaquam d^los civibus, Deo primum j^requejurando, Sanctorum demum choris and
Genetrice comitantibus frelis facturum) in duarum venerandis matrum finibus,
Ecclesia earnalisque sub sancti Abbatis amphibalo, Latera regiorum tenerrima
pucrorum, vel praecordia crudeliter duum totidemque nutritorum, inter ipsa, ut
dixi, sacrosancta Altaria, nefando ense hastaque prodentibus laceravit, etc.
Quid tu qu^que catule Leonine Aureli Canine agis? Nonne pacem Pa^riae
mortiferum ceu serpentem odiens, CIVILIAQUE BELLA and CREBRAS INJUSTE PRAEDAS
SITIENS animae tuae caelestes portas pacis ac refrigerii praecludis? Quid tu
etiam insularis Draco, MULTORUM TYRANNORUM DEPULSOR TAM REGNO QUAM ETIAM VITA,
snpradictorum novissime in nostro stylo prime in malo, major, multis potentia,
simulque malitia, Largior in dando, profusior in peccato, robuste armis, sed
animae forti^r excidiis, Maglocune, in tam vetusto scelerum a^ramento stolide
volutaris? Quare tantas peccaminum regiae cervici sponte, ut ita dicam,
ineluctabiles celsorum seu Montium innectis moles? Nonne in primis
adolescentiae tuae annis avunculum Regem, cum fortissimis propemodum militibus
acerrime ense, hasta, igni oppressisti? Parum cogitans propheticum dictum:
Psalm. 54. 24.
Viri inquiens sanguinum and doli, non dimidiabunt dies suos. Quid pro hoc solo
retributionis a justo judice sperares (and si non talia sequerentur, quae
secuta sunt) itidem dicente per prophetam, Isay 33. 1
Vae tibi qui praedaris, nonne and ipse praedaberis? and qui occidis, nonne and
ipse occideris? and cum d^siveris praedari, tunc cades. These sins brought
the ancient British Kings, with their Kingdoms and People to ruin. Legitur in
Libro Gildoe Sapientissimi Britonum, Quod ijdem Britones, propter Avaritiam and
rapinam Principum, propter iniquitatem and injuriam Judicum, propter desidiam
praedicationis Episcoporum, propter luxuriam and malos mores populi Patriam
perdiderunt, write Alcuinus and De Gestis Regum Angl. l 1 c. 3. p, 26.
Malmesbury. The Lord grant they may not bring our Kingdoms and Nations to
like ruin and desolation now.

How many bloody Wars and battles the Brotons, after they were driven out of
their Country into the Welsh Mountains by the Sa^ons, fought with them for the
defense of their Country, Rights, Liberties, under the conduct of valient
Cad^in, who after twenty four years civil Dissension amongst the Britons, and
so long an Inter-regnum, was Galfr. Morum. Hist. l. 12 c 1. ^, 5. Speeh Council.
p. 112.
by the UNANIMOUS CONSENT OF ALL THE PRINCES and NOBLES OF THE BRITONS
ASSEMBLED TOGETHER (in a great Parliamentary Council) AT LEGECESTER ELECTED
and MADE (...) OF THE BRITONS; Which Nobles and Counselor, would not permit
him to give way, that Edwin the Saxon, by his permission, should be crowned
King of Northamberland: Aiebant enim CONTRA IVS VETERVMQVE TRADITIONEM ESSE,
Insulam unius CORONAE DVOBVS CORONATIS SVBMITTI DEBERE. And after his decease,
under Cadwallo his Son, who succeeded him in the Crown; and under famous
Cadwallader, succeeding Cadwallo his Father in the Kingly Government, by
lineall d^scent; by whose death, both the royal blond, with the Government of
the Britons, and the very name of Britain it self expired; you may read at
large in Geoffry Monmouth, B^da, Gildas, Maelmesbury, Huntindon, See Math.
Westminster. Anno 74^. 811. 853
Matthew Westminster, Fabian, Holinshed, Grafton, Speed and others, being over
tedious to relate. The divisions and discords amongst the British Nobility,
during Cadwalladers sickness, seconded with eleven years sere p^stilence,
famine and all sorts of miseries, whereby the land became desolate, enforced
them to forsake their native Country, and to seek relief in foreign parts.
Whereupon the Saxons sending for more of their Countrymen into Britain,
replenished and planted the vacant Country, dispossessing the Britons totally
of their ancient rightful Inheritance; which they never since regained: after
they had possessed it from Brute to Cadwallader, for two thousand seventy six
years, under one hundred and two Kings, as John Brompton records in the
beginning of his History, col. 725.

And this shall suffice concerning the Britons Contests and Wars for their
Liberties, Laws, Government, Country, Religion, against the Romans, Saxons, and
touching their Great Parliamentary Councils, and Proceedings in them, from
Julius Caesar's to the Saxons Conquest, and total supplantation of them by
Treachery, Violence and the Sword; of which violent Intrusion, Laeland our
famous Antiquary, and Archbishop Parker in his Antiquit^tes Ecclesiae
Britannicae, p. 12. give their Censure in point of Conscience; who writing of
Pope Gregory's conversion of the Pagan Saxons (who expelled the Britons) to the
Christian Faith, conclude thus; Debuerat Gregorius admonuisse Saxones, GENTEM
PERFIDAM, ut si sincere Christia^issim^m admittere vellent, BRITANNIAE
IMPERIVM, QVOD CONTRA SACRAMENTVM MILITIAE PER TYRANNIDEM OCCVPAVERANT, IVSTIS
DOMINIS AC POSSESSORIBVS RESTITVERENT. That is: Gregory ought to have
admonished the Saxons, a PERFIDIOUS NATION, that if they would sincerely
embrace Christianity, they then ought to restore the Kingdom of Britain, which
they had seized upon by Tyranny, against the Oath of their Militia, to the just
Lords and Possessors thereof; (a Doctrine fit to be pressed on others now by
all our Ministers) which because they neglected to do, you may read what a
divine retaliation their Postetity received from the Pagan Danes, in the
ensuing Sections.

CHAP. III.
SECT. III.
Comprising some remarkable General Historical Collections; proving the
limited Power and Prerogative of the first Saxons Kings of England, disabled to
make any Laws, War, Peace, alienate their Crown Lands, impose any Taxes,
Tributes in any Necessity, or kind whatsoever, but in and by common consent in
the General Parliamentary Councils of their Nobles and Wisemen, which they
were obliged to summon upon all occasions, when there was need, and to govern
their people justy according to Law. The Saxons proceedings against their
Tyrannical oppressing Kings; and the severe Judgments of God upon some Saxon
Subjects, for their Perjury, Treachery, disloyalty, Rebellion against;
expulsions, murders of their lawful Sovereigns, and unrighteous violent
disinheriting the Christian Britons by the sword, of their Native Country.
THe British Kings and Britons, Anno Dom. 586.
being for their Tyranny, Perjury, Treachery, Injustice and other sins
related, reprehended by Gildas, driven out and dispossessed of their Royalty
and Country by the Saxons Math. Westminster. Anno 586. p. 208. Fabian, Grafton,
Holinshed and others.
they (about the year of our Lord 576.) divided it into seven Kingdoms, and
set up seven Kings in several parts of the Island; who soon after waged civil
Wars, and more than civil Wars one with another. These Kings all agreed,
utterly to delete the name of Britain, and the memory of the Britons; Whereupon
they by common consent ordained. That the Island should not be called Britain
from Brute, but England. Andrew Hor^es Mirror of Justice, c. 1. Sect. 2. p. 7,
8, 9, Malmes bury, Huntingdon, Beda, Ethelwerdus, Holinshed, Speed, and others.
These Kings were at first elected by the Saxon Nobles and People, to reign
over them, to govern the people of God, and TO MAINTAIN and DEFEND THEIR
PERSONS and GOODS IN PEACE BY THE RULES OF RIGHT. Prep. 1, 2, 3, ^.
And at the beginning (so soon as they turned Christians) they made their Kings
to swear, that they should maintain the Christian faith with all their power,
and GOVERN THEIR PEOPLE BY RIGHT, without respect to any person, and should be
SUBJECT TO SUFFER RIGHT AS WELL AS OTHERS OF THE PEOPLE. And although the King
ought not to have any Peer in his Land, for as much if he did wrong, or
offended against any of his people, he, or any of his Commissioners, should not
be both Judge and party, it behoved of RIGHT, THAT THE KING SHOULD HAVE
COMPANIONS FOR TO HEAR AND DETERMINE IN PARLIAMENT ALL THE WRITS AND PLAINTS OF
THE WRONGS OF THE KING, OF THE QUEEN, AND OF THEIR CHILDREN, and especially of
those, OF WHOSE WRONGS ONE COULD NOT HAVE RIGHT OTHER WHERE. And these
Companions are now called Counts, after the Latin word Comites; every o^e of
which had at first a Country delivered to him, to guard and defend it from the
Enemies; which Country is now called a County, and in Latin Comitatus: and
these Counties, together with the Realm, were turned into an Inheritance. So
Horn in his Mirror of Justice* in the reign of King Edward the first.

These English Saxons from the first Settlement of their K^^gdomes and
Monarchies, had no Sovereign Power at all t^ make, alter, or repeal Laws,
impose Taxes, or alien their Crown Lands, but only by common consent in
General Parliamentary Councils, much less to imprison, con^emn, exile, outlaw
any m^ns person, or to deprive him of his Life, Lands, Goods* Franchises,
against the Law, without any Legal trial, as these Subsequent Historical
Collections will at large demonstrate.

That they had no Power nor Authority to make, Proposition 5.
alter or repeal any Laws, but only by common advice and consent of their
Nobles and Wisemen, in their Great Parliamentary Councils of the Realm, is
evident by this passage of our Venerable Eccles. Hist. Gentis Anglorum l. 2. ^.
5. Huntingd. Hist. l. 3. p. 226 Malmesbury De Gestis Regum Ang l. 1 c. 1.
Chron: Johann: Brompton col; 738:
Beda, concerning Ethelbert King of Kent, Anno 605.
the first Christian Saxon King and Lawmakers: He, about the year of Christ
605. Inter caetera bona quae genti suae consulendo conferebat, etiam Decreta
illi, juxta exempla Romanorum, CVM CONSILIO SAPIENTVM CONSTITVIT. Quae
conscripta Anglorum sermon, hactenus habentur, and observantur ab ea. In
quibus primitus posuit, qualiter id emendare deberet, qui aliquid rerum vel
Episcopi, vel reliquorum ordinum furto aufernt, volens scilicet tuitionem eis,
quos, and quorum doctrinam susceperat praesiare. Malmesbury and Huntingdon
write of him. Quin etiam curam extendens in posteros LEGES PATRIO SERMON,
TVLIT, quibus bonis praemia decerneret, improbis per remedia meliora
occurreret, NIHIL SVPER ALIQVO NEGOCIO INFVTVRVM RELINQVENS AMBIGVVM. The first
Law this Christian King ever made BY THE COUNCIL OF HIS WISEMEN, was for God,
his Church and Ministers, to protect them and theirs from violence (a Jove
principium:) and the next for to Protect Great Councils and their Members from
Injury: thus recorded by Council. Tom. 1. p. 127. Proposition 3.
Sir Henry Spelmau, out of a famous ancient Manuscript called Textus Roffensis.

1. Quicunque Res Dei vel Ecclesiae abstulerit, duodecima componat solutione;
Episcopires, undecima solutione; Sacerdotis res, nona solutione; Diaconires,
sexta solutione; Clerici res, trina solutione: Pax Ecclesiae violata duplici
emendetur solutione: Pax (Monachi) duplici etiam solutione.

2. Si Rex populum suum convocaverit, Proposition 5. 6
and hos ILLIC. quispiam injuria afficerit; duplex esto emendatio, and
praeterea 50. Solidos Regi pendito. Let the forcers of Parliaments consider it.

To these I might subjoyn, all the Ecclesiastical and Civil Laws, Canons,
Constitutions of all our other Saxon Kings, before the Normans reign, recorded
in Mr. Lambards Archaion, and scatteringly mentioned in Beda, Ingulfus, William
of Malmesbury, Huntindon, Matthew Westminster, Florentius Wigorniensis, Brompt.
Antiquitates Eccl. Britannicae, Mr. Seldens Titles of Honor, Mr. Fox Acts and
Monuments, with other Antiquaries and Historians, all made, altered, amended,
repealed from time to time by common advice and consent in their Great
Parliamentary Councils: which, because I have particularly insisted on in my
Antiquity Triumphing over Novelty, and Historical Collection of the ancient
Great Councils and Parliaments of England, I shall forbear here to repeat at
large, being never yet denied by any, and a truth beyond contradiction.

That our Saxon Kings from their original institution, Anno 605.
could not alienate or transfer to any other uses (no not to endow Churches,
Proposition 10.
support Gods Worship or Ministers) any of their Crown Lands, Demesnes or
Revenues, without common consent of their Nobles and Prelates in their Great
Parliamentary Councils, is apparent by the three first Charters we read of
granted by Chronica W: Thorn col: 1761, 1762 2123: Spelm: Concilia, p 118,
119, 120, 126 127.
Ethelbert, the first Christian Saxon King, to the Church of Peter and Paul in
Canterbnry, Anno Dom. 605. Wherein the King, CVM CONSENSV venerabilis Augustini
Archiepiscopi AC PRINCIPVM MEORVM; by the consent of Archbishop Augustine and
his Princes, first gave and granted a parcel of Land, Proposition 7.
of his Right, in the East part of the City of Canterbury, to build a Church
and Monastery to the honor of St. Peter; and after that by a second Charter of
the same date, confirmed by his own, the Archbishops and Nobles subscriptions
thereto, with the Sign of the Cross, he gave and granted other Lands in
Langeport to God and his Church; and after that by a third Charter, Anno 610.
he granted other Lands and Privileges to it, as a testimony of his gratitnde
to God, for his conversion from the Error of false Gods to the worship of the
only true God; adjuring and commanding in the name of the Lord God Almighty,
who is the just Judge of all things, that the said Lands given to this Church
by the said subscribed Charters, should be perpetually confirmed; so that it
should not be lawful for himself, nor for any of his Successors, Kings or
Princes, or for any Secular or Ecclesiastical Dignity, to defraud the Church
of any part thereof. And if any shall attempt to diminish or make void any
thing of this Donation, let him be at present separated from the holy Communion
of the body and blood of Christ, and in the day of Judgment let him be
separated from the fellowship of all the Saints.

The two first of his Charters and Donations to this Church, were approved and
confirmed in a Common Council assembled by this King at Canterbury, 5. January
Anno 605. Omnium and singulorum approbatione and consensu, BY THE APPROBATION
AND CONSENT OF ALL AND EVERY OF THEM, as you may read at large in Sir Henry
Spelman, and William Thorn.

This truth is further abundantly confirmed by the Spelmani Council. p. 198,
227, 228, 334 407, 427, 428 435, 441. Ingulphi Hist. p. 851. 853, 864, etc.
Malmesbury De Gestis Regum Angl. l, 1. c: 2. l: 2. c: 6. Math. Westminster. Anno 794,
797, 945
Charter of Immunities of Withraed King of Kent, granted to the Churches under
him, Anno 700. The Charter of Ethelbald King of Mercia to the Church of
Croyland, An. 716. The Charter of King Ive, of Lands and Privileges to the
Church of Glastonbury, Anno 725. The Charter of King Offa of Lands and
Privileges to the Courch of St. Albanes, Anno 794. The Charter of King Egfred
to the same Church, Anno 797. The Charter of Bertulph King of Mercia to the
Abbot of Croyland, made in the Parliamental Great Council of Biningdon, Anno
850. and of Kingsbury, Anno 851. (a memorable president recorded at large by
Abbot Ingulphus, Hist p. 858. to 863.) the Charter of King Aethelstan to the
Abbey of Malmesbury, An. 930. The Charter of King Edmond to the Abbot of
Glastonbury, Anno 944. and of the same Edmund to the Abbey of Hyde, Anno 966.
and to the Abbey of Croyland the same year; and to the Abbey of Malmesbury, Anno
974. with many other Charters of our Saxon Kings, to Abbeys, Bishops and
Churches, recorded in Ingulphus, Malmesbury, Spelman and Chronicon I^han:
Brompt: Chronica W: Thorn, Evidentiae Ecclesiae Christi Cantur and Chronologia
August: Cant.
others; all which were made and confirmed by these Kings, with the consent and
approbation of their Bishops, Abbots and Nobles, assembled in their Great
Parliamentary Councils, and ratified, confirmed by them, being else void in
Law, and repea^lable, as appears by the General Spelmanii Council: p. 340.
Evidentiae Ecclesiae Christi Cant: col: 2018
Council of Kingston, Anno 838. Wherein the Manor of Mallings in Kent, which
King Baldred had formerly given to Christ's Church in Canterbury, being
afterward Sed quia ille Rex cunctis Principibus non placuit, nolu^runt donum
^jus permanere ra^tum, etc.
revoked and subtracted from it, because the Nobles offended with the King,
would not ratify that donation, nor suffer it to remain firm, was resetled and
confirmed to this Church in and by this Council (specially summoned for that
purpose) by King Egbert and his Son Athelwelfe, CONSENTI ENTIBVS DEMVM
MAGNATIBVS: the Nobles now at last consenting to it in this Council, Proposit.
10.
which they refused formerly to do. A clear Evidence of the Noble-mens
Negative and Affirmative Voices to the Saxon Kings grants of their Lands and
Charters to pious uses, and of their invalidity without their concurrent
assents thereto. In most of these forecited Charters of our Kings to these
Churches and Monasteries, it is observable, that they exempted them and their
Lands, AB OMNIBVS PVBLICIS VECTIGALIBVS, ONERIBVS, REGIIS EXACTIONIBVS, ET
OPERIBVS, nisi in structionibus Arcium, vel Pontium, quae nunquam ull^s possint
Laxari. From which notwithstanding King See Ingulphi Hist. p: 853 864.
Spelmanni Concilia p: 198, 227, 228.
Ive exempted the Abbey of Glastonbury; and King Aethulwulfe and Beorred the
Abbey of Croyland; and ab expeditione militari. And therefore, as they could not
thus exempt them from public Tributes, Burdens, Regal Exactions and Services
without common consent in Parliamentary Councils, so they could not impose any
public Tributes, Burdens, Exactions or Services on them without common grant
and consent in such Councils, (unless by special referrations) as I shall by
ensuing Presidents most fully evidence.

How careful the Saxon Nobles and Subjects were from the first erection of
their Kings and Kingdoms in England, to preserve their Privileges, Liberties,
Properties, Laws, from the usurpations, Invasions, and arbitrary power of
Tyrannical Kings or Usurpers, and how un^nimous, magnanimous they showed
themselves in their just defense, will appear by these few Presidents of their
Proceedings against their Tyrannical Oppressing Kings, which I shall muster up
together in their Chronologicall Order.

Anno Dom. 756. Math. Westminster. Anno 756: p: 274. Will. Malmesb: De Gestis Reg.
Angl: l: 1: c, 2: p. 15. Henry H^ntindon Hist: l, 4, p 341, 342. Chron: Iohann:
Brompton col: 770, 796: Speeds Hist. p, 2^9. Holinshed, Grafton, Fabian, and
others in his Life. Prop: 1, 2, 3, 4
Sigebert King of the West Saxons, Anno 756.
growing insolent and proud by the Successes of his Predecessors in their
Wars, became intolerable to his People, treating them very ill by all kind of
means, LEGESQVE ANTECESSORVM SVORVM PROPTER COMMODVM SVVM VEL DEPRAVARET, VEL
MVTARET; endeavoring to d^prave or change the Laws of his Ancestors, for his
own private luchre, and using EXACTIONS, and CRUELTIES UPON HIS SUBJECTS,
setting asid^^ ALL LAWS. Whereupon his most Noble and Faithful Counselor
Earl Cumbra, lovingly intimating to him, the complaints of all the people,
persuaded the King to govern the people committed to his Charge more mildly,
and to lay aside his inhumanity, that so he might become amiable to God and
man; he thereupon soon after commanded him to be wickedly slain, and becoming
afterward more cruel to the people, augmented his Tyranny. Upon which the
rest of the P^ers, seeing their State and Lives were every day in danger, and
the Common Subjects, WHOSE LAWS WERE THUS VIOLATED, being incensed into fury,
all the Nobles and People of his Realm assembling together, rose up against
him, and upon provident mature deliberation, AND UNANIMOUS CONSENT OF ALL, they
(before he had reigned full two years) expelled him out of the Kingdom, and
elected and made Kenulphus (sprung from the blood royal) King in his stead.
Whereupon flying into the Woods like a forlorn person for shelter, he was there
slain by Cumbra his Swineherd, in revenge of his Masters death. Ita cr^delitas
Regis omnem pene Nobilitatem pervagata, in homine ultimae sortis stetit, writes
Malmesbury. To which Henry Huntindon adds this memorable observation: Ecce
manifestum Domini Judicium, ecce quomodo Domini justitia nonsolum in futuro
seculo, verum etiam in isto digna meritis recompensat. Eligens namque Reges
improbos ad contritionem promeritam subjectorum, alium diu insanire permittit,
ut and populus pravus diu vexetur, and Rex pravior in aeternum acrius
crucietur, veluti Ed^lboldum regem Merce praesatum: alium vero cita
disterminatione praeoccupat, ne populus suus nimia Tyrannide oppressus non
respiret, and immoderata Principis requitia, citissimas ultionis aeternae
debito paenas incurrat, veluti Sigebertum hunc de quo tractamus. Qui quanto
nequior extitit, tanto vilius a Subulco interf^ctus, a d^lore in dolorem
transiit. Vnde Domini justitiae aeternae laus and gloria nunc and semper.

In the Math: Westminster: Anno 758* p, 275: Huntindo^ Hist: l, 4. Speeds History p,
254, 367. See Fabian, Holinshed, Grafton. Propos. 1. 2, 3.
year of our Lord 758. the people of the Kingdom of Mercia rising up against
their King Beornred, Anno 758.
pro eo quod populum non EQVIS LEGIBVS, sed PER TYRANNIDEM GVBERNARET, because
he governed his people not by their JUST LAWS, but by arbitrary Tyranny, they
all of them, as well NOBLES as IGNOBLE, assembled together in one, and Offa a
most valiant young man being their General, they expelled him out of the
Realm: which being accomplished, BY THE UNANIMOUS CONSENT OF ALL, as well
Clergy as People, they crowned the said Offa, King. This Beornred treacherously
murdered King Ethelbald his Sovereign, whose Captain he was, and then usurped
his Crown, but was himself deprived of it, and slain soon after by Offa (who
succeeded him) by divine retaliation.

So Math: Westminster: Anno 957: p, 370. Will: Malmesbury De Gestis Regum l, 2: c, 7
p, 55. See Huntindon Speed, Holinsh: Grafton, in his Life, and Fabian. Chron:
Johann: Brompton col: 863* Hen, de Knighton: de ^^^itibus Angl: l, 1: c, 1:
Edwin King of Mercia in the year 857. for his Misgovernment, Anno 957.
his despising the Wisemen and Nobles of the Realm, who hated his vicious and
oppressive courses, affecting and fostering ignorant and unrighteous persons,
his forcible expelling the Monks and others out of their possessions by armed
men, his banishing Dunstan into France for reprehending his vices, and other
injurious and Tyrannical Actions against Law and Right, was utterly forsaken
and rejected by all his Subjects, and by the unanimous consent of all,
dejected, deposed from his royal Dignity, and his Brother Edgar Elected King
in his place, Deo dictante, and annuente populo, by the dictate of God himself
and the peoples consent, AB OMNI POPVLO ELECTVS. as our Historians write.

By these Presidents, pretermitting others, it is apparent, that the ancient
Saxons held their Kings Supremacy to be bounded within the rules of Law and
Justice; and that they esteemed their Kings to lose both the name and office of
Kings, when they ceased to Govern them according to Law and Justice, or exalted
themselves above their Laws and Liberties; which was not only the ancient
Divinity of those former times, as appears by Pope Eleutherius his forecited
Letter to King Lucius, but the received Law amongst the Saxons, as is evident
by the Laws of King Spelmanni Council: p, 622.
Edward the Confessor, Lex 15. hereafter cited. The Law was the sole Umpire
between these Kings and their people; See Lambards Archaion Brompton col: 761
which Law, as no Great man, nor any other in the whole Kingdom might violate
or abolish, as Ive the great Saxon King confesses in his Laws: So the Kings
themselves were to submit thereto in all things, as well as their Subjects;
Whence Spelmanni Council: p, 396, 387; Chron: Iohann: Brompton col: 841.
Aethelstan the Saxon King, in his Prologue to his Laws, made at the Great
Council of Grat^ley, Anno Dom. 928. by the advice of the Arch Bishops,
Bishops, Nobles and Wise men of the Realm, used this memorable expression, as
the Law of that age, between King and people; Ea mihi vos tantum modo
comparatis velim, QVAE JVSTE AC LIGITIME PARARE POSSITIS. Neque enim mihi ad
vitae usum QVICQVAM INJVSTE ACQVIRI CVPIVERIM. Etenim cum ea ego vobis, LEGE
VESTRA omnia benign largitus sum, ut MEA MIHI VOS ITIDEM CONCEDATIS,
prospicitote sedulo ne quis vestrum, neve ^^rum aliquis qui vobis paruerit,
offensi^n^m aut divinam, aut nostram concit^tis.

Indeed some of the Saxons, being too much addicted to Faction, Treason,
Sedition and Rebellion against their Kings, abused their just Liberties and
Privileges to the unjust murder and dest^^ction of their Kings, especially
those of the Kingdom of Northumberland; to prevent which excess^s, in the
famous Council of Spelmanni Council: p, 291, etc: 29^, ^96, 298, 300:
Calchuth Anno 787. held (...) of Northumberland, his Bishops and Nobles, Anno
787.
and Of^. King of Mercians, and his Bishops and N^lles, there (...) memorable
Laws and (...), both for the Security, Immunity of King and people, which they
with all their Subjects assented to; and with all devotion of mind, to the
uttermost possibility of their power, vowed through Gods assistance to observe
in every point.

Cap. XI. Of the Duty and Office of Kings: Vndecimus Sermo fuit ad Reges and
Principes, ut Regimen suum cum magna cautela and disciplina peragant, and cum
Justitia judicent, ut scriptum est: Psalm. 2: 11.
Apprehendite disciplinam, ne quando irascatur Dominus and pereatis, etc.
Habentque Reges Consiliarios prudentes, Dominum timentes, moribus hon^stos, ut
populos bonis exemplis Regum and Principum eruditus and confirmatus, proficient
in laudem and gloriam omnipotentis Dei.

Cap. XII. De Ordinatione and Honor Regum (who were then See Math. Westminster: Anno
886: p, 339, 340, 341. Proposition
generally Hereditary not Elective) We decree, that in the Ordination of Kings,
none may permit the assent of evil men to prevail; but KINGS SHALL BE LAWFULLY
ELECTED BY THE PRIESTS and ELDERS OF THE PEOPLE; and those not begotten of
Adultery or Incest: for as in our times by the Laws, a Bastard cannot be
admitted to the Priesthood, so neither can he be able to be the Lords
anointed: and he who shall be born out of lawful Wedlock shall not be King of
the whole Realm, and Heir of his Country: the Prophet saying; Dan: 4: 17*
Know ye that the Lord rules in the Kingdom of men, and the Kingdom is his,
and he will give it to whomsoever he will, Prop. 7, 8.
Therefore we admonish all in general, that they would, with a unanimous voice
and heart, entreat the Lord, that he who electeth him to the Kingdom, would
himself give unto him the regiment of his holy discipline to govern his people.
Likewise honor is to be rendered to them by all men; the Apostle saying; 1 Pet:
2: 17, 13:
Honor the King: and in another place, Whether it be to the King as Supreme,
or to Governors, as to those who are sent by him, for the punishment of
Malefactors, but to the praise of them that do well. Likewise the Apostle,
Romans 12. 1
Let every Soul be subject to the higher Powers, for there is no power given
but of God: And the powers that are are ordained of God. Therefore who ever
resists the power, resists the Ordinance of God, and those, who resist,
acquire damnation to themselves. Let no man detract from the King: for Solomon
says: Eccles. 10: 20.
Thou shall not detract from the King in thy mouth, neither shall thou curse
the Prince in thy heart, because the birds of the air shall carry the voice,
and that which has wings shall tell the word. LET NO MAN DARE TO COMMUNICATE
IN (or conspire) THE KINGS DEATH, BECAUSE HE IS THE LORDS ANOINTED: and if any
shall have adhered to such a Wickedness (or Treason) if he be a Bishop, or any
of the Priestly Order, let him be thrust out of it, and cast out of the holy
inheritance, as Judas was ejected from his Apostolical degree: and every one,
whosoever he be, who shall assent to such a Sacrilege, shall perish in the
eternal bond of an Anathema, and being associated to JVDAS THE TRAITOR shall
be burnt in sempiternal burnings, as it is written: Romans 1.
Not only those who do such things, but those also who consent to such who
do them, shall not escape the Judgment of God. For the Esth. 2: 21 22, 23.
two Eunuchs consenting to slay Ahasuerus, were hanged on a Gallows. Consider
what 1 Samuel 24. 4, 5: c, 26, 7, 8, 9: 2 Samuel: 1: 4, to 17.
David said to the Captains, when the Lord had said unto him, I will deliver
Saul into thy hands; when he found him sleeping, and was exhorted by the
Soldiers to slay him; Let this sin be far from me, that I should stretch
forth my hand against the Lords anointed. Yea, he cut off the head of that
Soldier, who after his death came unto him, protesting that he had slain Saul;
and it was reputed unto him for righteousness, and to his seed after him: And
it is often proved among you by examples, that WHOEVER HAVE HAD A HAND IN See
Dr: Beards T^eatre of God Judgments. Math. Westminster: An: 786, ^02, 821, 838, 854
934, 946. 979 1001, 10^6, 1017, 1054, Prop, 1, 2, 3^.
THE MURDER OF THEIR KINGS, HAVE ENDED THEIR LIFE IN A SHORT SPACE, and utroque
Jure caruerunt, (it should be corruerunt) and have perished by both Laws
(civil and sacred.)

Cap. 13. De Judiciis Justis ferendis. Let Great and Rich men execute just
Judgments, neither let them accept the Person of the Rich, nor contemn the
Poor, nor swerve from the rectitude of Judgment, or Law, nor receive gifts
against the innocent, but judge in righteousness and truth; the Prophet
saying, Judge justly ye sons of men: Also elsewhere, Lev: 1915.
Thou shall not do that which is unjust, nor judge unjustly: thou shall not
stand against the blood of thy neighbor. Likewise Isaiah Isay 1, 17: c, 58: 6,
7, 8*
Seek Judgment, relieve the Oppressed, judge the Fatherless, defend the
Widow: then come and let us reason together, says the Lord. Also elsewhere,
Undo every bond of iniquity, undo the heavy burdens, let those who are
oppressed go free, and break every yoke. Then shall thy light break forth as
the morning, and thy health shall spring forth speedily. The Lord says in the
Gospel, Math: 7: 2:
For with whatsoever judgment ye judge, you shall be judged, and whatsoever
measure you meet, it shall be measured to you again. Neither shall you take BY
FORCE FROM ANY ONE THAT WHICH IS HIS OWN; as it is said, Exodus: 20: 17:
Thou shall not covet the thing which is thy Neighbors. Thou shall not covet
thy Neighbors wife, nor his house, nor his ox, nor his sheep, nor his field,
nor any thing that is his. For the Prophet threatens, saying, Isay 5: 8, 9
Woe to you who join house to house, and lay field to field, till there be no
place, that you may be placed alone in the midst of the earth. These things are
in my ears, says the Lord of Hosts. Again the Prophet cries; Psalm: 82: 4
Deliver the poor and needy, rid them out of the hand of the wicked. Remember
what he deserves, who shall offend one of these little ones: but whosoever
shall receive one of these, receives Christ, from whom he shall deserve to
hear in the day of Judgment; Math. 25, 34:
Come ye blessed, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of
the world.

Cap. XIV. De cohibendis Fraud, RAPINIS ET TRIBVTIS ecclesiae INJVSTE
IMPOSITIS. Let Fra^d, Prop. 1, 2, 3.
VIOLENCE AND RAPINE BE FEARED; AND NO UNJUST OR GREATER TRIBUTES IMPOSED ON
THE CHURCHES OF GOD, then by the Roman Law and THE ANCIENT CUSTOMS OF FORMER
EMPERORS AND PRINCES HAS BEEN USED. He who desires to communicate with the
holy Roman Church, and St. Peter the chief of the Apostles, let him study to
keep himself free from this vice of VIOLENCE. So concord and unanimity shall be
every where between Kings and Bishops, Ecclesiastics and Laics, and all
Christian people: that there may be unity every where in the Churches of God,
and peace in one Church concurring in one faith, hope and charity, holding the
Head which is Christ, whose Members ought to help one another, and to love one
another with continual Charity, as he himself has said. John 13: 35.
By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if you shall love one
another.

These old established Saxon Laws and Canons backed with sacred Scriptures,
manifest the Duty of our old Saxon Kings, and their Officers toward their
Subjects, whom they could not injure, oppress or tax in any kind against their
ancient Laws, Customs, Privileges; as likewise what Loyalty and Obedience
the people owed to their Kings: which bounds when their Kings exceeded in an
exorbitant manner, you have seen how they proceeded with them; and when the
people exceeded them on the other hand against their Loyalty and Duties, they
did not escape unpunished. Take but one memorable general president in this
kind, in the Seditious, factious, rebellious Saxons of the Kingdom of
Northumberland, who were infamous for their Insurrections and Rebellions
against, and Expulsions and Murders of their Kings. De Gestis* Regum Angl. l,
1: c, 3: p, 26.
William Malmesbury and Historia: l, 4* p, 342, 343, 344. Speeds History p,
244, 245, 246. See Fabian, Holinshed, Grafton, Math. Westminster. Anno 789, 798, 808
8^4, 848, 871 872.
Huntindow give us this Abbreviation of their Rebellions, Treasons, Regecides:
Osulf son of Egbrick reigned one year, and was betrayed and slain by his
Subjects; and made way for Mollo, who reigning diligently for two years, was
compelled to lay down his Regality, and slain by Alred: who succeeding him,
reigned eight years, and then was chased out of his Realm, and deposed by his
people from the Throne he had invaded: Adelred Son of Mollo succeeding him,
reigned three years, and then was driven out of his Kingdom, and forced to
fly from the face of his Rebellious Dukes and Captains. Then Celwold (alias
Alfwold) being cried up King, after ten years reign, mourned under the
Treachery of his Subjects, being slain without fault by the Treason of Duke
Sigga: Osred his Nephew (the next King) reigned scarce one year, and then was
chased by his Subjects out of the Realm, and afterward slain. Adelred Son of
Mollo reigned again four years (taking severe vengeance against those
Rebellious Dukes and others who first expelled and deposed him) and then was
slain by his always most wicked people, being unable to avoid the fate of his
Predecessors, Ardulf his Successor reigned twelve years, and then was chased
out of his Realm by his rebellious Subjects: And Oswold after him, holding the
Title of King only for twenty eight days, was forced to save his life by
flight unto the King of Picts. After which the Northumbrians preoccupated with
the madness of their folly, continued diverse years without a King. For
Malmesb: De Gestis Reg: l, 1. c, 3: p, 26, 27. Speeds History p, 248. Alchuvini
Opera p, 1667; 1668.
many Natives and Nobles, being offended with these Rebellions and Murders of
their Kings, fled out of their Country, as fearing some heavy plague to befall
it. Alcuinus, that Countryman (then in France with Charles the great) being
ready to return to his Country with gifts to King Offa from Charles the
Emperor, thought best to continue where he was, writing thus to Offa; That he
knew not what to do amongst his Country men, amongst whom no man could be
secure, or do any good in giving wholesome Counsel to them, their holy places
being wasted by Pagans, their Altars defiled with perjuries, terra SANGVINE
DOMINORVM ET PRINCIPVM FAEDATA, and their very land it self polluted with the
blood of their Lords and Princes; and the raining of blood then at York, in the
Lent time, where their Religion first took its beginning in that Nation,
presaged that blood should come from the Northern parts upon that BLOODY LAND
and Realm of Northumberland, almost brought to desolation for its intestine
dissentions, bloud-sheds and fallacious Oaths (which they violated to their
Sovereigns.) The Emperor Charles himself, having prepared diverse Presents and
Letters to be sent by Alcuinus and others to King Offa, and King Ethelred, and
the Bishops of their respective Realms, after his Presents and Letters
delivered into the hands of the Messengers; hearing of the murder of King
Ethelred, and the Treachery of this Nation to their Kings (by Messengers
returning through Scotland from King Offa) recalled all his Presents and Gifts,
and was so far incensed against that NATION, which he called PERFIDIOUS, AND
PERVERSE, AND MURDERERS OF THEIR KINGS, ESTIMATING THEM WORSE THAN PAGANS, that
unless Alcuinus had interceded for them, he had presently subtracted all the
good he could from them, and have done them all the hurt that possibly he could
devise.

De Gestis Reg* l, 1 (...), 3.
Malmesbury records, that after Ethelred no man durst ascend to the Kingdom,
whiles every one feared (in particular) lest the chance of these foregoing
Kings should befall himself, and would rather live safe in inglorious
idleness, then reign pendulus in doubtful danger: Seeing most of the Kings of
Northumberland departed out of this life by the Treachery and destruction by
their Subjects. Whereupon they having no King for thirty three years, THAT
PROVINCE WAS EXPOSED TO THE DERISION AND PREY OF THEIR NEXT NEIGHBORS; and the
Barbarous Danes speedily in great Numbers, invaded, spoiled and possessed it
all that time, slew most of their Nobility and people, till at last they were
enforced to subject themselves to the power and pleasure of the West Saxon
Kings, to defend them from the Danes, who infested, invaded, and miserably
slew, wasted, destroyed these Seditious, Treacherous King-deposing,
King-murdering Northumberlanders Histor: l, 4: p. 343, 344, l, 5: p, 312. Watb:
Westminster. An: 873, 875, 876, 886.
Henry Huntindon and Matthew Westminster record, that the year before the
Northumberlanders traitorously slew their King Ethelred, there were fiery
Dragons seen flying through the air; after which followed a very great famine,
which destroyed many of them; soon after the Pagan Nations from Norwey and
Denmark invaded and miserably destroyed those of Northumberland and
Lindesfa^ne, horribly destroying the Churches of Christ, with the Inhabitants;
at which time Duke Sigga, who unworthily betrayed and slew his Sovereign King
Alfwold of Northumberland, worthily perished; the whole Nation being first
almost quite consumed with civil Wars, and by these Pagan invaders, whose
Plague was far more outrageous and cruel than that of the Romans, Picts,
Scots, or Saxons Invasions and Depredations in former ages; they most
frequently invading and assailing the land on every side, desiring not so much
to obtain and rule over it, as to spoil and destroy it, with all things
therein; burning their houses, carrying away their goods, tossing their little
children, and murdering them on the top of their pikes, ravishing their wives
and daughters, then carrying them away captives, and putting all the men to the
Sword: which sad and frequent rumors from all parts, struck such terror into
the hearts of King and people, that their very hearts and hands failed, and
languished, so that when they obtained any victory, they had no joy nor hope of
safety by it, being presently encountered by new and greater swarms of these
Pagan Destroyers. The cause of which sore Plague and Judgment he together with
Flores Hist* Anno 83^: p, 301, 302.
Matthew Westminster, thus express. In the Primitive Church of England Religion
most brightly shined; but in process of time all virtue so withered and
decayed in them, VT GENTEM NVLLAM PRODITIONE ET NEQVITIA PAREM ESSE
PERMITTERENT, that they permitted no Nation to be equal to them IN TREASON AND
WICKEDNESS; which most of all appears in the History of the (forecited) Kings
of Northumberland* For men of every Order and Office, DOLO ET PRODITIONE
INSISTEBANT, addicted themselves TO FRAUD AND TREASON, in such sort as their
impiety is formerly described in the Acts of their Kings. Neither was any thing
held disgraceful, but Truth and Justice, Nec honor nisi, BELLA PLUS. QVAM
CIVILIA, ET SANGVINIS INNOCENCIVM EFFVSIO and causa dignissima caedis
Innocentia. Nor any thing reputed honorable, but more than civil Wars, and
effusion of the blood of Innocents, and Innocence, reputed a cause most worthy
of death. THEREFORE the Lord Almighty sent a most cruel Nation like swarms of
Bees, who spared neither age nor sex; to wit, the Danes, with the Goths, the
Norwegians, and the Sweeds, the Vandals, with the Prisons, who from the
beginning of King Edelwolfe, to the coming of the Normans under King William,
wasted and made the fruitful Land desolate for 230. years, destroying it from
Sea to Sea, and from man to beast. Which sore and dreadful long continued
Judgment of God upon the Land, for those crying sins now abounding amongst
us, as much almost as amongst the Northumberlanders and other Saxons then, may
cause us justly to fear the self same punishments, or the like, as they then
incurred, and the Britons before that under the bloody Usurper Vortigenne,
unless we seriously repent and speedily reform them. From these unparalleld
prodigious Treasons, Insurrections, Regicides, Rebellions of these
Northumberlanders, I conceive that infamous Proverb (used by Maximilian the
Emperor, and frequent in Tractatus Joannis Aven^ini de Rebus Turcicis p, 117.
Heylins Microcosmus in Germany.
Foreign and other Writers) first arose touching the English: That the King
of England was, REX DIABOLORVM, a King of Devils (not of men or Saints)
SVBDICOS ENIM REGES EJICERE TRVCIDARE because the English (especially the
Northumberlanders) so often rebelled against, expelled, deposed and murdered
their Kings, beyond the Spaniards, French and other Nations. Which Proverb the
late extravagant Proceedings of some Jesuitized pretended English Saints, have
now again revived out of the ashes of oblivion.

But I hope these sad recited old domestic Presidents will hereafter instruct
both Kings, Magistrates, Parliaments and people, to keep within those due
bounds of Justice, Righteousness, Law, Equity, Loyalty, Piety, Conscience,
Prudence and Christian Moderation, which the Laws of God and the Land
prescribe to both, and the Council of Calchuth, forecited long since prefixed
them.

That the ancient English Saxon Kings at and from their primitive Establishment
in this Realm, Proposition 1.
had no power nor prerogative in them to impose any public Taxes, Imposts,
Tributes, or Payments whatsoever on their people without their Common Consents
and Grants in their Great Councils of the Realm, for any spiritual or temporal
use, I shall evidence by the four first General public Taxes that I meet with
in the Histories of their times, which I shall recite in Order according to
their Antiquity, though I shall therein somewhat swarve from my former
Chronological Method, in reciting some subsequent Laws and confirmations
relating to every of them, for brevity sake, out of their due order of time,
and coupling them with the original Laws for, and Grants of these general
Charges and Taxes, to which they have relation, and then pursue my former
method.

Henry Huntindon, in the Prologue to his fifth Book of Histories p. 347. writes
thus of those Saxons, who first seized upon Britain by the Sword. Saxones autem
pro viribus paulatim terram (Britanniae) bello capiscentes, captam obtinebant;
obtentam, adificabant, adificatam LEGIBVS REGEBANT: not by arbitrary Regal
power without or against all Law.

The first Taxes and Impositions ever laid under the Saxon Kings Government,
after they turned Christians, upon the people of England, were for the
maintenance of Religion, Learning, Ministers, Scholars, (long before we read
of any Taxes imposed on them for the public Defense of the Nation by Land or
Sea) all and every of which were granted, imposed only by common consent in
their Great Councils (before the Name of Parliament was used in this Island,
which being a French word came in after the Normans, about Henry the third his
reign) without which Councils grant they could neither be justly charged, nor
levied on all or any Freemen of this Island, by any civil or legal Right, by
those to whom they were granted, and thereupon grew due by Law.

1. The first General Tax or Imposition laid on and paid by the Saxon Subjects
of this Land appearing in our Histories, was that of Caericsceatae (id est
CENSVS ECCLESIAE) in plain English, Churchets, or Church-Fees; in nature of
First Fruits and Tithes.

The first Law whereby these Churchets, Anno Dom. 692.
Church-Fees, or First Fruits were imposed on the people, Proposition 1.
and settled as an annual duty on the Ministers (paid only before that time as
voluntary Free Will Offerings to the Ministers of the Gospel by devout and
liberal Christians) was enacted by Spelmanni Council: Tom: 1: p, 183, 184, 185,
187: Chron: Johann: Brompton col: 761, 762, 766
Ive, King of the west Saxons, in a Great Council held under him Anno Dom.
692. Wherein, by the exhortation, advice and assent of Cenred, his Father,
Heddes and Erkenwold, his Bishops, AND OF ALL THE ALDERMEN, ELDERS AND WISEMEN
OF HIS REALM, and a great Congregation of the Servants of God, he established
this Law (among sundry others) which none might abolish. Cap. 4. De Censu
Ecclesiae: Cericsccata (i.e. Vectigal, or Census Ecclesiae) reddita sint in
Festo Sancti Ma^^tini: Si quis hoc non complete, reus sit IX. sol: and du^
decuplareddat ipsum Cericsceatum. So one Copy renders it out of the Saxon:
another thus, Cyricsceata: (idest PRIMITIAE SEMINVM) ad celebre divi Matini
Festum redduntor: qui tum non solverit, qua raginta Solidis mulctator, and
ipsas praeterea Primitias duodecies persolvito. After which there is this
second Law subjoyned, Cap 62 De Cyricsceatis. Primitias Seminum quisque ex eo
dato domicilio, in quo ipse natali die Domini c^mmoratur. These Duties were
afterward enjoined to be paid by the Lambard: Archaion: Chron. Johann.
Brompton col: 341, ^58. Spelm: Council: p, 402, 419, 420, 444.
Laws of King Adelstan Anno 928. c. 2. Volo ut Cyricsc^atha reddantur ad illum
locum cuirecte pertinent, etc. By the Laws of King Edmund made Anno 944. in a
Great Synod at London, AS WELL OF ECCLESIASTICAL AS SECULAR PERSONS summoned
thither by the King, c. 2. Decimas praecepimus omni Christiano super
Christianitatem suam dare and emendent Cyricsceattam, id est Ecclesiae censum.
Si quis hoc dare noluerit, excommunicatus: sit. By the Laws of King Edgar Anno
965. c. 2, 3. Spelmanni Council: p, 530, 531.
and the Laws of King Aethelred; made by him and his Wisemen apud Habam,
about the year of Christ 1012. Cap. 4. DE CONSVETVDINIBVS sanctae Dei Ecclesiae
reddendis. Praecipimus, ut OMNIS HOMO super dilectionem Dei and omnium
sanctorum DET CYRISCEATTAM, ET RECTAM DECIMAM SVAM, sicut in DIEBVS
ANTECESSORVM NOSTRORVM FECIT, quando melius fecit: hoc est, sicut aratrum
peragrabit DECIMAM ACRAM: and omnis consuetudo reddatur super amicitiam Dei, ad
Matrem Ecclesiam cui adjacet, ET NEMO AVFERAT DEO QVOD AD DEVM PERTINET, ET
PRAEDECESSORES CONCESSERVNT. See Gulielmi Sonmeri Glossarium Title:
Cyricsceattam.
By which Laws it seems, that these Cyricsceata, or Church-Fees, were of the
same nature with Tithes, (if not Tithes in truth) and the tenth acre, or tenth
part of all their Corn and arable Lands increase (Tithes both in the Irae^eus,
l, 4: c, 34: Origin Homil: 11 in Number. Hicron: in Malach: c, 3. Augustine: de
Tempore Sermon: 219. Cassianque c, 25, 33. Isiodor Pelusio ta: l, 1. Ep. 317
Antiochus Homil. 120: Council: Arelatense 4: Can: 3.
Fathers, Councils, Writers of this and some former ages, being usually styled,
First Fruits) though most esteem them duties different from Tithes. Which duty
the people being backwards (as it seems) to pay, King Kn^te by the advice and
consent of his Wisemen in a Great Council Anno 1032. quickened the payment of
them by this additionall Law, increasing the first penalty by a superadded fine
to the King. Spelm* Council: p, 563 Chron: Iohann: Brompton col: 920.
Cyricsceata (which the Latin Translation renders, Seminum primiciae) ad
festum Divi Matini penduntor: Si quis dare distulerit, eas Episcopo undecies
praestato, ac Regi ducenos and viginti Solidos persolvito. Et dat omnis
Cyricsceot ad matrem Ecclestam per omnes Liberas domus. I find by the Surveyes
and Records of our late Bishops Revenues; That these Churchets of later times
were certain small portions of Corn, Hens, Eggs, and other Provisions paid by
each House or Tenement (according to the several values of them) for the
Maintenance and Provisions of the Ministers; which were constantly rendered to
our Bishops by their Tenants under the name of Cyricsceata or Churchets, See
Spelm: Glossarium and Guli: Sonmeri Glossaerium Title: Cyricscea^^am.
in diverse Manors, till they were lately voted down. This was the first kind
of public Tax imposed on the people for the Maintenance of the Ministry: and
that only by common grant and consent in Common Councils of that age; as were
their Spelmanni Council: p. 375, 563, 564, 571
annual Tributes for Lights, Parish Alms, and their Soul-shot or Mortuaries
at every man's decease, first granted by common Consent in Parliamentary
Councils, which I shall but name.

2. The second principle annual Charge or Tribute imposed on and paid by the
people under the Saxon Kings, Anno Dom. 787.
was Tithes of the annual increase of their Lands and Goods, Proposition 1.
for the maintenance of Gods Worship, Ministers and Religion; which though due
by Gods Law and a Divine Right to Ministers (as the first Law made for their
due and true payment recites, and I have lately proved at large in my
Gospel-Plea, etc.) yet they could not be legally imposed, nor exacted from the
people by the Ministers in foro humano, without public consent and grant.
Whereupon in the Centur: Magd: 8* c, 9. Spelm: Council: p, 292, 293, 298, 299,
300 301,. Mr. Seldens History of Tithes ch: 8, p, 188, 189.
General Council of Calchuth (held in the year of our Lord 787) Cap. 17. Vt
Decimae solvantur; this Law was made. In paying tithes, as it is written in the
Law (of God) Thou shall bring the tenth part of all thy Corn and First Fruits
into the House of the Lord thy God, etc. Wherefore likewise WE COMMAND with an
obtestation, that all men be careful to render Tithes of all things they
possess, BECAUSE IT IS THE PECULIAR PORTION OF THE LORD GOD, etc. Which Law
being read in that public Council by Gregory Bishop of Ostia, before King
Alfwoldus, Archbishop Eanbald, and all the Bishops, Abbots, Senators, Dukes
and PEOPLE OF THE LAND: they all assented to it, and with all devotion of mind,
Let our Tith-opposing Soldiers and others observe it.
according to the uttermost of their power, bound themselves by vow, that by
Gods supernall assistance they would observe it in all things; ratifying it
with the Sign of the Cross and Subscription of their Names thereto, according
to the Custom of that age. After which it was read before King Offa in the
Council of the Mer^ians and his Senators, Jambertus Archbishop of Canterbury,
and the rest of the Bishops of the Realm, with a loud voice, both in the Latin
and Germane tongue, that all might understand it: who ALL WITH A UNANIMOUS
VOICE AND CHEERFUL MIND ASSENTED TO IT, and promised that they would (by Gods
Grace assisting them) with A MOST READY WILL, to the best of their power,
observe this (and the rest of the Statutes there made) in all things. And then
ratified them with the sign of the Cross and subscription of their Names
thereto. It seems very probable by this Clause in the Laws of Spelmanni
Council. p, 621. Hen: de Knyghton De Eventibus Angliae l, 2, col, 2336.
Edward the Confessor (confirmed by William the Conqueror) Cap. 9. Of Payment
of Tithes of Cattle, Bees and other things; Ha^c enim beatus* Augustinus
praedicavit, and docuit: Et haec CONCESSA SVNT A REGE, ET BARONIBVS, ET POPVLO,
That upon the preaching of Augustine, (first Archbishop of Canterbury)
Ethelbert King of Kent, with his Barons and People (assembled in a great
Parliamentary Council) after their Conversion by him to the Christian Faith,
granted Tithes of all things to him and their Ministers by a special Act or
Law; (which if true) must be about the year of our Lord 603. at least one
hundred and eighty years before the Council of Calchuth. But because I find no
such special Law of his extant in any Author; and this passage may be intended
of Augustine Bishop of Hippo (flourishing about the year of Christ 410.) who
has sever all Homiles concerning the Due payment of Tithes; as Hom. 48. inter
Sermones, 59. Sermo De Tempore 219 ad Fratres in Eremo. Sermo 64. and in Psalm.
146. and because this clause may be as well intended of King Alfwold, or King
Offa, and his Barons and People in the Council of Calchuth, as of King
Ethelbert and his Barons and People; I have therefore begun with their Law for
Tithes, being extant, certain; whereas the other is but conjecturall: yet made
by common grant and assent of the King, and his Barons, and People, if there
were any such.

After this Council of Calchuth, I find very many Laws confirming,
continuing, establishing in all successions of ages, till this day, this charge
and payment of Tithes (all made by Common Consent in General Councils or
Parliaments, both before and since the Conquest, which because they are all
extant in John Bromptons Chronicle, printed at London, 1652. Mr. Lambards
Archaion, Sir Henry Spelmans Councils, Rastals Abridgement of Statutes, and
accurately collected in a Chronological order, by Mr. Seldom in his History of
Tithes chapter 8. where all may peruse them, I shall wholly pretermit them here,
and refer the Reader to these Authors: All which Laws are clear Evidences of
the first Propositions verity.

The third General ancient Saxon Tax and Charge occurring in our Histories,
Anno Dom. 727, 793.
imposed on the People, was that of Spelmanni Council. p* 308, to 313, 290, 261.
Radulsus de Diceto Abbreviationis Chronicorum col, 446, Chron. Iohann. Brompton
col: 754, 776.
Rome-scot, Proposition 1.
or Peter Pence; to wit one penny out of every House each year, paid on the
Feast of St. Peter ad vincula; for and toward the maintenance of the English
School and Scholars at R^me: from the payment whereof all the Lands belonging
to the Abbey of St. Al^anes were exempted by King Offa, by whom this Tax or
Alms was first granted, for the maintenance of the English Scholars at Rome,
and that by the UNANIMOUS antecedent and subsequent CONSENT, of Archbishop
Humbert and his Suffragans, ET PRIMATIBVIS SVS VNIVERSIS, and of all his Nobles
or chief Men, assembled in a PROVINCIAL COUNCIL at Verolam, in the year of our
Lord 793. This School (as Malmesbury De Gestis Regum Angliae l. 2 c. 1. and
Balaeus Cent. 1. c. 15. record) was first founded by King Offa before his going
to Rome, which Sir Henry Spelman proves out of Brompton and others: But it
appears by Math. Westminster. Anno 727, p, 265.
Matthew Westminster, that this School was there first built and endowed with
Peter Pence by King Ive 66. years before King Off^aes grant and endowment. For
he writes; that King Ive going to Rome Anno 727. built a House in that City, by
the consent and will of Pope Gregory, which he caused to be called, the School
of the English: To which the Kings of England, and the royal Stock, with the
Bishops, Elders and Clergymen might come to be instructed in the Catholic
doctrine and faith, and so, being steadfastly confirmed in the faith, might
return home again. For the Doctrine and Schools of the English, from the time
of St. Augustine, were interdicted by the Roman Bishops, by reason of the daily
Herisies which had sprung up by the coming of the English into Britain, whiles
the Pagans intermixed with the Christians, corrupted both the grace of holy
conversation, and the Christian Faith. He likewise built a Church, dedicated to
the Honor of the Virgin Mary, near to this School, where the English coming to
Rome, might celebrate divine Mysteries, and be likewise buried if they died
there. Then he adds, Propo. 1.
ET HAEC OMNIA VT PERPETVAE FIRMITATIS ROBVR OBTINERENT, STATVTVM EST GENERALI
DECRETO (made in General Council of the Realm) PER TOTVM REGNVM OCCIDENTALIVM
SAXONUM, in quo praedictus Ina regnabat, ut singulis annis de singulis familiis
denarius unus qui anglice, ROME-SCOT appellatur, beato Petro, and Ecclesiae
Romanae mitteretur, VT ANGLI IBIDEM COMMORANTES VITALE SVBSIDIVM INDE HABERENT.
Which grant, Offa King of Mercians first enlarged and granted in his Kingdom
(distinct from that of Ive) 66. years after this, as aforesaid. This Annual
Contribution toward this Schools maintenance, was afterward confirmed, and
the due payment thereof prescribed, under penalties by the Spelmanni Council. p.
445, 446, 517, 530* 544, 621, 625 633. Mr. Lambards Archa^^n. Johannis Brompt
Chron. col. 871. 902, 920. Henr. de Knighton de Eventibus Angliae l, 2* col,
235 ^.
successive Laws of King Edgar, King Ethelred, Canutus, Edward the Confessor,
and William the Conqueror, made in successive GREAT COUNCILS held in their
times, BY AND WITH THE ADVICE AND ASSENT OF THEIR ARCHBISHOPS, BISHOPS,
WISEMEN, NOBLES AND SENATORS. in the years of our Lord 967, 1009, 1012, 1032,
1060. (or thereabouts) and 1070. By virtue of which Laws this Tax was duly
paid every year in all succeeding ages, till it was finally abolished and taken
away by name, by the Statute of 25. H. 8. c. 21. being perverted from its
primitive intended use, and made a constant Revenue by and for the Popes
themselves, against the Donors minds, and their Successors, who so long
continued it for the foresaid uses, of the English schoolings.

These three most ancient Taxes and Charges, originally granted, imposed, and
afterward continued only by Common grant and Consent of the King, Nobles,
People in General Councils and Parliaments, are a most pregnant proof of the
first Proposition, and of the Peoples most ancient Original Fundamental Right
of Property in their Goods and Estates, exempt from all Impositions and
Tallages whatsoever, but only by their free Grants and Consents in Parliament.
For if our ancientest Christian Saxon Kings and greatest Monarchs could not by
their Prerogatives or absolute Power alone, but only with and by the free and
common consent and grant of their Nobles, Wisemen, Prelates and People in the
Great Parliamentary Councils of their Realms, impose the Payment of First
Fruits and Tithes upon their Subjects, See my Gospel Pl^a, for Tithes, etc.
1653.
though due by the very Law of God, toward the Maintenance of Gods Worship and
Ministers, for the public good, instruction, salvation of all their Souls:
nor yet the Payment of Peter Pence, for the Maintenance of Learning and
Scholars, to supply the Ministry, and furnish the Realm with able learned Men,
for the common benefit both of Church and State, being things of greatest
Concernment for the Peoples, Kingdoms Happiness, Government and Prosperity:
much less then could they lay on them any other Tax, Tribute, Aid or
Assessement whatsoever, of less necessity and concernment, for any inferior
uses, or for Defense of the Realm by Land or Sea against Enemies or Rovers, by
their own absolute Authority, but only by and with their voluntary Grants and
Consents in General Parliamentary Councils of the Realm, Anno Dom. 871, 873,
983, 984, etc.
as every rational man must acknowledge.

The fourth Public Tax or Imposition on the people in point of time,
Proposition 1.
is that of Danegeld (the first Civil Tax we everread of) whereof there was
two sorts. See my Humble Remonstrance against the Illegal Tax of Ship Money p,
19, etc.
The first, paid to the Danes themselves by way of Composition, as to a
prevailing Conquering Enemies, to prevent their Plunders, Rapines, Incursions.
The second, paid for the maintenance of valient Soldiers and Mariners, Mat.
Westminster. An. 871, 873 983, 991, 994 etc. Simeon Dunelmensis Hist. de Gestis Regum
Angliae p, 162, 163, 164, 166 169.
to defend the Sea Coasts and Seas against the Invasions, Piracies of the Danes
and other Enemies. The first Payment I find of any moneys to the Danes by way
of Composition, was in the year of our Lord 871. When Bernredus King of
Mercians compounding friendly with them, Pecuniis Inducias impetravit, obtained
a Truce with them for money, as Matthew Westminster records: After this Anno
873. Merciarum Gentes, dato munere, appeased those Pagans with a Gift. What the
sum of Money or Gift was, is not expressed, nor how it was raised: nor yet upon
whom: but the words imply, that it was done by common consent of the Nobles in
a General Council, for their Common Preservation from Plunder (not imposed or
raised by the Kings Prerogative without their free consents in a General
Council or Parliamentary Assembly, for so it was assessed and levied in
succeeding times. Math. Westminster. Anno 983, 991, 994 1002, 1007, 1012. Simeon
Dunelmensis Hist. col. 162, 163, 164, 168, 166
Anno Dom. 983. The Danes infesting all the Parts of the Realm, and the people
not knowing where or how to resist them; DECRETVM EST A VIRIS PRVDENTIBVS* It
was decreed by the Wisemen, (no doubt in a General Council assembled for
that end, not by the Kings absolute Authority) that they should be overcome
with Money, who could not be vanquished with the Sword. Wherefore they
satisfied the Covetousness of the Danes with the payment of ten thousand
pounds. Anno 991. A Tribute of 10000 l. was given them BY THE ADVICE OF
SIRICIVS, DUKE ETHELWARD AND OTHER NOBLES OF THE REALM, that they should cease
their frequent Rapines, Burnings and Slaughters of men which they used about
the Sea Coasts. Anno 994. King Aethelred CONSILIO PROCERVM SVORVM, by the
Counsel of his Nobles (no doubt in a Parliamentary Assembly) gave them a
pension of 16000 l. collected of all England, that they should cease from the
Rapines and Slaughters of innocent men: And Anno 1002. the same King HABITO
CONCILIO CVM REGNI SVI PRIMATIBVS, utile duxit, a Danis dextras accipere, etc.
And CONSILIO PRIMATVM SVORVM, by the Counsel of his Nobles (or Chief men) gave
them 24000 l. and Anno 1007. CONSILIO PRIMATVM SVORVM, BY THE COUNSEL OF HIS
NOBLES. he gave them 30000 l. gathered out of all England, that they should
desist from Rapines, and hold a firm Peace with him. Anno 1012. Duke Edric and
ALL THE NOBLES OF ENGLAND OF BOTH ORDERS (to wit, the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal) were assembled together at London before Easter (no doubt in a Great
Council) and continued there so long till the Tribute promised to the Danes
should be paid, which was 48000 l. All which is recorded in these express
terms by Matthew Westminster, Florentius Wigorniensis and Simeon Dunelmensis in
their Chronicles and Histories of these respective years; and by Polychronicon,
Fabian, Holinshed, Grafton, Speed and other late Historians out of them. So as
this Tax or Tribute paid to the Danes, was undoubtedly imposed and levied by
common Consent in the Parliamentary Councils of those times, not by the Kings
own Power and Prerogative alone. True it is, King Suanus the Dane having
conquered most of the Land, exacted it from the people, and levied it perforce
against their wills, for the payment of his Soldiers: But the Inhabitants of
St. Edmonds-bury refused to pay it: Whereupon he threatened by force to spoil
and destroy the Town; but in the midst of his Jollity and Nobles, he suddenly
cried out, that he was struck through by St. Edmond with a Sword, or Spear, no
man seeing the hand that smote him: and so with great horror and torment died
three days after at The^ford: as Hoveden Annal. pars prior: Simeon Dunelmensis
de Gestis Regum Angliae. Anno 1014. col. 170. Math. Westminster Anno 1014 p.
394. Ranulsus de Diceto, Abbreviationes Chronicorum col. 465. Johann. Brompton
Chron. col. 892. Fabian part 6. c. 200 Polychronicon l. 6. c 16. Speed in his
History l. 7 p. 420. with others relate. A memorable Punishment for this his
illegal Exaction and Oppression.

As for the Tax of Danegeld imposed on the People, (to wit) 12 d. as some,
Chron. Johan. Brompton col. 957.
or 2 s, as others, to be annually paid out of every Hyde or Plowland
throughout the Realm, (except the Lands of the Church, and some others exempted
from it by special Charters) it was imposed by Authority and Acts of General
Councils only, (not by royal Prerogative) for Defense of the Kingdom by Land
and Sea against the Danes, and other Enemies and Pirates, as is evident by the
Laws of King Edward the Confessor cap. 12. The Black Book of the Eschequer l.
1. c. 11. Sir Henry Spelman and William Sonmer their respective Glossarium:
Tit. Danegeld* p; 200, 201. Mr. ^elden his Mar^ Cla^sum l* 2 as I have
irrefragably proved at large in My Humble Remonstrance against the Illegal Tax
of Ship-mony p, 19. to 25, to which I refer you for fuller satisfaction.

Anno 1051: Anno Dom. 1051.
this unsupportable Tax of Dane^el^ was ^^leased for ever to the People of
England by King Edward the Confessor, (...) toward his oppressed People,
Proposition (...)
to wit, in the 38. year from the time that Suanus King of the Danes commanded
it to be yearly paid to his Army, in the reign of King Ethelbert, Father to
this King Edward: Which Abbot Ingulph in his History p: 897. John Brompton in
his Chronicle col. 938, 9^3. Simeon Dun^lmensis De Gest. Reg: Angl: col: 184.
Ailredus Abbas Rievalus de Vita and miraculis Edwardi Confess col: 383.
Radulfus de Diceto Abbrev. Chron: col: 475 Henry de Knyghton de Eventibus Angl
l, 1 c. 9. col: 2331. Mr: Seldom in his Marc Clausum l, 2 Sir Henry Spelman in
his G^ossary, Title D^^eg^ld, and others thus relate in Ingulphus words.
TRIBUTUM GRAVISSIMUM quod DANEGELD dicebatur, OMNI ANGLIAE IN PERPETUUM
RELAXAVIT; and DE TAM FERA EXACTIONE NE IOTA UNVM VOLVIT RETINERE: re^oring to
the People all the money then collected and brought into his Bedchamber by his
Officers, and there laid in heaps; upon which this most holy King (as some of
these record) saw a Devil dancing and triumphing with over much Joy: and
calling it, HIS MONEY, QUIA INJUSTE ADQUISITA EST DE SUBSTANTIA PAUPERUM;
because it was See Mich. Leckm. Ser 83 and Sueni Ros^l^^ Tit. Pedagium.
unjustly gotten out of the substance of the poor Subjects. (though by color
of former Grants by common consent in Parliamentary Councils) upon which
occasion this good King forthwith rest^ red all that was collected, and
perpetually released for the future this great and heavy Tribute (which had
continued near forty years) to the Englishmen for ever, so that after that
day it was no more gathered; as Roger Hovedon Annal: pars prior. p, 447. Hygden
in his Polychron: l, 6. c, 24. Capgrave, Surius, Ribadenicra, Holinshed in the
life of Edward the Confessor^Math* Westminster: Simeon Dun^lm^nsis, and Florent.
Wigorniensis An: 1051. Grafton in his Chronicle p. 180. Speed in his History of
Great Britain l, 8. c, 6 Sect 7, p, 419. Fabian in his Chron: part 6. c, 210 p,
282, with the other forementioned Authors jointly attest.

By these four first General Taxes and public charges thus imposed on the
ancient Saxons and English, only by common grant and consent in the great
Parliamentary general Councils of the Realm, both for the maintetenance of
Gods Worship, Ministers, Religion, Learning and defense of the Realm against
foreign Enemies and Invasions, the truth of the first fundamental Proposition
in the precedent Chapter, is abundantly confirmed, during all our Saxons Kings
Reigns; which I shall confirm in subsequent Sections, by Presidents in all
succeeding ages to this present: who never granted any Subsidies, Aids, Taxes,
but by full consent in Parliament, and that in small proportions (one See Matthew
Paris in Henry 3 and Cooks 4 Justitutes c, 1. Rastal Taxes.
Subsidy, or Escuage, or Fifteen, or Tenth at most, and no more, not endless
Monthly Taxes, much less Excises coupled with them, as now, and many times
refused to grant any Aid or Tax at all, as I shall prove at large in Henry the
third his reign) and then not before all their Greivances first redressed and
the Great Charter, and their violated Liberties first confirmed by new Grants,
Oaths, Acts, Charters, Excommunications, not so much as thought upon now,
after such unparalleld violations and subversions of them, which all our late
endl^ss^ Egyptian Tax-masters of several kinds, even out of Parliaments, by
their own usurped authority, without the oppressed peoples grants or consents
in any ^e^ll English Parliaments, may do well to consider; and withal to
peruse that notable Discourse of Gulielmus Peraldus, Bishop of Lions, De
Virtutibus and Vitiis. Tom. 2. De Avaritia cap. 3. DE INJVSTIS TALLiIS f. 4^,
45 Where he largely demonstrates See Alexand. Fabrit. Destr. Vitionem pars 4 c,
5. who is fuller than he herein.
the greatness and odiousness of the sin of laying and levying unjust illegal
Taxes on the people; proving, that besides the sin of RAPINE, there is PECCATVM
PRODITIONIS the sin of TREAS^N in it; to other with the sin of INGRATITUDE, and
CONTEMPT OF GOD and ANGELS. And withal resolves; That if Rul^^^, Soldiers
shall impose or levy any unjust Taxes upon the People, or exact more from them
(...) just wages, contrary to the Gospel precept, Luc. 3. 14. (...) PRODITORES,
they are TRAITORS: Spoliant enim filios De. (...) fidei (...) commendatos; for
they spoil the people of God committed to their good f^^^^ and tuition, and use
them no otherwise than if they were Enemies: and who knows not that it is the
Crime of TREASON, cum amicis inimicitias exercere; to exercise acts of enmity
toward their friends? and like the Devi^ himself to render affliction and
punishments to those, instead of protection and ^^^^ibution, who serve and pay
them best. Quibus* dici potest quod secundum (...) DOMINATIO EORVM DIABOLICA
EST: as he there d^^ermines, to rectify the mistakes of those, who now think
this kind of new Tax imposing Government, not Diabolical, but Angelical or
Saint-like.

I now return to my former Chr^nolog^cal method and Collections, during all the
reigns of our Saxon and Danish Kings, which I shall prosecute in the nex^
Section, till the English supplantation by the Normans; of which John Brompton
Abbot of ^^rual gives this reason (by way of divine ret^^i^tion) which I desire
all Swordmen and othe^s, who ^epute Conquest, and the longest Sword, a just
and Saint-like Title to other Men^ Lands, Poss^ssions, and all temporiz^ng
Divines (who like Augustine the first A^ch bishop of Canterbury, who converted
the English to Christianity QUI PRAETEXTV FIDEI GEN^EM ADVENAM IN ALIE^^
CONFIR^AVIT IMPERIO UT SVAM ET ROMANA^ JURISDICTIONEM DILATARET, instead ^f
preaching, of pressing the Doctrine of RESTITUTION to them, for which he is
justly taxed by Laeland and Antiqu. Eccles. Brit. p, 12.
Math. Parker, as being long, dissimilis Pa^^a^^o tunc Scotorum Apostolo, qui
Constantinum eorum Regem (test. Polydoto) multis precibus hortatus est, ne
gentem Saxo^um IMPIAM contra BRITANNOS CHRISTIANOS IVVARET) seriously to
ruminate upon Chron. Johan. Brompton col. 883.
Hoc autem Dei nutu factum esse constaet, ut ^^lum contra IMPROBOS ANGLOS
postea IUSTO DEI IUDICIO tempore disposito adveniret. Nam SICVT ANGLI quos
DEUS, sceleribus suis exigentibus, disterminare proposuerat, BRITONES peccatis
suis exigentibus, humiliaverant, and A TERRA ANGLIAE MINUS JUST FVGAVERANT;
SIC I^^I DUPLICI PERSECUTIONE, prim^ DAC^RUM saevienti^^, postea NORMANNORVM
superuenientium fortitudine GENTIBVS EXTRANEIS SUBDERENTVR, quod in sequentibus
appareb^^.

FINIS.

