A LETTER OF DUE CENSURE, AND REDARGVTION TO Lieut. Coll: JOHN LILBURNE:
touching his Trial at Guild-Hall-London in October: last. 1649.

WHEREIN If there be contemper'd some corrosive ingredients, it is not to be
imputed unto malice: The intent is, to eat away the Patients proud, dead flesh,
not to destroy any sincere, sound part.

2 SAMUEL: 16. 5. And when king David came to Bahurim, behold, thence came out a
man of the family of the house of Saul, whose name was Shimei, the son of
Gerah: he came forth, and cursed still as he came.

6. And he cast stones at David, and at all the servants of king David: and all
the people, and all the mighty men were on his right hand, and on his left.

7. And thus said Shimei when he cursed, Come out, come out thou bloody man,
and thou man of Belial:

8. The Lord has returned upon thee all the blood of the house of Saul: and
behold, thou art taken in thy mischief, because thou art a bloody man.

11. And David said to Abishai, and to all his servants, etc. Let him alone,
and let him curse; etc. It may be that the Lord will look on mine affliction,
and that the Lord will requite good for his cursing this day

LONDON: Printed by Fr: Ne^le. 16^0.

YOu Benjamites which envy Judahs Crown,
Cursing weak Princes, when their hands hang down:
Which limit God by your intayles, and spite
Scepters transported by his sovereign right:
Which scorn the Son of Noble Jonathan,
As a desponding, poor, unhearted man,
Because he can behold without regret
His Fathers Flowers in David's garland set:
Expect black-mouthed Shimeis tardie fate,
The sword of Heaven trenches deep, though late.
SIR,
GODS strict injunction obliges us all, to reprove sin, wheresoever we find
it: and as far as reproof has any vigor in it, to endeavor the reducement into
the right way of all such as wander from it through ignorance. I being therefore
to direct this my reprehension, and censure to you, desire you to accept of it,
as enjoined by God himself: For I have read the relation of your Arraignment in
October: last, (the same as is verified, and avowed under your own hand) and my
conscience tells me, I should deal unfaithfully with you, and neglect Gods
command, if I should not strive to convince you, of the great scandal, that
has been given by it to all good, and wise men. If I my self err, or
transgress my bounds in this censorious, redargutory address of mine: I
desire the like freedom from you; well knowing that in many things, we offend
all: and therefore, God forbid, but I should be as ready to ask pardon, where I
give offense, as to grant pardon where I receive any. Nay I am not more forward
in begging your pardon when I know I have offended, then I am in challenging
your censure, wherein I have offended, when I know not the same my self. Alas,
it is a woeful obstinacy in some men that they will not hear, and it is as
woeful a timidity in others, that they will not give just, and due
reprehensions. I doubt you are hardened in your errors, because so few declare
against you: yet I hope, this will easily sink into you, that other men's
silence, when you are really become a public scandal, will neither be able to
acquit you before God, nor disoblige them. This man pretends you are a stranger
to him, that man intimates you are below his reprehension: a third, objects,
that you are mordacious, and so wilful, that you are beyond the benefit of any
ingenuous reprehension: but sure, Gods command of an office so just, and
charitable, as Christian objurgation is, is not so to be superseded, or eluded.
Your sin becomes mine, upon my silence, because I endeavor not to cure you:
and my sinful silence adds to your trespasses, because it renders you the
more incurable. For, first, All English Protestants are to regard you as a
brother within Gods command, and not as a stranger without it, for our common
Mother the State of England, and our common Mother the Church of England, has a
share in you: and necessarily must suffer loss by the loosing of you, or gain
by the reduction of you: and so in both these respects, or consanguinious
relations (religious, and politic) you are to be tendered as a brother, though
perhaps your face be strange to us. Nay Gods command of reprehension is so
large, that he that may be made my brother by it, though he be not so as yet,
is capable of, and may require at my hands all faithful brotherly offers from
me. 2ly, If you were bred a man of Trade, and not of letters: no man, how
learned soever, can therefore allege, that it is too inglorious a task for him,
to contest with you. Your want of literature at the last day will not make you
incapable of charity, or absolve them, who fail in the offices of charity
toward you; the duty of reproof was not imposed upon us by God, that we might
gain victory to our selves, but that we might recover souls to him: wherefore if
any man make use of reproof only for trial of his wit, and affect therein a
garland above truth: that man setting himself on work is to receive wages from
himself: he remains still a debtor unto God, but it is not to be expected that
God should be made a debtor unto him. 3ly: others testify not against you for
fear of your maledicency and inflexibility: but neither are these so to be
acquitted before God. For God does not call all men in the forenoon, nor in the
third, nor fourth hour of the afternoon: it belongs to us, early and late to
admonish, and advertise, and with patience to expect Gods time, and good
pleasure whether he will prosper our first, or our latter endeavors. Besides
if Gods call has preceded, yet we still must wait with patience, for his call
does not always work a sensible change in the first moment, especially in men
of rugged dispositions, and in those things which are most congeniall to the
ruggedness of their dispositions. Lastly, if a sensible, apparent change has
been wrought by Gods call, yet still more patience is required of us, forasmuch
as there is so much instability, and lubricity in the best men, that none of us
are absolutely free from temporary relapses, and strange defections at
sometimes. These things therefore will charge justly all of want of charity, or
pusillanimous despondence, who see other men's deviations, yet seek not to
reclaim them, and receive scandals often times, yet use no endeavors to amend
them.

But I hasten to the principal scope of this Letter, and to the particular
heads of those things, for which you are liable to reproof.

1. The first thing, which in reading the manner of your Trial gave me
scandal was: your prolix urging, and repeating of very many impertinent
things, and yet complaining withal, that a just, and due freedom of speech
was taken from you; it is most evident, (though you were not satisfied with your
own vain loquacity) that a multitude of frivolous things fell from you too
unworthy to detain the meanest and idlest of your Auditors, much more unworthy
to entangle a Bench of such honorable, and sage Commissioners.

2. The second was: your laying hold of diverse shifting cavils, and shufling
exceptions in Law which were only fit to waste time, and procure trouble to the
Court, (they were far from making any defense for you at all) and yet
complaining at the same time, that the Law was forced, and violented to your
destruction.

3. The third which convinced me of your ignorance, if not of your impudence,
was the utmost strength of your most formal pleas, and reasons in Law: for in
my mind even those, though you demeaned your self strangely presumptuous upon
the justice of your cause, and upon your knowledge of the Law, were exceeding
defective, and insufficient.

4. The 4th. thing which gave me deep offense, and left you totally inexcusable
in my judgment, was your bitter raylings against the Judges, nay your most
filthy reproachings against all Law, and Authority, I might almost say against
humanity, and Divinity too; and yet still whilst you treated your Judges as
the most despicable creatures in the world, your complaint was, that you were
most villanously treated your self.

5. The 5th. thing which deserves a keen reproof from all honest men, was your
assayling the sincerity of your Jurors so diversely, it was very plain that by
the insidious clamors of your disciples, you attempted them one way, and by
other subtle blandishments you seemed to wind your self into their favors
another way. For though you had the hap to amuze your 12. men, there is scarce
any honest man in England, that is not moved to a great deal of disdain at the
gross attempts which you made to debosh them both ways.

Of these in this order.

1. In your Arraignments first entrance being called upon to hold up your hand*
acco^ding to the old custom and Law of England, by way of anticipation you
demand freedom of speech: a thing you could not d^ubt of, provided you would
not extend the bounds of your freedom too far. But it should seem your demand
was for freedom of speech void of all bounds, and that your Judges might put
no difference betwixt matters alleged proper for the time, place, and trial
in hand, and matters utterly improper: you must have it as free for you to
waste time away, and to abuse the Courts patience by trifling, as to defend
your self by opening the true state of your cause, and giving judicial answers
to your Indictment. You begin therefore with long harangues of what had passed
at Westminster, and Oxford, at some Arraignments of yours before the House of
Peers, and Judge Heath: and then making no just use thereof: you descend as
causlesly to speak against clandestine Trials, and upon that occasion you
inform the Court, what had once been debated betwixt M: Miles Corbet, and your
self at a Committee for Examinations. From thence you slide to the great
exploits that were done at Brainford against the Kings Army by your self, and
some few others. From thence you digress to some conference betwixt the
Lieutenant of the Tower, and your self, wherein is laid open what faith you had
given him to be his true Prisoner. You next rove further from thence, and
inform the Court what the L: President Bradshaw, and M. Cook had pleaded for
you in 1641. against the rigorous urging of Oaths by the Lords of Star Chamber:
likewise, what your City friends formerly had suggested for you in their
Petition: what estate of yours had been seized upon by some Ministers of the
Parliament: what incivility the Soldiers had showed in apprehending you: what
Coll: Walter Long had spent the King during his imprisonment in the Tower: what
you had read in the Law Books against special Commissions of Oier and
Terminer: how requisite it was that your Judges should expose their Commission
to your exception, that their power of judging you might so be submitted to
your power of judging them.

To conclude, (though you concluded not so) after much more obstreperous
contestation about so many several impertinences, you vouchsafe at last to
arrive at your Trials Introduction, to wit, the first ceremony of holding up
your hand to the Court, and even that ceremony also must afford you a larger
field for your eloquence to expatiate in. This was your preludium in the
forenoon of your first day: and to trace you further through all your
extravagancies, for two entire days would be endless: but by this preludium
any man may easily discern what lessons were played afterward, when your pipes
were once thoroughly tuned. You will perhaps say, though these and some other
passages (by you repeated more then once,) were foreign to the main issue of
guilty, or not guilty, yet inasmuch as they did some way tend to move
commiseration in the people, they were not altogether unseasonable, or
improper. But this supposes that you were brought to the bar as well to work
upon the multitude, and catch the affections of the injudicious, as to satisfy
your sworn Judges and Jurors in matter of Law, or Fact: which is a thing not at
all to be supposed. For you must needs grant, that it belongs not to the common
people that are admitted to see and hear, to pass any judgment at all: that
it belongs not to the Judges to see or hear, as the common people do: that
public persons are to divest themselves of private affections: that if your
Judges might not look upon you with private eyes, or acquit you of present
guilt in regard of past merits, or former sufferings (which is not allowed to
them) yet they are not to be swayed at all with your bare averments of your own
merits, and sufferings without sufficient testimony, and examination of others.
You know the old Theorems of Law: Judges are to proceed, and pass sentence not
secundum allegata, bu^ secundum allegata and pro^ata: and therefore in all
Courts of Justice, things not made apparent, are in the same predicament, as
things not existent. It appears therefore, that all these discourses of yours,
wherein so many hours were consumed, were improper, and extrajudiciall; and
this appearing so clearly: with what front could you pretend, and clamor as
you did, that freedom of discourse was taken away from you, and that all that
was due to an English man was denied you? Is it possible, is it reconcilable
to sense, that you could be abridged of just liberty in pleading things
pertinent, and yet at the same time range abroad so wildly, and profusely
lavish away your oratory in things so impertinent? Two entire days were spent
in your Trial; and yet it is most evident by the short issue you were put
upon, (viz: whether you were the Author or no of such, and such Pamphlets) that
as much business of other men's uses commonly to be dispatched in a quarter of
the space, as was dispatched then of yours. Your own Narrative also set forth by
your own approbation (if not order and direction) shows, and ocularly
demonstrates, that in your long Trial, neither the Commissioners on the Bench,
nor the Counsel^ at Bar took up half so much time in speaking, as you your
self did. There can be no error in this, if we will but number your leafs, and
lines of your own panegyricall, ostentatious Relation. Besides not only the
prolixity, but also the acrimony of your language testifies against you: for
men that are restrained from speaking, are much more restrained from speaking
insolently, maliciously, and abusively: and the same Authority that checks
modest language, will serve to choke up, and obstruct all immodest expressions.
Sure, you were not well advised, when you suffered this book of your Trial to
pass the Press: for it either contradicts you, or it self; inasmuch as in
some places it contains very passionate complaints to yours against the Court,
as if it triumphed over you, and debarred you of a free defense: yet the whole
tenor of it from one end to the other declares amply, and pregnantly, that your
Judges were by you treated as the most abject captives in the world, and, as it
were, dragd up and down before the vulgar only to grace your chariot wheels. In
due place I shall instance to you, and give in particulars how insulting you
were, how the ears of your Judges were always deafned almost with their own
reproaches, and all other men's mouths stopped with your hyperbolicall
boastings. Such odious shameless things were scarce ever vented by any brawler
whatsoever, in any place whatsoever, much less did ever any prisoner at Bar
presume to spit such things in the face of Justice it self. But my order leads
me next after your mere impertinences to your frivolous cavillations.

2. I shall here only recite, with much brevity, some of your principal
subterfuges, and demurring pretenses, and then let the world judge, whether
ever any Tribunal before would suffer Justice to be so bafled: or any Prisoner
before ever thought it worth while to lay hold of such poor advantages. The
ceremony of your hands erection must first be explained to you; and when by its
explanation it appears harmless, and of a reasonable signification, you will
agree to do something equivalent, and tantamount, but the ceremony it self, and
its ancient Authority you will not submit to. For your Judges Commission, you
must first be advised whether it be general, or special: and when you are
advised that it is not special: yet you must have leave a great while to show
your learning and reading against special Commissions. When you are to plead
to your Indictment of Treason (Guilty, or not Guilty:) you must first spend
time in pleading against such pleading: and when that will not prevail, you
give in a conditionate, delusory plea, such as you think is good enough for the
trial to proceed upon whilst you please, but may be revoked at your pleasure.
When your Indictment is read, you must have a copy of it, you must have space
for eight or nine days to put in exceptions against it: you must have Counsel
assigned you to prepare those exceptions: and if these things be granted,
(which you know were never granted in England, or elsewhere) you will vouchsafe
to make an absolute, binding plea. When the question is put, by whom you will
be tried: you will not say by God and your Country, because that is a form
anciently prescribed, but after some time wrangled away, you will yield to the
same in substance: that is, you will be tried in the presence of God by a Jury
of your Equals, according to Law. When you see your sophisms are not able to
blind your Judges, you carp at the very Honor of your Trial: you repine at
the Bench for being adorned with so much learning, and for being filled with so
great a number of Judges, Aldermen, Knights, Esquires, etc. no less then
forty in all: nay neither your Judges, nor the Grand Jury (though they were
choice men also) could escape the brands of suborned persons, and conspirators
against your life. When the Judges, to pacify your impetuous noise for
Counsel, promise you shall have it, as soon as matter of Law arises out of
matter of Fact, and in the mean time assure you they (according to their duty)
will be faithful Counsel to you, you answer, that your Indictment is nothing
else but matter of Law. When a second day is granted you to produce witnesses
(a favor not expected by other Delinquents, who at their perils are to be
always ready with their witnesses to purge themselves of any crime) instead
of bringing witnesses, you begin that second day with a disavowing of your
Plea. When you have used all art your self in consuming, and dallying away
time, you demand leave for your Solicitor that he may come in upon the Court,
as a fresh Reserve of yours. When the Petit-Jury appears to be sworn, you are
not contented to except against them your self upon your own discretion; you
desire your friends may be admitted also to except against them, because
perhaps some of your Friends may know some of them better then you do. When
witnesses appear to prove you the Author of such a book, you prescribe them to
swear to this individual book, viz: that this identicall book was delivered to
the Printer, and this identicall book is intimated in the Indictment. When a
single witness appears against you, though he be seconded with never so many
pregnant circumstances, and strong presumptions, yea though others contest also
to the same thing, only not acted in the same place, and at the same time; you
then waive the municipall Law of England, and prefer the Civil Law before it:
it is in vain for your Judges to cite Statutes against you: for either you are
wiser then the Statutes of England, or you are a wiser Interpreter of the
Statutes of England, then your Judges. When three competent witnesses depose
against you as to the same seditious book, you say those books were not without
errataes, and it is possible that the same book had had no seditious passages in
it, had it not been for those Errataes of the Printer. When some of the books
carried the signature of your own hand upon them, you put the Attorney General
to his proofs that that was your hand: and if that be proved by the Attorney,
you tell him plainly, He gains nothing by it, for except the book be proved
yours otherwise, the signature of your hand proves it not so. When the Printers
Errataes will not help you, you say the book perhaps might be misdated, for if
the book was made and dated before the Act of Parliament (which condemned such
books as seditious) it was not seditious. When the Act of Parliament is proved
precedent to the date, you say, perhaps the Act was not duly proclaimed, or
else the copy of the Act read now, was not examined duly by the Clerks book
at Westminster, or else the Clerks book at Westminster was no true Parliament
Record. Let it be supposed also that you are proved the Author of such books,
and the same to be treasonable; yet still you defend your self with this, that
in those treasonable books, you had no treasonable intent, and then you are
still upon this guard: Men's, non Actus facit rem: The Law condemns none for a
Treasonable Act, except his intent be proved treasonable. Alas, what is there,
that can escape your exception? From the Judges, and the Laws, and the
Witnesses, and the Informers, and the Jurors, you proceed at last to except
against the Doorkeeper of the Jurors. You pretend, forsooth, that the very
Doorkeeper has expressed something of bitterness against you: and therefore you
move that the Door of the room where the Jurors are to agree of a Verdict,
may be kept by some other man more impartial toward you. Who ever heard of
such dallying capritioes before in any Court of Justice? who ever heard of any
Judges hands bound up before by the like nugatory cavillations of any Prisoner
whatsoever? You think your life a strange prey, that all the world should be
such greedy hunters of it: but I think your soul a strange Purgatory rather,
that so many jealous, uncharitable thoughts, like Zim, and Ohim, should be
disquieting haunters of it. The Parliament is partial, and conjured against
you, because some Members of it have been provoked by, and put at a distance
with you by some enmity of yours: The Atturny General is no competent
Prosecutor against you, because he is a Burgess of Parliament: The Judges are
excepted against, because they are created by the Parliament: and all the rest
of the Bench are to be suspected, because, forsooth, they may be mislead, and
overborn by these creatures of the Parliament. Thus to you justice can never
be administered, till the world be new molded, nay nor yet so, except you have
the new moulding of it. But I pray tell me, do all these objections, and
prolongations of yours savor of a dejected, oppressed spirit, or could they
proceed from an imprisoned, overawed tongue? Judicet Orbis. Surely you did
direct these futilous, empty umbrages of reason either to sway wiser judgments,
or only to infect, and trump the ruder multitude: if the first, you render
your self a very deliring man notwithstanding all your reading of the Law,
which you vaunt so much of: if the second, you merit the brand of a frontlesse
impostor, and seem to prefer Mahomets politics before Machiavels.

3. I come now from your impertinencies, and cavils to the more rational, and
formal part of your defense: but what true strength there was in your best
arguments, and pleas; let the world judge, and decide.

You begin with the Commission, by which the Court sits upon you, and is
qualified to absolve or condemn you. You argue stiffly that you ought to hear
it read, and pass your censure of it; nay you pretend all other Commissions,
besides those ordinary ones, whereby the Country Assizes, and Quarterly
Sessions are held, are against Law.

By this, it should seem, the Judges come upon the Bench to be judged of by
Prisoners at the Bar, as well as Prisoners at the Bar come to be judged by
the Bench. For if the party arraigned may freely question, and dispute the
Authority before which he is arraigned, there must be some other Court to
determine betwixt him, and his Judges, or else he and his Judges being both
clothed with equalty of jurisdiction, must depart upon equal terms, without
any judgment passed on either side. And if so, what issue, what effect can
Justice have? I do not deny, that a Prisoner may be wrongfully condemned, I do
not deny that a prisoner so wronged is remediable: I only deny, the Prisoner
to be a competent Judge of such wrongs. Upon this reason it stands, that a
Prisoner may appeal to a higher Judge from the lower, but his right of appeal
derives to him no right of Judgment: nor can appeals lie but only from
inferior Courts. For if there were a freedom of judging due to Prisoners,
as well as of appealing, all impeachments, and criminal charges would be
endless, and utterly incapable of determination. Commissions hereupon are
directed to the Judges, not to Prisoners, and being Warrants for the Judges to
proceed upon, and to justify their sentences, not rules, or Laws by which
Prisoners are to stand or fall, they ought to be read, and examined by the
Judges, but not so by Prisoners. Besides, though it may be proper for a
Prisoner in some cases to appeal at last from his Judges, where they have not
rightly pursued their Commission: you he cannot plead at first to the virtue of
the Commission, forasmuch, as in so doing he appeals not to, but from the
Supreme Authority: nor can he plead want of legal form in the Commission,
forasmuch as that pertains to the danger, or indemnity of his Judges, not of
him: and if he were as much concerned in it, as his Judges (which he cannot be)
yet twere absurd that his judgment should be made equal, or superior to the
judgment of his Commissioners. It Is by you taken for granted, that the special
Commissions of Oier, and Terminer in the North (which were first granted by
Hen: the 8th: and after continued by all his Successors) were illegal, and
unformall: if we should grant this too (as we do not) you may conclude, that
the Commissioners which acted thereupon, were answerable for acting without a
sufficient warrant: but you cannot conclude notwithstanding, that any
Delinquent, or Defendant suffered unjustly thereby, or was condemned contrary to
Law thereupon. Moreover, it is high arrogance in you to condemn all
extraordinary Commissions of Oier, and Terminer; and to say that the Stat: of
Westmist: the 2d. (where the Supreme power of the Nation, King, Peers, and
Commons, was present, and did cooperate) by which such extraordinary
Commissions were established, was an irrational innovation. You may as
justifiably say, that Ed: the 3d. and all the Kings, and Parliaments since to
this day have deserved your correction, and subjected themselves to your vile
exprobration, for that they also have confirmed, and kept in force the same
irrational innovation. What an unlimited liberty do you take to your self? such
things are irrational Innovations, because you affirm, they are contrary to
Magna Charta: and yet you know well, the power and Majesty of England, the same
as created Magna Charta it self, by several Statutes, and by a continual
confirmation of practice for the space of above 300. years, have declared them
neither to be innovations, nor contrariant to Magna Charta. Wherefore since your
judgment cannot bow to any, nor can pay a reverent submission to the Authority
of so many Parliaments, or to the prudence of so many ages, what satisfaction
are you capable of? You will say this Parliament in 1641. when it consisted of
4. or 5. hundred Members, and when it was an undeflowred Counsel condemned,
and abolisht the Northren Court. Let it be so: that particular Court had
declined from its primitive institution, and so was thought fit to be
dissolved: but you know after much debate about the abuses of extraordinary
Commissions in general, and after a full poizing of all that could be urged on
both sides, nothing was concluded further against them; and so the Parliaments
resolution at last makes as much against you, as its debate at first makes for
you, Exceptio in non exerptis firmat regulam. More was delivered at your Trial
by the Atturny General, and the Judges touching this subject: and that this
Commission by which you were to be judged, was not special but general: I
shall not therefore add any more at present upon the subject, but refer you to
your own memory. I shall only supply this advertisement, that whatsoever
illegality can be objected against special Commissions, it more befits and
imports the Commissioners, then their Prisoners arraigned before them, to
dispute the same. And whereas you appeal (as it were) from this present
devirginated Parliament, to that which sat in 1641. which acted so gallantly,
as you say, for universal liberty; and not for self-interest: you must be
reminded, that none but Parliaments ought to judge of Parliaments: and that
Parliaments become no Parliaments when they are liable to the censures of
private persons. You may be also further reminded, that the Parliament of 1641.
which was so pure, yet in 1642. afforded a great number of revolting Members to
the King: such as you your self then judged revolters. Nay the same Parliament
in 1647. afforded yet many more revolters in your construction, for your first
quarrel against the Parliament was, that it did not then purge it self of the
degenerate Members that assembled with M. H: Pelham. This is therefore a
contradictorious humor in you to decry the Parliament in 1649. that you may
extol the Parliament in 1641, when according to your own former judgment, the
Parliament of 1649. is only the unrevolting remainder of the Parliament in 1641.

The next thing you complain of, is: that you are not arraigned in your own
County at the Assizes, and that you were not apprehended by the Civil Officer,
although the Nation be now in peace, and you one that neither sought to fly,
nor make resistance. Here you suppose that you are an ordinary person, that
these are ordinary times, that the crime you are Indicted for is an ordinary
crime, and so you infer, that this apprehension, and arraignment of yours being
extraordinary is against the common right and Freedom of the Nation. But. 1.
for your person, you are not a common malefactor; you are presumed, upon no
light grounds, to be the Head, or one of the heads of a dangerous, and
desperate faction; and faction that has already been in Arms, and is still
watching new opportunities of rising again in Arms; a faction that has used all
endeavors to disband, divide, and debosh the Army, and to effect the same is
willing to combine with Royalists, or any foreign Invaders whatsoever: the
Crime charged upon you is as heinous as can be, it is vigorously attempting by
all manner of practices, and correspondencies, especially by seditious
Pamphlets, to imbroyl this Nation in a third Civil war, and so to subvert the
settled Form of Government. The former Wars have been exceeding bloody, and
long it was before the Nations wounds could be stanched, wherefore another
tearing open of the same wounds, would in probability make them more mortal,
and more hard to be healed, then they were before. 3. For the times they are
not so calm, and secure, as your party, together with the Royalists, would fain
make us to believe they are, to the end that you might the better incense the
people against Taxes and Excise, and so wrest our Arms out of our hands: We
have not indeed Ensigns flourisht against Ensigns in the field, nor weapons
openly drawn against weapons, but every Summer almost we have new
Insurrections, and even now we keep our Colors unfurled, that we may keep
yours furled: and our Swords remain unsheathed to daunt you from unsheathing
yours. Non recurrendum est ad extraordinaria in iis quae fleri possunt per
ordinaria: we grant you so much: but you must then as freely grant to us; that
where ordinary remedies are not so safe, and available, we must have resort to
such, as are extraordinary. Judge Jenkins never read this maxim of the Law to
you, that a private mischief is rather to be chosen, then a public
inconvenience. For certainly neither he, nor you would so confound perpetually
all persons, cases, and times, and be so oblivious of all necessity, and reason
of State, as to put a private man's liberty in balance against public safety,
and to value some formalities in practice equal with the highest of all Laws,
if ever you had seriously studied this incontroulable, unerring maxim.
Besides, were that Law by which you challenge an ordinary Trial at the Assizes
in Surrey, every way equivalent to the Empress of all Statutes, Customs, and
formalities (Salus Populi): yet neither so would your challenge hold: forasmuch
as your Treason (if proved against you) was committed not only in Surrey where
perhaps your books were written, but in London also where your books were
Printed, yea in every County of the Land where they were published, and dispersed
amongst the people. There is not a Parish in England, or Wales, but may appear
to prosecute you for a general disturber of Peace, and mover of sedition, and
one that has most desperately conjured against his whole Country, and every
part of it.

The 3d: thing you argue against is the plea of Guilty, or not Guilty: it is
against the Petition of Right, you say, that any man should be compelled to
answer Interrogatories against himself: that the Star Chamber Court was
abolisht for forcing such Interrogatories upon us: lastly, that the practice of
Christ himself, and his Apostles, discharges us from answering to such
Interogatories. You run here into a gross mistake, for that you distinguish
not betwixt the abusive framing, and enforcing of some special Interrogatories
upon oath, where the crime is not of public concernment, and where other proof
is failing, and where they extend further then to the point in issue: and
demanding an affirmative, or negative without oath to the direct point in
issue, where according to valid evidence a legal charge of public concernment
is preferred. If these things were distinguished, you would not find any thing
in the Petition of Right repugnant to the old Interrogatory of Guilty, or not
Guilty. For since the 3d: of K: Charles Delinquents have been tried, and held to
this old plea, as well as before in all ages, and none of our Judges ever yet
sprung any such new interpretation, as you now spring, contrary to the custom
of all times, and all Nations. The odium that now lies upon some
Interrogatories has been contracted either by the fraud of the party
interrogating, or obstinacy of the party interrogated: whereupon the
sweet-temper'd Law of England, to prevent the mischief that might arise from
either of these parties, that neither the one might strain questions too high,
nor the other decline them too far, finds out a channel in the midst of the
stream, neither totally abandoning them, nor giving too wild a license to
them. The civil Law is very rigorous, and in many places uses racks to extort
evidence from ordinary Delinquents, where there is but moderate presumption
against them: and yet doubtless this rigor is more salubrious, then such a
fondness as you now contend for, when you would reject all Examinations in all
case whatsoever. The Star Chamber was grown to a great abuse of Interrogatories
in private Suits and differences, and was therefore wisely abolisht: but this
proves not, that the first institution of the same Court, yea and its long
continuation after under so many wise Parliaments was unpolitick. For in times
of Reformation it often happens, that even good things, when they have been far
deboshed, are prudently laid aside, and sometimes justly burnt, yea ground to
powder, and made subjects of our detestation. Well therefore might the Lord
President (whom) I shall always mention with as much honor, as you with
contempt, nay whom your contempt confirms to me to be the more honorable) well
might He detestate Star Chamber Examinations, as they had been abused in the
late Kings days, and yet not declare himself now an absolute enemy to all
Examinations whatsoever. The obstinate silence of Delinquents, when they will
not confess, nor deny their guilt, is ever taken for a Confession not only by
the Laws of England, but by the Laws of all other Nations: and 'twas more
favor to you then you could challenge from your Judges, that your plea, which
you would not allow to be negative, was not taken for affirmative against you.
It Is true, if it were sin in a prisoner to confess his guilt, it would be sin
in a Magistrate to press him to such a Confession; but since it is rather a
service to the God of truth, to affirm a truth in the midst of danger, I mean
such a truth, as is of more advantage to justice, and to the safety of a State,
then it is of disadvantage to the party confessing, what rigor is in the Law,
or in the Judge, that requires such a plea from the prisoner? For the
objection, that evil minded men will deny guilt contrary to truth, of which
untrue denial the Magistrate by this means becomes the occasion: it is answered
easily: in as much as he which is no proper cause, though he be an occasion of
offense, offends not therein: in as much also as the Magistrate is not to
prevent an uncertain offense by declining a certain duty: nor will the Law
presume all men false, because many are not true. As for our Saviors example,
who you say being examined before Pilate, would not by his own confession, or
asserting of a truth, make himself obnoxious to judgment: It shows you as
pseudodox in Divinity, as you are in Law. I shall by and by make it appear,
that our Savior who neither had any guilt to confess, nor did refuse to give
answer to any pertinent, judicial questions of the Magistrate, nor had any
hope of escaping condemnation by being silent, is very much blasphemed by you.

A 4th. thing, for which you conceive your arguments are valid, and concludent,
is allowance of Counsel, as also time for eight or nine days to consult with
them, before you answer your Indictment. Your reason is, because you know not
the formalities of Law, as neither having Latin, nor French to read the books,
and you say it is a great deal of nicity and danger for an ignorant man to be
locked up to single formalities. The Judges tell you, that when matter of Law
arises out of matter of Fact, you shall have Counsel assigned you; that till
such matter arise, they are your sworn Counsel, and are bound to be
indifferent betwixt the State, and you: and they will take care that no
niceties, nor single formalities shall overthrow you. You do as good as reply,
that because you are void of Latin, and French, you must have Counsel; and
because they are partial, and you dare neither trust their Offices, nor Oaths,
you must have Counsel such as you dare trust: the sum is this: because you
are ignorant of the practice of Law, you may rail at your Judges, and because
you may rayl at your Judges, you may claim time, and other Counsel besides
them, of your own choosing: if you were not as unskilled in the theory, as you
are in the practice of the Law, you would not upon all occasions so often
infist upon inconveniences likely to ensue to your self, and take no notice of
public mischiefs. You would then be satisfied, that your Judges ought rather
to admit of a mischief to you, then of an inconvenience to the State: although
you perpetually urge them to admit of mischief to the State, rather then
inconveniences unto you. You pretend in the next place, that your Indictment is
long, and consists wholly of matter of Law: and therefore time and Counsel
ought to be assigned you. Your Judges answer you again, that though the
Indictment be long, yet you need not charge your memory with every part of it,
the main matter of it is very brief, and no other but matter of Fact: viz:
whether, or no, you were the Author of the several books therein nominated.
Now no study of Law in England, neither that which is published in English, nor
that which is locked up from the vulger in-Latin and French, can avail you in
this matter, you may perfectly inform your Counsel whether you composed those
books, or no, but your Counsel can inform you nothing at all therein. You
still allege, that after proof of the fact, it may be too late for Counsel
to assist you: and you are not able now to give answer without Counsel,
because you knew not before what would be the matter of your Indictment. I wish
you would at last remember, that the Judges are not to consider only, what is
most behoofull for you, but what is most behoofull for you, and the State: but
still you continue your error in this, that, you suppose your Indictment to be
mere matter of Law, when as you might as well have pretended that it was all
Mathematics, or Metaphysics, as all Law. For is there any impossibility at
present for you to answer without Counsel whether these were your books, or
no: because you knew not before, what you were to answer to? When you say, your
Counsel may come too late after confession of the Fact, your meaning is plain:
it is insinuated thereby, that when you have disowned, or owned a thing, they
cannot procure you a new liberty to own, or disown it the second time, and so
not being able to nullify your answer; they cannot procure you new Counsel,
or new respite for eight or nine days more to give in a new Answer: but when
you say it is impossible for you upon the sudden, and without advice of Counsel
to own, or disown books, you seem very dark to me, I cannot dive into your
meaning. You come now to precedents, and say first, that Ju: Heath at Oxford
allowed you Counsel before pleading. The Judges Answers might give you full
satisfaction herein. For, 1. Heath well enough understood that your charge was
not Treason: 2ly, if it were Treason, He understood, as well, that the
Parliament had more prisoners of the Kings, then the King had of the
Parliaments, and so the retaliation would turn to the disadvantage of the King.
3ly, The proceedings at Oxford are no fit rules for our Courts at Westminster,
nor is it congruous that you who then fought against Heath, and his
confederates, for subverting Law, should now cite his practice at Oxford for
Law, and bring us to rely upon him as a main pillar of Justice. For another
precedent, you cite the Parliament in the Earl of Straffords Case, who, you
say, had Counsel assigned him before pleading, but this is contradicted by
Justice Jermyn: and He better informs you, that the Earl of Strafford before
pleading had no Counsel granted Him: and if He had, the Parliament was not so
subject to the common rules of Law, as inferior Courts are. Your 3d: precedent
alleges that Major Rolph had Counsel allowed him by the Lord Ch: Baron Welde
in a Charge of Treason before the Grand Jury had past upon Him. But the Answers
of your Judges clearly avoid the force of this allegation; for first, it is no
more evident to this Court what was done by the Lord Ch: Baron in Rolphs Case,
then upon what reason it was so done. If Counsel was allowed, it may be Rolph
confessed the Charge, or there might be some other difference in the Case: and
so the allowance of Counsel might be legal. But 2ly, suppose it to be
illegal, and then it has no obliging force upon this Court* That Court which
is engaged to administer justice according to the form of the Common Law of
England, may not so safely follow one example varying from the old usage, as
they may a thousand keeping more close to the same.

In the 5th. place, you strive to invalidate the States witnesses, saying,
there are none but single witnesses now produced against you: and the validity
of single witnesses is taken away by 2. Statutes of Ed: 6. To this the Judges
answer, that the Statutes of Ed: 6. are overruled by a later Stat: of 1. and 2.
of P. and Mary. That also by the Common Law of England, where Treasons are
triable thereby, one witness is sufficient, especially when there are several
facts of a Treasonable nature, and several testimonies given in to each
respective fact. But if single witnesses be not sufficient, yet still in this
case of yours, besides a concurrence of circumstances, and a triplication of
witnesses to several facts of the same nature; and other strong presumptions,
there wants not the complete number of 2. or 3. witnesses to one, and the same
matter, and such as lie under no just or reasonable exception.

In the 6th. place therefore supposing the books proved to be yours, yet you
say, there might be Errataes either in the dating, or Printing of them: and you
are not to suffer for other men's errors. Here is a great weight hanged upon a
small thread: you must not be admitted to be the Author of such, and such
treasons, because there is a possibility, a very remote possibility, that you
were not the Author of them. You strike, and wound a man that dies immediately,
and have nothing to plead for your self, but a mere distant possibility that
the man might have some other mortal inward disease, of which he would have
fallen down dead at the same instant, though your hand had not been upon him.
This plea will not hold good, you are here the affirmant, and the proof lies on
your side, you must make it appear by Chirurgions, and Physicians, that your
blow was not mortal, and that there was indeed some other mortal cause, or
else your mere alleged possibility will advantage you nothing at all. And if
one possibility in that case will not acquit you, how should you be acquitted
in this Indictment, where many seditious passages in many several books are
charged against you, and you have nothing to ward them all, but possibility
upon possibility that all those seditious passages might be caused by so many
several mistakes of the Printers? You having no proofs, nor colorable
presumptions to offer, that there were indeed any such mistakes? He that
affirms (whether he be Plaintiff, or Defendant, if the matter affirmed be very
important) must prove, so far as he affirms, this is a rule in Law, and Logic
not to be dispensed with. And thereupon the Defendant, if by good specialty it
has been proved by the Plaintiff, that money was lent, shall not avoid the
Action, by pleading payment, and satisfaction given, unless he prove, and make
the same evident. Away then with these toys of your Printers possible
Errataes: away likewise with the possible misdating of your books. For the Act
of July last did not so much make, as declare your books treasonable: and you
know in my L. of Straffords Case, when he insisted upon this, that where there
was no Law, therewas no Transgression: it was soon returned to him for answer,
That endeavors to subvert settled Government, was against an internal Law, if
there were none written against it, being malum in se, not quia prohibitum: and
for that reason every man in such transgressions without written Law, is a Law
to himself. It was also further pressed to him, that after the Statute of the
25. Ed: 3. wherein Treasons were specially enumerated, the Parliament
nevertheless had attainted diverse Delinquents, whose Treasons were not
enumerated in that Satute, and it was no relief to the offenders to plead, that
they had offended without warning, and were made the first examples of public
severity. There is nothing more notorious then this, that the Peoples safety
is supreme to all Judicial Laws, as well in order of time, as in order of
Nature: and that as it was, the prime judicial Law engraven in our breasts at
the Creation: so it ought to be the most fundamental Law enrolled in our
public treasuries.

The 7th* prop of our cause is, that you are only acoused, and impeached for
words, and by several Statutes, you say, of Hen: 4. Q. Mary, and Q. Eliz: it
is manifested, that they in those days detested the making of words, or
writing to be Treason. He that rightly distinguishes, rightly delivers, and
teaches truth: but you relying upon a contrary art, an art of confounding
things, not of distinguishing, render your self justly suspected, that your
aim is subtly to infuse, and inspire falsehoods into your disciples, not to
hold forth, or teach truths. You cannot but know there is sometimes a wide
difference in words, yea in the same words; that some words signify more then
others, and at sometimes sound forth greater matters then at others. For
example, words in writing are more permanent, then words spoken: and words
written are of a more transient nature then words printed, forasmuch as they
intimate less of purpose, and premeditation: and the same words spoken,
written, or printed by a discontented man, or at the point of death, or
directed unto persons aggrieved, carry much more weight in them, and use to
make deeper impression, then they would if they had been uttered by another
person, upon another occasion, unto men of another condition. Therefore the
Prophet, who regards some men's words no more then the crackling of thorns under
a pot, or croaking of frogs in a pudle: yet likens other men's words to sharp
arrows, and poisoned darts, yea, and other men's counsels to the venom of asps,
and to the eggs of cockatrices. Adonijah had a request to present to his
brother Solomon, and for the more reverence sake He would use the mediation of
Solomon's mother therein: the matter also of his request was only for a wife,
for a wife of ordinary parentage, who in Law could have no pretension to the
Crown: Howsoever Solomon who found a great danger wrapped up in this plausible
supplication, distinguishes further nevertheless, and by the sentence of his
oraculous breast, that same design which deserved death, and was treasonable
in his brother supplicating, was simple, and altogether inoffensive in his
mother interceding. Achitophel was only of Counsel with Absalom, we find not
that He furnished Horses and Arms, or raised men with his manifestoes, yet
doubtless his words were more pernicious to David at such a time, then the
swords of ten thousand other Revolters; and David was more earnest with God to
disappoint the inductions of Achitophels tongue, then to rout and defeat all
the other brigades, and stratagems of his Son Absalom. Tarquin when his Son
consulted with him about the destruction of a neighbor State, conveyed his
fatal, subversive plots by signs, and dumb gestures: for even by doing
execution with his staff upon the highest grown, and fairest Lilies in the
garden, He sufficiently taught, and instructed a young Traitor to despoil a
Commonwealth of its most potent, and most politic Grandees. What Tarquin did
without words, or writings against a foreign Enemy, may be practisde nearer at
home by an intestine conspirator to the ruin of his own Country, and shall we
say that no Law ought to take hold of such a conspirator, because his treasons
did not amount to so much as words, or writings? Good Sir, study the superior
Laws more, and the inferior less, at leastwise when you have attained skill
enough to render to every private man what is his due in chattels real, and
personal, make a further progress, and strive to satisfy your self in that
which is the due of the whole State, and concerns our general preservation.
Mounsiur Du Bartas, as He is Englished, advertises well (you may find Law in
verse sometimes, as well as in Litleton) Treasons are like the Cockatrices eye,
If they foresee they kill, foreseen they dye.
The story of the Basilisk perhaps is not to be credited in Physics, yet it
affords us this wholesome mythologie in Politics, that when we come within any
near distance of Traitors (where their designs like poisonous beams of the eye
may possibly reach us) we must expect to surprise, or be surprised, to
anticipate, or be anticipated. Away then with all your niceties in Law, whereby
you retard justice, if our safety cannot be provided for without some
incommodity of yours, nor the absolute Empress of all Laws be served, and
obeyed without infringing some privilege of yours: you must give us leave to
prefer the being of England, before the well-being of any Englishman: nay the
well-being of England, before the being of any Englishman whatsoever. Two whole
days are now consumed in one issue of yours, (whether such books were yours or
no) and 2. whole months had been consumed, if all your Arguments of dilation
and respite had been hearkened unto: but if such a privilege be indulged to
every prisoner in cases of Treason: what unprofitable, uneffectuall things will
justice, and judgment become in England? how will Treasons like Hydraes-heads
spring forth? whilst one Delinquent is upon his trial, ten more will start up
in his place: and either there will not be found Judges enough, or the Judges
will not find time enough to arraigne any considerable part of them. If words
could not amount to Treason, Achitophel, and Adonijah would as easily purge
themselves, as you can, and so will a thousand other delinquents: but if you
will grant that Adonijah might couch Treason in an humble Petition for a wife,
and Achitophel do the like in his advices to his Masters sons, grant also that
the Laws of England may be as severe against such Traitors, as the Laws of the
Jews were. And for all your other subterfuges, except you think your self a
better pleader then that Gilonite was, you may well think, his would have been
as legal as yours are: grant him such a Trial, as you claim, and as much
prolongation of time, and he will make his cause as fair as yours: nay leave
him to be his own Judge (as you in effect challenge to be) and he will justify
Absoloms defeated Army, and prove them, as holy Martyrs, as you do your Burford
brethren. Consider also, that there is now more Law against you for seditious
books, then there was against Adonijah, for petitioning his brother: and
consider withal that the Laws of England now, are not therein more rigid then
they were in former times. You profess your self exact in all the body of our
English Law (except only in the practical formalities of it) therefore I
question not, you have read Burtons Case in the 10th: of H: 7. the Duke of
Norfolks Case in the 13. of Eliz: together with Owens Case in the 13th. of K:
James: and you know these (with diverse others cited against the Earl of
Strafford, since the beginning of this Parliament) do inform you sufficiently,
that many have suffered for merely traitrous words, even when no further
traitrous act, or intent was proved against them. Correct therefore at last your
own impudent arrogance, by taking notice that there is nothing due to you, but
what is due to every man in England: and that if every man in England shall
baffle Law, as you do, and therefore accuse the present Government, of Tyranny,
and usurpation, because it refuses to be baffled: there remains nothing but
that we all dissolve into our first chaos of confusion.

Your 8th: help, or strength upon which you rest, is the power of your 12
Jurors. For you first pull down the Judges from their Tribunal as mere
ciphers, and as Clerks that have nothing to do, but to cry, Amen: and then into
their seats you promote your 12. men, whereupon you grow confident, that this
gratification of yours, together with your condiscending to be their City
brother, will bring them to your devotion, and cause them to employ their new
given jurisdiction only to the advantage of the giver. We perceive hereby
plainly the substance of your Levelling philosophy to be briefly this: The
Judges because they understand Law, are to be degraded, and made servants to
the Jurors: but the Jurors, because they understand no Law, are to be mounted
aloft, where they are to administer justice to the whole Kingdom. The Judges
because they are commonly Gentlemen by birth, and have had honorable education,
are to be exposed to scorn: but the Jurors, because they be commonly
Mechanics, bred up illiterately to handy crafts, are to be placed at the
helm. And consequently Learning and gentle extraction, because they have been
in esteem with all Nations from the beginning of the world till now, must be
debased; but ignorance, and sordid birth must ascend the chair, and be lifted
up to the eminentest offices, and places of power. Cobblers must now practice
Physic instead of Docters; Tradesmen must get into Pulpits instead of Divines,
and plowmen must ride to the Sessions instead of Justices of the Peace. The
pretense of levelling is to put all men upon an equal floor, by adding to the
inferior so much as may match him with his superior, and taking from the
superior so much as may match him with his inferior: and this is sufficiently
heretical in policy. But the intention of our Levellers, we see, is more
diametrically opposite to the order of Nature, for it leaves an inequality
amongst men as great as ever; It does not partially alter, but totally cross
Divine Providence, whilst it elevates that which was depressed, and depresses
that which was elevated: and so makes that the Head which was the Foot; and
that the foot, which was the Head. The turbulent Kentish spirits that followed
Cade, and Tyler, as they intended the ruin of all men generously born, and
qualified, so they professed their intention, and upon all occasions fell foul
upon any, whom they found guilty of Inkhorns and pens: but our modern
perturbators intend one thing, but profess another; their mystery is to
destroy Law under pretext of Liberty; and to supplant Liberty under pretext of
Law. You which sometimes would appear the grand Patron of Law, yet at other
times deride the whole profession of Lawyers, revile all the Benches of Justice
at Westminster, spurn at Statutes more then 500. years old, set at naught the
wisest of our Kings, and Parliaments, yea and the most salubrious Acts that
ever our Kings and Parliaments passed. If any Law crosses you, you break
through it as great flies use to do through copwebs: it is sufficient for you to
say 'twas a part of the Norman yoke, or an irrational innovation: nay some of
our ancient customs, such as holding up of hands at the bar, are so beyond
all exception, that no man can see why they should be unsuitable to your
phancie, but only because they are ancient, and bear the stamp of Authority.
You a prisoner judge, and condemn your Judges for going against Law: and yet
nothing can be more against Law, then for Judges to be so judged, and condemned
by prisoners; especially when the sense of the Law also is manifestly distorted
by such prisoners for upholding things illegal, and opposing things most
legal. The like may be said of Liberty, that also as well as Law finds you a
propugner in show, but an impugner indeed; you bear a buckler in one hand to
defend it seemingly, but a sword in the other hand to wound it really. You had
the breeding of an Apprentice to enable you for Trade, and want Latin and
French to enable you for Law, or for the true understanding of its terms: yet
you nevertheless must interpret Law to the Judges, and by your interpretation
make them mere Ciphers; and this is your birthright due to you, as an
Englishman: when as the Judges notwithstanding, because perhaps you deny them
to be Englishmen, or to have any share in your birthright, have nothing to do
but to submit to your magisteriall Interpretation; by your doctrine the Flower
of the Nation must be subjected to the bran, or else Liberty cannot prosper:
the Gentleman must be ordered at the pezants discretion, the Judge must do the
mean office of a Clerk, and cry Amen to the Juryman, (which all hitherto have
judged villainous, and servile) or else villainous servilitie is introduced
amongst us. But if Liberty be a public, common benefit, does it not appertain
to the Gentleman, as well as to the pezant, and to the Judge as well as to the
Juror? nay does it not extend to the securing, and preserving (as far as is
possible) of every man in every due right? or is there not something that is
the proper interest of a Gentleman quatenus a Gentleman? and of a Judge
quatenus a Judge, as well as there is of a pezant quatenus a pezant, and of a
Juror, quatenus a Juror? That most excellent, harmonions eutaxie in Heaven
which God himself settled from the beginning amongst the Angels, is a thing
more perfect then that which we call Political liberty on earth; yet even
amongst the Angels there are different thrones and Preeminences, and though all
oppression be excluded, all subordination is not. How Levelling therefore should
stand with Liberty amongst men, when it stands not with that more perfect Order
which is amongst Angels, I cannot see: and yet Levelling it self is far more
tolerable, then that extreme Ataxie which our Levellers seek to introduce under
that more plausible name. But you bring Authorities for what you say,
concerning the Jurisdiction of your 12. Men, and cite Litleton and Cook for
that purpose. All that is affirmed by Litleton, and Cook is this, that in some
Cases the Inquest may render a verdict at large upon the whole matter: that
they may have cognizance of the condition of a Lease, where they have
cognizance of the Lease it self: that a special verdict may be given in any
Action, whether the issue be special, or general: that where the Inquest may
give a verdict at large, if they will take upon them the knowledge of the Law,
they may give their verdict generally. In the application of these Authorities,
you rush hastily upon three gross errors. For first you strain these your
Atthorities to all cases and questions of Law, whether easy or uneasy
whatsoever, and this cannot be done without manifest violence to the words of
your Authors. 2ly. You strain these Athorities to all Jurors whatsoever,
whether they have knowledge of the Law, or not: and yet the words themselves
cry out against such a torture. For both Litleton and Cook are express in
this, that the Jurors must be such, as take upon them the knowledge of the Law.
Now we know well that some Cases are so plain in Law, that the meanest men may
understand them: and that Jurors at sometimes have been so chosen, that they
might well take upon them the knowledge of the Law in matters of greater
difficulty. But he that shall conclude from hence, that all Jurors in all cases
understand Law, or that their verdicts ought to sway, though they understand
not Law, shall show himself strangely ridiculous. For we all know, that of
common Tradesmen, and Husbandmen, such as ordinarily use to be impannell'd,
there is not one of a thousand that understands Law in a point of any
intricacy: and we know as well that scarce any thing in the world could be more
mischievous in a State, then to leave differences, and Suits in Law to Judges
utterly ignorant, and unlearned. I make no doubt, but if our Levellers could
obtrude this imposture upon the world, and procure any favorable reception for
it, it would advance their cause much, and exceedingly hasten that general
confusion and disorder, which they aim at, I know nothing more conducing to
their ends. 3ly, You strain the word Verdict here beyond Litleton or Cook, for
they only say they may give their judgment upon the whole matter; but you
infer, therefore the Judges are mere ciphers, therefore the Judges have no right
or power to deliver their Judgments, therefore the determination of the Judges
is no way forcible, or obliging. This is a Non sequitur. For though the Verdict
be given in upon the whole matter, and so enclose Law as well as Fact, yet the
binding Force of the Verdict, as to matter of Law, may be derived from the
sanction, and ratification of the Judges, not from the jurisdiction of the
Inquest. And it may well be supposed, that the Jurors may err in matter of
Law, in which case the Judges must alter the erroneous verdict by a contrary
judgment; and that judgment questionless shall nullify the erroneous
verdict, not the erroneous verdict the judgment. Whereby it plainly appears,
that in a verdict upon the whole matter there is no new jurisdiction acquired
by the Jurors in matter of Law, nor lost to the Judges, forasmuch as the
Judgment stands good, and obliges not as it is rendered by the Jurors, but as
it is confirmed by the Judges.

But in case all your Forces should be routed, you have yet another place of
strength to retreit to; you say, Men's non Actus facit reum; if the books be
found yours, if the matter of the books be found treasonable, yet you having
never had any treasonable intention in those books, ought to be judged
according to your guiltless intention, not according to your guilty books.
This rule of yours cannot be denied to hold in cases where the intention is as
manifect as the Act; but in other dubious cases, where the Delinquent has no
evidence for his guiltless intention, besides his own averment, Judges, and
Juries observe it not. God therefore before whose all-piercing eye nothing is
obscure, to whom the inward intention is as visible as the outward act, judges
of the Act by the intention: but in humane Courts it is otherwise, for man
cannot judge the secret intention, but by the overt act; and so where any doubt
is of the Intention, he leaves that, and safely passes his judgment upon the
act, which proof has put out of all doubt. And therefore by Gods own Law, in
cases of Chance-medly, where one neighbor unwittingly and unwillingly had
slain another by the fall of an ax, etc. the casual delinquent was absolutely
free before Gods unerring Tribunal above, but not so before his earthly,
deceivable Judges here below, for if he made not haste to exile himself from
his own habitation, he remained obnoxious to the sword of the Marshal.
Wherefore if the innocence of the mind did no further absolve in contingent
transgressions, where no testimony but the act it self came in against the
transgressor: you have little reason to expect absolution in such studied,
premeditated crimes as you are arraigned for, when no testimony of innocence
but your own comes in for you. I have now done with all your more plausible,
and specious justifications, and if I have proved most of them to be ungatory,
sinewlesse cavilations, having only the shadow of reason, but nothing of the
substance in them, blame me not for handling them under both Notions. I come
now to your scurrilous, opprobious, unchristian language, wherein the
detestable eructations of your mouth (being but the envenomed, embittered
ejections of your proud heart) have violated Heaven, as well as earth,
consparcated Laws, as well as Magistrates, and denigrated the actions of our
Forefathers, as well as ours of modern times. A man would think, that the
abyss of Hell it self had been ransackt, and rummaged for the making up of
some railings, that issue almost daily from your mouth, and of some seditious
passages that flow almost weekly from your pen: howsoever I will not say as
Peter said to Magus, you are in the gall of bitterness, I will only say (as I
may safely) the gall of bitterness is in you. He that was the Recorder of your
story, as if you had been too short in your incivilities, has made his Margin a
supplement to help out what was wanting, and therefore to confute Mr. Nutleys
testimony against you, He adds, This as an arrant lie. page: 81. and to confute
Judge Nicolls, He adds, What a lying Judge is this Mr. Nicolls? p. 34. also to
cast an odium upon our Laws, He calls our Term Judges the intolerable bondage
of Westminster Hall, and all proceedings in Law there, Outlandish, the mere
introductions of the Norman Tyrant. p. 20. But you were not the penman, you
only approved of this story thus being penned, and set your hand as a License
for its publication. You say well, you need not to be loaded with more then
what you must needs avow to be your own. Some that were absent, as the Lo:
President, p. 12. some that were dead, as the King: p. 36. did not escape your
lashes: nay the whole Army, p. 145. though not appearing at all in this
business, escaped not without this brand from you, that they had twice rebelled
against their Creators, Lords and Masters. But I hasten to those that were
present in Court, or that were interessents in the Courts proceedings. The
Atturny General, though a Member of the Parliament, and a servitor to the
State in place, and trust very eminent, is more then ten times abusively
treated by you. You ask him, p. 143. What baseness is this in you to use me
thus falsely. p. 114. you say He used you, as the Scribes and Pharisees did our
Savior: p. 60. You call him Your Prosequutor, and that in an extreme foul,
and dishonest way. Upon diverse occasions you tax him of notorious, gross,
impudent untruths. See p: 145. 142. 141. 99. 52. 17. etc. The L: Commissioner
Keeble, told you no prisoner had ever such favor as you; to which you answered
immediately, that to disprove what He said, you could show an hundred
precidents to the contrary. p. 49. the Margin has this tante also: Take notice
the Judge stood up, and spoke out an appeal to the people. Moreover, p. 121.
when He told you the Commissioners could not bear any further delays from you,
you returned presently, Will you not give me breath? if you thirst after my
blood, and nothing else will satisfy you, take it presently. your unreverence
to the whole Bench is incredible, sometimes you single out the Judges, as the
principal members, and sometimes you discharge your rancour against the whole
array of your Commissioners. P: 34. You say it is the unjustest thing in the
world, that you for your life should have to do with all the Judges (who are
all engaged men) that have had above six months time, with the assistance of
diverse Parliament Men your enemies, to beat their brains together against you.
P: 35. O Lord, was there ever such a pack of unjust and unrighteous Judges in
the world. My life is before you, you may take my blood if you please. P: 40.
You make the Judges greater Tyrans then the King, and pray God to deliver you
again, and again from all such Justiciaries. P: 44. I am willing to die the
object of your indignation, and malice. P: 46. Contrary to your solemn promise
you make my ignorance in the formalities of Law, to be the means of my
destruction: you diverse times call them faith-breakers, cruel, bloody men,
Norman intruders; and wish your innocent blood may be charged upon them, nay
and upon their posterity for diverse generations. You frequently tax them of
surprising, circumventing, insnaring, murdering you with nicities, and
puntilioes. I could cite more then 20. more passages to this purpose. As for
the whole Court, you handle them also no less ruggedly. P: 146. you oppress
me first, and then go about to hang me as a Traitor, for crying out of your
oppression: the Lord deliver me, and every honest man from you the vilest of
men. P. 148. There was never such a Trial upon English ground as this, where
all the legal rights of an Eng: have been denied. P: 31. All the proceedings
hitherto have been so absolutely arbitrary, that it was impossible for me to come
provided. P: 64. You make your Protest against their unjust and bloody
proceedings, and in other places you sometimes appeal from them to the Jury,
sometimes to your Auditors, sometimes to all mankind, sometimes to God. Many
quotations might be to this effect. Next after the Court, your spightfull,
exulcerated mind breaks forth extremely against the Parliament, the supreme
Power of England. P. 146. you say you were imprisoned most unjustly by their
Power, without any the least shadow, or color in Law many months before their
Acts were made. P. 117. It Is very hard for me to contest with the present Power,
whose Agents have free liberty to say any thing against me, whilst I am denied
all the privileges of an Englishman. P. 86. when the Parliaments Act of
Treason was pressed against you, you say, as there may be counterfeit money, so
there may be Statutes too, and for ought you know this may be one too; and then
you desire proof that these are true Acts of Parliament. P. 79. you except
against the testimony of Coll: Purefoy, because a Parliament Man, and so a
party against you. P. 47. Imprisonment, and many provocations were long since
put upon me, to make me cry out of oppression; but to hang me therefore by a Law
made after the pretended crime, is not just. P. 34. You and the Parliament set
us long since together by the ears with the Caveleers, to fight pretendedly
against their injustice. P. 31. I have been imprisoned seven months for
nothing. P. 14. All my enemies base, wicked Petitions, Papers, and books
preferred against me were hugged, and embraced by the Parliament: but my
friends, p. 13. could get no Answer to their Petitions, but received slights,
abuses, and scorns. P. 11. Contrary to the Petition of Right, and other
wholesome Laws (though there has been eight years wars in England, pretendedly
for preservation of Law, and Liberty) was I by force of Arms apprehended, and
proceeded against. Thus rash, and harsh you are against this present
Parliament; and yet not only against this present Parliament, for former
Parliaments also, as often as they side not with you, find you the same man.
Ex: gratia all the Parliaments that settled, or established Term Judges, and
Commissions of Oier and Terminer, you charge of bringing in upon us
intolerable burdens, and irrational innovations. And thus in taking upon you
a censorian, and Pretorian Power over all Laws and Lawmakers, you raise your
self above all that is called God upon earth; and in so raising your self, you
affect a tyranny over us not so truly unchristian, as Antichristian. Give me
leave now hereupon freely to expostulate with you, and lay aside all
partiality. 1. Why will you, being a private person, rise up so fiercely
against the government of a State, when you see you must either perish in the
design, or compass the same with so vast an effusion of other men's blood? By
Gods Law, every soul is to be subject to the higher Powers, and whosoever
refuses to stand to the final sentence of the highest Power, is punishable by
death. Upon this account the Magistrate is owned by God, as his anointed
Vicegerent; and the good King of Judah giving a charge to his Judges before
they went forth to execute his special Commission of Oier and Terminer,
therefore presses them to integrity, because they were to judge for God, and
not man. Our Law directs you also to be tried by God and your Country, but you
except against that direction purposely, because you conceive God is not in the
Court present to pass upon you, but has only an ordinary presence there, such
as he has every where. But if the judgment seat be Gods, and not man's, and if
the sentence which the Judges speak upon that seat be Gods, and not man's, (as
we must needs believe it is, if we will believe the express words of Gods
book) how can you deny God to have an extraordinary judicial presence in the
Court? a presence to try and pass upon you? for this is most plain, if God
were not judicially, and extraordinarily in the Court, the Judges then should
be said to determine for man, and not for God, to give sentence in their own
names, and not as Gods ministers. You will answer, that the men in present
authority now at Westminster, which granted this Commission are Usurpers, and
we are not to look upon Usurpers, or imagine that they so represent God, and do
Gods business, as other legal Magistrates that are rightly invested by God
himself. Hereunto I shall reply, that judgment in this case (whether the
present Parliament be rightly the Supreme Authority of England, or no) belongs
not to you being a private person, more then it does to me, or any other man in
England. You know also, that when such judgment belongs not to one private
person more then to another, and the judgments of all private persons are so
apparently divided, as now they are, that no one can decide without indangering
the peace of all; that private person can never discharge himself of sedition,
and Treason, which breaks the common Peace out of a fond preference of his own
phancie before other men's. In England there are now some that hold the Supreme
Authority to be in the last Kings Heir absolutely, and their endeavors are to
bring him in upon his own terms; you and your party, hold it lawful to join
with him, upon your terms, but till you join with him, and He submit to your
terms, the supreme Authority is not in him: We, and our side, which is now
prevalent, after a long dispute in Arms, hold this to be a true Parliament, and
that the true Parliament is ever the Supreme Authority of England; and we have
not only the decision of the Sword (which in such like dubious cases after the
last appeal has been made to it, is no contemptible plea) but also the
strongest reason, and majority of suffrages of all the people throughout the
Land on our side. It Is your manifest regret that your party, and the Royalists,
though they correspond, and conspire together, cannot both counterpoize the
third greater, and better party, that stands for the Majesty of Parliaments.
You, and the Royalists, have diverse times endeavored to persuade the people,
that they are generally against the Parliament, and by several acts, and
attempts against the Parliament, you have put it to the trial, whether the
people would adhere to you, or the Parliament; yet still the major and better
part of the people have declared against you, and continued their loyalty to
the Parliament. The City of London, if it had been so adverse to the Parliament
(as was presumed by you, and the Royalists both) was strong enough to master
the Army, (the only advantage of the Parliaments you cry out upon) yet when it
came to proof, would not draw a sword against the Parliament: if these
demonstrations will not satisfy you, but you will still plot new commotions,
and study to engage the people in new bloody broils, you show yourselves to be
thirsty of humane blood, and all your endless cavilling pretensions will not
absolve you before God. Jehoiadah the Priest of the royal line, and a public
person, affords us an excellent example; his part was to subvert a manifest
Usurpres, and Idolatresse, and to reinthrone a true Prince, of whose title
there was not one man in the whole Nation that could make any doubt, yet to
avoid bloodshed, and the mischeifs of a dubious, open war, He diverse years
concealed the rightful Title, and submitted to the yoke of a heathenish
murderous Tyranness, making no insurrection at all, till he was sure to do
right to the young King, without causing any destruction of the people. How
unlike are your actions to Jehoiadahs, who being no public person, nor
interessed extraordinarily in the present differences above any other man, will
needs hazard the peace of the Land against a lawful Authority, when you have
little hopes of effecting what you strive for, without a vast expense of blood?
But in the next place, suppose the power of the Parliament were indubitably
usurped, as you can never prove it, (for it is still but the Nations power, and
what Nation ever usurpt over it self?) yet by what Law of God, or man, is it
lawful for such a common person as you are to machinate against it? Herod had
usurped over the Jews, the Romans had usurped over Herod, Caesar had usurped
over the Romans, yet our Savior shows himself submissive upon all occasions to
all these Powers. When He is brought before Annas, he comports himself humbly,
and as becomes a prisoner when he is lead to Caiphas, and presented before the
Jewish Counsel, he yields to be examined, and makes there such answers as He
knew would be adjudged blasphemous, and capital. When he was turned over to
the Tribunal of Pilate the Roman Deputy, and transmitted from thence to Herod
the Deputy in Galilea, He still made reverent dutiful confessions upon all
legal Interrogatories, though to the eminent forfeiture of his own life. Yet
no man will suppose all these had a proper jurisdiction over our Savior, or
such power as was free from all force, and usurpation. All the Apostles also
walked in our Saviors steps, for we read that they though innoent were
examined, scourged, imprisoned, and did suffer martyrdom by Magistrates in all
Nations under Heaven, and we read not that any one of them at any one time
unreverently treated, or declined any Court, or Counsel, except it were by
appeal from the inferior to the superior Judge: yet we may safely believe that
some of all the States, and Potentates before whom they were convented, might
be liable to this exception of yours. You will say, all men in justice ought to
be enemies to Usurpers, and Friends to such as are unduly depressed. I reply on
the contrary, that private men, let the case be what it will, of their own
heads, or upon their own conducts, are not to rise against a settled Usurper,
or enterprise any thing that may disturb the common Peace: nay even public
persons are to prefer the safety of the people, before any lower interest, or
right, or Law whatsoever. The story of Jehoiadah justifies this, during so many
years as He suffered Athaliah; and the story of David also, who by right, and
Law, was to proceed against Joab for murder; but the superior right, and Law
of Common safety bounds his hands many years from doing justice: and yet we
cannot say therein, that the not doing of justice was the doing of injustice,
inasmuch as He obeyed the superior Law rather then the inferior, and chose to
spare one guilty murderer, rather then to expose thousands of innocent men to
the chance of war. But in the 2d: place, if you will needs suppose you have a
right to pronounce this Government usurped, and so justly liable to your
opposition, yet why do you not then circumscribe your self within the bounds of
this Government? how is it, that you assume to your self as great a prerogative
of censuring the acts of other Parliaments, as you do of this, and the
ordinances of our Ancestors as imperiously as you do ours? If you did seem
wiser in the Laws of England then all the Judges, and Lawyers of the Land, you
did arrogate too much to your self: but when you will pretend to be wiser then
the Laws themselves, when you will with opprobrious terms revile the
Legislative power of this Nation, and say, that for six hundred years together
our Ancestors, assembled in Parliament, were the Introducers, or continuers of
foolish and slavish Acts; you arrogate more to your self, then any man till
this day ever arrogated. In this you challenge the obedience due to some great,
new-raised Prophet, such as Mahomet pretended to be amongst the brutish
Arabians; or that Vice-God at Rome, who amongst a more dementated, obdurated
generation changes times, and customs at his pleasure. In the 3d: place also
if you will believe that you have a Dictatorian power over all times, and Laws
past, and present, and so may justify all that you act against them: yet why
do you not act against them without such detestable cursings, odious raylings,
and unsavory derisions, as your mouth is perpetually defiled with? Michael the
Archangel when He was in the lists engaged against Gods most rebellious enemy,
broke not out into any distempered expressions, nor thought it beseeming his
holy cause to pass the bounds of just reproof. It Is likely Satan which found no
matter in Michael worthy of reproof, was diverted by his malice into
blasphemous provocations; but Michael notwithstanding all the bitter
provocations, and all that matter of scandal, which abounded in his traytrous
adversary, restrained himself from foul retortions. So our Savior in the
Gospel died praying for his murderers, that they might obtain remission, even
for that desperately flagitious cruelty, which made the earth tremble, and the
Sun contract his beams. Stephen also the first disciple of our Savior that
exposed himself to Martyrdom, yet in the very agony of death recommended his
sanguinary persecuters to mercy. Wherefore if the Son of God, if Angels, if all
the Apostles use blessing instead of cursing, and if all holy men still pray
for their most merciless executioners, instead of railing where guilt is never
so evident: what is it for you to imprecate heavy judgments upon Gods Judges
sitting on his Bench to speak his sentence? and from what kind of spirit do
your filthy upbraidings, and sarcasms proceed, when you power them not only
upon Magistrates, but upon righteous Magistrates, such as offer you no wrong,
but suffer much at your hands? Certainly if these things proceed from a right
Christian spirit, we must believe that the mild white Dove which descended
upon our Savior in the river of Jordan, has now changed wings with the black,
carnivorous raven. Paul once out of a sudden passion, and incogitancy called an
high Priest painted wall (a term not undue to the man, though ill applied to
the Ruler) but being presently returned to Himself, He recovered his wonted
meek, and patient temper; and though he had suffered a most unparralleld piece
of injustice from a wicked man, He was not ashamed after to retract, and check
himself publicly for deriding a wicked Ruler. Tell me then seriously, is this
contumelious spirit that rages in you the same that possessed Christ and his
Disciples? can you imagine, that you who not only defy Gods Ministers of
Justice, in the place of Judicature, and speak vilifyingly of the highest of
Powers, but also harden your self therein, and trumpet it forth to the world,
as if you had achieved thereby some glorious conquest, are of the same spirit,
as those which went like sheep to the slaughter, and never opened their mouths
before their shearers? St. Paul condemns in himself an unwitting, precipitated
taunt against a Judge very impious and scandalous, but you think you may justly
pride your self in blaspheming many righteons Judges, and this you do at such a
time, in such a place, and before such an Auditory, that your blasphemy must
needs reach God mediately, though it strike his anointed vicegerents
immediately. I can say no more but this, the same thing which in your own
practice makes you boast, makes me being practiced by another, tremble. Lastly,
if you must have a license to oppose Authority; to oppose all manner of
Authority, ancient as well as modern; and further, if you must be licensed to
join all manner of reproaches, execrations and blasphemies to your opposition:
yet what means this, that you ubraid other men most of that, which you are most
apparently guilty of your self, and for the most part afperse, and columniate
those whom you take for enemies with such things, as all men know to be most
apparently false? when you have insolently tyrannisde over our ancientest Laws,
and Customs, and the Powers from whence they were derived; when you have
pursued our high Court of Parliament with bitter exprobrations; when you have
entertained the whole Bench of your Judges with such language as is only due
to the basest, and worst of men; when you have obstructed the proceedings
against you with the most trifling nicities, and scruples in Law that everwere
invented; when you have spent your strength, and tired your lungs (as your self
complains) not by pleading, but by seeking an exemption from pleading, and
therefore have scarce allowed any freedom to the Court to answer you; you
nevertheless complain, that all Law, and right has been denied to you: that
it is the sworn design of the Parliament to compass your life by indirect
means: that your Judges have insolently overawed you; that you have been
ensnared with mere puntilios, and formalities of Law; that freedom of pleading
has been taken from you. Never was case more clear in the world then yours is:
if there were no Court to judge your books seditious, nor no testimony to prove
the books yours, yet I am persuaded there is scarce a man in England that
doubts of either; That very Jury that pronounced you not guilty of composing
those books after proof by witnesses, I am most confident did in their hearts
believe you unquestionably the Author of them, before they heard any witness
speak at all. Violent presumptions heretofore were held ever sufficient
convictions, and as good as legal testimonies, and yet though all men's
consciences in your case are satisfied with violent presumptions, and violent
presumptions are now seconded with competent, pregnant, abundant testimonies,
that you are the Author of these books: and though you your self think not fit
to deny them, yet you are not ashamed to inveigh against them, that judge you
to be the composer of them. I cannot indeed imagine that thing of which you are
ashamed: if you are ashamed of any thing, it is the absolute denial of your
books, for which you are Indicted; but I am persuaded it is some other respect,
and not shame that makes you abstain from that denial. You seem frontlesse
enough, when you cry out upon your easy, contemned Judges for intrapping, and
oppressing you: but when you cry out upon their snares, and oppressions at the
same time that you call them shadows, and non-entityes, ubraid them as Normane
Intruders, denounce against them as wilful, perjured murderers, and in very
deed make yourself a Judge at the Bar, and arraign them as your prisoners on
the Bench; you seem more impudent then Impudence it self: your want of blushing
is enough to make not only Friends, but even strangers, and opposites to blush
for you. But you that acknowledge no Law, unless it be consonant to your own
humor, and unless it receive its obliging force from your sanction, how can
you offend? and you that cannot offend, why should your face be stained with
that ordinary tincture of modesty that abashes other men? Humane rules and
precedents are all liable to your condemnation: if you say they are
irrational, or savor of innovation, that's sufficient to over rule them: and
as for Divine Authorities, it is in your breast to interpret them, and no man's
else, whereupon they are made Lesbian rules to you, and they must not conform,
but must be conformed to your judgment. Ex: gra: The 4. Evangelists testify,
that our Savior being presented in judgment before diverse Tribunals, made
such pleas, and confessions as drew on upon himself a capital sentence, and
were the only evidence, that either the Jews had to condemn him of blasphemy,
or the Romans of sedition. You nevertheless say, that our Savior by silence
avoided the danger of his Examiners, and left you a warrant thereby to conceal
your guilt from the Judges, and to evade that danger of condemnation which the
prescription of our Laws would else entangle you in. When the States Attorney
General presses you for an answer to his proofs, and not mere allegations,
which make you the Author of seditious books: you more then once aver, that our
Savior shook off his Interrogators with an eluding answer; and therefore in
imitation of Christ you say, Thou M: Prideaux affirmest, I am the Author of
seditious books, but prove it if thou can. This is ruff handling of humane
Magistrates, and Laws, but this is worse handling of Inspired Writers, and
worst of all is the false gloss you set upon our Saviors actions. Our Savior
being demanded by Caiphas in the Counsel of the Jews, whether he were the Son
of God, or no, according to Matthew and Luke returned answer, Thou said it:
and Mark repeating the same Answer, makes it a pure affirmation, or an assent
confirming what the high Priest said. For Marks relation which must be the same
as the other Evangelists was, answers positively and fully to the question: I
am the Son of God. 2ly, All these Evangelists record this further of our
Savior, that immediately after his answer to the high Priest, He proceeded to
tell the Counsel, that they themselves should one day see him sitting on Gods
right hand, and so be convinced of that now they would not believe. 3ly, The
Counsel understood our Saviors Answer to be affirmative, and positive, for
upon that Answer, according to all the Evangelists, He was instantly condemned
of blasphemy from the confession of his own mouth. Neither did our Savior,
being examined before Pilate concerning his regal interest, give an evading
Answer: Pilates question was, Art thou a King? our Saviors answer was, Thou
say it: but to show that this Answer was a positive affirmation of the thing
questioned, our Savior added immediately, To this end was I born, and for this
cause came I into the world, that I should bear witness unto the truth: And we
find that Pilate doubted not of our Saviors meaning, whether it were
affirmative, or elusive. This is therefore an high violation of Divine
Authority, that you should call those Answers, and pleas of our Savior
dilatory, and fallacious, which the Evangelist makes to be so plain, and the
Jewish, and Roman Magistrates both entertained as so positive: and that you
should flatly say, our Savior patronized obstinate silence in all Delinquents,
and therefore would not reveal truth, when He says directly of Himself, that
He was born, and sent into this world to bear witness to the truth. 4ly, How
can you imagine, that our Saviors silence to some impertinet questions, was
any justification of your not pleading, when our Savior had not the same
reasons of silence, as you, and other Delinquents have, and pretend for? For
first, our Savior was guilty of nothing, which in justice could take away his
life, or expose him to any other the least lash of the Law. If you will believe
the Roman Judge, before whom he was tried, He was convinced, and thrice
labored to save him, knowing that the Jews of envy prosecuted against him;
and being driven to wash his hands of so foul, and murtherous sentence, argued
with the Jews, that He had not only examined him himself, and found no
capital delinquencie in him; but had also sent him to Herod, and by Herod He
was also sent back acquitted: this makes our Saviors case very different from
yours. 2ly, Our Savior knew his doom was unavoidable, and so He could not make
use of silence upon the same grounds as you do. 3ly, Our Saviors silence was
not obstinate, against any clear Law, as yours is. 4ly, It was not general, or
continual: when he was questioned either about his Divinity, or regallity
(things questionable in Law) He gave direct answers: and even when He was
questioned extravagantly about his Disciples, or the nature of truth, or his
doctrine, after some space of modest silence, He gave reasons of his silence;
He told them they were resolved before hand not to believe him: and that he had
always taught openly, and not in corners, so that the testimony of his
auditors, and spectators, would be more proper in matters of that nature, then
his own. Hereupon Pilate received satisfaction, as also Herod, though all their
impertinent questions were not presently answered: and when Pilate washed his
hands before the people in token of his innocence, and pleaded earnestly for
his enlargement more then once, or twice: He told the people plainly, that
Herod to whom He had sent him to be examined, had sent him back again, being of
his judgment, and finding nothing worthy of death in him. Lastly, if our
Savior had refused to answer Caiaphas, Herod, and Pilate, who had not due
jurisdictions over him, this affords no plea, nor patronage for your peremptory
silence: forasmuch, as our Savior was a King de jure, though He would not take
upon him the office of a King de facto: and it may be believed, that in some
acts of his He did transcend the capacity, and condition of a mere private
person: in which He is not imitable by you. I shall infer therefore, that you,
when you cite our Saviors example, and practice to justify your opposing
Judges and Laws, and to smother Treason, and frustrate judgment, contrary to
that which is asserted by all the Evangelists, you do blasphemously, and
impudently make God the countenancer of sin, that you may make man the apter to
sin against God.

The 5th: and last matter of scandal in your book, is, your double dealings
with the Jury: for though your 12. men are most religiously obliged to bring in
a verdict without favor or fear, you nevertheless endeavor both ways to
force them from their religious obligations as well by terror, as by arts of
embracery. On one side, you are their brother Citizen, a great honourer
doubtless of your City matriculation: some of them you know to be honest men,
as you are a profound metaposcopist, there are lineaments of honesty drawn in
their very faces, and the whole array of them has this preferment from you, that
they were the only supreme dispencers of justice in England, and that the
Judges that sit aloft in scarlet robes, are but Clerks to say Amen to their
verdicts: and this you pronounce as a more profound Jurist. On the other side,
lest these gentle stroakings should not sufficiently win upon them, you place
some hundreds of your Myrmidons behind in ambuscado, who are ready to break
forth with mighty hums, and acclamations, at the closing of your defense, and
before the Atturny General enters upon his reply. You did conjecture
doubtless that your 12. Jurors (half of them being congregated out of
Chicklane, Pickt-hach, and the other Suburbs of Smithfield, without one Butcher
amongst them all) would be apt to shrink at such a new, unexampled impression.
Former times would have looked strangely upon such attempts, and such diverse
assaults made upon a Jury: but in you all frauds, and riots are pious and
plausible, so they may acheive to you a conquest over your opposites, nay in
all your surprisals and oppressions of other men, you must have leave to
complain, that you are surprised, oppressed, and cut off from all right by a
State of conspirators.

Sir, I could now let the rains of my discourse looser, and take occasion to
range further, (for since the writing, and Printing of this Letter, I have seen
some other Additions, and supplements of yours, or your Friends, about your
Trial, and I may perhaps hereafter animadvert upon them: But I will not at
present pursue you too far, I will rather choose to give my self a sudden stop.

The Angels that fell from Heaven had nothing to seduce them unto so desperate
a revolt besides their own excellent Natures; there was not in Heaven any other
object that could tempt, or pervert them. Had they dutifully, and piously
limited their contemplations to the transcendent blessedness, and infinite
perfection of their Creator, they had not so fondly inamoured themselves, upon
themselves, nor dazeled their own eyes with their own created beauty: but when
their eyes were once dazell'd with objects less amiable, their devotions were
easily alienated from objects more amiable, and that alienation in them was
most ungracious, and damnable. Neither did excessive, doting self-love only
exile the Angels out of Heaven, but also, men out of Paradise; for Adam
likewise, judgeing himself nearest to himself, and so thereupon confining all
his passions, or the supreme sway of his affections to himself, erroneously
thought himself worthy of an equality with his Maker: and so not laying to
heart the greatness, and goodness of God, but blinding himself with an undue
zeal to his own person, he most unnaturally made himself Gods rival, as if he
himself were capable of Divine knowledge, or God deducible to humane
imbecillty. It Is not worth inquiry, whether Adams will first darkened his
understanding, or his understanding first captivated his will: we know Adam had
the principle of knowing, and the principle of affecting good in an eminent
degree: and that He sinned against both those principles when he valued a
finite, derivative, obliged excellency in himself above infinite, original,
obliging excellency in his God. For in the conception, and birth of sins, it
often happens, that at the same time the understanding contracts darkness from
the factious vehemence of the will: and the will contracts obstinacy from
obscurity in the understanding. And I think, we may safely believe that Adams
understanding was too unactive, and remiss at the same instant, for that it
did not further improve, and feed the will by sublime, restless
contemplations: and at the same instant that his will (having al ready
received so much light from the understanding) was too cold and unaspiring, for
that it did not still covet solid solace from objects more glorious, and to
that end resollicite eagerly the Understanding for profounder illuminations.
Such was the origination, and semination of sin in Adam, and such is still the
traduction and propagation of sin in Adams posterity: there is no difference
but this: we now are not guilty of our own sins only which we daily commit our
selves, as we naturally partake of Adams frailties, and are left obnoxious to a
thousand new temptations thereby; but also of his first transgression, as we
were morally engaged in the same Covenant, and so left obnoxious to the same
punishment. We remain therefore all far more apt now, then He was to adore our
selves, and to circumscribe our own blind affections within the circle of our
own excellencies: and this is so eminent in some men, that ignorance no sooner
begets arrogance in them, then arrogance begets impudence: and impudence begets
wilfulness, and an outrageous hardness in malice. Sir, if you who know your
self to be of Adams race, would deal strictly with your self, and impartially
inquire into the cause that makes you so far to postpone all Powers, Laws,
professions of men to your self, and most immodestly to boast of those things
in your self, which you would disdain in other men, and which other men think
as disdainable in you: you would soon discover your self-love had quite put out
your eyes, and then betrayed you into the ambuscadoes of all those daring sins
that use to fight under the banners of violent insolence, and of uncontrouled
impudence. The main canker that festers inwardly, and infects your most retired
thoughts is this, that you see other men promoted in the Commonwealth to places
of honor, and power before you, whereas you in worth, and value promote your
self far before them, nay, and all others whatsoever: and this gross error
does not only swell you into disdain, and malice implacable against other men,
but also inflames you toward your self with arrogance intolerable, and arms
you with immodesty most unmalleable. You ought here to consider, that as to
other men you are no competent Judge of their parts and deportments, more then
every other private man in England is: and when you see so many other men in
England give a contrary judgment to yours, you ought to suspect your own
judgment, rather then to despise theirs. It Is well known who those men are,
that are most obnoxious to your emulation: and let but their enemies judge, let
their most conjured foes give sentence is this cause, whether they deserve your
emulation, or no: and even they will contradict you herein, and tell you that
they fear, and admire what you deride, and rail upon. Then as to your self,
whom you adore, and court as the most exquisite piece of mankind, and upon
that account censure whole professions, whole States, nay and whole Ages not
complying with your phancie: you ought to consider, that of all men, you are
the most uncompetent Judge in your own case. Omit those whom you repute now
your diametricall enemies, though they are the major, and better part of the
Nation, and ask the Royalists, (whom you look upon as your late adopted
Friends) or any others unconcerned, if you conceive there are any such: ask
them what value they set upon you, and doubtless they will be bold to tell
you, that you are an Incendiary and Innovator; as far short of Perkin Warbeck,
as you are beyond Wat. Tyler. I know there is a party of your Adherents, that
seek to foment these prodigious high conceits in you: and they perhaps may
amount to some ten, or twenty thousand heads in all: but if my intelligence
fails not exceedingly, the greatest part of them consists of women, boys,
Mechanics, and the most sordid sediment of our Plebeians, and only some few
are Royalists, or turbulent Levellers, who rather make use of your fury, the
admire your policy; and employ you as an Instrument, rather then follow you as
a head. But if you think men whether Friends, Enemies, or Neuters, are apt to
deceive, and as apt to be deceived, and therefore unfit witnesses, or Informers
in this case, fix your thoughts more studiously upon things: consider your own
ways, and positions, as I have here more nakedly presented them to your view.
You see your main endeavor is, to open a way, and maintain, that any private,
single person may dispute, nay damn any Command, Law, Custom, or Power
whatsoever, and lawfully frame parties to abet him in his disturbance of the
common peace by any means whatsoever: that the diffusive, or rather confusive
body of the people may be appeall'd unto, by malcontents in any common cause,
although it be so vast a body that it is scarce to be congregated, or rightly
ordered, or consulted with in any one place, or at any one time, when some one
fundamental point is to be assented unto, or dissented: and muchlesse is it
fit for the ordinary administration, and exercise of rule in ordinary cases,
as often as private men shall find themselves aggrieved: that all study of Law
and Policy is mischievous, and therefore the judgment of all difficulties, and
difference ought to be expected from unlettered mechanics, Plebeians, not from
such as are nobly descended, such as have been verst in State-businesse all
their days, and such as have made Law their study from their youth: that the
Nation ought not to have any one common place of resort for justice, such as
Westminster Hall is: but for the better cautonizing of the Commonwealth, and
dissecting it into several independent (and by consequence repugnant) bodies,
in each County there ought to be a several Tribunal: in which Tribunal the
ignoranter and meaner saeces of the multitude ought to possess the highest
Chair: that popular liberty ought to be enlarged beyond all rational
political bounds, so that no private Subject ought to pay any tax for
defraying the public charge, unless it stand with his own liking: nor ought
any Fellon, or Traitor, be examined, or held to any form of trial, further
then it shall please his own humor. These are the crude traditions which your
levelling sect abides by: now let not only those which have been bred under
Eng: Laws, but let all other Nations that embrace the Roman Civil Justitutes
imbodied by Justinian, nay let Heathens, Turks, Jews, let all men of former
ages, as well as of this present declare, if any thing can be invented more
destructive to society, and the congregative disposition of mankind, then
these traditions are. No more need be said, if you profess the subversion of
your Country, and a general emnity to the kind of man, your philosophy must
be held impious, though not stolid: but if you propose these things for the
good of your Country, and your kind, you will be held, as stolid, as impious:
but what shall I say? in case self-love has wholly dementated you, all that I
can press will be to no purpose, neither can the various testimonies of men,
nor the irrefragable evidence that shines out of common maxims, nor the
experience of all ages convince you, that you are to credit any thing besides
your self. What your present temper is therefore, whether flexible by counsel,
or inflexible I cannot tell: but I must needs tell you this: for a close of all:

Since you have acted your part so outragiously, it leaves an offense, and a
regret too upon me: that your Commissioners should act so tenderly: that the
Jury should act so disloyally; and that London should be the Scene, where hands
should be clapped so unworthily.

P: Script:
Sir, I had sooner dressed, and speeded these my plain, freindly Animadversions,
had I been in England at your Arraignment, or if I had sooner recovered my
health after my coming into England: therefore let not delay, and the
interposition of so many months expose me to your mis-interpretation. I had
also kept these Papers from the Press, had you only been concerned in them:
but when my second thoughts suggested to me, that I was bound not to reprove
you alone, but your abettors, and partakers also, and that the charity of my
reproof ought not only to extend to the conviction of you, and yours, but also
to the confirmation of all your dissenters, I was induced to make them public:
wherefore pray, let this apologize for me in that behalf. Adiu.

Yours in the bonds of Christianity: H: P

FINIS.

