A SEASONABLE VINDICATION Of Free-Admission, and Frequent Administration of the
HOLY COMMUNION To all Visible Church Members, Regenerate or Unregenerate. From
the Institution, Precept, President of Christ himself; the Doctrine, Practice
of the Primitive Church, Fathers, Councils, Christians: the Confessions,
Articles, Records, Chief Writers of our own and other reformed Churches: the
dangerous Consequents, Effects, Schisms arising from the Disusage, Infrequency,
Monopoly of this Sacrament, to visible or real Saints alone; and Suspension of
all others from it, till approved Worthy upon trial. And that upon mere
Anabaptistical, and Papistical false Principles, Practices, ( here discovered)
unadvisedly embraced, imitated, asserted, exceeded by sundry over-rigid,
reforming Ministers; to our Saviors dishonor, our Churches great disturbance,
their own, their peoples prejudice; and the Common Enemies, and Seducers grand
Advantage.

By Will: Prynne of Swainswick Esquire a Bencher of Lincolns Inn.

1 Cor. 10. 2, 3. 16, 17. And did ALL eat the same spiritual meat; and did ALL
drink the same spiritual drink, etc. The Cup of blessing which we bless, is it
not THE COMMUNION of the Blood of Christ? The Bread which we break, is it not
THE COMMUNION of the Body of Christ? For we being many are one Bread, for WE
ARE ALL PARTAKERS OF THAT ONE BREAD.

Aug. Ep^st. 179. Non bonum est homini hominem vincere, sed bonum est homini ut
eum Veritas vincat volentem; quia malum est homini ut eum Veritas vincat
invitum. Nam ipsa vincat necesse est, sive Negantem, sive Confitentem.

LONDON, Printed by F. Leach for the Author, 1656.

To the over-sadly divided, misguided Ministers, of the miserably distracted,
undermined, almost ruined Church of England; especially such who in Theory or
Practice have swerved from their Duties, in casting off the Frequent
Administration of the Holy Communion, with their peoples Free-Admission
thereunto; and in other particulars of moment here briefly touched.
DEar reverend Christian Brethren, whom I cordially honor for your Romans 1. 1.
c. 10. 15. 2 Cor. 5. 20. c. 6. 1. c. 8. 23.
high and heavenly Calling; give me leave, with that Christian Liberty which
becomes me, without any fear or flattery, to inform you; that I have for many
years bypast, with a bleeding soul and mournful spirit, taken special Notice
of some offensive Deviations from, and Negligences in your Ministerial
Function, (whereof many of you are guilty) which have given great Advantages to
your Common Romish, and Sectarian Adversaries, and just scandal to diverse of
your best-affected Friends, some whereof I formerly endeavored by seasonable,
timely In my 4. and 12. Serious Questions, ^ and Seasonable Vindication of
them. My 16 Important Questions. Suspension suspended. Independency examined. A
full Reply to brief Observations.
Publications, to crush in the very shell, and now deem high time to remind you
of, being grown Epidemical, yea almost destructive to your very Ministry, as
well as perilous to our Church and Religion.

Not to enlarge upon your own manifold intestine 1 Cor. 3 3, 4.
sad Divisions between and against your selves; which have separated you into
several Opposite Squadrons, (that I say not Factions, and Battalioes) of
Presbyterians, Episcopalists, (or Royalists) Independents, Interdependents;
openly, secretly warring against, and seeking to supplant each other, by the
extravagant power, proceedings of illegal Arbitrary Committees, and new coined
Orders, Ordinances, Covenants, Engagements, with other Machiavilian Devices,
whereby you have endeavored to eject, sequester, suppress, vex, ensnare,
ruin one another under our successive late public Revolutions of Government.
By which you have now at last made your selves mere Tenants at will, both in
respect of your Benefices, Tithes, Ministry, to every New upstart power; a
derision to your Popish, a prey to your Anabaptistical and other Sectarian
Adversaries; who infinitely increase their Numbers, Proselytes, by these your
unbrotherly feudes; and have no special Committees to restrain, eject,
suppress them, but are crept into most Committees, and places of power, to
vex, molest, discountenance, persecute, eject, sequester many of you, at their
pleasures; and secretly encourage, countenance, abet our last insolent
spreading Romish Sect of Quakers, to disturb, affront, revile your persons,
Doctrine, Ministry, both in the Church, Streets, and all other places, and to
publish their most railing scurrillous Invectives against you, to accomplish
your speedy extirpation by these Instruments of the Pope and Devil, which they
dare not immediately attempt by themselves In which prosecuted design of your
utter speedy extirpation, all Anabaptists, Sectaries concur, and unite their
forces with the Jesuits and Popish party, as John Can demonstrates in his
Second voice from the Temple, p. 2. where he excites The Supreme Authority of
the Nation, the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, to whom he dedicates
it, utterly to extirpate the National Church Ministry, Worship, Government of
England; and to starve, famish all the Ministers thereof (whom he styles,
Antichristian Idols) by taking away the food and maintenance whereby hitherto
(and at this present) they are ^ourished, fed, and kept alive. In regard of
which joint desperate Co^federacy against you by these your combined common
Adversaries, I shall now exhort and advise you,

First of all, To lay aside and abandon all private animosities, factions,
feuds, contests, and persecutions against each other; as not only unbeseeming
the Romans 10. 15 H^br. 13. 20. Isay 9. 6. Ephesians. 2. 14. to 22.
Ambassadors, Ministers of the God, Prince, Gospel of Peace; but as the most
probable, unavoidable means of your own speedy destruction; as these two Gospel
Texts will assure you, Mat. 12. 25, 26. And Jesus said unto them, Every kingdom
divided against it self is brought to desolation, and every City or House
divided against it self shall not stand. And if Satan cast out Satan (or one
Min^ster another of a contrary party) he is divided against himself; how shall
then his kingdom (or Christ's, where his Ministers are thus divided, and cast
out one another) stand? And Gal. 5. 15. But if ye bite and devour one another,
take heed that you be not consumed one of another. Among all the evils that
afflict the body politic of the Church or State, there is none so pernicious
as division, especially amongst the Ministers and chief Officers thereof, See
Mr. John Daille His Apology for the Reformed Churches, chapter 2.
because it strikes at the very foundation of their being, and poisons the
original of their life and strength. Wherefore, I beseech you most especially
to avoid, detest this destructive sin.

2ly, Seeing all Ministers and Christians are specially obliged by the John 13.
34, 35, c. 17. 20, 21, 22. Ephesians. 4. 3. to 17.
command, and will of their Master, and by their own welfare, safety,
salvation, to continue inseparably united one to another, and all together to
make up but one harmonious Body; I shall exhort, beseech, advise you all, to
Psalm. 133. 1.
live and love like Brethren; Phil. 1. 27.
To be all of one mind and of one Spirit, striving together for the faith of
the Gospel; Ephesians. 4. 3.
To keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. Joh. 13. 3^, 35.
To manifest to all the world that you are Christ's disciples by loving one
another. And to pursue this pathetical exhortation of the Apostle, to cease the
Contentions between the Minister and people in the Church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 1.
10. Now I beseech you Brethren in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye
all speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions among you; but that ye
be perfectly joined together in the same mind and in the same judgment.

3ly, Hab. 2. 1.
Stand constantly upon your watch, and Phil. 1. 27. Jude 3.
unite all your studies, endeavors together against the manifold plots,
policies of Satan, and your Iesuitical, Popish, Sectarian common Enemies, who
seek nothing but the speedy ruin of your persons, Ministry, and of our
Protestant Religion, Church, State, being more active, subtle and successful
of late years in this design, than ever in former ages. And let their present
joint attempts, combinations against you, be a prevailing argument to unite
your affections, endeavors, studies to countermine them.

4ly, Avoid all carnal, Machivilian Policies, all sordid Compliances, and Ezech
2. 6. Mat. 10. 26. 28. 31.
base Fears of any Mortals, how great or powerful soever: And never Romans 3. 8.
act nor consent to any evils, error, unrighteous, impious Projects, or
hypocritical designs, yea, hope that any good may come thereby: but rather
part with your lives, liberties, and all worldly enjoyments, than with a good
conscience, and the truth or Ordinances of God entrusted to your care.

5ly, Take Notice of some particular late failings and scandalous sinful
Omissions or Neglects in the discharge of your Ministerial Office, in which
diverse of you have been and still are very peccant.

Whereas, by our former Liturgies (confirmed by 2 and 3 E. 6. c. 1. 5 and 6 E.
6. c. 1. 1 Eliz. c. 2.
sundry Acts of Parliament yet in force) the Decalogui, or Ten Commandments of
God himself, See Dod, Downham, Bp. Andrews, Elton, and others on the
command^ments.
(asserted by all or most of you to be Moral, and Perpetual, as they are a rule
of Life and Obedience) were to be publicly read in all Churches, (as
heretofore was usual) once every Lords day, and when ever the Lords Supper was
administered; to the end the people might the better remember and observe them
in their lives and conversations. This godly custom, has for sundry years
together been universally neglected, and cast aside by all or most of you. By
which means, the elder sort of people have quite forgotten these Commandments;
the younger sort are altogether ignorant of them, and generally know not,
whether there be any such Decalogue for them to learn, know, observe: their
Parents, Masters, not instructing them in them in their private families as
formerly; since discontinued publicly in our Chnrches; The number of
Antinomians is hereby augmented, confirmed in their Error: the Knowledge,
Sense, Conscience of sins against these Precepts, almost quite obliturated:
And these Laws of God, with all other good Laws of the Realm, quite cast aside,
slighted, scorned, violated in the highest degree, by many professed Saints of
the highest Orb, like Old Almanacks quite out of date or force, especially the
5, 6, 8, and last of them, Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, etc. nor
any thing that is his: now turned into an affirmative, or quite expunged out of
the Decalogue of too many English Protestants, as well as the Sea Ledesma his
Catechism; Officium beatae Ma^iae, and Popish primers which expunge it.
second Commandment heretofore out of the Papists. And whether this omission
be not a sin against Deutr. 6. 1. to 10. c. 18. 18. to 22. c. 4. 9, 10. Acts
13. 15. Psalm. 1. 2. Josh. 1. 8. and other Scriptures, fit henceforth to be
reformed, let your own Consciences, with all Protestant Commentators on these
Texts, and the Decalogue resolve you.

2ly, Whereas the Summary Heads of the Christian Faith, comprised in ancient
Creeds, (made, See Cy-prian de Symbolo, Dr. Jackson, and others on the Creed:
and all ancient Greek and Latin Liturgies.
used in the Primitive Church, and continued in all Christian Churches, as most
useful, necessary, ever since) were usually repeated by the Ministers and
people in all our Churches heretofore, when ever they assembled to worship God
on Lords-dayes, and other Festivals or times of Devotion; This Godly,
profitable Christian practice, has been generally disused and set aside by
most of you for sundry years together: whereby the old Principles of our
Christian Faith and Creeds, are quite forgotten, or neglected by the ancienter
sort, and unknown to the younger people, (not instructed to learn or repeat
them by heart as formerly, by their Parents and Masters, since disused in our
Churches by Ministers) and a world of New Faiths, Heresies, Blasphemies,
Errors, have been set up and vented in opposition thereunto, destructive to the
very Foundations of our Religion. Now whether this Omission be not a great
Misdemeanour or Oversight in you, repugnant to the 1 Cor. 15. 1. to 8. Hebr. 5.
12, 13. c. 6. 1, 2, 3. 2 Pet. 1. 12, 13, 15. c. 3. 2. and other Texts, let all
Old and New Expositors on the Creed, determine, and your own Consciences judge?

3ly, Whereas by the Laws of our Land, confirming the Book of Ordination, and
the Liturgies of our Church, all our Deacons, Ministers, formerly on Lords
days and other times of public Divine Service, were specially obliged to read
certain Psalms, with one Chapter of the Old Testament, and another out of the
New, in the Church, for the peoples better edification and instruction in the
Scriptures, and encouragement to read them diligently in their Families and
private Closets; yet now of late years, contrary to their Solemn Promise at
their See the Book of Ordination.
Ordinations, diligently to read the Canonical Scriptures of the Old and New
Testament to the people assembled in the Church, and contrary to Exodus 24. 7.
Deuteronomy. 6. 1. to 10. c. 11. 18. to 22. c. 31. 11, 12, 13. Josh. 8. 34, 35. 2
Kings 23. 1, 2, 3. 2 Chronicles. 34. 29, 30, 31. Neh. 8. 1. to 19. c. 9. 1. 3. c.
13. 1. Isay 34. 16* Ier. 36. 6, 10, etc. c. 51. 61, 62. Luke 4. 16, 17. Acts
13. 15. c. 15. 21. 31. 2 Cor. 1. 13. Ephesians. 3. 4. Col. 4. 16. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 27.
Rev. 1. 3. c. 5. 4, 5. 2 Cor. 3. 14. 1 Timothy 4. 3. contrary to the practice of
Gods own people the Jews, of Christ himself and his Apostles; of the Primitive
Fathers, Councils, Church, Christians, as Bish. J^wel D^fence of the Apology,
^ar. 5. ^. 9. d^vis. 1. p. 489. 490. part. 6. p. 608, and His Reply to Harding,
Art. 3. divis. 6. p. 117, 118 and Artic. 15. Of reading the Scriptures, p. 383,
etc.
Bishop Jewel proves at large, of all Harmony of Confessions, sect. 10. to 16.
Protestant Churches in foreign parts; the Practice, Canons, Rubricks, and
Liturgies of our English Church, and command of God himself in the forecited
Texts, most of our Independent Ministers have wholly cast off the reading of
all Psalms, Chapters of the Old and New Testament in their Churches and
Meetings (more particularly in Pendennis Castle in Cornwall, where there was
not one Chapter, Psalm either sung or read, during my near two years close
imprisonment, in their Meeting House there;) yea, many Presbyterians and other
Ministers have overmuch failed herein, reading only either one Chapter out of
the Old Testament or New, and sometimes only one Psalm, without a Chapter, now
and then on Lords days, and other Public Days of worship. By which ill
president, the generality of their people (especially such who cannot read) are
become wholly ignorant of the Scriptures, and made a prey to every seducer; the
constant reading of the Scriptures in private, is much neglected; the Scriptures
themselves much slighted; yea many turned professed Anti-Scripturists,
rejecting the Old and New Testament both together; and others who retain the
New Testament, have quite rejected the old, as nothing appertaining to
Christians; though a chief part of the Churches foundation, and approved,
enjoined to be searched, studied, read by Christ himself and his Apostles in
the New Testament, Mat. 5. 17. 18. c 7. 12. c 22, 40. c. 26. 56. Mar. 1. 2. Lu.
1. 70. c. 16. 26. 31. Acts 3. 18. c. 10. 43. c. 13. 15. 27. c. 26. 22. 27. c.
28. 23. c. 17. 2. 11. c. 18. 24. 28. Romans 1. 2. c. 16. 26. Ephesians. 2. 20. c. 4.
11, 12. 13. 1 Pet. 1. 10, 11. 2 Pet. 1. 19 20, 21. c. 3. 1, 2. with other
express Gospel texts. And is not this a gross sinful Omission now fit to be
repented of and reformed by you all, having produced so many sad effects, and
complying too much with the Papists, B^sh. Jewels Defense of the ^pol^gy, part.
5. chapter 9. divis. 1. p. 499.
and Mr. Harding, who styles the public reading of the Scriptures to the
people in their mother Tongue, The instinct and work of Satan?

4ly, Many Minsters and Congregationt (especially Independents and Anabaptists)
have wholly cast off the Singing (as well as reading) of Psalms, Hymns, and
Spiritual Songs, not only contrary to the Exodus 15 1 etc. Numb. 21. 17. Deuteronomy.
31. 19 etc. Judge. 5. 12 2 Samuel 22. 1. 2 Chronicles. 29. 27. Ps. 18. 1. Ps. 92. 1.
Cant. 1. 1. l. sa^ 5. 1. c. 26. 1. c. 30. 29. c. 35. 10. c. 38. 10. Amos 8. 23.
c. 8. 3.
precepts of God, and Practice of the ^aints in the Old Testament: but of
Christ himself, his Apostles, Saints, Church in the New, Luke 1. 13, 14. Mat.
26. 30. 1 Cor. 14. 15. Ephesians. 5. 17. Col. 3. 1^. Heb. 2. 12. Iam. 5. 13. Rev.
15. 3. c. 5. 9. c. 14. 3. And is not this a sin fit to be redressed by those
who are guilty of it? unless they deem our present Oppressions, Thraldom, and
public Calamities such, as deserve to turn all our Psalms into Lamentations,
and Songs into Howlings, Amos 8. 10. Ezech. 26. 13. Iam. 7. 9.

5ly, Whereas our Ministers heretofore by our Councils, Canons, Liturgies were
obliged to Catechize and instruct their younger Parishioners in the Lords
Prayer, Creed, ten Commandments and Principles of Christian Religion; and made
a Conscience to perform it on Lords days and other Seasons in the Church, to
the great edification and corroborations of their People against Heresies,
Sects, Errors, Vices; The generality of Ministers of late years have either
totally rejected, or in a great measure neglected this part of their
Ministerial duty; contrary to Gal. 6. 6. Heb. 5. 15, 16. c. 6. 1, 2, 3. Deuteronomy.
6. 1. to 10. and other express Scriptures. Whereby Parents and Masters have
for the most part given over this dutyin their Families; and so the people
being generally ignorant, uninstructed, unsettled, ungrounded in the Principles
of Religion, are Ephesians. 4. 14. Jam. 1. 6.
tossed and carried to and fro with every wind of doctrine, made a prey to all
sorts of Sectaries and seducing Spirits, and divided from our Churches into
different separated Conventicles, almost past hopes of reducing to the tr^th
and unity of the Gospel. How necessary it is therefore for all peccant
Ministers to reform this Sin, let the Preface to Mr. Crooks Guide, and others
who have written of the Vtility and Necessity of Catechizing, inform them.

6ly, Some Ministers (especially Independents) have (contrary to Luke 9. 62.
Romans 1. 1. Heb. 7. 23, 24.) See a Transcript of a Letter ^^om the Summer Hands
at the end of my Fresh Discovery of Prodigious Bending Stars.
quite renounced their very Ministerial Ordination and Function, preaching only
now as gifted Brethren, not as Ministers of the Gospel; and others of them have
either overmuch neglected or scrupuled the baptizing of Infants; especially Mr.
Henry Burtons Vindication.
of these who are not of their own independent Congregations: Which how
repugnant it is to the precepts and Presidents of Christ and his Apostles; How
scandalous to our Protestant Church and Religion, how advantageous to our
Papal, Anabaptistical, and other Sectarian Common Enemies, let Mr. His
Vindication of the judgment of the Reformed Churches, and Protestant Diviues,
concerning Ordination, London 1647.
Seaman, Mr. Baxter, Mr. Hall and others, who have written largely on these
Subjects of late times resolve them; and themselves now reform with penitent
hearts.

7ly, The thing I shall here principally charge upon the consciences of
hundreds of Ministers guilty of this Sacrilegious Crime, is, their many years
wilful discontinuance of the frequent public celebration of the Lords Supper
to their Parishioners; against the very essential duty and Office of their
Function, as Ministers of Christ, and Incumbents of Parish Churches, the
Precept and President of Christ himself, the Practice of the Apostles,
Prim^tive Church, Fathers, Christians, and all former Churches, Ministers of
Christ throughout the world; the Canons, Decrees, Injunctions, Laws, Statutes
of our own and foreign Church^s, States in all ages, and the very Directory it
self; as I have My Suspension suspended; ^ Legal Resolution of 2. Important
Questions; A New Discovery of some Romish Emissaries and Popish Errors.
elsewhere, and shall here more largely manifest. By which Negligence and
Omission, I shall desire them now at last most sadly to consider,

1. That they rob God himself of one chief public Ordinance, and part of his
solemn worship.

2. That they rob Jesus Christ himself of one of his instituted Sacraments,
whereby they should principally show forth the benefits, fruits, and memory of
his death, till his Second coming, 1 Cor. 11* 25, 26.

3. That they rob their Churches and people of the inestimable benefits,
comforts of Christ's most blessed Supper. Wherein they are more culpable,
sacrilegious and injurious to Christ's Institution and their people, than the
Sacrilegious Popes and Popish Priests, who administer this Sacrament to
themselves in both kinds every Mass, and give the People the Consecrated Bread
in all places, once a year at least, and the Cup too in some places, by special
Bish. Jewels Reply to Harding, p. 73. Fox Acts and Mon. Vol. 1. p. 910, 911,
912.
dispensations: whereas they deprive themselves and their people wholly of both
parts of this Sacrament for sundry years, and will not dispense it to them at
their and others earnest entreaties.

4. That herein they give as high, as gross, as sinful a Non obstante to
Christ himself, the Primitive Church and Fathers, in casting aside this
Sacrament of the Lords Supper for so many years together; as the Sessio 13.
Surius Council. Tom, 3. p. 821, 822.
Council of Constance did, when it took away the use of the Cup only from the
Lay People; and hereby justify, imitate, exceed this their Sacrilegious,
Antichristian practice.

5. That hereby they sinfully neglect, renounce one principal essential part of
their Ministerial function and pastoral duty, which they were purposely
ordained Ministers, and presented to their Parochial Cures and Benefices
diligently to discharge, (as I have A Legal R^solution of two important
Quaeres. Harmony of Conf^ssions. sect. 10. to 16.
elsewhere manifested at large) to wit, to administer this Sacrament to their
people.

6. That they herein pointblank oppugn, contradict the Sea My Susperston
suspended. Tho. Beacons Catechism.
constant practice of the Primitive Church, Fathers, Christians; who usually
administered the Holy Communion to all their visible Church Members every Lords
day; with the constant usage of all the Churches of God throughout the world,
in all former ages till this present, who prescribed, practiced the frequent
celebration thereof, as a necessary, useful, and most comfortable duty.

7. That herein they have in a great measure imitated the tyranny and practice
of Pope Innocent the 3d. and the Popish English Clergy under him; who
interdicting the whole Realm of England, Anno 1208. ( by reason of differences
then risen between King John, the Archbishop of Canterbury, and other Prelates)
for 6 years, 3 months, and 14 days space; thereupon through the Clergies
obstinacy cessaverunt in Anglia omnia Ecclesiastica Sacramenta praeter
solummodo Confessionem, and viaticum in ultima neccessitate, et Baptisma
parvulorum, ad irrestaurabile damnum Ecclesiae, tam in temporalibus quam
spiritualibus, as Hist. Angliae* An. 1208, 1214. p. 239. 240. Mat. Park^r,
Antiq* Eccles. Brit. p. 148 149. etc. Godwins Catalogue of Bishops, ^. 62. 63,
etc. Fox Acts and Mon. Vol. 1. p. 324, 326, etc. Holinshed, Speed, Grafton and
others in tbe life of King John.
Matthew Paris and others inform us: The King hereupon by special Writs and
Patents, commanded William of Cornhil, Joseline of Cornwall and others, to seize
all the Lands, Goods, Livings of the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Pri^rs,
Religious Persons, Clerks and Priests, that should from the Monday next before
Easter refuse to celebrate divine Service and Sacraments to the people; and
confiscated them all as forfeited to his Treasury: Being driven to use such
austerity and sharpness against them, to enforce them to perform their
Pastoral charge; as Acts and Monuments, Vol. 1. p. 324.
Mr. Fox records out of the Clause Roll of 9 Johannis in the Tower of London.
And have not many whole Parishes, Cities* and Dioceses, well nigh for as long a
space or more, been actually interdicted in like manner, by sundry obstinate
Ministers, from all Ecclesiastical Sacraments, except baptizing of Infants,
(and some of them from that too) and from the administration of the Lords
Supper to such as lie at the point of death, which was not denied to any during
that long Papal Interdict? And do they not deserve then, as severe a seizure of
their Benefices, Lands, Goods for this their wilful neglect of their Pastoral
duty for so long a season, as the Popish Clergy then incurred for their
negligence, obstinacy, and fear of the Popes displeasure?

8ly, This Crime and Neglect of theirs is highly aggravated by sundry
circumstances, which instead of justifying or extenuating, does elevate it to
the highest pitch.

1. It has been carried on and acted by special Confederacies, Combinations
amongst most Ministers guilty thereof; who have had sundry public and private
meetings, yea some days of Humiliation (which is worse) to carry on this
Sacrilegious design^; as the Popish Priests and Prelates formerly had, for the
Sacrilegious taking away of the Consecrated wine from the Laypeople in the
Sessio 13. Surius Council. Tom. 3. Fox, Vol. 1. p. 783.
Council of Constance.

2. They have justified it both in Dr. Drakes Bounda^y, Mr. Collings Juridical
suspension, and others.
Press and Pulpit, as not only Lawful and Necessary, but their bounden duty;
yea the will and appointment of Jesus Christ, as the Sea Gerson, and D.
Featlies Grand Sacrileg of the Chur: of Rome.
Popish Priests have justified their Half Communion, and taking away the Cup.

3. They have miserably wrested, perverted, tortured many Sacred Texts of
Scripture to warrant this their Sacrilege, as the Popish Priests have done to
justify their depriving the people of the Sacramental Cup.

4. They have printed, preached against the My short Vindication of 4. Serious
Questions. p, 17. to 29. and 47.
express Letter of the Scripture, all Antiquity, the Articles, Homilies,
Liturgy, and these Writers of our Church, and Confession of the Council of
Constance it self, That our Savior never administered the Sacrament to Judas,
but only to the other xi. Apostles; to justify their Sacrilege by this
palpable untruth.

5. They have cast most vile aspersions upon this most blessed Sacrament, to
justify this their practice, and deter the people from it; stiling it
frequently in their Pamphlets, Sermons; A Brotherly and Friendly Censure, p. 6,
7. An Antidote p. 6. [See My short Vindicatication, p. 28. to 36.] Dr. Drak^s
B^nda^y, and others.
Deadly poison: A Cup of poison, which will poison and kill men's souls. An
Ordinance of Christ, which has no efficacy spiritually to quicken, regenerate
or convert men, but only to confirm such who are already regenerated and really
converted. And asserting, That it belongs to none but real Saints, and such as
are truly sanctified; and not to all visible Members of the visible Church able
to examine themselves.

6. They have pleaded Dr. Drake, Mr. Collins, and others
tenderness of Conscience, Duty; and partaking with unworthy Communicants in
their sins, to justify their Non-celebration of this Sacrament, which both in
Conscience and Duty they are obliged duly to celebrate; and by not doing
whereof they are not only partakers, but Authors, abettors, perswaders of their
peoples sinful contempt and neglect thereof.

7. They have deprived many thousands of Gods dear, precious real Saints of the
inestimable benefits, comforts of, strength and growth in grace by this most
heavenly Ordinance, to whom they confess it does of right belong, and debarred
themselves also from it, for sundry years together, only for fear such whom
they deem ignorant, scandalous, should partake thereof. And is not this the
extremity of injustice, impiety, uncharitableness, to debar Gods Children, and
Christ's invited Guests from his Table, only for fear some unworthy or unbidden
guests should intrude thereto? Certainly this is diametrically contrary to the
Luke 12. 42. to 47.
Office of every Good and Faithful Steward whom the Lord has made ru^er over
his household to give them their portion of meat in due season; who cannot
expect a blessing, but curse from his Lord when he comes, and that he should
cut him in pieces, and give him his portion with unbelievers.

8. Some of them are grown so inveterately and transcendently malicious against
the frequent public administration of the Lords Supper, that they deem,
prosecute it as a scandalous Crime in other Ministers, for which they d^serve
to be sequestered and suspended from the Ministry: Some Ministers in Surrey,
Middlesex, and other places having lately been prosecuted, yea sequestered and
put out of their Livings, and those of the late Kings party all silenced and
prohibited to administer the Sacraments at once, principally upon this account.
When as those Ministers rather deserve suspension both from their Office and
Benefice, as Scandalous, who have wilfully neglected the celebration of this
Sacrament for sundry years, and are guilty of all the premised aggravations of
this their Sin and Sacrilege.

Now Dear Brethren, I beseech, I adjure you in the Name and Fear of God,
without prejudice or partiality, to reflect on all these premises, so far
forth, as any of you are really guilty of them; and now at last to behold,
consider, lament, repent, reform these transcendent Exorbitances and Excesses,
into which the Policy of Satan, the pravity of your own hearts, the ambitious
affectation of a New Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction over the Sacraments of Christ
himself, and the Consciences of your flocks (the sourse of this New
Sacrilegious extravagance) have hurried you by degrees: and 2 Chronicles. 30 8.
be no more stiffnecked in the obstinate neglect, defense, or excuse of all or
any of them; Which I have faithfully represented to your view in their proper
colors and just aggravations; not with the least intention to cast any
reproach or infamy upon your Persons, or Ministerial Function (which I
cordially honor, reverence, and have ever supported, defended to my power;) but
the more effectually to convince you of the greatness, sinfulness of these
your Errors and Deviations whereinto you have lapsed of late years; and for
which especially (in my weak apprehension) God has brought so much neglect,
contempt, reproach upon, and opposition against your persons and calling, more
than in former ages; of which you all now so much complain in Press and
Pulpit, not without just cause: You all well know, 1 Samuel 2 27* to the end
That the kicking at Gods sacrifice and offering which he commanded, and
despising of God therein, was that which made Elyes sons and their Ministry to
be lightly esteemed, and brought ruin on them and their families, and caused
God to translate the Priesthood from them unto Samuel. Yea, you cannot but take
notice of Mal. 2. 1, 2, 8, 9. And now, O ye Priests, this commandment is for
you. If ye will not hear, if ye will not lay it to heart, to give glory unto my
name, says the Lord of hosts, I will even send a curse upon you, and will even
curse your blessings; yea, I have cursed them already, because ye do not lay it
to heart, Behold, I will corrupt your seed, and spread dung upon your faces,
etc. Ye have departed out of the way, ye have caused many to stumble at the
Law, ye have corrupted the covenant of Levi, says the Lord of hosts: Therefore
have I also made you contemptible and base before all the people, according as
you have not kept my ways, but have been partial in the Law. And may you not
then conclude from these two Scriptures; That your kicking against the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and casting this offering quite aside, which
Christ commanded you frequently to celebrate, with your departing out of the
way in all the forementioned particulars (which has caused many to stumble at
the Law) are the principal causes, that have moved God to make yo thus
contemptible and base before all the people? Yea, has not your casting off the
Lords Supper for so many years, occasioned many of the people to cast off all
other Ordinances, Sacraments? encouraged the Anabaptists to cast off
Infant Baptism; and thousands to reject both your Ministry, Churches, and to
turn Anabaptists, Seekers, Quakers, Ranters, Independents, Papists; and some
professed Atheists? I shall therefore apply that wholesome advice of our Savior
to the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, unto you, at this season, Rev. 2. 5.
Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do thy first
works; or else (you may justly fear what follows) I will come unto thee
quickly, and will remove thy Candlestick out of its place, unless thou repent.

Now because Christ's own institution, practice, and the practice of his
Apostles recorded in the word, is the (...) ^or. 11. 1, 2. 3. Ephesians. 5. 1. ^.
John 2. 5, 6.
only rule you ought to follow in the admission of your Parishioners and people
to this Sacrament, and your administration thereof unto them; give me leave to
propound these Observations to you from them, which through Gods blessing may
rectify both your Erroneous judgments, consciences, practices in secluding
others from the Sacrament, without any Gospel grounds.

1. It is clear, that Mat. 26. 26. to 30. Mar. 14. 22. to 26. Luke 22. 8. to
23. 1 Cor. 11. 23, 24. 25.
Jesus Christ himself secluded none from this Sacrament of his body, either for
ignorance or scandal; but admitted all his disciples to it at first, without
any pre-instructions that we read of, either of its nature or use, but what is
recorded in the very institution it self, done suddenly after the passover, as
they sat at Table. That all his disciples were then ignorant of the Article of
his resurrection from the dead, and would not believe that he was risen, within
4. days after he administered this Sacrament to them (though he Mat. 20. 19. c.
26. 32. 27. 63. Mar. 8. 31. Lu. 18. 33. c. 24 25. 26* 45. 46.
often foretold them he should rise again the third day, and the Prophets also
predicted it) as is clear by Mat. 28. 17. Mar. 16. 11, 13, 14: where Christ
himself appeared to the eleven, and upbraided them with their unbelief and
hardness of heart, because they believed not them that had seen him after he
was risen, upon their double testimony to them; whose words seemed unto them as
idle fables, and they believed them not, Lu. 24. 11, 12. 21, 22, etc. 37, 41,
46. John 20. 24, 25. to 30. Yet he admitted them all to his Supper, though thus
ignorant and unbelieving. And as he admitted all his Disciples, though thus
ignorant: so he likewise admitted Judas himself, though a John 6. 70, 71. c.
18. 2, 3, etc. c. 17. 12. 22. 6. Mat. 26. 14 15, 16. 47, Acts 1. 16. to 21.
Devil, a Thief, a Traitor, a Seller of him to the Jews for money, a Son of
perdition, yea cast away, and Christ then knew him to be such a wretch.

2ly, It is most evident, that Mat. 26. 2. 17. to 26. Mar. 14. 14. John 18. 28,
etc.
all those whom Christ admitted to eat the Passover with him, he likewise
admitted to receive this Sacrament of his last Supper, without secluding any of
them. But all circumcised Persons whatsoever, as well unregenerate, ignorant,
or scandalous, as the most regenerate, knowing and holy Saints (if not totally
cut off from the Congregation, and legally, not morally unclean) were admitted
to eat of the Passover, Exodus 12. 3, 4. 43. to 50. Deuteronomy. 16. 2. etc. Josh. 5.
10. 2 Kings 23. 21, 22. 2 Chronicles 30. 1. to 26. c. 35. 1. to 20. Ezra 6. 19, 20,
21. 1 Cor. 10. 11. 3, 4, 5* Therefore all such Christians and Church members
(if not actually cut off by Excommunication from the Church) ought, by Christ's
own practice, to be admitted to the Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 10. 16, 17, 18.

3ly, We read of no special Preparation Sermon made by Christ to fit his
Disciples to receive this Sacrament: of no Classis or Presbytery appointed by
him to examine their faith, knowledge, graces, preparation, worthiness,
fitness before they were admitted to it; or to seclude them from it, if
adjudged unworthy, ignorant, or scandalous by them. Of no such extraordinary
preparation, prescribed to them ere admitted to receive it, as is now See The
Practice of Piety, Mr. Rogers of the Sacrament. D. Drakes Boundary, Mr.
Collings Juridical suspension.
peremptorily exacted, prescribed, as absolutely necessary ere men must
approach, or be admitted to receive it; and no other preparation or
self-examinanation then was requisite for the receiving of the Passover, or
other daily holy duties. All which our Savior, no doubt, would have absolutely
prescribed at his first institution and celebration of this Sacrament for a
pattern to all succeeding ages, if so absolutely necessary, as ^ome over-rigid
Ministers (now wiser, holier, and more scrupulous than Christ himself, the
Author of this Mystery) now affirm in Press and Pulpit, without any precept or
president from their Lord and Master Jesus Christ, but their own fancies.

4ly, It is apparent from the 1 Cor. 10. 16, 17. The Cup of blessing which we
bless, is it not the Communion of the Blood of Christ? The Bread which we
break, is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ? For we being many are one
bread: For we are all partakers of that one Bread: That all the believing
Corinthians and Members of the visible Church of Corinth (except the 1 Cor. 5.
7. ^3.
incestuous Corinthian excommunicated from the Church and all other Ordinances
as well as this) did receive the Lords Supper usually together: Yet many of
them were very ignorant; yea mere babes in Christ, whom the Apostle fed with
milk, and not with strong meat, being not able to bear it; and some of them
denied the resurrection of the dead, or were ignorant of it, 1 Cor. 1, 2. 3. c.
7. 10, 11. c. 14. 38. c. 15. 12, 13. etc. Others of them were in a great
measure scandalous: 1 In going to Law with their Brethren before unbelievers,
for which he reprehends them, 1 Cor. 6. 1. to 8. Others of them guilty of
Adultery, lasciviousness, fornication, chapter 6. 18, 19. c. 10. 8. 2 Cor. 12.
21. Others of them spiritually proud, and puffed up with their knowledge, who
did eat things sacrificed to Idols in Idols Temples, and scandalized their weak
brethren, chapter 8. 1. 2, 7, 8, etc. c. 10. 22, 23, 28, 29, 30, 32, 33. Others of
them withheld due maintenance from Pa^l himself and those other Ministers who
instructed them, chapter 9. 6. to 20. Besides, their men and women were very
disorderly in their public assemblies, and came together not for the better,
but for the worse, for which he reprehends them chapter 11. 3. to 34. and chapter 14.
throughout. More particularly, when they came to receive the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper they were very disorderly, in not receiving it all together, and
tarrying not one for the other; in despising and not relieving their poor
Brethren, and not eating with them; yea some of them were drunken when they
came to receive; and they were also full of schisms, contentions, factions;
some being for Paul, others for Apollos, others for Cephas, etc. 1 Cor. 11. 16.
to 34. 1 Cor. 3. 1, 2, 3. Yea, the Apostle writes expressly that he could not
speak unto the generality of them, as unto spiritual, but unto carnul, even as
unto babes in Christ, being carnal and walking as men, chap. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4. Yet
notwithstanding all these disabilities, si^s, scandals, they were then freely
admitted to the Lords Table, and not secluded from it. And though the Apostle
reprehends them in this Epistle for their ignorance, these other vices sins and
disorders in their meetings; yet he gives no order to their Ministers or
Presbyteries to seclude them from the Sacrament till better instructed,
prepared, and reformed in their lives; but only admonishes them, to reform
those their abuses themselves; to judge and examine themselves before they eat
and drink of the Lords bread and cup; because otherwise they shall eat and
drink Judgment to themselves, and bring Gods temporal Judgments of sickness
and death upon them: yet no way dehorts them from constant and frequent
reception of this Sacrament by reason of this danger of unworthy receiving,
which they must take care to reform, 1 Cor. 11. 33, 34. but in no case omit the
duty, being Christ's prescribed Ordinance, to show forth his death till ^e come,
Verse 25, 26.

From which only Texts and Presidents in Scripture, relating to this Sacraments
institution and reception, it is most clear to my judgment and conscience,

1. That Ignorance in Church Members and baptized Christians of years of
discretion, is no sufficient ^ause to debar them from the Lords Supper, no
more than from the preaching of the word. The reason is most clear, because
Christ's Supper (as De Trinitat^, ^. 3. c. ^.
Augustine, Reply to Har^ing* See here, p* 8.
Bishop Jewel, In his (...)* ^ 4^5, 42^. See M^ Sus^^^^^^ susp^^^ ^, p. 30, 3^.
Thomas Beacon, and others resolve) is both a visible and audible Sermon, Word,
and the Priest therein preaches and declares the death of the Lord, with the
fruits and benefits of his passion to the Communicants, to instruct, teach,
edify them thereby; as he does by his other Sermons, reading and preaching of
the word at other seasons. Therefore the best and readiest way to instruct and
reform the peoples ignorance, is frequently to call, press and admit them to
this holy Sacrament, that they See M^. J^h^ H^ms^^, his Second Vindication of
Free admi^^ion, p. 28. to 33.
may be thereby edified, instruct^d, comforted, enlightened by it, and not to
seclude them from it, year after year; which does but continue, and increase
their former ignorance, and harden them therein.

2ly, That no scandalous sins, crimes, unregeneracy, or want of spiritual,
saving graces, ought to seclude any external Christians or Church Members from
the Lords Supper, no more than from hearing of the word, prayer, thanksgiving,
fasting, reading the Scriptures, or any other public or private duties of Gods
worship: Because they are peremptorily ^ Cor. 11. 24, 25, 26* Luke* 22. 19 See
he^e, p. 50*
commanded to perform this duty in remembrance of Christ's death, and thereby to
show forth his death till he come, as well as to hear, read, pray, fast, praise
God, and the like, from which no sin, nor unpreparednesse may exempt, or excuse
any man; yea it is a far greater, and more dangerous sin, wilfully to
neglect, omit, contemn the performance of this or any other holy duty, than
sinfully to perform and set about it, there being a total disobedience in the
one, but a partial obedience at least (through a failing in the due manner of
peformance) in the other. Which I wish all Ministers and Christians would now
sadly consider: And so much the rather, because the Apostle and Spirit of God
in this Epistle (pointblank against Dr. Drakes, Mr. Collins, and others
conclusions thence) make the Corinthians scandalous sins forementioned, their
resort to, and eating meats offered to Idols and Devils in their Temples (a
more scandalous crime than any English Christians are now guilty of) not a
ground to seclude them from the Lords Table, Supper, Temple, as unfit to
communicate with other Christians; but presses their frequent participation of
the Lords Table, and resort to his Temple, his Ordinances, as the strongest
argument to dissuade, reclame them from these scandalous sins; Witness these
express words, 1 Cor. 10. 14. to 24. Wherefore my dearly beloved, flee from
Idolatry, I speak as to wise men, judge ye what I say: The Cup of blessing
which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of Christ? The bread
which we break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ? For we being
many, are one hread; For we are all partakers of that one bread. Behold Israel
after the flesh, are not they which eat of the Sacrifices partakers of the
Altar? What say I then? that the Idol is any thing, or that which is offered in
sacrifice to Idols is any thing? But I say, that the things that the Gentiles
sacrifice, they sacrifice to devil^, and not to God: and I would not that ye
should have fellowship with Devils. (Mark this inference, and that which
follows) Ye cannot drink the Cup of the Lord, and the Cup of Devils: Ye cannot
be partakers of the Lords Table, and of the Table of Devils, etc. In which
clause the word cannot, is not taken physically or naturally (for they did
actually eat, drink of the Table, Cup of the Lord and Devils, for which he
reprehends them:) nor of a moral or spiritual cannot, as some interpret it;
that is, You cannot lawfully, or spiritually, of right, drink of the Lords Cup,
or be partakers of the Lords Table, but ought to abstain or be secluded from
them, so long as ye partake of the Cup and Table of Devils; which is clearly
contradicted as false by the 16, 17, and 20 verses: but of a rational and
logical Such a cannot as we read of, 1 John 3. 9. Gal. 5. 17. Lu. 14. 20. Mat.
6. 24. Acts 27. 31. Lu. 11. 7. Romans 6. 1, 2. 2 Cor. 13. 8. Cant. 5. 3. which
will well expound this cannot here.
cannot; That is, You cannot (in reason, duty, justice, convenience,
experience) drink of the Cup, and partake of the Table of Devils, or go to
Idols Temples; but flee from Idolatry, and not have fellowship with Devils;
because you all drink the Cup of the Lord, and are all partakers of the Lords
Table, and of that one bread, which is the Communion of the Body of Christ.
Which argument is thus seconded, enforced in the 2 Cor. 6. 14, 15, 16. Be ye
not unequally yoked together with unbelievers: for what fellowship has
righteousness with unrighteousness? and what communion has light with
darkness? or what concord has Christ with Belial? or what part has he that
believes with an Infidel? And what agreement has the Temple of God with
Idols? For ye are the Temple of the living God; as God has said, I will dwell
in them, and walk in them, and I will be their God, and they shall be my
people. Wherefore come out from among them, and be ye separate, says the Lord,
and touch no unclean thing, and I will receive you, etc. A full Exposition of
and Commentary on this former Text. Therefore by the Apostles own argument and
resolution, the most scandalous Church Members, if not actually excommunicated,
not only may, but must, yea ought to be admitted to the Lords Supper, and not
secluded from it; and their participation thereof ought to be thus enforced on
them by Ministers, as the strongest argument, and most prevailing reason,
motive, to reclame them from their scandalous Sins; which have no rational
fellowship, communion, concord, part, agreement or consistency with such a
sacred Ordinance, but ought to be abandoned as most incongruous, unsuitable,
and repug^ant thereunto, and to their Christian profession. Which is more
agreeable to the will, mind of Jesus Christ, and will be far more effectual
upon the Souls, Consciences, lives of scandalous Sinners, than their many years
sinful seclusion from this Sacrament, which does but harden them in their
scandalous sins, and cause them to have more fellowship with Devils in their
works of darkness, than ever they had before their seclusion from the Lords
Supper.

3ly, That all visible Church Members as visible, have an equal external right
of admission to this Sacrament, and ought all equally to receive it in common,
without any seclusion, when administered, being that wherein their common
Christian communion principally consists, and is testified unto the world:
whence it is styled 1 Cor. 10. 16. Here p. 5. etc.
The Communion, and no other Ordinance but it so termed. Therefore there is no
Classis, Presbytery, or other Church Officer appointed by Christ or his
Apostles, to suspend or seclude any Churchmember from it, but rather (if any
such Classis or Officers there be) to incite and invite them to it, when
negligent to receive it: Isay 55. 1, 2. John 7. 33. Rev. 22. 17.

4ly, See the Directory.
That though preparation Sermons to the Lords Supper, to instruct and prepare
the people for the more devout and diligent receiving, are commendable,
profitable, useful, especially where the people are ignorant, careless, and
backward to receive it. And although an extraordinary self-examination,
preparation, humiliation and repentance be very profitable, advantageous,
comfortable to such who have time and means sufficient, before they approach to
this Supper of the Lord; yet they are not so absolutely necessary as Mr.
Rogers, of the Sacrament, The Practice of Piety, Dr. Drake his Boundary, Mr.
Collins Juridical suspension.
many now assert them in print, and Discourse; nor the want of them a
sufficient cause for any persons to debar themselves, or for Ministers or
Presbyteries to seclude others from this Sacrament; There being no other, no
greater preparation, qualification, or higher degree of faith, love, charity,
repentance, devotion, and other Christian graces, required in our approaches
thereunto, than unto other public and private Ordinances of Gods worship, for
ought appears by Scripture. And that self-examination required of Christians
when they receive this Supper by the Apostle in the 1 Cor. 11. 28. is required
of all Christians at other times and seasons by the same Apostle, 2 Cor. 13. 5,
6, and of all Saints, long before this Sacrament instituted, as a constant and
daily duty, especially in times of affliction, and approaches to God in other
holy duties, Lam. 3. 39, 40. Psalm. 4. 4. Ps. 119. 5^. Hag. 1. 5. Prove. 6. 6.
Jer. 8. 6, 7. Eccles. 5. 1.

5. See my Suspension suspended, and Vindication of 4 Serious Q^estions.
That the Ministers administering the Sacrament to an ignorant, scandalous, or
unworthy Communicant, who eats and drinks judgment or damnation to himself
thereby, does no ways make him guilty of his sin, or unworthy receiving; for
then Christ and the Ministers of Corinth should have been guilty of Judas and
the Corinthians unworthy receiving. The reasons are apparent, 1. Because the
administration of it is the Luke 12. 42 c. 22. 19. 1 Cor. 10. 16, 17. c. 11.
23, 24, 25, 26. c. 9. 16, 17. c. 4* 1, 2.
Ministers bounden duty; and the receiving, the receivers; but the unworthy
receiving, his own Sin alone, and personal crime, to which the Minister is no
party or accessory, no more than the rider guilty of his horses halting,
stumbling; or the Musician of his instruments jarring; or Schoolmaster of his
Scholars blots, or misframing of his Letters; or the Physician or Chirurgian of
their Patients distempers or disorders which hinder the good operation of his
wholesome medicines. Or the Minister guilty of the peoples unprofitable hearing,
when Ezech. 2. 1. to 8. 2 Cor. 2. 15, 16. Hebr. 4. 2. 7.
the word becomes unto them the savor of death unto death, and a means of
their obduration by their own defaults. 2ly, Because the good success of the
Sacrament, and all other means of Salvation, 1 Cor. 3. 6, 7, 8. Heb. 4. 1, 2*
depends not on the Minister, but Gods blessing on them, and the peoples due
receiving of them. 3ly, Because the Ministers are unto God a sweet savor of
Christ in them that are saved, and in them that perish, as well in administering
the Sacraments, as preaching the Gospel, 2 Cor. 2. 14, 15, 16. they being both
ordained by God and Christ himself, as well to be ^u. 2. 34. c. 8. 18* c. 20.
18. Isay 8 14. 15. c. 28. 16. Romans 9. 33. 1 Pet. 2. 8. Man. 10 14, 15. c. 21.
44. Mat. 16. 15, 16. John 15. 22. Ezech. 2. 3. to 9 1 Cor. 11. 25. to 30. 2
Cor. 2. 15, 16. Heb. 6. 6, 7, 8.
savours of death unto death in a secondary and accidental respect, to magnify
his justice toward those who unworthily receive, abuse or contemn them; as to
be a savoar of life unto life to them who receive them worthily, to the
magnifying of his free grace toward them. Wherefore there can be no real
ground or scruple of conscience left for Ministers, not to administer it freely
unto all Church members, but only mere design, to erect a new Jurisdiction and
Presbytery, to seclude men from this Sacrament only, under a pretext of
conscience.

5ly, That Isay 1. 2. to 21. Z^p. 2. 1. Ez^ch. 6. 1. to 9. J^r. 3. 1. to 24. 2 Chronicles. 33. 2. to 21. c. 36. 14, 15, 16. Mar. 16. 15, 16. Rem. 10 18 19, 20, 21.
Tim. 1. 12. to 17. c. 2. 1. to 7. Psalm. 65. 2, 3. Ps. 95. 6, 7. Ps. 96. 1. 2.
to 11. Ps. 100 1, 2, 3, 4. Psalm. 146. 11, 12, 13. Acts 9. 1. to 23.
no scandalous sin whatsoever does directly and properly of it self debar
Christians from the Sacrament, or any other public Ordinances or private
duties, (the best ordinary means prescribed by God to cure and heal their sins,
convert and reclame them from them;) but only consequentially, when they are
actually and judicially excommunicated, or cut off from the Church and public
Assemblies for them, 1 Cor. 5. 5. 7. 1 Timothy ^. 20.
for the terror of others, the prevention of infection by their Society, the
shaming, punishing of themselves for their scandalous sins, and bringing them
to repentance for them. That excommunication it self does not formally,
specially and intentionally seclude men from this Sacrament, (as most
ignorantly fancy) no more than from any other public Ordinance; but only
consequentially and indirectly, by secluding them for a time from the Eus^b.
Eccl. Hist. l. 6. c. 45. Bishop Jewels reply to Harding, p. 35.
Church it self, and Communion, Society of all the faithful, where the public
Ordinances and Sacraments are administered: whence it is styled and defined. A
casting or putting a scandalous Sinner out of the Church: A cutting him off
from the Congregation, and a delivering him over unto 1 Cor. 5. 5. 7. 13 Gal.
5. 12. 1 Timothy 1. 20. Tit. 3. 10. 3 John 10. Bochellus Decreta Eccl. Gal. l. 1.
Tit. 14. Summa Angel. et Rosella. Tit. Excommunicatio. Gratian, Causa 11. Qu.
3* Articles of England, Artic. 33. Harmony of Confessions, sect. 10, 11, 14,
15. Eusebius. Hist. l. ^. c. 46.
Satan; but never, a Suspension from the Lords Supper, or other public
Ordinances; being only the consequence, nor form or essence of Excommunication,
so much of late contested for, and so little understood, by those who are most
eager to introduce it.

6ly, I humbly conceive, that no greater measure or degree of knowledge, faith,
profession of Christ, Confession of sin, and repentance, is necessarily
required by God, or to be exacted by Ministers, to enable men now to receive
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, than in the Primitive Church was exacted by
Christ's own Apostles and Ministers in persons of ripe years newly converted to
Christianity, upon their admission to Baptism; they being both Sacraments and
Seals of the Covenant of Grace alike, and requiring the self-same
qualifications. Hence our learned Reply to Harding, Art. 2 d^vis. 25. p. 103*
104.
Bishop Jewel writes, It appears by St. Cyprian, St. Hierom, August. de
Eccles. Dogma^ l 1 c. 52.
St. Augustine, and other old Writers, That they that were baptized, as well
Children as others, immediately received the holy Mysteries in both kinds. St.
Hierom. contra Luciferium.
Hierom speaking of one Hilarion says thus. He cannot administer Baptism
without the Sacrament of Thanksgiving. Cyprian de Lapsis, Sermon. 5.
St. Cyprians words touching this matter be these: Ubi solennibus adimpletis,
etc. After the solemnity (of the Consecration) was done, and the Deacon began
to administer the Cup unto them that were present; and among others there
received, the child's turn being come, by the power of the divine Majesty, she
turned away her face, etc. Here by the way we may well gather, That like as the
Priest, the Deacons, and the people received, even so the child received too,
without any manner of innovation or difference. This Custom of administering
the Lords Supper as well to infants, as others, immediately after their Baptism
in the Primitive times, proceeded (as I conceive) from the very practice of the
Apostles. Acts 2. 38. to 42. where the 3000. Converts so soon as they believed
and were baptized, were immediately admitted into the Apostles fellowship, and
to the breaking of bread, which most interpret of the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, comparing it with Acts 20. 7. and 1 Cor. 10. 2, 3. 16, 17. Now a very
See Mr. Blake his Covenant sealed, p. 233.
small measure of instruction, knowledge, faith, repentaece, confession of sin,
and acknowledgement of Christ, was reputed sufficient in the Primitive Church
by the Apostles and Ministers of Christ, to qualify and admit converts of ripe
years to the Sacrament of Baptism; as is clear by Mat. 3. 5, 6. Acts 2. 38, 41,
42, 46, 47. c. 8. 12, 13, 16. 36, 37, 38. c. 9. 17, 18. c. 10. 47, 48. c. 11.
16, 17. c. 16. 15. 30. to 35. c. 18. 8. c. 22. 16. where all were instructed,
converted, believed, baptized in one and the very self-same day, and made
profession of the faith of Christ, upon the first Sermon they heard, without
any further delay or Suspension of them from Baptism. Therefore they and all
other baptized Christians of ripe years, immediately upon their baptism and
conversion, ought now to be admitted to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper upon
the self-same terms and qualifications, and not secluded from it, under a
pretense of ignorance or unfitness to receive it.

7ly. Whereas some Ministers most insist upon the 1 Cor. 11. 27, 29. Whosoever
shall eat this bread, and drink this cup of the Lord unworthily, shall ^e
guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. For he that eats and drinks
unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to himself (not to the Minister or
other Communicants) not discerning the Lords body: as the prime ground, and
reason to suspend ignorant and scandalous persons, in their judgment, from
this Sacrament. I beseech them to observe, 1. What the Ancient Fathers, and
Defense of the Apology^* part. 5. ^h. 16. divis. 1. p. 514, 515.
Bishop Jewel out of them concludes against the Papists, who object it, to
prove a Transubstantiation in this Sacrament Even so Contra Crescon^um, l. 1.
cap. 23.
St. Augustine writes of the water of Baptism. Baptismus valet al^is ad
Regnum, aliis ad judicium. Again he says, Contra Cresco^^um, l. 2. c. 23.
Baptismum multi habent, non ad vitam aeternam, sed ad poenam aternam, non been
utentes tanto b^ne. Verily De Tempo^^^^, Sermon. ^0.
Saint Augustine says, Reus erit, non parvi pretii; sed sanguinis Christi, qui
(fornicatione et adulterio) violat et commaculat animam, Christi sanguine et
Passione mundatam. Again he says, De Tempore, Sermon. 120.
Adultter reus erit aeternae mortis, quia vilem in se habuit sanguinem
Redemptoris. D^ Pessi^^ and ^ruc^ Dominis.
Athanasius says, Adorantes dominum, neque ita, ut dignum est ei, viventes,
non sentiunt se reos fieri Dominicae mortis. De Ablutione P^dam.
And St. Cyprian says, Impiis in morte Christi nullus superest quaestus, sed
justissime eos beneficia neglecta condem^ant. If then See here, p. 45, 46.
Baptism be received by some unto judgment and everlasting pain, as well as
the Lords Supper: If Fornicators and Adulterers by defiling their souls made
clean, by the Passion and blood of Christ, be guilty of the blood of Christ,
though they receive not this Sacrament; If those who worship the Lord in
prayer, or any other sacred Ordinance as well as this, and yet live not so as
is meet for the Lord, are thereby made guilty of our Lords death; If wicked
men's despising of the benefits of Christ, does justly condemn, and make Christ
death ungainfull to them, as well as unworthy receiving this Sacrament: Then
this Text can afford no Jurisdiction or ground at all to our Ministers, or
others, to seclude any from the Lords Supper, no more than from Baptism, or any
other sacred Ordinance upon this Account, ^ 2ly. Observe what Exposition
Defense of the Apology, p. 515.
Bishop Jewel in the same place gives of this Text. This therefore is St. Paul's
meaning, that the wicked resorting unworthily to the Holy Mysteries, and having
no regard what is meant thereby, DESPISE THE DEATH AND CROSS OF CHRIST: and
therefore are guilty of the Lords Body and Blood that are represented in the
Sacrament. To come nearer to the purpose, [g] Aug. ad Bonef. Epist. 50.
St. Augustine says, Habeant foris Sacramentum corporis Christi, sed rem ipsam
amittunt intus cujus est illud Sacramentum: ET IDEO SIBI JUDICIUM MANDUCANT ET
BIBUNT. Here Saint Augustine says, they are guilty, NOT BECAUSE THEY RECEIVE,
BUT BECAUSE THEY RECEIVE NOT THE BODY OF CHRIST. Mark well these words Mr.
Harding, (and let others mark them now) they are effectual: The wicked by St.
Augustines judgment are guilty, NOT BECAUSE THEY RECEIVE, but BECAUSE THEY
RECEIVE NOT THE BODY OF CHRIST. And if so, then I hence infer, That those who
wilfully neglect to receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, or keep off
others from it who desire and press to receive it, are more guilty of the body
and blood of Christ, than those who unworthily receive it; because they See the
(...) in the Common Prayer Bo^k* Heb. (...). 24. 30. M^t. (...). 14* 15. ^ct^
13. 45, 46. 51.
more neglect, contemn, despise and undervalue Christ's death and passion
represented therein, than those who in obedience to his Institution make
conscience externally to receive it, when administered; and do neither
externally, nor internally, Sacramentally nor spiritually receive the body of
Christ: when as the others who receive unworthily, receive it externally and
Sacramentally, at least in the Elements: Which Judas likewise did, as Bishop
Jewel there asserts, out of two Quotations in Aug. Epist. 160. and in Psalm* 3.
St. Augustines writings. 3ly. Consider, that when our Savior sent forth his
Apostles (and Ministers, who succeed them) to preach; he gave them this
Commission, Mark 16. 15, 16. Go ye into all the World, and preach the Gospel to
every creature. He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved; BUT HE THAT
BELIEVES NOT SHALL BE DAMNED. Which is likewise seconded John 3. 18, 36. 2
Cor. 2. 15, 16. If then the damnation of those who believe not the Gospel
preached, authorizeth not Ministers or Presbyteries to seclude any unbelieving
Christians, or other unprofitable hearers from hearing the Word and Gospel read
or preached in the Church or elsewhere; then by the self-same reason, this
danger of eating and drinking damnation, and being guilty of the Lords body and
blood, can be no sufficient Authority, Ground or Commission for any Classi^,
Presbytery or Minister whatsoever, to seclude any visible unexcommunicated
Churchmember from the Lords Supper, no more than from the Word preached, read,
prayer, or any other sacred Ordinance; which See Perkins cases of conscience,
book 2. c. 10. Every man of years living in the Church, and being baptized, is
bound (...) conscience by the commandment to use the Lords Supper.
God commands them to frequent; which no mortals^may or can (without the
highest presumption, usurpation) juridically enjoin them to abstain from, or
neglect; Seeing we ought herein to obey God, rather than men, as the Apostle:
themselves have twice resolved, Acts 4. 17, 18, 19, 20, 29, 30, 32. c. 5. 20,
21, 28, 29. etc. 42. and Daniel long before them, Dan. 6. 5. to 18.

All which particulars, with what else I shall subjoyn in this Vindication,
duly considered, together with that Commission which every Minister publicly
received heretofore at his Ordination, when he had this power conferred on him
(Be thou a faithful Dispenser of the Word of God, and OF HIS HOLY SACRAMENTS.
Take thou Authority to preach the Word of God, AND TO MINISTER THE HOLY
SACRAMENTS, IN THIS CONGREGATION where thou shall be so appointed) And that
solemn promise he then openly made, See the Book of Ordination; confirmed by
the Statutes of 5 and 6 F. 6. ^. 1. 3* ^. 6. c. 2. 8. El^z. c. 1.
I will by the help of the Lord, GIVE MY FAITHFVL DILIGENCE ALWAYS SO TO
ADMINISTER THE DOCTRINE AND SACRAMENTS OF CHRIST AS THE LORD HAS COMMANDED,
AND THIS REALM HAS RECEIVED THE SAME, according to the commandments of God:
will (I hope) through Gods blessing on them, resolve and determine all those
distracting needless Controversies, touching Suspension of particular Persons,
or whole Parishes from the Lords Supper, and remove all New-erected Bars and
Rayles to keep the people from Free-admission and access to the Lords Table,
in all plaees where of late years they have been injuriously sequestered from
it; and restore the frequent Celebration thereof in remembrance of our Saviors
Passion. And so much the rather, because the very Directory it self (as well as
our old Common Prayer Book) in the Section Of the Celebration of the Communion
or Sacrament of the Lords Supper, resolves thus in the very first lines. The
Communion, or Supper of the Lord is See Peter ^ombard, Sent. l. 4. distinct.
35. Henricus de Vu^ruma and other Schoolmen thereon: Gratian de Consec. D^st. 2.
frequently to be celebrated. But how often, may be considered and determined
by the Ministers and other Church Governors of each Congregation as they shall
find most convenient for the comfort and edification of the people committed to
their charge. After which it directs, When the day is come for administration,
the Minister shall make a short Exhortation, expressing the inestimable
benefits we have by the Sacrament, together with the ends and use thereof
setting forth the great necessity of having our Comfort and Strength renewed
thereby in this our Pilgrimage and Warfare; which being the things I plead for,
I cannot but hope, all Ministers of the Church of England will henceforth
cordially pursue, notwithstanding all former Books, Cavils, Scruples to
dissuade them from their duties herein.

Phil. 2. 1. 2.
If there be therefore any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if
any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels and mercies, fulfill ye my joy, that
ye be like minded, having the same love, being of one accord, of one mind
herein. Phil. 4. 8, 9, 23.
Finally brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest,
whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are
lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; if there be any virtue, if there
be any praise, think on these things. Those things which ye have both learned,
and received, and heard and seen in me, do, and the God of Peace shall be with
you. The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all Amen.

So prays your unfe^gned Christian Friend and Brother in the Lord. WILLIAM
PRYNNE.
Swainswick, Sept. 1. 1656.
A Seasonable Vindication of the frequent Administration of the Holy Communion,
to all Visible Church Members, Regenerate or Unregenerate.
HAving heretofore in 4 Serious Questions, printed 1644. A Vindication of 4.
Serious Questions, A^. 1645 16 Important Questions touching Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction and Censures. And Suspension suspended, published 1646.
several Publications from Divine and Humane Authorities of all sorts, largely
evinced, That the holy Communion of the Lord's Supper belongs equally to all,
and every visible Member of every particular Church capable of
self-examination, ( not actually cut off from it by a legal Excommunication) be
he regenerate or unregenerate: That it ought to be now frequently administered
in public to all congregations, as it was in the Primitive Church: That it is
a powerfully Converting, as well as a Confirming Ordinance: That Christ himself
admitted Confessed by the whole Council of Basil. Fox Acts and Monuments Vol.
1. p. 909. Besides those Councils, Fathers, Protestant Confessions, Authors of
all sorts quoted in my Vindication of 4 Serious Questions, p. 12. to 29. and p.
47*
Judas to it (though a Devil, Thief, Traitor, Covetous wretch, selling Christ
for money to his Crucifiers) at its original institution, as well as the
holiest Apostles. That all Ministers are bound by their Office, Duty, Christ's
command, to administer; and all their people of age of discretion, often to
receive it. That none may or ought to be secluded from it, but such as are for
their Notorious sins, actually excommunicated from Church Communion and all
other Ordinances. That sole Suspension from this Sacrament, by way of
Church-censure, with free admission to all other public Ordinances: and
Examination by Ministers or Presbyters of other men's fitness by way of
Jurisdiction, before their admission to the Lords Supper; are not warranted by
any precept, or president in Gods word. That neither the Ministers who deliver
this Sacrament, to unworthy Receivers presenting themselves humbly and
earnestly to receive it; nor such who receive together with them, are guilty of
their unworthy receiving, but themselves alone, nor any ways partakers with
them in their sins: Answering likewise all Objections to the contrary. (Which
Mr. John Humfrey, in his Sermons, Vindications of Free-admission to the Lords
Supper, and Rejoinder to Dr. Drake, has acutely, judiciously, solidly backed;
vindicated since; with John Timson, in The Bar removed, and Answer to Mr.
Collings, and Mr. Saunders:) And having newly in my Legal resolution of two
Important Quaeres of General present concernment, clearly demonstrated from our
Statute, Common and Canon Laws, the bounden Duty of Ministers or Vicars of
Parish-Churches, to administer the Sacraments, as well as Preach, to their
Parishioners: with the Legal Remedies to reclaim them from, or punish or remove
them for their wilful obstinacy in denying the Sacraments to them: ( A Theme
not formerly handled by any of my Profession, generally unversed in such
Law-points:) Which Remedies doubtless may, will be put in execution against
such Anti-Communion, refractory, sacrilegious Ministers, who wilfully rob their
Parishioners of their Sacramental Bread and Wine, ( being herein far worse than
Popish Priests, who deprive their Laics only of the Cup, but freely admit them
to the Sacred Bread, in the eating of whith alone they likewise misinstruct
them, Council. Constant. Sess. 13. Surius Tom. 3. Council. p. 821. Bella^ min.
Suarez, and others. De Integritate Sacramenti, et Communione sub utraque
specie, Council. Trident. Sess. 21. c. 3. Bishop Jewels Reply to Harding, p. 72,
etc.
that they also drink Christ's Cup and Sacred Blood:) And though they often preach
unto their people when they injuriously detain their Tithes, Dues; Thou shall
not muzzle the mouth of the Ox that treads out the corn: Deuteronomy. 25. 4. 1 Cor.
9. 9. that so they and theirs may have bread to eat at their own Tables; yet
themselves (against this and other Divine commands) still muzzle the mouths of
those Oxen ( their Parishioners, whose Tithes and Duties they receive) which
not only tread out, but sow and provide them corn, and keep them thus muzzled,
sundry Months, nay Years together, from eating any Bread at the Lords own
Table, though he Luke 14. 16, 17, 23. c. 22. 17, 19, 20. Matt. 22. 3, 4, 9, 10.
c. 26. 26, 27. 1 Cor. 11. 23, 24, 25. etc.
invites, commands, compels them by his Word, precepts, and the presidents of
all former ages, frequently to resort thereto.

To prevent which Prosecutions, by their injured, offended people, and reclaim
them from this their Sacrilegious obstinacy by all Christian friendly means, or
else to leave them exposed to the Justice, Penalties of our Laws, without any
color of Excuse, or Plea in bar, in Law or Conscience; I thought it convenient
(by way of Corollary to all my former Publications of this subject) to
recommend to them and others some Passages touching the Lords Communion, and
its often celebration, distribution to ALL Church Members, in our peerless Bishop
Jewel, and shining Thomas Becon, with certain Observations of my own deduced
from them; which through Gods blessing may rectify their erroneous Judgments,
Consciences, Practices, wherein now they ignorantly act the Parts, imitate,
exceed the extravagances, promote the designs of Papists, Anabaptists, and
other Sectaries, and by building blindly or unadvisedly upon their Foundations,
increase their Numbers, Churches, and decrease, subvett their own; as we all
find by sad experience, and themselves will most repent of (if now they will
not reform their Errors) when it will be over-late. I shall therefore beseech
all such Ministers to lay aside all obstinacy, self-interests, Prejudices,
Parties, Combinations, By respects whatsoever, and with sincere, unbias^ed,
docible Spirits, to pursue Solomon's divine advice, Prove. 8. 33. Hear
instruction and be wise, and refuse it not; lest Poverty and shame befall them,
as they do those who refuse instruction, Prove. 13. 18. and lest they sin
wilfully without hope of pardon. Cyprian, lib. 2. Epist. 3.
Post inspirationem vero et revelationem factam, qui in eo quod erraverat
perseverat prudens and sciens, sine venia ignorantiae peccat, praesumptione
atque obstinatione superatur; as S. Cyprian resolves.

It is a memorable saying of ^mbros. in 1 Cor. 11. See Bishop Jewels Reply to
Harding, p. 72.
S. Ambrose touching the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. Indignus est Domino,
qui aliter Mysterium celebrat, quam ab eo traditum est. Non enim potest devotus
esse, qui aliter praesumit quam datum est ab Authore. Which had those Ministers
I now deal with, duly pondered, they would never have presumed to advance their
own new Crochits, above the Precept, against the express President of the very
Author of this Mystery. Which how great a Crime it is, that old blessed Martyr
Epist. l. 2. Epist. 3.
St. Cyprian will inform them in these positive words. Not to do that thing
that the Lord did, what is it else but to cast off his word, and to despise his
Discipline, and to commit, not worldly, but SPIRITUAL ROBBERY AND ADULTERY,
while as a man, from the truth of the Gospel, STEALS AWAY BOTH THE SAYINGS
AND DOINGS OF THE LORD, and corrupts and defiles Gods Commandments? And is
not their peremptory denial to administer the Communion to their people year
after year; their stealing away the Body, Blood, Bread, Cup, Table, whole
Supper of the Lord himself from their Parishioners, and corrupting, wresting,
defiling sundry Scriptures to justify this their practice, a casting off his
Word, a despising of his Discipline, a committing, not of worldly, but
spiritual Robbery, Adultery; yea, a stealing away of the sayings and doings of
the Lord, worse than that of the Bishop. Jewels Reply to Harding, p. 79.
Aquar^i (of whom he writes) who did often consecrate the Sacram. and deliver it
to the people; Yet, vel ignoranter, vel simpliciter in Calice Dominico
sanctificando, ET PLEBI MINISTRANDO, non hoc faciunt quod Jesus Christus
Dominus and Deus noster, hujus Sacrificii Author and Doctor, fecit and docuit;
consecrating and ministering water to the people instead of wine? And if St.
Cyprian might well write this against the Heretics called Aquarii, which in
the holy ministration would use no wine, but instead thereof did consecrate
water, and ministered it unto the people, MUCH MORE MAY WE SAY THE SAME AGAINST
OUR ADVERSARIES, WHICH CONSECRATE AND MINISTER UNTO THE PEOPLE NO CUP AT ALL,
writes venerable Jewel: as these now, do consecrate, minister to them no
Sacrament at all, which is far worse. I shall desire these Sacrilegious,
novellizing Ministers, (for the most part unacquainted with Antiquity)
seriously to ponder, what this imcomparably learned, most judicious, pious,
Bishop Jewel (in the name and defense of the Church of England) after all his
sufferings, and exile for Religion, has written of the Holy Communion, etc.
against Mr. Harding, in his I herein follow the Edition printed at London, 1609.
Reply, Article 1. of Private Mass, where he informs us in positive terms;

1. p. 21. vid. p. 70, 71. to the same effect.
That the holy Communion, was so OFTEN, and so GENERALLY FREQUENTED AMONGST ALL
CHRISTIANS IN THE PRIMITIVE CHURCH IN ALL THEIR ASSEMBLIES and CONGREGATIONS,
that at length the very company and fellowship of them was called COMMUNIO,
taking name of that action which was most solemnly used among them at their
meetings (which he there proves by sundry instances out of S. Aug. Page 16. 23,
24.
S. Hierom, and others) which De Sermo. Dom. in Monte. 12, in Johan. Tract. 26.
Aug. (like as also Ad Luciniam in Apologia, advers. Jovinian.
S. Hier. and others) witnesses, the whole people DAILY RECEIVED TOGETHER. In
specula Ecclesiae.
Hugo Cardinalis says further; Vel aic^tur Communio, quia in Primitiva
Ecclesia populus communicabat quolibet die. It is called the Communion, for
that the people in the Primitive Church DID COMMUNICATE EVERY DAY. In the
primitive Church they in their health RECEIVED DAILY, and in their sickness
Justin. Martyr Apol.
had the Sacrament sent home unto them. From whence he thus objects against Mr.
Harding his Private Mass, and censures, the negligence of the Priests in the
Church of Rome, in administering the Communion, and in not exciting the people
to the frequent reception of it: Ibid. p. 11, 12, 13.
Mr. Harding grants, that the people in the Primitive Church RECEIVED THE
HOLY COMMUNION EVERY DAY (when they looked hourly to be caught, and done to
death, in the persecution of Paynims, that they departed not hence sine
viatico, without their voyage provision) and so consequently unawars he
confesses, that in the Primitive Church was no private Mass; which, as he
says, came in afterward BY THE NEGLIGENCE AND UNDEVOTION OF THE PEOPLE (in not
repairing so frequently to the Communion as at first) It is great pity so good
a thing (as it is supposed) should have no better beginning. One special
principle of these men's Doctrine, is, to imbar the people from reading and
understanding of the Scriptures, and to suffer them to know nothing; for that,
as some of them Mr. Harding Tit. 15. Divis. 7. fol. 155 b.
have said, THEY BE DOGS and SWINE, AND THEREFORE SHOULD NOT PRECIOUS STONES BE
LAID BEFORE THEM: yet now must their negligence be the rule of Christ's
Religion. This is laid as the ground and foundation of the whole cause.
Charity, say they, is cold, and the people careless. But therefore has God
appointed Pastors and Ministers to oversee and control the people, and not to
suffer them to perish in their negligence. Were it a matter of tithes, or other
payment, the people should be called upon, and not suffered in any wise to be
negligent, neither should their negligence stand for excuse; how much less
should it be suffered when the case touches God? The Bishops and Fathers in
the second Council Council Brac. 2. cap. 84. Seu ex Synodo Graeco collecto.
holden at Bracara in Spain, decreed thus. If any man resort unto the Church,
and hear the Scriptures, and FOR NEGLIGENCE OR WANTONNESS WITHDRAWS HIMSELF
FROM THE COMMUNION OF THE SACRAMENT, and in the reverend mysteries does break
the rule of discipline; we decree, that such a one be put out of the Catholic
Church, until he have done penance, and showed the fruits of his repentance,
that having obtained pardon, he may be received again to the holy Communion.
Thus the godly Fathers in old times did not flatter and favor the peoples
negligence in this Case, as Mr. Harding and his fellows do; but exhorted,
warned, reproved, rebuked them, called them MALAPERT and IMPUDENT, THAT WOULD
BE PRESENT, AND NOT RECEIVE, AND EXCOMMUNICATED THEM FOR THEIR NEGLIGENCE: But
these men contrariwise turn away their faces from their Brethren, and suppress
their voice, and will not be heard, etc. and find no fault with the people; but
rather make them believe, that they receive for them, and apply Christ's death
unto them by their Mass, and that the very hearing thereof is sufficient for
them, and meritorious; and thus, as much as in them lies, THEY INCREASE THE
NEGLIGENCE OF THE PEOPLE, AND DISCOURAGE THEM FROM THE HOLY COMMUNION. The
people is taught nothing, they understand nothing, they see nothing, neither
comfort, nor memory of Christ, nor benefit of his passion. And this is the
cause of their Negligence; therefore they stand thus back, and withdraw
themselves: Howbeit what needs Mr. Harding to charge the people with
negligence and undevotion? THE POPE HIMSELF AND HIS CARDINALS DO SCARCELY
COMMUNICATE ONCE IN A YEAR; BUT ARE AS NEGLIGENT AND AS UNDEVOUT THEREIN AS THE
MOST PART OF THE PEOPLE. Now let us view the weight of Mr. Hardings reasons.
The people is negligent and undevout, Ergo, The Priest may say Mass alone.
This Argument is very weak. So might Mr Harding say, The people will not hear
the word of God, Ergo, The Priest may go into the Pulpit and preach alone. For
Christ's Supper (as August. ^de Trinit. l. 3. c. 4.
St. Aug says:) IS A SERMON, and the Priest therein PREACHES AND VITERETH THE
DEATH OF THE LORD, etc. As for the people, they are not so negligent nor
undevout as Mr. Harding here charge them; they are Gods people, glad to be
instructed, and desirous to follow, and wheresoever the Gospel is received,
glad to give testimony thereof, and to increase the same, BY THE HOLY COMMUNION
OF CHRIST'S BODY AND BLOOD, IN GREAT COMPANIES AND WHOLE CONGREGATIONS ALL
TOGETHER. But what ill luck is this, that they whom Mr. Harding so often
condemns for Heretics, CAN BE SO DEVOUT, AND HE AND HIS CATHOLICS THUS
REMAIN WITHOUT DEVOTION? Let the people be taught; let them hear the holy
ministration in their own tongue, that they may understand the holy mysteries,
and feel comfort and sweetness in the same; let them see examples of diligence
in the Clergy, then will they be no longer negligent: then should M. Hard.
perforce give over his private Mass, as seeing the whole right of his cause
hangs only of the negligence, and mis-doing of the people. Ibid. p. 18. 19.
The Church (says Mr. Harding) has charged and ordered, that no man who is
worthy and disposed shall be refused. O Miserable is that Church, whereas NO
MAN NO NOT SO MUCH AS ONE, IS WELL DISPOSED! Here in few words he condemns
the whole Church of Rome, even the whole College of Cardinals; amongst whom, as
he says, there is not one well disposed and worthy, and therefore they all
withdraw themselves from the Communion. But Chrysostom. ad Popul. Antioch. Homil.
61.
Chrysostom says, If thou be not worthy to receive the Communion, then art
thou not worthy to be present at the Prayers: Therefore Mr. Harding should
drive his unworthy people from the Church, and not suffer them to hear his
Mass. They imagine that any man, be he never so great a sinner, may pray to
God, and have free access to the throne of Majesty: Only they think a sinner
may not receive the holy Communion. But it is written, Heb. 4. 2 Timothy 2.
Let him depart from his wickedness whosoever calls upon the name of the
Lord. Whosoever is a member of Christ, and may boldly call God his Father, may
also be bold to receive the Communion. If Mr. Harding wish indeed, that the
people would prepare themselves and communicate with the Priest, as he
pretends; why does he not provide for them? Doubtless there are many godly
men among the people, and oftentimes more virtuously disposed a great deal than
the Priest. Neither is it of their unworthiness that they abstain so often; nor
of their worthiness, that they receive once a yeac, but only of custom. But if
the People be slack, yet must the Priest do the daily Sacrifice, says Mr.
Harding: that is, He must offer up Christ unto his Father for the sins of the
world. Herein appears the wanton folly of this people: That they may do, and
are commanded to do, they will not do; but that they cannot do, that they will
needs do, etc. Christ's death must be kept in remembrance; Ergo, the Priest is
bound to say daily Mass, yea although there be no man to receive with him.
Alas! How holds this poor argument? Or how may we make it good? Is there no
other mean to remember Christ's death, but only by saying private Mass? Or is
not every one of the people bound to remember the same as deeply and as often
as the Priest? etc. He adds, Ibidem, p. 12, 13.
The Feast ( says Mr. Harding) is common, all are invited: They shall be
received that are disposed and proved: If this feast be common, it must needs
be common to very few, for the provision is very little to serve many. That all
be called in the Latin Mass, is a great and manifest untruth: for neither the
Priest nor the Deacon, either by word or by gesture calls them; nor have they
any preparation for them if they were called; Yet are not these men ashamed to
say, They shall be received that are disposed and proved. Every man ought
humbly to prepare and dispose his heart before he presume to hear, or receive
any thing that touches God: For God is Spirit, and we are Flesh; God is in
heaven, and we on earth. Pythagoras, being but an heathen, was wont to say, We
ought not to speak of God without light; that is, without premeditation and
good advisement, who it is of whom we speak. And the Pagans in their sacrifices
were wont to remember their Priests with these words, Hoc age: the meaning
whereof was, Dispose thy mind, it is God unto whom thou speak. The wise man
says, Eccles. 18.
Before thou pray, prepare thine heart, and be not as a man that tempts God.
Likewise in old time, they that were called Catechumeni, were warned aforehand
to prepare their hearts, that they might worthily receive Baptism; as it is
decreed under the name of Clement, Clem. epist. 3.
whose words be these: Let him prepare himself in all things, that after three
Months ended, upon the Holy day, he may be baptized. Also Tract. 10: and 11.
in Johan.
St. Augustine exhorts the Catechumeni, likewise to dispose their minds
against the time of their Baptism: Thus ought every man to examine and prepare
himself before he hear Gods word; Before he presume to open his mouth to pray
unto God; Before he receive the Sacrament of Baptism; and namely, Before he
come to the holy Communion. And therefore the Priest gives warning unto the
people with these words, Lift up your hearts: which words, as De Bono
Perseverantiae, l. 2. c. 13.
St. Augustine says, were commonly used in the holy Mysteries. But I think Mr.
Harding here by these words, prepare and dispose, means privy Confession,
which many have used, as a rack of men's consciences, to the maintenance of
their Tyranny: (...) Did. 17.
Peter Lombard says, Without it there is no way to heaven. In Council. Lateran.
c. 21.
Innocentius the third commands, That whosoever is not confessed, neither be
suffered to come into the Church being alive, nor to be buried when he is dead.
De Potestate Ecclesiae.
Hugo writes thus, I am bold to say, whosoever comes to the Communion
unconfessed, be he never so repentant and sorry for his sins certainly he
receives unto his judgment. So violent the late Writers have been in exacting
things of their own devices. Otherwise the old Fathers, notwithstanding they
sometimes speak of Confession, yet they require it with more modesty, and many
of them require no such thing at all. De Paenitentia, and in Psalm. 50. Hom. 2.
De Lazaro, Hom. 4.
Chrysostom says, Let the Court (where thou yieldest thy self guilty) be
without witness: Let God alone see thee. And again, If thou be ashamed to show
thy sins to any man, then utter them every day in thy heart. I say not, go,
confess thy sins unto thy fellow servant, that may upbraid thee with them; but
confess them unto God that is able to cure them. And again, thus he imagines
God to speak unto a sinner, Open thy sin privately to me alone, that I may heal
thy wound. And Theodorus, sometime Archbishop of Canterbury, says, De
Paenitentia, Did. 1. Quidam Deo.
Graci and totus Oriens confitetur soli Deo: The Greeks, and all they of the
East, confess confess themselves only to God. Thus much I thought good to touch
hereof, lest it should be thoughs there is none other way for a man to prove
and dispose himself, but only by Auricular Confession. The meaning of these
words of St. Paul, 1 Cor. 11.
Let a man examine himself, stands in two points, in Faith and Repentance:
Faith containoth the truth of our belief, Repentance cencerneth the amendment
of our life: which kind of examining endures all our life long. But to say or
think we are all examined and disposed one only day in the year, and that of
custom, not of Holiness, and not one day before, nor one day after, it is
childish, it is super st^tious, it is Jewish, it is no pers^asion meet for the
people of God. If Ad Popul. Antioch. Hom. 61.
Chrysostom were alive, he would cry out, O what presumption! O what a custom
is this! And De Sacramentis, l. 5. c. 4. Leo Epist. 81.
St. Ambrose would say, If thou be not worthy evry day to receive, then art
thou not worthy once in the year.

2ly. He has these observable passages out of the Fathers and Schoolmen
concerning the community of the Lords Supper, (belonging alike to all the
Church, People, Congregation present, whence it is styled the Communion, and
not to the Priests, elect, or truly regenerated alone) and concerning the end,
use of the Sacraments to unite Christians together into one body and Christian
Communion, and prevent all Schisms, Discords, Separations in the Church. Bishop
Jewel, ibid. p. 16. 19, 26. 71, 89, 90, 97.
Christ himself has already determined the case: For albeit he has appointed
no certain number of Communicants, yet has he by special words appointed a
number, Take ye: Eat ye: Drink ye ALL: Divide ye among your selves; Mat. 26.
Mar. 19. Luke 22. 1 Cor. 11.
Do ye this in my remembrance: Ye shall set forth the Lords death: These very
words, I say, cannot be taken of one single man, but necessarily import a
number. St. In 1 Cor. 11.
Hierom says, Dominica Coena OMNIBUS debet esse communis; quia ille omnibus
Discipulis suis qui aderant, aequaliter tradidit Sacramenta. The Lords Supper
must be common to All. And that he proves by Christ's example; because Christ
gave the Sacraments equally to all his Disciples that were present. In Apolog.
2. p. 82, 83.
Justin Martyr declaring the order of the Church in his time, says; Of the
things that be consecrated every man takes part: The same things are delivered
to the Deacons to be carried to them that are away. And Ambr. 1. Cor. 11.
St. Ambrose, expounding these words, Want one for another, says thus, That
the oblation of many, may be celebrated together, and may be ministered unto
All: Strom. l. 1.
Clemens Alexandrinus says, As^^ (...) as the manner is, have divided the
Sacrament* they give every of the people leave to take part of it. Chrysostom. in 1
Cor. Hom. 23.
St. Chrysostom plain^y de^cribeth the very order of the Communion that was
used in his time, by these words, The spiritual and reverend Sacraments are set
forth equally to rich and poor, neither does the rich m^n enjoy them more and
the poor man less; They have all like honor, and like coming to them. The
Sacraments once laid forth, are not taken in again until all the people have
communicate, and taken part of that Spiritual Meat: but the Priests stand still
and wait for all, even for the poorest of them all. Again Chrysostom. in 2 Cor. Hom.
18.
he haith, There are things wherein the Priest differs nothing from the
people; as when we must use the fearful Mysterie^: for we are all of one
worthiness to receive the same. Ad Philadelph.
Ign^tius says, One bread was broken for all, and one Cup was divided to all.
In the Can. Apost. Can. 9.
Canons of the Apostles, it is decreed; That if any man resort unto the Church,
and hear the Scriptures, and abstain from the Communion, he stands
excommunicate, as one that troubles the Congregation. The De Consecratione,
Did. 1, and 2.
like Decrees are found under the names of Cal^xtus Anacl^tus Martinus,
Hilarious, and others: by which it is certain, that the whole Church received
together. This Latin word Missa, in the time of Tertullian, and St. Cyprian,
signified a dismission, or a license to depart, and was specially applied unto
the Communion upon this occasion that I must here declare. They that were then
named Catechumeni, that is to say, Novices in the faith, and not yet
christened, were suffered to be present at the Communion, until the Gospel was
ended. Then the Deacon commanded then forth, pronouncing these words aloud:
Is^odorus, in Lexico.
Catechumeni exeunto: or thus, Ite, Missa est, Go ye forth, Ye have license to
depart. Of this dismissing or departing forth of the Catechumeni and others,
the Service it self was then called Missa. The rest remained still in the
Church, and received the Communion together with the Priest. Further, the
breaking of the bread, which even now is used in the Mass it self, signifies,
a distribution of the Sacrament unto the people, as August, ad Paulinum, Epist.
59.
St. Augustine says unto Paulinus, Ad distribuendam comminuitur, It is broken
to the end it may be divided. Surely, one De Missa publica proroganda.
Lorichius, a Doctor of Mr. Hardings own side, says thus, Ipsius Sacramenti
Institutio vult, ut omnes una manducemus et bibamus. The very instu^tion of the
Sacrament wills, that we all eat and drink together. After which, Bish.
Jewels Reply to Harding, p. 103 104.
Bishop Jewel adds, It appears by that place of Cyprian, Sermon. 5. De Lapsis.
St. Cyprian, the h^ly Communion was thought so necessary to all the faithful,
that children and infants were not excluded. And it appears by St. Hierom,
Aug. de Eccles. Dogmat. l. 1. c. 52.
St. Augustine, and other old Writers, That they that were baptized, as well
children as others, immediately received the holy Mysteries in both kinds.
Hieron. contra Luciferium.
St. Hierom speaking of one Hilarious, says thus, Non potest Baptisma tradere
sine Eucharistia: He cannot administer Baptism without the Sacrament of
Thanksgiving (Therefore all that were admitted to, and though worthy of one
Sacrament, were freely admitted to, and thought worthy of the other in the
Primitive times) Cyprian de Coena Dom.
Vident haec Sacramenta Pauperes Spiritu, et hoc uno contenti ferculo, omnes
hujus mundi delicias aspernantur, and possidentes Christum, aliquam hujus mundi
possidere supellectilem dedignantur.

He further adds in another place, It is Ibidem, p. 20, 21, 22, 23, 28, 29.
granted of all, without contradiction, that one end of all Sacraments is to
join us to God; Another end is to join us all together. And so likewise writes
S. Paul, 1 Cor. 12.
All we are baptized into one body. And therefore says Contr. (...) stum
Manich. l. 19. c. 11.
St. Augustine, In nullum nomen Religionis coagulari, etc. Men cannot be
brought into any name of Religion, be it true or false, unless they be joined
together with some bend of visible signs or Sacraments. And as touching the
later of these two ends, the same Ecclesiast. Hierarch. c. 3.
Dionysius (Areopagita) writes thus, That holy, common and peaceable
distribution of one and the same bread, and common Cup, preaches (or
prescribes) unto them a heavenly unity, as being men fed together. And
Pachymeres the Greek Paraphrast, expounding the same place, has these words;
For that common diet and consent brings us into the remembrance of the Lords
Supper. St. Cyprian (ad Magnum) says, With what love and concord all faithful
Christians are joined together, the Lords Sacrifice does declare. These words
do sufficiently declare both the common receiving of the Sacrament, and also
the knitting and joining of many together. Without all question the effect that
Dionysius meant stands in this; that the people prays and receives the
Holy Communion together, and thereby does openly testify, that they be all one
in Christ Jesus, and all one amongst themselves. And therefore Ad pop. Antioch.
Hom. 61.
Chrys^stom says, For that cause in the Mysteries we embrace one another, that
being many, we may become one. But De Coena Dom.
St. Cyprian says, The whole Church is but one House, in which the Lamb is
eaten. The Communion or fellowship of the Church stands in sundry respects;
For we communicate together, either in consent of mind, as it is written of the
Apostles, Acts 4.
They had all one heart and one mind: Or in knowledge of God, as Christ prays
for his Apostles unto his Father, John 17.
That they may be one, as thou and I be one. And St. Paul to the Philippians,
Philip. 2.
I thank my God always, that ye are come to the Communion of the Gospel. Or in
one Christ, as Paul says; Gal. 3.
There is now no bondsman, there is now no freeman, but all are one in Jesus
Christ. To be short, we communicate in Spirit, in Prayers, in Love; we are all
washed with one Blood; we are all fed with one body; we have all one hope of
our vocation; and all together with one heart and one voice, be we never so far
asunder, do glorify God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. And this is that
only House where^n the Lamb is eaten, grounded upon the Foundation of the
Apostles and Prophets. In this House we dwell, here we wa^^ together with
consent: here we eat the Lamb of God, being all Brothers and Members of one
Body, and all One in Christ Jesus. God restore you (Mr. Harding) once again
into the same House, that you may open the eyes of ^our heart, and see from
whence you are fallen. In Johan. l. 11. c. 26.
Cyrillus says, They that receive the mystical benediction are one body with
Christ, and also between themselves. Whereunto agree these words of In
Ecclesiast. c. 3.
St. Hierome, spoken in the behalf of Christ, Bless thine inheritance which
thouhast gathered together in thy Church, by the Mystery of my Body and Blood.
And In 1 Cor. 10.
Anselmus a man of later years, We break and divide the bread into many parts,
to declare the unity of the love of them that receive it. Here note, This
description of unity stands in receiving the Sacrament, and not only in the
Communion. The whole Church of God is but one house, and all the Members of the
same do communicate together in Faith and Spirit. Hereof we may form the
Major. Every particular Church ought to be a resemblance of the whole Church;
and this particular Communion ought to be a resemblance of that General
Communion. That General Communion is common to all, and every Member receives
his part. Ergo, the particular Communion ought to be ministered commonly unto
all, and every Member to receive his part. Or thus, The Ministration of the
holy Communion represents the Conjunction and fellowship that we have in
Faith; And as Ad Magnum.
St. Cyprian says, That Christian men are joined together in unseparable
Charity, the Lords Sacraments do declare. But Christian people being assembled
in one Church, do communicate in faith all together: Ergo, being so assembled,
they ought to communicate in Sacraments all together. But Mr. Harding of the
nature of this word Communio, seems to fashion out Haeretici Ordinem and
textum Scripturarum supergredientes, and quantum in ipsis est solventes, membra
veritatis transserunt and transformant, and alteram ex altero sacientes,
seducunt multos, ex his quae aptant ex Domimcis cloquiis malo composito
phantasmati, Irenaeus adv. Haereses, l. 1.
far other arguments.

It is called Communio, says he: Ergo, it may be private.

It is called Communio: Ergo, it may be received of one alone.

It is called Communio: Ergo, the Priest may receive it without Communicants.

Mr. Harding, weigh your Argnments better, before you send them thus abroad;
You shall less offend God and your own Conscience; you shall less deceive
your Brethren, and children shall take less occasion to wonder at you.

Ibidem, p. 23, 24.
Now to add a little more hereunto touching the nature of this word Communio,
wherein you so uncourteously charge all others with ignorance and lack of
learning, as it pleases you to do throughout your whole Book, I think it not
amiss to show you, what certain Writers, both old and new, have thought and
written in that behalf. I need not here to allege the words that St. Paul uses
touching the holy Communion, 1 Cor. 10. 16, 17.
We are all one Bread, all one body, as many as do communicate of one Bread.
Neither that Hierom. 1 Cor. 11.
Saint Hierom says, The Lords Supper must be Common. Neither that In 1 Cor.
Hom. 27.
St. Chrysostom, The thing that is the Lords they make Private: But the Lords
things are not this Servants, or that Servants, but common to all. Neither that
In Johan, Tract. 26.
St. Augustine says, He would have us to understand, that this Meat and Drink
is the Fellowship of his Body and of his Members. Neither that In 1 Cor. Homil.
24.
Chrysostom says, What shall I call the Communication or Communion? we are all
one self-same body. What signifies the Bread? The Body of Christ: And what are
they made that receive it? The Body of Christ. Although these Fathers by these
words do manifestly declare, That the holy Mysteries in their time were divided
commonly to the whole people: yet will I take no advantage thereof, for that
Mr. Harding will reply, They come not precisely to the nature of this word
Communio. Therefore I shall note one or two others, and such as Mr. Harding
cannot deny, for that they speak directly to the matter. In Dionys. cap. 3.
Pachymeres a Greek Writer, the Paraphrast upon Dionysius, has these words;
Therefore (says he) has this Father Dionysius called it The Communion, for
that there all they that were worthy, did communicate of the Holy Mysteries:
(And all then were reputed worthy, and received daily in the Primitive Church,
but persons excommunicate and enjoined to Penance; who upon great and notorious
crimes could not be suffered to communicate with the rest of the faithful,
sometimes during their whole life, but only when they should depart the world.
This extremity was used for terror of others, and such reconciliation was
thought necessary at the end, for solace of the party, that he should not
utterly be swallowed up in despair, but might perceive he was received again
amongst the faithful (by sending the Communion to him at his death) and so
depart comfortably as the Member of Christ, as Page 100.
Bishop Jewel writes and proves in the next page.) In 1 Cor. 10.
Haymo writing upon Saint Paul's Epistles, says thus, The Cup is called
Communication, which is as much as participation, because all do communicate of
it. In Speculo Ecclesiae.
Hugo Cardinalis, says thus, Afterward let the Communion be said, which is so
called, that we should all communicate. De Missa publica proroganda.
Gerardus Lorichius, Dicitur Communio, quia concorditer de uno Pane, et uno
Calice multi participamus, etc. Is is called Communio, because we (being many)
do communicate together agreeably of one Bread and one Cup. And this word
Communio, is as much as participation, or receiving of parts. De Ecclesiae
Observationibus.
Micrologus, Non potest proprie dici Communio, nisi plures de eodem sacrificio
participent. It cannot justly be called a Communion, unless many do receive of
one Sacrifice. If Mr. Harding will not believe us, yet I hope he will believe
some of these. They be all his own. It were much for him to say, they be all
ignorant and unlearned, and not one of them understood what he wrote. Certainly
their age will give it them, they are no Lutherans.

3ly. Ibidem p. 24.
Whereas Mr. Harding in defense of Private Mass puts this case: What if 4. or
5. of sundry houses, in a sickness time, being at the point of death, require
to have their rites cre they depart; the Priest after that he has received the
Sacrament in the Church, dineth, and then being called upon, carries the rest
a mile or two unto the sick; He does what he is required: Does he not in this
case communicate with them? etc. Else if this might not be counted a lawful and
good communion, and therefore not be used, one of these great Inconveniences
should willingly be committed; That either they should be denied that necessary
victual of life at their departure hence; which were a cruel Injury, and a
thing contrary to the examples and godly ordinances of the Primitive Church: Or
the Priest, rather for companies sake, than of devotion, should receive that
holy meat after he had served his stomach with common meats, etc. Bishop Jewel
amongst other solid Answers hereunto, returns this. But if the people would now
communicate every day, as they did then (in the Primitive Church) or at least
oftener than they do now, then should not this matter seem so necessary at the
end, as is here pretended: And so had Mr. Harding lost another Argument.

To these 3. passages of Bishop Jewel, I shall annex that of his learned
coetanean, and fellow Exile for Religion, Thomas Beacon, (a burning and a
shining light) in his Catechism, Vol. 1. of his Works, f. 462, 463. where after
he has proved by sundry Scriptures and Authorities, That the Lords Supper in
the Apostles times, Primitive Church, was commonly received every day, or Lords
day at the least. Adding, That among the Greeks, even at this day, if any man
absent himself from the Lords Table by the space of 14. days (except he can
render a reasonable cause of his absence) he is excommunicate, and put from the
Company of the faithful: and that in all those mighty, large, populous
Kingdoms, under that most puissant King, Precious John, the holy Communion of
the Body and Blood of the Lord, has from the beginning been daily administered
unto the people, and yet is at this present day, as Histories make mention. He
then censures this as a gross Popish innovation and abuse (contrary both to
Scripture, and Antiquity) That whereas the Lord Christ Jesus would have the
holy Communion of his blessed Body and precious Blood to be often times received
of the faithful, for a remembrance of his death and passion, and for the
worthy, earnest, diligent consideration of that inestimable Benefit which we
have obtained of God the Father, through the Son his passion and death: The
custom of the Popes Church is, that the people receive the Sacrament usually
but once a year, that is to say, at Easter. By which ^eans, the Commandment of
Christ is broken, the Sacrament neglected, the death of Christ not so earnestly
remembered; the people become unthankful, Dissolution of life breaks in, Vice
increases, Virtue decreaseth.

From these (with sundry other like) Passages of Bishop Jewel, and Thomas
Beacon, (incomparably eminent both for their Learning and Piety) it is
irrefragable,

1. That in the Apostles days (as some from Acts 2. 46, 47. c. 20. 7. 11. 1
Cor. 10. 16, 17, 21. c. 11. 17. to 34. resolve) and in the Sea Bishop Jewels
Reply to Harding, p. 11, 13, 38, 39, 48, 51, 359, and My Suspension suspended,
p. 24, 25, 26.
Primitive Church for many hundreds of years next after the Apostles, and among
the Greeks and Christians under Precious John at this day, all Christians and
visible Members of the Church, of years of discretion to examine themselves,
constantly received the Communion all together every day, or Lords day at the
least, when ever they met to pray, hear the Word, or perform any other public
Duties of Religious Worship unto God; and that out of mere duty, piety,
devotion, zeal and love to Christ. Chap. 12. divis. 2. p. 228.
Bishop Jewel, in his Defense of the Apology of the Church of England, proves
this more fully by the confession and testimonies of sundry Popish Authors.
Thomas Aquine says, In Primitiva Ecclesia, quando magna vigebat devotio Fidei
Christianae, Statutum suit, ut fideles quotidie communicarent. In the Primitive
Church, when great Devotion of the Christian Faith was in strength, it was
ordained, that the faithful should receive the Communion every day. Durand. in
rational. l. 4. c. 55.
Durandus says, In the Primitive Church, all the faithful daily received the
Communion. In Luc. c. 24.
Hugo Cardinalis says, In the Primitive Church All, as many as were present at
the Canon of the Mass, did daily communicate: and if they would not, they
departed out of the Offertory. If ye think these Authorities are not
sufficient, Contra Musculum, de Sacrificio.
Johannes Cochlaeus says, Omnes olim, etc. In old time both all the Priests,
and all the say people received the Communion with the Minister that had made
the Oblation, as is plainly perceived by the Canons of the Apostles, and by the
Books of the ancient Doctors of the Church, etc. Likewise says In Canon.
Missae.
Iodocus Clichthovius, In Primitiva Ecclesia, etc. In the Primitive Church the
faithful received the Communion every day. Likewise it is noted in the Margin
upon the Apostles Canons. Omnes olim, qui intererant, communicabant. In old
time, all that were present, did communicate. In the Council of Antioch, Can.
2. and Council. Aquisgran, cap 70. Omnes, etc. All that come into the Church of
God, and hear the Holy Scriptures, and refuse the receiving of the Lords
Sacrament, let them be put from the Church. These Decrees reach not only to the
Ministers of the Church, but to the whole People. In 1 Cor. 11.
St. Ambrose says, Munus obla^um totius populi fit, etc. The oblation offered
is made the whole peoples; For that in me bread all are signified; For in that
we are all one, we must all receive of one bread. In imitation hereof, the
Protestant Churches in foreign parts did frequently receive the Lords Supper all
together, witness the Harmony of Confessions, sect. 14. p. 307
Former Confession of Helvetia, Artic. 22. Of the Lords Supper: We do therefore
use the holy meat oftentimes; because that being admonished hereby, we do by
the eyes of faith, behold the death and blood of Christ crucified, and
meditating upon our salvation, not without a taste of heavenly life, and a true
sense of life eternal, we are refreshed with this spiritual, lively, and inward
food, with an unspeakable sweetness, and we do rejoice with a joy that cannot
be expressed with words for that life which we have found, and we do wholly and
with all our strength pour out our thankssgivings for so wonderful a benefit
of Christ bestowed upon us. And this Ibid. p. 349.
Confession of Sweveland, of their practice: Our men do often times, with as
great reverence as they may, receive the Sacrament, to be the lively food of
their souls, and to stir up in them a grateful remembrance of so great a
benefit. The which thing also uses now to be done among us much more often and
reverently, than heretofore was used: (to wit, in times of Popery:) With the
Ibid. p. 331
Confession of Auspurg, in these words, Therefore the Mass, (to wit, the
celebration of the Lords Supper) must be used to this end, that there the
Sacrament may be reached unto them that have need of comfort. As Ambrose says,
Because I do always sin therefore I ought always to receive a medicin. And
seeing the Mass is such a Communion of the Sacrament, we do observe one common
mass every Holyday, and on other days, if any will use the Sacrament, when it
is offered to them, which desired it. Neither is this custom newly brought into
the Church. With what Ezech. 3 9. Zech. 7. 22.
hearts of adamant, brows of brass, searedness (not tenderness) of Conscience
then, can or dare any Protestant Ministers, Parsons or Vicars now, who have
Cure of Souls, obstinately deny, peremptorily refuse to deliver the Lords
Supper to themselves, or any, or all of their Parishioners and Church members,
when they earnestly desire it at their hands, not only for sundry days, weeks,
months, but years together? and that under a new monstrous See Dr. Drekes
Boundary to the Holy Mount. Mr. Collings, and others.
pretext of extraordinary Zeal, Piety, Devotion, Sanctity, tenderness of
conscience, transcendent Love to Christ, his Sacraments, their own and their
peoples souls? Or with what color will such Pastors be able to justify or
excuse themselves before any Tribunals of God or men, when legally accused,
convicted for this notorious detestable Sacrilege, and Apostasy from the custom
of the Primitive and Protestant Churches, if they presently repent not of it
with confusion of face, and redemption of their former wilful neglect herein,
by constant, frequent, public Communions henceforth delivered to all their
people in Common, without future seclusions of any unexcommunicate persons from
it, who unfeignedly desire it.

2. That the Apostles, Primitive Christians, Fathers, Authors, with these two
most judicious Divines, believed, asserted, both by their preaching, writing,
practice, Bish. Jewels Reply to Harding, p. 20, 21, 23, 24, 29, 32, 38, 27, 28.
That the Sacrament belonged to, and ought to be administered to every visible
Christian and Churchmember alike, to all the whole Congregation in common; and
that none ought to be secluded, suspended from it, but persons actually Bish.
Jewels Reply, p. 24. 29, 30, 35. Harmony of Confessions, sect. 14.
excommunicated from Church Communion, and all other public Ordinances, for
notorious, scandalous offenses: That upon this ground, and its frequent common
reception by all, it was styled, The Communion, both by the Fathers, Primitive,
and Modern Christian Church-writers of all sorts. This is the express doctrine
of the whole Church of England, confirmed by 13. Eliz. c. 12.
Parliament, and subscribed, assented to by all true Ministers, Pastors of the
Church of England, admitted to any Pastoral Charge, Article 30. The Cup of the
Lord is not to be denied to the Lay People; For both the parts of the Lords
Sacrament by Christ's Ordinance and Commandment, ought to be ministered to all
Christian men alike. A universal affirmative, admitting all unto, and
sequestring no (unexcommunicated) Christian from both or either parts of the
Lords Supper. Which the Confession of the Protestant Churches in Saxony, thus
back Harmony of Confessions, 12 Section, p. 285. See 14. Sect. p. 360.
Article 22. Of the Sacraments. The Church also is discerned from other
Gentiles by certain Signs and Ceremonies instituted of God, and usually called
Sacraments, as are Baptism, and the Losds Supper. Which notwithstanding are not
only Signs of a Profession, but much more (as the ancient fathers said) Signs
of Grace; that is they be Ceremonies added to the promise of the Gospel
touching Grace, that is, touching the free remission of sins, and touching
reconciliation, and the whole benefit of our redemption; the which are so
instituted, that every man may use them; because they be pledges and
testimonies which declare, that the benefits promised in the Gospel, do
appertain to every one. For the voice of the Gospel is general: this use does
bear witness, that this voice does appertain to every one which uses the
Sacraments. What other Protestant Churches, Confessions affirm to this purpose,
you may read at large in the Harmony of their Confessions, Sect. 10, 11, 12,
13, 14, 15. With what color of Piety, Justice, Equity, Conscience, Zeal,
Prudence, Christianity, Charity then, dare any of our Independent,
Presbyterian, or other Ministers seclude, debar, not only pretended ignorant,
scandalous, unregenerate, Visible Church Members, nor actually or legally
excommunicated, but even true regenerate godly Christians, and their whole
Churches, Parishes, (if not some whole Towns, Cities) from this holy Supper and
Communion, from month to month, yea year to year, upon false pretenses, that it
belongs not to them; that they shall profane the Sacrament; cast pearls before
Swine; give holy things to dogs; damn, poison their own and their peoples
souls, if they give the Bread, Cup of the Lord unto them; and make visible and
real Saint ship, fitness, worthiness, the sole rule, ground of right, interest
in, and admission to this Sacrament; against the professed Doctrine, Practice
of all former ages, Churches. And all in truth to erect a more than arbitrary
Ecclesiastical Papal Tribunal over Christ's own Sacraments, and their
Parishioners consciences, persons, to admit to, or seclude all and every of
them from the Lords Supper at their pleasures, upon their own terms and times
alone; the sole true round of this impious, sacrilegious, unchristian,
antichristian Innovation; for it deserves no better Epithites.

3ly. That the Apostles, Primitive Church, Christians, Fathers freely and
usually admitted all visible Christians whatsoever to the Communion of the
Lords Supper, of discretion to examine themselves, whom they freely admitted to
Baptism, Prayer, hearing of the Word, or any other public Ordinances of Gods
worship: Bish. Jew^^s Reply to Harding, p. 11. 12. 53 67 29. Apostol. Canones
Can. 9. Harmony of Conf^ssions, sect. 14. p. 344.
enjoining them all under pain of Excommunication, when ever they heard the
Word, or met together in public, to receive the Lords Supper likewise in
common together, and excommunicating such who communicated not in this sort, as
men working the trouble and disorder of the Church. That they required, exacted
no other, no greater, no solemner self-examination, preparation, fitness,
visible worthiness, or real graces in the, when they came to receive the Lords
Supper, but the very same they demanded, expected from them, when ever they
came to be baptized, pray, hear, read the Word, or converse with God in any
other sacred Ordinances of his worship, God himself requiring the like
examination, qualification, preparation, fitness in all other holy duties and
approaches to him in his word, as in this duty, as is evident by Eccles. 5. 1,
2. Lam. 3. 40, 41. Psalm. 26. 6. Isay 1. 16, 17, 18. 1. 15, 16. 2 Chronicles. 30. 17,
18, 19, 20. Exodus 12. 48. 2 Cor. 13. 5. Jam. 1. 5, 6, 7, 21. Mat. 22. 12. 1
Pet. 2. 1, 2. Hebr. 12. 1. 1 Timothy 2. 8. Heb. 4. 2. 2 Pet. 1. 5. to 19. Luke 8.
18. Mar. 4. 24. Romans 14. 23. and other texts, compared with 1 Cor. 11. 28, 29.
and Christ's Mat. 26. 26, etc. Man. 14. 22, etc. Luke 22. 19, 20. 1 Cor. 11. 23,
etc.
sudden institution and celebration of this Sacrament at his last Supper,
without giving any previous Notice of it to his Disciples to prepare themselves
for its worthy reception, their former preparation, fitness to eat the Paschal
Supper, and hear Christ's heavenly instructions given them, John 13. 14, 15, 16,
17. being deemed by Christ himself a sufficient preparative to communicate with
him at his Table. Upon what true ground of conscience, piety, justice, reason
or religion then, can any Ministers now seclude all or any of their baptized
Parishioners of sufficient capacity to examine themselves, whom they freely,
constantly admit to communicate with them in baptism, prayer, preaching,
singing Psalms, hearing, reading Gods word, and other ordinary or extraordinary
public duties of Gods worship, from the Communion of the Lords Supper only? or
deem them unprepared, unqualified, unworthy to communicate in this Ordinance
alone; when as they deem them sufficiently qualified, prepared, worthy to
converse with God, and the most regenerated Saints in all or any other public
Ordinances but this? Or by what divine warrant from Gods own Word, our
Saviors, his Apostles, the Primitive Fathers, Christians, the Harmony of
Confessions, sect. 14.
Protestant Churches, or Bishop Jewels Doctrine or Practice, can they now
over-rigidly exact^a more transcendent, serious, diligent, special examination,
preparation, qualification, worthiness, fitness, holiness in their people
when they resort to the Communion of the Lords Supper, than when they come to
hear, read the word, fast, pray, receive the Sacrament of Baptism, give thanks,
or sing praises unto God; or else seclude, or deem them for unworthy Receivers,
who can eat or drink nothing but their own damnation? Yea, with what
conscience, reason, justice, can any Communicants neglect, refuse, delay to
receive the Lords Supper, upon this pretext alone, that they are wholly
unworthy, unfit, unprepared only for this duty, when publicly administered in
the Churches whereof they are members, and they there present at all or any
other sacred public Ordinances, in which they then repute themselves not
unfit, unworthy, unqualified, unprepared to converse with God, and communicate
with other Christians, but in this duty alone? Doubtless the serious
consideration of Bishop Jewels, St. Ambrose, and St. Augustines words
forecited, touching due preparation to all holy duties, with that of
Chrysostom, If thon be not worthy to receive the Communion, then thou art not
worthy to be present at Prayers: and of the Primitive Christians daily
communicating, as well as hearing and praying, will rectify this common
received Error both in Ministers and People, now made the principal plea in
bar, excuse, justification, by the one magisterially to sequester, repel
their Parishioners from the Lords Table, and by the people voluntarily to
withdraw, debar themselves from it, against Christ's own precept and their
bounden duties, to the prejudice, if not peril of their souls. Which I write
not, to make any careless or neglectful of due preparation when they repair to
the Lords Table; but to stir all up to a like conscientious, holy preparation
in all their public or private approaches to God in other duties; to rectify
this common, superstitious, epidemical error, that most think they are
unworthy, unprepared for the Lords Supper only, even then when they deem
themselves not so for all or any other sacred public duties; and thereupon
approach not to it when it invited, or so frequently as they ought; and that
henceforth none may deem themselves only worthy to receive the Lords Supper
once or twice a year, but unworthy at all other seasons, they being not worthy
to receive it once a year, if they be not worthy every day, according to St.
Ambrose doctrine; Who writes thus of the custom of the Latin Church in his
time (as Reply to Harding, p. 19.
Bishop Jewel records his words) Ambr. in 1 ad Timoth. c. 2. Non quotidi^.
Every week we must celebrate the oblation, although not every day unto
strangers, yet for the Inhabitants; yea sometimes twice in the week; who then
as frequently received the Communion, as they heard the Word, or prayed, and
deemed the self-same preparation sufficient for all three Ordinances then
conjoined, as unseparable in point of usual practice. The reason why Christ
instituted the Sacrament of this Supper in the most common daily Elements of
Bread and Wine, was, that so they might be commonly and frequently received by
all at his Table for the spiritual nourishment of their Souls, as well as daily
and frequently received for the nutriment of their bodies at their private
Tables.

4ly. That Christ himself, his Apostles, the Primitive Fathers, Christians,
with all others who thus pressed, practiced the daily administering and
receiving of the Lords Supper, reputed it a converting, as well as confirming
Ordinance, Haec autem est commmunis Theologorum Doctrina, Sacramenta confer
Gratiam, vel faciendo, ubi non invenit factam, vel factam augendo. Nostra
Sacramenta dicuntur salvare, REGENERARE, etc. Bellarmin. Amesii Bellarminus
Enervatus, Tom. 3. l. 1. c. 4.
begetting, quickening grace in unregenerate, as well as confirming, inoreasing
Grace in regenerate Christians, as the Word read and preached does. This De
Trinit. l. 3. c. 4.
St. Augustines forecited words ( For Christ's Supper is a Sermon, and the
Priest therein preaches and utters the death of the Lord) with sundry
others, who style it a visible Word, a means of quickening and begetting Grace,
etc. sufficiently manifest, and I have A Vindication of 4 Serious Questions, p.
39. to 48. Suspension suspended, p. 24. to 39. See Mr. Humsrey his Rejoinder to
Dr. Drake. His 2. ^indication of Free. Admission to the Lords Supper, p. 32,
33, etc. Mr. Blake his Covenant sealed, p. 204. 240.
elsewhere proved at large. How dare then any Novellers, (Ministers or others)
deny it to any unconverted, unregenerated Christians, as a mere deadly poison
only to them; being the most probable, effectual lively means of their
humiliation, compunction, regeneration, conversion unto God, prescribed as the
chiefest balsom, cordial to heal their wounded, sin-sick Souls, and support
their despairing, languishing Spirits? Or how dare any such Souls, Spirits,
Christians (though laden, heavy laden with the greatest Crimes) abstain from
this most Sovereign Medicin to effect and perfect their Spiritual cure, upon
pretense of their own unfitness, unworthiness, unpreparedness, when as the more
dangerous, more desperate, mortal their Wounds and Maladies are, the more and
more speedily they need, the fitter they are for this Spiritual Basilicon, this
heavenly Electuary, which they See My Suspension suspended, p. 36, 37.
Concordia Lutherana, p. 542. to 550.
then most defer, neglect, when they need it most, and would first be healed,
cured by some other means before they resort to this most precious healing
Physic, which most effectually applies Christ's passion, blood, merits to their
despairing dying Souls, of all other Ordinances whatsoever? If all, in
desperate, corporal wounds, diseases, resort presently to the most effectual
healing Medicaments, why not then in Spiritual likewise; but be enjoined,
persuaded, enforced under pain of damnation to defer and forbear them?

5ly. That it Bish. Jewels Reply, p. 11, 12, 13. 29. 69. Chrysostom. in Ephesians.
Homil. 3.
was the constant practice, duty of the Primitive Fathers, Bishops, Pastors,
and of the Protestant Churches Ministers in the beginning of Reformation to
invite, excite and stir up all their people, when backward, negligent,
undevout, to the frequent constant rec^ption of the Lords Supper; reputing all
such who neglected this duty, to be malapert, impudent, unworthy of Christian
Communion, and rebuking, censuring, excommunicating them as such, till they
repented of this sin, as the premises largely manifest; together with that
pathetical Exhortation in our Book of Common Prayer, prescribed by the whole
Church, Parliament of England to be used by all Ministers, 5 and 6 E. 6. c. 1.
1 Eliz. c. 2.
and read in Churches, when they shall see the people negligent to come to the
Holy Communion; which I shall desire all our Ministers, and Negligent
Communicants often to read, ponder at their leisures, for their better
information and conviction. With what consciences, reason, equity, Piety then,
can any who profess themselves the only true faithful orthodox Ministers of
Jesus Christ, (yea the holiest and devoutest Zealots of all others) now make it
their chiefest business, their greatest glory, praise, the argument of their
ferventest zeal and devotion by preaching, writing, disputing, not to exhort
provoke, encourage, invite, compel their people to, but to dehort, deter,
s^quester, debar their Parishioners and others from the Lords Table, and their
holy Communion with Christ and one another in this Ordinance, for whole
months, yea years together; Mr. Rutherfords Divine Right of Church Gov. p.
252, 253, 254, etc. A Brotherly and Friendly Censure, p. 5, 6. Mr. Drake, p.
179, 180. Mr. Coll. and others.
advising them to abstain, fly from it, as a most certain deadly poison and
damnation to their souls; and instead of discharging their Pastoral duties in
excommunicating all such who profanely neglect to repair to it, seclude,
excommunicate themselves, and all their Parishioners from it (though they
earnestly importune them to be admitted to it) month after month, year after
year, against all Laws of God and Man; and by most absurd, unchristian,
unreasonable whimsical conceits, and pervertions of Scriptures, endeavor to
justify in Press and Pulpit this their most sacrilegious, unchristian,
impious, Papal, Antichristian practi^e before all the world; An Antidote
against 4* Dangerous Questions. A Brotherly and Friendly Censure Mr. Drake his
Boundary to the Holy Mount. Mr. Collings, Mr. Saunders, and others.
censuring all others as professed Enemies to Reformation, Christ's Covenant and
Kingdom, Profane, Licentious Libertius, Erastian Heretics; Men of loose
Principles, void of piety, devotion, holiness, etc. who either concur not
with, or publicly oppose them in these their irreligious Innovations, and
tyrannous usurpations, diametrically contrary to the Doctrine, Practice of all
former Christian Bishops, Pastors, Ministers, Churches, from the Apostles days
till this day. The Lord now convince, rebuke, humble them for these their
scandalous Practices, Publications, and reclame them for the future, for their
poor oppressed peoples spiritual welfare, and our Churches future peace and
settlement in these distracted times.

6ly. Bishop Jewel, and Thomas Beacon, in their forecited passages, charge
these particulars on the Church and Clergy of Rome, as antichristian Papal
Practices, Innovations, Errors, Crimes, contrary to the institution, doctrine,
Practice of Christ, his Apostles, the Primitive Church, Fathers, Christians,
and of all reformed Protestant Churches, Ministers; in which most of our
Anabaptistical and Independent Ministers, yea many Presbyterians now imitate,
equal, and far exceed them.

1. That the Custom of the Popes Church and Popish Clergy is, usually to
administer the Lords Supper to the People, but once or twice a year, by which
means the commandment of Christ is broken, the Sacrament of Christ neglected,
the death of Christ not so earnestly remembered, the people become unthankefull,
dissolute in life, vice increases, virtue decreaseth. But how many Ministers
now amongst us, not only neglect, but peremptorily refuse to administer the
Sacrament to their Parishioners and people, so often as once or twice every year
at certain times; but not so much as once in two, three, or four years space,
or more, together? whereby all the forementioned sins and evils are more
multiplied amongst us of late years, than formerly in times of Popery: Herein
therefore they are more inexcusable and blameworthy than the Papists, whom
they exceed in this exorbitancy.

2ly, That the Pope and Popish Priests made the peoples negligence and
undevotion in not resorting daily and frequently to the Lords Supper, the rule
of Christ's religion, and Groundwork of their private Masses. And instead of
controuling, rebuking the people for not repairing constantly and daily to this
Sacrament, they suffered them to persevere and perish in this their negligence;
yea increased their negligence, and discouraged them from the holy Communion:
whereas, were it a matter of Tithes or other payments, they should be called
upon, and not suffered in any wise to be negligent, neither should their
negligence stand for excuse. And do not our Anabaptistical, Independent
Ministers, crept into many Parish Churches, and some Presbyterians likewise,
make the peoples negligence, ignorance, unpreparednesse, undevotion, the very
Groundwork of their casting off and discontinuing all public Communions in
their Churches, there formerly celebrated every Month, or quarterly at least,
and to set up private Communions in their Conventicles and private Meetings to
some few selected Proselites like so many private Masses; yea, instead of
exciting their Parishioners to the frequent constant receiving the Lords
Supper, and reprehending them for their undevotion, backwardness in resorting
to it, do they not foster, encourage them in their Non-approaches thereunto;
nay use all possible strained Arguments to dissuade, deter, debar them from the
least access unto it; though strict and diligent in calling on them for their
own Tithes, dues, wherein no negligence or plea must be admitted? O then do
they not fully imitate, equal, yea exceed the Popes and Popish Priests herein,
(who force all to communicate once a year at least, under pain of
Excommunication) under pretext of avoiding Popery and profaneness? The Lord
set this home upon their Spirits, that they may reform it without delay.

3ly, That the Popes and Popish Priests debarred the people from reading the
Scriptures, etc. upon this ground, that they be Dogs and Swine, and therefore
should not such precious stones be laid before them. And do not many of our
Minsters, upon this very Ground debar all their people from the Lords Supper,
and justify it in Mr. Dr^k^, Mr. Collings, and others.
Print and Pulpit, from Mat. 7. 6. Give not that which is holy to Dogs, nor
cast ye your Pearls before Swine, lest they trample them under their feet, and
rent you? Which was certainly never intended of the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper (not then instituted) nor of such who earnestly desire frequently to
receive this Pearl, this holy thing, and are ready to rent their Ministers for
not delivering it unto them, whereas they would highly love, honor them, did
they constantly give it to them, as they ought by Christ's injunction, and the
Primitive Fathers practice; But rather of heavenly admonitions, reprehensions,
Instructions given to excommunicated, obstinate Sinners, who would be more
exasperated than reformed by them, as I have A Vindication of 4 Serious
Questions p. 38, 39. Four Serious Questions, p. 3.
elsewhere proved at large, and Mr. Humsr^ys Second Vindication of Free
Admission to the Lords Supper, Sect. 12. p. 71. etc.
others very lately. And are they not then direct Popes, Papists herein,
fighting with their Arguments against their own People, and Christ's own sacred
Communion?

And here let me inform these Censorious Ministers, who term and deem all those
baptized Christians, whom they judge unregenerate, Dogs, and Swine; that these
are no Scripture, Gospel or Christian terms, or Epethites becoming their Lips
or Pens, but mere Anti-Scripture, ungospel, unchristian Reproaches, Revilings
unbecoming their ministerial Function, and Profession of Christianity,
diametrically contrary to Gods, Christ's, the Holy Ghosts, the Prophets and
Apostles language in holy Writ: Which in the Old Testament styled all the
circumcised Israelites, and seed of Abraham, joined unto him by external
federal Covenant and profession, though for the most part really void of saving
Grace, and inward spiritual holines^, Exodus 22. 31. c. 19 6. Levit. 11. 44. c.
19 2. c. 20 7. Number. 15. 40. c. 16. 3. Deutr. 7. 6. c. 14. 2. 21. c. 26. 19. c.
28 9. Ezra 8. 28. c. 9. 2. Isa. 6. 13. c. 62. 12. Dan. 8. 24. c. 12. 7.
Holy men: A Kingdom of Priests, and an holy Nation, a peculiar people: an holy
people unto the Lord thy God, a chosen special people unto himself above all
the Nations which are upon the face of the earth; the holy seed: the holy
people, the redeemed ones, Exodus 3. 7. 19. c. 6. 7. c. 7. 4. c. 33. 15, 16.
Levit. 20. 26 c. 26. 12. Deuteronomy. 9. 29. c. 10. 15. c. 29. 13. c. 32. 9. 43. 1 Samuel 2. 24. c. 12. 22. 2 Samuel 7. 7. 11. 23, 24. 1 Kings 8. 16. 36. to 52. c.
14. 7. 2 Kings 11. 17. 1 Chronicles. 17. 21, 22. c. 29 17, 18. 2 Chro. 6. 6. 24. 39.
c. 23. 16. Psalm. 38 9. Psalm. 29 11. Ps. 47. 9. Ps. 50 7. Ps. 68. 7. 22. Ps. 77.
15. 20. Ps. 78. 1. 20. 52 62. 71. Ps. 79. 13. Ps. 81. 11, 13. Ps. 85. 2. Ps.
94. 5. Ps. 95. 7. 10. Ps. 100. 3. Ps. 106. 4. 40. Ps. 111. 6. 9. Ps. 135. 12.
Ps. 148. 14. Isay 1. 3, 4. c. 3. 12. c. 5. 13. 25. c. 40. 1, 2. c. 58. 1. Jer.
2. 11, 12. 31, 32. c. 5. 26. 31. Ezech. 13. 9. 19. Dan. 9. 20. Hos. 4. 6. 8.
12. Joel 3. 3. Amos 7. 8. 15. c. 9. 13. Obad. 13. Mich. 2. 4, 8, 9, c. 3. 3. 5.
c. 6. 2, 3, 5. Zeph. 2. 9, 10. Zech. 8. 7, 8.
Gods people, the Lords people, the Lords portion and inheritance: his own
people, the sheep of his pasture; the people of the Lord of Hosts; and that not
only when they kept themselves pure from Idolatry, false worship, and other
wickedness, but even when they were polluted with idolatry, false worship, all
manner of pollutions, impieties, and plagued by God, punished and carried away
captive for their sins, as the marginal Texts, with sundry others testify. So
all their Priests, Levites, Cities, (especially Jerusalem) are styled holy,
most holy to the Lord, the holy Court, though many of them were polluted,
profaned, defiled with all kind of wickedness and idolatry, Exodus 30. 29.
Levit. 11. 44. c. 21. 6, 7, 8. Isa. 52. 1. c. 64. 10. c. 1. 21. Neh. 11. 1. 18.
Dan. 9. 24. Mat. 4. 5. and other Scriptures. Thus all the converted Jews and
Gentiles under the Gospel, externally professing, embracing the faith of
Christ, and baptized into Christ, are styled Gods people, my people, by God
himself in the Old Testament; Ps. 110. 3. Hos. 2. 23. Zech. 13. 9. and likewise
in the New, Romans 9. 25. Holy, Holy Brethren, Saints, Saints by calling; a holy
Generation, a Royal Priesthood, a peculiar people; 1 Cor. 7. 14. 1 These. 5. 27.
Hebr. 3. 1. 1 Pet. 2. 5. 9. Romans 1. 2. 1 Cor. 1. 2. 2 Cor. 1. 1. c. 13. 13. Ephesians
1. 1. 15. c. 6. 18. Col. 1. 2. 26. Philem. 5. yea they are said to be in Christ
as branches in the vine, John 15. 1. to 9. sanctified with the blood of the
Covenant, Heb. 10. 29. To be redeemed by Christ, 2 Pet. 2. 1. yea reputed
Members of the visible Churches of God, and of the Saints, though the major
part of them be not really sanctified, and defiled with manifold sins, 1 Cor.
1. 2. c. 14. 17. to 34. c. 14. 23. 33. Acts 20. 28, 29, 30. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 1. c.
5. 14. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 1. c. 3. 6. to 16. Rev. 2. 4, 5. 14, 15. 20. c. 3. 1. etc.
4. 14, 15, 16. compared together, to omit many other like Texts. And such as
these, even when they fall into scandalons sins, are to be restored with the
spirit of meekness, and to be admonished as Christian BRETHREN, and not
reputed Enemies, Dogs, or Swine, Gal. 6. 1, 2. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6. to 16. being
still our Brethren in Christ, till either actually apostatized from the
Profession of Christ, or actually cast out of the Church by excommunication for
gross scandalous Crimes, as the New Testament ever styles them. Let them
therefore henceforth beware how they style any Christians, who frequent the
public Ordinances, and profess the faith of Christ externally as well as
themselves, Dogs or Swine, or use them as such by secluding them from the
Sacrament, though they join with them in all other sacred ordinances, as their
Christian Brethren, and fellow Members of the Church of Christ.

4ly. That the Pope himself and his Cardinals do scarcely communicate once in
a year, but are as negligent and as undevout therein as the most part of the
people, And are not many of our Ministers now more negligent and undevout
herein, than the Pope himself and his Cardinals, or most part of the Popish
people under them? in that they do scarcely communicate not only once in a
year, but scarce in many years together in public in their Churches? And that
not out of bare negligence, as they, which is bad; but out of mee^ design, to
deba^re all their people from the Lords Supper likewise, lest they should
participate with them at the Lords table, which is far more impious, detestable
both to God and Man.

5ly, That the Pope and Popish Priests think that any man, be he never so great
a sinner may pray to God, and resort to other Ordinances; only they think a
Sinner may not receive the Holy Communion. And is not this the very Doctrine,
Opinion, thought of many of our Ministers now, who deny, debar their people the
Lords Supper, and yet admit them freely to all other Ordinances of Prayer,
Preaching, etc? Yet this must be no Popery, forsooth, in them, but new
Evangelical light sent down from heaven of late into their hearts.

6ly, That Mr. Harding and the Popish Priests, write, profess, That the feast
of the Lords Supper is common, all are invited, but they only received to it
those who are disposed and proved; that is, after they have been examined by,
and made an Auricular Confession to their Priests, and been adjudged by them
worthy to communicate. But yet many of our Parish Priests and Ministers now,
are far worse than these Popish Priests herein: For many of them Mr.
Rutherford, Divine Right of Church-Gov. p. 280. Dr. D^^k^s Bound^y, Mr.
Collings Suspension.
deny this Feast to be common; but peculiar only to the true regenerate Saints:
they invite not all unto it, but such alone who have saving faith and grace
within them; Yea, they invite not such of their Parishioners to this feast for
whole years together; but deny them their portion in this heavenly banquet, for
fear some unregenerate ones should thereby intrude into this feast together
with them. Neither will others of them admit any to this feast, unless they,
on their now Presbyteries Dr. Drakes Boundary, p. 113, 114, 115, etc. See Mr.
Hum^ryes Rejoinder to it, p. 159, 160, etc.
first examine them touching their lives, faith, knowledge, Graces, visible
worthiness, and adjudge them upon trial to be well disposed and provided to eat
of this heavenly feast; for which they have neither precept nor president in
Scripture, but only from these Popish Priests, whose language, practice they
imitate. And such as will not subject themselves to this their Tyranny (as
Bishop Jewel terms it) must no ways be admitted, but secluded from Christ's
Table by these Servants, though their Lord himself invites, commands them to
resort thereto. Yea (which is a strain beyond all Popish Tyranny of this kind:)
Some Ministers have refused to try or examine those Parishioners who have freely
offered to put themselves upon their strictest Inquisition and Scrutiny, or
administer the Sacrament to them, or to those they every way thought fit,
worthy to receive it, peremptorily denying it to them months after months,
and year after year, (though importuned by all Christian means to administer
it) upon this most unrighteous, untheological, unchristian ground, That if they
should admit them to the Sacrament, which was of right due unto them, then
others of their unregenerate Parishioners would crowd in amongst them, and
claim it likewise as their due. Thus the children must be kept from this their
daily, monthly sacred bread, because the Dogs (as they profanely term all
other Christians at large) should Mat. 15. 27.
not so much as gather up any of the Crumbs that fall from the Lords Table.
Yea, most of our Anabaptistical, and Independent Ministers, who have got into
our Parochial Cures, of purpose to enjoy the Glebes, Tithes, (though they
disavow Parochial Congregations as unevangelical, and antichristian, which then
in conscience they should not accept, for filthy Lucres sake alone, and
willingly resign to others) are so transcendently peccant and super-tyrannical
herein, that they will upon no terms or entreaties whatsoever administer the
Lords Supper to the best, the holiest Saints of God, whose graces they cannot
but approve (nor yet baptize their Infants for the most part) unless they will
first new-mould themselves into their Anabaptistical Societies, or Independent
Church-models, the neglect or refusal whereof alone, (I know not by what
warrant from Christ or his Apostles) they make a sufficient ground for ever to
debarr them from this Sacrament, though never so worthy, so prepared otherwise,
to receive it. Isay 1. 2.
Hear, O Heavens! Hearken, O Earth, and blush, tremble at these monstrous
Sacrilegious Impieties, these super-transcendent Papal Tyrannies, and worse
than Antichristian Exorbitances, which have rendered many who profess
themselves the eminentest Protestant Ministers, and Saints of the highest
Classis, more injurious, undevout, unrighteous, uncharitable, and tyrannical
herein, than Popes ( Extrav. de Concessione Praehenda, etc. in Glossa. Reply to
Harding, p. 234.
In illis quae v^l^, est ei proratione voluntas, and that there is no other
reason to be yielded of his doings, but only this, Qu^a ipse voluit, being now
verified of them, as well as formerly of the pope) or Popish Shavelings. The
serious consideration whereof should make them execrate these their Popish
Exorbitances, and repent in dust and ashes for the^.

7ly, That Popish Priests from the Name and Nature of the Communion argue thus
point blank against both. It is called Communio: Ergo, it must be private:
Ergo, it may be received of one alone, etc. And do not many of our Ministers
now argue thus, or more absurdly than they? It is called Communio, because
formerly received by all Christian Congregations together in Common: Ergo, It
may, it must now be wifully discontinued and laid aside for sundry years
together: Ergo, none but Saints and segregated Conventicles must receive it
together in private; Ergo, none that are not of our private Church Way or
Congregation must receive it from or with us: Ergo, neither the Parish Priests,
nor any whole Parochial Congregations may or ought of right to receive it all
together in the public Church now, as they did heretofore.

8ly, That the Popish Priests (though they administer this Sacrament but
commonly once a year to the people) yet d^^m it a Cru^^ injury, a thing
contrary to the examples and godly Ordinances of the Pr^mitive Church, to deny
the Lord Supper to private persons on their death or sick beds who desire it.
And therefore would rather deliver it alone to the sick person, without the
Priests communicating with him, contrary to the nature and institution of the
Communion, than suffer the party to die in discomfort, and be swallowed up in
despair without it. But many of our Ministers are now so cruel, and hardhearted
to their Parishioners, that they will upon no terms or entreaties, daily
frequently, or yet at all deliver the Communion publicly to them in the Church
in their healths, that so they might not stand so much in need of it in their
sickness, as Reply to Harding, p. 24. 100.
Bishop Jewel advises ( to prevent this Popish Mischief) and the Primitive
Christians, Fathers practiced: Neither will they administer or send it
privately to them at their deaths, as the Primitive Fathers did, even to
excommunicate persons on their deathbeds, to comfort their hearts, strengthen
their faiths, and keep their souls from sinking in despair. In this therefore
they are more uncharitable, injurious, tyrannical, than the very rigidest
Popish Priests and Popes unto their People.

9ly, That Bishop Jewels Reply to Harding, p. 12, 13, 18. and Defense of the
Apology, p. 226.
the Popes and Popish Priests having discontinued the daily Communion of the
Lords Supper with the people, have instead thereof set up Private Masses,
wherein the people stand by only as Ga^ers, and Spectators only of the Priests
eating and drinking; but yet must not eat, drink, or communicate with them at
the Altar or Lords Table, they neither calling them thereto by words or
gestures, nor having any preparation for them if called: making them believe
the hearing and seeing of what they do is sufficient: whereby they increase the
Negligence of the people, and discourage them from the Holy Commnion. Which
Practice, though merely Popish and Antichristian; Bish. Iew^l ibid. p. 3. to
12. 279, 280, 281. 365, 366.
contrary to the precept and practice of Christ and his Apostles, the Custom,
Doctrine, Canons of the Primitive Fathers, Churches; the Harmony of
Confessions, sect. 12. 14.
Confessions, Articles of all foreign Churches, and of the Artic. 25.
Church of England, professedly condemned, declamed against by the Exhortation
prescribed in the Book of Common Prayer, ratified by sundry Acts of our
Protestant Parliaments, by Bishop Jewel, and all former Protestant orthodox
Writers; Yet Dr. Drake in his Antiquaeries, Preface, and p. 6. and his Boundary
to the holy Mount, p. 160, 161, etc. herein plays the downright Pope and
Popish Priest, not only in imitating, but thus justifying, pleading for this
Practice, as fit to be introduced in all our Protestant Churches. Scandalous
Persons, yea Heathens may be present at the Lords Supper, and all Sacramental
actions, and that with a great deal of profit. The fruit of the visible and
audible Word may here be attained by bare presence, etc. But they must not be
admitted to, but debarred from the participation of the Sacramental Bread and
Wine. Mark his reason. By presence, benefit may be gained; but the Danger of
eating and drinking unworthily cannot be incurred without actual receiving. A
better solider Argument for Private Popish Masses, if true, than any produced
by Mr. Harding, Bellarmine, or any Romish Pope or Priest. In which passage he
proclaims open war, against the Mat. 26. 26, 27. Mar. 14. 22, 23. 1 Cor. 11.
23, etc.
Institution, Practice, Do this, etc. of our Savior; who instituted this
Sacrament, not to be Gazed upon, but eaten and drunken by all present, admitted
no bare Spectators, but Gave it to ALL his Disciples: Yea he therein bids
defiance to the Holy Ghost and St. Paul himself, 1 Cor. 10. 2, 3, 4. 16, 17. c.
11. 22. to 34: to the Gregor. dial. l. 2. c. 23. Bishop Jewels Reply to
Harding, p. 365. Mr. Fox Acts and Monuments, Vol. 3. p. 1, 2.
Ite Missa est, Qui non communicate det locum, Custom, Doctrine of the whole
Primitive Church, Fathers, Christians, as Bishop Jewel will at large instruct
him; and more particularly to the 25 Article of the Church of England. The
Sacraments were not ordained of Christ to be gazed upon, or to be carried
about, but that we should duly use them. And this Exhortation, Resolution in
our English Liturgy. Whereas you offend God so sore in refusing his holy
Banquet, I admonish, exhort, and beseech you, that unto this unkindnesse you
will not add any more. Which thing you shall do (let this Doctor and others
mark it well) if ye stand by as Gazers, and lookers on those that do
communicate, and be not partakers of the same your self, this makes the fault
much greater, and is a further contempt, having the Mysteries of Christ in
derision. Is it not said, Take ye and eat, Take and drink ye all of this? With
what face then will ye hear these words? Will not this be a neglecting,
despising and mocking the Testament of Jesus Christ, etc? Wherewith other
Harmony of Confessions, sect. 14.
Protestant Churches in their very confessions accord; And St. Chrysostom long
before them, ad Ephe^^o^, Hom. 3. Whosoever stands by, refusing to
communicate, is wicked and shameless, and unworthy to be partaker of the
Prayers. Thou will say I am unworthy to be partaker of Christ's Mysteries; thou
art then unworthy to be partaker of the Prayers. Thou mais^ no more stand here,
th^n one of the Catechumeni, or Novices, that was never Christened. Thus, Dum
stulti vitia vitant in contraria currunt: This New Doctor will on no means
admit ignorant, scandalous, or unregenerate Christians to receive the
Sacrament; for fear they should eat and drink their own damnation: but yet
defines, they may be present at it, and all the Sacramental actions, without
receiving; and that too with a great deal of Profit; What, I pray? To make
their fault much greater, to commit a further contempt, than if they unworthily
received them; by having the Mysteries of Christ in derision, and neglecting,
despising and mocking the Testament of Jesus Christ; as our whole Church
resolves, against this his Popish Whimsy, contradictory to it self: For if they
may see and hear the Sacramental actions and administrations worthil^, and with
a great deal of profit; no doubt they may also receive it with much more profit
and comfort too: and it will Nonplus this grand Rabbi to resolve us, how any
can be a fit, a worthy, a profitable Auditor and Spectator of this Sacrament;
and yet an unfit, unworthy, unprofitable, yea damned Receiver. Let him
therefore not disown, retract this his Popish Dotage, Contradiction, Absurdity,
to which he is driven, to avoid the dint of my In my 12. Queries. My
Vindication of 4 Serious Questions; And Suspension suspended.
former Arguments, against his absurd newfound Suspension and excommunication
of men, by way of Church censure for notorious Scandals, only from the actual
reception of the Lords Supper; but not from being Spectators at it, and freely
admitting them as unexcommunicate true Churchmembers to all other Ordinances,
without the least seclusion from them: For which Mr. John Humfrey has since
sufficiently schooled him, in his Rejoinder to his Boundary.

10ly, That the Popish Priests having abolished daily, weekly, frequent
Communions together with their people in the Church, who ought to receive the
Sacrament, and remember the death, Passion of our Savior, as often as the
Priests themselves, do yet ( to keep a perpetual remembrance of Christ's death)
oblige themselves to say Privase Masses daily, communicate alone without the
people, and offer up Christ daily in sacrifice to his Father, wherein appears
their wanton folly, that they may do, and are commanded to do, they will not
do; but that they cannot do, that they will needs do. And is not this the
wanton folly of our Anti-Communion Ministers now? That they may lawfully, and
are commanded to do, (to administer the Communion frequently, constantly to all
their people) they will by no means do, but argue, plead, preach, Dr. Drakes
Boundary. Mr. Collings in his Suspension.
write against it: But that themselves confess they cannot, nor ought to do,
that they will needs do, in despite of God and Men, even Pope* like, Primum
l^gant, deinde causas in cos quaerunt. Cyril. in Johan. l. 12. c. 45* Just.
^yd^ord Law: Iew^ls Reply to Harding, p. 358
without any articles, hearing, conviction, and before any judicial Suspension,
Excommunication, by any Classis or Ecclesiastical ^udicature, against all or
any of their Parishioners, excommunicate, and keep back all, or the Major part
of their Parishioners from the holy Communion for sundry months, years
together, by their own lawless, Arbitrary, Tyrannical usurpations, without any
lawful Authority from God or Man; and will neither receive it alone
themselves, as the Popish Priests do, nor suffer their people to receive it
with them, to keep a perpetual remembrance of Christ's death; thereby incurring
that Censure of Tertullian, de Resurrectione carnis, Haretici ex conscientia
infirmita^ is suae nihil unquam tractant ordinari^; yea that just Woe and
Censure denounced by our Savior, Mat. 23. 11. Luke 11. 52. Woe unto you
Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites, for ye shut up the kingdom of heaven against
men: for you neither go in your selves, neither suffer ye them that are entering
to go in: or, them that were entering in, ye hindered and forbad; as Luke
renders it. The Lord give them now Grace to discern and reform this their
perverse, Pharisaical Pride, Hypocrisy, and Tyranny, yea Enmity against the
Memorial of our Saviors passion: for it deserves no milder Titles, being such
in reality.

11. That the Popish Priests require a more extraordinary, transcendent
holiness, worthiness, examination, confession of sins, preparation, and
qualification in such Christians as they admit to the Lords Supper, than they
exact from them in their approaches to God in any other holy Ordinances and
Duties of his worship, (be it Prayer, hearing or reading of Gods word, Fasting,
Thanksgiving, singing of Psalms, Baptism, and the like;) And that upon this
conceit, Mr. Harding against Jew^l: See ^is D^fence of the ^ipology, p. 263*
264. ^^ss^le Romanum, Pontificale Romanum, Ho^ae ^eatae Mariae; L^desma his*
catechism. Bel^armine, De Veneratione Eucharistiae. Bishop Jewels Reply to
Harding, p. 283, 284. Amesius Bellarmin. Enervatus, Tom. 3. l. 4. c. 8
that it is more sacred and divine, than any other Ordinance whatsoever. For
there it is, Hoc est Corpus meum; there we eat and drink (say they) the very
Body and Blood of Christ it se^f, and so converse more immediately with Christ
and God himself, than in any other Ordinance. Which ridiculous Popish dream of
Transubstantiation, as it ^ish. Jewels Reply to Harding, p. 282, 283, 284. 305,
306. 453. Bishop Morton against Masse-Ceremonies.
ushered i^ their elevation, Adoration of the Sacrament, prostration, kneeling,
bowing to it and their Altars, with other various Papal Superstitions and
Idolatries; so it first introduced this Suspension, Excommunication of
Christians from the Lords Table only (now so eagerly contested for by
Anabaptists, Independents, and overrigid Presbyterians) though freely admitted
to all other Ordinances of Gods public worship, and that extraordinary,
transcendent, special Worthiness, Holiness, Self-examination, Preparation,
Fitness, which they appropriate to this Ordinance alone, to make men worthy
Receivers, yet never press upon them to make them worthy Petitioners, Hearers,
Readers, Thanksgivers, Meditators; introduced first by Popish Priests after
Transubstantiation, as an appendent, or consequent of it; but not known,
practiced in Christ's Church before, in the primitive purest times (as the
premises evidence) when they received the Lords Supper every day when they met
together to pray, or hear the word: Which as it has bred a strange Schism
between the Sacrament and Ordinances of God themselves, as if the Lords Supper
were far holier, and Christ more really, immediately, and in another manner
present therein, than he is in Baptism, Prayer, or the Word preached; when as
in truth, Gods Sacraments, Ordinances are all of equal holiness, and God the
Father, Son and holy Ghost equally present with us, and as immediately
conversed with by us in them all, as in the Lords Supper; as is undeniably
evident, by Eccles. 5. 1, 2. 1 Cor. 10. 2, 3, 4 Mat. 28. 19, 20. Acts 10. 33.
44. 47. John 6. 29. to 66. compared with 2 Chr. 6. 19. to 42. Ps. 16. 11. Ps.
27. 4, 8. Ps. 17. 5. Ps. 65. 4. Ps. 84. Ps. 95. 2. Psalm. 100. 1, 2, 4. Ps. 105.
4. Ps. 132. 14. Ps. 140. 13. Isay 26. 8, 9. c. 6. 3, 5. c. 64. 1. 5. Jer. 30.
21. Mat. 7. 6. 1 Cor. 9. 13. 2 Timothy 3. 15. Romans 6. 3, 4, 5. c. 1. 16, 17. Gal.
3. 1, 2. 27, 28. By these passages of the Fathers, cited by Defense of the
Apology of the Church of England, chapter 14. divis. 2. p. 260, 261, 264.
Bishop Jewel against Harding, who charged him with too Gross an Error, in
making the presence of Christ in Baptism, like to his presence in the Supper.
In Johan. Tract. 50.
Saint Augustine says, Habes Christum in praesenti per Baptismatis
Sacramentum: Thou have Christ in the time present by the Sacrament of Baptism.
In Epist. ad Ephesians. Hom. 20.
St. Chrysostom says, In the Sacrament of Baptism, we are made flesh of
Christ's flesh, and bone of his bones. Super Missus est. Hom. 3.
Saint Berna^d says, (of Baptism) Lavemur sanguine ejus; Let us be washed with
his blood. In Sermon. de 4 Feria, c. 1
L^o says, Thou art washed in the blood of Christ when thou art baptized in his
death. By these few, (writes Jewel) it may appear, That Christ is present at
the Sacrament of Baptism, even as he is present at the holy Supper, unless ye
will say, We may be made Flesh of Christ's flesh, and be washed in his blood, and
be partakers of him, and have him present without his Presence: Therefore
Chrysostom when he has spoken vehemently of the Sacrament of the Supper, he
concludes thus; Sic et in Baptismo; Even so it is also in the Sacrament of
Baptism. The Body of Christ is like wise present in them both. And for that
cause Beda in 1 Cor. 10.
Beda says* Nulli est aliquatenus ambigendum, tunc unumquemque fidelium
Corporis Sanguinisque Dominici participem fieri, quando in Baptismate Membrum
Christi efficitur. No man may doubt, but every faithful man is then made
partaker of the Body and Blood of Christ, when in Baptism he is made the Member
of Christ. And whereas Mr. Reply to Harding* p. 284.
Harding and others advanced the Dignity of the Lords Supper, above Baptism and
the Word, and seclude those from it, whom they admit to the other, upon this
Ground; That those who eat and drink the Lords Supper unworthily, eat and drink
judgment to themselves, not discerning the Lords body: Thereto Bishop Jewel
replies, St. In Malac^i. c. 1.
Ierom says, Dum Sacramenta violantur* ipse cujus Sacramenta sunt, violatur.
When the Sacraments be misused, God himself, whose Sacraments they be, is
misused. And St. Augustine says, Qui indigne accipit Baptisma, Iudicium
accipit, non Salutem, Who so receives Baptism unworthily, receives Judgment,
(or Damnation) not Salvation; as well as he who receives the Lords Supper
unworthily. Yea, Christ himself when he sent forth his Disciples to preach and
baptize, Mar. 16. 15, 16. said unto them, Go ye into all the world, preach the
Gospel to every Creature: He that believes (the Gospel preached) and is
baptized, shall be saved; he that believes not shall be damned: To which he
superaddes Mat. 20. 14, 15. c. 11. 20. to 25. Mar. 6. 11. And whosoever will
not receive you, nor hear your words, when ye depart out of that house or City,
shake off the dust of your feet; Verily I say unto you, it shall be more
tolerable for the Land of Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment, than for
that City. 2 Cor. 2. 15, 16. For we are unto God a sweet savor of Christ (in
preaching the Word as well as administering the Sacraments) in them that are
saved, as in them that perish: To the one we are the savor of death unto
death; and to the other we are the savor of life unto life. By which it is
apparent, that there is as much danger, judgment, damnation incurred by every
man by his unworthy receiving of Baptism, and unprofitable hearing and
contemning the Word preached, as by his unworthy receiving the Lords Supper; as
also by his unworthy praying, which is an abomination unto the Lord, and turned
into sin, Psalm. 109. 7. Prove. 28. 9. Isa. 66. 3. Upon which account all
unregenerate, ignorant, impenitent, scandalous persons should be totally
secluded from Baptism, preaching, hearing of the Word and Prayer, as well as
the Lords Supper by our Ministers. So this Erroneous Popish opinion (refuted at
large by Dr. Ames, in his Bellarminus Enervatus, Tom. 3. l. 1. c. 4. De
Saramentorum Comparatione) has severed the ordinary daily use of the Lords
Supper used in the Primitive times, from the ordinary public Prayers, and
preaching the Word; which it always accompanied in the best and purest times;
and engendered a world of unnecessary, unchristian Controversies, Schisms, Sect;
in the Church of God, especially in our own, of later times. And therefore
ought now to be duly considered, reformed, exploded, as well as that Monster
of Transubstantiation, which originally introduced these fond superstitious
Popish Errors, that now so much intoxicate the brains, perplex the consciences
both of Protestant Ministers and People, and are like to prove our Churches
ruin. The Church of England in her 13 Article, with our Protestant Writers,
Divines, do all Generally condemn the Popish doctrine of Merit of Congruity;
Yet most of them now really embrace, justify, (f) See Bishop Jewels Reply to
Harding, p. 283, 284, etc.
preach, teach, print it, in their extraordinary Preparations for the Lords
Supper. They all generally now teach and exact, a visible, or real worthiness,
as absolutely necessary for every Communicant; (g) Dr. Drake his Boundary, Mr.
Collings. Mr. Rogers, Of Preparation to the Sacrament. The Practice of Piety,
touching Preparation for the Sacrament. ^ntidote against 4. Qestions.
without which, he must in no wise approach to the Lords Supper, for then it
will certainly prove mere poison to him, and he shall only eat and drink
thereat his own damnation. But if he be so really, so visibly worthy and
prepared, as they prescribe and require hi^ to be, then he may certainly assure
himself, that God will accompany this ordinance with his special presence,
Grace, blessing, so as he shall assuredly reap much Grace, increase
confirmation of his Faith, Joy, Peace, Assurance, and all other Graces by it.
Whether this be not the Popish Schoolmens meriting Grace of Congruity; (h)
Bonavent. in 3. Sent. did. 4. art. 2. qu. 2. and others thereon. Summa
Angelica, Tit. Meritum.
and tying of Gods Grace, Spirit, to our Worthiness, Merits, Preparations, for
our own inherent Worthiness and Preparation sake, let all judicious
Protestants resolve? Verily, when I seriously ponder that Memorable Passage of
Martin Luther in his Greater Catechism, Concordia Lutherana, p. 242. to 252.
That this Sacrament was not institnted for those that are worthy, and purely
cleansed, from their sins, but clean contrary, even for miserable and wretched
sinners, sensible of nothing but their own unworthiness, Therefore let such a
one say; Lord, I would very willingly be worthy of this Supper: but yet I come
unto it, induced by no worthiness of mine own, but trusting on thy Word alone,
because thou have commanded me to come, etc. For the Sacrament is not to be
looked on as an hurtful thing, Nota.
from which we should run with both our feet, but as a saving and wholesome
Medicin, which may heal thy diseases, and give life both to thy Soul and Body.
Why then do we so shun it, as if it were a Poison, which being received would
bring present death unto us? Yea, but some may say, I am not so sensible of my
sins and unworthiness as I should be. To such as are in this condition I can
give no better advice, than to look into their own hearts, and to see whether
they be not flesh and blood, and may not say with Paul, Romans 7. I know that in
me, that is, in my flesh, dwells no thing that is good. In sum, by how much
less sensible thou art of thy sins and defects, the more reasons thou have of
coming, and frequent seeking Help and Physic And when I consider these
Passages in the Practice of Piety; (so much approved by all our Divines, and
pious Christians) concerning the due manner of Practicing Piety in receiving
the Holy Supper of the Lord, Edit. 31. p. 402. 435.
That no man living is of himself worthy to be a Guest at so holy a Banquet.
The Rules there prescribed, How to consider and perceive our own unworthiness,
by examining our lives according to Gods Commandment: With these ensuing
Meditations prescribed to every Communicant to ponder, both before and at this
Sacrament, Page 451, 452, 453.
Ponder then, with what face dare thou offer to touch so holy a body, with
such defiled hands; Or to drink such precious blood, with so lewd and lying
mouths; Or to lodge so blessed a Guest, in so unclean a Stable: For if the 1 Samuel 6. 19.
Bethshemites were slain for but looking irreverently to the Ark of the Old
Testament; what judgment may thou justly expect, who with such impure eyes
and heart, art come to see and receive the Ark of the New Testament, in which
Col. 2. 39.
dwells all the fulness of the Godhead bodily? etc. If John Baptist ( the
holiest man that was boru of a woman) thought himself Mat. 3. 11.
unworthy to bear his shoes; O Lord, how unworthy is such a profane wretch as
thou art, to eat his flesh, and to drink his precious blood? If the blessed
Apostle St. Peter, seeing but a glympse of Christ's almighty power, thought
himself Luke 5. 8.
unworthy to stand in the same boat with him; How unworthy art thou to sit with
Christ at the same Table, where thou may behold the infiniteness of his
Grace and Mercy displayed? If the Matt. 8. 8.
Centurion thought that the roof of his House was not worthy to harbor so
divine a Guest; What room can there be fit under thy Ribbs for Christ's
Holiness to dwell in? If the Mal. 9. 20. 21.
bloud-issued sick woman feared to touch the hem of his garment; How should
thou tremble to eat his flesh, and to drink his All-healing blood. Yet if thou
come humbly in Faith, Repentance and Charity, abhorring thy sins past, and
purposing unfeignedly to amend thy life henceforth, let not thy former sins
affright thee; for they shall never be laid to thy charge, and this Sacrament
shall seal unto thy Soul, that all thy sins and the judgments due unto them,
are fully pardoned, and clean washed away by the blood of Christ. For this
Sacrament was not ordained for them who were perfect, (or worthy) but to help
penitent sinners unto perfection. Christ Mat. 9. 12. 13. c, 11. 28.
came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance. And he says, The
whole need not a Physician, but they that are sick. These has Christ called,
and when they came, them he ever helped; witness the whole Gospel, which
testifies, that not one sinner who came to Christ for Mercy, went ever away
without his errand. Bath thou likewise thy sick soul in this Fountain of
Christ's blood; and doubtless, according to his promise, Zech. 13. 1. thou
shall be healed of all thy sins and uncleanness. Not Sinners therefore, but
those who are unwilling to repent of their sins, are debarred from this
Sacrament, etc. Ibid. p. 458
I am in a word a Romans 7. 14. 24.
carnal creature, whose very soul is sealed under sin; a wretched man compassed
about with a body of death; Yet, Lord, seeing thou Mat. 9 13. c 11. 28. c. 22.
1. etc.
call, here I come; and seeing thou call sinners, I have thrust my self
in among the rest; and seeing thou call All, with their heaviest loades, I
see no reason why I should stay behind. O Lord, I am sick, and whether should I
go but unto thee, the Physician of my Soul? Thou have cured many, but never
did thou meet with a more miserable Patient, etc. And why should I doubt of
thy Good will, etc? With this further passage, Ibid. p. 408.
But then thou will say, It were safer to abstain from coming to the holy
Communion, than to resort unto it. Not so: For God has Nam. 9. 11. Heb. 2. 9.
Mat. 22.
threatened, to punish the wilful neglect of his Sacraments with eternal
damnation. And it is the commandment of Christ, Mat. 26, 26 1 Cor. 11.
Take, eat, do this in remembrance of me; and he will have his Commandment
under the penalty of his Curse obeyed. And seeing this Sacrament was the John
13. 1.
greatest token of Christ's love, which he left at his end to his Friends, whom
he loves to the end; therefore the neglect and contempt of this Sacrament,
must argue the Heb. 10. 28, 29.
contempt and neglect of his Love and Bloudshedding; than which no sin in Gods
account can seem more heinous; Nathing hinders why thou may not come freely
to the Lords Table; but because thou would rather want the love of God, then
leave thy filthy sins. O come then, but come a Guest prepared for the Lords
Table: Seeing they are ^poc. 19. 9.
blessed who are called to the Lambs Supper. And when I further observe the
several passages of like nature in others of our Writers, touching this
Sacrament; with this Confession of our sins in our English Liturgy; And this
acknowledgement, We do not presume to come unto this thy Table, O Lord,
trusting in our own worthiness, but in thy great and manifold Mercies: we are
unworthy, O Lord, to gather up the crumbs under thy Table, etc: even then when
we approach unto this Supper; With those passages prescribed in the Exhortation
before this Sacrament, to be used by all our Ministers to their People when
they see them negligent to come to the Holy Communion: When God calls you, be
not you ashamed to say, I will not come, etc? I for my part am here present,
and according to mine Office, I bid you in the Name of God, I call you in
Christ's behalf, I exhort you as you love your own salvation, that ye will be
partakers of this Holy Communion, etc. I can no ways approve the forementioned
Doctrine and Opinion, of visible or real worthiness (pre-required by our Dr.
Drake his Boundary, Mr. Collings his Juridical Suspension.
New Doctors, as the only rule of their admitting men to this Sacrament) as
Orthodox or solid, but reject it as erroneous, Popish, and mere merit of
Congruity; Disclaim that General received opinion, That there is another
sublimer Fitness, Holiness, Examination, Preparation required of all men in
their addresses to this Sacrament, than to any other of Gods Ordinances; And
cannot but conclude it a most damnable, impious, dangerous, unchristian
practice, for any Ministers to dehort, debar, prohibit any of their
unexcommunicated Parishioners from it, who desire to receive it, whiles they
freely admit them to all other Ordinances, since God himself both thus calls
and commands them under pain of the highest sin, contempt and damnation, to
repair constantly to this Sacrament, as the chiefest medicine to cure, comfort,
refresh their sin sick, drooping, despairing Souls. And upon unpassionate
serious, second thoughts of what is here premised, I doubt not they will all
subscribe to my Opinion herin, though they may deem it a strange Novelty at
first reading, and admit all freely to this Sacrament, as well as to other
Ordinances.

12ly. Our Reverend Apology of the Church of England, c. 12. Divis. 3. Defense,
of the Apology, p. 228, 229, etc. Reply to He^ding. p. 71, 72, 73, 74, 75, etc.
82. 108, 109. Dr. Fea^lies Grand Sacrilege of the Church of Rome.
Bishop Jewil, the Harmony of Confessions, sect. 14. with all Protestant
Churches and Divines, justly charge the Church of Rome, and Romish Priests,
with Grand Sacrilege, Church-robbery, wickedness, injury, impiety in the
highest degree, for denying, prohibiting the Cup of the Lord to the Lay people
in the administration of this Sacrament, contrary to Christ's own institution
and practice, the practice of the Primitive Church, Fathers, Christians, in
former ages, and all other Christian Churches in the world, for certain reasons
best known to themselves; and more especially for this very reason (as In
Tractatu contr. Haeresin communicandi Laicos sub utraque specie.
John Gerson, a principle member of the Council of Constance, privy to its
secrets records) That if Laymen should communicate under both kinds, as
Priests, Dignitas Sacerdotis non esset super dignitatem Laicorum, The Dignity
of Priests should not be above the dignity of Laymen: Whence Gabriel Biel
extolleth the dignity of the Priest above our Lady, and all other Saints,
because he may communicate under both kinds, and they cannot. And so have they
altered the Sacrament of aequality and unity, and made it a Sacrament of
difference, and dissension, as Reply to Harding, p. 73.
Bishop Jewel truly observes. Now I appeal to the Judgments, Consciences of
all judicious Protestants, and Gratian de Consecr. Did. 2. etc.
Pope Gelasius himself, who justly condemned this practice, as most wicked,
injurious, impious Sacrilege in the Popes and Priests of Rome; whether it be
not a far greater, worser, execrabler Sacrilege for any of our Protestaut
English Ministers, contrary to our Saviors precept, president, the custom,
doctrine, practice of the Apostles, Primitive Churches, Fathers, Christians,
and all other Churches in the world; yea, to the Councils, Canons, Injunctions,
Articles, Liturgies, Homilies, Writers of our English Church, and 1 E. 6. c. 1.
5, and 6. E. 6. c. 1. 1 Eliz. c. 2. 3. Iac. c. 4, 5.
Statutes of our Realm, obstinately, wilfully to detain, not only the Sacred
Cup, but Bread, and whole Lords Supper from all their Parishioners, for sundry
Months, Years together, as no ways due or belonging to them? And that only
upon no other real Ground but this alone, See Dr. Drakes Boundary. Mr. Collings
his Iuridical Suspension. The Divines of Syon College Consid^rations and
Cautions, June 9. 1646. p. 5. etc.
to erect a new Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in themselves and their intended
Presbyteries, over the Lords Sacrament it self, and all their people; and to
advance their own Sacerdotal or Presbyterial Dignity hereby above the Dignity
of their ordinary Lay Parishioners; this New Papal Authority, Tyranny,
Sacrilege, being never claimed, practiced by them before, but only since their
late pretended divine right, and claim to their new Presbyterian Sovereign
Authority, to examine all their Parishioners visible worthiness, fitness,
preparedness to receive this Sacrament, before their actual admission
thereunto. Whereby they have now altered this blessed Sacrament of Equality and
Unity, (to which all visible Members of every particular Congregation capable
of Self-examination, have an equal right and common interest, as well as
themselves, or their new Presbyteries, Triers, and ought to receive it together
with them, as frequently as they shall receive it) and made it a Sacrament of
Difference, Dissension, division, separation, and no Communion at all; nor yet
so much a Sacrament or Ordinance of Christ at all in many Churches, but only in
Notion and Dispute, not actual public Celebration, according to Christ's
command, Luke 22. 19, 1 Cor. 11. 24, 25, 26. Mat. 26. 26. etc.
This do in remembrance of me. They having now metamorphosed our Saviors
precepts, Take ye, Eat ye, Drink ye ALL of this, in Remembrance of me: As OFTEN
as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, show ye the Lords death till he come,
into This do not, Take ye not, Eat ye not, Drink ye not AT ALL in Remembrance
of me. Never once (much less often) eat this bread, nor drink this Cup, nor show
ye the Lords death thereby till he come. O my obstinate refractory Christian
Brethren (if I may be now deemed worthy by you, to call you so) who are guilty
of this practice; I advise you, beseech you, for the Honor of my blessed
Savior, and this his holy Sacrament; the Honor of our Protestant Church and
Religion; the Honor of your own Ministry and Function; the comfort, the
Salvation, the edification of your own and your peoples Souls, now at last most
seriously to consider this your worse than Papal, Romish, impious Sacrilege,
Impiety, Antichristian Pride, Usurpation, Tyranny, Rebellion against Christ's
positive Precepts, (for I can truly give it no other, better Terms than these)
with shame and confusion of Face, Heart, Spirit; and then be 2 Chronicles. 30. 8.
no more stiff-necked; no longer Popish, Romish, in this and other
forementioned particulars, as you have hitherto been: which render you more
really scandalous, if not impious, than any you debar from this Sacrament:
And Gal. 16.
repute me not your Enemy, nor a Rayler; because I thus plainly, impartially
tell you the truth, and have paralleld your late practices with Popes and
Popish Priests exorbitances, Sacrileges; not minced your Crimes with diminutive
terms, but set them forth by their proper Titles, in their Native Colors,
that you might the better discern their horror, avoid their danger, and be
the more humbled for them before God and Men; but Psalm. 141. 5. 1 Samuel 25. 32,
33, etc. Prove. 9. 8. c. 24. 25. c. 28. 23.
repute me your best, your truest, cordiallest Christian Friend, Tit. 1. 13.
for discovering these your Iniquities, and rebuking you sharply, that you may
be sound in the Faith. Rev. 2. 5.
Remember therefore whence you are fallen; repent and reform your late
dangerous Errors, and do your first works, by discharging your Pastoral
duties to your people, in frequent, public, common Celebrations of the Lords
Supper, together with them, as your Ministerial and Parochial Functions,
Christ's Precepts, the Statutes, Edicts of our Church and Realm oblige you; And
that upon this ensuing Consideration super added to the Premises.

7ly, That Reply to Harding, p. 20. 21. 93. 112. Harmony of Confessions, sect.
12, 13, 14, 15. Articles of England 28. Harmony of Confessions. sect 14.
August* de Consensu Evangel. l. 3. c. 25.
Bishop Jewel and the Fathers, Authors forecited by him, resolve; That one
principal end of the holy Communion, is, to join and unite Christians together
in Christian Communion, unity, amity, as being all fed together, and partakers
of this one bread: That by their common open receiving of this holy communion
frequently together, they do openly testify and declare, that they are all one
in Christ Jesus, and all one amongst themselves; That this is the principal
means to join and keep them together; and to prevent Schisms, Divisions, Sects
Contentions amongst Christians; It being impossible (as Contr. Faustum Manich:
l. 19. c. 11.
S. Aug. writes) to conjoyn men together into any name of religion, be it true
or false, unles they bejoyned together with some bond of visible Sign or
Sacraments, like confederated sworn Brethren. Hereupon the later Confession of
Harmony of Confessions, p. 306. 310.
Helvetia, cap. 12. writes thus of this Holy Supper, Moreover we are
admonished, in the celebration of the Supper of the Lord to be mindful of the
body whereof we are made Members, and that therefore we be at Concord with all
our Brethren, that we live holily, and not pollute our selves with wickedness
and strange Religions, but persevering in the faith to the end of our life,
give diligence to excel in holiness of life. With which accords the Former
Confession of Helvetia, in these words, Also the Lords Supper is as a badge
unto us: for as one loaf, and one wine, are made of many grains and grapes; so
we being the whole multitude of the faithful, are gathered together to be one
bread and one body. By this we testify in an outward profession, that we are
redeemed by the blood of Christ, and made the members of Christ, to whom we
give thanks, in whom we are Confederates, and do promise to perform mutual
duties one toward another. The Confession of Saxony thus seconds them, God
will have this public receiving to be a Confession, whereby thou may show
what kind of Doctrine thou do embrace, and to what company thou do join
thy self. Also he will (hereby) that the members of the Church should have a
Bond of mutual love among themselves. Ibid. sect. 15. p. 360.
God would that these public Meetings should be witnesses of the Confession
and severing of the Church of God from the Sects and Opinions of other Nations.
John, assembled his flock at Ephesus, and taught the Gospel, and by the use of
the Sacraments, the whole Company did declare that they embraced this Doctrine,
and did invocate this God, who delivered the Gospel, and that they were
separated from the worshippers of Diana, Jupiter, and other Idols. For God will
be seen and have this Church heard in the World, and have it distinguished by
many Public Signs from other Nations. And the promises wherein, God does
affirm he will preserve his Church ar included in the very words of the Supper,
where he commands, the death of the Lord should be showed forth, and this
Supper distributed till he come. Therefore doubtless the principal and only
means that Ministers or Magistrates can use, to prevent the dangerous,
universal, epidemical increase of Sects, Schisms, Separations from our Parish
Churches and public Assemblies; to reclaim, reduce, reunite their people in
personal presence and affection to themselves, their Churches, and one another,
and to restore unity, amity, peace, settlement, to our miserably distracted,
dilacerated Church and Realms, divided, subdivided into so many Sects,
Factions, one from and against another, is, to restore, press, practice the
frequent public use of this Holy Communion every Lords day, or Month at
least, and not to seclude any of their Parishioners from it capable of
self-examination, but such alone who are actually excommunicated from all
Church Communion, and all other public Ordinances, for their notorious sins
demeriting such a censure. The contrary Doctrine, Practice, ( derived from, and
asserted by the Sea Lucas Osiander, Contra Anabaptist. De Ecclesia, c. 6.
quaest. 3. etc. Harmony of Confessions, Sect. 10. to 16.
Anabaptists, but oppugned by Protestant Churches, Writers heretofore, though
now asserted by Independents and Mr. Rutherford, Divine Right of Church Gov. p.
280. Dr. Drakes Antiqueries, and Boundary, Mr. Collings Juridical Suspension,
Mr. Gillespy and others.
rigid Presbyterians) That this holy Communion belongs only to the truly
regenerate, or to none but visible Saints: not to any unregenerate Persons or
Sinners, who are all to be seclnded from it. That none ought to be admitted to
it, but such who upon trial and due examination by their Ministers or
Presbyteries, shall be adjudged worthy Communicants, and sufficiently
qualified, extraordinarily prepared to receive it: And the discontinuing of
this Communion in most Churches upon these false Principles for sundry months
and years together, having been the original fountain, sourse, and principal
occasion of all those unhappy Schisms, Divisions, Separations, Contentions,
Sects, Disputes, Differences which have rent our Churches, Realms, into so many
Pieces, and brought so much hatred, scorn, contempt upon our Ministers persons,
Functions, Ministry, in wise men's observations. To put this out of question. I
shall desire all sadly to consider, that the greatest rents, schisms that have
befallen the Church of Christ in these later ages of the world, have proceeded
from Errors, Crntroversies touching the Sacraments, which have severed it into
irreconcilable Sects and Separations. The Popish Error of Transubstantiation,
and the consequences (of Adoration, of the Hostia, Masses, etc. arising thence)
with the Sacrilegious depriving the Laity of the Cup, by the solemn (...) 13,
(...) Conc^^. ^om 3. p. 821, 822. See Harmony of Confessions, sect. 14 ^. 324,
325, 330, 340, 351.
Decree of the Council of Constance, was the original Ground, the principal
(though not only) cause, of all Protestant Churches Separation from the Church
of Rome; as Mr. Fox his Acts and Monuments, the French Book of Martyrs, Bishop
Jewel, Bishop Morton, and others in their learned Works heretofore, Dr. Daniel
Featly, in his Grand Sacrilege of the Church of Rome, Mr. John Daille his
excellent Apology for the Reformed Churches, showing their Necessity of
Separation from the Church of Rome, and others in their late Treatises of
Schism, at large demonstrate: And had not the Council of Basil (since the
Decree of Constance) granted the use of the Sacrament in both kinds, Bishop
Jewels Reply to Harding, p. 72. Ae^aeas Sylvius Hist. Concilii. Basiliensis.
Fox Acts and Monuments. Vol. 1. p. 905. to 912. History of the Council of Trent.
and restored the Cup unto the kingdom of Bohemia; and the Council of Trent
since, upon certain conditions granted the same to other Kingdoms and
Countries, they had all totally revolted from the Church and Popes of Rome, and
turned Protestants, so much were they displeased with them for this Gross
Sacrilege. Hence the Council of Basil in their Act of Concession of the
Sacrament in both kinds to the Bohemians, uses this observable Preface: Fox
Acts and Monuments, Vol. 1. p. 909.
In the name of God and of our Savior Jesus Christ, upon the Sacrament of
whose most blessed last Snpper we shall entreat, that he which has instituted
this most blessed Sacrament of Unity and Peace, will vouchsafe to work this
effect in us; and to make us, that we may be one in the said Lord Jesus our
Head; and that he will subvert all the subtilties of the devil, which through
his envious craftiness, has made this Sacrament of Peace and Unity, an
occasion of Wars and Discord; that whiles Christians do contend touching the
manner of communicating, they be not deprived of the fruit of the Communion.
Whereupon St. Augustine in his Sermon upon Infants, in the Decrees, De
Consecratione Distinct. 2. Quia passus, says thus. So the Lord Jesus Christ
certified us, and willed that we should appertain unto him, and consecrate the
Mystery of our Peace and Unity upon the Table. He that receives the Mystery of
Unity, and does not keep the bond of Peace, does not receive a mystery for
himself, but against himself. This we thought good above all things to be
premised. A clear testimony, that the Popish Abuses in the Sacrament, and this
Sacrilege in depriving the people of the Cup, was the original cause of all
the Schisms, Wars, Discords, then in and against the Church of Rome, and
between her, the Bohemians, and other Churches, Kiugdoms. Since this, the Fox
(...) and Monument^, Vol. 2 p 87, (...) etc. (...) and the Letters of (...).
erroneous Doctrine of Consubstantiation in the Sacrament, has totally and
almost irreconcilably divided the Lutherans from the Calvinists, and other
Protestant Churches, and set them at open variance, hostility one against the
other. Moreover, these erroneous tenets of the (...) against the Anabaptists.
Harmony of Confessions, sect. 10. ^0 15: Articles of England, art. ^6.
Anabaptists; that none ought to be baptized before they can render an approved
account of their faith: and that none ought to be admitted to the Lords Supper
but visible Saints, who upon prec^dent trial and examination shall be adjudged
worthy to communicate; That communicating with any other but Saints does
profane this and other ordinances, and defile those Saints who communicate
with them; has occasioned them first to separate wholly, not only from the
Church of Rome, but from all other Protestant Churches whatsoever, whether
Lutherans, Calvinists, Presbyterians, or Independents, and to communicate with
neither of them. The Independents See A Reply of 2. of the Brethren to ^ ^. Mr.
Burtons (...) of Independency, Mr. Edward Gangraenaes.
taking up the Anabaptists wicked erroneous Principles against mixed Communions,
have thereupon separated themselves from the Presbyterians and our Parechial
Churches, and upon this foundation, erected new gathered Churches, and
segregated conventicles of their own. And some over-rigid Presbyterians,
unadvisedly swallowing down this Anabaptistical Drugg, See Mr. Rutherford,
Gillespy, D^. D^^ke, (...) Colling^, Syon College, the (...) Ministers, (...)
Books of this subject.
founding their New Presbyteries, Triers, Trials of all Communicants
worthiness, Suspensions of all ignorant, scandalous persons from this
Sacr^ment, and unmixt Communions only of visible Saints thereon, have thereby
split themselves upon a double rock, and manifold inextricable inconveniences,
to the total subversion, and unexpected sudden frustration of their intended
platform, and elevated hopes. First, by closing with the Anabaptists and
Independents in this Foundation of their Separation from all other Churches and
Christian Congregations, they have made most of their conscientious
Parishioners to turn See Mr. Edwards Gangraenacs.
Anabaptists or Independents, and to desert both their Church and Ministry;
whereby their numbers are decreased, and these their Opposites Churches Numbers
infinitely increased in few years space beyond all belief. 2ly. By denying, upon
this Account, to administer the Lords Supper to the generality of their
Parishioners as unworthy of it; and none other but Dogs or Swine; and by not
administering it in their Churches upon this ground, for sundry months, nay
years, lest any unworthy Communicants should press unto it; they have thereupon
incurred the general indignation, hatred, contempt, reproaches, and lost the
affections of the residue of their people, caused many of them to turn Ranters,
Quakers, Achiests, contemners, neglecters of all ordinances; for to resort to
old Episcopal Clergymen, and those who will freely admit them to the Lords
Table. And so by this their Error, sacrilege, ambition, neglect in, and
forbearing to celebrate the Lords Supper (against Christ's own precept, the
Custom of the Primitive and all other Churches) to their Parishioners, as
formerly, and endeavor to set up a New Judicatory, or inquisition over their
Persons, Consciences, to examine their fitness, and suspend them from the
Communion, they have by divine retaliating Justice or Providence at least (and
I desire them to observe it) sodeinly, unexpectedly, beyond all humane
probability, by an unparalleld sacrilege, lost most of their Church revenues,
Tithes, Duties, either seized, or detained from them by their people from whom
the^ detain this Sacrament; yea lost both their intended Presbyterial
Government, Classes, Iudicatories, Reputations, Credits, Reverend esteem, the
love and affections of the Generality of their Parishioners, and rendered their
Persons, Function, Ministry, generally odious, contemptible, opprobrious
throughout the whole Nation; as themselves experimentally feel, complain of,
and all intelligent men observe. Which being an undeniable experimental truth,
there can be no better, speedier means used, to regain their former honor,
love, respect, and reduce their straying flocks from their several Schisms,
Sects, Conventicles, unto their Parochial Congregations, Assemblies, Ministry,
but to renounce those Anabaptistical Errors, Practices, they have unadvisedly
taken up and strenuously defended; to restore the frequent weekly, monthly use
at least of the holy Communion (the principal bond of Christian Amity, Peace,
Unity, Harmony of Conf^ssions, sect. 14 and Practice of (...).
serving instead of ANOATH to bind them all together in the true Profession of
Christianity, to re-gather their people together, and reunite and keep them
close to themselves and one another) and to grant a free admission unto all
visible Church members able to examine themselves, to the holy Communion, as
well as to all other Ordinances (as Christ, his Apostles, the Primitive
Fathers, Christians did; and the premises undeniably manifest they are bound to
do) and to endeavor by preaching, writing, exhortations, and all good
Christian means, to prepare and excite all persons capable, to the frequent
participation of this Sacrament, and not dehort, deter any such from it, as
they have done of later years, and thereby driven them both from their Churches
and Ministry. Remember what Reply (...). 18.
Bishop Jewel in his forecited words replies to Mr. Harding, O miserable is
that Chdrch, wherein no man, no not so much as one is well disposed, and fit to
communicate at the Lords Table. What conscientious, zealous Christian can with
comfort continue in such a Church, or what Minister with comfort or conscience
continue in his Pastoral charge over it, and not remove, or separate from it to
some other Church and people better qualified for Christian Communion, at
Christ's heavenly Feast? Such Churches these Ministers declare their own to be,
by their practice, to whom they pretend they cannot, dare not administer the
holy Communion at all, as having no right unto it to the peoples scandal, and
their own; And how many such Parochial Churches have we now in England, who
have had no Sacrament of the Lords Supper publicly administered in them for
diverse years last past? though the more sinful and worse they are, the more
they need this Sovereign Medicine, this Sinne-clensing, Soul-recovering
Antidote to cure their Spiritual Maladies, and diseased Souls; the withholding
whereof from them, instead of working their Spiritual cures, has See Concordia
Lutherana, p. 542. and My Suspension suspended, p. 36.
but only lengthned, increased their diseases, and made them more sinful,
obstinate, vicious, irreligious, sacrilegious, profane, undevout, atheistical,
neglectful, contemptuom of this and all other sacred Ordinances than before,
and banished the serious frequent meditation of Christ's precious bloodshed, and
benefits of his passion quite out of their remembrance; As therefore the Sea
Mr. Humfrey his Reply to Dr. Drake, p. 154.
Anabaptists, and Independents seclude none from their Sacraments, whom they
deem visible members of their selected, refined, gathered Congregations; upon
this account, That none are or ought to be members of their Churches, but such
who have an equal right and free admission to all Gods Ordinances: So let our
Presbyterian Ministers now upon the same account, either separate from their
Churches, as no true visible Churches of Christ, or else admit all the visible,
actual Members of their Parochial Congregations, to this holy Communion, as
well as to all other Ordinances, wherein they have all an equal interest, as
Church Members, lest all their people withdraw and separate from them, as many
thousands have lately done, and will do, must else do more and more, till this
Sacrament be restored to them, That being no true visible Church of Christ, nor
true Christian Congregation, wherein the Sacraments are not duly, frequently
administered, as well as the Gospel preached, as all See the Harmony of
Confession^, section 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. Articles of England, art. 19. 26.
Protestant Churches, Confessions, Writers, unanimously resolve: And those
Churches must needs be full of Schisms, factions, Contentions, Animosities,
hatreds, void of Christian love, unity, and in a most desperate sad condition,
where the Supper of the Lord (the Articles of England, artic. ^8.
sign and bond of the love, peace, unity, amity that Christians ought to have
amongst themselves, and Sacrament of their redemption by Christ's death) is
wholly cast aside, kept from them by their Ministers. Which the Lord give all
such obstinate Church-distracting, Church-destroying Ministers grace now timely
to consider, reform, for their own, their peoples, the Churches benefit, union,
Peace, and future Settlement, upon serious perusal of all the premises,
compiled, published for this much-desired end alone.

For a close of all, I shall desire all proud Pharisaical, supercilious,
over-severe Ministers and other Christians puffed up with such a swelling
conceit of their own transcendent Holiness, worthiness, and most others
unworthiness, that they think them altogether unworthy to communicate with
them at the Lords Table; to consider seriously with themselves, these few
particulars, which may abate this their spiritual pride and uncharitableness,
and reform their erroneous practices in this kind.

1. Advisedly ruminate upon Christ's own parable of the boasting Pharisee, and
humbled sinful Publican, who went both up together into the Temple to pray;
and which of these two Christ himself justified, Luke 18. 9. to 15. Which
Parable he spoke unto certain who trusted in themselves, as being righteous,
and despised others, v. 9. This alone methinks should at least abate, if not
fully cure this their overweaning self-conceit. Compared with those Isay 65. 5.
Which say (to others) stand by thy self, come not near to me, FOR I AM HOLIER
THAN THOU. These are a smoke in my nose, a fire that burns all the day;
Behold, it is written before me, I will not keep silence, even recompense into
their bosoms. Let all such pure Justiciaries take heed they come not within the
verge and censure of Prove. 30. 12. 13. There is a generation that are pure in
their own eyes, and yet are not washed from their fillhinesse. O how lofty are
their eyes, and their eye lids are lifted up: (with spiritual pride) Withal
let them remember that of Jam. 4. 5. and 1 Pet. 5. 5. Yea, all of you be
clothed with humility, for God resists the proud, and gives grace unto the
humble. With that of Phil. 2. 3. Let nothing be done through strife or
vainglory; but in lowliness of mind, let each esteem other. BETTER THAN
HIMSELF. And then they would seclude none from the Lords Table (especially
before a legal conviction, trial, and sentence of Excommunication judicially
passed against them) as unworthy to bear them company, being as good, or better
than themselves, in the judgment of true Christian Charity and Humility, if
they pursue this Apostolical precept.

2ly, Let them Ponder our Saviors own precept, Mat. 7. 1. Luke 6. 37. Judge
not, that ye not judged; Condemn not, and ye shall not be condemned. With that
of Romans 14 4, 10. etc. Who art thou that judge another man's servant? to his
own Master he staudeth or falls; But why do thou judge thy Brother? or why
do thou set at naught thy Brother? ( yea count, call him a mere Dog or
Swine, and seclude him from Christ's Table as such, before any legal trial or
conviction of him as such?) We shall all stand before the judgment sent of
Christ, etc. So then, every one of us shall give an account of himself to God.
LET US NOT THEREFORE IVDGE ONE ANOTHER ANY MORE. Compared with 1 Corinthians. 4. 3,
4, 5: But with me it is a very small thing that I should be judged of you, or
of man's day ( or judgment) yea I judge not my self, but he that judges me is
the Lord. Therefore IVDGE NOTHING BEFORE THE TIME, until the Lord come, who
will both bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest
the counsel of the hearts; and then shall every man have praise of God, Jam. 2.
12, 13. So speak, and so do, as they that shall be judged by the Law of
Liberty: For he shall have judgment without mercy, that has showed no mercy;
and mercy rejoices against judgment, John 7. 51. Does our Law judge any man
before it bear him, and know what he does? Which texts duly weighed, would take
off all rash, censorious, private, illegal judgments passed upon whole
Parishes hearts, and spiritual estates, and suspensions of them from the Lords
Table upon bare surmises, before any judicial hearing, trial, conviction of
their scandalous Crimes and Offenses, deserving such a severe, unchristian
censure, by those who have no divine nor humane Authority to inflict it, as now
they do.

3ly. Let such remember, that as Christ himself never erected any private
Consistory in himself, his Apostles, Ministers or Presbyterian Classis for the
trial, examination of any man's knowledge, preparation, worthiness, Graces,
before they came to the hearing of the Word, Prayer, or other public
Ordinances of his worship; but enjoined every man only to examine, prove
himself, and search, try his own heart, ways, Lam 3. 40, 41. Psalm. 4. 4. 2
Cor. 13. 5. compared with Ier. 8. ^6. c. 31. 18, 19. and to judge himself, (not
others, whose hearts, states he cannot certainly know:) 1 Cor. 11. 28. 31. Romans
14. 3. to 14. So in our approaches to the Lords Supper, he gives no Commission
to any Classis, Minister, in or by his word, to try or examine any others
fitness ere they be admitted to the Lords Supper, but only commands every man
to 1 Cor. 1^. 28. 31.
examine and judge himself alone, (not any other,) The reason is there rendered,
For he tkat eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks judgment
(ordamnation) to himself* (alone) not to any other: For if we would judge our
selves, we should not be judged, v. 31. The Fathers, with other Commentators
generally on and from this Text, press all, to examine themselves before they
receive this Sacrament, And the Churches of Harmony of Con^^ssio^s, s^ct 14.
308, 310, 314, 315, 322, 339.
Helvetia, Bohemia, Belgia, Sax^ny, in their public Confessions, and Church of
England in her public Liturgy, from this Text, Exhort all Communicants
diligently to examine themselves, before they eat the Sacramental Bread, or
drink of that Cup: but enjoin not their Ministers or Classes juridically to
examine or approve them as worthy Communicants before they admit them;
introduced originally by Popish Priests, who called their people to See my N^w
Discovery, p. 38 39.
Auricular Confes^ion, and shrift, before they would admit them to the
Sacrament, which the Fathers in the Primitive times exacted not, as Bishop
Jewel formerly manifests. And this will still their Polypragmatical Humor, of 1
Pet. 4. 15. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 12.
playing the Bishops in other men's Dioceses, and Popes in other men's
consciences; instead of examining their own Hearts, Lives, Actions,
Consciences, Faith, Love, Repentance and other Graces, especially their own
Charity, Humility, Gentleness, and Long-suffering toward their Brethren, whom
they thus seclude from the Sacrament, without any legal Commission from God or
Man, which will hardly consist with that true Christian brotherly love,
charity, humility, gentleness, meekness and forbearance, which is required in
all worthy Communicants, as they deem themselves.

4ly. Let such Divines and others who make the truth of Grace, or real visible
Saintship, the only condition, qualification of rightful admission of any to
the Lords Supper, consider these sad inevitable consequences of this their
Error. 1. That no Minister, person whatsoever (without immediate revelation
from God) can Jer. 17. 9. 10. 1 Samuel 16. 6, 7. Acts 1. 24.
certainly or infallibly know the hearts or truth of any Parishioners Graces;
and therefore by this rule, he neither can nor dares administer it to any, de
fide; because 1 ^^ro. 28. 9. 9. 1 Kings 8. 39. 2 Timothy 2. 19.
God only knows their hearts and truth of Graces. 2ly, That many who appear and
seem to be real Saint, for a time, appear at last to be wicked Mat. 23. 27. 28.
Acts 20, 30 1 (...). 2. 18, 19.
Hypocrites: and many thousands who appear not outwardly to be Saints, even to
the most eminent See 1 Samuel 1 11. to 19. 1 Kings 19. 14 18.
inspired Prophets of God, are yet real Saints in truth and Gods esteem, Romans
11. 3, 4, 5. If this then should be the only rule of admission to the
Sacrament, many false Hypocrites should be admitted to, and thousands of real
Sain^s secluded from it. 3ly, All new converted, or tenderhearted, humble,
doubting Christians, laboring under the burden of their corruptions, or
Satan's temptations, not fully assured of the truth of their ^eal conversion,
Graces; should then necessarily sequester themselves from this Sacrament, when
they need it most, though their Ministers should deem them fit and worthy;
because unresolved of the truth and reality of their own saving Graces, and so
unworthy to communicate in their own resolutions. 4ly, If truth of Grace be
necessarily requisite in all Receivers, then much more, or at least equally
requisite in all Ministers, who consecrate and administer to, as well as
receive it first of all, with their Parishioners. And then, if the Parishioners
doubt, As all Anabaptists, Q^ak^rs, S^ctaries, now do.
deny, or have no certain assurance of the truth of Grace in their Ministers;
by this rule, they neither may, can, nor will receive at all: And so Ministers
having no certain infallible assurance of their Parishioners true conversion or
Graces, nor they of their Ministers, this Sacrament must be wholly exploded and
laid quite aside. Upon which Consideration the Church of England in the 26.
Article, and the Protestant reformed foreign Churches in their Harmony of
Confessions, sect. 10. to 16.
Confessions resolve; That the unworthiness of the Ministers, does not hinder,
or take away the efficacy of Gods word, Sacraments, Ordinances, which are
effectual because of Christ's institution and promise, although they be
ministered by wicked men, which will be ever mingled with the good in the
visible Church. 5ly, I desire such Ministers who have preached, printed, cried
up this false rule of admission to, and administration of this Sacrament, sadly
to consider, the retaliating justice of God upon them, arising from this their
error, and neglect of administering it. That whiles they have peremptorily
debarred their Parishioners and people from the Lords Supper, and laid it quite
aside, as denying or doubting their real Sain^ship; many of their people have
upon their own principles, turned Anabaptists, Independents, Quakers, Seekers,
yea, publicly in their Churches, Pulpits, Cans Voice from the Temple.
Audlands, Spe^ds, and other Q^akers late Pamphlets.
Writings proclaimed them, to be no real Saints or Ministers of Christ at all,
but Baals Priests, Seducers, of the people, false Prophets, Hirelings,
Hypocrites, Deceivers, Impostors, Antichrists, fit only to be cast forth unto
the Dunghill, trodden under foot of men; deserted both their Church assemblies,
Ministry, and withheld their Tithes. I beseech them sadly to ponder, how God
has thus repaid them in their own false coin, and to acknowledge his justice
on them in it.

5ly, Let them consider this notable passage of Abba^i, Theon^. de ^ elle
vonum, Collatio. c 21. B^^^. Patrum, Tom. 5 ^ars 2. p. 229.
Abbot Theon (about 530 years after Christ) That men's sins ought not to deter
them from, but excite them to the frequent participation of the Lords Supper;
and that those who deem themselves worthy receivers, (as these supercilious
secluders of their Parishioners from the Sacrament do) are most unworthy. Nec
tamen ex eo debemus nos a Dominica Communione suspendere, quia nos agnoscimus
peccatores, sed ad eam magis ac magis est, et propter animae medicinam, et
purificationem Spiritus avide festinandum: veruntamen ea humilitate mentis ac
fide, ut indignos nos perceptione tantae gratiae judicantes, remedia potius
nostris vulneribus expetamus. Ali^quin, nec anniversaria quidem digne est
praesumenda Communio, ut quidam facunt, qui in Monasteriis consistentes, ita
Sacramentorum coelestium dignitatem, and sanctificationem, ac meritum
metiuntur, ut aestiment ea non nisi sanctos and immaculatos debere praesumere,
et non Potius ut sanctos mundosque nos sua participatione perficiant Qui
profecto majorem arrogantiae praesumptionem, quam declinare sibi videntur,
incurrunt, quia vel tunc cum ea percipiunt dignos se ejus perceptione
dijudicant. Multo enim justius est, ut cum hac cordis humilitate qua credimus
et fatemur, illa sacrosancta mysteria nunquam pro merito nos posse contingere,
singulis ea Dominicis diebus ob remedium nostrorum aegcitudinem praesumamus,
quam ut vana persuasione cordis elati, vel post annum dignos eorum participio
nos esse credamus. Wherefore as the blessed ancient Martyr Epist. 14. Bi^l.
Patrum Tom. 1. p. 93. b.
Ignatius in his Epistle to the Ephesians, thus exhorts them to the frequent
reception of the Eucharist. Date itaque operam ut crebrius congregemini ad
Eucharistiam et gloriam Dei. Quando enim saepius in idem loci convenitis
labefactantur vires Satanae, et ignita illius ad peccat^m jacula irrita
resiliunt: which Bibl Patrum. ^om. 6. ^ars 2. p. 275 E.
Joannes C^^machus likewise seconds, pressing the frequent reception of the
Eucharist upon these and other Grounds (which the primitive Christians daily
and frequently received in common, as the marginal Anastatius Si^nita, qu^^st.
7 Bibl Patrum. Tom. 6. pars 1. p 725. Tertu^lian Apologeti^us. Beati Rhenani
Annotat. in Tertull. De Corona M^l^^^s, p. 734. C^nt. M^g^l^ 2. to 8. cap. 6.
De Ri^^bus circa ^^n^m.
Authors, besides those forecited, and Eusebius De Demonstratione vangelica,
lib. 1. c. 10. p. 300. inform us) So let our rigid Innovators, now imitate this
their practice for the future, lest they increase the power, kingdom of Satan,
their own and their Parishioners sins and damnation; by debarring them from
this spiritual balm, and sovereign means of their Salvation, instead of making
them more worthy and prepared to receive it, or less sinful, by their
Suspension from it.

6ly. Let them ponder, that the Primitive Fathers and Christians, though they
were over-rigid to such as fell away to Idolatry, through fear, in times of
persecution; yet upon their repentance they admitted them to receive the Lords
Supper at home in private, when they lay sick upon their deathbeds, though
they stood actually excommunicated from the Church and all public Ordinances;
to the end they should not be swallowed up utterly in despair, but die
comfortably as the Members of Christ; as Reply to Harding, p. 30. 35. Eusebius
Ecclis. Hist. l. 6. c. 36. Nicep. l. 6. c. 6. Cent. Mag. 3. col. 133.
Bishop Jewel proves at large by the story of Serapion, and Council.
Carthaginense 6. Can. 13. With what hearts, faces, consciences then, can these
Cathari, and Novations deny this Sacrament now to their Parishioners, who
earnestly desire and long after it, both in their healths, sicknesses, and at
their very deaths, though never actually excommunicated, nor guilty of such
Gross Apostasy to Idolatry: when as they freely admit them to their
Church Assemblies, and all other public Ordinances? contrary to the practice
of the Primitive Churches, Fathers: who cast all such as were excommunicated
for any scandalous sins crime, or heresy, ont of their Churches, debarred them
from their Congregations, and all Christian Communion with them in prayer, or
any other public Ordinances, as well as in the Lords Supper; which is most
apparent by the Excommunications and presidents of Eus^bius Eccles. Hist. l. 6.
c. 63. Nicephorus Eccl. Hist. l. 6. c. 6. Bishop Jewels Reply to Harding, p. 35.
Serapion, Nicephorus l. 6. c. 37. Cent Mag. 3. c. 7. col. 151.
Numerianus, Niceph. l. 5. c. 25. Cent. 3. col. 144. 151.
Philip, and Theodores Hist. l. 5. c. 18.
Theodosius the Emperors; Sozomen, l. 6. c. 25.
Apoiinarius, and Theodoret, Hist. l. 1. c. 2. 4. Centur. Magd. 4. col. 414.
Arius the Heretics, with others recorded in Ecclesiastical Histories; By this
pregnant Testimony of Tertullian in his Apology: Summumque futuri judicii
praejudicium est, si quis ita deliquerit, ut a Communione orationis et
Conventus, et omnis sancti commercii relegetur: By these phrases of Epist. 28.
38. 40. 54. 62. Edit. Pamelii, and De Oratione, lib.
St. Cyprian, whereby he expresses the nature and use of Excommunication in
his age. Arcere, cohibere, ejicere, excludere, pellere, rejicere ab Ecclesia,
Seperare a Christi corpore, etc. By these expressions of Homil. 7. and 22. in
Josuam. Hom. 13. in Ezech. Hom. 3. et 12. in Hieremiam. Tract. 15. in Matthew.
Origin, Ab Ecclesiae corpore desecari, per Ecclesiae Praesides. Auferatur e
populo Dei, eradicetur, et tradatur Satana. Is qui praesidet populo, and regit
Ecclesiasticam disciplinam ejicit eum de Congregatione fidelium. In Ecclesiis
Christi consuetudo tenuit talis, ut qui manifesti sunt in magnis delictis,
ejiciantur ab oratione Communi, etc. By this phrase of Epistola (...) Patrum*
Tom. 3. p. 47.
Gregorius Thaumaturgus, Bishop of Neo-Caesaria, against covetors plunderers of
Captives and other men's goods for filthy gain; whom he resolves to be, a Dei
Ecclesia abdicati; which Theodorus Balsamon (Patriarch of Antioch) thus
expounds. Ecclesia abdicatus, id est, ejectus et al^onus; dicuntur enim
abdicati, filii, quando propter aliqua crimina ab haereditate paterna
alienantur. In tempore autem talis calamitatis, existimare aliorum calamitatem
esse sui lucri occasionem, est impiorum hominum, et Dei invisorum, et qui omnem
improbitatem superant. Unde visum est, eos abdicare, pro eo quod est, aperte
Ecclesia expellere, et a sidelium multitudine separare, ne propter ipsos Dei
ira ad omnes veniat, etc. Which I wish the plundering Covetous Saints of our
age, would consider, being all ipso jure, excommunicated persons; Qui ea
rapiunt, quae ad eos, qui in bello capti sunt, pertinent. To these I might add
the like phrases and passages of St. Basil, St. Hierom, St. Ambrose, St.
Augustine, Isychius, Prosper, Primasius, Eucherius, and others, collected by
the Cen^. Mag^eb. 3, 4, and 5. c 4. De Clavibus.
Century Writers: where you may peruse them at leisure. With that of A^
Monac^os Scrmo. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 3. p. 500. b.
Faustus, Rhegiensis Episcopus: Illis ipsis qui graviter apud nos delinquunt,
nullam tristiorem, nullam acerbiorem possumus invenire sententiam, quam ut A
corpore Congregationis abscissi, sine pace discendant: And infinite other
Testimonies in all succeeding ages, proving excommunicated persons for
scandalous effences, to be See My New Discovery, p. 41, 42.
totally secluded and cut off from the Church of God and all public Ordinances
therein Whatsoever; and not suspended only from the Communion. Which utterly
subverts that Newfound Excommunication only from the Lords Table, introduced,
exercised, and so much contested for by our Novellizing Ministers of late
years, against the practice of the Church and people of God in all former ages;
to the dishonor of Christ and his Sacrament, and the great prejudice,
grievance, offense, scandal of their people; which I trust they will now
reform, upon this Discovery and Conviction of their Error.

Finally, let all such remember, That Jesus Christ himself (the only 1 Car. 11.
22. to 30.
Author, instituter of this Sacrament, for a perpetual remembrance of his death
and passion, [x] Mat. 11. 28 29. c. 22. 2. to 1. Rev. 22. 17. Isay 55. 1 2.
compared w^^h Mat. 14. 23, 24. Mat. 26. 26, 27 Heb. 9. 19, 20, 1 Cor. 10. 1, 2,
3, 4. 16, 17. c. 11. 20. to the (...)
till his second coming in the clouds) invites and calls all Christians good
and bad, for whom he died and shed his blood, though the greatest, vilest,
worst of sinners, and unworthiest of all others, to come unto this Sacrament,
as a most effectal means to heal, cure, convert, comfort, ease, refresh,
sanctify, confirm, save them, as the forecited Passages out of Luthers
Catechism, the Practice of Piety, all Liturgies, and most Writers of this
Sacrament, accord; inviting none thereto, but such as confess themselves most
grievons Sinners, standing in need of his free pardon, cure, grace, mercy,
which they there expect to receive and get sealed to their souls; Whereupon
they are all bound under pain of contempt of the greatest mercy, highest sin,
and severest judgemeet, to resort unto it when they are thereunto invited, as
well as to other Ordinances, their sinfulness, unpreparednesse, being no
discharge or exemption from this their bounden duty: which is a greater Crime
to forbear, than receive unworthily; as being a total and higher wilful
contempt, undervaluing of this Ordinance. That Christ himself at its original
institution See My Vind^cation of 4. Serious Questions, p. 17. to ^9.
admitted Judas himself unto it, though John 6. 70, 71. c. 12. 6. Mat. 26. 14
21. 2^. 47, etc. Acts 16, 17, 18.
a Devil, Thief, Covetous wretch, a Traitor to, and seller of him to his
malicious crucifiers: together with Peter, whom Mat. 26. 33, 34, 35, 69. to the
end, Mar. 14. 66, etc. Lu. 22. 25, etc. John 18, 15, etc.
he then foretold should within few hours after thrice together most shamefully
deny him, as he did, and the other Apostles, who Mat. 28. 56.
all soon after for sook him, fled; and were all of them then Mar. 16. 11, 12,
13, 14. Lu. 24. 21. to 49. Johan 20. 2. to 30.
ignorant and uncredulous of the Doctrine of his resurrection and ascension (as
I have A Vindication of 4. Serious Questions, and Suspension susp^nd^d.
elsewere proved at large.) And that purposely to manifest, that this Sacrament
(which is but a visible word) belongs equally to all visible Members of every
visible Church, whether good or bad, regenerate or unregenerate, (though it be
a favor of life unto life to the one, and of death unto death to the other) as
well as the word preached; and a converting as well as confirming Ordinance,
from which no Churchmembers professing Jesus Christ, may or ought to be
secluded. Wherefore, if the Disciple be not above his Master, nor the Servant
above, or greater than his Lord, (as the John 13. 16 c. 15. 20. Mat. 10. 24.
Lord of this Sacrament assures us) then no Minister of Christ may, can, or
ought (under pain of highest Antichristian Insolency, Pride, Tyranny, and
affront to Christ himself, his Kingdom, Power, and Sovereign Authority) to
seclude or keep back any from his sacred Table whom himself has called,
invited, admitted thereunto, upon any pretexts whatsoever. Let every one
therefore henceforth Phil. 2. 10, 11. Rom 14. 11.
bow and submit to Christ herein, and no longer stubbornly stout it out against
him, Psalm. 50 22.
lest he tear them in pieces suddenly, and there be none to deliver; and
seclude them for ever from his Mat. 26. 29 R^v. 19. 9. Lu. 22. 16 30.
Table, Kingdom in Heaven, for suspending his invited guests from his Supper,
here on earth, without his Commission, or command. I shall close up all with Ad
Cacil. l. 2. Epist, 3.
St. Cyprians words (recorded likewise by Reply to Harding, ^ag. 107.
Bishop Jewel) which I wish all our Ministers to lay to heart: Religioni
nostrae congruit, et timori, et ipsi loco et officio Sacerdotii nostri,
custodire Traditionis Dominicae veritatem, et quod prius apud quosdam videtur
erratum, Domino monente, corrigere; ut cum in claritate sua et Majestate
Caelesti venire caeperit, inveniat nos tenere, quod monuit; observare quod
docuit; facere quod fecit. And his words to Cornelius the Pope, (registered in
the Section 14. p. 332.
Harmony of Confessions out of the Confession of Auspurg) How do we teach or
provoke the people to shed their Blood in the Confession of Christ's name, IF WE
DENY THE BLOOD OF CHRIST TO THEM WHO ARE IN THIS WARFARE? Or how shall we make
them fit for the Cup of Martyrdom, IF WE DO NOT FIRST ADMIT THEM BY THE RIGHT
OF COMMUNICATION TO DRINK IN THE CHURCH THE CUP OF THE LORD?

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Epistle page 4. l. 34. yea r. in, p. 5. l. 6. r. First, Whereas, p. 13. l. 5.
these, (...). p. 22. l. 7. experience, expedience. Margin p. 9. l. 10. bending,
blazing.

Page 2. l. 23. or, r. and, p. 4. l. 10. superatus, p. 9. l. 25. year, p. 13.
l. 17. says. p. 23. l. 2 ae. forecited Authors. p, 24. l. 13. backs, p. 25. l.
18. ground. p. 28, l. 3. dele it, p. 38. l. 19. formerly, r. frequently, p. 41.
l. 13. on, by. l. 37. not, now. p. 49. l. 3. Sacraments. p. 48 l, 35. into p.
53. l. 21, as, a. p. 54. l. ult, and p. 55. l. 1. dele 7ly, l. 14. Signs, p. 6.
l. 15. ^or, or. p. 61. but, then. p. 64* l. 2. but will recompance even.

Margin, p. 38. l. 3. Praebendae. p. 54. l. 3. Gal. 4. 16.


