KING Richard the Third REVIVED. Containing A Memorable Petition and
Declaration contrived by himself and his Instruments, whiles Protector, in the
name of the three Estates of England, to importune and persuade him to accept
of the Kingship, and Crown of England, by their joint Election, (as if he were
unwilling to undertake, or accept, though he most ambitiously aspired after
them, by the bloody murders of K. Henry 6. Edward 5. and sundry others) before
his Coronation; presented afterward to, and confirmed by the three Estates and
himself, in his first Parliament, to give him a colorable Title both by
Inheritance, and their Election to the Crown. Transcribed out of the Parliament
Roll of 1. R. 3. (printed in Speeds History of Great Britain: where his other
Additionall Policies to engage the City of London, Lawyers, Divines and People,
to elect, and make him their King, are at large recorded.)

Eccles. 3. 15. That which has been, is now, and that which is to be, has
already been: and God requires that which is driven away. 1 Samuel 12. 17, 19.
The Lord shall send thunder and rain, that ye may perceive and see, that your
wickedness is great which ye have done in the sight of the Lord, in asking you
a King. And all the people said unto Samuel, Pray for thy servants unto the
Lord thy God, that we die not; for we have added unto all our sins, this evil,
to ask us a King. LONDON, Printed for William Leak, at the Crown in
Fleetstreet, betwixt the two Temple-Gates. 1657.

In Rotulo Parliamenti tenti apud Westminster. die Veneris vicessimo tertio die
Januarii, Anno regni Regis Richardi Tertii primo, inter alia continentur ut
sequitur.
Memorand. quod quaedam Billa exhibita fuit coram Domino Rege in Parliamento
praedicto in haec verba.
WHereas late heretofore, that is to say, before the Consecration, Coronation,
and Inthronization of our Sovereign Lord King Richard the Third, a roll of
Parchment containing in writing certain Articles of the tenor underwriten, on
the behalf, and in the name of the three Estates of this Realm of England, that
is to say, of the Lords Spiritual, and Temporal, and of the Commons by name,
and diverse Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and other Nobles and notable persons
of the Commons in great multitude, was presented and actually delivered unto
our said Sovereign Lord, the intent and effect expressed at large in the same
roll, to the which roll, and to the Considerations, and instant petition
comprised in the same, our said Sovereign Lord for the public weal, and
tranquillity of this Land being duly assented.

Now for as much as neither the said three Estates, neither the said persons,
Things done and concluded without the 3. estates in Parliament, gave little or
no satisfaction to the People, though in the name of the Parliament and 3.
Estates.
which in their name presented, and delivered as it is aforesaid the said Roll
unto our said Sovereign Lord the King, were assembled in form of Parliament, by
reason whereof diverse doubts, questions, and ambiguities been moved and
engendered in the minds of diverse persons, as it is said.

Therefore, to the perpetual memory of the truth, and declaration of the same,
be it ordained, provided, and established in this present Parliament, that the
Tenor of the said Roll, with all the Contents of the same, presented as is
abovesaid, and delivered to our abovesaid Sovereign Lord the King, in the name,
and in the behalf of the said three Estates out of Parliament; Now by the said
The 3. Estates must concur to make a Parl. else his Title would neither be
valid, nor satisfactory, but ambiguous, as before: No one or two of them being
a full Parl. but all 3. conjoined.
three Estates assembled in this present Parliament, and by authority of the
same, be ratified, enrolled, recorded, approved, and authorized to the removing
of the occasions of doubts, and ambiguities, and to all other lawful effects
that shall now thereof ensue, so that all things said, affirmed, specified,
desired, and remembered in the said Roll, and in the tenor of the same,
underwritten in the name of the said three Estates to the effect expressed in
the said Roll, be of the like effect, virtue, and force, as if all the same
things had been so said, affirmed, specified, and remembered in full Parliament,
and by authority of the same accepted, and approved, the Tenor of the said Roll
of Parchment whereof above is made mention, follows, and is such.

To the high and mighty Prince, The new device of this Bloody Usurper, to
entitle himself to the Crown of England, and take upon him the Regal Government.
Richard Duke of Gloucester.
Pleases it your Noble Grace to understand the considerations, election, and
Petition underwritten of us the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons of
this Realm of England, and thereunto agreeable, to give your assent to the
Common, and public weal of this land, and to the comfort, and gladness of
all the people of the same.

First we consider, how that heretofore in time passed this land for many years
stood in great prosperity, honor, and tranquillity, which was caused for so
much as the Kings reigning, Good Counselors.
used and followed the advice, and counsel of certain Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and other persons of approved sagenesse, Administration of Justice.
prudence, policy, and experience, dreading God, and having tender zeal, and
affection to indifferent administration of Justice, and to the Common, and
public weal of the land: Then our Lord God was dread, loved, and honored;
Then within the land was peace and tranquillity, and among the neighbors
Concord and Charity; Then the malice of outward enemies was mightily resisted,
and repressed, and the land honorably defended with many great and glorious
victories; Then the intercourse of Merchants was largely used and exercised;
Merchandise, and Trade.
by which things above remembered, the land was greatly enriched, Merchants.
so that as well the Merchants as the Artificers, and other poor people;
Artificers.
laboring for their living in diverse Occupations, Gains.
had competent gain, to the satisfaction of them, and their households, living
without miserable and intolerable poverty. But afterward, when as such had
the rule and governance of this land, Adulation, Avarice. III Counsel.
delighting in adulation, and flattery, and led by sensuality and
concupiscence, followed the counsel of persons insolent, vicious, and of
inordinate avarice, despising the Counsel of persons good, virtuous, and
prudent, such as above be remembered; the prosperity of this land decreased
daily, so that our felicity was turned into misery, and our prosperity into
adversity, and the order of policy, Laws Confounded.
and the Laws of God and man confounded, whereby it is likely this Realm to
fall into great misery, and desolation, (which God defend) without due
provision of convenable remedy be had in this behalf in all godly haste.

Over this, among other things more special, we consider how that the time of
the reign of Edw: Edward the 4 his Marriage blemished.
4th. late deceased, after the ungracious pretended marriage (as all England
has cause to say) made betwixt the said King Edward and Elizabeth, sometimes
Wife to Sir John Gray Knight, late naming her self, and many years heretofore
Queen of England, Laws perverted.
the order of politic rule was perverted, the Laws of God, and of Gods
Church, etc. also the Laws of Nature, and of England, and also the laudable
customs and liberties of the same, wherein every Englishman is inheritor,
Liberties, and Laws every English man's Inheritance. Arbitrary Go-Force.
is broken, subverted, and contemned, against all Reason and Justice: so that
the Land was ruled by self-will, and pleasure, fear and dread, all manner of
Equity and Law laid apart and despised, whereof ensued many inconveniences and
mischiefs, Its mischievous Fruits. Murders. Extortions. Oppressions.
as Murders, Extortions, and Oppressions, namely of poor, and impotent people,
so that no man was sure of his life, land, or livelihood, ne of his wife,
daughter, or servant, every good maiden, and woman, standing in fear to be
ravished, Incettainty of Men's lives and Estates.
and deflowred. And besides this, what discorts, inward battles, effusion of
Christian men's bloods, Discords. Wars.
and namely, by the destrnction of the Nobles blood of this land was had, and
committed within the same, Nobles blood destroyed.
it is evident, and notorious through all this Realm, unto the great sorrow,
and heaviness of all true English men. And here also we consider, how that the
said pretended Marriage betwixt the abovenamed King Edward, Kings Marriage
without the Lords assent, and by sorcery and witchcraf^.
and Elizabeth Gray, was made of great presumption, without the knowing and
assent of the Lords of this land, and also by Sorcery and Witchcraft committed
by the said Elizabeth, and her Mother Iaquet Duchess of Bedford, as the
common opinion of the people, and the public voice, and fame is throughout
all this land, Void Marriage.
and hereafter if the cause shall require, shall be proved sufficiently in time
and place convenient. Private Mari^^e in a Chamber.
And here also we consider, how that the said pretended Marriage was made
privily, and secretly, without edition of banes, in a private Chamber, a
profane place, and not openly in the face of the Church, after the Law of Gods
Church, but contrary thereunto, and the laudable custom of the Church of
England; and how also at the time of contract of the same pretended Marriage,
and before and long time after the said King Edward was and stood married,
Precontract.
and troth-plight to one Dame Elinor Butler, daughter to the Earl of
Shrewsbury, with whom the said King Edward had made a Precontract of Matrimony,
long time before he made the said pretended Marriage with the said Elizabeth
Gray, in manner, and form aforesaid. Which premises being true, as in very
truth they be true, it appears, and follows evidently, that the said King
Edward during his life, and the said Elizabeth, lived together sinfully, and
damnably in adultery, against the Law of God and of his Church; and therefore
no marvel that the Sovereign Lord, Edward the 4. his ungodly disposition.
and head of the land being of such ungodly disposition, and provoking the ire,
and indignation of our Lord God, such heinous mischief, and Inconveniences as
are above remembered were used, and committed in the Realm amongst the Subjects.
Also it appears evidently, and follows, that all the issue, His Children
illegitimate, and Bastards.
and children of the said King Edward be Bastards, and unable to inherit, or
claim any thing by inheritance by the Law, and custom of England.

Moreover, we consider how that afterward by the three Estates of this Realm
assembled in Parliament, The Duke of Clarence attainted by Parliament.
holden at Westminster, Anno 17. of the reign of the said King Edward the 4th,
he then being in possession of the Crown, and royal Estate, by Act made in the
same Parliament, George Duke of Clarence, brother to the King Edward now
deceased, His issue thereby not inheritable and uncapableto claim the Crown.
was convicted, and attainted of High Treason, as in the said Act is contained
more at large; because, and by reason whereof, all the issue of the said George
was, and is disabled, and barred of all right and claim that in any case they
might have, or challenge by inheritance, to the Crown and Dignity royal of this
Realm, by the ancient Laws and Customs of this same Realm.

Over this, Richard the 3. declared undoubted and only heir to the Crown.
we consider, that you be the undoubted heir of Richard Duke of York, very
inheritor of the said Crown, and dignity royal, and as in right King of England
by way of Inheritance; And that at this time the premises duly considered,
there is none other person living but you only, that may claim the said Crown
and Dignity royal, An Englishman by birth.
by way of Inheritance, and how that you be born within this Land, by reason
whereof, as we deem in our minds, His pretended virtues and fitness to reign as
King, without one word of his Murders, Treasons, Regicides, Hypocrisy and other
Vices.
you be more naturally inclined to the prosperity and common weal of the same,
And all the three Estates of the Land have, and may have more certain knowledge
of your birth, and filiation aforesaid. We consider also the great wit,
prudence, Justice, Princely courage, and the memorable and laudable acts in
diverse battles, which as we by experience know you heretofore have done, for
the defense, and salvation of this Realm, and also the great nobleness and
excellency of your birth, His valor in battle.
and blood, as of him that is descended of the three most royal houses of
Christendom, that is to say, His honorable and royal birth.
England, France, and Spain, Wherefore these premises duly by us considered, we
desiring effectually the peace, tranquillity, and weal public of this Land,
and the reduction of the same to the ancient honorable estate, and prosperity;
And having in your great prudent Justice, Princely courage, and excellent
virtue, singular confidence; His election by the 3. states and this Instrument
to be K. of England.
have chosen in all that in us is, and by that our Writing choose you high and
mighty Prince our King, and Sovereign Lord, etc. to whom we know of They make
his hereditary Title, the ground of their Choice.
certain it appertains of Inheritance so to be chosen. And hereupon we humbly
desire, pray, and require your most Noble grace, Their Petition and importunity
to him, to accept of the Crown, though himself most eagerly thirsted after i^.
that according this election of us the three estates of your Land, as by
inheritance; you will accept, His hereditary right thereto, seconded by their
election.
and take upon you the said Crown and royal dignity, with all things thereunto
annexed, and appertaining, as to you of right belonging, as well by inheritance
as by lawful election; and in case you so do, we promise to assist and serve
your Highness, Their promise to assist, serve, and obey him, upon his
acceptance thereof, as his Subjects, and to live and dye with him.
as true, and faithful Subjects and Liegemen, and to live and dye with you in
this matter, and in every other just quarrel; for certainly we be determined
rather to adventure, and commit us to the peril of our lives, and jeopardy of
death, than to live in such thraldom and bondage as we have done long time
heretofore, Their pretended great Thraldom, Bondage, Oppressions, etc. under
his Predecessors. Extortions.
oppressed and injured by Extortions, and new Impositions, against the Law of
God, and Man, and the liberties, and old policy, and Laws of this Land, wherein
every Englishman is Inherited. Our Lord God, King of all Kings, by whose
infinite goodness, New Impositions against Laws and Liberties.
and eternal providence, all things bin principally governed in this world,
lighten your Soul, and grant you grace to do as well in this matter as in all
other, Nota.
that which may be according to his will and pleasure, Their prayer for him.
and to the common and public weal of this Land: Great Trouble (occasioned
partly by himself.) Justice.
So that after great clouds, troubles, storms, and tempests, the Sun of Justice
and of Grace may shine upon us, to the joy and comfort of all true-hearted
Englishmen.

Albeit that the right, Richard the 3. His hereditary Title to the Crown by the
Law of God and Nature.
title, and estate which our Sovereign Lord King Richard the Third has to, and
in the Crown and Royal dignity of this Realm of England, with all things
thereunto within the same Realm, and without it annexed and appertaining, bin
just and lawful, as grounded upon the Laws of God and Nature, and also upon
the ancient Laws and laudable Customs of this said Realm; And also taken, and
reputed by all such persons, as bin The Lawyers flatter, and approve his Title.
learned in the abovesaid Laws and Custom;

Yet nevertheless, The Common people ignorant in the Laws.
for as much as it is considered, that the most part of the people is not
sufficiently learned in the abovesaid Laws and Customs, whereby the truth and
right in this behalf of likelihood may be hid, and not clearly known to all the
people, and thereupon put in doubt, and question. And over this, how that the
The Parl authority with the people, when true, free, and real, consisting of
the 3. Estates.
Court of Parliament is of such authority, and the people of this Land of such
a nature and disposition as experience teaches, that manifestation and
declaration of any truth or right, made by the three Estates of this Realm
assembled in Parliament, and by authority of the same, makes before all other
things, most faith, and certain Its Declaration quieteth all men's minds,
removes all doubts and seditions. yet he that considers 39 H. 6. n. 8. to 33 1
E. 4. n. 8. to 40. will scarce believe this for a truth, neither proved it so
in his own case.
quieting of men's minds, and removes the occasion of doubts, and seditious
language.

Therefore, at the request, and by the assent of the The 3. Estates must all
concur to make a Parliament, and valid Election. They decree and declare him
undoubted King of this Realm, by inheritance and their lawful election coupled
together.
Three Estates of this Realm, that is to say, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal,
and Commons of this Land assembled in this present Parliament, and by authority
of the same, be it pronounced, decreed, and declared, that our said Sovereign
Lord the King was, and is the very undoubted King of this Realm of England,
with all things thereunto within the same Realm, and without it, united,
annexed, and appertaining, as well by right of consanguinity and inheritance,
as by lawful election, consecration and Coronation.

And over this, that at the request, and by the assent and authority abovesaid,
be it ordained, enacted, and established, * The Crown settled and entailed on
him, and the heirs of his body.
that the said Crown, and royal dignity of this Realm, and the Inheritance of
the same, and all other things thereunto within this Realm, or without it,
united and annexed, and now appertaining, rest and bide in the person of our
said Sovereign Lord the King, during his life, and after his decease in his
heirs of his body begotten, and in especial at the request, and by assent, and
the authority aforesaid, be it ordained, enacted, established, pronounced,
decreed and declared, that the high and excellent Prince His Son declared heir
apparent.
Edward, Son of our said Sovereign Lord the King, be heir apparent of the
same our Sovereign Lord the King, to succeed to him in the abovesaid Crown and
royal dignity, with all things (as is aforesaid) thereunto united, annexed, and
appertaining, to have them after the decease of our said Sovereign Lord the
King, to him, and to the heits of his body lawfully begotten.

Quae quidem B^lla Communibus Regni Angliae in dicto Parliamento existentibus
transportata fuit, cui quidem Billae idem Communes assensum suum praebuerunt
sub hiis verbis: A ceste Bille les Communs sont assentes; quibus quidem Billa
and assensu coram Domino Rege in Parliamento pradicto, lectis, auditis, and
plene intellectis, and de assensu Dominorum Spiritualium and Temporalium in
dicto Parliamento similiter existentium, et Communitatis praedictae; nec non
authoritate ejusdem Parliamenti pronunciatum, decretum, and declaratum existit,
omnia, et singula in Billa praedicta contenta fore vera et indubia, ac idem
Here he creats and ratifies his own Title.
Dominas Rex, de assensu dictorum trium Statuum Regni, et authoritate
praedicta, omnia and singula praemissa in billa praedicta contenta concedit, et
ea pro vero et indubio pronunciat, decernit, et declarat.

Eccles. 1. 9, 10, 11 The thing which has been, it is that which shall be: and
that which is done, is that which shall be done; and there is no new thing
under the Sun. Is there any thing whereof it may be said, this is new? it has
been already of old time, which was before us. There is no remembrance of
former things, neither shall there be any remembrance of things that are to
come, with those that shall come after.

Yet it is both solid Piety, Policy, Prudence, in such an age as this, for all
considerate, conscientious Englishmen, advisedly to remember, read, consider
the Tragical ends, Psalm. 73. 17, 18, 19. Ps. 92. 6, 7.
as well as the successful Beginnings, Proceedings of this King Richard, and
his activest Instruments, to gain and settle the Kingship on him by such
Politic Stratagems.

FINIS.

