The New Cheaters forgeries, detected, disclaimed;
By Will. Prynne Esquire; a Bencher of Lincolns Inn.
WHereas not only one Walker, Bates, and others heretofore, for their own
private lucre, have printed sundry illiterate Pamphlets in my name, to cheat the
People, but likewise one Chapman in Pope's Head alley (as I am credibly informed
by those who will prove it) on the 30. of this instant May has printed and
dispersed a paper, entitled, [ A Sheet, Or if you will, a Winding Sheet for
the good Old Cause: By W. P. Philopolites.] Prefixing the Letters of my name
before it, as penned by me, and on this 31. of May, has printed and published
another Sheet, styled [ Mola Asinaria: Or, The Unreasonable and Unsupportable
Burden now pressed upon the shoulders of this groaning Nation, etc.]

BY WILLIAM PRYNNE, Bencher of Lincolns Inn.

Printing my name thus at large not only in the Title, but in the Contexture it
self, insinuating it to be penned by me, on purpose to cheat the people of
their moneys; and make me the Father of these BASTARDS, (through the Stationers
Knavery) which the true Fathers need not be ashamed to own publicly by name,
being Ingenuous well-penned Pieces. To prevent all future Frauds of this nature
(especially in Pamphlets declaiming against Public Cheats,) I held it my duty
openly to detect and disclaim these two, in print before all the world; having
no hand at all in the conception, generation, or production of either of these
Pamphlets directly or indirectly, whose Compilers are altogether unknown to me.
And I shall desire all Stationers, Printers henceforth to take notice; that
their thrusting out Books in other men's names to pick peoples purses, is a
Counterfeiting of Letters in other men's names falsely and deceitfully to get
money from other persons, within the Stat. of 33H 8. c. 1. punishable by
Imprisonment, Pillory, and all other corporal pains, except death: Which Law I
intend to prosecute against them, if they shall henceforth abuse me, and the
people in this kind.

As for the scurrillous railing, nameless, empty abusive Printed Libels and
Papers formerly and lately published against me; I look upon them only with
contempt, as the braying of illiterate Asses, who can neither contradict nor
refute my writings for the public good and safety: and value them no more,
than the barking of mangie Dogs against the Moonshine: having treasured up
this Sovereign Antidote of my Saviors own composition, in my breast many years
since, against the venom of all false viperous tongues or pens, Luke 6. 22, 23.
Blessed are ye when men shall hate you, and separate you from their company,
and cast out your name as evil, for the Son of man's sake: Rejoice and leap
for joy, for great is your reward in heaven, for so did your Fathers unto the
Prophets. A wise Heathen could say, Regium est male audire cum been feceris;
much more a magnanimous Christian. The best refutation of Raylings, is
Contempt; Spreta exolescunt.

In testimony of the premises, I thought necessary to subscribe and publish
them under my own hand and name.

From my Chamber at Lincolns Inn 31 May 1659. WILLIAM PRYNNE.

LONDON,Printed for Edward Thomas at the Adam and Eve in Little Britain, 1659.


