THE LORDS and COMMONS first Love to, Zeal for, and earnest Vindication of
their injuriously accused and impeached Members, and violated Privileges.

Manifested by their own printed Declarations, Petitions, Votes, in the case
of the Lord Kimbolton, Mr. Denzill Holles, and some other Members, impeached by
the Kings ATORNIE, Mr. HERBERT, (by the Kings own special command) of High
TREASON, in January 1641.

With a Parallel of Cromwells Plot, in bringing the Army to London, with HENRY
JERMINS and PERCYES.

And a brief recital of two ancient Judgments in former Parliaments;
proving, that it is no less then Treason, for any to impeach Lords and Members
of Treason, for any thing acted by them, in, or by Authority of Parliament; and
that the Lords and Commons in this Parliament have, in effect, voted and
declared as much.

Humbly submitted to the consideration of both Houses, and of all such who by
their Covenant, and Protestation are obliged to defend the Privileges of
Parliament; and bring the Infringers of them and malicious false impeachers of
their Members to condign punishment.

Rev. 2. 4. 5. Nevertheless, I have somewhat against thee, because thou have
left thy firstlove Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent
and do the first works; or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove
thy Candlestick out of his place, except thou repent.

London, Printed Anno Dom. 1647.

An exact Collection of all Remonstrances, etc. p. 38. etc.
A DECLARATION Of the House of Commons, touching a late breach of their
Priveledges: And for the Vindication there of: And of diverse Members of the
said House.
WHEREAS the Chambers, Studies, and Trunks of Mr. Denzil Holles, Sir Arthur
Haslerigge, Mr. John Pym, Mr. John Hampden, and Mr. William Strode Esquiers,
Members of the House of Commons upon Monday the third of this instant January,
by color of his Majesty's Warrant have been sealed up by Sir William
Killegrew, and Sir William Flemen, and others; which is not only against the
Privilege of Parliament, but the common Liberty of every Subject: Which said
Members afterward the same day, were under the like color, by Sergeant
Francis, one of his Majesty's Serjants at Arms, contrary to all former
presidents, demanded of the Speaker fitting in the House of Commons, to be
delivered unto him, that he might Arrest them of high Treason. And whereas
afterward the next day, his Majesty in his Royal person came to the said
House, attended with a great multitude of men, armed in warlike manner, with
Halberts, Swords, and Pistolls, who came up to the very Door of the House, and
placed themselves there, and in other places, and passages near unto the said
House, to the great terror and disturbance of the Members then sitting, and
according to their duty in a peaceable and orderly Manor, treating of the
great affairs of England and Ireland. And his Majesty having placed himself
in the Speakers Chair, demanded of them the persons of the said Members to be
delivered to him, which is a high breach of the Rights and Privileges of
Parliament, and inconsistent with the Liberties and freedom thereof. And
whereas afterward his Majesty did issue forth several Warrants to diverse
Officers, under his own hand, for the apprehension of the said Members, Which
by Law he cannot do, there being not all this time, any legal charge or
accusation, or due process of Law issued against them, nor any pretense of
Charg made known to that house; all which are against the fundamental
Liberties of the Subject, and the Rights of Parliament; whereupon we are
necessitated, according to our duty, to declare; And we do hereby declare,
that if any person shall arrest Master Holles, Sir Arthur Haslerigg, Mr Pym,
Mr. Hampden, and Mr. Stroud, or any of them or any other Member of Parliament,
by pretense or color of any warrant issuing out from the King only, he is
guilty of the breach of the liberties of the Subject, and of the privilege of
Parliament, and a public enemy to the Common wealth; And that the Arresting
of the said Members, or any of them, or of any other Member of Parliament, by
any Warrant whatsoever without a Legal proceeding against them, and without
consent of that house, whereof such person is a Member, is against the Liberty
of the Subject; and a breach of the Privilege of Parl. And the person which
shall arrest any of these persons or any other Member of the Parliament, is
declared a What then are those Officers and soldiers in the Army, who have
arrested, and stayed sundry Members, (as Mr. Nicholls, Col. Birch. Sr. Samuel
Luke, etc.) impeached, imprisoned and driven away others, and menaced all o^
rest that remained in the House, in the Speakers absence in the Army.
public enemy of the Commonwealth. Notwithstanding all which, we think fit,
farther to declare, that we are so far from any endeavors to protect any of
our Members, that shall be in due manner prosecuted according to the Laws of
the Kingdom, and the rights and privileges of Parliament, for Treason or any
other mis-demeanors, that none shall be more ready and willing then we our
selves to bring them to a speedy and due trial, being sensible, that it
equally imports us as well to see justice done against them that are criminous,
as to defend the just Rights and Liberties of the Subjects and Parliament of
England.

And whereas, upon several examinations taken the 7th. day of this instant
January, before the Committee appointed by the house of Commons to sit in
London, it did fully appear, that many Soldiers, Papists and others, to the
number of about five hundred came with his Majesty on Tuesday last to the said
house of Commons, armed with Swords, Pistols and other Weapons, and diverse of
them pressed to the door of the said house, thrust away the doore-keepers, and
placed themselves between the said door and the ordinary Attendance of his
Majesty, holding up their swords, and some of them holding up their Pistols
ready cocked near the said door; and saying, I am a good markes-man, I can
hit right I warrant you, and they not suffering the said door, according to
the custom of Parliament to be shut, but said, they would have the door open,
and if any opposition were against them, they made no question, but they should
make their party good, and that they would maintain their party, and
whenseveral of the Members of the house of Commons were coming into the House,
their attendants desiring that Room might be made for them, some of the said
Soldiers answered, A pox of God confound them; and others said, A pox take the
house of Commons, let them come and be hanged: What a do is here with the
house of Commons; And some of the said Soldiers did likewise assault, and by
force disarme some of the attendants, and servants of the Members of the house
of Commons, waiting in the Room next the said house; and upon the Kings
return out of the said house, many of them by wicked Oaths and otherwise
expressed much discontent* that some Members of the House, for whom they came,
were not there, and others said, when comes the word? And no word being given
at his Majesty's coming out, they cried a Lane a Lane, afterward some of them
being demanded what they thought the said company intended to have done?
Answered, that questionless in the posture they were set, if the word had been
given they should have fallen upon the house of Commons, and have cut al their
throats. Upon all which we are of opinion, that it is sufficiently proved, that
the coming of the said Soldiers, Papists and others with his Majesty, to the
house of Commons on Tuesday last, being the fourth of this instant January, in
the manner aforesaid, was to take away some of the-Members of the said house,
and if they should have found opposition or denial, then to have fallen upon
the said Was not the Armies impeachment of the Members and march to London for
the same pvrpose and design alike traiterous.
house in a hostile manner, And we do hereby declare that the same was a
traiterous design against the King and Parliament.

And where as the said Mr. Holles, Sir Arthur Haslerigge, Mr. Pym, Mr. Hampden,
and Mr. Strode upon report of the coming of the said Soldiers, Papists and
others in the warlick and hostile manner aforesaid, did with the approbation of
the house, As the ^i and other impeached Members did since.
absent themselves from the service of the house, for avoiding the great and
many inconveniences, which otherwise apparently might have happened, Since
which time a printed paper in the form of a Proclamation. bearing date the
6th. day of this instant January, has issued out, for the apprehending and
imprisoning of them; therein suggesting, that Did not the Army and their Agents
print the same of the xi impeached Members who desented themselves to please
them
through the conscience of their own guilt, they were absent and fled, not
willing to submit themselves to Justice. We do further declare, So are their
Papers against the xi. Members too
that the said paper is false, scandalous, and illegal: and that
notwithstanding the said printed paper, or any Warrant issued out, or any other
matter yet appearing against them, or any of them, they So ought all the
impeached Members and others suspended and exempted against by the Armies
means.
may and ought to attend the service of the said house of Commons, and the
several Committees on foot. And that it is lawful for all persons whatsoever,
to lodge, harbor, or converse with them, or any of them, and whosoever shall
be questioned for the same, shall be under the protection and privilege of the
Parliament.

And we do further declare, that the publishing of several Articles purporting
a form of a Charge of high Treason against the Lord Kimbolton, one of the
Members of the Lords house, and against the said Mr. Holles, Sir Arthur
Haslerigge, Mr. Pym, Mr. Hampden, and Mr. Strode, by Sir William Killegrew, Sir
William Flemen and others, in the Innes of Court and else where, in the Kings
name, was a And was not the Armies printing and publishing their general and
particular false scandalous Charge against the xi Members, such?
high breach of the privilege of Parliament, a great scandal to his Majesty,
and his Government: A seditious act manifestly tending to the subversion of the
peace of the Kingdom, and an injury and dishonor to the said Members, there
being no legal charge or accusation against them.

That the Privileges of Parliament, and the Liberties of the Subject so
violated and broken, cannot be fully and sufficiently vindicated, unless his
And is it not now as just to ^nquire as much of the General the Council of
War and Army, touching those who contrived and published the Charge and
impeachment against the xi Members, and pressed their removeall from the House,
etc before any proof against them?
Majesty will be graciously pleased to discover the names of those persons, who
advised his Majesty to issue out Warrants, for the fealing of the Chambers, and
Studies of the said Members, to send a Sergeant at Arms to the house of
Commons to demand their said Members, to issue our several Warrants under his
Majesty's own hand to apprehend the said Members; His Majesty's coming
thither in his own Royal person, the publishing of the said Articles, and
printed paper in the form of a Proclamation against the said Members, in such
manner as is before declared, To the end, that such persons may receive
condign punishment.

And this house does further declare, that all such persons as have given any
Council, or endeavored to set or maintain division or dislike between the
King and Parliament, or have listed their names, or otherwise entered into any
Combination or agreement, to be ayding, or assisting, to any such Conncell, or
endeavor, or have persuaded any other so to do, or that shall do any of the
things above mentioned: And shall not forthwith discover the same to either
house of Parliament; Or the Speaker of either of the said Houses respectively
and disclaim it, are In what case then are those Officers and Agitators in the
Army who contrived and published their engagements, Charge, and Remonstrauces
against the accused Members and others of both Houses?
declared public Enemies of the State and peace of this Kingdom, and shall
be enquired of and proceeded against accordingly.

Die Lunae 17. Ianuarij 1641. It is this day ordered, by the Commons assembled
in Parliament, that this Declaration be forthwith published in print.

An exact Collection, etc. p. 76.
To the Kings most Excellent Majesty, The humble Petition of the Lords and
Commons now Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
SHOWS,
THat your Majesty in answer to their late Petition, touching the proceedings
against the Lord Kimbolton, Mr. Holles, Sir Arthur Hasterigge, Mr. Pym, Mr.
Hampden, and Mr. Strode, Members of the Parliament was pleased to signify:
That as your Majesty conceived that you had ground enough to accuse them. So
now your Majesty finds as good cause wholly to desert the prosecution of them.
Notwithstanding which they remain still under that heavy charge so imputed to
them, to the exceeding prejudice not only of And is not this as true of the now
impeached Members and Pe^s?
themselves but also of the whole Parliament.

And Whereas by the express Laws and Statutes of this your Realm; that is to
say, by two Acts of Parliament, the one made in the 37. year and the other in
the 38. year of the reign of your most noble progenitour King Edward the 3. If
any person whatsoever make suggestion to the King himself of any crime
committed by another, the same person ought to be sent with the suggestion
before the Chancelour or Keeper of the great seal, Treasurer, and the Great
Council, there to find surety to pursue his suggestion; which if he cannot
prove, he is to be imprisoned till he has satisfied the party accused of his
damages and slander, and made fine and ransom to the King.

The said Lords and Commons humbly beseech your Majesty, that not only in point
of Justice to the said And ought not your selves to do that right to your
impeached Members now, upon their malicious accusers, as you petitioned for the
Members then impeached upon the selfsame grounds.
Members in their particulers, but for the vindication of the Rights and
Privileges of Parliament; Your Majesty will be pleased to send the person or
persons, that in this case made the suggestions or informations to your Majesty
against the said Members of Parliament, together with the said suggestions or
informations, to your Parliament. That so such good fruits of the said good
Laws may be had as was intended by them, and the Rights and Privileges of
Parliament may be vindicated* which of Right and Justice ought not to be denied.

An exact Collection. p. 295 l 200. 201. etc.
The Declaration or Remonstrance of the Lords and Commons in Parliament
assembled. May 19. 1642.
THe Infinite mercy and providence of the Almighty God has bin abundantly
manifested since the beginning of this Parliament, in great variety of
protections and blessings, whereby he has not only dilivered us from many
wicked plots* and designs, which if they had taken effect would have brought
ruin, and destruction upon this Kingdom: but out of those attempts has
produced diverse evident and remarkable advantages to the furtherance of those
services, which we have bin desirous to perform to our Sovereign Lord the
King, and to this Church and State, in providing for the public peace and
prosperity of his Majesty, and all his Realms, which in the presence of the
same all-seeing deity, we protest to have been, and still to be the only end of
all our counsels and endeavors, wherein we have resolved to continue, freed,
and enlarged from Can al Members make this Protestation now, without perjury or
hypocrisy?
all private aims, personal respects or passions whatsoever

In which resolution we are nothing discouraged, although the heads of the
Malignant party disappointed of that prey, the Religion and Liberty of this
Kingdom which they were ready to self upon and devour before the beginning
of this Parliament, have still persisted by new practices both of force and
subtlety, to recover the same again. For which purpose; they have made
several The very Plot of Cromwell, Ireton, and their Confederates since, who
tread in these Malignants stepps and have actually executed, what they only
designed.
attempts for the bringing up of the Army: they afterward projected the false
accusation of the Lord Kimbolton, and the five Members of the house of Commons,
which being in it self of an odious nature, they yet so far prevailed with
his Majesty, as to procure him to take it on himself* but when the
unchangeable duty and faithfulness of the Parliament could not be wrought
upon by such a fact as that; to withdraw any part of their reverence and
obedience from his Majesty, they have with much art and industry advised his
Majesty, to suffer diverse unjust Have not the Army and Agitators in their
Remonstrances Declarations, and other printed Papers done the like, for a like
design, or worse?
scandals and imputations upon the Parliament to be published in his name,
whereby they might make it odious to the people, and by their help to destroy
that, which hitherto has been the only means of their preservation, etc.

The accusation of the Lord Kimbolton, and the five Members of the house of
Commons, is called And were not the late impeachments of the 11 Members and 7
Peers such, far above any satisfaction yet given them by their Accusers?
a breach of Privilege, and truly so it was, and a very high one; far above
any satisfaction that has been yet given. How can it be said to be largely
satisfied, so long as his Majesty labored, to preserve Mr. Attorney from
punishment; Who was the visible Actor in it? so long as his Majesty has not
only justified him, but by his Letter declared, that it was his duty to accuse
them, and, that he would have punished him, if he had not done it? So long as
those Members have not the The case of those now impeached
means of clearing their innocence? And the Authors of that malicious charge
undiscovered, though both houses of Parliament have several times petitioned
his Majesty to discover them. And that not only upon grounds of Common Justice,
but by act of Parliament, His Majesty is bound to do it? So long as the King
refuses to pass a bill for their discharge; Aleadging, that the narrative in
that Bill is against his honor, whereby he seems still to avow the matter of
that false accusation though he deserts the prosecution, offering to pass a
bill for their acquittall, yet with intimation, that they And must the now
impeached Lords and Commons do so to, as their false Acusers would have them?
must desert the avowing their own innocence, which would more wound them in
honor, then secure them in Law.

And in Vindication of this great privilege of Parliament, we do not know that
we have invaded any privilege belonging to his Majesty as is aleadged in this
Declaration.

But we look not upon this only in the Notion, of a breach of privilege,
which might be, though the accusation were true, or false, but under the notion
of a heinous crime in the Attorney, and all other Subjects, who had a hand in
it. A Is not this the Council ^^ Wars and the Armies crime, (...) impeaching
(...) present in^ent Lords, Commons, and Citizens of Treason, in the ^ of the
high ^ I^dicatory? (...) shall it go unpunished and ^y unrecompenced and
unsighted?
crime against the Law of nature, against the rules of Much les Sr Thomas Fair^
and his Council in the army.
Justice, that innocent men should be charged with so great an offense as
Treason, in the face of the highest Iudicatory of the Kingdom, whereby their
lives, and estates, their blood, and honor, are endangered without witness,
without evidence, without all possibility of reparation in a Legal course: yet
a crime of such a nature, that his Much less then an whole army.
Majesty's command can no more warrant, then it can any other Act of injustice.
It is true that those things which are evil in their own nature, such as is
false testimony, or false accusation cannot be the Subject of any command, or
induce any obligation of obedience upon any man, by any authority whatsoever:
therefore the Attorney in this case was bound to refuse to execute such a
command, unless he had some such evidence or testimony as might have
warranted him against the parties, and be liable to make satisfaction if it
should prove false: and it is sufficiently known to every man, and adjudged in
Parliament, that the Be sure then to give the impeached Members of both houses
now, very good satisfaction against their malicious accusers to ^re^nt the
danger ^mated.
King can be neither the Relator, informer nor witness. If it rest as it is
without further satisfaction, no future Parliament can be safe, But that the
Members may be taken and destroyed at pleasure, yea the very principles of
Government and Justice will be in danger to be dissolved.

The Occasion of this Declaration and Remonstrance of both Houses, was the
treasonable Plot of Henry Jermin, Peircy, Goaring, and others related in and
annexed to it: which they thus express, * That by their instruments and agents
they attempted to disaffect and discontent his Majesty's Army (in the North) to
engage for the maintenance of their wicked and traiterous designs, Exact
Colection p. 18. 210. 211. 219. 217. 218. 221. 222 228.
the keeping up Bishops in votes and functions; and by force To COMPEL THE
PARLIAMENT, to order, limit, and dispose their proceedings in such manner as
might best concur with the intentions of their dangerous and potent faction. To
which end they concluded, that the Army should keep together and not disband
till all their arreares were paid: That they should petition the Parliament for
money, there being so great arrears due unto them, and so much delays made for
the procuring of them. That they should likewise send up a Declaration to the
Parliament of these particulars, That nothing should be done in Parliament,
contrary to any former act of Parliament. That Bishops should be maintained in
their Votes and functions, And the Kings Revenue be established. That they
should bring up the Army to London, against the Parliament and City, for that
the Army heard of great tumults about London; (and therefore offered themselves
to serve the King and Parliament (in a Petition drawn to that purpose) with
the last drop of their bloods: and by this pretense of guarding the Parliament
and City upon this noise of Tumults in London, to compel the Houses to Order
things according to their desires, and to secure the Tower of London, and
Portsmouth, and impeach the leading Members that should oppose them; which last
was put in execution, against some Members, as is before related.

Whether Cromwell and his Confederates, have not punctually pursued their
traiterous designs, and far out-stripped them in all these particulars, by
engaging this Army of late upon the same grounds and pretenses to do the very
same and much more in reality, which that Army then was only designed to do
intentionaly; let the impartial reader judge, ^^ who are the greatest Traitor
and Conspirators of the two against the Parl. Kingdom, and King too (whom they
have forcibly plundered out of both houses possession, from whom they still
detain him, and recruit and keep the Army together, near the City, to give
laws to Parliament, City, King and Kingdom, to impeach, imprison, suspend and
expel the Members of both houses who dare oppose them, at their pleasure; and
enforce them to vote and unvote what their Grand Council of the Army and
Agitators shall prescribe them) let the Houses, City, and Kingdom determine.
Certainly their late intimacy and correspondency with Ashburuham, and Capt.
Leg, who had a great hand in this Conspiracy and Treason, of bringing up the
Northren Army to London upon these pretenses, against the Parliament, and City
who adheered to them; makes intelligent men shrewdly suspect, they had a finger
in bringing up the Army of late to London, upon the like pretenses of tumults
there* who have been more unreasonable and treasonable in their Remonstrances,
Petitions, Demands to, and Actions against the houses, and Members then the
Northren Army: ex Cauda Draconem.

What crime it is for any to accuse Members of Parliament of Treason for acting
or voting any thing in Parliament, or by the Parliaments authority or command,
will evidently appear by the resolutions of two ancient Parliaments.

In the 10. year of King Richard the 2. the Parliament by a ^ c. R. 2. c. 1. ^
R. 2. c. 1. 2. 3.
special Act and Commission, put the government of the Kingdom, and Kings
Revenues into the hands of certain Lords, by reason of the Kings
misgovernment: Whereupon the King soon after that Parliament ended, called his
Judges, and Counsel at Law to Nottingham Castle to demand their opinions
concerning this act and Commission and the procurers thereof in Parliament; and
concerning some proceedings in Parliament: to which they returned their Answer,
thus expressed in the Statute of 21. R. 2. c. 12.

Memorandum that the 25. day of the month of August the 11th. year of the
Reign of King Richard the second, at the Castle of Nottingham, before our said
Sovereign Lord the King, Rob. Tresilyan chieif Justice, Rob. Belknap, chief
Justice of the common Bench, Io. Halt, Rog. Fulthrop, and Will, Burgh, Kts.
fellows of the said Rob. Belk. and Io. Locton one of the Kings Serj. at Law,
being personally required in the presence of the Lords and other witnesses
under written, by our said Sovereign L. the King in the faith and Legeance by
which they be firmly bounden to the said King, that they should truly answer
to certain questions under written, and before them recited, and upon the
sameby their discretions to say the law.

First it was enquired of them? 10. Ri. 2. c. 1.
Westminster be hurtful to the Kings Royal prerogative?

Whereunto all of one mind answered, that they be hurtful,

Whereunto with one assent they answered,

Item,

Where unto of one mind they said,

Item,

Whereunto by one assent they gave answer,

Item,

Where unto of one assent it was answered,

Item,

To this question of one mind they answered; in all other Articles touching
the Parliament until the end of the Parliament; And if any do contrary to
this rule of the King, he ought to be punished as a Traitor.

Item whether the King when soever it pleases him,

Whereunto it was of one mind answered, that he may. And if any would proceed
in the Parliament against the King will,

Item it was enquired.

To which question it was by one mind answered, that they might not,

Item it was enquired how he is to be punished that moved in the Parliament,
Edward the Son of King Edward Great Grandfather to the King that now is, was
another time endited in the Parliament, by the inspection of which statute, the
said new statute or Ordinances, and Commission were conceived in the Parliament?

To which question,

Item it was enquired of them, Westminster against the Earl of Suffolk were
erroneous and revocable or not?

To which question of one assent they said,

In witness whereof the Justices and Sergeant aforesaid to this present have set
their seals, These men being Witnesses, the Reverend Fathers, The Lords,
Alexander Arch Bishop of York, Robert Archbishop of Dublin, John Bishop of
Darham, Thomas Bishop of Chester, John Bishop of Bangore; Robert Duke of
Ireland, Mighell Earl of Suffelk, John Ryppon Clerk, and John Blake. Dated the
day, place, month and year aforesaid.

For this opinion of theirs; That the Lords procuring of this Commission,
Statute, and Ordinance in Parliament was Treason, and, That the, Members in
Parliament might be guilty of Treason, for their free votes and proceedings in
Parliament; or acting any thing by the Parliaments authority and command in the
cases propounded to them, they were all the very next Parliament 11. R. 2,
accused of Treason, impeached as Traitors and Enemies to the King and Realms,
fore-judged of their lives, and judgment given against them of forfeiture of
all their Lands, teneements, goods and Chattels, as the statutes of 11. R. 2.
c. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 21, R. 2. c. 12. and our Historians in 11. R. a. record.
Trysilian was drawn to Tyburn, and there executed others were perpetually
banished: Belknap himself confessed, and said, Speedes Hist p. 747^
There wanted but a hurdle a horse. and a halter to carry him where he might
suffer the death he deserved: for if I had not done this I should have died for
it, and because I have done it, I Deserve Death for Betraving the Lords. This
judgment being reversed by the Kings power in the forced Parliament of 21. R.
2. c 12. it was in the next Parliament of 1. H. 4. c. 3. 4. affirmed and
confirmed, as given for the great Honor, and common profit of the Realm. So as
these two Parliaments have resolved, that to accuse Lords and Members of
Parliament, of treason for votes, Ordinances, and proceedings of Parliament, or
for acting in or by Authority of Parl, is no less then Treason, and that such
accusers and impeachers (especially if Judges and Lawyers) are Traitors and
Enemies both to King; and Kingdom, undermining the Freedom; Privileges, and
Foundation of all Parliaments, where no Members can set or speak freely and
securely without endangering their heads and, states, nor any act securly under
their Ordinances and Commandes if they may be thus impeached and become guilty
of high Treason, for what they shall voteand act in Parliament, or by its order
and Authority.

This President, was cited at large and much urged by Mr. Oliver St John his
Majesty's Solicitor General, in his speech at a conferrence of both Houses of
Parliament concerning Ship Money, lanu: 1640. printed by the Houses Order pa.
28. etc. where he proves out of the Parliament Rolls. That in this very case,
Judgment of High Treason was given against 18. several persons: 8. whereof
were executed, the rest banished, and their Lands and Goods forfeited; That it
was made Felony for any to procure their pardon, and they to be dealt withal
as Traitors, if they returned from their banishment.

That of these 18 persons, all save three were impeached by the Commons. That
the sum of their offense and Treason was; Their endeavoring to overthrow
NOTE*
Parliamentary proceedings; and conspiracy against the Persons of those Lords,
who procured this Commission and Act of Parliament for the good of the
Kingdom, with reference to their proceedings in Parliament, thereby to
overthrow the Commission and Act of Parliament, wherein those Lords had been
principal Actors. That the judgments given against them were not hudled up in
have, but given upon long and mature deliberation; being the whole work of
that Parliament from Nov. 14. till Febr. 15. following: the Houses spending
long time, and taking great pains in examining the evidence the better thereby
to satisfy their own conscience and the world: That the Parliament of 21. R.
2. which revoked and made void these judgments, was held by force, And is not
this so held since the armies march to London, Guards upon it, and quartering
about it?
viris armatis, et sagittarijs immensis, as is declared in the Parliament Roll
of 1. H. 4. No. 21. and 22. That this Parliament of Revocation was no free
Parliament. And in the Parliament of 1. H. 4. No. 48. these judgments of
Revocation are declared to be erronea, iniqua, et omni juri, et rationi
repugnantia: erronius, wicked, and contrary to all right and reason: And in the
Parliament of 1. H. 4. in print, these Attaindors are confirmed. So that these
Judgments of Attaindors have the authority of two Acts of Parliament, both of
them of force at this day: though these Judges delivered these erroneous
opinions against the Lords by violence for If no excuse in these Judges, much
less in Parliament Members; who now plead it.
fear of death and torture of their Bodies, which was no excuse. So he: How
far this President may trench upon any Lawyers now, in relation, to the
impeachment of any Lords and Members for what they acted in this present
Parliament and by authority and Ordinances of both Houses, let Mr. Solicitor,
and the Ho^es, whom it most concerns, determine.

Of what crime those are guilty, who out of particular spleen, malice, or to
carry on their own private designs have lately mutined and brought up the
Army to London, and by its countenance and power most injuriously impeached
some faith full Lords and Commons of High Treason, for sitting and voting in
Parliament, and acting only in obedience to their Ordinances and Commands, for
the Parliaments service and defense, against a rebellions Army, marching up
against the Houses and City in an Hostile manner against the Houses express
commands to the contrary? and whether they be not Traitors and Enemies to the
Realm in this particular, and as bad or worse then the Gunpowder Traitors,
which would have blown up the Members only of one Parliament, where as these
endeavor to blow up the foundations of all Parliaments, with their Members and
Privileges too at once, let these two ancient Parliaments, and those who are
learned in the Laws resolve.

And certainly this very Parliament, has often declared them such and no better
in the promised Declarations, and sundry others: and the House of Commons alone
in this observable Vote printed by their special Order.

An exact Collection, p. 190.
Die Jovis 12 Maii. 1642 Resolved upon the Question.
THat this House does declare, that if any person whatsoever shall arrest or
imprison the persons of the Lords and Gentlemen, or any of them; or Any other
of the Members of either House of Parliament, that shall be employed in the
service of both houses of Parliament, or shall offer violence to them, or any
of them For being Any thing in pursuance of the Commands or infirmations of
both Houses, shall be held Disturbers of the proceedings of Parliament, and
public Enemies of the State. And that all Persons are bound by their
Protestation to endeavor to bring then to condign punishment.

Much more then are both Houses in Honor and Justice bound to do it, by their
Protestation, and much more by their Solemn League and Covenant; wherein they
have lifted up their hands to the most High God, and sworn, sinceerely,
really, and constantly to endeavor with their Estates and lives, mutually to
preserve the rights and privileges of Parliaments, and not to suffer
themselves directly or indirectly, by Whatsoever combination, persuasion, or
terror to be withdrawn from this Covenant; or to give themselves to a
detestable indifferency or neutrality in this cause, but all the days of their
lives to continue zealously and constantly therein: and to discover all
Incendiaries, Malignants, and evil Instruments who act any thing contrary to
this League and Covenant, and that they may be brought to public trial, and
receive condign punishment, as the degree of their Offiecnces shall deserve,
or the supreme Iudicatory of the Kingdom judge convenient.

Which clause of the Covenant, it is high time for them, and every true-hearted
English man, who makes conscience of his Covenant, or bears any love to
Parliaments, to remember and put in due execution after so many insufferable
violations of the undubitable Rights and Privileges of Parliament, and most
injurious, malicious, violent prosecutions, false impeachments, suspentions,
and expulsions, of their innocent well deserving Members, for their fidelity and
duty to the Houses and their Country; for fear the honor, power and
privileges of Parliament be blown up and lost for ever by base unworthy,
cowardice, and silence in this common cause, which so greatly concerns our
whole Kingdoms present and future welfare, peace and settlement.

And till the Houses right and vindicate themselves and their Members herein,
let them never expect any Honor, blessing, or cordial assistance from God or
Men, but to be made the obloquy shame and scorn both of the present and all
future Ages, after all their former splendour and renown, now almost totally
and finally ecclipsed, by what means and degrees themselves best know, whereof
their late deserting and betraying of their own innocent worthy Members to the
malice of some potent Officers, in the Army (contrary to their former
proceedings in the case of the Lord Kimbolton, Mr. Hollis, Mr. Pym, and others,
which gaind them so much honor, love* and ready assistance from the City and
Kingdom) is not the least.

Qui Deo et sibi nequam cui bonus? If they shall prove unfaithful to God,
their own and the peoples souls, in not settling Religion, suppressing
Heresies, Errors, Blasphemies, Scisms; or treacherous to their own
Privileges, and faithful Presbyterian Members in sacrificing them any longer
to the Ambition, and malice of L. G. Crumwell and his Confederates, (ten
thousand times See the Putney projectors A Word to Lieut. Genesis Cromwell An:
Anatomy of the Army, where this is abundantly proved.
more guilty then they of those very Crimes and Treasons of which they have
falsely impeached them, and therefore to be impeached, imprisoned, and cast out
of the House and Army rather then they) without restoring them to the Houses
and their Liberty, with just and Honorable reparations to the Houses and them,
from their malicious Accusers, to prevent the like future attempts upon other
eminent Members and Patriots of their Country; neither God, nor men, City, nor
Country, Engl. Scotl. nor Ire. (whose affections they have almost quit
estranged and lost) will ever trust, believe, honor, or cordially adhere to
them any more, but utterly desert and cast them off, as undoers or betrayers of
them selves and them: And then what will become of their Honors, the idolized
General, Cromwell, and imperious Army; their late compliances with whom in
their unjust impeachments, and Demands have almost quite lost all their other
best affected friends, and brought them into that low, contemptible, and almost
desperate condition, of which they now complain. Repent therefore instantly of
all your late dishonorable faylings in this kind, or any other; and do your
first work* to regaine the discontented Members, Citizens, and Kingdoms
hearts, and preserve your selves and them from approaching utter ruin. And
remember the Apostles caveat, Gal. 5. 1 ^, 15, for all the Law is full-filled
in one word, even in this, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. But if ye
bite and devour one another, Take heed that ye be not consumed one of another
and made a prey to the Common Enemy; who rejoices at your intestine
animosities, and divisions, the sad effects whereof our Savior himself has
peremptorily predicted, Mar. 3. 24. 25. If a Kingdom be divided against it
self, that Kingdom cannot stand; And if a House (of Parliament) be divided
against it self, that House cannot stand. The Lord give all hearts and wisdom
to consider and believe it whom it does concern, and those especially who have
been the Authors and contrivers of the late malicious impeachments, against the
Lords, commons, and citizens, which they are unable to make good.

FINIS.

