THE CORDIAL OF Mr. David Ienkins: OR HIS REPLY To H. P. Barrester of
Lincolnes-Inne, ANSWERED.

LONDON: Printed for Robert Bostock, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard, at the
sign of the Kings Head. 1647.

Master JENKINS his REPLY Answered.
IN all the Papers which M J. weekly almost publishes (to slander and condemn
the Parliament of Rebellion, Perjury, Oppression, Cozenage, etc.) his maine
artifice, and that which most infects the people, is, his blending and
confounding things together, which are in nature different, and by all means
ought to be discriminated. In three things especially his want of ingenuity is
most obvious, and his not distinguishing most advantageous to him. For, first,
He puts no difference betwixt that latitude of power which is due to a just
just in just things, and when he pursues the true interest of his people; and
that power which consists in doing wrong. And yet nothing is more notorious
then this, that the Kings of England have vast Prerogatives in doing good, but
none at all to do any man, much less the whole State, harm. Secondly, He
distinguishes not betwixt those actions of the Subject which are done in times
of necessity, and upon extraordinary extremities; and those which are done in
ordinary times, when there is no special emergent cause to enforce them.
Thirdly, He compares not the smaller matters of the Law with the weightier, but
attributes to both alike; nay, when both (...) consist or take place at the
same time, he makes the weightier Law give way to that which is of less
consequence, and may be reckoned, inter apices juris. The Law will admit of a
private mischief rather then a public inconvenience; as nature will suffer
this particular quantity of water contrary to its own propenfity to be
violented and rapt upwards, rather then that any vacuity should be in the
universe. But M. J. sometimes will endure public mischief, rather then
private inconveniences; he will rather allow that Salus Populi shall be
opposed, then such or such a branch of Prerogative, or the propriety of the
Subject should be strained. Law is not so dull a study as some men would have
it, nor are its bounds restrained to the ordinary actions and pleas of J. a
Nokes and J. a Styles, about a carve of ground, etc. no; the profession is
far more noble, and as its basis, is reason improved with Logic, so its
pyramid is policy crowned with History and Philosophy. That Lawyer therefore
that will argue upon this high subject, which M. J. now undertakes, ought to
root himself deeper, before he begins to build up his argument, and to take
notice of these premises:

1. That all men who are qualified, and exalted to bear rule in a sphere
above other men, are so dignified and differenced by some Commission; which
Commission must be granted by man immediately, or else by God extraordinarily,
and immediately.

2. That in this age (which knows of no Oracles, or miracles remaining) God
does not immediately, and otherwise then by the same providence (as rules in
other humane affairs) either design the persons, or distinguish the
Prerogative of any Kings or Potentate. God is not said more properly to promote
to the Crown of England Edward the fourth, then Henry the sixth; nor to make a
King of France more unlimitable then a King of England: These things are left
to men, the same providence of God attending them, as attends other matters.
Yea, the Scripture is most clear in this, that when God by immediate and
extraordinary orders from heaven did interpose in designing Saul to the Throne
of Israel, yet he did it by lottery, and did it so, that Saul might be said
elected, and constituted by the people, as well as designed by God. And indeed
since all Princes, whether hereditary, or elective, whether more absolute, or
more conditionate, whether inthroned by just Title, or by tortion, and mere
force, have Commissions equally from Heaven: How can we think that Heaven acts
immediately alike in all? since Cyrus is as well Gods anointed in those
Provinces which he wins by the sword, as in those which come to him by descent;
and the French King is as truly Gods Vicegerent now in France, as Charles (whom
he has intruded upon) is in England; and since the King of Spain, by special
Law of Heaven, can claim no larger supremacy in Castile, then in Burgundy, in
Naples, then in Arragon; what an unreasonable thing is it, to ascribe all these
devolutions of rule, and variations of power to the immediate hand of God,
which changes not, rather then to the acts of men, which are seldom permanent?

3. That if we will suppose that Princes Commissions are all immediately drawn
and signed by God, yet we cannot suppose that Gods Commission ever enabled any
man to do injury; his charge to all Kings is contrary, and does inhibite all
insolence in comportment, nay even all elation of heart. And for man, (so far
as Princes are inaugurated upon earth) we see by experience they all almost
have their visible Terries, and Boundaries set to them; and it were most
unnatural if the intendment of all humane Laws should not refer to the
safety of the people.

4. That if any obscurity or ambiguity be in other Laws, yet in the Laws of
England there is none at all. All our Books proclaim our Nation to be a free
Nation, and our Kings to be limited from doing any wrong. And because there may
be dispute about the interpretation of these generals, therefore particulars
are deduced out of them, and our Laws do not only declare us free, but
wherein our freedom consists; nor do they bind the King from wrong but
specify withal, what is wrong to the Subject. If the King arbitrarily change
our Laws, raise Subsidies, impose Taxes, imprison our bodies, deny, delay, or
sell justice to us; this is declared to be wrong, and inconsistant with our
freedom. And if any question arise about our Charters, the King himself cannot
interpret, or sit as Judge, he is in all cases taken to be a party, and so
incompetent to sit as Judge. His sworn Judges are to do right betwixt him and
the Subject out of Parliament, and the two Estates are to do right above the
Judges, if need be, in Parliament. And in case of any perplexity or doubt, the
liberty and safety of the people is to be preferred before the Prerogative of
the King; and all interpretations must rather favor that interest which is
general, then that which is particular. And for the Military power of England,
as the King ought not to use any other then the natural Liege people of
England in his Wars; so neither can he press the people of England to serve
in his Wars at discretion. If the War be foreign, or against a foreign
power, the Parliament ought to be consulted in it; but if force be to be used
against Subjects, that force is to be merely sub-servient to Law, and whether
it be to execute ordinary Judgments, or to suppress Riots, or Insurrections
(how dangerous or great soever) the Sheriff, and other ordinary Officers of
Justice ought to be employed in the business, and those which are so employed
are to be directed solely by the Judges and Courts of the Land in speeding Law,
and not at all by any extrajudiciall command of the King in opposition to Law:
If these things were not so, the King of England could not be restrained from
doing wrong, our Kings would be above all Law, and the Law could have no power
above them, and if our Kings were above Laws, and not restraineable thereby
from doing wrong, the people of England were not a free people, but as
remediless Slaves, as the Grand Signiors Vassells are. Our Laws provide
against servitude in us, but that were vain if they did not provide also for
efficacy in themselves, in so much as Laws, if the King were above them, and
so might alter them at pleasure, or interpret them according to his own sense,
or could execute, or not execute at discretion by being sole Master of the
sword, would be no better then Cobwebs to us.

By the light which reflects from these fundamentalls premised, we shall now
the better view and examine that which Mr. Jenkins replies to the eight
particulars of H. P.

In the first particular the question is, Whether the House of Commons have
power to examine a Delinquent or no, Mr Ienkins holds the negative upon this
ground, that they have neither the Kings Writ, Patent, nor Commission for it.
It was answered, That they did both sit and act by the Kings Writ, and
something greater then the Kings Writ. Mr Ienkins not being able to deny that
the Parliament was summoned by the Kings Writ, and that it is continued still
by an Act passed fince, only quarrels at the Act of continuance, pretending
that the Act by which this Parliament is continued agrees not with the Act
passed lately for a Trienniall Parliament, nor with that for an Annual
Parliament, passed in Edw. the thirds time, as also that it is mischievous,
otherwise by Protections, Privileges, etc. Is not this to quarrel with the
King and both Houses? Is not this to tell us that Mr. Ienkins is wiser then all
the three Estates, though joined together? The King, the Lords, and Commons
judged that this Act did agree with the other two, yet Mr. Ienkins judges
contrary. The King, the Lords, and Commons judged the advantage of this Act to
be greater then any inconveniences, Mr. Ienkins is of another mind. Our Books
have a Rule, That no man ought to be wiser then Law; Mr. Ienkins exempts
himself out of this Rule; but in the next place, whatsoever the three Estates
may do, yet Mr. Ienkins tells us, that the two Houses make no Court, nor Body
Corporate, nor Parliament without the King, no more then a man remains a man
without a head; Here is the mistake, Mr. Ienkins thinks the King is a head to
the Parliament simpliciter, or phisice, whereas he is so but secundum quid, or
metaphorise, for if he were such a head to the Politic Body, as the true head
is to the natural Body, the body could have no subsistence without him; but
experience in our case teaches us the contrary, and we can easily calculate
that if the whole Royal Line should be spent, and the Crown Escheat sitting a
Parliament, the Lords and Commons would remain a living Parliament, and be the
supreme power of the Kingdom without a King: Also if this should happen out
of Parliament, the Lords joining with the chosen representants of the whole
Kingdom would be equally as competent (if not more) for all Acts of Majesty,
and supreme dominion as now they are in Parliament. Mr. Ienkins must needs
also know, that there are some Acts of Parliament yet of force in this Land,
which by the Lords and Commons were carried and consumnated, not only without
but even against the King; but I forbear to draw Censure upon my self by
citing them; and whereas it was objected, That the Parliament was in a meaner
condition then other inferior Courts, if the Kings mere discretion could so
make their deliberations void and vain. Mr. Ienkins replies, That this is most
true and just, for as much as in other Courts the King can neither judge nor
control; but in the Court of Parliament (quoad Acts) the King is both Judge
and Controller. And why cannot the King judge and control in the ordinary
Courts? because there they have the Kings power committed to them by Patent,
and as they are sworn to do right, so the King is sworn not to interrupt or
frustrate them. Thus:

1 We see the Kings Patent to a few men is more vigorous, then the most
honorable Writ of the Law is when it is directed from the King to all the
Peers, and Commons of the Land abetted besides with formal Statutes.

2 We see an Oath taken from the Judges is of more value then the faith and
loyalty of the whole people.

3 We see the King by his Coronation Oath is stronglier obliged not to obstruct
Justice in private cases; depending before lower Courts, then the general
safety and welfare of the people in that Treshault Counsel, which is so
honorable that none ought to think ignobly of it.

4 We must grant, that Mr. Ienkins can better tell what the Law is in this
point then both Houses.

5 Whereas an Argument Ab inconvenienti was valid in Law before, now an
Argument drawn from the safety and liberty of the whole State, and from the
end of all Law is made rediculous by Mr. Ienkins; for he which grants we are
borne to liberty and safety as our right, yet grants no means to attain to
that right, nor remedy to recover it, except the Kings Grace, and even then the
Grand Seigniours Subjects have their Masters grace and discretion to depend
upon as well as we.

Thus is our state like a goodly Ship, exquisitely decord, strongly manned, and
abundantly riggd with all kind of Tackling; and so built for agility in fair
weather, that nothing in that respect can be added to her perfection; yet still
she is so molded by these kind of Royalists, that the least foul weather
oversets her. We have excellent Laws to secure our proprieties against the
Crown; we have excellent Privileges in Parliaments to secure our Laws
against the Judges, and other Ministers of the Crown; and yet nevertheless
the Parliament it self is so discontinuable, dissolvable, and controllable by
the Crown, that our all which depends upon it, has nothing in the last place,
to make it self good to us, but the favor of the Crown.

Thus may our Laws and Privileges, in which there is acknowledged to be a
directive, but no coactive force over the King, be compared to an imaginary
Mathematical Line in the heavens, but not to any fence or circumvallation upon
the earth: Well may they inform the King what we ought to enjoy, as the Laws
of God and nature without them do to all other Nations; But they can never
assure us what we shall enjoy. And therefore I wonder why the Royalists should
so much extol the rare Constitution of this Kingdom, when besides some other
flowers of the Crown, they ascribe to the King such a negative voice in
Parliament, as is sufficient alone to destroy all that is granted us in all
things else. But to return to our Reply.

It Is maintained next, that whatsoever power is in both Houses, yet there is no
power in the House of Commons to examine at all, because the House of Commons
cannot administer an Oath; and examination without Oath is a mere
communication, and rejected as unprofitable in Law.

One reason why the House of Commons cannot examine upon Oath, is because it is
no Court; and it appears to be no Court, because it has no power of trial,
nor ever practiced any such power, by Bill, Indictment, Information, Plaints,
or Original. And for the Lord Cooks Relation, that the House of Commons have
imposed Fines, and imprisoned men in Queen Elizabeth's time, and since; He
says these are but late, and a few matters of fact, and a facto ad jus is no
good argument. Here we see though the greatest plea against the House of
Commons is the non-user of any such power, yet when the non-user is proved,
then it is objected, That it is but of late times, and illustrated but by a few
presidents.

A second reason against the House of Commons being a Court, is because it has
neither the Kings Patent, nor any Statute nor common usuage to make it so. The
House of Lords is acknowledged to be a Court of Record to many purposes, partly
because the King sits there, and partly because there is clear Law for their
Privileges; but the House of Commons is excepted against (as not within these
reasons.) The truth is, both Houses are but one Court, and one Council, and
the time has been when they have both sat in one place together; and there may
be good reason given why they may sit several and have their privileges kept
distinct; and why the Lords should be more active in some matters of judgment,
where the whole Commonalties interest is not touched: But this is no proof,
That what the Lords act by themselves, receives no influence from the House of
Commons; Or that the House of Peers is of more value in the eye of the Law, or
has any greater jurisdiction by the Law, then the Representative Body of the
whole State. As for the Kings sitting in the House of Lords, there is but
little moment in that, in regard that he sits not there to judge, or to debate,
but only to propose and consent. And there is no Law to debar him from the
like in the Commons House; and so it was when both Houses sat together, and
still is when they meet together. And secondly, whereas some Patent, Statute,
or Usage, is demanded from the House of Commons, in maintenance of their
judicial power, This we say is unreasonable: Nay, if any Patent, Statute, or
Usage, could be produced for preferrence of the Peerage before all the Knights,
Gentlemen, and Commons of England in this point; that were rather to be
rejected, as most unjust and unnatural. A third reason is brought against the
House of Commons out of the Writ of Summons, forasmuch as in that Writ, the
King resolves, consults, and treats with his Peers, super ardua regni, but the
Commons are called ad faciendum and consentiendum in iis quae ibidem de communi
concilio ordinari contigerint. These words of the Writ, though they are
general, and in some things ambigious, yet they are no more disadvantagious to
the Commons, then to the Lords or King. But if words are to be interpreted by
the practice of Parliaments, and by the tenor of all our other Laws, we shall
find that the Kings part is to propose and consent, but not to debate; that
the Lords part is to propose, debate, and consent in some things, but not in
all: that the Commons part is to propose debate, and consent in all. And this
appears by the raising of Treasure, the grand concernment of the Kingdom,
called justly, Ornamentum pacis and firmamentum belli and in this, though the
King and Lords may propose and consent, yet none but the Commons may propose,
debate, and consent. From reasoning Mr Jenkins now betakes himself to railing,
and tells both Lords and Commons, that whatsoever their Writ meant, they act
now quite contrary; for by their Writ they were required to treat and consult
with the King, concerning the King, the defense of the Kingdom, and the
Church; whereas they first imprison the King, next arm the Kingdom for
themselves against the King, and lastly demolish the Church by abolishing
Bishops, Deanes, etc.

For the first, the King left them unconstrained, and deserted Westminster,
whether they were summoned to attend him, and after took Arms to dissolve
them; but those Arms being now broken, the Parliament keeps him from raising
new broils, but so far are they from refusing to treat with him, that they
prepare Propositions for him, and reject no messages or Letters that come from
him; neither is the Kings restraint properly to be called imprisonment being
much different therefrom, both for the manner and for the end of it; the manner
of it is ingenuous, and accompanied with many accommodations, which thousands
of other Freemen, nay Gentlemen of England cannot attain too; and for his
Attendants, they are truly his Servants, and as observant in all Offices
compatible with the peace of the Kingdom as ever he had any. The end of his
restraint also is not to incommodate him in any degree, there is nothing aimed
at in it but to preserve the Kingdom from new disturbance, till he appears
fully reconciled, and to preserve him from drawing prejudice upon himself. For
the second, since it is not for the Kingdoms damage, nor the Kings, that future
Commotions be suppressed; the Lords and Commons could no way better satisfy the
intent of their Summons, then by suppressing Commotions by the same posture of
defense as they now are in. I could wish also, that Mr. Ienkins would
understand, that as the Kingdom is called the Kings, so the King is called the
Kingdoms; and that propriety which the Kingdom has in the King, is more
tenderly to be expounded then that which the King has in the Kingdom. For the
third, that the word Church should only be applied to Churchmen, or the word
Churchmen to Bishops, Deanes, etc. is more then the Law teaches: and if the
business be studdied well 'twill not be found a thing impossible, as Master
Ienkins supposes for the Parliament to abolish Bishops, Deanes, etc. and yet to
advance Churchmen, or to take away some of the excessive Grandour of
Churchmen without any destruction to the Church.

2 Thus much of Mr. Ienkins Reply to the first particular, I come now to his
second, where he takes it ill, that in cases of pardons the King should be
thought to be vertually in the two Houses, for as much as that power he says
remains solely in the King, and therefore cannot rest at all in the two Houses.

That the power of pardoning Delinquents is so in the King solely, as that he
cannot derive the same to the Parliament as he does his other power is not
proved by Mr. Ienkins, nor can it be possibly proved, and that the King does
not derive the same (as he does his other) is as far from being proved also;
for doubtless in all Acts of Oblivion, the two Houses convey an additionall
vigor, and so make the Acts more virtuous then the Kings mere Act could do,
and therefore this new vigor which is conveyed by the Houses, if it be not
that which is derived from the King, as Mr. Ienkins Tenets deny, then it flows
naturally and originally from the two Houses; and what can Mr. Ienkins cause
gain by this? But says Mr. Ienkin, The King is a Prisoner, and so having no
power but what is divested by his imprisonment, the power of the Houses is
usurped by themselves, and not derived by the King. The block which Mr. Ienkens
here stumbles at is this; He thinks an imprisoned King has no power at all, or
remains indeed no King, but this is not absolutely true of all Kings
imprisoned, for as our case is, either imprisonment is something more then that
which our King suffers, or else imprisonment as to some Acts may stand with
freedom as to other Acts. I have touched upon this subject already. But let
Master Ienkins be as bitter as he pleases in his censures and reproaches, it is
not intended by the two Houses that the King should be disabled from doing any
acts of justice and piety, it is only from raising new Forces, and begetting new
concussions, that this new guard desires to prevent him. Master Ienkins next
says, that the King may revoke and discharge his Commissions at pleasure, but
what of this? the question is, whether or no the King may frustrate and elude
his Commissions; and this Master Ienkins speaks not directly to. We need not
quarrel therefore further about this, we will grant to Master Ienkins that
Parliaments may be justly determined and dissolved by our King, provided he
will grant to us that the same may be justly frustrated or eluded. But Master
Ienkins stomachs much at our calling the two Houses a Parliament, and censures
it in us as a great delusion, although we know well that nothing is more common
in speech, then to say that the King calls his Parliaments, writes to his
Parliaments, dissolves his Parliaments, etc. The King must be taken abstracted
from that which he calls, writes to, and dissolves, or else we must consider
him calling himself, writing to himself, dissolving himself, which cannot be
without absurdity. Besides, when we speak of the great Council of the
Kingdom, we mean the Parliament abstracted from the King, forasmuch as the
King in Parliament does not so properly give as receive Counsel, and why we
may not as well call the two Houses a Parliament, as the great Council,
treshault Court, or mickle-gemot of the King and Kingdom, I cannot devise. The
Law says the King cannot be absent from his Parliaament; this must be meant
authoritatively, not personally, for diverse of our Kings have been in France
sitting Parliaments here, and yet even they were politically present, though
physically absent, as Master Ienkins himself must needs grant. Now if the
Parliament be the Kings Court or Council, and such a Court or Council as he
cannot virtually be absent from, though in person he be often distant, and at
some time must not be otherwise, how can it be maintained by Master Ienkins
that the two Houses are not the Parliament? Another objection of Master Ienkins
against the two Houses is, that they were deserted by diverse of their own
Members, who in considerable numbers went to the King at Oxford; but this is no
other objection then might be made against the Husband, when the wife elopes
and withdraws from his bed, shall that party which remains constant, and
attends duly at the place assigned in the summons for transacting of that
business which was specified in the summons, suffer for that parties sake
which proved inconstant, and neither observed the place nor business of the
writ by which it was convened? sure this is most unreasonable; doubtless when
the King called these uncertain members mungrels, who together with their whole
faction would neither be cordially true to Religion and Liberty at London, nor
totally consent to subvert them at Oxford, he had more reason on his side then
Master Ienkins has, who disparages those that kept their stations because of
the defection of their mungrell brethren. In the last place Master Ienkins
though he confesses that the common Law did always restrain our Kings from all
tallages and subsidies but by consent in Parliament, as does appear by Magna
Charta; yet he says this is no consequence, because the King cannot take the
subjects good at pleasure, therefore the Commons have a concurrent power with
the King in Parliament; indeed this consequence is ill-framed, but in its right
form it appears thus; if the Commons in Parliament have that great power to
raise treasure out of the whole Kingdom, which the King has not our of
Parliament, then they must deduce this power from themselves, or those whom
they represent, and not from the King, who cannot give that which he has not in
himself; but so it is that the Commons have this power, Ergo. If Mr. Ienkins
will answer this he shall befriend my intellect. The last objection which
Master Ienkins makes against this concurrent power of the Commons in granting
subsidies is this, that Parliaments may be held, and be complete Parliaments
without subsidies, and hereupon he tells us that former Parliaments rarely
granted any unless in time of forrain-Warres; and Q. Eliz. refused a subsidy
granted, and K. Ia. in his first year had none granted him. Is there any
solidity in this objection? I appeal to all ingenuous men, Parliaments may be
without subsidies, Ergo the granting of subsidies is no act of power in
Parliaments; or thus, giving of subsidies is an Act of power in Parl. but since
at some-time it may be difused and intermitted, or a power that at sometimes
is not reduced into acts, therefore it is no power, or not inherent in the
people, but only derivative from the King. Let Master Ienkins apply his own
words to himself here, for certainly he ought to make a conscience of
blinding the people with such untrue colors to the ruin of King and Kingdom.

3. The third particular now offers it sel^^ ^n order, and here Master Ienkins
his reply ought to prove that if the two Houses had a Parliamentary power in
themselves, they needed not send Propositions to the King, but instead of
opposing this (which was the only thing made good by his answerer) he diverts
his force to oppose the equity and justice of the Propositions sent to his
Majesty. This is not to reply to his Answerer, but to satisfy his own peevish
disposition; yet since he may abuse the people as well when he railes as when
he argues something must be returned in answer to him. After he has
magisterially condemned the Propositions in general as being contrary to law,
he vouchsafes at last thus particularly to interrogate us: Have the two Houses
a strict right to lay upon the people what taxes they judge meet, have they
power to pardon all Treasons, etc. subintelligitur without the Kings consent?
We answer they have not any such ordinary power; but if the Kingdoms safety
lie upon it, and the King will not concur in saving the Kingdom in an
ordinary way, they may have recourse to extraordinary means for the saving of
it ordinarily the people may not take up Arms, but in case of extraordinary
invasion by foreign or domestic force they may justify taking up of Arms, and
when War it self is justifiable, all the necessary concomitants and expedients
of a politic war are justifiable. Nature has confined water to a descending
course, yet not by such a rigid Law, but that for the necessary subvention of
the whole Fabric, and for the avoiding of that vacuity which Nature more
abhors then the dispensation, or temporary suspension of such, or such a
particular inferior Law, this ponderous element may forsake its ordinary
course, and mount upwards. In a Village where houses stand scattered and
remote, it is not lawful for me to demolish this house, because that which
stands next it is all of a flame, but in a City this is lawful where the
houses are so conjoined, that the flame of one house may extend it self to the
consuming or indangering of a whole street or more. It is not generally lawful
for me to judge my neighbor unheard, or to execute my neighbor unjudged: Yet
if I find my neighbor engaged in such a Treason as Faulx was, and ready with
his Match to give fire to such a Train of Powder as he had laid, and have no
other means to prevent him, I may run upon him with my Sword, and make my
self both his Judge and Executioner. Now if Master Ienkins will say, that such
extraordinary acts as these are warranted by Law, I shall co^ply with him, yet
I conceive it is not upon any particular Law, but upon the general law of
public safety that these warrants are grounded upon; and if I am not
mistaken, it is rather policy, then Law, that admits of such strange deviations
from the common practice and rule of Law. But says Master Ienkins, these
propositions cannot pass into Statutes but by the Kings concurrence, and has
not the King a free power to assent, or dissent in those things which must
receive their being from his concurrence? Or is the seeking of the Kings
concurrence nothing but a mere Complement? We answer, The King has a power to
assent and dissent: yet without any impeachment of his liberty, he may, nay he
must, assent to such Bills as are for the public good, and to dissent from
such as are tending to the public detriment; the reason is, because the free
choice of the King is to receive its determination from without from the matter
of the Bills, not from within, or from the propension of his own will: for the
will injoyes a more perfect liberty when it is attracted, and as it were
necessitated by that object which is good, then when it is left to its own
equilibrious motions, and so wavers indifferently betwixt good and evil. If it
be said, that in the choice of that which is good, the King cannot so well
satisfy his own judgment by the advice or reason of other men, as by that
which is dictated to him by his own breast: It must be answered, first, in the
grand concernments of the Kingdom, wherein the King has not so great a share
as the people has, it is more just that the reason of two Estates be satisfied,
then his. Secondly, in cases where the King is severally interessed, his
particular interests ought to succumbe and give a preference to the general.
Thirdly, either the matter in debate is intricate, and admits of doubts, or
not; If there be doubt in it, then the King ought not to oppose his single
judgment, or rather opinion to the resolution of the Highest Court and
Council of the Kingdom: If there be no doubt in it, (an accident sure very
rare, that the Lords and Representants of a whole State should judge a thing to
be advantageous, when the King knows it certainly to be disadvantagious) then
the King is to consider whither the matter in question be necessary or
expedient, if it be expedient only, then the King ought not to contest about
it, forasmuch as that contestation may be more inexpedient for the State then
his concession. But if it be necessary (as the cause of true Religion, etc.)
where the King being Orthodox, knows his Subjects to be blinded with Idolatry
or Heresy, and cannot without sin give his Royal assent to such irreligious
Bills, as they present; then as it were impious in him to sign them, so it is
outrageous in him to disturb the public peace about them. The reason of this
is, because Politicians guide themselves rather by the calculation of what is
probable then what is possible only, and therefore though it be possible that
a King with one eye should see more then a Parliament with many, yet since this
is not probable, there is scarce any State but chooses rather to be swayd by the
counsels of many then by the counsel of one, and where the counsel of one
claims a prevalence above the counsels of many, it is not obeyed without great
reluctance commonly, and public disturbance. Besides, if one man's eyes
perchance see more then the eyes of many (as is very rare, though not
impossible) yet it is very strange that that one man's discovery should not open
the eyes of other standers by without force, in respect that light is a thing
lovely to all, and ready to be embraced upon the least glimpse of it, and a
very little thereof being let in through a narrow cranny, may make all that is
contained in a very wide room visible. And if one man possibly in things
indifferent should see more then many, yet it is very near to an impossibility,
that one man should apprehend truth more then many, where that one man has more
prejudice against the truth by selfe-interests, then the many. And who can
doubt, but that Princes, as Princes, are more drawn by the by as of
selfe-interests against that which is the good of the community, then that
Court which is not only by the virtue of representation, but even naturally
also in some degree the community it self? The root sends juice and
nourishment to the branches, but expects none back from them; and the fathers
love has a strong ascent toward the fruit of his body, but weak and
virtulesse is the descent of that juice which falls from the branches to the
root, or of that love which the son refunds upon his progenitors; and even so
it is in the relative Offices of Prince and Subject, the Prince looks less
tenderly upon the people as being his root or parent, whilst yet the people
looks more tenderly upon the Prince, as its own stem and issue. Hence it
is, that all States are accounted more or less slavish, as their Princes are
more or less arbitrary in their supreme counsels; and all men are accounted
more or less miserable, as they are more or less slavish. What became of
Rome, and of the whole world that was subject to Rome, after it was once yoked
by the Caesar's, who might arbitrarily wave the advice of the Senate, and
consult with Slaves, Eunuchs, Women, Panders, etc. or what brought us to all
our late bloody catastrophes, but the discountenance and detestation of
Parliaments? Ask the Lord Digby himself, and even his Speeches made in
Parliament since November 1640. will inform us, that there were many causes of
our miseries, but the cause of all those causes was the abandoning and
disgusting of Parliaments: Sure the Lord Digby may pass as an Authentic
testimony for our side, and yet even the Lord Digby, before he turned Courtier,
had the ingenuitie to resent this Kingdoms servilitie, when a woman of a false
religion, hostile nation, and adverse affection, together with her Jesuiticall
train, had more predominance in our public affairs then the two Estates
assembled in Parliament. But Master Ienkins will still say, that the King is
assisted with his Judges, and other Counsel both Spiritual and Temporal, and
that the House of Commons in some debates may be divided unto two or three
odds voices; and therefore why may not the King so assisted be better advised
then those two or three odds voices? This is an old objection, and seems
plausible, but is easily answered: For 1. It is very unequal that a few
Counselors whom the King chooses should be preferred before many whom the
Kingdom chooses, in those matters which import the Kingdom, more then the King.
2. If the Kings Council in the House of Peers were equally to be valued with
the House of Commons, yet still so long as it is left arbitrary to the King to
follow their advice, or not, the Kingdom is in the condition as Turkey is,
where the Grand Signior is left only to consult with himself or any of his
Concubines or Eunuchs. And lastly, there can be no lower or baser degree of
slavery imagined, then for a Nation to be subjected to a Lord that is so
absolute in the highest results of State, as that he may use no Counsel, or
make choice of what Counsel he pleases.

4. I have now to the fourth particular, where M. Ienkins affirms again, that
the two Houses do separate the Kings power from his Person as the Spencers did,
and from thence frame the same three condemned conclusions as they did. The
separation of his Person from his power is proved, partly by imprisonment of
his Person, and partly by usurping all his power; for M. Ienkins tells us, that
the two Houses counterfeit a Seal of their own* and thereby seal Writs, make
Judges, settle Courts, and this is done contrary to the Kings consent, not
declared only by Letters, Ministers, and word of mouth, but by his true great
Seal of England.

It is here, 1. To be noted, that M. Ienkins himself does now distinguish
betwixt that which the King declares by word of mouth personally; And by
Letters and Ministers extrajudicially; and that which he declares legally by
his Writs, and judicially by the great Seal: and this is a plain concession,
that the Kings Person may urge one thing, and his Office another; that his
personal command may be unjust and not to be obeyed, at the same time that his
regal command may be just, and necessarily must exact obedience. It is to be
noted 2. That the reason alleged, why the Kings commands in this war are
legal and just, not personal and unjust, is, because they were authorized and
fortified with the true great Seal: and what is this but to proclaim, 1. That
the great Seal of England is solely at the Kings dispose, to be employed
according to his mere discretion: 2. That the mere annexion of the great Seal
makes any Act of the Kings legal and authentical: 3. That M. Ienkins is
better able to judge of the two great Seals which is the true one, then the
two Houses of Parliament? When M. Ienkins will be as learned in proving, as he
is audacious in presuming, these new quaint points, we shall know what to
answer; In the mean time we will expatiate no further then his discourse
leads us. As for imprisoment of the Kings Person, we have answered to that
already, and forasmuch as the keeping Chaplains from him is objected, we
answer thereunto, that not Chaplains, but such and such Chaplains, viz. such
as the State judges Incendiaries, are denied, and there is no more injustice in
restraining such Incendiaries then in restraining Commanders and Arms. Now to
parallel the Houses with the Spencers, M. Ienkins says, that they having
declared his Majesty to have broken his trust touching the government of his
people, they have raised Arms to take him, they have taken and imprisoned him,
they govern themselves, they make Laws, impose Taxes, make Judges, Sheriffs,
and take upon them Omnia insignia Majestatis; and is not this says, he to
remove the King for misdemeanors, to reform per aspertee, to govern in aid
of him, the three conclusions of the Spencers? M. Ienkins here, as if he had
abjured all ingenuitie, confounds diverse things which he knows to be
exceeding different in nature. For 1. He takes no notice whether the force
which has bin used by the Parliament be offensive, or defensive; and yet none
can be ignorant, how many things may be justified in a defendant which cannot
by the offendant. 2. He distinguishes not betwixt that force of the defendant,
which aims only at a temporary securance against the Assaylant, and that which
proposes to it self vindication or reparation by the total removal, or
destruction of the Assaylant. He knows well, that the Spencers aimed at a
total dethronization of their Master, whilst the Parliament aims at nothing
but beating down that Sword which was drawn against them. 2. That the Spencers
intended to levy offensive Arms, for reforming that in their Master per
aspertee, which was not so dangerous to their persons and lives, as that which
has bin contrived and enterprised against this Parliament, for not only a
party of 300 Armed men to seize and tear five principal Members out of the
House, (and by consequence to menace all that retained any freedom in them)
but Armies were solicited to attempt against this Parliament before they
thought of any force; and this is far above those provocations which were
pretended by the two Spencers. 3. The Spencers, by pretext of governing in aid
of the King, intended to oppress all the Nobility, Gentry, Communaltie of the
Land, but this is impossible to be suspected in a Parliament, which consists of
the choice, and are a considerable part of all these.

5. The 5. particular now offers it self, wherein Mr. Ienkins maintains that
every King of England, and only the King in England can grant pardons, and that
in all cases, and for this he cites Stanfords pleas 99. It was not, nor is
denied to M. Ienkins that the Kings of England have power to pardon
delinquencies, so far as themselves are parties suffering. But the question
is whether the Kings of England only can, and always can pardon
delinquencies; and whatsoever Master Ienkins thinks, the authorities of
Stanford and Dier are not full to prove the affirmative; and certainly if it
were proprium quarto modo for the Kings of England to pardon in all cases, it
were very unproper for general acts of indemnity to be passed by all three
estates, frustra fit per plura, quod fieri potest per pauciora; if one of the
estates be sufficient; to what purpose do the other 2 concur? Secondly, all
remedy by appeal would be cut off from subjects. For either my appeal must
make void the Kings pardon, or if the Kings pardon be not void in this case,
and as to this murder committed, my appeal must be dismissed. It had been
candid in Mr. Ienkins if he would have replied some thing to this objection
about appeals, for now it may be supposed he replied nothing therein, because
he could reply nothing to the purpose; besides, if the Kings pardon cannot
frustrat my appeal (as Mr. Ienkins knows well it cannot) why should the same
destroy the remedy and justice that is due to a whole state? Treason may be
committed against the State as well as against the King, even as murder may
damnifie me as well as the King, and shall it be held less contrary to justice
that the State should be deprived of its remedy by the Kings pardon, then that
I should? Good Mr. Ienkins policy is not to be superseded by Law, but Law is to
be improved by policy: and as in quiet times and private cases it is safer to
follow Law then Policy, so in times of troubles, and in affairs of general and
great concernment, it is safer to observe Policy then Law. The same may be said
of not pardoning, for doubtless the King has as much latitude to refuse, as to
grant pardon, yet when his power in either may be mischievous, his power in
both must submit to reason of State, and Law is not violated, but better
improved when true reason of State takes place above it.

6. I am now to proceed to the sixth particular, where Mr. Ienkins will not
endure that the King shall be said to retain the right or habit of governing,
at the same time when he is said not to be actually in a condition to govern;
he intimates that the Law makes no such distinction, and infers ubi lex non
distinguit, non est distinguendum: by this it should seem it is not allowable
that a Lawyer should make use of any distinctions, for which he has not some
book authority, though the difference of things be never so pregnant. A
miserable confinement to Lawyers, and sure 4 or 500 years past if Lawyers had
been so confined, we had now left us no prints of any distinctions at all. All
other Scholars besides Lawyers, nay all Lawyers that are not mere Lawyers, (I
mean by mere Lawyers, such as have made no improvement of their reason by
Logic, Policy, and other humane literature) are of a contrary opinion, and
hold it more true, qui been distinguit, been docet. But what a ridiculous thing
is this, because Hen. 6. lying in his cradle not able to speak, write, read, or
do any act of power, has a right to govern, therefore I must grant he is in a
condition to govern, for fear of distinguishing when the Law does not
distinguish? so of Edw. 2. and Ri. 2. because they had a right to the Crown, in
that moment of time when they abdicated the same, and pronounced themselves
unfit to govern, therefore I am obliged to believe that they were not
abdicated nor made unfit for government. Next Mr. Ienkins likes not this
distinction that the King is not barred simply from returning to his Parliament
though he be barred secundum quid, that is from returning unreconciled or armed
against his Parliament, he professes that he and the whole City knows the
contrary; how the City should know the Parliaments intentions so exquisitly, or
M. Ienkins be assured of the Cities knowledge so infallably I cannot imagine;
but I wish M. Ienkins which takes upon him to be a Priest as well as a Lawyer
by virtue of Justinians Commission, were such a Priest indeed, as that we might
expect nothing but knowledge and truth from his lips.

7. The seventh particular comes now in order, where M. Ienkins puts us in
mind of the oath of Supremacy, taken by all members of the House at their
first sitting, and asks H. P. why he styles the King Supreme governor in all
all causes and over all persons, etc. and leaves out only Supreme? surely not
to detract any thing from the Kings celsitude, but because the word seemed
superfluous; for he that swears the King to be Supreme over all persons,
swears him to be only Supreme over all persons, inasmuch as there cannot be
more Supreme persons over all then one; but away with these frivolous
logomachies. The argument runs thus, If the King be only Supreme governor in
all causes, then in Parliament causes, if over all persons, then over both
Houses, and if so, then how is he become a prisoner, and how do the Houses Act
by virtue of their prisoners writ? It was answered before that the King is
granted to be Supreme or only Supreme over all persons, but yet still (...),
and not beyond the Law, nor beyond that community for which and by which the
Laws themselves were made. The Duke of Venice (the like may be said also of all
elective conditionate Kings and Potentates) has no person in any cause
whatsoever superior, or equal to him: yet he has his bounds set him by the
Law; and as the Law is above him whom it bounds, so that power which can make,
and alter Law in Venice, is above the Law it self. M. Ienkins himself
confesses that the King is not above the Law, nor above the safety of the
people; but in regard that the King is Supreme in all causes, as well
Parliamentary as other, and over all persons, as well the Lords and Commons in
Parliament as others, M. Ienkins supposes there is no other Judge of the Law,
and safety of the people but the K. but this is not to be admitted by us,
because we know well that whosoever is the Supreme judge of the Law, if not
directly, yet he is consequentially above all Laws, and whosoever is above all
Law cannot be restrained by the safety of the people, though the most sublime
of all Laws. Wherefore if this be admitted true of our King, that he is Supreme
Judge of Law, then it must follow that the Subject of England has no more
assurance of Law or safety then what is founded only in the Kings breast, and
discretion. For the Kings being a prisoner that has been already answered, and
indeed it is is more truly said that his hands are held and disweapond, then
that his feet are fetterd, or his head undiademnd. Then for the Parliaments
acting by the Kings writ, there ought to be some mistakes cleared therein
also; for we do grant that the writ is the Kings, the Great Seal is the
Kings, that Officer which has the Custody thereof is the Kings, the People are
the Kings; but we do not grant that any of these are so the Kings, as that
they are not the Kingdoms also in a more eminent degree: for as the Husband is
the Wifes truly, but not (...) eminently as the Wife is the Husbands, so the
Kingdom is the Kings, and the King is the Kingdoms, yet the Kingdoms
interest and relation far is more valuable and sublime.

8. The last particular now offers it self in the close of all, and here M.
Ienkins does not deny expressly that many things may be good in Law
notwithstanding that some formalities, or those things which we term apices
Iuris are wanting; for doubtless where 2 Laws are and both cannot be
fulfilled, the less important Law though it be more particular must give way
to the more important Law, though more general. ex. gr. when the King dies, by
the common Law in force, Parl. cease, all judges, Sheriffs and Officers not
absolutely necessary etc. return to a private condition, and so remain till
new Commissions obtained: but if the new King happen to be beyond sea, as at
the death of Hen. 3. so that new Commissions cannot be immediately granted, and
thereupon the greater Law of public safety is brought into competition with
the Law of an inferior nature, a new seal may be made, new Judges, new
Officers may be created, and either a former Parl. may be continued, or a new
one su^mond, and all necessary points of complete administration may be
expedited as in probality they were before the arrival of Ed. 1. God did not
make any particular dispensation his shewbread might be eaten by common
persons if in distress, or the golden vessels of his Temple aliend when the
City was to be redeemed from the insolence and rapines of a prevailing. Enemy,
the general Law of necessity was sufficient to warrant both the one and the
other, but I will press this no further since M. Ienkins alleges nothing to
show why a Parl. which cannot deliver it self by an Act, may not use means to
deliver it self by an Ordinance. I will not insist further hereupon. But
instead of disputing, M. Ienkins seems to jeere (...) for setting up Excise,
raising Arms, Taxing the people, imprisoning the King, abolishing the Common
Prayer Book, selling Church Lands, etc. and in an irony he concludes, that all
these are in order to public justice and safety. M. Ienkins here leaves us
upon uncertainties, whether he condemns our Cause because it required such
props, or only these props because they assisted us in promoting so bad a
cause. If he allow of the ends, but not of the means, if he allow we may
defend the Laws and safety of the State, but not by Arms, or if he allow of
Arms but not of Taxes, etc. He must renounce* rule natural as well as
logical, Qui dat finem, dat media con^^ centia ad finem; If he allow of the
means, but not as conducting to such an end, upon presumption that our Laws,
and the Sc^^ were not endangered, or if he prove that they may not be defended,
he takes upon him more then is due; for his part is to plead, not to judge, and
answers might be given to his pleading, but nothing can be said to his judging.

I conclude therefore with the L. Cooks Sensure of Treason as M. Ienkins does,
and am of the same opinion, that Treason ever produces fatal and final
destruction to the offender, and never attaines to its desired ends; and wish
that all men for this Cause would serve God, honor the King, and have no
company with the Seditious. Yet let me add this, we have neighbors now in the
Netherlands, that lately have revolted from their Master, and yet prosper and
flourish beyond all in Europe; the justice of their revolt may be questioned by
some* but I for diverse reasons do not question it, and one amongst the rest is
this of the L. Cooks, because I think an act merely treasonable cannot prosper.

FINIS.

