THE THIRD PART OF THE SOVEREIGN POWER OF PARLIAMENTS and KINGDOMS. Wherein
the Parliaments present Necessary Defensive War against the Kings offensive
Malignant, Popish forces; and Subjects taking up Defensive Arms against their
Sovereigns, and their Armies in some Cases, is copiously manifested, to be
Just, Lawful, both in point of Law and Conscience; and neither Treason nor
Rebellion in either; by inpregnable Reasons and Authorities of all kinds.

Together With a Satisfactory Answer to all Objections, from Law, Scripture,
Fathers, Reason, hitherto alleged by Dr. Fern, or any other late opposite
Pamphleters, whose gross Mistakes in true Stating of the present Controversy,
in sundry points of Divinity, Antiquity, History, with their absurd irrational
Logic and Theology, are here more fully discovered, refuted, than hitherto
they have been by any: Besides other particulars of great concernment.

By WILLIAM PRYNNE, Utter-Barrester, of Lincolnes Inn.

2 Samuel 10. 12. Be of good courage, and let us play the men for our People, and
for the City of our God, and the Lord do what seems him good. Esther 9. 1,
2. 5, 10. In the day that the enemies of the Jews hoped to have power over
them, the Jews gathered themselves together into their Cities, through out all
the Provinces of King Ahashuerus, to lay hand on those that sought their lives,
and no man could withstand them; for the fear of them fell upon all people.
Thus the Jews sinote all their enemies with the stroke of the sword, and
slaughter and destruction; and did what they would with those that hated them;
but on the spoil laid they not their hand. It is this eighth day of May, 1643.
Ordered by the Committee of the House of Commons in Parliament for Printing,
that this Book, Entitled, The third Part of the Sovereign Power of
Parliaments and Kingdoms, be Printed by Michael Spark, senior. John White.

Printed at London for Michael Spark, Senior. 1643.

TO HIS EVER-HONOVRED, NOBLE, KIND FRIENDS, THE Right Honorable Lord
Ferdinando Fairfax, the Right Worshipful, Sir William Waller, and Sir William
Bruerton, Knights, Commanders in Chief, of the Parliaments Forces, in several
Counties.
Deservedly Renowned Worthies,
YOUR Incomparable Valor, Zeal, Activity, Industry for the preservation of
Your Dearest Country, Religion, Laws, Liberties, and the very being of
Parliaments, all now endangered by an unnatural generation of Popish and
Malignant Vipers, lately risen up in Arms against them in diverse parts of
this Realm; and those many miraculous Victories with which God has been
lately pleased to Crown your cordial endeavors, to promote his glory and the
Public safety, as they have justly demerited some grateful general
Acknowledgements from the whole Representative Body of the State; so they may
in some sort challenge a private gratulatory Retribution from Me, who have
formerly had the happiness to participate in your Christian Affections, and
now reap much Consolation by your Heroic Actions.

Having therefore seasonably finished this Third part, Of the Sovereign Power
of Parliaments and Kingdoms; copiously Vindicating, the Lawfulness, Justness
of the Parliaments present Necessary Defensive War (in which you have had the
Honor to be employed, not only as Chief, but which is more, as most
successful Commanders, in your several Countries,) in point both of Law and
Conscience; and fully wiping off those black Aspersions, of TREASON and
REBELLION, which the opposite party (really guilty of these crimes against both
King and Kingdom, as I have Part 1. Edit. 2 p. 108, to 1. 12.
elsewhere manifested, and here lightly touched) have out of Malice, Ignorance,
or both conjoined, most injuriously cast upon your Loyal, honorable
proceedings, which rejoice the souls of all true Philopaters, who cordially
affect their Country or Religion; I could not, without much ingratitude, yea
injustice, have published it to the world, but under the Patronage of your
ever-honored resplendent names, who have so valorously, so successefully
pleaded this Cause already in the Field, that it needs the less assistance
from the Press.

My many inevitable interruptions and straites of time in its contexture, which
may happily detract something from its perfection; shall I hope, derogate
nothing from your Honorable, Friendly acceptance; whom I have thus conjoined
in the Dedication; because the Parliament has united you in their present
Warlike employments, and God himself jointly honored you with success, even
to admiration among the Good, indignation amidst Malignants, envy with the
Malicious, and, I trust, to an active sedulous emulation in all your Fellow
Commanders, employed in other Quarters in the selfsame Cause.

Your present busy public, and mine own private Employments, prohibit me to
expatiate; Wherefore earnestly beseeching the Glorious Lord of Hosts to be ever
mightily present with your several Noble Persons, Forces, and to make you
always eminently, active, Valorous, Victorious, as hitherto he has done, till
Peace and Truth, Tranquillity and Piety, by your several triumphant
Proceedings, shall once more lovingly embrace and kiss each other in our
divided unreformed, sinful Kingdoms; And till the effect of these just wars
You manage, shall be quietness and assurance to us and our Posterities after
us for ever; I humbly recommend your Persons, Proceedings to his protection who
can secure you in and from all dangers of war, and rest,

Your Honors, Worships most affectionate Friend and Servant, WILLIAM PRYNNE.

To the Reader.
Christian Reader,
I Who have been always hitherto a Cordial Desirer, endeavourer of Peace, am
here necessitated to present Thee with a Discourse of War; to justify The
Lawfulness of the Parliaments present taking up of necessary Defensive Arms.
Which neither their Endeavors, nor my, with many others Prayers could (with
any safety to our Privileges, Persons, Religion, Liberty, Realms, now
forcibly invaded by his Majesty's Popish and Malignant Cavallieres) hitherto
prevent, or conjure down.

To plead the Justness of a War, of an unnatural Civil war, (the worst
of any) of a War between the Head and Members, may seem not only a
Paradox, but a Prodigy, in a Land heretofore blessed with an aged,
uninterrupted Peace: And Civilis Belli, l. 1. p. 1.
Lucans Bella per AEmathios plusquam civilia Campos, etc. (now most unhappily
revived among us) being but Historical, and Poetical; may pass the world
with less admiration and censure, than this harsh Piece, which is both Legally
and Theologically (like the Subject matter) Polemicall. But as the Apud veros
Dei cultores etiam ipsa bella pacata sunt; quae non cupiditate aut crudelitate,
sed pacis studio geruntur Aug. de diverse. Eccl. observe. 7. Gratian Cause. 23.
qu. 2. cap. Apud. Albericus Gentilis de Iure belli. l. 1. c. 5.
aim, the end of all just War, is and ought to be only future settled Peace;
so is the whole drift of this Military Dissertation: not to foment or protract,
but end our bloody Wars; which nothing has more excited, animated,
lengthened in the Adverse party, than a strong conceit, (if not serious
belief,) that The Parliaments Forces, neither would, nor lawfully might in
point of Law or Conscience forcibly resist or repulse their invasive Arms,
without danger of High Treason and Rebellion, (which Bugbeare I have here
refuted, removed) and the In-activity, the much admired slownesse of many of
our Forces, in resisting, in preventing their vigorous Proceedings, which a
little timely vigilance and diligence had easily controlled.

It is a more than Patriae deesse quoad vita supperat nefas est Livius, Ro^.
Hist. l 5.
Barbarous Inhumanity for any person, not to put to his uttermost strength,
speedily to close up the mortal wounds of his bleeding, dying Native Country;
but to protract its cure, to enlarge, increase its deadly Ulcers, Stabs, Sores,
and make a lasting trade of War, out of a sordid, Militare non est delictum
sed propter praedam militare peccatum est. August. de Verbis Dom. Tract. 19.
and Gratian. cause. 23. qu 1.
sinful desire of Gain, of Plunder, to raise a private fortune by the
Republics ruins, (a sin, of which some perchance are guilty) is an
unparalleld, most unnatural prodigious Impiety.

It was thought a great dishonor heretofore, for men of Honor and Estates,
not to serve and defend their Country gratis, as our own See Littleton in his
Chapter of Gran-serjanty, Knight Service, Escuage, and Cook ibi.
Lawbooks and Histories plentifully manifest: and shall such Persons now turn
sordid Mercenaries; stir neither hand nor foot without their Pay; and be more
diligent to get their wages, than discharge their Service? God forbid.

It is Numb. 32 Josh. 1. 12, to 18.
Recorded of the Children of Gad and Reuben, after they had recovered their
inheritance on this side Jordan, that they went all up armed before the Lord
over Jordan, at their own free cost, until they had driven out all the
enemies in it before them, subdued the Land, and settled their brethren of the
other Tribes peaceably in it. And shall not Englishmen of Estates do the like
for their Brethren now, in these times of need, when money (the sinews of
War) is almost quite shrunk up, by reason of former Disbursements and want
of Trade? We read, Judge 5. 19.
That the very Heathen Kings of Canaan when they came and fought in Taanach by
the waters of Megiddo, against the Israelites, THEY TOOK NO GAIN OF MONEY,
for their pains: Such was their Noble-generosity, which Deborah registers in
her Song for their eternal Glory. And we hear of diverse Lords and Gentlemen
in the Kings Army, which serve against their Country gratis; yea furnish out
sundry Horse and Foot, of their proper cost; of few or none such there who
receive any Pay. And shall these be more free, generous, active in serving,
fighting against God, Religion, Laws, Liberties, Parliament and their Country;
than those of like Rank and quality on the Parliaments party are in warring
for them? O 2 Samuel 1. 20.
let not such anignoble, unchristian Report be ever once justly told in Gath,
or published in the streets of Askelon, lest the daughters of the Philistines
rejoice, lest the sons and daughters of the uncircumcised triumph.

I know there are some Heroicke Worthies in the Parliaments Armies, of whom I
may truly sing with Deborah, Judge. 5. 9. 18.
My heart is toward the Governors of Israel, that offered themselves willingly
among the people; and who like Zebulon and Nepthali, have freely jeoparded
their lives unto the death, in the high places of the field. Blessed be their
Endeavors, and their Names for ever Honorable: I shall now only wish that
others would imitate their laudable examples, that so our long-lingring wars,
may be speedily and happily determined in a blessed, pure, pious, secure,
honorable, lasting Peace. They are Tormentors, not Chirurgions, Executioners,
not true Soldiers, who desire, endeavor not speedily to close up and heal
their dearest Countries bleeding, festring wounds; for which I have prepared
this Treatise, as a Sovereign Balm, to incarne and cicatrize them, not
ulcerate, or inflame them.

It was the Prophets Patheticke expostulation, Jer. 8. 20. 22.
The harvest is past, the Summer is ended, and we are not healed: Is there no
balm in Gilead? Is there no Physician there? why then is not the health of the
Daughter of my people recovered? It may be Englands and Irelands expostulation
now: The Lord put it into the hearts of our great Physicians (the King,
Parliament, and Grandees of both Armies) that they may now at last with
bleeding, melting hearts and spirits, speedily pour forth such effectual
healing Balmes into these two dying Kingdoms deadly wounds, as may effectually
cure and restore them to more perfect health and vigor than they ever formerly
enjoyed, that so they may lose nothing but their putrid blood, their proud dead
flesh, their filthy sanies and corrupt humors, by their unnatural stabs
already received: Toward the advancement of which much desired cure, if these
my undigested rude Collections (interrupted with sundry inevitable interloping
Distractions, which may justly excuse their many defects) may add any
contribution, or satisfy any seduced, or scrupulous Consciences touching this
present War; I shall deem my labors highly recompensed; And so recommending
them to Gods blessing, and thy charitable acceptance, I shall detain thee
with no further Prologue.

Farewell
THE SOVEREIGN POWER OF PARLIAMENTS and KINGDOMS: PROVING Is It.
That the Parliaments present necessary Defensive War, is Just and Lawful
both in point of Law and Conscience, and no Treason nor Rebellion.
HAving in the two former Parts of this Discourse dissipated four chief
Complaints against the Parliaments proceedings; Object. 5.
I come now in order (in point of time and sequel) to the 5th Grand Objection
of the King, Royalists, and Papists against the Parliament. To wit: See many
Printed Declarations, Proclamations to this effect; with other Pamphlets.
That they have traitorously taken up Arms, and levied war against the King
himself in his Kingdom; and would have taken away his life at Keinton
battle, which is no less than Rebellion and High Treason, by the Statute of
25. E. 3. c. 2. with other obsolete Acts; and by the Common Law. Which
Objection, though last in time, is yet of greatest weight and difficulty, now
most cried up and insisted on, of all the rest, in many of his Majesty's late
Proclamations, Declarations, and in Anti-Parliamentary Pamphlets.

To give a punctual Answer to this capital Complaint, Answ.
not out of any desire to foment, but cease this most unnatural bloody war,
which threatens utter desolation to us if proceeded in, or not determined with
a just, honorable, secure, lasting peace; now lately rejected by his Majesty's
party. I say,

First, 1.
that it is apparent to all the world, who are not wilfully or maliciously
blinded; That this Majesty first began this war, not only by his endeavors
to bring up the Northern Army to force the Parliament, confessed by the
flight, letters, examinations of those who were chief Actors in it; but by
raising sundry forces under color of a guard before the Parliament levied any.

Secondly, 2.
that the Sea the Houses several Declarations to this effect.
Parliament in raising their forces had no intention at all to offer the least
violence to his Majesty's person, Crown, dignity, nor to draw any English
blood; but only to defend themselves and the Kingdom against his Majesty's
Malignant invasive plundring Forces, to rescue his Majesty out of the hands,
the power of those ill Councellers and Malignants who withdrew him from his
Parliament, to bring him back with honor, peace, safety, to his great
Council; (their General and Army Marching with a Petition to this purpose,)
and to bring those Delinquents to condign punishment who most contemptuously
deserted the Houses, contrary to Order, Law, the Privileges of Parliament,
their own Protestation taken in both Houses, sheltring themselves, under the
power of his Majesty's presence and Forces, from the justice of the Houses, and
apprehension of their Officers, contrary to all presidents in former ages, in
High affront of the privileges, honor, power of the Parliament, and 13 E 1 c.
38 31 H. 6, c. 1. See Ashes Table, Contemp. 6, 7. the Law books there quoted,
6 H. 8. c. 16. 3 E. 3. 19. Coron, 161. Dyer, 60. Stamford: Pleas, l. 1. c, 29,
f. 38. l, 3, c, 63, f, 153
Fundamental knowns Law of the Realm: Since which time, his Majesty having
(contrary to his former Proclamations and frequent Printed solemn
Declarations) entertained, not only diverse Irish Pop^sh Rebels, but likewise
English and Outlandish Papists in his Army, and given Commissions to sundry The
Declaration of the Lords and Commons in Answer to his Majesty's, concerning
Keinto^ Battle.
Arch Popish Recusants, to Arm themselves, and raise Forces against the
Parliament, and Kingdom, now in the field in all the Northern parts, Wales,
and other places, (and that under the Popes own consecrated Banner as many
report) in defiance of our Protestant Religion, (designed by the Popish Party
both at home and abroad, to no less then utter extirpation in England, as well
as in Ireland, if not in Scotland too, (as some of them openly profess;) the
Parliament are hereupon necessitated to augment and recrute their forces; as
for the precedent ends at first, so now more especially, for the necessary
defense of the Protestant Religion established among us by law; against which
they (and all others who are not wilfully blinded) visibly discern a most
apparent desperate conspiracy; which though not clearly perceived, but only
justly suspected at first, does now appear (all circumstances and agents
considered) to be the very Embrio and primitive cause of this deplorable war;
against which the Parliament and subjects are now more necessitated and engaged
to desend themselves then ever, seeing they have by all possible means
endeavored to prevent this war at first, and since to accommodate it, though
in vain, upon just, reasonable, and honorable safe terms for King and
Kingdom. The sole Question then in this case thus truly stated will be.

Whether his Majesty, having contrary to his Oath, Duty, the fundamental Laws
of God and the Realm, raised an Army of Malignants, Papists, Forraigners;
against his Parliament, Kingdom, People, to make an Offensive war upon them,
to murder, rob, spoil, deprive them of their peace, liberties, properties,
estates; to impose unlawful taxes by force upon them; protect Delinquents and
evil Counselors against the Parliaments Justice, and violently to undermine
our established Protestant Religion; the Commonwealth of England legally
assembled in Parliament; and all Subjects in such cases by Command and
direction from both Houses of Parliament, may not lawfully and justly without
any Treason or Rebellion, in point of Law and Conscience, take up defensive
Arms to preserve the Privileges of Parliament, their Laws, lives, liberties,
estates, properties, Religion, to bring Delinquents and ill Councillors to
condign punishment, and rescue his seduced Majesty out of their hands and
power, though he be personally present with them, to assist and countenance
them in this unnatural destructive war?

And under correction (notwithstanding any thing I ever yet heard or read to
the contrary) I conceive affirmatively, that they may justly do it, both in
point of Law and Conscience. I shall begin with Law, because in this unhappie
controversy, it must direct the conscience.

First, I have Part 1. and 2. throughout.
already proved in Judgment of Law; the Parliament and Kingdom assembled in
it, to be the Sovereign power, and of greater authority then the King, who is
but their public Minister in point of civil Justice, and General in matters
of war, as the Roman Kings and Emperors were, and other foreign Kings of
old and at this day are. The Parliament then being the highest power, and
having principal right and authority to denounce, conclude and proclaim
war, (as I have manifested in the debate of the Militia,) may not only
lawfully resist, but oppugn, suppress all Forces raised against it, and the
Kingdoms peace or welfare.

Secondly, the principal end of the Kingdoms, original erecting Parliaments,
and investing them with supreme power at first, was, to defend not only with
good Laws and Council, but when absolute necessity requires (as now it
does,) with open force of Arms; the Subjects Liberties, Persons, Estates,
Religion, Laws, Lives, Rights, from the encroachments and violence of their
Kings, and to keep Kings within due bounds of Law and Justice, the end of
instituting the Sea Polybius Hist. l. 6. Arist Polit. l. 3. c. 10. 11. l. 5. c.
10. l. 2. c. 5. Bodin l. 1, c, 10. l, 2, c. 5.
Senate and Ephori among the Lacaedemonians, the Senate and Dictators among the
Romans, the Hieron. Blan. Aragonens. Rerum Comment. p. 588. 589. 716. to 725.
747. to 760. Joan, Mariana de Rege and Regie Instit. l. 1. c. 5. to 10.
Forum Suprarbiense, and Justitia Aragoniae among the Aragonians; of
Parliaments, Dietts, and Assemblies of the estates in other foreign
Kingdoms, and in Scotland, as I shall prove at large in its In the Appendix.
proper place. This is clear by the proceedings of all our Parliaments in
former ages; Especially in King John's, Henry the third, Edward the 1. 2. 3. and
Richard the seconds Reigns; by the latter Parliaments in King James his
reign, yea of 3. Caroli, the last dissolved Parliament, and this now sitting,
whose principal care and employment has been to vindicate the Subjects
Liberties, properties, laws, and Religion, from all illegal encroachments on
them by the Crown and its ill Instruments: by the Part. 1.
forecited resolutions of Bracton, Fleta, the Myrror of Justices, Vowell,
Holinshed, the Council of Basil, and others, that the Parliament ought to
restrain and bridle the king when he casts off the bridle of the Law, and
invades the Subjects Liberties, especially with open force of Arms in an
Hostile manner: and by the constant practice of our Ancestors and the Barons
Wars, in maintenance of Magna Charta, with other good Laws and Privileges,
confirmed by Parliament. If then the Parliament be instrusted by the Kingdom
with this Superlative power, thus to protect the Subjects Liberties,
properties, Laws, persons, Religion, etc. against the kings invasions on them
by policy or violence: they should both betray their trust, yea the whole
kingdom too, if they should not with open Force of Arms, (when Policy,
Council, and Petitions will not do it) defend their own and the Subjects
Liberties, persons, privileges, etc. against his Majesty's offensive Armies
which invade them, intending to make the whole kingdom a present booty to
their insaciable rapine, and a future vassal to his Majesty's absolute
arbitrary power, by way of conquest.

I read in Commonwealth l. 3. c. 1 See Plut. Caes. and Pompeius.
Bodin that the Roman Senate being no way able to restrain Caesar, took their
refuge to that ancient Decree of the Senate, which was commonly made but in
dangerous times of the Common-weal^. Videant Consules and caeteri Magistratus
ne quid detrimenti capiat Respublica: Let the Consulls and other Majestrates
fore see that the Commonweal take no harm. With which decree of the Senate,
the Consulls being armed, suddenly raised their power, commanding Pompey to
take up Arms and raise an Army against Caesar to oppose his violent
proceedings by force who after his conquest of Pompey refusing to rise up to
the Consulls, Pretors, and whole Senate, out of his pride, through his ill
Counselors advise, and talking with them, as if they had been but private
men, he so far offended both the Senate and people, that to free the
Republicke from his Tyranny, and preserve their hereditary Liberties, they
conspired his death, and soon after murdered him in the Senate House, where
they gave him no less than 23. wounds. And Aragonensium Rerum Com^^^. p. 724.
Hieronimus Blanca assures us, that the Suprarbiense Forum, Iustitia Aragoniae,
or States of Arag^n, (erected to withstand the tyranny and encroachments of
their kings) may by the Laws of their Realm assemble together, and RESIST
THEIR KING WITH FORCE OF ARMS, as often as there shall be need to repulse his,
or his Officers violence against the Laws; For when they erected this Court,
they said, It would be little worth to have good Laws enacted, and a middle
Court of Justice between the King and people appointed, if it might not be
lawful to take up Arms for their Defense when it was needful; (being
agreeable to the very Law of nature and reason;) Because then it will not be
sufficient to fight with Counsel: For if this were not so, and the State and
Subjects in such cases might not lawfully take up arms, all things had long
ere this been in the power of Kings. Therefore, no doubt, our Parliament and
State, as well as others, may by the very Law of Nature, and fundamental
institution of Parliaments, now justly take up Defensive arms to preserve
their Liberties, Laws, Lives, Estates, Religion. from vassallage and ruin.

Thirdly, Our own Parliaments, Prelates, Nobles, and Commons in all ages
(especially in times of Popery) as well in Parliament, as out, have by open
force of arms resisted, suppressed the oppressions, rapines, unjust violence,
and armies of their Princes raised against them; Yea, incountred their Kings in
open Battles, taken their persons Prisoners, and sometimes expelled, nay
deposed them from their Royal authority, when they became incorrigible open
professed enemies to their kingdoms, their Subjects, seeking the ruin,
slavery, and desolation of those, whom by Office, Duty, Oath, and common
Justice, they were bound inviolably to protect in Liberty and peace, as the
Part 1. p. 6, 7, 8, etc.
premised Histories of Archigallo, Emerian, Vortigern, Segebert, Osred,
Ethelred, Bernard, Edwin, Ceolwulfe, King John, Henry the 3d. Edward 1. and 2.
Richard the 2, Henry the 6th. (our British, Saxon, English Kings,) and other
examples common in our own Annalls, plentifully manifest. Neither are their
examples singular, but all Kingdoms generally throughout the world in all ages
have done the like, when their Kings degenerated into Tyrants, of which there
are See Arist. Polir. l. 5 c. 10 Dt. Beards Thea^re of Gods Judgments. l. 2.
c. 9. to 43. Ad generum Cereris pauci sine sarguine fuso, Descendunt Reges, and
sicca morte Tyranni suvenal. See the Appendix.
infinite precedens in History: which actions all ages, all Kingdoms have
always reputed lawful both in point of Policy, Law, Religion, as warranted by
the very Laws of Nature, Reason, State, Nations, God; which instruct, not
only particular persons, but whole Cities and Kingdoms for their own
necessary defense, preservation, the supportation of humane Society and
Liberty, to protect themselves against all unlawful violence and Trranny,
even of their Kings themselves, or their Ministers, to whom neither the Laws
of God, Nature, Man, nor any civil Nation, ever yet gave the least authority
to Murder, Spoil, Oppress, enslave their Subjects, or deprive them of their
lawful Liberties or Estates; which resistance were it unlawful or unjust (as
many ignorant Royallists and Parasites now teach) some few oppressing
tyrannizing wilful Princes, might without the least resistance, ruin,
murder, enslave the whole world of men; overthrow all settled forms of civil
government, extirpate Christian Religion, and destroy all humane Society at
their pleasures; all which had been effected, yea, all States and Kingdoms
totally subverted long ago, by ambitious Tyrannizing lawless Princes, had not
this Lawful, Natural, Hereditary power of resisting and opposing their
illegal violence (inherent in their Parliaments, States, Kingdoms) restrained
and suppressed their exorbitances of this kind. Now that this necessary
Defensive opposition and resistance against open Regal Hostile violence, which
has been ever held lawful, and frequently practiced in all Kingdoms, all
ages heretofore, as just and necessary; should become suddenly unlawful to our
Parliament, and Kingdom only, at this instant, seems very unreasonable unto
me.

Fouthly, It is the express resolution of Polit. l. 5. c. 13. 11.
Aristotle, Memorabil. l. 4. p. 813.
Xenophon, Hist. l. 6.
Polibius, Spelmani Council. Tem. 1 p. 34.
Pope Elutherius, (in his Epistle to our first Christian King, Lucius) King
Lambard. Archaion. p. 130. Fox Acts and Mon. vol. 1. p. 214.
Edward the Confessor in his established Laws, c. 17. the Lib cap. 1. 2 Surius
Tom. 3. p. 383.
Council of Paris, Anno 829. and Isiodor cited by it; Commonwealth. l. 2. c.
4, 5.
John Bodin, De Rege et Regis Jnstit. l. 1. c. 5. 6.
John Mariana, and generally of all foreign Divines and Politicians, Pagan or
Christian; yea of Lib. 3. c. 9. fol. 107.
Bracton, Lib. 1. c. 17:
Fleta, De Laudib. Legum Angl. c. 9. to 15.
Fortescue, and Speech in Parliament House, Anno 1609.
King James himself; that a King governing in a settled Kingdom, cease to be
a King, and degenerates into a Tyrant, so soon as he leaves to rule by his
Laws; much more, when he begins to invade his Subjects, Persons, Rights,
Liberties, to set up an Abitrary power; impose unlawful Taxes, raise Forces,
and make War upon his Subjects, whom he should Protect, and rule in peace; to
pillage, plunder, waste, and spoil his Kingdom; imprison, murder, and
destroy his people in an hostile manner, to captivate them to his pleasure; the
very highest degree of Tyranny, condemned and detested by God, and all good
men. The whole State and Kingdom therefore in such cases as these, for their
own just necessary preservation, may lawfully with force of Arms, when no
other course can secure them, not only passively, but actively resist their
Prince, in such his violent, exorbitant, tyrannical proceedings; without
resisting any kingly, lawful royal Authority Vested in the Kings person, for
the Bract. l. 3. c. 9. Fleta l. 1. c. 17. Fortos. c. 9. to 15. Cook 7. Report
fol. 5. 11. Calvin's Case. Romans 13 4, 5. 1 Pet. 2. 14.
kingdoms preservation only, not destruction; because in, and as to these
illegal oppressions, tyrannical actions, not warranted, but prohibited by the
Laws of God, and the Realm, (to whom he is See the Apendix.
accountable, and by whom he is justly censurable for them) he is no lawful
King, nor Majestrate, but an unjust oppressing Tyrant, and a mere private man,
who (as to these proceedings) has quite denuded himself of his just Regal
authority. So that all those wholesome Laws made by the whole State in
Parliament, for the necessary preservation and defense of their Kings Royal
Person, and lawful Sovereign power; the suppression of all Insurrections,
Treasons, Conspiracies and open Wars against them, whiles they govern their
people justly according to Law, (as all good Princes are 2 Samuel 23. 3 2 Chro.
9. 8 See the Kings Coron. oath,
obliged to do by oath and duty;) or the open violent resisting of their
Lawful authority and Commands; to which all Subjects both in point of Law and
Row. 13. 1 2, 3. 1 Pet. 2 13. 14. Titus 3. 1
Conscience, ought cheerfully and readily to Submit; will yield no public
Countenance, Encouragement, or Protection at all to Kings, in their irregall,
tyrannical oppressions, or violent courses; especially when they turn
professed public enemies to their people, proclaim open War against them,
invade their Laws, Liberties, Goods, Houses, Persons, and exercise all acts of
Hostility against them, as fatre forth as the most barbarous Foreign Enemies
would do: It being against all common sense and reason to conceive, that our
Parliaments, Laws which strictly inhibit and punish the very smallest
violations of the public peace, with all kinds of Oppressions, Robberies,
Trespasses, Batteries, Assaults, Bloodsheds, Fraies, Murders, Routs, Riots,
Insurrections, Burglaries, Rapes, Plunderings, Force-able Entries, Invasions of
the Subjects Liberties or Properties, in all other persons, and greatest
public Officers whatsoever (whose Perniciosus de Repub etc. Ciecero de Legi. 2 Samuel 12. 7, to 14. cap. 16. 21. 22. 2 Chr. 33. See. Marian. de Reg. and Reg.
Inst. l. 1. c. 9.
Delinquences are so much the more heinous, execrable and censurable, De Leg.
Ang c. 9. 10. 12, 13. 14.
as their persons, honors, and places are more eminent) should so far
countenance, justify, or patronize them only in the King, the Supreme
fountain of Justice ( ad tutelam Legis corporum and bonorum erectus, as
Fortescue, and Sir Lib. 7. f. 5, Calvin's Case. c.
Edward Cook resolve; Cujus Potestas Iuris est, and non Injuriae; and cum sit
author Iuris, non debet inde injuriarum nasci occasio, unde Iura naseuntur, as
Lib. 3. c. 9. f. 107.
Bracton, and Lib. 1 c. 17.
Fleta determine;) as not to permit the Subjects, under pain of Rebellion and
high Treason, by force of Arms, upon express command and direction of the
whole Kingdom in Parliament, so much as to defend their Persons, Goods,
Estates, Houses, Wives, Children, Liberties, Lives, Religion, against the open
violence of the King himself, or his Malignant plundring, murdering Papists,
Caveleers: When as Kings of all others (as Lib 3. c. 9.
Bracton, De Laud legum Angl. c. 9. to 15.
For escue, and De Rege and Regis Instit. l. 1. c. 9.
Mariana prove at large) both by Oath and Duty, ought to be more observant of,
and obedient to the Laws of God and their Realms ( which are Deuteronomy. 10. 17
Prove. 28. 21 Romans 2. 11. Ephesians 6. 11. 1 Pet. 1. 17.
no respectors of Persons) then the very meanest of their Subjects. That
Precept then of Paul, Romans 13. 1. 2. 3. Let every Soul be subject to the
higher Powers, etc. And the Statute of 25. E. 3. c. 2. with other obsolete
Acts, which declare it High Treason, to levy War against the King in his
Realm, must needs be intended of, and quallified with these subsequent just
limitations, suitable to their genuine sense and meaning; to wit, That as long,
and so far forth, as Kings justly and uprightly do execute their just
Royal power, conferred on them by God and their people, according to the Law
of God, and their Realms, to the Protection, encouragement and praise of all
their good Subjects, and the deserved punishment only of Malefactors; they
must and ought to be cheerfully obeyed, and quietly submitted to, as Gods own
Ministers, without the least resistance, private or public; neither ought any
private men upon any private injuries, of their own authority to raise up in
Arms against them, seeing they are public Magistrates in whom all the
Kingdom have an interest, without the general assent and authority of the
whole State and Kingdom, or of both Houses of Parliment which represents it.
But if Kings degenerate into Tyrants, and turn professed enemies to their
Kingdoms, Parliaments, People, by making open War against them; by spoiling,
murdering, imprisoning, maiming, sacking, destroying, or putting them out of
their Protections, without any just or lawful grounds, endeavoring by force
of Arms to subvert their Laws, Liberties, Religion, and expose them as a prey
to their merciless blood-thirsty Soldiers; or bring in Foreign Forces to
conquer them, (our present case;) I dare confidently aver, it was never the
thought nor intention of Paul, or the Holy Ghost, much less of our Nobles,
Prelates, and Commons in Parliament, which enacted these Laws (who so often took
up Arms, as well offensive, as defensive, against our Kings, in such like cases
heretofore) to inhibit Subjects, Kingdoms, Parliaments (especially, by direct
Votes and Ordinances of both Houses) under pain of damnation, high Treason, or
Rebellion, by defensive Arms to resist Kings themselves, or any of their
Cavalliers: and if this question had been put to Paul, Peter, or any of those
Parliaments, which enacted these objected Laws; Whether they ever meant by
these Precepts or Statutes, totally to prohibit all Subjects, by general
assent in Parliament, to take up such defensive Arms, or make any forceable
resistance, against their Kings or their Armies, in such cases of extremity and
necessity as these, under the foresaid penalties? I make little question, but
they would have clearly resolved; that it was never so much as within the
compass of their thoughts, much less their plain intention, to prohibit
such a resistance, in this or such like cases, but only according to the
precedent exposition of their words; and that they never imagined to establish
in the world any Irresistable Lawless Tyranny, or any such spoil or butchery
of Kingdoms, of Subjects, execrable to God and man, in all persons, all ages,
which have See Doctor Beards Theater of Gods Judgments, l. 2. c. 13. to 42.
resisted them even unto blood; but rather totally to suppress them; There
being scarce any more pregnant Text, against the Tyranny, the boundless
Prerogatives, the illegal proceedings of Kings, and Higher Powers in all the
Scripture, then that of Romans 13. 1. to 7. if rightly scanned, as Pareus, and
others on it manifest. Therefore the Parliaments and peoples present defensive
War, and resistance against their seduced King, and his Malignant Popish
Cavalliers, is no violation of any Law of God, of the Realm; but a just
necessary War, which they have to the uttermost endeavored to prevent: and
no Treason, no Rebellion at all within the meaning of any Law, or Statute,
unless we should think our Parliaments so mad, as to declare it high Treason,
or Rebellion, even for the Parliament and Kingdom it self, so much as to take
up Arms for their own necessary preservation, to prevent their inevitable
ruin, when they are openly assaulted by Royal armies; which none can ever
presume they would do, being the very high way to their own, and the whole
Kingdoms subversion.

Fifthly, admit the King should bring in Foreign forces ( French, Spanish,
Danes, Dutch, or Irish) to destroy, or Conquer his Subjects, Parliament,
Kingdom, (as some such forces are already landed, and more expected daily;)
and should join himself personally with them in such a service, I think there
is no Divine, Lawyer, or true hearted Englishman, so void of reason, or common
understanding, as to affirm it Treason, or Rebellion in point of Law, and a
matter of Damnation in Conscience, or true Divinity, for the Parliaments,
Subjects, Kingdom, to take up necessary defensive arms for their own
preservation in such a case, even against the King himself, and his army of
Aliens; but would rather deem it a just, honorable, necessary action; yea, a
duty, for every English man to venture his life, and all his fortunes, for the
defense of his own dearest Native Country, Posterity, Liberty, Religion; and
no less then a glorious Gratian. Causa 23. qu. 1. 2. 3. Calvin. Lexicon. Iurid
Tit Bellum.
Martyrdom, to dye manfully in the Field, in such a public quarrel: the
very Heathens generally resolving; that Cicero Tusquaest. l. 2.
Dulce and decorum est pro Patria mori: Et mortes pro Patria appetitae, Non
solum gloriosae Rhetoribus, sed etiam beatae videri solent: In a case of this
quallitie. Whence that noble Roman Live Romans Hist. l 5. sect. 51. p. 219.
Camillus, professed to all the Romans in a public Oration; Patriae deesse
quoad vita suppetat, alijs turpe, Camillo etiam NEFAS EST. And is not there the
self same equity, and reason, when the King shall raise an Army of Popish
English, or Irish Rebels, Malignants, Delinquents, and bring in Forraigners
(though yet in no great proporation) to effect the like design. If armed
forceable resistance be no Treason, no Rebellion in Law or Conscience, in the
first, it can be no such crime in our present case.

Sixthly, I would demand of any Lawyer, or Divine: What is the true genuine
reason, that the taking up of offensive arms against, or offering violence to
the person, or life of the King, is High Treason, in point of Law and
Divinity? Is it not only because and as he is, the head and chief member of
the Kingdom, which has a Common interest in him; and because the Kingdom it
self sustaines a public prejudice and loss by this War against, and violence
to his Person? Doubtless, every man must acknowledge this, to be the only
reason; for if he were not such a public person, the levying War against, or
murdering of him, could be no High. Treason at all. And this is the reason,
why the elsewhere cited Statutes of our Realm, together with our Historians,
make levying of War, deposing, or killing the King by private persons, High
Treason; not only against the King, but the REALM, and Kingdom to; Witness
the Statutes of 5. R. 2. c, 6. 11. R. 2. c. 1. 3. 6. 17 R. 2. c. 8. 21. R. 2.
c. 2. 4. 20. 3. H. 5. Parl. 2. c. 6. 28. H. 8. c. 7. 1. Mar. c. 6. 13. Eliz. c.
1. 3. Iaco. 1. 2. 3. 4. and the Act of Pacification this present Parliament,
(declaring those persons of England and Scotland TRAITORS TO EITHER REALM, who
shall take up Arms against either Realm, without common consent of
Parliament) which Enact, The levying of War against the Kingdom and
Parliament, invading of England or Ireland, treachery against the Parliament,
repealing of certain Acts of Parliament, ill Counselling the King, coining
false Money, and offering violence to the Kings person, to take away his Life,
to be high Treason, not only against the King and his Crown, but THE REALM
TO; and those who are guilty of such crimes, to be High Traitors and Enemies
TO THE REALM, Walsingh. Hist. Ang. p. 334. 335.
as well at to the King. Hence John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, being accused
in a Parliament held in 7. R. 2. by a Carmelite Friar, of High Treason, for
practicing suddenly to surprise the KING, and seize upon his Kingdom; the
Duke denied it, as a thing incredible upon this very ground; If I should thus
(said he) affect the Kingdom: Walsing, hist Ang. p. 337.
Js it credible after your murder (which God forbid) that the Lords of this
Kingdom, could patiently endure me, Domini mei ET PATRIAE PRODITOREM, being a
Traitor both of my LORD and COUNTRY? Hence in the same Parliament of 7. R. 2.
John Walsh Esquire Captain of Cherburg in France, was accused by one of
Navarre, DE PRODITIONE REGIS and REGNI, Of Treason against the King and
Kingdom; for delivering up that Castle to the Enemies; And in the Walsing.
hist. Ang. p. 245. 246.
Parliament of 3. R. 2. Sir John Annesley Knight, accused Thomas Ketrington
Esquire, of Treason against the King and Realm, for betraying and selling the
Castle of Saint Savior within the Isse of Constantine in France, Walsing. hist
Ang p 72. 76 91, 92. 105, 106.
to the French, for a great sum of money, when as he neither wanted Victuals,
nor means to defend it: both which Accusations (being of Treasons beyond the
Sea) were determined by Battle, and Duels fought to decide them. Hence the
great Favorite, Pierce Gaveston, Tanquam Legum subversor, Hostis Terrae
Publicus, and Publicus Regni Proditor, capite truncatus est: and the two
Spensers after him, were in Edward the second his Reign likewise banished,
condemned, and executed, as Traitors to the King and Realm, ET REGNI
PRODITORES for miscounselling and seducing the King, and moving him to make
War upon his people: Hence both the Halls Chro. 1 and 3. H. 4 f. 17, 22. Fox
Acts and Mon. vol. 1. Edit. ult. Col. 676, 677.
Pierces, and the Archbishop of York, in their Articles against King Henry the
fourth, accused him, as guilty of High Treason, and a Traitor both to the King,
Realm and Kingdom of England, for Deposing and murdering Richard the second.
And hence the Gunpouder Conspirators, were 3 Iac. c. 1, 2 3, 4. The Kings
Proclamations. 3 Jacob. Against them, and the Arrai^nement of Traitors.
declared, adjudged, and executed as Traitors both to the KING and REALM, for
attempting to blow up the Parliament House, when the King, Nobles, and Commons
were therein assembled: If then the King shall become an open enemy to his
Kingdom, and Subjects, to waste or ruin them; or shall seek to betray them
to a Foreign Enemy (which has been held no less then Treason in a King to
do, who by the express resolution of 28. H. 8. cap. 7. may become a Traitor
to the REALM, and thereupon forfeit his very right and title to the Crown;)
it can be no Treason nor Rebellion in Law or Theology, for the Parliament,
Kingdom, Subjects, to take up arms against the King and his Forces, in such a
case, when he shall wilfully and maliciously rent himself from, and set
himself in direct opposition against his Kingdom; and by his own voluntary
actions turn their common interest in him for their good and protection, into
a public engagement against him, as a common Enemy, who seeks their general
ruin. And if Kings may lawfully take up arms against their Subjects, as all
Royallists plead, after they reject their lawful power, and become open Rebels
or Traitors, because then as to this, they cease to be Subjects any longer, and
so forfeit the benefit of their Royal protection: By the self-same reason (the
bond and stipulation being mutual; Kings being their Subjects Cook 7. Report,
Calvin's case.
Liege Lords, by Oath and Duty, as well as they their Liege people:) When Kings
turn open professed Foes to their Subjects in an Hostile Warrelike way, they
presently both in Law and Conscience, cease to be their Kings de jure, as to
this particular, and their Subjects alleagiance thereby is as to this
discharged, and suspended toward them, as appears by the Kings Coronation
Oath, and the Math. Paris page 73. Speed p. 483. 484.
Lords and Prelates conditional Fealty to King Steven, so that they may justly
in Law and Conscience resist their unlawful assaults, as enemies; for which
they must only censure their own rash unjust proceedings, and breach of Faith
to their People, not their Peoples just defensive opposition which themselves
alone occasioned.

Seventhly, It must of necessity be granted; that for any King to levy war
against his Subjects, unless upon very good grounds of Law and conscience, and
in case of absolute necessity, when there is no other remedy left, is directly
contrary to his very Oath and duty, witness the Law of King Edward the
Confessor, cap. 17. and Coronation Oaths of all our Kings forementioned; To
keep PEACE and godly agreement ENTIRELY, ACCORDING TO THEIR POWER to their
people; Contrary to all the fundamental Laws of the Realm, and the Prologues
of most Statutes, entirely to preserve, and earnestly to endeavor the peace
and welfare of their peoples persons, goods, estates, laws, liberties;
Contrary to the main tenor of all 1 Timothy 2. 1 2, 3. Ier. 19 7 Psalm. 122. 6. 7,
8. Isa. 29. 8. and 9. 6.
Sacred Scriptures, which have relation unto Kings; but more especially to the
1 Kings 12. 21. 23. 24. and 2 Chronicles. 11. 1. 2. Where when King Rehoboam had
gathered a very great army to fight against the ten Tribes, (which revolted
from him for following his young Counselors advice, and denying their just
request, and crowned Jeroboam for their King) intending to reduce them to his
obedience by force of arms; God by his Prophet Shemiah expressly prohibited
him and his army, to go up, or fight against them; and made them all to
return to their own houses without fighting; and to Isay 14. 4. 19. to 22.
where God threatens, to cast the King of Babylon out of his grave, as an
abominable branch, as a carcass trodden under foot, (mark the reason)
Because thou have destroyed thy Land, and slain thy People, to cut off from
Babylon his name and remembrance, and Sons and Nephews: as he had cut off
his peoples, though heathens. Yea, contrary to that memorable Speech of that
noble Roman Livy Romans Hist. l. 7. Dec. 40, p. 285. Arist. Polit. l. p. 5.
Marian^ de Rege, l. c. c. 5.
Valerius Corinus when he was chosen Dictator, and went to fight against the
Roman conspirators, who took up arms against their Country. Fugeris etiam
honestius, tergumque civi dederis, quam pugnaveris contra patriam; nunc ad
pacificandum been atque honest inter primos stabis: postulate aequa et ferte;
quanquam vel iniquis standum est potius, quam impias inter nos conseramus
manus, etc. If then a Kings offensive war upon his Subjects, without very
just grounds and unevitable occasions be thus utterly sinful, and unlawful in
law and Conscience; and most diametrally contrary to the Oath, Office, trust
and duty of a King, (who by this strange metamorphosis Arist. Polit. l. 3. and
5 Buchan. de Iure Regni apad Scotos.
becomes a Wolf instead of a Shepherd, a destroyer in liew of a Protector; a
public Enemy in place of a Common friend; an unnatural Tyrant, instead of a
natural King) it follows inevitably; that the Subjects or Kingdoms
resistance and defensive war in such a case, both by the law of God, of
nature, of the Realm, must be lawful, and just; because directly opposite to,
the only preservative against that war, which is unlawful and unjust: and so
no Treason, nor Rebellion (by any Law of God or man,) which are illegal and
criminal too.

Eighthly, It is the received resolution of all Gratia^. Causa, 23. qu 1, 2, 3.
Jacob Spulegiu^, Lexicon Iur is, tit Bellum. F. de Iustitia et jure Non sine.
Ioannis Ca^vini Lexicon ^uris. Tit. Bellum co. 244, 245. Summa Angelica, et
Rosella Aensis Sum. Part. 3. qu. 36. mem. 3. and quaest. 47. number. 3. Martin
Laud. de Bello, Suriu^ Council. Tom. 3. p. 520.
Canoni^^s, Schoolmen, and Civil Lawyers; That a defensive war undertaken
only for necessary defense, does not prop^ly deserve the nam of war, but
only of Defense: That it is no l^vying of war at all, (which implies an
active offen^ive, not passive defensive raising of forces, and so no Treason
nor offense within the statute of 25. E. 3. c. 2. as the Parliament, the only
proper Judge of Treasons, has already resolved in point of Law but a faculty
only of defense Cuilibet Omni Iure, ipsoque Rationis Ductu Permissa; etc.
permitted to every one By all Law, (or right) and by the very conduct of
reason, since to propulse violence and injury is permitted by the very Law of
Nations. Hence of all the seven sorts of war which they make, they define the
last to be, A just and Necessary War quod fit se et sua defendendo; and that
those who d^e is such a war (caeteris paribus) are safe (Causa 23. qu. 1.) and
if they be slain for defense of the Commonwealth, their memory shall live in
perpetual glory. And hence they give this Definition of a just War. Calv.
Lexicon. Jurid. Ib. ex Hotomano. and other forcited.
War is a Lawful Defense against an imminent or praeceeding offense upon a
public or private cause, concluding: That if Defense be severed from War, it
is a Sedition, not War; Although the Emperor himself denounce it; Yea,
although the whole World combined together. Proclaim it: For the Emperor, a
King, can no more lawfully hurt another in War, then he can take away his
goods or life without cause. Therefore let Commentato^s b^awle eternally about
War, yet they shall never justify nor prove it lawful, Nisi ex Defensione
Legitima; but when it proceeds from Lawful defense, all Wars being rash and
unjust, against those who justly defend themselves. This War then being
undertaken by the Parliament, only for their own, and the Kingdoms necessary
defense, against the Kings invasive Armies and Cavalliers (especially, now
after the Kings rejection of all Honorable and safe terms of Peace and
accommodation tendered to him by the Parliament:) must needs be just and
lawful; and so no Treason, nor Rebellion, in point of Law or Conscience; Since
no Law of God, nor of the Realm, has given the King any Authority or
Commission at all to make this unnatural War upon his Parliament, his
people, to enslave their Souls and Bodies, or any inhibition to them, not to
defend themselves in such a case.

These general Considerations thus premised, wherein Law and Conscience walk
hand in hand; I shall in the next place lay down such particular grounds for
the justification of this War, which are merely Legal; extracted out of the
bowels of our known Laws; which no professors of them can contradict.

First, it is unquestionable, that by the Common and Statute Law of the Land,
the King himself, who cannot lawfully proclaim War against a Foreign
Enemy, much less against his people, without his Parliaments previous assent,
as I have elsewhere proved; cannot by his absolute Sovereign Prerogative,
either by verbal Commands, or Commissions under the great Seal of England,
derive any lawful or just Authority to any General, Captain, Cavalliers, or
person whatsoever, without Legal Trial and Conviction, to seize the Goods or
Chattels of any his Subjects, much less, forcecibly to Rob, Spoil, Plunder,
Wound, Beat, Kill, Imprison, or make open War upon them, without a most just
and in vitable occasion, and that after open kostilitij denounced against them.
And if any by virtue of such illegal Commissions or Mandats, Assault, Plunder,
Spoil, Rob, Beat, Wound, Slay, Imprison, the Goods, Chattels, Houses, Persons
of any Subject not lawfully convicted; They may, and ought to be proceeded
against, resisted, apprehended, indicted condemned for it, notwithstanding such
Commissions as Trespassers, Thieves, Burglarers, Felons, Murderers, both by
Statute, and Common Law; As is clearly enacted and resolved, by Magna Charta,
cap. 29. 15. E. 3. Stat. 1. cap. 1. 2. 3. 42. E. 3. cap. 1. 3. 28. E. 1. Artic.
super Chartas, cap. 2. 4 E. 3. c. 4. 5. E. 3. cap. 2. 24. E. 3. cap. 1. 2 R. 2
cap. 7. 5 R. 2 ca 5. 1. H. 5. cap. 6. 11. R. 2. cap. 1. to 6. 24 H. 8. cap. 5.
21. Jacob. c. 3. Against Monopolies. The Petition of Right. 3. Caroli 2. E. 3.
c. 8. 14. E. 3. ca. 14. 18. E. 3. Stat. 3. 20. E. 3. cap. 1. 2. 3. 1. R 2. cap.
2. And generally all Satutes against Purveyers 42. Ass. Pl. 5. 12. Brook
Commissions, 15. 16. Fortesoue, c p. 8. 9. 10. 13. 14. 26. 1. E. 3. 2. 2. H. 4.
24. Br. Faux Jmprisonment, 30. 28. 22. E. 4 45. a Tr. 16. H. 6. Monstrans de
Faits 182 Stamford lib. 1. fol. 13. a. 37. a. The Conference at the Committies
of both Houses, 3o. Aprilis, 4o. Caroli, concerning the Right and Privilege of
the Subject: newly Printed. Cook lib. 5. fol. 50. 51. lib. 7. fol. 36. 37.
lib. 8. fol. 125. to 129. Judge Crooks and Huttons Arguments, against
Shipmoney, with diverse other Law-Bookes. Therefore the Cavalliers can no ways
justify, nor excuse their Wounding, Murdering, Imprisoning, Assaulting,
Robbing, Pillaging, and spoiling of his Majesty's people and Subjects, and
making War upon them, by virtue of any Warrant or Commission from the King;
but may justly and legally be apprehended, resisted, and proceeded against, as
Murderers, Rebels, Robbers, Felons, notwithstanding any pretended Royal
Authority to countenance their execrable unnatural proceedings.

Secondly, It is irrefragable, that the Subjects in defense of their own
Persons, Houses, Goods, Wives, Families, against such as violently assault them
by open force of Arms, to wound, slay, beat, imprison, rob, or plunder
them, (though by the Kings own illegal Commission) may not only lawfully arm
themselves, and fortify their houses (their Castles in Judgment of Law,)
against them; but refist, apprehend, disarme, beat, wound, repulse, kill them
in their just necessary defense; not only without guilt of Treason, or
Rebellion, but of Tresspas, or the very least offense; And Servants in such
Cases may lawfully justify, not only the beating, but killing of such
persons, who assault their Masters persons, goods, or houses; as is expressly
resolved by the Statute of 21. E. 1. De malefactoribus in Parcis; By 24. H. 8.
cap. 5. Fitzherbert, Corone, 192. 194. 246. 258. 261. 330. 21. H. 7 39.
Trespass, 246. Stamford, lib. 1. cap. 5. 6. 7. 22. Ass. 46. 11. H. 6. 16. a. 14.
H. 6. 24. b. 35. H. 6. 51. a. 9. E. 4. 48. b. 12. E. 4. 6. a. 12. H. 8. 2. b.
Brook, Coron 63. and Trispas 217. Therefore they may justly defend themselves,
resist, oppose, apprehend, and kill his Majesty's Cavalliers, notwithstanding
any Commissions, and make a defensive War against them; when as they assault
their persons, houses, goods, or habitations, without any Treason, Rebellion,
or Crime all against the King or Law.

Thirdly, It is past dispute, That the Sheriffs Justices of Peace, Mayors,
Constables and all other Officers of the Realm, may and ought by our Laws and
Statutes to raise the power of the Counties and places where they live, and
command all persons to arm themselves to assist them upon their Command, when
they see just cause (which commands they are all bound to obey under pain of
imprisonment and fines, for their contemptuous disobediene herein:) to
suppress and withstand all, public breaches of the Peace, Riots, Routs,
Robberies, Fraies, Tumults, Forcible Entries, and to apprehend, disarme,
imprison, and bring to condign punishment all Peace-breakers, Riotors,
Trespassers, Robbers, Plunderers, Quarrellers, Murderers, and Forces met
together, to do any unlawfull-Hostile act, (though by the Kings own precept:)
and in case they make resistance of their power, they may lawfully kill and
slay them without crime or guilt, if they cannot otherwise suppress or
apprehend them: yea, the Sheriffs, and all other Officers may lawfully raise
and arm the power of the County to apprehend Delinquents, by lawful Warrants
from the Parliament, or Process out of other inferior Courts of Justice, when
they contemptuously stand out against their Justice, and will not render
themselves to a Legal trial; in which service all are bound by Law to assist
these Officers, who may lawfully slay such contemptuous Offenders, in case they
cannot otherwise apprehend them. All which is Enacted and Resolved by 19. E. 3.
cap. 38. 3. Ed. 1. cap. 5. 2. R. 2. cap. 6. 5. R. 2. cap. 5. 6. 7. R: 2. cap.
6. 17. R. 2. cap. 8. 13. H. 4. cap, 7. 1. H. 5. cap. 6. 2. H. 5. cap. 6. 8. 19.
H. 7. cap. 13. 3. E. 6. cap. 5. 1. Mar. cap. 12. 31. H. 6. cap. 2. 19. E. 2.
Fitz Execution, 247. 8. H. 4. 19. a 22. Ass. 55. 3. H. 7. fol. 1. 10. 5. H. 7.
fol. 4. Register, f^ 59. 60. 61. Fitz. Coron. 261. 288. 289. 328. 346.
Stamford, lib. 1. cap. 5. 6. Cook lib. 5. fol. 92. 9. 3. with sundry other
Books, and Acts of Parliament, and Walsingham, Hist. Angliae, page 283. 284.
Yea, the Statute of 13. Ed. 1. cap. 38. recites; That such resistance of
Process out of any the Kings Courts (much more then out of the Highest Court
of Parliament) redounds much to the dishonor of the King and his Crown; and
that such resisters shall be imprisoned and fined, because they are desturbers
of the Kings Peace, and of his Realm. And the expired Statute of 31. H. 6.
cap. 2. Enacted: That if any Duke, Marquess, Earl, Viscount, or Baron,
complained of for any great Riots, Extortions, Oppressio^s, or any offense by
them done against the Peace and Laws, to any of the Kings Liege-people, should
refuse to obey the Process of he Kings Court, under his Great or-privie Seal,
to him directed, to answer his said offenes; either by refusing to receive the
said Process, or dispiting it, on withdrawing himself f^r that cause, and not
appearing after Proclamation made by the Sheriff in the County, at the day
prescribed by the Proclamation; that then he should for this his contempt,
forfeit and lose all his Offices, Fees, Annuities, and other Possessions that
he, or any man to his use, has of the gift or grant of the King, or any of his
Progenitors, made to him or any of his Ancestors: And in case he appears not
upon the second Proclamation on the day-therein to him limited; that then he
shall lose and forfeit his Estate and place in Parliament, and also All the
Lands and Tenements which he has, or any other to his use for term of his
life, and all other persons having no Lands not appearing after Proclamation,
were to be put out of the Kings Protection, by this Act. Such a hemous offense
was it then reputed, to disobey the Process of Chancery, and other inferior
Courts of Justice even in the greatest Peers; how much greater crime then is,
and must it be, contemptuously to disobey the Summons, Process, and Officers
of the Parliament it self, the supremest Court of Judicature, especially in
those who are Members of it, and stand engaged by their Prostestations, trusts,
and Places in it, to maintain its honor, power, and privileges to the
uttermost? which many of them now exceedingly vilify, and trample under feet:
and therefore deserve a severer censure then this statute inflicts; even such
as the Act of 21. R. 2. c. 6. prescribed to those Nobles unjustly fore-judged
in that Parliament; That their issues males now begotten shall not come to the
Parliaments, nor to the Counsels of the King nor his heirs; nor be of the
Kings Counsel nor of his heirs; Therefore it is undubitable, that the
Sherifes, Justices of Peace, Majors, Constables, Leivtenantes, Captains, and
other Officers in every County through the Realm, may by their own Authority
(much more by an Ordinance and Act of association of both houses) raise all the
power of the County, and all the people by virtue of such commands may lawfully
meet together in Arms to suppress the riots, burglaries, rapines, plunders,
butcheries, spoiling, robberies, and armed violence of his Majesty's Cavaleers;
and apprehend, imprison, slay, arraigne, execute them as common enemies to the
kingdoms peace and welfare, even by the known Common Law, and Statutes of the
Realm, and seife Delinquents notwithstanding any royal Commission or personal
commands they may or can produce.

Fourthly, it is most certain, that every Subject by the very Common Law of
the Realm, (yea Law of Nature) as he is a member of the State and Church of
England, See principally 48. H. 3. Rot. Pat. Mem 7. and Mem. 11 Dorss.
is bound both in duty and conscience, when there is necessary occasion, to
Array and Arm himself to resist the invasions, and assaults of open enemies
of the Realm, especially of Forraigners, as is clear by infinite *
Presidents, cited by the Kings own Council, and recited by Judge Crook in
his Argument concerning Ship Money; in both the Houses two Remonstrances and
Declarations against the Commission of Array; and the Answer of the first of
them in the Kings name; all newly Printed (to which I shall refer the Reader
for fuller Satisfaction:) See Aristot. Pol. l. 1, c, 1, 2, and l. 2, 3. Polib.
hist. l. 6. Fortescue. c. 9. to 15.
and by the express statutes of 1 E. 3. c. 5. 25. E. 3. c. 8. and 4. H. 4. c.
13. The reason is from the Original compact and mutual stipulation of every
member of any Republicke, State or Society of men for mutual defense one of
another upon all occasions of invasion, made at their first association and
incorporation into a Republike, state, kingdom, Nation, of which we have a
pregnant example, Judge. 20. 1. to 48. If then the King himself shall introduce
foreign Forces and enemies into his Realm to levy war against it, or shall
himself become an open enemy to it; the Subjects are obleiged, by the
self-same reason, law, equity, especially upon the Parliaments command, to Arm
themselves to defend their Native Country, Kingdom against these foreign and
domesticke Forces, and the King himself if he join with them; as far forth
as they are bound to do it upon the Kings own Writ and Commission, in case he
joined with the Parliament and Kingdom against them; the necessary defense and
preservation of the Kingdom and themselves (and of the King only so far
forth as he shows himself a King and Patron, not an enemy of his Kingdom,
and Subjects,) being the sole ground of their engagement in such defensive
wars: according to this notable resolution of Cicero, De Offici^^. l. 2. p.
626.
Omnium Societatum nulla est gratior, nulla carior quam ea quae cum Republica
est unicuique nostrum Cari sunt pare^tes, cariliberi, propinqui, familiares,
SED OMNES OMNIVM CARITATES PATRIA VNA COMPLEXA EST, pro qua quis bonus dubit
t^mortem oppetere, si ei sit prosuturus? Q^o est detestabilior illorum
immanitas. qui lacerant omni scelere Patriam, and n^a sunditus delenda occupati
and sunt and fuerunt: and seeing kings themselves as well as Subjects are bound
to Exodus 32. 9. to 15. 32. Number. 14. 11. to 15. 2 Samuel 8. 9. 17. 1. Chr. 21. 17.
John 10. 11. 15. c. 11. 48. 49. 50.
hazard their lives for the preservation of their Kingdoms, and peoples
safeti; and not to endanger the ruin of the Kingdom and people to preserve
their own lives and prerogatives, as I have elsewhere manifested; it cannot be
denied, but that every Subject, when the King is unjustly divided against his
Kingdom, Parliament, and People, is mere obleiged to join with the kingdom,
Parliament, and his Native dearest Country, (who are most considerable)
against the King; than with the king against their; and rather in such a case
than any other, because there is less need of help, and no such danger of
ruin to the whole Realm and Nation, when the King joins with them against
foreign invading enemies; as there is when the king himself becomes an open
intestine Foe unto them, against his Oath and Daty: and the Cicero de Ligibus.
Peoples safety being the Supremest Law, and the Houses of Parliament the most
Sovereign Authority, they ought in such unhappie cases of extremity and
division to oversway all Subjects, to contribute their best assistance for
their necessary just defense, even against the king himself and all his
Partisans, who take up Hostile Arms against them, and not to assist them to
ruin their own Country, Kingdom, Nation, as many as now over-rashly do.

Fifthly, I conceive it clear Law, that if the King himself, or his Courtiers
with him, shall wrongfully assault any of his Subjects to wound, rob, or
murder them without just cause, that the subjects, without any guilt of
Treason or Rebellion, may not only in their own defense resist the King and
his Courtiers assaults in such a case, and hold their hands (as Resolution of
Conscience. Sect. 2.
Doctor Fern himself accords) but likewise close with, and disarme them; and
if the King or his Courtiers receive any blows, wounds, in such a case; or be
casually slain, it is neither Treason nor Murder, in the Defendants, who had
no Treasonable nor murtherous intention at all in them, but only endeavored
their own just defense, attempting nothing at all against the kings lawful
Royal authority: as is clear by all Law See Stamfords Pleas: f. 14. 15. 16.
Cases, of man slaughter, se defendends, and to put this out of question, I
shall cite but two or three cases of like Nature. It has been very see Andrew
Favine his Theater of Honor l. 10. c. 5. 6. 7. Halls Chron. H. 8. f. 6. 7. 9.
11. 12. 58. 63. 68. 78 85. 91. 95. 146. 154.
frequent with the Kings of England, France, and other Princes, for trial of
their man hood, to run at Iousts and fight at Barriers, not only with
forraigners, but with their own valiantest L^rds and Knights, of which there
are various Examples. In these Martial disports, by the very Law of Arm^s,
these Subjects have not only defended themselves against their kings assaults
and blows; but retorted lance for lance, stroke for stroke, and sometimes
unborsed, disarmed, and wounded their Kings, our Hall An. 16. H. 8. f. 122. 123.
King Henry the eight, being like to be slain by the Earl of Suffolk, at a
Tilting in the 16. year of his reign: and no longer since then the year
1559. Henry the 2d, King of France, was casually slain in a loust by the Earl
of Mountgommery, his Subject, (whom he commanded to Just one bout more with
him against his will) whose Spear in the counter-blow ran so right into one of
the Kings eyes, that the shivers of it peirced into his head, perished his
brain and slew him: yet this was Judged no Treason, Felony, nor offense at
all in the Earl, who had no ill intention. If then it has ever been reputed
lawful and honorable, for Subjects in such military exercises, upon the
challenges of their kings, to defend themselves courageously against their
assaults, and thus to fight with and encounter them in a martial manner,
though there were no necessity for them to answer such a challenge; and the
casual wounding or slaying of the King by a Subject in such a case be neither
Treason nor Felony: then much more must it be lawful by the Law of Arms,
Nature, and the kingdom, for the Parliament and subjects in a necessary, just,
unavoydable war, to defend, resist, repulse the kings and his
Cavaleers-personall assaults, and return them blow forblow, shot for shot, if
they will wilfully invade them; and if the king or any of his Forces miscarry
in this action, they must (like King Halls Chron. f. 123. 16. H. 8.
Henry the 8th when endangered by tilting) blame themselves alo^e, and have no
other just legal remedy but patience, it being neither Treason, Rebellion,
nor Murder in the defensive party, and most desperate folly and frenzy in any
Prince, to engage himself in such a danger, when beneede not do it. I read
of General History of France p. 227, 228. Fabians Chron part. 7. in his life;
with others.
Charles the first of France; that he fell suddenly destracted upon a message
he rec^ived from an old poor man, as he was marching in the head of his Army;
and thereupon thinking himself b^tray^d encountered his own men, and slew two
or three of them ere they were ware of him, wo^nding others. Whereupon they
closing with him, dis^rmed and led him away fo^ceably, keeping him close shut
up like a Bedla^, till he recovered his sens^s. I think no man in his right
wits, will deem this their action Treasonable or unlawful; neither did the
king or any in that age thus repute it. If then a King in an angry frantic
passion (for Seneca de Ira.
Ir. brevius furor est;) shall take up Arms against his loyal Subjects, and
assault their persons to murder them and spoil their goods; if they (by
common consent in Parliament especially) shall forcibly resist, disarme or
restrain his person, till his fury be appeased, and his judgment rectified by
better counsels; shall this be Treason, Rebellion, or Disloyalty? God forbid:
I think none but mad men can or will averte it. It was a great doubt in Law,
till the statute of 33. H. 8. c. 20. settled it, If a party that had committed
any high Treasons when he was of perfect memory; after accusation, examination,
and confession thereof became mad or lunaticke; whether he should b^ tried
and condemned for it during this distemper? And some from that very act (and
21. H. 7. 31. 36. Ass 27. 12. H. 3. For faiture 33 and Dower 183. Fitz. Not.
Br. 202. D. Stamford Pleas, 16. b. and Cook. l. 4. f. 124. Beverlyes case,
which resolve, that a Lunaticke or Non Compos cannot be guilty of murthe^, fell
n^y, ^^petite Treason, because having no understanding, and knowing not what he
does, he can ^ave n^ follonius intention) conceive, that a real madman cannot
be guilty of high Treason (though Sir Edward Cook in Bev^rlies case, be of a
contrary opinion) if he should assault or kill his king. And I suppose few will
deem Eadmerus, Malmes Hunt. Hoveden, Mat. West. Mat. Par Polychonicon, Fab.
coxton, Holinsh. Grof. Speed, Daniel, and others in the life of Will. Refus.
Walter Terrils casual killing of King William Rufus with the glance of his
arrow from a tree, shot at a Dear, high Treason; neither was it then reputed
so, or he prosecuted as a Traitor for it, because he had no malicious intention
(as most think) against the King, or any thought to hurt him. But I conceive
it out of question, if a king in a distracted furious passion without just
cause, shall invade his subjects persons in an open hostile manner to destroy
them; it neither is, nor can be Treason ner Rebellion in them, if in their own
necessary defense alone, they shall either casually wound or slay him contrary
to their loyal intentions; and those See Stamford Bracton, Fitzherbert, Brock,
Cromp. Tit. T^eson and Coro^s.
Statutes and Law-book^s which judge it high Treason, for any one maliciously
and traitorously to imagine, compass or conspire the death of the King; will
not at all extend to such a case of mere just defense; since a conspiracy or
imagination to compass or procure the Kings death, can neither be justly
imagined nor presumed, in those who are but merely defensive, no more then in
other common cases of one man's killing another in his own inevitable defense
without any precedent malice; in which a Pardon by Law, is granted of course:
however, questionless it is no Treason nor murder at all to slay any of the
kings soldiers and Cavaliers who are no kings, in such a defensive war.

Sixthly, suppose the King should be captivated, or violently led away by any
foreign or domesticke enemies to him and the kingdom, and carried along with
them in the field, to countenance their wars and invasions upon his loyallest
Subjects, by illegal warrants or Commissions fraudulently procured, or
extorted from him. If the Parliament and Kingdom in such a case, should raise
an Army to rescue the King out of their hands, and to that end encountering the
enemies, should casually wound the King whiles they out of loyalty sought only
to rescue him; I would demand of any Lawyer or Divine, whether this Act should
be deemed Treason, Rebellion or Disloyalty in the Parliament or army? Or which
of the two Armies should in point of Law or Conscience be reputed Rebels or
Traitors in this case? those that come only to rescue the King, and so fight
really for him indeed, though against him in show; and wound him in the rescue?
Or those who in show only fought for him, that they might still detain him
captive to their wills? Doubtless there is no Lawyer, nor Theologue but would
presently resolve in such a case, that the Parliaments Army which fought only
to rescue the King were the loyal Subjects; and the Malignants army who held
him captive with them, the only Rebels and traitors; and that the casual
wounding of him (proceeding not out of any malicious intention, but love and
loyalty to redeem him from captivity,) were no trespass nor offense at all,
being quite besides their thoughts: and for a direct president; It was the very
case of King Mat. Par. An. 1266. p. 967. Speed p. 640. Dan. p. 180. 181.
Holinsh. Graft. Stow, and others.
Henry the third; who (together with his son Prince Edward) being taken
Prisoner by the Earl of Leycester in the battle of Lewis, and the Earl
afterward carrying him about in his Company in nature of a Prisoner, to
countenance his actions, to the great discontent of the Prince, the Earl of
Gloucester and other Nobles; hereupon the Prince and they raising an Army,
encountered the Earl, and his Porces in a battle at Evesha^ where the King was
personally present, slew the Earl, Routed his Army, and rescued the king; in
this cruel battle, the In praesenti bello, Dominus Rex extitit vulneatus and
morti paene vicinus, jaculo in eum ex improviso de. jecto, Mat. Par. Ibid.
king himself (being wounded unawares with a Iavelin, by those who rescued
him) was almost slain, and lost much of his blood: yet in a Parliament soon
after sommoned at Winchester, Anno 1266. the Earl and his Army were
dis-inherited as Traitors and Rebels; but those who rescued them though with
danger to his person, rewarded as his loyal subjects. And is not this the
present case? A company of malignant ill Counselors, Delinquents, Prelates,
Papists, have withdrawn his Majesty from his Parliament, raised an Army of
Papists, Forraigners, Delinquents and Malcontents, to ruin the Parliament,
Kingdom, Religion, Laws, Liberties; to countenance this their design, they
detain his Majesty with them, and engage him all they can on their side: the
Parliament out of no disloyal intention, but only to rescue his Majesty's
person out of their hands, to apprehend delinquents, preserve the Kingdom from
spoil, and defend their Privileges, Persons, Liberties, estates, religion,
from unjust invasions, have raised a defensive Army, which encountered these
Forces at Edgehill, (where they say the King was present) slew the Lord
General (Earl of Lindsey) with many others; and as they never intended, so
they offered no kind of hurt or violence at all to his Majesty's person then or
since; and now full sore against their wills, Petitions, endeavors for peace,
they are necessitated to continue this offensive war, for their own and the
Kingdoms necessary preservation. The sole question is; Whether this Act, this
Defensive War of the Parliament and their Forces be high Treason or
Rebellion? and who are the Traitors and Rebels in this case? Certainly, if I
understand any Law or Reason, the Parliament and their Forces are and must be
innocent from these crimes; and their opposite Popish Malignant Cavaleers, the
only Rebels and Traitors; as this Parliament (the only proper Judge of
Treasons) has See the Remens^r^nce of both Houses Nov. 2. 1642.
already voted and declared them in point of Law.

Seventhly, it is Littleton sect. 378. Cook. Inst. Ib f. 233. l. 5. E. 4. 26.
27. 11. E. 4. 1. b. 15. E. 4. 3 6. Plowden p. 379. 380. 43. E. 3. c. 4 4. H. 7.
c. 6. 7. Cook l. 9 f. 50. 95. 96. 99.
Little ^s and other Law-bookes express resolutions; That if a man grant to
another the Office of a Parkership, of a Park for life, the estate which he
has is upon condition in Law (though not expressed) that he shall well and
lawfully keep the Park, and do what which to his Office belongs to do, or
otherwise it shall be lawful for the grantor and his heirs to remove him, and
grant it to another if he will: and if the Parker negligently suffer the Dear
to be killed, or kill the Dear himself without sufficient warrant from his
Lord, it is a direct forfaiture of his Office. If then a Keeper or Forrester
cannot kill or negligently suffer his Dear to be killed (no nor yet destroy
the vert on which they should feed, or suffer it to be destroyed) without
forfaiture of his Office, even by a condition annexed to his Office by the very
Common Law; shall a King, think you, lawfully murder, plunder and destroy his
Subjects, his kingdom, without any forfaiture or resistance at all? or will
the Common Law of the Land in such a case which provides and annexeth a
condition to the Office of a Parker, not much more unite it to the royal
Office of a King, (who is but a regal Keeper, or Isa. 78. 70. 71. 72.
shepherd of men, of Christians, of free men, not of slaves) for the Subjects
preservation and security? Does the Common Law thus provide for the safety, the
Liberty, welfare of our beasts, yea our wild beasts, are our Dear so dear
unto it, and will it not much more provide for the security of our own
persons, Lives, Liberties, estates? shall not these be dearer to it than out
Dear? How many See Charta de Fortesta, Rassals Abridgment, Title Forests. 3.
Jac. c. 13. Petrus Bieser sis de Instit-Episcopi. Bibl. Patr^m Tom 12. Pars 2.
p. 944. Illud ni^ilo. minnis absurdum, etc.
riged Laws have been anciently, and of late years made, against the
killing, the destroying of the kings, the Subjects Dear in Forests and
Parkes, for which some have lost their Liberties, Lives, members? And shall not
the Laws for the preservation of the Subjects Lives, Liberties, estates be
more inviolably observed, more severely prosecuted? May a Forrester, Warrener,
or Keeper of a Park lawfully beat and kill another in defense of his Dear
and other game, without any penalty or forfaiture at all, enjoying the Kings
Peace as before this fact, by the express statute of 21. E. 1. Rastall
Forests 19. and Stamfords Pleas, l. 1. c. 5. 6. And cannot a poor subject
defend his own person, family, house, goods, Liberty, life, against the kings
Forces, or Cavaleers without the danger of Treason or Rebellion, if the king
himself be present with them, or they come armed with his unjust Commission?
Certainly this is a too absurd, irrational, beastiall opinion for any to
believe. It is our Saviors own doubled argument, Mat. 6. 26. Luke 12. 24.
Behold the fowls of the air, and consider the Ravens, for they neither sow
nor reap, neither have storehouse, nor borne, yet your heavenly Father
feeds them: ARE NOT YE MVCH BETTER THEN THEY? THEN FOWLS? And Luke 12. 6.
7. Mat. 10. 29. 30. 31. Are not two sparrowes sold for a farthing? and not one
of them shall fall to the ground without your Father: But the very hairs of
your head are all numbered: Fear ye not therefore; YE ARE OF MORE VALVE THEN
MANY SPARROWES And the Apostle has the like argument, 1 Cor. 9. 9. 10. Does
God take care for Oxen? Or says he it not altogether for our sakes? for our
sakes, NO DOUBT THIS IS WRITTEN, etc. Genesis 1. 28. 29. 30. c. 92. Psa. 8. 4. to.
9.
Men are the Sovereign Lords of all the Creatures, of far more excellency
and dignity then all, or any of them; especially Christian men; whence the
Apostle Paul gives this strict charge to the Elders of Ephesus (belonging as
well to kings as Ministers) Act. 20. 28. Take heed therefore unto all the
flock over which the holy Ghost has made you overseers to feed the Church of
God which he has purchased with his own blood: and God himself has given
this express inhibition even to Psalm. ^05. 14. 15. 1 Chr. 16. 20 21. See the
Vindication and Revindication of this Text.
Kings themselves, concerning his and their peoples safety (most strangely
inverted by flattering Divines, quite contrary to the words and meaning:) Touch
not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no harm?. And shall not men then made
after Gods own Image; men redeemed and purchased by the blood of Christ; men
made Rev. 1. 6. c. 5. 10. c. 20. 6.
Kings and Priests to God their Father, whom God himself has expressly
prohibited Kings themselves to touch or harm; not be allowed liberty to defend
their persons, houses, lives, liberties, without offense or Treason, against
Kings or any their Cavaleers assaults, by the Law of God, the Common or statute
Law of the Realm; when as their very Keepers, Warreners, Forresters may
lawfully resist, and slay them to without crime or punishment, if they should
offer but to kill, to steal their Dear or Connies? Are they not much better,
much dearer to God, to Kings, then fowls? then Sparrowes? then Oxen? then
Dear? and their lives, their blood more precious then theirs? surely the
Scripture is express: that Psalm. 71. 14. Ps. 116. 15.
precious in the sight of the Lord is the blood, the death of his Saints; and
therefore Genesis 9. 6. Mat. 26. 52.
he that sheddeth man's blood (be he whom he will in an unlawful way) by man
shall his blood he shed; if not in a judicial way, yet by way of just defense,
as Christ himself expounds it, Mat. 26. 52. ALL they that take the sword, shall
perish with the sword: and Rev. 10. 10. He that kills with the sword, MVST BE
KILLED WITH THE SWORD; (no doubt he may be killed by way of necessary defense;)
then it immediately follows; here is the patience and faith of the Saints:
that is, Saints will and must patiently endure many pressures and wrongs from
Tyrants and oppressors without resistance, but if they once come to make war
with them, as the seven headed beast there did v. 7. then both the faith and
patience of the Saints themselves will bind their hands no longer, but give
them free liberty in such an extremity (for their own and the Churches
preservation, in their just defense) to slay those seven headed beasts that
shall assault them; the very faith of Christ then teaches them no other lesson
but this: he that leads into captivity shall go in o captitivitie, and he
that kills with the sword must be killed with the sword: and in such a case,
God says, Psalm. 149. 6. 7. 8. 9. Let a two edged sword be in their hands, to
execute vengeance upon the heathen, and punishment upon the people: to bi^de
their Kings with chains and their Nobles with fetters of Iron; to execute upon
them the judg^ment written: This honor (this privilege in such cases) HAVE
ALL THE SAINTS, Praise ye the Lord. And very good reason is there for it. For
as Nature it self has instructed Lions, Bears, Wolves, Boares, Stagges,
Backs, and most other beasts, not only to defend themselves against the
violence of one another, but even of Men their supreme Lords, when they
assault and hunt them to take away their lives, over which God has given men a
lawful power: much more then may men by natures dictate, defend their persons,
lives against the unlawful violence of their kings or Armies (over which God
has given them no power at all but in a legal way of justice for capital
offenses) when they assault or make war upon them to destroy them. Not to
trouble you with Histories of Stagges and other beasts which have killed men
that chased them, in their own defense, of which there are infinite examples
in the Sea Tertul. and Cyprian de Spectaculis Onupbrius, Bulengerus, Lyp^ius,
and others, De Theatris, Ludis Circensieus and Joannes Mariana despectaculis.
Roman and Spanish Histories, in those Amphithreatricall sports and spectacles
wherein men encountered and fought with Lions, Tigers. Bears, Bulls and other
savage Beasts; I shall only recite some few examples even of Kings themselves,
who have been slain and devoured by such beasts as they have chased: Graft.
part. 4 p. 40. part. 5 f. 42 part. 6. p. 62.
Mada^ King of Britain (as Polycronicon, Fabien, Grafton and others record)
being in his disport of hunting, was slain of the wild beasts he pursued, when
he had reigned 40. years: so was his son King Memphis slain and destroyed
in hunting in the same manner. Merindus King of Britain, was devoured by a
Sea monster which he encountered: and Zonaras Annal. Tom. 3. f. 15. Muns^eri
Cosmeg. l. 4. c. 50. p. 1104.
Basilius the 35 Emperor of Constantinople hunting a Stag, of an extraordinary
greatness, and thinking to cut off his neck with his sword; the Stagge ran
fiercely at him, gored him with his horns on which he tossed him, bruised his
entralls, whereof he dyed some few days after, and had been slain
immediately, on the beasts horns, had not one there present drawn his sword
and cut off his girdle, by which he hung on the horns, to whom he gave a very
ill requital for this loyal service: other stories of kings sla^ne by beasts
in their own defense occure in story, and examples of kings slain by men in
and for their preservation, are almost innumerable: that of our king Mat. West.
An 946. p. 946. Malm^sHunting. Fab. Graft, Holins. Speed, and others in his
life.
Edmond is observable among others, who as our Historians write being at a
feast at Pulkers Church on Saint Augustines day, espied a these named Leof,
whom he had formerly banished, sitting in the Hall, whereupon he leapt over the
Table, assaulted Leof, and plucked him by the hair of the head to the ground;
who in his own defense, wounded the king to death with a knife, hurt many of
his servants, and at length was himself hewn all in pieces. But that of our
King Hoved. (...). pars posterior. p. 791. Mat. Paris, Mat. Wesim. Polye. Fab.
Walsi^g. Holinsh Graf. Speed, Daniel in the life of Rich. 2.
Richard the 1. is more remarkable, who being shot in the arm with a barbed
Arrow by one Peter Basil, (or Bertram Gurdon as others name him) at the siege
of Chaluz Castle in Aquitain which rebelled against him; the Castle being
taken, and the king ready to dye of the wound, commanded the person that shot
him to be brought into his presence, of whom he demanded, What hurt ^e had done
him that provoked him to this mischief? To whom he boldly replied: Thou have
killed my father and my two Brothers, with thine own hand; and now would
have slain me: take what revenge thou will; I shall willingly endure what ever
torture thou can inflict upon me, in respect I have slain thee, who have
done such and so great mischief to the world. The king hearing this his
magnanimous answer, released him from his bonds, (though he slew the rest) and
not only forgave him his death, but commanded an hundred shillings to be given
him. If then bruites by the very law of Nature have thus defended themselves
against kings, who have violently assaulted them, even to the casual death of
the assailants: Why men by the selfsame Law, may not justly defend themselves
against the unjust assailing wars of their Princes, and Armies, without
Treason or Rebellion, exceeds my shallow understanding to apprehend: and I
doubt those very persons who now plead most against it, only to accomplish
their own pernicious designs, would make no scruple of such a necessary
defensive wars and resistances lawfulness, were the case but really their own;
and those Papists and Cavalieers who now take up arms against the Parliament,
the supreamest lawful power in the Realm, and their own native Country,
without check of Conscience, would doubtless make no bones at all forcibly to
resist or fight against the King himself, should he but really join with the
Parliaments Army, against them and their designs; there being never any
Soldier or Politician, but those only who were truly sanctified and
religious, that made any conscience of fighting against, yea murdering of his
natural king, not only in a lawful defensive war, but in a Traiterous and
Rebellious manner too, if he might thereby advantage or promote his own
particular interests, as is evident by the council and speech of David's
soldiers, and King Saul himself. 1 Samuel 24. 4. 5. 6. 7. 18. 19. 21. by the
words of Abishai, to David, 1 Samuel 28. 8. 9. 23. 24. by the Council of
A^^itophell, which pleased Absolon, and all the Elders of Israel well, 2 Samuel
17. 1. 2. 3. 4 and the infinite number of Emperors, of Kings, which have been
traitorously, and rebelliously slain, without any just occasion by their own
Soldiers, and that in a mere offensive, not defensive way; above half the
Roman, Grecian, and German Emperors dying of such assassinations, or
poysonings, very few of them of mere natural deaths, as the Histories of
their lives declare.

Eighthly, It is in a manner agreed by See Bishop Bilson, of Christian subject
on, etc. part 3. p. 411 to 422. and the Authors there cited.
Historians, Politicians, and Divines, that if a King will desert the defense
and Protection of his people in times of war and danger, and neither aid nor
protect them against their enemies according to his Oath and Duty, they may in
such a case of extremity, for their own necessary defense and preservation,
desert him, who deserteth them, and elect another King, who can and will
protect them from utter ruin. Upon this very ground the Speed. hist. l. 6 c. 5.
4. l 7. 6. ^. 4. Camb. Brit. p. ^07. 108 etc See Holinsh. Poly. Gras.
Brittons of this Nation after many hundred years subjection to the Roman
Emperors, rejected their yoke and government, when they refused and neglected
to defend them against the barbarous Picts and others, who invaded them, when
they had often craved their assistance; electing them other Patriots: So the
Jacob^^ Valde sius de Dignitate Regum Regn. Hisp. c. 18. Franciscus Tarapha de
Reg^bus Hispaniae, Michael Ritius de Regibus Hisp. l. 2. Manst. Cosm. l. 2 c 20.
Spaniards being deserted by the Roman Emperors and left as a prey to their
enemies, abandoned their government, and elected them Kings of their own to
protect them, which they justified to be lawful for them to do. And in like
manner the Romans and Italians being forsaken of the Emperor Constantine, when
they were invaded by See Bishop Bilsons true difference, etc. p. 3. 411. to
416. and the Appendix here. p. 8. 9.
Aistulfus King of the Lumbards; Elected Charles the Great for their Emperor,
and created a new Empire in the West, distinct from that of Constantinople in
the East, which Bishop Bilson himself concludes they might lawfully do, in
point of conscience. So Aventinus A^i. l. 3. The general hist. of France in
his life. See the Appendix.
Childerick being unfit to govern, and unable to repulse the enemies of the
French which invaded his territories; thereupon by the advice of Pope Zachary,
and of a whole Synod and Parliament in France, they deposed Childericke, and
elected Pipin for their King, who was both able and willing to protect them;
Upon this very ground the Sea Grimstans Imperial history in their lives, and
and the Appendix.
Emperors Charles the third, and Wenceslius were deposed, as being unable and
unfit to defend and govern the Empire, and others elected Emperors in their
steeds, Thus The General History of Spain p. 455.
Mahomet the blind, King of Granado, was in the year 1309. deposed by his
own Brother, Nobles, and Subjects, who were discontented to be governed by a
blind King, who could not lead them to the wars in person. And Gras^. part 7
p 85. Buchanon Remon Scot. l. 4. p. 121.
Ethodius the 2d king of Scotland, being dull of wit, given to avarice, and
nothing meet to govern the Realm; thereupon the Nobles took upon them the
government, appointing Rulers in every Province, and so continued them all his
reign, leaving him nothing but the bare title of a King, (not depriving him
thereof, out of the respect they gave to the family of Fergusius) but yet
taking away all his regal power. And not to multiply cases or examples of this
nature: Theater of Honor l. 2. c. 13. p. 183.
Andrew Favine in his Theater of Honor, out of the Chronicle of Laureshe^m and
Aimonius in his 4th Book of the History of France, relates a notable
resolution given by the Parliament and Estates of France in this very point. In
the year 803. Jews the Debonnaire king of France holding his Parliament in
May; there came thither from strange Provinces two Brethren, kings of Vuilses,
who with frank and free good will submitted themselves to the judgment of the
said Parliament, to which of them the kingdom should belong. The elder of
these two brethren was named Meligastus, and the younger Celeadraus, Now albeit
the custom of the said kingdom, adjudged the Crown to the eldest, according
to the right of Primegeniture, allowed and practiced by the Law of Nature, and
of later memory, in the person of the last dead King Liubus, father to the two
contendants; yet notwithstanding in regard that the Subjects by universal
consent of the kingdom, had rejected the elder brother FOR HIS COWARDICE AND
EVIL GOVERNMENT ( cum secundam ritum ejus gentis commissum sibi Regnum parum
digne administraret) and had given the Crown to the younger brother FOR HIS
VALOVR and DISCREET CARRIGE; after full hearing of both parties, BY SENTENCE
of PARLIAMENT, the Kingdom was adjudged to the younger Brother, ( stat^it ut
junior frater delatam sibi a Populo suo pot flatem haberet, etc) and thereupon
the eldest did him homage, with oath of Alleigance in the said Parliament, and
submitted to this sentence. And upon this very ground in See Part. near the
end.
some of our ancient British and Saxons Kings Reigns when the right heir to
the Crown was an infant, unable to defend his kingdom and people against
invading enemies, the Crown has commonly descended to the Uncle or next heir
of full age, who was able to protect them and repulse their enemies, till the
right heir accomplished his complete age, as I have elsewhere manifested. If
then a Kingdom by general consent; may elect a new King to defend and
preserve it, in case of invasion and eminent danger of ruin by foreign
enemies, when their present King either cannot, or will not do his duty in
protecting them from their enemies, and exposes them for a prey to their
devastations, as these examples and authorities conclude they may, though I
will not positively determine so. Then certainly by equal, semblable and
greater reason, subjects may lawfully take up necessary defensive Arms against
their Kings, when they shall not only desert, but actually invade and wage
war against them, destroy and wast them in an open Hostile manner, and handle
them as cruelly as the worst of enemies: such a wilful unnatural Hostile
invasion, being far worse than any cowardly or bare desertion of the^ when
they are invaded by a foreign enemy. And if Kings in case of sottishness or
Lunacy may be lawfully deposed from their kingdoms by common consent of their
Realms, when they are altogether unfit or unable to govern, as Bishop Bilson
asserts, and I have manifested else where: then much more may they be lawfully
resisted by force without guilt of Treason or Rebellion, when they wilfully and
maliciously, contrary to their oath and duty, cast off their Royal
governments, the protection of their subjects, and wage open war against
them, to enslave or ruin them. If a Father shall violently and unjustly
assault his son, a husband his wife, a master his servant, a Major or other
inferior Officer, a Citizen to murder, maime, or ruin them; They may in such
a case by See Summ^ Rosella Tit. Bell. um.
the Law of Nature, God man, resist, repulse them in their own defense without
any crime at all, as daily practice experimentally manifests; yea they may
swear the peace against them, and have a Writ Fitz Not. Brevium f. 80. 81.
de securitate Pacis in such cases. Therefore by the selfsame reason they may
resist the King and his Army in like cases; there being no more humane nor
divine Law against resistance in the one case, than in the other.

Finally, it is the resolution of Common weal l 2. c^ 5. 220. 221.
John Bodin and others, who deny the lawfulness of Subjects taking up Arms
against their Sovereign Prince, or offering violence to his person, though he
become a Tyrant: That if a Sovereign Prince or King by lawful election or
succession turn a Tyrant, he may lawfully (at his Subjects request) be invaded
resisted, condemned or slain by a foreign Prince. For as of all Noble acts,
none is more honorable or glorious, then by way of fact to defend the honor,
goods, and l^ves of such as are unjustly oppressed by the power of the more
mighty, especially the gate of Justice being shut against them: thus did Moses
seeing his brother the Israelite beaten and wronged by the Egyptian, and no
means to have redress of his wrongs: So it is a most fair and magnificall
thing for a Prince to take up Arms to relieve a whole Nation and people,
unjustly oppressed by the cruelty of a Tyrant: as did the great Hercu'es who
traveling over a great part of the world with wonderful power and valor
destroyed many most horrible monsters, that is to say, Tyrants; and so
delivered people, for which he was numbered among the gods, his posterity for
many worlds of years after, holding most great Kingdoms. And other imitators
of his virtue as Dio, Timoilion, Aratus, Harmodius, Aristogiton, with other
such honorable Princes, bearing Titles of chastisers, and correctors of
Tyrants, And for that only cause Tamerlain Emperor of the Tartars, denounced
war unto See Knols Turkish Hist. in his life.
Bajazet King of the Turks, who then besieged Constantinople, saying, That he
was coming to chastise his Tyranny, and to deliver the afflicted people; and
vanquishing him in battle, routed his Army, and taking the Tyrant prisoner, he
kept him in chains in an Iron Cage till he dyed. Neither in this case is it
material that such a virtuous Prince being a stranger, proceed against a
Tyrant by open force, or fierceness, or else by way of justice. True it is
that a valient and worthy Prince, having the Tyrant in his power, shall gain
more honor by bringing him unto his trial, to chastise him as a murderer a
manqueller, and a robber; rather than to use the Law of Arms against him.
Wherefore let us resolve on this, that it is lawful for any stranger (Prince)
to kill a Tyrant, that is to say, a man of all men infamed, and notorious for
the oppression, murder, and slaughter of his subjects and people. And in this
sort, our Speed Hist. p. 1193. 1194 The History of the Netherlands, and the
Swedish Intelligencer.
Queen Elizabeth aided the Low Countries against the Tyranny and oppressions
of the King of Spain: and the King of Sweden of late years the Princes of
Germany against the Tyranny and usurpations of the Emperor, upon their
solicitation, If then, it be thus lawful for Subjects to call in foreign
Princes to releeve them against the Tyranny and oppressions of their kings (as
the Barons in Mat. Par. Mat. West. Hoved. Speed, Holish. Fab. Graft. Daniel in
his life.
King John's time prayed in aid from Philip and Lewis of France against his
tyranny) and those Princes in such cases, may justly kill, depose, or
judicially condemn these oppressing Kings and put them to death. I conceive
these whole kingdoms and Parliaments may with far better reason, less
danger, and greater safety to themselves, their Kings and Realms take up
defensive Arms of their own to repulse their violence. For if they may
lawfully help themselves and vindicate their Liberties from their Kings
encroachments by the assistance and Arms of foreign Princes who have no
relation to them, nor particular interest in the differences between their
kings and them, which can hardly be effected without subjecting themselves to a
foreign power; the death or deposition of the oppressing King: much more may
they defend and releeve themselves against him by their own domesticke Forces,
if they be able, by general consent of the Realm; because they have a
particular interest and engagement to defend their own persons, estates,
liberties, which forraigners want; and by such domesticke Forces may prevent a
foreign subjection, preserve the life of the oppressing Prince, and
succession of the Crown in the hereditary line; which See Knols Turkish Hist.
of the calling in the Turk into Graecia and Cambdin and Speed of the
Britains calling in the Saxons which proved their ruin and conquest.
foreign Armies most commonly endanger. And certainly it is all one in point
of Reason, State, Law, Conscience, for Subjects to relieve themselves, and make
a defensive war against their Sovereign by foreign Princes Arms, as by
their own: and if the first be just and lawful, as all men generally grant
without contradiction; and Bracton to l. 2. c. 16. I see no color but the
latter must be just and lawful too, yea then the first rather, because less
dangerous, less inconvenient to King and Kingdom.

From Reasons, I shall next proceed to punctual Authorities. Not to mention
our ancient See Matthew. Westminster. Huntingdon, Galfridus Monumetensis, Florentius
Wigorniensis, Polychronicon, Fabian, Caxton, Grafton, Holinshed, Speed, and
others, in their several lives.
Brittons taking up of arms by joint consent, against their oppressing,
tyrannizing Kings A^chigallo, Emerian, and Vortigern, whom they both expelled
and deposed, for their tyranny and mis-government; nor our Saxons ray sing
defensive Forces against King Sigebert, Osfred, Ethelred, Beornard, Coolwulfe
and Edwyn, who were forcibly expelled, and deprived by their Subjects for their
bloody cruelties and oppressions; which actions the whole Kingdom then, and
those Historians who recorded them since, reputed just and honorable, and no
Treason nor Rebellion in Law or Conscience, being for the Kingdoms necessary
preservation, and the peoples just defense; which Histories I have elsewhere
more largely related. Nor yet to insist long on the forementioned Barons
war, against king John, and Henry the 3d. for regaining, establishing,
preserving Magna Cha^ta, and other Liberties of the Realm, which our Kings had
almost utterly deprived them off; I shall only give you some few brief
observations touching these wars, to clear them from those black aspersions
of Rebellion, Treason, and the like, which some late Historians (especially
John Speed) to flatter those Kings to whom they Dedicated their Histories, have
cast upon them, contrary to the judgment of our ancienter Choniclers, and
Matthew Paris; who generally repute them lawful and honorable.

First then consider, what opinion the Prelates, Barons, and Kingdom in
general, had of these Wars at first, Matthew. Far^^ Hist. Angl. p. 234 to 240.
Holinshed, Grafton, Speed, Fabian and Daniel, p. 140 141. 142. 143.
Anno 1414. in a Parliament held at Paul's the 16. year of King John's reign,
Steven Langton Archbishop of Canterbury, produced a Charter of King Henry the
First, whereby he granted the Ancient Liberties of the Kingdom of England
(which had by his Predecessors been oppressed with unjust exactions, according
to the Laws of King Edward, with those emendations, which his Father, by the
counsel of his Barons, did ratify: which Charter being read before the
Barons, they much rejoiced; and swore in the presence of the Archbishop; that
for these Liberties they would, if need required, spend their blood: which
being openly done in Parliament, they would never have taken such a public
solemn Oath, had they deemed a War against the King, for recovery, or
defense of these their Liberties unlawful, and no less then Treason and
Rebellion in point of Law or Conscience. After this the Barons assembling at
Saint Edmond^bury, conferred about the said Charter, and swore upon the high
Altar, That if King John refused to confirm and restore unto them those
Liberties (the Rights of the Kingdom) they would make War upon him, and
withdraw themselves from his Allegiance, until he had ratified them all with
his Charter under his great Seal. And further agreed, after Christmas to
Petition him for the same, and in the mean time to provide themselves of Horse
and Furniture to be ready, if the King should start from his Oath made at
Winchester, at the time of his absolution, for confirmation of these Liberties,
and compel him to satisfy their demand. After Christmas they repair in a
Military manner to the King, lying in the new Temple, urging their desires with
great vehemency: the King seeing their resolution and inclination to war,
made answer, That for the matter they required, he would take consideration
till after Easter next, In the mean time, he took upon him the Cross, rather
through fear, then devotion, supposing himself to be more safe under that
Protection: And to show his desperate malice and wilfulness (who rather then
not to have an absolute domination over his people, to do what he listed,
would be any thing himself under any other that would but support him in his
violences) he sent an Embassage (the most base and impious that ever yet was
sent by any free and Christian Prince) unto Miramumalim the Moore, entitled
the great King of Africa, Morocco, and Spain; wherein he offered to render
unto him his Kingdom, and to hold the same by tribute from him as his
Sovereign Lord; to forgo the Christian Faith, as vain, and to receive that
of Mahomet, employing Thomas Hardington and Ralph Fitz-Nicholas, Knights, and
Robert of London Clerk, Commissioners in this negotiation; whose manner of
access to this great King, with the delivery of their Message, and King John's
Charter to that effect, are at large recited in Matthew Paris, who heard the
whole relation from Robert one of the Commissioners, Miramumalim having heard
at large their Message, and the Description of the King and Kingdom, (governed
by an anointed and Crowned King, known of old to be free and ingenuous; ad
nullius, praeterquam Dei spectans dominationem) with the nature and disposition
of the people, so much disdained the baseness and impiety of the Offerer, that
fetching a deep sigh from his heart, he answered, I have never read nor heard,
of any King possessing so prosperous a Kingdom, subject and obedient to him,
who would thus willingly ruin his Principality, as of free to make it
tributary, of his own to make it another, of happy to make it miserable, and
to submit himself to another pleasure, as one conquered without a wound. But I
have heard and read of many, who with effusion and loss of much blood (which
was laudable) have procured liberty to themselves; modo autem audio, quod
Dominus vester miser, deses and imbellis, qui nullo nullior est, de libero
servus fieri desiderat, qui omnium mortalium miserrimus est. After which he
said; That the King was unworthy of his Confederacy; and looking on the two
Knights with a stern countenance, he commanded them to depart instantly out of
his presence, and to see his face no more; whereupon they departing with shame;
he charged Robert the Clerk, to inform him truly what manner of person King
John was: who replied, That he was rather a Tyrant then a King; rather a
Subverter then a Governor; a Subverter of his own Subjects, and a Fosterer of
Strangers; a Lion to his own Subjects, a Lamb to Aliens and Rebels; who by
his sloathfulnesse had lost the Duchy of Normandy, and many other Lands, and
moreover thirsted to lose and destroy the Kingdom of England: An unsatiable
Extortioner of money; an invader and destroyer of the possessions of his
natural people, etc. When Miramumalim heard this, he not only despised, as at
first, but detested and accursed him, and said: Why do the miserable English
permit such a one to reign and domineer over them? Truly, they are effeminate
and flavish: To which Robert answered: the English are the most patient of all
men, until they are offended and damnified beyond measure. But now they are
angry, like a Lion or Elephant, when he perceives himself hurt or bloody; and
though late, they purpose and endeavor to shake the yoke of the Oppressor
from their necks which lie under it: Whereupon he reprehended the overmuch
patience and fearfulness of the English; and dismissed these Messengers; who
returning, and relating his Answer to King John, he was exceeding sorrowful,
and in much bitterness of Spirit, that he was thus contemned and disapointed
of his purpose. Yet persisting in his pre-conceived wicked design to ruin his
Kingdom and people, and hating all the Nobility and Gentry of England, with a
viperous Venom, he sets upon another course; and knowing A true Character of a
Pope,
Pope Jnnocent to be the most ambitious, proud, and covetous of all men, who by
gifts and promises would be wrought upon, to act any wickedness: Thereupon he
hastily dispatcheth messengers to him with great sums of Money, and a
re-assurance of his tributary Subjection, (which shortly after he confirmed by
a new Oath and Charter,) to procure him to Excommunicate the Archbishop of
Canterbury, and the Barons, whom he had formerly favored; which things he
greedily desired, that he might wrecke has malice an them by Dis inheriting,
Imprisoning, and Spoiling them being Excommunicated: Which things when he had
wickedly plotted, he more wickedly executed afterward. In the mean time, the
Barons foreseeing that nothing was to be obtained but by strong hand, assemble
an Army at Stamford, wherein were said to be two thousand Knights, besides
Esquires, and marched from thence toward Oxford, where the King expected their
coming to answer their demands. And being come to Brackley with their Army,
the King sends the Earl of Pembroke Mariscall, and the Archbishop of
Canterbury, with others, to demand of them, what were those Laws and Liberties
they required? to whom they showed a Schedule of them, which the Commissioners
delivered to the King: who having heard them read, in great indignation asked;
Why the Barons did not likewise demand the Kingdom? and swore he would never
grant those Articles, whereby himself should be made a Servant. So harsh a
thing is it to a power, that is once gotten out into the wide liberty of his
will, to hear again of any reducing within his Circle. Upon this answer, the
Barons resolve to seize the Kings Castles; constitute Robert Fitz-walter their
General, entituling him, Mariscall of the ARMY of GOD, and of HOLY CHVRCH: A
Title they would never have given their General, or Army, had they deemed this
War unlawful in Law or Conscience. After which they took diverse of the
Kings Castles and are admitted into London; where their number daily
increasing, they make this Protestation; Never to give over the prosecution of
their desire, till they had constrained the King (whom they held perjured) to
grant them their Rights. Which questionless, they would not have done, had
they not believed this War to be just and lawful. King John seeing himself
in a manner generally forsaken of all his people, and Nobles, having scarce 7.
Knights faithful to him (another strong argument, that the people and Kingdom
generally apprehended, this taking up arms against the King to regaine, to
preserve their hereditary Rights and Liberties, to be lawful) counterfeits the
Seals of the Bishops, and writes in their Names to all Nations, That the
English were all Apostates, and whosoever would come to invade them, he, by
the Popes consent, would confer upon them all their Lands and Possossions.
But this device working no effect, in regard they gave no credit to it, and
found it apparently false; the King seeing himself deserted of all, and that
those of the Barons part were innumerable, ( cum tota Angliae Nobilitas in unum
collecta, quasi sub numero non cadebat, writes Matthew Paris, another argument
of the justice of this cause and war, in their beliefes and consciences; at
last condescended to grant and confirm their Liberties, which he did at
Running-Meade, in such sort as I have formerly related. And though the Pope
afterward for his own private ends and interest, (bribed by King John, who
resigned his Kingdom to him, and became his Vassal, without his peoples
consent, which resignation was judged void,) excommunicated the Barons withal
their assistance; Qui Ioha^nem illustrum Regim Anglorum Cruce signatum, ET
VASALLVM ROMANAE ECCLESIAE (an honorable Title indeed for a King) pers
quuntur, molientes ei Regnum auferre (which this Pope him self did but few
years before, giving his Crown and Kingdom it self to King Phillip of
France, which to save, he sordidly resigned up to the Pope) quod ad Romanam
Ecclesiam dignoscitur pertinere. Yet this Excommunication thus procured by
bribery, proceeding not out of Conscience to preserve the Kings due Rights, 1
Page 235. 267. 268.
but selfe-respects to support the Popes usurped interest and Title to the
Realm; and being a wicked plot of the King, more wickedly executed by the
Pope, (who as Matthew Paris writes, was AD OMNIA SCELERA pro praemijs datis vel
promissis cercus and proclivis) and the Londoners, Barons, with diverse Prelates
then contemning it, as pronounced upon false suggestions, and especially for
this cause, that the ordering of temporal affairs belonged not to the Pope,
Cum Petro Apostolo and ejus Successoribus non nisi Ecclesiasticarum dispositio
rerum a Domino sit collata potestas. And using likewise these memorable
Speeches in those blind days against the Pope and his usurped Supremacy, with
liberty. Vt quid ad nos se extendit Romanorum insatiata cupiditas? Quid
Episcopis Apostolicis and Militiae nostrae? Ecce successores Constantini and
non Petri, non imitantur Petrum in meritis, vel operibus; nec assimulandi sunt
in Potestate. Prob pudor, marcidi ribaldi, qui de armis vel literalitate minime
norunt, jam toti mundo propter excom nunicationes suas volunt dominari;
ignobiles usurarij and Simoniales. O quantum dissimules Petro, qui sibi Petri
usurpant partem? etc. I conceive this Excommunication rather justifies then
disproves the lawfulness of this their taking up of arms, and the war
ensuing it being but for their own just defense, when the King afterward with
fire, sword, and bloody barbarous Foreign Forces wasted his Realm in a most
inhumane, tyrannical manner, Factus de Rege Tyrannus; imo in bestialem
prorumpens feritatem, etc. which necessitated the Barons for their own
preservation and the Kingdoms (devoted by this unnatural Prince to Vassallage
and utter desolation) to elect Lewis of France for their King: Who, together
with the Peers and Estates of France, assembled at Lions concerning this
Election; resolved it to be just and lawful, and the Barons Defensive Wars
against, and rejection of King John for his Tyranny and oppressions, to be just
and honorable, since they did but flee to these extraordinary remedies, and
seek for justice abroad, when they were denied it by him that should give it
them in as ordinary way at home, chosing a King, in place of a Tyrant, as Hist.
Angl. page 270. 271
Matthew Paris, with the Page 123. 122.
general History of France (written by John de Serres, and Englished by Edward
Grimston) more largely manifest.

Secondly, the Lawfulness and justness of the Barons Wars in Defense of
Magna Charta, with other their Hereditary Rights and Liberties, appears most
evidently, by the resolution of all those Parliaments summoned by King. Henry
the 3d. Edward the 10 2. 3. Richard the 2d. and other our succeeding Kings;
which have many times, even by See part 1. p. 19. 20.
force of Arms, or Menaces; and sometimes by fair terms, caused these Kings
by new Acts of Parliament to ratify Magnae Charta, the Charter of the Forest,
with other Fundamental Liberties, thus forcibly extorted from King John at
first; and constrained them to confirm him with their Oaths and solemn
public Confirm. Chartarum. 25. E. 1. c. 4.
Excommunications, to be published by the Bishops in their Dio^esse twice every
year: often solemnly vowing, and protesting, both in and out of Parliament, to
defend these Laws and Liberties, with their estates, arms, lives, blood;
which their ancasters had purchased with their blood; as I have manifested in
the two first parts of this Discourse: All which they would no doubt have
forborne, had they deemed it high Treason or Rebellion in point of Law, to take
up arms against their Kings in defense or these Laws and Privileges; neither
would our Kings and Parliaments in times of Peace, have so frequently confirmed
these Laws and Immunities, as just and necessary for the peoples welfare, had
they reputed their former purchases and confirmations by war and arms, no
less then Treason, or Rebellion. And if it were neither Treason nor Rebellion
in the judgments of our Ancestors and those Parliaments which procured, and
ratified Magna Charta, to take up arms in defense thereof; much less can it
be Treason or Rebellion in the Parliament and Subjects now (by Votes, by
Ordinances of both Houses) with force of arms to preserve, not only these
their hereditarie Charters, Laws, Privileges, but their very Lives, Estates;
yea, the Privileges and being of Parliaments themselves, which are now invaded,
endangered.

What opinion the world had of the lawfulness of most of the Barons Wars in
King Henry the 3d. his Reign, against this troublesome persidious King, in
defense of their Laws, Liberties, Estates, appears first, by the Dialogue
between Agnellus, a Friar minorite, one of King Henry his Counsel, (purposely
sent to the Earl Marshall, then in arms against the King) and this Martial
Earl, in the Abbey of Morgan. Anno 1233. I will first relate the true state of
that War, and then their Dialogue concerning it: Math. Paris Hist. p. 371. to
385. Daniel, p. 153. 154. See Holinsse, Graft. Speed. Matthew. West. Anno 1233.
King Henry by the ill counsel of Peter Bishop of Winchester, removed all his
English Officers, Counselors, and Servants from his Court, and put
Poictovines, and Forraigners in their places, being ruled wholly by them;
withal he puts the English Garrisons out of all his Castles, and substitutes
Forraigners in them, which daily arived both with Horse and arms in great
multitudes, and much oppressed the people, calling them Traitors; so that the
power and wealth of the Realm was wholly under their Command. The Earl
Marshall seeing the Noble and Ignoble thus oppressed, and the rights of the
Kingdom like utterly to be lost; provoked with a zeal of Justice, associating
to himself other Noble men, goes boldly to the King, reproves him in the
hearing of many, For calling in those Poictovines, by evil Counsel, to the
oppression of the Kingdom, and of his natural Subjects, and likewise of Laws
and Liberties; Humbly beseeching him, hastily to correct these excesses, which
threatened the imminent subversion both of His Crown and Kingdom, which if he
refused to do, he and the other Nobles of the Realm, would withdraw
themselves from his Counsel, as long as he harbored those Strangers. To which
Peter of Winchester replied: That the King might lawfully call in what
strangers be would, for the Defense of his Kingdom and Crown, and likewise so
many, and such, as might compel his proud and rebellious Subjects to due
Obedience. Whereupon the Earl Marshall and other Nobles, departing
discontented from the Court, when they could get no other answer, promised
firmly one to another; That for this cause which concerned them all, they
would manfully fight, even to the separation of Soul and Body. After which,
they seeing more Strangers arrive with Horse and arms every day, sent word to
the King; That he should forthwith remove Bishop Peter, and all his Strangers
from his Court, which if he refused, they all would BY THE COMMON CONSENT OF
THE WHOLE REALM drive him, with his wicked Counselors, out of the Realm, and
consult of choosing them a new King. After these, and some other like passages,
the King raising an Army, besieges one of the Earls Castles; and not being
able to win it, and ashamed to raise his Seige without gaining it, he sent
certain Bishops to the Earl, and requested him; that since he had besieged
his Castle, and he could not with Honor depart without winning it, which he
could not do by force, that the Earl to save his Honor would cause it to be
surrended to him, upon this condition, That he would restore it certainly to
him within 15. days, and that by advise of the Bishops he would amend all
things amiss in his Kingdom; for performance of which the Bishops became his
Pledges, and the King appointed a meeting at Westminster, on a set day between
Him and the Lords: whereupon the Earl surrendered the Castle to the King, upon
Oath made by the Bishops that it should be restored at the day. But the King
refusing to deliver the Earl the Castle, according to promise, and threatening
to subdue his other Castles; the Earl hereupon raises his Forces, winnes his
Castle again, routs diverse of the Kings Foreign Forces, at Gorsemond,
Monmouth, and other places; and invaded the lands of his Enemies. Upon this
occasion, Friar Agnellus (or Lamb) acquaints the Earl, what the King,
together with his Counsel and Court, thought of his proceedings; to wit, that
the King said, he had proceeded over traitorously, and unjustly against him,
yet he was willing to receive him into favor, if he would wholly submit
himself to his mercy; and that others held it not just, safe, and profitable
for him to do it; because he had done wrong to the King, in that before the
King had invaded his Lands or Person, he invaded and destroyed the Kings Lands,
and slew his men; and if he should say, he did this in defense of his body and
inheritance; they answered, no, because there was never any plot against either
of them; and that were it true, yet he ought not thus to break forth against
the King his Lord, until he had certain knowledge, that the King had such
intensions against him: ET EX TVNC LICERET TALIA ATTEMPTARE; and from
thenceforth he might lawfully attempt such things, (by the Courtiers and Friars
own Confessions:) Upon which the Marshiall said to Friar Lamb: To the first
they say, that I ought to submit my self, because I have invaded the King: it
is not true, because the King himself, (though I have been ever ready to
stand to the Law and judgment of my Peers in his Court, and have often times
requested it by many messengers between us, which he always denied to grant)
violently entered my Land, and invaded it against all justice: whom hoping in
humility to please, I freely entered into a form of peace with him, which was
very prejudicial to me: wherein he granted, that if on his part all things
were not punctually performed toward me, I should be in my pristine state
before that peace conclnded; namely, that I should be without this homage, and
absolved from my allegiance to him, as I was at first by the Bishop of Saint
David's; Seeing then he has violated all the Articles of the Peace, IT WAS
LAWFVLL FOR ME, According to my agreement, to recover what was mine own; and
to debilitate his power by all means; especially seeing he endeavored my
destruction, dis-inheritance, and seizing of my Body, of which I have certain
intelligence, and am able to prove it if need be. And which is more, after the
15 days truce, before I entered Wales, or made any defense, he deprived me of
the Office of Marshall, without judgment, which belongs to me, and I have
enjoyed by Inheritance, neither would he by any means restore me to it,
though required. Whence I have plainly learned, that he will keep no peace
with me, seeing since the Peace he handles me worse then before. Whereby I
ceased to be his Subject, and was absolved from his homage by him. Wherefore
it was, and is lawful for me to defend my self, and to withstand the malice
of his Counselors by all means. And whereas the Kings Counselors say, it is
profitable for me to submit to the Kings mercy, because he is more rich and
powerful then I am. It is true, the King is richer and more potent then I, but
yet he is not more powerful then God, who is Justice it self, in whom I
trust, in the confirmation and prosecution of my right, and of the Kingdoms.
And whereas they say, the King can bring in Strangers of his kindred, who are
neither Scots, nor French, nor Welsh, who shall make all his foes his
Footstool, and come in such multitudes, as they shall cover the face of the
earth, and that he can raise seven men to my one: I neither trust in Strangers,
nor desire their confederaciei nor will I invoke their aid, Unless, which God
forbid, inopinata and immutabilis, fuero compulsus necessitate; I shall be
compelied by a sudden and immutable necessity; and I believe by his Counsels
ill advise he will quickly bring in such multitudes of Strangers, that he will
not be able to free the Kingdom of them again; for I have learned from
credible men, that the Bishop of Winchester is bound to the Emperor, that he
will make the Kingdom of England subject to him; which God in his providence
avert. And whereas they say, That I may confide in the King and his Counsel,
because the King is merciful, credible, etc. It may well be that the King is
merciful; but he is seduced be the Counsel of those, by whom we feel our
selves much hurt; and he is Noble and credible (whom God long preserve so) as
much as in him lies; but as for his Counsel, I say, that no one promise made
to me, was ever yet kept, and they have violated many corporal Oaths made to
me, and the Oaths they took for observing Magna Charta, for which they
remain excommunicate and perjured. Yea, they are enjured concerning the
faithful Counsel which they have sworn to give to our Lord the King, when as
they have wilfully given him the Counsel of Achitophel, against justice; and
corrupted the just Laws they have sworn to keep, and introduced unusual
ones: for which, and for many other things, for which neither God nor man ought
to trust them, or their accomplices, are they not every one excommunicated? Rumor
de veteri faciet ventura timeri:
Cras poterunt fieri turtia sicut heri.
Falix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum.


Whereas the said Counselors of the King say, that I invaded the Kings body at
Gorsmund Castle, before the King had entered my Land; and so I did injury to
the King, for which I ought to implore his mercy, least others should take
example thence to raise up Arms against the King. I answer, that I was not
there in person; and if any of my Family were thereby chance, they invaded
only the Family of the King, not the person of the King: which yet if they had
done, it were no wonder, seeing the king came with his Army into my Land, that
he might invade me, and oppress me by all the means he could, which may
appear to all by the tenor of his Letters, by which he made a general
assembly throughout England against my Army. And since the premises objected
against me are false, and it is true, that the King has treated me worse
since the time I expected his mercy, then any time before, and does yet use the
same Counsel as then; and since he endeavors precisely to follow their
Counsels in all things, by whose advise I suffer all the premised grievances; I
ought not to prostitute my self to his mercy. Neither would this be for the
Kings honor, that I should consent unto his will, which is not grounded upon
reason. Yea, I should do an injury to him, and to Justice, which he ought to
use toward his Subjects, and to maintain. And I should give an ill example to
all, by deserting Justice, and the prosecution of right, for an erroneous will
against all Justice, and the injury of the Subjects: For by this it would
appear, that we loved our worldly possessions, more then Justice it self. And
whereas the Kings Counselors object, that we have combined with the Kings
capital enemies, namely, the French, Scots, Welsh, out of hatred and damage
to king and kingdom: That of the French is altogether false, and that of the
Scots and Welsh too; excepting the king of Scots, and Leoline Prince of
Northwales; who were not the kings enemies, but faithful friends, until by
injuries offered them by the King and his Counsel, they were by coertion
against their wills, alienated from their fidelity, as I am. And for this
cause I am confederated with them, that we may the better being united, then
separated, regaine and defend our rights, of which we are unjustly deprived,
and in a great part spoiled. Whereas the Kings Counsel propose, that I ought
not to confide in my Confederates, because the King, without any great hurt to
his Land, can easily separate them from my friendship: Of this I make no great
doubt, but by this the iniquity of his Counselors does most of all appear:
that in some sort they would cause the King to sustain loss, by those whom he
specially calls, capital enemies, to injure me who have always been his
faithful Subject, whiles I remained with him, and yet would be so, if he would
restore to me and my friends our right. Whereas the said Counselors say, that
the Pope and Church of Rome, do specially love the King and kingdom, and will
Excommunicate all his adversaries, which thing is even at the doors, because
they have already sent for a Legate: It pleases me well, said the Marshall;
because the more they love the King and Kingdom, by so much the more will they
desire that the King should treat his Realm and Subjects, according to
justice: And I am well pleased they should excommunicate the adversaries of the
Kingdom, because they are those who give Counsel against Justice, whom works
will manifest; because Justice and Peace have kissed each other; and because of
this, where Justice is corrupted, Peace is likewise violated. Also I am pleased
that a Legate is coming, because the more discreet men shall hear our
justice, by so much the more vilely shall the adversaries of Justice be
confounded. In which notable discourse we see the lawfullnesse of a necessary
defensive War yielded and justified both by the King, his Counsel, and the
Earl Marshall, as well against the King himself, if he invade his Subjects
first, as any of his Forces who assist him. After which the Marshall slew many
of his Enemies by an Ambuscado, while they thought to surprise him, and wasted
and spoiled their goods, houses, lands; observing this general laudable rule
which they made, to do no hurt, nor ill to any one, but to the Kings evil
Counselors by whom they were banished, whose goods, houses, woods, Orchards,
they spoiled, burnt, and rooted up. The King remaining at Gloucester, heard of
these proceedings of the Marshall, but his forces being too weak, he durst not
encounter him, but retired to Winchester with Bishop Peter, confounded with
over much shame, leaving that Country to be wasted by his adversaries; where
innumerable carcases of those there slain lay naked and unburied in the ways,
being food to the beasts and birds of prey: a sad spectacle to passengers,
which so corrupted the air, that it infected and killed many who were healthy.
Yet the Kings heart was so hardened, by the wicked council he followed, against
the Marshall, that the Bishops admonishing him to make peace with him, WHO
FOVGHT FOR IVSTISE: he answered, that he would never make peace with him,
unless coming with an halter about his neck and acknowledging himself to be
a Traitor, he would implore his mercy. The Marshall both in England and
Ireland; professed that he was no Traitor; that his war being but defensive,
was just; immutabiliter affirmant, quod li^uit sibi de jure quod suum crat
repetere, and posse Regis and Consiliorum suorum, modis omnibus quibus poterat,
infirmare.

Page 966. 967. Daniel, p. 178.
William Rishanger in his continuation of Matthew Paris, speaking of the death
of Simon Monfort Earl of Leycester, slain in the Battle of Ev^sham, the
greatest Pillar of the Barrons wars; uses this expression. Thus this
magnificent Earl Simon, ended his labors, who not only bestowed his estate
but his person also, for releiefe of the oppression of the poor; for the
asserting of Justice, and the right of the Realm: he was commendably skillful
in learning, a daily frequenter of divine Offices, constant in word, severe in
countenance, most confiding in the prayers of Religious persons, always very
respectfull to Ecclesiastical persons. He earnestly adheared to Robert
Grosthead Bishop of Lincoln, and committed his children to his education. By
his advise he handled difficult things, attempted doubtful things, concluded
things begun, specially such things whereby he thought he might gain desert.
Which Bishop was said to have enjoined him, as he would obtain remission of
his sins, that he should undertake this cause for which he contended even
unto death, affirming, that the peace of the Church of England could never be
established, but by them material sword; and constantly averring; THAT ALL WHO
DIED FOR IT WERE CROWNED WITH MARTYRDOM. Some say that this Bishop on a time,
laying his hand on the head of the Earls eldest son, said unto him. O most
dear son, thou and thy father shall both dye on one day, and with one hand
of death; YET FOR JUSTICE AND TRVTH. Fame reports that Simon after his death
grew famous by many miracles, which for fear of the King came not in public.
Thus this Historian, thus Robert Grosthead the most devout and learned Bishop
of that age, (who most of any opposed the Popes Usurpations and exactions)
determine of the justice and lawfulness of the Barons Wars; Walter Bishop of
Worcester concurring in the same opinion with Grosthead. The same Page. 970.
author Rishanger records; that the Earl of Gloucester, a great stickler in
these wars against the king, with whom at last he accorded; signified to the
King by his Letters Patents under his seal, that he would never bear Arms
against the King his Lord, nor against his Son Prince Edward, NISI DEFENDO;
but only in his Defense: which the King and Prince accepting of, clearly
proves; that defensive Arms against King or Prince were in that age generally
reputed Lawful, by King Prince, Prelates, Nobles, People. I may likewise add
to this what I read in An. 3263. p. 336.
Matthew Westminster, that Richard Bishop of Chichester the day before the
battle of Lewis against King Henry and his son (who were taken prisoners in
it by the Barons and 20000. of their Soldiers slain;) absolved all that went
to fight against the King their Lord from all their sins. Such confidence had
he of the goodness of the cause and justness of the war.

In one word, the Mat. Par. p. 952. 953. Speed, p 636. Dan. p. 178.
oath of association prescribed by the Barons to the King of Romans, brother to
King Henry the third, in the 43. year of his Reign; Hear all men, that I
Richard Earl of Cornwall, do here swear upon the holy Evangelists, that I
shall be faithful, and diligent to reform with you the Kingdom of England,
hitherto by the council of wicked persons overmuch disordered: and be an
effectual Co^djutor TO EXPEL THE REBELS, and disturbers of the same. And
this Oath I will inviolaby observe, under pa^ne of losing all the lands I have
in England: So help me God. Which Oath all the Barrons and their associates
took, (by virtue whereof they took up arms against the Kings ill
Counselors, and himself when he joined with them,) sufficiently demonstrates
their public opinions and judgments of the lawfulness, the justness of
their wars; and of all other necessary defensive arms, taken up by the
Kingdoms general assent for preservation of its Laws, Liberties, and
suppression of those Rebels, and ill Counselors who fight against, or labor
to subvert them by their policies.

W^lsing. Hist. Angl. p. 70 to 75. Ypodigma Neustr. An. 1309. 1310 Dan.
Holi^sh. Graf. Speed, Fab Stow and others in his life: Fox Acts and Monuments,
Edw. ult vol. 1. p. 480. 481.
In the third year of King Edward the 2d, this king revoking his great Mynion
Piers Gaveston, newly banished by the Parliament into Ireland, and admitting
him into as great favor as before, contrary to his oath and promise: the
Barrons hereupon by common consent sent the King word; that he should banish
Piers from his company according to his agreement, or else they would
certain^ly rise up against him as a perjured person. Upon which the King much
terrified suffers Piers to abjure the Realm; who returning again soon after
to the Court at York; where the king entertained him; the Lords spiritual and
temporal, to preserve he liberties of the Church and Realm, sent an
honorable message to the King, to deliver Piers into their hands, or banish
him, for the preservation of the peace, Treasure and weal of the Kingdom;
this wilful King denies their just request; whereupon the Lords thus contemned
and deluded, raised an army, and march with all speed toward New Castle, NOT
TO OFFER INIVRIE OR MOLESTATION TO THE KING, but to apprehend Peirs, and judge
him according to Law: upon this the King flees together with Peirs to
Tinemouth, and from thence to Scarborough Castle, where Piers is forced to
render himself to the Barrons, who at Warwick Castle, (without any legal
trial by mere martial Law) beheaded him, as a subvertor of the Laws, and an
OPEN TRAITOR TO THE KINGDOM. For which facts this King afterward reprehending
and accusing the Lords in Parliament, in the 7th year of his Reign; they
stoutly answered, THAT THEY HAD NOT OFFENDED IN ANY ONE POINT, BUT DESERVED HIS
ROYAL FAVOR, for they HAD NOT GATHERED FORCE AGAINST HIM ( though he were in
Piers his company, assisted, countenanced, and fled with him) BUT AGAINST THE
PVBLICKE ENEMY OF THE REALM: Whereupon there were two acts of oblivion passed
by the King, Lords and Commons assembled in that Parliament, (Printed in the F.
43. 44.
2d Part of old Magna Charta:) The first, that no person (on the Kings part)
should be questioned, molested, impeached, imprisoned, and brought to
judgment, for causing Pierce to return from Exile, or harboring, councelling
or ayding hi^^ere after his return: The second on the Barons part, in these
words: It is provided by the King, and by the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots,
Priors, Earls, Bar^s and Commons, of the Realm, assembled according to our
Command, and unanimously assented and accorded, that none of what estate or
condition soever he be, shall in time to come be appealed or challenged, for
the apprehending, deteining, or death of Peirsde Gaveston, nor shall for the
said death be apprehended, nor imprisoned, impeached, molested, nor grieved,
nor judgment given against him by us, nor by others at our suite, nor at the
suite of any other, either in the Kings Court or elsewhere. Which act the King
by his Writ, sent to the Judges of the Kings Bench, commanding that this grant
and concord shall be firm and stable in all its points, and that every of them
should be held, and kept in perpetuity; to which end he commands them to cause
this act to be there enrolled, and firmly kept for ever. A pregnant evidence
that the Barons taking up Arms then against this Traitor and enemy of the
Realm, in pursuance of the Act and sentence of Parliament for his banishment,
though the King were in his company, and assisted him all he might, was then
both by King and Parliament, adjudged no Treason, nor Rebellion at all in point
of Law, but a just and honorable action: Wherefore their taking up Arms is not
mentioned in this Act of oblivion, seeing they all held it just, but their
putting Piers to death, without legal trial; which in strictness of Law,
could not be justified. Now whether this be not the Parliaments and kingdoms
present case in point of Law (who took up arms principally at first, for
defense of their own Privileges of Parliament, and apprehention of
delinquents who seducing the king withdrew him from the Parliament, and caused
him to raise an Army to shelter themselves under its power against the
Parliament) let every reasonable man determine: and if it be so, we see this
ancient Act of Parliament resolves it, to be no high Treason, nor Rebellion,
nor offense against the King; but a just, lawful act, for the kings, the
kingdoms honor and safety.

Not long after this, the two Walsirg. Holinsh. Fab. Graf. Stow, Speed, Daniel
in his life.
Spensers getting into the kings favor, and seducing, miscouncelling him as
much as Gaveston did; the Lords and Barrons hereupon in the 14th and 15th
years of his reign, confederated together, to live and dye for justice, and
to their power to destroy the TRAITORS OF THE REALM, Especially the two
Spensers: after which they raised an Army, whereof they made Thomas Earl of
Lancaster General; and meeting at Sherborne, they plunder and destroy the
Spensers Castles, Manors. Houses, Friends, Servants, and marching to Saint
Albanes with Ensigns displayed, sent Messengers to the King then at London,
admonishing him not only to rid his Court but Kingdom, of the TRAITORS TO THE
REALM, the Spensers (condemned by the Commons in many Articles) to preserve
the peace of the Realm; and to grant them and all their followers Lette^s
Pattents of indemnity, for what they had formerly done. Which the King at first
denied but afterward this Army marching up to London, where they were
received by the City, he yielded to it, and in the 15th year of his Reign by
a special Act of Parliament the said Spensers were disinherited and banished
the Realm (formis-councelling the king, oppressing the people by injustice, a
vising him to levy war upon his Subjects, making evil Judges and other
Officers to the hurt of the King and Kingdom, ^ng^ossing the Kings ear, and
usurping his Royal authority) as ENEMIES of the King and OF HIS PEOPLE: and by
another Act of Parliament, it was then provided, that no man should be
questioned for any felonies or trespasses committed in the prosecution of Hugh
^e de pensers the father and son; which Act runs thus? Whereas of late many
great men of the Realm surmised to Sir Hugh le Despenser the son and Father,
many misdemeanors by them committed against the estate of our Lord the King and
of his Crown, and to the disinheritance of the great men and destruction of
the people, and pursued those misdemeanors and attainder of them by force,
because they could not be attainted by process of Law, because that the said
Sir Hughes had accroached to them the royal power in diverse manner: the said
Grandees having mutually bound themselves by oath in writing, without the advice of our Lord the King; and after in pursuing the said Hugh and Hugh, and
their alies and adherents, the said great men and others, riding with banners
displaied, having in them the Arms of the king and their own; did take and
occupy the Chattels, Villages, Manors; Lands, Tenements, Goods, and likewise
take and imprison some of the Kings liege people and others, took some and
slew others, and did many other things, in destroying the said Hugh and Hugh,
and their alies, and others in England, Wales, and in the Marches, whereof some
things may be said Trespasses, and others felonies: and the said Hugh and Hugh,
in the Parliament of our Lord the King, sommoned at Westminster three weeks
after the Nativitie of Saint John Baptist the 15. year of his Reign, for the
said misdemeanors were fore judged and banished the Realm, by a vote of the
Peers of the Land; and the foresaid great men in the said Parliament, showed
to our Lord the King, that the things done in the pursuit of the said Hugh and
Hugh, by reason of such causes of necessity, cannot be legally redressed or
punished without causing great trouble, or perchance war in the land, which
shall be worse; and prayed our Lord, that of all alliances, trespasses and
felonies they might be for ever acquitted, for the preservation of peace, the
avoiding of war, and asswaging of angers and rancors, and to make unity in
the land; and that our Lord the King may more entirely have the hearts and
Wills of the great men and of his people, to maintain and defend his Lands,
and to make war upon and grieve his enemies. It is accorded and agreed in the
said Parliament by our Lord the King, and by the Prelates, Earls, Barrons, and
Commons of the Realm there assembled by command of our Lord the King, that
none of what estate or condition soever he be for alliance, at what time soever
made, by deed, oath, writing, or in other manner, nor for the taking,
occupying, or detainer of Chattels, towns, Manors, Lands, Tenements, and good
taken, imprisoning or ransoming the Kings liege People, or of other homicides,
robberies, felonies, or other things which may be noted as trespasses or
fellonies committed against the peace of the king by the said great men, their
allies, or adherents in the pursuit aforesaid, since the first day of March
last past, till the thursday next after the feast of the assumption of our
Lady, to wit, the 19. day of August next ensuing, be appealed, nor challenged,
taken nor imprisoned, nor grieved, nor drawn into judgment by the King, nor
any other at the suite of any other which shall be in the Kings Court or in any
place else; but that all such trespasses and Felonies shall be discharged by
this accord and assent: saving always to all men, but to the said Hugh and
Hugh, action and reason to have and recover their Chattels, Farms, manors,
Lands, tenements, wards and marriages according to the Laws and customs used
in the Realm, without punishment against the king, or damages recovered
against the party for the time aforesaid. For which end they prescribed
likewise a Charter of Pardon annexed to this Act according to the purport of it
which every one that would might sue out, which Charter you may read in old
Magna Charta.

From which Act of Parliament I shall observe these three things. First, that
this their taking up Arms to apprehend the Spens^rs as enemies to the King and
kingdom, and marching with banners displayed, was not then reputed high Treason
or Rebellion against the King, though it were by way of offense, not of
defense, and without any authority of Parliament: for there is not one word of
Treason or Rebellion in this Act, or in the Charter of pardon pursuing it: and
if it had been high Treason, this Act and Charters on it extending only to
Fellonie and Trespasses not to Treasons and Rebellions, would Dy^^^. 50. pl. 4
(...). 6 ^. 12. Stamford. f. 2.
not have pardoned these transcendent Capital crimes. Secondly, that the
unlawful outrages, robberies, and murders committed by the soldiers on the
kings liege people, and not on the two Spensers the sole delinquents, were the
occasion of this Act of oblivion and pardon, not the Armed pursuing of them,
when they had gotten above the reach of Law. Thirdly, that though this were an
offensive not defensive war, made without common assent of Parliament, and
many murders, robberies, and misdemeanors committed in the prosecution of it
upon the kings liege people who were no Delinquents; yet being for the common
good to suppress and banish these ill Counselors, enemies, Traitors to King
and Kingdom, the King and Parliament thought it such a public service as
merited a pardon of these misdemeanors in the carriage of it, and acquitted all
who were parties to it, from all suites and punishments. All which considered,
is a clear demonstration, that they would have resolved our present defensive
war, by Authority of both Houses, accompanied with no such outrages as
these; for the apprehension of such as have been voted Traitors and
Delinquents by Parliament, and stand out in contempt against its justice, for
the defense of the Privileges and Members of Parliament, the Liberties and
properties of the subject, the fundamental laws of the Realm, the Protestant
Religion now endangered by Papists up in Arms in England and Ireland to
extirpate it, and the removing ill Counselors from his Majesty; to be no high
Treason, Rebellion or offense at all against the king, but a just and lawful
Act, the very miscarriages whereof in the general (except in such disorderly
Soldiers for whom martial Law has provided due punishments) deserve a
public pardon both from King and Kingdom. And to put this out of Question; as
no fancy of mine own, we have an express Act of Parliament, resolving the
taking up of Arms by the Queen, Prince, (both but subjects and capable of
High Treason in such a case as well as others) the Nobles and people of the
Realm against these two Spensers and other ill Counselors about this king in
the last year of his reign, (though the King himself were in their Company,
and taken prisoner by the Forces raised against them,) for the necessary
preservation, relief, and safety of the Queen, Prince, Nobles, Kingdom, to
be no high Treason nor offense at all: namely, the statute of 1 E. 3. c. 1. 2.
3, which I shall recite at large. Whereas Hugh Spenser the Father, and Hugh
Spenser the Son, late at the suite of Thomas then Earl of Lancaster and
Leycester, and Steward of England, by the common assent and vote of the Peers
and Commons of the Realm, and by the assent of King Edward Father to our
Sovereign Lord the King, that now is, AS TRAITORS and ENEMIES OF THE KING, and
OF THE REALM, were Exiled, disinherited and banished out of the Realm for
ever. And afterward the same Hugh by evil Council, which the king had about
him, without the assent of the Peers and Commons of the Realm, came again
into the Realm: and they with other procured the said king to pursue the said
Earl of Lancaster, and other great men and people of the Realm, in which
pursuit the said Earl of Lancaster and other great men and people of the
Realm, were willingly dead and disinherited, and some outlawed, banished, and
disinherited; and some disinherited and imprisoned, and some ransommed and
disherited: and after such mischief the said Hugh and Hugh Master Robert
Bald^cke and Edm^nd Earl of Arundell usurped to them the Royal power, so that
the king nothing did, nor would do, but as the said Hugh and Hugh, Rob^rt and
Edmond Earl of Arundell did council him, were it never so great wrong: during
which usurpation, by duresse and force against the Will of the Commons, they
purchased Lands, as well by fines levied in the Court of the said Edward, as
otherwise: and whereas after the death of the said Earl of Lancaster, and
other great men, our Sovereign Lord the King that now is, and Dame Isabel
Queen of England, his Mother, by the Kings will and Common Council of the
Realm, went over to France, to treat of peace between the two Realms of
England and France, upon certain debates then moved. The said Hugh and Hugh,
Robert and Edmond Earl of Arundell continuing in their mischief, encouraged
the king against our Sovereign Lord the king that now is, his son, and the
said Queen his wife, and by royal power which they had to them encroached, as
before is said, procured so much grievance by the assent of the said King
Edward, to our Sovereign Lord the King that now is, and the Queen his mother,
being in so great jeopardy of themselves in a strange Country, and seeing the
Destruction, Damage, Oppressions, and Distractions which were notoriously done
in the Realm of England, upon holy Church, Prelates, Earls Barons, and other
great men, and the Commonalty by the said Hugh and Hugh, Robert and Edmond
Earl of Arundell by the encroaching of the said royal power to them, to take
as good Council therein as they might. And seeing they might not remedy the
same unless they came into England, with an Army of men of war; and by the
Grace of God with such puissance, and with the help of great men and Commons
of the Realm, they have vanquished and destroyed the said Hugh and Hugh,
Robert and Edmond: Wherefore our Sovereign Lord King Edward that now is, at
his Parliament holden at Westmiuster, at the time of his Coronation, the morrow
after Candlemas, in the first year of his reign, upon certain Petitions and
requests made unto him in the said Parliament upon such Articles above
rehearsed, by the common council of the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and other
great men, and by the Commonalty of the Realm, there being by his Commandment,
has provided, ordained and stablished in form following. First, that no great
man, or other of what estate, dignity, or condition he be, that came with the
said king that now is, and with the Queen his mother into the Realm of
England, and none other dwelling in England, who came with the said king that
now is, Nota.
and with the Queen, In aid of them to pursue their said enemies, in which
pursuit the King his Father was taken and put in ward, and yet remains in
ward, shall not be molested impeached or grieved in person or goods, in the
kings Court, or other Court, for the pursuit of the said king, taking and with
holding of his body, nor pursuit of any other, nor taking of their persons,
goods, nor death of any man, or any other things perpetrate or committed in the
said pursuit, from the day the said king and Queen did arm, till the day of
the Coronation of the same king: and it is not the kings mind, that such
offenders that committed any trespass or other offense out of the pursuites
should go quit, or have advantage of this statute, but they shall be at their
answer for the same at the Law. Item, that the repeal of the said Exile which
was made by Dures and force be ad^ulled for evermore, and the said Exile made
by award of the Peers and Commons, by the kings assent as before is said,
shall stand in his strength in all points, after the tenure of every particular
therein contained. Item, that the Executors of the Testament of all those that
were of the same quarrel dead, shall have actions and recover the Goods and
Chattels of them, being of the said quarrel, whose executors they be; as they
of the same quarrel should, etc.

Certainly here was an higher pursuit and levying war against the King and
his evil Counselors, then any yet attempted by this Parliament; and a war
rather offensive, then defensive, in which the king himself was both taken and
detained Priso^r, and then forced to resign his Crown to his son; yet this
is here justified, as a necessary, just and lawful war by an Act of
Parliament, never yet repealed; and all that bare Arms against the king and
his ill Counselors, yea they who pursued, apprehended, and imprisoned the king
himself, are, as to this particular, discharged by the king, and whole
Parliament from all manner of guilt, of punishment, or prosecution whatsoever
against them. Which consideration makes me somewhat confident, that this King
and the Parliament held in the 25. year of his Reign, chapter 2. Which declares
it high Treason, to levy war against the King in his Realm, did never
intend it of a necessary defensive war against a seduced King and his evil
Counselors (especially by the Votes of both Houses of Parliament, who
doubtless would never pass any Act to make themselves, or their Posterity in
succeeding Parliaments, Traitors, for taking up mere necessary defensive Arms
for their own, and the Kingdoms preservation) for that had been diametra^ly
contrary to this statute, made in the very first year and Parliament of this
King; and would have l^yd an aspertion of High Treason upon the king himself,
the Queen his Mother, their own Fathers, and many of themselves; who thus
took up Arms and made a defensive kind of war upon King ^dward the 2d,
taking him prisoner: but only to Rebellious insurrections, of private persons,
without any public authority of Parliament, or the whole Kingdom in general;
and of mere offensive wars against the King without any just occasion,
hostility or violence on the Kings part, necessitating them to take up
defensive Arms: which I humbly submit to the judgment of those grand Rabbis
and Sages of the Law, and the Honorable Houses of Parliament, who are best able
to resolve, and are the only Judges to determine this point in controversy,
by the express letter and provision of 25. Ed. 3. chapter 2. of Treasons.

In the Walsing Hist. A^gl p. 213. See Holinsh. Speed. Trussell in Ri^^. ^ and
Cambdens Bri^^d, of the British Islands, p. 2^4.
first year of king Richard the 2d. John Mercer a Scot, with a Navy of
Spanish, Scottish and French ships much infested the Merchants and Coasts of
England taking many prises without any care taken by the king, Lords, or
Council to resist them. Whereupon John Philpot a rich Merchant of London,
diligently considering the defect, that I say not treachery of the Duke of I
ancaster, and other Lords who ought to defend the Realm, and grieving to see
the oppressions of the people, did at his proper charge hire a thousand
soldiers and set out a fleet, to take the said Mercers ships, with the goods
he had gotten by Pyracie, and defend the Realm of England from such
incursions: who in a short time took M^rcer prisoner, with 15. Spanish ships,
and all the Booties he had gained from the English: whereat all the people
rejoiced exceedingly, commending and extolling Philpot for the great love he
showed to his Country, and casting out some reproachful words against the
Nobles and Kings council who had the rule of the kingdom and neglected its
defense: Whereupon the Nobility, Earls and Barons of the Realm, conscious of
this their negligence, and envying Philpo^ for this his Noble praiseworthy
action, began not only secretly to lay snares for him, but openly to reproach
him, saying: That it was not lawful for him to do such things without the advice or council of the King and Kingdom: quasi non licuisset benefacere
Regi VELREGNO sine consilio Comitum and Baronum: (Writes Walsingham) as if it
were not lawful to do good to the King or Kingdom, without the advice of the
Earls and Barrons, or Lords of the Privy Council. To whom objecting these
things, and especially to Hugh Earl of Stafford, who was the chief Prolocutor
and spoke most against it, John Philpot gave this answer: Know for certain,
that I have destinated my money, ships, and men to sea to this end, not that I
might deprive you of the good name and honor of your Militia, or warlike
actions, and engrosse it to my self, but pitying the misery of my Nation and
Country, which now by your sloathfulnesse, of a most Noble kingdom, and Lady
of Nations, is devolved into so great misery, that it lies open to the pillage
of every one of the vilest Nations, seeing there is none of you, who will put
your hand to its defense. I have exposed me and mine therefore for the
Salvation of my proper Nation, and frteing of my Country. To which the Earl
and others had not a word to reply. From this memorable history and discourse
(which I have translated verbatim out of Walsingham,) I conceive it most
evident, that in the default of king and Nobles, it is lawful for the Commons
and every particular subject without any Commission from the king or his
Council, in times of iminent danger, to take up Arms and raise Forces by Sea
or Land to defend the king and his Native Country against invading enemies; as
Philpot did, without offense or crime. Then much more may the Houses of
Parliament, the representative body of the whole kingdom, and all private
Subjects by their Command, take up necessary defensive Arms against the kings
Popish and Malignant Forces to preserve the king, Kingdom, Parliament, People
from spoil, and ruin.

In Walsia. hist. Angl p. 341.
the 8. year of King Richard the 2d. there arose a great difference between
the Duke of Lancaster, and the king and his young accomplices, who conspired the
Dukes death; agreeing suddenly to arrest and arraigne him before Robert
Trisilian Chief Justice, who boldly promised to pass sentence against him,
according to the quality of the crimes objected to him. Upon this the Duke
having private intelligence of their treachery, to provide for his own safety,
wisely withdrew himself, and posted to his Castle at Ponfract, storing it with
Arms and Victuals. Hereupon not only a private but public discord was like
to ensue; but by the great mediation and pains of Ione the kings mother, an
accord and peace was made between them: and this defense of the Duke by
fortifying his Castle with Arms against the King and his ill instruments for
his own just preservation, held no crime. If such a defense then were held
just and lawful in one particular Subject and Peer of the land only, much
more must it be so in both Houses of Parliament, and the Kingdom, in case the
Kings Forces invade them.

In the Walsing. Hist. Ang. p. 358, to 367. Polyc. Fab. Speed, Grant. Hoti^.
Howes, Trassel. in 10. and 11 R. 2. 11 R 2^^. 1. ^07.
10th year of King Richard the second this unconstant king being instigated by
Michael de la Pole, Robert V^ere Duke of Ireland, Alexander Nevill ARchbishop
of York. Robert Trysilian. and other ill Counselors and Traitors to the
kingdom, endeavored to seize upon the Duke of Gloucester, the Earls of
Arundell, Warwick, Derby, Notingham, and others who were faithful to the
kingdom, and to put them to death, having caused them first to be indighted of
High Treason at Nottingham Castle, and hired many Soldiers to surprise them:
Hereupon these Lords for their own just defense, raised Forces and met at
Harynggye Park with a numerous Army: whereat the King being much perplexed,
advised what was best for him to do. The Archbishop of York and others of his
ill Council, advised him to gee forth and give them battle; but his wisest
counselors dissuaded him, affirming, that the King should gain no benefit if
he vanquished them and should sustain great dishonor and loss if he were
conquered by them. In the mean time Hugh Linne an old Soldier, who had lost
his senses, and was reputed a fool, coming in to the Council, the King
demanded of him in jest, what he should do against the Nobles met together in
the said Park? who answered; Let us go forth and assault them, and slay every
mothers son of them, and by the eyes of God, this being finished, THOU HAVE
SLAIN ALL THE FAITHFVLL FRIENDS THOU HAVE IN THE KINGDOM. Which answer,
though uttered foolishly; yet wise men did most of all consider. At last is was
resolved by the mediators of Peace, that the Lords should meet the King at
Westminster, and there receive an answer to the things for which they took
Arms; thither they came strongly Armed with a great guard, for fear of
ambuscadoes to entrap them: where the Chancellor in the Kings name spoke thus
to them. My Lords, our Lord the King hearing that you were lately assembled at
Harenggye Park in an unusual manner; would not rush upon you as he might have
easily done, had he not had care of you, and those who were with you: because
no man can doubt, if he had raised an Army, he would have had many more men
than you, and p^rchance much blood of men had been spilt, which the King does
most of all abhor, and therefore assuming to himself patience and mildness,
he has made choice to convent you peceably, and to tell him the reason why yoy
have ass^mbled so many men. To which the Lords answered, That THEY HAD MET
TOGETHER FOR THE GOOD OF THE KING AND KINGDOM; AND THAT THEY MIGHT PVLL AWAY
THOSE TRAITORS FROM HIM, WHICH HE CONTINVALLY DET AINED WITH HIM. The Traitors
they appealed were the foresaid ill Counselors, and Nicholas Brambre the false
London Knight: and to prove this appeal of them true, casting down their
gloves they said they would prosecute it by Duel: The King answered; This
shall not be done now, but in the next Parliament, with we appoint to be the
morrow after the Purification of the blessed Virgin, to which as well you as
they coming, shall receive satisfaction in all things according to Law. The
Lords for their own safety kept together till the Parliament, and in the mean
timed feated the Forces of the Duke of Ireland, raised privately by the Kings
Command to surprise them. The Parliament coming on the 11. year of Richard
the second: these ill counselors were therein, by special Acts attainted,
condemned of High Treason, and some of them executed; and these defensive Arms
of the Lords, for their own and the Kingdoms safety, adjudged and declared to
be no Treason: but a thing done to the honor of God and Salvation of the King
and his Realm: witness the express words of the Printed Act of 11 R. 2. c.
1. which I shall transcribe. Our Sovereign Lord the King amongst other
Petitions and requests to him made by the Commons of his said Realm in the
said Parliament, has received one Petition in the form following. The Commons
prayed, that whereas the last Parliament for cause of the great and horrible
mischiefs and perils which another time were fallen BY EVIL GOVERNANCE WHICH
WAS ABOUT THE KINGS PERSON, by all his time before by Alexander late Archbishop
of York, Robert de Veere late Duke of Ireland, Michael de la Pole late Earl
of Suffolk, Rober: Trisilian late Justice, and Nicholas Brambre Knight, with
other their adherents, and others, Whereby the King and all his Realm, were
very nigh^ to have been wholly undone and destroyed; and for this cause, and
to eschew such perils and mischiefs for the time to come, a certain statute
was made in the same Parliament, with a Commission to diverse Lords, for the
weal, honor and safeguard of the King, his regalty and of all the Realm, the
tenor of which Commission hereafter follows: Richard, etc. as in the Act.
And thereupon the said Alexander, Robert, Mighill, Robert, and Nicholas and
their said adherents, seeing that their said evil governance should be
perceived, and they by the same cause more likely to be punished by good
justice to be done, and also their evil deeds and purposes before used to be
disturbed by the said Lords assigned by commission as before; made, conspired,
and purposed diverse horrible Treasons, and evils against the King, and the said
Lords so assigned, and against all the other Lords and Commons, which were
assenting to the making of the said Ordinance and Commission, in destruction of
the king, his Regalty, and all his Realm. Whereupon Thomas Duke of Gloucester
the kings Uncle, Richard Earl of Arundle, and Thomas Earl of Warwick,
perceiving the evil purpose of the said Traitors, did assemble themselves in
forcible manner for the safety of their persons to show and declare the said
Treasons and evil purposes, and thereof to set remedy; as God would, and came
to the Kings presence, affirming against the said 5. Traitors appealed of High
Treason, by them done to the King, and to his Realm: upon which appeal the
king our Sovereign Lord, adjourned the said parties till this present
Parliament, and did take them into his safe protection, as in the record made
upon the same appeal fully appears. And afterward in great Rebellion, and
against the said protection, the said Traitors, with their said adherents and
others aforesaid, continuing their evil purpose, some of them assembled a
great power (by letters and Commission from the King himself, as Walsingham
and others write) to have destroyed the said Duke and Earls appellants, and
other the kings lawful liege people, and to accomplish their Treasons and
evil purposes aforesaid. Whereupon the said Duke of Gloucester, Henry Earl of
Darby, the said Earls of Arundell and Warwick, and Thomas Earl Marshall,
seeing the open Destruction of the King and all his Realm, if the said evil
purposed Traitors and their adherents, were not disturbed, which might not
otherwise have been done, but with strong hand; for the weal and safeguard of
the King our Sovereign Lord, and of all his Realm, did assemble them
forcibly, and rove and pursued till they had disturbed the said power gathered
by the said Traitors, and their adherents aforesaid, which five Traitors be
attainted this present Parliament of the Treasons and evils aforesaid, at the
suite and appeal of the said Duke of Gloucester, Earls of Darby, Arundle,
Warwick, and Marshall. That it would please our redoubled Sovereign Lord the
King to accept, approve, and affirm, in this present Parliament, all that was
done in the last as before, and as much as has been done since the last
Parliament by force of the statute, Ordinance, or Commission aforesaid; and
also All that the said Duke of Gloucester Earls of Arundell and W^rwicke did;
and that the same Duke and Earls, and the said Earls of Derby, and Marshall
or any of them did, Or any other of their company or of their aid, or of their
adherents, or of any of them, or touching the Assemblies, Ridings, Appeals,
and Pursuites aforesaid, * As a thing made to the Honor of God, Salvation of
the King, maintenance of his Crown, and also of the Salvation of all his
Realm (therefore doubtless no Treason Rebellion, nor any offense in point of
Law:) and also to Ordain and Stablish, that the said Duke of Gloucester, Earls
of Darby, Arundell, Warwick and Marshall, nor none of them, nor none of such
as have been of their return, or company, force, aid or council, or any of
them in the things aforesaid, nor none other person for any thing aforesaid
shall be impeached, molested, or grieved at the suite of the king, nor of the
party, nor in other manner, because of any assembly, riding, beating, levying
of Penons, or of Banners, discomfiture, death of a man, imprisonment of any
person, taking, leading away, or detinue of any horses or of any other beasts,
taking or carriage of goods, harness, armor, cattle, and other ^ovable goods,
breaking of houses, or of other possessions or goods, assault, battery,
robberies, thefts, coming or tarrying with force and arms, or armed in the
Kings presence at the Parliament, or Council, or else where. Raising of
people, or exciting the people to rise forcibly against the peace by letters,
commissions, or any other deeds, or of any other thing that may be furni^hed by
them, or any of them, or ought or purposed to have been done from the
beginning of the world, touching any of the said matters before the end of this
present Parliament by any imagination, interpretation, or other color, but
shall be quit and discharged for ever: except that the King be answered of all
the goods, and cattels that were to them which be attainted in this present
Parliament, or to any of them, and which goods and things were taken by any
person the first day of January last past, or after hitherto. We considering
the matter of the said Petition to be true, and the request of the said Commons
in this party Nota.
to be to the honor of God, and the profit of us and our Realm, of the assent
of the Prelates, Dukes, Earls, Barrons and all others of this present
Parliament, do garnt the requests of the said Commons in all points, after the
form of the said Petition. And moreover of the assent aforesaid, we will and
grant for the greater quietness of our said Realm, though that the said Duke
or Earls appellants, or any other of their company, retinue, force, aid,
council or adherents, or any of them have taken, led away, or withholden any
of our Iusticers, or any other of our ministers, in disturbance of execution of
the Law of our Realm of England, or in other manner, or that they have taken
any manner of person as Traitors to Us or to our Realm, or other person, and
the same have voluntarily suffered to go at large, or escape beyond the sea
from the 14th day of November. last past, till the end of this present
Parliament; that they nor any of them be for this cause impeached, molested,
nor grieved any manner of way at the suite of us, our heirs, nor none other
party, but thereof they shall be quit, and discharged for ever; nor that they
nor any of them be in any wise molested, grieved, nor impeached at the suite of
us, our heirs, or other party for any thing done at any time for to attain to
their purpose against the said appealers or any of them, or against any other
person for this cause, nor for any other thing or deed to affirm the same
purposes, till the end of this present Parliament, but thereof shall be
acquitted.

This Act with others made the same Parliament continued inviolable without
dispute for 10 years space, during which there were 8. more Parliaments held which
approved it: but in 21 R. 2. the King having See Walsingh, Hol^sh. Graft.
Speed, Sto^, Tussell, in 21. R 2 and 21 R c. 16: 17 ^8. 19 But especially ca.
20 will manifest the unjustnesse of this unlawful packed conventicle if I may
so call it.
violently seized upon the Duke of Gloucester and the Earls of Warwick and
Arundell, and packed a Parliament to his mind, by not summoning any Lords
thereto but those o^ his party, by causing diverse Knights and Burgesses of his
own nomination, never chosen by the people, to be returned in diverse places,
and overawing the rest with a guard or 4000. Cheshire Archers, caused these
Lords to be illegally attainted of Treason upon fained pretenses, out of this
old grudge, and the Acts of this Parliament to be reversed; yet not this Act,
as I conceive, which is part of it, being specially saved by 21. R. 2. c. 13.
But however by the statute of 1 H. 4. c. 3. 4. the Parliament of 21. was wholly
repealed, reversed, revoked, voyded, undone and anulled for ever, with all the
Acts, circumstances, and dependants thereof: and this Parliament of 11. R. 2.
Enacted to be firmly holden and kept after the purport and effect of the same;
as a thing made for the great Honor and common profit of the Realm, and chapter
5. It is ordained and assented, that the Lords and other which were forejudged
in the Parliament holden the said 21. year, or by Authority of the same, which
now be in life, and the heirs of the Lords and others that be dead, shall be
wholly restitute and restored to their names, all manner of inheritaments and
possessions, reversions, fees, reversions, offices, liberties, and franchises
as entirely as the said Lords and others which be in life, or the Lords and
other which be dead, ancestors of the heirs, or the feoffees of the said Lords
or other aforesaid, or other feoffees to their use, were at the time of the
judgment given against them, the said 21 year, by entry, without other suite
thereof to be made, or livery to be had of the same. And all the goods and
chattels which were the said Lords, or the other persons aforesaid, so
forejudged, whereof the king is not answered, and be in the hands of the
Sheriffs, Escheators, or other Officers, Ministers, or any other and concealed
by them, the king wills and grants, that the same Lords and other which now
be in life, and the Executors, and administrators of them that be dead; shall
have thereof delivery and restitution; and that the Sheriffs, Escheators,
Officers and Ministers so occupying the said goods and chattels by such
concealment, be punished for the same concealment.

So that by the express resolution of these two several Parliaments, these
Lords and Commons taking up defensive Arms and making war against those wicked
Councillors of this King which sought their ruin, and endeavored the
destruction of the Realm (though they had the kings presence and commissions
to countenance all their actions and proceedings of this nature, and the Lords
wanted the Ordinances of both houses to authorize this their arming, and war)
was solemnly declared and adjudged, to be no Treason nor Rebellion at all, nor
levying of war against the king, within the statute of 25. E. 3. but
contrariwise; a thing done to the honor of God, the Salvation of the King,
(for if the Kingdom perish or miscarry, the king as king must needs perish
with it) the maintenance of his Crown, (supported only by the maintenance of
the kingdoms welfare) and the Salvation and common profit of all the Realm:
and this being one of the first solemn judgments (if not the very first)
given in Parliament after the making of the statute of 25 E. 3. which has
relation to its clause of levying war, must certainly be the best exposition
of that Law: which the Parliament only ought to interpret, as is evident by
the statute of 21. R. 2. c. 3. (It is ordained and stablished, that every man
which, etc. or he that raises the people and rises against the King to make
war within his Realm; and of that be duly attainted and judged in the
Parliament shall be judged as a Traitor of High Treason against the Crown,)
and other forecited Acts: and if this were no Treason, nor Rebellion, nor
Trespass in the Barons against the king or kingdom; but a war for the
honor of God, the salvation of the king, the maintenance of his Crown, the
safety and common profit of all the Realm; much more must our Parliaments
present defensive war against his Majesty's ill Counselors, Papists,
Malignants, Delinquents, and men of desperate fortunes, risen up in Arms
against the Parliament, Laws, Religion, Liberties, the whole Kingdoms peace
and welfare, be so too; being backed with the very same, and far better,
greater authority, and more public reasons then their war was, in which the
safety of Religion was no great ingredient, nor the preservation of a
Parliament from a forced dissolution, though established and perpetuated by a
public Law.

King Henry the 4th, taking up Arms against King Richard, and causing him to
be Articled against, and judicially deposed in and by Parliament for his
Maladministration; It was Enacted by the Statute of 1. Hen 4. cap. 2. That no
Lord Spiritual nor Temporal, nor other, of what estate or condition that he
be, which came with King Henry into the Realm of England, nor none other
persons whatsoever they be, then dwelling within the same Realm, and which
came to this King in aid of him, to pursue them which were against the Kings
good intent, and the COMMON PROFIT OF THE REALM, in which pursuit Richard late
King of England, the second after the Conquest, was pursued taken and put in
Ward, and yet remains in Ward, be impeached, grieved, nor vexed in person,
nor in goods, in the Kings Court, nor in none other Court, for the pursuites of
the said King, taking and withholding of his body, nor for the pursuits of any
other, taking of persons and cattells, or of the death of a man, or any other
thing done in the said pursuit, from the day of the said King that now is
arived, till the day of the Coronation of Our said Sovereign Lord Henry. And
the intent of the King is not, that offenders which committed Trespasses, or
other offenses out of the said pursuits, without special warrant, should be
aided, nor have any advantage of this Statute, but that they be thereof
answerable at the Law. If those then who in this offensive War assisted Henry
the 4th. to apprehend, and depose this persidious, oppressing tyrannical king,
seduced by evil Counselors and his own innate dis-affection to his natural
people, deserved such an immunity of persons and goods, from all kinds of
penalties, because though it tended to this ill kings deposition, yet in their
intentions it was really for the common profit of the Realm, as this Act
defines it. No doubt this present defensive War alone against Papists,
Delinquents, and evil Counselors, (who have miserably wasted, spoiled, sacked
many places of the Realm, and fired others in a most barbarous manner, See
Albaricus Gentiles de Jure Be^li lib. 2 cap. 18. 20. 21. 22. 23
contrary to the Law of Arms and Nations, and labor to subvert Religion,
Laws, Liberties, Parliaments, and make the Realm a common Prey) without any ill
intention against his Majesty's Person, or lawful Royal Authority, deserves a
greater immunity; and can in no reasonable man's judgment, be interpreted any
Treason, or Rebellion against the king, or his Crown, in Law or Conscience.

In Grofton, p. 625. 626 627 628. Hall. 32. and 33. H 6. f. 167. 168.
Holinshead, Stow, Speed, Fabian.
the 33. year of king Henry the 6th. (a weak Prince wholly guided by the
Queen and Duke of Somerset, who ruled all things at their wills, under whose
Government, the greatest part of France was lost;) all things went to ruin
both abroad and at home; and the Queen (much against the Lords and Peoples
minds) preferring the Duke of Sommerset to the Captain ship of Calice, the
Commons and Nobility were greatly offended thereat, saying, That he had lost
Normandy, and so would he do^ Calice. Hereupon the Duke of York, the Earls of
Warwick and Salisbury, with other their adherents, raised an Army in the
Marches of Wales, and Marched with it toward London, to suppress the Duke of
Sommerset with his Faction, and reform the Government. The king being
credibly informed hereof, assembled his Host, and marching toward the Duke of
York and his Forces, was encountered by them at Saint Albanes, notwithstanding
the kings Proclamation to keep the Peace; where in a set Battle, the Duke of
Somerset, with diverse Earls, and 800. others were slain on the kings part, by
the Duke of York, and his companions, and the king^^ a manner defeat. The
Duke after this Victory obtained, remembering that he had oftentimes declared
and published abroad; The only cause of this War to be, THE ADVANCEMENT OF THE
PUBLIC WEAL, and TO SET THE REALM IN A MORE COMMODIOVS STATE and BETTER
CONDITION; Using all lenity, mercy, and bounteousnesse, would not once touch or
apprehend the body of King Henry, whom he might have slain, and utterly
destroyed, considering that he had him in his Ward, and Governance; but with
great honor and due reverence, conveyed him to London; and so to Westminster:
where a Parliament being summoned and assembled soon after; It was therein
Enacted, That no person should either judge or report any point of untruth of
the Duke of York, the Earls of Salisbury and Warwick, For coming in Warlike
manner against the King at Saint Albanes. Considering that their attempt and
enterprise, Was only to see the Kings Person in Safeguard and Sure-keeping,
and to put and Alien from Him the public Oppressors of the Common wealth; by
whose misgovernance, his life might be in hazard, and his Authority hang on a
very small Thread. After this, the Hall, Grift^ Fabian, Caxton, Holinshed Stow,
Speed, Anno 37. 38. and 39. R 6.
Duke, and these Earls raised another Army, for like purpose, and their own
defense in the 37 and 38 years of H. 6. for which they were afterward, by a
packed Parliament at Coventree, by their Enemies procurement, Attainted of high
Treason, and their Lands and Goods confiscated. But in the Parliament of 39. H.
6. cap. 1. The said attainder, Parliament, with all Acts and Statutes therein
made, were wholly Reversed Repealed, annulled; as being made ^y the excitation
and procurement of seditious ill disposed Persons for the accomplishment of
their own Rancor and Covetousness, that they might enjoy the Lands, Offices.
Possessions, and Goods of the lawful ^ords and liege People of the King; and
that they might finally destroy the laid lawful Lords, and Liege People, and
their Issues and Heirs for ever (as now the Kings ill Counselors, and hungry
Cavalleers seek to destroy the Kings faithful Liege Lords and People, that
they may gain their Lands and Estates; witness the late intercepted Le^ter of
Sir John Brooks, giving advise to thus purpose to his Majesty:) and this
Assembl^ was declared; to be no lawful Parliament, but a devilish Counsel,
which desired more the destruction then advancement of the Public weal; and
the Duke, Earls, with their assistants were restored, and declared to be
Faithful and Lawful Lords, and Faithful liege People of the Realm of England,
who always had great and Fathfull Love to the Preferrement and Surety of the
Kings Person, according to their Duty.

If then these two Parliaments acquitted these Lords and their companions, thus
taking up Arms, from any the least guilt of Treason and rebellion against the
King, because they did it only for the advancement of the public weal, the
setting the Realm in a better condition the removing ill Counselors, and
public oppressors of the Realm from about the King, and to rescue his person
out of their hands: then questionless by their resolutions, our present
Parliaments taking up defensive arms, upon the selfsame grounds, and other
important causes (and that by consent of both Houses, which they wanted) can be
reputed no high Treason nor Rebellion against the King in point of Law; and no
just, no rational Judge or Lawyer can justly aver the contrary, against so
many forecited resolutions in Parliament, even in printed Acts.

The Grafton, p. 847. 848 Hal. 3. R. 3. f. 55. 56. See Helished, Stew, Speed,
and Barons Henry 7.
Earl of Richmund, afterward King Henry the seventh, taking up arms against
Richard the third, (a lawful King, defacto, being crowned by Parliament; but
an Usurper and bloody ^yrant in Verity;) to recover his Inheritance, and Title
to the Crown, and ease the Kingdom of this unnatural blood-thirsty
Oppressor, before his fight at Boswell Field, used this Oration to his
Soldiers, pertinent to our purpose. If ever God gave victory to men fighting
in a just quarrel; or if he ever aided such as made war for the wealth and
tuition of their own natural and nutritive Country: or if he ever succored
them which adventured their lives for the relief of Innocents, suppression of
malefactors, and apparent Offenders; No doubt, my Fellows and Friends, but he
of his bountiful goodness will this day send us triumphant victory, and a
lucky revenge over our proud Enemies, and arrogant adversaries; for if you
remember and consider the very cause of our just quarrel, you shall apparently
perceive the same to be true godly, and virtuous. In the which I doubt not but
God will rather aid us, (yea, and fight for us) then see us vanquished, and
profligate by such as neither fear him, nor his Laws, nor yet regard Justice
and honesty. Our cause is so just, that no enterprise can be of more virtue,
both by the Laws Divine and Civil, etc. If this cause be not just, and this
quarrel godly, let God, the giver of victory judge and determine, etc. Let us
therefore fight like invincible Giants, and set on our enemies like untimorous
Tigers, and banish all fear like tamping Lions. March forth like strong and
robustious Champions, and begin the battle like hardy Conquerors; the Battle
is at hand, and the Victory approaches, and if we shamefully recule, or
cowardly fly, we and all our sequel be destroyed, and dishonored for ever.
This is the day of gain, and this is the time of loss; get this days
victory, and be Conquerours; and lose this days battle, and be villains.
And therefore in the name of God, and Saint George, let every man courageously
advance his standard: They did so, slew the Tyrannical Usurper, won the
Field; And in the first Parliament of his Reign, there was this Act of
indemnity passed, That all and singular persons coming with him from beyond
the Seas into the Realm of England, taking his party and quarrel, in
recovering his just Title and Right to the Realm of England, shall be utterly
discharged, quit, and unpunishable for ever, by way of action, or otherwise, of
or for any murder, slaying of men, or of taking and disporting of goods, or
any other trespasses done by them, or any of them, to any person or persons of
this his Realm against his most Royal Person, his Banner displayed in the
said field, and in the day of the said field, etc.

Which battle though it were just, and no Treason nor Rebellion in point of
Law in those that assi^ted King Henry the 7th. against this Usurper; yet
because the killing of men, and seizing their goods in the time of War, is
against the very fundamental Laws of the Realm, they needed an Act of
Parliament to discharge them from suits and prosecutions at the Law for the
same: the true reason of all the forecited Acts of this nature, which make no
mention of pardoning any Rebellions or Treasons against the King, (for they
deemed their forementioned taking up of Arms no such offenses) but only
discharge the Subjects from all suites, actions, and prosecutions at Law for
any killing or slaying of men, batteries, imprisonments, robberies, and
trespasses, in seizing of Persons, Goods, Chattels.

What our Princes and State have thought of the lawfulness of necessary
Defensive sive Wars of Subjects against their oppressing Kings and Princes,
appears by those aides and succors which our Kings in former ages have sent
to the French, Flemmings, Almaines, and others, when their Kings and Princes
have injuriously made Wars upon them, and more especially, by the public
aid and assistance which our Speeds Hist. p. 1192. to 1197 1^. 36. 1237.
Grimston. Hist. of the Netherlands, l. to. p. 611. 612. etc. and Imperial
Hist. p. 730. to 856.
Queen Elizabeth and King James by the public advise and consent of the
Realm, gave to the Protestants in France, Germany, Bohemia, and the
Netherlands against the King of France, the Emperor, and King of Spain, who
oppressed and made War upon them, to deprive them of their just Liberties and
Religion, of which more hereafter. Certainly, had their Defensive Wars
against their Sovereign Princes to preserve their Religion, Liberties,
Privileges, been deemed Treason, Rebellion, in point of Law; Queen
Elizabeth, King James, and our English State, would never have so much
dishonored themselves, nor given so ill an example to the world, to Patronize
Rebels or Traitors; or enter into any solemn Leagues and Covenants with them
as then they did, which have been frequently renewed and continued to this
present.

And to descend to our present times; our King Charles himself has not only
(in show at least) openly aided the French Protestants at Ree and Rochel
against their King who warred on them; the Germane Princes against the
Emperor; the Hollanders, and Prince of Orange, (to whose Son he has
married his elstest Daughter) against the Spaniard, and entered into a solemn
League with them, (which he could not have done in point of Law, Justice,
Honor, Conscience, had they been Rebels or Traitors, for standing on their
guards, and making defensive Wars only for their own and their Religions
preservation;) but likewise by two several public See the acts of
Pacification and Oblivion in both those Kingdoms.
Acts of Parliament, the one in England, the other in Scotland, declaring, the
Scots late taking up Arms against him and his evil Counselors, in defense of
their Religion, Laws, Privileges, to be no Treason, nor Rebellion; and them
to be his true and loyal Subjects (notwithstanding all aspertions cast upon
them by the Prelaticall and Popish Party) because they had no ill or disloyal
intention at all against his Majesty's Person, Crown, and Dignity, but only a
care of their own preservation, and the redress of th^se Enormities,
Pressures, grievances in Church and State, which threatened desolation unto
both. If then their seizing of the Kings Fortes, Ammunition, Revenues, and
raising an Army for the foresaid ends, has by his Majesty himself, and his
two Parliaments of England and Scotland, been resolved and declared to be no
Treason, no Rebellion at all against the King; by the very same, (or better
reason, all circumstances duly pondered) our Parliaments present taking up
Arms and making a Defensive War for the ends aforesaid, neither is, nor can
be adjudged Treason or Rebellion, in point of Law or Justice.

In fine, the King himself in his An exact Collection of all Remonstrances,
etc. p. 329. 331.
Answer to the 19. Propositions of both Houses, June 3. 1642. Confesses, and
calls God to witness: That all the Rights of his Crown are vested in him
for his Subjects sake: That the Prince may not make use of his high and
perpetual power to the hurt of those, for whose good he has it; nor make use
of the name of public Necessity, for the gain of his private Favorites and
Followers, to the detriment of his people; That the House of Commons may
impeach those, who for their own ends, though countenanced with any
surreptitiously gotten Command of the King, have violated that Law, which he is
bound (when he knows it) to protect, and to protection of which they were
bound to advise him, at least, Not to serve him in the Contrary (let the
Cavalleers and others consider this:) and the Lords being trusted with a
Judiciary power, are an excellent screene and bank between the King and
people, to assist each against any Encroachments of the other; and by just
Judgments to preserve that Law, which ought to be the Rule of every one of the
three. Therefore the power Legally placed in both Houses, Being more then
sufficient to prevent and restrain the power of Tyranny; by his Majesty's own
Confession; it must needs be such a power as may legally enable both Houses,
(when Arms are taken up against them, by the King or any other, to subvert
Laws, Liberties, Religion, and introduce an Arbitrary government;) not only
to make Laws, Ordinances, and Assessements, but likewise to take up Arms to
defend and preserve themselves, their Laws, Liberties, religion, and to
prevent, restrain all forces raised against them, to set up Tyranny; else
should they want not only a more then sufficient, but even a s^fficient
necessary power, to prevent and restrain the power of Tyranny; which being
once in arms cannot be restraned, and prevented, repulsed, with Petitions,
Declarations, Laws, Ordinances, or any Paper Bulwarks and Fortifications, or
other such probable or possible means within the Parliaments power, Alber.
Gentil. de Jure Belli, li. 1. ca. 13 14. 15.
but only by Arms and Military Forces, as reason and experience in all Ages
manifest.

From all which pregnant punctual domesticke Authorities and resolutions of
Ancient, Modern and present times, I presume I may infallibly conclude; That
the Parliaments present taking up necessary Defensive Arms, is neither,
Treason, nor Rebellion, in judgment of Law; but a just and lawful Act, for
the public benefit and preservation of King, Kingdom, Parliament, Laws,
Liberties, Religion; and so neither their General, Soldiers, nor any person
whatsoever employed by them in this War, or contributing any thing toward its
maintenance, are or can be Legally indicted, prosecuted, or in any manner
proceeded against as Traitors, Rebels, Delinquents against the King or
Kingdom; and that all Proclamations, Declarations, Indictments, or proceedings
against them, or any of them, as Traitors, Rebels, or Delinquents, are utterly
unlawful, iniust, and ought to be reversed as mere Nullities.

It would be an infinite tedious labor for me to relate, what Civilians and
Canonists have written concerning War, and what War is just and lawful,
what not: In brief, they all generally accord; Gratian causa 23. qu 1. 2. 3.
and the Canonists in their Glesses on that Text. Summa Angelica and Rosel. Til
Ecl Anto. Cortes. Reper. in Abatem tit. Bellum; Jacob. Spi^lg and 10. Calvin.
Lexi. Iurid. Tit. Bell. Mar^ Lauden de E^^l. Tract. Alber. Gent. de jure bell.
Petrinus Belli de Re milita. and b^l^o trast. De Iure b^lli B^lg. Hugae, 1^99.
Hugo Grot. de Iu^e Belli et Pa^is.
That no War may or ought to be undertaken cut of covetousness, lust,
ambition, cruelty, malice, desire of hurt, revenge, or for booty: propter
praedam enim militare peccatum est; Whence Joh; Baptist, Luke 3. 14. gave this
answer to the Soldiers who demanded of him, what shall we do? Do violence to
no man: neither accuse any man falsely; and be content with your wages. Ne dum
sumptus quaeritur, praedo grassetur. Which prooves the Wars of our plundring,
pillaging Cavalleers altogether sinful and unjust: And that such a War
only is just, which is waged for the good and necessary defense of the
Commonwealth, by public Edict or consent; or to regaine some thing, which is
unjustly detained or taken away, and cannot otherwise be acquired: or to repel
or punish some injury; or to curb the insolency of wicked men, or preserve
good men from their unjust oppressions; which Wars ought only to be
undertaken out of a desire of Peace; as they prove out of Augustine, Gregory,
Isidor Hispalensis, and others. In one word, they all accord; That a necessary
defensive War to repulse an Injury, and to preserve the State, Church,
Republike, Freedoms, Lives, Chastities, Estates, Laws, Liberties, Religion,
from unjust violence is, and ever has been lawful by the Law of Nature, of
Nation; yea, By all Laws whatsoever, and the very dictate of Reason: And that
a^n^cessary defensive War is not properly a War, but a mere Defense,
against an unlawful Violence; And therefore m^st of necessity be acknowledge
lawful; because directly opposite to, and the only remedy which G^d and
Nature have given men against T^rannicall and unjust invasions, which are both
s^^n^full and unlawful. And so can be no Treason, no Rebellion, no crime at
all, thou^^ our Princes or Parents be the unjust assail^nts. Of which see more
in Hugo Gro^ius, de Iure Belli, l. 2. c. 1.

I shall close up the Civillians and C^no^^^s Opinions touching the lawfulness
of a Defensive War, with the words o^ A^beric^^ ^entilis, Professor of Civil
Law in the University of Oxford, in Queen Elizabeth's Reign, Who in his
learned Book, De Jure Belli and Pacis, Dedicated to the most illustrious
Robert Devoreux Earl of Essex; (Father to the Parliaments present Lord
General:) determines thus, Lib. 1. ca^ 13 page 92. etc. Although, I say, there
be no cause of war from nature, yet there are causes for which we undertake
war by the conduct of nature; as is the Cle. 2. de Sent.
cause of Defense, and when war is undertaken, because something is denied to
to be granted, which nature it self affords, and therefore because the Law of
nature is violated, War is undertaken. We say there is a three fold Defense,
one Necessary, another Profitable, a third Honest; yet we shall deem them all
Necessary. Bal 3. cons. 458. and S. cons. 405
He who defends himself, is said to be necessitated, neither will Baldus have
us distinguish whether he defend himself, his goods, or those under his
charge, whether near, or remote; His defense is necessary, and done for
necessary defense, against whom an armed enemy comes, Clar:. Hemicidium.
and his against whom an enemy prepares himself: and to such a one the same
Bal. ad. d. l. 32. loc. Ios. Decl. l. ut Vim
Baldus truly teaches, aid is due by compact, whom others likewise approve
Ap. Mitr.
This war we may say, was anciently undertaken against Mithridates, and
against his great pre^aations. Neither ought wise men to expect, till he had
professed himself an enemy, but to look more into his deeds, then words: Thus
whiles we say necessity, we speak not properly, but we understand, that
necessity which is not rare in humane affairs, and has wont to be called
need: which yet precisely is not that true necessity, etc. Phil. de Principe.
It is a most unjust conflict, where the one side being agent, the other is
only patient. There is a just defense, and slaying, although the slayer might
flee without danger and so save himself, whether the slayer who defends
himself be of that condition, that it would be a disgrace to him to flee, or
whether it would be no disgrace. Clra.. bomicidium.
Which opinions are received in the causes of private men; and to me are much
more approved in public causes. L 3. de Just. l. 4 ad le. Aq. Ceph. cors. 721
Defense even in Bruites is a Law of nature: Cic. 2. Iuci. 12. fa. 3.
it is persuaded and constituted in us, not by opinion, but by a certain
imbred faculty: and it is a necessary Law; for what is there (says Cicero)
that can be done against force, without force? This is the most approved above
all Laws. c. 3. de se exc. c. 18 de Homicid.
All Laws, all Rights permit to repel force with force. Ammia 23
There is one Law and that perpetual, to defend safety by all means. Cic. pro
Milo,
All mean^s are honest of preserving safety: this, reason to the Lea^ued,
necessity to B^rbarians, cust me to Nat^ons, nature it self to wild Beasts,
has prescribed; and this is no written, but borne, or native Law. Likewise, to
defend our Estates, is a necessary defense, and this is a just cause of
defending, if we be assaulted by war, though we our selves have demerited
the war: which thing others, and Paulus Caestrensis have taught. And it will
follow, and add this reason; because the Law or Force of war is not ended by
obtaining the things first demanded; but walks according to the conquerers
pleasure. Aug 19. con Fav.
Who is content to repay so much revenge only as he has received wrong? says
Augustine, and all know it. This arbitrary power all not subdued may justly
decline, and therefore defend themselves against it with Arms. Witnesses,
Jason. l. 15. l. de in re.
Judges who are enemies are repelled, although they against whom they proceed
gave the cause of the enmity. Con. reg. peccatum. p. 2.. 9.
To one in Arms he gives all things w^o denies just things: said Caesar.
Neither do we hear make question of that blameless moderation, where there
is no superior. These things therefore are avoided: and therefore the cause of
Romulus shall be said right to me, who defended himself by war against the
invading Sabines, albeit he had given them cause of war and offense, by the
rape of their women. Bed^^ 5 de Rep. 5.
The force of necessity is so great, when men are pr^ssed with Arms, that
those things which are unjust may seem most just; as Bodin well, Livie l. 8.
war is just, to whom it is necessary; and piae arma, quibus nulla nisi in
armis relinquitur spes: and Arms are pious to those to whom no hope is left
but in Arms. Extreme necessity is exempted from all Law. And yet I restrain
not the present definition, to extreme necessity, or take extreme according
to the condition of men's affairs: for be it so, let it be no necessity, which
may be no necessity; Romulus might have avoided war by restoring the ravished
women; yet he might likewise defend himself against the enemies even soon
after marching against him. I stay not in this definition: for that is a
question belonging to Citizens. Costr. l. 1. de Just.
He who being banished may be hurt without danger, yet he may defend himself.

CHAP. XIIII. De utili Defensione: He proceeds thus,
I Call that a profitable defense, when we move war, fearing least we our
selves should be warred upon: Pater. l. 2.
no man is sooner oppressed then he which fears nothing, and security is the
most frequent beginning of calamity. This first. Next, we ought not to expect
present force, it is more safe if we meet that which is Future. There is more
hope and more courage in him that infers force, then in him who repels it: he
has more courage who inferres danger, then he who repulseth it, Liu. 21 28.
Livy and Vigetius: if the enemy should once prevent, Veget. l. 3.
all things are disturbed with fear; it behooves them therefore (says Hist. l.
5.
Nicephorus, an historian of no contemptible authority) who would live without
danger, to meet with, and prevent impendent evils, and not to delay or
expect, that thou may revenge the received injury with danger, if for the
present thou may cut out the root of the growing plant, and suppress the
endeavors of an enemy who thinks ill. And Them. 1. ad Arislog.
Suidas, yea Demosthenes; war is not to be delayed but urged, least being
first injured, we be compelled to repulse force. Dio. l. 45.
This (as the Latin De nosthenes Cicero says) is likewise a disgrace, that if
thou may prevent future, thou would rather redress Present evils. That
rude youth likewise (so has nature it self prescribed this Law) Terent. 4.
Eunu. 6.
I would rather look to our selves, then I would be revenged having received
injury: Philo. de spe. Leg.
But Philo most excellently, that we presently slay a serpent at the first
sight, although he has not hurt us; nor perchance will hurt us; so careful
are we of our selves before he move himself. Am I not over-tedious to thee in
naming these Authors, which yet are none of ours? But the consent of various
and many authors is great reason, etc. Neither yet omit I, things held in lieu
of proverbes, and therefore prove much what they signify, Pers. at. 3. Ovid.
2. de Art. Horat. ad Loll. Ep. 1.
Meet the approaching disease. Withstand beginnings; else medicines are
provided overlate. Neglected fires are wont to get strength. Behold something
out of the Authors of Law: C. lib. 2. Tit. 41. l ul. l. Tit. 27. l. 1. and C.
T. de Sica. l. 1.
It is better to keep Laws unviolated, then afterward to seek remedy. Bald.
4. cons. 111 Jas. l. 3. de Just.
It is lawful to prevent: One providing to offend, I offend lawfully; and
others of this nature, which are more defined to humanity, and approved by men's
judgments. Bal. 1. Cons. 369. 4. 312. Alex. 2. 144. Cla.. Homicidium, Zas. l.
ut vim.
No man ought to expose himself to danger: no man ought to expect himself to
be smitten or slain unless he be a fool. We ought to meet the offense not
only which is in act, but that likewise which is in possibility to act. Force
is to be repelled and propulsed with force; therefore not to be expected; in
which expectation there are also both other the foresaid certain evils, and
that likewise: which is mentioned in the causes of private men, least perchance
by giving the first stroke we be slain; or lest we yield by flying, and be
oppressed lying down. But not to fly is to repel force: all these things are
clear, and tried, and most apt to warlike tractates. What follows, has some
doubt, when the thing may seem to come to that pass, that we must now run to
this profitable defense. Dec. cons. 603.
A just cause of fear is required, suspicion is not sufficient. Now p. l. 5.
6. quod met. can.
a just fear is defined, a fear of a greater evil, and such as may
deservedly happen unto a constant man. But here in this great cause of
Kingdoms, a fear that no damage should happen although not very great, or if
there be an evident cause of fear although the danger be not true, De damn.
inf. l. 27. loc.
but the cause only of fear just, is sufficient: but not when a man fears
that he ought not, etc. But concerning prevention there are notable things in
Gell. l. 7. c. 3.
Gellius. In all things to be taken heed of, there is not the same cause;
neither in the affairs and actions and Offices of humane life; or of taking,
or deferring, or revenging, or bereaving. To a gladiator, ready to fight this
lot of fight is propounded; either to slay, if he shall prevail, or to be
slain if he shall give over. But the life of man is not circumscribed with
such unjust untamed necessities, that therefore thou ought first to do the
injury, which unless thou shall do, thou may suffer. And Cicero; Cic. pro
tu. Quict. l. 5. c. 13
who has ever enacted this, or to whom can it be granted without the greatest
peril of all men, that he might lawfully slay him, of whom he might say he
has been afraid, lest he himself might be slain afterward by him? yet
rightly, notwithstanding, the Mitileins against the Athenians, Thucid. l. 3.
If we seem injurious to any, if we have first failed, not tarrying till we
might plainly know, if they would do us any hurt: he does not rightly
consider: for if we had been of equal power, we might safely lay ambushes for
them again, and we might delay: then he should speak truth: but since they
have always with them a power of hurting, it beseemed us to have this power,
that we might anticipate a defense. Why again do we ask for Bartolusses, or
Baldusses with whose bare names we might rest satisfied? and yet do not more
esteem the defense of a most noble Republic, yea of Thucidides, a most noble
man, and the sentence of a most wise man fortified with reason? And seeing
there may not be one probable cause of fear, and generally nothing can be
defined concerning it, here we shall only say, that it has always been very
considerable, and at this day, and hereafter it is to be considered, that
potent and ambitious Princes may be resisted, for they being contented with no
bounds will at last sometime or other invade the fortunes of all men. Zonarus.
Thus the Romans move war against Philip, lest Greece being subdued, he
should first make war upon them. Thus Pausanias, ^. 1.
Lysimachus, when Demetrius had gotten the Kingdom, fearing least he should
provoke him, first moved war, for he knew that Demetrius had it from his
father, always to think of promoting the Empire. Thus the Hero lib. 7.
Lacedemonian Ambassadors, move the King of Sicily to war, because all the
rest of the Graecians being overcome by Persa, he might in like manner stir
up ware against the Siculi: Men say, by helping us thou may defend thy self.
Thus the Xenop. 5. Graec.
Lacaedemonians themselves, persuaded by the Acanthii took up war against
the Olynthi: who by conquering their neighbors every where, and proceeding
always to further parts, they made no end of wars and of increasing their
dominion. Thus the Live. lib. 7.
Compani for the Fidicini against the Samnites, and they say. We have fought in
word for the Fidicini, in deed for our selves. when we saw a neighboring
people, to be set upon by the wicked plundering of the Samnites: and when the
Fidicini had been inflamed, that fire would h^reafter be transferred upon us:
which also Thut. lib. 6.
Herm^crates a just man of Syracuse: does any of us think, that a neighbor
further off being already overcome the calamity will not come upon him also?
Thus Salu. frag:
Perseus, thus Metridates did move and call in others against the power of the
Romans: for neither are occasions of war wanting to those that aspire to the
Empire, and now they are hated for their power. Which thing Dion lib. 9.
Appius somewhere says to those his Romans; and it appears most true; for by
ayding their confederates and friends, presently they got the Empire of the
whole world. But to omit these manifold examples, which even Bod. 5. de rep.
ult.
others have thus noted, and which do thus declare to us the Law of Nations,
which we seek; might not all men most justly withstand the Turk on that side,
and the Spaniard on this, meditating dominion every where and plotting it? for
indeed the Turk wrongs not many, nor yet the Spaniard, neither can the one or
other do it; but they both do injury to some, and he that does wrong to one,
threatens many: shall wars themselves be expected? P Syr^
we have heard of the Turks before, and we all see it: if any one discernes it
not of the Spaniards; he may hear of P. Jovius, that the nature of these are
both impotent and greedy of bearing rule; and when they have once crept in,
endeavor always by all means to attain the highest power. Therefore we
ought to resist; Jou. lib. 1.
and it is Ari. 5. pol.
better to beware that men increase not too much in power then to seek remedy
afterward against the mighty. Hier. Epi. 2.
While the enemy is little, kill him. Wickedness, lest Tares grow, is to be
crushed in the seed. Why are not these sayings of Hierome pertinent even here?
We cannot jointly resist a common danger: Bal. 2. cons. 2. 6. 6.
a common fear unites even those that are most divided and furthest off: and
that by the instinct of nature, and our Dion l. 6.
Baldus teaches out of Aristotle; This is the reason of Empyres, that they may
not hurt; as he, whosoever he was said well in Dionysius, and nothing more true,
Ovid. 5. Fast. Posse u^cere sat est; Quodque p^^ testalios perdere, perde.
prior.
and uttered as it were from an Oracle, In the judgment of Bodin: Plut. Pomp.
It is sufficient to have power to hurt, and that which can destroy others, dee
thou destroy first: as aptly here the witty Poet; and truly it is very
grievous, that we may possibly suffer an injury although we do not suffer it:
as Bal. 2. cors. 195. 202.
Plutarch speaks: and Apul. de m^nd
Baldus, that it is lawful to use means for resistance: nor ought it to be in
the power of an adversary to hurt us if he would: and that we ought to
consider, that which hurts, and that which can hurt. Even the continuing of
concord among the elements is this, by Polit 4. Ep. ^. Guic. lib. 1.
equal proportion, and while in none, one is subdued of the other: o And this
is that, which that most wise, most desirous of peace, and father of peace,
Laurencius Medices procured always, that the affairs of the Ita^an Princes
should be balanced with equal weights, whence both Italy might have peace,
which both it had whiles he lived, and was the preserver of this temper; and
which peace ceased when he deceased, and that temperature. The great offspring
of Medices, was a great safeguard both to his own City and the rest of Italy:
does he not as yet endeavor this, that one should not be able to do all
things, and all Europe come under the command of one? unless some be able to
resist the Spanyard, Europe will certainly fall. Ans. Edeg.
If any will pull a middle stone out of the wall, upon which all relies, the
rest being carried together will follow. Polyb. lib. 2.
No, this must never be permitted, that the dominion of any should grow so
great, as neither to doubt before so much as of most manifest injustice, which
Polybius says, and says again: whence Hero therefore aided the Carthaginians
against the Mercenaries, least the Carthaginians being oppressed, the Romans
should be able to do all things. This Li^. l. 42.
Livie of the diverse conceits of men upon the war of the Romans, and Perseus,
that some favored him, some them, but there was a third part, the best and most
prudent, who would have neither part to become more powerful, the other
oppressed, for so themselves should be in the best condition, always
protecting them from the injuries of the other: And these things ingeniously,
Marcus Cato for the Rhodians: who through hatred to the Romans, Gellius l. 7. 3.
by their good will at least, or wishes had favored Perseus, They would not
that we should have conquered the King: but also many other people, and many
Nations; and partly not for reproach sake, but because they feared, that if
there were no man whom we stood in awe of we might do what we list, and every
one of us, if any think any thing to be attempted against his own estate,
does even with his strength contrarily endeavor that it be not attempted
against him. This the Ambassador of Persius had thus discussed before the
Rhodians, that they ought to endeavor, that the right and power of all things
be not devolved to one people. Cato adds, that their will ought not to be
punished so much, because it ought to be discerned more certainly. Dion. l. 38.
Caesar does not contradict, who thus disputes of raising of war against King
Ariovistus, that he ought to be punished before he became great, or should do
any evil, even because he had a thought to do them hurt. Neither ought this
to be understood of the naked thought, and bare will; but of that which has
assumed the Act, declared in another L. 225. d. v. 8.
place; that King was now fearful to the Romans in France, and his Arms
threatened danger: Caesar therefore wisely and justly thought that there was no
further delay to be made, but that he might restrain Arms with Arms. The
Jou. l. 34.
Switzers lately very wisely, that they will favor neither the French nor
Emperor, but would keep a league with them both, until their Armies should not
be hurtful to the Helvetiin Commonwealth. But I conclude, the defense is just
which prevents dangers already meditated of, already prepared; and also not
thought upon, but very likely, possible: yet neither this last simply; or would
I call it just, to endeavor this war, as soon as ever any should be made too
potent; which I do not affirm. For what if any Princes power should be
increased by successions, by elections; will thou trouble him with war,
because his power may be dangerous to thee? Another thing therefore must be
added concerning Justice. We will add to others, who what they have thought of
a just war, attend.

CHAP. XV. Of Honest Defense.
IT remains to speak of honest defense, which is undertaken without any fear
of danger to us, sought for no want of our own, for no profit, but only for
other men's sakes, L 3. de ju. and ju.
and it rests upon this foundation, that (as Marcus Tullius says) nature
has ordained among men affinity, and love, and good will, and the bond of good
will, and that the law of nations is placed in the society of men, which
therefore is called by Cicero also, Cic. 3. de si.
Civil. Plut. de Vi. Alext
Thus Verily the Stoickes would have the City of the whole world to be one,
and all men to be commoners, and townsmen; and like one Heard feeding together
in a Common ground. Niceph. gr. li. 4.
All this that thou beholdest, wherein heavenly and earthly things are
contained, is one; and we are members of one great body, and the world it self
is one Sen. ep. 96.
body. But Nature has made us allied, seeing she has begotten us of the same,
and in the same, also endewed us with mutual love, and has made us sociable.e
And this our society is most like the joining of stones, in a wall; which
would fall, if the stones did not withstand, and uphold one another, as Seneca
excellently; and which as Gel. lib 6.
Gellius, consists, upholden as it were, with a mutual contrariety and
support. Hor. ad 100. ep. 1.
This is the desagreeing concord of things, as Horace speaks, and we also
before. And now thou hear that all the world is one body, and all men are
members of this one body, and thou hear the world to be an house, and to be
a City; which hear again, for they are beautiful. The world is the greatest
house of things, thus Varro. Sen. ult. ben.
Man is a sociable creature, and being borne for the good of all, looks upon
the world as one house: thus Seneca: Lact. de ira, Dei. c. 10.
again Lactantius says, the world is a Commonwealth, having one form of
government, and one Law; Phi. lose
Philo, there is one Commonwealth of all and a common City of all. c. Apol M
act.
Tertullian, Minutius, and also in Aristotle, There is one great City: what an
harmony is here of wise men? Add touching Society that of Cicero; Society in
the largest extent, Arist. de mu.
( which though it be often said we must repeat more often) is of men toward
men, Cic. 3. de offic Laet.
more inward, of those that are of the same Country; nearer of those that are
of the fare City and in another place: We are so borne that there may be a
certain Society between all; but greater as any one is nearer: Citizens are
be ter^ban strangers; kindred han Forriners. And thus does Aug 19. de civ.
Augustine note there societies; the first of the household, the second of the
City, the third of the world, and says, all the Nations in the world are
joined together by humane society. But what is this society and conjunction?
Among the good there is as it were a necessary benevolence, which spring of
freindship, is constituted of nature; but that same goodness belongs also to
the multitude; for virtue is not inhumane, nor cruel, nor proud, which will
not look upon all people, writes Cicero; and Ambet 3. de often. 3.
Ambrose, the law of nature binds us to all charity; that one should bear
with another, as members of one body: and so also Bal c de pri. do.
Baldus, we are borne for our own and for strangers by the bond of Charity:
those that say, care ought to be had of Citizens, deny it of strangers, these
men take away community and society of mankind. Also Cicero: which Lact. 6
Instit. 6.
Lactantius both cites and has approved. And the same Cicero. Ci. c. 7. Alt:
2.
It is a filthy opinion of them, Arist. 1. pol. and Psalm. 107. 7 123.
who refer all things to themselves, filthy indeed, for man is borne for
society, and it is his Gal. 6. and 1. petr. 4.
duty to help others, and not live to himself only: and for this cause
Cicero condemned the Philosophers, because while they lacked one kind of
justice, and (as Hier. Ep. 14.
another holy man writes) fulfilled indeed the greatest part of equity, not to
hurt any, they offended against the other, because they forsook the society of
life, and so forsook this part of justice, to profit when thou can; Claud.
4. cons He.
Do thou not see how the world it self, the most beautiful of all works
does bind it self with love? we are Romans cons. 420.
bound by the Law of nature (so says the interpreter of the Law) to be
profitable every way: and the Dec. cons. 469 not l. 3. l. 5. de just.
same men deliver an equal defense of their own and of strangers, but
specially of confederates, from whom we must keep off an injury; and that this
defense is both of divine and humane law. Plat. 9. de leg.
Plato thinks, he ought to be punished that keeps not back an injury offered
to another. Now that which Plato and these Interpreters say of private Citizens
we may very well apply to Princes and people: for what reason there is of a
private man in a private City, there is the same in the public and universal
City of the world, of a public Citizen, that is, of a Prince, of the people
of a Prince: Bal. 2. cons 195.
As a private man has relation to a private man, so a Prince to a Prince,
says Baldus, Sen. 1. 2. de Ira.
A man is a Citizen to a man in the greater City, and borne for mutual succor
says Seneca. And because we are one body, if one member will hurt another
member, it is meet the others should help that which is hurt, because it
concerns the whole, even that which hurts, that the whole be preserved. So
men should help men, for society cannot be preserved, but by the love and
safety of the people. Xiphil.
Vespatian cannot be approved who denies aid, I know not to whom, upon this
pretense, because the care of other men's affairs appertained not to him: for
what good man is there who does nothing but for his own sake? Cic. 7. fa. 12.
Cicero again, even to Procop. 2. pers.
Lazius King of Persia, that he is not therefore just, because he does nothing
unjustly, unless also he defended the unjustly oppressed; and by that means
they obtained help, and bands of Soldiers against the Romans: for it is not a
strange thing amongst men for a man to defend the estates and safety of men,
Cicer. pro Quin.
Cicero had said the same; he should have respect if not of the man, yet of
humanity, which is due to every one from every one, for this very cause,
because they are equally men: and humane nature the common mother of all men
commends one man to another, Just. Ge. an. 3.
It is a noble example of the barbarous King of Mauritania: who, when he heard
that his enemy Alfonso king of Castile, was pressed and almost oppressed by
the Armies of his son, he sent a hughe mass of gold unto Alfonso, he
himself went over with a great Army of Soldiers into Spain, judging it a
most unworthy thing that his Son should expel his Father from his Kingdom;
adding withal, that the victory obtained, he would be an enemy again unto
the same Alfonso. What? do I fear the Barbarians, enemies also, and bringing
gifts? That the deed of an enemy should be taken in the worst sense? does L. 6.
de Ex
Guiceardine say truth; that these things are not done of any but in hope of
some profit? The saying of Guicciardine is dispraised by noble Mountaygn in
those his Noble examples? I demand of what right it is? It is a question, if
any be bound by Law to defend another, when he can? and they seem commonly to
deny this and the Lib. 21. de he. vel. ac. ve.
Law sometimes says, that we may without offense neglect other men's affairs:
but our proper question is; if any can thus justly defend another? Castr. l. 2.
de just. Al. 7. 17. 27. Clar. f. q 87 and Homicidium: De cons. 678.
wherein no man denies just defense, even for the defense of a stranger it is
lawful to kill another, by the opinion which is approved of all Doctors: Lib.
6. de app. Ias. l 3. de iu. Dec. cons. 691 Ceph. 712 Cuia. 20. obs. 20.
yea, the defense of him is approved, that neglects to defend himself, yea
that refuses to be defended by another; whether a friend defend him or
another, even an enemy: and thus it is called the rule of humanity, and so L.
39. dene. ge. 1. segq.
a benefit to be conferred often times upon the unwilling. So also there be
many other definitions. Also they conclude by an argument, not firm enough
that way, in another question: that a man may take money for defending another,
which he should receive dishonestly, if he were bound to defend him by law: for
may not a servant get a reward from him whom yet notwithstanding he might not
neglect without punishment? neither is it dishonestly given nor dishonestly
taken, in way of thankfulness. L 5. qui s. ma ad li per. Pla 9. de leg.
So it is not ill taken of a Citizen from a City, nor by a son from a
father: for truly it is manifest, that many things cannot be done without
offense; and therefore if done they are worthy of rewards, yet not of
punishment, if they be not done. Again, somethings on the contrary neglected,
indeed contract offense, but reformed they merit not glory, so Bernard: to
which I add a mean, that there be some things which being neglected contract
offense, and fulfilled, deserve reward. Ias. d. l. 3. Eug. cons. 86.
But also even in the Court of conscience they will have a man to be bound to
defend a man. Bal. l. ul. c. de ju. de imp.
But conscience is the will of a good man, yea of the best: but they deliver
this also even in the way of honesty: and we follow honesty here, and that
arbiterment: Alc. l. cons. 27. Mol. ad Dec. l. 3. de reg.
but both in Civil and Canon Law, against the rest Bartolus inclines thus:
Albericus, Igneus, Decius, Alciatus, Molineus, so teach: and Bal. 4. cons. 111.
l. 1. C. de ser. fug.
Baldus elegantly, that it is a fault to omit the defense of another; of
himself, a treachery: which also in another place he determines. Plato is also
of this mind: and thus also Eccle. 4.
Siracides: free him to whom injury is done, out of the hand of the injurious.
I also am of the same mind, especially, if, which the forenamed interpreters
add, defense be not made with the danger of the defender. Bal. l. 1. de of.
pr. vi.
For no man is bound to put himself in danger; no man is bound so to assist
against a fire. Nic. Call. 7. his. 29.
Otherwise thou hear Constantine say, that they which live by the rule of
Gods Law, account an injury done to another, to be their own. Behold that thus
also he aided the Romans against Maxentius. Hear again Baldus his Lawyer, he
that defends not, nor resists an injury, is as well in fault, Cic. 2. deoff.
as he that forsakes his parents, or friends, or Country: and if these be true
in private men, how much more will they be in Princes? These mutually call
themselves Cosens, Cosen-germans, Brothers. They are so much the more true in
Princes, by how much if a private man defend not a private man, the majestrate
remains, that can both revenge the wrongs, and repair the losses of private
men, but there is none can piece up the injuries and hurts of Princes, but the
same Prince, who after had rather apply a medicine to the evil, than hinder at
the first that evil be not done. These things are true, but that also you may
hold with Bal l. 10. 10. c. de op. le.
Baldus that although these were not true out of Philosophy of judgments,
which is of things necessary: they are certainly true from Philosophy of
manners: which consists of things persuaded, which Philosophy also we follow
in this whole Treatise. The Philosophy of Judgments, permits a man to neglect
even himself, as Baldus writes, and if besides, as it falls out almost
always, another special cause be joined to this general rule of honesty, it
may come nearer to justice. Let the opinion verily be true for me, that this
cause of honesty alone, perchance has never moved any man to that honest
defense. Guic. lib. 2.
Guicciardines mouth said truly, no Prince will make war for Pesants,
unless persuaded with desire of his own gain: yet that is ignominous to
Princes and savours not of justice: but I had rather concur with Leo the
Philosopher. We know very few to keep true love, for its sake alone to be
stirred up to succor those that are entangled in misery, but on the contrary
side, that the number is very great of those that for hope of getting any
thing, come to help the unworthy: which is a more mild saying, and I think
more true. But I seek another thing, it is complete justice which defends the
weak: so Ambr. 1 de often. 27. c. 5. 23. q 3.
Ambrose, and the Canon Law, and I seek for that Justice. The Romans also
joined this cause with others by which they were moved often times to make
war: Dlon sol. de legis.
the defense of the Lucans (says Dionysius) was the manifest cause of the
Samniticall war, which might have a show of honesty, as common, and a
National custom of the Romans to aid those that fled unto them: but the
secret cause which did more urge, was, the power of the Samnites was great, and
greater would it have been, if the Lucans had been subdued, so the reason of
profit lies hid: and therefore seems not so good, as it is honest: and yet we
call profitable also, good and just, and the one is made just by the other:
therefore what if they be dear unto us whom we should defend? l. 5. qui ex ca.
in po. ea.
Vlpianus says, that for love and friendship, for no other reason defense
ought not to be omitted. The defense of those that ought to be dear unto us,
is from nature, witness M. Tullius. What, if our allies and confederates? Anb.
de off.
He that keeps not of an injury from his fellow when he can, is as well in
fault, as he that does it. Ambrose, and Live. 31. 34.
even we our selves are hurt when our fellows are hurt: as in Livie. ^^ de
Repub. ult.
John Bodin judges amiss, that an ally and a confederate is not bound to
help his fellow, if there be no caution of help in the league; and the
contrary is now showed by us, and also shall be showed in the third book.
Plut. Apoph.
What if they be of the same stock and blood? Agesilaus made war against the
Persians, that he might bring the Greeks of Asia into liberty. And the petty
Kings of Iov. l. 23.
Germany by an old custom of the Nation, think it an heinous offense, not to
be assistant to those that implore mutual help: although there is there
besides a certain body of a Commonwealth: as it is reported long since, that
there was of the Achai. What if of the same Religion? Oros. l. 5. c. 2.
Nations are joined together by the tie of Religion, more than either by the
communion of another law, or contract of a league: and therefore if we implore
nature by communion, the law of Nations by covenant, the Commonwealth by
laws, by common Religion (the most powerful thing of all) we implore the
bowels of men and of the holy One, who is the head of that communion. Procop.
11. Pers. and Call. l. 7. c. 57.
So there was war with the Persians, because their fugitives were not
delivered them, and they were not delivered by the Romans, who would not
despise the humble professors with them of the same religion, who fled from the
Persian cruelty. Thus Justinus answered the Persian, that he could not but
receive those of the Christian Religion, falling away to him from the Persian,
who compelled them to forsake Christian Religion. Alcd. 38.. Sacra. de V. O.
And our writers do thus resolve, that war may be made if any converted to
Christian Religion, should be oppressed by their Lords, and that for the right
of society contracted from conversion. What if neighbors? Cic. pro Planc.
for what? had I not very many, very just ties of familiarity, of neighborhood
of country, of friendship to defend Plancus? says Cicero. And here is our
case. q We are in danger if our neighbors house be on fire, for if fire have
fiercely taken hold of some houses, they will hardly be defended but that the
next houses will be burnt, which was elsewhere in Salust, and now in Ovid.s
Fire that is near is hardly kept off from houses: it is good that we abstain
from near adjoined places: which verses are proverbiall in this thing; and
proverbes add some credit. This notes something that as it is lawful to pull
our neighbors house down, least the fire should come to us: and that question
of a Decia. Cons. 651.
house infected is the same, although touching this it is answered contrary:
Levit. 14.
Yet the House infected with Leprosy was pulled down L. 29. ubi gl. de l. Aq:
And in many cases it is so, that we may do ill to others, that it be not ill
with us. We must beware of all contagion, especially of our neighbors: the ill
contagions of a neighboring People are hurtful. Ibo. l. 1.
The Romans (says Florus) as a certain infection ran over all, and taking
in all the nearest people, brought all Italy under them, and whatsoever
Dominion they had Eccl. 22.
Before fire is the vapor and smoke of the Chimney, Syracides also. So we see
smoke from our neighbors fire, and will we not run and put out the fire
where it is? It is C. 6 de seaexe 6. Eug con. 90
written again, that it is lawful for any to help his neighbor against an
injury, yea, he seems to be partaker of a fault, who does not aid his deadly
foe, even speaking against help, nor yet desiring it. Concerning which I have
noted before, and will note further in the Chapter following.

CHAP. XVI. Of ayding Subjects that are Strangers against their Lord.
I Demand, if we may justly defend Subjects also that are Strangers against
their Lord? What if their cause also be unjust? Lib. 1. de Offi. 13.
Ambrose notes those three gods, Jupiter, Neptune, and Pluto, have thus
Articulated, lest upon their intrenching on one another jurisdiction, they
might make War among themselves: they should not usurp the rule of the Sea,
etc. Euri. Hip.
They say likewise, that we gods have this Law, none of us will cross the
desire of him that wills but we yield always one to another. Which being
the fictions of very wise men, are applied unto Princes of the earth. But even
without any circumstance at all, the Corinthians speak thus to the Athenians:
Thuc. l. 1.
We do plainly deny that any is forbidden to punish his own: for if thou
shall defend those that have offended, even your own Subjects will defend
themselves from you. Yet I think not Subjects of other men are altogether
strangers from that neerensse of nature, and union of Society, you do also cut
off the unity of mankind, whereby life is sustained, as excelently 4. de Benes.
Seneca. And if we make not Princes lawless, tied to no Laws nor Conditions:
It is necessary, that there be some to admonish them of their duty, and may
hold them fast bound; which reason I expounded in the second Book of
Embassies. Neither will I here infer any confusion of kingdoms, or any
inspection of one Prince over another Prince: neither do I suffer those things
to be distinguished, which are most firmly glued together by nature, I mean,
that kindred with all, among all. Neither here otherwise may one Prince have
inspection over another Prince, but such as may happen by every other War,
wherein one Prince carries himself as a judge both of himself, and of
another. If a question were among private men, it were most unjust to go to a
Foreign Prince about it. Also if there arise a difference between a private
man and his Sovereign, there are Magistrates appointed which may be sought
unto. But when the controversy is touching the Commonwealth, there neither
are, nor can be any judges in the City. I call that a public matter, when
such, and so great a part of the Subjects is moved, that now there is need of
War against those that defend themselves by War. And as if those should
come into part of the Principality of the public, and are Peers to the
Prince, who can do so much as he. Ceph. 612.
Even as one King is said to be equal to another, who can resist another
offering wrong, however greater, and more powerful; although I say not these
things of the Subjects themselves, unless it be in respect of Foreign
Princes, which will aid the Subject against their Sovereign, and who can aid
them no otherwise then in a controversy, Con. Regn. Pecca. par. p. 9. Bod. l.
2. de Rep. c. 5. and l. 5. c ult. Cic 3. de Off.
as I have expounded, of the Commonwealth.f And indeed, if the Subjects be
used more cruelly and unjustly, this opinion of defending is approved even of
others, who both bring that laudable example of Hercules, the Lord of Tyrants
and Monsters. There is also the example of Constantine, who aided the Romans
against Maxentius, as I noted before. Bal. lib. 4. c. de just. and subst.
We defend Sons against injust Fathers. Add now those golden Sayings of Sen.
ult. de Benef.
Seneca. That being cut off, whatsoever it was, whereby he did cleave unto me,
the Society of humane right is cut off. If he do not impugn my Country, but
is burdensome to his own, and being bannished my Country does vex his own,
yet so great naughtiness of mind has cut him off: although it makes him not
an enemy, yet hateful unto me. And the reason of the duty which I owe unto
mankind, is both more precious, and more powerful with me, then that which I
own to one single man. Thus verily; or else we make all men foreigners to all
Princes, if we determine that they can do according to their pleasure and
lust. Now what if the cause of the Subject be unjust? The foresaid Authors
deny, that men ought to aid unjust Foreign Subjects, least any by so ayding
introduce the same Law into his own Kingdom, which the Corinthians did
before. Yea, Ephesians. 5. 9. Caesar. (...) de si c. ^
Aristotle thinks, that neither a wicked Father is to be loved nor assisted
with help. But this is false of a Father, as I taught in a certain
Disputation, perhaps it is more true, that those may be defended of us by war,
who are unjust. For if it be a just war which is to repulse a wrong, although
they that repulse an injury, have given occasion to the war: the same it
seems may be determined in the defense of others, even of Subjects, for the
same reason. Surely there is that iniquity in War, that it will make the same
man to pronounce law to himself in his own cause, or verily willing to
pronounce it. Upon which pretense another Prince may bring aid on the contrary
side, that things may more civelly be composed without war. And this is that
which Plu. Pyrrh.
Pyrrhus did when he came to aid the Tarentines against the Romans; he
admonished them first, that they would by their own endeavor put an end to
the Controversy; although neither the Romans would not unjustly hearken unto
the King; or because they might deservedly suspect him, as being sent for by
enemies, armed with enemies, ready to fight for enemies, and of kin to
enemies. (...) cons. 224. Ceph. 57 Bal l. 1 de ser. fug.
He that stands armed with another, is said to bring help and aid unto him;
neither is there need to prove any thing against that at all. Even he that
arms himself, is believed to think upon war. And Alex. 7. cons. 2. Ceph.
721.
if he that is the friend of an enemy be excluded from being a witness, much
more from being a Judge. Ias l. 16 de Iurisd. Cic. pro Com. Ceph 750.
For it is easier, if any be received for a witness then a Judge; L. 47. de re
iu l. 28. C. de ^os. te.
The friend of my enemy is not presently meant my enemy, as neither my friends
friend is my friend; but there is a great suspicion of them both, and of the
friend of an enemy the more. But I return to the question. Leo-nou. 103
We are bound both to defend justly unjust Sons against the cruelty of a
Father, or Servants against the cruelty of a Master; and we laudably endeavor
that by fury (here is War) no not wicked men should be chastened and
punished, for fury and war have no measure. L. 5. Bal l. 4. C. de ser. Cor.
And he that led by humanity or pity, or any other approved and just cause,
has received another man's Servant, is not bound by the Statute of a corrupt
Servant, and that reception is accounted in the nature of good, etc. Plut. quo
nutr. li. Hiere. ep. 9.
Even he is commended, who being angry with his servants committed them to be
punished by another, this commendation being added, because he himself was
angry. Therefore a good Prince will have the Liberty of rage against his own
Subjects to be taken from him, being angry, as a good Father, as a good Master,
and he will always judge, That Kingdoms were not made for Kings, but Kings
for Kingdoms, which is most true. This also of Plato avails, that we ought
to use Eloquence, chiefly to accuse our friends, to whom it is the best, thus
to be drawn from future evils. And so I think that we may defend unjust
Foreign Subjects, yet to this end only, for the keeping off immoderate
cruelty and too severe punishment: Alex l. 20. Sol. mu.
Seeing it is not inhumane to do good to those that have offended. Yet I dare
affirm, that this reason of bringing help does seldom stand alone, but that
another of necessity and profit may be pretended, or truly shown, as is said
before. Behold now is the greatest question: If the English have justly aided
the Hollanders because their cause was unjust, and the Hollanders were even now
Subjects to the Spaniards? both which notwithstanding are false. It was said,
that a War was to be undertaken upon that occasion, that a good Peace might
be obtained of the Spaniard, which otherwise, as is thought, could not have
been had: Cells. l. 5. de just.
And so truly War is lawfully undertaken, as Cells. 3. c. 9 Hypp. deloc. in
hom.
our men allege: And the most wise reason of the Physicians makes for it,
That if any Fever be slow which holds the body, and which yields to no cure,
then the Disease is to be changed, yea, to be augmented and heightened. For
when it does not receive cure for the present as it is, it may receive that
cure which is future. But even War might have been undertaken without that
evil of an unfaithful Peace. As there be many bonds of neerenesse between the
English and the Hollander: the ancient friendship with the Dukes of Burgondy,
the familiarity of these people, and the old Consanguinity; all the rest, which
are noted at the end of the former Chapter. And therefore with Cicero, Cic.
prosy
They think not that the nocent are not to be defended, if they be the friends
of a good man. Add one thing of great moment, that the Hollanders overcome in
War, should altogether change their condition, and we see it in the conquered
part, being for the most part, cast down from their ancient Liberty, and for
the most part oppressed with Garrisons, are governed now only at the pleasure
of the Prince. But this our Neighbors cannot endure. l. 3. de holy. ex.
Neither is any other forbidden to favor Liberty. But L. 54. de Leg.
it much behooves Neighbors to have a Neighbor. Not. ad Alex cons. 197. Bal
l. 9. C. de Pa. in m. 7.
For if one man has need of another man, what shall we say that one Neighbor
is to another, saitha Pindarus, andb Callimachus: Ill Neighbors are odious to
me, and Heb. Apoph. 1 c 3.
some wise Hebrew, The worst of all diseases is an ill Neighbor: And another
of the same Nation, Woe to the wicked, and woe to his Neighbor. Plu. Apoph.
And where may Hes. 1. op. op.
Moral Fables be silent? Faer. 1. c 7
An evil neighborhood is like a misfortune; L. 33. de con. em. Com. Pii. 2.
li. 19.
The vicinity of great Men is always to be shunned of the weaker; Alc. Emb.
164. Plut. Euth.
Good men receive good things from good Neighbors, and evil Men, evil
things, etc. So * Plato, and so Th^mistocles; When he sold a piece of ground,
he commanded the Crier to Proclaim, that it had a good Neighbor: Which L.
33. de con. em.
Interpreters note, to the Law. And there be many things of the same kind.
Wherefore neither if these neighboring Subjects would change their condition,
neither if by reason of a fault committed against their own King, they be
compelled to alter it, is another Neighboring Prince compelled to suffer it,
to whom neither another man's will nor offense ought to bring damage. The Com.
Pij. 2. li. 10.
Venetian Ambassadors when they interceded for Sigismund of Maltesta, to Pope
Pius the second, they spoke even this, that Neighboring Princes would not have
another Neighbor, whom furthermore they knew not, what he might hereafter be.
And you may note, that Sigismond held Towns from the Church, and for his
committed offenses, he ought worthily to lose them. Perhaps some will doubt,
whether these things be true in private men's causes. 26. de da. inf. Alex. 2.
174.
For a private man seems to have power to do with his own what he list, if
it be profitable to himself, and hurt not another. Yet these things be true
thus in the causes of Empires. For Princes ought to take heed for the future,
that another if he will, may not yet be able to hurt another, which is
expounded in the Treatise of Profitable defense. L. 1. de aq. pl. L. 8 si se.
ui. Bal. 4. cons. 396.
But even that rule, that it is lawful for any to do what he list with his
own, holds not otherwise; then if the condition of a Neighbor be made
neither worse nor more grievous thereby: although it be true that no man may
take care of the gain, which his Neighbor made, and which was owing to him by
no obligation. But even security, and a certain singular conjunction of love
from a Neighbor, is due to Empires: Now this we know, what things are taken
away when Neighbors are changed. Arist. 3. pol.
And the same people is not the same that they were, if the Commonwealth be
not the same that it was. For it is not lawful (I say again) to do all
things with the Subjects; for that is not lawful with the Subjects which would
be a hurt, and a danger to those that are no Subjects. It is not lawful to
make Fortes in his own Land, Bal. 5. Cons. 409.
which may be terrible to those that are not his, as you shall hear in the
third Book. Therefore neither is it lawful to do with his own, that which
may be a terror to others. Bal. q. Cons. 396.
How ever these are called equivalent, to do in his own place, and toward his
own Subjects. Whether if my Neighbor should place in his House Gunnes, and
other things against my House, may I neither be careful for my self, nor
stir against my Neighbor? Thus, thus were Preparations made in Holland; and
that great Noble man, Leicester, very wisely foresaw, that the defense of the
Hollanders, was very wholesome and necessary for the Commonwealth, and he
persuaded it to be undertaken, Lyp.
least if the Spaniards should break through that Pale of Europe, as then very
wisely Iustus Lipsius, called it there should remain no obstacle at all to
their cruelty. And thus far of War Defensive.

Thus, and much more this our learned Professor of the Civil Law, Albericus
Gentilis; whose words I have thus largely transcribed; because they not only
abundantly justify the lawfulness of the Parliaments present Defensive War
in point of Law, and their Ordinances of Association and mutual Defense, but
likewise fully answer all the cavils and pretenses of Royalists and Malignants
against the progress and managing of this war, from principles of Nature,
Law, Humane Reason, Equity, and humane Authorities.

THE LAWFVLNES OF THE PARLIAMENTS present Defensive War in Point of Divinity
and Conscience.
THe lawfulness and justness of the Parliaments present necessary Defensive
War, in point of Common, Civil, Canon Law, and Policy, having been largely
debated in the premises, because not hitherto discussed in that kind by any,
to my knowledge; I shall in the next place proceed to justify it in point of
Divinity and Conscience; Wherein, though I shall be more concise then I
intended, because sundry Learned * Divines, Master Goodwine his Anti-cavallar.
and Bone for a Bishop. Master Burrought his Lord of Hosts. The several Answers
and Replies to Doctor Fern. The honest Broker, Scripture and Reason, pleading
for Defensive Arms (the best and acutest of this kind) with many others.
in many late Printed Books, common in all men's hands have professedly handled
it at large, and given good satisfaction unto many unresolved scrupulous
Consciences; yet because this Treatise may come into diverse hands, which have
not perused their discourses; and those whose judgments may be convinced by
the Legal, may still have some scruples of Conscience resting in them, in
reguard of the Theological Part, and because some things (perchance) in Point
of Theology, which others have wholly omitted, may seasonably be here supplied,
to satisfy Consciences yet unresolved of the justness of the present, and all
other necessary Defensive Wars, I shall not over-sparingly or cursorily pass
through it, without a competent debate.

Now lest the Consciences of any should be seduced, ensnared with generalities
or clear mistakes through the mis-stating of the points in question, with
which devise, many have been hitherto deluded by the Opposites, who cumbate
only with their own misshapen fancies, discharging all their Gunshot against
such Tenets as are not in question, and no ways coming near the White in
Controversy, I shall for my own orderly proceeding, and the better satisfaction
of ignorant, scrupulous, seduced consciences, more punctually state the
Question, then formerly in the Legal Part; first, Negatively, next,
Positively; and then proceed to its debate. Take notice therefore.

First, 1.
that this is no part of the question in dispute. Whether the Parliament, or
any Subjects whosoever, may actually disobey, or violently with force of Arms
resist the Kings, or any other lawful Magistrates just commands, warranted
either by Gods Word, or the Laws of England? it being out of controversy,
readily subscribed by all of both sides; that Such commands ought not so much
as to be disobeyed, much less forcibly resisted but cheerfully submitted to,
and readily executed for Conscience sake, Romans 13. 1. to 6. 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14.
Tit. 3. 1. Hebr. 13. 17. Josh. 1. 16, 17. 18. Ezra. 7. 26. Eccles. 8 2, 3, 4,
5. the only thing these objected Scriptures prove, which come not near the
thing in question, though our Opposites most rely upon them.

Secondly, Neither is this any branch of the dispute: Whether Subjects may
lawfully rise up, or rebel against their Prince, by way of Muteny, Faction, or
Sedition, without any just, or lawful public ground; or for every trifling
injury, or provocation offered them by their Prince? Or whether private men,
for personal wrongs (especially where their lives, chastities, livelihoods are
not immediately endangered, by actual violent, unjust assaults) may in point of
Conscience, lawfully resist, or rise up against their Kings, or any other
lawful Magistrates? Since all disavow such tumultuous Insurrections and
Rebellions in such cases: yet this is all which the often objected Examples of
Number. 16.
Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, with other Scriptures of this Nature, do or can
evince.

Thirdly, nor is this any parcel of the Controversy. Whether Subjects may lay
violent hands upon the persons of their Princes, wittingly or willingly to
deprive them of their Lives or Liberties, especially, for private Injuries; or
in cold blood, when they do not actually nor personally assault their lives or
chastities; or for any public misdemeanors, without a precedent sentence of
Imprisonment, or death against them given judicially, by the whole States or
Realms, where they have such Authority to araigne and judge them? For all
unanimously disclaim, yea abominate such Traitorous practices and Jesuitical
Positions, as execrable and unchristian: yet this is all which the example of
David's not offering violence to King Saul: the 1 Samuel 24. 3. to 22. cap. 26. 2.
to 25. 2 Samuel 1. 2. to 17. or that perverted Text of Psalm. 105. 15. ( the best
Artillery in our Adversaries Magazines) truly prove.

Fourthly, Neither is this the thing in difference, as most mistake it. Whether
the Parliament may lawfully raise an Army to go immediately and directly
against the very person of the King, to apprehend or offer violence to him,
much less intentionally to destroy him, or to resist his own personal
attempts against them, even to the hazard of his life? For the Parliament, and
their Army too, have in sundry See an exact Collection of of al Remon.
strances, etc.
Remonstrances, Declarations, Protestations, and Petitions, renounced any such
disloyal intention or design at all; for which there is no color to charge
them; and were his Majesty now alone, or attended only with his Ordinary
Courtly Guard, there needed no Army nor Forces to resist his personal
assaults. Yet this is made the principal matter in question by Doctor Fern,
The Resolving of Conscience. The Necessity of Christian Subjection, etc. A
Revindication. The Grand Rebellion, etc
by An appeal to thy Conscience, and other Anti-parliamentary Pamphlets; who
make this the sole Theme of their Discourses: That Subjects may not take up
Arms Against their Lawful Sovereign, because he is wicked and unjust; no,
though he be an Idolater and Oppressor: That, Suppose the King will not
discharge his trust, but is bent, or seduced to subvert Religion, Laws,
Liberties, yet Subjects may not take up Arms, and resist the King, it being
unwarrantable, and according to the Apostle, damnable, Romans 13. Yea, this is
all the questions the G. valleers and Malignants demand of their Opposites in
this cause. What? will you take up Arms; will you fight against, or resist the
King? etc. Never stating the question of his Forces, his Army of Papists,
Malignants, Delinquents, but only of the King himself abstracted from his
invading, depopulating Forces, against whom, in this sense of theirs, the
Parliament never yet raised any Forces, nor made the least resistance hitherto.

These four particulars then being not in question, I shall here appeal to
the most Malignant Conscience: Whether Doctor Fern, and all other our
Opposites, pretenders of Conscience, have not ignorantly, if not maliciously,
made shipwreck of their good Consciences (had they ever any) by a wilful
mistating of the Controversy, concerning the present Defensive War, in the
four preceding particulars, which they make the only Questions; when not so
much as one of them comes within the Verge of that which is the real
Controversy; and never once naming that in all, or any of their Writings,
which is the point indeed? Secondly, Whether there be any one Text or Reason
in all their Pamphlets, particularly applied to any thing which concerns the
present War, but only to these four particulars, which are not in debate?
And if so, (as no Conscience can gainsay it) then there is naught in all the
wast Papers they have published, which may either resolve or scruple any
Conscience, That the Parliaments Defensive Arms and resistance are unlawful
in point of Divinity, or Conscience, which is steered by the Scriptures
Compass.

But if these particulars be not in question; you may now demand, what the knot
and true state of the present Controversy, in point of Conscience, is? In few
words, take it thus.

Whether both Houses of Parliament, and the Subjects by their Authority, for
the preservation of their own Persons, Privileges, Laws, Lives, Liberties,
Estates, Religion; the apprehension of Voted co^tumatious Traitors, and
Delinquents, the rescuing his seduced Majesty out of the power of Popish
pernicious Counselors and Forces, who end avour the Kingdoms subversion, by
withdrawing him from, and incensing him against his Parliament, may not
lawfully with a good Conscience, take up necessary defensive Arms, and make
actual Warlike resistance against his Majesty's Malignant ill Counselors, and
invading Popish Forces ( who now Murder, Rob, Spoil, Sack, Depopulate the
Kingdom in a most Hostile manner, to set up Tyranny, Popery, and an Arbitrary
lawless Government,) in case they come armed with his personal presence, or
commission, to execute these their wicked illegal designs; Especially, when
neither the Parliament nor their forces in this their resistance, have the
least thought at all, to offer any violence, to the Kings own person, or to
oppose his Legal, just Sovereign Authority?

Or shorter, Whether the Kings Captains and Soldiers invading the Parliament,
and Subjects, as aforesaid, the Parliament or Subjects (especially when
authorized by an Ordinance of both Houses) may not with a safe Conscience
forcibly resist these Malignants though armed with the Kings illegal
Commissions, without his personal presence; or with his presence and
Commissions too? And for my part, I think it most evident, that they may
lawfully resist, repulse them, even by Divine Authority. For the better
clearing whereof, I shall premise these three undeniable Conclusions.

First, That no lawful King or Monarch whatsoever, (much less the Kings of
England, who are no absolute Princes) have any the least Authority from the
Laws of God or man, personally by themselves, or instruments, to do any
injury or injustice to their Subjects; how much less then by open Force to
Murder, Rob, Plunder, Ravish, Ruin, or Spoil them of their Laws, Liberties,
Estates, Religion, all which is plentifully proved by Law Authorities, in the
premises; and punctually confirmed by these ensuing Texts. Ezech. 44 15, 16,
17. cap. 45. 8, 9. Psalm. 105. 14. 15. Isay 14. 15. to 23. 2 Samuel 23. 3. Isay 1.
23. cap. 3. 12. 14. 15. Prove. 28. 15. 16. Ezech. 22. 6. 7. 27. Zeph. 3. 3.
Mich. 3. 1. to 12. 1 Samuel 12. 3. 4. 5. 1 King. cap. 21. and 22. Zeph. 2. 8.
Isay 9. 7. cap. 16. 5. cap. 32. 1. 2. cap. 49. 23. 2 Chronicles. 9. 8. Ier. 22. 3.
to 32. Obad. 2. 10. to 16. Romans 13. 3. 4. 5. 6. 1 Pet. 2. 13. 16. and infinite
Scriptures more.

Secondly, 2.
That all Subjects and persons whatsoever, are obliged both in point of Law and
Conscience to disobey, resist, and not execute, the unjust illegal
Commissions, Mandates of their Kings, and other Magistrates. This is evident by
the Midwi^es refusal to murder the Hebrews Male-children at King Pharoabs
command, for which God blessed them, and built them houses, Exodus 1. 15. to 20.
By Balaams denial to curse or defy the Israelites, at King Balacks entreaty.
Numb. 22. and 23. and 24. By the refusal of Saul's Guard and Footmen to slay or
fall on the Priests a Nob, by King Saul's personal command, though present, and
not only their King but Master too: 1 Samuel ^2. 17. 18. By Ionathans denial to
kill, or consent to the death of David upon Saul's mandate, though not only his
Sovereign, but Father, although he might have gained the Crown by it, and
endangered his own life by refusing it, 1 Samuel 20. 27. to 42. By Saul's
Armour-beares forbearance to run him through with his Sword, when he fled
before the Philistimes, though he as his King and Master enjoined him to do
it; lest the uncircumcised should come and thrust him through and abuse him. 1 Samuel 3^. 4. By Mordechai his denial to bend the knee to Haman, the great
Favorite, though the King had so commanded, Esther 3. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. By
Shadrac^, Meshach Abodnego, and Daniels refusal, to eat of the Kings portion
of meat and wine assigne^ them, least they should be desiled, Dan. 1. 5. to 12.
By their peremptory resolution, not To fall down and worship King
Nebuchadnezzars golden Image, though twice strictly commanded by the King to
do it, and threatened to be cast into the fiery Furance ( as they were) for
refusing it, Dan. 3. 4 to 30. By Daniels disobeying the Kings and Lords
Jdolatrous Decree, not to offer a Petition to any God or man for 30. days,
save of King Darius, under pain of being cast into the Lions Den, Dan. 6. 5.
to 24. By the Pharisees and chief Priests Officers neglect to apprehend our
Savior for his Preaching, though enjoined so to do by their Masters, John 7.
32. to 48. By the Apostles refusal to give over Preaching, and perseverance in
Preaching, notwithstanding the High Priests and Councels express Inhibitions
and doubled Commands, seconded with Apprehensions, Imprisonments, Scourgings;
and their direct resolutions in this very case, See Gratian Cause. 11. q. 3.
That we ought to obey God rather then men, Acts 4. 12. to 22 cap. 5. 17. to
the end. By Peter's Preaching to, and conversing with the Uncircumcised
Gentiles, notwithstanding the Christian Jews dislike, Acts 11. 1. to 19. with
infinite Presidents of this nature in Ecclesiastical Histories; the very
sufferings of all the Sea Fox Acts and Monum. French Book of Mattyrs, with
others.
Martyrs depending on this ground alone: which is backed by Matthew. 10. 28. 32.
33. Luc. 12. 4. 8. cap. 9. 23. 24. 25. 26. Ezech. 2. 3. to 9. Rev. 13. 3. to
the end. Romans 12 1. 2. John 16. 2. 3. 1 Thessalonians. 2 14. 15. 16. Exodus 32. 2. Josh.
24 15. Psalm. 44. 15. to 23.

Thirdly, 3
That as all Kings illegal unjust commands are void in Law, and will no ways
extenuate the guilt, or justify the actions of those instruments who execute
them in point of Law, 1 Page 10. 11. etc.
as I havef formerly cleared; so are they likewise mere nullities, and
insufficient to excuse the executioners of them in point of Conscience; as is
evident by, Psalm. 52. 5. where God threatens to destroy Doeg the Edomite, for
ever, to take him away, pluck him out of his dwelling place, and root him out
of the land of the Living, for executing King Saul's bloody command upon the
Priests at Nob, 1 Samuel 22. By Gods exemplary punishment upon those Soldiers
who by King Nebuchadnezzars special command, bound the three Children and cast
them into the fiery Furnace; who were slain by the flames of the Furna^e,
though these three Martyrs had no harm in the Furnace it self, Dan. 3. 20. to
28. By Gods consuming the two Captains and their fifties with fire from
heaven, who came violently to apprehend the Prophet Elijab by King Ahaziah his
commission, and unjust command, 2 King. 1. 9 to 16. By the Precept of John
Baptist given to Soldiers themselves, Luke 3. 14. Do violence to no man: (
neither by the Kings, nor Generals Command) neither accuse any falsely. By 1 Timothy 5. 22. Lay hands suddenly on no man, ( no more in a violent, Military,
then an Ecclesiastical sense) neither be partakers of other men's sinne^:
Compared with the next forecited Scriptures; with Romans 1. 32. Math. 15. 14.
Psalm. 50. 18 21. Prove. 1. 10. to 16. Oba^. verse. 10. to 16 Isay 1. 23. with
Isay 9 16. The leaders of this people cause them to err, and those that are
led of them are destroyed. What therefore Saint John writes in another case, 2
John 10. 11. If there come any unto you ( be he an Archbishop, Bishop,
Archdeadon, Fern himself, or any Court Chaplain whatsoever,) and being not
this Doctrine; receive him not into your house, neither bid him God speed; for
he that bids him God speed, Is partaker of his evil Deeds: I shall apply to
this particular of executing Kings unjust Commands against their people; they
are partakers of their Kings wickedness, if they do but intertaine their
unjust Commissions into their Houses or bid them God speed; much more if they
execute them either voluntarily, or against their wills, out of an unworthy
fear, or base respects.

These three Conclusions being irrefragable, Argument ^
My first Argument to justify resistance from them shall be this. That
violence against the Subjects persons, Consciences, Families, Estates,
Properties, Privileges, or Religion, which neither the King himself in proper
person, nor any his Officers, nor Soldiers by command from him, have any
Authority by the Laws of God or man, in Law or Conscience to inflict: and
which in Conscience ought not to be obeyed, but rejected as a mere nulli^y,
even by the instruments enjoined for to execute it; may justly with a safe
Conscience be resisted by the Parliament and Subjects; there being not one
syllable in Gods Word to contradict it. But the violence now offered by the
Kings Forces to the Parliament and Subjects every where, is such. Therefore it
may justly with a safe Conscience be resisted; especially in the Kings
Commanders and Soldiers, who are neither the King himself, nor the Higher
Powers ordained by God; and no other then plain Thieves and Murderers in Law
and Conscience, if they plunder, kill, spoil; their Commissions being but
Nullities in both; and they in this particular mere private men, without any
Authority to justify their actions, as I have already proved.

Secondly, 2
That resistance which is warranted by direct Precedents recorded, approved in
Scripture even by God himself, must questionless be lawful in case of
conscience: But the resistance even of Kings, their highest Magistrates,
officers in the execution of their unjust Commands is thus warranted. Therefore,
doubtless, it must be lawful in point of Conscience. The Minor (only
questionable) is thus confirmed. First, by the notable example of the Prophet
Elijah, 2 Kings 1. 2. to 16. who sending back King Ahaziah his Messengers
(sent by him to enquire of Baal^zebub the God of Ekron, whether he should
recover of his disease) with an harsh Message to the King, contrary to his
Command, which they disobeyed; thereupon this King, in an angry fume, sent two
Captains with 50. men apeece, one after another, to apprehend the Prophet for
this affront; (as Antiq. Iud. lib. 9. cap. 1. Ipse Prophetae cum minatus vim
esset, ut ni sponte sua faciat, vi coactum eo pertrahat. etc.
Josephus, with other Interpreters accord,) who coming with their forces to
him, said; Thou man of God, the King has said, come down quickly. To whom he
successively answered: If I be a man of God, then let fire come down from
Heaven, and consume thee and thy fifty; And there came fire from heaven
thereupon, and consumed two Captains and their fifties: but the third Captain
and his fifty, who humbled themselves to the Prophet, and begged the sparing of
their lives, were spared; the Angel of the Lord bidding the Prophet to go
down with them to the King, and not be afraid. From which Text it is
infallible, even by a divine Miracle from heaven, doubled by God himself; That
it is lawful for Subjects in some cases, to resist the unjust violence of the
Soldiers and Captains of their Kings though armed with their Regal Commands.
Secondly, by the History of the Prophet Elisha, 2 Kings 6. 31, 32, 33. Who when
King Ioram (his Sovereign) had sworn unjustly in his fury; God do so to me
and more also, if the head of Elisha shall stand on him this day; and thereupon
sent a Messenger before him to Elisha his house to take away his head; the
Prophet was so far from submitting to this Instrument of his; that he
Commanded the Elders sitting then with him in the house, to look when the
Messenger came, and shut the door, and Hold him fast at the Door, though the
sound of his Masters feet (the King) were behind him; whom he styles, the son
of a Murderer. Might these two eminentest Prophets thus openly resist the
Captains, Soldiers, and unjust Executioners of their Princes, with a good
Conscience; and may not others lawfully do the like? No doubt they may.
Thirdly, (If I be not much mistaken) this kind of resistance is warranted even
by Christ himself, and his Apostles: For a little before his Apprehention,
Christ uttered this speech unto his Disciples, Luke 22. 36, 37, 38. But Now, he
that has no Sword, let him sell his garment and buy one, etc. -- And they
said, Lord, behold, here are two Swords. And he said unto them, it is enough.
Why would Christ have his Disciples buy Swords now, unless it were for his and
their own better Defense, being the time when he was to be apprehended. Matthew.
26. Mar. 14. Luc. 22. John 18.
Soon after this Judas and his Band of men sent from the High Priests, with
Swords and Staves came to seize upon Christ. Which when they who were about him
saw what would follow: They said unto him; Lord, shall we smite with the Sword?
His commanding them to buy Swords now, was sufficient ground for this question,
and intimation enough, that they might now use them: whereupon Christ giving no
negative answer; One of them which were with Jesus (and John directly says it
was Peter) smote a servant of the High Priest (whose name was Malchus) and cut
off his right ear. Hereupon Jesus answered and said, Suffer ye Thus Far: So
Luc. 22. 50. 51.
Luke; Mark relates no answer at all reprehending this fact: John 18. 10. 11.
John records his speech to Peter thus. Then, said Jesus unto Peter, Put up thy
Sword into the sheath. The Cup which my Father has given me, shall I not
drink? To which Matthew adds, Math. 26. 52 53.
thinkinst thou that I cannot pray to my Father, and he shall presently give me
more then twelve Legions of Angels? But how then shall the Scriptures be
fulfilled, that thus it must be? So that the reason why Christ bade Peter thus
to put up his sword; was not because he thought defense of himself, and Peter's
smiting now altogether unlawful in it self; but only inconsistent with Gods
present providence, which it should seem to cross. Christ was now by Acts 2.
23. Cap. 4. 27. 28. Luke 24. 21. 26. 27. Isay 53.
Gods eternal decree, and the Scriptures prediction, (which must be
necessarily fulfilled) to suffer death upon the Cross for our iniquities:
should Peter then, with the other Disciples have totally resisted his
apprehention at this time, and proceeded still to smite with the Sword as they
began, till they had rescued our Savior, he could not then have suffered, nor
the Scriptures be fulfilled: had it not been for this special reason (rendered
by Christ himself, to clear all scruples against the Lawfulness of
selfe-defence in such cases,) Peter might still have used his sword to rescue
his Master from these Catchpoles violence; and if he and his fellows had been
too weak to withstand them, Christ was so far from imagining that he might
not have lawfully defended himself; that he informs them, he could (and
would no doubt) have presently commanded whole Legions of Angels from heaven,
by his Fathers approbation, to rescue him from unjust violence. And his Speech
to Pilate, after his taking, plainly, iustifies the lawfulness of such a
forcible defense with Arms to preserve a man's life from unjust execution: John
18. 36 If my Kingdom were of this world, Then would my Servants fight (in my
Defense and Rescue) that I should Not be delivered to the Jews: but now my
kingdom is not from hence. All which considered, clearly justifies, the
Lawfulness of resisting the Kings, or higher Powers Officers, in cases of
apparent unjust open violence or assaults; and withal answers one grand
argument against resistance from our Saviors present Example: namely, See
Doct. Fernes resolving of Conscience. An Appeal to thy Conscience, with others
who muchrely on this ill foundation.
Christ himself made no resistance when he was unjustly apprehended; Ergo,
Christians his Followers (Ergo, no Kings, no Magistrates too, as well as Christ
the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, for they are Christians as well as
subjects;) ought not to make any forcible resistance of open violence: Which
argument is a mere inconsequent; because the reason why Christ resisted not
these Pursevants, and High Priests Officers, was only, that his Fathers
decree, and the Scriptures foretelling his Passion might be fulfilled, as
himself resolves; not because he deemed resistance Unlawful, which he even
then approved, though he practiced it not, as these Texts do fully prove.

Fourthly, 4.
The lawfulness of a defensive War, against the invading Forces of a
Sovereign, is warranted by the example of the City Abel; which stood out and
defended it self against Ioab, David's General, and his Forces, when they
besieged and battered it; till they had made their peace, with the head of
Sheba who fled into it for shelter, 2 Samuel 20. 14. to 23. And by that of Ester,
Chapter 8. 8. to 17. chap: 9. 1. to 17. pertinent to this purpose. Where Haman
having gotten the Kings Decree, to be sent unto all Provinces for the utter
extirpation of the whole Nation of the Jews, the King after Hamans Execution
(through Gods great mercy, and Mordecaies and Queen Esters diligence) to
prevent this bloody massacre by their Enemies, granted to the Jews in every
City, by Letters under his Seal, To gather themselves together, and to stand
for their lives, to destroy, to slay, and to cause to perish all the power of
the people and Province That would Assault them, both little ones and women, and
to take the spoil of them for a prey; and that the Jews should be ready
against the day, to avenge themselves of their enemies. Hereupon when the day,
that the Kings Commandment and Decree ( for their extirpation) drew near to be
put in execution, in the day that the enmies of the Jews hoped to have power
over them; the Jews gathered themselves together in their Cities, throughout
all the Provinces of King Ahasuerus, to lay hand on such as sought their hurt;
and no man could withstand them, for the fear of them fell upon all people:
And all the Rulers of the Provinces, and the Lieutenants, Deputies, and
Officers of the King helped the Jews, because the fear of Mordecai fell upon
them: So the Jews smote all their enemies with the stroke of the Sword, and
slaughter, and destruction, and did what they would unto those that hated them.
In the Palace they slew eight hundred men, and Hamans ten sons, on several
days. And the other Jews that were in the Provinces, gathered themselves
together, and Stood for their Lives, and had rest from their enemies, and slew
of their foes seventy and five thousand, but they laid not their hands on the
prey. Lo here a Defensive war, justified, and granted lawful, by the Kings
own Letters to the Jews, against their enemies, who by former Charters from
him, had Commission wholly to extirpate them. Neither had this license of the
King in point of Conscience, been lawful, had their defense and resistance of
the Kings former Commission been wholly unlawful. And the reason of the Kings
grant to them, to resist and slay their Enemies, that would assault them; was
not simply, because their resistance without it, and standing for their lives,
had been unlawful, by reason of the Kings first unjust Decree, which they
ought not in Conscience to submit to, without repugnancy; But only to enable
the Jews, then Captives, and scattered abroad one from another in every
Province, with more convenience, security, boldness, and courage now to join
their forces together, to resist their malicious potent enemies; to daunt them
the more thereby; Nature it self, yea, and all Laws in such a bloody
National Butchery as this, without any just cause at all, both taught and
enabled every one of the Jews, to stand for his life, his Nations, Religions,
preservation, even to the last drop of blood. Therefore the Letters of the King
did not simply enable them to resist their enemies, which they might have done
without them; but give them Authority to destroy, and slay the Wives and little
children of their Enemies, and to take the spoil of them for a prey; which
they refused to do, because they deemed it unjust, notwithstanding the Kings
permission and concession, which as to these particulars, was illegal, and
more then he could justly grant. This general National resistance of Gods
own people then of their assaulting cruel Enemies, even among Strangers, in
the land of their Captivity under a foreign Enemy, with the former and other
following precedents, will questionless more then conjecturally prove, if not
infallibly resolve, The lawfulness of a necessary Defensive War, and
opposition by free Subjects, against their Kings assailing Forces which seeks
their ruin, though armed with their Kings Commission, and that without any
Ordinance of Parliament authorizing them to resist, much more then, when
enabled to oppose them by Ordinances of both Houses; as the Jews were to
resist and slay their enemies by this Kings Letters and Authority.

Thirdly, 3
That kind of resistance which has no one Text, nor Example in Scripture to
impeach its lawfulness, but many Texts and precedents to countenance it, must
doubtless be lawful in point of Conscience. But the resisting of Kings
invading pillaging, destructive Forces (who have nothing to plead; to justify
all their Villainies but a void illegal Warrant) has no one Text nor example
in Scripture to impeach its lawfulness, for ought I can find; (and if there
be any such, I wish the Opposites would object it, for Romans 13. as I shall show
hereafter, does no ways contradict, but approve it:) But it has many Texts
and precedents to countenance it; as the premises and sequel attest: 4.
Therefore it must doubtless bee-lawfull in point of Conscience.

Fourthly, it is confessed by all men, (yea those who are most intoxicated with
an (...) Luc. O^^inder. Ench^nd Contr c. 9. and 10. De Magistr. (...).
Anabaptisticall spirit, condemning all kind of war, refusing to carry Arms
to defend themselves against any Enemies, Thieves, or Pirates) that it is
lawful not only passively to resist their Kings unlawful Commands, and
invading Forces, but likewise by flight, hiding, or other policies, to evade
and prevent their violence; which is warranted not only by Exodus 2. 15. etc.
Moses, 1 Samuel 19. to 31.
David's, and 1 King. 19.
Elijahs, their several flights from the violence of the Egyptians, Saul, and
Iezabel, who sought their lives; but likewise by Mat. 2. 13. 14. 15.
Joseph, Mary, and Christ himself, who fled into Egypt to escape the hands and
but chery of King Herod; by Christ's own direction to his Disciples Matthew. 10.
23. But when they persecute you in this City, flee ye into another; and that
Prediction of his Matthew. 23. 34. Behold, I send unto you Prophets, and wise
men, and Scribes, and some of them ye shall kill and crucify, and some of them
shall you scourge in your Synagogues, and persecute them from City to City;
which was really fulfilled. Acts 8. 3. 4. c. 9. 1 2. c, 11. 19. c. 13. 50, 51.
c. 14. 1, to 24, c. 17. 1. to 16. c. 22. 42. c. 26. 11. 12. c. 9. 24, 25, 26. 2
Cor. 11. 32. 33. Rev. 12. 6. Of which read more in Tertullian his book De
Fuga in persecutione. Hence then I argue thus. That unjust violence of Princes
and their Armies, which Subjects with a safe conscience may decline and flee
from, when as they want power, means, or convenience to resist it, they may no
doubt lawfully resist even with force of Arms, when they have sufficient
means and conveniences to resist, and cannot flee or submit thereto, without
the public ruin: since the same justice and equity, which enables them by
flight or stratagem to decline unjust assaults of a superior power, or its
judgments, does likewise enable them to escape and prevent it with resistance,
when they cannot do it by flight or other policy: If then they may lawfully
with a safe conscience hide, flee, or use lawful policies, to prevent the open
injust violence of their kings and their Officers, when not guilty of any
capital crime deserving censures; because by the very light of nature, and Law
of Charity they are obliged to preserve themselves from unjust tyranny; and
are no ways bound to subject themselves to the cruelty, the unjust assaults,
or oppressions of others: then by the selfsame reason, they may lawfully with
force of Arms defend themselves against such violent unjust attempts which
they are no way obliged to submit unto, when as they cannot conveniently secure
themselves and the public, but by such resistance, and should both betray
their own, the public safety, and Religion (as the Subjects and Parliament
should now do) in case they did not resist by force of Arms to the utmost of
their power: and become 1 Timothy 5. 8.
worse than. Infidels, who have even thus often provided for their own and the
Republickes security.

Fifthly, God himself, the fountain often justice, the Zeph 3. 5. Esaias 45. 21.
God of 1 Cor. 14. 33 40.
Order, the Job 7. 20.
preserver of humane society who detests of all tyranny, Psalm. 5. 6. Psalm. 11.
5.
cruelty, oppression, injustice, out of his John 3. 16. 1 John 4 9.
Philanthropie (which brought the Son of his bosom from heaven to earth)
would never certainly in point of policy or conscience prohibit that, which is
the only probable means and apparent remedy, to prevent, suppress disorder,
tyranny, cruelty, oppression, injustice, yea confusion in the world; and to
preserve good order and humane society: a truth so apparent, that no rational
man can contradict it. Therefore questionesse he never prohibited forcible
necessary resistance of the highest powers and their instruments in cases of
open unjust violence, and hostile invasion made upon their people to ruin
them, or subvert their established government, Laws, Liberties, Justice,
Religion: There being no other probable ordinary means left to any Kingdom,
Nation, People, to preserve their government, lives, Laws, Liberties,
Religion, and to prevent, suppress, or redress tyranny, cruelty, disorder,
confusion, yea utter ruin, when their Kings and Governors degenerate into
Tyrants, invading them with open force, but only defensive Arms: prayers and
tears alone, without military opposition by force of Arms, being no more able
to defend a person, City or Kingdom against Oppressing Princes and their
Armies, then against thieves, Pirates or common enemies; whom they must and
ought to resist, as well with Arms as Orisons, with Spears as well as Tears,
1 La^ 2. 12. to 42. Alfonsia Carthagena Regum, Hisp. Acaphel. c. 44.
else they should but tempt the Lord and destroy themselves (like thosec Jews
and Goths who would not fight upon the Sabbath, and so were slain by their
enemies without resistance:) yea wilfully suffer the Commonweal to be
subverted, Religion extirpated; Laws trampled under feet, their own
posterities to be enslaved, ruined without any opposition, even in a moment.
For were it utterly unlawful, and no less than Treason or Rebellion, in point
of conscience for any subjects to take up Defensive Arms to resist the Kings
army, or forces, consisting for the most part of Papists, Delinquents, deboist
Athesticall persons of broken fortunes, feared consciences and most irreligious
lives, I appeal to every man's conscience, how soon these unresisted
Instruments of cruelty would utterly extirpate our protestant Religion, and
common faith, for which we are enjoined earnestly to contend and strive: Jude
3. Phil. 1. 27. 28. And shall we then yield it up and betray it to our
adversaries without strife or resistance? how suddenly would they ruin our
Parliament, Laws, Liberties; subvert all civil order, government; erect an
arbitrary Lawless tyrannical Regency regulated by no Jaws but will and Just?
how soon would they murder, imprison, execute our Noblest Lords, Knights,
Burgesses, best Ministers, and Commonwealths-men for their fidelity to God,
their King and Country? how many Noble families would they disinherite? how
many wives, widows, Virgins would they force and ravish; what Cities, what
Countries, would they not totally pillage, plunder, sack, ruin, consume with
fire and sword? how soon would our whole Kingdom become an Acheldama, a
wilderness, a desolation, and the surviving inhabitants either slaves or
beasts, if not devils incarnate? Yea how speedy might any private Officers,
Captains, Commanders, by color of illegal Commissions and commands from the
King, or of their Offices, and all the notorious rogues and thieves of England,
under color of being listed in the Kings Army, if the people might not in
point of Law or Conscience resist them with Arms who came armed for to act
their villainies, maliciously rob, spoil, plunder, murder all the Kings liege
people, without any remedy or prevention, and by this pretext, that they are
the Kings Soldiers, suddenly seize and gain all the arms, treasure, forts,
ammunition, power of the Realm, into their possessions in a moment; and having
thus strengthened themselves, and slain the Kings faithful subjects, usurp
the crown it self if they be ambitious, as many private Captains and
Commanders have anciently slain diverse Roman and Grecian Emperors, yea sundry
Spanish, Gothish and Moorish Kings in Spain by such practices and aspired to
their Crowns, (of which there are sundry such like presidents in most other
Realms:) to prevent, redres, which several destructive mischiefs to People,
Kingdom, Kings themselves, God himself has left us no other certain,
proper, sufficient remedy but a forcible resistance, which all Kingdoms,
Nations throughout the world, have constantly used in such cases, as I shall
manifest more largely in the Appendix. Therefore certainly it must needs be
lawful, being Gods and Natures special Ordinance to secure innocent persons,
Cities, Nations, Kingdoms, Laws, Liberties, Lives, Estates, Religion, and
mankind it self, against the hurtful Lusts of unnatural Tyrants, and their
accursed instruments, against ambitious, treacherous, male-contented Spirits,
maliciously bent against the public weal, and peace. There are two things
only which usually restrain inferior persons from murdering, robbing,
disseising, injuring one another; the one is, fear of punishment by the
Magistrate; the other, fear and danger of being resisted, repulsed with shame
and loss of limb or life by those they violently assault, injure; and were
this once believed, received for Law or Divinity in the world, that it were
unlawful to resist, repulse a thief, murderer, riotor, or disseisor coming
in the Kings name, long enjoy his life, goods, liberty, lands, but some or
other would deprive him of them notwithstanding all restraints of Laws, of
penalties, and maintain suites against him with his own estate violently
seized on; the right of lawful defense, being every man's best security, to
preserve his life, estate, in peace against the violence of another, whence the
wisdom of the Common Law, makes every man's house his Castle, in the necessary
defense whereof, and of his person, goods from the violence, rape of others, it
gives him liberty to beat, repulse, yea kill injurious assailants: which
right of defense if once denied, would open a wide gap to all wickedness,
injustice, disorders whatsoever, and speedily bring in absolute confusion,
subversion of all property, Law, Order. As for Emperors, Kings, great Officers,
and other ungodly instruments, armed with Princes unjust commissions, who deem
themselves above the reach of humane Laws, censures, and accountable for their
unjust actions to none but God himself, there is no other known bar or
obstacle to hinder or restrain their armed violence, Tyranny, oppressions,
but only the fear of the oppressed assaulted subjects armed resistance; which
if once denied to be lawful, all Royalties would soon be transformed into
professed Tyrannies, all Kings and Magistrates into Tyrants, all Liberty into
slavery, property into community, and every one would thereby be exposed as a
voluntary prey to the arbitrary cruelty covetousness, avarice, lusts, of the
greatest men. Therefore doubtless this armed resistance cannot but be lawful,
necessary, just, in point of Law and Conscience, to eschew these general
mischiefs.

Sixthly, all will readily grant it lawful in case of Conscience, for subjects
to resist a foreign enemy which invades them with force of Arms, though
animated by the King himself to such invasion; and why so, but because they
are their enemies, who would wrongfully deprive them of their native
inheritance, Liberties, estates, and work them harm; upon which ground, we
read in the 2 Kings 3. 21. That when the Moabites heard that the Kings of
Israel, Judah and Edom came up to fight against them with a great Army, they
gathered all that were able to put on armor, and upward to withstand them, and
stood in the border; and when ever the Midianites, Philis^ines, Syrians,
Babylonians, Egyptians, Cananites or other enemies came to assault the
Jsraelites, they presently assembled together in Arms to encounter and repulse
them, as the Histories of Joshua, Judges, Samuel, the Kings, Chronicles, and
Nehemiah abundantly evidence, almost in every Chapter. If then Subjects may
with a good Conscience resist forragin enemies on this ground alone; then
likewise domestic foes and their Kings own Forces, when they become open
enemies, to rob, kill, plunder, destroy them as inhumanely, as injuriously as
the worst Foreign foes, there being the self same ground for the lawfulness
of resistance of the one as the other, and if the balance incline to one side
more than other, an intestine enemy being more unnatural, unjust, hurtful,
dangerous, and transgressing more Laws of the Realm (which obliege not
strangers) than a Forraigner, and a Civil war being far worse, and more
destructive than a Foreign; the resistance of an homebred enemy, must be the
more just and lawful of the two, even in point of Conscience.

Seventhly, The very Law of God both allows and commands all men, to resist
their spiritual enemies, with spiritual Arms: Jam 4. 7. Resist the Devil
and he will flee from you, otherwise he would easily subdue and destroy us. 1
Pet. 5. 8. 9. Be sober and vigilant, because your adversary the devil as a
rearing Lion walks about seeking whom he may devour: whom resist steadfast in
the faith, Ephesians. 5. 10 to 19. Finally my brethren be strong in the Lord, and
in the power of his might: Put on the whole Armor of God, that ye may be able
to stand against the wiles of the devil. For we wrestle (or war) not against
flesh and blood, but against Principalities, against powers, against the Rulers
of the darkness of this world, against Spiritual wickedness (or wicked
spirits) in high places. Wherefore take unto you the whole Armor of God, that
ye may be able to withstand in the evil day, and having done all, to stand:
Stand therefore having your loins girded about with truth, etc. Above all
taking the shield of faith, wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery
darts of the wicked; And take the helmes of Salvation, and the sword of the
spirit, which is the Word of God: Praying always with all prayer and
supplication. Hence Christians are termed, Soldiers of Jesus Christ, and
Christianity a warfare, against the world, the flesh, and Prince of the world,
the Devil: 2 Timothy 2. 3, 4. 2 Cor. 10. 3. 1 Timothy 1. 18. Iam. 41. 1 Pet. 2. 11.
Romans 7. 23. 2 Cor. 10. 4. 1 Cor. 9 7, I say 41. 2. Rev. 12. 7. 17. In which
warfare, we must fight and resist even unto blood striving against sin, Heb.
12. 4. Using not only prayers and tears, but other spiritual weapons of
war, mighty through God, able to cast down every high thing that exalts it
self, to bring into Captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ, and
to revenge all disobedience, 2 Cor. 10. 4. 5. 6. If then we may and must
manfully resist, and fight against our Spiritual enemies, though
Principalities, Powers, Rulers, wicked spirits in high Places; and the John 14.
30. c. 12. 31. c. 16. 11.
Prince of this world himself, the Devil, when they assaut and seek to
devour our souls: then by the selfsame reason, we lawfully with a safe
conscience, may, yea ought to resist, repulse our corporal enemies when they
maliciously, unjustly, forcibly assault us, against all rules of Law, of
Conscience, to murder, enslave, destroy our bodies, Souls, Religion, the
Republicke, which must be dearest to us, though they be Principalities, Powers,
Rulers, wicked Spirits in high Places; yea Princes of this world; with all
their under Officers and Instruments of cruelty, not only with prayers and
tears, but corporal Arms and force, because they unnaturally, tyrannically,
seek the destruction of our bodies, estates, Liberties, Republicke, Religion,
there being no inhibition in Scripture, not to resist the one or other, but
infinite Texts authorizing men, not only to resist, but war against, yea
slay their malicious open enemies, until they be sub^ued or destroyed, Exodus
23. 22. 27. Levi. 26. 7. 8. Number. 24. 8. Deuteronomy. 20. throughout. Josh. c 8. to c.
13. 2 Samuel 22. 38. to 42. 1 Chronicles. 17. 8. 10. Esth. 9. 5. Neither do the Texts
of Mat. 5 39. Luke 6. 29. But I say unto you, that ye resist not evil, but
whosoever shall smite thee on the right cheek^, turn to him the other also,
and him that takes away thy cloak, forbid not to take thy c^ate also;
prohibit all actual resistance of public violence offered by enemies to our
persons, goods, or lawful defensive wars; which precept (as is clear by the
context, and resolved by Gratian. Cause. 23. Qu. 1.
Augustine, Gratian, Sum Theolog. Pars. 3 qu. 47. m. 3. Ofiander E^^ ibid. c.
9. (...)
Alensis, andf others) extends only to some private injuries and revenges, and
to the inward patient preparation of the mind to suffer two injuries, rather
the^ maliciously to revenge a single one, especially in cases where we want
ability to resist; not to an actual bearing of all gross outward injuries to
our persons or estates, without resistance: which precept being given generally
to all Christians; to Kings and Magistrates as well as Subjects, if it be
strictly urged, prohibits Kings and Magistrates to resist the violence and
injuries of the people, as much as the people, not to repulse the Arms
violence and oppressions of their Princes and Governors: and that Text of
James 5. 6. Ye have condemned and killed the just, and he does not resist you,
(which some think is meant of Christ alone) proves only, that some just men,
and many Martyrs have been condemned and killed without resistance, as our
Savior was; not that it is unlawful to resist an open enemy, thief or
murderer, who comes to kill, rob, or plunder us against Law and Conscience. I
read of Gratian Cause 23. qu. 1. les Flours desvies des sanctes part. 2. p. 470.
Saint Andrew, that when the people can together in multitudes to rescue him
out of the hands of a wicked man, and defend him from the injury of death, he
teaching them both by word and exemple, exhorted them, not to hinder his
martyrdom; yet the people lawfully rescued innocent Jonathan, from that unjust
death which his Father King Saul twice vowed he should undergo: 1 Samuel 14.
15. 38. to 46.
Some men's patient suffering death and injuries without resistance, is no
better an argument, that all therefore must so suffer without opposition, then
that all men ought to yield their purses up to highway thieves, or their
persons, goods, ships, to Turks and Pirates, without fight or resistance,
because some, yea many have shamefully done it for want of courage when they
were able to resist, and so have deservedly lost their purses, ships, goods,
liberties, and become Turkish Gally-slaves, to the ruin of their estates,
bodies, souls, which miseries by a manfull just defense, they might have
easily prevented. All which considered; I see no ground in Scripture, nor
reason, but that temporal enemies of all kinds which wrongfully invade our
persons or estates by open force of Arms in a warlike manner, may be resisted
with temporal weapons, as well as spiritual enemies with spiritual Arms.

Eighthly, 8.
That which all Nations in all ages by the very light of nature have constantly
practiced, as just and lawful, must doubtless Ro^^. 2. 15. 15.
be lawful in point of conscience, if there be no Law of God to the contrary.
But selfe-defence against invading Tyrants and their instruments has by the
very light of Nature been constantly practiced, by all Nations in all ages, as
just and lawful, which the premises, the Appendix, the Histories of all ages
evidence; their being never any one Nation or Kingdom for ought I find, that
ever yet reputed it a thing unlawful in point of Conscience; to resist the
open malicious destructive tyranny, violence, hostility of their unnatural
Princes, or that desisted from any such resistance, giving themselves up
willingly to their outrageous lusts and butcheries, without any opposition
(though some private men and Martyrs have sometimes done it, upon particular
reasons, as to avoid the scandal of Religion; to bear witness to the truth,
for the confirmation and conversion of others; or for want of power or
opportunity to resist; or to avoid a general massacre of their fellow
Christians, or because they were only a few private men; and their religion
directly opposite to the Laws and government under which they lived, or the
like, not because they judged all resistance simply unlawful, as Dr. Fernes
resolving of Conscience; An appeal to thy Conscience.
blind Doctors falsey inform us, which I shall prove hereafter;) and there is
no Law of God at all to prohibit such resistance: therefore doubtless it must
be lawful, even in point of conscience.

Ninthly, 9.
that which is directly opposite to what is absolutely illegal, and unjust in
point of conscience, and the chief law full obstacle and remedy, to prevent or
redress it, must certainly be just, be lawful in the court of Conscience,
since that which is directly opposite to that which is simply ill, and unjust,
must necessarily be good and just. But necessary just defense by force of
Arms, is directly opposite to that open Armed violence, and tyranny which is
absolutely illegal and unjust in point of Conscience, and the chief lawful
remedy and obstacle to prevent or redress it: as reason, experience and the
premises evidence. Therefore it must necessarily be just and lawful, even in
the Court of Conscience.

Tenthly, 10.
That resistance which does neither oppose the Kings royal person, nor lawful
Authority; must certainly be lawful in point of conscience: But the
resistance of the Kings Forces not accompanied with his person, in the
execution of his unjust commands; is neither a resistance of his Royal person,
(for that is absent, and his Cavalliers I hope are no Kings, nor yet invested
with the privileges of Kings; nor yet of his lawful Authority;) his illegal
Commissions and Commands, being mere nullities in Law, transferring no
particle of his just Authority to those who execute them. Therefore it must
certainly be lawful in point of conscience.

Eleventhly, 11.
That resistance which is the only remedy to keep not only Kings themselves,
but every one of their Officers and Soldiers from being absolute Tyrants,
Monarchs; and the denial whereof, equalizeth every soldier, and particular
Officer to Kings, yea God himself (whose prerogative only it is to have an
Romans 9. 19. 20.
absolute unresistable will;) must doubtless be lawful in the Court of
Conscience. But this necessary defensive resistance now used by the Parliament
and Subjects, in such: For if they may not resist any of the Kings Officers or
Soldiers in their plunderings, rapines, fierings, sackings of Towns, beating,
wounding, murdering the Kings liege people and the like; will not every common
Soldier and Officers be an absolute Tyran, equal in Monarchy to the great
Turk himself, and paramount the King, who has no absolute irresistible
Soveraignety in these particulars? Either therefore this resistance must be
granted, not only as lawful, but simply necessary, else every officer and
common Soldier will be more than an absolute King and Monarch, every subject
worse than a Turkish slave, and exposed to as many uncontrolable Sovereigns,
as there are Soldiers in the Kings Army, be their conditions never so vile,
their quality never so mean, and the greatest Peers on the Parliaments party,
must be irresistably subject to these new absolute Sovereigns lusts and wills.

Twelfthly, 12.
if all these will not yet satisfy Conscience in the Lawfulness the justness
of the Parliaments and peoples present forcible resistance of the Kings
Captains and Forces, though Armed with an illegal Commission (which makes
nothing at all in the case, because void in Law) there is this one Argument yet
remaining which will satisfy the most scrupulous, malignant, opposite
Conscience: That necessary forcible resistance which is Authorized, and
Commanded by the Supreamest lawful power and highest Sovereign Authority in
the Realm, must infallibly be just and lawful, even in point of Conscience,
by the express Resolution of Romans 13. and our opposites own confession; who
have See Doctor Fern; Appeal to thy Conscience; The Grand Rebellion; The
Necessity of Christian Subjection, and others.
no other Argument to prove the Offensive war on the Kings part Lawful, but
because it is commanded; and the Parliaments and Subjects Defensive Arms
Unlawful, but because prohibited by the King, whom they salsely affirm?, to be
the highest Sovereign power in the Kingdom, above the Parliament and whole
Realm collectively considered. But this resistance of the Kings Popish
malignant, invading Forces; is Authorized and Commanded by the express Votes
and Ordinances of both Houses of Parliament, which I have already undeniably
manifested, to be the Supreamest Lawful Power, and Soveraignest Authority in
the Realm, Paramount the King himself, who is but the Parliaments and
Kingdoms Public Royal Servant for their good: Therefore his Resistance must
infallibly be just and Lawful, even in Point of Conscience.

Thus much for the Lawfulness in Court of Conscience of resisting the Kings
unjustly assaulting Forces, armed with his Commission: I now proceed to the
justness of opposing them by way of forcible resistance when accompanied with
his personal presence.

That the Kings Army of Papists and Malignants, invading the Parliaments or
Subjects persons, goods, Laws, Liberties, Religion, may even in Conscience be
justly resisted with force, though accompanied with his person, seems most
apparently clear to me, not only by the preceding Reasons, but also by many
express Authorities recorded, and approved in Scripture, not commonly taken
notice of: as,

First, 1.
By the ancientest precedent of a defensive war that we read of in the world,
Genesis 14. 1. to 24. where the five Kings of Sodom, Gomorrah, Admah, Zeboiim, and
Zoar, rebelling against Chedolaomer King of Nations, after they had served him
twelve years, defended themselves by arms and battle against his assaults,
and the Kings joined with him: who discomfiting these five Kings, pillaging
Sodom and Gomorrah, and taking Lot, and his goods along with them as a p^e^:
hereupon Abraham himself, the Father of the faithful, in defense of his
Nephew Lot, to rescue him and his substance from the enemy, taking with him
318. trained men of his own family, pursued Chedorlaomer, and the Kings with
him, to Dan, assaulted them in the night, smote and pursued them unto Hoba,
regained all the goods and prisoners with his Nephew Lot, and restored both
goods and persons freely to the King of Sodom, thereby justifying his and his
peoples forcible defense, against their invading enemies, in the behalf of his
captivated plundered Nephew and Neighbors.

Secondly, 2.
by the Example of the Israelities, who were not only King Pharaoh his
Subjects but Bondmen too, as is evident by Exodus, chapter 1. to 12. Deuteronomy. 6. 21. c.
7. 8. c. 15. 15. c. 16. 12. c. 24 18. 22. Ezra. 9. 9. Now Moses and Aaron being
sent by God to deliveer them from their Egyptian bondage, after 430. years
captivity, under color of demanding but three days liberty to go into the
wilderness to serve the Lord, and Pharaoh, (notwithstanding all Gods Miracles
and Plagues,) refusing still to let them depart, till enforced to it by the
slaughter of the Egyptians first borne; as soon as the Israelites were
marching away, Pharaoh and the Egyptians, repenting of their departure,
pursued them with their Chariots and Horses, and a great army even to the red
Sea, to reduce them; here upon the Israelites being astonished and murmuring
against Moses, giving themselves all for dead men; Moses said unto the people
fear ye not, stand still, and see the Salvation of the Lord, which he will
show to you this day: for the Egyptians whom you have seen to day, ye shall
see them again no more for ever, the Lord shall fight for you, etc. And
hereupon God himself discomfited routed, and drowned them all in the red Sea:
I would demand in this case, whether the Isralites might not here lawfully
(for their own redemption from unjust bondage) have fought against and
resisted their Lord, King Pharaoh, and his invading Host, accompanied with his
presence, had they had power and hearts to do it, as well as God himself, who
fought against and destroyed them on their behalf; If so, (as all men I think
must grant, unless they will censure God himself) then a defensive war in
respect of life and liberty only, is just and Lawful even in conscience, by
this most memorable story.

Thirdly, 3.
by that example recorded Judges 3. 8. 9. 10. where God growing angry with the
Israelites for their Apostacy and Idolatry, sold them (here was a divine
title) into the hands of Cushan-Rishathaim King of Mesopotamia, and the
children of Israel served him 8. years. Here was a lawful title by conquest
and 8 years submission seconding it. But when the children of Israel cried
unto the Lord, the Lord raised up a deliverer to them even Othniel, the son
of Kenaz: and the Spirit of the Lord came upon him, and he went out to war,
and the Lord delivered Cushan-rishatiam King of Mesopotamia into his hands, and
his hand prevailed against him, so the land had rest 40. years. Lo here a
just defensive war approved and raised up by God and his Spirit (in an
ordinary manner only, as I take it, by encouraging the Instruments) wherein a
conquering King, for Redemption former liberties, is not only resisted but
conquered, taken prisoner, and his former dominion abrogated, by those that
served him, as conquered subjects.

Fourthly, 4.
by the example of Ehud, and the Israelites, Judges chap. 3. 11. to 31 where we
find, God himself strengthening Eglon King of Moab against the Israelites for
their sins, who thereupon gathering an Army smote Israel, possessed their
Cities, so as the Israelites served this King 18. years. Here was a title by
conquest, approved by God, submitted to by the Israelites: yet after all this,
when the children of Israel cried unto the Lord, he raised them up a deliverer,
namely Ehud, who stabbing Eglonn the King in the belly, under pretext of
private conference with him, and escaping; he thereupon blew the trumpet,
commanded the Israelites to follow him to the war, slew ten thousand valiant
men of Moah, which he subdued, and procured rest to his Country 40. years.
God, his Spirit, Word, approving this his action.

Fifthly, 5.
by the example of Barack and Deborah, Judges chapter 4. and 5. Where God selling
the children of Israel for their sins into the hand of Iabin King of Cannan;
and his Captain Sisera, for 20. years space, during which he mightily
oppressed them, hereupon Barack, at the instigation of the Prophetess Deborah,
by the command of the Lord God of Israel, gathered an Army of ten thousand men;
which Sisera, and the King of Canaan hearing of; assembled all their Chariots
and Army together, at the River of Kishon, where the Lord discomfited Sisera
and all his Host, with the edge of the sword before Barack his Army, and
subdued Iabin the King of Canaan, before the children of Israel: which war is
by a special Song of Deborah and Barack highly extolled, and God in it, as
most just and honorable: and this curse denounced against those that refused to
assist in it, Judges 4. 23. Curse ye Meroz (says the Angel of the Lord) curse
ye bitterly the inhabitants thereof, because they come not out to the help of
the Lord, to the help of the Lord, against the mighty; with this Corolary; so
that thine enemies parish O Lord: but let them that love thee be as the sun
when it goes forth in his might. What more can conscience desire to justify
the lawfulness of a just defensive war?

Sixthly, 6.
by the Example of Gideon and the Israelites, Judges c. 6. Who being delivered
by God into the hands of the Prince of Midian for seven years, Gideon by
special encouragement and direction from God himself, with a poor despicable
Army of 300. men, defeated the great Host of the Midianites, and took and
slew their Princes. By these 4 last pregnant presidents, it is most evident,
that a foreign King who has gained a Title only by conquest (though with
divine concurrence, by way of punishment for that peoples sin) may lawfully
be resisted, repulsed, even after some years forced subjection and submission
to him, by the people conquered, to regaine their former liberties.

Seventhly, 7.
by the precedent of Abimelech King of Shechem, who being elected King by the
voluntary assents of the people, God afterward sending an evil spirit of
division between Abimelech and the men of Shechem; thereupon they revolted from
him, and choosing Gael for their Captain, fortified the City against him; and
when Abimelech came with an Army to take in the Town, they in their defense,
went forth and fought with him; resisted his seige; and they of the Tower of
Shechem standing upon their guard refused to surrender it after the Town was
surprised, and so were burnt. After which coming too near the walls, at the
Tower of Thebez assaulted by Abimelech he had his brains and head so bruised
with the piece of a millstone cast down upon him by a woman, that he called
hastily to his Armourbearer, and said unto him, draw thy sword and slay me,
that men say not of me; a woman slew him: whereupon he thrust him through, that
he dyed: and so every man departed to his place. Thus God rendered the
wickedness of Abimelech, and all the evil of the men of Shechem upon their
own heads, Judges 9. So the Text.

Eighthly, 8.
by the example of Iepthah, who after that God had sold the Israelites for
their Idolatry into the hands of the children of Ammon 18. years space,
Iepthah being made head and Captain by the Elders and people of Gilead, first
argued the case with the King of Ammon touching the unjustnesse of his war
upon them, desiring God to be Judge between them; and then by Gods assistance,
smote and subdued the Ammonites and their Cities, Judge. c. 11. And so cast off
their yoke.

Ninthly, 9.
By the practice of Sampson, who after God had delivered the Isra^lities into
the hands of the Philistimes who ruled over them forty years space, did by
Gods extraordinary assistance often encounter, slay and resist the Philistimes,
rescuing the oppressed Israelites from their vassalage; and at his death slew
more of them then in his life, Judge. c. 13. to 17. which deliverance was
afterward perfected by Samuel, 1 Samuel 7. and approved, nay, wrought by God.

Tenthly, 10.
by the Example of David, who being persecuted by fedifragous dissembling King
Saul his father-in-law (a notable pattern of the inconstancy and invaliditie
of Kings solemnest oaths and Protestations:) who contrary to many solemn
vows and feighned reconciliations, sought unjustly to deprive him of his life;
thereupon David retired from the Court, entertained a guard of four hundred
men, and became a Captain over them, 1 Samuel 22. 2. After which Abiather
escaping to him from Nob when the Priests there were slain by Doeg, upon
Saules command, for David's sake, David used these words to him. Abide thou with
me, fear not, for ^e that seeks thy life seeks my life, but with me thou
shall be in safeguard. 1 Samuel 22. 23. Soon after the Philistimes beseiging
Keilah, David by Gods encouragement, smote them and saved Keilah; intending
there to secure himself and his men: which Saul hearing of, said; God has
delivered him into my hands; for he is shut in by entering into a Town which
has gates and bars, whereupon he called all the people together to beseige
David and his men: (which he needed not do, did he or any else believe, that
they would not, ought not to have made any forcible resistance:) David informed
hereof; enquired seriously of God, whether Saul would certainly come down?
and demanded twice of him: will the men of Keila deliver me and my men up into
his hand? And the Lord said, they will deliver thee up. Had not David and his
men resolved to fortify and defend themselves there, if the men of Keilah
would have been faithful to them, and believed they might have resisted Saul
with his Forces, certainly he would never have presumed to ask such a
question twice together of God himself, to receive his resolution therein,
neither would God have vouchased an answer thereto: but his double inquiry,
and Gods resolution, infallibly demonstrate his intention to resist, and the
lawfulnes of his defensive resistance, would the Keilites have adhered to him.
This the very next words fully clear, 1 Samuel 23. 13. Then David and his men,
about six hundred arose, and departed out of Keilah, and went wheresoever they
could go, and it was told Saul, the David was escaped from Keilah: Gods
prediction of the Keilites treachery was the only cause of their departure
thence, where they had resolved to defend themselves, of which hope being
disappointed beyond expectation, they want whither soever they could go. After
which David and his men being but few in number, not able in humane
probability, without tempting God, to encounter Saul's great Forces, retired
themselves into woods, mountains, rocks, strong holds, wildernesses; where
Saul pursuing them, they still declined him: but had he and his army ever
assaulted them, no doubt they would and might lawfully have defended
themselves, else why did they join themselves in a body? why retire to strong
holds, and places of advantage? why 1 Samuel 23 13. to 29. c. 24. 1. to 20.
twice urge David to kill Saul in cold blood, when he did not actually assault
him, but came causually unawares within his danger? Why did David himself,
say, even when he spared his life when he was a sleep, 1 Samuel 26. 10. As the
Lord lives, the Lord shall smite him, or his day shall come to dye, or he
shall descend into battle and perish? but that if he had given him battle, he
might have defended himself against him, though Saul should casually or
wilfully perish in the fight? And why was David so importunate to go up
against him with King Achish to the battle wherein he perished, 1 Samuel 29. were
resistance of him, in case he assaulted him, and his Forces utterly unlawful?
This precedent of David then, if rightly weighed, is very punctual to prove
the justness of a defensive war, (of which more anon) and no evidence at all
against it.

Eleventhly, 11.
by the practice of the 10 Tribes: who after their revolt from Rehoboam for
giving them an harsh indiscreet answer to their just demands, setting up
another King and Kingdom, even by divine approbation; Rehoboam thereupon
raising a great Army to fight against and reduce them to his obdience; God
himself by Semaiah the Prophet, sent this express inhibition to Rehoboam and
his Army: Thus says the Lord, ye shall not go up, nor fight against your
brethren return every man to his house, FOR THIS IS DONE OF ME: Whereupon the
obeyed the Word of the Lord and returned: 1 Kings 12. 2 Chronicles. c. 10. and 11.
After which long wars continued between these Kingdoms by reason of this
revolt, wherein the ten Tribes and Kings of Israel still defended themselves
with open force, and that justly, as the Scripture intimates 2 Chronicles. 12. 14
15. though that Jeroboam and the Israelites falling to Idolaty, were afterward
(for their Idolatry, not revolt) defeated by Abiah and the men of Judah, who
relied upon God, 2 Chronicles. 13.

Twelfthly, 12.
by the example of the King of Moab and his people, who Rebelling against
Iehoram King of Israel, and refusing to pay the annual Tribute of Lambs and
Rams, formerly rendered to him; hereupon Iehoram, Iehoshaphat, and the King of
Edom raising a great Army to invade them, the Moalites hearing of it, gathered
all that were able to put on Armor, and upward, and stood in the border to
resist them. 2 King. 3 4 to 27. And by the practice of the Ed^mites, who
revolting from under the hand of Judah, made a King over themselves: Whereupon
Ioram King of Judah going up with his Forces against them to Zair, they
encompassed him, in their own defense; and though they fled into their Tents,
yet they revolted from Judah till this day, and Libnah too, 2 Kings 8. 20 21.
22.

Thirteenthly, 13.
by the example of Samaria, which held out 3. years siege against Shalmazezer
King of Assyria, notwithstanding their King Hoshea had by force submitted
himself and his Kingdom to him, and became his servant. 2 Kings 17. 3. to 10.
c. 18. 9. 10.

Fourteenthly, 14.
by the practice of godly Hezechiah, who after the Lord was with him and
prospered him whethersoever he went, REBELLED against the King of Assyria, and
served him not (as some of his predecessors had done) 2 Kings 18. 7. whereupon
the King of Assyria, and his Captains coming up against him with great
Forces, and invading his Country, he not only fortified his Cities, and
encouraged his people manfully to withstand them to the utter most, but
actually resisted the Assyrians even by divine direction and encouragement; and
upon his prayer, God himself by his Angel for his and Jerusalems preservation,
miraculously slew in the Camp of the King of Assria in one night, an hundred
fourscore and five thousand mighty men of valor, Captains and Leaders; so as
he returned with shame of face to his own Land, 2 King. c. 18. and 19. 2 Chronicles. c. 32. I say c. 36. and ^7. An Example doubtless lawful beyond
exception, ratified by God himself and his Angel too.

Fifteenthly, 15.
by the examples of King Iehoiakim, and Jehoiakin, who successively rebelling
against the King of Babylon who subdued and put them to a tribute, did likewise
successively defend themselves against his invasions, seiges though with ill
success, by reason of their gross Idolatries and other sins. (not of this
their revolt and defense to regaine their freedoms condemned only in Ze^echia,
for breach of his 2 Chronicles. 36. 13. Zech. 17. 10. 18. 19.
oath;) whereby they provoked God to give them up to the will of their enemies,
and to remove them out of his sight, 2 King. c. 24. and 25 2 Chr. 36. Ier. c.
37. and 38 and 39.

Finally, by the History of the Maccabees and whole state of the Jews defensive
wars under them, which though but Apochryphall in regard of the compiler, yet
no doubt they had a divine Spirit concurring with them in respect of the
managing and Actors in them. I shall give you the sum thereof, very
succinctly. Antio^us Epiphanes conquering Jerusalem, spoiled it and the Temple,
set up Heathenish customs and Idolatry in it, subverted Gods worship destroyed
the Books of Gods Law, forced the people to forsake God, to sacrifice to Idols
slew and persecuted all that opposed, and exercised all manner of Tyranny
against them. Hereupon Mattathias a Priest and his Sons, moved with a godly
zeal, refusing to obey the Kings Command in falling away from the Religion of
his Fathers, slew a Jew that sacrificed to an Idol in his presence, together
with the Kings Commissary, who compelled men to Sacrifice, and pulled down
their Idolatrous Altar; which done they fled into the mountains, whither all
the well-affected Jews repaired to them. Whereupon the Kings Forces hearing
the premises pursued them, and warred against them on the Sabbath day;
whereupon they out of an over-nice superstition 1 Mac. 2, 32. to 42.
least they should profane the Sabbath by fighting on it when assaulted,
answered them not, neither cast a stone at them, nor stopped the places where
they were hid, but said, let us dye all in our innocence; heaven and earth
shall testify for us, that your put us to death wrongfully, whereupon they
slew both them, their wives, and children, without resistance, to the number of
a thousand persons. Which Mattathias and the rest of their friends hearing of,
mourned for them right sore, and said one to another (mark their speech) if we
all do as our brethren have done, and fight not for our lives, and Laws
against the Heathen, they will now quickly root us out of the earth; therefore
they decreed, saying; whosoever shall come to make battle with us on the
Sabbath day, we will fight against him, neither will we do all as our
brethren, that were murdered in their secret places. Whereupon they presently
gathered and united their Forces, assaulted their enemies, recovered their
Cities, Laws, Liberties; defended themselves manfully, and fought many battles
with good success against the several kings who invaded and laid claim to
their Country, as you may read at large in the books of Maccabees. All these
examples, (most of them managed by the most pious, religious persons of those
days, prescribed and assisted by God himself, whose Spirit specially
encouraged, strengthened the hands and Spirits of the undertakers of them (as
Enchirid. Controvers. c. 9. De Magistrate. Polit.
Osiander well observes,) and therefore cannot be condemned as unjust, without
blasphemy and impiety:) in my opinion are a most clear demonstration of the
lawfulness of a defensive war (in point of Divinity and Conscience) against
Kings and their Armies who wrongfully invade or assault their Subjects, though
themselves be personally present in their armies, to countenance their
unlawful wars; and likewise evidence, that a Royal title gotten forcibly by
conquest only, though continued sundry years, is not so valid in point of
conscience, but that it may be safely questioned, yea rejected; there being no
true lawful Title of Soveraignety over any people, but that which originally
depends upon their own free election, and unconstrained subjection simply
considered, or which is subsequently seconded therewith after a possession got
by force or conquest.

Now that the kings personal presence cannot justify the unjust actions, or
protect the persons of those that assist him in any unlawful action contrary
to the Laws of God, or the Realm, is a truth so evident, that it needs no
proof, it being no part of the kings Royal prerogative or Office, but
diametrally repugnant to it, either to do injury himself, or to authorize, or
protect others in committing it, as I have elsewhere proved at large. Therefore
it can administer no patronage nor defense at all to those who accompany his
person in the unjust invasions of his Subjects, nor dis-able them to defend or
repulse their unjust assaults and rapines. For suppose a King should so far
degenerate and dishonor himself, as personally to accompany a pack of
thieves who should rob his subjects on the high way, break up their houses in
the night, or practice Piracie on the Sea, or commit Rapes or murders on his
people every where; I think no man so void of Reason, Law, Conscience, but
would readily grant, that the Subjects in all these cases might lawfully defend
themselves by force against these Robbers, Thieves, Murderers, notwithstanding
the Kings presence or association with them, whose personal Prerogatives, and
immunity from assaults or violence being incommunicable, underivable to any
other, and peculiar to himself alone, he can transfere no such protection to
others who accompany him in their injurious practices; and that these Acts of
theirs are direct fellonie and murder, for which they might be justly
apprehended, condemned, executed, though thus countenanced by the Kings own
presence. And if this be truth (as our Law-bookes resolve, and the Scripture to
in places forecited) the kings presence can no more deprive the subjects of
their necessary just defense against his Popish Forces, assaults, nor justify
their proceedings, or the present unjust offensive war, then in the former
cases, there being the selfsame reason in both; wars being in truth, but
greater and more detestable Murders, and Robberies, when they are unjust, as
Epist. l. 2. Ep. 2. Donar^
Cyprian, De Ciu. Dei. l. 4. c. 4.
Augustine, with O siander; Enchrid. Cont c. 9. De Polit. Magist-au 3. p. 203.
Abber. Gentillu^ de Iure Bellit. l. 1. c. 5. Hugo Grotius, de Iure Belli l. 2.
c. 1. 2.
others rightly define.

Thirdly, personal unjust assaults and violence even of Kings themselves may
in some cases lawfully be resisted by subjects; This Doctor Fern himself
acknowledges, Sect. 2. p. 9. Personal defense is lawful against the sudden
(much more then against the premeditated) and illegal assaults of such
Messengers of the King; yea, OF THE PRINCE HIMSELF THVS FAR, to ward his
blows, to hold his hands and the like: not to endanger his person, not to
return blows; no: for though it be natural to defend a man's self, yet the
whole commonwealth is concerned in his person: the king therefore himself,
(much more in his Cavalliers) may thus far at least safely be resisted in
point of conscience. And that he may be so indeed is manifest by two pregant
Scripture examples, The first is that of King Saul, 1 Samuel 14. 38. to 46. where
Jonathan and his Armor-bearer, routing the Philistimes whole Army, violated
his Father Saul's command, of which he was wholly ignorant in taking a little
honey one the end of his stick in the pursuit; hereupon king Saul, most
rashly and unjustly vowed twice one after another, to put him to death:
whereupon the people much discontented with this injustice, were so far from
submitting to the Kings pleasure in it, that they presently said to the king:
shall Jonathan dye, who has wrought so great Salvation in Israel? God forbid:
As the Lord lives there shall not one hair of his head fall to the ground, So
the people, RESCVED JONATHAN that he dyed not; though he were not only King
Saul's Subject, but Son too. Indeed it appears not in the Text, that Saul
offered any violence to Ionathans person, or the people to Saul's: and it may be
the peoples peremptory vow and unanimous resolution to defend Jonathan, from
this unjust sentence of death against him, made Saul desist from his vowed
bloody intendment: but the word rescued, with other circumstances in the story,
seem to intimate, that Jonathan was in hold to be put to death, and that the
people forcibly rescued him, out of the executioners hands. However, certainly
their vow and speeches declare, that if Saul himself or any other by his
commanded had assaulted Jonathan to take away his life, they Josephas Antiq.
Judae l. 4. c. 8, p. 104.
would have forcibly resisted them and preserved his life, though with loss of
their own, believing they might lawfully do it, else they would not have made
this resolute vow; nor could they have performed it, had Saul wilfully
proceeded, but by a forcible rescue and resistance of his personal violence.
The other is that of king Vzziah, 2 Chronicles. 27. 16. to 22. who presumptuously
going into the Temple against Gods Law, to burn incense on the Altar, Azariah
the high Priest, and with him fourscore Priests of the Lord, that were valiant
men went in after him, and WITHSTOOD (or resisted) Vzziah the king; and said
unto him; It appertains not unto thee Vzziah to burn incense unto the Lord,
but to the Priests the sons of Aaron, that are consecrated to burn insence:
go out of the Sanctuary for thou have trespassed, neither shall i^ be for thine
honor from the Lord God. Then Vzziah was wroth, and had a censor in his hand
to burn incense, and whiles he was wroth with the Priests, the Leprosy rose
up in his forehead: And Azariah, and all the Priests looked upon him, and
behold he was Leprous in his forehead: AND THEY THRVST HIM OVT FROM THENCE; yea
himself hasted also to go out, because the Lord had smitten him. If then
these Priests thus actually resisted King Vzziah in this sinful Act, thrusting
him perforce out of the Temple when he would but offer incense; much more might
they, would they have done it, had he violently assaulted their persons. If any
king shall unjustly assault the persons of any private Subjects, men or women,
to violate their lives or chastities (over which they have no power) I make no
doubt, that they may and ought to be resisted, repulsed, even in point of
conscience, but not slain; though many kings have lost their lives, upon such
occasions: as Philip. de Melanct, Chr. l. 4. Dr Beards Theater of Gods
Judgment l. 2. c. 29. p. 400.
Rodoaldus the 8. king of Lumbardy Anno 659. being taken in the very act of
adultery by the adulteresses husband, was slain by him without delay; and how
kings attempting to murder private Subjects unjustly, have themselves been
sometimes wounded, and casually slain, is so rise in stories, that I shall
forbear examples: concluding this with the words of Number. 16. Romans 13. 1. to 6.
1 Pet. 2. 13. 14.
Josephus, who expressly writes. That the King of the Israelites (by Gods
express Law, Deuteronomy. 17.) was to do nothing without the consent of the high
Priest and Senate, nor to multiply money and horses over much, which might
easily make him a contemner of the Laws; and if he addicted himself to these
things more than was fitting. HE WAS TO BE RESISTED, least he became more
powerful then was expedient for their affairs.

To these Authorities, I shall only subjoyne these 5. undeniable arguments to
justify Subjects necessary defensive wars, to be lawful in point of conscience
against the persons and Forces of their injuriously invading Sovereigns.

First, 1.
it is granted by all as a truth irrefragable, that kings by Force of Arms may
justly with safe conscience, resist, repulse, suppress the unlawful warlike
invasive assaults, the Rebellious armed Insurrections of their Subjects, upon
these two grounds, because they are Esaias. 14. 19. to 23. Ezech. 44. 15. 16. 17.
Zech. 11. 4. 5. ^ King. 25. 2 King. 24. 4.
unlawful by the Edicts of God and man; and because kings in such case, have
no other means left to preserve their Royal persons, and just authority
against offensive armed Rebellions, but offensive arms: Therefore Subjects by
the selfsame grounds, may justly with safe consciences resist, repulse,
suppress the unjust assayling military Forces of their kings in the case
fore-stated, though the king himself be personally present and assistant,
because Estates upon Credit, 1: Sect. 378. 379. 2 Part. 1. p. 51. to 74.
such a war is unlawful by the resolution of God and men, and against the
oath, the duty of kings: and because the subjects in such cases have no other
means left to preserve their persons, lives, liberties, estates, religion,
established government from certain ruin, but defensive Arms. There is the
self same reason in both cases, being relatives, therefore the selfsame Law
and Conscience in both.

Secondly, 2.
It must be admitted without debate; that this office of highest and greatest
trust, has a condition in Law annexed to it (by Littletons own resolution) to
wit, that the King shall well and truly preserve the Realm, and do that which
to such Office belongs; which condition our king by an express oath to all
his people solemnly taken at their Coronation, with other Articles expressed
in their oath (formerly recited) is really bound both in Law and Conscience
exactly to perform, being admitted and elected king by the peoples suffrages
upon solemn promise, Part. 1. p. 51.
to observe the same condition to the uttermost of his power, De Princip. l. 1.
2. 3. 6.
as I have a Praefat, ad Ruh. de collationibus, p. 583 584.
elsewhere cleared. Now it is a clear case resolved by Genesis 9. 9. 16. c. 17.
7. 13. Ps. 89. 28. 34. Ps. 105. 10. Ps. 111. 9. Esaias 55. 3. Esaias 33. 20. 21.
Josh. 21. 45. c. 23. 14. Heb 6. 17. 18.
Marius Salomonius, confirmed at large by Rebussus by 12. unanswerable reasons,
the Authorities of sundry Civil Lawyers, and Canonists quoted by hi^; agreed
by De Iure Belli. l. 2. c. 12, 13. l. 3 c. 14, 15, 16.
Albericus Gentiles and Hugo Grotius, De Iure belli and Pacis l. 2. c. 11. 12,
13, 24.
who both largely dispute it; That Kings as well as Subjects are really bound
to perform their Covenants, Contracts. Conditions, especially those they make
to all their Subjects, and ratify with an Oath; since God himself who is most
absolute, is yet mostf firmly obliged by his Oaths and Covenants made to his
despicable vile ereatures, sinful men; and never violates them in the least
degree. If then these conditions and Oaths be firm and obligatory to our
kings; if they will obstinately break them, by violating their Subjects Laws,
Liberties, Properties, and making actual war upon them; the condition and
Oath too would be merely void, ridiculous, absurd, an high taking of the
Name of God in vain, yea a plain delusion of the people, if the whole State
or people in their own defense might not justly take up Arms, to resist their
kings and their malignant Forces in these persidious violations of trust,
conditions, oaths; and force them to make good their oath and covenants, when
no other means will induce them to it. Even as the Subjects oath of homage and
allegiance Grotius De Iure Belli l. 2. c. 14. Sect. 3.
would be merely frivilous, if kings had no means nor coercive power to cause
them to observe these oaths, when they are apparently broken: and many whole
kingdoms had been much over seen in point of Policy, or prudence, in
prescribing such conditions and oaths unto their kings, had they reserved no
lawful power at all which they might lawfully exercise in point of conscience,
to see them really performed, and duly redressed, when notoriously
transgressed, through wilfulness, negligence, or ill pernicious advice.

Thirdly, 3.
when any common or public trust is committed to three or more, though of
subordinate and different quality, if the trust be either violated or betrayed,
the inferior trustees, may and ought in point of Conscience to resist the
other. For instance; if the custody of a City or Castle be committed to a
Captain, Leutenant, and common Soldiers: or of a ship to the Master,
Captain, and ordinary Mariners: If the Captain or Master will betray the
City, Castle, or ship to the enemy or Pirates, or dismantle the City walls and
fortifications to expose it unto danger, or will wilfully run the ship against
a rock to split, wrecke it, and endanger all their lives, freedoms, contrary
to the trust reposed in them; or fire or blow up the City, Fort, ship: not
only the Leiutenant, Masters Mate, and other inferior Officers, though
subject to their commands, but even the Common Soldiers and Mariners may
withstand and forcibly resist them, and are bound in Conscience so to do,
because else they should betray their trust, and destroy the City, Fort, ship,
and themselves too, which they are bound by duty and compact to preserve. This
case of Law and conscience is so clear, so common in daily experience that no
man doubts it: The care and safety of our Realm by the original politic
constitution of it, always has been and now is, committed jointly to the
king, the Lords, and Commons in Parliament, by the unanimous consent of the
whole kingdom. The king the supreme member of it, contrary to the trust and
duty reposed in him, through the advice of evil Counselors wilfully betrays
the trust and safety of this great City and ship of the Republicke; invades the
inferior Commanders, Soldiers, Citizens, with an Army: assaults, wounds,
slayes, spoils, plunders, sackes, imprisons his fellow trustees, Soldiers,
Mariners, Citizens, undermines the walls, fires the City, ship, delivers it up
to thieves, Pirates, murderers, as a common prey, and wilfully runs this
ship upon a rock of ruin. If the Lords and Commons jointly entrusted with him,
should not in this case by force of Arms resist him, and his unnatural
instruments, (there being no other means else of safety left them) they should
sinfully and wilfully betray their trust, and be so far from keeping a good
Christian Conscience in not resisting by force, that they should highly sin
against Conscience, against their trust and duty, against their natural
Country, yea and their very Allegiance to the king himself, by encouraging him
in, and consenting unto these proceedings, which would make him not to be a
king, but Tyrant, and destroy him as a king, in the spoil and ruin of his
Kingdom, thereby endangered to be consumed) and tempt God himself: as Pope
Nicholas, and Cause. 23. quest. 8. Suri. Council. Tom. 3 p. 520.
Gratian resolve in these words. If there be no necessity we ought at all times
to abstain from wars, but if inevitable necessity urge us, we ought not to
abstain from wars, and warlike preparations for the defense of our selves,
of our Country, and paternall Laws, no not in Lent, least man should seem to
tempt God, if when he has means, he provide not for his own and others
safety, and prevents not the Detriments of holy religion.

Fourthly, Cajetan. 2^. ^ae. qu. 4. ar. 1. Ambrose, Offic. l. 1. c. 36 Summa:
Angelica, Rosella and Sylvester, Tit. Bellum, and the Clossers on Gratian.
Causa. 23. qu. 3.
those injuries which Allies and other neighbor States or Princes may with
good Conscience repulse with Arms from Subjects wrongfully oppressed, invaded
tyrannically by their Sovereigns, or their wicked Instruments, at, or without
the Subjects entreaty, when they are unable to relieve themselves: no doubt the
Subjects themselves, if able, may with better reason, and as good Conscience
resist and repel; because every man is Lev. 19. 18. Mat. 22. 39. Rom 9. 3. c.
14. 4. 1 Cor. 9. 27. Phil. 2. 12. 1 Timothy 5. 8
nearer, and more obliged to defend and preserve himself and those of his
own Nation, Religion, blood, then strangers are, and may with less public
danger, inconvenience, and more speed effect it, then Forraigners: but Allies
and Foreign Neighbor States and Princes, as Did. 23. qu. 3. to 8.
Gratian (o^t of the 5. Council of Carthage; Augustine, Ambrose, Hierom,
Anastatius, Calistus and other) De Jure Bell. l. 1. c. 14. 15. 16.
Albericus Gentilis, Commonweal. l. 2. c. 5. l. 5. c. 6. Sect. 2. l. 3. c. 25.
Sect. 4. 5. 6.
John Bodin,a Huga Grotius, and Generally all ^^nonists, Casuists, Scho^lemen
accord, may in many cases with good conscience, by for^ of Arms repulse from
Subjects wrongfully oppressed, invaded, and tyrannically abused, the injuries
offered them by their Sovereigns; and that either at, and in some cases
without the Subjects entreaty: Which they prove by Moses his slaying the
Egyptian that oppressed the Hebrew. Exodus 2. 11. to 15. by Joshua his ayding
of the Gibeonites against the five Kings that made war against them, Josh. 10.
by the example of Jehoshaphat, 1 Kin. 22. 2 Kings 3. Of the chief. Captains
securing Paul with a guard of Soldiers against the Jews who had vowed his
death, Acts 23. by Abraham's rescuing Lot, Genesis 14. by sundry ancient and late
Examples in story. Therefore Subjects themselves no doubt if able, may with good
reason and conscience, lawfully resist, and repel their Princes invading
Forces, though accompanied, assisted with his personal presence.

Fifthly, It is yielded by all Divines, Lawyers, Canonists, Schoolmen; as
Cause. 23. qu. 1. 2.
Gratian, 1a. 2ae. qu. ^ art. 10. and qu. 64. ar. 7. dub. 4.
Ban^es, l. 4. disp. 5. art. 10. l. 5 qu. 1. art. 8.
Seto, lib. 21. c. 9. du. 8.
Lessius, l. 1. Contr Illust. 18.
Vasquius, p. 3.
Covaruvi^s, n 2. 2. 2 ae. qu. 64 art. (...)
Aquinas, Verbo Bellum, par. (...) n. 3. and p. 2. and Homicidium. 3. q. 4.
Sylvester, ad l. ut vim. Di de Just. and Iure.
Bartolus, In rep. l. 1. and unde vi.
Baldus, l. 11. c. 3. n. 147.
Navarre, De Iure Bell. l. 1. c. 13. 14.
Albericus Gentilis, De Jure Bell. l. 2. c. (...)
Grotius and others, that private men by the Law of God, and nature, may in
defense of their lives, chastities, principal members, and estates, lawfully
resist all those who forcibly assault them, to deprive them thereof; yea and
slay them to, unless they be public persons of eminency, by whose slaughter
the Commonweal should sustain much prejudice, whose lives in such cases must
not be willingly hazzarded, though their violence be resisted: which is
clearly prooved by Judges 11. 8. 15. to 18. 1 Samuel 17. 41. to 53. Deuteronomy. 22.
26. 27. since therefore all these are apparently endangered by an invasive
war and Army, more then by any private assaults; and no aid, no assistance
or protection against the loss of life, chastity, estate, and other
violences, injuries which accompany wars can be expected from the Laws, or
Prince himself (the fountain of this injustice,) or legal punishments
inflicted on the malefactors, whose armed power being above the reach of common
justice, and injuries countenanced, abetted, authorized by the Sovereign who
should avenge and punish them, every subject in particular, and the whole state
in Parliament assembled in general, may and ought in point of conscience
jointly and severally to defend themselves, their neighbors, brethren, but
especially their native Country, Kingdom, whose general safety is to be
preferred before the lives of any particular persons, how great or considerable
soever, which may be casually hazarded by their own wilfulness, though not
purposely endangered or cut off in the defensive encounter, by those who make
resistance. And if (according to 2 2. Ar. 6. 7. q 2. Card. qu. 33. li 1. Petr.
Nau. l. 11. Ca 3. n. 147. Grotius. de Iure Belli. l. 2. c. 1. Sect. 4.
Cajetan and other Schoolmen,) Innocents which only casually hinder ones
flight from a mortal enemy may be lawfully with good conscience slain by the
party pursued, in case where he cannot else possibly escape the loss of his
own life, because every man's own life is dearer to him then another, which
he here takes away only to preserve his own life, without any malicious
murtherous intent, though others doubt of this case: or if innocent persons set
perforce in the front of unjust assailants (as by the Cavalleires at Brainford
and elsewhere,) to prevent defense, and wrong others with more security and
less resistance, may casually be slain, (though not intentionally) by the
defensive party (as I think they may) for prevention of greater danger and the
public safety; See the Relation of Brainford.
then certainly those of public place and Note; who wilfully and unnaturally
set themselves to ruin their Country, Liberty, Religion, Innocent brethren
(who only act the defensive part,) and voluntarily intrude themselves into
danger, may questionless with safe conscience be resisted, repulsed: in which
if they casually chance to lose their lives without any malice or ill intention
in the defendants, it being only through their own default, such a casual
accident when it happens, or the remote possibility of it in the combat before
it begins, cannot make the resistance either unjust or unlawful in point of
conscience; for then such a possibility of danger to a public person should
make all resistance unlawful, deprive the Republicke wholly of this only
remedy against tyrannical violence, and expose the whole commonweal to
ruin, whose weal and safety, is to be preferred before the life or safety of
any one member of it whatsoever.

Having thus at large evinced the lawfulness of Subjects necessary forcible
resistance, and defensive wars against the unjust offensive Forces of their
Sovereigns; I shall in the next place answer the principal arguments made
against it, some whereof (for ought I find) are yet unanswered.

These Objections are of four sorts, out of the Old Testament, the New; from
reason, from the example of the primitive Christians, backed with the words of
some Fathers; I shall propound and answer them in order.

The first out of the Old Testament, Object. 1.
is that of Numb. 16. Dr. Fern Sect. 2. p. ^0.
Korah, Dathan, and Abiram for their insurrection against that very divine
Authority which God himself had delegated to Moses and Aaron, without any
injury or injustice at all once offered to them or any assault upon them. Ergo
(mark the Nonsense of this argumentation) no Subjects may lawfully take up
mere necessary defensive Arms in any case to resist the bloody Tyranny,
Oppression, and outrages of wicked Princes, or their Cavalleires, when they
make war upon them to destroy or enslave them.

An Argument much like this in substance. Answ.
No man ought to rise up against an honest Officer or Captain in the due
execution of his Office, when he offers him no injury at all. Therefore he
ought not in conscience to resist him when he turns a thief or murderer, and
felloniously assaults him, to rob him of his purse, or cut his throat. Or,
private men must not causelessly mutiny against a lawful Magistrate for doing
justice and performing his duty: Ergo the whole Kingdom in Parliament may not
in Conscience resist the Kings Captains and Cavalleeres, when they most
unnaturally and impiously assault them to take away their Lives, Liberties,
Privileges, Estates, Religion, oppose and resist justice, and bring the whole
Kingdom to utter desolation. The very recital of this argument is an ample
satisfactory refutation of it, with this addition. These seditious Levites
Rebelled against Moses and Aaron, only because God himself had restrained
them from meddling with the Priests Office which they would contemptuously
usurp, and therefore were most severely punished by God himself, against whose
express Ordinance they Rebelled: Ergo, the Parliament and Kingdom may in no
case whatsoever, though the King be bent to subvert Gods Ordinances, Religion,
Laws, Liberties, make the least resistance against the king or his invading
forces, under pain of Rebellion, High Treason, and eternal condemnation, This
is Doctor Fernes and some others, Bedlam Logic, and Divinity.

The next is this, Object. 2.
Thou shall not revile the Gods, nor curse the Ruler of thy people, Ex. 22. 28.
An appeal to thy Conscience. p. 3. 4. 5.
Eccl. 10. 20. Curse not the King no not in thy thought, and curse not the rich
in thy Bedchamber; ( which is well explained by Prove. 17. 26. It is not good
to strike Princes for equity.) Ergo it is unlawful for the Subjects to defend
themselves against the Kings Popish depopulating Cavaleers.

I answer, Answ.
the first text pertaines properly to Judges and other sorts of Rulers, not to
Kings, not then in being among the Israelites: the second, to rich men as well
as Kings. They may as well argue then from these texts: that no Judges nor
underrulers, nor rich men whatsoever, though never so unjust or wicked, may or
ought in conscience to be resisted in their unjust assaults, Riots, Robberies,
no though they be bent to subvert Religion, Laws, Liberties: as that the King
and his Soldiers jointly or severally considered, may not be resisted: yea,
these acute disputants may argue further by this new kind of Logic:
Christians are expressly prohibited to curse or revile any man whatsoever, under
pain of damnation, Romans 12. 14. Mat. 5. 44. Levit. 19 14. Numb. 23. 7. 8. 2 Samuel 16. 9. Levit. 20. 9. c. 24 P 1. 14. 23. Levit. 20. 9. Prove. 20. 20. 1 Cor.
6. 10 1 Cor. 4. 12. 1 Pet. 2. 23. Jude 9. Ergo, we ought to resist no man
whatsoever, (no not a thief that would rob us, cut-throate Cavaleers that
would murder us, lechers that would ravish us) under pain of damnation. What
pious profitable Doctrine, think you, is this: All cursings and railings are
simply unlawful in themselves: all resistance is not so, especially that
necessary we now discourse of, against unlawful violence to ruin Church and
State. To argue therefore, all resistance is simply unlawful, because cursing
and reviling (of a different nature) are so, is ill Logic, and worse
Divinity. If the objectors will limit their resistance, (to make the Argument
sensible,) and propose it thus: All cursing and reviling of Kings and Rulers
for executing justice impartially (for so is the chief intendment of the place
objected, delinquents being apt to clamor against those who justly censure
them) is unlawful; Ergo the forcible resisting of them in the execution of
justice and their lawful authority is unlawful: the sequel I shall grant,
but the Argument will be wholly impertinent, which I leave to the Objectors to
refine.

The third Argument is this: Object. 3.
That which peculiarly belongs to God, no man without his special authority
ought to meddle with: An Appeal to thy Conscience. p. 2.
But taking up Arms peculiarly belongs to he Lord. Deuteronomy 32. 35. Where the
Lord says, vengeance is mine: especially the sword, which of all temporal
vengeance is the greatest.

The Objector puts no Ergo, Answ.
or conclusion to it, because it concludes nothing at all to purpose, but only
this. Ergo, The King and Cavalleeres must lay down their Arms and swords,
because God never gave them any special commission to take them up. Or, Ergo,
no man but God must wear a sword, at least of revenge; and ^hether the kings
and Cavalleers Offensive, or the Parliaments mere Defensive sword, be the
sword of vengeance and malice, let the world determine, to the Objectors shame.

The fourth is, Object. 4.
from Appeal to thy Conscience. p. 3.
Eccles. 8. 2. 3. 4. I council thee to keep the Kings Commandment and that in
regard of the Oath of God: Be not hasty to go out of his sight, stand not in
an evil thing; for he does whatsoever pleases him: where the word of a king
is there is power; and who may say unto him, what do thou?

This Text administers the Opposites a double Argument, Answ.
The first is this; All the Kings Commands are to be kept of all his Subjects,
by virtue of the Oaths of supremacy, alleigance, and the late protestation
including them both: Ergo, by virtue of these Oaths we must not resist his
Cavalleeres, but yield our thoates to their swords, our purses and estates to
their rapines, our chastities to their Lecheries, our Liberties to their
Tyrannies, our Laws to their lusts, our Religion to their Popish Superstition
and Blasphemies, without any opposition, because the king has often commanded us
not to resist them. But seeing the Oath and Law of God, and those oaths of
ours, obleige us only, to obey the Kings just legal commands and no other,
not the Commands and lusts of evil Counselors and Soldiers, this first
Argument must be better pointed ere it will wound our cause.

The second, this: The king may lawfully do whatsoever pleases him Ergo,
neither are He, or his Forces to be resisted. To which I answer, that this
verse relates only unto God, the next antecedent; who only does and may do
what he pleases, and that both in heaven and earth, Psalm. 135. 6. Psalm. 115. 3
Esaias 46. 10. not to Kings who neither may nor can do what they please in
either, being bound both by the Laws of God, man, and their Coronation Oaths
(perchance the oath of God here meant, rather then that of supremacy or
alleigance) to do Sam. 23. 3. Esaias 32. 1. c. 16. 5. c. 9. 7. 2 Chronicles. 9. 8.
only what is lawful and just, not what themselves shall please. But admit it
meant of Kings, not God: First the text says not, that a king may lawfully do
what he pleases: but he does whatsoever pleases him: Solom^n himself 1 King.
c. 11. and 12. 2 Chr. c 9. and 10. and 11. Neh. 13. 26.
committed idolatry, built Temples for Idolatrous worship, served his
idolatrous wives Gods, married with many idolatrous wives, greivously oppressed
his people, etc. for which God threatened to rent the kingdom from himself, as
he did the ten Tribes from his son, for those sins of his: 2 Samuel c. 11. and
12. and 34.
David committed adultery, and wilfully numbered the people; and what King
Jeroboam, Manasseh, Ahab, other wicked Kings have done, out of the pleasure and
freedom of their lawless wills, to the infinite dishonor of God, the ruin
of themselves, their posterities, Kingdoms, is sufficiently apparent in In the
books of Kings, Chronicles, Jeremiah, and Daniel.
Scripture; was all therefore just, lawful, unblameable, because they did
herein whatsoever they pleased, not what was pleasing to God? If not, as all
must grant: then your foundation fails; that Kings may lawfully do whatsoever
they will; and Solomon's words must be taken all together not by fragments; and
these latter words coupled with the next preceding; Stand not in an evil
matter: and then Paul's words will well interpret his, Romans 13. 4. But if thou
do that which is evil be afraid, for he bears not the sword in vain, for
he is the minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath upon them that do
evil. So that the genuine sense of the place is, and must be this. Stand not
in an evil matter, for the king path an absolute power to do whatsoever he
pleases, in way of justice to punish thee, if thou continue obstinate in thy
evil courses; to pardon thee, if thou confess, submit, and crave pardon for
them. Ergo, the king and his Cavalleeres have an absolute power to murder,
plunder, destroy his Subjects, subvert Religion, and he and his Forces must not
herein be resisted, is an ill consequent from such good premises.

The third is this: Where the word of a King is, there is power, See
Cassanaeus. Catal. Gloriae Mundi, pars 5. consid. 24. sect. 62. p. 22. 2.
and who may say unto him what do thou? (that is, expostulate with, censure
him for doing justly, as Job 34. 17. 18. 19. expound it,) Ergo the king or his
Forces may not be resisted in any case: they might rather conclude. Therefore
neither Kingdom nor Parliament, nor any Subject or person whatsoever ought to
demand of the king, to what end, or why he has raised Forces and Armed Papists
against the Parliament, and Protestant Religion? These Court-Doctors might as
truly conclude from hence: If the king should command us to say Mass in his
Chapel, or our Parishes, to adorn Images, to turn professed Mass Priests,
etc. to vent any Erroneous Popish Doctrines; to pervert the Scriptures to
support Tyranny and lawless cruelty: we must and will (as some of us do)
cheerfully obey; for where the word of a King is, there is power, and we may
not say unto him, what do thou? If a King should violently ravish matrons,
defloure virgins; unnaturally abuse youth, cut all his Subjects throats, fire
their houses, sack their Cities, subvert their liberties; and (as De Fontif.
Romans l. 4.
Bellarmine puts the case of the Popes absolute irresistible authority) send
millions of souls to hell; yet no man under pain of damnation, may or ought
to demand of him, Domine cur ita facis? Sir, what do you? But was this the
holy Ghosts meaning think you, in this place? If so, then 2 Samuel 12. 7. etc.
Nathan was much to blame for reprehending king David's Adultery. 2 Chro. 27.
17. 18. 19. 20.
Azariah and the 40. Priests who withstood King Vzziah when he would have
offered incense, on the incense Altar, and thrust him out of the Temple,
telling him, it pertains not to thee Vzziah, to burn incense to the Lord,
etc. Were no less then Traitors. John Baptist was much over-seene to tell King
Herod, It is not lawful for thee to have thy brothers wife. The Prophet who
sharply reprehended Amaziah for his Idolatry and new altar, 2 Chronicles 25. 15.
16. was justly checked by the king. Eliiah was to be rebuked, for telling Ahab
so plainly of his faults, 1 King 18. 17. 18.
and sending such a harsh message to King Ahaziah; Elisha much to be shent for
using such harsh language to King Jehoram, 2 Kings 3. 13. 14. yea Samuel and
Hanani deserved the strappado for telling King Saul, and Asa, That they had
done foolishly, 1 Samuel 13. 3. 2 Chronicles. 15. 2 King. 1. 3. 4. 16.
9. The meaning therefore of this Text, so much mistaken, (unless we will
censure all these Prophets, and have Kings not only irresistible but
irreprehensible for their wickedness) is only this: No man may presume to
question the kings just actions, warranted by his lawful royal power: (this
text being parallel with Romans 13. 1. 2. 3. 4.) What then? Ergo, None must
question or resist his, or his Cavalleers unjust violence and proceedings, (not
the Parliament the supremest Judicature and Sovereign Power in the Kingdom)
is a ridiculous consequence: yet this is all this Text does contribute to their
present dying bad cause.

The 5. Object. 5.
is that usually objected Text of An Appeal to thy Conscience, p. 4. c. Answer
of the Vindication of Ps. 105. 14, 15 and the Revindication printed at
Cambridge, 1643.
Psalm. 105. 14, 15. Touch not mine anointed. Ergo the King and his Cavaleers
must not be so much as touched nor resisted, I wonder they did not as well
argue, Ergo none must henceforth kiss his Majesty's hand (since it cannot be
done without touching him,) neither must his Barber trim him, nor his
Bedchamber-men attire him, for fear of high Treason in touching him: And the
Cavaleers must not henceforth be arrested for their debts, apprehended for
their robberies and murders; neither must the Chyrurgion dress their wounds,
or pock-soars, or otherwise touch them, (so dangerous is it to touch them, not
out of fear of infection, but) for fear of transgressing this sacred Text,
scarce meant of such unhallowed God-dammee^. Such conclusions had been more
literal and genuine then the first.

But to answer this long since exploded trivial Objection, Answ.
not named by Dr Fern, though revived by others since him. I say first, that
this Text concerns not kings at all, but the true anointed Saints of God their
Subjects, whom kings have been always apt to oppress and persecute, witness
Psalm. 2. 2. etc. Act. 4. 26. 27. Act. 12. 1, 2, 3 with all sacred and
Ecclesiastical Histories, ancient or modern. This is most apparent; first,
because these words were spoken by God to Kings themselves, as the Text is
express, Psalm 105 14, 15. 1 Chronicles. 16. 20, 21. He suffered no man to do them
wrong, but reproved even KINGS for their sakes, saying, (even to king
themselves, namely to king Pharaoh, an king Abim^lech, Genesis 12. 10. to 20.
Chap. 20. and 26 1. to 17. 29) Touch not mine Anointed, and do my Prophets no
harm: Therefore not meant of kings. Secondly, because these words were spoken
directly and immediately of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, their wives and families, as
it is evident by Verse 6. the whole series of the Psalm, which is Historical;
the forecited Texts of Genesis to which the words relate, the punctual
confession of Augustine, and all other Expositors on this Psalm; Now neither
they, nor their wives, nor their children clearly, were actual, much less
anointed Kings; For first, they lived long before the government of kings was
erected among the Israelites, of whom 1 Samuel 8. and 9. and 10. see 1 Chronicles. 1.
43.
Saul was the first. 2. They had no kingdom nor territories of their own when
these words were uttered, but were strangers in the Land, going from one Nation
and Kingdom to another, sojourning obscurely like Pilgrims and Strangers upon
earth, in Egypt, and Gerar, under King Pharaoh, Abimelech, and other Princes,
not as kings, but subjects and private men, as Verse 12. 13. Genesis 12. and 20.
and 26 Chap. 36. 7. Chap. 37. 1. Deuteronomy. 23. 7. Hebr. 11. 13. resolve. Thirdly,
They were but very few men in number, Verse 12. Genesis 34. 30. they were
Masters only of their own small families, and that under foreign Kings;
therefore doubtless no kings at all. Fourthly, this was spoken of these
Patriarchs Wives and Families, as well as of themselves, (and they certainly
were no kings, unless you will have kingdoms consisting only of kings, and no
subjects at all) Verse 12. 14. Genesis 12. 15. to 20. Chap. 20. 2. to 17. Chap.
26. 11. Chap. 34. 30. Chap. 35. 6. Fifthly, the Scripture no where calls them
kings, much less the Text, which terms them expressly Prophets, Touch not mine
Anointed, and do MY PROPHETS (not properly so taken, but largely, that is, My
servants, my chosen people, as Verse 6. expounds it) no harm: The later Clause,
Do my Prophets no harm, being an exact interpretation of the former, Touch not
mine Anointed, that is, My Prophets and Servants, so far forth as to do See
Zeph. 2. 8. Genesis 20. 6. Job 1. 11. c. 2. 5. c. 19. c. 5. 19. c. 12. 14. Genesis
26. 11. 29. Ier. 12. 14. 1 Ioh. 5. 18.
them harm; For in a common sense, no doubt, they Matthew. 8. 3. 15. c. 17 7.
Mar. 6. 56. Luke 8. 45, 46, 47
might be touched without offense to God or them, by way of imbracement,
assistance, and the like Sixthly, Though there were kings in Abraham's days or
before, as is evident by Genesis 14. 1, 2, etc. yet there were no anointed kings,
nor were kings ever called Gods anointed till Saul's days, who was the first
anointed King I read of, 1 Samuel 10. 1. and the first king ever styled, The
Lords Anointed 1 Samuel 12. 3, 5. whereas Priests were anointed long before,
Exodus 30. 30. Chap. 40. 13, 15. Therefore Anointed in the Text cannot be meant
of kings, or of persons actually anointed, but only of those Saints of God,
who were metap^^rically and spiritually anointed, having the gifts and graces
of Gods Spirit, Psalm. 28. 8, 9. Hab. 3. 13. 2. Cor. 1. 21. 1 John 2. 27. Eze.
16. 9. Isay 20. 27. This Text then being not meant of kings which are actually,
but of Christians only spiritualy anointed, in regard of which anointing (as I
have The Vindication and Revindication of Psalm. 105. 14, 15
elsewhere largely manifested) they are in Scripture, not only styled
Christians (which in plain English is anointed) Acts 11. 26. c. 26. 26. 1 Pet.
4. 16. but Christ (in the abstract) 1 Cor. 12. 12. Ephesians. 4. 12, 13. the
Members, Body, Flesh and Bones of Christ. 1 Cor. 12. 12, 7. Ephesians. 1. 22. 23 c.
5. 29, 30, 31. Col. 1. 24. Yea, Kings and Priests unto God the Father: Exodus
19. 6. 1 Pet. 2. 5. Revel. 1. 6. c. 5. 10. c. 20. 6. for whom God has prepared
a heavenly Kingdom, (wherein they shall reign with Christ for ever) with an
everlasting Crown of glory too, Matthew. 5. 3. c. 25. 34. Luke 6. 20. c. 22. 29.
30. Col. 1. 13. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 12. 1 Corinthians. 9. 25. 2 Timothy 2. 12. c. 4. 8. Heb.
12. 28. 2 Pet. 5. 4. 2 Pet. 1. 11. Iam. 2. 5. Revel. 22. 5. The proper argument
then that can be thence deduced by our Opposites, is but this Non sequitur.

Kings themselves must not touch Gods spiritually anointed Saints and servants
to do them harm; Ergo, if Kings do violently and unjustly make war upon them,
not only to harm, but plunder, murder, destroy them utterly, extirpate that
Religion they profess and are bound to maintain, they are obliged in point of
conscience, under pain of damnation, not to resist; Whereas the conclusion
should be directly contrary. Therefore they may lawfully with good conscience
resist them to the uttermost, in such cases: For since God has thus directly
enjoined Kings, Not to touch, or do them harm; if Kings will wilfully violate
this injunction, they may with safe conscience, by force of Arms withstand,
repulse, their unjust violence, and hinder Kings or their instruments from
doing them that injury which God himself prohibits; else they should be
accessories to their kings injustice, and authors of their own wrongs,
according to these received Maxims; Gratian. causa. 23. qu. 3, 4, 5, 6. Where
many Fathers are cited, to this purpose.
Qui non pohibet malum quod potest, jubet; Qui potest obviare and perturbare
perversos and non facit, nihil est aliud quam favere eorum impietati: Nec caret
scrupulo societatis occultae, qui manifesto facinori desinit obvi^re. Qui
definit obviare cum potest, consentit: used by Ambrose, Hierome, Augustine,
Isiodor, Anastatius, and Gratian, who recites, applies them to defensive wars.
And if our Opposites (who pervert this Text by translating it from Subjects and
Saints, to Kings) may in their erroneous sense safely argue thence, That if
subjects take up Arm against their Princes, contrary to this Text, their
Princes may by virtue of this precept, justly resist them with force, and
repulse their injuries; then by the true genuine sense thereof (being meant of
Subjects, Saints, not Kings) if Kings will violently assault and make war upon
Saints, their Subjects, to harm them, they may with as good reason and
conscience defend themselves against their Kings and ill Instruments, as their
Kings protect themselves in this sort against them, and that by authority of
this Text, by our Opposites own argumentation.

Thirdly, admit this Scripture meant of Kings, yet what strength is there in it
to privilege them from just necessary resistance? If any, it must rest in the
word anointed; but this will afford kings no such corporal privileges as
many fancy, neither from lawful resistance, nor deposition, nor sentence of
death it self, which I shall undeniably evidence to refute a commonly received
error: For, first, it is apparent, that the anointed here meant, are such
only who are spiritually anointed, either with the external profession and
ceremonies of Gods true religion, or with the internal graces of the Spirit;
for neither Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, nor their families (nor any kings or Priests
in their days) for ought we find, were corporally anointed. Besides, the
anointing here intended, is that which is common to Exodus 30. 30. c. 40. 13,
15. Levit. 4. 3. 16. 1 King. 19. 16.
Priests and Prophets (as Touch not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no harm,
infallibly proves) rather then that which is peculiar to kings. Whence I thus
argue, That anointing which is common to subjects as well as kings, and cannot
secure any subjects, who in the genuinesence of the Text, are Gods anointed,
from just resistance, corporal violence, legal censures, or death, cannot in
or of it self alone secure kings from any of these, no further then it secures
subjects: for the anointing being the same in both, must have the self-same
operation and immunities in both. But this anointing in subjects can neither
exempt their persons from necessary just resistance, if they unlawfully assault
or war upon their Superiors, equals, inferiors; nor free them from arrests,
imprisonments, arraignments, deprivations, or capital censures, if they offend
and demerit them, as we all know by Eccles. 9 2. c. 8. 14. Ezec^. 18. 24, 26.
Ich. 16. 2.
Scripture and experience: Therefore it can transfer no such corporal
immunities or exemptions from all or any of these, to kings; but only, exempt
them from unlawful violence and injuries, in point of right, so far forth, as
it does other Subjects. In a word, this anointing being common to all
Christians, can give no special Prerogative to Kings, but only such as are
common to all Subjects, as they are Christians. Secondly, admit it be mean^ of
an actual external anointing, yet that of it self affords Kings no greater
privilege then the inward unction, of which it is a type, neither can it
privilege them from just resistance, or just corporal censures of all sorts.
First, it cannot privilege them from the just assaults, invasions, resistance,
corporal punishments of other foreign kings, Princes, States, Subjects not
subordinate to them, who upon any just cause or quarrel may lawfully resist,
assault, wound, apprehend, imprison, slay, depose, judge, censure foreign
kings, even to death; as is apparent by Psalm. 136. 19, 20. Number. 21. 2^ 33, 34,
35.
S^hon King of the Amorites, and Og the king of Bashan, slain, the King of
Josh. 8. 29.
Ai hanged by Joshua, the Josh. 10. 22, 23, 24, 25, 26.
five kings of Canaan that besieged Gibeon, on whose ne-ks Joshua made his men
of war to put their feet, then smote, slew, and hanged them upon five trees.
Who also assaulted, resisted, imprisoned, condemned, slew, executed diverse
other Josh. 10. 42. c. 11. and 12. 7. to 24.
kings of Canaan, to the number of thirty one in all; by king Judge, 1, 26, to
76.
Adonibezek, Judge, 3, to ^6
Eglon, 1 Samuel 15, 32, 33.
Agag, with other Heathen Kings, imprisoned, stabbed, hewn in pieces by the
Israelites. If any object, These kings were not actually anointed, which they
cannot prove, since Isay, 45, 10
Cyrus an Heathen King, is styled Gods anointed; no doubt Saul was an
anointed King, if not the first in the world, 1 Samuel 10. 1. yet he was justly
resisted, wounded, pursued by the Philistines, 1 Samuel 31. 3. 2 Chro. 35.
Josiah an anointed good King, was slain by Pharaoh Necho King of Egypt, whom
he rashly encountered; 1 King. 22, 34, 35.
King Ahab was slain by an Archer of the King of Assyria, 2 King 9, (...) 27.
King Ioram and Ahaziah were both slain by Iehu, by Gods command; 2 Chr. 31.
10. 6, 7.
Iehoaaz was deposed by the King of Egypt, 2 Ki. 2^, 6, 7
Iehoiakim and Iehoiakin both deposed, fettered and kept prisoners by the King
of Babylon; bylone; who alsoy app^eherded d^posed, judicially condemned King
Zedechiah, put out his eyes, and sent him prisoner to B^hylon bound with
fetters of brass. So 2 Chronicles, 33, 11, 1^.
Manasses was deposed, bound with fetters of brass, and carried captive by the
Captains of the King of Assyria. 2 King 14, 33.
Amaziah King of Judah was taken prisoner by Iehoash King of Israel. Infi^ite
are the presidents in stories, where kings of one Nation in just wars, have
been assaulted, invaded, imprisoned, deposed, slain, by Princes and Subjects of
another Nation; and that justly, as all grant without exception; neither their
anointing, nor Kingship being any exemption or privilege to them at all in
respect of forraigners, in cases of hostility, to whom they are no Sovereigns,
no more then to any of their Subjects. Whereas if this royal anointing did
make their persons absolutely sacred and inviolable, no foreign Princes or
Subjects could justly apprehend, imprison, smite, wound, slay, depose, or
execute them. Secondly, Kings who are suborordinate See M. Seldens Titles of
Honor l. (...) 3, s^ct 1, 2, Bodin Communwal. v. 3, l. 2, c. 5. Joseph De
Bello Indaico, l. 1. c 10. 15.
Homagers and Subjects to other Kings or Emperors, though anointed, may for
Treasons and Rebellions against them, he lawfully resisted, assaulted,
imprisoned, deposed, judged to death and executed, because as to them they are
but Subjects, notwith^^anging their anointing, as appears by sund^y presidents
in our own and foreign Histories; and is generally confessed by the learned.
Thirdly, the Roman, Greek and German Experours though anointed, the ancient
Kings of France, Spain, Arragon, Britain, Hungary, Poland, Denmark, Bohemia,
India, Sparta, and other places (who were not absolute Monarchs) have in former
ages been lawfully resisted imprisoned, deposed, and some of them, judicially
adjudged to death and executed by their own Senates, Parliaments, Diets,
States, for their oppression, mal-administration, tyranny, and that justly, as
Commonw. l. 2, c 5.
Bodin, De Iure Belli, l. 1. c. 3, sect. 11. 16.
Grotius, with others affirm, notwithstanding any pretense that they were
anointed Sovereigns. Fourthly, Popes, Bishops and Priests anciently were, and
at this present in the Romish Churches are actually anointed as well as Kings;
and we know the In their titles and cont. ovdrsies de Immunitate Cleri^erum,
Bishop Latimers ^ermon at Stamford, f. 67, b.
Popish Clergy and Canonists have frequently alleged this Text, Touch not mine
anointed and do my Prophets no harm, in Councels, Decretalls and solem^
debates in Parliament, to prove their exemption from the arrests, judgments,
capital cens^res and proceedings of Kings and secular Judges for any crimes
whatsoever, because (forsooth) they were Gods anointed, intended in this Text,
not Kings; therefore Kings and Seculars must not touch, nor offer any the least
violence to their persons, no not in a way of justice. By color of this Text
they exceedingly deluded the world in this particular for ^undreds of years.
But in the seventh year of Hen. the 8. in Keilwayes Resorts, f. 181.
Dr. Standish his case debated before a Committee of both Houses of Parliament,
and all the Judges of England, this Text being chiefly insisted on to prove the
Clergies exemption, Jure Divino, was wholly exploded in England, and since that
in Germany, France, other Realms; and notwithstanding its protection, many See
par. r. p. 88. and Fox Act and Monuments.
Fopes, Bishops, and Clergymen in all Kingdoms, ages, for all their
anointing, have for their misdemeanors not only been resisted, apprehended,
imprisones, but deprived, degraded, hanged, quartered burned, as well as other
men (Yea 1 King. 2, 26, 27.
Abiathar the High Priest was deposed by S. ^omon for his Treason against him,
notwithstanding his Anointing;) their anointing giving them not the smallest
immunity to do ill, or not to suffer all kinds of corporal, capital
punishments for their misdemeanors. If this actual anointing then, cannot
lawfully exempt or secure Priests and Prelates persons, nor the Pope himself
from the premises, how then can it justly privilege the persons of Kings?
Fifthly, among the Papists all infants, either in their baptism, or
confirmation are actually anointed with their consecrated See Claudius
E^sencaeus Dig. s. in. P^o^. ^pist. ad Tim. d. c. rismatis usu p. 261, etc.
Chrisme, and with Espencaeus Ibid. See homas it aldensis, Bellarmine and
others, De Sacramento extremae u^ctiours, and all Schoolmen and Canonists, De
Sacrame, torum Numero and Extrunct.
extreme unction to boot at last cast, which they make Cat. log Gloriae Mu^di,
par. 5. Consid. 35. p. 40. Alber. de Re^ Super G. of Rubr. F. d^sta., ho.
a Sacrament, and so a thing of more divine sovereign Nature then the very
anointing of Kings at their inauguration, which they repute no Sacrament, as
being no where commanded by God: But neither of these actual unctions, exempt
all or any of those anointed with it from resistance, or any corporal
punishments, or just censures of any king; therefore the very anointing of
Kings cannot do it. Sixthly, the Ceremony of anointing kings, as Cassanaens
Ibid. and Consid. 19.
Cassanaeus with others write, is peculiar only to the German Emperor, the
King of Jerusalem, the King of France, the King of England, and the King of
Sicily; but to no other kings else, who are neither anointed nor crowned, as
he affirms; so that it cannot give any privilege at all to any but only to
these 4. not other kings, who are not anointed Now seeing only hese 4. kings
are actually anointed, yea lawful Kings and their persons sacred, even before
they are anointed or crowned, yea other kings persons (as of Spain, Hungary,
Denmark, Sweden, Poland, etc.) who are not anointed, are as sacred, as exempt
from danger, as those who are enoyled; And seeing the anointing of kings is at
this day a mere arbitrary humane Ceremony, not enjoined by divi^e authority,
nor common to all Kings, who are Cook 7. ^eport. Calvin's Cas^c f. 11. Philoch.
Arch. De Somnio Ver (...), c. 171.
Kings before their Coronations, it is most certain and infallible, that this
enoyling in and of it self derives no personal Prerogatives or Immunities at
all to kings, much less an absolute exemption from all actual resistance in
cases of unjust invasions on their Subjects, or from the censures of their
Parliaments for public distructive exorbitances, as most have hitherto blindly
believed.

Neither will the frequent next objected speeches of David concerning Soul.
Impeach the premises, 1 Samuel 24. 6. 10. c. 26. 9. 11. 2. and 2 Samuel 1. 12. 16.
The Lord forbid that I should do this thing unto my Master the Lords Anointed,
to stretch forth my hand against him seeing he is the Lords Anointed. I will
not put forth my hand against my Lord, for he he is the Lords anointed. And
David said to Abishai, Destroy him not, for who can stretch forth his hand
against the Lords Anointed, and he guiltless? The Lord forbid that I should
stretch forth his hand against the Lords Anointed. The Lord delivered thee
into my hand to day, but I would not stretch forth mine hand against the Lords
Anointed. How wa^ thou not afraid to siretch forth thy hand against the Lords
Anointed? Thy blood shall be upon thy head, for thy mouth has testified that
thou have slain the Lords Anointed. Which several Texts seem at first sight
to insinuate, that Saul's very external anointing was that which did secure
his person from assauls and violence; and that it is unlawful even by way of
defense, forcibly with Arms to resist a persecuting unjustly invading king,
because he is anointed.

But these Texts, if duly pondered, will warrant neither of these conclusions.
First then, Object. S. An^sw.
I answer, that Saul's bare anointing, considered as an external Ceremony to
declare him a lawful King, did not, could not add any immunity to his person
against David's, or any other Subjects just violent resistance, as the premised
reasons manifest; but it was only his royal Sovereign Office conferred on him
by God and the people, to which his external anointing by Samuel was but a
preparation That which made Saul, with other his successors, a king, was not
his bare anointing. For 1 Samuel 10. 1, 2. 24.
Saul himself was anointed by Samuel, before he was made and chosen King, not
when he was made King. So 1 Samuel 16. 1, to 14
David, ^ king, 19. (...), 16.
Hazael, 1 king. 19. 16. 2 king 9. 1. to 3.
selu, with others, were anointed before they were actual Kings, and many of
their Successors by descent, were real kings before they were anointed; some
of them being not anointed at all for ought we read: therefore their unction
made them not kings, since neither simply necessary, nor essential to their
being kings. Nor did Saul's anointing only, preceding his Regality, make his
person sacred, or any other kings persons; for then it would follow, That if
Saul had not been actually anointed, or had continued king for some years
without this anointing, then David in such a case might lawfully have slain
him, without check of conscience, and that the persons of kings not at all
anointed; and of hereditary kings before their Coronations, till they are
anointed, should not be sacred, nor exempt from violence; which is both false
and perilous to affirm; but it was his Sovereign Royal Authority over David
(then his Son-in-law, Servant, Subject) which restrained him from offering
violence to his person. Soul then being thus privileged, not because he was
anointed, but because he was an anointed king, and that not quatenus
Anointed, but quatenus King; the true sense and genuine interpretation of
these Texts must be, That Saul's person was sacred, exempt from his Subjects
violence, not because he was anointed, as if that only did privilege him; but
because he was a lawful king 1 Sa. 15, 16, 17. c. 10. 1, 2, 4.
appointed by the Lord himself, the 1 Samuel 12, 13. c. 15. 13. c. 16 1, 1 Chro.
28.
Lords anointed, being but a periphrasis, or form of speech, wherein the
Geremony of anointing, is used for the Regality, or kingly power it self,
declared not conferred by anointing, and in plain words without any figure, it
is put for, the Lords King, that is, a King appointed by the Lord; in which
sense God calls Christ Psalm 2. 6. Psalm. 18. 50.
my King; and David styles himselfex Gods King. Saul's Royal Authority without
his anointing, not his anointing, predestinating him to his Authority being
the ground of this his immunity from David's violence. Secondly, 1 Samuel 10. 1,
2, 24.
Saul was anointed some space before he was made King, and 1 Samuel 16. 1. 10 14.
David many year before he came to the Crown: I would then demand of any
man; if Saul or David after their unction, and before their election and
inauguration to the Crown had invaded or assaulted any of the people in an
hostile manner, whether they might not have justly resisted, repulsed, yea
slain them to in their own necessary defense? If not, then one Subject may not
repulse the unjust violence of another in an elective kingdom, if by
possibility he may after wards be chosen king, though for the present he be
neither actually king nor Magistrate, but a Shepherd, as David was, Psalm. 78.
70, 71. which I presume none will affirm, I am certain none can prove: If so,
then it was not Saul's anointing but only his Royal Authority, which made
David thus to spare his life, his person. So that our Opposites pressing this
Argument only from his Anointing, is both false and idle, as all the premises
demonstrate.

But to set the Argument right; I answer thirdly, That all which these Texts
and David's example prove, is but this. That Subjects ought not wilfully or
purposely to murder or offer violence to the persons of their kings; especially
in cold blood when they do not actually assault them. Ergo they may not
resist, repulse their personal actual assaults, nor oppose their cutthroat
Cavaleers when they make an unjust war against them. Which Argument is a mere
Non sequitur.

For 1. David's example extends only to Saul's own person, not to his Soldiers,
who were neither kings, nor Gods Anointed; and whom David no doubt would have
resisted and slain too had they assaulted him, though he spared Saul: as Sect.
2, p. 8.
Dr. Fern himself insinuates in these words; David's Guard that he had about
him, was only to secure his person against the cutthroats of Saul, if sent to
take away his life, etc. He was anointed and designed by the Lord to succeed
Saul, and therefore he might use an extraordinary way of safe-guarding his
person: Therefore he and his Guard would and might doubtless have with a safe
conscience resisted, Sect,
repulsed Saul's cutthroat Soldiers, had they assaulted David, to take away
his life. And iffo, then the Kings Cutthroat Cavalleers by his own confession,
may lawfully be resisted, repulsed, slain in a defensive way, by the
Parliaments forces now.

Secondly, the argument is absurd, because we may forcibly resist and repulse
with safe conscience, those whom we may not wilfully slay. If a man assaults
me, to beat or wound me, I may resist, repulse him with violence, but I may not
kill him in mine own defense, without murder or manslaughter, unless I could
not otherwise preserve my own life by slight or resistance. Sect, 2, p. ^.
Doctor Fern grants, that a Subject may in his own private defense, lawfully
ward off the Kings own blows, and hold his hands, in case of sudden and
illegal assaults, much more then of malicious and premeditated: but yet
denies, he may either wound or kill him, and that truly. To argue therefore
from David's example and words, The King may not with safe conscience be
wittingly slain by his subjects: Ergo, He and his Cavaleers may not be forcibly
resisted, repulsed by them for their own defense and preservation, is a gross
inconsequent by the Doctors own confession.

Thirdly, there is nothing in all these speeches, or the practice, or in David,
pertinent to the case in dispute; for when 1. Sam. 2 c. 3. 10 16.
David's men moved him to kill Saul, and would have risen up against him, to
slay him, and David refused to act, or suffer his men to do it; neither Saul
not any of his men did actually assault David or his followers, nor so much as
once discover them; but Saul went casually to cover his feet into the Cave,
where they lay hid; which done, he rose up and went on his way, not once
espying David (though he cut off the skirt of his Robe privily) nor any of his
men with him. To argue therefore, That David and his men might not with a safe
conscience stretch forth their hands and rise up against their Sovereign king
Saul, to kill him thus in cold blood, when he assaulted them not, nor so much
as thought of their being in the Cave, and went out of it quietly, not
discovering them; Ergo, they might not, they would not in conscience have
resisted, repulsed him, or his Forces, had they assaulted, or given them
battle in the Cave, is a Nonsense Conclusion; just in effect the same with
this. I may not resist or repulse one who assaulrs me not, Ergo, I may not
resist one that actually assaults me to take away my life, or to beat, rob,
wound me: What Logic, Reason, Law or Divinity is there in such an argument?
So after this when 1. Sam. 26, ^ 7. to 25
Abishai said to David, God has delivered Saul thine enemy into thy hand this
day, now therefore let me smite him, I pray thee, with the spear, even to the
earth at once, I will not smite him the second time: And David said to Abishai,
Destroy him not, for who can stretch forth his hand against the Lords Anointed
(to wit, to slay him purposely, as Abishai intended) and be guiltless? The
Text is express. That Saul and his men were then in their own Trenches, fast a
sleep, because a deep sleep from the Lord was fallen upon them; David and
Abishai were here the only affailants, they came into Saul's Trenches, he and
his whole army were in so sound a sleep, that they came to Saul's own person,
took away with them his Spear, and the Cruse or water from his Bolster, and
departed, not being once discerned; No man resists, assaults, discovers them.
To slay Saul thus in cold blood, without any assault or present provocation,
and especially upon a private quartell, had been Treachery and impiety in a
Son-in-Law, a Servant, a Subject a ^uccessour; and to do it with the hazard of
their own lives, had any of Saul's Army been awakened at the stroke Abishai
would have given him. (as probably they might have been) they being but two,
and within their enemies Trenches, in the midst of the Army, who might have
easily and speedily slain them, had been rashness, indiscretion; their
departure with the Spear and Cruse was more Heroical, Loyal, prudentiall. To
conclude therefore, as our Opposites do from this speech and example, That
David thought it unlawful in point of Conscience for him or Abishai to murder
his S^veraign Lord King Saul, when he and his men were thus fast asleep in the
midst of their Trenches, offering them no wrong, making no actual assaults
upon them; Ergo, they could not, would not justly with safe consciences have
forcibly defended themselves against Saul and his Army, had they been assaulted
by them in their own Trenches; is a transcendent absurdity, refuted by the very
next words of David to Abishai at that instant, 1 Samuel 26. 10. And David said
furthermore, As the Lord lives, the Lord shall smite him, or his day shall
come to die; or he shall DESCEND INTO BATTLE AND PERISH; which intimates, that
if Saul would force him to a battle, then he might lawfully defend himself
against his violence, though he might not murder him now in his sleep, when he
did him no hard; and if he casually perished in the battle, it was Saul's own
wilful default, not his, who could not dissuade him by all this his fair
carriage and sparing of his life, (when he had those two advantages to slay
him) from his violent prosecution, nor yet succeed him in the Crown (as God had
appointed and foretold) should he suffer him to murder him and his men in
battle without resistance. Yea, David's earnestness to go with Achish and the
Pallistines to the battle against Sanl, wherein he perished, 1 Samuel 2^
(unless we will tax Davide for a notable Hypocrite and dissembler)
unanswerably eviden^eth, that he deemed it lawful to resist, to encounter Saul
and his Forces in battle, not withstanding his person might chance to perish
in the fight, though not to slay him treacheously, and basely upon the
precedent advantages: And his slaying of that lying 2 Samuel 2.
Amalekite who brought him tidings of Saul's death, reporting that himself had
slain him, to gain a reward from David, he being then one of Saul's soldiers
(as it seems) concludes only, that it was not lawful for any of Saul's own men
to saly him, by his own command: Not that resistance of him in the open battle
was unlawful in point of conscience. Other answer might be given to this
Objection concerning David and Saul. As 1. that this difference was but private
and personal between Saul and David, David being then Saul's private subject,
Servant, Son in Law, not public between Saul his whole Parliament or Kingdom;
now many things are unlawful to be done in private quarrels, which are just
and honorable in public differences.

Secondly, that David himself, though he thus forbore to murder Saul, yet he
tells him, 1. Sam. 24, 10, 11, 12. This day thine eyes have seen how that the
Lord had delivered thee to day into mine hand in the Cave, and some had me kill
thee, but mine eye SPARED THEE; and I said, I will not put forth my hand
against my Lord, for he is the Lords anointed. Moreover, my father, see, yea
see the skirt of thy Robe in my hand, for in that I cut off the skirt of thy
Robe and KILLED THHE NOT, know then and see, that there is neither evil nor
transgression in mine hand, and I have not sinned against thee, yet then
huntest my soul to take it. The Lord judge between me and thee, and the Lord
avenge me of thee, but mine hand shall not be upon thee, and plead my cause and
deliver me out of thine hand. And after this upon the second advantage, he
uses like words, The Lord render to every man according to his right consnes
and faithfulness, for the Lord delivered thee into my hand to day, 1 Samuel 26.
23, 24.
but I would not stretch forth my hand against the Lords anointed. And behold,
as THY LIFE WAS MVCH SET BY THIS DAY IN MY EYES, so let my life be much set by
in the eyes of the Lord, and let him deliver me out of all tribulations:
Wherein David declared, that God had given up Saul's life into his power, that
it was his own mere goodness that moved him to spare Saul contrary to his
Soldiers, and Abishaies minds, who would have slain him, without any seruple
of conscience; that the reasons he spared him were: First, because he was Gods
Anointed, that is, specially designed and made King of Israel by Gods own
election, which no kings at this day are, and so this reason extends not so
fully to them, as to Saul. Secondly, Because he was his Father and Lord too,
and so it would have been deemed some what an unnatural act in him. Thirdly,
because it had favored only of private self-revenge and ambitious aspiring to
the Crown before due time, which became not David, the quarrel, being then not
public, but particular betwixt him and David only, who was next to succeed
him after his death. Fourthly, because by this his lenity he would convince and
reclaim Saul from his bloody pursuit, and clear his innocence to the world.
Fifthly, to evidence his dependence upon God and his special promise; that he
should enjoy the Crown after Saul by divine appointment; and therefore he would
not seem to usurp it by taking Saul life violently away. Most of which
consideration fail in cases of public defense, and the present controversy.
Thirdly, that Saul himself, as well as David's Soldiers, conceived, that David
might with safe conscience have slain as well as spared him; witness his
words, 1. Sam. 24. 17, 18, 19 Thou art more righteous then I, for thou have
rewarded me good, where as I have rewarded thee evil: And thou have shewedme
this day how thou have deals well with me; for as much as when the Lord had
delivered me into thine hand THOU KILLEDST ME NOT. For if a man find his enemy
WILL HE LET HIM GO WELL AWAY? Wherefore the Lord reward three good for that thou
have done unto me this day, etc. And in 1. Sam. 26. 21. Then said Saul, I have
sinned; return my son David, for I will no more do thee harm, because my
solve was precious in thine eyes this day; behold I have played the fool
exceedingly, etc. But the former answers are so satisfactory, that I shall not
pray in aid from these, much less from that evasion of Dr. Fern, who makes
this, and all other David's demeanors in standing out against Saul Sect. 2. p. 2.
EXTRAORDINARY; for he was anointed and designed by the Lord to succeed Saul;
and therefore he might also use all extraordinary ways of safe guarding his
persons; which like wise insinua^es, that this his scruple of conseience in
sparing Saul's life was but extraordinary, (the rather, because all his
Soldiers and Abishai would have slain Saul without any such scruple, and Saul
himself conceived, that any man else but David would have done it:) and so by
consequence affirms, that this his sparing of Saul is no ways obligatory to
other subjects, but that they may lawfully in David's case kill their
Sovereigns; But David's resistauce of Saul by a guard of men, being only that
ordinary way which all subjects in all ages have used in such cases, and that
which nature teaches not only men, but all living creatures generally to use
for their own defense, and this evasion derogating exceedingly from the
personal safety of Princes, yea, and exposing them to such perils as they have
cause to con the Dr. small thanks for such a bad invention, I shall reject it
as the extraordinary fancy of the Dr. and other loyalists, void both of truth
and loyalty.

The 7. Object. 7.
Objection out of the Old Testament is this, 1. Sam. 8. 11. Samuel tells the
people, how they should be oppressed under kings; Dr Fern, Resolving of
Conscience, Sect. 2. p. 10. And others.
yet all that violence and injustice that should be done unto them, is no just
cause of resistance: for they have NO REMEDY LEFT THEM BUT CRYING TO THE LORD,
v. 18. And ye shall cry out in that day because of the King which ye shall have
chosen you, and the Lord will not hear you in that day.

To this I answer 1. Answer.
that by the Doctors own confession, this text of Samuel, much urged by some of
his fellows, to prove an absolute divine Prerogative in Kings, is quite
contrary to their suggestion; and meant only of the oppression, violence, and
inju^ (not lawful power) of Kings, which should cause them thus to cry out to
God This truth we have clearly gained by this objection, for which some
Royallists will renounce their champion. 2. It is but a mere fallacy and
absurdity not warranted by the Text; which says not, that they shall only cry
out; or that they shall use no remedy or resistance, but crying out; which had
been material, but ba^ely, ye shall cry out in that day, etc. Ergo, they must
and should only cry out, and not resist at all; is a gross Non-sequitur:
which Argument because much cried up, I shall demonstrate the palpable
absurdity of it by many parrallell instance. First, Every Christian is bound to
pray for Kings and Magistrates, 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2. Ergo, they must only pray and
not fight for them, nor yield tribute or obedience to them: Kings and their
Subjects too are bound to cry out, and pray to God against foreign enemies
that come to war against them, as Exodus 14.
Moses did against Pharaoh and his Host, Psa. 59. I. 10 and other Psalm.
David against his enemies, 2 Chronicles. 32. 20. 2 King. 19.
Hezekiah against Sennacherib and his Host, 2 Chronicles. 14. 9 9. to 15.
Asa against his enemies, 2 Chronicles. 13 14, 15, 16.
Abijah and the men of Judah against Jeroboam and the Israelites their enemies;
and as all Christians usually do against their enemies. (Yea, I make no doubt
but the Doctor, and other Court-Chaplains, inform his Majesty and the
Cavalleers, that they must cry to God against the Parliamenteers and Round
heads now in Arms to resist them;) Ergo, they must only pray, but in no wise
resist or fight against them; All men must pray to God for their Mat. 16. 11.
daily bread: Ergo, they must only pray and not labor for it; Sick Iam. 5.
14, 15, 16.
persons must pray to God to restore their health: Ergo, they must take no
Physic, but only pray; All men are expressly commanded to Psalm. 50. 15
cry and call upon God in the day of trouble, Ergo, they must use no means
but prayer to free themselves from trouble; pretty Logic, Reason, Divinity,
fitter for derision then any serious Answer. This is all this Text concludes,
and that grossly mistaken Speech of Saint Ambrose, Christians weapons are
Prayers, and Tears; of which anon i^ its due place, In one word, prayer no more
excludes resistance, then resistance, prayer; both of them may, and sometimes
(when defense is necessary, as now) ought to concur; so that our Court
Doctors may as well argue, (as some Prelates not long since did in word and
deed) Ministers ought to pray, and Gods Match. 22. 23.
House is an Oratory for prayer: Ergo, they must not Preach (atleast, ^ery
seldom) or make his House an Auditory for Preaching: Or as rationally reason
from this Text, That Subjects must cry out to God against their kings
oppressions, Ergo, they must not petition their Kings, much less complain to
their Parliament for relief; as conclude from thence; Ergo, they may in no case
resist the king, Object. 8.
or his invading Forces, though they endeavor to subvert Religion, Laws,
Liberties, as the Doctor himself states the controversy: whose arguments will
hardly satisfy conscience, being so void of reason, sense; yea science.

The eighth is this, Dr fern, Sect. 2, 3. An App^al to thy Conscience.
None of the Prophets in the old Testament, reprehending the Kings of Israel
and Iudeh for their gross Iaolatry, cruelty, oppression, did call upon the
Elder of the people for the duty of resistance; neither do we find the people
resisting, or taking up Arms against any of their kings, no not against Ahab or
Manasseh, upon any of these grounds: Ergo, resistance is unlawful.

To which I must reply, Answ. 1.
first, That none of the Prophets did ever forbid resistance in such cases,
under pain of Damnation, as our new Doctors do now; Ergo, it was lawful, 2.
because not prohibited. Secondly, that as none of the people were then
inhibited to resist, so not dehorted from it: therefore they might freely have
done it, had they had hearts and zeal to do it. 3.
Thirdly, Antique, Iud. l. 4. c. 8.
Josephus resolves expressly, That by the very Law of God, Deuter. 17. If the
King did contrary to that Law, multiply silver gold, and horses to himself,
more then was fitting, the-Israelites might lawfully resist him, and were bound
to do it, to preserve themselves from Tyranny; Therefore no doubt they might
have lawfully resisted their Kings Idolatry, 4.
cruelty oppressions. Fourthly, Explanat. Artit. 42. Operum, Tom. 1. 84
Hulderichus Zuinglius, a famous Protestant Divine, with others, positively
affirms, That the Israelites might not only lawfully resist, but likewise
depose^ he^r Kings for their wickednesses and Idolatries; yea, That all the
people were justly punished by God, because they removed not their flagitious,
idolatrous Kings and Princes out of their places, which he proves by Ierem 15.
where after the four Plagues there recited, the Prophet subjoynes the cause of
them, saying, Verse 4. I will give them in fury to all the Kingdoms of the
Earth; ( that is, I will stir up in fury all the kings of the earth against
them) because of Manasseh the son of Hezekiah king of Judah, for that which he
did in Jerusalem. This Manasseh had committed many wickednesses by Idolatry
and the stedding of innocent blood, as we may see in the one and twentieth
Chapter of the second of the Kings; for which evils the Lord grievously
punished the people of Israel: Manasseh shed overmuch innocent blood, until he
had filled Jerusalem even to the mouth, with his sins wherewith he made Judah
to sin, that it might do evil before the Lord: Therefore because Manasseh
King of Judah did these most vile abominations, above all that the Amorites had
done before him, and made the Land of Judah to sin in his undeanesse, therefore
thus says the Lord God of Israel, Behold, I will bring evil upon Jerusalem
and Judah, that whosever shall hear, both his ears shall tingle etc. In sum,
if the Jews had not thus permitted their King to be wicked WITHOUT PVNISMENT,
they had not been so griev^^nsly punished by God. We ought to pull and crossed
away even our eye that offends so a hand and foot, etc. If the Israelites had
thus DE OSED Manassch by consent and suffrages of all, or the greatest part of
the multitude; they had not been so grievessly punished of God. So Zuinglius,
with whom even Third Part of the True Difference between Christion subjection,
etc p. 513. 514.
B. Rilson himself in some sort accords who in de ending and interpreting his
opinion, c^ntesseth, 1 Samuel 14.
That it is a question among the Learned, What Sovereignty the whole people of
Israel had over their Kings; confessing, that the peoples resouing Jonathan
that he died not, when Saul would have put him to d^^th, 1 Chronicles. 13.
David's speech to the people when he purposed to reduce the Arc, 1 Kin. 12.
all the Congregations speech and carriage toward Rehoboam when they came to
make him King, with the Ier. 26.
people: speech to Jeremy, Thou shall die the death; have persuaded some, and
might lead Zuingli^s to think that the people of Israel, notwithstanding they
called for a King, yet RE^ERVED TO THEMSELVES SVFFICIENT AVTHORITY TO OVERRVLE
THEIR KING, IN THOSE THINGS WHICH SEEMED EXPEDIENT AND NEEDFVLL FOR THE PVBLIKE
WLLFARE; else God would not punish the people for the kings iniquity, which
they must suffer, and not redress. Which opinion, if as Orthodox, as these
learned Divines and Josephus aver it, not only quite ruins our Opposites
Argument, but their whole Treatises and cause at once. But fifthly, I answer,
that subjects not only by command of Gods Prophets, but of God himself, and by
his special approbation have taken up Arms against their Idolatrous Princes,
to ruin them and their Posterities: A truth so apparent in Scripture, that I
wonder our purblinde Doctors discern it not: For did not God himself,
notwithstanding his frequent (conditional) Promises to establish the Kingdom
of Israel on David, Solomon and their Posterity; for 1 King. 11. 1. to 40.
Solomon's gross Idolatry ( occasioned by his Wives) tell Solomon in express
terms? Wherefore for as much as this is done of thee, and thou have not kept
my Covenant and my Statutes, which I have commanded thee, I will surely REND
THE KINGDOM FROM THEE, and will give it to thy servant. Notwithstanding in thy
days I will not do it, for David thy fathers sake; but I will rend it out of
the hand of thy son. Did not the Prophet Abijah in pursuance hereof, rending
Ierohoams garment into twelve pieces, tell him? Thus says the Lord, the God of
Israel, behold, I will rend the Kingdom out of the hand of Solomon, and will
give ten tribes to thee; And I will take the Kingdom out of his sons hand, and
will give it unto thee, even ten Tribes; and I will take thee, and thou shall
reign according to all that thy soul desires, and shall be King over Israel;
and I will for this afflict the Seed of David.y Yea, 1 King. 12. 2 Chr. 10.
did not ALL ISRAEL upon Solomon's death, when Rehoboam his son refused to grant
their just requests at their coming to Sechem to make him king, use this speech
to the king, What Portion have we in David? neither have we inheritance in the
son of less, to your Tents o Israel: now see to thine own house David.
Whereupon they departed and fell away from the house of David ever after, and
made Iereboam King over all Israel. And does not the Text directly affirm?
Whenefore Rehoboam hearkened not unto the people, for the cause was from the
Lord, that he might perform the saying which the Lord spoke to Abijah unto
Jeroboam, the son of Nebat. After which when Rehoboam raised a mighty Army to
reduce the ten Tribes to obedience, the Word of the Lord came to Shemaiah the
man of God. saying, Speak unto Rehoboam and all the house of Judah and
Benjamin, Thus SAYS THE LORD, Ye shall not go up to fight against your
brethren the children of Israel, return every man to his house; FOR THIS THING
IS FROM ME; They hearkened therefore to the word of the Lord and returned to
depart, according to the word of the Lord. Lo here a Kingdom quite rent a way
from the very house of David; yea, a new King and kingdom erected by the
People, by Gods and his Prophets special direction, and approbation, for King
Solomon's Idolatry. Who is such a stranger to the sacred Story, but has
oft-times read, how God anointed Iehu King, of purpose to extirpate and out off
the whole house of K. Ahab his Lard for his and Iezabels Idolatry and
bloodshed, in flaying the Prophets, and unjustly executing Naboth for his
Vineyard? in performance whereof he slew his Sovereign King Ioram, Ahaziah King
of Judah, Queen Iezabel, all Ahabs posterity, his great men, his Nobles, and
all the Priests and Worshippers of Baal, till he left none remaining, according
to the word of the Lord which he spoke by his servant Elijah, 2 Kings c. 9. and
10. For which good service the Lord said unto Iehu, Because THOU HAVE DONE WELL
in executing that which is right in mine eyes, and have done unto the house of
Ahab according to all that was IN MINE HEART, thy children of the 4.
generation, shall sit on the Thron of Israel. This fact therefore of his thus
specially commanded, approved, rewarded by God himself, must needs be just and
lawful, nor Treason, nor Rebellion in Iehu, unless the Opposites will charge
God to be the author, approver, and rewarder of sin, of Treason.

Neither will it serve their turns to Reply, Evasion, Reply.
that this was an extraordinary example, not to be imitated without such a
special commission from heaven, as Iehu had, and no man can now a days
expect; Deuteronomy. 13. thorowout. c. 17. 1. to 8.
For since God has frequently enjoined all gross incorrigible Idolaters
(especially those who are nearest and dearest to, and most potent to seduce us)
to be put to death, without any pity, or exception of Kings, whose examples
are most pernicious, and apt to corrupt the whole Nation, as the presidents of
the Idolatrous kings of Israel and Judah abundantly evidence) if Kings become
open professed Idolaters, though private persons may not murder them, and
their families, as Iehu; yet the representative body, or greater part of their
Kingdoms, (as many Pious Divines affirm) may lawfully convent, depose, if not
judge them capitally for it: and Gods putting zeal and courage into their
hearts, or exciting them by his faithful Ministers, to such a proceeding, is a
sufficient Divine Commission to satisfy Conscience, if no sinister private
ends, but mere zeal of Gods glory, and detestation of Idolatry be the only
Motives to such their proceedings. 1 Kin. 15^ 27. to 34. 1. 16 1, 2.
Thus we read, God stirred up Baacha, exalted out of the dust, and made him a
Prince over the house of Israel, who slew king Nadab, and smote all the house
of Jeroboam, till he left him not any that breatned, because of the sins of
Jeroboam which he sinned, and which he made Israel sin, by his provocations
wherewith he provoked the Lord God of Israel to anger; who going on after in
Ieroboams sins, r Kings 16. 1, to, 20.
God threatens to out off all his house, and make it like the house of
Jeroboam; which was actually executed by Zimri, who slew his Sovereign King
Elah, son to Baacha, With all the house of Baacha, and left not one that pissed
against the wall, neither of his kinsfolks, nor of his friends, according to
the word of the Lord which he spoke against Baacha by^ ^chu the Prophet. Which
act of Zimri, though a just judgment in regard of God, on the family of Baacha
for their Idolatry, was notwithstanding reputed Treason in Zimri, because he
did it not out of Conscience or zeal against Idolatry, being, and continuing an
Idolater himself; but only out of ambition to usurp the Crown, without the
peeples consent; whereupon all the people made Omri King and then going all to
the Royal Palace, set it on fire, and burnt Omri in it, both for his sins,
Idolatries, and Treason which he wrought. We read expressly, 2 Chronicles. 25, 27,
28. c, to 6. 1 King. 14. 19, 20, 21. c, 15.
that after the time that Amaziah did turn away from following the Lord, they
(for this) conspired a conspiracy against him in Jerusalem, and he fled to
Lachish, but they sent to Lachish after him, slew him there; and they brought
him upon horses, and buried him with his fathers in the City of Judah. Then all
the people of Judah took Uzziah, who was 16 years old, and MADE HIM KING in the
room of his father Amaziah, and he did that which was right in the sight of the
Lord. So 2 King. 15.
Zachariah, Shallum, Pekahiah, Pekah, four evil Kings of Judah, successivly
acquiring the Crown by murder, and reigning evilly in Gods fight, were all
slain by Gods just judgment on them, of one another, and Hoshea. In few words,
God himself ever annexed this condition to the Kings of Israel and Judah, that
they should serve and fear him, obey him Laws, keep his Covenant, otherwise if
they did wickedly for sake him, or commit idolatry, he would destroy, forsake,
and cast them and their seed off from being 1 Samuel 12. 14. 19, 25. 2 Samuel 7.
11, 12, 14, 15, 16, Psa. 89. 30, 31, 32, O Chro. 28. 7, 8, 9. 1 Kin. 11. 9, 10,
11, 12. 32, 38. 1 Samuel 19. 23, 26, 27, 28 29, 25 c. 16. 1. comfared with Deuteronomy.
7. 16 to the end.
Kings. When therefore they apparently violated the condition, the whole State
and people, as Gods Instruments, lawfully might, and sometimes did by Gods
special direction, remov depose, and sometimes put them even to death for
their gross iniquities, and idolatries; and when they did it not, it was not
(as many think) for want of lawful Sovereign Authority remaining in the whole
State and people, (as I shall fully manifest in the Appendix) but out of a
defect of zeal, out of a general complying with their Kings in 1 King 12. 3 c,
3. 33. 34. c. 4 to 7. c. 15 to the end of, c. 22. 2 King. c. 1. to the end of
6. 25. 2 Chro. 10. 1. to the end of c. 24.
their abominable idolatries and sins, which brought War, Captivity, ruin,
both on their Kings, their Posterity, the whole Nation and Kingdoms of Judah,
and Israel, as the Sacred Story plentifully relates. All which considere, this
object on proves not only false, but fatal to the Obiectors cause, who might
with more discretion have forborne, then forced such an answer to it, which I
hope and desire no private persons will abuse to justify any disloyalty,
sedition, Treason, Rebellion, or taking up of Arms against their lawful
Princes, though never so evil, without the public consent and authority of
the representative bodies or major part of their several Realms by assed with
no sinister nor private respects, but aiming only at Gods glory, and the
public weal security, peace of Church and State. Thus much in answer to the
principal Objections out of the Old Testament. Object 9.


The ninth and most material Dr Fern, Sect. 2. p 10, 11, 12 ande sewhere. The
netessitie of Christian Sub^ection, Oxford, 1643. Appeal to thy Conscience,
1643. I he Lords Anointed, Oxford, 1643 with others.
Objection, on which our Opposites principally rely, is that noted Text in the
new Testament, Romans 13. 1, 2. Let every soul be subject unto the higher Powers,
for there is no Power but of God; the Powers that be, are Ordained of God.
Whosoever therefore resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God, and
they that resist, shall receive to themselves damnation. From whence Dr. Fern
concludes, 1. That the King is the Supreme or Highest Power here intended. 2.
That all persons under the Highest Power are expressly forbidden to resist. 3.
That in those days there was astanding and continual great Senate, which not
long before had the Supreme Power in the Roman State, and might challenge more
by the fundamentalls of that State, then our Great Council will or can. But
now the Emperor being supreme, as S. Peter calls him, or the Higher Power, as
S. Paul here, there is no power of resistance left to any that are under him,
by the Apostle. 4 Was there ever more cause of resistance then in those days?
Were not the Kings then not only conceived to be inclined so, and so, but even
actually to be enemies of Religion, had overthrown Laws and Liberties? And
therefore if any should from the Apostles reasons that he gives against
resistance in the 3, 4, 5, Verses. ( for Rulers are not a terror to good works,
but evil, and he is the Minister of God to thee for good) reply, That Rulers
so long as they are not a terror to the good, but ministers for our good, are
not to be resisted; the consideration of those times leaves no place for such
exception, because the Powers then (which the Apostle forbids to resist) were
nothing so, but subverters of that which was good and just. The Emperors did
then indeed rule abs^l^tely ^d arburarily, which should have according to the
Principles of those days been astro^ger motive to resist. But how did they
make themselves of Subjects such absolute Monarchs? was it not by force and
change of the Government? and was not the right of the People and Senate
(according to the Principles of these days) good against them, with as much or
more reason, then the right of the people of this Land is against the
Succession of this Crown, des^nding by three Conquests? 5. The prohibition does
not only concern Christians, but all the people under those Emperors, and not
only Religion was persecuted, but Liberties also lost, the people and Senate
were then enslaved by Edicts and Laws then enforced on them by Nero and other
Roman Emperors, yet notwithstanding the Apostle prohibits them to resist. By
all which conscience will clearly see, it can have no warrant in Scripture for
resistance, to wit, of the King, or his invading Forces, by way of necessary
defense. So the Doctors and other Objectors hence conclude.

To give a satisfactory Answer to this grand Objection, I shall in the first
place inquire, Whether there be any thing in this Text, Answ.
prohibiting subjects to resist with Force the armed unjust violence of their
Princes persons or instruments, especially when they are bent to overthrow
Religion, Laws, Liberties, the Republike, and turn professed Tyrants? And under
correction, I conceive there is not the least syllable or shadow in this Text
for any such inhibition, as is pretended. Not to insist upon the words, higher
Powers odained of God, etc. which extend not unto Tyranny and illegal
exorbitant oppressions, of which hereafter; I shall deducemy first
Demonstrations to prove this negative Assertion, from the occasion inducing the
Apostle to insert these objected Verses into this Epistle: Sixsold Comment, on
Romans 13. Quest. 1. p. 576.
Dr Willet recites 7. Reasons of it, all fortifying my assertion; I shall
mention only the three most probable, most received of them, and apply them as
I go.

First, the Roman Magistrates being then infidels, the new converted Christians
among them, either did, or might take themselves to be wholly exempted from any
subjection or obedience to them, reputing it a great incongruity, that
Christians should owe any subjection to Pagans: To refute which error, the
Apostle informs them, that though the Magistrates themselves were Ethnicks, yet
their Authority and Power was from God himself; therefore their profession of
Christianity did rather oblige them to, then exempt them from subjection. Thus
Haymo Soto, Calvin, Guather, Marlorat, Willet, Pareus, with others on this
Text. Turn this Reason then into an Argument, and it will be but this Non
sequitur: Christianity exempts not subjects from due obedience to just Pagan
Magistrates, Ergo, Tyrants may not be resisted, neither ought the Parliament
and their Forces to resist the King Cavallcers unjust assaults, as the case is
formerly stated. Pretty Logic, and Divinity.

2. The Gaulonites, as Antiqu. Iud. l. 18. c. 1. 2.
Josephus records, with other lews, being Abraham's seed, held it unlawful for
them to yield any subjection or tribute to the Roman Emperors, or other Heathen
Princes, reigning over them; whereupon they demanded this question of Christ
himself, It is lawful to pay tribute to Caesar? Matthew. 12. which error
perehance spread it self into the Christian Church, by reason of Evangelicall
Liberty, grounded on Ioh. 8. If the Son shall make you free, then are ye free
indeed; Mat. 17. Then are the Children free; and To. 6. We are not under the
Law, but under Grace. ^o refell this mistake, the Apostle inserted these
passages into this Epistle; Thus Soto, Calvin, Peter Martyr, Willet, and
others. Whence nothing but this can be properly concluded, Neither the
Prerog^tive of the ^ews, not Liberty of Christians exempts them from due
subjection to l^wfull hea he ^ Magistrates, because they are Gods Ordinance,
Ergo, No Subjects can with safe conscience defend themselves in any case
against the unjust invasions of Tytannicall Princes or their Armies. A palpable
Inconsequent.

Thirdly, the Apostle having formerly t^ught, Romans 12, 19,
that Christians might not avenge themselves: lest some might have inserred
thereupon (as many O slander. Enchir contr. cap. ^. de Magist. Polit.
Anabaptists have done) that it was not lawful for Christians to use the
Magistrates defense against wrongs, nor for the Magistrate himself to take
vengeance of evil doers: To prevent this the Apostle argues, That the
Magistrates are Gods Ministers, appointed by him to punish Malefactors, and
take vengeance on them. So Gualther, Willet, and others. To conclude from this
ground: Oppressed Subjects may seek redress of their grievances from the
Magistrates, who may lawfully punish Malefactors, Ergo, they may not resist
with force, Tyrannical bloody Magistrates, or their wicked Instruments, when
they actually make war upon them, to ruin, spoil, enslave them, is but a
ridiculous Non sequitur. There is nothing therefore in the occasions of the
Apostles words which gives the least color, to disprove the lawfulness of
such resistance, or of the Parliaments just defensive war.

Secondly, this is manifest by the whole Scope of this Text, which in sum is
only this, That Christians ought in conscience to (l) be subject to all
lawful higher Powers, so far forth as they are Gods Ordinance, Gods
Ministers, for their good, to the praise of the good, and punishment of evil
doers, and notto resist them in the execution of their just Authority: Or
Christianity exempts not Christians from obedience unto faithful Civil
Magistrates: to infer from thence. Ergo it is unlawful for Christians in
point of conscience to resist their Magistrates when they war upon them to
subvert Religion, Laws, Liberties, slay, plunder them, is but a mere nonsense
deduction.

Thirdly, this appears most perspicuously from the motives to obedience, and
reasons against resistance of Magistrates specified by the Apostle in the text
it self.

First, the higher Powers must be submitted to, and not resisted, because they
are ordained of God, and are Gods Ordinance, verse. 1. 2. But they are ordained
of God and his Ordinance, so far forth only as they govern according to his
Word; and preserve, Isay 32. 1, 2. c. 49. 23. 1 Sa. 8. 20. Psa. 78. 72, 73, 74.
protect Religion, Laws, Liberties, the persons and estates of their people;
They are not Gods Ordinance, Paraus, Willet, So^o, and others.
but the Devils, when they do quite contrary, 1 Pet. 5. 8.
walking about like roaring Lions, seeking whom they may devour, as the Devil
does; According to that resolution of Bracton, and Fleta Lib. 3. c. 9. f. 107.
Exercere debet Rex potestatem Iuri^ sicut Dei Vicarius and Ministeri in terra,
quia illa Potestas SOLIVS DEI EST potestas autem injuriae DIABOLI ET NON DEI;
Cujus horum operum fecerit Rex ejus minister erit. Igitur dum facit justitiam,
vicarius est Regis aeterni: MINISTER AVTEM DIABOLI dum declinat ad injuriam.
Therefore they are so far forth only to be obeyed and not resisted, Fleta,
l. 1. (...). 17.
as they are Gods Ordinance, and lawful Magistrates, not as they are tyrants
and the Devils Agents: we might have obeyed the evil spirits themselves whiles
they continued good Angels; Ergo we must not resist them now they are turned
Devils, is ill Logic, course Divinity, contrary to the 1 Pet. 5. 8, 9. Iam. 4.
7.

Secondly, because those who resist shall receive to themselves damnation,
temporal or eternal, since they resist Gods Ordinance, v. 2. But that
subjects should be temporally and eternally damned, only for resisting
tyrannical Magistrates or their Cavaleers, and that by authority from the
Parliament, when they with armed violence most impiously set themselves to
subvert Religion, Laws, Liberty, Property, and take away their lives, against
all Laws of God and Man; for which they themselves incur both Isay 14. 4. to
23. 1 King. 1. 21, and 22. Psalm. 52. 1. to 7. Psa. 7. 13. Psa. 94. 10. 21. 23.
Psalm. 140. 1. to 13.
temporal and eternal damnation, is such a Paradox, as is no ways warranted
by, but directly opposite to the Scripture. Therefore it must be intended only
of resisting lawful Authority, and just commands.

3. They must be subjected to, not resisted, because Rulers are not a terror to
good work, but to evil, v. 3. Now is this a reason why Subjects should not
resist tyrannical oppressing Princes, Magistrates, or their Instruments, who
are only a terror to good works, not to evil? who do Psalm. 140. 1. Io. 60.
Prove 1. 16. Mich. 2. 13. c. 3. 23. 1^. 3.
evil and only evil continually, even with both hands? doubtless not. We
must not resist Rulers who are a terror to good works but to evil; Ergo, we
must not resist Rulers, who are a terror to good works, not to evil, as our
Opposites conclude hence, is to argue poi^^ blank against the Apostle; Ergo, we
may and must resist them to our powers, lest we be Romans 1. 31. 32. 1 Timothy 5. 22
2 John 10. 11. Rev. 18 4.
partakers of their sins and punishments, and become authors of Religions and
the Commonwealths subversion, is a more proper inference.

Fourthly, the Apostle subjoynes this argument against resistance. Will thou
not then be afraid of the power? do that which is good, and thou shall have
praise of the same, Verse. 3. That power is not to be resisted, which we need
not be afraid of, and of whom we shall have praise whiles we do that which is
good: But this only can be intended of a lawful power justly executed; not
of Tyrants, or their ill Ministers bent with force of arms to ruin Religion,
Laws, Liberties,; who only terrify, disgrace, discountenance those that are
good; applaud, advance none but those who are evil, and as Micah writes, Chap.
3. 2. 3. Love the evil and hate the good, and pluck off their skin from off
them, and their flesh from off their bones, etc. Therefore this inhibition of
resistance extends only to lawful Magistrates, not to ungodly oppressing
Tyrants.

Fifthly, he is not to be resisted, but obeyed; because he is the Minister of
God to thee for good, Verse. 4. But is this true of Tyrants? of ungodly
Magistrates bent to subvert Religion, Laws, Liberties, and destroy their
people? True of See Suetonius, Eutropius, Zonaras, Grimston and others in their
lives.
Caligula, of Nero, who wished all the Romans had but one neck, that he might
cut them all off at one stroke; and purposely fired Rome to consume it,
beholding the flames as a most delightful spectacle? Are such the Ministers of
God for our good here intended? or not rather, See Seneca de Clem. l. 1. Hosea
13. 11.
the very Pests, Judgments, Scourges, Wolves, Cutthroats, destroyers of
mankind, and direct Antinodes to all things that are good? If these be not
within the Apostles definition, they are without his inhibition; which extends
only to such, who are the Ministers of God to us for good: and implies a
lawfulness of resisting those who are the Devils Ministers to us for evil,
rather then Gods for good.

Sixthly, He subjoynes this further reason of obedience and not resistance,
Verse. 5. But if thou do that which is evil be afraid; for he bears not the
Sword in vain; for he is the Minister of God, a revenger, to execute wrath
upon him that does evil; which no ways suites with a Tyrant bent to subvert
Religion, Laws, Liberties: For he secures all evil men, especially those who
are isntrumental to advance his cruelty, and oppressions; gives liberty to all
manner of wickednesses, Proclaims impunity to his ill instruments, knowing
that of the Poet to be true; Lucan. d. Bello Civili. l. 8. p. 141.
Libertas scelerum est quae Regna invisa tuetur, etc. He bears the sword not
only in vain, in reference to any good end, for the promoting of Gods glory
and the public good; but likewise draws it forth, and uses it directly
against both; See Fox Acts and Monuments throughout.
And is so far from being a Minister of God, or revenger to execute wrath
upon them that do evil, that he is the very Minister of the Devil, Apolog.
c. 5. and Seneca devita beaia, c. 24.
Tertullian, Nihil nisi grande aliquid bonum a Nerone damnatum. This reason
then extends only to righteous Governors, in their execution of justice upon
wicked malefactors wherein they must not be resisted; Not to bloody,
graceless, lawless Tyrants and their instruments, who by the rule of
contraries may and ought to be resisted in their cruelties, oppressions,
impieties.

Seventhly, the Apostle hereupon concludes, Verse. 5. Wherefore you must of
necessity be subject not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake. This
conclusion as the word, Wherefore, demonstrates, being inferred from the
premised reasons, extending only to (...) extends to all civil Magistrates,
as well inferior and subordinate, as superior, (and many stick not to
strain it even to Ecclesiastical ones) So Origin, Ambrose, Hierome, Remigius,
Theodulus, Chrysostom, Theodoret, Primasius, Haymo, Rabanus Maurus,
Theophylact, Oecumenius, Haymo, Aquinas, Anselm, Lyra, Bruno, Gorran, Hugo de
Sancto Victore, Tostatus, Luther, Calvin, Erasmus, Melanchthon, Gualther,
Musculus, Bucer, Hemingius, Ferus, Fayus, Soto, Alexander Alesius, Peter
Martyr, Pareus, Beza, Piscator, Zuinglius, Tollet, Willet, Wilson, Nacclantus,
Snecanus, Vignerius, Wenerichius, Winckelman, Estius, Faber, Cornelius a
Lapide, Salmeron, Catharinus, Guilliandus, Adam Sasbout with sundry others.
This then being irrefragable, hereby it is most apparent; First, that no
resistance of the higher powers is here prohibited, but only in the due and
legal execution of their offices: For if any inferior Officers illegally
endeavor to subvert Religion, Laws, Liberties, and unrightly govern the
people, they may lawfully be resisted by them: For example, if a Mayor, Justice
of Peace, Constable or other officer; extravagating from the common course of
Law and Justice; shall with force of arms in a riotous manner assault any
private man, or the whole City or Village where he lives, to beat, wound,
kill, plunder, dispossess the inhabitants of their houses, goods, franchises,
or assault them on the highway side, to take away their purses; in these and
such like cases, both in point of Law and conscience he may not only be
forcibly resisted, but repulsed, apprehended, battered, if not lawfully slain
by the people, and proceeded against as a delinquent: The reason is, because
these illegal unjust actions, are not only besides, without their
Commissions, but directly contrary to their offices, and the Laws, which never
gave them authority to act such injustice: yet they are higher Powers ordained
of God, within this Text, and no way to be resisted in the due execution of
their Offices according to Law. If then these inferior Officers may be thus
forcibly resisted, repulsed, notwithstanding this Text, in such cases as these;
then by the self same reason Kings and Emperors may be thus resisted too;
since the Text extends indifferently to them both. Let then the objectors take
their choice; either affirm, that no inferior lawful Officers whatsoever,
may be forcibly resisted, by the people, or repulsed, arraigned censured for
their misdemeanour, by virtue of this Text; which would bring an absolute
Tyranny, Anarchy and confusion presently into the world, and make every
Constable as great a Tyrant, Monarch as the grand Emperor of the Turks; or else
confess, that this Text condemns not such resistance, even of Kings and
Princes, when they forcibly war upon their Subjects to subvert Religion, Laws,
Liberties, and ruin the republike; since it makes no distinction at all
between the ones power and the others; but equally enjoynes subjection,
prohibits resistance unto both; and that only in just administration of their
several authorities, not in the arbitrary unjust prosecutions of their wills
and lusts.

Secondly, it follows, that the Kings Soldiers, Cavaliers and Forces now
raised against Law, and armed only with illegal Commissions void in Law, as I
have proved; are none of the high powers ordained of God, nor lawful Rulers or
Magistrates within the meaning of this Scripture; and so the forcible resisting
of them, and of the Kings illegal commands and designs executed by them, is
no resistance of the higher powers here prohibited.

Thirdly, that the Houses of Parliament being in truth the highest powers
ordained of God in this Realm, and their just legal Ordinances, Votes,
Forces, for the necessary defense of Laws, Liberties, Religion, against the
Kings ill Counselors, and Malignant Popish Forces, neither may, nor ought in
conscience to be resisted by the King himself, or any of his Subjects,
Soldiers, under the peril of that damnation mentioned in this Chapter.

For the second, Quest. 2.
Whether the Roman Emperor in Paul's time was the highest Sovereign power in the
Roman State, or not? It is taken for granted by Doctor Fern and other Doctor
Fern, Appeal to thy conscience; The necessity of subjection.
opposites, that he was, as a thing past doubt, the Senate and people (as they
say) having resigned up their power to the Emperor. But this no doubt is a
gross error, (which I have largely refuted in the Appendix, and therefore
shall be the briefer here) derived from some civil Lawyers; who out of
Justinian. Digest. lib. 2. Tet. 2. and Instit. Tit. 2. falsely affirm, that
Lege Regia; by the regal Law the Senate and people transferred all their
Empire and power unto the Emperor. For first the Senate and people (as
Albericus Gentilis well observes) did not by this Law give the Emperor all
power and command to dispose of them, or the lands and revenues of the Empire,
as he pleased; but only to govern them according to their Laws, as men; not
to slay and alienate them as beasts. Thus reason dictates, so the words of the
Law sound. Alci. l. 3. de V. s. l. 35. and de P^^^.
Divines are deceived, Lawyers flatter, who persuade, that all things are
lawful to Princes, and that their power is highest and free. It is ridiculous
to affirm, that absolute power over the subjects belongs to Popes; which
belongs not to the Emperors themselves over the Italians, from whom they
derive it. Imagine therefore that the Emperor had a power never so free, yet
it is not of dominion, but of administration. L. 7. de Don. l. 1. quae res, p.
1. da. ob. non. pos. l. 8. qui mo piso l. 17. pro. Empt.
And he who has but a free administration has not the power of donation.e A
guardian is then reputed in stead of a Lord, cum tutelam administrat, non cum
pupillum spoliat; when he rightly administers his tutelage, not when he spoils
his pupil. So Gentilis. If then the Emperors had only a free legal
administration, not an absolute dominion; granted them by the people, then this
sovereign power still resided in the Senate and people, as Justinian Digest.
lib. 1. Tit. 2. De Origin Juris, will sufficiently manifest: Secondly,
Commonweal, l. 2. c. 5. p. 221.
John Bodin a learned Civilian clearly proves: That the Roman Emperors were at
the first; nothing else but Princes of the Commonweal, The SOVEREIGNTY
NEVERTHELESS STILL RESTING IN THE PEOPLE, and THE SENATE: So that this
Commonwealth was then to have been called a Principality; although that
Seneca speaking in the person of Nero his Scholar, says. I am the only man
amongst living men, elect and chosen to be the Lieutenant of God upon earth: I
am the Arbitratour of life and death; I am able of my pleasure to dispose of
the state and quality of every man. True it is, that he took upon him this
Sovereign authority, by force wrested from the people and Senate of Rome,
(therefore not freely given him by any Law) but IN RIGHT HE HAD IT NOT, the
State being but a very principality WHEREIN THE PEOPLE HAD THE SOVEREIGNTY. In
which case, THERE IS NO DOUBT but that IT IS LAWFUL to proceed against a
Tyrant by way of justice, if so men may prevail against him: or else by way of
fact, Sucionius, Zona^as, Grimston, Eutropius, Sab^llicus, Op^neerus, and
others in his life.
and OPEN FORCE, if they may not otherwise have reason; As the Senate did in
the first case against NERO: and in the other against Maximinus. So Bodin, who
directly resolves, that even in Nero his reign when this Epistle was written,
the highest sovereign power was not in the Emperor, but in the Senate and
people: who notwithstanding this objected Text, had no doubt a lawful Right,
not only to resist Nero when he turned Tyrant with open force, but likewise
judicially to arraigne and condemn him even to death, as they did, for his
public crimes. Now that the Sovereign highest Power remained in the Senate
and people notwithstanding this Lex Regia, Marius Salamonius ( an incomparable
learned Roman Civilian) has largely proved in his six Books De principatu (
purposely written to refute the contrary common error) where he writes, First,
that the Roman Emperors were created and constituted only by the Senate and
people; and that the Creature should be superior to the Creator, the child to
the parent, is absurd. Secondly, that the Emperors were but the Senates and
peoples public servants; therefore they were their Lords; and not inferior,
but superior to their servants. Thirdly, that they were subordinate and
inferior to the Laws made by the Senate and people; and bound by all their
Laws, but such as the Senate and people did by special Acts exempt them from.
Fourthly, that the people and Senate did by special Laws create, limit,
Marius Salamonius de Principatu, l. 6. p. 122. to 126.
enlarge or abridge their Emperors power and jurisdiction, as they saw cause,
giving sometimes more or less jurisdiction to one Emperor then another: which
they could not justly do, were they not the highest Sovereign power. Finally
he proves it by the very Lex Regia it self; which because rare and unknown to
most, I shall here recite, to inform and reform our ignorant Court Doctors,
Lawyers, with Salamonius his observations from it. Lex Regia, was not only one
single Law: There was not one Law for all Emperors, but it was revived for
every Emperor, yet not with the same conditions. The brass Table which yet
hangs in the Lateran Church, proves that the Royal Law was accustomed to be
altered in every Princes reign AT THE PLEASVRE OF THE ROMAN PEOPLE; for it is
part of the Royal Law of the Empire of Vespatian, that it should be altered:
which had been void, if from the beginning of the Empire a perpetual Law had
been made for all successors; the words of the Law are these.

;Faedusve cum quibus volet facere, ita ut licuit Divo Augusto, Tyber. Julio
Caesari Aug. Tyherioque Claudio, Julio Caesari Aug. Germanico.

Vtique eum Senatum habere, relationem facere, remittere Senatus consulta, per
relationem, discessionemque facere liceat, ut licuit Divo Augusto, Tiberio,
Julio Caesari Augusto, Tyberio, Claudio Caesari Augusto Germanico.

Vtique quum ex voluntate, auctoritateue, jussu, mandatione ejus, praesenteve
eo Senatus habebitur, omnium rerum jus perinde habeatur, servetur, ac si^e lege
Senatus edictus esset, habereturque.

Vtique Coss. Magistratus potestatem, imperium, curationemve cuivis rei petenti
Senatui populoque Romano commendaverit, quibusve suff^agationem suam dederit,
promiserit, eorum Comitiis quibusque extra ordinem, ratio habeatur.

Vtique ei fines pomaerii proferre, procurare, cume Rep. censebit esse, liceat;
uti licuit Tiberio, Claudio Caesari, Augusto Germanico.

Vtique quaecunque ex usu Reip. majestate divinar: humanar: publicar:
privatarumque rerum esse censebit, ea agere, facere jus, potestasque sit, ita
uti Divo Aug. Tyberioque, Julio Caesari Aug. Tyberioque Claudio Aug. Germanico
fuit.

Vtique quibus legibus, Plebisve scitis scriptum fuit, ne Divus Augustus
Tyberiusve, Jul. Caes. Aug. Tyberiusve, Claudius Caes. Aug. Germanicus
tenerentur; his Legibus Plebisque scitis Imp. Aug. Vespatianus solutus sit;
quaeque ex quaque Lege, Rogatione Divum Aug. Tyberiumve, Iul. Caesarem Aug.
Tyberiumve, Claudium Caes. Aug. Germanicum facere oportuerat, ea omnia
Imperatori Caesari Vespatiano Aug. facere liceat.

Vtique quae ante hanc legem rogatam, acta, gesta, decreta, imperata, ab Imp.
Caesare Vespatiano Augusto, jussu, mandatuve ejus a quoque sunt, ea perinde
justa rata sint, ac si populi plebisve jussu acta essent. Sanctio. Si quis
hujusce legis ergo adversus leges, rogationes, plebisve scita, senatusue
consulta fecit, feceritve, sive quod cum ex lege, rogatione, plebisve scito,
senatusve consulto facere oportebit, non fecerit, hujus legis ergo, id ei ne
fraudi esto, neve quid ob eam rem populo dari debeto, neve de ea re cui,
actioneve judicato esto, neve quis de ea re apud eum agi sinito.

This Law first shows, that there was not one royal Law made for all
Emperors, but that for every several Emperor several Laws were necessary,
containing the conditions whereupon the Principality was collated by the Roman
people: For to Vespatian, it appears power was granted, of enlarging or
settling the bounds, as it was granted to Germanicus, but not to other Princes.
And in the last Chapter but one, which says: And by those things which by any
Law, etc. it is lawful to do; a larger power is given to Vespatian then to
the forenamed Emperors; and that they ought to do some things, which
Vespatian ought not to do by Law. Likewise by these words; Vtique quibus
legibus, etc. solutus sit: it appears that Vespatian was not freed from all
Laws, nor yet the Emperor before him. Likewise out of the Chapter where it
says, Ex usu Reip. Majestate, etc. it is evident that not an absolute free
administration of things was committed to the Emperors, but only such as was
useful, that is, which should be for the profit and honor of the republike:
whence is inferred, that those things which were not for the benefit and honor
of the Commonweal, Emperors had no right nor power to do. And in the last
Chapter is perspicuously set down THAT SUPERIOR POWER OF THE PEOPLE, GREATER
THEN THE PRINCIPALITY IT SELF. How then does Vlpian say, the Prince is loosed
from Laws? he says not from all Laws: verily that he was exempt from many is
no doubt, etc. (yet it was by a special clause in the Lex Regia.) This and
much more Salamonius. All which considered, will infallibly evidence, the Roman
Senate and People to be the highest power in Paul's time, not the Emperor; who
even at this day (as Commonweal l. 2 c. 5.
Bodin proves) is inferior to the Germane States, who are the Sovereign
power: when King Henry the fourth of France, Anno 1600. used this speech to the
Duke of Savoy; General History of France, p. 965.
If the King of France would be ambitious of any thing greater then his Crown,
it might be an Empire, but not in the estate that it is now, the title of
Empire being little more then that of the Duke of Venice; the soveraingty
(writes the Historian in the Margin) remaining in the States of the Empire.

All that is objected against the premises, is that passage of Tertullian,
Object.
much insisted on: Colimus ergo and Imperatore^ sic, Ad Scapulam, lib. p. 163.
Objected by, The necessity of Subjection, and others.
quomodo and nobis licet, and ipsi expedit, ut hominem a DEO SECUNDUM; and
quicquid est a Deo consecutum, SOLO DEO MINOREM. Hoc et ipse volet: Sic enim
OMNIBUS MAJOR EST, DUM SOLO VERO DEO MINOR EST. Sic and ipsis Diis major est,
dum and ipsi in poteste sunt ejus, etc.

To which I answer, Answ.
that these words only prove the Emperor in the Roman State to be the highest
Officer and Magistrate under God, of any one particular person; not that he was
the Sovereign highest power above the Senate and people collectively
considered: And the occasion of these words will discover the Authors intention
to be no other: which was this. The Christians in that age were persecuted and
put to death by Scapula President of Carthage, to whom Rhenani Annot. Ibid.
Tertullian writes this Book, because they refused to adore the Emperor for a
God, to swear by his Genius, and to observe his solemnities and triumphs in an
Ethnicall manner; as is evident by the words preceding this passage: Sic and
circa Majestatem Imperatoris infamamur, etc. and by sundry notable passages in
his Apologeticus. In answer to which accusation Tertullian reasons in the
Christians behalf; that though they adored not the Emperor as a God; yet they
reverenced him as a man next under God; as one only less then God; as one
greater then all others, whiles less only then the true God, and greater then
the Idol Gods themselves, who were in the Emperors power, etc. Here was no
other thing in question; but whether the Emperor were to be adored as God?
not, whether he or the Roman Senate and people were the greatest highest
Sovereign power? And the answer being, that he was but a man next under God,
above any other particular officer in the Roman State; is no proof at all,
that he was paramount the whole Senate and people collectively considered, or
of greater Sovereign power then they; which the premises clearly disprove.
Add; that this Father in his Apology thus censures the Pagan Romans for their
gross flattery of their Emperors whom they feared more then their Gods,
appliable to our present times; Siquidem majore formidine and callidiore
timiditate Caesarem observatis, quam ipsum de Olympo Jovem, etc. adeo and in
isto irreligiosi erga dees vestros deprehendimini, cum plus timoris, humano
Domino dicatis; citius denique apud vos per omnes Deos, quam per unum genium
Caesaris pejeratur. Then he adds, Interest hominis Deo cedere; satis habeat
appellari Imperator: grande and hoc nomen est, quod a Deo tradetur: negat illum
imperatorem qui deum dicit; nisi homo sit, non est imperator. Hominem se esse
etiam triumphans in illo sublimissimo curru admonetur. Suggeritur enim ci a
tergo, Respice post te; hominem memento te. Etiam hoc magis gaudet tanta se
gloria coruscare, ut illi admonitio conditionis suae sit necessaria. Major est
qui revocatur ne se deum existimet. Augustus imperii formator, ne Dominum
quidem dici se volebat: et hoc enim Dei est cognomen. Dicam plane Imperatorem
Dominum, sed more communi, sed quando non cogor, ut Dominum Dei vice dicam.
Concluding thus: Nullum bonum sub exceptione personarum administramus, etc.
lidem sumus Imperatoribus qui and vicinis nostris. Male enim velle, male
facere, male dicere, male cogitare de quoquam ex aequo vetamur, Quodcunque non
licet in Imperatorem, id nec in quenquam: quod in neminem, eo forsitan magis
nec in ipsum qui per deum tantus est, etc. From which it is evident, that the
Christians did not deifie nor flatter their Emperors more then was meet, and
deemed they might not resist them only in such cases where they might resist
no others, and so by consequence lawfully resist them, where it was lawful for
them to resist other private men who did injuriously assault them.

If then the Roman Emperors were not the highest Sovereign power in the Roman
State when Paul writ this Epistle, but the Roman Senate and State, as I have
cleared: and if the Parliament, not the King, be the supremest Sovereign power
in our Realm, as I have abundantly manifested; then this objected Text (so
much insisted on by our opposites) could no ways extend to the Roman Senate,
State, or our English Parliament, who are the very higher powers themselves,
and proves most fatal and destructive to their cause of any other, even by
their own Argument, which I shall thus doubly discharge upon them.

First, that power which is the highest and most sovereign Authority in any
State or kingdom by the Apostles and our Antagonists own doctrine, even in
point of conscience, neither may, nor ought in what case soever (say our
opposites) to be forcibly resisted, either in their persons, ordinances,
commands, instruments, offices, or Armed Soldiers, by any inferior powers,
persons or subjects whatsoever, especially when their proceedings are just and
legal, under pain of temporal and eternal condemnation. But the Senate
among the Romans, not the Emperor; and the Parliament in England, not the
King, really were and are the higher Powers and most sovereign Authority.
Therefore by the Apostles own Doctrine even in point of conscience, they
neither may nor ought to be disobeyed or forcibly resisted in any case
whatsoever, either in their Persons, Ordinances, Commands, Instruments,
Officers, or Armed Soldiers, by the King himself, his Counselors, Armies,
Cavaliers, or by any inferior powers, persons, or Subjects whatsoever,
especially when their proceedings are just and legal, (as hitherto they have
been) under pain of temporal and eternal condemnation. I hope the Doctor
and his Camerads will now beshrew themselves that ever they meddled with this
Text, and made such a halter to strangle their own treacherous cause, and
those who have taken up arms in its defense.

Secondly, that Power which is simply highest and supreme in any State, may
lawfully with good conscience take up Arms to resist or suppress any other
power, that shall take up arms to subvert Religion, Laws, Liberties, the
Republike, or the just Rights and Privileges of the Subject, or of this higher
power. This is our opposites own argumentation. Therefore the Parliament being
in verity the highest supreme Power in our State, may lawfully with good
conscience take up Arms to resist or suppress his Majesty's Malignant, Popish
Forces, or any other power which already has, or hereafter shall be raised to
subvert Religion, Laws, Liberties, the Republike, just Rights and Privileges
of Parliament, or the Subjects; and every man with safe conscience may
chearefully serve in such a war, upon the Parliaments encouragement or
command, without guilt of treason, or rebellion either in Law or Conscience.

For the third Question; Quest. 3.
Whether Tyrants or unjust oppressing Magistrates, as they are such, be within
the intendment of this Text, and not to be resisted in any case? I have fully
cleared this before from the occasion, scope and arguments used in this
Chapter; that they are not within the compass of this Text; as they are such,
and may be resisted in their Tyranny and oppressions notwithstanding this
inhibition; I shall not repeat, but only fortify this Position with some new
reasons and authorities.

First then, that which is not the ordinance of God, but rather of the Devil,
and the mere sin and enormity of the Governor himself, not of the
Government, is not within the intention of this Text, and may lawfully be
resisted without any violation of it. But Tyrants and unjust oppressing
Magistrates as they are such, are See Mich. 3. 1. to 5. Isay 3. 4, 5. Zeph. 3,
3. Ezech. 45. 8, 9.
not Gods ordinance, but rather the Devils, and their Tyranny and oppression
is only the sin and enormity of the Governors themselves, not of the
government; A truth granted by all men: Therefore they are not within the
compass of this Text, and may lawfully be resisted without any violation of it.

Secondly, that which is no point of the Magistrates lawful power ordained of
God, but diametrally repugnant to it, cannot be within the meaning of this
Text, and may lawfully be resisted; but the tyranny, oppression, rapine, and
violence of lawless Kings and Magistrates are such, as all must and do
acknowledge. Ergo, they are not within the verge and compass of this Text, and
may lawfully be resisted.

Thirdly, all powers intended in the Text, are not only ordained, but ordered
of God, that is, In Romans 13. Col 1266. Willet. on Romans 13. quest. 6. p. 583.
Paraeus with others observe) they are circumscribed and bounded with certain
Rules or Laws of justice and honesty, within which they must contain
themselves, else they exorbitate from Gods ordinance when they pass beyond
these limits, and become none of Gods; This the Greek word (...), (which Arias
Montanus and others render, ordinatae, and the Margin of our English Bibles,
are ordered of God;) does sufficiently warrant being coupled with the
subsequent limitations; For rulers are not a terror to good works, but to
evil, etc. they are Gods Ministers attending continually on this very thing.
Now the Tyranny and oppression of Kings and other Rulers, are mere
exorbitances, arbitrary illegal actions, exceeding the bounds of justice and
honesty prescribed by the Laws of God and men. Therefore not within the limits
of this Text, and resistible.

Fourthly, it is generally accorded by all Commentators, that though the
lawful power of Princes or other Magistrates degenerating unto Tyrants, be of
God, and not to be resisted; yet the Tyranny it self, and abuse of this power
is of Satan, not of God, and the vice of the persons only, not of the Power it
self; whence they conclude, that Tyrants are not within the meaning of this
Scripture. So Origin, Paraeus, Willet, with most others on this Text; and
Zuinglius most expressly Explanatio Artic. 41. Tom. 1. f. 82. 83. where he
complains, that many Tyrants, cheat, steal, rob, slay, plunder, and attempt
any thing against their subjects to oppress them; assuming a pretext and veil
of their malice from this Text of Paul. Yea Dominicus Soto, Cajetan, Pererius,
and other Popish commentators on this place observe; that Paul adds this
Epithet, of higher or excelling powers ( omitted by him in other parallel
Texts) of purpose to exclude Tyrants, who are no excelling Lords, nor lawful
Powers; reigning often times by Gods permission for the peoples punishment; not
by his ordination for their good: and blame Bueer for saying, that Tyrants
power is from God, as if he were ths author of sin and Tyranny.

This then fully answers that absurd error of Doctor Sect. 2.
Fern, wherein all his force is placed: That the Power in Paul's days which he
here prohibits to resist, were subverters of that which was good; and the Roman
Emperors Tyrants: where he sottishly confounds the tyranny, lusts, and vices of
the Emperors persons, which were detestable, with their power it self, which
was good and commendable; as if the Imperial power it self was ill, because
Nero was ill, and was Grimston, Suetenius, Eutropius, Zonaras, Volaterranus,
Speed and others in his life.
therefore justly condemned to death by the Roman Senate, as a public enemy to
the Roman State, though they approved and continued his just Imperial
principality, which lasted in succession for many hundred years after his
censure, death. To which I shall only add; that though Nero himself were a
Tyrant, yet the Roman Senate, and all their Inferior Offices were not Tyrants;
many of them, no doubt, being just and upright Magistrates. The Precept
therefore being thus in the general, and the plural number, Let every soul
be subject unto the higher powers; nor personal; let them be subject to Nero;
or special, to the Roman Emperor (whom Paul no doubt would have As he does
Phil. 4. 22. Act. 25. v. 10, 11, 12. c. 26. 32. c. 28. 19. See Matthew 22. 17.
2^. Luke 2. 1. c. 23. 2. Acts 11. 28. c. 17. 7.
specified, had he specially intended them, as our opposites fondly dream;) we
may safely conclude, that the Apostle intended it only of lawful powers and
Magistrates, not of Nero or other Tyrants: And writ this to Christians only,
to whom he dedicates this Epistle, witness Chapter 1. V. 7. To all that be at Rome
beloved of God, called to be Saints, etc. not to Pagan Romans, as the Doctor
dreams, to whom he writes not; much less to the Roman Senate, who were then
the sovereign power; and therefore could be subject to no other but
themselves. Precepts of obedience to children and Servants, concern not
parents and masters as such, in point of submission or obedience.

For the fourth Quere: Quest. 4.
Whether Kings and Kingdoms be Gods ordinance; or an institution Jure divino,
not a humane ordinance, instituted Jure humano? or, how far divine or humane?
Is a necessary considerable question grounded on this Text, and very needful
to be discussed to clear the present controversy.

Some of our opposites are so intoxicated with the divinity of Monarchy, as
they confidently Doctor Fern, Sect. 2. 3 Appeal to the Conscience, p. 11. ^0
15. The necessity of subjection. Christus Dei, p. 11. 12. with others.
determine; hat the efficient cause of royal Monarchical power is only God;
not the people. That Kings receive no power or regal Authority from the
people, but from God alone; That the power of Kings is not a humane, but a
divine power, of which God only is the efficient cause. That the people do
not make the King, but God properly and absolutely; this power, right and
authority he has from God. That the King has no dominion and power from his
Subjects by way of trust, but from God, from whom he has his kingdom and
power, so that by Idolatry and oppression, he breaks not the trust reposed in
him by his Subjects, because the people HAVE COMMITTED NOTHING TO HIS CHARGE,
but God only, etc. For proof whereof they produce Prove. 8. 15. By me Kings
reign, Dan. 2. 21. God removes Kings and sets up Kings, Dan. 4. 17. 25.
The most high rules in the kingdom of men, and gives it to whomsoever he
will; and sets up over it the basest of men, with Hos. 13. 11. 1 Samuel 10. 1.
Jer. 27. 5, 6, 7. Isay 45. 1, 2. and other Texts.

To answer this question distinctly, Answ.
and dissipate these gross erroneous Paradoxes; we must distinguish:

First, between, Government it self in general, and kingly or other kinds
of government, in special, (as our opposites distinguish between, a Sabbath,
and the Sabbath; the first they say is moral and of divine institution, the
later not.)

Secondly, between the Regal power of Kings, the persons invested with this
power, the manner of obtaining, and the administration of their power.

Thirdly, of Gods manner of instituting and ordaining things; which is twofold,
immediately by himself, mediately by others. And these institutions of both
kinds are either universal, extending to all places, Nations; or particular,
concerning some Countries, and Nations only, and not others; Perpetual for
ever, or temporal only for some set time: Immutable, not capable of the least
alteration; or mutable, and that either at the pleasure of God only; or at the
will of men, when they shall see just cause, either in part or in whole.

Fourthly, in what several senses things may be said to be of God. First, in
respect of his own immediate institution. Secondly, of his general or
special commands. Thirdly, of his general or special disposing providence,
without any special institution or command. Fourthly, of his approbation of,
assent unto, and blessing on the mere institutions of men. Fifthly, of his
permission only.

To apply these distinctions to the present occasion.

First, it is clear, that power and government in general are Gods own
institution; who as he has appointed (in the great fabric of the world a
Genesis 1. 16. 18. 28. 29 30. Jer. 31. 35, 36. Psalm. 136. 8, 9.
certain constant form of government and subordination of one creature to
another) so he has for the good of mankind, appointed that there should be
some form of government or other among men in the world; which in respect of
families he has specially and universally decreed, Genesis 3. 16. Exodus 20. 12.
Ephesians. 6. 1, 2. 5. c. 5. 22. 24. Col. 3. 23. to 25. c. 4. 1, 2. 1 Timothy 6. 1, 2.
1 Pet. 2. 18. c. 3. 1, 2, 3.
as that the wife should be subject to the husband, the children to the
parents, the servants to their masters; but in regard of Commonweales, or
Nations, he has left it arbitrary and indefinite, leaving every Nation and
Country free liberty to elect such a public politic form of government, as
themselves should judge most expedient for their public good, and that mutable
(since all humane things are so) as they should see just occasion, not
prescribing any sempiternall, immutable form of government to any particular
Nations, Regions, much less to all the world.

Secondly, government in general being thus of God, but the kinds of it thus
left arbitrary to men's institution and free election; the particular
governments instituted by any Nation for the better regulating of their lives,
the preservation of humane society, and advancement of Gods glory, may be
truly said in some sense to be of God, though instituted, invented by men. Not
because God himself did immediately ordain or prescribe them by special
command to all, or any one people: or because God himself did immediately
ordain or prescribe them by special command to this, all, or any one people:
but because he by his general or special providence did direct this Nation
to make choice of such a government, or gave them wisdom to invent and settle
it, as most commodious for their republike, till they should see cause to alter
it: or because he blessed and approved it, when invented and received by them.

Thirdly, Kingly powers, Kingdoms, Kings (the things now in question) are, and
may be said to be of God, and ordained of God, in no other manner or sense,
then all other particular Governments or Magistrates are. For this Text of the
Romans, speaking only of the higher powers, the powers that are, and of
Rulers; as does that place of Titus 3. 1. And the Text of Prove. 8. 15, 16. (so
much relied on by the objectors) extending as well to all subordinate Rulers as
Kings; witness the subsequent words, By me Kings reign, and Princes decree
justice: by me Princes rule AND NOBLES, yea ALL THE JUDGES OF THE EARTH; (that
is, all Magistrates whatsoever) it cannot but be yielded; that all and every
lawful kind of government, all lawful Rulers and Magistrates of what fort
soever are of Gods ordination, and his ordinance, as far forth as Monarchies
are; and what is truly affirmable of the one, is of the other too.

These generals thus premised as indubitable; I say first of all: That
Monarchy or regal power is not of God, nor yet Gods ordinance by way of
immediate divine institution or special command from Gods own free motion, as
our opposites affirm it.

For first, God himself never immediately instituted a royal Monarchical
government in any Nation whatsoever, no not among his own people; whose
government was at first Josepbus Antiq. Jud. l. 4. c. 8. Carolus Sigonius de
Repub. Hecraeorum. l. 7. c. 5.
Paternall and Patriarchicall; next Aristocraticall; then Regal; not by Gods
immediate institution and voluntary designation; but by the peoples earnest
importunity, contrary to the good liking of God and Samuel, as is evident by 1 Samuel c. 8, and 9, and 10, and 11. Hos. 8. 4. and the Appendix.

Secondly, Aristot. Polyt. l. 3. and 5. Polib. Hist. l. 6. Just. in Hist. l. 1.
Cassanaeus Catalog. Gloriae Mundi pars, 5. Consid. 1. Philochius Archilacus de
Somnio Viridarii, c. 171. Fortescue c. 9. 13. 15. Mr. Seldens Titles of Honor,
part. 1. c. 2, 3, 4, 5.
All Politicians, and Historians grant, that the original crection of all
Monarechies was either by the peoples free consent and ordination; or by
Tyranny and usurpation; or be conqest; none by divine institution or special
command from God: And it must needs be so, because most Genesis 14. 1 Samuel 8. 5.
Seldens Titles of Honor, part 1. c. 1. 2. See the Appendix.
kingdoms were primitively erected, either among Pagan Nations and States, who
knew not God nor his Word, or among Christian States since special commands
and Revelations from heaven ceased: which if our opposites deny; I shall desire
them to instance in any one Monarchy in the world, instituted immediately by
God himself, or by special command from his own free motion: Till this be
done, all their asseverations will be accounted fabulous.

Thirdly, if Regal power be Gods ordinance by way of divine immediate
institution and command; then this institution of Regal Monarchy, with the
several Prerogatives, and boundaries of it, would appear in some Text of
Scripture, and this government would be specially and perpetually prescribed
either to all, or some particular Nations by God himself. But this
institution, with the general Prerogatives and bounds of Regal Authority, are
no where extant in Scripture, neither this form of government therein
prescribed, but left arbitrary to all or any Nation in particular, for ought
any man can demonstrate. Those Texts which concern the Kings of the Israelites
in point of sovereignty, and Prerogative, being judicial only, and peculiar
to that Nation, nor moral, or extending unto others. Therefore it is not Gods
ordinance by way of divine immediate institution, or command.

Fourthly, if it were of divine ordination in this sense; then the Regal power
and authority of all Kings and Monarchs in the world should be equal, yea the
very same; and there should be no different kind of Kings; as the divine
authority of all Ministers (being of Gods own institution by one and the same
commission) is one and the same: But the regal power and jurisdiction of all
Kings and Monarchies in the world is not equal nor the same; for some have
far greater authority then others; there are many different sorts of Kings in
the world, some only annual, others for life, others hereditary, others at
will, deposible at the peoples pleasures when ever they offended, (Such were
the Kings of the Procop. Vand. l. 1.
Vandalls in Africa, of the Ammon. l. 2. c. 2. l. 4. c. 25. Hugo Grotius de
Jure Belli. l. 1. c. 3. c. 58. 72.
Goths in Spain; cum ipsos deponerent populi quoties displicuissent: such the
Kings of the Heruli (Procopius, Gothicorum) Of the Lombards, Paulus Warnafredi,
l. 4. and 6. Of the Burgundians, Ammianus, 11. lib. 28. Of the Moldavians,
Laonichus Chalcocandylas; the King of Agadis among the Africans, Joannis Leo,
lib. 7. Of the Quadi and Jazyges (in excerptis Dionis) with sundry others
hereafter mentioned.) Some elective, others successive, some conditional,
others absolute, as I have plentifully mentioned in the Appendix. Therefore
they are not of divine ordination in the objectors sense.

Fifthly, If Kings were of divine ordination in this sense, then their kingdoms
and people upon their Elections, Institutions and Coronations could not justly
prescribe any conditions, oaths or covenants to them, upon promise of
performance whereof they only accept of them to be their Kings, refusing else
to admit them to reign over them; and such conditions, oaths, covenants,
would be mere nullities, since men have no power at all to detract from Gods
own divine institutions, or to annex any conditions or restrictions to them.
But our Antagonists themselves dare not aver, that Kingdoms and Nations upon
their Kings Coronations, Institutions and elections may not lawfully prescribe
conditions, oaths, and limitations to them, upon promise of performance
whereof they only submitted to them as their Sovereigns, it being the
received practice of our own, of all or most other Kingdoms whatsoever, See
Part 1. p. 51 to 76. Edi^^. 2.
especially elective ones, and confirmed by divine Authority, 2 Chronicles. 10. 1.
to 19. Therefore they are not of divine institution in the objected sense.

Sixthly, All Bracton l. 3. c. 9. Fleta l. 1. c. 5. 17. See here, p. 5. and
part 1. p. 88.
Lawyers and most Orthodox Divines determine, that Kings have no other just or
lawful royal Authority, but that which the Laws and customs of their
Kingdoms allot them, and that the Law only makes them Kings, from which if
they exorbitate they become Tyrants and cease to be Kings. Their Royal
authority therefore is of humane institution properly, not Divine; from their
people, who both elect, constitute them Kings, and give them all their regal
Authority by humane Laws enacted, not from God as the only efficient cause.

Seventhly, All Kingdoms, Monarchies, Policies, are mutable and variable in
themselves, while they continue such; yea, temporary and alterable into other
forms of Government by public consent, if there be just cause; without any
immediate command or alteration made by God himsele, or his divine authority:
There being no positive Law of God confining any Nation, (whose humane earthly
condition is still variable) to a Monarchical or any other constant form of
government only, much less for perpetuity without variation. Therefore, they
are not of divine institution in this sense.

Eighthly, St. Peter expressly defines Kings and Monarchies, in respect of
their institution, to be humane creatures, or institutions, 1 Pet. 2. 13.
Submit your selves to every ORDINANCE OF MAN for the Lords sake; whether it be
to the King, as supreme, etc. And they are common to Pagans who know not God,
as well as to Christians. Therefore, they are not simply divine, but humane
Ordinances.

Ninethly, Our Antigonists will yield, that other forms of Government, whether
Aristocraticall, Oligarchicall, Democraticall, or mixed of all three, are not
absolutely and immediately of divine institution; nor yet Dukes,
Principalities, with other inferior Rulers, though the Apostle in this Text
makes them all equally Gods Ordinance, and Divine. Therefore Monarchy, Kings
and Kingdoms are not so.

Tenthly, The very Text it self seems to intimate, that Royalties and higher
powers are not of God, by way of original or immediate institution, or
command: for the Apostle says not; that all powers whatsoever were originally
instituted and ordained by God himself; but, There is no power but of God; The
powers that be, are (not were at first) ordained (or rather, ordered) of God:
that is; where powers and Governments are once erected by men, through Gods
general or special providence, there God approves and orders them for the
good of men.

2. If Monarchies, and Kings themselves be not of divine institution, and Gods
ordinance in the former sense, as is most apparent: and Aristotle, Plato, all
Politicians grant; Then they are so only in some other sense, in what I shall
truly inform you.

First, They are of God, and his Ordinance, by way of imitation, as derived
from Gods own form of Government, which is Monarchical; Whence he is called,
Psalm. 86. 10 Deuteronomy. 32. 39. Isa. 37. 16. c. 44 6. 1. Cor. 8 4. Ephesians. 4. 6.
The only God, God alone, 1 Timothy 6. 15 6. 15. Romans 17. 14. c. 19. 16. Deuteronomy. 10.
17.
the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords.

Secondly, By way of approbation; He Deuteronomy. 17. 14. 15, 16. 1 Samuel 8. 22. 2 Samuel
7. 12.
approves and allows this kind of Government where it is received, as well as
other forms.

Thirdly, by way of direction, he gives diverse general 2 Samuel 23. 3, 4. 1 King
11 11. 38 2 Chro. 9, 8. Prove. 31. 4
rules and directions to Kings (and to other Rulers and Magistrates also as
well as them) in his sacred word how they ought to demean themselves, toward
him and their Subjects; and likewise 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2. 1 Pet 2. 13, 14. Romans 13.
1 to 7. Tit 3. 1.
to Subjects, how they should carry themselves toward their Kings; and all
other Rulers and Governors temporal or spiritual: in which sense they may be
properly said, to be ordered and ordained too, of God.

Fourthly, By way of special providence and incitation; God excites and moves
some people to make choice of Kings, and Monarchical forms of Government,
rather than others; and to elect one man or family to that dignity rather than
others, yea his providence mightily rules and swayes in the changes, the
elections, actions, counsels, affairs of Monarchies, Kingdoms, Kings, States,
to order them for his own glory, the Kings, the Subjects good or ill, in ways
of Justice or Mercy; as is evident by Dan. 2. 21. c. 4. 17. 25. Hos. 13. 11.
Jer. 27. 5, 6, 7. Isa. 45. 1, 2, 3. c. 10. 5. to 20. Psalm. 110. 5. Psalm. 113.
7, 8. Job 12. 18. to 25. Dan. 5. 26. 28. The genuine drift of all these Texts.

Fifthly, Kings may be said to be of God and his Ordinance, because they, (and
so all other Rulers, Judges, Magistrates as well as they, in respect of their
representation and the true end of Government) are said to be Gods; to be Gods
Ministers and Vicegerents; to sit upon Gods Throne, and ought to reign, to
judge for God, and to rule Gods people according to Gods Word, with such
justice, equity, integrity as God himself would Govern them. Exodus 22. 28. 2 Chronicles. 9. 8. Romans 13. 4, 5. 2 Samuel 23. 3. Psalm. 78. 72, 73, 74 2 Samuel 5. 2.
Prove. 8. 15, 18. Psalm. 82. 1. 1 Cor. 8. 5. Isa. 32. 1. c. 9. 7. c. 16. 5. Deuteronomy.
1. 17.

Sixthly, Ill Kings, and Tyrants, may be said to be of God, by way of
permission, and of Ordination too, in reference to the peoples punishment, Job
34. 30. Hos. 13. 11. 1 Samuel 8. 18. In these regards (common to all other
Governors and lawful Governments, as well as Kings and Monarchies) Kings and
Kingly Authority, are and may be said to be of God, and Gods Ordinance; yet not
immediately, or properly in the first acception, here refuted, but so as that
still they are really the institutions and ordinances of men, of humane, not
divine right, and authority.

As for the objected Scriptures to prove Kings jure Divino, Object.
as Prove. 8. 15. By me Kings Reign, etc. Ergo, they are of immediate divine
institution, and have all their authority from God, not from the people, and
may in no case be resisted, censured, deposed, or put to death for any
misdemeanors; the consequences thence inferred.

I answer, Answ.
First, That this Text speaks only of the promotion or Reign of Kings; 2
Chro. 9. 8. Isa. 32. 2 c. 16. 5.
not of the erections and power of Monarchies; and so do Daniel 2. 21. c. 4.
17. 25. c. 5. 26. 28. with the other objected Scriptures.

Secondly, If it be meant of the rule of Kings; then true it is, that good
Kings Reign by Gods direction, according to his word, executing justice, and
judgment, as he enjoynes them; But then it is not true of wicked Kings and
Tyrants, who though they Reign by Gods Providence or permission, yet they rule
not by his word and will as he prescribes them.

Thirdly, If it be meant of the means and manner of Kings coming to their
Kingdoms, as I conceive it is, and the Texts of Daniel persuade:

True it is: first, That some Kings Reigned and came to the Crown by Gods
immediate nomination and designation, as Saul, David, Solomon, Jeroboam, Jehu,
and Hazael did: But that all, or most did heretofore, or now do so, especially
in Pagan Kingdoms, is a notorious falsehood.

Secondly, it is true, That most lawful Kings in hereditary or elective
Kingdoms, come to their Crowns, and Reign; though not by Gods immediate
nomination, yet by his ordinary or special providence, (though it be untrue of
Usurpers, and Tyrants who come to Reign by Treason, Murder, or other
unlawful means; and so by Gods See Doctor Willet, Paraeus, and others on Romans
13.
permission only, rather than his providence: and then the sense of the place
is but this; That Kings receive their Crowns, and Reign by Gods general, or
more special providence: Which I think is the full and proper sense of the
place. In this sense C. Plinius Secundus a heathen in his admirable Panegyrio
to the Emperor Trajan, a Pagan, Rhetorizeth thus of him: Quid enim
praestabilius est, aut pulchrius munus Deorum, quam castus and sanctus and Diis
simillimus Princeps? Ac si adhuc dubium fuisset sort casuque Rectores terris,
an aliquo numine darentur, Principem tamen nostrum liqueret DIVINITUS
CONSTITUTUM. Non enim occulta potestate fatorum, sed ab Jove ipso, coram ac
palam repertus, electus est, etc. Which Apologeticus.
Tertullian thus seconds, speaking even of the Roman Pagan Emperors. Inde est
Imperator, unde and homo antequam Imperator; inde Potestas ei, unde and
spiritus: Per Deum tantus est: So Irenaeus, Cujus jussu homines nascuntur,
hujus jussu and Reges constituuntur. And Diodorus Siculus of the Egyptians;
Existimant non SINE DIVINA QUADAM PROVIDENTIA, pervenisse ad summam de omnibus
Potestatem: So the Porphyr.
Esses, hold this opinion, Non obtingit cuiquam Imperium sine Dei cura
speciali: So Apud Cassiodorwn.
Vitigis, Omnis provectus, maxim Regius, ad Divinitatis munera referendus est:
and Clemens Apostol. constit. l. 7. c. 17.
Romanus, too. Regem timeto, sciens Domini esse electionem. Which Grotius de
Jure Belli, l. 1. c. 3. sect. 8. confirms with other Authorities; all
concurring in this, That Kings and Emperors are such only by the selfsame
PROVIDENCE OF GOD, by which they were men before they were Emperors; which
gives them no greater Prerogative in respect of irresistibility in unjust
exorbitant actions, then their being men, by the selfsame providence of God,
gave them before they were Emperors, as Tertullians words most clearly prove.

But what privilege this alone should yield to Kings, more than to any other
Magistrates, Men or Beasts, for my part I cannot yet discern. For does not the
same Text say of Nobles, Princes, Judges, as well as of Kings, Prove. 8. 15, 16.
By me Princes (put as contradistinct to Kings) decree justice; By me Princes
Rule AND NOBLES, YEA ALL JUDGES OF THE EARTH? Does not David say of all kind
of Promotions whatsoever, Psalm. 113. 7, 8. The Lord raises the poor out of
the dust, and lifeteth the needy out of the dunghill; that he may set him with
Princes, even with the Princes of his people? And Psalm. 75. 5, 6. Promotion
comes neither from the East, nor from the South; but God is the Judge; he
puts down one and sets up another? Nay, does not Christ inform us Mat.
10. 29 30. Luke 12. 6, 7
That the very hairs of our head are all numbered? That two sparrowes are sold
for a farthing, and yet one of them shall not fall on the ground without our
Fathers providence? Yea does not every man, yea every Bird, Beast, Fish, Raven,
and living creature whatsoever, (as the Scripture Psalm. 105. 27. to 32. Psalm.
145. 14, 15, 16. Psalm. 17. 27, 28.
expressly resolves) receive, enjoy their Lives, Honors, Offices, Estates,
food, raiment, being, preservation, by Gods general and special providence,
as well as Kings their Crowns, Honors, Lives, Estates?

And is not the providence, yea are not the very Psa. 307. Psalm 92. 11, 12.
Act. 12. 7. to 18. Heb. 1. 14.
Angels of God, who are all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister to them
who shall be heirs of salvation, as vigilant over every pious Christian (though
never so mean and despicable) as over the greatest Monarch in the world? If so,
as all men must necessarily acknowledge ( there being Romans 2. 1. Acts 10 34. 1
Pet 1. 17. Deuteronomy. ^0 17. Job 34. 1^, 20. 2 Chronicles, 19. 7. Gal. 2. 6. Ephesians. 69
Col. 3. 25.
no respect at all of persons with God, who accepts not the persons of Princes,
regards the rich no more then the poor, for they are all the work of his hands)
then kings reigning by the Providence of God, can of it self no more exempt
them from resistance, censures, deprivations, for their detestable public
crimes, then it exempts any other Nobles, Princes, Judges, Magistrates,
Christians, or the meanest subjects whatsoever; which I shall make good by one
more unanswerable demonstration. There is not one of our Antagonists but will
acknowledge, that Priests under the Law, and all Ministers under the Gospel,
if rightly qualified, are not made only such by Gods special Providence, but
likewise by Divine institution from God himself; Nay, Tollet, Quest. 4 on Romans
13. p. 580. See Cassanaeus, Catalogus Gloriae Mundi, pars 4. Consid. 1. to 8.
Willet, and many others on this very Text of the Romans, make a difference
between the civil and Ecclesiastical Regiment and Powers: for the first (say
they) is so from God, that yet the institution thereof may be devised and
altered by man, and therefore Peter calls it, the Ordinance of man; but the
spiritual Power is immediatelly instituted by God, and no ways alterable or
determinable by man: And therefore the Apostle says Ephesians. 4. 11. He gave some
to be Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, etc. So that by their
determination, Ministers are more Gods Ordinance, and more jure Divino, then
Kings; yea but few years since they all professed themselves to be as much, if
not more, Gods anointed, then Kings; and some of our Archbishop Laud and Neel,
in the High Commission and Starchamber.
Archest Prelates made public challenges in the open Court, That if they could
not prove their Lordly Episcopacy to be Iure Divino, they would presently burn
their Rochets, and lay down their Bishoprics; though they never made good
their promises: and to doubt, whether the Pope and his supreme Authority be
iure Divino by Christ's own immediate institution, deserves a faggot in the Roman
Church: Yet notwithstanding all this Divine Right and institution, our
Opposites will grant, That if Popes, Archbishops, Bishops, Priests, Ministers
preach false Heretical doctrines, oppress, wound, slay, rob, plunder the
people committed by God to their cares; or attempt with force to subvert
Religion, Laws, Liberties; or commit any capital offenses, they may not only
with safe conscience be resisted, repulsed by their people, but likewise
apprehended, arraigned, deprived, condemned, executed, by Lay Judges, as
infinite examples in our Histories manifest, and the example of Abiathar the
High Priest, 1 Kings 2. 26, 27 And if so, then why not Kings as well as they,
or other temporal Magistrates, notwithstanding any of the objected Texts?
Either therefore our Opposites must grant all Bishops, Priests, Ministers, yea,
all other Magistrates whatsoever, as irresistible, uncensurable, undeprivable,
uncondemnable, for any crimes whatsoever, as they say kings are, which they
dare not do; or else make Kings as resistable, censurable, deprivable, and
liable to all kinds of punishments, (by their whole Kingdoms consent in
Parliament) as far forth as they, notwithstanding all the former Objections,
which quite subverts their cause.

Thirdly, Kings and Kingdoms are not so Gods Ordinance, as that they should be
universal over all the world, and no other Government admitted; or so as any
one Nation whatsoever should be eternally tied to a Monarchiall Government,
without any power to alter it into an Aristocracy, or other form, upon any
occasion; or so as unalterably to continue the Sovereign power in one family
alone, as not to be able to transfer it to another, when the whole State shall
see just cause: Hereditary Kingdoms being but Offices of public trust for the
peoples good and safety, as well as elective; most of them were elective at
first, and Foxius de Rege, etc. p. 17. Grotius de iure Belli, l. 1. c. 3. n. 10.
made hereditary only either by violent usurpation, or the peoples voluntary
assents and institution, and not by any immediate divine Authority, and so
alterable by their joint assents, as Explan. Artic. 42.
Zuinglius, De Iure Reg. apud Scotos.
Buchanon, De Rege and Regis Instit. l 1. c. 4. to 8.
Mariana observe, and the Histories of most Kingdoms, the experience of all
ages evidence. Which truths being generally confessed by all Arist Polit. l. 3.
and 5. Polyb. Hist l. 6. Genesis Haest. of France, Spain, Hungary, Bohemia,
England. Grotius de iure Belli, l. 1. c. 4. n. 7 Covaru. Quaest. Illustr. T. 2.
396, n. 2. 4. Vasquries Contr. Illustr. 59. n. 8. 61. n. 22 100. n. 29. Hookers
Eccles. Pol: l. 1. see. 10. p. 69. 70, 71.
Politicians, Historians, Statists; by many judicious Divines, contradicted by
no one text of Scripture that I have met with which our Opposites have objected
hitherto, they will find all Monarchies upon the matter, to be mere humane
Institutions, alterable still by that humane Power which did at first erect
them, and subordinate still thereto, as the Creature to its Creator; and to be
Gods Ordinance only in regard of special providence, and the like, as other
inferior Magistrates, Rulers are, who may be justly resisted, altered,
removed, censured, notwithstanding the objected Text. From which whiles some
men earnestly press, that every soul by Gods own Ordinance, ought to be
subject to some public civil power, (which See Scripture and reason pleaded
for defensive Arms, p 30, 31, 32.
others safely deny, fince the Patriarks, the first families of most Nations
and Countries were not so, and all Nations, all people before settled public
governments, were erected, which in many places are not very ancient; since
those whose Parents are dead, and are not by them subjected to a Government,
are naturally free; and none bound to part with their freedom to any other,
unless they see a necessity, a great advantage, and that upon such terms and
conditions as they deem meet,) they involve even Kings and Emperors themselves
by Gods own Ordinance, in a subjection to a superior earthly civil power, to
wit, to their Laws, Parliaments, Kingdoms, (which I have proved Paramount them,
collectively considered) according to the common proverb Seneca Grotius de
Iure Belli, l. 1. c. 4. sect. 6. p. 84.
Omne sub Regno graviore Regnum est; and that of Eccles. 5. 8.
Solomon (concerning oppressing Kings and Judges) He that is higher then the
Highest considers, and there be higher then they: And so make kings not only
resistble by their whole Kingdoms the supreme Sovereign power, but likewise
subject to their Realms superior commands, and incapable to resist their
lawful power and Forces even in point of Conscience, by virtue of this very
Text. And so much for the fourth Question.

For the fifth and last, See Paraeus, willet, Tollet, Soto, Marloras, and
others on this Text.
What kind of resistance of the Higher powers is here prohibited? I answer
briefly, That resistance is here forbidden, which is contrary to subjection or
obedience, as the words, Let every soul be subject to the higher Powers,
coupled with the ensuing reason, Whosoever therefore resists (that is,
disobeyeth, or is not subject to) the Power, resists the Ordinance of God;
and they that resist shall receive to themselves damnation. Quest. 5.
In the Greek there are two distinct words used, (...), the Latin, English,
French, Dutch use them both as one, without distinction: The first word
signifies properly disordered, counter-ordered, or ordered against, (as
Paraeus, Willet, and others observe) and it is thus used by the Apostle, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6, 7, 11; or disobedient, 1 Timothy 1. 9. The later word signifies
properly to resist, withstand, or oppose; in which sense it is used, Matthew. 5.
39. Luke 21. 1, 5. Act. 6. 10. Romans 9. 19. Gal. 2. 11. 2 Timothy 3. 1. Hebr. 12.
4. Iam. 4. 7. chap. 5. 6. 1 Pet. 5. 9. and applied indifferently both to a
spiritual, corporal, and verbal resistance of the Holy Ghost, the Devil, or
men: Since then the Apostle in this Text uses the Hebrew phrase Soul, not Man,
Let every Soul be subject to the Higher Powers; because (as Haymo, Tollet,
Willet, Soto, and most other Interpreters observe) we Judge 5. 2. 9. 1 Cor. 2.
3. 12. 1 Cor. 9. 17. 1 Pet. 5. 2. Philem 14. 1 Chronicles. 29. 6. 9 14. 1 Timothy 6.
18. Exodus 35. 21, 22. 29. 1 Chronicles. 28, 9. Psalm. 100. 3.
ought willingly and cheerfully to submit to the higher Powers, not only with
our bodies, but souls and spirits too: I may hence clearly infer, that the
resistance of the higher Power he prohibited as contrary to this subjection,
is not only that which is corporal and violent by force of arms, as the
Objectors gloss it; but that likewise which is verbal, mental, spiritual in
the soul it self without the body, and no more then a mere passive
resistance, or not obeying: For not to do what the higher Powers enjoin, is in
verity actually to resist, to withstand them; as not to do the will, not to
yield obedience to the motions, dictates of the Holy Ghost or devil is really
to resist them, even in Scripture phrase: Yea, corporal resistance or
opposition by way of force is only an higher degree of resistance, but not the
only or proper resistance here prohibited, which relates principally to the
Soul and Spirit. For as corporal forced obedience against a man's will which
still holds 2 Cor. 9. 7.
out, is no true obedience in the esteem of God or men: and as the very
essence, life of all outward obedience consists See (c) beso. 2 Cor. 9. 13.
7. Romans 12. 8. 11.
principally in the cheerful submission or activity of the soul or will: So a
forced corporal resistance against the mind or conscience, is in a manner no
resistance; and the very malignity, quintessence of all inward or outward
resistance, disobedience, rests only in the mind, soul, will; and is here
principally forbidden, as is evident by the 5. verse; Wherefore ye must needs
be subject, not only for wrath (which relates only to the body, which men's
wrath can only harm in case of disobedience, Mat. 10. 28.) but also FOR
CONSCIENCE SAKE, which principally, if not wholly relates unto the soul, of
which the conscience is a chief-overruling part. This then being altogether
irrefragable, gives our Antagonists, with Dr. Fern, an eternal overthrow, and
unavoidably demonstrates the resistance of the Higher Powers here prescribed,
to be only of just lawful powers in their just commands or punishments, which
we must neither corporally, verbally, nor so much as mentally resist, but
readily submit too with our very souls, as well as bodies: not of Tyrants or
ungodly Rulers unjust oppressions, Forces, proceedings to subvert Religion,
Laws, Liberties, which all our Opposites, all Divines whatsoever grant, we are
bound in conscience passively to resist, and disobey; yea, with our Tongues to
Levit. 19. 17. Mat. 14. 4. Psalm. 139, 21. 22 Pro. 29. 27. Ps. 11. 5.
reprehend, and our Souls and spirits to oppose, detest, abhor, hate in the
very highest degree of opposition, notwithstanding this inhibition: And
therefore by like reason are no ways prohibited, but authorized by it, even
forcibly to resist to our utmost power, have we means and opportunity so to
do, as the Parliament now has: That power and proceedings which Christians
may lawfully with good conscience, yea and are bound to resist with all their
souls, minds, tongues, they justly may and must likewise resist with all their
corporal might and strength; especially if they have good opportunity, public
encouragements, and means to do it, as Deuteronomy. 6. 12. 1 Pet. 5. 9. Jude 3. 4.
Phil. 1. 27, 28. 1 Cor. 16. 13. compared together, and with the premised
Scriptures, fully evidence. But Christians may lawfully with good conscience,
yea must resist with all their souls, minds, tongues, the forenamed violent
proceedings of kings, Oppressors, ill Counselors and Cavaleers, and no ways
submit unto them with their souls, minds, tongues, lest thereby they should
approve and be partakers, with promoters of their execrable designs; therefore
they may and must with safe conscience resist them with all their corporal
might and strength, having now opportunity, a Parliamentary public command and
sufficient means to execute it. And thus have I now at last not only most
clearly wrested this sword out of the hands of our great opposite Goliahs, but
likewise cut off their heads, and so routed all their forces with it, as I
trust they shall never be able to make head again.

Yet before I wholly take my leave of this Text to gratify our Prelaticall
Clergy, I shall for a parting blow add this one observation more, That all our
( See Tostatus, Caictan, Cornelius a Lapide. Soto Estrus, with most Popish
Commentators, and Dr. Willet on this Text, Bellarm. de Clericis, and the
Canonists, de exemptionibus, and Immunit. Clericorum.
Popish Clermen her^tofore (and many of them till this day) notwithstanding the
universality of this Text, Let every soul be subject to the higher Powers,
etc. not only pretended themselves to be of right exempted from the
jurisdiction censures, taxes of Emperors, Kings, and a^ Civil Magistrates,)
Which privileges some of our late Prelates began to revive, as the late cases
of Mr. Shervill, the Mayor of Arundel, and some others evidence, censured for
punishing drunken Priests) but likewise held it lawful to censure,
excommunicate, depose even Emperors and Kings themselves, and interdict their
Kingdoms; witness not only the Bp. Bilsons ^^ue Difference etc. par. 3. p.
369. to 376. Io. VVhites Defense of the way c. 6. p. 14. to 22.
Popes excommunications of many Emperors and Kings, by apparent usurpation and
injury; but of sundry Prelates excommunications of their own Sovereigns as of
right and putting them to open penances; as K. Suintilla, Sancho, Ramir in
Spain, and others elsewhere, of which you may read diverse presidents in my
Appendix: The History of Theod. Eccles. hist l. 5. c. 17, 18. Sozom. l 7. c. c.
34.
St. Ambrose his excommunicating the Emperor Theodosius for the bloody murder
of those of Thessalonica, is so commonly known, that I need not spend time to
recite it, nor yet the Sea Math. Westminster. Math. Paris, Hoved ^n Polychron. Fab.
Caxton, Polidor, Virigit, Holmsh. Slow, Grafton, Speed, Daniel in the Lives of
Hen 2. K. John and Hen. 3.
excommunications and censures of our King John, or Henry the 2. and 3. Suano
King of Denmark (as Saxo-Grammaticus records) was not only sharply
reprehended, but excommunicated in a most bold and solemn manner by one of his
Bishops for his uncleanness, and murdering some eminent persons, of whom he
was jealous, whiles they were at their devotions in the Church. Page 62. Ge.
hist. of Spain.
This Bishop instead of meeting this King when he came to enter into the
Church, with accustomed veneration, clad in his Pontificalibus, with his
Crosier S^affe kept him from entering so much as within the Court thereof;
calling him not by the name of a King, which he suppressed, but a shedder of
man's blood; and not content to chide him, he fixed the point of his Staff in
his breast, preferring the public scandal of Religion before private society,
not being ignorant, that the Offices of familiarity were one thing, the rights
of Priesthood another thing, that the wickednesses of Lords as well as servants
ought to be revenged, nor are Noble-mens crimes to be more partially censured,
then ignoble ones: And not content thus to repulse him, he added an execration
thereunto and denounced a sentence of damnation against him in his presence, so
as he left it doubtful, whether he repulsed him more valiantly with his hand,
or voice. Hereupon the King considering this Act to proceed from zeal and
public severity against wickedness, and being confounded with the blush of
his guilty conscience, forbad any to resist his violence, and patiently
underwent, heard both his repulse and reprehention; After which, this King
laying aside his royal Robes, put on old course apparel, desiring rather to
testify his sorrow by the deformity of his habit, then his contempt by the
splendour of it. And struck with so sad a sentence of the Bishop, he would not
endure to carry about the ornaments of Royal Magnificence; but casting away
the ensigns of Regal Majesty, he put on sackcloth the badge of penitence;
putting off his power likewise together with his vestment, and of a
sacrilegious Tyrant, became a faithful reverencer of holy things. For
returning barefoot to the Church Porch, he cast himself prostrate in the
entrance thereof, and humbly kissed the ground, suppressing the grief which is
wont most sharply to be inflicted from contempt, with shamefac'tnesse and
moderation, redeeming the fault of his bloody reign with shame and penitence:
After which confessing his fault, and craving pardon with tears of the Bishop,
he was absolved, and then putting on his Royal Robes, admitted into the
Church, and brought up to the Altar, to the exceeding joy of the people, who
applauding the kings humiliation and modesty; plus poenitentia pium, quam
imperto scoelest^^m (...) confessus: A memorable story of a zealous stout
Prelate, and of a pen^tent submissive wild Prince: I shall only add to this
some few domestic president^ of our Welsh Kings S^elm Council tom p. 381 38.
(...) aodw n. Ca^al of ^ish. Edit. 2 2. p. 328.
Teudur king of Brecknock, for his perjury and murder of Elgisti^ another King
of that Country, was solemnly excommunicated by Gurcan the 10. Bishop of
Landaffe and his Clergy, in a Synod assembled for this purpose, by uncovering
the Altars, casting the Crosses and Relics on the ground, and depriving him
(...) Christian communion, Whereupon Toudur unable to undergo this malediction
and rigorous justice, with a contrite heart, and many tears powered forth,
craved pardon of his crimes, and submitted himself to the penance imposed on
him according to his quality and greatness. Spelm Council. p. 382, 383.
King Clotri slaying Iuguallaun treacherously, contrary to his League and Oath,
Berthgwin the 14. Bishop of Landaffe, hearing thereof, assembled a Synod of his
Clergy at Landaffe, and solemnly excommunicated the King with all his Progeny
and Kingdom, by uncovering the Altars, casting down the Crosses on the earth,
and depriving the Country both of Baptism and the Euch^rist. Whereupon the
King unable to endure so great an excommunication, with great deiection
submitted himself to the Bishop, and leaving his Kingdom, went on pilgrimage
into foreign parts for a long space; after which returning, by the
intercession of king Morcant, he obtained absolution from the Bishop, to whose
enjoined penance he submitted himself, conferring diverse Lands upon the Church.
And in another Synod at Landaffe under this Bishop, King Gurcan, for living
incestuously with his Mother-in-law was solemnly excommunicated in form
aforesaid; whereupon he craved pardon, resolved to put away his Mother-in-law,
promised satisfaction by K. Iudhail his Intercessor; upon which he was
absolved, upon promise of amendment of life, with fasting, prayer and alms;
after which he bestowed diverse Lands on the Church, Spelm. Con^ p. 383, 384.
Godw. Catal. of Bish. p. 523.
Houell king of Gleuissig, contrary to his Oath and League, trecherously
circumverring and slaying Gallun, hereupon Cerenlyir the 18. Bishop of
Landaffe, calling a Synod, solemnly excommunicated him by laying all the
crosses on the ground, overturning the Bells, taking the Relics from the
Altar and casting them on the ground depriving him of all Christian communion,
under which excommunication he remained almost a whole years space; After
which, this king came barefoot to the Bishop, imploring his absolution from
this sentence with many tears, which he obtained after publke penance enoyned.
Not long after the same Bishop and his Clergy in another Synod, for the like
crime, in the self-same former excommunicated Ili son of Conblus, till he
came barefooted with tears and prayed absolution; which upon performance of
enjoined penance, promise of future reformation, with prayers, fasting, alms,
and the settling of some Lands on the Church, was granted him by the Bishop. So
Spcim. Council. p. 305, 385.
Loumarch son of Cargnocaun, was in a full Synod excommunicated by Gulfrid the
20. Bishop of this See, for violating the patrimony of the Church; and king
Brochuail, with his family convented before a Synod, threatened
Excommunication, enjoined Penance and satisfaction by the Synod, for some
injuries offered to to Ciueilliauc the two and twentieth Bishop of Landaffe.
Goduin. Cata. log. of Bistr. p 527.
Mauric King of of Glamorgan was excommunicated by Joseph the eigth and
twentieth Bishop of Landaffe, for treacherously putting out the eyes of Etguin
during the truce between them; After which he was again publicly
excommunicated in a Synod, for violating the Sanctuary of the Church of
Landaffe, and hurting some of this Bishops servants; and not absolved till he
made his submission, and did his Penance, and gave some lands to the Church for
satisfaction of these offense. Thus Spelmanim. Council. Tau. 1. p. 626, 627.
Goduin. Edit. 2. p. 528.
Calgucam King of Morganauc, and his whole family were solemnly excommunicated
by Her^wald the nine and twentieth Bishop of Landaffe in a Synod of all his
Clergy, only because one of the Kings followers being drunk, laid violent
hands upon Bathutis the Bishops Physician and Kinsman on Christmas day, Anno
1056. Whereupon all the Crosses and Relics were cast to the ground, the Bells
overturned, the Church doors stopped up with thorns, so as they continued
without a Pastor and Divine Service day and night for a long season, till the
King ( though innocent) submitted himself to the Bishop; and to obtain his
absolution, gave Henringuinna to him and his Successors for ever, free from all
secular and royal services, in the presence of all the Clergy and people. So
Mat. Paris. H^st. p. 551, 715 Goduin. catalo. p. 537. 547.
Richard the tenth Bishop of Bangor, excommunicated David ap Lhewelin, Prince
of Wales, for detaining his brother Griffith prisoner, contrary to his Oath,
repairing to him upon the Bishops word for his safe return, who never left
vexing him, till he had delivered him up to to the King of Englands hands. Many
such presidents of Prelates censuring and excommunicating their Kings occur in
Story, which for brevity I pretermit; onely' I shall inform you, that Antiqu.
Eccles. Bull. p. 245. See Walsingh. Hist. Angl p. 238. to 144.
John Stratford Archbishop of Canterbury, in the 14. year of K. Edw. 3,
contesting with this King, and excommunicating diverse of his followers, and all
the infringers of the Churches Liberties, presumed to write thus unto his
Sovereign; There are two things by which the world is principally governed, The
sacred Pontifical authority, and the royal power, of which the Priesthood is
by so much the more weighty, ponderous, and sublim^, by how much they are to
give an account of kings themselves at the Divine audit: And therefore the
kings Majesty ought to know, that you ought to depend on their judgment, not
they to be regulated according to your will. For who doubts that the priests
of Christ are accounted the FATHERS AND MASTERS of Kings, Princes, and all
faithful Christians? Is it not known to be apart of miserable madness, if the
son should endeavor to subjugate the Father, the servant the master to
himself? The Canonical authority of Scriptures testifies, that diver.
Pontiffs have excommunicated, some of them Kings, others Emperors: And if you
require somewhat in special of the persons of Princes; Saint Innocent smote
the Emperor Archadius with the sword of excommunication, because he consented
that Saint John Chrysostom should be violently expelled from his See. Likewise
Saint Ambrose Archbishop of Millain, for afault which seemednot so heinous to
other priests, excommunicated the Emperor Theodosius the great: From which
sentence, having first given condign satisfation, he afterward deserved to be
absolved; and many such like examples may be alleged, both more certain for
time, and nearer for place. Therefore no Bishops whatsoever neither may nor
ought to be punished by the secular Power, if they chance to offend through
humane frailty: For it is the duty of a good and religious Prince to honor
the Priests of God, and defend them with greatest reverence, in imitation of
the Pious Prince of most happy memory, Constantine, saying, when the cause of
Priests was brought before him, You cannot be judged by any, to wit, of the
secular judges, who are reserved to the judgment of God alone; according to
the assertion of the Apostle ( very ill applied) saying, The spiritual man is
judged of no man, 1 Corinthians. 2. 15. ( Not meant of Bishops or Clergymen, but
Saints alone, endued with Gods Spirit, not of judging in courts of justice, but
of discerning spiritual things, and their own spiritual Estates, as the
Context resolves:) Thus and much more this Prelate, who notwithstanding this
text of the Romans, pleads an exemption of all Bishops and Priests from the
kings secular power, by Divine Authority, and arrogates to Priest and Prelates,
a judiciary lawful power over Kings themselves, to excommunicate and censure
them for their offenses. And to descend to later times, even since the the
Reformation of Religion here, John Bridges Dean of Sarum, and Bishop of Oxfort,
even in his Book entitled, The supremacy of Christian Princes over all persons
thorowout their Dominions, in all causes so well Ecclesiastical as spiritual,
printed at London, 1573. p. 1095. writes thus; But who denies this ( M.
Saunders) that a godly Bishop may upon great and urgent occasion, if it shall
be necessary to edify Gods Church, and there be no other remedy, flee to this
last censure of Excommunication AGAINST A WICKED KING? Making it a thing not
questionable by our Prelates and Clergy, that they may in such a case lawfully
excommunicate the King himself: And Doctor Bilson Bishop of Winchester, in his
True difference between Christian subjection and unchristian Rebellion,
dedicated to Queen Elizabeth her self, printed at Oxford, 1595. Part. 3. Page
369. to 378. grants, That Emperors, Kings and Princes, may in some cases be
Excommunicated and kept from the Lords Table by their Bishops; and grants, That
with Heretics and Apostates, be THEY PRINCES or private men, no Christian
Pastor nor people may Communicate: Neither find I any Bishop or Court Doctor
of the contrary opinion, but all of them readily subscribe hereto. If then not
only the ill Counselors and Instruments of Kings, but Kings and Emperors
themselves, may thus not only be lawfully, justly resisted, but actually
smitten and excommunicated by their Bishops and Clergy, with the spiritual
sword, for their notorious crimes and wickednesses, notwithstanding this
inhibition; (which Theod. Eccles. Hist. 1. 4. c. 5, 6.
Valentinian the Emperor confessed; and therefore desired, that such a Bishop
should be chosen and elected in Millain after Auxentius, as he himself might
really and cordially submit to him and his reprehensions, since he must
sometimes needs err as a man, as to the medicine of souls; as he did to
Ambrose, when he was elected Bishop there;) why they may not likewise be
resisted by their Laity in the precedent cases with the temporal sword, and
subjected unto the censures of the whole Kingdoms and Parliaments, transcends
my shallow apprehension to conceive, there being as great, if not greater, or
the very self-same reason for the lawfulness of the one, as of the other. And
till our Opposites shall produce a substantial difference between these cases,
or disclaim this their practice and doctrine of the lawfulness of
excommunicating Kings and Emperors, they must give me and others liberty to
conceive, they have quite lost and yielded up the cause they now contend for,
notwithstanding this chief Text of Romaves 13. the ground of all their strength
at first, Object. 10.
but now of their ruin.

The tenth Dr. Fern Sect. 2. Appeal to thy Conscience.
Objection is this, that of 1 Pet. 2, 13, 14, 15, 16. Submit your selves to
every ORDINANCE OF MAN for the Lords sake, whether it be to The King AS
SVPREAME, or unto Governors, as unto them that are sent by him (to wit, by
God, not the King, as the distribution manifests, and Romans 13. 1, 2, 3, 4.) For
the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well, etc.
Fear God, Honor the King; we must submit to Kings and honor Kings, who are
the supreme Governors; therefore we may in no case forcibly resist them or
their Officers, though they degenerate into Tyrants.

To which I answer; Answ.
that this is a meerin consequent; since the submission here enjoined is but to
such Kings, who are punishers of evil doers, and praisers of those that do
well; which the Apostle makes the Ground and motive to submission; therefore
this text extends not to Tyrants and oppressors, who do quite contrary. We
must submit to Kings when they rule well and justly, is all the Apostle here
affirms; Ergo we must submit to, and not resist them in any their violent
courses to subvert Religion, Laws, Liberties; is meet nonsense both in Law,
Divinity, and common Reason.

If any reply, Reply.
as they do, that the Apostle, verse. 18, 19, 20. Bids servants (...) subject
to their Masters with all fear, not only to the good and gentle, but also to
the froward: For this is thank-worthy, if a man for conscience toward God
endure grief suffering wrongfully, etc. Ergo this is meant of evil
Magistrates and Kings, as well as good. Answ.
I answer 1. That the Apostles speaks it only of evil Masters not Kings; of
servants, not subjects; there being a great difference between servants,
Apprentices, Villains, and free borne subjects, as all men know, the one being
under the arbitrary rule and government of their Master; the other only under
the just, settled, legal Government of their Princes, according to the Laws of
the Realm: Secondly, this is meant only of private personal injuries, and
undue corrections of Masters given to servants without just cause, as verse. 20.
For what glory is it, if when ye be BVFFETED FOR your faults, etc. intimates:
not of public injuries and oppressions of Magistrates, which endanger the
whole Church and State. A Christian servant or subject must patiently endure
private undue corrections of a froward Master or King: See Heb. 12. 10. Matthew.
5. 39, 40.
Ergo whole Kingdoms and Parliaments, must patiently without resistance suffer
their kings and evil Instruments to subvert Religion, Laws, Liberties,
Realms, (the proper deduction heen) is but a ridiculous conclusion.

Secondly, This Text enjoynes no more subjection to kings, then to any other
Magistrates; as the words: Submit your selves TO EVERY ORDINANCE of Man; Or
unto Governors, etc. prove past all contradiction; And verse 6. which bids us,
Honor the King; bids us first in direct terms, HONOR ALL MEN; to wit, All
Magistrates at least, if not all men in general, as such: There is then no
special Prerogative of irresistability given to kings by this Text in
injurious violent courses, more then there is to any other Magistrate or person
whatsoever; God giving no man any Authority to injure others without
resistance, especially if they assault their persons or invade their Estates to
ruin them: Since then inferior Officers, and other menmay be forc^bly
resisted when they actually attempt by force to ruin Religion, Laws,
Liberties, the republike, as I have proved, and our Antagonists must grant; by
the self-same reason kings may be resisted too, notwithstanding any thing in
this Text, which attributes no more irresistability or authority to Kings, then
unto other Magistrates.

Thirdly, Kings are here expressly called; AN ORDINANCE OF MAN, not God; as I
have formerly proved them to be. If so; I then appeal to the consciences of our
fiercest Antagonists, whether they do believe in their consciences, or date
take their Oaths upon it; That ever any people or Nation in the world, or our
Ancestors at first, did appoint any Kings or Governors over them, to subvert
Religion, Laws, Liberties; or intend to give them such an unlimited
uncontrollable Sovereignty over them, as not to provide for their own safety,
or not to take up Arms against them, for the necessary defense of their Laws,
Liberties, Religion, Persons, States, under pain of high Treason, or eternal
damnation, in case they should degenerate into Tyrants, and undertake any such
wicked destructive design. If not (as none can without madness and impudence
aver the contrary, it being against all common sense and reason, that any man
or Nation should so absolutely, irresistably inslave themselves and their
Posterities to the very lusts and exorbitancies of Tyrants, and such a thing as
no man, no Nation in their right senses, were they at this day to erect a most
absolute Monarchy, would condescend to;) then clearly the Apostle here
confirming only the Ordinances of men, and giving no Kings nor Rulers any
other or greater power then men had formerly granted them (for that had been to
alter, not approve their humane Ordinances) I shall infallibly thence infer;
That whole States, and Subjects, may with safe conscience resist the unjust
violence of their Kings in the foresaid cases, because they never gave them any
authority irresistably to act them, nor yet divested themselves (much less
their posterity whom they could not eternally inslave) of the right, the power
of resisting them in such cases; whom they might justly resist before, whiles
they were private men, and as to which illegal proceedings they continue
private persons still, since they have no legal power given them by the people
to authorize any such exorbitances.

Fourthly, The subjection here enjoined, is not passive, but active, witness
ver. 15. For so is the will of God, that by WELL DOING (to wit, by your actual
cheerful submission to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, etc.) you
put to silence the ignorance of foolish men: as free, and not using your
liberty, etc. If then this Text be meant of active, not passive obedience; then
it can be intended only of lawful Kings, of Magistrates in their just
commands, whom we must actually obey; not of Tyrants and Oppressors in their
unjust wicked proceedings, whom we are bound in such cases actually to disobey,
as our Antagonists grant, and I have largely evidenced elsewhere: Wherefore, it
directly commands resistance, not subjection in such cases; since actual
disobedience to unjust commands, is actual resisting of them. And that these
Texts prescribing resistance tacitly, should apparently prohibit it under pain
of Treason, Rebellion, Damnation, is a Paradox to me.

Fifthly, This Text does no way prove that false conceit of most, who hence
conclude: That all Kings are the Supreme Powers, and above their Parliaments,
and whole Kingdoms, even by Divine institution: There is no such thing, nor
shadow of it in the Text.

For first, I.
This Text calls Kings, not a Divine, but Humane Ordinance; If then Kings be
the Supreamest Power, and above their Parliaments, Kingdoms, it is not by any
Divine Right, but by Humane Ordination only, as the Text resolves.

Secondly, II
This Text prescribes not any Divine Law to all or any particular States; nor
gives any other. Divine or Civil Authority to Kings and Magistrates in any
State then what they had before; for if it should give Kings greater Authority
and Prerogatives then their people at first allotted them, it should alter and
invade the settled Government of all States, contrary to the Apostles scope,
which was to leave them as they were, or should be settled by the peoples joint
consent: It does not say, That all Kings in all Kingdoms are, or ought to be
Supreme; or let them be so henceforth: no such inference appears therein. It
speaks not what Kings ought to be in point of Power; but only takes them as
they are, (according to that of Romans 13. 2. The Powers that ARE, etc. to wit,
that are, even now every where in being, not which ought to be, or shall be)
whence he says; Submit to the King as supreme: that is; where by the
Ordinance of man the King is made supreme; not, where Kings are not the
supreamest Power; as they were not among the Sea Bodin Commonweal l. 1. c. 10.
l. 2. c. 5. Hugo Grotius de jure Belli. l. 1. c. 3. sect. 8 to. 13. and
Annotata.
ancient Lacedaemonians, Indians, Carthaginians, Goths, Aragonians, and in most
other Kingdoms, as I have Part. 1. and in the Appendix.
elsewhere proved: To argue therefore, We must submit to Kings where the people
have made them supreme; Ergo, All Kings every where are and ought to be
supreme Jure divino; (as our Antagonists hence infer) is a gross absurdity.

Thirdly, III.
This Text does not say, That the King is the supreme sovereign Power, as
most mistake; but supreme Governor, as the next words; or Governors, etc.
expond it; and the very Oath of Supremacy, 1. Eliz. Cap. 1. which gives our
Kings this Title, Supreme Governor within these his Realms. Now Kings may be
properly called Supreme Magistrates or Governors in their Realms, in respect
of the actual administration of government and justice, (all Magistrates
deriving their Commissions immediately from them, and doing justice, for, and
under them:) and yet not be the Sovereign Power, as the Roman Emperors, the
Kings of Sparta, Arragon, and others; the German Emperors, the Dukes of Venice
in that State, Bodin. Commonweal l. 2. c. 5. l. 1. c. 10.
and the Prince of Orange in the Nether-lands, were and are the Supreme
Magistrates, Governors; but not the Supreme Severaigne Powers; their whole
States, Senates, Parliaments, being the Supreamest Powers, and above them;
which being Courts of State, of Justice, and a compound body of many members,
not always constantly sitting, may properly be styled, The Supreme Courts and
Powers; but not the Supreme Magistrate or Governor: As the Pope holds
himself, the Supreme Head and Governor of the Militant Church; and the
Archbishop of Canterbury styles himself, the Primate and Metropolitan of all
England; and so other Prelates in their Provinces; yet they are not the
Sovereign Ecclesiastical Power, for the King, at least General Counsels or
National Synods (which are not properly termed Governors, but Power,) are
Paramount them, and may lawfully censure or depose them, as I have Parl. 1 p.
88.
elsewhere manifested. To argue therefore, that Kings are the highest Sovereign
Power, because they are the highest particular Governors and Magistrates in
their Realms, as our Antagonists do; is a mere Fallacy, and Inconsequent,
since I have proved Par. 1. and the Appendix.
our own, and most other Kings, not to be the highest Powers, though they be
the Supreamest Governors.

Fourthly, IIII.
This Text speaks not at all of the Roman Emperor, neither is it meant of
him, as Doctor Fern^, with others mistake; who is never in Scripture styled a
King, being a Title extremely odious to the Romans, and for ever banished
their State with an Livy Hist. l. 1. See the Appendix. p. 3. 4.
Oath of execration, by an ancient Law, in memory whereof they instituted a
special annual Feast on the 23. of February, called, Macrob. Saturnal. l. 1.
c. 13. Seldens Titles of honor. part. 1. c. 2. sect. 2. p. 13.
Regifugium; the hatred of which Title continued such, that Tully Aug. de Civ.
Dei. l. 2.
and Augustine write; Regem Romae posthac, nec Dii nec Homines esse patiantur:
And Seldom, ibid. Plutarchi, Iuli^^ Caesar, ^atropias. Grimston in his life.
Caesar himself being saluted King by the multitude, perceiving it was very
distasteful to the States, answered, CAESAREM SE, NON REGEM ESSE: which Title
of Caesar, (not King) the Scripture ever uses to express the Emperor by:
witness Matthew. 22. 17, 21. Mark 12. 14, 16, 17. Luke 2. 1. chap. 20. 22, 24,
25. chap. 23. 2. John 19. 12, 15. Acts 11. 28. chap. 17. 7. chap. 25. 8, 10,
11, 12, 21. chap. 26. 32. chap. 27. 24. chap. 28. 19. Phil. 4. 22. Which Texts
do clearly manifest, that no Title was ever used by the Apostles, Evangelists,
Jews, to express the Emperor by, but that of Caesar, not this of King.
Therefore Peter's Text, speaking only of the King, not Caesar, cannot be
intended of the Roman Emperor, as ignorant Doctors blindly fancy.

Fifthly, V.
This Epistle of Peter (the Gal. 2. 7. 8.
Apostle of the Jews) was written only to the dispersed Jews thorowout Pontus,
Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bythinia, 1 Pet. 1. 1. over whom Herod at that
time reigned as King, by the Roman Senates and Emperors appointment, who had
then conquered the Jews, and made them a tributarie Province, as is evident by
Matthew. 27. 17, 21. Mark 12. 14, 16, 17. Luke 20. 22, 24, 25. chap. 23. 2. Acts
17. 7. chap. 25. 8, 10, 11, 12, 21. chap. 27. 24. chap. 12. 1. to 24. compared
together; and by Ant. Iud. l. 17. c. 12. l. 18 c. 1. l 20 c. 9. and De Bell.
Iud. l. 1.
Josephus, the Century writers, Baronius, Sigonius, and others. The King then
here mentioned to be supreme, was Herod, or King Agrippa, or some other
immediate Mat. 3 1. c. 27. 11. Act 25. 13. 24. 26 c. 26. 2. c. 12. 1.
King of the Jews, who was their supreme Governor, not absolutely, but Ant.
Iud. l. 13. to 20. John 19. 12.
under the Roman Senate and Emperors, and made so by their appointment,
whence called in the Text; an Ordinance of man, not God: Now this King of the
Jews (as is evident by Paul's Appeal to Caesar from Festus and King Agrippa, as
to the Sovereign Tribunal; Acts 25. and 26. by Josephus, Philo Judaeus de
legatione ad Caium, and the consent of all Historians) was not the absolute
Sovereign Power, but subordinate to the Roman Emperor and Senate, Ios. de
Bell. Iud. l. 1 c. 10. 11. 12. 15.
who both created, and bad power to control, remove, and censure him for his
misdemeanors; yet Peter calls him here Supreme, because the Highest Governor
under them, as we style our Kings See the Appendix.
Supreme Governors under Christ. Therefore having a Superior Governor and
Power over him, to which he was accountable and subordinate; Supreme in the
Text, cannot be meant, of a King absolutely Supreme, having no Power Superior
to him, but God; but only relatively Supreme, in respect of under-Governours,
there actually residing: whose Supremacy being forcibly gained only by
conquest, not free consent; (and the ancient native Schickardus jus Regium.
Heb. p. 7. Cunaeus de Rep. Haeb. p. 101 166.
Kings of the Jews, being inferior to their whole Senates and Congregations,
and to do all by their advice, as Josephus Antiq. Jud. lib. 4. cap. 8. 2. Sam.
18. 3, 4. Jer. 38. 45. 1. Chron. 13. 1. to 6. attest) will no way advantage our
Opposites, nor advance the Prerogative of Kings; since it extends only to the
King of the Jews that then was, who was not simply Supreme, but a Subject
Prince subordinate to the Roman State and Empire, and one appointed by a
Conqueror, not freely chosen and assented to by the people. So as all the
Argument which can hence be extracted for the absolute Soveraigntie and
irresistibility of Kings over their whole Kingdoms and Parliaments, is but
this. The King of the Jews was in Peter's time the Supreme Magistrate over that
Nation, by the Roman Senates and Emperors appointment, to whom yet he was
subordinate and accountable; the Romans having conquered the Jews by force,
and imposing this government upon them, without their consents. Therefore the
Kings of England, and all other Kings are absolute Sovereign Monarchs,
Superior to their whole Parliaments and Kingdoms, collectively considered;
and may not in point of conscience be forcibly resisted by them, though they
endeavor to subvert Religion, Laws, Liberties: How little coherence there is
in this Argument, the silliest child may at first discern.

From these Scriptures, Objection II.
I descend to Reasons deduced from them, against resistance, which I shall
contract into three Arguments: The first is this; Bodin l. 2. c. 5 Bilson.
part. 3. (...) An appeal to thy conscience, and many others.
Kings are the Fathers, Heads, Lords, Shepherds of the Commonwealth; Ergo,
They ought not to be resisted in any their exorbitant proceedings; it being
unlawful, unseemly, for a Son to resist his Father; the Members the Head; the
Vassals their Lord; the Flock their Shepherd.

To this I answer: Answer 1.
First, They are Fathers, Shepherds, Lords, Heads, only in an improper,
allegorical, not genuine sense; therefore nothing can thence be properly
inferred: They are and ought to be such in respect of their 2. Sam. 24. 17. Isa
49. 23. Ps 78 72 73. 74. Isa. 40. 11. c. 32. 2. to 18. Joh. 10. 9. to 19.
loving and careful affection toward their Subjects; not in regard of their
Sovereign Power over them: Therefore when their Tyranny makes them not such,
in regard of care and affection to their people; their people cease to be such,
in regard of filial, natural, and sheep-like submission: When these Shepberds
turn Ezekiel. 22. 27 Zep 33 Mat. 7. 25. Act. 20 29.
Wolves; these Fathers, Step-fathers; the Subjects, as to this, cease to be
their Sheep, their Children, in point of Obedience and Submission.

Secondly, 2.
If we consider the Commonweal and Kingdom collectively; Kings are rather
their Kingdoms children then Parents, because 1 Pet. 2 13.
created by them, their public servants, ministers, for whose benefit they are
employed, and receive Romans 13. 6.
wages; not their Sovereign Lords; their subordinate Heads, to be directed and
advised by them, not Tyrannically to overruled them at their pleasure:
Therefore Paramount, and able in such cases to resist them.

Thirdly, 3.
Parishioners may, no doubt, lawfully resist the 2 John 10. 11
false Doctrines and open assaults of their Ministers, though they be their
Spiritual Shepherds: Citizens the violent oppressions of their Majors, though
they be their Politic Heads: Servants the unjust assaults of their Masters,
though their lawful Lords; ( who may Littleton. sect. 19 4. and Coke Ib. p.
126.
not misuse their very Villains, by Law:) And if Parents will violently
assault their natural children, Husbands their Wives, Masters their Servants,
to murder them without cause, they may See Alb Genesis de Iur. Bell. l 1. c. 15.
16.
by Law resist, repulse them with open force.

Fourthly, 4.
A Son who is a Judge, may lawfully resist, imprison, condemn his natural
Father; A Servant, his Lord; A Parishioner his Pastor; a Citizen his Major; a
mere Gentleman, the greatest Peer or Lord, as experience proves; because they
do it in another capacity, as Judges and Ministers of public Justice, to which
all are subject. The Parliament then in this sense, as they are the
representative Body of the Realm, not private Subjects, (and their Armies by
their authority) may, as they are the highest Sovereign Power and Judicature,
resist the King and his Forces, though he be their Father, Head, Shepherd,
Lord, as they are private men.

Fifthly, This is but the common exploded Argument of the Popish Clergy, To
prove themselves superior to Kings, and exempt from all secular Jurisdiction,
because they are spiritual Fathers, Pastors, Heads to Kings; who ought to
obey, not judge, and censure them, as Antiq Eccles. Brit. p 245.
Archbish. Stratford, and others argue. But this plea is no ways available to
exempt Clergy men from secular Jurisdiction; from actual resistance of parties
assaulted, nor yet from imprisonment, censures, and capital executions by
Kings and Civil Magistrates, in case of capital Crimes; Therefore by like
reason it can not exempt Kings from the resistance, censures of their
Parliaments, Kingdoms, in case of tyrannical invasions. We deride this
Argument in Papists as absurd, as in sufficient to prove the exemption of
Clergy men: I wonder therefore why it is now urged to as little purpose,
against resistance of Tyrants, and oppressing Kings and Magistrates.

The second reason is this, Object. 12.
Appeal to thy conscience, and others.
The Invasions and oppressions of evil Kings and Tyrants, are afflictions and
punishments inflicted on us by God: Therefore we ought patiently to submit unto
them, and not forcibly to resist them.

I answer; Answ.
First, The invasions of Foreign Enemies are See 1 Kin. 11. 14. to 41. 2 Chro.
33. 11. ca. 35. 1. to 21. Isai. 10 6.
just Judgments, and punishments sent upon men by God; as were the invasions
of the Sea Gildas de Excidio. Brit. Matthew West. Malmsbuzy, Huntingdon, and
all our Chroniclers.
Danes, Saxons and Normans in England, heretofore; of the Spaniards since.
Ergo, we ought not to resist or fight against them. The present rebellion of
the Papists in Ireland is a just punishment of God upon this Kingdom and the
Protestant party there; Ergo, Neither we, nor they ought in conscience to
resist or take Arms against them. Every sickness that threatens or invades our
bodies, is commonly an affliction and punishment sent by God: Ergo, We must not
endeavor to prevent or remove it by Physic, but patiently lie under it
without seeking remedy. Injuries done us in our persons, estates, names, by
wicked men, who assault, wound, rob, defame us, are from 2 Samuel 16. 10, 11, 12.
God, and punishments for our sins: Ergo, We may not resist them: Yea, Subjects
Rebellions, Treasons, and Insurrections, against their Princes many times, are
punishments inflicted on them by God, displeased with them, as the Statute of 1
Ed. 6. c. 12. resolves, and the 1 King cap. 11. and 12.
Scripture too: Ergo, Kings ought not to resist or suppress them by force of
Arms; If all these Consequences be absurd, and idle, as every man will grant,
the objection must be so likewise.

I read, That in the Joan. Cannot. lib. 4. Polycrat. c. 1. and Boch^llus
Decreta, Eccles. Gal. l. 5. Tit 1. cap 5. p. 697.
persecution of the Hunnes, their King Attila being demanded of by a religious
Bishop, of a certain City? who he was? when he had answered; I am Attila, the
scourge of God: The Bishop reverencing the divine Majesty in him; answered,
Thou art welcome o Minister of God; and ingeminating this saying; Blessed be he
that comes in the Name of the Lord, Opened the Church door, and let in the
persecutor, by whom he obtained the Crown of Martyrdom, not daring to exclude
the scourge of the Lord; knowing, that the beloved son is scourged, and that
the power of the scourge it self is not from any, but God. Will it hence
follow? That all Christians are bound in conscience to do the like, and not to
resist the barbarous Turks, if they should invade them; no more then this
Bishop did the bloody Pagan Hunnes, because they are Gods wrath? I trow not.
One Swallow makes no Summer; nor this example, a general president to bind
all men.

The third reason is this, Object. 13.
Saints forcible resistance of Tyrants, begets civil wars, great disorders,
and Dr. Fern, Sect. 3, 4. and others.
many mischiefs in the State: Ergo, It is unlawful, and inconvenient.

I answer, Answ.
First, That this doctrine of not resisting Tyrants in any case, is far more
pernicious, destructive to the Realm then the contrary; because it deprives
them of all humane means, and possibilities of preservation; and denies them
that special remedy which God and nature has left them for their
preservation: Laws, denial of Subsidies, and such like remedies prescribed by
Doctor Fern, being no remoraes or restraints at all to armed Tyrants;
Wherefore I must tell thee Doctor, Theologorum utcunque dissertissimorum
sententiae, in hac controversia non sunt multo faciendae, quia quid sit Lex
humana ipsi ignorant, as Vasquius controvers. Illustr. 81..11. determines.

Secondly, The knowledge of a lawful power in Subjects to resist Tyrants, will
be a good means to keep Princes from Tyrannical courses, for fear of strenuous
resistance; which if once taken away, there is no humane bridle left to stay
the Inundation of Tyranny in Princes or great Officers; and all Weapons,
Bulwarks, Walls, Laws, Arms will be merely useless to the Subjects, if
resistance be denied them, when there is such cause.

Thirdly, Resistance only in cases of public necessity, though accompanied
with civil war; serves always to prevent far greater mischiefs then war
it self can produce, it being the only Antidote to prevent public ruin, the
readiest means to preserve endangered, to regaine, or settle lost Liberties,
Laws, Religion, as all ages witness; and to Seditiones non facit, sed tollit
quieversorem Patriae, publicaeque disciplinae co^^cerit, Vindiciae. contr.
Tyran. p. 145.
prevent all future Seditions and Oppressions.

Fourthly, Desperate diseases, have always desperate remedies, Malo nodo,
malus cuneus: When nothing but a defensive war will preserve us from ruin
and vassalage; it is better to embrace it, then hazard the loss of all,
without redemption. Ex duobus malis minimum. All Kingdoms, States in cases of
necessity, have ever had recourse to this as the lesser evil; and why not ours
as well as others.

The last (and strongest Objection as some deem it) is the sayings if some
Fathers backed with the examples of the primitive Christians, Object.
to which no such satisfactory answer has hitherto been given, as might be.

The first and grandest Objection against Subjects forcible resistance,
Authority 1.
and defensive war, is that speech of Saint Ambrose, Lib. 5. Orat. in
Auxentium. Coactus repugnare non audeo: dolere potero, potero flere, potero
gemere: adversus arma, milites, Gothos, Lachrymae meae arma sunt: talia sunt
munimenta sacerdotum: A LITER NEC DEBEO, NEC POSSVM RESISTERE.

This chief Authority, Answ.
though it makes a great noise in the world, if solidly scanned, will prove but
Brutum fulmen; a mere scar-crow and no more.

For first, Ambrose in this place speaks not at all of Subjects resisting their
Princes, or Christians forcible resisting of the persecuting Roman Emperors;
but of resisting Valentine, and the Arms and Soldiers of the Goths, who at
that time See Orosius, Europius, Paulus Diaconus, Grimston, and others.
over ran Italy, and sacked Rome, being mortal Enemies to the Romans, the
Roman Emperors, Saint Ambrose, and Millain where he was Bishop.

This is evident by the express objected words: I can grieve, I can weep, I
can mourn, (to wit for the wasting of my native Country Italy, by the Invading
Enemies the Goths:) against Arms, Soldiers, GOTHS (mark it) my tears are
Weapons, etc. If any sequel can be hence properly deduced, it must be that for
which the Sea Lucas Osiander Enchir Contr. cap. 9. de Magistratu. polit.
Anabaptists use it (from whence our Opposites, who tax the Parliaments Forces
for Anabaptists, when themselves are here more truly such, and fight with this
their weapon.) That it is unlawful for Christians to fight, or make so much as
a defensive war against invading Foreign barbarous Enemies, of whom this
Father speaks: And then if the Irish Rebels, Danes, Spaniards, French, should
now invade England, both against the Kings and Kingdoms Wills, we must make no
forcible resistance at all against them with Arms in point of conscience, but
only use prayers and tears.

This is the uttermost conclusion which can properly be hence deduced; which
our Antagonists will confess to be at least erroneous, Anabaptisticall, if not
Heretical.

Secondly, 2.
You must consider who it was that used this speech; Ambrose, a Minister, then
Bishop of Millain; who by reason of this his function being an Ambassador of
Peace; had his hands bound from fighting with any other weapons, even against
invading foreign Enemies, but only with the sword of the spirit, prayers and
tears: and that his calling only, was the ground of this his speech; is
infallible by the latter clause thereof, which our Opposites cunningly
conceal. Prayers are my Arms: For such are the Defensive Armor OF PRIESTS;
Otherwise I NEITHER OUGHT NOR CAN RESIST: Why so? Because he was a Minister, a
Bishop; and Paul prohibites such to be STRIKERS, Tit. 1. 7. 1 Timothy 3. 3. and
because Priests under the Law did but blow the Trumpets, and never went out
armed to the wars, Josh. 6. Upon which ground Gratian Distinct. 5. and Causa
23. qu. 8. Aquinas. 2. 2. qu 40. Artic. 2. Silu. de Bello, p 3. Grotius de Iur.
Belli. l. 1. c. 5. sect. 4. p. 98. Nicetas Chro. l. 6.
Diverse Counsels, Decretalls, Canonists, expressly prohibit, and exempt Priests
and Bishops, from bearing Arms, or going to War, though many of them have
turned See Walsengham. hist. Angliae. p. 312. to 330.
great Soldiers, and been slain in wars.

Hence Anno 1267, in a Parliament held at Bury, K. H. 3d. and Ottobon the Popes
Legate, demanded of all the Bishops and Clergy men, holding Barronies or
Lay-fees, that they should go personally armed against the Kings enemies, or
find so great service in the Kings expedition, as appertained to so much Lands
and Tenants. To which they answered, That THEY OUGHT NOT TO FIGHT WITH THE
MATERIAL SWORD; (no not against the Kings Enemies) But with the spiritual; to
wit, with humble and devoute tears and prayers, ( using these words of
Ambrose:) And that for their benefices they were bound to maintain Peace, NOT
WAR.

Hence our King Roger de Hoved. Annal. pa^s post. p. 768. to 778. Neubrigiasis,
hist. l. 5. c 21.
Richard the first, taking the Bishop of Beauvoyes in France, his great Enemy,
armed from top to toe, prisoner in the field; commanded him to be strictly kept
in prison in his arms, and would by no means suffer him to put them off: for
which hard usuage he complained to the Pope, and procured his letter to King
Richard to free him from his arms and restraint; in which Letter, the Pope
sharply reproves the Bishop for preferring the secular warfare before the
spiritual, in that he had taken a Spear instead of a Crosier; an Helmet in
liew of a Miter; an Habergion instead of a white Rochet; a Target in place of a
Stole; an Iron-sword, instead of a spiritual sword. After which, the King sent
his Arms with this Message to the Pope: See whether this be thy sons Coat or
not? Which the Pope beholding, answered; No by Saint Peter. It is neither the
apparel of my sons, nor yet of my Brethren, but rather the vesture of the
sons of Mars. And upon this ground Antiqu: Eccles. Brit. p. 299. 300. 10. E.
4. 6. Stamford, f. 153.
Our Bishops anciently, when Members of Parliament, departed the house when
Cases of Treason or Felony came in question, because they might not by the
Canons, have their hands in blood.

This then being Ambrose his direct words and meaning, That he neither ought,
nor could use any other Weapons against the invading Goths, and their forces,
but prayers and tears; See Io: Mayor in 4. Scot. Did. 15.
because he was a Minister, not a Bishop, a Layman; The genvine Argument that
our opposites can thence extract, is but this. Priests must use no other
Defensive Arms, but prayers and tears, against invading foreign Enemies. Ergo,
The Priests and Ministers in his Majesty's Armies, who bear Offensive Arms,
must now in conscience lay them down, and use no other resistance, but prayers
and tears against the Parliaments forces: where as their former inference
against resistance: Ergo, It is altogether unlawful for the Parliament, or any
Lay-Subjects by their command, to defend Religion, Laws, Liberties, against his
Majesty's invading forces, who intend by force to subvert them; is but
ridiculous nonsense, which never once entered into this Fathers thoughts, and
can never be extorted from his words.

Ministers of the Gospel must not use any Arms, but prayers and tears to resist
a foreign Enemy: Ergo, None else may lawfully use them to withstand an
invading adversary; Is a conclusion fitter for Anabaptists then Royallists, who
may now with shame enough, for ever bid this authority adieu; with which they
have hitherto gulled the ignorant World: And henceforth turn it against the
Commission of Array, enjoining Bishops, and Clergy men, to array and arm
themselves as well as other men, as the Presidents cited in Judge Cook his
Argument against Ship Money; in the Parliaments two Declarations against the
Commission of Array; and in the Answer published in the Kings name, to the
first of them, plentifully evidence.

Finally, 3
Hence I infer, That Clergy men may, and must fight against their invading
Enemies with prayers, tears, the Weapons which they may lawfully use as proper
for their callings. Ergo, Laymen may, and must resist, and fight against them
with corporal Arms, since they are as proper for them in cases of needful
defense, as these spiritual Arms are for Priests.

The second Authority is that of An appeal to thy conscience. p. 28. Grotius de
Iure Belli, l. 1. c. 4. sect, 4. p. 83.
Nazienzen. Authority 2.
Oration. 2. in Julianum. Repressus of Julianus Christianorum lachrymis, quas
multas multi profuderunt. HOC VNVM or Solum ( as Grotius translates it)
adversus persecutionem medicamentum habentes: To which I shall add by way of
supply this other passage. Nos autem; quibus NVLLA ALIA ARMA, nec muri, nec
praesidia, praeter spem in Deum, reliqua erant: Vtpote OMNI HVMANO SVBSIDIO
PRORSVS DESTITVTIS ET SPOLIATIS, quem tandem alium aut precum auditorem, aut
inimicorum depulsorem habituri eramus, quam Deum Jacob, qui adversus superbiam
jurat. From whence they conclude, that Christians must use no other weapons but
prayers and tears, against Tyrants and oppressors.

To which I answer. Answ. 1.
First, that it is clear by this, that Christians may use prayers and tears
against Tyrants and oppressors.

Secondly, that these are the most powerful prevailing Arms both to resist
and conquer them. 2.
This the opposites readily grant. Therefore by their own confession,
Christians both may and must resist tyrants by the most powerful and effectual
means that are. Tyrants therefore are not the higher Powers, Kings, Rulers,
which Paul and Peter in the fore-objected texts, enjoyne men under pain of
damnation to be subject and obedient to for conscience sake, and no ways to
resist; since they may resist them with the powerfullest arms of all others,
prayers and tears.

Thirdly, 3.
if they may be lawfully resisted with these most prevailing arms
notwithstanding Paul's and Peter's objected inhibitions, then a fortiori they may
be with corporal, which are less noxious and prevalent; he that may with most
successeful means resist, vanquish, and overcome his tyrannizing oppressing
Sovereign, may likewise do it by the less noxious Arms. If Christians may
repulse and subdue a Tyrant with their Prayers, Tears, then why not with their
Swords? Does God or the Scripture make any such distinction, that we may and
must resist them under pain of damnation, with these kind of weapons; and
shall it be no less then Treason, Rebellion, Damnation to resist them with the
other? what difference is there in point of Allegiance, Loyalty, Treason,
Conscience, to resist an oppressing tyrannizing Prince and his Forces with a
Prayer, or with a Sword? with a Tear, or with a Spear? Are they not all one
in substance? By the Statutes of 26 H. 8. c. 13. 1 E. 6. c. 14. 5 E. 6. c. 11.
1 Eliz. c. 6. 13 Eliz. c. 1. words against the King delivered even in
Preaching, are made and declared to be high Treason, as well as bearing Arms,
and striking blows; yea, the Statute of 1 and 2 Ph. and Ma. c. 9. makes
certain prayers against this persecuting Queen, high Treason; and by the
Statute of 25 E. 3. c. 2. it is high Treason for any man to COMPASS OR IMAGINE
the death of the King, Queen, Prince, The Christians then styled Julian,
Idolianus, Pisaeus, Adonaeus, Tauricremus, alter Hieroboam, Achab, Pharao, etc.
Nazianzen, Orat. 47. and 48. in Iulianum.
as well as to slay or leavy war against them. If then we may, by the
Objectors confession, the practices and examples of the Primitive Christians,
against Julian and others, fight with our Tongues, Prayers, Tears,
Imaginations against our Sovereigns, who turn Tyrants and Persecutors; and
thereby suppress, conquer, confound them, of which none make scruple, though
our Statutes make it no less then high Treason in some cases; then
questionless they may by the self same reason and ground, resist them with
open force, notwithstanding any inhibition in Scripture. We may not, must not
resist any lawful King or Magistrate in the just execution of his office, so
much as with a repugnant will, thought, prayer, tear: we may, yea must resist
an oppressing, persecuting Tyrant with all these; therefore with any other
Arms, means Exodus, Samuel, Kings, Chronicles, Numbers, Judges and the Book
of Psalms every where almost.
. Hezekiah, David, Moses, Abijah, Asa, resisted their invading enemies, and
conquered them with their prayers; but yet they provided to repulse and
vanquish them with other external Arms. The Christians resistance and
vanquishing their Emperor Julian with the one, is an infallible argument, they
might do it with the other too, there being no such distinction in the
objected Scriptures, that we may fight against and resist them with our
prayers, tears, not arms.

Fourthly, 4.
this Father says not, that it was unlawful for the Christians to use any
other weapons but tears against Julian, the only thing in question. No such
syllable in the Oration, but only, that they had no other Arms to resist and
conquer him with, being utterly destitute and spoiled of all other humane
help. Therefore their want of other Arms and help, See Zozimen. l. 5. c. 2.
Non Gentiles solum, etc.
not the unlawfulness of using them, had they had them, was the only ground
they used prayers and tears, not arms. To argue then, those who are destitute
of all Arms, but prayers and tears, must use them only: Ergo those who have
other Arms besides prayers and tears, may not lawfully use them to resist a
Tyrant, is but Scholastical Nonsense; yet this is the very uttermost this
authority yields our opposites. In one word, this Father informs us, that this
Apostate Emperor Oration. 1. in Iuli anum p. 760.
Julian, would not make open war at first upon the Christians, because this
would altogether cross the end he aimed at: (mark the reason) Nos enim, si
vis inferatur, acriores obstinatioresque futuros, ac tyrannidi obnixum pietatis
TUENDAE STUDIUM OBJECTUROS cogitavit. Solent enim fortes and generosi animi, ei
QUI VIM AFFERRE PARAT CONTUMACITER OBSISTERE, non secus ac flamma, quae a vento
excitatur, quo vehementius perflatur, eo vehementius accenditur. Which argues,
that the Christians would have forcibly resisted him, had he at first with
force invaded them; therefore he weakened, subdued, disarmed them first by
policy; and then fell to persecute them with force, when they had no means of
resistance left. Authority 3.


The third authority is that of Appeal to thy conscience, p. 28, 29.
Bernard, Epist. 221. to King Lewis of France, Quicquid vobis de Regno vestro,
de anima and corona vestra facere placeat, NOS ECCLESIAE FILII, matris
injurias, contemptum, and conculcationem omnino dissimulare non possumus.
Profecto STABIMUSET PUGNABIMVS USQUE AD MORTEM ( si ita oportuerit) pro matre
nostra ARMIS QUIBUS LICET, non scutis and gladiis, SED PRECIBUS ET FLETIBUS AD
DEUM. Therefore it is unlawful for Christians to resist with force of Arms.

I answer first, Answ. 1.
Bernard was both a Monk and Clergie-man, prohibited by Scripture and sundry
Canons to fight with military Arms against any person or enemy whatsoever; and
he utters these words of himself, as he was a Clergie-man, servant, and son
of the Church; in the selfsame sense as Saint Ambrose did before. It was then
only his Calling, not the cause which prohibited him forcibly to resist King
Lewis.

Secondly I answer, 2.
that this authority is so far from prohibiting resistance of oppressing
Princes, endeavoring with force of Arms to subvert Liberties, Laws,
Religion; that it is an unanswerable proof for it, even in our present case:
King Lewis to whom Bernard writes, had then raised a civil war in his Realm
against Theobald and others who desired peace; which the King rejecting,
Bernard does thus reprehend him in the premises. Verum vos nec verba pacis
recipitis; nec pacta vestra tenetis, nec sanis consiliis acquicscitis. Sed
nescio quo Dei judicio, omnia vobis ita vertitis in perversum, ut probra
honorem, honorem probra ducatis; tuta timeatis, timexda contemnatis; and quod
olim sancto and glorioso Regi David, Ioab, legitur exprobrasse; diligitis eos
qui vos oderunt, Nota.
and odio habetis qui vos diligere volunt. Neque enim qui vos instigant priorem
iterare maliciam adversus non merentem, quaerunt in hoc honorem vestrum, sed
suum commodum, imo nec suum commodum, SED DIABOLI VOLUNTATEM; ut Regis (quod
absit) potentiam concepti furoris habeant effectricem; quem suis se posse
adimplere viribus non confidunt; INIMICI CORONAE VESTRAE, REGNI MANIFESTISSIMI
PERTURBATORES. (Our present case, in regard of the Kings evil seduding
Counselors.) Then immediately follows the objected clause, At quicquid vobis,
etc. After which he gives him this sharp reproof. Non tacebo quod cum
excommunicatis iterare faedus and societatem nunc satagis, quod in necem
hominum, combustionem domorum, destructionem Ecclesiarum, dispersionem
pauperum, raptoribus, predonibus (sicut dicitur, adhaeretis; juxta illud
Prophetae Ps. 49.
si videbas furem currebas cum eo, etc. quasi non satis per vos mala facere
valeatis. Dico vobis, non erit diu inultum, si haec ita facere pergitis, etc.
Here this holy man prohibited by his orders to fight against this King, his
Sovereign with his Sword; fights strongly against and resists his violence
with his Pen. And although he may not use a Sword and Buckler in respect of
his calling to defend his mother the Church against him: yet he is so far
from yielding obedience to and not resisting him, according to Paul's and Peter's
pretended injunctions, that he expressly tells him to his face, That HE WOULD
STAND AND FIGHT AGAINST HIM EVEN UNTO DEATH (if there were need) with such
weapons as he (being a Monk and Minister) might use, to wit, with Prayers and
tears, though not with Sword and Buckler; which were more prevalent with God
against him then any other Arms. So that he resists him in the very highest
strain that may be; and clearly admits, that Laymen who might lawfully use
Swords and Bucklers, might with them justly defend the Church in standing and
fighting for it against him even to death, as well as he might do it with
prayers and tears, his proper Arms: Which answers that objection out of his
170. Epistle, written to the same King; and his 183 Epistle to Conrade King of
Romans; where he subjects these Kings to the Pope, whom he advises them to
obey; and reprehends them for their misdemeanors, notwithstanding that text of
Romans 13 which he there recites.

The fourth authority, Authority 4.
is the example of the primitive Christians, who submitted themselves willingly
to their persecuting Emperors; without resistance in word or deed. For proof
whereof, several passages are recited out of Fathers, which I shall conjoyne:
the first is out of Tertullian his Apologeticus. Quoties enim in Christianos
d^saevitis, partim animis propriis, partim legibus obsequentes? Quoties etiam
praeteritis a vobis SUO JURE NOS INIMICUM VULGUS invadit lapidibus and
incendiis? Ipsis Bacchanalium furiis, nec mortuis parcunt Christianis, quin
illos de requie sepulturae, de asylo quodam mortis, jam alios, jam nec totos
avellant, dissecent, distrahant? quid tamen de tam conspiratis unquam
denotatis, de tam animatis ad mortem usque pro injuria repensatis? quamvis vel
una nox pauculis faculis largitatem ultionis posset operari, si malum malo
dispurgi, penes nos liceret. Sed absit ut aut igni humano vindicetur divina
secta; aut doleat pati, in quo probatu^. Si e^im in hosts exortos non tantum
vindices occultos agere vellemus, de^sset nobis vis numerorum and copiarum?
Plures nimirum Mauri and Marcomanni, ipsique Parthi, vel quantaecunque, unius
tamen loci and suorum finium gentes, quam totius orbis? Externi sumus and
vestra omnia implevimus, urbes, insulas, castella, municipia, conciliabula,
castra ipsa, tribus, decurias, palatium, senatum, forum, sola vobis relinquimus
templa. Cui Bello non idonei, non prompti fuissemus, etiam impares copiis, QUI
TAM LIBENTER TRUCIDAMUR? Si non apud istam disciplinam MAGIS OCCIDI LICERET,
QUAM OCCIDERE. Potuimus and inermes, NEC REBELS, sed tantummodo discordes
solius divortii invidia adversus vos dimicasse. Si enim tanta vis hominum, in
aliquem orbis remoti sinum abrupissemus semus a vobis, suffudisset utique
damnationem vestram tot qualiumcunque amissio civium, imo etiam and ipsa
institutione punisset: proculdubio expavissetis ad solitudinem vestram, ad
silentium rerum, and stuporem quendam quasi mortui urbes quaesissetis quibus
imperaretis. Plures hosts, quam cives vobis remanisissent, nunc enim pauciores
hosts habetis prae multitudine Christianorum, pene omnium civium. Which S.
Cyprian (Tertullians imitator) thus seconds, Laedere Dei and Christi servos
persecutionibus tuis desine, Ad Demetrianum liber.
quos laesos ultio divina defendit. Inde est enim quod nemo nostrum quando
apprehenditur, reluctatur, nec se adversus injustam violentiam vestram quamvis
nimius and copiosus noster sit populus, ulciscitur. Patientes facit de secutura
ultione securitas. Innocents nocentibus cedunt. Insontes poenis and
cruciatibus acquiescunt, certi and fidentes, quod in ultum non remaneat,
quodcunque perpetimur, quantoque major fuerit persecutionis injuria, Lib. 5.
tanto and justior fiat and gravior pro persecutione vindicta. Which Lactantius
thus trebles. Confidimus enim Majestati ejus qui tam contemptum sui possit
vlcisci, quam servorum suorum labores and injurias. Et ideo cum tam nefanda
perpetimur, ne verbo quidem reluctamur, sed Deo remittimuus ulti^n^s. De Civit.
Dei, lib. 22.
Saint Angustine relates the same in these words, Neque tunc Civitas Christi
quamvis ad huc peregrinaretur in terra, and haberet tam magnorum agmina
populorum, adversus impios persecutores, pro temporali salute pugnavit, sed
potius ut obtineret aeternam, non repugnavit: ligabantur, includebantur,
caedebantur, torquebantur, urebantur, laeniabantur, cruciabantur, and
multiplicabantur. Non erat iis pro salute pugnare, nisi salutem pro salute
contemnere. The sum of all these Fathers sayings (which I have largely cited,
because I would conceal nothing that might be materially objected) is this:
That the Christians in the primitive Church, though they were many in number,
and sufficiently able to defend themselves against their persecuters by force
of Arms, did yet refuse to do it, yielding themselves up to any tortures,
punishments, deaths, without the least resistance in word or deed; Ergo, the
Parliament and Kingdom ought now to make no resistance at all against the
Kings popish Army and Cavaliers, but to expose themselves to their cruelties
and rapines, without the least resistance in word or deed.

Because this objection sticks most with many Scholars, Answer.
Statists, and tender consciences, I shall endeavor to give a satisfactory
answer to it, without any shifting evasions, or questioning the truth of
Tertullians, and Cyprians assertions, concerning the multitude and strength of
the Christians, and their ability to resist, which some have taken Mr. Goodwin
his Anti-cavalierisme, Scripture and Reason for defensive Arms.
great pains to refute.

First, 1.
then I say, that neither of all these Fathers say, That the primitive
Christians held it unlawful, muchlesse damnable, in point of conscience for
them to resist their persecuting enemies, no such syllable in any of them. And
Tertullians, Si non apud istam disciplinam MAGIS OCCIDI LICET QUAM OCCIDERE, by
way of necessary defense, implies no such thing, but rather proves the
contrary, that resistance is lawful, because it is lawful to be slain as a
martyr; therefore in this case to slay. So as there is nothing in these
authorities in point of conscience to condemn the Parliaments present
resistance, and defensive war, as unlawful:

Secondly, 2.
they all seem to grant, that the Christians deemed resistance even by force
of Arms to be lawful for them, though they used it not; no Text of Scripture
prohibiting, but allowing it, and these Fathers producing no one text which
truly condemns it; this being the very sum of their words. That though (...)
Christians were exceeding many in number, of strength and power abundantly
sufficient to defend themselves in a warlike manner against their persecuters,
and had full liberty and no restraint upon them in point of Conscience either
to withstand their persecutors with Arms, or to withdraw themselves from under
the jurisdiction of their persecuters into remote parts, to the great weakening
and loss of the State: yet such was their patience, innocence, and desire of
Martyrdom, that they resisted not their Adversaries with force, nor retired,
nor fled away from under their obedience, but cheerfully without the least
resistance by word, deed, or thought, yielded up their Bodies, Liberties,
Lives, to the cruelties of their Enemies, to obtain that Crown of Martyrdom
which they desired, and to offer up themselves a voluntary freewill oblation to
the Lord, who would certainly avenge all their wrongs. This is the sum of all
these Authorities, which evidence resistance lawful in it self, and to these
Christians too in their own judgments and resolutions, though the desire of
Martyrdom made them freely to forbear it. These Examples and Authorities
therefore abundantly corroborate, and no ways impeach our cause.

Thirdly, 3.
their examples of not resisting Persecuters, being rather voluntary, then
enjoined, out of a longing desire to be Martyrs, and an assurance of divine
vengeance to be executed on their Persecuters, is no restraint nor ground at
all for other Christians, now not to use any forcible resistance, it being a
gross inconsequent to argue: The Primitive Christians voluntarily refused to
defend themselves with force of Arms against their Persecuters, though they
were not bound in point of Conscience from such resistance, and had both
liberty and power to resist. Ergo, Christians in point of Conscience ought not
to make any forcible resistance against oppressing Lords and Persecuters now:
For then this their voluntary choice and election should deprive all following
Christians of that ability of defense which both themselves then had, and since
enjoy by Gods and Natures Law. Yet this is all the argument which can be
ingeniously framed from these Authorities and Examples; the absurdity whereof I
shall thus further illustrate from like Precedents: We know, first, That See
Socrat. schelast. Theod. Niceph. Eccles. Hist. Fox Acts and Monuments. Tertul.
Apolog. and ad Martyrs Cyprian ad Martyrer.
the primitive Christians, out of a desire of martyrdom, not only refused to
resist, but to flee away from their Persecuters, when they might safely do it;
some of them holding it unlawful and dishonorable to flee in such a case; by
name Tertullian, in his book De fuga in persecutione. Will our Opposites from
hence infer: Ergo, it is unlawful for Christians not only to resist, but
even to flee from their Persecuters, or his Majesty's murdering, plundering
Forces? Or for them selves to flee, not only from the Parliaments Forces, but
Justice too, as many of them have done, yea, made escapes against Law to flee
therefrom. If the Christians not fleeing, bind neither them, nor us, not to
flee now, why should their not resisting only do it? Secondly, See Fox Acts
and Monuments, Vol. 1. passim.
The Primitive Christians ran to the stake of martyrdom, when they were
neither accused, cited, persecuted by any, freely confessing themselves
Christians, and rather desiring presently to die Martyrs, then live Christians,
and reputing is worse then death not to be admitted to, or delaied the honor
of being Martyrs, of which we have infinite Presidents in Ecclesiastical
Histories commonly known and over-tedious to recite. I shall only instance in
Julian the Apostates Nazianz. Orat. 47. (...)
Christian Soldiers: who being overreached by him under color of a largess,
to throw some Frankincense into a fire secretly kindled by the Emperor in
honor of an Idol, they dreaming of no such thing, and doing it only as (...)
plementall Ceremony; as soon as they heard how the Emperor had overreached
them, and given out speeches that they had sacrificed to his Idol, presently
rising from the feast prepared for them, in a fury, inflamed with zeal and
wrath, ran through the Market place, and cried out openly, We are Christians,
We are Christians in mind; let all men hear it, and above all, God, to whom
we both live and will also die. O Christ our Savior, we have not broken our
faith plighted to thee: If our hand has any way offended, verily our mind
followed it not at all; we are circumvented by the Emperors fraud with whose
gold we are wounded. We have put off impiety, we are purged by blood. After
which, posting speedily to the Emperor, and casting away their gold, with a
generous and strenuous mind they exclaimed against him in this manner. O
Emperor, we have not received gifts, but are damned with death. We are not
called for our honor, but branded with ignominy. Give this benefit to thy
Soldiers, kill and behead us unto Christ, to whose Empire only we are
subject. Recompense fire for fire; for those ashes reduce us into ashes. Cut
off the hands which we have wickedly stretched out; the feet wherewith we have
perniciously run together. Give gold to others, who will not afterward repent
they have received it; Christ is enough, and more then sufficient unto us, whom
we account in stead of all. The Emperor enraged with this speech, refused to
slay them openly, lest they should be made Martyrs, who as much as in them lay
were Martyrs; but only banished them, revenging this their contempt with that
punishment. Will it then follow from these memorable examples, That all true
Christians now in England and Ireland must come thus and offer themselves
voluntarily to the Popish Rebels and Forces (now in Arms to extirpate the
Protestant Religion in both Kingdoms) or that the Members of both Houses must
go speedily to Oxford to the King and his evil Counselors, and there let them
kill, hang, burn, quarter, slay, execute, torture them, subvert Religion,
Laws, Liberties, Parliaments, without the least resistance? Or will our
Opposites hence conclude (as they may with better Judgment and Conscience do)
Ergo, all such persons voted Traitors and Delinquents in any kind by both
Houses of Parliament, ought now in point of Conscience (to avoid the effusion
of blood and ruin of the Realm, through the civil wars they have
occasioned) to lay down their Arms, and voluntarily resign up themselves to
the impartial Justice of the Parliament, without any the least resistance for
the future: If no such Doctrinall, or Practical conclusions may be drawn from
these their Precedents of voluntary seeking and rendering themselves up to the
Martyrdom of their Opposites; then the unlawfulness of resisting cannot be
inferred from this their non-resisting. Thirdly, how many cowardly Soldiers in
all ages, and in this too, have voluntarily yielded up Forts, Castles, Ships,
Arms, Persons, to their invading approaching enemies without fight or
resistance? How many persons have resigned up their Purses to highway thieves,
their Lands to disseisors, their Houses, Goods to riotors, their Ships,
Estates, Persons, to Turkish and other Pirates, without any resistance, when
they might have lawfully and easily preserved them by resisting? Will it
therefore follow, that all others must do so? that we must not sight against
invading Enemies, Thieves, Pirates Riotors, because many good Christians out of
fear or cowardice, or for other reasons have not done it in all ages? I ^ow
not. Will the Jews refusi^g three Joseph. Amiq. Ju. lib. 12. cap. 13. lib. 13.
c. 12. l. 14 c. S. Dion. Hist. 56. Strabo Greg. lib. 16. 1 Mac. 2. Dr. Heylea
History of the (...), p. 1. (...).
or four several times to defend themselves against their insulting enemies on
their Sabbath; or the Francisci a Carthagena Regum. Hisp. Aeeph. c. 44.
Goths not resisting their invading foes on the Lords Day; or will the
Alexandrian Jews example and speech to Flaccus, Hugo Grotius de jure belli
lib. 1. cap. 4. Annos ad sect. 7. p. 95. and sect. 7. p. 88. 89.
Inermes sumus ut vides, and tamen sunt qui nos tanquam hosts publicos hic
criminantur. Etiam eas quas ad nostri tutelam parts dedit natura, re^ro
vertimus ubi nihil habent quod agant, corpora praebemus nuda and patentia ad
impetum eorum qui nos volunt occidere. Or that example of the Christian See
Grotius ibid.
Theban Legion, slain without the least resistance for their Religion: who as
an ancient Martyriologer says, Caed^bantur passim gladiis non reclamantes, sed
and depositis armis cervices persecutoribus vel intectum corpus offerentes:
warrant this deduction. Ergo, no Christians now must resist their invading
enemies on the Sabbath day, but must offer their naked bodies, heads, throats,
unto their swords and violence? If not, then these examples and authorities
will no ways prejudice our present resistance.

Fourthly, 4.
the Christians not only refused to resist their oppressing Emperors and
Magistrates, who proceeded judicially by a kind of Law against them, but even
the vulgar people, who assaulted, stoned, slew them in the streets against Law,
as Tertullians words, Quoties enim praeteritis a vobis SUO JURE NOS INIMICUM
VULGUS invadit lapidibus and incendiis, etc. manifest without all
contradiction; and indeed this passage so much insisted on, relates
principally, if not only to such assaults of the rude notorious vulgar, which
every man will grant the Christians might lawfully with good conscience
forcibly resist, because they were no Magistrates nor lawful higher powers
within Romans 13. 1. 2. or 1 Pet. 2, 13, 14. Either then our Antagonist must
grant, that it is unlawful in point of Conscience forcibly to resist the
unlawful assaults and violence of the vulgar or private persons who are no
Magistrates: and that it is unlawful now for any Christians to resist Thieves,
Pirates, or bear defensive Arms, as the Lucas Ostand. Enchir. contr cap. 9.
Anabaptists (from whose quiver our Antagonists have borrowed this and all
other shafts against the present defensive war) and so make the primitive
Christians all Anabaptists in this particular: Or else inevitably grant
resistance lawful, notwithanding their examples and these passages of not
resisting. The rather, because Tertullian in the next preceding words, puts no
difference at all between the Emperor and meanest Subjects in this case; Idem
sumus (says he) Imperatoribus, qui and vicinis nostris male enim velle, male
facere, male dicere, male cogitare de quoquam ex aequo vetamur. Quodcunqne non
licet in Imperatorem id n^c in quenquam.

Fifthly, 5.
admit the Christians then deemed all forcible resistance of persecuters simply
unlawful in point of Conscience, as being a thing quite contrary to Christian
profession and Religion; then as it necessarily proves on the one side, That
even Christian Kings, Princes, Magistrates, must in no wise forcibly resist the
tumultuous Rebellions, Insurrections, and persecutions of their Subjects,
because they are Christians as well as Rulers, and in this regard equally
obliged with them not to resist with Arms; much less then their Parliaments
Forces lawfully raised for the public defense. So on the contrary part it
follows not, that therefore resistance is either unlawful in it self, or that
the Parliaments present resistance is so. For first, such resistance being no
where prohibited (as I have formerly proved) their bare opinion, that it was
unlawful to them, cannot make it so to them, or us in point of conscience,
since God has not made or declared it so. Secondly, the primitive Christians
held many things unlawful in point of Conscience, which we now hold not so. De
corona Militis.
Tertullian and others inform us, That the Christians in his time thought it a
heinous sin (Nefas) to pray kneeling on the Lords day, or between Easter and
Whitsontide (and so by consequence to kneel at the Sacrament) praying always
standing on those days in memory of Christ's resurrection. Which custom was
ratified also by many Surius Council. tom. 1. p. 347. tom. 2. p. 1052. tom. 3.
p. 324. 277.
Councels: Yet then it was lawful no doubt in it self for them to pray
kneeling, and we all use the contrary custom now. The Christians then held it
unlawful, to eat blood in puddings, or any other meats, as Apologet.
Tertullian, Octavius.
Minucius Felix testify, and many Council. Constant. 6. can. 76. Surius tom. 2.
p. 1050.
Councels expressly prohibited it since, as unlawful: Yet all Churches at
this day deem it lawful, and practice the contrary. The Christians in
Tertullians days, and he himself in a special Book, De fuga in persecutione,
held it unlawful to flee in times of persecution, and therefore they
voluntarily offered themselves to martyrdom without flight or resistance. Yet
we all now hold flying lawful, and all sorts practice it as lawful; yea many
more then they ought to do. I might give sundry other instances of like
nature: The Christians opinion therefore of the unlawfulness of any armed
resistance of Persecuters public or private (held they any such) though
seconded with their practice, is no good argument of its unlawfulness, without
better evidence, either then, or at this present. Thirdly, the case of the
Primitive Christians and ours now is far different; The Emperors, Magistrates,
and whole States under which they then lived were all Pagan Idolaters, their
Religion quite contrary to the Laws and false Religions settled in those States:
There were many Tertul. Apolog. Eusebius, Socrates, scolasticus, Hist. 1.
Laws and Edicts then in force against Christian Religion, unrepealed: most
Professors of Religion were of the lowest rank, Cor. 1. 26. John 7. 48.
not many wise, Noble, mighty men, scarce any great Officer, Magistrate, or
Senator, was of that profession, but all fierce enemies against it: For
Christians, being but private men, and no apparent body of a State, to make any
public forcible resistance in defense of Religion against Emperors, Senators,
Magistrates, Laws, and the whole State wherein they lived, had neither been
prevalent nor expedient; a great hinderance and prejudice to Religion, and as
some hold, unlawful. But our present case is far otherwise; our King,
Parliament, State, Magistrates, People, are all Christians in external
profession, our Protestant Religion established, Popery excluded, banished by
sundry public Laws; the Houses of Parliament, and others now resisting, are
the whole body of the Realm in representation, and have authority, even by
Law, to defend themselves and Religion against invading Popish Forces: In which
regards our present resistance is, and may clearly be affirmed lawful, though
the primitive Christians, in respect of the former circumstances, might not be
so. Secondly, their resistance, (especially of the Magistrates not vulgar
rabble) if made, had been only, singly for defense of their Religion then
practiced but in corners, publicly condemned, no where tolerated: Our present
war is not only for defense of our Religion established by Law, and to keep
out Popery, but for the preservation of Laws, Liberties, the very essence of
Parliaments, the safety of the Realm, and that by authority of Parliament, the
representative body of the Realm. The Parliaments defensive war, therefore,
upon these politic grounds is just and lawful, though the Primitive
Christians, perchance in defense of Religion only, as its case then stood,
would not have been so: even as the Roman Senators and States resisting of
Nero, or any other Tyrannical Emperors violations of the Laws, Liberties,
Lives, Estates of the Senate, people, were then reputed just and lawful,
though the Christians defense of Religion would not have been so esteemed in
those times. And thus I hope I have satisfactorily answered this objection
without shifts or evasions, and rectified these mistaken Fathers meanings, with
which our Opposites have seduced the illiterate over-credulous vulgar.

I have now (through Gods assistance) quite run through all Objections of
moment from Scripture, Reason, Fathers, against the lawfulness of the
Parliaments present defensive war, and discovered diverse gross errors, yea,
Impostures in our Opposites writings, wherewith they have perverted many men's
Consciences, and cheated the ignorant seduced world: I shall therefore here
advise them in the presence of Almighty God, as they will answer the contrary
before his Tribunal at the Day of Judgment, seriously to consider these my
answers, and publicly to retract those their Errors, false gross
mis-interpretations, perversions of Scriptures, Authors, which I have here
discovered. And since they pretend nothing but their satisfying and keeping of
a good Doctor Ferni Resolving of Conscience, An Appeal to thy Conscience, The
necessity of Christian subjection, etc. all plead conscience.
Conscience in and by others, concerned in this Controversy; to show a sincere
ingenuous Conscience therein themselves where they have been mistaken, since
the contestation pretended, is not for Victory, Time-serving, or Self-seeking;
but for Truth, Gods glory, and the public weal: and if I have over-shot my
self in any thing, I shall promise them a thankful acknowledgement, and ready
palinedy upon their information and conviction of any apparent oversights, I
may casually fall into.

Now because they shall not deem me singular in my opinion concerning the
lawfulness of subjects defensive Arms against their Sovereigns, bent to
subvert Religion, Laws, Liberties, the Republike, or deem it is a late upstart
Novelty, I shall conclude this discourse with such personal, natural and
public authorities, as they shall not be able to balance with
counter-resolutions; in which I shall be as brief as I may be.

For personal Authorities, I shall not be ambitious to remember many,
especially Papists, whose common, constant received opinion, and practice has
always been and yet is, See part. 1. 1. p. 4. 6.
That Subjects upon the Popes command alone, and absolution of them from their
Sovereigns allegiance, may and ought to take up even offensive Arms against
their own natural Princes excommunicated, interdicted, deposed, or only
declared contumacious, Schism^ticall or Heretical by the Pope, without, yea,
against their Kingdoms, Parliaments privities or consents, much more then with
their approbation. What Papists have determined and practiced in this very
point you may read at large in Gratiau himself Causa. 15. Quaest. 6. and Causa.
23. in the very Oath of Supremacy, and Statut. of 3. Iacobi, chapter 4. which
prescribes it, in Bishop Jewels view of a seditious Bull, in Doctor John White
his Defense of the way, Chap. 6. and 10. in Abbas Vspergensis, Sabellicus,
Valateranus, Grimston and others, in the Lives of the Roman and German
Emperors; in Aventinchis Annalium Boyorum, the General and Particular
Histories of France, Spain, Germany, Italy, Sicily, Hungary, England; in Bishp
Bilsons third part of the True Difference between Christian Subjection and
unchristian Rebellion. In sundry Sermons on the fifth of November, to which I
shall refer you: Bochellus Deeret. Eccl. Gal. l. 5. Tit. 5. c. 8. 759.
In Pope Paschal his letter to Robert Earl of Flanders, about the year of our
Lord, 1107. exorting him to war against those of Liege, Henry the Emperor and
his Assistants, wheresoever he should find them, excommunicated and deposed as
an Heretic and enemy to the Church; telling him, that he could not offer a
more grateful sacrifice to God, then to ware against them; concluding, Hoc
tibi and Militibus this in peccatorum remissionem, and Apostolicae sedis
familiaritatem praecipimus, ut his laboribus, and triumphis ad Coelestem
Jerusalem, Domino praestante, pervenias: Which Letter was excellently answered
by those of Liege. And in the Eochellus Decret. Eccles. Gall. l. 5. Tit. 5. e.
5. p. 757, 758. Nich. Gilles Annals of France.
Council of Towers in France, under Jews the twelfth, Anno 1510. it was
unanimously resolved by the Church of France, That if the Pope did make war
upon temporal Princes, in lands which they held not of the patrimony of the
Church, they might lawfully by force of Arms resist and defend both themselves
and other; and not only repulse this injury, but likewise invade the lands of
the Church, possessed by the Pope their notorious enemy, not perpetually to
retain, but to hinder the Pope from becoming more strong and potent by them,
to offend both them and theirs. And that it was lawful for such Princes, for
such notorious hatred and unjust invasion to withdraw themselves from the Popes
obedience, and with armed force to resist all censures denounced by the Pope
against them, their subjects and Confederates, and that such sentences ought
not to be obeyed, but are mear nullities in law, which obliege no man. Yet I
must inform you further in brief, that John Mayor a Popish Schoolman in Lib. 4.
Sentent. ( as Grotius writes) affirms, That the people cannot deprive
themselves of the power, not only of resisting, but deposing Kings in cases
which directly tend to their destruction; and that De Potest Papae in Principes
Christ. l. 4. G. 16.
John Barclay, a late Scottish Priest, though a strenuous defendor of Princes
Prerogatives, expressly averres, That if a King will altenate and subject his
Kingdom to another, without his subjects consents, or be carried with atrue
hostile mind, to the destruction of all his people, that his Kingdom is
thereby actually lost and forfeited, so as the people may not only absolutely
resist, and disobey, but depose him, and elect another King: to which De-lure
Belli, l. 1. c. 4. sect. 10, 11. p. 89 90.
Hugo Gortius a Protestant, freely subscribes; and John Bodin allows of
Subjects resistance, yea, deposing kings, insome Kingdoms absolutely, and in
some cases gener allyin all; De Repub. l. 1. c. 10. l. 1. c. 5 and l. 5. c. 5.
and 6. For Protestant personal authorities; we have Huldericus Zuinglius,
Explanatio Articuli, 40, 41, 42, 43. Tom. 1. fol. 82. to 86. who allows not
only Subjects actual resistance, but deprivation of Kings, Where Princes set
themselves to subvert Religion, Laws, Liberties; and that by the common consent
of the States in Parliament, from whom Kings originally receive their Royal
power and authority. Martin Luther, Bugenhagius, Iustus Jonas, Ambsdorfius,
Spaelotinus, Melancthon, Cruciger, and other Divines, Lawyers, Statesmen, Anno
1531. who published a writing in justification of defensive Arms by subjects in
certains cases; Sleidan, Hist. lib. 8. 18. 22. David Chrytraus, Chron.
Saxoniae, l. 13. p. 376. Richardus Dinothus de Bello Civili Gallico Religionis
caeusasuscepto, p. 231. 232. 225. 227, etc. A book entitled, De Iure Belli,
Belgici, Hagae, 1599. purposely justifying the lawfulness of the Low Countries
defensive war. Emanuel Meteranus Historia Belgica, Praefat. and lib. 1 to 17.
David Paraeus, Com. in Romans 13. Dub. 8. And. Quaest. Theolog. 61. Edward
Grimston his General History of the Netherlands, l. 5. to 17. passim. Hugo
Grotius de Iure Belli and Pacis, lib. 1. cap. 4. with sundry other foreign
Protestant Calvin Instit. l. 4. c. 20. sect, 31. and in Dan 6. v. 22. 25. O
siander in Epit. Centur. 9. and 17. Sharpii Sympho. p. 244. 246, 412. Vindica
contra cyrannos.
writers, both in Germany, France, Bohemia, the Netherlands and elsewhere; Iohu
Knokes his Appellation, p. 28. to 31. George Bucanon De Iure Regni apud Scotos,
with many See the ungerding of the Scottish Armor, ^, 4. 32. 34.
Scottish Pamphlets justifying their late wars: Ioh. Ponet once B. of
Winchester, his Book entitled, Politic Govern. p. 16. to 51. Alber. Gentilis
de Iur. Belli, l. 1. c. 25. l. 3. c. 9. 22. M. Goodmans Book in Q. Ma. days,
entitled, How superior Magistrates ought to be obeyed, c. 9. 13. 14. 16. D. A.
Willet his Sixfold Commentary on Romans 13. Quaestion. 16. and Controversy,
3. p. 588 589, 590, 608, etc. Andin. l. Iud. 34, 55.
Peter Martyr Com: In Romans 13 p. 1026. with sundry late writers, common in
every man's hands, justifying the lawfulness of the present defensive War,
whose Names I spare. And lest any should think that none but Puritanes have
maintained this opinion, K. James himself in his Answer to Card. Perron,
justifies the French Protestant taking up Defensive Arms in France. And The
true Difference, etc. part. 3. p. 520, 521, 522.
Bish. Bilson ( a fierce Antipuritane) not only defends the Lawfulness of the
Protestants defensive Arms against their Sovereign in Germany, Flaunders,
Scotland, France; but likewise dogmatically determines in these words; Neither
will I rashly pronounce all that resist to be Rebels, Cases may fall out even
in Christian Kingdoms, where the people may plead their right against the
Prince, AND NOT BE CHARGED WITH REBELLION, As wherefor example? If a Prince
should go about to subject his People to a foreign Realm, or change the form
of the Commonwealth from Impery to Tyranny, or neglect the Laws established
by Common consent of Prince and people, to execute his own pleasure. In these
and other caeses which might be named, IF THE NOBILITY AND COMMONS IOYN
TOGETHER TO DEFEND THEIR ANCIENT AND ACCVSTOMED LIBERTY, REGIMENT AND LAWS,
THEY MAY NOT WELL BE COVNTED REBELS. I never denied, but that the People might
preserve the foundation, freedom, and form of the Commonwealth, which they
fore prised when they first consented to have a King: As I said then, so I say
now, The Law of God gives no man leave; but I never said, that Kingdoms and
Commonwealths might not proportion their States, as they thought best, by
their public Laws, which afterward the Princes themselves may not violate. By
supertour Powers ordained of God, (Romans 13.) we understand not only Princes,
BUT ALL POLITIC STATES AND REGIMENTS; somewhere the People, somewhere the
Nobles, having the same interest to the sword, that Princes have to their
Kingdoms, and in Kingdoms where Princes bear rule by the sword; we do not mean
THE PRIVATE PRINCES WILL AGAINST HIS LAWS, BUT HIS PRECEPT DERIVED FROM HIS
LAWS, AND AGREEING WITH HIS LAWS: Which though it be wicked, yet may it not
be resisted of any subject, (when derived from, and agreeing with the Laws)
with armed violence. Marry, when Princes offer their Subjects not Justice, but
force, and despise all Laws to practice their lusts, not every, nor any private
man may take the sword to redress the Prince; but if the Laws of the Land
appoint the Nobles as next to the King to assist him in doing right, and
withhold him from doing wrong, THEN BE THEY LICENCED BY MAN'S LAW, AND NOT
PROHIBITED BY GODS, to interpose themselves for safeguard of equity and
innoceucy, and by all lawful AND NEEDFVLL MEANS TO PROCVRE THE PRINCE TO BE RE
FORMED, but in no case deprived where the Scepter is Hereditary. So this
learned Bishop determines in his authorized Book dedicated to Queen Elizabeth,
pointblank against our Novell Court-Doctors, and Royallists.

But that which swayes most with me, is not the opinions of private men,
biased oft-times with private sinister ends which corrupt their judgments,
(as I dare say most of our Opposites in this controversy have writ to flatter
Princes, to gain or retain promotions, etc.) But the general universal
opinion and practice of all Kingdoms, Nations in the world from time to time.
Never was there any State or Kingdom under heaven from the beginning of the
world till now, that held or resolved it to be unlawful in point of Law or
Conscience, to resist with force of Arms the Tyranny of their Emperors, Kings,
Princes, especially when they openly made war, or exercised violence against
them, to subvert their Religion, Laws, Liberties, State, Government. If ever
there were any Kingdom, State, People of this opinion, or which forbore to take
up Arms against their Tyrannous Princes in such cases, even for conscience
sake, I desire our Antagonists to name them; for though I have diligently
searched, inquired after such, I could never yet find or hear of them in the
world; but on the contrary, I find all Nations, States, Kingdoms whatsoever,
whether Pagan or Christian, Protestant or Popish, ancient or modern,
unanimously concurring both in judgment and constant practice, that forcible
resistance in such cases is both just, lawful, necessary, yea, a duty to be
undertaken by the general consent of the whole Kingdom, State, Nation, though
with the effusion of much blood, and hazard of many men's lives. This was the
constant practice of the Romans, Grecians, Goths, Moors, Indians, Egyptians,
Vandals, Spaniards, French, Britains, Saxons, Italians, English, Scots,
Bohemians, Polonians, Hungarians, Danes, Swedes, Jews, Flemmins, and other
Nations in former and late ages, against their Tyrannical oppressing Emperors,
Kings, Princes, together with the late defensive Wars of the protestants in
Germany, Bohemia, France, Swethland, the Low Countries, Scotland, and
elsewhere, against their Princes, (approved by Queen Elizabeth, king James, and
our present king Charles. who assisted the French, Bohemians, Dutch, and German
Protestant Princes in those Wars, with the unanimous consent of their
Parliaments, Clergy, people) abundantly evidence beyond all contradiction;
which I have more particularly manifested at large in my Appendix, and
therefore shall not enlarge my self further in it here: only I shall acquaint
you with these five Particulars.

First, that in the Slcidan. 8. 18. 22. Bish. Bilsons Difference, etc. part. 3.
p 518. Chylrae^^ Chron. Sax. l. 13. p. 376, etc.
Germans Defensive Wars for Religion, in Luthers days, the Duke of Saxony,
the Lantzgrave of Hesse, the Magistrates of Magdeburge, together with other
Protestant Princes, States, Lawyers, Cities, Counselors and Ministers, after
serious consultation, coneluded and resolved, That the Laws of the Empire
permitted resistance of the Emperor to the Princes and Subjects in some cases,
that defense of Religion and Liberties then invaded, was one of these caeses;
that the times were then so dangerous, that THE VERY FORCE OF CONSCIENCE AND
NECESSITY DID LEAD THEM TO ARMS, and to make a League to defend themselves,
THOUGH CAESAR OR ANY IN HIS NAME WOULD MAKE WAR AGAINST THEM; That if the
Emperor had kept his bonds and Covenants, they would have done their duties;
but because he began first to make the breach, the fault is his: For since he
attempteth to root out Religion, and subvert our Liberty, he gives us cause
enough TO RESIST HIM WITH GOOD CONSCIENE; The matter standing as it does, we
may resist him, as may be showed by Sacred and profane Stories. Unjust
violence is not Gods Ordinance, neither are we bound to him by any other
reason, then if he keep the conditions on which he was created Emperor. BY THE
LAWS THE MSELVES IT IS PROVIDED, that the inferior Magistrate shall not
infringe the right of the Superior: and so likewise if the superior
Magistrate exceed the limits of his power, and command that which is wicked,
not only we need not obey him, BUT IF HE OFFER FORCE WE MAY RESIST HIM. So
they in point of Law and Conscience then publicly resolved.

Secondly, that the Genesis Hist. of France p 682, 683 The Appendix, p. 34* 35.
44. 45.
French Protestants, and others, in the reign of King Francis the second, Anno
1559. being much oppressed by the Guisian faction, who had got the K. into
their power, and wholly swayed him ( as his Maj. ill Counselors sway him now)
there upon assembling together to consult of some just defense, to preserve the
just and ancient government of the Realm. They demanded advice TOUCHING LAW
AND CONSCIENCE, OF MANY LEARNED LAWYERS AND DIVINES; who resolved, THAT THEY
MIGHT LAWFVLLY oppose themselves against the Government which the House of Guise
had usurped, and AT NEED TAKE ARMS TO REPVLSE THEIR VIOLENCE; so as the
Princes, who in this case are born Magistrates, or some one of them would
undertake it, being ordered by the States of the Realm, or by the sounder part
of them. Dinothus Hist. Gal. l. 48 p. 227.
That defense of Religion and Liberties against violence and oppression were
just causes of War; Et quod pia arma ea sint, ultra quae nulla restat
spesvitae nec salutis. A like resolution and determination was mado by the
chief Dukes, Peers, Nobles, and Officers of France, Anno 1614. which you may
read in the Appendix.

Thirdly, that the Fox Acts and Mon Vol. 2. Edit. ult. p. 208, 209, 213, 219.
Angrognians and Waldensian Protestants of Lucerne and Piedment in the year
1558. to 1561, being persecuted by the Lord of Trinity and their Popish
Sovereigns, assembling solemnly together to consult how to prevent the great
dangers then at hand, after long prayer and calling upon God for his grace and
Spirit of direction and Counsel, well to manage their weighty affairs, and to
preserve themselves and the Protestant Religion professed by them, concluded in
the end, to enter into a solemn mutual Covenant, and to ioyn in a League
together for defense of themselves and their Religion; whereupon they all
promised by Gods grace and assistance, to maintain the pure preaching of the
Gospel and administration of the Sacraments, and one to aid and assist the
other, etc. which they did with good success, obtaining many glorious
victories against invading persecuting enemies. The like did Fox Acts and Mon
Vol. 1. Ed. ult. p. 848. to 852. Pontaut Bohemiae piae, lib. 1.
Zisca, the Thahorites and Bohemians heretofore, and of Grimstons Imperial
Hist. p. 655, 730. to 740, 746, to 806 sparsim.
later times; as the Maginall Authors largely relate, resolving it just and
lawful for them in Law and Conscience, to defend themselves and their Religion
by force of Arms against their persecuting Sovereigns.

Fourthly, that the Erman. Mes teranus, Hist. Belgica, Grimsi. Genesis Hist. of
the Netherlands.
Netherland Provinces, being oppressed in their Bodies, Estates, by the Duke of
Alua and Spaniards Tyranny, and in their Religion and Consciences, by the
introduced Irquisition to extirpate Religion; did after serious deliberation,
and consultation with learned men of all sorts, unanimously conclude and enter
into a solemn Covenant to defend their Libities, Religion, Laws, by force of
Arms, against the Spanish Tyranny; as you may read at large in their
Histories. And in the year 1572. The Prince of Orange and his Confederates,
having levied a goodly Army to relieve Mons besieged by the Duke of Alua,
caused this notable Grimstons Genesis Hist. of the Netherlands, l. 9. p. 369, 370.
Protestation to be printed and published to the World, as well in his own
name, as in his Confederates, giving a reason of the Arms which he had taken
up, as follows.

We William by the Grace of God, Prince of Orange, Earl of Nassau, etc. To
all Noblemen, Knights, Gentlemen, and others, of what quality soever of these
Netherlands, which desire the Liberty thereof, being miserably tyrannized and
oppressed by the Duke of Alva, the Spaniards, and other their friends, TRAITORS
AND MVRTHERERS OF THEIR OWN COUNTRY, We declare that everyone of us, for a
particular love and zeal he bears unto his Country, and for the glory of
God, which we desire above all, have often sought by all means the good and
quiet of the Country, as well by Petitions and other mild means, as by force
of Arms, thinking to draw those that were as we are, to do the like,
sometimes by sighs and prayers unto God, having had patience until that it
should please him to mollify the hearts of the said Tyrants; but in the end
solicited and called generally and particularly by the inhabitants of the said
Country, by reason of the inhumanities and oppressions; We have in the Name of
God (ACCORDING TO OUR CONSCIENCES) TAKEN ARMS; protesting before God and his
Angels, and before all Men present and to come, that we have not been moved
hereunto by any private passion, but with an ardent desire which we have to
oppose our selves against this more then barbarous and unsupportable tyranny,
to the Proclamations, Edicts, taxes, Imposts and charges of the hundredth,
thirtieth, twentieth and tenth penny imposed by the insatiable covetousness of
the Duke of Alva, against the Laws Liberties, Freedoms, and ancient
Privileges of the said country; which Laws, Liberties, freedoms and ancient
privileges, we mean (by the grace of God) to restore unto the said country,
holding it under the obedience of their Prince and natural Lord, as we are
bound to do: affirming and maintaining, that gi Princepa Tyrannus est, ^ure
Naturali re^quis omnibus mundi Principilius incumbit illi populo Trannidem
patienti open and cuxilium far; hominum egregiorum virorum bas est vera laus,
decus and benor. Vasquius Contro Ill. 36. ^ 36.
all Princes and Noblemen, Gentlemen, Commonweales, or others, of what quality
soever, be they strangers or homebred, that have been moved to give us aid or
assistance IN THIS SO JUST AN ENTERPRISE, have not don it for any other intent,
but for true piety and compassion which they have with us of the said miseries
and calamities: Wherefore we pray and entreat every one, both in general and
particular, to assure themselves, that we intend not to do wrong to any man,
nor to attempt upon the good estates or honor of any of what quality soever,
were he of the Clergy, but are ready to aid and assist every one freely and
willingly; as for his liberty, EVERY ONE IS BOUND TO SVCCOR US BY ALL DVE AND
POSSIBLE MEANS. In the mean time we will give order, that God and the country
may be served, in procuring the preservation of the people, and the defense of
their houses, wives, and children: Praying to God, that he would favor and
bring to a good end SO HOLY AND NECESSARY AN ENTERPRISE.

This their defensive War, yet continuing, has been justified by many, and
in special maintained to be just and honorable BOTH IN LAW AND CONSCIENCE in a
particular Book De jure Belli Belgici, printed at the Hague with the States
approbation, 1599. to which I shall refer you.

Fifthly, Mytronimus Elanca Aragenens. Rerum Comment. p. 661. 46^ (...) p. 652.
(which comes nearest to our present case of any story I have met with)
Alphonso the 3. king of Arragon, in the year 1286. through the ill advise of
some bad Counselors and Courtiers about him, departed in discontent from the
Parliament of the Estates of Arragon then assembled at Saragossa, and posted to
Osca, because the Parliaments took upon them to make Laws to reform and order
his Court, his Courtiers, which he denied, but they affirmed, they had just
right and power to do. Hereupon, the business being put unto greater
difficulty; the Estates affirmed. A Comitiis intempestive discedere Regi NEFAS
ESSE, That IT WAS A WICKED ACT, FOR THE KING THVS UNSEASONABLY TO DEPART FROM
THE PARLIAMENT; NEITHER WAS SO GREAT. A BREACH OF THEIR PRIVILEGES AND RIGHTS
TO BE PATIENTLY ENDVRED: Whereupon they presently raised up the Name and FORCES
OF THE UNION or Association ( formerly made and entered into between the
Nobility, Cities, and people, mutually to aid and assist one another to
preserve the Peace and Liberties of the Realm, even with force of Arms) IT
BEING LAWFVLL for the common cause of Liberty; Non Verbis solum, SED ARMIS
QVOQVE CONTENDERE, not only TO CONTEND with words, BUT ALSO WITH ARMS. Upon
this, king Alphonso desirous to prevent the mischiefs them present and
incumbent, by advise of his Privy Counsel, published certain good Edicts at
Osca for regulating his Court, Counsel, Judges, Officers; by which he thought
to have ended all this Controversy, but because they were promulged only by
the Kings own Edict, not by the whole Parliament as binding Laws, they still
proceeded in the Union; till at last, after various events of things, this King
returning to the General Assembly, and Parliament of the Estates at Saragossa,
in the year 1287 condessended to their desires, and confirmed the two memorable
privileges of the Union, with the Sovereign power of the Justice of Aragon,
which could control their very Kings: Of which see more in the Appendix.

I shall close up this of the lawfulness of a necessary defensive war, with
the speech of the Emperor Alexander Seuerus, recorded by Quoted by Grotius de
Iure Belli 2. (...) 1. Annos ad sect. 14. p. 11.
Herodian, l. 5. He who first infers injuries has no probable color; but he
that repulseth those who are troublesome to him; EX BONA CONSCENTIA sumit
fiduciam; assumes confidence FROM A GOOD CONSCIENCE, and good hope of success
is present with him from hence, that he offers not injury, but removes it.

Thus have I now at last waded through this weighty controversy, of the
lawfulness both in point of Law and Conscience, of the Parliaments present,
and all other subjects necessary Defensive Wars against their Sovereigns, who
invade their laws liberties, Religion, Government, to subvert them, by open
force of Arms: in which I have freely and impartially discharged my
conscience, not out of any turbulent, seditious, or disloyal intention, to
forment or perpetuate the present, or raise any future destructive, unnatural
wars between king, Parliament, and People, or to countenance, to encourage
any tumultuous, rebellious, factious, ambitious, traitorous spirits to mutiny
or rebel against their Sovereigns for private injuries, or upon any false
unwarrantable ends or pretenses whatsoever; (let Gods curse and men's for ever
rest upon all those, who are in love with any war, especially a Civil,
within their own dearest Countries bowels; or dare abuse my loyal sincere
Lucubrations to any disloyal sinister designs, to the prejudice of their
Sovereigns, or the States wherein they live:) but only out of a cordial
desire to effect such a speedy, honorable, safe, religious, semplternall peace
between king and Parliament, as all true Christian English hearts both
cordially pray, long for, and endeavor, by informing his seduced Majesty, his
evil Counselors, his Popish Malignant Forces, that if they will still proceed
unnaturally and treacherously to make war against their Native Country,
Religion, Laws, Liberties, and the Parliament, (which to do I have Part. 1.
(...) 2. p. 108. to 112.
elsewhere manifested to be no less then high Treason, Rebellion, against both
King and Kingdom) they may in point of conscience and Law too, be justly
opposed, resisted, repulsed, even by force of Arms, without any guilt of
Treason, Rebellion, or fear of temporal or eternal condemnation, as public
Enemies, Rebels, Traitors to the Realm, whatevever they have hitherto been
informed of to the contrary by temporizing Lawyers, or flattering illiterate
Court Divines; and by assuring all such noble generous public spirits, who
shall willingly adventure their lives or fortunes by the Parliaments command,
in the present necessary defensive war, for the ends premised; that for this
good service they shall neither in the Courts of Law, nor Conscience, incur
the least stain, or guilt of Treason, Rebellion, sedition, or any such like
odious crime, much less eternal condemnation; the panick fear whereof,
frequently denounced against them by many sottish Malignants, Royalists,
ill-instructed Lawyers and Theologasters, has frighted, kept back, and
withdrawn multitudes from, yea cooled, corrupted many in this honorable
public duty, service, which they now owe of Right to God and their Country;
in which to be treacherous, perfidious, sloathfull, negligent, cold,
uncordiall, or timorous (as too many hitherto have been, to the greater honor
of those who have been faithful, active, Valiant, and sincere) especially now
after so many late horrid treacheries most happily discovered and a new
Covenant solemnly entered into, demerits a perpetual brand of infamy and
reproach. To dye fighting for ones dearest bleeding, dying Country, has in
all ages been honored with a Crown of Martyrdom; to live or dye fighting
against it has ever deserved the most capital censures, ignominies, and
heaviest execrations. Let both sides therefore now seriously ponder and lay all
the premises close to their souls, consciences; and then I doubt not through
Gods blessing, but a happy peace will speedily thereon ensue Isay 2. 4.
Nation shall not lift up sword against Nation, Country against Country,
Englishman against Englishman, Brother against brother any more, as now they
do, neither shall they learn such an unnaturaall cursed kind of Civil War
any more, but beat their swords into Plow-shares, and their spears into
pruning hooks; and Romans 16. 16. 1. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 26. 1. Pet. 5. 14.
greet one another with a kiss of holy peace and charity: Which desired end
and issue of these present bloody wars God in his mercy hasten and
accomplish, to the joy of all our Souls.

I should now, according to former engagements, proceed to other remaining
particulars; but because this part has already far exceeded its intended
bounds, out of a desire to give full satisfaction in a point of highest
present, and future concernment every way; I shall reserve the residue, with
the Appendix, for another distinct part; with which I shall conclude my
Meditations and Collections of this subject, without any further Additions, if
God say Amen.

Finis Partis tertiae.
Errata.
Page 100. l. 28. to. by. p. 101. l. 32. Omri, Zimri. l. 40. Judah. Israel. p.
115. 1. 12. that. p. 127. l. 36. of their. p. 128. l. 31. hence. p 136. l. 8.
not a Bishop; a Bishop, not a Layman.


