THE LIAR CONFOUNDED OR A Brief Refutation of John Lilburnes
miserably-mistated-Case, mistaken-Law; Seditious Calumnies, and most malicious
Lies against the High Court of PARLIAMENT, the Honorable Committee of
Examinations, Mr Speaker, with other Members of the Commons House; and Mr
William Prynne; wherewith he has seduced many ignorant overcredulous People.
Manifesting the Parliaments extraordinary Clemency toward him, their Justice
in their Commitment of, and proceedings against him; for which he so
ingratefully and falsely taxes them, with Tyranny and Injustice

By WILLIAM PRYNNE of Lincolns Inn, Esquire.

John 8. 44. Ye are of your Father the Devil, and the lusts of your Father
will ye do: he was a murderer from the beginning and abode not in the truth,
because there is NO TRVTH IN HIM: when he speaks a Lie he speaks of his
own; for he is a LIAR, and the FATHER OF IT.

Ephesians. 4. 25. Wherefore putting away Lying, speak every man TRVTH to his
Neighbor: for we are members one of another.

Prove. 12. 19. The lip of truth shall be established for ever, but a LYING
TONGVE is but for a moment.

LONDON, Printed by John Macock; for Michael Spark senior. 1645.

TO The Honorable William Lenthall Esquire, Speaker of the Honorable House of
COMMONS and Master of the ROLES.
Sir,
I Here present you with a Brief Relation and Refutation, of John Lilburnes
Notorious Lies, and forged Calumnies, against the Parliament, and whole House
of Commons in General, the Committee of Examination; Your self; some other
Members of both Houses, your Brother Sir John Lenthall, and My self in
special: Whereby the whole Kingdom may discern his (and his confederates)
Impudent Falsities, Forgeries, Lies, groundless Slanders; and Your Untainted
Innocencies, triumphing gloriously over them. The truth of his Case,
misreported by him, rightly stated; the Legality of Your Proceedings against,
commitment of him, demonstrated; his mistaken Law, refuted; and the seeds of
Mutiny, of Sedition sown among the Ignorant Vulgar, in his seditious Printed
Papers (scattered abroad by one Leaner and others, among the Kentish Malignants
and the Malcontents in other parts) extirpated, to prevent all Popular,
Insurrections against the Parliaments Sovereign Authority.

Your special Interest in the Subject matter of this Relation, has (among
other motives) induced me to select You for its Patron, in the Dedication, to
whose Protection I commend it, and Your self to Gods; desiring really to
express my self upon all just Occasions,

Your most Affectionate Friend to serve You, William Prynne.

To the Jmpartiall Reader.
Christian Reader,
IT is S. James his Observation, c. 3. 5. Behold how great a matter a little
fire kindles: And the tongue is a fire, a world of iniquity, and sets on
fire the course of nature, and is seton fire of hell: which I may truly apply
to John Lilburns tongue, and much more to his pen employed only in compiling
Libellous Letters and Papers: Behold how great combustions and tumults have
they kindled among the Ignorant Vulgar, who adore him as the only Oracle of
Truth, when as he is a mere Legend of Lies: Had not his Papers kindled a
public dangerous flame, disaffected diverse of his Seditious Faction, and set
their tongues nay hearts against the Parliament, against whom they are brewing
mischief in sundry private Conventicles, and ripening public Mutinies, I had
sat still in silence, and only answered this Rayler as the Arch-Angell
Michael did the Devil, when he strove with him about the body of Moses Jude 9.
The Lord rebuke thee: or have spread his Letter only in private before the
Lord, as Hezekiah spread Sennacharibs blasphemous Letter, 2 Kings 19. 14, 15,
16. saying, Lord bow down thine ear and hear, open Lord thine eyes and see,
hear the words of this Senacharib (Lilburne) which has sent to reproach the
Living God; and the highest powers under him. But the flame being now grown to
such an height as endangers the firing of our whole State into a public
combustion, I could do no less, then contribute my best endeavors (after so
long a silence) and bring one bucket or two of water toward the extinguishing
of his Prodigious firebrands, which were certanely set on fire of hell, which
breathes forth in his seditious Papers, fit for no other use then to make
public bonefires in the streets.

I shall desire the unprejudiced Reader, whoever he be, to read this short
Relation and Refutation with an impartial eye, and then, I dare say, he will
soon resolve; There was never such an execrable Libell and Legion of Lies
published against the Parliaments the Committees Just proceedings, and other
well-deserving Members, Persons Integrities, as this of Lilburnes Letters; who
(if we may lawfully judge of the Tree by the fruits) is in Simon Magus his
condition, even drenched in The very gall of bitterness, and fettered in the
bond of iniquity; and he will more admire, and perchance blame the Parliament
for their overmuch Clemency and Mildness, in proceeding with so much Patience
and Moderation against such an obstinate Delinquent, then he or any of his
Confederates do, or can maliciously exclaim against them, for their pretended
overmuch Oppression, Tyranny and Injustice, of which there is not the least
shadow appearing in any of their proceedings. So submitting all to thy censure,
and Gods blessing, I shall cease to trouble thee with any further Prologue.

A Brief Relation and Refutation of John Lilburnes notorious Lies and
Calumnies, against the PARLJAMENT and others.
OF all the most Glorious Attributes of God in Scripture, there is none more
eminent then this, Deuteronomy. 32. 4. Psalm. 31. 5. Esaias 65. 16.
That he is a God of TRVTH, in the affirmative; A Tit. 1. 2.
God that CANNOT LIE; yea, that it is Heb. 6. 18.
Impossible for him to Lie, in the Negative: And of all the disgraceful Titles
given to the Devil himself in Sacred Writ, there is none more infamous then
this: John 8. 44.
That he is a LIAR and the Father of Lies, and aboade not in the TRVTH: Whence
it necessarily follows, That of all persons in the world, none are more
desperately wicked, and unlike to God; or more Diabolically impious and like to
the very Devil himself, then LIARS; and of all Liars those especially, who
most maliciously forge, and then scandalously Register, Print, and Publish to
all the world, most notorious Lies and Untruths of others, who least of all
deserve such Devilish usage at their hands. Hence it was, that our Savior
told the Lying Jews; John 8. 44.
Ye are of your Father the Devil; and the lusts of your father will ye do: and
that Peter used this expression to Ananias, when he told but a kind of
officious, not a mere malicious slanderous Lie, Acts 5. 3.
Why has SATAN FILLED THY HEART, TO LIE to the Holy Ghost? Intimating, that
Liars hearts are filled up to the brim with Satan, their Ghostly Father; and
that they have not the least dram of Gods Holy Spirit in them; which is ever
styled John 14. 17 c. 15 26. c. 16. 13. 1 John 4. 6. c. 5. 6.
A Spirit of Truth, which guides true Christians into all Truth: Upon this
ground Solomon ranks, Prove. 6. 16. 17. 19.
A lying tongue and a false witness that speaks Lies, among those things
which the Lord especially hates and abhominates; And Saint John registers Rev.
21. 8. c. 22. 15.
Liars, and he that loves and makes a lie, in the black Catalogue of those
damned ones, who shall have their part in the lake which burns with fire and
brimstone, and shall be excluded the Caelestiall Jerusalem; to Mat. 25. 4^.
accompany the Devil and his Angels for Eternity, in hell fire.

Yet notwithstanding this undeniable verity, there is a new Generation of fiery
zealots sprung up in the world of late, who deem themselves brimfull of the
Spirit of Truth, and most others no better than Reprobates or Devils in
carnate; who like Jobs deceitful friends, are Job 13. 4.
Forgers of Lies; or like the Tit. 1. 12.
Cretians, always Liars; if not like those wicked ones whom David describes,
Psalm. 58. 3, 4. They go astray as soon as they be born (yea newborn into their
factious separation) speaking Lies; their poison is like the poison of the
Serpent; Psalm. 52. 2, 3, 4.
Their tongue devises mischiefs like a sharp rasor, working deceitfully; They
love lying more than to speak righteousness; they love all devouring words:
Yea, Jer. 9. 3. 5.
they bend their tongues like their bow for lies, but are not valiant for the
Truth, and they will deceive every man his Neighbor, and will not speak the
Truth: they have taught their tongues to speak Lies, and weary themselves to
commit Iniquity, even in Print: being the very generation of men in the latter
times of whom the 1 Timothy 4. 1. 2. 2 Timothy 3. 3. 4.
Spirit speaks expressly, that they should depart from the faith, giving heed
to seducing spirits; speaking Lies in hypocrisy, having their conscience
seared with a hot Iron: false accusers, sierce, heady, high-minded, etc. having
a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof.

Among the whole rabble of this lying, slandring Generation, there is none more
peceant then John Lilburn, of late years a poor obscure Apprentice in London,
but now a Lieutenant Colonel, and Ringleader of an Anti-Parliamentary
Anabaptistical Faction: who forgetting all the Laws of Christianity and common
Civility, has abused his best Benefactors, yea the very high Court of
Parliament who (as himself confessed) saved him from the Gallows; and most
grossly belyed, traduced his ancient Christian friends in such a scurrilous,
virulent, unchristian manner, without any provocation, as no age can parallel,
in sundry Printed Libels, which he intitles Letters, wherewith he has poisoned
the minds of many poor Ignorant people of his Sect and others, with prejudices
against the Parliaments proceedings, and filled their mouths with bitter
invectives, calumnies, and reports against those they formerly honored most of
any Mortall^, and the very Raisers of John Lilburne to all the reputation he
ever gained in the world; to wit, Master William Prynne, (whose Servant he was
generally reputed to be, and was contented to own that Title for his own
emoliment, though never capable of such an Honor;) and Dr. John Bastwick; the
Printing of whose Letany (which he freely bestowed on him at his request) was
the best stock he had, and that which first made him notorious to the Prelates,
(their opposites) and the present Parliament; whereas otherwise he had lain
buried in obscurity among the rubbish of the meanest vulgar, scarce known to
any but him self.

For my own particular, I so much undervalue all his scurrilous lies, and
railing invectives against my self, that I deem them more worthy scorn, than
answer, and his Libellous, seditious Letter to a Friend, with that unto my
self, fitter to be refuted by the hangman hand than any others: But because I
am certainly informed by diverse, That this last Letter, with other seditious
Printed papers of his, which he has privately scatred among his friends, have
done extraordinary hurt, much incensed his ignorant misinformed Brethren of
the Separation, and opened the mouths of them, yea of many Royalists and
Malignants against the Parliaments proceedings in his and other cases, as
tyrannical, illegal, arbitrary, unjust, and diametrally contrary to Magna
Charta; (which this grand Ignoramus had never law enough to understand in the
Language wherein it was first written, nor in his mother tongue, as appears by
his very transcribing of it, wherein he writes DISEASED for DISSEISED,) the
meaning of which Law term I am certain he understands not) and that his
mistaken Law (embraced by his disciples as infallible Oracles) has deceived
many poor silly souls, and is conceived to have been learned from my self,
(whose servant heretofore and now he is generally cried up to have been, when
as I bless God, I never entertained him in my service; nor any such turbulent,
factious, crosse-graind piece as he shows himself.) I have at the motion of
some friends, undertaken to pass a brief censure on this his most seditious
Letter, so far as it trencheth upon the Parliaments and Committees most just
Proceedings, and my own personal reputation, both which I shall clearly
vindicate from his Malicious Lies, and intolerable Libellous slanders. Wherein
I shall pursue this method.

First, truly State the Parliaments most just and favorable Proceedings
against him; which he most wilfully, falsely, and ungratefully mis-relates to
alinate the peoples affections from, and draw down an odium upon them, without
the least just occasion.

Secondly, Rectify his gross mistaken Law, his mis-interpretation of Magna
Charta, and the Petition of Right, and manifest the Parliaments and Committees
proceedings against him to be warranted by both; not contrary to either, much
less to be utterly Illegal, Tyrannical, Unjust, and destructive to the
Subjects Liberties, as he scandalously reports them.

Thirdly, Recite and answer this whole Jury of most gross Lies and Slanders,
summoned from the very Vicinage of Hell, and brought by him to the Bar to give
in a Verdict intentionally against my Reputation, but really against his own.

1 To begin with the first of these; Upon the publication of my, Truth
triumphing over Falsehood, Antiquity over Novelty, in defense of the
Parliaments undoubted Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, against Papists, Prelates,
Anabaptists, Independents, Royalists, who oppugned the same, John Lilburne, for
whom I had done sundry Courtesies, but never injured in thought, word, or deed,
I know not out of what malicious, schismatic, or unchristian humor, before
ever he had read over my book (a great part whereof he understood not) Writ and
sent me a most railing virulent Letter, dated the 7. of January 1645. wherein
he scurrilously Libels not only against my self, but likewise against the
Synod assembled by Parliament, against the Ordinances of Parliament,
prohibiting the Printing of Libellous and Seditious Pamphlets, Books without
special License, (as contrary to the Liberty and Privileges of the Subject,
and learned of the Spanish Inquisition) and against the Ordinance for payment
of Tithes, which he tells the Parliament is, A CONTRADICTION TO THEIR COVENANT,
charging them thereby with no less then Perjury; which Letter before I had
leisure fully to peruse, he published in Print without any License, to the
great scand all both of the Synod, Parliament, and their proceedings:
whereupon it was about 2. days after complained of, and some clauses thereof
read in the Commons House, and thereupon this Order made, and entered in the
Commons Iournall.

Janu. 17. 1644.
Ordered, that the consideration of a Letter Printed under the name of John
Lilburne be referred to the Examination and Inquiry of the Committee of
Examinations; and it is further referred to that Committee to summon the said
John Lilburne, and to examine him upon the writing, Printing, and publishing of
the said Letter, and to report the state of the whole business to the House.

The Committee is further to send for the Company of Stationers, and toknow of
them, by whose default it happens, that such scurrilous, libellous, and
seditious Pamphlets are every day Printed and published, they undertaking at
the passing of their Ordinance, to prevent all these Inconveniences, that
formerly grew by the licentiousness of the Press, and to enjoin them to be
more diligent in suppressing such licentiousness, and to acquaint them, that
the House does expect a better account of their Proceedings herein, hereafter.

Immediately after this Order made, John Lilburne was casually run into the eye
with the head of a Pike about Moore-fields, which for a time endangered both
the loss of his life, and eye too; whereupon the prosecution of this Order was
suspended. No sooner was he recovered, but he caused sundry false, and
scandalous Articles to be Printed against Colonel Edward King, under whom he
served for a time in Lincolnshiere, till this Colonel committed and cashiered
him, for his seditious and Schismatic car^iage, and bitter invectives
against the Church and Ministers of England, in the Country and Army; which
Articles he caused to be Printed and dispersed through London and Lincolnshire,
to defame this well-deserving Gentleman, who has adventured his life, and
spent his estate in his Countries Service. No sooner had he Printed and vented
these Libellous Articles here, but he poasted into Lincolnshire to disperse
them there, In the mean time, the Printer with one or two of the underhand
dispensers of these libellous Articles being apprehended, confessed, that
Lylburne gave order to Print them, undertook the payment of the Printer, and
had, or was to have, 200. Copies of them for himself to disperse privately
among his friends.

In May following, this Libeller returning to London, conscious to himself of
his guilt, and of the Injury he had done the Parliament, Assembly, and my self,
in his forementioned published Letter, declined the meeting of me face to face,
ever turning aside when as he came near me. Which I often observing, he one day
met me full butt, near the lower end of Westminster Hall, ere he espide me,
and then turned his back suddenly upon me to avoid me. Whereupon I presently
accosting him; spoke to him with all mildness to this effect: Lieutenant
Colonel Lilburne, I am very sorry that you have so far forgotten your duty
to the Parliament, as without any cause on their parts (who have purchased your
liberty, and saved your life of Late) to Libell against their Ordinances,
Proceedings, and charge them with no less then breach of their Covenant; to
revile the Synod assembled by their Authority, which never gave you any
offense; and so far transgressed the Laws of friendship, and Christianity
toward me your ancient Friend, as to rail against, and slander me in Print in
such a reproachful, unchristian manner, as you have: when as I have done you
many Courtesies, but never offered you the smallest Injury in word or deed. I
hope by this time you have seriously considered these Injuries, of which the
House of Commons has taken special notice; and I shall next desire you in a
friendly Christian way, to give some satisfaction to the House, and my self,
for the Indignities done us by your Libellous Letter, which had you not
published in Print before I had leisure to peruse; I had been silent. But
instead of giving an ingenuous answer to this just request, he fell into an
angry fit; Using many unsitting insolent words to me, in the open Hall; and to
show his Billings-gate education, among other uncivil speeches, said; A turd
in your teeth; if you were out of the Hall, I would teach you to lay your hand
on mine, when as I only touched his hand in a familiar manner with my finger;
using diverse other harsh threatening words no ways beseeming him or me:
Whereupon, I returned him this answer: Sir, I perceive you a man of such a fiery
temper, that there is no discoursing with you in any private loving way; and
therefore since you are so choleric and refractory, I hope you will not take
it ill, if you be called to an account for this your Letter in an other place
before your betters, (according to a Vote already passed in Parliament) where I
presume you will remember your self, better, and not be so rude as now you
are. To which he replied to this effect; Do what you dare against me, I shall
justify my doings in any place. Whereupon I answered, That if this were his
resolution, he should shortly answer his Letter before the Committee of
Examinations, to which. the House had referred it: And so we parted.

This Committee being soon after informed, that Lilburne was returned to
London, on the 16 of May, made a Warrant, only to Summon him to appear before
them the next day at two of the clock, concerning the Printing and publishing
of his Libellous Letter, without any License, contrary to an Ordinance of
Parliament. Upon which Summons he appearing May 17. confessed upon his
Examination, that he did write this Letter, (the original whereof was produced
under his hand) that he not receiving an answer to it in three or four days
space, did thereupon cause it to be Printed without License; But refused to
declare the Printers name that Printed it. Mr. Prynne being then present at his
Examination, informed the Committee, That he did not desire to prosecute the
business against him with rigor, but only to make him confess his Injuries
to the Parliament, and Assembly, and crave pardon for them: which if he would
there do, he would freely remit all personal scandals, and injuries done by
him to himself, desiring only his reformation, not his ruin, or vexation.
Whereupon Lilburne desired this favor from the Committee, That he might set
down his own Answer in writing, touching the Printing and contents of his
Letter, and that if he might have co^^^^ient time to do it, he would deliver
it in under his hand, at the time appointed; W^i^h the Committee (out of their
clemency) freely granted, though I believe, they never indulged so much liberty
to any other in the like case: only they added this command (then entered in
their Book of Examinations,) He was commanded to be careful to publish
nothing. Hereupon being dismissed for the present, he Penned an Answer full of
Invectives against the Parliament, the Judges, and Justices Legal proceedings
against seditious Sectaries, seconded with many false relations of unheard off
cruelties toward them, to render the Parliament odious to his Faction:
calumniates and railes afresh against me, as an enemy to Gods people, a
Seditious Firebrand, one deserving to be hanged etc. which answer he no sooner
delivered in to the Committee, but the very same, or the next day after, he
published it in Print without any License, contrary to the Committees express
Command, and the Privileges and Orders of Parliament, and to show his further
contempt of Authority, caused this very Letter, for which he was questioned, to
be reprinted. About which time, the Scurrilous Libels entitled, The
Araignement of Persecution, and A Sacred Synodicall Decretall, were published,
Printed with the self same Letter and Press, as his Letter and Answer were,
and some of them seized together with his Letters by the Stationers. Who
acquainting the Committee of Examinations therewith, according to the former
Order of the House; thereupon the Committee, for these insufferable insolences
and contempts of his, on the 18. of June ordered; that Lilburne should be sent
for in custody, touching the Printing of his Letter, and other Scandalous
Books; in which number was his Answer to nine Arguments, Printed at an
unlicensed Press, Anno 1645. with his Picture and Verses before it; wherein he
intollerably railes against our Church, Ministers, Worship, Gover^ent, as
Antichristian, and Diabolical, to be utterly abhorred, renounced by all Gods
people. Upon this the Messenger only summoned him to appear before the
Committee, but did not at all attach or imprison him. After that another
seditious Libell, entitled, Martyns Echo, Printed with the self same Letter
and Press, that Lilburnes Letters and Pamphelts were, being published, and
having some of his very Expressions and Phrases scatterd in it, Lilburne, upon
the Stationers Information (who were checked for suffering these Libels to be
Printed, which they said, they could not remedy, unless some were exemplarily
punished) was again Ordered to be sent for in custody by the said Committee;
whereupon the Messenger took and detained him in his house, but for one nights
space, where he used him very courteously, and took not one farthing of him:
And notwithstanding his publishing of so many Libellous Pamphlets, contrary to
express Ordinances of both Houses, (which inflict not only Imprisonment, but
other Censures too upon such delinquents) and his refusal to discover the
Printers of those Books, the Committee of Examinations were so exceeding
indulgent to him (thinking to reclaim his incorrigible obstinacy by lenity)
that they permitted him to go at large, attending them only when he should be
sent for, without putting in any Bail.

On the 19. th. of July following, Lilburne walking in the Court of Requests
with one Hawkins, and others, reported to them (without any real ground at
all, but bare reports, heare-sayes from persons of mean condition) That there
were strange things discovered against many Members of the House of Commons,
and went as high as the Speaker, against whom it would be proved, that he had
with his own hand sent three score thousand pounds to the King at Oxford; and
that many Members had made their Peace, and done strange things, amongst whom,
Sir Robert Harloe was one. Of which seditious and scandalous Speeches, the
House being informed by Colonel King, Dr. Bastwicke, and other Witnesses of
good credit, and having no time to examine the business, having sat all that
day till past six of the clock, made this ensuing Vote.

Die Sabbati. 19. Julij 1645.
Resolved upon the Question, by the Commons assembled in Parliament, that
Lieutenant Colonel Lilburne be forth with taken into Custody, by the Sergeant
at Arms attending this House; and so kept till the House take further Order.

To the Sergeant at Arms, attending on this House, or to his Deputy, etc.
H. Elsing Cler. Parl. D. Com.

By virtue of this Warrant, and upon this occasion only, he was apprehended by
the Sergeant of the House, and kept in Custody, till the 24. of July. At which
time being brought to the Committee of Examinations, and there examined
touching this forementioned scandalous Speeches of the Speaker, and others: He
peremptorily refused to give them any answer, unless the Committee would first
express the cause, why he was ordered to be taken into custody, when as
himselse did well knwo, it was for those very words against the Speaker, and
other Members, whereupon they told him they would then examine him. Using
diverse insolent Speeches to them, and charging them with the breach of Magna
Charta which he is not ashamed to relate at large in his Printed Libel to his
Friend, page 2. to 5. whereupon he was most justly and Legally committed to
Custody, and his contempt Ordered to be reported to the House.

The very next day, he compiled a most lying, scandalous, seditious Libell,
Against the Parliament, Speaker, some eminent Members of both Houses. Sir John
Lentall, Doctor Bastwicke, and my self, which he Entitled, The Copy of a
Letter from Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburne to a friend. The most seditious,
scandalous, false lying Libell against the Parliament, Commit of
Examinations, and Members of both Houses, that ever yet was penned, far worse
then any Oxford Aulicus, and tending only to stir up the People to rise up
against the Parliament, to resist their power, Proceedings, and alienate their
affections from them. This, after his old manner, he sent to a private
Unlicensed Press (always ready at his command) where being speedily Printed,
he despersed the printed Copies thereof every where by his Agents among his
Friends, and Confederates, who vented them underhand for money: One of the
Printed Copies whereof being brought into the House, and there read, the House
unanimously passed this Vote.

Die Sabbati 9. August. 1645.
Ordered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That the consideration for
finding out the Author of this Book, be referred to the Committee of
Examinations, and that in case it appears to be Lilbournes Book, they shall
have power to commit him to what Prison they please.

Hereupon the Committee of Examinations sent for Lilburne this very day in the
afternoon, to examine him concerning the writing and printing of this Letter;
but he most obstinatly, in a peremptory and contemtuous manner refused to be
examined, or give any answer to the questions demanded of him, concerning the
writing, or publishing thereof; whereupon he was committed to Newgate, by this
ensuing Warrant, expressing the cause of his commitment thither, according to
the Petition of Right, and Magna Charta, the effect whereof is thus entered in
the Keepers Book of Newgate.

Gibb and Chambers Vic August. 1645.
Lieutenant Colonel Lilburne committed by Laur. Whittaker Esquire, from the
Committee for Examination, for refusing to answer to such Questions as were
propounded unto him by this Committee, by Order of the House of Commons, and
for the reasons that he gave for the same. And not to permit him to go out of
the same, without further Order of the House or Committee.

Dat. 9o. Augusti 1645. Examinat per Radm. Briscoe. Cler. de Newgate.

On Monday the 11th. of August, this comtemptuous obstinate deportment of his,
and refusal to be examined, was reported to the House, together with his
commitment for it to Newgate: whereupon the House unanimously made and entered
these two Votes.

Die Lunae 11o. Augusti 1645.
Ordered upon the Question by the Commons assembled in Parliament, that they
do approve of what the Commit has done concerning Lieutenant Colonel
Lilbourne.

Ordered upon the Question, That Lieutenant Colonel Lilburne be tried at the
next Quarter Sessions to be held for the City of London, concerning the
contriving, making, devulging, and spreading DIVERSE NOTORIOVS SCANDALS, set
forth in his name, in a Printed Pamphlet, under the Title of a Letter to a
Friend, AGAINST THE PARLIAMENT, AND SEVERAL MEMBERS OF THE COMMONS HOUSE: and
the care hereof, is especially referred to Master Recorder.

And by other subsequent Orders, a Solicitor and Council were specially
assigned in the behalf of the Parliament, to prosecute this business against
him.

Yet notwithstanding this incorrigible Lib^ller, and unparalleld affronter of
the Higher Powers, persevering in his villainy and seditious practices, since
his commitment to Newgate, has compiled, printed, and privily dispersed
another most pestilent, mutinous Libell against the Parliaments power and
proceedings, to incense and muteny the people against them, (Printed in half a
sheet) as Libellous and seditious as his Letter, and much of the same stra^ne:
for all which unparalled insolences he shall no doubt be brought to a fair
Legal trial, and receive condign punishment in due season.

This is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth of his Case, and
of the Parliaments, and Committees proceedings against him, every Tittle
whereof, will be justified, and made good by a clowd of Witnesses, being
persons of Honor, quality, Piety, Fidelity, by the Parliaments and Committees
Journalls, Lilburnes own Pamphlets, and himself, (if he be not past all
shame, grace) dares not gainsay it in any particular.

Now this being the true state of his Libellous, Seditious, Incorrigible,
Contemptuous carriages toward the Parliament, successively from time to time;
and of the Parliaments leasurely, mild, indulgent proceedings toward him; I
appeal to all the world, yea, to his best and most partial friends and
Confederates.

First, Whether any mortal, be he Papist, Prelate, Malignant, Royalist, or
Cavalliere, much less, any professed Votary to the Parliaments service, did ever
demean himself so Libellously, Slanderously, Seditiously, Contemptuously,
Peremptorily, Presumptuously, and ungratefully to the Parliament, the Committee
of Examinations, the Members, and proceedings of the House, as this proud
upstart Jack has done, both in words, writing, deeds, without the least
shadow of remorse or penitence? Or, whether any History records his Parallel?

Secondly, Whether ever any Parliament, Committee, or other Court of Justice,
did with so much lenity, patience, and long-suffering endure so many reiterated
multiplied Libels, and public affronts against their Jurisdiction,
Proceedings, Justice, Members, without any just occasion, or ground at all, as
this Parliament and Committee has received from this Seditious Lying Libeller,
before they did commit him, after so many preceedent questionings, and
admonitions? Or, whether any such pattern of Clemency, Patience, as they have
used toward this incorrigible wretch, can be produced out of any Parliament
Rolls, or Journals, in preceding Ages? If not, as I am confident none can;
then how desperately ungrateful and malicious is this Lilburne, for taxing
them with Tyranny, Cruelty, and injustice in their proceedings against him?

Thirdly, Whether ever any proceedings were more Legal, just, and regular in
every punctilio of Law, or more consonant to Magna Charta, the Petition of
Right, or Laws of the Land, then these against him? And whether ever any man
committed by Parliament had less cause to complain of Injustice, and
Infringement of the Subjects Liberty, then he? Yet never did any man, both in
discourse, and Printed Libels, so rail against the Parliament, for Tyranny,
Injustice, breach of Magna Charta, the Petition of Right, the Subjects
Hereditary freedom and liberty, as he has most causelessly and seditiously
done, of purpose, to raise up tumults against, and alienate the peoples
affections from the Parliament, his Emissaries scattering abroad these his
seditious Libels among the Malignants in Kent, and else where, no doubt to
excite them to a new Rebellion.

Having thus truly stated his case, and the truth of the Parliaments
proceedings: I shall in the next place discover and refute his malicious Lies
and Forgeries against the Parliament, and Committee of Examinations, in his
own Printed Relation of his Case, in his Letter to a Friend.

In this Lying Libell Page 3. he writes: Yet notwithstanding, since the first
of May last, I have by the Authority of the House of Commons, BEEN THREE TIMES
IMPRISONED, before ever I knew mine Accuser, or mine accusation, or ever was
suffered to speak one word in mine own defense: which I humbly conceive is
contrary to Magna Charta, And these Privileges that I ought to enjoy, by
virtue of my having an interest therein. The manner whereof, he relates more
largely, Page 12. 13. 14 where he repeates the former words with this addition:
In again I was called, and told, I must wait again to morrow; I expressed my
self again and again unto them, to give me leave to declare but one thing
to them, but heard I could not be till about two hours after, waiting at the
door, bemoaning, and Note here his seditious carriage.
crying out to those that stood by, of the sad and deplorable condition, that
I, and the rest of the Free people in England are fallen into, to be so
unjustly Imprisonned, for the expense of our blood, for the just preservation
of our just Freedoms, that we should from Commitees of Parliaments themselves
be Imprisoned, we know not wherefore, and when we come before them, according
to their own command, that we shall be If the Committee has business of
great^^ importance, yet John Lilburn, must forthwith be heard, and have
p^ecedence of all others, else Magna Charta, and the Subects Liberties are
presently infringed.
remanded back again, and not suffered to speak one word for our selves; Hear
o Heavens, and give ear o Earth, and thou righteous God, that love justice,
and judgment, and hate, and abh^orrest oppression, and cruelty, which
make wise men mad, put forth thy hand, and do justice thy self upon the
unjust and unrighteous Judges of this age, whom the people have set up for
their good; namely, to preserve their Lives, Liberties, and Estates, as their
faithful Stewards and Servants, do yet destroy what they would seem to
mainetaine.

What heavier charge of Injustice, Oppression could be objected against the
Parliament and its Committees, then this vile libellous Incendiary has most
falsely and scandalously cast upon them, in these seditious bitter lines, in
which there is scarce one word of truth. For where as he publishes with a
b^azen forehead.

1. That he has been three times imprisoned since the first of May last; by
Authority from the House of Commont; (before his two last commitments.)

It is most certain, he was not so much as once imprisoned by any Authority
from the House, though he deserved to be three times successively imprisoned
in that space, for his intolerable Libels, and affronts against the
Parliament: Let him therefore shame the Devil, and tell his deluded
Confederates, when, where and by whom he was thus three times imprisoned; to
what Goal he was thus committed; how long he lay there; what fees he paid, and
how he got thence released: or else recan^ this desperate malicious Lie. True
it is, he was thrice sommoned to appear before the Committee of examinations
for his successive printed Libels; and the last time sent for in custody, by a
Messenger but yet not apprehended as a Prisoner, but entertained, and lodged by
him at his house as a friend one night without paying any fees; and permitted
the next morning to go at liberty without bail or mainprize. And these are
the three (No) imprisonments, this lib^ller so much declaimes against, instead
of rendering heartiest thanks to the Committee for their incomparable Clemency
toward him; considering his reiterated Crimes and obstinacy.

2. Whereas he ave^s he was thrice imprisoned before ever he knew his Accuser
or Accusation: he writes expressly in the very next words page 1. 2. 3. etc.
that I was his Accuser; that his Accusation was, the writing and printing of
his letter to me, and that he was the Author of Martins Books. Was not here
then both an Accuser and Accusation by his own printed confession? True it is,
that when he first appeared before the Committee, I did accuse him for printing
his libellous Letter; but the Commons house had accused him for it some two or
three Months before and ordered the Committee to send for and examine him;
which order he knew off long before he was sent for: and when he was sommoned
the second and third time, the Wardens of the Stationers (formerly checked
about his unlicensed libells,) were his known Accusers, not I, but as their
Council: And therefore it is a most impudent Lie; that he neither knew his
Accuser nor accusation before he was committed.

3. Whereas he complains he was committed before he was ever suffered to
speak one word for himself; this is a more audacious Lie then all the rest.
For at his first appearance before the Committee, he had liberty to speak what
he pleased for himself; nay, (which was never granted to any before upon a
bare Examination without Articles, by express order from the house) Leave and
time indulged him by them to set down his own answer in writing, which he not
only gave in under his hand, but likewise published in print to all the world,
and informs them again in this very Libell that he did so; Yet forsooth he
has the monstrous impudency to print this contradiction, That he was never
heard to answer or speak one word for himself. O the falsenesse and boldness
of this matchless Liar! who needs no other testimony against him, but
himself. It may be at his second appearance, the Committee being otherwise
employed, had no time to hear him; but I am certain, they did not then commit
him, before he was heard or suffered to speak one word; For he was not at all
committed. And that he was committed at other times, before he was heard one
word, is so apparently false, that the greatest part of his Libellous Letter to
a Friend, is but a mere Relation of what saucy, malapert, daring speeches he
used to the Committees faces, charging them with the breach of Magna Charta,
(which they gave him free liberty to read, as himself records for their
vindication against his brazen-face Lies) and much trampling upon the Subjects
Liberties; they hearing him speak, with much patience, such desperate Language
against their Authority and most just proceedings, as never any Malignant
Cavaleere, or Royalist of the Kings own Party, durst use unto them; which they
would not have endured from any other, but such an impudent ungratfull
Companion as himself, Yet for all this liberty of speech, in his defense, he
cries out of the sad and deplorable condition that himself, and the other free
people of England are fallen into, that they should from Committees of
Parliament themselves, be Imprisoned they know not wherefore, and when we come
before them according to their own commands, be remanded back again,
unheard AND NOT SVFFRED TO SPEAK ONE WORD FOR OUR SELVES, when himself was
suffered (as he there relates) to speak, and write so much: Wherefore I shall
only turn his own Scripture exclamation against himself. Hear o Heavens, and
give ear o Earth, and thou righteous God, that love Justice, and Truth, and
hate and abhorrest Lying, and Liars, put forth thy hand, and do justice thy
self upon this most desperate Malignant Liar, Slanderer of the Parliaments
most just proceedings against him, for his conversion and amendment, if he
belong thee, or else to his just punishment, who has thus falsely abused his
Tongue and Pen, against these highest Powers, who represent thy person, and are
thy faithful Ministers: And all you giddy seduced people of his combination
and Schism; now at last discern and Judge, I beseech you, of the graceless,
nay, Devilish temper of this transcendent Liar; and how false those vile
imputations are, which he has publicly charged on the Parliament, to render
them odious to the people, out of the mere malevolence and virulency of his
seditious spirit, contrary to his own knowledge, in his Printed papers. How
can, or dare you credit him in any thing, who has so grosely belyed both the
Parliament, and Committee, in those very particulars, which are the ground of
all his Satyricall Declamations against their Proceeding as Tyrannical, and
unjust, which certainly himself, of all Malignants ever yet brought before
them, had the least cause of any to complain.

But admit, all these three malicious Lies to be true; there is no such cause
for such an outcry as he makes against the Parliaments proceedings as Arbitrary
and unjust: Certainly, had he ever enjoyed the honor of being mine, or any
other Lawyers, or Justices Clarke, he would have known, that there is nothing
more usual, then for Judges, Justices, Mayors, Aldermen, and all superior and
inferior Courts of Justice in the Realm, upon private credible Informations
or complaints, to sommon, yea, attach men by Bayliffes, Sergeants, Constables,
and other Officers, to appear before them upon general summons, to answer
such matters as shall be objected, or alleged against them; and sometimes to
commit them to safe Custody till examined, before they ever acquaint them with
their Accuser, or Accusation, or hear them speak one word in their own
behalf; yet none ever deemed these ordinary proceedings of theirs, either
Arbitrary, Tyrannical, or Illegal, contrary to Magna Charta, or the Subjects
Liberties, but most just. And shall not the Parliament, the supremest Court,
have as great a liberty and power, thus to summon and attach men upon
informations against them, only to answer their Accusations, when ripe for
Examination, as the meanest Justice of the Peace does daily ex^rcise without
exceptions? How many thousands have the Lord Mayor of London, the Courts of
Guard, and Committee of Examinations sent sor, attached, and restrained thus
for a short space of their liberty, till they could be examined, before ever
they knew their Accuser or Accusaton, or could be brought to public
examination; and yet not one of them, ever made such an horrid outcry against
the Legality of their proceedings, as this Ignoramus, who understands the Law,
and Magna Charta, no more then a Iack-daw, as one once said of a doting Lawyer.

But to proceed to his other falsehoods, Page 7. he writes: That during his
imprisonment at Oxford, he was ruined in his estate to the value of six or
seven hundred pounds, which he left behind him at London, which he can clearly
make appear. Which he likewise recites in two other printed papers. This
certainly is as gross a lie as any of the former. For his best and nearest
friends will attest, he was never worth half so much; and the maine reason,
why he left the City, and went into the Parliaments Forces, was not so much for
any good affection to the Parliaments cause, as to protect himself against his
Creditors arrests for these many debts, which he incurred by renting of a
Brew House, which (both himself and his Father, often times told me, when they
repaired to me for advice in Law concerning it) had quite undone and broke both
himself and his friends, who stood engaged for him. And this Libeller himself
Page 5. insinuates as much, complaining for want of recompense for his
imprisonment, TO PAY HIS DEBTS, and buy him and his bread: So that he was as
much or more beholing to the Parliaments Service for protecting him from the
arrests and executions of his Creditors, as they were to him for any of his
good services, the praise whereof he has now, utterly lost and blemished by
his evil, Libellous, and Seditious attempts against them.

Page 16. He most scandalously and falsely avers; That many of the House of
Commons took to themselves 3. l. 10. s. a week, and some of them more, and
others of them great places, worth 500 l. 1000 l. 1500 l. 2000 l. and more per
annum, and live in as great pomp, superfluity, and bravery, as ever they did
in their days, by the ruin of the Commonwealth, when as thousands who have
spent all they have in the world, and done the Kingdom good service, have not
a bitt of bread to put in their mouths, etc. This is a most notorious Lie: the
Lords and Commons having removed all their Members by a special Ordinance,
from all the Offices conferred on them by the Parliament, though well
deserving, and fit to manage them: And when this slanderer shall make good
this false charge by sufficient witnesses against any particular Members guilty
of it, he shall receive a fuller answer.

Page 5. He complains; that the Parliament and House of Commons, who formerly
owned him, having served their turns of him; he could never have Justice from
them, though he has been as faithful a friend to the Commonwealth, as ever
any they employed. And whereas Magna Charta says, Justice and Right we will
deny to none, we will defer to none, yet have I waited these four years
upon them, at great expenses, and cannot get them to put their Votes in
execution, And now of late I have followed them about this six months, to the
expense of about 100 l. to get a Petition read, that I might have justice, and
reparation, but have been denied Justice and Right, and could not get my
Petition read: which he ingeminates, inculcates in sundry other pages. To which
I answer, that it appears by the next preceding words, that the Parliament
served his turn first, not he theirs. First, By enlarging him out of Prison,
and restoring him to his Liberty. Secondly, By hearing his cause, and Voting
his sentence in the Star Chamber illegal, and that he ought to have
reparations. Thirdly, By saving him from an arraignement for his life before
the whole House of Peers about the Earl of Strafford, when the King himself
sent in an Accusation against him, Aug. 4. 1641. (for his seditious carriage)
To which he might have added (and does elsewhere relate) a fourth; by saveing
his neck from the Gallows at Oxford, and purchasing his release by an
exchange from thence, to which I contributed my own best assistance. But did
the House ever employ him in any public service to serve their turns? Surely
never, for ought I could learn, and if they had, they should have heard of it
to purpose in this Letter. What an ungrateful lying Merchant then does he show
himself, thus ill to requite the House of Commons for this their extraordinary
favors, to use such scandalous false speeches, and Libellous invectives
against them, that having served their own turns of him, he could never have
Justice from them since, etc. Yea, but he has waited above four hours space,
and can have no reparations for his losses, according to their Votes. But is
this the House of Commons fault? Have they been backewards to do him right? or
rather has not he been negligent and wanting to himself, in procuring a
transmission of his cause to the Lords, without whose concurrence his sentence
cannot be reversed, nor his damages ascertained and repaired. Surely it is
very well known to the world, that my own Sufferings, Imprisonments, Losses,
transcended his by many degrees, and that the Commons Voted me Reparations and
Damages for them, long before they passed their Votes for him; that never yet
received one farthing recompense for all my Losses, Damages, eight years
Imprisonment, Exile, the loss of my calling and estate, in any kind
whatsoever, though (I presume) I have done far greater more and better Services
for the State, Church, Parliament, then ever he performed for them: Yet did I
never complain either of or against the Parliament, for breach of Magna Charta,
in not doing or delaying to do me Right or Justice, neither had I just cause to
do it, since the weightier public affairs of three bleeding Kingdoms,
Churches, and our Bloody Wars and Schisms in all three, have engrossed all
their time, thoughts, and deprived them both of vacancy, opportunity, and
since, of present means to right me in this kind, in these necessitous times.
The like I might say of my Dear Fellow Sufferers, Doctor Bastwicke, Mr. Henry
Burton, Mr. Peter Smart, Dr. Leighton, Mr. Walker, and sundry others, who
suffered far greater losses, and underwent far longer imprisonments then John
Lilburn, and were Voted Reparations in the Commons House before any such Vote
for him, yet never received any satisfaction or fruit of these Votes, by reason
of the Parliaments more public employments, whose Councels, Debates, time have
been wholly taken up, to preserve our three whole Kingdoms, Religion, Lives,
Liberties, and themselves from eminent ruin, which, blessed be God, they have
done: Yet never did any of these revile the Parliament or Commons, or publicly
tax them of injustice, in such a Libellous base unchristian way as he has
done, but still sit down quietly, and wait with patience till God shall
restore the Parliament and Kingdom to such a condition, as may enable them
effectually to accomplish what they so long since Voted in their behalfes.
Only poor upstart John is lately swelled to such an Altitude of worth and
Merit in his own conceit, for his late Libellous and seditious
Anti-parliamentary pamphlets, that he thinks the whole Parliament guilty of the
breach of Magna Charta for not setting all public businesses aside, to hear
his private Petition, and give him Reparations; whereas if they had strictly
pursued Magna Charta in doing undelayed justice against him for his seditious*
scandalous, execrable Libells against themselves, their Proceedings Power,
Members, and others who have done them service, perchance he might have
received his just recompense at Tiburne ere this; and I pray God give him so
much grace and timely repeatance, as may make him capable of so much mercy, to
escape it at last.

I find another notorious slander of his, with which I shall conclude, in the
11 page of this Letter of his to this effect: I served under my Lord of
Manchester, where and with whom I adventured my life, as freely as any man in
the Army; and the best requital that I got at his hands was, an earnest
endeavor by him to hang me, for taking Tickell castle from the Cavaliers:
Truly though none will or can believe this Slander of this Noble Lord; yet they
will easily believe it of himself (if they considerable his seditious
Anti-Parliamentary Libels, Practices, and some other conspiracies of him or his
confederates against the Parliament and some chief members of it) that he does
most earnestly endeavor to hang himself; and some of his best friends fear,
that hanging will be his destiny, since he takes such desperate courses to
bring him to it. He has therefore now need to ply God with his prayers, to
give him so much Grace, (and I heartily pray he may so do) as may prevent so
great a shame, so sharp a sentence, and reserve him for some better end.

Having thus charged throug and rooted his maine Squadron of Lies and Scandals
against the Parliaments and Committees proceedings: I shall in the third place
a little examine and refute his mistaken law, his mis-interpretation of Magna
Charta and the Petition of Right, which had very ill fortune to fall into the
hands of such a lawless Ignoramus. The sum of Lilburnes complaint against
the Parliament is: That he has been several times sent for, examined and
imprisoned by the Parliament and its Authority, in a most unjust, arbitrary and
tyrannical way, contrary to Magna Charta, the Petition of Right, and liberty
of a freeborn subject. This I have already manifested to be a most false and
scandalous Lie in matter of fact: I shall now clear it to be so in point of
law, to stop his and all men's clamorous mouths, by making good these 4.
Propositions

First, that his first summons, only to appear before the Committee of
Examinations, upon an express order of the Commons house, for printing his
first Libellous Letter against the Parliaments Ordinances, Proceedings, Power,
the Venerable Assembly, and my self, without license; contrary to several
Ordinances of both Houses; is neither against Magna Charta, nor the Petition of
Right, nor the Subjects Liberty, not Law of the Land, but consonant to them all.

2. That his second summons, and third sending for in custody for printing his
Libellous Answer given under his hand to the Committee without license,
contrary to their express order, and direct Ordinances of Parliament, is not
contrary to Magna Charta, etc. but agreeable thereunto.

3. That the Committee's examination of him concerning his last printed
unlicensed Papers and words of Mr. Speaker, was no infringment of Magna Charta
or the Subjects liberty, but warranted by Law: and his commitment for refusing
to answer, most just and Legal.

4. That his commitment to the Sergeants custody by Vote of the Commons House
before ever he knew his Accusation or Accusor, and without being called to the
Bar and heard to speak there for himself, is no infringment of Magna Charta,
the Petition of Right, the common law, or subjects liberty, but warrantable,
just, and Legal.

Before I proceed to these particular Heads, I shall give you a briese Account
what the law of the land is in cases of Libels against private or public
persons Lilburnes Libels and false reports both of the Parliament Committees,
Speaker, and members of both houses being the ground both of his summons and
imprisonment.

The law before the Conquest was, that the Author and spreader of false Rumors
among the people, had his Tongue cut out, if he redeemed it not by the prize of
his head: as appeared by the Laws of King Alfred: cap. 28. and Sir Edward
Cooks 3. Institutes p. 198. We read in Bracton l. 2. Tit. De Crimine lesae
Majestatis; in Glanvil. l. 2. f. 110. in Britton Tit. of Appeals f. 39. in
Stamford, Plees del Corone f. 1. b. and sundry other law-bookes: that at the
Common Law, both before and since Magna Charta, it was no less then
High Treason for any man to do or give consent or assistance to any thing which
might move Sedition in the Realm, or Army: which nothing is more apt to do
then seditious Libels against the Parliament and chief Members of it, to
mutiny the people and Army against them: of which crime how guilty Lilburne is,
let all who have read his most seditious Papers judge: Tr. 18. E. 4. B: R:
Thomas Heber was indicted and outlawed of High Treason among other things, for
saying (after the Parliament ended) That the last Parliament was the most
simple and insufficient Parliament that ever had been in England: I am
certain John Lilburne has not only said but written, printed, and published
to the world of this present Parliament yet sitting, that which is far worse:
viz: p. 4. 5. etc. That Judgment (there) is turned backward and equity cannot
enter: That the Lord saw it, and it displeased him that there was no Judgment
there. That the Parliament having served their turns of him, he could have no
justice since: that he has been denied Justice and Right both by the House and
Mr. Speaker. That the vote of the house for his Commitment is contrary to Magna
Charta, and to the just practice that was used by the very Heathen Romans: O
brave times, and brave justice! To which he adds this imprecation to heaven
against them; Hear o Heavens, and give ear o earth, and thou righteous judge
that love justice and judgment, put forth thy hand and do justice thy self
upon these unjust and unrighteous Judges of this age, whom the people have set
up for their good, namely to preserve their lives, Libertyes, and Estates, as
their faithful Stewards, and yet destroy what they would seem to maintain:
with other passages as bad or worse.

By the Statutes of Westminster 1. (made 3. Ed. 1.) c. 33. 2. R. 2. c. 5. 12.
R. 2. c. 11 1. and 2. Phil. Mary c. 3. and 1. Eliz. c. 7. It is enacted and
straightly defended upon grievous pain, that from thenceforth none should be so
hardy to contrive, speak, or tell any false news, lies, or other such false
things, or publish any false News, Lies or Tales, or Prelates, Dukes, Earls,
Barons, Nobles or Great men of the Realm, whereby debates, discords, or
slanders may arise between the King and his people, or the Lords, Nobles and
commons, whereof great peril and mischi^fe might come to all the Realm, and
quick subvertion and d^struction of the Note.
said Realm, if remedy were not provided; And that he that shall offend
herein, shall be kept in prison, until he has brought him forth in Court, that
did first speak and report the same; and if he cannot bring him forth, that
then he should be grievously punished (according to the nature of the ^ffence)
by the Council. And all Justices of Peace within every shire, City, and Town
Corporate, are enabled to hear examine and determine the said causes, and
enjoined to put these Laws in due execution, that from henceforth condign
punishment be not deferred from such offenders: And by virtue of these Acts,
and of the very Common Law it self, many persons for libellous false speeches,
News, Reports, and writings not only against Noblemen, Judges, great Officers,
and other persons of honor, but even of private persons, have constantly in
all ages been indicted in the Kings Bench before the Judges, and proceeded
against in the Starchamber, for raising or spreading false News, Lies, Libels,
Rumors, and been imprisoned, fined, adjudged to the pillory, to wear papers
on their heads, lose their ears, undergo other corporal punishments, and
bound with good sureties to the good behavior, as you may read in Sir Edward
Cooks Commentary or Institutes on Magna Charta 3 E. 1. c. 33. His 3. Institutes
c. 76. f. 174. His 4 Institutes cap. 5. and 7. 5. Rep. pars 2. f. 129. 125. 9.
Rep. f. 59. Cromptons Jurisdiction of Courts Tit. Starchamber and Bank le Roy
43 Ass. 38. and Parson Harrisons case in the Kings Bench for defaming Judge
Hutton, being a late memorable president of Justice in this nature, which every
man approved.

This being the known, received Common and Statute Law of the Realm, agreeable
to Magna Charta and the Petition of Right, which protect no man's liberty,
person, or estate, against the due proccedings and punishments of Law, when he
turns a Libeller, Malefactor, Felon, Traitor, or Delinquent against the Law
(for then every Thief, Murderer, Felon in Newgate might plead it as well as
John Lilburn against their imprisonments and judgments) The first question
will be; Whether the Committee of Examinations and House of Commons being
really and truly informed of all the forementioned seditious Papers, Libels,
Lies and false Reports published and printed by Lilburn against the
Jurisdiction, Ordinances, Proceedings of the Parliament, their Committees,
Members, the Synod, and others, might not justly summon him to appear before
them, being authorized and commanded by a special Order of the House to do it,
without any infringement of Magna Charta and the Petition of Right? Certainly,
this being the truth of the question, there is no man that knows what belongs
to Law or justice, but will acknowledge it, since there is nothing so common in
daily practice or experience, as for the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of London, the
Mayor, Justices, and chief Officers in every City or Corporacion, the Justices
of Peace in every County, the Judges and Stewards in every Court of Justice,
the several Committees, and all Subcommittees of Parliament, upon informations
and complaints of any wrong or injury within their several Jurisdictions, to
send out general warrants, writs, or summons to the parties complained of, to
appear before them, to answer such things or misdemeanors as shall be objected
against them. And in the Army it self John Lilburne cannot but know, it is an
ordinary course for the General, or Council of war, or any chief Officer of
the Army, to send the Provost Marshall, or other under Officers to summon any
soldier under their Command to appear before them upon complaints, without
sending them notice first, what their accusation is, or who their accuser; and
John Lilburne himself (as I am credibly informed) has without any Commission
done more then this amounts to in Lincolnshire, whiles he had there some petty
Command. And shall not a Committee of Parliament then have as much authority to
summon John Lilburne to appear before them upon a just complaint and special
Order of the House, without a grand infringement of Magna Charta, the Petition
of Right, and such an outcry as you have heard in print; when as any Justice
of Peace, or petty Officer may do as much and more in the like case; and every
Soldier or Officer at any Court of Guard in any the Parliaments Garrisons?
Hear O Heavens, and hearken O Earth, what mad Nonsense new Law and Doctrine
this Ignoramus has published! How many thousands have this Committee and other
Committees and Sub-Committees of Parliament summoned to appear before them,
many of them in custody since the Parliament begun; and yet not one of them,
(though the veriest malignant Royalist or Anti-parliamentarian breathing) did
ever pretend or allege, that this was an infringement of Magna Charta, or
invasion of the Subjects Liberties. And all that have read any Parliament
Iournalls in either House, know, that in all O^ders which appoint Committees or
Sub-Committees to examine any business, this clause is added, And this
Committee has power to send for Parties, Witnesses, Records, etc. which they
pursue accordingly and have done so in all ages. Further, take notice, First,
that in matters which concern the State or Republike merely, there needs no
particular Informer or Relator, but the Judges and Officers of State ought ex
officio to inform and prosecute all public Delinquents. Secondly, that John
Lilburne certainly was the first of any I ever met with that preached, or at
least printed such Apocryphal Nonsense Law, for which he produces no
Authority but his own Ignorance. And if the summoning of men to appear either
in Courts of Justice, or before Magistrates and Justices of Peace, should be
against Magna Charta, certainly there could never be any Law or Justice
executed, the summons being ever the first process and means to bring men to
appear before the Officers of Justice, who are to examine their misdemeanors
complained of, and so to inform them of them when they appear; and if men
should know their particular accusers or accusations before their summons, it
would be a means: First, to make the Delinquents fly or hide away to avoid the
hand of Justice, if they could possibly make escapes. Secondly, to corrupt the
Informers and witnesses that should prosecute, and to smother or ex^enuate
theeir crimes. Thirdly, to furnish the Delinquent with premeditated answers and
evasions, and so introduce a total subversion or pervertion of Justice; All
which inconveniences a general summons, which the Laws provide and allow of,
prevents. In few words, a summons to appear without an actual attachment of
the person summoned, is no imprisonment, no outing of any man of his freehold,
lands, goods, franchises; no sentence passed against him; Therefore clearly,
no proceedings at all within the words or intent of Magna Charta or the
Petition of Right, as this New Lawyer, out of his deep ignorance, has most
magisterially resolved: being one of those unintelligent Lawyers that St Paul
speaks of 1 Timothy 1. 17. Desiring to be Teachers of the Law, understanding
neither what they say, nor what they affirm.

These Premises make way for proof of the second Conclusion: to wit, That the
Committees sending for Lilburne in custody, upon new information of the
Stationers against him for printing his libellous Answer given in to them,
contrary to their express Order, with scandalous marginall Notes, and other
schismatic, seditious Papers, contrary to Law, and several Ordinances of
Parliament; is agreeable to Magna Charta, and the Petition of Right, not any
ways repugnant to them.

For the clearing whereof to the very meanest capacy, we must distinguish,
between a warrant to apprehend a man in nature of a process or attachment; and
the commitment of a man to a prison, goal, or Messenger upon his examination,
after an apprehension or attachment. In the first of these, a general warrant
made to a Sheriff, Constable, Messenger, or any other inferior Officer, upon
a precedent particular information, or vehement suspicion, is and ever was
reputed just, legal; without expressing the name of the Accuser or particulars
of the Accusation in the warrant. For example, If an information be given in to
the Lord Mayor of London, or to the Chief Justice of England, or any Justice
of Peace, that any particular person has committed or is suspected to be
guilty of such a Murder, Robbery, Treason, Trespass, or offended any penal
Law, the breach whereof they have power to examine, there is nothing so
ordinary in daily practice and experience as to send a warrant to the Sheriff,
Constable, or other under Officer, to apprehend and bring the party accused or
suspected before them, to answer such things as shall be objected against him.
The like is done daily in all Courts of Justice upon complaint of
Misdemeanors; in and by both Houses of Parliament, their Committees, and
Sub-Committees, and has been done of late in many thousand persons cases, who
neither did nor could of right so much as once complain of the breach of Magna
Charta. And I appeal to John Lilburn, or any other Officer or Soldier in our
Armies, whether the General, Council of war, and other Officers do not every
day almost upon complaints send for Soldiers and others in custody, and
apprehend them by the Marshall, sometimes by a warrant in writing, sometimes by
a mere verbal command, without acquainting them before hand with the Accusers
name, or his particular accusation, but only in general terms, to answer such
things as are or shall be objected against them? and did ever any Soldier yet
complain that this was tyranny, injustice in their General, the Counsel of
war, their Officers, or contrary to Magna Charta, the Petition of Right, and
the Liberty of the Subject for which they fight? What ground then has this
clamorous Libeller to rail against the Parliament or Committee of
Examinations, for sending for him in custody upon a precedent true, just and
vi^^ble complaint, even the printing of these libellous Papers, conttary to
their express Order, the privileges of Parliament, and Ordinances against
unlicensed printing, which inflict in this case imprisonment by this very
Committee, with other penalties upon such offenders? Certainly none at all but
only his own seditious, malignant, venomous rankor against the Parliaments
justice? But certainly if others, yet he of all men had least cause to
complain thus in this case; because though the warrant was to bring him in
custody, yet he was not brought thither in custody as other prisoners ate, but
only summoned to appear, and that upon a more particular warrant then others,
expressing in general terms the cause for which he was sent for; and when he
came, he was neither committed to any prison, nor forced to put in Bail, nor
detained in the Messengers custody as a prisoner, but remained with him one
night at his free liberty as a friend, and paid no fees nor any thing for his
diet and lodging, as the Messenger himself will depose. And was this sending
for an infringement of Magna Charta, and the Laws of the Land? Certainly if it
were, it was only in his favor, that he was not according to the Law of the
Land, Magna Charta, and the several Ordinances concerning printing, presently
committed to some Goal or other for his seditious Libels and Lies, and there
detained as he has been since.

This case of summons and attachment by virtue of a general warrant being
clear out of Magna Charta and the Petition of Right, the sole question will
be; What commitment and imprisonment that is which is against Magna Charta and
the Petition of Right? and whether Lilburnes was such a commitment? This will
best appear by the very Petition of Right it self, and the original case and
votes in Parliament which were the grounds and occasion of this Petition: The
case was only this.

Diverse eminent Gentlemen of the Kingdom, in the third year of King Charles,
were sent for by Pursevants before the Lords of the Council, for refusing the
loan of moneys then set on foot, contrary to diverse Statutes, and by them
committed to several prisons sundry months, without expressing any cause of
their commitment in the warrant: And when for their deliverances they brought
their Habeas corpus in the Kings Bench, the Iaylors certified no cause of their
deliverance or commitment, but only the Kings special Command, signified by
the Lords of his privy Council; yet the Judges would not bail, but remaunded
them to prison; Hereupon in the next Parliament complaint was made, that this
imprisonment and detaining of them in prison only upon the Kings bare Command,
without any other cause expressed, was against Magna Charta and other Statutes,
and the Judges remanding of them to prison upon such a general warrant,
illegal: And after a long and sound debate of the business, it was thus
unanimously resolved in the Commons House, 3 April. 4. Car. Regis, and
afterward A Conference had by a Committee o^ ^oth Houses concerning the Rights
and Privileges of the Subject: 3 April. 4 Car. printed 1642. p. 66.
consented to by the Lords.

1. Resolved upon the Question, That no Freeman ought to be detained or kept
in prison, or otherwise restrained by the Command of the King, or the Privy
Council, or any other, unless some cause of the commitment, detainer, or
restraint be expressed, for which by Law he ought to be committed, detained,
or restrained.

2. That the Writ of Habeas corpus may not be delayed, but ought to be granted
to every man that is committed or detained in prison, or otherwise restrained,
though it be by the Command of the King, the Privy Council, or any other, he
praying the same.

3. That if a Freeman be committed or detained in prison, or otherwise
restrained by the Command of the King and Privy Council, or any other, no
cause of such commitment, detainer, or restraint being expressed, for which by
Law he ought to be committed, detained or restrained, and the same to be
returned upon a Habeas Corpus granted for the said party, then he ought to be
delivered or bayled.

These Votes and the Lords concurrence with them, begat the Petition of Right
after many days debate, which thus states the Subjects grievance in this
particular. First it recites Magna Charta c. 29. and 28. of Ed. 3. That no
Freeman should be taken or imprisoned, without being brought to answer by due
process of Law; and then proceeds thus.

Nevertheless against the Tenor of the said Statutes, and other the good Laws
and Statutes of your Realm to that end provided, diverse of your Subjects have
of late been imprisoned without any cause showed: And when for their
deliverance they were brought before your Justices by your Majesty's Writs of
Habeas corpus, there to undergo and receive as the Court should order; and
their keepers commanded to certify the causes of their detainer, no cause was
certified but that they were detained by your Majesty's special Command
signified by the Lords of your Privy Council, and yet were returned back to
several prisons, without being charged with any thing to which they might make
answer according to the Law. Whereupon they pray in this Petition, That no
Freeman in any such manner as is before mentioned, be imprisoned or detained.
To which the King subscribed this Answer, Let Right be done as is desired. Now
what is this to Lilburns case? Who was not now committed to prison by the
Committee without any cause expressed, but only sent for in custody to come
before the Committee (as these Gentlemen were sent for by Pursevants, to come
before the Privy Council) to answer to such things as should be objected
against them; which sending for was never so much as once complained of in
Parliament, as a breach of the Great Charter or Subjects Rights, but admitted
to be legal. Had the Parliament or Committee sent Lilburne then to Newgate
(without expressing any cause of his commitment in the warrant) and he had
brought a Habeas corpus in the Kings Bench to be bayled, as these Gentlemen
did, and then no cause of his commitment or detainer had been returned, but
only the Committees pleasure, if thereupon he had been remanded; perchance
then he might have had some color to complain of injustice and breach of
Magna Charta, and the Petition of Right: But the Committee not so much as then
proceeding against him so far as to commit him, but only sending for him in
custody, and permitting him to go at large upon his appearance without bail,
only upon his bare word to attend them when he should be summoned, how this can
be brought within the compass of Magna Charta or the Petition of Right, as a
breach of both, or either, transcends my understanding, and all other Lawyers
but himself. I am credibly informed, that this upstart monstrous Lawyer since
he was called to the Bar at Newgate, where he now practices, has the Book
of Statutes there lying open before him, which he reads and interprets to all
the poor ignorant people that visit him, telling them, that he will in a few
days make them understand the Laws and Statutes of the Realm as exactly as
any Lawyer in the Kingdom; Belike he keeps now his Reading in that Inn of
Court, and will be a Sergeant at Law, or a Judge very shortly, since he has
commenced a Reader of Law in so short a space. But I shall beseech his
Readership to resolve this Mootpoint, against what clause of Magna Charta and
the Petition of Right his sending for in custody by the Committee of
Examinations, is, and what coherence there is in this his Argument?

No man ought to be detained or kept in prison upon a Habeas corpus returned in
the Kings Bench, unless some legal cause of his commitment be returned upon
the Writ; because it is contrary to Magna Charta, and so resolved in the
Petition of Right.

Ergo the Committee of Examinations in sending for John Lilburne in custody to
examine him for his printing and divulging Libels (contrary to the Common,
Statute Law, and Ordinances of Parliament) without any commitment of him, or
any Habeas corpus brought or returned, is contrary to Magna Charta, and so
resolved in the Petition of Right.

When all the wise men of Gotham College can make this argument Sense or
Reason, it may pass for Law among the vulgar Separatists, till then it
deserves no other censure but this, that it is only John Lilburns Newgate Law.

Yea but he has something more to say against the Commons House (though not
against the Committee of Examinations) in this point; which is contrary, Object.
as he conceives (and it is but his conceit, to the true intent of Magna
Charta: And what is that? forsooth, he was by the forementioned Vote of the
House of Commons on the 19 July 1645. upon Dr Bastwicks Paper only (which the
Doctor has sufficiently clea^ed to be a mere Lie and sland^r to defame him)
ordered to be forthwith taken into custody by the Sergeant at Arms attending
that House, and so kept till the House took further order; by means of which
Vote he was committed to prison (to his custody only) before he was ever heard
speak. This forsooth is the grand breach of Magna Charta, so much declaimed
against in his Letter to a Friend; and since seconded in another most seditious
printed paper, entitled, The Copy of a Letter from an Utter Barrister to his
special friend, concerning Lieutenant Colonel Lilburnes Imprisonment, there
justified to be illegal, and against Magna Charta.

I answer and aver, that this Commitment of his by the House of Commons was
most just, and necessary, if the occasion and ground of it be considered. Answ.
John Lilburne had that very day publicly reported to Independent Hawkins,
and others at Westminster, diverse groundless, scandalous, malicious Reports,
amounting to no less then High Treason, concerning Mr Speaker and other
members of the House of Commons, in a libellous, illegal, scandalous,
seditious way, of purpose to defame, and stir up the people against them and
the House of Commons, whose destruction by sorce and violence he, or his
confederates, had then been plotting, and since pursued in sundry private
meetings: which being done without any ground, proof, or legal way of
accusation, the House being informed of it that Evening when they had sat all
day, and had no time to examine Lilburne touching it that night, did for this
false Rumor spread by him in such sort, contrary to the forementioned
Statutes, and the Liberties and Privileges of Parliament, only Vote, That the
Sergeant at Arms belonging to the House, should apprehend and take him into
custody, till further order taken by the House for examination of the
business: Which Order is no judicial Imprisonment or Commitment contrary to
Magna Charta, or the Petition of Right, but a mere Process or Attachment to
apprehend and bring him to examination. Of which there are thousands of
presidents in both Houses in this and former Parliaments, as well in the case
of the members themselves when informed or complained against, as of others;
and no more then all Courts of Justice do, and ever have done, before and since
Magna Charta, who grant out writs to arrest men upon Actions of Debt,
Trespass, and the like, before ever they hear the parties; and that which
every Magistrate, Justice of Peace, and Subcommittee daily do without
exception, who make out warrants to attatch and bring Delinquents before them
upon mere informations, before ever they hear them speak: For how, I pray,
should they hear them speak before they be sent for? and if no warrant or
process should be granted by the Houses, Committees, Courts of Justice;
Officers, Judges, Justices, against any, till they were first heard speak, then
no man ever would or could appear before them, for this would be to hear men
first, and then to summon them that they might be heard, when as they must
first be summoned, and then heard, the process ever necessarily preceding the
hearing. See then the sottishness and folly of this grand Ignoramus, who
complains of a breach of Magna Charta, only because he was not heard in the
House, before they voted him to be apprehended and sent for by the House, which
had no cause to send for him to hear him speak, if he had bin heard before he
was sent for: he might have as justly complained against his own mother that
she did not hear him cry before he was born, or against his father, for not
binding him an Apprentice in London before he sent him up thither that he might
be bound, as against the Parliament, for not hearing him speak before they
voted him to be sent for or attached by the Sergeant at Arms. Pri^hee, John
Lilburn, to use but thy own instances; did ever Straford or the Archbishop of
Canterbury complain of the breach of Magna Charta, because they were accused
by the Commons of High Treason and committed upon their Accusation, before ever
they acquainted them with their Charge or heard them speak? Or if Newgate
examples like thee better, did ever any Horse-stealer, Thief, or Felon in
Newgate, complain that Magna Charta was violated, the Petition of Right
infringed because he was apprehended by a Constable by warrant from the
Justice, before ever he was brought before him, or he heard him speak, or
because he was not arraigned at the Bar, and there heard and tried before he
was indicted? Silly John if this be all thy Law, and Reason, there is no man in
his right senses, but will judge thee fitter for Bedlam then Newgate, and think
thy overmuch Learning in the Law has made thee mad or lunatic. And if the
Sergeants keeping thee in his custody, till the House or Committee had leisure
to examine and hear thee speak for thy self, be a breach of Magna Charta, and
the Petition of Right, then Straford, Canterbury, might as justly have
complained of this injustice as thee, for that they were detained prisoners
till they were brought unto their Trials to prevent escapes; and all thy fellow
prisoners in Newgate, may as justly complain for being there detained till
their trials. Wherefore John, if I may advise thee as thy old Friend and
Council, never meddle any more with matters concerning Law, until thou have
studied thy self and it a little better, especially so far as to cast dirt
with it into the Parliaments face, and charge them with injustice, tyranny, or
proceeding against Law and Magna Charta; their imprisonment of thee in this
nature upon this occasion, being by the lawful judgment of thy peers, and by
the Law of the Land, as well as by the Law and Custom of Parliament, which
neither is nor ought to be always bounded by Magna Charta, especially in
extraordinary cases (as we see by sundry particulars in these extraordinary
times of war and danger) having power to repeal old Laws, to enact new ones
if they see occasion, and to inflict new punishments upon new crimes and
offenses, not heard of in former ages: of which nature thy Libels and
Invectives against them seem to be, though the Parliament and Committee in
their proceedings against thee and them, have gone on in the old way of Law and
justice in all particulars; to the last of which I shall next proceed.

And that is, to prove in the third place, That the Committee of Examinations
examination of thee by order of the House, concerning thy false Reports of Mr
Speaker and other members, and thy printed Libell against the Parliament and
them, entitled, A Copy of a Letter to a friend, and their commitment of thee
to Newgate for refusing to be examined, and the House of Commons Vote in
prosecution of it, were legal, and just; agreeable, not contrary to Magna
Charta and the Petition of Right.

Had Poor John but Law enough to qualify him to be the meanest Justice of
Peace his Clark, or some Recorders, or Clark of the Assizes his Clerks Clark,
he might have known, that by the Law of the Land, every Justice of Peace every
day does, may and ought to examine every Traitor and Felon that is brought
before him, concerning the Treasons and Felonies that are laid to their charge;
that those examinations so taken usually are and ought to be returned to the
Assizes, Sessions, and there openly read and given in evidence many times
against them to the Jury, even in these capital causes; And if they refuse to
be examined, it is held a contempt against Law and the ordinary course of
justice: and when they are indicted, arraigned at the Bar, the Judges and
Justices demand of them when the indictment is read, Whether they are guilty or
not guilty? and if they refuse to answer, and put themselves upon the trial of
the Country, the law of the Land deemes it such an high contempt against
justice, that presently, without further trial or evidence of their
guiltiness, they are for this their obstinacy and contumacy See Brooks
Abridgment, ti^. Pain and Penance.
adjudged to be pressed to death in the most painful manner, far worse then any
hanging; because their contempt in not answering, is in Law a greater offense
then that for which they stand indicted; as obstinacy in any sin is worse then
the sin it self. And in case they answer, not guilty, and so come unto their
legal trial, the Judge, Justices, and Jury sometimes, doc usually strictly
examine and interrogate them again (as well as the witnesses) touching the
particular Treasons, and Felonies whereof they stand indicted, and often times
when witnesses fayl or prove short, find them guilty, and hang them by their
own examinations and confessions at the Bar, or at their apprehension. If
then Judges and Justices may proceed thus to examine Traitors and Felons
themselves, in their own cases in capital crimes which concern their very lives
and estates, without violating Magna Charta or any other Law; may not the House
of Commons then much more appoint the Committee of Examinations to interrogate
Lilburn concerning his See p. 6, 7, 8.
forementioned speeches and Letter, without any infringement of Magna Charta or
the Subjects Liberty, which protect no man against such legal examinations?
There was never any Traitor or other grand Delinquent, to my knowledge,
committed by the Parliament, Privy Council, or others, to the Tower or any
other prison, but was once at least, if not twice or thrice examined,
concerning the Treasons and offenses for which they stood committed: How m^^y
members of both Houses in form^^ Parliaments, and in this especially (which
has stood most of any for the Subjects Liberties and Privileges of
Parliament) have been thus examined in their own cases? yet never any of them
at any time refused to be examined, or ever esteemed it a breach of Magna
Charta, or a thing against the Subjects Liberty? I dare say, the Committee of
Examinations have examined above five thousand persons of all sorts, sexes,
degrees, before them in cases which concern themselves, and yet never met with
any that refused to be examined, or that pleaded Magna Charta against it, till
Lawless John Lilburn (or some of his Disciples) came to be examined before
them; who when he was sent for before this very Committee about his first
printed Letter to my self, had not learned so much Law as he has gained
since, for he then submitted to an examination, wherein he confessed both the
writing and printing of that Letter; and for this his conformity was not then
committed, but suffered to go at large, till the matter should be reported to
the House. Not to spend more time, or cite presidents in so plain a case; the
two grand Irish Rebels, Mac-Guire and Mac-Mohon, were upon their apprehensions
in Ireland, examined touching that late horrid Treason and Rebellion there, of
which they were chief contrivers; and being sent for over hither by the
Parliament, were several times examined by Order of the Houses, both by the
Chiefe-Iustice and others; and by their own examinations thus taken, (being the
principal evidence against them) condemned and executed at Tyburn, according
to their just demerits, never pleading nor pretending, that their examinations
and the proceedings against them were against Magna Charta. If Io. Lilburn then
and all others cannot but subscribe to all the premises, he must then recant
his false mistaken Law in this particular, as well as in the former.

This poor Ignoramus has nothing to object against this, but that to be
examined upon Interrogatories concerning our selves, as we were in the
Starchamber and High Commission, is against the Law of Nature, and that which
caused this Parliament to suppress those Courts, and to vote his own sentence
there illegal, unjust, arbitrary, against the subjects Liberty; and yet now
they walk in the very same steps, and build up that again which by that Vote
they formerly destroyed. So he dogmatizeth in page 15 of his Letter.

Take then an answer to it in few words; 1 It is neither against the Law of
Nature, nor of the Land, nor Magna Charta, nor the Petition of Right, for a man
to be examined against himself upon interrogatories (as all the premises
sufficiently manifest) no not in cases of Treason, Felony, nor in any other
case; nor yet against the Law of God, for then Joshua had never thus examined
Achan in a case where his confession cost him his life, Josh. 7. 14. 15. 19, to
26. nor Peter, Ananias and Saphyra, wherein their Lie lost their lives, Acts 5.
1. to 11. Indeed in capital, and some other mere criminal causes, a man by
our Laws ought not to be examined upon his oath against himself, nor yet in
case of Illegal Loanes, the only thing complained of and provided against by
the Petition of Right; but without oath men are and may be thus examined
against themselves, by the rules and constant practice of our Law, and in some
criminal causes upon oath to.

2 The examination of men upon their oaths in Starchamber, was held lawful,
and used there above an hundred years without dispute; neither did this
Parliament ever judge such examinations against Law, or pull down that Court
for them; nor yet in your own case so vote or adjudge: But that which they
voted against, and that for which they suppressed this Court, was the
bloodinesse and exorbitancy of their Censures, Fines, for small or no offenses;
for making that criminal which was legal; that a great offense, which was
neither a fault, nor crime, and making that Court as an Engine to undermine all
our Laws and Liberties by degrees; and bringing those into it (as Sheriffs,
Justices, and others) who refused to levy or pay Shipmoney, or opposed any
Oppressions, Monopolies, unlawful Taxes, Projects, Impositions, Innovations,
or Arbitrary proceedings in State or Church; or maintained the just Rights,
Laws, and Liberties of the Subjects against them. And the High Commission was
voted down on the like grounds, but not principally for the Oath ex Officio,
which was condemned in them not so much because it was unlawful for any man to
accuse himself, or be examined in his own cause, with, or without an oath (for
then the Chancery, Exchequer, and Court of Wards, where men are to answer and
are examined upon oath against themselves, should have been suppressed as well
as it;) but upon two other reasons. 1. Because men were there forced to take
this Oath before sight of their Articles, and so sworn to answer criminally to
what they knew not when they took the Oath, so as they could not swear in
judgment. 2. Because the High-Commissioners had no power given them by the
Statute of 1 Eliz. c. 1. or any other Law, to administer any such Oath.

3 Sundry Acts of Parliament have prescribed Oaths, to be given to men in
their own cases in sundry particulars, as the Statutes in the 5 R. 2. c. 13. 8
H. 6. c. 7. 14. H. 8. c. 5. 3 Iac. c. 4. 5. 1 Iac. c. 15. 21 Iac. c. 19.
Margin will inform you. Therefore they are not simply against Law; but yet the
Committee of Examinations examined not Lilburne upon Oath against himself, and
they had a special Order from the House to examine him without Oath, which
they might justly do, and daily practice in case of Delinquency, in other men's
cases; therefore his insolent contemptuous refusal to be thus examined by them,
was a most high insufferable contumacy against the Committee, Parliament, their
Power and Privileges, for which he was most justly committed See p. 7. 8.
to Newgate, as the House has unanimously voted; and that according to the
rules of Law, Magna Charta, and the Petition of Right, the particular causes of
his imprisonment being expressed in the forcited warrant by which he was
committed to Newgate.

By all which it is most evident, that both the Committees and Parliaments
proceedings against this obstinate Libeller and Liar, have been in every
circumstance and punctilio, agreeable to the constant practice, rules,
proceedings of Law and Justice, yea warranted by Magna Charta and the Petition
of Right, and no ways repugnant to them in any particular whatsoever.
Therefore Lilburnes seditious railing Invectives against them, both in his
printed Libels, and his ordinary Discourses, with the late most seditious
printed Paper, entitled, A Copy of a Letter from an Utter Barrister to his
special Friend, concerning Lieutenant Colonel Lilburnes imprisonment,
declaiming against his commitment as illegal, and advising him to appeal to
the People for right against the Parliament concerning his restraint, as to the
supreme Power, etc. are but mere malicious, scandalous Libels and Firebrands of
sedition, to excite the ignorant vulgar, and Separatists of his Faction against
the Parliament; and promote some Anabaptists long agitated and late detected
Conspiracy, to root out the Members of this Parliament by degrees, beginning
with Mr Speaker, whom if they could cut off, all the rest would easily follow:
and if this succeeded not, then to suppress and cut off this Parliament by
force of Arms, and set up a new Parliament of their own choice and Faction; to
which Conspiracy all Lilburnes mutinous Papers, the Arraignment of Persecution,
A sacred Synodall Decretall, Martins Echo, with other seditious Pamphlets
mentioned in my Fresh Discovery of new prodigious lights and Firebrands, and
two new printed Pamphlets since; the one entitled, Englands misery and remedy,
in a Judicious Letter from an Utter Barrister to his special Friend,
concerning Lieutenant Colonel Lilburnes imprisonment in Newgate; and another
Paper beginning thus; In the 115 page, etc. were but so many preparatives and
incentives to prepare the people to join with, and assist them in this
damnable Traytorly Plot.

Having thus far vindicated the Parliaments and Committees Justice and
legality in their proceedings against Lilburnes Notorious Calumnies, Lies, and
mistaken law, I should in the next place have vindicated Mr Speaker, with the
rest of the Members of the Commons House, from those groundless lies and
slanders he reported of them, for which he was first apprehended by Vote of the
House. But because this matter has been fully fifted to the bottom by the
Committee of Examinations, and from thence reported to the House, which has by
solemn Votes acquitted Mr Speaker, the other Members, and Sir John Lenthall,
from the groundless slanderous reports concerning them, I shall only here
insert the Votes, and so pass it over.

Die Lunae 15 Septembris 1645.
UPon Mr Whittacres Report of the whole state of the Proceedings before the
Committee of Examinations, concerning Mr Speaker and Sir John Lenthall, it is

Resolved etc.

That the House does agree with the Committee, that there is no color of
proof appearing of Mr Speakers sending of 60000. l. or any sum of money to
Oxford, or consenting thereunto.

Resolved etc.

That this House does agree with the Committee, that there is no color of
proof appearing of Mr Speaker, or any Member of the House, holding any
correspondency with Oxford.

Resolved etc.

That this House does agree with the Committee, that it was a breach of
Privilege of Parliament in the Committees of Surry and Salters Hall, to enter
upon any examination touching Mr Speaker or any Member of this House.

Resolved etc.

That there is not any color of proof of 60000. l. or any money at all sent
by Sir John Lenthall to Oxford, or that he was privy to any money sent or
received to that purpose.

Resolved etc.

That there is not any proof against Sir John Lenthall of holding any
correspondency with Oxford, by Letter, Message or any other way.

Resolved etc.

That this Complaint has been raised and prosecuted without any ground at
all, falsely, maliciously, and scandalously.

Resolved etc.

That William Pendred, Edward Ienkes and Hannah his wife, James Freeze, and
Stephen Pratt, have been principal instigators and prosecutors of these
proceedings, and deserve severe and exemplary punishment.

Mr Seldom Mr Grimstone Mr Recorder Mr Sandys Mr Whitlock Mr Less Sir Tho.
Widdrington Sergeant Wild.
This Committee or any three of them, is appointed to consider what exemplary
punishment is fit to be inflicted upon the malicious Instigators and
Prosecutors of these Proceedings named in the Votes aforesaid, and that they
do bring in their Report by Thursday morning next peremptorily; And are to
meet when and where they please.

Copia vera. H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

I could willingly here cast Anchor, and rake no further into Lilburnes
dunghill and Legend of lies; pretermitting all his scurrilous Invectives and
slanderous falsehoods against my self, as not worth my taking notice, or any
Animadversions on them; but because I know the Natural Disposition of this
Libeller, and his perverse Generation of seduced Disciples, that they would
judge me guilty of all the false Aspersions he has cast upon me in his
Libells, if I should only vindicate the Parliament and its Members, not my
self; and so cannot, without betraying mine own Innocence and Reputation,
pretermit or pass them by in silence; I shall crave so much liberty and
patience from the Reader, as to wipe off the dirt and lying Calumnies which he
has most injuriously cast into my face, to wound and blast my credit and
integrity with all of his own Schismatic Tribe, and others to, as much as
in him lies, though unable to effect it.

In his Copy of a Letter to a Friend, page 12. he begins his railing scandalous
Lies against my self, in stead of recanting those in his former Letter and
Answer to the Committee; and because I am a Lawyer he has mustered up no less
then a whole Jury of notorious Lies and Slanders against me, which I shall
relate and answer in their order.

1. The first is, That Mr Prynne writ Books, and the Parliament licensed them,
wherein he presses to have all those destroyed and cut in pieces, which he
styled Independents, for all the good services that they had done the Kingdom,
and by his unsufferable slanders, wicked bloody, and un-English man's
provocations, having written Books AGAINST ME and my harmless Brethren,
tending causlesly to our utter ruin and destruction. Certainly this is a Lie
for the whetstone; let him show any such thing in any of my writings, as he
relates (confessed to be licensed by the Parliament for their greater honor
and Authenticknesse) which I am certain he can never do, though he writes,
Poor I being almost overwhelmed in my spirit at the perusal of them etc. writ
to him an Epistle in one sheet; or any Books writ by me against himself; or
else be for ever branded for a Liar in the highest degree.

2. The second; That I did most lyingly, just William Prynne like, affirm
before the Committee of Examinations, that his Letter was sent to the Press
and published in print, before ever I read or perused it: which verily is most
false (mark his reason) for it was delivered him three or four days, before
it was printed. I answer, admit this latter clause true, touching the delivery
of his Letter to me, yet does it follow thereupon, that I did presently read
and peruse it as soon as it was delivered? or can this false Accuser produce
any one witness or circumstance to prove, I did ever read or peruse it before
it was printed by his appointment? Surely no, I had at that time other public
pressing occasions lying on my hands, of greater importance then the perusal
of his libellous Letter, which retarded me from any serious perusal or reading
it over, till I saw it in print. This I affirmed for truth to the Committee,
and will still maintain, whatever John Lilburne (to use his own language) most
lyingly, just like himself, affirms to the contrary.

3. The third, That Mr Prynne was then ashmed of this his false information
before the Committee, and durst not go on to abide the proof of it, but put
it off with sophistical tricks: And also Ergo he was heard before the
Committee, and knew his Accusation and Accuser by his own con^^ssion.
before the Committee at the next time, to his face, I challenged him hand to
hand, to dispute upon any one proposition he would pitch upon in the whole
Letter, and refer my self to the Committee themselves to be Judges, and
would stand to their Judgment, but the paultry Simpleton declined it. All this
is a most palpable paultry Lie, and not one syllable of it true, as both the
Chair man and Committee will attest; he being then and there questioned, not
for writing to, or libelling against Mr Prynne, but for printing this Letter
without license, contrary to Ordinances of Parliament, and for libelling
therein against the Assembly, the Ordinances and Proceedings of Parliament, and
charging the Parliament it self (most falsely and seditiously) with breach of
their Covenant: Whereupon he was by special Order of the Commons House
forementioned, convented before the Committee of Examinations for those
offenses only, not for any thing relating to Mr Pryn, nor for any Proposition
in his Letter. And whereas he vaunts, that he challenged Mr Prynne to dispute
with him before the Committee upon any Proposition in his Letter, and make the
Committee themselves Judges, it is a mere vainglorious Lie, without any shadow
of truth; serving only to discover his pride and insolency to the world, such a
challenge (if true) being no ways seemly or sufferable before such a Committee:
And had any such been made, Mr Pryn could with ease have proved him as great
an Ignoramus in his Divinity, as he has here manifested him to be in his Law;
and have informed him, he might have done well to wave such a challenge, his
Propositions having been long before that answered, refuted publicly in print
by another hand, to which this Simpleton never yet durst adventure to return
the least Reply.

4. The fourth; That Mr Prynne (it seems) was the man that got Justice Whitaker
to commit him to custody about the 14 of May, before either he knew his
accuser or accusation. This is but his own seeming conjecture, a scandal to
Mr Whitaker and the Committee, who saw cause sufficient upon the very Order of
the House, the examination of the libellous Passages in his Letter against the
Assembly and Parliament, and his contemptuous unlicensed printing of his Answer
given unto them in writing, contrary to sundry Ordinances of Parliament, and
the Stationers complaints against him, to send for him by a Messenger then, and
since that to commit him to Newgate, for printing his last scandalous,
scurrilous, and most seditious Letter; and that without any infringement of
Magna Charta, or the Subjects Liberties, which never authorized John Lilburne,
nor any other person, to print Lies and Libels against the whole Parliament,
Speaker, Particular Members of both Houses, or other persons of Quality, which
by the Statutes of Westminster 2. c. 33. 2 R. 3. c. 5. 12 R. 2. c. 5. and other
Acts, is not only punishable by imprisonment, See Cook. 5. Rep. f. 125. etc. 9.
f. 59. b.
fine, and other corporal censures, but in some cases with death.

5. The fifth is p. 20. That surely the man (Mr Prynne) is out of his wits,
(for discovering, publishing his and his Confederates gross Lies, Libels, and
Slanders against the Parliament and Assembly, to the world in his last Book)
whereas all that read his Letters, their Libels, and Mr Prynnes said Book, will
rather deem himself and them out of their wits, then Mr Prynne, who was then,
and yet, God be thanked, known to be in his right senses by all but Bedlam John
Lilburne.

6. The sixth is contained in the same page, where he honors me with this
worshipful Epithet, and language, Will. Pryn the Lawyer, but rather the grand
Liar; (and why so?) because he it told by Captain Hobson a Tailor, and
Captain Beamond an Apothecary, (two Anabaptisticall Lay-preachers, committed
for preaching about Newport Pannell, contrary to an Ordinance of Parliament)
that the maine things charged against them by Sir Samuel Luke, are only proved
by one witness, (who as they have informed him, is as base and vile as a man
can be) and contradicted by some four or five of Sir Samuel Lukes own
witnesses etc. Certainly some Members of the Committee and Commons House, who
then heard, and have since read the Examinations of Sir Samuels witnesses, to
the shame of these unsufferable GRAND LIARS, will avow, that all the Charges
against them are not only confirmed and made good by Sir Samuel Lukes own
testimony, a person of Honor, but likewise punctually proved, attested by
three or four witnesses at least (whose depositions I my self have perused in
the original Book) of far better credit, quality, and reputation then the
parties accused; and that they all unanimously concur, without the least
contradiction, proving much more against them then Mr Prynne relates of them;
And therefore John Lilburn (to use his own language) here shows himself once
more a Grand Liar, in giving such unseemly speeches to Mr Prynne, for relating
naught but truth; and defaming, traducing the witnesses produced by Sir Samuel
(whose persons, conditions he knows not) in so gross a manner, upon the
Delinquents own bare false reports.

7. The seventh, That Mr Prynne has published to the world abundance of lies
and slanders, not only against these Lay-preachers, but also against Honorable
Sir Thomas Fairfax, and Honorable Cromwell, and diverse other chief Officers
in the Army, to whom the whole Kingdom owes so much honor and respect, for
all their faithfulness and good service done them: which (writes he) is so
insufferable, unwarrantable, unjust, and abusive as I think was never done by
any to the Parliament since they sat, besides Mr Prynne: And I am consident,
if I had done as much as he has in that Book (he means, my Fresh Discovery)
and had been such a firebrand, as there he is, I should hardly escape Tiburne.

O the intolerable Impudency of this Scribler, whose lines are as full of lies
as a Dog of fleas! In my Epistle to the Parliament before my Fresh Discovery, I
occasionally related; That two Captain Pr^achers. Hobson and Beamond,
apprehended by Sir Samuel Luke for bre^ch of an O^dina^ce of Parliament against
Lay-Preachers, did among other their lavash speeches, MOST FALSELY AND
SEDITIOUSLY AFFIRM; That the General and all the Colonels in the Army were
deeply engaged in their design of preaching etc. of purpose to vindicate the
Honorable Victorious General and his Noble Colonels from this very notorious
false slander most untruly cast upon them by these slanderers. For doing them
this right and honor, I am thus most scandalously charged by Lilburne, with
publishing lies and slanders against them, with being a firebrand, and
deserving Tyburne; who on the contrary justifies and pleades for these
slanderous Delinquents in three whole pages, and thereby slanders both the
General and Officers in the highest degree, whose Innocence I have vindicated
from their misreports. Certainly, all Lilburnes friends, who have any spark of
Truth or Christianity in their breasts, will for ever execrate and renounce
such an abominable impudent slanderer as this, who dares affirm such gross
untruthes, even in print; and I wish his public penitence for all his premised
slanders may be such as none may ever conclude in his own terms; that since
he has been a far greater Firebrand in his last printed libellous Letters,
then Mr Prynne appears to be in his Fresh Discovery, he will hardly escape
Tiburn, if justly prosecuted for and censured according to his misdemeanors.

8. The eighth is, That in page 22. he promises hereafter at some other time
to anatomize Will Prynnes lies and fooleries, and destructive practices to the
Commonwealth in supporting Sir Phillip Cartwright, the Malignant governor of
Iersey, who by his means alone has been as great an instrument of the support
of the King, and of his unjust wars, as any has been in England.

It seems this Libeller for want of present matter intends to forge and
publish some new lies and forgeries of me for the future, which I shall as
easily wipe off, as those already charged on me: As for my supposed destructive
practices to the Commonwealth in supporting Sir Philip Cartwright (he should
say Carteret, a man he never knew) I shall give a brief account thereof because
it most concerns the State to be truly informed of it, and of the loss of
Jersey.

It is very well known to the world, what extraordinary favors and respect I
received from Sir Philip Carteret and his Lady during my three years close
imprisonment, and exile in Iersey, when all my kindred and friends, by special
order from the Lords were debarred any access unto me; and none of my friends
in England durst publicly to own me; and that my brother Burton (then close
prisoner in Garnsey Castle) did by his interest in the Governor there, at my
request, procure him more liberty, respect, and better Accommodations then all
his other friends could obtain for him. In respect of which obligations, I
should have manifested my self a Monster of ingratitude, had I not contributed
my best assistance to support Sir Philips innocence, honor, and reputation,
against the malicious and injurious Accusations, Aspersions of his inveterate
backbiting Enemies, who endeavored only to defame, and out him of his Offices
of trust, that themselves might step into them. Among these his Adversaries,
one Bandinell an Italian, Dean of Iersey (who first introduced Episcopal
Government, and Jurisdiction into that Island) a man of a very lewd and wicked
life, and a crafty Machivilian was the chief; who came purposely over into
England, to procure a Benefice in Iersey for a distracted son of his, and to
complain to the Archbishop of Canterbury against Sir Philip, for his courtesies
and kindness unto me, as the readiest means to obtain his desires; but
instead thereof, this Parliament being assembled before his arrival here, and
the Archbishop questioned, he met with Articles of complaint against himself,
for several gross misdemeanors and oppressions done by him in that Isle as
Dean, for which he was committed by the Commons House for two or three months
to the Sergeants custody; after which he confederating with one Monsieur
Samyres of Iersey, who was justly questioned by Sir Philip for an astront
against him as Deputy Governor, in laying down his Captains staff, and
command in the open field, because he could not have his will in disposing of
the Lieutenants place in his band to a person altogether unfit, whom the whole
company disliked; they first of all secretly contrived diverse false and
scandalous Articles against Sir Philip to the Parliament, without any name
subscribed to them, and enclosed them in a Letter, desiring any well-affected
person, who should take them, to present them to the house of Parliament, left
them upon the Stocks at London, where being found by one who passed that way,
they were presented to some Members of the House, who gave Sir Philip notice
thereof: Not long after, this Deane and Samyres drew up a large paper of
Articles (the very same in substance, and for the most part in words with the
former) and delivered some Copies of them to sundry Members of both Houses, but
were not forwards to press them to be read, that so they might slander Sir
Philip in the opinion of those Members by this underhand dealing to stay his
return to Iersey, and he be disabled to clear his innocence; which Sir Philip
hearing of, procured these Articles (which they left in the Earl of Stamfords
hands) to be read in the Lords House, and so moved his adversaries to make
them good if they could, that so he might clear himself from their false
Accusations ere his departure from hence, and not be slandered in his absence:
Whereupon at Sir Philips solicitation only, not theirs, a day of hearing was
appointed before a Committee of Lords in the Lords House, whereat I was
present: The Dean and Samyres being called in, they were demanded first,
whether they had any deputation, or Commission from all the Islanders, or any
considerable part of them to exhibit these Articles against Sir Philip, they
being entitled, Articles exhibited by the Inhabitants of the Isle of Iersey
against Sir Philip Carteret, and complaining for the most part only of general
grievances to the Island: They answered, they had no deputation from the States
or Inhabitants of the Island to exhibit those articles, but they doubted not
but they would justify and allow what they had done; Whereupon Sir Philip
produced a Deputation from the three Estates of that Island made in their
general Assembly under their common Seal, deputing and intrusting him for
their Agent to the Parliament, to inform them of some public grievances of
which they desired redress, and crave some confirmation and enlargement of
their privileges; which Deputation certainly they would never have made to
him, had himself been the chief and only public grievance, as the Articles
imported, and such an enemy to their common good as was suggested. Whereupon
the Lords were fully satisfied, the accusers silenced and reproved by the Lords
for abusing them and the Islanders, in presenting a Petition in their names
without their privity and Commission, against a person of honor deputed by
them to the Parliament and state. After which, they demanded of them severally,
what they could object or prove against Sir Philip, who answered that they
could prove nothing for the present, since all their witnesses were in Iersey,
and that they could attest little of their own knowledge; only Samyres
complained, that Sir Philip had put him from his Captains place, and ordered
him to answer his contempt in England in refusing to take it up again;
whereupon Sir Philip answered, that he had voluntarily laid it down in
contempt, for which he had power to Fine and commit him; but in regard he was
his kinsman, and one of a weak estate, he only gave him an admonition, and used
him with all kindness and civility: which Samyres could not deny, on whose
part the business appeared so foul, that they told Sir Philip, because he did
not committ him for his contempt then, they would commit him now, and the Dean
too, for their malicious libellous Articles, which they could not prove, nor
say any thing to of their own knowledge; But by Sir Philips importunity and
request, their commitment was taken off: Soon after which, Sir Philip was
settled Deputy Governor of that Isle by order and approbation of both Houses,
and ordered to put it in a posture of defense against the French; whereupon he
returned to Iersey, and I departed into the Country; of which his malicious
prosecutors taking advantage, caused their false and scanscandalous Articles to
be secretly Printed at their own charge, and dispersed into diverse Parliament
men's hands and others about London, and then carried the residue of them into
Iersey, where they translated them into French, and dispersed them among their
Acquaintance and the people, as if they had been Printed by the Parliaments
Authority, and made good before them, of purpose to raise a Faction against Sir
Philip, for which being there judicially questioned and Indicted, they
thereupon appealed to the Parliament, pretending their Articles were there
depending; to take off which prosecution, upon some misinformation of theirs
against Sir Philip to the close Committee, they procured a Warrant to send for
him over into England as a Prisoner, to answer to some charges against him,
contained in the former Articles.

Whereupon Sir Philip writ a Letter to the Committee, acquainting them with the
former malice of his enemies; his discharge of these Accusations on a hearing
before the Lords, the cost and danger of his journey thence, the inconvenience
to the state of his present deserting the Island, desiring that till some
offense were really proved against him, he might not thus bevexed upon a mere
suggestion being a person of quality having so great a trust, and settled there
by a late special Order of both Houses, offering to give Bond or any other
security to the Parliament, to answer any charge that his prosecutors should
either in England, or by a Commission in Iersey be able to prove against him;
so as they on the other side might enter into Bond to answer him damages, in
case he should clear himself from all their accusations, of which he made no
doubt; Whereupon the Committee were fully satisfied, but not the prosecutors
malice; For one Maximilian Messervy and his brother, who during my imprisonment
in Iersey were accused for Coining, and venting counterfeit Coin of all sorts,
both Gold and silver; and (Maximilian being imprisoned for his crime diverse
months, the melting pot, Mould, Mettles, sophisticated with some false Silver
and Gold being found in his study, which I my self there saw, besides sundry
single and double false Pistols, which he vented unto others, for which offense
he had been executed, had not he obtained a special pardon from the King, by
Sir Philips and Captain Carterets means) falling about this time to their old
trade of Coining false gold, and venting some of it both in Normandy and the
Island; Sir Philip upon complaint and proof thereof, sent out Warrants and
Officers to apprehend them, and made Proclamation (there usual) that none
should convey them out of the Island; notwithstanding, they both escaped thence
in the night in a small boat, and fled into France, and not long after into
England: Sir Philip upon their flight, before their arrival here, writ a
Letter to my self, informing me of the particulars of the offense and proof
against them, craving my advise how to proceed now they were sled from thence,
and how to punish him that transported them contrary to his Proclamation; to
which I returned an Answer. Upon these Coyners arrival at London, they siding
with Sir Philips opposites, complained of great injuries he had done them for
their good affection to the Parliament, and pretended they could ptove great
matters against him concerning the State, if they could but procure a Warrant
to apprehend and bring him over prisoner; and by the help of some friends they
made here, and their false insinuations they procured a Warrant from the close
Committee, for these two Coyners to go unto Iersey and apprehend Sir Philip,
and bring him over Prisoner to the Parliament, which Warrant was signed and
delivered to Ma^^^^^^ian: Of which I casually having information, and knowing
what cr^^es they were guilty of, and that Maximillian was as very a villain,
and cunning ^heater as breathed (having formerly cheated diverse of my friends,
and my (...)) did according to my bounden duty, and the care I had of the
Parliaments honor, acquaint some of the Committee with this gross abuse, and
the qualities of tho^^ persons, informing them, what an extraordinary scandal
and dishonor it would be to the Parliament, and what cause of clamours and
just exceptions it would give to the Kings Malignant party to exclaim against
them, if they upon the information of those false Coyners, who were Traitors by
Law, and had relapsed into this offense after a Pardon, and now fled from
thence to escape the hands of Justice, should thus be sent over thither by the
Parliaments Authority as their Agents, to apprehend Sir Philip, the Governor,
a man of honor and credit, (who had formerly saved them from the Gallows, and
did now but his duty in prosecuting them, and craved my advice therein before
their arrival here) and bring him prisoner over hither, who had just cause to
apprehend and hang them there: That this would be such an Act of indiscretion
and injustice, as would open the mouths of all the world against them, and
alienate the heart of Sir Philip, the whole Island and all good men from them:
And thereupon I desired them to take some course to call in their Warrant,
which they thought very just, and desired my assistance therein; whereupon, I
employed one to find out their lodgings, which he did at last, informing me
withal, that they were full of money, and that Maximilian had offered a small
Ingot of gold to sell; whereupon I conceiving they had here set up their
Coining trade for which they fled from Jersey, procured a Warrant from Justice
Hooker to apprehend their persons, and search their lodgings for suspicion of
Coining, which was delivered to one Master Stone a Constable in Saint Clements;
who coming early in the morning to their lodging, and standing at their Chamber
door, heard them telling money on the Table, which he conceived to amount to
five or six pounds at least by the noise it made, after which he knocking at
the door and demanding them to open it, they suspecting by his words and
carriage he was some Officer, refused to do it, stood upon their guard, and
Maximillian offered to escape forth out of a Garret window, and after that at a
back door; but at last they were both apprehended and searched, but no money
could be found about them, except three or four pieces of French and Spanish
Coin, not amounting to above five or six shillings: But in Maximilians Trunk
there was found a plate and mould to coin with, which himself bespoke about a
month before of a Smith near Charing Cross, bringing him the pattern in paper,
pretending it was an instrument, which he must use in the Army, wherein he
pretended he was to be a Trooper; together with powder to cast gold and silver
mettle in, and Alchimy Salts to color their false silver with; and in the
chamber over theirs, there was found about a pound or two of their false mettle
(hid under the mats in a corner) some in the lump not sophisticated, some in
small pieces newly melted, and so cunningly sophisticated with Alchimy
ingredients, that it showed like silver, and would endure the Test; insomuch,
that the Goldsmiths themselves could not discern whether it was sophisticated
or not, till Sir John Wollastons servants melted it down; and then there was
not one grain of silver in it, being the most artificial counterfeiting of
silver without any mixture of it, that they ever saw. Upon these pregnant
evidences of their guiltiness of coining false money here, seconded with their
real guilt of it in Iersey, whence they so lately fled: They were examined by
Justice Shepherd: where Maximillian confessing his having the Ingot of gold,
which he tendered to sale, and being examined what he had done therewith; First,
he said he had given it away, but to whom he knew not: then, that he had
exchanged it for some Commodities he wanted, but when, where, and with whom he
exchanged it he knew not; afterward he said, he had delivered it to a Master
of a Ship, and being taken tardy in that; his last envasion was, that he had
sent it to Saint Mal^es in France: Upon all these circumstances they were both
committed Prisoners to the Gate House, there being nothing wanting fully to
convict them, but only some of their false Coin, which they conveyed away in
such sort that no piece of it could be found, though the Constable heard them
telling it, as he conceived. After which they were examined by Sir Robert
Harles Master of the Mint, who took away the Warrant they had from the close
Committee, to apprehend Sir Philip, which Maximillian carried about him in a
little box: Not long after this, these two Coyners lying prisoners in the
Gate House, procured some Iersey Anabaptists, and other of Sir Philips
adversaries, to inform some Members of the House of Commons, that these two
Coyners were very honest men, who came purposely from Iersey to complain of Sir
Philip to the Parliament for his Malignity and great oppressions, and that by a
mere plot and combination of some Malignants and friends of Sir Philips; their
lodgings were searched, and they committed by Justice Hooker and Justice
Shepherd to the Gate House, of purpose to take them off from prosecuting Sir
Philip who was a great Royalist, and notorious Enemy to the Parliament, and
would keep the Island only for the King; they having complained against him,
and one or two of his Agents here, that were in custody, to the Committee of
Examinations; Upon which misinformation, both the Justices and Constable were
sent for to that Committee to be examined, touching this practice; who
acquainting me therewith, I accompanied them thither, and hearing them begin to
examine Justice Shepherd in a criminal way, upon the pretended plot against
these Coyners; I the reupon took all the business on my self, that the
Justices and Constable did what they had done upon my information, being mere
strangers to Sir Philip and the Prisoners, acquainted them with all the
premises, produced Sir Philips Letters, the Mettle, Mould, and other
particulars to make them good: informing how they had abused the close
Committee, and this Committee too, through their mis-informations, and what a
dishonor it would be to countenance, or employ such villains, whom they should
either hang here, or send over thither in a way of Justice to be executed,
desiring them to take some course to punish those who did thus mis-informe and
abuse them; neither of them daring to appear, to make good what they suggested:
Whereupon the Justices were dismisled, these Coyners remanded to the
Gate House, and Ordered to be proceeded against at the Sessions: Whilst these
things were in agitation, about the time of these Coyners first arrival in
England, Sir Philip assembled the Estates of Iersey together in nature of a
Parliament; where he, and the States in name of the whole Island, framed and
joined together in two Petitions, the one to the King, the other to the
Parliament, to this effect: That they were deeply affected with the dissentions
and civil Wars in England between the King and Parliament; that they feared
the like distractions there, unless timely prevented by their wisdoms and
care: That it was their cordial desire not to look on the King or Parliament
as divided one from another, but united, and would thus cordially adhere to
both, without siding against either, etc. Whereupon they humbly prayed they
might enjoy their joint favor and protection, and the like liberty of Trade to
both their Quarters, as they enjoyed by ancient Charters between England and
France, during the Wars between both, only with their Lawful Commodities,
without doing prejudice to either side.

This Petition to the Parliament, with Letters from Sir Philip to Mr. Pym were
sent to London by one John le Coulter of Iersey, bound thence for England with
diverse Letters from some English Captives in Argeir, to their friends here
about their Redemption; who coming to London with the Letters and Petition,
presently met with some Iersey men, opposites to Sir Philip, and acquainting
them that he had Letters from Sir Philip to Mr. Pym, with a Petition from the
Estates of the whole Island to the Parliament, and desiring their direction how
he might present them to Mr. Pym, they presently procured him to be seized on
by a Messenger, as a Spy sent purposely over by Sir Philip, (whom they cried
up for a Malignant and Enemy to the Parliament, without any color or shadow of
proof) took away all his Letters and the Petition, which by this means was
smothered and never presented to the House; and if presented and Answered,
would doubtless have settled that Island in quietness, and made Sir Philip
and the whole Island firm to the Parliament: After which, by false suggestions,
they detained him above three months in their Custody, to his great expense,
before I could procure his full release: About the same time, one Osmond Cook,
a Soldier of Mount-Orguile Castle, who attended on me in my Chamber, during
all the time of my close Imprisonment there, and came into England about half
a year before, merely upon his own private business, to recover a house and
some Lands in Beccles, devised to him by his Uncle, returning into Iersey from
hence, was in his passage thither by these malicious persons Informations
seized on in the Western parts as a Spy to Sir Philip, sent up Prisoner to
London by Sea, and there detained in Custody diverse months: Notwithstanding,
there was no proof of any thing at all against him, but mere suggestions
behind his back, the which to my knowledge were false. Whiles these two
parties were thus Imprisoned, Sir Philips Adversaries, by their malicious
suggestions, of his dangerous malignity and Enmity to the Parliament, and
importunate solicitations, procured an Order from the close Committee, for
Major Lidcot and some other Officers, with six very good brass Ordnance, and
sundry Muskets, Barrells of Powder, Match and Ammunition, to be sent into
Iersey to apprehend Sir Philip, as an enemy to the Parliament, to besiege and
take in the Castles, secure the Island to the Parliament, and desend their
party there, and withal, got the Coyners Messeruies enlarged, to go over with
them into Iersey, Maximillian promising to do great matters for the Parliament,
with the party he and his confederates would there raise, and out of my
cordial affection to the Parliament and that Island, acquainted Mr. Solicitor
and others of the close Committee, with the inconveniences and ill consequence
of this rash design, of which I having intelligence, grounded upon mere
misinformations of Sir Philips adversaries to effect their own ends: informing
them upon my own knowledge that both Castles in Iersey were so strongly
situated and fortified, that they must have an Army by Land, and a Fleet by
Sea to Block them up, that an hundred men in each would maintain the Castles
against all the Force the Island could make, and three times more; and
therefore it was a ridiculous thing to imagine that a Major with five or six
Gunners and Officers, and that small force Sir Philips Enemies could raise
there should take both or either of the Castles, especially without a Fleet to
assist them, one of them being quite surrounded with the Sea at half Flood, and
above half the other at low water; that the Castles to my knowledge were very
well furnished with Ordnance and Ammunition, for two or three years Siege; that
they could every tide receive fresh Supplies of Victuals, Men, and what ever
they wanted from France and elsewhere: That the Islanders were generally raw
faint-hearted Soldiers, who durst not come within Canon shot of the Castles,
much less approach a Breach, and run upon the Canons mouth, as they must do if
they will take them: That if they sent any Ordnance, Muskets, or Ammunitions
thither, which they needed at home, they would all certainly be lost, and that
they who engaged them in this action, did it more out of private ends and
malice against Sir Philip, then any public good to the Parliament; for admit
the Parliament had the Castles and Island surrendered without a stroke, they
would cost them more the keeping, then they were worth, and draw a charge upon
the State in these needful times to no purpose, but to waste the public
Treasure: That in times of Peace, the King received not one penny profit from
the Island, but only the Governor, whose whole income in time of war, would
not maintain the Garrison soldiers, requisite to keep one of the two Castles,
and that it could supply the Parliament neither with fighting men, nor money,
nor Shipping in this time of War, but must be supplied from hence with all
these: And admit the King had it all in his absolute power, it could do the
Parliament no hurt at all, since it could neither supply him with Soldiers,
Men, Money, Provisions, nor Ammunition; and far remote from England, quite out
of the road of our English Trade. That the Inhabitants being generally very
poor, and having none but base French Coin among them, could yield the King no
supply of moneys: That Sir Philip Carteret and the States of the Island, did
now by Petition and Letter, desire the Parliaments friendship and Kings
jointly, and not to side with either as divided but United; and that he would
engage himself, if they would give but a fair Answer to their Petition (which
was suppressed by the opposite party) that Sir Philip and those Islanders of
his party, should continue firm unto the Parliament, and their friends, and
never do one act of Hostility or unkindness on the Kings behalf against them;
and that the Parliaments and the Kings Ships upon all occasions, should have
all accomodations, and ride safely in the Harbor there at their pleasure,
which was all the benefit we could reap if the Island and two Castles were
totally in the Parliaments possession: That if they sent any Ships or Forces
thither to apprehend Sir Philip, or Seize the Island and Castles by sorce,
(especially by such infamous persons as the Coyners and some others were) it
would make Sir Philip and his party to stand upon their guard, and perchance of
friends or Neuters at the most, to turn professed enemies, and side with them
that were ill affected, without any advantage to the State, and draw much
expense upon them, which would end in loss and dishonor, as experience would
manifest, and I would make appear by unanswerable Arguments, before the whole
Committee in the presence of those who put them upon this design: To which
end, I did put all this under my hand in writing, and left it with some of the
close Committee: Whereupon, there was some stop made of the Iersey Expedition
for a week or two; but afterward some of the Committee crediting Sir Philips
Adversaries, who continually solicited them, and kept Osmond Cook and le
Coultre in Prison, and promised a present Conquest of the Castles and Island:
Major Lidcot and some other Officers, through their importunity, were sent over
thither with six great Brass pieces, Muske^s, Powder, Match, and other
necessaries: Before the Major departed hence, I meeting him at Westminster
Hall, informed him of the strength of the Castles, the impossibility of taking
them, the Cowardice and treachery of the Islanders, and of some of those who
were to go over with him, who would certainly betray him for their own
advantage, especially Maximillian the Coyner; and therefore advised him to be
very vigilant, telling him I much feared he would soon return thence with loss
and dishonor, and without any success; which I acquainted him with, out of my
good affection to himself and the State, the importunity of Sir Philips
Adversaries having engaged the Parliament and himself in this design; which I
endeavored to hinder, but could not, and therefore had done my duty. Soon
after they set sail for Iersey, and there Landing with their Ordnance, Arms,
Ammunition, summoned in the Country to beleaguer the Castles, which they did at
a distance, out of danger of Canon shot for a little space. But Captain
Carteret arriving there with about fifty new Soldiers after Sir Philips death,
(who died in the new Castle during the Leaguer,) the event proved answerable to
my Predictions; the Canons, Muskets, and Ammunition sent thither, were all
lost and taken by Captain Carteret, the Major basely deserted by the Islanders,
the Dean, Messeruy and others that went over with him from hence, who revolted
to the other side, and with the hazard of life was forced to make his passage
through the Enemy, and to fly thence by night in a small Boat, and return for
England, to the great dishonor and expense of the Parliament: And by this
means the Island was totally lost to the Parliament, and of real Friends, or
Neuters at the most, made their professed Enemies: Whereas if my advise had
been followed, this vast expense had been saved, this dishonor prevented, and
the Island continued firm to the Parliament, which has been thus abused by Sir
Philips opposites, merely out of private spleen and ambition to gain his
places, which God knows, they had neither wisdom nor ability to manage: And
this is Mr. Prynnes destructive practices to the Commonwealth, in supporting
Sir Philip Cartret, whom this slanderous Libeller, only upon false reports
styles, the Malignant Governor of Iersey, and as great an instrument of
supporting the King in his unjust wars as any has been in England, which is
certainly a most loud Lie, since it has not at all been proved, none I believe
can say, that Sir Phillip ever supported the King in his wars, with Men,
Money, Ammunition, nor ever did the least hostile act against the Parliament;
but only defended himself, when causelessly sent for, and terribly assaulted
by his Enemies solicitations, and mis-informations to the Parliament; how ever
this is certain, that I never supported him in his Malignity, or since he
turned Malignant, if he proved such a one after the Majors arrival there. And
Major Ledcot will inform this slanderer, and all the world (as he did in
Westminster Hall, and in my chamber upon his return from this Iersey
expedition) that it had been happy for the Parliament and Island too, had my
advice agrinst that most improbable design been hearkened to, that those who
put the Parliament on this Expedition, were most of them false dishonest men,
biased with private interests, who deserted him for their own advantage. And
that he found every tittle I had informed the Parliament and himself before
his voyage, to be true by wosull experience: And therefore John Lilburne may
save the labor of anatomizing Mr. Pryns destructive practices to the
Commonwealth, in this particular of Iersey, and support of Sir Phillip Cartret,
wherewith he promises to abuse the world ere long. And to that purpose has
employed Anabaptists from Iersey, who were the principal fomenters of this
Expedition, to make a present underhand Inquisition, of my carriage in this
business, which they are now very busy about enquiring of every Iersey man
and others, (as diverse of the parties have lately informed me) what they know
or have heard concerning me and my carriage in Iersey, and holding intelligence
with Sir Phillip: And I shall only desire him to take notice, that the Dean,
Sir Phillips principal enemy, who betrayed Major Lydcot, being since
imprisoned in Iersey, and attempting an escape, broke both his leg and neck
over the Castle walls; that Messeruy another principal actor who proved
treacherous, is since executed in Iersey for his coining; that Monsieur Kiddel,
a great stickler against Sir Philip, because he could not have one of his
daughters for his wife, was a person so scandalous for his drunkenness and
Venery, and storing Garnsey with a specious generation of Bastards, that he was
enforced to fly thence into England; That both the Gurdons Lawyers and others,
who were most active in this plot, and made most friends in Parliament, are
professed Anabaptists, and now grown so insolent, that they threaten and abuse
their other Countrymen, who will not join with them in their Anabaptisticall
Religion, and Church, and promise to themselves all the Offices and government
of the Island when reduced, and to set up their Religion there cum privilegio;
That Monsieur Daristux was late a zealous popish Monk, who deserting his orders
(some say for incontinency) and advanced by Sir Phillips means to a living
there, to my own knowledge proved a most ungrateful wretch toward him, and a
mere firebrand in the isle, and since his coming over a chief incendiary in
the French Church in Norwich, which he has in a manner quite ruined and
dissolved; and these were Sir Phillips chief opposi^es, who engaged the
Parliament in the invasion of the Island of Iersey, for their own private ends,
and have quite undone both Iersey and Garnsey too, and put the Parliament to a
vast expense, only to make the Islanders and Governors of them their Enemies,
who upon my certain knowledge were once, and I believe would still have
continued their faithful friends, or at least remained Neuters, and not
attempted ought against the Parliament, or any really adhering to them. And for
a close of this particular, I shall aver thus much of my own knowledge to
do deceased Sir Phillip right against his slanderers.

1. That during my imprisonment in Iersey, and ever since, I found him a real
Friend to the State and Parliament of England in all his discourses and
actions; and a man as much joyed at the calling of this and the former
Parliament, and as much grieved, and complaining at the dissolving the last
Parliament, as any.

2. That he was a man most cordial and helpful to poor distressed Protestants
and Ministers in France, during the late wars and persecutions against them
there; a noble harbourer and entertainer of them and theirs upon all occasions,
and more cordially assistant to, and honored, beloved by them, and more
complaining of our Courts treacheries toward them, especially in the loss of
Rochell, then any English Subject whatsoever, and both the Islands of Iersey
and Garnsey put together.

3. That he was the greatest favourer, advancer, incourager of godly Ministers
of any in that Island, and more charitable, helpful to the poor and sick, upon
all occasions then all the Island besides, there being scarce one day in the
week, wherein his Lady at her own expense did not freely at Sir Philips cost
send Physic, and cordials to diverse diseased persons of all sorts.

4. That his Family was the most orderly, pious, Religious, courteous,
Hospital, and best nurtured by far of any in the Island, generally honored
and respected by all persons of honor in Normandy, Brittany, Picardy, England
and Iersy too.

5. That he was an enemy to the Bishops Tyranny and Proceeding, Innovations,
and was so reputed at Court by the Archbishop; and used me and my brother
Burton too, by my interest in him, with such nobleness and respect, when no
other persons of quality durst to own us, or stand our friends, though we were
mere strangers to him.

6. That he was a man of more eminent parts for Government, Justice, Peace,
War, State affairs, and all public employment, then all the Islanders put
together, and an excellent Penman.

7. That he was a faithful, constant friend, and the only man in the Isle;
that I ever found or heard of sit to be trusted with the Government and eustody
of it, or to be relied on as a friend: most natives having this Norman quality,
that never a two of them almost (though allied and of the same blood) do
cordially love, or really trust one another, and will prove treacherous at any
time to their nearest friends and kindred for advantage.

8. He was the only man, that by reason of his friends and acquaintance in
France, was either able or active to protect the Natives from injuries, and to
procure them Justice and relief, when injured, robbed or wronged by seizing of
their goods in France: The only man able or willing to entertain strangers with
nobleness and freedom; the best Iusticiary between man and man in the whole
Isle, and the most willing and able to do any public good, and procure favors
for the Islanders, whom I am certain have much repented his death, and will
hardly ever enjoy so good a Governor and real friend to them as he was,
having now a Lion to rule over them instead of a Lamb.

9. He was the only man that procured Schollerships and Fellowships in Oxford
for the Islanders of Iersey, with sundry Immunities both from England and
France concerning Trade; and did twenty times more good in, to, and for the
Island, then all his enemies put together, and to my knowledge had done far
more, had he not been discouraged by his malicious and ungrateful prosecutors,
some whereof were obliged to him for their very lives and estates, and all them
for many more courtesies then ever they received from them: It being one virtue
in the Islanders, of which I had experience in hundreds, which I there helped
and cured gratis to my cost, and not one of twenty would so much as return me
verbal thanks, nor yet will those Sir Philips Lady recovered even from the
very jaws of death, and relieved both with food and raiment.

Lastly, He was the only man of note in all the Isle (setting all pretenses and
self ends aside) that was really cordial to the Parliament, and best able, and
most willing to do them any service: And I am confident would have continued so
till his death, and kept both Islands friendly and obedient to them, had not
those his malicious enemies (of mean birth and fortune in respect of him) by
their Libels, slanders and false informations to the Parliament, and practices
against him, dis-obliged and engaged him to stand upon his guard till he could
vindicate his own innocence and honor to the Parliament, against the false
suggestions of his enemies, who never yet proved the least crime or offense
against him, and some of them the Messeruyes by name) professed after to my
self and others, and acknowledged as much before the Committee of Examinations;
That they could testify nothing at all against him, and that he was the best
Governor and Friend the Island ever had, after they had so much traduced him
for a Malignant and oppressor.

All which considered, let the world judge, what cause I had to support Sir
Philips honor and reputation against such malicious scandalous conspirators,
who plotted his dis-grace and ruin, and who are most guilty of the dis
engaging, undoing and loss of Iersey and Garnsey Castle, the Isl^nd to in
effect, and putting the Parliament to a vast unnecessary expense, to satisfy
their own malicious and ambitious designs to multiply the Parliaments enemies,
and dis-oblige their best and faithfullest friends.

His 9. slanderous lie against me is, That he shall make it appear that I have
been a protector of those that have betrayed the strong holds of the
Parliament, into the hands of the Cavaliers. Certainly, most think I am
guiltless of this, except it be only in prosecuting Col. Nathaniel Fincs (an
Independent) so far as a Council of War, upon his own engagements prove,
for delivering up the strong hold and rich City of Bristoll, (the greatest
loss which befell the Parliament since these wars) into the hands of the
Cavaliers, in such a cowardly and unworthy manner, that he had Judgment given
and passed against him, for it, as a Traitor and to have his head cut off; For
which just prosecution my Independent brother Robinson has enveighed against
me in Print, belike because he desired to have more faults bewrayed.

10. That I am a pleader of all Malignant Priests causes for money: Certainly
this is a loud lie. There have been hundreds of Malignant Priests, with whom
whom I was never of Council, many with whom I have refused to be of Council,
rejecting both them and their fees, which I might have justly taken: Many
against whom I have been of Council, being ten to one to those I have been of
Council for; Therefore no pleader of All Malignant Priests causes. True it is,
I have been of Council with some good Ministers, ^rticled against (by some
separatists) as Malignant and scandalous, which upon examination proved not
such, and I presume is no crime to defend such Innocents against unjust
accusers. True it is, I have appeared as Council for some three Ministers,
which upon Examination have been voted Malignant, or scandalous, whereupon
sequestered, but it was before it appeared to me they were such, and upon the
Letters, recommendations, or importunity of some special friends of mine, who
assured me of their innocence in the things whereof they were accused;
Otherwise I was never voluntary of Council, much less for fees with any such,
nor intend to be, if I know them such. However, since diverse matters and
questions of late arise and are mixed in most cases, in which Ministers need
the help of Council, as likewise to manage their evidence, to clear things
that are doubtful both to the Committee, Judges and jury, it is neither a
crime nor scandal for any Lawyer, to be of Council with an ill person, in an
ill, much less in a doubtful cause, so as he neither wrest the Law, nor
evidence to justify the guilty person, nor extenuate the crime, but only to
sift out the truth, to rectify the contrary, evidence where it is mistaken or
pressed over far, and and so truly to state the case as it is, and ripen it
for a just judgment.

The 11. is, That I have been a pleader of Patents in point of Law, and that
against express Acts of Parliament, Magna Charta, and the Petition of Right,
and that lately before Committees of Parliament.

This is a gross untruth, I having been of Council against many such Patents,
(but never with any such to my knowledge,) both before and since the
Parliament, if he means it of my being Council against the importation of
false printed English Bibles from Holland, contrary to several Ordinances,
some old Acts of Parliament, and some new ones, long since drawn, read and
committed by the House, he showed himself a very Ignoramus, as little skilled
in common Law, as in Magna Charta which he so much talks of, but understands
no more then Mr. Goose, since he cannot distinguish an Ordinance and Act of
Parliament from a Patent,

His 12. slander is, That I am a pleader of Judges practices as binding to the
people, against express Acts, Magna Charta, and the Petition of Right, the
overthrowers and destroyers thereof being Traitors to the Common wealth: This
he desires time to prove for want of present Evidence, and he will do it just
at doomesday in the afternoon, not before; and when he has better studied
those Acts and understands them, perchance he will be of another judgment.

You have heard a full jury of Lies, and slanders only against my self in
this one Libellous Letter, all which conjoined together, with those
forementioned against the Parliament, Speaker and Members, give in this verdict
against the impudence of this same Author, That he is a Father of Lies and
slanders, deserving the alteration of one Letter in his Name, and to be called
only LYEBORNE instead of Lilburne for the future, to shame him from his lying
pract^ses, which no friendly admonitions or advice could hitherto effect.

I shall not mention his several untruths touching my honored Brother Dr.
Bastwicke, who has sufficiently vindicated both himself, and the Parliament
in print against these Libellous Calumnies: Not his many railing invective
speeches against the Parliaments justice and proceedings, since his
imprisonment at Newgate, and his practices to raise commotions against the
Houses, by new printed Libellsand Letters, affronting, questioning, both their
power, justice, and animating the Vulgar rabble to call them to account, which
I have formerly touched upon, but, shall only mention one particular more.

Soon after his imprisonment in Newgate, in a very irregular and seditious way
he caused diverse of his confederated brethren of the Separation about London,
to present a petition in his behalf to the Parliament in affront of their
proceedings; wherein they style him, The great instrument of the Bishops, and
Star-chambers downfall, attributing that honor principally to him, which I am
certain was more due to others; concluding with these three desires to the
House.

1. That you will be pleased to order his sudden removal from the infamous
prison of New gate, (a very sancy request, contrary to the Committees and both
Houses express vote.)

2. That in debating the occasion of his restraint, you will be pleased to make
the most favorable construction thereof, and (if it may stand with your
wisdoms,) to give him his speedy enlargement: (A request almost as insolent
as the former.)

3. That you will be plased to give relief to those pressures that lie upon
him, and to order him a competent part of his Arrears, for support of his wife
and family.

How ill the House took this Petition in behalf of such an incorrigible
peremptory Delinquent, and how great an infringement they deemed it of their
Privileges both for manner and matter, the Members present at the debate can
best inform the World; certainly it was very displeasing to them, as the
Votes, and Answer to the Petitioners manifested, however to show their charity,
they Ordered him one hundred pounds of his Arreares to be forthwith paid, for
his, and his families relief, according to the last request in the Petition:
But to the monstrous ingratitude and obstinacy of this Libeller and his
consederates; They generally report over all the City and Country, that The
Parliament voted, and paid him this money, only to stop his mouth for their
injustice toward him, and to take off his Prosecution of Mr. Speaker and
others, for holding Intelligence with, and sending money to the King;
Interpreting this their Charity toward him, upon this Petition of theirs, no
other then a Bribe, and taking occasion from it, to cast new Libellous
Aspersions on the House; it being the accursed disposition of this Generation
of Vipers (who have Adders poison under their lips) to turn the very best
things into poison, and misconstrue the Parliaments best actions, though
occasioned by themselves.

I shall therefore, for a close of this Relation and Resutation:

First, earnestly desire the Honorable Houses of Parliament, and whole Kingdom
to take notice of the Lying, Libelling, Railing, False, Dishonest, Perverse,
Uncharitable, Vnchr^stian disposition of Anabaptists and Separatists, who make
no conscience of Forging, Reporting, Publishing, and Printing the most False,
Impudent, Notorious, Scandalous Lies and Forgeries that can be, both of the
Houses of Parliament, their Covenant, Members, and most innocent, pious,
blameless persons living, that are not of their Faction, or opposites unto it,
without the least shadow of proof or truth, in which Infernal, Diabolical,
black Art, many of them outstrip the very Devil himself, and John Lilburn all
his followers: And thereupon to be very circumspect, 1. How they believe or
entertain any Informations or Reports of any of this Sect, against the
Parliament or any other persons, especially against our Ministers, whose utter
Extirpation they have plotted, together with their Tithes and Maintenance. 2.
How they adhere or give any countenance to any of this Seditious, Factious
party, who endea^our and aim at nothing but Anarchy and Ataxy, and confusion in
Church and ^tate. 3. To have a vigilant, jealous eye over them and their
private Conven^^cles, where they forge and devise Lies, Slanders, and plot the
overthrow or disturbance of Church and State; and to proceed strictly against
their Ringseaders according to Law and Justice, to preserve both from speedy
ruin, our connivance at them, having strongly multiplied both their Numbers
and Insole^cies in all places, which will prove more mischievous then any
Clubmen, if not speedily suppressed.

Secondly, I shall desire all people truly fearing God, to consider seriously
of John Lilburns confident, insolent, unchristian carriage and ingratitude
toward the Parliament, his Raisers and best Benefactors; and those many Lies,
Forgeries, and Falsehoods he has most Libellously and Seditiously published,
even in print, against them, without the least shadow of truth: And to beware
how they give him the least countenance, encouragement, in these sinful and
ungodly courses, for fear they participate both of his sins and punishments.
And if at any time they resort unto him, to charge those sins of his
effectually and impartially, like two Christian friends, upon his conscience,
and not to sooth him in them, that to he may become sensible and ashamed of
them, and make a public, real confession and Recantation of them, answerable
to the public Scandal they have given. And if he continue obstinate and
impenitent, for ever to renounce his company, as an incorrigible, desperate
Delinquent, whose heart is hardened to his own destruction.

Thirdly, to beware how they take up Lilburns mistakes upon trust for current
Law, or Divinity, since he has so far overshot and mistaken himself in both;
and never to adventure upon any Design against the Parliament, State or
Church, which may hazard either their Lives, Liberties, Estates or Credits,
upon the idle Dreams and Dotages of ignorant Mechanic Lawyers or Divines, who
understand neither Law nor Gospel, though they deem themselves learneder and
wiser then either the Parliament, Assembly, or all the Lawyers in the Realm, as
John Lilburn clearly does.

Finally, I shall desire John Lilburn, out of my ancient and present Christian
respects toward him, and all who truly love him, to make a right use and
interpretation of this Relation and Refutation of his gross Lies, Slanders,
and mistaken Law; and my sharp Expressions in some places, which are but
answerable, and scarce equivalent to his offenses, which can neither be
expressed, censured or refuted, but by Expressions suitable to their
Exorbitances, The friendliest Christian office I could do him, considering his
former obstinacy and impenitency, is, to discover his Errors and Offenses to
him and the world, the better to bring him to a sight and feeling of, and godly
sorrow for them; It is Gods own precept, Levit. 1917. Thou shall in any wise
rebuke thy neighbor (or Brother) and not suffer sin upon him: And we are
commanded to rebuke Liars sharply, that they may be found in the Faith, Tit. 1.
12, 13. Yea Solomon informs us, Prove. 27. 5, 6. Open rebuke is better then
secret love (in some cases) for faithful are the wounds of a friend, but the
kisses of an enemy are deceitful: Adding further, Prove. 24. 24, 25. He that
says unto the wicked, Thou art Righteous, him shall the people curse, Nations
shall abhor him; But to them that rebuke him shall be delight, and a good
Blessing shall come upon him. Prove. 9. 2. Rebuke a wise man, and he will love
thee. And however he may take it for the present, yet, Prove. 28. 23. He that
rebukes a man, afterward shall find more favor then he that shall teach him
with the tongue. And therefore if God has reserved him for Mercy, not for
Judgment only, (which his obstinacy and others flattery of him in his ungodly
pride, and presumptuous evil ways give no cause to favor) I hope this
Corrosive, the public Discovery and Censure of his execrable Lies and Slanders
against the highest Powers, and his best and dearest friends, without just
provocation, which bring him to a due sight and sense of his horrible
misdemeanors, humble his haughty insolent spirit, bend his inflexible obstinate
Will, and work such a through change of his heart, and detestable, malicious,
seditious, slanderous courses, to the Infamy of that Profession of Religion he
outwardly seems to make (though no sparks of it appear in his actions,
writings) that he will henceforth learn to know himself, and the Error of his
former courses, and bless God and me for dealing in this round friendly manner
with him, when others favor him in his sins for their own ends, to the
apparent hazard of his soul and body. It is the Apostles Canon in 1 Timothy 5.
20. Them that sin, rebuke before all, that others also may fear. I am sure
Lilburn has sinned, and that more then twice or thrice openly, impudently,
obstinately, with a high hand, and a stout heart, against God, Religion, the
Parliament, its Committees, Members, his dearest Christian friends and
preservers, yet in his wickedness without remorse. No Christian then can
justly tax me, for Relating openly before all that himself may repent, and
others fear the like transgressions, or to countenance or share with him in
his, which is so apparently guilty. I shall desire God to give him grace to
repent in time, ere it be too late, and request both him and all his Adherents,
to 2 Timothy 2. 7.
consider what I have here said and writ, and the Lord give them understanding
in all things. I will close up all with the close of St. James his Epistle
general, c. 5. 19, 20. Brethren, if any of you do ERR FROM THE TRVTH, and can
convert him, let him know, that he that converteth the sinner from the Error of
his way, shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins. If I
may be so happy, as to effect such a conversion in him, by all the Premises, I
have my end, and shall bless God for it while I live; so far am I from bearing
any malice to his Person, though I sharply lash his sins and lies.

FINIS.

