A PVBLIKE DECLARATION AND SOLEMN Protestation OF The Freemen of England and
Wales, against the illegal, Intolerable, undoing Grievance of Free Quarter.

Printed in the year. 1648.

A Public Declaration and Solemn Protestation of the Freemen of England and
Wales, against the illegal, intolerable, undoing Grievance of Free Quarter.
WE the Knights, Esquires, Gentlemen, Freeholders, Citizens, Burgesses, and
Freemen of the Realm of England and Domion of Wales, do hereby publicly
declare, remonstrate and protest to the Honorable Houses of Parliament, the
Army and Soldiery and all the world, that the keeping up of an overnumerous
burdensome Army, since the Wars determined, and their forcible entering into
our Houses, taking and eating up our provisions for horse and men, and
free-quartering upon us, against our wills, to our ineffable vexation,
oppression, and undoing (especially in these times of extraordinary dearth,
samine, and decay of trade) is an express high violation of our fundamental
Laws, Rights, Properties and Liberties, in the late just defense whereof
against the King and his Malignant party, we have spent our estates, blood, and
hazarded our dearest lives in the field; a direct breach of Magna Charta c. 22.
and 29. (purchased with so much Noble blood of our Ancestors,) prohibited by
the Rastall. Tit. Purveyours; and War.
Satutes of 3. E. 1. c. 7. 28. E. 1. c. 2. 1. E. 3. c. 7. 4. E. 3. c. 3. 5. E.
3. c. 1. 14. E. 3. c. 19. 25. E. 3. c. 1. 36. E. 3. c. 2. 6. 9. 7. R. 2. c. 8.
2. H. 4. c. 14. 20. H. 6. c. 8. 21. H. 6. c. 2. 14. 28. H. 6. c. 2. which
declare and enact the taking away of our provisions and goods of any sorts
without our consents, agreeing with and paying us for them, even by Purveyours
authorized by Law and Commission to be no less then felony, (much more then
when taken by Officers and Soldiers authorized by no Law nor Commission, under
the great Seal to do it) and contrary to the very Letter of the Petition of
right, 3. Carols, which declares the quartering of Soldiers and Mariners upon
the Kings people against their wills in their Houses to be AGAINST THE LAWS
and CUSTOMS OF THE REALM, and A GREAT GREIVANCE and VEXATION TO THE PEOPLE,
and enacts, That they shall not be burdened therewith in time to come.

We likewise further remonstrate, that King Richard the second in the
Parliament held at Westminster Anno 1. H. 4 number 22 was among other things
impeached and deprived of his Crown, for raising a guard of Cheshire Soldiers
and quartering them as his Court to overawe the Lords and Commons assembled in
Parliament at Westminster in the 21. year of his reign, to vote what he
prescribed them, and to put the power of the whole Parliament into the hands of
a few Lords and Commons of his party; which Grastons Chron. p. 390.
Soldiers did assault and beat the Kings good Subjects, and take from them
their victuals against their wills, and paid therefore little or nothing at
their pleasure, and not redressing the same upon complaint to their great
oppression and discontent.

That the whole House of Commons this present Parliament in their An exact
Collection.
Remonstrance of the State of the Kingdom December 15. 1641. (published by
their special Order) declared. That the charging of the Kingdom with billited
Soldiers heretofore (complained of in the Petition of Right) and the
concomitant design of GERMAN HORSE, that the Land might either submit with
fear, or be enforced with rigor TO SUCH ARBITRARY CONTRIBUTIONS as should be
required of them was a product of the Jesuits, Counsels OF JESUITS, Papists,
corrupt Prelates, Courtiers and Counselors to enslave the Subjects and deprive
them of their just Liberties. And that both Houses of Parliament and the King
himself upon the House of Commons impeachment Mr. St. John's his Majesty's
Solicitor Generals argument, at a Committee of both Houses, concerning the
Earls Attainder by Hill, p. 35. 36, etc.
attainted, condemned and executed Thomas late Earl of Strafford, Lord Duputy
of Ireland for high Treason by a special Bill this Parliament, for quartering
and sessing soldiers upon the Kings Subjects in Ireland, and levying forces
and moneys on them by Officers and Soldiers of the Army against Law, by
billeting on them till they were paid, (declared to be a levying of War
against the King and his people, and so High Treason within the Statute of 25.
E, 3. for which he lost his head on Tower Hill) contrary to the Statute of 18.
H. 6 made in Ireland, chapter 3. which enacts; That, no Lord, or ANY OTHER of what
condition he be, shall bring or lead Hoblers, Kearnes, or horded men, nor any
other people nor horses to lie on horse back or on foot upon the Kings Subjects
without their good wills and consents: but upon their own costs, and without
hurt doing to the Commons of the Country; And if any so do, HE SHALL BE
ADJUDGED A TRAITOR. And the Statute of Kilkenny in 3. E. 2. c. 1. 2. which
enacts and declares it to be mere felony and open Robery for any Kerne, to live
idle on the tenants, farmers and poor people of the Country, or to take any
prises, lodging or sojourning from them against the consent of the owners, or
paying and agreeing with them for the same.

We do moreover further declare, that by the very 24. H. 8. c. 5. 21. Ed. 1.
de Malefactoribus in Parcis, Fitz. Coron. 192. 194. 246. 258. 261. 330. 22.
Ass 46. Stamford. Pleas. l. 1. c. 5. 6. 7. 11. H. 6. a 16. 14. H. 6. 24. b.
35. H. 6. 51. a. 9. E. 4. 48. b. 11. E. 4. 6. a. 27. H. 7. 36. 12. H. 8. 2. b.
Brook Corone. 63. Trespass. 207. Cook. 5. Report. 91. Ashes. Tables. Coron. 6.
7.
Statute and Common Law of the Land, every man's house is and ought to be his
Castle; which he his servants and friends may lawfully defend against all who
shall forcibly, and illegally attempt to enter it against his will; and justify
the killing of any who shall violently assault the same or enter it feloniously
against the consent, which to do is Burglary, and a capital Offense and that
every Subject, may by the Common Law defend his goods with force and arms
against any who shall illegally offer to take them away, against his consent
and not paying for them which to take is direct robbery and felony for which
the party taking them ought to suffer death and that the owner and his servants
may lawfully justify the beating and killing of such theives in defense of
their goods; and may assemble his Neighbors and friends to defend his house
and goods against such violence.

Which and (...) Rights and Privileges of ours, both Houses of Parliament, in
above thirty Remonstrances, and by their Solemn League and Covenant, have
promised and are daily engaged, under pain of breach of Faith, Honor, Trust,
Oath, and the Highest disreputation, inviolably to maintain.

Yet notwithstanding all the premises, the General and Officers of the Army
have ever since the votes of both Houses for the Armies disbanding in April
and May last, not only doubly recruited their forces far above their first
establishment when the King had two Armies in the field, and many strong
Garrisons, without the Houses Order or privity, but quartered them upon us in
our houses against our wills, and the Laws and Statutes aforesaid, to the
utter undoing of many thousands of us, not paying us one farthing for their
quarters out of the many months pay they have since received; but instead
thereof have levied treble their pay upon us, under color of freequartering and
compositions for it, the horse enforcing us to pay them 14. 16. and 20.
shillings a week, and the foot, 6. 7. 8. 10. 12. and sometimes 14. shillings
a man toward their quarters, and yet take quarters upon us and others, and
sending fresh quarterers on us as soon as the former are removed: which we here
protest and declare to be direct Burglary and Felony in them, and no less then
Treason in their chief Officers, and a levying of War upon us, by this
present Parliaments resolution in the Earl of Straffords case: for which we
must now crave reparations and justice against them, and satisfaction for all
the quarters thus forcibly taken on us; being resolved to pay no more Taxes
toward the Army, till all our quarters, and the money raised and extorted from
us for compensation of it, be fully satisfied.

And seeing diverse Officers and Soldiers of the Army, notwithstanding the late
Ordinances of both Houses against Free Quarter, and their and the Generals and
Officers engagements published in print, that upon our paying in of six months
Contribution toward the Army upon the sixty thousand pounds tax, (principally
intended for Ireland, but now wholly Monopolized by the Army) no Officer nor
Soldier should after the 15. of January take free quarter upon us under pain
of death, against our wills, which notwithstanding they do in many Counties,
which have paid in their six months Contribution, refusing to obey the
Parliaments Orders, and protesting they will take Free Quarter notwithstanding,
and forcibly break into our houses, and take away our provisions with more
insolency then before: We do here publicly remonstrate, and protest against
this dishonorable breach of faith and promise, and this intolerable
oppression, and cheating of us to our faces; and demand open and speedy justice
and reparations for the same, from the Houses and General; and do require and
enjoyne all our Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses (who are our Substitutes, and
derive This is evident by this clause of the Writ for their Election. Ita quod
iidem Milites, Cives and Burgenses sufficientem potestatem pro se and
COMMVNITATE, Comitatus Civium and Burgensium praedictum ad faciendu^ and
faciendu^ his, etc. Ita quod pr^ defectu ejuusmodi potestatis dicta negotia
infecta non remaneant quovis modo.
all their authority and Commission from us, whom we have authorized only to
maintain our just Rights, Liberties and Properties, not to invade or betray
them) as they will answer the contrary at their perils to the Kingdom, and
the respective Counties, Cities and Buroughs, for which they serve, to right
themselves and us; and make good the Houses and their own promises to us
herein; otherwise we are resolved never to trust, nor believe them more, and to
disclame them for our Trustees or Representatives in Parliament for the future,
for breaking of their trusts, and disobeying our Instructions. And because the
quartering of Soldiers in our Houses against our wills, against the Houses and
Generals engagements, is such an intolerable Grievance and Vexation, as
utterly deprives us of the freedom comfort, and command of our own houses,
wives, children, servants, beds, stables, bread, here, provisions for horse
and men, which are all exposed to the arbitrary commands of every base
dominiering, deboist and insolent Soldier and Officer, who command all we
have, and may cut our throats at pleasure every hour in our own houses, where
we cannot sleep nor remain secure, and now renders our condition worse then any
Turkie-Gally-slave, undoing and enslaving us at once, even to those who were
once our servants, and now become our Lords and Tyrants over us, who do
nothing but pick quarrels with us, and will be content with no ordinary
provisions, purposely to extort compositions from us in money, above double and
treble their pay: whereby they grow rich, and the whole Kingdom poor, even to
extremity, all trading being now utterly gone and decayed by reason of
Free Quarter and excessive raues daily multiplied, which ingrosteth all the
Treasure of the Kingdom, whereby trade should be supported and the poor
employed; who are now upon the point of starving, and are ready to rise up and
mutiny in City and Country for want of bread and employment; whiles many
thousands of strong lusty boys, youths, Soldiers, and their horses (whose
labors might much enrich the Commonwealth) lie idly like so many drones and
Caterpillars upon us, taking both pay and free quarter too for doing nothing,
but eating, drinking, swearing, whoring, stealing, robbing, and undoing us, and
the Realm too: We do here publicly Protest and declare, against allowing any
more free quarter to any Officers or Soldiers on us for the future as such an
intolerable and undoing Grievance, as we neither can nor will any longer
undergo; and that if any of them shall hereafter, against our wills, forcibly
enter our houses, or take away or devour our provisions and goods (as they
have injuriously and feloniously done for many months last past) we are
unanimously resolved to proceed against them for it, as Burglairs, Thieves and
Felons, and to defend our houses and goods, against them with force and arms,
with the hazard of our lives; resolving rather to die Freemen, then live any
longer Slaves, especially to those who have been our mercenary servants, and
pretend they have hitherto fought and continued in arms together by their own
authority, almost a full year against both houses Votes for their disbanding,
of purpose (as they pretended in their printed Declarations, though we find it
otherwise) to make us absolute Freemen; Whereas we feel and discern by
woeful experience, that their design is quite contrary, even to make us, the
King, Kingdom and Parliament no other then conquered slaves, as many of them
stick not to term us to our faces, who dare not be any longer accessories and
contributors to our own and the Kingdoms imminent ruin, bondage and
captivity in the least degree against our right and Covenant, and will no
longer sit still, like so many tame silent fools, and conquered slaves, whiles
they put new yoakes of bondage on our necks, and fetters on our feet, to
inthrall us to a more intolerable Arbitrary Power and Tyranny, then ever the
King or his Cavalliers intended in England, or Strafford himself in Ireland;
and rule us only by the Sword and Martial Law; And our very Knights, Citizens
and Burgesses, representing us in Parliament, whom they impeach, suspend,
expel the House, and overawe by their power, new Guards and Garrisons put
upon them, and the Lords House too, at pleasure, so as they neither can, nor
dare to do us that right, ease and relief against the Soldiery, as otherwise
they would, and are bound to do, being enforced daily to pass new Ordinances
of Indemnity from them, even for their very felonies, burglaries, plunders and
murders too, for which they must not be questioned, which encourages them now
to commit the like offenses with greater boldness then ever, in hopes of the
like indemnity for the future, as they have forcibly obtained for what is past.

Our Grastons Chronicle, p. 162. 163. Cambdens Brittania, p. 143.
Historians record that in the Reign of King Egelred the Danish Soldiers
exercised such pride and abusive oppressions over the people in England, on
whom they quartered, that they caused Husband men to do all their vile labor,
and the Danes held their wives in the mean time at pleasure, with daughter and
servant: And when the Husbandman came home he should scarsly have of his own
as his servants had so as the Dane had all at his commandment and did eat and
drink his fill of the best, when the owner had scant his fill of the worst.
And besides this, the common people were so of them oppressed, that for fear
and dread they called them (in every such house as they had will of and
quartered in) LORD DANE, which so vexed and discontented the people, that by
secret Commission, from the King directed to all the good Towns, Buroughs and
Cities of the Land, they were on St. Brice day, at a certain hour assigned,
all suddenly assaulted, and slain by the people, every mothers son of them
throughout all England: this slaughter of theirs beginning in Hertfordshire, at
a little town called Welden, for the which deed it took the first name,
because the Weal of that County (as it was then thought) was there first won.
And the Sicilians did the like to the Dominiering French forces, who oppressed
them with their insolences and free quarter, cutting all their throats in one
evening, and so freeing their Country from captivity.

Truly our condition now under the Lording Army and Soldiery has been and yet
is altogether as bad, if not worse in many places, then our Predecessors was
under their freequartering Lord Danes, or the Sicilians under the French
forces: and we heartily wish it may not now produce the like Tragical and
bloody effects, which pure necessity will enforce the Malignant and poorer sort
now ready to starve, and the very best friends to the Parliament unto, for
their own self preservation and defense, as we may justly fear, if not timely
prevented by the Houses and Generals strict care and discipline, in making
good their Engagements to us, wherein they have hitherto failed, and speedily
reduce the Army to such a small proportion of five or six thousand only, as
they may well pay and master; and quarter in Innes and Alehouses without any
pressure to us. Being peremptorily resolved in their defaults, by Gods
assisting power to right and ease our selves of them, and all other oppressing
Grievances, by the best and most expeditions means we may, to preserve our
selves, our Posterities, Kingdom and neglected Ireland, (whose supplies are
wholly frustrated and engrossed by our idle super-numerary, and super-necessary
Army and Soldiers) from utter vassalage and ruin. And therefore we do hereby
earnestly desire and admonish all Officers and Soldiers at their utmost
peril, from henceforth after this our public Remonstrance, to take no more
free quarter, nor force any more moneys from us, against our wills; but
carefully to follow John Baptist's Lesson to them (a burning and shining Light)
Luke 2. 14. And the SOVLDIERS likewise came to John, saying; And what shall we
do? And he said unto them: Do violence to no man; neither accuse any man
falsely, and be content with your wages; Lest they so far discontent and
enrage us so far, as to fall a quartering of them in good earnest, which we
heartily desire (if possible) to prevent by this timely admonition, and notice
of our unalterable, just and necessary resolutions, from which neither fear
nor flattery, nor entreaties shall remove us.

And shall likewise humbly importune the Honorable Houses of Parliament to
order and declare according to the Tenor of the Petition of Right that all
Officers and Soldiers whatsoever shall be liable to the Jurisdiction, Arrests,
Warrants and power of High Sheriffs, Justices of Peace, Mayors, Bailiffs,
Constables, Tything-men, and other public Officers of Justice, for Felonies,
Breaches of Peace, and other misdemeanors punishable by the Laws and Statutes
of the Realm, as farre-forth as any other Subjects are and be; and that all
those may be particularly enjoined to discharge their duties herein; and all
Officers of the Army ordered to be ayding and assisting to them therein under
pain of Fellonie and being casheered; without which we shall enjoy neither
security nor peace in Country or City, no nor in our own beds and Houses.

FINIS.

