A MODERATE APOLOGY Against a Pretended CALUMNY.

In Answer to some Passages in THE PRE-EMINENCE OF PARLIAMENT.

Newly published by James Howell Esquire, one of the Clerks of his Majesty's
most Honorable Privy Council.

Wherein a Reason is rendered, why The Popish Royal Favorite styled him, No
Friend to Parliaments, and a Malignant. And the copy of a Letter written by
George Gage from Rome to King James, inserted, to manifest an Agency between
him and Rome, to procure the Popes Dispensation for the Spanish Match.

By William Prynne of Lincolnes Inn, Esquire.

Prove. 27. 5. 6. Open rebuke is better then secret love. Faithful are the
words of a friend, but the kisses of an Enemy are deceitful.

Printed at London for Michael Spark, Senior. 1644.

A Moderate Apology AGAINST A pretended Calumny.
THou shall not raise a false report, nor put thy hand with the wicked to be an
unrighteous Judge, Exodus 23. 1. is a divine precept of such Justice and Equity,
as should bind all Tongues, and Pens to the good behavior, and engage every
man to be as tender of his Brothers reputation as his own. A good name is
better thee precious ointment, Eccles. 7. 1. and rather to be chosen then great
riches, Prove. 22. 1. therefore not rashly to be blasted, traduced with
slanderous defamations.

Being then publicly taxed by Master James Howell, though in a modest candid
manner, in his Pre-eminence and Pedigree of Parliaments, page 10. 11. etc.
(newly printed,) as criminal of offering him very hard measure, nay, of doing
him apparent wrong, in stiling him in a Book entitled, The Popish Royal
Favorite, p. 42. NO FRIEND TO PARLIAMENTS, AND A MALIGNANT; a character which
(he says) he deserves not, and disdaines; I shall give both himself and the
world this brief account of these harsh expressions, not any ways to traduce
this learned Gentleman (whose excellent parts I highly honor) but to acquit my
self from pretended guilt, of a malicious or groundless Calumny.

The title of a Malignant, since the late deplorable differences between his
Majesty and the Parliament, is grown into such common and universal use, that
none but Neuters, and Ambodexters (if they) either do or can evade it. The
Cavaliers and Royalists on the one side, the two Houses of Parliament and their
Adherents on the other side, both in their Discourses and Writings style all
such who are opposite, or not professedly cordial to either of them,
MALIGNANTS; a truth so experimentally evident, as needs no demonstration. It
was Mr Howels disaster among others (as himself ingenuously confesses, page
13.) to fall so heavily under the displeasure of the highest Court of
Parliament; that he was, upon some informations given in against him, by its
Authority and direction apprehended and committed to the Fleet, (where he has
continued Prisoner sundry months, and yet remains) his Papers seized, his
Letters intercepted, for this cause especially (as I was credibly informed from
some Members of Parliament, who had the perusal of his Papers) that he had
been in arms against the Parliament, and was a dangerous MALIGNANT, MUCH
DISAFFECTED TO THE PRESENT PARLIAMENT, who by reason of his Abilities, and
acquaintance with Malignants, might probably do much mischief, and very ill
offices against the Parliament, if not restrained. Receiving therefore such a
Character of his unknown person and disposition, from so good Authority, and
meeting with sundry Satirical Passages in his Vocal Forest, and in his Parley
between Patricius and Peregrine against this and former Parliaments,
(discovering a more then ordinary Malignity in him against such Assemblies;)
having occasion to transcribe some passages out of him, touching the Kings
voyage into Spain, and some occurrences during his abode there, (to satisfy
Malignants, and Opposites to the present Parliaments proceedings) in some
Letters and Complements then passed between the Pope and King; I imagined with
my self that I could not probably so clearly convince, and resolve them in this
particular by any printed authorities whatsoever as by this of Mr Howels,
reputed one of that party by the Parliament, and most who knew him; and that
other Malignant Readers unacquainted with his person or inclination, might take
notice of him, as one addicted to the Kings party (without any thought to
injure or defame the Gentleman more then any other of the Kings adherents) I
used these expressions of him; The Popish Royal Favorite, p. 42.
Now that such Letters really passed between the King and Pope during his abode
in Spain, appears not only by diverse ancient printed copies of them in sundry
Languages, but is also thus expressly attested by Mr James Howell (an attendant
upon his Majesty in that expedition) NO FRIEND TO PARLIAMENTS, BUT A MALIGNANT
NOW IN CUSTODY, in his Vocal Forest, etc. If Mr Howell be so great a
Royalist, as this Book of his proclaims, and most repute him; I presume he will
esteem it no Calumny, nor dishonor in this age to be styled, No friend to
Parliaments, but a Malignant: this being the chief ground of his present Dures
in the Fleet, and that title wherein most Cavaliers now glory: Page 11.
But if his imprisonment has made him, as much a friend, and as real an
affectionate humble servant and Votary to the Parliament as possibly I can be,
and that he will live and die with these affections about him, as he now
professes in print, I shall rejoice at his conversion, and readily retract my
censure of him upon his reconciliation to this Parliament; and his Retractation
of these Anti-parliamentary Passages in his Vocal Forest, that have given
great offense, (which he seems tacitly to confess, page 18.)

Not long after Druinas Monark convokes a universal Assembly, Vocal Forest.
p. 182. 183. 184. 188. 189. 190.
etc. Who with much alacrity agreed to a good round supply, and indeed it was
the greatest gift that ever subjects gave King; but before it was brought to
any sound perfection, this good work was unluckily disturbed by a multitude of
Questions concerning the Privilege of the Subject, and Prerogative of the
Sovereign, by which delays the realty and reputation of that great donative
was much lessened, and the foreign actions the Royal Oak, was engaged in,
abroad, received much prejudice: yet he did formerly confirm unto them all
their former Privileges, and gave two most gracious Answers to their Petitions
tending to this end. And having complied with them thus to their hearts desire,
as also in two former Assemblies, wherein were delivered them as sacrifices,
some of the Crown Officers; and done them sundry Acts of Princely Grace, yet
some extravagant spirits given over to fancy and faction disturbed the calm of
these proceedings. They fall like thunder upon Villerio, etc.

The Great Assembly aforesaid rejoyned, and met again in one body, and now he
that was supposed to be the cause of the tempest being thrown overboard, there
were greater hopes a calm should ensue, but the storm continued as furious as
ever, and unlucky passions blasted as much, if not more then they had done
formerly in Villerios time.

They flew a fresh upon other great Officers, and questioned a duty, that for
guarding of the Seas and common defense of the Realms, had been indisputably
granted to so many preceding Kings for a been esse; which they made difficulty
to afford the Royal Oak Regnant, unless he would first renounce all Right to
it, and so receive it merely from them: thus they chopped Lodgick with
Sovereign Majesty, who moved with these traverses, resolved though to his
un-utterable grief, to dismiss this Great Council: but upon the point when
this was to be done in form; the Lower Assembly in a strange tumultuary manner
adjourned themselves before they had received his Royal pleasure: They denied
him his Officers at Arms, violated the Prolocutour, being twice sent for,
delayed to let in his Messenger, and discontentments turning this to a strange
kind of disobedience, they break up in confusion. Add hereunto, that
notwithstanding, there was an other peculiar Assembly of Reverent Yewes of
purpose for the regulating and sweeping clean of the houses of the Almighty,
yet the Poplers must make it their office to tamper with the Constitution of
holy things; and indeed this is one of the greatest scandals and brands; that
not only Petropolis, but other forraigners (who have with her forsaken
Petropolis) cast upon Druina, viz. that her Ecclesiastical Ordinances are the
Commands and Injunctions of this Secular Power and Members of this Assembly;
who not only confirm (which may be come them well enough, and is necessary for
a general obedience) but take upon them to be Judges herein. So that one being
asked, what they did in that Lower Great Assembly, he was Answered presently,
That they were making of a New Creed; Another was overheard to say, That he
could not be quiet in his conscience, until the holy Text should be confirmed
by an act of theirs; whence may be inferted, that some of them believe it
belongs to them to make Sanctions as well as Statutes.

This induced the Royal Oak, though he be responsible to none for the account
of his actions, but to the High Majesty of Heaven, to publish an open Protest
unto the World for the satisfaction of his better sort of Subjects, of the
Causes of these disorders: declaring, that while Villerio lived, he was
entitled to all the distempers and events of former Assemblies: therefore much
endeavor was used to demolish him as the only wall of separation twixt their
Sovereign and them: but he now being cut off, no alteration was found amongst
them at all, or calmnesse in their proceedings.

He was pleased to declare further, That he imputed not these Commotions to the
whole Assembly, knowing that there were amongst them, many Religious, grave and
well-minded Patriots; but the sincere and better part of them being over-borne
by the clamours and practices of others, who careless of their duties, and
taking advantage of the times and his necessities, constrained him to break off
that Meeting, which had it been answered with like duties on their parts, as
love on his, might have proved happy to all Druina.

These fatal distempers as they did much hurt to the body politic at home
for they were like humors stirred in the Natural body without Evacuation, so
did they produce disadvantageous effects abroad; and better had it been that
the raysers and fomenters of them had never sprung up in Druina, etc.

When this Gentleman, I say, shall have fully recanted these bitter passages
against a former Parliament, with all his violent Invectives in his late The
Printer avowed, and stil^ ma^^fested this Discourse to be his.
Discourse or Parley between Patricius and Peregrine (upon their landing in
France,) touching the Civil Wars of England and Ireland, suppressed at the
Press; the most Malignant invective Satyr I have hitherto met with, against
the Sovereign Jurisdiction of all our Parliaments, and the proceedings of the
present Parliament, against which (as I was credibly informed) he had taken up
offensive Arms, being in the battle of Egde hill; I shall then cordially
retract my Censure of him; till then I must appeal to his own conscience and
the world, whether I have slandered or misreported him in the least degree.
Page 5. 16. 17


Now whereas Mr Howell endeavors to excuse his Majesty's compliances with the
Pope during his residence in Spain; averring, that the Dispensation for this
Marriage, and capitulations stipulated in favor of the Romish Catholics in
England, were negotiated only by the King of Spains Ministers, because his
Majesty would have nothing to do with Rome: I must inform both him and
others, that though by the Mercury Francois Tom. 9. An. 1623. p. 517. An. 1624.
p. 14.
Articles of the Spanish Match, the Popes Dispensation for it was to be
procured by the King of Spains Negotiation, yet King James himself writ Letters
and sent Agents to Rome to expedite it, as is evident by this ensuing Letter of
George Gage to King James from Rome An. 1623, the copy whereof (with others of
this kind) was found among Secretary Windebanks own papers.

SIR,
IT may please your Majesty to understand, that in a Congregation held the 22
of March, stilo novo, the Dispensation was finally resolved, and order taken
that Cardinal Bardino should draw the Articles in Form, the Cardinal La
Susanno, make the Breve, and Mon-Signor Aquas the Popes Secretary, (who was
present at the two last Sessions) draw some Instructions for Mon-Signor de
Massimi the Nuntio, now resident in the Court of Spain. And in the following
Congregation held the 29. these things were seen and allowed, and the next day
presented to the Pope, and allowed by him: Concerning the particulars of the
proceeding here, of difficulties overcome, and of what yet remains to be
done; I have given a large account to Master Secretary Calvert, by which if
your Majesty receive not that satisfaction which we who have labored therein
have most earnestly desired; I shall most humbly beseech your Majesty to
believe: First, that we have left no diligence undone by which we could hope to
remove impediments: And secondly, that such difficulties as are either spent,
or yet to be advested, have not been laid hold on by the Cardinals, either to
frustrate or prolong this Treaty: But out of an Opinion that they could not
otherwise secure their conscience, proceed upon a just and valuable ground, and
satisfy the Judgment of such discreet Persons as may in times ensuing
understand the passages of this great business: And this point I am the bolder
to represent to your Majesty's gracious consideration, because jointly with all
their Protestations to this effect, their Actions have concurred also to give
good testimony thereof. They hold most Honorable language of your Majesty,
Nota.
they profess a great desire to have occasions of doing you all humble
service; they have a firm opinion, that the former rigours used toward your
Catholic Subjects have risen from others, Nota.
but the graces given them from your self: And they are confident that your
Majesty, now that so potent intercessions have been used with you, and all
grounds of civil jealousies removed, will not only command a real performance
of what you are pleased to promise in their favor, but sutably to your own
great Royal heart enlarge the benefit of your Princely goodness. I have
therefore (Sir) finding them thus affected, thought it suitable to your service,
to let them understand, that since they expect these things from a Prince who
yields to no man, either in esteeming or returning a benifit, they may safely
promise themselves all good success, and give way to their own good
dispositions, of respect and affection toward your Majesty: and the rather I
have done so, because I persuade my self, that your Majesty is of the same
opinion with him, who speaking of the Romans to King Bocchus, said, Licet
Parents abunde habemus, amicorum neque nobis neque cuiquam mortalium satis
fuit.

I send your Majesty Letters from the Cardinals Bandino and Lodojusio, Nota.
which they write in answer of your Majesty's to them, who above all others
have sought to obliege your Majesty, as by my Letter to Master Secretary you
will perceive. After the Ester Holli-dayes I shall begin my journey toward
Florence and Parma to perform your Majesty's Commandments there, whereof I
will give your Majesty account in due time: It will be the end of May before I
shall get out of Italy, during which time I shall with devotion expect your
Majesty's Orders, if any thing further you shall be pleased to command my
service. So I humbly pray the Divine goodness to give your Majesty many fair
years of life, Thereby to enjoy the fruits of this noble Alliance, and to make
happy your gracious Government.

Your Majesty's most humble and loyal subject, GEORGE GAGE.


This Letter, with our late entercouse with Rome by sending Mr Walter Montague
and others, extraordinary Agents thither, maintaining Sir William Hamilton a
constant Ledger there, and receiving three Popes Nuncio^s successively (Panzam,
Con, and Rosetti) as constant Residentiaries here in London to reduce us back
to Rome, to omit all other particulars, are a most pregnant testimony, that
King James, and some of his great Ministers of State (as I shall God willing
manifest by undeniable testimonies) have had overmuch commerce with Rome, which
is now no time to palliate.

I shall therefore conclude with the same Request in effect to Mr Howell, which
he makes to me in the close of his new Pamphlet, That having unpassionatly
perused what I have here written, in penning whereof my conscience, quill, and
hand have concurred, he would be pleased to be so charitable and just; as to
conceive, I had probable if not real grounds for what I formerly published,
without the least intention to defame or misreport him, or any other personated
in that Treatise.

FINIS.

