THE SECOND PART OF THE NARRATIVE Concerning the Armies Force and Violence upon
the COMMONS HOUSE, AND MEMBERS.

LONDON, Printed Anno Dom. 1648.

THE SECOND PART Of the Narrative concerning the Armies force and violence upon
the COMMONS-HOVSE and MEMBERS.
Upon Thursday the Army* engaged Members of the House of Commons [most of them
being Treasurers, Great Accomptants, Purchasers of Bishops Lands, or such as
hold Great Offices by the Houses gift, or received great sums of money upon
pretense of great Losses never yet appearing or made good upon Oath] above one
hundred Members being secured, or violently kept out of the House, by that
insolent Colonel Pride [which usually goes before destruction] after their
Hypocritical Fast was ended, were pleased to adjourne the House till Tuesday;
that the General and his grand Council, (of which there is scarce one
Gentleman of quality, but poor Mechanics of small or broken fortunes before
the Wars) might possess themselves of the City, plunder all their Treasures to
pay the Soldiers, secure their Gallant Sheriff Brown a Member of the House,
and act their parts with other Members, to new* modle the house, according to
their hearts desire) adjourned til Tuesday. In the mean time the General and
his Agents under pretenses of favor and respect to some of the imprisoned
Members, endeavored by subtilty to engage them to give their parol to him to
continue at their Houses or Lodgings in or near the Town till the House should
command their attendance, and in the mean time, not to act against the
Parliament or the Army: Which most of them upon debate refused to accept of,
conceiving it to be a voluntary confinement of themselves and subjecting of
them to the Generals power inconsistent with the Honor or privilege of
Parliament, and thereupon refused to remove upon any such restrictive terms
unless absolutely discharged without any condition or restriction whatsoever.
Whereupon the General continues them still Prisoners, they having liberty only
to remove their lodgings to places more convenient. On Tuesday morning the Army
placed Guards of their own upon the Commons House again, and though they had
secluded and driven away near two hundred Members before, yet they had a List
of more Members fit to be excluded and purged out* Whereupon Mr. Edward Boys
one of the Knights of the shire for Kent (a great friend of theirs) Sir Humfrey
Tuston, and some six more Members entering into the house to discharge their
duty, were violently kept back by Col. Pride and his Officers; and Sir Edward
Martin Knight of the shire for Devon being in the house it self, was kept out
and secluded the house. O the tender regard of the privileges of the House,
which these Saints of the Army boast of in the very first line of their late
Remonstrance: and See their Declaration of August 18. 1647.
The restitution of the Houses to a condition of Honor, Freedom and safety,
and preserving them therein, which they so much vaunted of, and for which they
and both Houses kept a solemn Thanksgiving [mocking both God and men thereby,
who has justly rewarded them for that damnable Hypocrisie] in August 1647. It
seems these Parliament Saviors and Protectors then, are turned Parliament
destroyers and Subverters now, as they profess to the world in print in their
proud and treasonable, (which they style Humble) Proposalls and Desires, Dated
December. 6. 1648. A New Jesuitical Gun, powder Treason to blow up Parliaments*
As soon as the House was set, Mr. Nathaniel Stephens Knight of the shire for
the County of Gloucester, reported to the house the violence offered to Mr. Ash
and other Members of the house who were imprisoned and forcibly secluded by the
Officers of the ARMY, and thereupon moved the HOUSE to vindicate their
Privileges and right their Members, and not to proceed in any business till
that was done; else he could not in consciecne or honor join with them, but
must and would withdraw. Yet the engaged faction (who formerly fled from the
house to the Army for security when there was no actual force upon the houses
in July 1647. and passed an Ordinance by a greater force from the Army, for
nulling and vacating all Ordinances, Orders and proceedings in Parliament,
during their absence from the House upon a mere pretext of force) not only
continued sitting in the House without flying from it, when under such an
horrid force of the Army as this upon their Members, but also proceeded to act,
though not above 45. in number; and to vote the votes for no more addresses to
the King to be revived, and unvote the Votes for the Treaty with the King, as
prejudicial and dishonorable to the Kingdom, and likewise unvoted the votes
for restoring the ten impeached Members.

These votes being passed, the General by a party of Horse and foot violently
seized upon Sheriff Brown a Member of the House, and secured him prisoner in
St. James, to a room without hangings or bedding: And about 4. of the clock
at night Captain Lawrence the Marshall of the Army brought a message from the
General and his Council to remove Sir William Waller, Major Genesis Massey, Sir
John Clotworthy, and Commissary Copley, from the Kings Head in the Strand,
where they were six days imprisoned, to St. James. Upon which they
expostulating with the Marshall desired him to bring an order in writing from
the General or his Council for their removal, they having never seen nor
heard of any warrant from them in writing for their former restraint: Whereupon
he repaired to the Genesis and returned with a warrant under his hand for their
removeall to St James about 6 of the clock. Upon reading whereof, they read a
Protestation drawn up in writing and signed with all their hands to this
effect: That they being Members of Parliament and Free men of England did
protest before God, Angels and Men, that neither the General himself nor his
Council of War, had any power or authority to seize, detain, imprison, or
remove their persons, nor to try them by a Council of War: And that they had
usurped to themselves a greater Arbitrary power over the Members of Parliament,
and Freemen of this Realm then ever this or any other King of England had
arrogated to himself etc. And that though they neither would nor could submit
to their usurped power, yet they would always be ready to submit themselves to
any trial by a free Parliament, for any crime that could or should be
suggested against them. Which when they had read, they tendered to the Marshall
to deliver it to the General and his Council, who refused to receive and left
it upon the Table. Some other Members there present, alleged to the Marshall,
That these proceedings of the Army against the Members by mere power without
any Authority at all, (by which alone the Marshall there openly affirmed the
General and Officers now proceeded) was as bad or worse then that of the Great
Turk or Ianizaries. That it was a far more arbitrary and tyrannical power
then ever the King or his evil Counselors, or the most persecuting Courts and
Prelates usurped or exercised, and that all their tyranny, oppression and
injustice was not comparable to theirs: That this was that the Officers and
Army protested against in all their Declarations, and professed they had fought
against, and therefore it was monstrous themselves should exercise such
Tyranny, and injustice now even upon Members themselves, and how then would
they tyrannize it over others? The standers by were deeply affected with this
new monstrous tyranny and persecution of Gallant Members and Commanders, who
had done such brave services for their Country, and were thus tossed up and
down at the lawless pleasure of ignoble and degenerous usurpers of more then
regal power, from prison to prison, and accompanying them to the coach and
there taking their farewells of them, they were guarded with Musketeers and
carried in the dark to Saint James prisoners, and there shut up in a foul room
where the Soldiers had layne some nights before, without hangings or bedding
to rest their heads upon, where they must lie all night upon the boards as they
did in Hell, if not otherwise provided for.

Certainly if these proud Officers of the Army, and Monsters of Tyranny had not
cast off all Humanity, all Christianity, all fear, all love of God or men, and
that Nobleness and ingenuity, which is incident to the rudest Soldiars toward
Soldiers and Gallant Commanders in the Wars as these Gentlemen have bin, and
quite degenerated, into beasts, they could not show such unheard of cruelty and
inhumanity to these Honorable Members and Patriots of their Country, and use
them more barbarously though their masters and friends, then usually they did
the worst Cavaliers, or then the King himself and his soldiers would have
treated them, had they taken them Prisoners in the field.

Doubtless this most execrable tyranny of these new Kings and Tyrants at
White Hall will engage both Heaven and earth unanimously against them, and
bring them unto fearful ends and speedy ruin, if they repent not, and return
to their pristine obedience. And their Commissions being forfeited and nulled,
the Soldiers absolutely discharged from any obedience to them, the Parliament
from any protection of them, the Kingdom from all contributions and taxes
toward them, and the Members, Kingdom and God himself enraged against them;
for this their exorbitant and matchless Tyranny, and horrid Rebellion in
levying w^rre upon the Houses, forcing and imprisoning their Members, and
casting them into Hell and other inconvenient places without any fitting
accomodations, they must of necessity suddenly fall, perish and become like dung
upon the earth, and of a most glorious and victorious Army, laden with Honor
and Booty, become the very scorn, sink and scumme of men, which God give them
hearts and grace to consider, before it be too late: and to remember that of
the Psalmist Psalm. 140. 11. Evil shall hunt the violent man to overthrow him.
It overthrew violent Strafford, and Laud this very Parliament and cost them
their heads and it will overthrow the Genesis and Council of war to, Who far
exceed them in violence and Tyranny of all sorts, and in overturning
Parliaments, Laws, Liberties, and the ancient Government of the Kingdom,
which have ever overturned those who have endeavored to subvert them, and
brought them to a dishonorable and shameful end.

Wednesday the 13 of December, the Officers of the Army kept out Sir John
Hippesley and Mr. Packer, and would not permit them to enter the House; where
they repealed the vote of the Commons on Monday the 4. of December, That the
King was removed from the Isle of Wight without the Privity or consent of the
House: There were out 45. in the house to repeal this vote passed by 240. and
those 45 are very eminent for their extreme honesty, and public receipts of
the Kingdoms Treasure. After which the Army Hackneyes repealed likewise the
vote of the fifth of December last passed by above 141 votes, that the Kings
Answer to the Propositions were a sufficient ground for them to proced to the
setlement of the Kingdom, which they desire to embroyle in perpetual wars and
broils, that they may keep their Offices, and what they have gotten into their
hands by hook or crook: whiles those who have spent their estates and
adventured their lives in these wars and have more honesty in their little
fingers, then those that sit in their whole bodies, are imprisoned and
restrained from the House by a company of Rebels, against their Superiors, to
give them no worse Title.

Thursday the 4th. of December, the fagge end of the Commons being about 43. in
number, considering that all the best and honest men were secluded from them by
the Army, and protested they were no House, moved that they might send to the
General to know upon what account their Members were restrained and secluded
by the Army, but with this unworthy addition, that they should carry with them
the Votes that passed the day before, for his Council of Wars approbation,
repealing what the excluded Members had formerly Voted a thing so dishonorable
and below A Parliament (if they were worthy the name of one) that they deserve
eternally to be excluded all future Parliaments, ex Cauda Draconem, you may see
what beasts they are by this Dragons tail.

The 20. of December the General sent for 16. of the imprisoned Members to his
lodging: where coming, Commissary Ireton, Col. Whaley, and Col. Rich
acquainted them that the General was fallen suddenly ill, and kept his
Chamber, and thererefore left them to acquaint them with his mind. That they
were all absolutely discharged; and had freely liberty to go to their lodgings
and houses; but did expect they should act nothing contrary to the present
actings; and if they did it would be the worse for them. To which they gave no
present answer, and will advise how they accept of Liberty upon such conditions.

FINIS.

