A Legal Vindication Of the Liberties of ENGLAND, AGAINST ILLEGAL TAXES And
pretended Acts of Parliament, Lately enforced on the PEOPLE: OR, Reasons
assigned by WILLIAM PRYNNE of Swainswick in the County of Sommerset, Esquire,
why he can neither in Conscience, Law, nor Prudence, submit to the New illegal
Tax or Contribution of Ninety thousand pounds the Month; Imposed on the Kingdom
by a pretended Act of some commons in (or rather out of) Parliament, April 7
1649. (when this was first penned and printed) nor to the One Hundred Thousand
pound per Mensem, newly laid upon England, Scotland and Ireland, Jan. 126.
1659. by a (...) of the old Commons. House, secluding the whole House of Lords,
and Majority of their hellow Members, by armed violence against all rules of
Law and Parliament Presidents.

Esaias 1. 7. He looked for Judgment, but behold Oppression; for Righteousness,
but behold a cry.

Psalm. 12. 5. For the Oppression of the Poor, for the sighing of the Needy; new
will I arise (says the Lord) and will set him in safety from him that would
ensnare him.

Exodus 6. 5. 6. I have also heard the groaning of the children of Israel, whom
the Egyptians keep in bandage; and I have remembered my Covenant. Wherefore say
unto the children of Israel, I am the Lord, and I will bring you out from under
the Burdens of the Egyptians; and I will rid you out of their Bondage; and I
will redeem you with a stretched out arm, and with great Judgments.

Eccles. 4. 1, 2. So I returned and considered all the Oppressions that are
done under the Sun, and beh^ld the tears of such as were oppressed, and they
had no comforter; and in the hand of their Oppressors there was power, but they
had no Comforter: Wherefore I praised the dead which are already dead, more
than the living which are yet alive.

The second Edition enlarged.

London, printed for Edw. Thomas at the Adam and Eve in Little Britain, 1660.

ERRATA.
PAge 4. l. 33. to, read by. p. 8. l. 1. Seclusion. l. 29. dele in. l. 31.
extended. p. 41. l. 10. on. p. 47. l. 2. only. p. 54. l 18. and, r. as. p. 57.
l. 4. it is. p. 62. l. 4. obsta. p. 71. l. 35. to. p. 71. l. 1. resolved. l. 8.
and, r. as. p. 79. l. 15. and, r. of.

Margin. P. 9. l. 9. 12, r. 17.

To the Ingenuous Reader.
THe Reasons originally inducing and in some sort necessitating me to compile
and publish this Legal Vindication, against Illegal Taxes and pretended Acts of
Parliament, imposed on the whole English Nation, in the year 1649. by a small
remnant of the Commons House, sitting under an armed Force, abjuring the King
and House of Lords, and unjustly secluding the Majority of their
Fellow-Commoners, against the very tenor of the Act of 17 Caroli, c. 6. by
which they pretended to sit, the letter of the Writs by which they were
elected, and those Indentures by which they were returned Members, the Oaths of
Supremacy, and Allegiance, Protestation, Solemn National League and Covenant
which they all took as Members; the very first Act of Parliament made and
printed after their first sitting, 16 Caroli, c. 1. and many hundreds of
Declarations, Remonstrances, Orders, Ordinances, Votes, from Nov. 3. 1640. to
Dec. 5. 1648. have constrained me now to reprint it with some necessary and
useful Additions in the year 1659. above ten years after its first
Publication: Those very Rumpers, who on the 7th. of April 1649. imposed a Tax
of Ninety thousand Pounds the Month on England alone, having on the 26. of
January, 1659. presumed to lay a new Tax of no less than One hundred thousand
pounds the Month, for six Months next ensuing, on England, Scotland, and on
Ireland too, (never taxed in former Ages by entire undubitable English
Parliaments) when as by their former Order, they advanced and paid in before
hand a heavy Tax (illegally imposed on them by a Protectorian Conventicle)
during those very Months for which they are now taxed afresh far higher than
before, though totally exhausted with former incessant Taxes, Freequarter,
Militia expenses, Imposts of all sorts, and utterly undone for want of Trade;
and all to keep them in perpetual Bondage under armed Gards, and Iron yoaks,
under pretext of making them a New Free State and Commonwealth, of the
Jesuits projection, perpetually to subvert our ancient hereditary Monarchy,
Kingdom, and true old English See Fortescue de Laudibus Legum Angliae, and Sir
Thomas Smith De Republica Anglicana 16 Car. c. 1.
Commonwealth, under which we formerly lived, and flourished with greater
freedom, splendour, honor, peace, safety, unity, and prosperity, than we can
See Rastal, Title Taxes, Tallages, The Acts for Subsidies of the Clergy and
Temporalty.
ever expect under any new Form of Government or Utopian Republic whatsoever
our whimsical Innovators can erect.

When our Parliaments under our ancient and late Kings granted any Aids,
Subsidies, Imposts, to supply the public Necessities, as they were always
moderate, and temporary, not exceeding the present Necessities, and the Peoples
abilities to pay them; so they ever received some Acts of Grace and Retribution
from our Kings, and New Confirmations of their Great Charters, and Fundamental
Laws and Liberties, recorded in our Parliament Rolls and Statutes at large.

But our New Republicans, worse than the old Egyptian Pharoes and Tax-Masters,
double our Bricks, Taxes, yet deny us straw and materials to make or defray
them redressing none of all our public Grievances, nor easing us of any unjust
burdens or oppressions whatsoever, nor indulging any Graces or Favors to us,
nor yet so much as preserving, or confirming our old Grand Charte^s,
Fundamental Laws, Statutes, for the preservation of our Lives, Liberties,
Properties, Franchises, Freeholds but violating them all in a far high: and
more presumptuous degree, than Strafford, Canterbury, the Shipmony Judges, or
any of our Kings, whom they brand for Tyrants, and that after all our late wars
and contests for their defense.

Upon which account, I held it my bounden duty, to enlarge and reprint this
Vinaication, nor out of any Factious or Seditions design, but from the impulse
of a true Heroic English public spirit, and Zeal to defend my Native
Countries undubitable Hereditary Rights, against all arbitrary Tyrannical
Usurpations and Impostors whatsoever* though arrogating to themselves the Title
and power of The Parl. of England, when their own Judgments, Consciences, as
well as all our ancient Statutes, Parliament Rolls, Laws, Judges, Law Books and
Treatises of English Parliaments, resolve them, to be no Parliament at all, but
an See My Memento to the p^esent Un-Parliamentary Juncto, Prynne the Member
reconciled to Prynne the Barreste^, and True and perfect Narrative, May 7. and
9. 1659.
Anti-Parliamentary Conventicle. If I now lose my life (as I have formerly done
my Liberty, Calling and Estate) for this public cause, I shall repu^e it the
greatest earthly Honor and (...) to dye a Ma^^^^ for my dying Country, and to
redeem her lost Liberti^s, with the loss of my momentary life, which will be
more i^ksome to me, than the (...) Death, if protracted only to behold those
ruins and desolations, which some Grandees Tyrannies, and Bedlam exorbitances
are like speedily to bring upon her, unless God himself, by his Miraculous
Provi^^n^^s reflrain their Fury, abate their Power, and confound their
Destructive Des^gns beyond all humane expectation as he has done of late, and
I trust he will s^dainly do again, to the rejoicing and reviving of all good
men. Which is the hope and expectation,

of thine and his Native Countries true Friend and Servant William Prynne.
Lincolns Inn, Feb. 12. 1659.
A Legal Vindication of the Liberties and Properties of all ENGLISH FREEMEN
Against ILLEGAL TAXES: OR, REASONS Assigned By WILLIAM PRYNNE, etc.
BEing on the 7th. of this instant June, 1649. informed by the Assessors of the
Parish of Swainswicke, that I was assessed at 2 l. 5 s. for Three Months
Contribution, by virtue of a (pretended) Act of the Commons assembled in
Parliament, bearing date the seventh of April last, assessing the Kingdom at
Ninety thousand pounds Monthly, beginning from the 25 of March last, and
continuing for Six months next ensuing, toward the maintenance of the Forces
to be continued in England and Ireland, and the paying of such as are thought
fit to be disbanded, that so Free Quarter may be taken off; whereof 3075 l. 17
s. 1 d. ob. is monthly imposed on the County, and 4 l. 5 s. 3 d. on the small
poor Parish where I live; and being since on the fifteenth of June required to
pay in 2 l. 5 s. for my proportion; I returned the Collector this Answer, That
I could neither in Conscience, Law, nor Prudence in the least measure, submit
to the voluntary payment of this illegal Tax, and unreasonable Contribution,
(after all my unrepaired losses and sufferings for the public Liberty)
amounting to six times more than SHIP MONEY, (the times considered) or any
other illegal Tax of the late beheaded King, so much declaimed against in our
three last Parliaments, by some of those who imposed this. And that I would
rather submit to the painfullest death and severest punishment the Imposers or
Exactors of it could inflict upon me by their arbitrary power (for legal they
had none) than voluntarily pay, or not oppose it in my place and calling to the
uttermost; upon the some, if not better reasons, ^^ I oppugned See my Humble
Remonstrance against Ship Money.
Ship Money, Knighthood, and other unlawful Impositions of the late King and
his Council heretofore. And that they and all the world might bear witness, I
did it not from mere obstinacy or sullenness, but out of solid real grounds of
Conscience, Law, Prudenoe, and public affection to the weal and liberty of my
native Country (now in danger of being ensl^ved under a new vassallage, more
g^ievous than the worst it ever yet sustained under the late, or any other of
our worst Kings) I promised to draw up the Reasons of this my resusal in
writing, and to publish them, so soon as possible, to the Kingdom for my own
Vindication, and the better Information and satisfaction of all such as are any
ways concerned in the imposing, collecting, levying or paying of this strange
kind of Contribution. In pursuance whereof, I immediately penned these ensuing
Reasons, against that Tax in 1649. which I augmented with some new additions*
against the hundred thousand pound Tax each month imposed on us, by our worse
then Egyptian Jan. 26. 1659.
Tax-Masters now; for those very six ensuing months space, they paid in long
since, before they became due, by their forced Exactions and Distresses,
against all rules of Justice, Law, Conscience, and presidents of former times;
which I humbly submit to the impartial Censure of all conscientious and
judicious Englishmen: desiring either their ingenuous Refutation, if erroneous;
or candid Approbation, if substantial and irrefragable, as my conscience and
judgment persuade me they are, and that they will appear so to all impartial
Perusers, after full examination.

First, By the fundamental Laws, and known Statutes of this Realm, No Tax,
Tallage, Aid, Imposition, Contribution, Loan or Assessement whatsoever, may or
ought to be imposed or levied on the free men and people of this Realm of
England, but by the WILL and COMMON ASSENT of the EARLS, BARONS, Knights,
Burgesses, Commons, and WHOLE REALM in a free and full PARLIAMENT, by ACT OF
PARLIAMENT: All Taxes, etc. not so imposed, levied (though for the common
defense and profit of the Realm) being unjust, oppressive, inconsistent with
the Liberty and Property of the Subject, Laws and Statutes of the Realm; as is
undeniably evident by the express Statutes of Magna Charta, cap. 29, 30. 25. E.
1. c. 5, 6. 34. E. 1. De Tallagio non concodendo, c. 1. 14 E. 3. Stat. 1. c.
21. Stat. 2. c. 1. 15. E. 3. Stat. 2. c. 1. Stat. 3. cap. 5. 21. E. 3. Rot.
Parl. n. 16. 25. E. 3. c. 8. Rot. Parl. n. 15. 27. E. 3. Stat. 2. c. 2. 36. E.
3. Rot. Parl. n. 26. 38. E. 3. c. 2. and Rot. Parl. n. 40. 45. E. 3. Rot. Parl.
n. 42. 51. E. 3. Rot. Parl. n. 25. 11 H. 4. Rot. Parl. n. 10. 1. R. 3. c. 2.
The Petition of Right, and Resolutions of both Houses against Loans, 3. Caroli:
The Votes and Acts against Ship Money, Knighthood, Tonnage and Poundage, and
the Star Chamber this last Parliament, Ann. 16. and 17. Car. c. 8. 12. 14. 20.
And fully argued and demonstrated by Mr. William Hackwell in his Argument
against Impositions, Judge Hutton and Judge Crook in their Arguments, and Mr. St.
John in his Argument and Speech against Ship Money, with other Arguments and
Discourses of that subject: Sir Edward Cook in his 2 Instit. (published by
Order of the Commons House) page 59. 60* etc. 527, 528, 529, 532, 533, etc.
with sundry other Records and Law Books cited by those great Rabbis of the Law
and Patriots of the Peoples Liberties. But the present Tax of Ninety Thousand
pounds a Month, now exacted of me, An. 1649. and this of an Hundred thousand
pounds each month now demanded, was not thus imposed. Therefore it ought not
to be demanded of, or levied of me; and I ought in conscience, law and prudence
to withstand it as unjust, oppressive, inconsistent with the Liberty and
Property of the Subject, Laws and Statutes of the Realm; even by the Junctoes
Knack of Oct. 11. 1659.

To make good the Assumption, which is only questionable.

First, This Tax was not imposed in, but out of Parliament, the late Parliament
being actually dissolved above two months before this pretended Act, by these
Tax-imposers taking away the King by a violent death, as is expressly resolved
by the Parliament of 1 H. 4. Rot. Parl. N. 1. by the Parliament of 14 H. 4. and
1 H. 5. Rot. Parl. N. 26. Cook 4. Institutes p. 46. and 4 E. 4. 44. See 1 E. ^
cap. 7. Cook 7. Report. 30, 31. Dyer 165. 4 Ed. 4. 43, 44, 1 E. 5. 1 Book
Commission. 10, 21.
and I have largely and irrefragably proved: in my true and perfect Narrative,
1659. For the King being both the Head, beginning, end and foundation of the
Parliament (as Modus tenendi Parliamentum: and Sir Edward Cooks 4 Instit. p. 3.
resolve) which was summoned and constituted only by his writ, now actually
abated by his death: and the Parliament (as is evident by the clauses of the
several Writs of Summons to Cromptons Jurisdiction of Courts. fol. 1. Cook 4.
Instit. c. 1.
the Lords, and for the election of the Knights and Burgesses, and levying of
their wages) being only PARLIAMENTUM NOSTRUM, the Kings Parliament that is
dead, not his Heirs and Successors; and the Lords and Commons being all
summoned and authorized by it to come to OUR PARLIAMENT, there to be personally
present, and confer with US (NOBISCUM, not Our Heirs and Successors) of the
weighty and urgent affairs that concerned (NOS) US and OUR KINGDOM of England;
and Knights and Burgesses receiving their wages for, Nuper ad NOS ad
PARLIAMENTVM NOSTRUM veniendo, etc. quod sommoneri FECINUS, ad tractandum
ibidem super diversis and arduis Negotiis NOS and Statum REGNI NOSTRI
t^ngentibus, as the tenor of the 5 E. 3. m. 6. part. 2. Dors. Claus. Regist. f.
192. 200.
Writs for their wages determines. The King being dead, and his Writs and
Authority by which they were summoned, with the ends for which they were called
(to confer with US, about US and OUR KINGDOMS affairs, etc. being thereby
absolutely determined, without any hopes of revival; the Parliament it self
must thereupon absolutely be determined likewise (especially to those who have
disinherited HIS HEIRS and SUCCESSORS, and voted down our Monarchy it self) and
they with all other Members of Parliament, cease to be any longer Members of
it, being made only such by the Kings abated Writ; even as all Judges,
Justices of peace, and Sheriffs made only by the Kings Writs or Commissions,
not by his Letters Patents, cease to be, Judges, Justices, and Sheriffs by the
Kings death, for this very reason, because they are constituted Justiciarios
and Vicecomites NOSTROS, ad Pacem NOSTRAM, etc. custodiendam; and he being
dead, and his Writs and Commissions expired by his death, they can be Our
Judges, Justices, and Sheriffs no longer, to preserve OUR Peace, etc. (no more
than a wife can be her deceased Husbands Wife, and bound to his obedience, from
which she was loosed to his death, Romans 7. 2, 3.) And his Heirs and Successors
they cannot be, unless he please to make them so by his new Writs or
Commissions, as all our 4 Ed. 4. 44. 1 E. 5. 1. Brook Commissions. 19. 21. and
Officer, 25. Dyer. 165. Cook. 7. Report, 30. 31. 1 E. 6. c. 7. Daltons Justice
of Peace, c. 3. p. 13 Lambert. p. 71.
Law Books and Judges have frequently resolved upon this very reason, which
equally extends to Members of Parliament, as to Judges, Justices and Sheriffs,
as is agreed in 4 E. 4. f. 43, 44. and Brook, Office and Officer, 25, Therefore
this Tax being clearly imposed not in, but out of, and after the Parliament
ended by the Kings decapitation, and that by such who were then no lawful
Knights, Citizens, Burgesses, or Members of Parliament, but only private men,
their Parliamentary Authority expiring with the King, it must needs be illegal,
and contrary to all the forecited Statutes; as the Convocations and Clergies
Tax and Benevolence granted after the Parliament dissolved in the year 1640.
was resolved to be, by both Houses of Parliament, and those adjudged high
Delinquents who had any hand in promoting it, as the Impeachments against them
evidence, drawnup by some now acting.

2. Admit the late Parliament still in being, yet the House of Peers, Earls,
and Barons of the Realm were no ways privy nor consenting to this Tax imposed
without, yea, against their consents, in direct affront of their See my Plea
for the Lords and House of Peers.
most ancient undubitable Parliamentary Right and Privileges, (these Taxmasters
having presumed to vote down and null their very House, by their new encroached
transcendent power) as appears by the title and body of this pretended Act,
entitled by them, An Act of THE COMMONS assembled in Parliament: Whereas the
House of Commons alone, though full and free, have no more lawful Authority to
impose any Tax upon the People, or make any Act of Parliament or binding Law
without the Kings or Lords concurrence, than the Man in the Moon, or the
Convocation, Anno 1640. after the Parliament dissolved (as is evident by the
express words of the forecited Acts, the Petition of Right it self; the Acts
for the Triennial Parliament; and against the proroguing or dissolving this
Parliament, 16 Car. c. 1, and 7. with all our printed Statutes, 14 R. 2. n. 15.
11 H 4. n. 30. 13 H. 4. n. 25.
Parliament-Rolls, and 4 H. 7. 18. b. 7 H. 7. 27. Fortescue, c. 18. f 20 Dyer,
92. B^ook Parliament, 76, 197. Cooks 4. Institut. p. 25.
Law Books: they neither having nor challenging the sole Legislative power in
any age; and being not so much as summoned to, nor constitutive M^mbers of our
See the Freeholders grand Inquest. My Plea for the Lords.
ancient Parliaments, (which consisted of the King, Spiritual and Temporal
Lords, without any Knights, Citizens or Burgesses, as all our Histories and
Records attest) till 49 H. 3. at soonest; they having not so much as a Speaker
or Commons House, till after the beginning of King E. the third's reign, and
seldom or never presuming to make or tender any Bills or Acts to the King or
Lords, but Petitions only to them, to redress their grievances and enact new
Laws, till long after R. the seconds time, as our Parliament Rolls, and the
printed Prologues to the Statutes of 1, 4, 5, 9, 10, 20, 23, 36, 37. and 50
Edw. 3. 1 Rich 3. 1, 2, 4, 5, 7, 9, 11, 13 Hen. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 8 9 Hen. 5. 1,
2, 3, 4, 6, 8, The 1, and 2, Part of my Register of Parliamentary Writs, and
exact Ab. idgement of the Records in ^^e Tower, my Historical Collection, part
1, 2. c. 3.
9, 10, 11, 14, 15, 29, 28, 29. 39 Hen. 6. 1, 4, 7, 8, 12, 17. 22 Ed. 4. and 1
Rich. 3. evidence (which run all in this form, At the Parliament holden, etc.
by THE ADVICE and ASSENT OF THE LORDS SPIRITUAL and TEMPORAL, and at THE
SPECIAL INSTANCE and REQUEST OF THE COMMONS OF THE REALM, (BY THEIR PETITIONS
put in the said Parliament, as some Prologues have it.) Our Lord the King has
caused to be ordained, or ordained certain STATVTES, etc.) Where the advising
and assenting to Laws is appropriated to the Lords; the ordaining of them to
the King; and nothing but the requesting of, and petitioning for them to the
Commons, and that both from King and Lords, in whom the Legislative power
principally, and before 49 H. 3. originally and solely resided, as is manifest
by the printed Prologue to the Statute of Merton, 20 Hen. 3. The Statute of
Mortemain, 7 E. 1. 31 E. 1. De Asportatis Religiosorum, the Statute of
Sheriffs, 9 Ed. 2. and of the Templers, 17 Ed. 2. to cite no more. Therefore
this Tax imposed by the Commons alone without King or Lords, must needs be
void, illegal, and no ways obligatory to the Subjects.

3. Admit the whole House of Commons in a full and free Parliament had power to
impose a Tax, and make an Act of Parliament for levying of it without King or
Lords; (which they never once did, or pretended to in any age) yet this Act and
Tax can be no ways obliging, because not made and imposed by a full and free
House of Commons, but by an empty House, packed, swayed, overawed by the chief
Officers of the Army, and their Confederates in the House, who having presumed
by mere force, and See my Speech, Dec. 4. 1648. and a full Declation of the
true state of the Case of the Secluded Members.
armed power, against Law and without President, to seclude the major part of
the House (at least eight parts of ten) who by Law and Custom are the House it
self, from sitting or voting with them, contrary to the Freedom and Privileges
of Parliament; readmitting none but upon their own terms of renouncing their
own form, Votes touching the Kings Concessions, and taking their new
treasonable Engagements, against the King, Kingship, and House of Lords. An
usurpation not to be paralel'd in any age, destructive to the very being of
Parliaments; (i) Cooks 4. Institutes p. 1. 5 R. 2. Stat. 2. c. 4.
Where all Members of both Houses are ex debito Justitiae, wi^h equal Freedom
to meet and speak their mind^: injurious to all those Counties, Cities,
Borough^, whose Knights, Citizens and Burgesses are secluded, and to the whole
Kingdom; yea, contrary to all rules of reason, justice* policy, conscience, and
their own Agreement of the people, which inhibit the Populi Minor pars, Populum
non obigit. Grotius de Jure Belli. l. 2. c. 15. sect. 3. Alexander ab
Alexandro. Genesis dierum. l. 4. c. 11.
far lesser part of any Council, Court or Committee, to oversway, seclude or
fore-judg the major number of their Assessors, and fellow members, over whom
they can no ways pretend the least jurisdiction; it being the high way to usher
Tyranny and confusion into all Councels, and Realms, to their utter
dissolution; since the King alone without the Lords and Commons, or the Lords
alone without the King or Commons, may by this new device make themselves an
absolute Parliament to impose Taxes and enact Laws without the Commons, or any
other forty or fifty Commoners meeting together without their companions, and
secluding them by force, do the like, as well as this remnant of the Commons
make themselves a complete Parliament without the King, Lords, or Majority of
their Fellow Members, if they can but now or hereafter raise an Army to back
them in it, as the Army did those sitting 1648. and 1649. and those sitting in
1659 have done, secluding the majority of their old Fellow Members by mere
armed Violence.

4. Suppose this Tax should bind those Counties, Cities, and Burronghs, whose
Knights, Citizens and Burgesses sat and consented to it when imposed, (though
I dare swear much against the minds and wills of all or most of those they
represent; who by the (k) Armies*new Doctrine, may justly question and revoke
their (a) Declarat. Nov. 28. and 30. 1648.
authority for this high breach of Trust; the rather, because the Knights and
Burgesses assembled in the first Parliament of 13. E. 3. Rot. Parl. n. 8. did
all refuse to grant a great extraordinary Subsidy demanded of them (though not
comparable to this) for the necessary defense of the Kingdom against foraign
Enemies, till they had conferred with the Counties and Buroughs for which they
served, and gained their assents:) Yet there is no shadow of Reason, Law or
Equity, it should oblige any of the Secluded Members themselves, whereof I am
one; or those Counties, Cities, Buroughs, whose Knights, Citizens and
Burgesses have been secluded or scared thence by the Armies or sitting Members
fraud, force, violence, or illegal Votes for their seculsion; who absolutely
disavow this Tax and Act as un-parliamentary, illegal, and never assented to
by them in the least degree; since the only 39. Ed. 3. 7. 4. H. 7. 10. Brook
Parl. 26. 40. Cook 4. Instit. p. 1. 25, 26. 1 Jac. cap. 1.
reason in Law, or equity, why Taxes or Acts of Parliament oblige any Member,
County, Borough or Subject, is, because they are parties, and consenting
thereunto either in proper person, or by their chosen Representatives in
Parliament; returned and authorized by Indentures under their Seals, it being a
recieved Maxim in all Laws, Claus. 23. E. 1. m. 24. dorso.
Quod tang it omnes, ab omnibus debet approbari. Upon which reason it is judged
in our 49. E. 3. 18, 19. 21. H. 7. 4. Brook Customs 6. 32.
Law Books, That Bylaws oblige only those who are parties, and consent unto
them, but not strangers, or such who assented not thereto. And (which comes
fully to the present case) in 7. H. 6. 35. 8. H. 6. 34. Brook Ancient Demesne
20. and Patl. 17. 101. it is resolved; That ancient Demesne is a good plea in a
Writ of Wast, upon the Statutes of Wast, because those in ancient Demesne were
not parties to the making of them, FOR THAT THEY HAD NO KNIGHTS NOR BURGESSES
IN PARLIAMENT, nor contributed to their expenses. And Judge Brook Parliament
101. has this observable Note, It is most frequently found, that Wales and
County palatines, WHICH CAME NOT TO THE PARLIAMENT (in former times, which now
they do) SHALL NOT BE BOUND BY THE PARLIAMENT OF ENGLAND: for ancient Demesne
is a good Plea in an action of Wast, and yet ancient Demesne is not excepted;
and it is enacted 2. Ed. 6. cap. 28. That Fines and Proclamations shall be in
Chester, for the former Statutes did not extend to it: And it is enacted, That
a Fine and Proclamation shall be in Lancaster. 5. and 6. Ed. 6. c. 26. And in a
Proclamation upon an e^igent is given by the Statute in Chester, and Wales, 1
E. 6. c. 20. And by another Act to Lancaster. 5. and 6. E. 5. c. 26. And the
Statute of Justices of Peace extented not to Wales, and the County palatine;
and therefore an Act was made for Wales and Chester, 27. H. 8. c. 5. who had
Knights and Burgesses appointed by that Parliament, for that and future
Parliaments, by Act of Parliament, 27. Hen. 8. cap. 26. since which they have
continued, their wages being to be levied by the Statute of 35. H. 8. c. 11.
Now, if Acts of Parliament bound not Wales and Counties Palatines, which had
anciently no Knights nor Burgesses in Parliament to represent them, because
they neither personally nor representatively were parties and consenters to
them; much less then can or ought this heavy Tax, and illegal Act, 1649, or
those of 1659. to bind those Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, or the Counties,
Cities and Buroughs they represent, who were forcibly secluded, or driven away
from the Parliament by the confederacy, practice, orders, commands, or
connivance at least, of those now sitting, who imposed these Taxes, and passed
these strange Acts, as the recited Lawbooks, and the later Clauses in all Writs
for electing Knights and Burgesses resolve, much less to oblige Scotland and
Ireland, who have The 1. part of the Parliamentary writs p. 411, to 422. Cooks
4 Instit. 75, 76, 1 Iac. c. 1, 2. Iac c. 3, 4. 7 Iac. c. 1. 12 Car. c. 17.
Parliaments of their own, and have, yea ought to have no Members sitting for
them in the English Parliaments, who seldom or never imposed Taxes on Scotland
or Ireland heretofore, whose taxes were only imposed by their own Parliaments,
as is evident by claus. 46 E. 3. m. 25. and claus. 47 E. 3. m. 3. My Plea for
the Lords, p. 426, 427, 2 R. 2 f. 11, 12. Brook Parliament 98. 20 H. 6. f. 8.
Fitz. Prescription 7. and Brook Prescription 4. They being not so much as a
Parliament of England, much less of Scotland and Ireland, (as they style
themselves) and having no authority by their writs of Elections and Indentures,
to treat or consult of any businesses, but only such as touch and concern the
Kingdom of England, not the Kingdoms of Scotland and Ireland, not mentioned in
the Writs or Indentures of their Elections: Especially, because those Taxes,
are thus imposed by them for the support and continuance of those Officers and
that Army, who traitorously seized and secluded the Members from the House, and
yet detain some of them Prisoners, against all Law and Justice, and have often
secluded them since: and because the secluded Members are the far major part
(above six times as many as those that sat and shut them out by force) and
would no ways have consented to these illegal Taxes, or the undue manner of
imposing them, without the Lords concurrence, had they been present. And, I my
self, being both an unjustly imprisoned and secluded Member, and neither of the
Knights of the County of Somerset, where I live, present or consenting to these
Acts or Taxes, (both of them being forced thence by the Army, and sitting
Members, and one of them now dead, and the other excluded) I conceive neither
my self nor the County where I live, nor the Borough for which I served, nor
the people of these Kingdoms, in the least measure bound by these Acts or
Taxes, but clearly exempted from them, and obliged with all our might and power
effectually to oppose them.

If any here object, That by the custom of Parliament, forty Object.
members only are sufficient to make a Commons House of Parliament, and there
were at least so many present when this Tax was imposed: Therefore it is valid,
obligatory both to the secluded Members and the Kingdom.

I answer: First, That though regularly it be true, that forty members are
sufficient to make a Commons House to begin Answ.
prayers, and businesses of lesser moment, in the beginning of the day, till
the other Members come, and the House be full; yet 40. were never in any
Parliament reputed a competent number to grant Subsidies, Taxes, pass or read
Bills, or debate or conclude matters of greatest moment; which by the constant
Rules, and usage of Parliament, were never debated, concluded, passed, but in a
free and sull House, when all or most of the Members were present, as the
Parliament Rolls, Journals, Modus tenendi Parliamentum, Sir Edward Cooks 4
Institutes, p. 1. 2. 26. 35. 36. Cromptons Jurisdiction of Courts, f. 1. etc.
39. E. 3. 7. Brook Parliament. 27. 1 Jac. c. 1. and the many Records I have
cited to this purpose in my Levellers Ievelled, my Plea for the Lords, and
Memento p. 10. the exact Abridgement of the Records in the Tower, p. 11. 13 14.
19. 31. 36. 43. 46. 50. 51. 66. 69. 73. 74. 78. 90. 92. 96. 105. 120. 144. 152,
154. 167. 169. 173. 182. 188. 193. 195. 202. 281. 286. 287. 290. 298. 308. 318.
318. 331. 335. 371. 373. 392. 426, 427. 428. 430. 439. 440. 450. 454. 555. 464.
465. 665. 750. abundantly prove beyond contradiction; for which cause the
Members ought to be fined, and lose their wages, if absent without special
License, as Modus tenendi Parliamentum, 5 R. 2. Par. 2. c. 4. 9. H. 8. c. 16.
and A Collection of all Orders, etc. of the late Parliament, p. 224. 357. with
the frequent summoning and fining absent Members evidence.

Secondly, though forty Members only may peradventure make an House in case of
absolute necessity, when the rest through sickness, and public or private
occasions: are voluntarily or negligently absent; and might freely repair
thither to sit or give their Votes if they pleased: yet forty Members never yet
made a Commons House by custom of Parliament (there being never any such case
till now) when the rest (being above four times their number) were forcibly
secluded or driven thence by an Army raised to defend them, through the
practice, connivance or command of those forty or fifty sitting, of purpose
that they should not over nor counter-vote them; much less an House to
sequester or expel the other Members, or impose any Tax upon them. Till they
show me such a Law, Custom or President (not to be found in any age) all they
pretend is nothing to purpose, or the present case.

3ly. The visible horrid, armed force upon both Houses of Parliament,
suppressing and secluding the whole House of Peers, See my Plea for the Lords
and House of Peers, and Historical Collection of the Great Councils and
Parliaments, and Fundamental Rights, Laws, and Liberti^^ of all English Freemen.
against their undoubted hereditary and most ancient right to sit and vote in
all Parliaments of England, ratified by the first Act made this Parliament, 16
Car. c. 1. and the Act for the continuance thereof, 17 Car. c. 7. by pretext
whereof the Members now sit; their forcible seclusion of the far greatest part
of the House of Commons only for their Vote of Dec. 5. 1648. to settle the
peace of the Kingdoms, after a long-lasting intestine war, upon most safe and
honorable terms, by the Army raised for their defense to sit and vote in
safety; as it totally subverts all the rights, Privileges, and Constitution of
our Parliaments, so it utterly nalls all their Votes, Orders, Ordinances,
Taxes, and Impositions whatsoever to all intents; as I shall evidence beyond
contradiction.

1. By Printed by it self, and in a Declaration of the Engagements and
Remonstrances, etc. of the General, and General Council of Officers of the
Army. London 1647 p. 107. 108.
the Declaration of WILLIAM LENTHAL Esquire, SPEAKER of the Honorable HOUSE OF
COMMONS, Printed July 29. 16 7. by his direction then; and rising up in
Judgment against him and all his sitting Conventicles, ever since the forcible
exclusion of the most of their Fellow Members, and the Lords, by their express
order and confederacy.

A Declaration of William Lenthall Esquire, Speaker of the Honorable House of
Commons.
ALthough it may happily be contrary to the expectation of some, that I attend
not the service of the House of Commons at this time, as I have constantly done
for 7. years last. past, yet can it not be reasonably expected by any that well
consider the Is there not a greater, longer, force and violence offered to both
Houses ever since Dec 1648. by aimed soldiers, than that by the unarmed
Apprentices, but for a few hours?
violence offered to both Houses of Parl. and to my self in particular on
Monday last; insomuch that I can safely take it upon my conscience, and so I
doubt not may all the Members of both Houses also, they sat in continual fear
of their lives, and by terror thereof, were compelled to pass such Votes as
it pleased an unruly multitude to force upon them; which as I did then openly
declare in the House, so I cannot but believe, that they are all void, and
null, being extorted by force and violence, and in that manner that they were;
and How can you dispense with your self, to fit since Dec. 6. and passing
Votes, to seclude and exclude the Lords and your fellow Members, and to Tax
them at your pleasure, and not believe them void and null?
I cannot any longer dispense with my self to be an instrument in passing such
Votes, or to give any color or shadow of Parliamentary authority unto them,
which are not the Votes of the representative body of the Kingdom, but of a
tumultuous multitude; as those must needs be accounted, that seemed to pass
the House on Monday last, and which shall pass hereafter, until better
provision be made for the safe and free sitting of the Houses of Parliament;
there being no effectual Nor yet by those now sitting against the Lords and our
forcible exclusion, but new votes in justification thereof?
course taken by the City since the last adjournment of the Houses, to prevent
the like tumults for the future, no nor so much as a Declaration from them to
show their dislike thereof. But on the contrary, it is generally voyced in the
Town, that there will be a far greater confluence of Apprentices, Reformadoes,
and others, on Friday at the Parliaments doors; and particularly notice was
given to me that after they The Army could not with all their power and
menaces, enforce the s^cluded Members to Vote against their Judgments and
Consciences? ec. 4. 1648.
had made the House Vote what they please, they would destroy me. I had
likewise information given me, that there would be a great number of
Apprentices of a contrary Opinion and affections to the other, about the
Parliament doors on Friday morning, which I foresaw must of necessity cause a
great combustion, and in probability occasion much bloodshed; the preventing
of which mischiefs, together with the considerations aforesaid, have weighed
more with me than any thing which may concern my particular, and especially
having served the House faithfully and diligently for the space of very near
seven years, Why have and do you yet serve the Juncto in a false and
Anti-Parliamentary way near as many years more, to abuse and deceive them?
in a true and Parliamentary way of proceedings, that I might not now be made a
servant to such a multitude to transfer upon them the color of Parliamentary
authority, there withal to abuse and deceive the minds, and to Have you not
done it since in the highest degree by High Courts of Justice, securing,
secluding, imprisoning, banishing, disanheriting thousands, and imposing Taxes
and Excises on them against all our Laws?
destroy the lives, liberties, and estates of the people of this Kingdom; And
having taken a Have you nor conscientiously observed them, by secluding,
ejecting the Lords, and your fellow Members? by subverting all Rights,
Privileges of Parliament, and Liberties of the Subject?
solemn Protestation and Covenant in my place and calling, to maintain the
privileges of Parliament, and the Rights and Liberties of the Subjects, I could
not now satisfy my self, but by Why do you not now much more absent your
selves upon the same account?
absenting my self at this time, rather than by my presence to give any shadow
or countenance of the authority of Parliament to such apparent violations
thereof. Neither can the omission of a circumstance, or some formality in the
adjournments of the House, (when through force and violence it cannot meet and
sit in any sort as a Parliament) be any prejudice to the future meetings and
proceedings thereof, when it may meet and sit again as a free Parliament, it
being well known, that nothing can dissolve this Parliament but an Act of
Parliament.

When a company of Apprentices, Reformadoes and others, shall call the
Ordinances of Parliament, pretended Ordinances; shall If it was so great a
crime to lock and keep them in the House? Was, yea is it not a far worse and
g^eater crime in you and your Juncto, to lock the Lords and your fellow
Members, and keep them forcibly o^t of the Houses for so many years till you
have passed what new Vores, and set up what new Government, and imposed what
Tixes you please upon them against their wills?
lock the doors of the Houses upon them, shall swear, not to let them out till
they had passed what they pleased concerning the Militia of London, and other
things, (though the Houses had immediately before voted otherwise,) shall
threaten the Houses in case they did not instantly fatisfie their demands;
shall knock, whoot, and hollow continually at the Parliament door, that the And
is it not a greater breach of ptivilege for you to vote out most of the Members
without hearing them?
Members could not be heard to speak or debate; and after that the House of
Commons had passed a Vote concerning the Militia of London, and that the
Speaker by the Vote had judged the The Major Vote therefore Dec. 4. 1648 ought
to carry it as well as then.
major part to be for the Negative, shall not suffer the House to be divided,
but in a thr eatning way require those that Did you not far worse in seeuring,
^^cluding, imprisoning, ejecting the majority of your Fellow Members, only for
voting against the minority, Dec. 4?
gave their votes againstth em, to corn out to them if they would; when after
the House was adjourned, they shall by main force thrust back the Speaker again
into the House, and force the Members in their presence and sight (diverse of
them thrusting into the House) to vote what they demanded: when they shall
justle pull and hale the Speaker all the way he went down to his Cosch, and
force him to avoid their violence to betake himself to the next Coach he could
get into, for Refuge: when they shall breath forth bloody threats against the
Members as they came out of the House, and since against me in particular at
the next meeting of the House (as I am credibly informed) and where there is no
appearance, but that they will continue to do as formerly they have done, or
far worse on Friday, And can you discharge them by sitting now, when the
Majority of the Members and Lords are secluded, and sorcibly kept out by your
Orders, and not permitted to sit with freedom and safety?
I couldnot in discharge of my Trust, Protestation and Covenant, sit in the
Chair of the House of Commons whilst it shall be iu such a condition: but so
soon as it may sit again in freedom and safety, I shall be ready to attend she
service thereof; but till then, as I have upon the forementioned grounds, fully
satisfied my own Conscience, so I doubt not but I shall give the whole Kingdom
(whose interest is most concerned in it) ample satisfaction in the necessity of
my absence.

William Lenthall, Speaker,

2ly. By the Engagement of those Lords and Commons that went to the Army after
the Apprentices transitory forc^, upon the Army Officers invitation) who
subscribed their names thereto, with some others who continued sitting in the
Houses.

Die Mercurii quarto Augusti 1647.
WE the Members of both Houses of Parliament who absent our selves from the
service of the Parliament, Was not the armea sorce, secluding and keeeping away
most of the Members since 1648. sar worse than this?
by reason of the force and violence offered thereunto, by a tumultuous
multitude; having received from his Excellency, Sir Thomas Fairfax, a
Declaration, entitled, a Declaration of his Exceliency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and
his Council of War, on the behalf of themselves and the whole Army, showing the
grounds of their present advance toward the City of London; and having perused
the same, we look upon it as a Declaration full of truth, the matter of fact
being well known unto most of us, who have been ey and ear witnesses thereof;
full of Christian, noble, and public assection to the good, peace and
prosperity of the Kingdom, and full of integrity and faithfulness to the tru^
interest of the English Nation; and Why have not the Army Officers, and most
Members subscribing this Engagement, and making and commending this resolution
kept this resolution, but apostatized from it ever since December 6. 1648. and
acted quite contrary to it?
full of undaunted and generous resolutions to assert the Honor and Freedom
of the Parliament, and effectually to vindicate it from the force and violence,
whereby it has been of late trampled under the foot of a Rabble of people,
unto which force Therefore now much more by the Members acting and continuing
force upon the majority.
it is still exposed, so as it may be exercised upon them at pleasure: and
whilst the Parliament remains in such a condition, although it be not
dissolvable but by Act of Parl yet it is suspended from acting as a Parliament
In all these things, and generally throughout, our sense so fully agrees with
what is expressed in that Dcelaration of the Army, that we cannot but receive
it with much approbation, and also with great thankfulness to God in the first
place, and next under him, They have been faithless more than once or twice to
the secluded Members, and the Iuncto too since this.
to this ever faithful Army, for that tender sense expressed therein of our
honor and security, who absent our selves from the Parliament in regard of
that force: And for that high Eugagem. of the Army to live and die with us in
this cause. Whereupon we cannot but Did you really perform this Engagement by
ordering the Army to secure and seclude the Majority of you^ fellow members,
and whole House of Lords heret^fore and twice of late?
mutually engage our selves, as hereby we do, to live and die with Sir The.
Fairfax and the Army, in the vindication of the honor and freedom of the
Parliament: And we cannot but observe the special providence of God in holding
up so extraordinarily Have not the Army and most of those s^bseribers since
Dec. 6. 1648. laid the greatest reproach (...) sorce upon the Nation, and
brought and offered greater contempts to the Honor, (...) esteem, Privileges,
Members of parliament, than the Apprentices or the (...) men in any age?
this Army, and reserving it to take off the scorn of this Nation, and to raise
up again from the depth of contempt, that once so much honored, and high
esteemed name of a Parliament.

And whereas in the said Declaration, it is desired, that we as persons upon
whom Is not this the case of the secluded and excluded Members in respect of
their Electors and the Kingdom?
their public trust still remains, (though for the present we cannot
exercise the same in a Parliamentory way) would advise his Excellency and his
Council os Wa^ insuch things as may be for the good of the Kingdom; and for
the attaining the ends aforesaid; We do declare, that we shall be ^ver ready to
do it upon all occasions, in such a capacity as we may, Is not this the speech
and answer of the secluded Lords and Commons to the Kingdom and people?
till we shall be enabled to discharge our trust in a free Parliament, which we
conceive we can never do, until the Houses of Parliament may be absolute
Judges, and Masters of their own securities, and such Is not this the true
style and Character of all th^se, since forcibly secluding the Lords and their
sellow Members?
Traiterous, audacious offenders, as have endeavored with so high a hand to
destroy the highest Authority (as by the particulars so fully and clearly
expressed in the Declaration of the army may appear) shall receive condign
punishment, or at least the Parliament put in such a condition, as that they
may be able to bring them thereunto: And The secluded Lords and Commons now
t^ust so too.
we trust in God, through his accustomed blessing upon this Army and their
Assistants, in their honest and just undertakings, the Parliament shall
speedily be put into a condition to sit like a Parl. of England; and we hope,
that Most Counties now begin to do it for their secluded Members restitution,
or a New Free Parliament without limitation.
every true hearted Englishman will put his helping hand to so necessary, so
public, and so honorable a work, as is the vindicating the freedom and honor
of Parliament, wherein the freedom and honor of all the free born people of
this Nation are involved.

Manchester, Speaker of the House of Peers.
Now sitting as a Commoner.
Sarisbury Denbigh Northumberland Gray of Wark Mulgrave Kent Howard Say and
Seal.
1 William Lenthal Speaker of the House of Commons.
2 Lord Lisle Tho. Gray Will. Pierpoint 3 Henry Mildmay Nathaniel Fiennes John
Fiennes 4 Arthur Haslerigg William Armyn 5 James Temple Edm. Prideaux 6 Miles
Corbet John Danvers Francis Allin John Evelin 7 George Fleetwood George Fennick
John Blackstone 8 Tho. Scot Tho. Scot Major 9 Roger Hill 10 Henry Martin 11
Cornelius Holland 12 Oliver Saint-Johns 13 William Lemmon 14 William Mounson
Humphry Edwards 15 John Weaver 16 John Corbett 17 Thomas Lister 18 Henry Smith
19 Nich. Love Francis Pierpoint Henry Lawrence 20 Tho. Ougain Godfrey Boswell
21 Henry Darley 22 Tho. Boon 23 Peter Temple 24 Philip Smith 25 Michael Livesey
Henry Hamond Gregory Norton Thomas Jarvice William Constable 26 William Say 27
Edward Ludlow 28 Edward Dunce 29 John Bingham 30 Augustine Skinner 31 John
Trenchard 32 Sam. Mayn Benjamine Weston Francis Thurnow. Rowland Wilson
Laurence Whitacr^ John Crowder 33 George Piggots John Bamfield
In all but 58.

Some 10 or more of which sat in the House in the Speakers absence, and went
not to the Army. Of these, 33. are yet living, and sitting now and then,
excluding the Majority of the House by force, and voting them out; 5. of them
now living are secluded, who subscribed this engagement, the rest since dead.
How these Subscribers and secluders can look God or men in the face, or justify
Taxes, Knacks and Proceedings to be legal and Parliamentary, whiles most of the
Members are kept out by force, after this their subscription and publication to
the contrary, under their own hands, let themselves resolve.

It will be also worth the Enquiry, who was the Penman and Contriver of this
Engagement.

Whether it be not more dangerous and treasonable in those Members who have
since confederated with the Army to seclude the Lords House, and their own
Members, than that Engagement of the Citizens, which the subfcribers hereof
voted to be Treasonable?

And whether it makes not these sitting Members who subscribed it, pre-ingaged
parties, and incompetent Judges of the secluded, ejected, and imprisoned
Members, who continued sitting in the House, according to their trust and duty;
and of the accused and imprisoned Citizens, who did but defend the Parliament
then sitting, according to their own Votes, Ordinances, Covenant, and their
duty?

3ly. By Sir Thomas Fairfax Letter to the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor,
Aldermen, and Common Council of the City of London.

My Lord and Gentlemen,
YOu may please to remember the former compliance of this Army with your
desires, to remove to this distance, and that upon the assurance you gave them
of your concurrence with their declared desires, for the settling the liberty
and peace of the Kingdom, (against which you never yet offered us one
exception, or any ground of dissent) as also of your great tenderness and
resolution to secure the Parliament and their privileges, from any violence or
attempt; the reason given us of your late listing of new forces, and wherein we
did most acquiesce.

That upon this confidence we had disposed the Army into several parts of the
Kingdom; for the ease of the whole, to above 100. miles distance: we had given
up our selves to the effecting of such Proposals as might tend to the
comfortable settlement of this poor Kingdom, and a hopeful way for the speedy
relief of Ireland.

We cannot then but be deeply sensible of the That on Dec. 6, 7. 1648 and since
that till now, has been worse, longer, and more unparalleld.
unparalleld violation acted upon the Parliament, upon Mondy last, by a rude
multitude from your City, because therein, the Guards sent from the City did
not only neglect their duty for the security of the Parliament from such
violence, and the whole City to yield any relief to the Houses in that
extremity, but I am assured from eye and ear-witnesses, that diverse of the
Common Council gave great encouragement to it, which does not only And does it
not gainsay the Armies and Officers Professions, Commissions, Protestations,
Declarations, and other Obligations to protect the Parl. and Secluded Lords and
Commons?
gainsay your former professions, but does violence to those many Obligations
that (by your Charter, Protestation, and sundry other ways) lie upon you to
protect the Parliament.

For my part, I cannot but look on your selves (who are in authority) as
accountable to the Kingdom, for your present interruptions of that hopeful way
of peace and settlement, things were in for this Nation, and of relieving
Ireland, occasioned by the late Treasonable and destructive Engagement:
Especially the lately prodigious and horrid force done upon the Parliament, The
force since on the Houses has effected it.
tending to dissolve all Government; upon which score, we and the whole Kingdom
shall have cause to put every thing of the like nature that may happen to the
Parliament, or to any who are friends to them, and this Army, except by your
wisdom, care, and industry, the chief actors may be detected, Do not the
Officers and Members deserve to be so served, for securing and secluding us?
secured and given up to the procuring of justice for the same, and the best
endeavors used to prevent the like for the future. And so I rest,

Your most assured friend to serve you, Tho. Fairfax.
Bedford, 29 July, 1647.

4ly By a Declaration of Sir Tho. Fairfax, The Armies Declaration, p. 120, etc.
and his Council of War, August 3. 1647. concerning the Apprentices force upon
the Houses; wherein are these observable passages,

Monday July the six and twentieth, the Common Council of the City presents
their Petitions to both Houses for changing the Militia, whereon the House of
Lords refuse to alter their resolutions; the House of Commons answered, they
would take it into consideration the next morning. Notwithstanding which, the
City and Kingdom cannot be ignorant with what rage and insolency the tumult of
Apprentices, the same day forced both Houses. They (1) blockt up their doors,
swearing, they would keep them in, till they had passed what Votes they
pleased; they woe) Is it not Arrse for the Mmy and sitting bloembers to dock up
the thors against me Lords and most of the Comisons? and to oeep them fut of
the houses or sundry years?
threatened the Houses, if they granted not their desires, knocking, whooting,
and hallowing so at the Parliament-doors, that many times the Members could not
be heard to speak or debate, not suffering the House of Commons to divide for
determining such Questions, as w^^e put, crying out, Was not the Armies
seizing, secluding, pulling and keeping those out who gave their Votes against
their Designs, Dec. 6. 1648. shutting them out ever since, and imprisoning some
of them sundry years, far worse than this?
That those that gave their Votes against them, should be sent out to them;
very often and loudly saying. Agree, agree, dispatch, we will stay no longer; and
in this outrageous manner, they continued at the House door above eight hours
together, the City-Guards there present nor the City relieving them; by reason
whereof the House was forced to Vote what that rude multitude would demand, and
then adjourned the House till the next morning; After which the House rising,
the Speaker and many Members going out of the House, they (3) forced them back
again into the House: Many of the Apprentices pressing in with them, where they
stood with their hats on their heads, and compelled the Speaker to take the
Chair, and the House to vote in their presence what they pleased; committing
many other insolences, as is published by the Speaker of the House of Commons
in his Declaration, and is too well known by all then present; and during the
time of this execrable violence done by the said Apprentices, It was far worse
to fill them with Soldiers and Troopers, Dec. 6, and 7. and since, to seelude
the most of the Members by force.
Westminster Hall and the Palace yard was filled with Reformadoes, and other
ill-affected persons designed to back them:

After this the Houses being adjourned till Friday following, upon the
Thursday, the Apprentices printed and posted a paper in several places of the
City, requiring all their fellows to be early at the Parliament the next
morning, for that they intended to adjourn by seven of the clock, and that for
a Month. Thus the Speakrs And now six times more of them are driven away by
the Army.
with many of the Members of both Houses were driven away from the Parliament.

These things being seriously considered by us, we have thought fit in the name
of the Army to declare, that all such Members of either House of Parliament as
are already with the Army for the security of their persons, and for the ends
aforesaid, are forced to absent themselves from Westminster, that Do not the
people esteem the secluded Members such, and are not they the supreme Authority
by the Armies and sitting Members own Votes, Jan. 4. 1648?
we shall hold and esteem them as persons in whom the public trust of the
Kingdom is still remaining, though they cannot for the present sit as a
Parliament with freedom and safety at Westminster, and by whose advice and
counsels, we desire to govern our selves, in the managing these weighty
affairs; and to that end we They went not to them till thus ^^^ited.
invite them to make repair to this Army, to join with us in this great cause,
we being resolved, and do hereby faithfully oblige our selves to stand by them
therein, and to live and die with them against all Opposition whatsoever. And
in particular, we do hold our selves bound to own that honorable act of the
Speaker of the House of Commons, who upon the grounds he himself expressed in
his Declaration sent unto us, has actually withdrawn himself; and hereupon we
do further And ought not the Army and English Nation, thus to engage, much more
to the now secluded Lords and Members?
engage to use our utmost and speedy endeavors, that he and those Members of
either House, that are thus enforced away from their attendance at Westminster,
may with freedom and security sit there, and again discharge their trust, as a
free and a legal Parliament: and in the mean time we do declare against that
late choice of a new Speaker by some Gentlemen at Westminster, as It is usual
and legal in the Speakers absence or sickness.
contrary to all right Reason, Law, and Custom; and we professs our selves to
be And a^e you not and the Kingdom too, now much more convicted of this truth?
most clearly satisfied in all our Judgments, and are also confident the
Kingdom will herein concur with us, that as things now stand, there is no free
nor legal Parliament sitting, being through the aforesaid violence at present
suspended: And And are not all since Dec. 6. 1648. till now much more null and
void, for the same reason?
that the Drders, Votes, or Resolutions, forced from the Houses on Monday the
26. of July last, as also all such as shall pass in this Assembly of some few
Lords and Gentlemen at Westminster, under what pretense and color soever, are
unto and null, and ought Hot to be submitted unto by the freeborn Subjects of
England.

And that we may prevent that slavery designed upon us and the Nation, that the
Kingdom may be restored to a happy State of a visible Government, now eclipsed
and darkened; we hold our selves bound by our duty to God and the Kingdom, to
bring to condign punishment the Authors and Promoters of that Is not yours of
Dec. 27. and Jan. 5. 1659. far more unparalleld, to the Parliament, and all the
freeborn Subjects?
unparalleld violence done to the Parliament; and in that to all the freeborn
Subjects of England, that are or hereafter shall be; and therefore we are
resolved to march up toward London, where we do expect, that the well-affected
people of that City will deliver up unto us (or otherwise put into safe
Custody, so as they may be reserved to a legal Trial) the Much more then now
the excluding Members?
eleven impeached Members that have again thrust themselves into the management
of public affairs, by this wicked design.

And that all others will give us such assistance therein, And ought not the
Army and ^ Monk n^w to do the like?
that the Members of both Houses may receive due encouragement to return to
Westminster, there to sit with all freedom, and so to perform their trust, as
shall condues to the settlement of this distracted Kingdom; and to inflict such
punishments upon these late Offenders, as shall deter any for the future to
make the like attempt.

Our lives have not been dear unto us for the public good, and being now
resolved by the assistance of God, to Are not the sitting secluders of the
Lords and majority of the Commons, far greater Delinquents, deserving greater
punishment?
bring these Delinquents to their deserved punishments, as that, than which,
there cannot be any thing of more public concernment to the Kingdom, we trust
(if it shall come to that) our blood shall not be accounted too dear a price
for the accomplishment of it. And if any in the City will engage themselves
against us to protect these Persons, and so put the Kingdom again into a new
and miserable War, The blood must be laid to the account of such persons, as
are the Authors thereof.

It is our chief aim to settle Peace with Truth and Righteousness throughout
the Kingdom, that none may be oppressed in his just freedom and Liberties,
Remember and fulfill these Promises, now at least, to the Parliament, King and
Kingdom, which Cross your Engagements. Abjurations of King and Kingship, to
set up an Utopian Commonwealth.
much less the Parliament it self: which things being duly settled, we shall be
as ready also to assure unto the King his just Rights and Authority, as any
that pretend it never so much, for the better upholding of an ill cause, and
the countenance of tumultuous violence against the Parliament: the which our
honest, just, and necessary undertakings, as we are resolved to pursue with the
utmost hazard of our lives and fortunes, so we doubt not, but we shall find
Gods accustomed goodness and assistance with us therein, till we have brought
them to a good and happy conclusion, for this poor distracted and languishing
Kingdom.

5ly. By the Ordinance of both Houses, eagerly promoted by all the fugitive
Members engaging with the Army, and now sitting, as well as others remaining,
who condemned and passed Votes against the Apprentiees tumult during their
absence, and never countenanced it in the least degree, as Ne dhams Interest
will not (but) lie.
some scandalously, and falsely suggest.

Die Veneris, 20 Aug. 1647.
An Ordinance for declaring all Votes, Orders, and Ordinances passed in One or
Both Houses since the force on Both Houses, July 26. until the 6. of this
present August 1647. to be Null and Void.
WHereas there was a visible, horrid, insolent and actual Force upon the
Parliament on Monday the 26. of July last: Whereupon the Speakers and And more
since their secluding and securing Dec. 6. and 7. 1648.
many Members of Both Houses of Parliament, were forced to absent themselves
from the service of the Parliament; And whereas those Members of the House,
could not return to sit in safety, before Friday the 6. of August. It is
therefore declared by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, that the
Ordinance of Monday the said 26. of July, for the repealing and making void of
the Ordinance of the 23. of the said July, for the settling of the Militia of
the City of London, being gained by force and violence; And all Votes, Orders,
Ordinances, passed in either or both Houses of Parliament, since the said
Ordinance of the 26. of July, to the said 6. of Aug. Therefore all since Dec.
6. till now are void by the self-same reasons.
are null and void, and were so at the making thereof, and are hereby declared
so to be, the Parliament being under a force and not free. Provided always,
and be it ordained, that no Person or Persons shall be impeached for his or
their actions by, or upon, or according to the foresaid Votes, Orders or
Ordinances, unless he or they shall be found guilty of contriving, acting or
abetting the aforesaid visible or actual force; or being present at, or hearing
of the said force, did afterward Act upon the Votes so forced, etc.

John Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

This force mentioned in all these 5. Declarations, Engagements, and Protests
against it, by the Army Officers, and fugitive Members, was far inferior and no
ways comparable to the force upon the secured and secluded Members, but far
inferior thereto in these respects. 1. That force was only by a few unarmed
tumultuous London Apprentices, who had neither Sword, nor Musket, nor Pike,
nor Stick in their hands; This upon the secluded Members, was by whole
Regiments, Troops, Companies of Horse and Foot, armed with Swords, Muskets,
Pikes, Pistols. 2. That force was upon this account; only to press the Houses
to repeal an Ordinance surreptitiously procured to settle the Militia of
London, without their privities, to the disservice of the City and Parliament,
passed but 3. days before: Theirs to prevent a settlement of the Peace of the
Kingdom, upon our vote touching the Kings Answer to the Propositions of both
Houses, for the public Peace, Safety, and honor of the Parliament, and three
Kingdoms. 3. Their tumult and force lasted but a few hours, and part of one
day, and then vanished: That secluding and securing the Members, continued
sundry years, and ever since the Junctoes two last sittings till this present.
4. That force neither secluded, nor secured, not drove away any one Member from
the Houses during its continuance, but only kept them tumultuously in the House
till the Ordinance of July 23 was repealed by them, and then vanished: This was
purposely employed to secure above 40. and seclude the Majority of the Members
of the Commons House, and whole House of Peers by violence, against their
Privileges, Trusts, and our Laws; and is still continued for that end. 5. That
force caused some few eminent Members, only to absent themselves from the
Houses, and repair to the Army, 3. or 4. days after the force was ended, upon
the Armies invitation, being the far lesser part of both Houses; This force
secured, imprisoned and actually kept out and drove away 5. parts of 6. from
the House, and that by practice and combination of some Members of the House,
to seclude the rest, lest they should over-vote them; and since by their
express Orders and Commands, kept out by armed guards for that end. 6. This
force was by such who were never raised, commissioned, waged to preserve the
Houses and Members from violence, that they might freely sit and vote without
disturbance. This by Soldiers, specially raised, commissioned, entrusted, paid
to defend their persons and Privileges, freely to sit and vote without
interruption or seclusion. 7. That force was condemned, disowned, by all the
Members of both Houses, as well those who remained sitting, or those who
absented themselves. This justified, approved, commanded even by those now
sitting, though they condemned it as Treasonable and Criminal, in these
Apprentices, and in Cromwell, Lambert, and other Army Officers since, in their
own cases. 8. This inconsiderable force, nulled and made void all Votes, Acts,
Ordinances passed not only during the continuance of this horrid actual,
visible force upon the Houses on July 26. but likewise from that day till the
6. of Aug. only because those few Members (invited to the Army) were forced, as
they affirmed, to absent themselves from the service of the Parliament, and
could not return to sit in safety before that day, though there was neither
force nor guards during that space upon either House to deter or drive them
thence. Therefore upon all these Considerations, The Ordinance, made for this
first Tax of 90000. (and now for 100000. l. a month) during the forcible
securing, secluding, of the whole House of Peers, and Majority of the Commons
House, must much more be null and void, and were so at the time of their making
to all intents, the Parl. and Houses being under a more horrid insolent,
visible and actual force, before and at the making of them, keeping out the
Major part of the Members, than ever the Apprentices, or any age were forme^ly
guilty of; and so no ways obliging the excluded Lords, Members, or any others
whatsoever, our secluders themselves, and these their Resolutions being Judges,
which do all justify the Protestation, published in their names (though not
owned by them) Dec. 11. 15, 8. to be no j^st cause ^^t their Ejection by the
pretended Ordinance of Dec. 5. made by 3. Lords, and 45. Commoners only, whiles
both Houses were under the Armies force, and so be null and void to all intents.

Fourthly, Neither forty Members, nor a whole House of Commons were ever enough
in any age, by the Custom of Parliament, or Law of England, to impose a Tax, or
make any Act of Parliament, without the King and House of Lords, as I have
already proved, and largely and irrefragably evidenced, in my Plea for the
Lords, and House of Peers; My Levellers Levelled; The 1. and 2. Part of my
Register and Survey of Parliamentary Writs; My true and perfect Narrative; and
full Declaration of the state of the Case of the secluded Members; much less
can they do it after they ceased to be Members by the Parliaments dissolution
through the Kings beheading; Neither were they ever invested with any legal
power to seclude or expel any of their fellow Members (especially, if duly
elected) for any Vote wherein the Majority of the House concurred with them, or
for voting against, or differing in their consciences and judgments from them;
nor for any other cause, without the Kings and Lords concurrence, (in whom the
ordinary judicial power of the Parliament resides) as I have undeniably proved
by presidents and reasons in my Plea for the Lords, p. 305, to 428. and Ardua
Regni, which is further evident by Claus. Dors. 7 R. 2. M. 32. and Mr. Seldens
Titles of Honor, p. 737. Banneret Camoys Case, discharged from being Knight of
the Shire by the Kings Writ and judgment alone, without the Commons vote,
because a Peer of the Realm; the practice of expelling Commons by their fellow
Commons only, being See my P^ea for the Lords p. 371, to 419.
a late dangerous, unparliamentary usurpation (unknown to our Ancestors)
destructive to the Privileges and Freedom of Parliaments, and injurious to
those Counties, Cities, Boroughs, whose Trustees are secluded; the House of
Commons it selfbeing no Court of Justice to give either an Oath or final
Sentence, and having no more Authority to dismember their Fellow Members, than
any Par in pa^em non habet Imperium, vel Jurisdictionem, Bracton, l. 5. c. 15.
f. 412.
Judges, Justices of the peace, or Committees have to disjudge, dis-Justice, or
discommittee their fellow-Judges, Justices, or Committee Men, being all of
equal authority, and made Members* only by the Kings Writ and peoples Election,
not by the Houses, or other Members Votes; who yet now presume both to make and
unmake, seclude and recall, expel and restore their Fellow Members at their
pleasure, contrary to the practice and resolution of former ages, to patch up a
factious Conventicle, instead of an English Parliament. Therefore this
Objection, no ways invalids this first Reason; why I neither can, nor dare
submit to this illegal Tax in conscience, law, or prudence, which engage me to
oppose it in all these Respects.

If any Object, That true it is, the Parliament by the common Law and Custom of
the Realm determines by the Kings death; but by the Statute of 17 Caroli, c. 6.
which Object.
enacts, That this present Parliament now assembled shall not be dissolved
unless it be by Act of Parliament to be passed for that purpose; continues the
Parliament still in being, notwithstanding the Kings beheading, since no Act of
Parliament is passed for its dissolution. The only pretext for to support this
continuance of the Parliament since the Kings violent death.

To this I answer, That it is a Maxim in Law, That every Answ.
Statute ought to be expounded according to the intent of those that made it,
and the mischiefs is intended only to prevent, as is resolved in 4 Edw. 4. 12.
12 Edw. 4. 18. 1 H. 7. 12, 13. Plowd. Com. fol. 369. and Cooks 4. Instit. p.
329, 330. Now the intent of the Makers of this Act, and the end of enacting it,
was not to prevent the dissolution of this Parliament by the Kings death, (no
ways intimated nor insinuated in any clause thereof, being a clear unavoidable
dissolution of it to all intents, not provided for by this Law) but by any Writ
or Proclamation of the King, by his Regal power, without consent of both
Houses; which I shall manifest by these Reasons.

First, From the principal occasion of making this Act. The King (as the
COMMONS in their Exact Collection, p. 5, 6.
Remonstrance of the state of the Kingdom, 15 December. 1641 complain) had
dissolved all former Parliaments during his Reign, without and against both
Houses approbation, to their great discontent and the Kingdoms prejudice, as
his Father King James had dissolved others in his Reign: and during their
continuance adjourned and prorogued them at their pleasure. Now the fear of
preventing of the like dissolution, prorogation, or adjournment of this
Parliament after the Scottish Armies disbanding, before the things mentioned in
the Preamble were effected by the Kings absolute power, was the only ground and
occasion of this Law (not any fear or thoughts of its dissolution by the Kings
untimely death, then not so much as imagined, being before the Wars or Irish
Rebellion brake forth) the King very healthy, not ancient, and likely then to
survive this Parliament, and many others, in both Houses judgment, as appears
by the Bill for triennial Parliaments. This undeniable Truth is expressly
declared by the Commons themselves in their foresaid Remonstrance; Exact
Collection, p. 5, 6, 14, 17. compared together; where in direct terms they
affirm, The abrupt dissolution of this Parliament is prevented by another Bill,
by which it is provided, it shall not be dissolved or adjourned without the
consent of both Houses: In the Bill for continuance of this present Parliament,
there seems to be some restraint of the Royal power in dissolving of
Parliaments; not to take it out of the Crown, but to suspend the execution of
it for this time and occasion only; which was so necessary for the Kings own
security, and the public peace, that without it we could not have undertaken
any of these great charges, but must have left both the Armies to disorder and
confusion, and the whole Kingdom to blood and rapine.

In which passages we have a clear resolution of the Commons themselves,
immediately after the passing of this Act: that its scope and intention, was
only to provide against the Kings abrupt dissolution of the Parliament by his
mere royal power, in suspending the execution of it for this time and occasion
only, and that for the Kings own security, (not his Heirs and Successors) as
well as his peoples peace and safety. Therefore not against any dissolution of
it by his natural (much less his violent) death; which can no ways be
interpreted, an Act of his Royal power, (which they then intended hereby, not
to take out of the Crown, but only to suspend the execution of it for this time
and occasion, and that for his security:) but a natural impotency, or unnatural
disloyalty, which not only suspends the Kings power for a time, but utterly
destroys and takes away him and it without hopes of revival for ever.

Secondly, the very title of this Act (An Act to prevent Inconveniences which
may happen by the UNTIMELY adjourning, proroguing or DISSOLUTION of this
present Parliament) intimates as much, compared with the body of it, which
provides, as well against the adjourning and proroguing of both or either
Houses without an Act of Parliament, as against the dissolution of the
Parliament without an Act. Now the Parliament cannot possibly be said to be
adjourned or prorogued in any way or sense, much less untimely, merely by the
Kings death, (which never adjourned or prorogued any Parliament) but only by
his Proclamation, writ, or royal command, to the Houses or their Speakers,
executed during his life, as all our Journals, 61. 3 Parl. 2. Rot Parl. n. 3.
6. 5 R. 2 n 64, 65. 11 R. 2. n 14, 16, 20. ^ H. 4. n. 2, 7. 27 H. 6. n. 12. 28
H. 6. n. 8, 9, 11. 29 H. 6. n. 10, 11. 31 H. 6 n. 22, 30, 49.
Parliaments Rolls and Cooks 4. Institut p. 25. Dyer, f 203.
Lawbooks resolve, though it may be dissolved by his death, as well as by his
Proclamation, Writ, or royal command. And therefore this title and Act coupling
adjourning proroguing and dissolving this Parliament together, without consent
of both Houses, by Act of Parliament, intended only a Dissolution of this
Parliament by such Prerogative ways and means by which Parliaments had been
untimely adjourned and prorogued as well as dissolved by the Kings mere will
without their assents; not of a dissolution of it by the Kings death, which
never adjourned nor prorogued any Parliament, nor dissolved any formerly
sitting Parliament in this Kings reign, or his Ancestors since the death of
King Hen: the 4th. and King James, the only Parliaments we read of dissolved by
death of the King since the Conquest; and so a mischief not intended nor
remedied by this Act.

Thirdly, The prologue of the Act implies as much; Whereas great sums of money
must of necessity be speedily advanced and procured for the relief of his
Majesty's Army and People (not his Heirs or Successors) in the Northern parts,
etc. And for supply of other his Majesty's present and urgent occasions (not
his Heirs or Successors future occasions) which cannot be so timely effected as
is requisite, without credit for raising the said moneys; which credit cannot
be attained, until such obstacles be first removed, which are occasioned by
Fears, Iealousies and Apprehensions of diverse of his Majesty's Royal Subjects,
that the Parliament may be adjourned, prorogued or dissolved (not by the Kings
sudden or untimelie death, of which there was then no fear, jealousy or
apprehension in any his Majesty's loyal Subjects, but by his royal Prerogative
and advice of ill Counselors) before Justice shall be duly executed upon
Delinquents, (then in being, not sprung up since) public Grievances (then
complained of, not others introduced since this Act,) redressed; a firm peace
betwixt the two Kingdoms of England and Scotland concluded, and before
sufficient provisions be made for the repayment of the said Moneys (not others
since borrowed) so to be raised: All which the Commons in this present
Parliament assembled having duly considered, do therefore humbly beseech your
Majesty, that it may be declared and enacted, etc. All which expressions,
related TO HIS late Majesty only, not to his Heirs and Successors; and the
principal scope of this Act, being to gain present credit to raise moneys to
disband the Scottish and English armies then lying upon the Kingdom, many years
since accomplished; yea Justice being since executed upon Strafford,
Canterbury, and other Delinquents then impeached; the public Grievances they
complained of (as the Star Chamber, High Commission, Ship-mony, Tonnage and
Poundage, Fines for Knighthood, Bishops Votes in Parliament, with their Courts
and Jurisdictions, and the like) redressed by Acts soon after passed, and a
firm peace between both Nations concluded before the Wars began; and this
preamble's pretensions for this Act all fully satisfied diverse years before
the Kings beheading: it must of necessity be granted, that this Statute never
intended to continue this Parliament on foot after the Kings decease:
especially after the ends for which it was made were all fully accomplished:
and so it must necessarily be dissolved by his Death.

Fourthly, This is most clear by the body of the Act it self: And be it
declared and enacted by the King our Sovereign Lord, with the assent of the
Lords and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of
the same, That this present Parliament, now assembled, shall not be dissolved,
unless it be by Act of Parliament to be passed for that purpose; nor shall any
time or times during the continuance thereof, be prorogued or adjourned, unless
it be by Act of Parliament, to be likewise passed for that purpose. And that
the House of Peers shall not at any time or times during this present
Parliament be adjourned, unless it be by Themselves; or by their own order.
And in like manner that the Houfe of Commons shall not at any time or times
during this present Parliament be adjourned, unless it be by Themselves; or by
their own order. Whence it is undeniable, 1. That this act was only for the
prevention of the untimely dissolving, Proroguing and adjourning of that
present Parliament then assembled, and no other. 2. That the King himself was
the Principal Member of his Parliament, yea, our Sovereign Lord, and the sole
declarer and enacter of this Law, by the Lords and Commons assent. 3. That
neither this Act for continuing, nor any other for dissolving, adjourning or
proroguing this Parliament, could be made without, but only by and with the
Kings Royal assent thereto; which the Lords and Commons assembled in
Parliament, in their Exact Collect. p. 69, 70, 736, 709, 722.
Remonstrance of the 26. of May 1642. often in terminis acknowledge, together
with his Negative Voice to Bills. 4ly. That it was neither the Kings intention
in passing this Act to shut himself out of Parliament, or create both or either
House a Parliament without a King, as he professed in his (...) c. 5. p. 27.
Nor the Lords nor Commons Intendment to dismember him from his Parliament, or
make themselves a Parliament without him; as their foresaid Remonstrance
testifies, and the words of the Act import: Neither was it the Kings, Lords or
Commons meaning by this Act, to set up a Parliament only of Commons (much less
of a remnant of a Commons House selected by Colonel Pride, and his Confederates
of the Army to serve their turns, and vote what they prescribed) without either
King or House of Peers; much less to give them any super-transcendent
authority to vote down and abolish the King and House of Lords, and make them
no Members of this present or any future Parliaments, without their own order
or assent, against which so great usurpation, and late dangerous
unparliamentary encroachments this very Act expressly provides in this clause,
That the House of Peers (wherein the King sits as Sovereign when he pleases,)
shall not at any time or times during this present Parliament be adjourned
(much less then dissolved, excluded, or suspended from sitting or voting, which
is greater, and that by their inferiors in all kinds, a Fragment of the
Commons House, who can pretend no color of Jurisdiction over them, before whom
they always stood bare-headed, like so many Grand-Jury-men before the Judges,
and attended at their Doors and Bar to know their pleasures:) unless it be by
Themselves, or by their own Order. 5. That neither the King, Lords nor Commons
intended to set up a perpetual Parliament, and intail it upon them, their heirs
or successors for ever, by this act, which would cross and repeal the Act for
triennial Parliaments made at the same time, and on the same Brook Parliment
80. Relation 85. Dyer 85.
day in Law; but to make provision only against the untimely dissolving of
this, till the things mentioned in the Preamble were accomplished and settled;
as the Preamble, and these often repeated words, any time or times during the
continuance of this present Parliament, concludes; and that during His
Majesty's reign and life, not after his death; as these words, coupled with The
Relief of his Majesty's Army and People; and for supply of his Majesty's
present and urgent occasions in the Preamble, manifest. Therefore, this Act can
no ways continue it a Parliament after the Kings beheading; much less after
the forcible exclusion both of the King and Lords House, and majority of the
Commons out of Parliament by those now sitting, contrary to the very letter and
provision of this act; by which device the King alone, had he conquered and cut
off, or secluded by his forces the Lords and Commons Houses from sitting, might
with much more color have made himself an absolute Parliament, to impose what
Taxes and Laws he pleased, on the people; without Lords or Commons, or any 40.
of the Commons House, or any 7. or 8. Lords concurring with him, secluding all
the rest by armed power, make themselves an absolute standing Parliament, for
him, his heirs and successors, by virtue of this act, than those few Commons
sitting since his trial and death do, or can do. 6. The last clause of this
act; And that all and every ^^ing or things whatsoever done, or to be done, (to
wit, by the King or His Authority) for the adjournment, proroguing or
dissolving of this present Parliament, contrary to this present Act, shall be
utterly void and of none effect. Now death, and a dissolution of this
Parliament by the Kings death, cannot (as to the King) be properly styled, a
Thing done, or to be done (by Him) for the adjournment, proroguing or
dissolving of this Parliament, contrary to this present Act; which cannot make
the Kings death utterly void and of none effect, by restoring him to his life
again. Therefore the dissolution of the Parl. by the Kings death, is clearly
out of the words and intentions of this Act, especially so many years after its
Enacting. 7. This present Parl. and every Member thereof, being specially
summoned by the Kings Writ, by the particular name of CAROLVS REX, not REX in
general, only to be His Parliament and Council, and to confer personally with
Him, of the great and urgent affairs concerning Him and His Kingdom, not his
Heirs and Successors; and these Writs, and the Elections upon them, returned
unto Him and His Court by Indentures, and the persons summoned and chosen by
virtue of them, appearing only in His Parliament, for no other ends but those
expressed in His Writs; it would be both an absurdity and absolute
impossibility to assert, that the King, or both Houses, intended by this Act,
to continue this Parliament in being after the Kings beheading or death:
unless they that maintain this paradox, be able to inform me and those now
sitting, how they can confer and advice with a dead beheaded King, of things
concerning Him and His Kingdom; and that even after they have abjured his Heirs
and Successors, and Royal line, and extirpated Monarchy it self, and made it
Treason to assert or revive it; and how they can continue still His Parliament
and Council, whose head they have cut off; and that without reviving or raising
him from his grave, or enstalling His right Heir and Successor in His Throne,
to represent His Person; neither of which they dare to do, for fear of losing
their own Heads and Quarters too, for beheading him. This Tax therefore being
imposed on the Kingdom long after the Kings beheading, and the Parliaments
actual and legal dissolution by it, must needs be illegal, and merely void in
Law to all intents; because not granted nor imposed in, but totally out of
Parliament, by those who were then no Commons nor Members of a Parliament, and
had no more authority to impose any Tax upon the Kingdom, than any other forty
or fifty Commoners whatsoever out of Parliament, who may usurp the like
Authority, by this president, to Tax the Kingdom or any County what they
please, (yea the whole 3. Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, as they
now presume) and then levy it by an Army or force of Arms, to the peoples
infinite, endless oppression and undoing. This is my first and principal
exception against the Legality of this Tax, and others they shall impose, which
I desire the Imposers and Levyers of it most seriously to consider, and
challenge them all to Answer if they can, for our 3. Kingdoms present, and
posterities satisfaction, by other Arguments than Imprisonments, close
Imprisonments, Pistols, Swords, and armed violence, and that upon these
important considerations from their own late Declarations.

First, themselves in their own Declaration of the 9th. of February, 1648. have
protested to the whole Kingdom: That they are fully resolved to maintain, and
shall and will uphold, preserve, and keep the fundamental Laws of this Nation,
for, and concerning the preservation of the Lives, Properties and Liberties of
the people, with all things incident thereunto: Which how it will stand with
the former, and this new Tax imposed by them out of Parliament, or in a thin
House under force, or their Act concerning New Treasons; I desire they would
fatisfie the Kingdom, before they levy the one, or proceed upon the other
against any of their Fellow Subjects, by mere arbitrary armed power against Law
and Right.

Secondly, Themselves in their Declaration expressing the grounds of their late
proceedings, and settling the present Government in way of a Free State, dated
17 Martii, 1648. engage themselves: 1. To procure the well-being of those whom
they serve: to renounce oppression, arbitrary power, and all opposition to the
Peace and Freedom of the Nation: And to prevent to their power, the reviving of
Tyranny, Injustice, and all former evils (the only end and duty of all their
Labors) to the satisfaction of all concerned in it. 2. They charge the late
King for exeeeding all his Predeoeessors in the destruction of those whom he
was bound to preserve; To manifest which they instance in The Loans, unlawful
Imprisonments, and othec Oppressions which produced that excellent Law of the
Petition of Right; which were most of them again acted, presently after the Law
made against them, which was most palpably broken by him, almost in every part
of it, very soon after his Solemn Consent given unto it. Is not this the Armies
and their own late and present practice?
His imprisoning and prosecuting Members of Parliament, for opposing His
unlawful Will: and of diverse Alderman Chambers the eminentest of them, is yet
since this Declaration discharged by you for his loyalty and conscience only.
worthy Merchants for refusing to pay Tonnage and Poundage, because not granted
by Parliament; yet And is it not so by you now, and t^ansmirted unto the
Exchequer to be levied?
exacted by HIM expressly against Law; and punishment of many And do not you now
the same, ye^, some of them very good Patriots?
good Patriots for not submitting to whatsoever he pleased to demand, though
never so much in breach of the known Law. The multitude of Projects and
Mouopolies established by Him. His design and charge to bring in Are not the
Generals and Armies Horses and Foot too, kept up and continued among us for
that purpose, being some of them Germans too?
German-Horse, to awe us into slavery: and his hopes of completing all by His
grand project of Not one quarter so g^ievous as the late and present Taxes,
Excises, Customs, imposed by you for the like purpose.
Ship-mony, to subject every man's Estate to whatsoever Proportion He pleases
to impose upon them. But above all the English Army was labored by the King to
be engaged against the English Parliament. A thing of that And is it not more
unnatural in those now sitting, to engage the English Army, raised by the
Parliament of England, and convenanting to defend it from violence, against the
very Parliament of England and its Members, to seclude, exclude, and eject the
majoritie of their Fellow Members, and whole House of Peers, by their Votes and
Commands, and that successively twice after one another, and yet to own and
support this Army without ^ighting those Members?
strange impiety and unnaturalness for the King of England, to sheath their
swords in one another bowels, that nothing can answer it but his own being a
Foreiner: neither could it have easily purchased belief, but by his succeeding
visible actions in full pursuance of the same. As the Kings coming in person to
the Was not Pride's and the Armies coming thither to seize, and actually
seizing above Forty, and secluding above two hundred Members, with Thousands of
a^med Horse and Foot; And their suppressing the House of Lords, and re
secluding the Members by armed Guards on May 7, and 9. and Dec. 27. 1659. a
thousand times a greater offense, especially after so many Declarations of the
Houses against this of the Kings?
House of Commons to seize the five Members, whither he was followed Was not
Humphry Edwards now sitting, (an unduly elected Member,) one of them thus armed?
with some hundreds of unworthy debauched persons, armed with Swords and
Pistols, and other Arms; and they attending at the Door of the House, ready to
execute whatsoever their Leader should command them. The oppressions of the
Council Table, Star Chamber, High Commission, Court Martial, Wardships,
Purveyances, Afforestations, and many others of like nature, (equalled, if not
far exceeded now by sundry arbitrary Committees and Sub-Committee, to name no
others, in all manner of Oppressions and Injustice) concluding thus: Upon all
these and many other unparalled offenses, upon his breach of Faith, of Oaths
and Protestations; upon the cry of the blood of England and Ireland: upon the
tears of Widows and Orphans, and childless Parents, and millions of persons
undone by him, let all the world of indifferent men judge, whether the
Parliament (you mean your selves only which made this Declaration) had not
sufficient cause to bring the King to Justice? And much more the whole Kingdom,
and secluded Lords and Members, to bring you to public Justice; sinee you not
only imitate, but far exceed him in all and every of these, even by your own
verdict.

3. Themselves charge the King with profuse Donations of Salaries and Pensions
to such as were found, or might be made fit Instruments and Promoters of
Tyranny: which were supplied not by the legal justifiable revenue of the Crown,
but by Projects and illegal ways of draining the Peoples purses. All which
mischiefs and grievances they say will be prevented in their free State, though
the quite contrary way; as appears by the late large Donations of some
thousands to Mr. Henry Martin is accomptable to the State for above 8700 l.
which the Committee of Accounts in two years time could never bring him to
account for, and yet has 3000 pound voted him lately for moneys pretended to
be di^bursed; to whom and sor what quae^e.
Henry Martin, the Lord Lisle, Commissary General Ireton, Cromwell, and others
of their Members and Instruments, upon pretense of arrears, or service, and
that out of the moneys now imposed for the relief of Ireland, and other public
Taxes, Customs, Lands and Revenues. And must we pay Taxes to be thus prodigally
given away and expended?

4. They therein promise and engage, That the good old Laws and Customs of
England, the badges of our Freedom, (the benefit whereof our Ancestors enjoyed
long before the conquest, and spent much of their blood to have confirmed by
the great Charter of the Liberties) and other excellent laws which have
continued in all former changes, and being duly executed, are the most just,
free, and equal of any other laws in the world, shall be duly continued and
maintained by them; the liberty, property and peace of the Subject being so
fully preserbed by them, and the common interest of those whom they serve. And
if those laws should be taken away, all Industry must cease; all misery, blood
and confusion would follow, and greater Calamities, then fell upon us by the
late Kings Mis-government, would certainly involve all persons, under which
they must inevitably perish. How well they have performed this part of their
Remonstrance, let their proceedings in their High Courts of Justice, the long
Imprisoments and close Imprisonments of my self, and other their
Fellow Members, their acts for new Treasons and Delinquents, and ejecting their
Fellow Members and Lords out of Parliament, without the least Impeachment,
Trial, Accusation, their Imprisonment of Sir Robert Pie, the Kentish Gentlemen,
and others, for demanding a Free Parliament, fair and free elections,
restitution of the secluded Members, etc. determine.

5. They therein expressly promise, p. 26. To order the revenue in such away,
That the public charges may be defrayed, The Soldiers pay justly and duly
settled, That free quarter may be wholly taken away, and the People eased of
their Burdens and Taxes: And is this now all the ease we feel; to have all
Burdens and Taxes thus augmented, doubled, trebled, paid in near a year before
hand, and then new and greater Taxes imposed on them for those very Months
they have paid in their old proportion before hand, beyond all Presidents of
Tyranny and oppression in any age, and that by pretended acts made out of
Parliament, against all these good old Laws and Statutes, our Liberties and
Properties, which these worse than Egyptian Tax-Masters have so newly and
deeply engaged themselves to maintain and preserve without the least diminution
and violation?

6. That this very Juncto, in their Act (as they style it) made and published,
October. 11. 1659. entitled an Act against the raising of Moneys upon the
people, without their common consent in Parliament; enact and declare, That no
Person or Persons, shall after the XI. of October, 1659. assesse, levy,
collect, gather or receive any customs imposts, excise, assesment,
contribution, tax, tallage, or any sum or sums of money, or other Imposition
whatsoever, upon the People or Commonwealth, without their consent in
Parliament, or as by Law might have been done before the 3. of November 1640.
And it is further enacted and declared, that every Person offending contrary to
this Act, shall be, and is hereby adjudged guilty of High Treason, and shall
suffer and forfeit as in case of High Treason. Which In their p^rliament^ P. a,
p. 5, 6, 7.
some of them have declared, to be the Fundamental and old Law of England,
against which no By-Law is to be made, and one of the main Birthrights of
England. Therefore themselves by assessing and imposing many former Customs,
Imposts, Excises, Assesments and contributions on the people; and this of one
hundred thousand pounds a Month, for 6. Month Jan. 26. 1659. See A Full
Declaration of the true state of the Case of the secluded Members p. 55, etc.
without Common consent in Parliament, when and whiles 26. of the greatest
Counties in England, and 11. Shires in Wales, 14. whole Cities, and most
Boroughs in England, have not so much as one Knight, Citizen or Burgess sitting
with them to represent them, and 9. English Counties no more but one Knight,
and but 4. Counties, and 2. Cities alone, and not above 3. or 4. Boroughs their
full numbers of Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, sitting with them to represent
them; all the rest to the number of 420. Members, besides the whole House of
Lords, being forcibly excluded or dead; by the tenor of their own Act and Decl.
are adjudged guilty of High Treason, and ought to suffer and forfeit as in case
of Treason, and all those Commissioners named in their Act, amounting to above
one thousand, and all Assessors, Collectors and Treasurers under them, who
shall assesse, levy, collect, gather or receive the same, shall incur the guilt
of Treason, and suffer and forfeit as in case of High Treason; and their real
and personal Estates, be confiscated to pay the public debts, and Soldiers
arrears.

7. That this Anti-Parliamentary Convention, in their late Declaration of Jan.
24. have published and declared to the world, That they are resolved to remain
constane and immovable, that the people of these Nations may be governed from
time to time by Representatives of Parliament, chosen by themselves. That they
should be governed by the Laws, That all proceedings touching the Laws,
Liberties and Estates of the free-people of the Commonwealth, shall be
according to the Laws of the Land; It being their principal care to
provideagainst all arbitrarinesse in Government. And that it is one of the
greatest cares they have upon them, how to give the people that ease, from
their present burdens, which their (undone) condition calls for. Which how
well and faithfully they have performed, and not rather most notoriously
violated, let the whole world, God, Angels, Men, determine, by their imposing a
Monthly Tax of one hundred thousand pounds a Month, for the 6. next Months,
they had paid and advanced before hand: By ordering Genesis Monk by a Vote of
their Council of State, at Whitehall (afterward ratisied by a Vote, at
Westminster when executed) the 9. of this instant February, to march with all
his Forces into the City of London, to seize and imprison 2. of their Aldermen,
and sundry of their Common Council men in the Tower, to pull down and destroy
the Gates and Portcullesses of the City; To discontinue, null and void the
Common Council of the City of London for this year, by ordering a Bill for the
choice of another Common Council, with such Qualifications as the Juncto shall
think fit; which was accordingly executed, and then ratified and approved by
their Votes; and by commanding him afterward to demand the City Arms, and to
disarm them by force, if they deliver them not upon demands s and all because
the Common Council upon a Petition of the Citizens, and Remonstrance of the
Gentlemen, Ministers and Freeholders of Warwickshire, and other Counties Febr.
8. voted and resolved; That no Person or Persons whatsoever, might impose any
Laws or Taxes upon the City and Citizens, until the Authority thereof be
derived from their Representatives in a full and free Parliament. And all this
without and before the least hearing or examination of the City and
Common Council: a Tyranny, Indignity, Dishonor and Ingratitude not to be
paralleld, and never offered in any age to the City and Citizens before by any
of our Kings, for the highest Treasons against them, at least before hearing
and convicti^^; much less only for demanding and claiming the benefit of those
Fundamental Laws and Privileges, for whose defense they had so lately expended
so many Millions of Treasure, and Thousands of their lives, to defend them
according to these their fresh Declarations, and Acts encouraging them
thereunto; (and that after all their former Obligations and Indearments to the
City upon all occasions, and the beheaded Kings free Confirmation of all their
former Charters, Liberties, Privileges, Militia, and enlargements of the same,
at the Treaty in the Isle of Wight, notwithstanding their taking up Arms
against him in the Parliaments defense) may now justly irritate and engage the
City of London, and all other Cities, Boroughs, Corporations and Counties of
this Realm, unanimously to oppose the present and all other Taxes and Excises
whatsoever, imposed on them by these Oppressors, and put their own Act in
vigorous execution against them, as the worst of Tyrants, and Invaders of their
Liberties.

Thirdly, Both Houses of Parliament jointly, and the House of Commons severally
in the late Parliament, with the approbation of all, and consent of most now
sitting, did in sundry Exact Collection, p. 5, 6, 7, 14, 342, 492.
Romonstrances and Declarations, published to the Kingdom, not only Tax the
King and his evil Counselors, for imposing illegal Taxes on the Subjects,
contrary to the forecited Acts; the maintenance whereof against all future
violations and invasions of the Peoples Liberties and Properties they made one
principal ground of our late bloody expensive war; but likewise professed Exact
Collection, p. 28, 29, 214, 263, 270, 491, 492, 495, 496, 497, 600.
That they were specially chosen and entrusted by the Kingdom in Parliament,
and owned it as their duty to hazard their own lives and estates, for
preservation of those Laws and Liberties, and use their best endeavors that
the meanest of the Commonalty MIGHT ENJOY THEM AS THEIR BIRTHRIGHTS, as well
as the greatest Subject. That every honest man, (especially those who have
taken the late Protestation, and Solemn League and Covenant since) is bound to
defend the Laws and Liberties of the kingdom against Will and Power, which
imposed what payments they thought fit to drain the Subjects Purses, and supply
those Necessities (which their ill Counsel had brought upon the King and
Kingdom.) And that they would be ready to live and dye with those worthy and
true-hearted Patriots of the Gentry of this Nation and others, who were ready
to lay down their lives and fortunes, for the maintenance of their Laws and
Liberties: with many such like expressions. Which must needs engage me (a
Member of that Parliament, and Patriot of my Country) with all my strength and
power to oppose this injurious Tax, imposed out of Parliament, though with the
hazard of my life and fortunes; wherein all those late secluded Lords and
Members who have joined in these Remonstrances are engaged by them to second
me, under pain of being adjudged unworthy for ever hereafter to sit in any
Parliament, or to be trusted by their Counties and those for whom they served.
And so much the rather to vindicate the late Houses honor and reputation from
those predictions and printed aspersions of the beheaded King, now verified as
undeniable experimented truths by the Antiparliamentary sitting Juncto; Exact
Collect. p. 285, 286, 298, 320. 32a, 378, 379, 381, 513, 514, 515, etc. 618,
619, 623, 647, etc. 671, 679, etc. A Collect. etc. p. 100, 102, etc. 117.
That the maintenance of the Laws, Liberties, Properties of the People, were
but only gilded Dissimulations, and specious pretenses to get power into their
own hands, thereby to enable them to destroy and subvert both Laws, Liberties
and Properties at last, and not any thing like them; to introduce Anarchy,
Democracy, Parity, Tyranny in the Highest degree, and new forms of arbitrary
Government, and leave neither King nor Gentleman: all which the people should
too late discover to their costs, and that they had obtained nothing by
adhering to and compliance with them, but to enslave and undo themselves, and
to be at last destroyed. Which royal Predictions many complain, and all
experimentally ^ind too truly verified by those who now bear rule, under the
Nam^ and visour of the Parliament of England, since its dissolution by the
Kings decapitation, and the Armies imprisoning and seclusion of the Members and
Lords, who above all others are obliged to disprove them by their Actions, as
well as Declarations to the people, who regard not words but real performances
from these new Keepers of their Liberties, especially in this FIRST YEAR OF
ENGLANDS FREEDOM engraven on all their public Seals, which else will but seal
their Selfdamnation, and proclaim them the Archest Impostors under Heaven; and
now again in their 3. Session, after their two sudden and forcible Dissolutions.

Secondly, Should I voluntarily submit to pay this Tax, and that by virtue of
an Act of Parliament made by those now sitting, (some of whose Elections have
been voted void; others of them elected by new illegal Writs under a new kind
of Seal, without the Kings Authority, Style or Seal, and that since the Kings
beheading, as the Earl of Pembroke, and Lord Edward Howard, incapable of being
Knights or Burgesses by the Common Law or Custom of Parliament, being Peers of
the Realm (if now worthy such a Title) as was adjudged long since in the Lord
Camoyes case, Claus. Dors. 7 R. 2. m. 32. asserted by Mr. Seldom in his Titles
of Honor, part 2. c. 5. p. 737. seconded by Sir Edward Cook in his 4. Institut.
p. 1, 4, 5, 46, 47, 49. and I have proved at large in my Plea for the Lords and
House of Peers,) As I should admit these to be lawful Members, and their
unlawful void Writs to be good in Law; so should I tacitly admit, and ex post
facto assent to some particulars against my knowledge, judgment, conscience,
Oaths of Supremacy, Allegiance, P^otestation, and Solemn League and Covenant,
taken in the presence of God himself, with a sincere heart and real intention
to perform the same, and persevere therein all the days of my life, without
suffering my self directly or indirectly, by whatsoever combination, persuasion
or terror to be withdrawn therefrom. As first, That there may be and now is a
lawful Parliament of England actually in being, and legally continuing after
the Kings death, consisting only of a few late Members of the Commons House,
without either King, Lords, or most of their Fellow-Commons: which the very
Consciences and Judgments of all now sitting, that know any thing of
Parliaments, and the whole Kingdom if they durst speak their Knowledge, know
and believe to be false, yea against their Oaths and Covenant. Secondly, That
this Parliament (so unduly constituted, and packed by power of an army
combining with them) has a just and lawful authority to violate the
Privileges, Rights, Freedoms, Customs, and alter the Constitution of our
Parliaments themselves; imprison, seclude, expel most of their Fellow Members
for voting according to their Consciences; to repeal what Votes, Ordinances and
Acts of Parliament they please, erect new Arbitrary Courts of War and Justice
to arraign, condemn, execute the King himself, with the Peers and Commons of
this Realm by a new kind of Martial law, contrary to Magna Carta, the Petition
of Right, and Law of the Land: dis-inherit the Kings posterity of the Crown,
extirpate Monarchy, and the whole House of Peers, change and subvert the
ancient Government, Seals, Laws, Writs, legal proceedings, Courts, and coin of
the Kingdom; sell and dispose of all the Lands, Revenues, Jewels, Goods of the
Crown, with the Lands of Deans and Chapters, as they think meet; absolve
themselves (like so many Antichristian Popes) with all the Subjects of England
and Ireland, from all the Oaths and Engagements they have made TO THE KINGS
MAJESTY, HIS HEIRS AND SUCCESSORS: yea, from their very Oath of Allegiance,
notwithstanding this express clause in it (which I desire may be seriously and
conscienciously considered by all who have sworn it) I do believe and in
Conscience am resolved, that neither the Pope, nor any person whatsoever has
power to absolve me of this Oath, or any part thereof, which I acknowledge by
good and full authority to be lawfully ministered unto me, and do renounce all
pardons and dispensations to the contrary; and to dispense with our
Protestations, Solemn League and Covenant so lately and A Collect. etc. p. 327,
358, 359. 399, 404, 416, 420, etc. 694, 751, 768, 769, 798, 802, 806, etc. 879,
889.
zealously urged and enjoined by both Houses on Members, Officers, Ministers,
and all sorts of People throughout the Realm; to dispose of all the Forts,
Ships, Forces, Offices and Places of Honor, Power, Trust or Profit within the
Kingdom to whom they please; to displace and remove whom they will from their
Offices, Trusts, Pensions, Callings, at their pleasures, without any legal
cause or trial: to make what new Acts, Laws, and reverse what old ones they
think meet, to ensnare, inthrall our Consciences, Estates, Liberties, Lives: to
create new* monstrous Treasons never heard of in the world before; and declare
real Treasons against King, Kingdom, Parliament, to be no Treasons, and
Loyalty, Allegiance, due Obedience to our known Laws, and conscientious
observing of our Oaths and Covenants (the breach whereof would render us actual
Traitors, and perjurious Persons) to be no less than High Treason, for which
they may justly imprison, dismember, disfranchise, displace and fine us at
their wills (as they have done some of late) and confiscate our Persons, Lives
to the Gallows, and our estates to their new Exchequer; (a Tyranny beyond all
Tyrannies ever heard of in our Nation, repealing Magna Charta, c. 29. 5 E. 3.
c. 6. 25 Ed. 3. c. 4. 28 Ed. 3. c. 3. 37. E. 3. c. 18. 42 E. 3. c. 3. 25 Ed. 3.
c. 2. 11 R. 2. c. 4. 1 H. 4. c. 10. 2 H. 4. Rot. Par. N. 60. 1 E. 6. c. 12. 1
Mar. c. 1. The Petition of Right, 3 Caroli, the Statutes made in the beginning
of the Parliament, 16 Caroli c. 1, 7, 8, 10, 12, 14, 20. and laying all our See
Cooks 3 Instit. p. 1. 21, 22, 23.
Laws, Liberties, Estates, Lives in the very dust, after so many bloody and
costly years wars, to defend them against the Kings and others invasions) raise
and keep up what forces they will by Sea and Land, impose what heavy Taxes they
please, and renew, increase multiply and perpetuate them on us, and on Scotland
and Ireland too, which no English Parliament ever did before, as often and as
long as they please, to support their own encroached, more then Regal,
Parliamental, Super-transcendent Arbitrary power over us, and all that is ours
or the Kingdoms, at our private and the public charge, against our wills,
judgments, consciences, to our absolute enslaving, and our three Kingdoms
ruin, by engaging them one against another in new Civil wars; and exposing us
for a prey to our Foreign Enemies. All which, with other particulars, lately
acted and avowed by the Imposers of this Tax, and sundry others since by color
of that pretended Parliamentary Authority by which they have imposed it, I must
necessarily admit, acknowledge to be just and legal by my voluntary payment of
it, on purpose to maintain an Army, to justify and make good all this by the
mere power of the Sword, which they can no ways justify and defend by the
Laws of God or the Realm, or the least color of reason, justice, honesty,
religion, conscience, before any Tribunal of God or Men, when legally
arraigned, as they may one day be. Neither of which I can or dare acknowledge,
without incurring the guilt of most detestable Perjury, and highest Treason,
against King, Kingdom, Parliament, Laws and Liberties of the people; and
therefore cannot yield to this Assesment.

Thirdly, the principal ends and uses proposed in the pr^tended Acts and
Warrants thereupon for payment of this Tax, and other Taxes since, are strong
obligations to me, in point of Couscience, Law, Prudence, to withstand it;
which I shall particularly discuss

The First is, the maintenante and continuance of the pr^sent Army and Forces
in England under the Lord Fairfax, Cromwell, and other Commanders since. To
which I say, First, as I shall with all readiness, gratitude and due respect,
acknowledge their former Gallantry, good and faithful Services to the
Parliament and Kingdom, whiles they continued dutiful and constant to their
first Engagements, and the ends for which they were raised by both Houses, as
far forth as any man; so in regard of their late monstrous defections, and
dangerous Apostacies from their primitive obedience, faithfulness, and
engagements in disobeying the Commands, and levying open war against both
Houses of Parliament, keeping an horrid force upon them at their very doors;
seizing, imprisoning, secluding, abusing, and forcing away their Members,
printing and publishing many high and treasonable Declarations against the
Institution, Privileges, Members and Proceedings of the late, and being of all
futur^ Parliaments; imprisoning, abusing, arraigning, condemning and executing
our late King, against the Votes, Faith, and Engagements of both Houses, and
dis-inheriting His posterity, usurping the Regal, Parliamental, Magistratical,
and Ecclesiastical power of the Kingdom to their General-Council of Officers of
the Army, and Anti-Parliamentary Conventicles, as the supreme swaying Authority
of the Kingdom, and attempting to alter and subvert the ancient Government,
Parliaments, Laws, and Customs of our Realms. And upon serious consideration of
the ordinary, unsufferable Assertions of their Officers and Soldiers uttered
in most places where they Quarter, and to my self in particular, sundry times,
Can or will the expulsed King himself or his Heirs say more, or so much as
these, if he invade and conquer us by foreign forces? And were it not better for
us then to submit to our lawful King, than to so many thousand perfidious
usurping pretended Conquerors of us, who of late pretended only they were no
other but our Servants, not Lords and Conquerors?
That the whole Kingdom, with all our Lands, Houses, Goods and whatsoever we
have, is theirs, and that by right of Conquest, they having twice conquered the
Kingdom: That we are but their conquered Slaves and Vassals, and they the Lords
and Heads of the Kingdom: That our very lives are at their mercy and courtesy:
That when they have gotten all we have from us by Taxes and Free Quarter, and
we have nothing left to pay them, then themselves will seize upon our Lands as
their own, and turn us and our Families out of doors: That there is now no Law
in England (nor never was, if we believe their lying Oracle Peter's) but the
Sword; with many such like vapouring Speeches and discourses, of which there
are thousands of witnesses: I can neither in Conscience, Law, nor Prudence
assent unto, much less contribute in the least degree, for their present
maintenance, or future continuance, thus to insult, inslave, and tyrannize over
King, Kingdom, Parliament, People at their pleasure, like their conquered
Vassals. And for me in particular to contribute to the maintenance of those,
who against the Law of the Land, the privileges of Parliament, and liberty of
the Subject, pulled me forcibly from the Commons House, and kept me Prisoner
about 2. months space under their Martial, to my great expense and prejudice,
and since that, close Prisoner near 3. whole years in Dunster, Taunton and
Pendennis Castles, and thrice forcibly excluded me and other Members out of the
House, May 7. and 9. and December. 27. 1659. without any particular cause
pretended or assigned, only for discharging my duty to the Kingdom, and those
for whom I served in the House, without giving me the least reparation for this
unparalled injustice, or acknowledging their offense (and yet detain some of
my then Fellow Members under custody by the mere power of the Sword, without
bringing them to Trial) would be, not ^^ly absurd, unreasonable, and a tacit
justification of this h^rrid violence, and breath of Privilege, but monstrous,
unnatural, perfidious, against my Oath and Covenant.

2. No Tax ought to be imposed on the Kingdom in Parliament it self, but in
case of necessity, for the common good, and defense thereof against foreign
Enemies, or Domestique Traitors and Rebels, as is clear by the Stat. of 25 E.
1. c. 6. all Acts for Taxes, Subsidi^s, Tenths, Aids, Tonnage and Poundage,
and Cooks 2 Instit. p. 528. Now it is evident to me, that there is no necessity
of keeping up this Army for the Kingdoms common Good, but rather a necessity of
disbanding it, or the greatest part of it, for these reasons: 1. Because the
whole Kingdom with Scotland and Ireland are generally exhausted by the late 18.
years Wars, Plunders and heavy Taxes; there being more moneys levied on it by
both sides, during these 18. last years, than in all the Kings Reigns since the
Conquest, as will appear upon a just computation: all Counties being thereby
utterly unable to pay it. 2. In regard of the great decay of Trade, the
extraordinary dearth of cattle, corn, and provisions of all sorts; the charge
of relieving a multitude of poor people, who starve with famine in many places,
the richer sort (eaten out by Taxes and Free Quarter) being utterly unable to
relieve them. To which I might add, the multitude of maimed Soldiers, with
the widows and children of those who have lost their lives in the Wars, which
is very costly. 3. The heavy Contributions to support the Army, which destroy
all Trade, by fore-stalling, engrossing most of the Moneys of the Kingdoms, and
enhancing their prices, keeping many thousands of able men and horses idle,
only like moths, and locusts to consume other laboring men's provisions,
estates, and the public Treasure of the Kingdoms, when as their employment in
their Trades and Callings, might much advance trading, and enrich the Kingdoms.
4. There is now no visible Enemy in the field or elsewhere, and the fitting
Members boast there is no fear from any abroad, their Navy being so
Victorious. And why such a vast Army should be still continued in the Kingdom
to increase its debts and payments, when charged with so many great Arrears and
Debts already, to eat up the Count^y with Taxes and Free Quarter, only to play,
drink, whore, steal, rob, murder, quarrel, fight with, impeach and shoot one
another to death as Traitors, Rebels, and Enemies to the Kingdom, and Peoples
Liberties, as of late the Levellers, and Cromwellists did, (when this was
written) and the Lambardists and Rumpists since, for want of other employments,
and this for the public Good, transcends my understanding. 5. When the King
had two great Armies in the Field, and many Garrisons in the Kingdom, this
whole Army by its primitive Establishment, consisted but of twenty two thousand
Horse, Dragoons and Foot, and had an Establishment only of about Forty five
thousand pounds a month for their pay, which both Houses then thought
sufficient, as is evident by their A Collect. etc. p. 599, 876.
Ordinances of Febr. 15. 1644. and April 4 1646. And when the Army was much
increased without their Order, sixty thousand pounds a month was thought
abundantly sufficient by the Officers and Army themselves, to disband and
reduce all super-numeraries, maintain the Established Army and Garrisons, and
ease the Country of all Free Quarter; which Tax has been constantly pain in
all Counties. Why then this Tax to the Army should now be raised above the
first Establishment, when reduced to twenty thousand, whereof sundry Regiments
are designed for Ireland, (for which there is thirty thousand pounds a month
now enacted, beside the sixty for the Army) and this for the common good of the
Realm, and that the Taxes since should be mounted to 120. thousand pounds each
month and now again to one hundred thousand pounds for those 6. months, for
which they have paid in 35. thousand pounds, 9. months since before hand; only
to murder our Protestant Brethren, and Allies of Scotland and Holland, destroy
and oppress each other, and keep up an Anti-Parliamentary Conventicle of
Tyrants and Usurpers, to undo, enslave and ruin our Kingdoms, Parliaments, and
their Privileges, against all their former Oaths, Protestations, Declarations,
Covenants, is a riddle unto me, on rather, a Mystery of Iniquity* for some men's
private ^^^re, (...) than the public weal. 6. The Militias of every County
(for which there was so great contest in Parliament with the late King) and
those Persons of interest and estates in every Shire or Corporation who have
been cordial to the Parliament and Kingdom heretofore, if put into a posture of
defense, under Gentlemen of quality, and known integrity, as they were under
Sectaries, Quakers, and Anabaptists of late, would be a far greater, safer,
fitter Guard to secure the Kingdom and Parliament against foreign Invasions, or
domestic Insurrections, than a mutinous mercenary Army of Sectaries, or
Persons and Soldiers of no fortunes, and that with more general content, and
the tenth part of that charge the Kingdom is now at to maintain this Army, and
a costly Militia besides, and prevent all danger of the undoing pest of
Free Quarter. Therefore there is no necessity to keep up this Army, or impose
any new Tax for their maintenance, or defraying rheir pretended Arrears: which
I dare aver, the Free Quarter they have formerly taken in kind, and levied in
money, if brought to a just account, as it ought, will double, if not treble
most of their ancient Arrears, and make them much indebted to the Country. And
no reason they should have full pay and Free Quarter too, and the Country bear
the burden of both, without full allowance of all the Quarters levied or taken
on them against Law, out of their pretended Arrears.

And if any of the sitting Tax-Makers here object, That Objct.
they dare not trust the Militia of the Cities and Counties of the Realm with
their own or the Kingdoms defense: Therefore there is a necessity for them to
keep up the Army, to prevent all dangers from abroad, and Insurrections at home.

I answer, 1. That upon these pretenses these new Lords may intail and enforce
an Army, and Taxes to support Answ.
them, on the three Kingdoms till Doomsday. 2. If they be real Members who
make this Objection, elected by the Counties, Cities and Boroughs for which
they serve, and deriving their Parliamental Authority only from the People,
(the Sea their Votes Jan. 4. and Declaracion, 17 March, 1648. p. 1. 27.
only new fountain of all Power and Authority, as themselves now dogmatize)
then they are but their Servants and Trustees, who are to allow them wages, and
give them Commission for what they act. And if they dare not now trust the
people, and those persons of quality, sidelitie, and estate, who both elected,
entrusted and empowered them, and are their Lords and Masters, not Slaves or
Vassals, yea the primitive and supreme power; it is high time for their
Electors and Masters, (the People) to revoke their authority, trusts, and call
them to a speedy account for all their late exorbitant proceedings, in
ejecting the Majority of their faithful Fellow Members, in whom the people
most confided, and for their mispence of the Kingdoms Treasure; and no longer
to trust those with their purses, liberties, safety, who dare not now to
confide in them, and would rather commit the safeguard of the Kingdom to
mercenary, indigent soldiers, than to those Gentlemen, Freeholders, Citizens,
Burgesses, and persons of Estate who elected them, whose Trustees, Servants,
and Attorneys only they profess themselves, and who have greatest interest
both in them and the Kingdoms weal, and are those who must pay these
Mercinaries, if continued.

3. The Gentlemen and Freemen of England have very little reason any longer to
trust the Army with the Kingdoms, Parliaments, or their own Liberties, Laws,
and Privileges safeguard, which they have so often invaded; professing now, See
their Declaration, Nov. 20. and proposals, Dec 6. 164^ and Cromwel^ Inst^ument
and Speeches.
that they did not fight to preserve the Kingdom, King, Parliament, Laws,
Liberties and Properties of the Subject; but to conquer and pull them down, and
make us conquered slaves instead of Froe-men: averring, All is theirs by
conquest (which is as much as the King and his Cavaliers, or any foreign enemy
could or durst have affirmed, had they conquered us by Battle:) And if so, then
this Army is not, cannot be upheld and maintained for the Kingdoms and peoples
common good and safety, but their enslaving, destruction, and the mere support
of the usurped power, authority, offices, wealth and absolute domination only
of those Generals, Officers, Junctoes, (as we have found by sad experience) who
have exalted themselves for the present, above King, Parliament, Kingdoms,
Laws, Liberties, and those who did entrust them, by the help of this
trus^breaking Army, who have Ezekiel. 18 24.
lost and stained all the glory of their former noble Victories and Heroic
Actions, by their late degenerate unworthy treacheries, practices, and a^e
become a reproach to the profession of a Soldier, the Protestant Religion, and
the English Nation in all Christian Kingdoms and Churches.

The second end of this heavy Tax of April 7. 1649. is the support and
maintenance of the Forces in Ireland, for which there was only twenty thousand
pounds a month formerly allowed, now mounted unto thirty thousand.

To which I answer in the first place, That it is apparent by the printed
Statutes of 25 E. 1. c. 6. 1 E. 3. c. 5, 7. 18 Ed. 3. c. 7. 25 Ed. 3. c. 8. 4
H. 4. c. 13. Cooks 2. Institutes, p. 528. and the Protestation of all the
Commons of England in the Parliaments of 1 Hen. 5. number. 17. and 7 H. 5. number. 9.
That no Freeman of England ought to be compelled to go in person, or to pay
any Tax for or toward the maintenance of any foreign War in Ireland, or any
other parts beyond the Sea, without their free consents in full Parliament. And
therefore this Tax to maintain Soldiers and the War in Ireland (neither
Imposed in Parliament, much less in a full and free one, as I have proved)
must needs be illegal, and no ways obligatory to me, or any other. 2. Most of
the ancient Forces in Ireland (as the British Army, Scots and Inchiqueen's,
toward whose support the twenty thousand pounds a month was designed) have
been long since declared Rebels, Traitors, Revolters, and are not to share in
this Contribution: and those now pretending for Ireland, being Members of the
present Army, and to be paid out of that Establishment, there is no ground at
all to augment, but to decrease this former monthly Tax for Ireland, over what
it was before. 3. Many of those now pretending for Ireland, have been the
greatest obstructers of its relief heretofore: and many of those designed for
this service by lot, have in words, writing and print protested they never
intend to go thither, and dissuade others from going, yet take Free Quarter on
the Country and pay too under that pretext. And to force the Country to pay
Contribution and give Free quarter to such Cheaters and Impostors, who never
intend this service, is both unjust and dishonorable. 4. If the relief of
Ireland be now really intended, it is not upon the first, just and pious
grounds, to preserve the Protestant party there from the forces of the bloody,
Popish, Irish Rebels, with whom (if report be true) these sitting
Anti-Monarchists seek and see the 2d. part of the History of Independency.
hold correspondence, and are now actually accorded with Owen Roe-Oneal, and
his party of bloudiest Papists (declaring For their New Iesuitical
Commonwealth, and joining with them in an offensive and defensive war, against
the King and Kingship:) but to oppose the Kings interest and Title to that
Kingdom ( See Seldens Titles of Honor.
settled on Him, his Heirs and Successors for ever by an express Act of
Parliament made in Ireland, 23 H. 8. c. 1. and by the Statute of 1 Jac. c. 1.
made in England, yet unrepealed,) and the Protestant remaining party there,
adhering to, and proclaiming, acknowledging him for their Sovereign; lest his
gaining of Ireland should prove fatal to their usurped Soveraigntie in England,
or conduce to his enthroning here: And by what Authority those now sitting can
impose, or with what Conscience any loyal Subject who has taken the Oaths of
Supremacy, Allegiance, and Covenant, can voluntarily pay any Contributions to
deprive the King of his hereditary right, and undoubted Title to the Kingdoms
and Crowns of England and Ireland, and alter the frame of the ancient
Government and Parliaments of our Kingdoms, See A Collect. p. 94, 95 99, 698,
700, 877, 878.
Remonstrated so often against by both Houses, and adjudged High Treason in
Canterburies and Straffirds cases, for which they were beheaded; and by
themselves in the Kings own case, (whom they decolled likewise) without
incurring the guilt of perjury and danger of high Treason, to the loss of his
life and estate, by the very laws and Statutes yet in force, transcends my
understanding to conceive: Wherefore I neither can, nor dare in conscience,
law, or prudence, submit to this Contribution.

The 3d. end of this Tax, (and more particularly of this new Tax of Jan 26.
1659. of one hundred thousand pound the Month for 6 months space, after a
former Tax levied before hand for the self-same Months) is the maintenance of
the Armies and Navyes raised, and continued for the defense of the twice
dissipated Anti-Parliamentarie Conventicle, and their Utopian Commonwealth,
and the necessary and urgent occasions thereof, now propounded and insisted on
by the sitting Members, as the only means of Peace and Settlement both in
Church and State: when as in truth it has been, is and will be the only means
of Unsettlement, and new divisions, wars, oppressions, confusions in both, to
their utter ruin and desolation if pursued. Which I shall evidence beyond
contradiction.

1. This project to metamorphoze our ancient Hereditary famous, flourishing
Kingdom into an Helvetian and Vtopian Commonwealth, by popular Tumults,
Rebellion, and a prevalent party in Parliament, was originally contrived by
Father Parsons, and other Jesuits in Spain in the year of our Lord 1590.
recommended by them to the King of Spain to pursue, and was principally to be
effected by Jesuits, to destroy and subvert our Protestant Monarchs, Kingdoms,
and subject them to the Tyranny and Vassallage of the Jesuits, and Spaniards,
as you may read at large in William Watson his Quodlibets, printed 1602. p. 92,
94, 25, 286, 389, 310, 330, 332, 333, 334, 322, 323, in his Dialogue between a
Secular Priest and a Lay Gentleman, printed at Rhemes, 1601. and in William
Clarke (both Secular Priests) his Answer to Father Parsons Libel, p. 75, 76,
etc. 2ly. After this it was particularly and by name recommended by Thomas
Campanella (an Italian Monk, and Arch-Machivilian) to the King of Spain, in the
year 1600. as the principal means to sow the seeds of Divisions and Dissentions
amongst the English themselves, and to engage England, Scotland and Ireland in
inextricable wars against each other, to divert the English from the Indies,
and his Plate Fleet, and reduce them under his universal Temporal and the Popes
Spiritual Monarchy at last; as you may read at large in his Book De Monarchia
Hispanica, c. 25. now translated into English. 3ly. It was again set on foot
and vigorously prosecuted by the Jesuits and Cardinal Richelien of France, in
the years 1639, and 1640. as you may read in my Romes Masterpiece, and Epistle
to A Seasonable Legal and Historical Vindication, etc. of the good old
fundamental Liberties, Laws, etc. of all English Freemen, printed 1655. And
specially recommended to the French King, and Cardinal Mazarin his Successor at
his death, Anno 1642. vigorously to pursue, and accomplish by the Civil Wars
raised between Scotland and England, and the late King and Parliament; as See
my Jus Pationatus, and New Discovery of Free State tyranny, and the Good Old
Cause truly stated.
Historia Conte de Galeazzo Gualdo Priorato, part 3. Venotiis, 1648. p. 175,
176. and was accordingly prosecuted by the Spanish and French Agents, and the
Jesuits and Popish Priests, and their seduced Proselytes of the Juncto and
Army, as I evidenced at large in my Speech, Dee. 4. 1648. and the Appendix to
it; my soresaid Epistle, and True and Perfect Narrative, May 1659. by evidences
past all contradiction. 4ly. It is evident, That the Jesuits, and Jesuited
Papists in England, Scotland and Ireland, with all the Sea the Coffin for the
Good Old Cause, John Rogers, and Nedham his Interest will not lie, My true and
perfect Narrative, and Conscientious Quaenes, where this is fully proved.
Sectarian Party of Anabaptists, Quakers Enthisiasts, and Sectaries of all
sorts (headed by disguised Jesuits, Monks, Friars, and Popish Priests*) have
been the chiefest Sticklers of all others for this New projected Commonwealth
against the King and Monarchy, and the only means to extirpate our established
Protestant Ministry, with their Maintenance, Tithes, Glebes, and embroyl us in
endless confusions and revolutions of Governments, Wars, Distractions, till we
be beggered, destroyed, and made a prey to our foreign Enemies. 5ly. The King of
Spain, was the first of all foreign Kings and States, who owned, counted and
ent^ed into a League of Amity with our new Commonwealth after the Kings
beheading, as a Creature of his own, in opposition to our King and Kingship,
and engaged us in a war against the Dutch, to make himself Monarch over us
both, according to Campanella his advice, De Monarchia Hisp. c. 25, and 27.
which our Republicans punctuallie pursued from 1649, till 1653. almost to the
ruin of us both, by the Spaniards Gold and policy. 6ly. That the French
Cardinal Mazarin, and other Popish Kings and States, complied and confederated
with our Republicans and late Protectors, in opposition to our Hereditary
Protestant King and Kingship, purposely to ruin us and our Religion at home,
and the Protestant Churches abroad, engaged by their policies in unchristian
wars against each other. 7ly. That we have all visibly seen and sensibly felt
by twelve years woeful experiment, that this Jesuitical project and chymera of
a Free State and Commonwealth, was propounded by the In their several
Agreements of the people, their D^cla^ation of Nov. 10. Their Proposals,
December. 6. And Declaration of March 17. 1648.
Army Officers, and the sitting Juncto, as the only means of our present and
future peace and settlement, both in Nov. 1647, 1648, 1649. and yet it has
proved (as I then predicted in my Speech and Memento) a perpetual Seminary of
new Wars, Tumults, Combustions, Changes, Revolutions of Government, and
Governors, Anti-parliamentarie Conventicles, Factions, Schisms, Sects,
Heresies, Confusions, and endless Taxes, Oppressions, Ataxies ever since; both
in Church, State, Court and Camp, almost to our inevitable destruction; and of
necessity it will and must do so still. And is it not then a worse than Bedlam
folly and frenzy for our Antiparliamentarie Juncto, Swordmen, and
Republicans, to enforce and impose it on us by mere armed violence against our
Judgments, Reasons, Consciences, Experiments, and compel us to maintain Armies
and Navies by this New insupportable Tax, to set up this Romish Babel, which
has been, is, and will be the most certain Remora and Obstacle of our Peace
and Settlement, and most apparent Jesuitical, Romish, Spanish Engine, to create
more and greater Confusions, Distractions than before, and effect our
inevitable destruction both as men and Protestants? 8ly. That this pretense of
erecting a Commonwealth was first pretended by Cromwell, and carried on with
specious pretexts to blind the credulous people, only to make way for his own
tyrannical and ambitious usurpation of a more than Regal and Monarchical power
over our Kingdoms, and settle it on himself and his posterity in conclusion;
which he effected by degrees. And what intelligent person discerns not the
self-same design now couched under it, in other ambitious Grandees now in
power, most eagerly crying up a Free State and Commonwealth upon the same
account? 9ly. The Anti-parliamentary, Unchristian, Atheistical, if not
Diabolical means, by which this Utopian Republic was at first endeavored to
be erected, established, and now again re-edified, must needs draw down the
full vials of Gods wrath and fury upon it, and all its Projectors, and our 3.
Nations too, if they voluntarily submit unto it. It was first ushered in by
ambitious, treacherous, perjurious, rebellious Army Officers, seduced by Romish
Emissaries, and their Confederates in the Commons House, forcibly secluding,
securring, and ejecting the Majoritie of their Fellow Members, (4. parts of 5.
at least) only for their Vote, to proceed to settle the peace of the Kingdom,
upon the Kings Concessions, after 7. years intestine wars: By the close
imprisonment of sundry of them in remote Castles for diverse years without
examination, hearing, or cause expressed; by their suppressing and voting down
the whole House of Lords, without hearing or impeachment, over whom they had no
Jurisdiction: by murdering their Protestant King in a strange Court of Highest
injustice; by exiling and disinheriting his royal Issue, and right Heir to the
Crown, to make way for their own Usurpation of Sovereign Power; by subverting
the fundamental Government of the Kingdom, and the constitution, rights,
privileges of English, Scottish, Irish Parliaments, and their Members: by
seizing upon, disposing and dissipating all the Crown Lands, Revenues, Customs,
Forts, Forces, Navies of our three Kingdoms: by imprisoning, disinheriting,
sequest^ing, exiling, destroying, murdering many thousands of their Protestant
Brethren and Allies of England, Scotland, Ireland, Holland, merely for their
Loyalty and Allegianee: by keeping a perpetual Army to overawe our 3. Nations
as conquered Vassals, bondslaves, and governing them by armed lust, tyranny,
military Committees, High Courts of Justice, Major Generals, and fleying off
their very Skins: by giving a boundless liberty to all Religions, Sects,
Heresies, Blasphemies, Jusque datum se^leri, etc. against all laws of God and
Man, the fundamental Laws, Statutes, Liberties, Franchises of the Realm, the
Oaths of Homage, Fealty, Supremacy, Allegiance, the Protestations, Vows, Solemn
League and Covenant, they had frequently taken themselves, and prescribed to
others; yea against many hundreds of Votes, Orders, Ordinances, Acts,
Declarations, Remonstrances they had successively made and published to the
World, and all sorts of civil and sacred Obligations to God, their King,
Country, the Trusts reposed in them by their Indentures and Commissions as
Members or Soldiers, by exercising a more lawless Tyranny, and boundless
Military power, than the worst of all our Kings in any age: and exacting vaster
sums of money sro^ the exhausted people in less than 10. years space, than all
our Kings since the Norman Conquest. And it now carried on again (after so many
sudden, strange and admirable demonstrations of Gods indignation against our
new Babel-Builders and their Posterities, by his various and successive
Providence beyond all human apprehensions) by the self-same violent,
exorbitant, unrighteous courses, unbeseeming Englishmen or Christians; and now
by re-excluding and ejecting all the old secured and secluded Members by armed
force and injurious Votes, without accusation, hearing, crime or impeachment,
against all rules of Law, Justice, and Parliamentarie Presidents, and of the
whole House of Lords, against the express Letter of the Act by which they
pretend to fit: By bidding open defiance to the Addresses and Desires of the
generality of the Nobility, Gentry, Ministry, Freeholders, Commoners, Citizens,
Burgesses of most Counties, Cities and Boroughs of England, declaring for a
Free-Parliament, or restitution of all the Secluded Members; by imprisoning
some Sir Robert Pie and others
Gentlemen and Soldiers of Quality, for delivering such Addresses to their
Speaker; by putting far higher affronts and force upon the City and
Common Council of London, after all their former Obligations to them, than ever
they received from the worst of our Kings in any age, before the least hearing
or legal conviction of them as Delinquents; by moving in the House, That all
who have declared or made Addresses for a Free Parliament, shall be disabled to
elect or be elected Members: By taking away the peoples freedoms of Election,
by prescribing new illegal Qualifications (against 3 E. 1. c. 5. See Rastals
Abridgements, Tit. Elections and Parliament.
all Laws and Statutes concerning Elections and all forms of ancient Writs)
both for the persons electing and to be elected to recruit their empty House,
of which themselves alone (not the people) will be the only Judges before they
shall be admitted when chosen: whereby they will (like Cromwell, and his
Council of State) keep out any the people shall elect, that is not of their
confederacy, and admit none but when and whom they please, to perpetuate the
Parliamentary Power, and all places of Trust and Gain in themselves and their
Creatures. And because few or none but Novices shall sit amongst them in
Parliamentarie affairs, (whom they can easily overreach and rule at their
pleasure, being Strangers to each other, and Parliament proceedings) they have
voted out all the old Secluded Members (though twice their number) and disabled
them to be new elected; or if elected to be readmitted, unless they will fully
submit to the Test of their new Febr. 18. 1659.
Qualifications and Engagements. Which will re-seclude all or most of them, if
elected, and prove fatal to the Peoples freedom in their Elections, and to all
Parliaments and Members in succeeding Ages, if submitted to.

For if a combined Majority of the Commons House, who have violated all their
primitive Oaths, Trusts, Protestations, Covenants, Remonstrances, Declarations,
and so Cooks 11 Reports, f. 98.
disabled, and disfranchised themselves from sitting any more as Members, or
the peoples Trustees, may without any new election at all by the people, after
their renuntiation and nulling of their first elections, by destroying, and
engaging against, that Regal power, by which they were first elected, and
sitting only by power of the Sword, without any Qualifications prescribed to
themselves (which they impose on others, and would seclude most of them from
being Electors or Elected Members) having gotten forcible possession of the
Commons House by armed Tyranny and Usurpation, after so many Declarations, and
bloody wars for the defense of the Privileges, Rights and Members of
Parliament, shall be quietly permitted without any legal impeachment, hearing,
trial, or cause alleged (but only for one just single Vote, December. 4. 1648.
carried in a full House after long debate, without any division) forcibly to
seclude and Vote out the greatest part of their Fellow Members of greatest
integrity, interest, ability and faithfulness to the Public, against all
rules of Law, Justice, and Parliamentarie proceedings, and their Electors
wills; and by new heterogeneal Writs derived from another power, and varying in
form, from those by which themselves were chosen, to enforce whole Counties,
Cities, and Boroughs to elect new Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, to recruit
their empty House, upon such pernicious Qualifications and Engagements as
themselves prescribe both to the Electors and Members to be elected; (of which
themselves will be the only Judges, ere they admit them to sit when chosen) on
purpose to carry on their own private designs, and force what Government they
please upon the people, against their public Interest, and desires, to
perpetuate our Confusions, Oppressions, Unsettlements, and to disable whom they
please to elect or be elected, without any public opposition by the secluded
Members and people then endeavored; then farewell Parliaments, Laws and
Liberties for ever.

Fourthly, The coercive power, and manner of levying this contribution,
expressed in the Act, is against the law of the Land, and liberty of the
Subject, which is threefold.

First, Distress and sale of the Goods of those who refuse to pay it; with
power to break open their Houses (which are their Castles) doors, chests, etc.
to distrain; which is against Magna Chart. c. 29. The Petition of Right, 3 Car.
The Votes of both Houses in the case of Shipmony, 1 R. 2. c. 3. and the
resolution of our Judges and Law Books, 13 Edw. 4 9. 20 E. 4. 6. Cook 5 Report,
f. 91, 92. Semains case, and 4 Inst. p. 176, 177.

Secondly, Imprisonment of the body of the party till he pay the Contribution;
which is contrary to Magna Charta, c. 29. The Petition of Right, The
resolution of both Houses in the Parliament of 3 Caroli, in the case of Loans;
and 17 Caroli, in the case of Shipmony, the judgment of our Judges and
law books, collected by Sir Edward Cook in his 2 Inst. p. 46, etc. the Statute
of 2 H. 4* rot. parl. n. 6. 16 Car. c. 1, 8, 10, 12, 14, 20. most express in
point.

Thirdly, Levying of the contribution by soldiers and force of arms, in case
of resistance, and imprisoning the person by like force, adjudged High Treason,
in the case of the Earl of trafford, and a levying of war within the Statute of
25 Ed. 3. by the last Parliament, for which he lost his head: and proved to be
High Treason, at large by Master St. John, in his Argument at Law at the
passing the Bill for his attainder, Printed by order of the Commons House.

Fourthly, (which heightens the illegality of these illegal means of levying
it) if any person whose goods are distrained, or person imprisoned for these
illegal caxes, shall bring his Action at Law, or an Habeas Corpus for his
relief, or action of false imprisonment, as he may justly do, not only those
who now style themselves Judges, forgetting the cases of Judge Thorp,
Tresilian, and others, of old, and the impeachments of the late Shipmony Judges
in the beginning of this Parliament, with Mr. St. John's Speech and Declaration
against them, worthy their perusal, will deny, or delay to right and release
them; (for which they deserve Thorps and Tresilians punishments) but if these
fail them, at least wise the new illegal Committee of Indemnity will stay his
legal proceedings, award costs against him, commit him anew till he pay them,
and release his Sut es at Law, and upon an Habeas corpus their own sworn Judges
(created by them, without any Oath to do equal Justice, etc. to all: but only
to be true and faithful to their new ere^ted State, and sitting amongst them
as Members) dare not bail, but remaund him against Law; An oppression and
Tyranny far exceeding the worst of the Beheaded Kings; under whom the Subjects
had Free-Liberty to sue and proceed at Law, both in the cases of Loans,
Shipmony and Knighthood, without any Council Table, or Committee of Indemnity,
to stop their suits, or force them to release them; and therefore in all these
respects (so repugnant to the Laws and Liberty of the Subject) I cannot submit
to these illegal Taxes, but oppugn them to the uttermost, as the most
Destructive to our Laws and Liberty, that ever were.

Fifthly, The time of the imposing of this illegal Tax, with these unlawful
ways of levying it, is very confiderable, and sticks much with me; it is (as
the imposers of it declare and publish in many of their new kind of Acts and
devices) in the first year of Englands Liberty, and redemption from thraldom,
and this last after its new revival after 6. years interruption and
inter-regnum by Oliver and his Son Richard. And if this unsupportable Tax, thus
illegally to be levied, be the first frui^s of our first years Freedom and
redemption from thraldom, as they style it; how great may we expect our next
years thraldom will be, when this little finger of theirs is heavier by far
than the Kings whole loins, whom they beheaded 2 Chronicles. 10. 10.
for Tyranny and Oppression?

6ly. The Order of this (first) Tax (if I may so term a disorder) or rather
newn^ss of it, engages me, and all lovers of their Countries Liberty,
unanimously to withstand the same. It is the first, I find, that was ever
imposed by any who had been Members of the Commons House after a Parliament
dissolved, the Lords House voted down, and most of their fellow Commoners
secured or secluded by their connivance or confederacy with an undutifull Army
at first: and this latter, the first doubled Tax upon the people, for the very
months they advanced, and ^ aid in beforehand, by the express command and
orders of the sitting Members, to exclude the secluded ones, not only out of
the House it self, but Lobby too, into which the meanest Footboyes, and Porters
have free access. Which if submitted to, and not opposed as illegal, not only
the King, or Lords alone without the Commons, but any forty or fifty Commoners,
who have been Members of a Parliament, gaining Forces to assist and countenance
them, may out of Parliament, now, or any time hereafter, do the like, and
impose what Taxes and Laws they please upon the Kingdom, and the secluded Lords
and Commons that once sat with them, and on Scotland, and Ireland too, being
encouraged thereto by such an unopposed president. Which being of so dangerous
consequence and example to the constitution and Privileges of Parliament, and
liberties of the people, we ought all to endeavor the crushing of this new
Coc^atrice in the shell, lest it grow up to a Fiery Serpent, to consume and
sting us to death, and induce the imposers of it, to l^de us with new and
heavier Taxes of this kind, when these expire (which we must expect, when all
the Kings, Bishops, Deans and Chapters Lands are shared amongst them, sold and
spent as they will quickl^ be) if we patiently submit to this leading Decoy:
since Mat. Paris 517.
Binus Actus inducit consuetudinem; as our Ancestors resolved, Auno 1240. in
the case of an unusual Tax demanded by the Pope^ whereupon they all unanimously
opposed it at first;

Ovid. de remed. Amoris.
Opprime dum nova sunt subiti mala semina morbi:
Principiis oqsta; sero medicina paratur
Cum mala per longas invaluere mora^.
B^ing the safest rule of State-Physick we can follow in such new diseases,
which endanger the whole Body-Politick. Upon which grounds the most
conscientious Gentlemen and best Patriots of their Country opposed Loans,
Shipmouy, Tonnage, Poundage, Knighthood, and the late illegal Impositions of
the King and his Council in the very beginnings of them, and thought themselves
bound in Conscience, Law, Prudence so to do, though there were some colorable
reasons and precedents of former times pretended to countenance them. And if
thief Worthies conceived themselves thus obliged to oppose those illegal
Impositions of the King and his Council, though countenanced by some Judges
opinions as Iegal, to their immortal honor, and high esteem both in Country
and Parliament, who applauded them as the Exact Collections, p. 5. 6. And their
own Declarations, 17. March 1648. p. 7 etc.
principal maintainers of their Countries Liberties; then much more ought I,
and all other tenderes of their own and Countries Freedom, to oppose this
illegal dangerous Contribution imposed on us by a few of our fellow Subjects
only, without, yea against all Law or President to countenance it, being of
greater consequence and worser example to the Kingdom, than all or any of the
Kings illegal projects or Taxes.

Seventhly, the excessiveness of this Tax, much raised and increased, when we
are so much exhausted, and were promised and expected ease from Taxes, both by
the Army in their Remonstrance November 20. 1648. and by the In their
Declarations March 17. 1648. p. 26.
Imposers of it, (amounting to a sixth part, if not a moiety of most men's
estates) is a deep Engagement for me to oppose it; since Taxes, as well as
Magna Chart. c. 14. 14 E. 3. c. ^. Cook 2. Instit. p. 26, 27. 169. 170.
Fines and Amerciaments, ought to be reasonable; so as men may support
themselves and their Families, and not be undone, as many will be by this, if
forced to pay it by Distress or imprisonment. Upon this ground, in the
Parliament Petitions of 1 Edward the third, we find diverse freed from payment
of Tenths, and other Taxes lawfully imposed by Parliament, because the people
were impoverished and undone by the Wars, who ought to pay them. And in the
printed Statutes of 31 Henr. 6. c. 8. 1 Mariae c. 17 to omit others, we find
Subsidies mitigated and released by subsequent Acts of Parliament, though
granted by p^ecedent, by reason of the peoples poverty and inability to pay
them. Yea sometimes we read of something granted them by the King, by way of
aid, to help pay their Subsidies, as in 25 Edward 3. Rastal Tax 9. and 36. Ed.
3 c. 14. and for a direct president in point: when Mar. Paris p. ^60.
Peter Rubie the Pope's Legate in the year 1240. exacted an excessive unusual
Tax from the English Clergy; the whole Clergy of Berkshire (and others) did all
and every of them unanimously withstand it, tendering him diverse Reasons in
writing of their refusal, pertinent to our time and present Tax; whereof this
was one, That the Re^venues of their Churches scarce sufficed to find them
daily food, both in regard of their smalness, and of the present dearth of
their Corn, and because there were such multitudes of poor people to relieve,
some of which died of Famine, so as they had not enough to suffice themselves
and the poor; Whereupon they ought not to be compelled to any such
Contribution: which many of our Clergy may now likewise plead most truly, whose
Livings are small and their Tithes detained; and diverse people of all ranks and
callings too, who must sell their stocks, beds, and their houshold*stuff, or
rot in prison, if forced to pay it.

Eighthly, the principal inducement to bring on the payment of this Tax, is a
promise of taking off the all-devouring and undoing Grievance of Free Quarter:
which has ruined many Countries and Families, and yet they must pay this heavy
Tax to be eased of it sor the future, instead of being paid and allowed for
what is already past, according to A Collection, etc. p ^71.
former Engagements; and yet Free Quarter is still taken. Against which I have
these just exceptions.

1. That the taking of Free Quarter by Soldiers in men's houses, is a grievance
against the very Common law it self, Semains Case. 7 Rep. Sendels Case. Lambe^t
f. ^7^. Daltons Justice of Peace, ^24. 24 H. 8. c. 4.
which defines every man's House to be his Castle and Sanctuary, into which none
ought forcibly to enter against his will; and which, with his Goods therein, he
may lawfully See Cook 5 Report. f, 9 P 92.
fortify and defend against all intruders whatsoever, and kill them without
any danger of Law: Against all the Statutes concerning See Rastal Title
Purveyers.
Purveyers, which prohibit the taking of any men's goods or provisions against
their wills, or payment for them, under pain of Felony, though by Commission
under the great Seal of England. Against the express Letter and Provision of
the Petition of Right, 3 Caroli. Condemned by the Commons House in their An
Exact Collecti, on p. 7.
Declaration of the State of the Kingdom of the 15. December, 1641. and charged
as an Article against King Richard the second when deposed, in the Parliament
of 1 H. 4. nu. 22. Yea, it is such a Grievance, as exposes our houses, goods,
provisions, moneys, servants, children, wives, lives, and all other earthly
comforts we enjoy, to the lusts and pleasure of every domineering Officer, and
unruly common Soldier: Therefore absolutely to be abolished without any
compensation: And to impose an unjust, heavy Tax, and induce people to pay it
upon hopes of freeing them from Free Quarter, is but to impose one Grievance to
remove another.

2. There have been many former promises, Declarations and Orders of both
Houses, and the General, for taking off Freequarter, upon the Peoples paying in
their Contributions before hand, and then non^ should afterward free quarter on
them, under pain of death: Yet no sooner have they paid in their
Contributions, but they have been free-quartered on as much or more than
formerly: the Soldiers, when we tell them of any Orders against free quarter,
slighting them as so many waste papers, and carrying themselves more unruly:
And when complaint thereof has been made to the Officers, Members, or the
Committee for the Army, or in the House; answer has still been made, That as
long as there is an Army on foot, there will be free quarter taken, and there
can be no prevention of it, there being a necessity for it: and when any have
craved allowance of it, they have found so many put offs and delays, and such
difficulties in obtaining it, that their expenses have equalled their
allowance; and after allowances made, the moneys allowed have been called for
again. So as few have had any allowance for quarters, and most have given over
suing for t^e^, being put to play an after-game, to sue for them after all
their contributions first paid, and not permitted to deduct them out of their
Contributions, as in Justice and reason they ought, which they are still
enforced to pay without deduction. This pretext therefore of taking away
Free Quarter, is but a shoo-horn to draw on the payment of this Tax, and a fair
pretext to delude the People, as they find by sad experience every where, and
in the County and Hundred where I resid^. For, not to look back to the last
years free quarter taken on us (though we duly paid our Contributions) In April
and May last past, since this very Tax imposed for taking away Free Quarter,
Colonel Harrisons Troopers under the command of Captain Spencer, (who quartered
six days together in a place, and exacted and received most of them 3 s.
others 3 s. 6 d. and the least 2 s. 6 d. a day for their Quarters, telling
their Landlords, that their Lands, and the whole Kingdom was theirs) have put
Bathwick, Bathford, Claverton, Comb, Hampton, Soust^ck, Walcot and Widcombe,
small parishes in our Hundred and Libertle, as they will prove upon Oath, and
given it me under their hands, to 94 li. 4 s. 3 d. charge; beside their
quarters in other parishes of the Hundred. Sir Hard^esse Wallers Soldiers,
upon pretext of collecting arrears of Contribution not due from the Hundred,
put it to at least 30 li. charge more for Free Quarter, they being very rude
and disorderly; and no sooner were we quit of them, but on the 22. and 23. of
May last, Col, Hunks his Foot under the conduct of Captain Flower and Captain
Eliot, pretending for Ireland, but professing they never intended to go
thither, marching from Minehead and Dunster (the next Western Ports to Ireland)
surther from it, to oppress the Country, put Bathwick, Langridge, Wolly,
Batheaston, Katherin and Ford to 28. li. 7 s. and Swainswick (where I live) to
about 20 li expenses for two days Free Quarter (by color of the Generals
Order dated the first of May) being the rudest and deboislest in all kinds,
that ever quartered since the Wars, and far worse than the worst of Goring's
men, whereof some of them were the dreggs, and their Captain Flower, a Cavalier
heretofore in arms (as i^ reported) against the Parliament. Their carriage in
all places was very rude, to extort money from the people, drawing out their
Swo^ds, ransacking their houses, beating and threatening to kill them, if they
would not give them two shillings six pence, three shillings, three shillings
six pence, or at least two shillings a day for their quarters, which when
extorted from some, they took Free Quarter upon others, taking two, three, and
some four quarters a man: At my house they were most exorbitant, having (as
their Quartermaster told me, who affirmed to me they had twice conquered the
Kingdom, and all was theirs) directions from some great ones above, from some
others in the Country (intimating some of the Committee) and their own Officers
(who absented themselves purposely, that the Soldiers might have none to
control them) to abuse me. In pursuance whereof, some thirty of them coming to
my house, shouting and hollowing in a rude manner on May 22. when their Billet
was but for twenty, not showing any authority, but only a Ticket, [Mr. Prynne
-- 20.] climbed over my Walls, forced my doors, beat my servants and workmen
without any provocation, drew their Swords upon me, (who demanded whose
Soldiers they were? by what authority they demanded Freequarter, my house
being neither Inn, nor Ale house? and Free Quarter against Law, Orders of
Parliament, and the Generals) using many high provoking speeches, brake some of
my windows open, forced my strong-beer cellar-door, and took the key from my
servant, ransacked some of my chambers under pretext to search for Arms, taking
away my servants clothes, shirts, stockings, bands, cuffs, handkerchiefs, and
picking the money out of one of their pockets; hollowed, roared, stamped, beat
the Tables with their Swords and Muskets like so many Bedlams, swearing,
cursing, and blaspheming at every word; brake the Tankards, Bottles, Cups,
Dishes wherein they fetched strong beer, against the ground, abused my maid
servants, throwing beef and other good provisions at their heads, and casting
it to the dogs, as no fit meat for Soldiers, and the Heads and Conquerors of
the Kingdom, as they called themselves; searched the outhouses for Turkies,
which they took from their eggs and young ones, Veal and Mutton being not good
enough for them: They continued drinking and roaring before, at and aftor
Supper, till most of them were mad-drunk, and some of them dead drunk under the
Table. Then they must have fourteen beds provided for them (for they would lie
but two in a Bed) and all their linen washed: My Sister answering them, that
there were not so many spare beds in the house, and that they must be content
as other Soldiers had been, with such beds as could be spared; they thereupon
threatened to force open her Chamber door, and to pull her and her children out
of their beds, unless she would give them three shillings a piece for their
beds, and next days quarters; and at last forced her for fear of their
violence (being all drunk) to give them eighteen pence a piece, as soon as they
were forth of doors, and six pence a piece the next day, if they marched not;
whereupon they promised to trouble the house no more. Upon this agreement all
but eight (who were gone to bed) departed that night, and the rest the next
morning. But I going to the Lecture at Bath, some thirty of them, ^ my absence,
came about ten of the clock, notwithstanding the moneys received of my Sister
for their Quarters, re-entred the house, and would have Quarters again, unless
she would give them three shillings a piece; which she resusing, they thereupon
abused and beat the servants and workmen, forced them to drink with them all
that day and night, swearing, cursing, roaring like so many Devils, brake open
my Parlour, Milk-house, and Garden-doors, abused my Pictures and brake an hole
in one of them; hacked my Tableboards with their Swords from one end to the
other, threw the chairs, stools, meat, drink about the house; assaulted my
Sister, and her little children and Maid servants with their naked swords
threatening to kill them, and kick them to gelly, shot at them with their
Muskets, and forced them out of the house to save themselves: which I hearing
of, repaired to my house, and finding them all so Bedlam mad, that they would
not hearken to any reason, nor be quieted, thereupon rode to seek their Captain
and Officers at Bath, who purposely absented themselves, and not sinding them
till the next morning, I acquainted the Captain then by speech (as I had done
the first night by Letter) with all these unsufferable outrages of the
Sould^ers (contrary to the Generals Order to carry themselves civilly in their
Quarters, and abuse none in word or deed) which would render him and them
odious not only to the Country and Kingdom, but to all Officers and Soldiers
who had any civilitie in them, and be a disparagement to the General, by whose
Proclamation he ought to be present with his Company, to keep them in good
order, under pain of cashiering: And therefore I expected and required Justice
and Reparations at his hands; the rather, because I was informed by some of his
own Soldiers and others, that they had not been so barbarously rude, but by
his encouragement; which if he refused, I should complain of him to his
Superiors, and right my self the best way I might. After some expostulations,
he promised to make them examples, and cashier them; and to remove them
forthwith from my house: but the only right I had, was, that more of his
Company repaired thither, making all the spoil they could, and taking away some
Brass and Pewter, continued there till near four of the clock; and then
marched away only out of fear I would raise the Country upon them; many of whom
proffered me their assistance: but I desired them to forbear till I saw what
their Officers would do; who instead of punishing any of them, permitted them
to play the like Rex almost in other places where they quartered since,
marching but three or four miles a day, and extorting what moneys they could
from the Country by their violence and disorders. Now, for me, or any others to
give moneys to maintain such deboist Bedlams and Beasts as these (who boasted
of their villainies, and that they had done me at least twenty pounds spoil in
Beer and Provisions, drinking out five barrels of good strong Beer, and wasting
as much meat as would have served an hundred civil Persons) to be Masters of
our Houses, Goods, Servants, Lives, and all we have, to ride over our heads
like our Lords and Conquerors, and take Free Quarter on us, amounting to at
least a full years contribution, without any allowance for it, and that since
the last Orders against Free Quarter, and Warrants issued for paying in this
Tax, to prevent it for the future; is so far against my Reason, Judgment and
Conscience, that I would rather give all away to suppress, discard them, or
cast it into the fire, than maintain such graceless wretches with it, to
dishonor God, enslave, consume, ruin the Country and Kingdom; who every where
complain of the like insolences; and of taking Free Quarter since the ninth of
June, as above two hundred of Colonel Cox his men did in Bath the last Lords
day; who drew up in a Body about the Majors house, and threatened to s^ise and
carry him away for denying to give them Free Quarter, contrary to the New Act
for abolishing it. Lastly, This pr^tended Act implies, that those who refuse to
pay this contribution without distress or imprisonment shall be still
oppressed with Free Quarter; And what an height of oppression and injustice
this will prove, not only to distrain and imprison those who cannot in
Conscience, Law or Prudence submit to this illegal Tax, but likewise to undo
them, by exposing them to Free Quarter, which themselves condemn as the highest
pest and oppression, let all sober men consider; and what reason I and others
have to oppose such a dangerous, destructive president in its first appearing
to the world. In few words; As long as we keep an Army on foot, we must never
expect to be exempted from Free Quarter or Wars; or to enjoy any peace or
settlement: and as long as we will submit to pay contributions to support an
Army, we shall be certain our new Lords and Governors will continue an Army to
overawe and enslave us to their wills. Therefore the only way to avoid
free quarter, and the cost and trouble of an Army, and settle peace, is to deny
all future contributions.

Ninthly, The principal end of imposing this Tax to maintain the Army and
Forces now raised, is not the defense and safety of our ancient and first
Christian Kingdom of England, its Parliaments, Laws, Liberties and Religion, as
at first; but to disinherit the King of the Crown of Engl. Sootl. and Irel. (to
which he has an undoubted Right by the Laws of God and Man; as the Parliament
of 1 Jacob. chapter ^. resolves) and to levy War against him, to deprive him of it:
To subvert the ancient Monarchical Government of this Realm, under which our
Ancestors have always lived and flourished, to set up a New-Republick, the
oppressions: and Grievances whereof we have already felt (by increasing our
Taxes, setting up arbitrary Courts and Proceedings to the taking away the lives
of the late King, Peers, and other Subjects, against the fundamental Laws of
the Land, creating new monstrous Treasons never heard of in the world before,
and the like;) but cannot yet enjoy and discern the least ease or advantage by
it: To overthrow the ancient constitution of the Parliament of England,
consisting of King, Lords, and Commons, and the Rights and Privileges thereof:
To alter the fundamental Laws, Seals, Courts of Justice of the Realm, and
introduce an Arbitrary Government at least, if not Tyrannical, contrary to our
Laws, Oaths, Covenant, Protestation, See an Exact Collection: and a Collection
of public Orders, etc. p. 99, 698, 700, 877, 878.
public Remonstrances and Engagements to the Kingdom and foreign States, not to
change the Government, or attempt any of the Premises. All which being no less
than High Treason by the Laws and Statutes of the Realm, as Sir E. Cook in his
Lib. 3. c. 1, 2.
Inst. and Mr. St. John in his Argument at Law, upon passing the Bill of
Attainder of the E. of Strafford (both printed by the Commons special order)
have proved at large by many Presidents, reasons, records; and so adjudged by
the last Parliament in the Cases of Strafford and See Canterburies Doom, and
Straffords Trial.
Canterbury, who were condemned and executed as Traitors by judgment of
Parliament, and some of those now sitting, but for some of these Treasons upon
obscurer Evidences of guilt, than are now visible in others, I cannot without
incurring the Crime and Guilt of these several High Treasons, and the eternal,
if not temporal punishments incident thereunto, voluntarily contribute so much
as one penny or farthing toward such Treasonable and disloyal ends as these,
against my Conscience, Law, Loyalty, Duty, and all my Oaths, Covenants and
Obligations to the contrary.

Tenthly, The payment of this Tax for the premised purposes, will (in my poor
judgment and conscience) be offensive to God and all good men, scandalous to
the Protestant Religion, dishonorable to our English Nation, and
disadvantagious and destructive to our whole Kingdom, hindering the speedy
settlement of our peace, the re-establishment of our King, Laws, the revival of
our decayed Trade, by renewing and perpetuating our bloody uncivil Wars;
engaging Scotland and Ireland, with foreign Princes and Kingdoms in a just War
against us, to avenge the death of our late beheaded King, the dis-inheriting
of his Posterity, and to restore his lawful Heirs and Successors to their
just, undoubted Rights, from which they are now sorcibly secluded; who will
undoubtedly molest us with continual Wars (whatever some may fondly conceit to
the contrary) till they be settled in the Throne in peace upon just and
honorable terms, and invested in their just possessions. Which were far more
safe, honorable, just, prudent, and Christian for our whole 3. Kingdoms
voluntarily and speedily to do themselves, than to be forced to it at last by
any foreign Forces; the sad consequences whereof we may easily conjecture, and
have cause enough to fear, if we now delay it, or still contribute to maintain
Armies to oppose their Titles, and protect the Invaders of them from public
Justice. And therefore I can neither in conscience, piety nor prudence, ensnare
my self in the guilt of all these dangerous treasonable consequences, by any
submission to this illegal Tax.

Upon all these weighty Reasons, and serious grounds of Conscience, Law,
Prudence, (which I humbly submit to the Consciences and Judgments of all
conscientious and judicious persons, whom they do or shall concern) I am
resolved by the Assistance and strength of the Omnipotent God (who has
miraculously supported me under, and carried me through all my former
sufferings for the Peoples public Liberties with exceeding joy, comfort, and
the ruin of my greatest Enemies and Opposers) to oppugn these unlawful
Contributions, and the payment of them o^ the uttermost, in all just and
lawful ways, I may; And if any will forcibly levy them by distress or
otherwise, without and against all Law or Right (as Thieves and Robbers take
men's Goods and Purses) let them do it at their own umost peril; being declared
all Traitors, and to be proceeded against capitally as Traitors by the Junctoes
own late Knack and Declaration. However, though I suffer at present, yet I
trust God and men will in due time do me justice upon them, and award me
recompense for all injuries in this kind, or any sufferings for my Countries
Liberties. However, fall back, fall edge, I would ten thousand times rather
lose my Lise, Liberty, and all that I have, to keep a good Conscience, and
preserve my own and my Countries native Liberty, than to part with one
farthing, or gain the whole World, with the loss of either of them; and rather
dye a Martyr for our Ancient Kingdom, than live a Slave under any New
Republic, or remnant of a broken, dismembered, strange Antiparliamental House
of Commons, without King, Lords, or the major part of the Knights, Citizens and
Burgesses of the Realm, in being subject to their illegal Taxes, and what they
call Acts of Parliament, which in reality are no Acts at all to bind me, or any
other Subject, in point of Conscience or Prudence, to obedience, or just
punishment for Non-obedience thereunto, or Nonconformity to what they style,
the present Government, of the Armies modeling, and I fear of the Popes,
Spaniards, Campanellaes, Father Parsons, and other Jesuits suggesting, to
effect our Kings, Kingdoms and Religions ruin, as I have In my Speech 4 Dec.
See Romes Masterpiece, the Epistle to my Jus Patronatus; A true and perfect
Narrative, 1659. the Epistle to the 1. part of my Historical Vindication and
Collection 1655.
elsewhere clearly evidenced, beyond all contradiction.

Psalm 26. 4, 5. I have not sat with vain Persons, neither will I go in with
Dissemblers: I have hated the Congregation of evil Doers, and will not sit with
the wicked.


WILLIAM PRYNNE.
SWAINSWICK, June 16. 1649.
FINIS.
A POSTSCRIPT.
SInce the drawing up of the precedent Reasons, I have met with a printed
Pamphlet, entitled. An Epistle written the 8th day of June. 1649. by Lieut.
Colonel John Lilbourn, to Mr. William Lenthal Speaker to the remainder of those
few Knights, Citizens and Burgesses that Col. Thomas Pride at his late purge
thought convenient to leave sitting at Westminster, (as most fit for his and
his Masters designe^, to serve their ambitious and tyrannical ends, to destroy
the good old Laws, Liberties and Customs of England (the badges of our Freedom
as the Declaration against the King of the 7th of March 1648. p. 23. calls
them) and by force of Arms to rob the people of their lives, estates, and
properties; and subject them to perfect vassallage and slavery, etc. who (and
in truth no otherwise) pretendedly style themselves. The Conservators of the
peace of England, or the Parliament of England entrusted and authorized by the
consent of all the people thereof, whose Representatives by Election (in their
Declaration last mentioned p. 27. they say) they are; although they are never
able to produce one bit of Law, or any piece of a Commission to prove, that all
the people of England, or one quarter* tenth* hundred or thousand part of them
authorized Thomas Pride, with his Regiment of Soldiers to choose them a
Parliament* as indeed he has de facto done by his PRETENDED MOCK-PARLIAM^NT:
and therefore it cannot properly be called the Nations or Peoples Parliament:
but Col. Prides and his Associates, whose really it is: who although they have
beheaded the King for a Tyrant, yet walk in his oppressi^g^st steps, if not
worse and higher. This is the Title of his Epistle.

In this Epistle, this late great champion of the House of Commons, and fitting
Junctoes Supremacy, both besore and since the Kings beheading, who with his
Brother His Petition and Appeal, and his Arrow of Defiance. See Mr. Edwards
Gangrena, 3. part. p. 154. f. 204. See My (...) for the (...) to
Overton and their Confederates, first cried them up as, and gave them the
Title of, The supreme Authority of the Nation: The only supreme Judicatory of
the Land: The only formal and legal supreme Power of the Parliament of
England, in whom alone the power of binding the whole Nation by making,
altering, or abrogating Laws, without either King or Lords, resides, etc. and
first engaged them by their Pamphlets and Petitions, against the King, Lords,
and Personal Treaty, (as he and they print and boast in b^ this Epistle, and
other late Papers) Page 11, 29
does in his own and his parties behalf (who of late so much adored them, as
the only earthly Deities and Saviors of the Nation) now positively assert and
prove

First, That Page 34, 35.
Commissary General Ireton, Colonel Harrison, with other Members of the House,
and the General Council of Officers of the Army, did in several Meetings and
Debates at Windsor, immediately before their late march to London to purge the
House, and after at White Hall commonly style themselves, the pretended
Parliament (even before the Kings beheading) A MOCK PARLIAMENT, a MOCK POWER, a
PRETENDED PARLIAMENT,; and NO PARLIAMENT AT ALL: And that they were absolutely
resolved and determined TO PULL UP THIS THEIR OWN PARLIAMENT BY THE ROOTS, and
not so much as to leave a shadow of it; yea, and had done it, if we (say they)
and some of our then FRIENDS in the House, had not been the principal
Instruments to hinder them: We judging it then of two evils the least, to choose
rather to be governed by THE SHADOW OF A PARLIAMENT, till we could get a real
and a true one (which with the greatest protestations in the world they then
promised and engaged with all their might speedily to effect) then simply
solely and only by the will of swordmen, whom we had already found to be men
of no very tender conscience. And do not the Speaker and all Lawyers and others
now sitting in their own Judgments and Consciences, and to their friends in
private, believe, say, and confess as much, that they are no Parliaments? and
yet have the impudency and the insolency to sit, act, and Tax, yea seclude and
imprison us at their pleasures, as a real, legal and absolute Parliament? O
Atheism! O Tyranny, and Impiety of the worst Edition!

If then these leading, swaying members of the new pretended purged Commons
Parliament and Army, deemed the Parliament even before the Kings beheading, a
Mock-parliament, a mockpower, a pretended Parliament, yea, no Parliament at
all; and absolutely resoved to pull it up by the roots as such, then it
necessarily folows, First, That they are much more so after the Kings death,
and their suppression of the Lords House, and purging of the Commons House to
the very dregs, in the opinions and consciences of those now sitting, and all
other rational men. And no ways enabled by Law to impose this or any other new
Tax or Acts upon the Kingdom, or to create any new Treasons, Confiscations,
Sequestrations and Penalties; and being themselves in truth the worst and
greatest of all Traitors and Tyrants. Secondly, that these grand Saints of the
Army and Steersmen of the pretended Parliament, and all Gown-men confederating
with them, knowingly sit, vote and act there against their own judgments and
consciences, for their own private, pernicious ends. Thirdly- that it is a
baseness, cowardice, and degeneracy beyond all expression, for any of their
fellow members now acting, to suffer these Grandees in their Assembly and Army,
to sit or vote together with them, or to enjoy any Office or command in the
Army under them, or to impose any Tax upon the people to maintain such
Officers, Members, Soldiers, who have thus vilified, affronted their pretended
Parliamentary Authority, and thereby induced others to contemn and question it:
and forcibly excluded and imprisoned the greatest part of the Members and whole
House of Peers, in order to their own future exclusion, and as great a baseness
in them and others for to pay it upon any terms.

Secondly he there affirms, that P. 26, 27.
Oliver Crumwel by the help of the Army, at their first Rebellion against the
Parliament, was no sooner up, but like a perfidious, base, unworthy man, etc.
the House of Peers were his only white boys, and who but Oliver (who before to
me had called them in effect, both Tyrants and Usurpers) became their Proctor,
where ever he came; yea and set his son Ireton at work for them also; insomuch
that at some meetings, with some of my friends at the Lord Whartons Lodgings,
he clapped his hand upon his breast, and to this purpose, professed in the sight
of God upon his conscience, THAT THE LORDS HAD AS TRUE A RIGHT TO THEIR
LEGISLATIVE Note.
and JURISDICTIVE POWER OVER THE COMMONS, AS HE HAD TO THE COAT UPON HIS BACK,
and he would procure a friend, viz. Master Nathaniel Fiennes should argue and
plead their just right with any friend I had in England. And not only so, but
did he not get the General and Council of War at Windsor (about the time that
the Votes of no more addresses were to pass) to make a Declaration to the whole
world, declaring THE LEGAL RIGHT OF THE LORDS HOUSE, and THEIR FIXED RESOLUTION
TO MAINTAIN and UPHOLD IT? which was sent by the General to the Lords by Sir
Hardresse Waller: and to indear himself the more unto the Lords, in whose house
without all doubt he intended to have sat himself, he required me evil for
good; and became my enemy to keep me in Prison, out of which I must not stir,
unless I would sloop and acknowledge, the Lords jurisdiction over Commoners;
and for that end he sets his agents and instruments at work to get me to do it:
yet now they themselves have suppressed them.

Whence it is most apparent. 1. That the General, Lieutenant General Cromwell,
Col. Ireton, Harison, and other Officers of the Army now sitting as Members,
and overruling all the rest, See my Plea for the Lords and House of Peers,
(yea and all other Lawyers, Members, sitting with them.
have wittingly acted against their own knowledges, Declarations, Judgments,
Consciences, in suppressing the Lords House, and depriving them of their
Legislative and Jurisdictive Right and power, by presuming to make Acts, pass
sentences, and impose Taxes without them, or their assents in Parliament,
contrary to the express Acts of 16 and 17 Caroli. c. 1. 7, 8, 12, 14, 20. and
hundreds of Ordinances, Remonstrances, Declarations, the Protestation, Vow and
Solemn League and Covenant made this Parliament, by the Votes of most now
sitting. 2. That this Tax enforced upon the Commons and Kingdom, for their own
particular advantage, pay and enrichment, and to suppress the House of Lords,
is in their own judgments and conscience, both unjust and directly contrary to
the Laws of the Realm, being not assented to by the Lords: and therefore to be
unanimously and strenuously opposed by all the Lords and other Englishmen who
love their own or Countries Liberties, or have any Nobility, or Generosity in
them.

Thirdly, he Page 34. 39, 40. 56, 47.
there asserts in positive terms in his own behalf, and his confederates; That
the purged Parliament now sitting, is but a pretended Parliament, a
mock-Parliament; yea, and in plain English, NO PARLIAMENT AT ALL, but the
shadow of a Parliament. That those Company of men at Westminster that gave
Commission to the high Court of Justice to try and behead the King, etc. were
no more a Parliament by Law, or Representatives of the people by the rule of
Justice and Reason, then such a company of men are a Parliament or
Representative of the People, that a company of armed Thieves choose and set
apart to try, judge, condemn, hang or behead any man that they please, or can
prevail over by the power of their Sword, to bring before them by force of
arms, to have their lives taken away by pr^tence of JUSTICE, grounded upon
rules merely flowing from their Wills and Swords. That no Law in England
authoriseth a company of servants to punish and correct their Masters, or to
give a Law unto them, or to throw them at their pleasure out of their power,
and set themselves down in it; which is the Armies case with the Parliament,
especially at Thomas Pride's late purge, which was an absolute dissolution of
the very Essence and being of the House of Commons; to set up indeed a
MOCK-POVVER, and a MOCK-PARLIAMENT; by purging out all those, that they were
any way jealous of would not Vote as they would have them; and suffering and
permitting none to sit but (for the Major part of them) a company of absolute
Schoolboys, that will, like good Boys, say their Lessons after them their
Lords and Masters, and vote what they would have them: and so be a skreen
betwixt them and the people, with the name of a Parliament, and the shadow and
imperfect image of Legal and Just Authority, to pick their pockets for them by
Assesements and Taxations; and by their arbitrary and tyrannical Courts and
Committees (the best of which is now become a perfect. Star Chamber, High
Commission, and Councel-board) make them their perfect slaves and vessals. With
much more to this purpose.

If then their principal admirers, who confederated with the Army, and those
now sitting, in all their late proceedings; and cried them up most of any, as
the Parliament and Supreme Authority of England before, at, and since the late
force upon the House, and its violent purgation, do thus in print professedly
disclaim them, for being any real Parliament, or House of Commons, to make Acts
or impose Taxes upon the people: or set up High Courts of Justice to try and
condemn the King, or any Peers or English Preemen; the secluded Lord; Members,
Presbyterians, Royalists, and all others, have much more cause and ground to
disavow and oppose their usurped Parliamentary authority, and illegal Taxes,
Acts, as not made by any true English Parliament, but a Mock-Parliament only.

Fourthly, He therein further avets: Page 52. 53. 56. 57. 58. 59.
That the death of the King, in Law indisputably dissolves this Parliament,
ipso facto, though it had been all the time before never so entire and
unquestionable to that very hour. That no Necessity can be pretended for the
continuance of it; the rather, because the men that would have it continue so
long as they please, are those who have created these necessities on purpose,
that by the color thereof they may make themselves great and potent. That the
main end wherefore the Members of the Commons house were chosen and sent
thither, was, To treat and confer with King Charles and the House of Peers,
about the great Affairs of the Nation, etc. And therefore are but a third part,
ot third estate of that Parliament, to which they were to come and join with,
and who were legally to make permanent and binding Laws for the people of the
Nation. And therefore having taken away two of the three Estates that they were
chosen on purpose to join with to make Laws, the end both in reason and law of
the peoples trust, is ceased: for a Minor joined with a Major for one and the
same end, cannot play Lord paramount over the Major, and then do what it
please; no more can the Minor of a Major; viz. one Estate of three, legally or
justly destroy two of three, without their own assent, etc. That the House of
Commons sitting freely within its limited time, in all its splendour of glory,
without the awe of armed men, neither in Law, nor in the intention of their
Choosers, were a Parliament; and therefore of themselves alone have no pretense
in Law to alter the constitution of Parliaments, etc. concluding thus: For
shame let no man be so audaciously or sottishly void of Reason, as to call Tho.
Prides pitiful Juncto A PARLIAMENT, especially those that called, avowed,
protested and declared again and again those TO BE NONE that sat at
Westminster, the 26: 27, etc. of July 1647. when a few of their Members were
scared away to the Army, by a few hours tumult of a company of a few disorderly
Apprentices. And being no representative of the People, much less A PARLIAMENT,
what pretense of Law, Reason, Justice or Nature can there be for you to alter
the constitution of Parliaments, and force upon the people, the show of their
own Wills, lusts and pleasures for laws and Rules of Government, made by a
PRETENDED EVERLASTING, NULLED PARLIAMENT, a Council of State, or Star Chamber
and a Council of War, or rather by Fairfax, Cromwell and Ireton?

Now; if their own late confederates and creatures argue thus in print against
their being and continuing a Parliament, their Jurisdiction, Proceedings,
Taxes, and arbitrary pleasures, should not all others much more do it, and
jointly and magnanimously oppose them to the utmost, upon the self-same
grounds, for their own and the public ease, Liberty, Safety Settlement, and
restoring the Rights, Privileges, Freedom, Splendour of our true English
Parliaments?

Fifthly, He there likewise affirms, P. 53. 54. 59. 41.
that those now fiting at Westminster have perverted the ends of their trusts
more then ever Strafford did: 1. In not ceasing the people of, (but increasing)
their grievances. 2. In exhausting their estates to maintain and promote
pernicious Designs to the peoples destruction. The King did it by a little
Shipmony and Monopolies; but since they began, they have raised and extorted
more money from the People and Nation then half (nay all) the Kings since the
Conquest ever did; as particularly: 1 By Excise, 2 Contributions. 3
Sequestrations of lands to an infinite value. 4 Fist part. 5 Twentyeth part. 6
Meal-mony. 7 Sale of plundered good. 8 Loanes. 9 Benevolences. 10 Collections
upon their fast days. 11 New imposittions or customs upon Merchandise. 12
Guards maintained upon the charge of private men. 13 Fifty Subsidies at one
time. 14 Compositions with Delinquents to an infinite value. 15 Sale of Bishops
lands. 16 Sale of Dean and Chapters lands: and now after the wars are done, 17
Sale of Kings, Queens, Princes, Dukes, and the rest of the Childrens revenues.
18 Sale of their rich goods which cost an infinite sum. 19 to conclude all, a
Taxation of ninety thousand pounds a month: (since that of one hundred and
twenty thousand pounds a Month; and lately of a whole years Tax within three
months, and now of one hundred thousand pound a a month, for the same six
months they have paid their Taxes, besides Excise, Customs, Frequent new
intolerable Militiaes, Payments to increased swa^ms of poor, sequestrations,
Highway money, and other charges, now all Trade is utterly lost, and the three
Kingdoms beggared and undone.) and when they have gathered it pretendingly for
the Commonwealths use, divide it by thousands and ten thousands a piece
amongst themselves, and wipe their mouths after it, like the impudent Harlot,
as though they had done no evil; and then purchase with it public Lands at
small or trivial values: O brave Trustees! that have Protested before God and
the world again and again in the day of their straits, they would never seek
themselves, and yet besides all this, divide all the choicest and profitablest
Places of the Kingdom among themselves. Therefore when I seriously consider,
how many in Parliament and elsewhere of their Associates (that judge themselves
the only Saints and Godly men upon the earth) that have considerable (and some
of them vast) estates of their own inheritance, and yet take five hundred, one,
two, three, four, five thousand pounds per annum Salaries, and other comings in
by their places, and that out of the too much exhausted Treasury of the Nation,
when thousands not only of the people of the world, as they call them, but
also of the precious redeemed lambs of Christ, are ready to starve for want of
bread; I cannot but wonder with my self, whether they have any conscience at
all within them or no; and what they think of that saying of the spirit of God,
That who so has this worlds goods, and sees his brother has need, and
shuts up his bowels of compassion from him (which he absolutely does that
any ways takes a little of his little from him) how dwells the love of God
in him? 1 John 3. 17. These actions and practices are so far from being like
the true and real children of the most High, that they are the highest
oppression, theft and murder in the world, to rob the poor in the day of their
great distress by Excise, Taxations, etc. to maintain their pomp, superfluities
and debauchery; when many of those from whom they take it, do perish and starve
with want and hunger in the mean time, and be deaf and Ad mant-hearted to all
their TEARS, CRIES, LAMENTATIONS, MOURNFUL HOWLINGS, GROANS. Without all
doubt, these pretended Godly Religious Men, have got a degree beyond those
Atheists or Fools, that say in their hearts, there is no God. Psalm. 14. 1. and
13. 1, 3. In quite destroying the peoples essential Liberties Laws and and
Freedoms, and in leaving them no Law at all (as M. Peter's their grand Teacher
averred lately to my face we had none) but their mere will and pleasures;
saving Fellons Laws, or Martial Law, where new Butchers are both Informers,
Parties, Jury men and Judges, who have had their hands imbrewed in blood for
above these seven years together, having served an Apprentiship to the killing
of men for nothing but many, and so are more bloody than Butchers that kill
^^eep and calves for their own livelihood; who yet by the Law of England, are
not permitted to be of any jury for life and death; because they are conversant
in the shedding of blood of beasts, and thereby through a habit of it may not
be so tender of the blood of men, as the Law of England, Reason and Justice
would have them to be. Yea, do not these men by their swords, being but
servants, give what Laws they please to their Masters, the pretended Lawmakers
of your House? now constituted by as good and legal a power as he that robs and
kills a man upon the high way?

And if this be the Verdict of their own Accomplices and Partisans concerning
them and their proceedings, especially touching their exhausting our Estates by
Taxes, and sharing them among themselves in the time of famine and penury (as
the great Officers of the Army and Treasurers who are Members now do: who both
impose what Taxes they please, and dispose of them, and all power, honor,
profit, to themselves and their creatures, as they please, without rendering
any Account to the Kingdoms, contrary to the practice of all former ages, and
the rules of reason and justice too) are not all others in the three Nations,
especially the secluded Lords, and Members, bound by all bonds of conscience,
Law and Prudence, to withstand their impositions and Edicts unto death, rather
than yield the least submission to them?

Sixthly, He there avers, proves, and offers legally to make good, before any
indifferent Tribunal, that the Page 2. 15* 27, 29. 33. 34. 35. 41. 53. 57, 58,
59, 64, 65. 75.
Grandees and overruling Members of the House and Army are not only, a pack of
dissembling, Juggling Knaves and Machevillians amongst whom in consulation
hereafter he would ever scorn to come, for that there was neither faith, truth
nor common honesty amonst them: but likewise Murderers; who had shed men's
blood against Law, as well as the King, whom they beheaded; and therefore by
the same Texts and arguments they used against the King, their blood ought to
be shed by man, and they to be surely put to death, without any satisfaction
for their lives, as Traitors, Enemies, Rebels to, and See Page 39. 52.
conspirators against the late King (whom they absolutely resolved to destroy
though they did it by martial Law) Parliament, Kingdom, and the peoples
Majesty and Sovereignty; That the pretended House and Army are guilty of all
the same crimes in kind, though under a new Name and notion, of which they
charge the King in their Declaration of the 17. of March 1648. That some of
them more legally deserve death, than ever the King did: and considering their
many Oaths, Covenants, Promises, Declarations, and Remonstrances to the
contrary (with the highest promises and pretenses of good for the people and
their declared Liberties that ever were made by men) the most perjured,
pernicious, false, Faith and Trust-breakers, and Tyrants, that ever lived in
the world: and ought (as many of you have been, and now are) by all rational
honest men to be most detested and abhorred of all men that ever breathed, by
how much more under the pretense of friendship and brotherly kindness, they
have done all the mischief they have done in destroying our Laws and liberties;
there being no treason like Judas his Treason, who betrayed his Lord and Master
with a kiss, etc. And shall we then submit to their Taxes and new Acts, or
trust them with our estates, lives, liberties, and the supreme power, or
acknowledge them for our legal Parliament and sovereign Lords of the three
Kingdoms, if such now in their own late adorers eyes?

Seventhly, He there asserts, P. 57. 34.
That whosoever stoops to their new change of Government and Tyrany, and
supports it, is as absolute a Traitor both by Law and Reason, as ever was in
the world; If not against the King PRINCE CHARLES, (heir apparent of his
Fathers Crown and Throne) yet against the peoples Majesty and Sovereignty. And
if this be true, as it is, that this purged Parliament IS NO PARLIAMENT AT ALL;
then there is neither legal Judges nor Justices of peace in England. And if so,
then all those that are executed at Tiburn etc. by their sentence of
condemnation are merely murdered, and the Let our Gownmen sitting at
Westminster and other places, and in high courts of Justice too, and there
condemning and executing men consider it.
Judges and Justices that condemned them are liable in time to be hanged (and
that justly) therefore, for acting without ajust and legal Commission, either
from TRUE REGAL, OR TRUE PARLIAMENTARY POWER (except in corporations only where
they proceed by ancient Charters in the An^ient Legal form).

And if this be Law and Luke 19. 14. 27. c. 12. 13. 14.
Gospel too (as no doubt it is) then by the same reason, not only all legal
proceedings, Indictments, Judgments, Verdicts, Writs, Trials, Fines,
Recoveries, Recognisances, and the like, before any Judges and Justices since
the Kings beheading in any Courts at Westminster, or in their Circuits,
Assizes, or quarter Sessions, held by new Commissions, with all Commissions and
Proceedings of Sheriffs, are not only merely void, illegal, and coram non
judice to all intents, with all Bills, Decrees, and Proceedings in Chancery, or
the Rolls; and all Judges, Justices, Sheriffs now acting, and Lawyers
practicing before them in apparent danger of High Treason both against King and
Kingdom, they neither taking the Oaths of Judges, Supremacy or Allegiance as
they ought by Law; but only to be true and faithful to the new erected State
without a King; but likewise all votes and proceedings before the pretended
House or any of their Committees, o^ sub-Committees in the Country, with all
their Grants and Offices, Moneys, Salaries, Sequestrations, Sales of Lands or
Goods, Compositions* etc. mere Nullities and illegal acts, and the proceedings
of all active Commissioners, Assessors, Collectors, Treasurers, etc. and all
other Officers employed to levy and to collect this illegal tax to support that
usurped Parliamentary Authority, and Army, which has beheaded the late King,
dis-inherited his undoubted Heir, levied war against and dissolved the late
Houses of Parliament, subverted the ancient Government of this Realm, the
constitution and Liberties of our Parliaments, the Laws of the Kingdom, with
the Liberty and property of the people of England, no less than High Treason in
all these respects, as is fully proved by Sir Edward Cook in his 3 Institutes,
chapter 1. 2. and by Mr. St. John in his Argument at Law at the attainder of the
Earl of Strafford, and Declaration and Speech against the ship-mony Judges,
published by the late Commons House order; which I desire all who are thus
employed, to consider; especially such Commissioners who take upon them to
administer a new unlawful Ex-officio Oath to any, to survey their Neighbors
and their own estates in every parish, and return the true values thereof to
them upon the new proun'd rate for the 3 last months contribution, and to fine
those who refuse to do it (a mere diabolical invention to multiply perjuries to
damn men's souls, invented by Cardinal Woolsey, much enveighed against by Father
Latimer in his sermons; condemned by the express words of the Petition of
Right, providing against such Oaths; and a snare to enthral the wealtheir sort
of people by discovering their estates, to subject them to what future taxes
they think fit) when as the whole House of Commons in no age had any power to
administer any Oath in any case whatsoever, much less then to confer any
authority on others, to give such illegal Oaths, and fine those who refuse
them: the highest kind of Arbitrary Tyrany both over men's Consciences,
Properties, Liberties; to which those who voluntarily submit, deserve not only
the name of Traitors to their Country, but to be Exodus 21. 5. 6.
boared through the ear, and they and their posterities to be made Slaves for
ever to these new Tax-masters and their successors; and those who are any ways
active in imposing or administering such Oaths, yea treasonable Oaths of the
highest degree, abjuring and engaging against King, Kingship, Kingdom and
House of Lords, and that with constancy and perseverance, against their former
Oaths of Homage, Fealty, Supremacy and Allegiance, the Protestation, Vow,
Solemn League, and National Covenant (the most detestable Perjury and High
treason that ever mortal men were guilty of) or assistant in imposing,
assessing, collecting, and levying illegal taxes by distress or otherwise, may
and will undoubtedly smart for it at last; not only by Actions of trespass,
false imprisonment, Account, etc. brought against them at the Common*Law, when
there will be no Committee of Indemnity to protect them from such suits, but
likewise by Indictments of High treason, to the deserved loss of their
Estates, Lives, and Ruin of their families (and that by the Junctoes own Votes
and Declaration October. 11. 1659.) when there will be no Parliament of purged
Commoners, nor Army to secure, nor legal plea to acquit them from the guilt and
punishment of Traitors both to their King and Country; pretended present forbid
fear of imprisonment, loss of Liberty, Friends, Estate, Life or the like, being
no See 1. H. 4. Rot. Par. n. 97.
excuse in such a case and time as this, but an higher aggravation of their
crime: nor yet to exempt them from Hell it self and everlasting Torments in it,
for their Perjuries Treasons, Oppressions, Rebellions, and actings against
their Consciences out of fear of poor inconsiderable mortals, who can but kill
the body at most, nor yet do that but by Gods permission, contrary to the
express commands of God himself. Ps. 3. 6. Ps. 27. 1. Ps. 56. 11. Ps. 112. 7,
8. Isa. 44. 8. c. 51. 7. 12. ler. 1. 8. Ezekiel. 2. 6. and 12. 4. 5. Mat. 10. 28.
1. Pet. 3. 4. Heb. 13. 6. the Rev. 21. 8.
FEARFUL being the first in that dismal list of Malefactors, who shall have
their part in the Lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the
second death; even by Christ's own sentence.

JOHN 18. 34. To this end was I born, and for this cause came I into the world,
that I should bear witness unto the truth.
FINIS.

