A PLEA for the LORDS: OR, A short, yet full and necessary Vindication of the
Judiciary and Legislative Power of the House of Peers, And the Hereditary just
Right of the LORDS and BARONS of this Realm, to sit, vote and judge in the
high Court of PARLIAMENT. Against the late seditious Anti-Parliamentary printed
Petitions, Libells and Pamphlets of Anabaptists, Levellers, Agitators,
Lilburne, Overton, and their dangerous Confederates, who endeavor the utter
subversion both of Parliaments, King and Peers, to set up an Arbitrary Polarchy
and Anarchy of their own new-modelling. By WILLIAM PRYNNE Esquire, a
Well-wisher to both Houses of Parliament, and the Republike; now exceedingly
shaken and endangered in their very Foundations.

Prove. 22. 28. Remove-not the ancient landmark which thy fathers have set.
Prove. 22. 21. My son fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with
those who are given to change; for their calamity shall rise suddenly, and who
knows the ruin of them both? LONDON, Printed for Michael Spark, at the blue
Bible in Green-Arbor. 164^.

To all truly Honorable, and Heroic Lords and Peers of the Realm of
England, who are real Patriots of Religion, and their Country.
Right Honorable,
THough true Nobility (always founded in Omnes pari forte nascimur, sola
virtute distinguimur. Minucius Feli^ Octo^. p. 123. Nobilitas sola est ac unica
virtus. Iuvenal. Satyr. 8.
virtue and real piety) needs no other tutelar Deity or Apology, but it
self, amongst those Omnes boni semper Nobilitati favemus: and q^ia utile est
reipub. Nobiles Homines esse dignos Majoribus suis, and quia valet apud nos
clarorum Hominum and been derepub. meritorum memoria, otiam mortuorum. Ci^ero
Orat. pro P. Sex.
ingenious Spirits, who are able to discern or estimate its worth; yet the
iniquity of our degenerated Age, and the frenzy of the intoxicated ignorant
vulgar is such, that it now requires the assistance of the ablest Advocates to
plead its cause, and vindicate the just Rights and Privileges of the House of
Peers, against the Li^burne, Overton, and others.
licentious Quills and Tongues of lawless sordid Sectaries, and Mechanic
Levellers; who having got the Sword and reins into their hands, plant all
their batteries and force against them, crying out like those Babylonian
Levellers of old Psalm. 137. 7.
against the House of Peers, Raze it, Raze it, even to the foundation thereof,
and lay it for ever level with the very dust; beholding all true Honor, worth
and Nobleness shining forth in your Honors heroic Spirits, with a malignant
aspect, because they despair of ever enjoying the least spark thereof in
themselves, and prosecuting you with a deadly hatred, because better and
greater then ever they have hopes to be, unless they can through treachery and
violence make themselves the only Grandees, by debasing your highest Dignity,
to the lowest Peasantry, and making the meanest Commoners your Compeers.

This dangerous seditious Design has engaged me (the unablest of many) out of
my great affection to real Nobility, and to the present tot^ering condition of
our Kingdom and Parliament (the very pillars and foundations whereof are now
not only shaken, but almost quite subverted) without any Fee at all, to become
your Honors Advocate, and voluntarily to plead your Cause, and vindicate your
undoubted right of sitting, voting and judging in our Parliaments, of which
they strenuously endeavor to plunder both you and your posterities; and to
publish these subitane indigested Collections to the world, to still the Psalm.
65. 7.
madness of the seduced vulgar, whom Ignoramus Lilburne, Overton, Walwin, and
their Confederates have labored to mutiny against your Parliamentary
Jurisdiction, Isa. 4 1. 25.
treading upon Princes as upon mortar, and as the Potter treads the clay, in
their illiterate seditious Pamphlets, which I have here refuted by Scripture,
Histories, Antiquities and Parliament-Rolls; the ignorance whereof, joined with
their malice, is the principal occasion of their error in this kind.

And truly were all our Parliament-Rolls, Pleas and Iournals, faithfully
transcribed, and published in print to the eye of the world, as most of our
Statutes are, by authority of both Houses of Parliament (a work as worthy their
undertaking, and as beneficial for the Public, as any I can recommend unto
their care) it would not only preserve them from imbezelling, and the hazards
of fire and war, to which they are now subject, but likewise eternally silence,
refute the Sectaries and Levellers ignorant false Allegations against your
Honors Parliamentary Iurisdict^on and Judicature, resolve and clear all or
most doubts that can arise concerning the power, jurisdiction and privileges
of both, or either House, keep both of them within due bounds (the exceeding
whereof is dangerous, and grievous to the People, except in cases of absolute
necessity, for the saving of a Kingdom, whiles that necessity continues, and
no longer) chalk out the ancient regular way of proceedings in all
Parliamentary affairs whatsoever, whether of war, or peace, civil or
criminal, concerning King or Subject, Natives or Forraigners, overruled and
reconcile most of the present differences between the King and Parliament,
House and House, Members and Members; clear many doubts, and rectify some
gross mistakes in printed Statutes, Law Books, and our ordinary Historians;
add much light, luster and ornament to our English Annals, and the Common Law;
and make all Lawyers, and the Members of both Houses far more able then now
they are, to manage and carry on all businesses in Parliament, when they shall
upon every occasion almost have former presidents ready at hand to direct them;
there being now very few Members in either House well read or versed in ancient
Parliament Rolls, Pleas, or Journalls, the ignorance whereof is a great Remora
to their proceedings, and often times a cause of dangerous encroachments of new
Jurisdiction over the Subjects persons and estates, not usual in former
Parliaments, and of some great mistakes and deviations from the ancient
methodicall Rules and Tracts of Parliament (now almost quite forgotten and laid
aside by raw unexperienced Parliamentmen) to the public prejudice, and injury
of posterity.

Your Lordships helping hand to the speedy furthering of such a necessary
public work, will be a great accession to your Honor, the best vindication of
your Parliamentary Jurisdiction, Right, Power and Judicature, against all
Opposites, till the accomplishment whereof, I shall humbly recommend this short
Plea in your Honors defense, to your Noble Patronage, who can pitch upon no
better or readier means to support your Honor and Authority, and to indeare
your selves in the Peoples affections, then in these distracted, dangerous,
stormy times, to engage all your interest, power and activity, speedily to
settle and secure Gods Glory, Truth, Worship, and the public Safety of the
Kingdom, against all open Opposers, and secret Underminers of them; to
unburthen the People of their heavy Taxes, the Soldiers insolences and free
quarter; to redress all pressing grievances, all oppressing arbitrary
Committees, and proceedings contrary to the rules of Law and Justice; to right
all grieved Petitioners (especially such who have waited at least seven years
space at your doors for reparations) relieve poor starved Ireland, and raise
up the almost lost honor, power, freedom and reputation of Parliaments, by
acting Honorably and heroically like your selves, without any fear, favor,
hatred or selfe-ends, and confining your selves and the Commons House to the
ancient bounds and rules of Parliamentary Jurisdiction and proceedings, and to
excel all others as far in Justice, Goodness and public resolutions, as
you do in Greatness and Authority. Which that you may effectually perform,
shall be the the prayer of

Your Lordships in all humble Service, W. PRYNNE.

A PLEA For the LORDS: OR, A short, yet full and necessary Vindication of the
Judiciary and Legislative Power of the House of Peers, and the Hereditary just
Right of the Lords and Barons of this Realm, to sit, vote, and judge in the
high Court of Parliament.
THe treasonable and destructive design of diverse dangerous Anabaptists,
Levellers, Agitators in the Army, City, Country, and of Lilburne, Overton,
(their Champions and Ringleaders in this Seditious Plot) to dethrone the King,
unlord the Lords, new-modell the House of Commons, extirpate Monarchy,
suppress the House of Peers, and subvert Parliaments, (the only obstacles to
their pretended Polarchy and Anarchy) are now so legible in their many late
printed Petitions, Libells, Pamphlets, and visible in their actings, and
public proceedings, that it rather requires our diligence and expedition to
prevent, then hesitancy to doubt or dispute them, they positively protesting
against and denying both King and Monarchy, in their A Remonstrance of many
thousand a^zens to their own House of Commons, p. 6. the just man's
Justification, p. 10. Regal Tyranny Discovered, A Declaration from his
Excellency, and the General Counsel of the Army, Ian. 11. 1647. p. 7.
Speeches, etc. at a Conference newly published by Walker, printed verbatim out
of Dolman the Jesuit his Book, condemned.
Pamphlets and Remonstrances, with the Power and Judicature of the House of
Peers, and their undoubted just Hereditary right to Vote, act, or sit in
Parliament, because they are not elected by the people as Knights and Burgesses
are, asserting, Lilburnes Just Man in Bonds, p. 1, 2. A Pearl in a Dunghill,
The Free-mans Freedom Vindicated, An Anatomy of the Lords Tyranny, his
Argument and Plea before the Committee against the Lords Authority, his
Petition to the Commons, his Letters to Henry Martin, Overtons Arrow of
Defiance shot into the Prerogative Bowels of the House of Lords, his Petition
and Appeal. A Defiance against Arbitrary Usurpation. The Agreement of the
People and Petitions wherein it was presented to the House of Commons. An
Alarm to the House of Lords. See M. Edwards Gangraena, part 3. p. 192. to 204.
That they are no natural issues of our Laws, but the Exorbitances and
Mushromes of Prerogative, the Wenns of just Government, the Sons of Conquest
and usurpation, not of choice and election, intruded upon us by power, not made
by the people, from whom ALL POWER, PLACE, and OFFICE that is just in this
Kingdom OUGHT TO ARISE, mere arbitrary Tyrants, Usurpers, an illegitimate and
illegal power and Judicatory, who act and Vote in our affairs but as
INTRUDERS, who ought of right not to judge, censure, or imprison any Commoner
of England, even for libelling against them, refusing to appear before them,
reviling and contemning them and their Authority to their faces at their very
Bar, (as Lilburne, Overton bost and print they did) or breaking any of their
undoubted Privileges. And to accomplish this their design the better, they
endeavor by their most impudent flattery to engage the House of Commons
against the House of Peers, the better to pull them down, stiling and
proclaming them in their Overtons Petition and Appeal to the High and mighty
States, the Knights and Burgesses in Parliament assembled. Englands legal
Sovereign Power. The R^monstrance of many thousands to their own House of
Commons. A printed Petition (now in agitation) of many Freeborne people to the
only Supreme Power of this Realm, the Commons in Parliament assembled. The
Anatomy of the Lords Tyranny. An Alarm to the House of Lords. See M. Edwards
Gangraena, part 3. p. 154. to 204.
Petitions and Pamphlets, The ONLY Supreme legal Judicatory of the Land, who
ought BY RIGHT, to judge the Lords and their proceedings, from whom they
appeal for right and reparations against the House of Peers, affirming, That
in the Commons House alone resides the formal and legal Supreme Power of
England, who ONLY are chosen by the people, and THEREFORE IN THEM ONLY is the
power of binding the whole Nation, by making, altering, or abolishing Laws
without the Kings or Lords concurrent assents, to whom they now absolutely deny
any Negative voice, making the Commons a complete Independent Parliament of
themselves; and therefore present all their Petitions and addresses to them
alone, without any acknowledgement or notice of the House of Peers, to whom
they deny any right or title to sit or vote in Parliament, unless they will
first divest themselves of their Peerage, and Barons right of Session, and
submit to stand for the next Knights and Burgesses place in the House of
Commons that shall fall void, where if they may have any voice or influence,
the meanest Cobbler, Tinker, Weaver or Water-man shall be elected a Knight, or
Burgess sooner then the best and greatest Peer, and John of Leyden preferred
before King or Prince Charles, Sic Sceptra ligonibus aequanti, which Petitions
and Pamphlets of theirs have so puffed and bladdered up many Novices, and raw
Parliament Men in the Commons House, unacquainted with the bounds, proceedings,
and original Constitution of Parliaments, and the Laws and Customs of
England, that they begin to act, vote, and dispose of the Army, Navy, etc.
without and against the Lords, not expecting their concurrence, contrary to all
former proceedings of Parliament, the Lords just Privileges, and their own
Solemn League and Covenant to maintain them, which may prove destructive to
both Houses, the Parliament, Kingdom, and oppressive to their Representatives
the people, (who generally dislike it) if not timely redressed, and breeds such
a deadly feud between the Houses as may ruin them both and the Kingdom to
boot. The end of these Anabaptists, Levellers and Lilburnians being only to See
M. Edwards Gangraena, part 3. where this is fully demonstrated.
destroy the Parliament, by setting both Houses at variance, they inveighing as
bitterly against the power, proceedings, Ordinances, Votes, Power, Members,
undue Elections and unequal Constitutions of the House of Commons, as the
Lords, and therefore have so earnestly pressed in their Lilburnes Letter to a
friend. Innocence and Truth justified, and his late Letters to Cromwell,
Martin, Sir Thomas Fairfax, and others. Englands Birthright. Englands
lamentable Slavery. Another word to the wise. Comparata Comparandis Liberty
against Slavery. The Arraignement of Persecution. The Ordinance against Tithes
unmounted. See Mr. Edwards Gangrana, part 3. p. 209. to 204.
Pamphlets, and by some late See the several Remonstrances from his Excellency
and the Army, from June, till December last. The agreement of the people, the
grand Design, Put^ey Projects.
Remonstrances, and Engagements from their Confederates and Agitators in the
Army, a speedy period and dissolution of this Parliament, and a new modelling
and more equal distribution of Members in the very House of Commons for the
future. All which Petitions, Papers, Remonstrances, and Pamphlets of theirs
tending to the utter subversion of Parliaments, the fundamental Laws and
Government of the Kingdom, and introduction of all arbitrary popular Polarchy
and Tyranny, are rather to be ranked among and more agreeable to the Earl of
Straffords and Canterburies Treasons, (which they exceed by many degrees) then
to be slighted or countenanced as they are, the keeping up of the honor of
Peers, and rights and Privileges of both Houses within their just bounds,
without interfeiring or incroachment upon one another, or invading the peoples
just Liberties and Rights, being the only means of their and our
preservation, settlement, security; upon which consideration, I shall endeavor
as briefly and fully as I may, to vindicate the undoubted Right of the Lords
and Peers of this Realm to sit and vote in Parliament, notwithstanding they
are not elected by the people, and make good the right and power of Judicature,
as well of Commoners as Peers against all cavills of the Anabaptisticall
Levellers, Lilburnians, Sectari^s, Agitators, and I hope so far to silence
and stop their mouths, if not convince their judgments, that they shall never
be able to reply again hereto.

The sum of all they object against the Lords right of sitting, voting and
judging, in Parliament is this: Overtons Defiance against all arbitrary
usurpation of the House of Lords, p. 5. 6 15. 17. 18. his Arrow against all
Tyrants, p. 6 10. 11. 12. and others forecited.
That they sit there only by Patent, the Kings will, Tenure or descent, not
only by the Peoples free Election, as the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses
do: That the people never entrusted nor invested them with any power, but the
King; they represent themselves only not the Commons, and the Sons only of
Conquest, (brought in by the Conqueror,) of Usurpation, not of Choice and
Election.

1. To this I answer: first, That our Earls, Barons, Nobles (and Archbishops,
Bishops, and Abbots too who held by Barony) sat anciently in all our
Parliaments, and General Counsels and Assemblies, many hundred years before
the Conquest by right of Peerage and Tenure, as now they do, as Modus tenendi
Parliamentum, Epist to his 9. Report, Institutes on Litleton, p. 110 4.
Institutes, c. 1.
Sir Edward Cook, Vowell M. Seldens Titles of Honor, part 2. chapter 5. where this
is abundantly manifested, Spelma^ni Council t^m. 1. Truth triump^ing over
Falsehood, antiquity over Novelty, p. 36 etc. The Freeholders Grand inquest, p.
4. to 20.
and others write, and our Historians record; therefore this is a gross
mistake, That they are the Sons of Conquest introduced by the Conqueror: the
rather, because in all Empires and Kingdoms in the world, though free and
never conquered, their Princes, Nobles, Lords, and great Officers of State,
have ever sat in all their Parliaments, Senates and General Counsels of
State, by reason of their Honors and places only, without any popular
Elections, as is clear by these Texts of Scripture, 1 Chronicles. 13. 1, 2. c. 28.
1, 2. etc. c. 29. 1. 6. 24. 2 Chronicles. 1, 2, 3. c. 5. 3. 4. etc. c. 23. 2. 3. 20.
21. c. 30. 2. 3. 6. 12. c. 34. 29. 30. c. 35. 7. 8. Neh. 9. 38. c. 10. Esther
1. 13. to 22. Dan. 3. 2. 3. 2 Chro. 29. 30. c. 32. 3. Ezra 9. 1. c. 10. 8. 1 Samuel 5. 8. c. 29. 3. to 10. Psa. 68. 27. Prove. 8. 15, 16. Isa. 19. 11. 12. 13.
Jer. 17. 25. c. 26. 11. 16. c. 36. 12. 14. c. 37. 14. 15. c. 38. 4. 25. 27.
Dan. 6. 1. 6, 7. Jonah, 3. 7. Psa. 2. 2. Isa. 1. 23. 26. compared together, and
by all Historians and Politicians testimonies.

2. Secondly, that they sit there only by the Kings Patent is false: for
first, many Peers and Nobles have been created in and by See M. Seldens Titles
of Honor p. 2. chapter 5. 14. ^, 3. c. 35. 9. R. 2. n. 16. 20. R. 2. n. 80, 1. H.
4. ^. 81. with many more.
Parliament, at the Commons and Peoples earnest Petitions, and by Patents
confirmed in Parliament, of which there are many Presidents. Secondly, though
the Kings Writ or Patent create others of them Peers and Baro^'s without the
peoples consent, yet the Laws and Statutes of the Realm made by the Commons
consents, and approved by the people, allow the King this power, and authorize
and 5. R. 2. Stat. 2. c. 4 31. H. 8. c. 10.
enjoyne Lords and Barons to sit in Parliament, when thus created, if there be
no just exceptions taken to them by the Houses; therefore though they are
created Lords and Peers, and sit in Parliament by the Kings Patent, and Writ
only, by way of instrument and conveyance, yet originally and really they are
made, and sit there by the Laws and Statutes of the Realm, to which all the
people have consented, of which more hereafter. Thirdly, all ancient and new
Cities and Buroughs who send Citizens and Burgesses to Parliament, and the
Divisions of Counties, were originally created and invested with this power to
elect Citizens, Burgesses, and Knights for the Parliament L^e Lit. c. 10. Sect.
162, 164. and Cook Ibidem. 49. Ass. 8.
only by the Kings Letters Patents and Charters, not by the peoples election
and choice, and none of them do or can choose or send Knights, Citizens, and
Burgesses to Parliament Cook 4. Instit. c. 1. and Cr^mptons Jurisdiction of
Cou^ts. c. 1. 1. R. 1. c 4. 8. H. 4 c. 14 8. H. 5. c. 7. 32. H. 6. c. 15 and 14
H. 5. c 3 l. 1. H. 7 12 2 H. 7. 13. a. 5. H 7. 9. H. 7. 12. 14 H. 6. 12. 7. ^.
4. 14 15. ^ 4 15. Coo^ 1. (...). 250. a.
without the Kings Writ, directed to them, but only by power and virtue of it;
therefore if the Lords sitting in Parliament be illegal and unwarrantable,
because they sit only by Patent and Writs from the King, the sitting of
Knights, Citizens and Burgesses must be so too, because they are elected only
by the Kings Writ, and enabled to elect and choose them only by his Patents,
the power of * creating Cities, Buroughs and Knights, being originally in the
King, as well as the power of creating Lords and Barons.

3. Thirdly, that the general election of the people is not absolutely
necessary nor essential to the making of a King, Magistrate, Counselor of
State, Peer, or member of Parliament, (nor yet of a Minister) as the Objectors
falsely pretend, who take it for granted as an infallible truth and Maxim of
State: for then it will follow, that neither Exodus 3. and 4. and 7.
Moses Deuteronomy. 3. 28. Nu^. 27. 16. (...) 23. Deuteronomy. 31. ^. (...). 9. 14. 23. c.
34. 9. Iosh^^.
Joshua, Ne^ c. 2. etc.
Nehemiah, 1 Samuel 9. 16. c. 10. 1. 21.
Saul, Psalm. 78. 70, 71, 72. 1 Samuel 1^. 2 Samuel 7, 8.
David, 1 Chronicles. 23. 1. c. 28. 5, 6. 2 Chronicles. 1. 8.
Solomon, nor any of the 2 Chronicles. 14 1. c. 17. 1. c. 28. 27. c. 29. 1.
pious Kings of Juda who came to the Crown by Gods immediate designation, or by
descent and succession, were just and lawful Governors or Kings, which none
dare aver, That the Number. 11. 16, 17. 24, 25, 26, 27.
70. Elders, the Princes, 1 Chronicles. 18. 15, 16, 17. c. 26. 29, 30, 31, 32, c.
27. c. 28. 1. 2 Chronicles. 19. 5. (...) 7.
Nobles, chief Captains, Judges, and Rulers among the Jews under Moses, and
their Kings, and other Governors, and the Jewish Sanhedrin, were no lawful
Judges, Magistrates, Counselors of State, or Members of their general
Congregations, Parliaments and assemblies, since we read of none of them chosen
by the people, but only designed by God himself, or made and created such by
Kings and Governors, and by them called and summoned to their general
congregations, assemblies and judicatures, as the premised texts and others
evidence. That Genesis 40. 40, 41, etc. Exodus 18. 25. Psalm. 105. 21. Acts 8. 10.
Joseph, Esther 8. and 10.
Mordecai, Dan. 2. 48, 49.
Daniel, Shadrac, Mesec, and Abednego, were no lawful Rulers or Magistrates,
because made such even by Heathen Kings, not by the peoples choice. And that
none of the Levites, Priests, High Priests or Prophets, under the Law were
lawful, because none of them (that we read of) made a Levite, Priest,
High Priest or Prophet by the peoples call; but by Exodus 40. Numb. 1, and 3.
and 4 1 Chronicles. c. 23. c. ^5, 29, and 26. (...). 2^. 13. Heb. 5. ^.
descent and succession in the selfsame Tribe, or by Gods own immediate call
and appointment, as Mat. 3.
John Baptist, Isa 61. 1. c. 65. 1 Ioh. 20. 21. Heb. 5. 4, 5.
Christ, the Mar 10. Luke 9. 10. Mar. 28. 19, 20. John 20. 21. 1 Cor. 1. 17.
Gal. 1. 1. Acts 8. 5. 14, 15. ^ Case Polit. l. 3. c. 2. Bod^. de Repub. l. 2.
c. 2, 3. Joan Mariana de Rege and Regum Instit. l. 1. c. 3, 4.
Apostles, the 70. Disciples and others under the Gospel were made and created
Ministers, Apostles, Evangelists and preaching Elders, without the peoples
call; and yet our opposites dare not deny their Ministry and Apostleship to be
lawful, being not of men, but of Gods and Christ's own call, without the
peoples. Secondly, then it will follow, that all Hereditary Kingdoms, which (
g) Politicians and Divines generally hold the best of Governments, all Patents
and Commissions in all Empires, Kingdoms and States of the world creating
Princes, Dukes, Earls, Lords, and such like Titles of Honor, whereby they are
enabled in all Christian Kingdoms to sit in their Parliaments and Assemblies
of State, and for creating Privy Counselors, Judges, Justices and other
Magistrates are void, null and illegal, and so all the Laws, Orders,
Ordinances made, Acts done and Judgments given by them, d See M. Seldens
Titles of Honor.
are void and erroneous, because they were not chosen and called to these
places and public Counsels and Judicatures by the people, but by the
Emperors, Kings, and Supreme Governors of State, and what a confusion such a
Paradox as this would breed in all our Kingdoms, and in all States and
Kingdoms in the world, let wise men consider, and those fools too who make
this Objection.

4. Fourthly, if there be no lawful Authority in any State, but from the
Peoples immediate election, then it will necessarily follow, that Sir Thomas
Fair^ax is no lawful General, his Officers and Council of War no lawful
Officers or Council; and Colonel, and Lievtenant-Colonell Lilburne no lawful
Colonel or Lieutenant Colonel, and ought not to use or retain these titles,
as they do, because none of them were called and chosen to those places by the
People, but made such by Commission from the Parliament.

5. Fifthly, This paradox of theirs, touching the peoples choice and call to
enable Peers to sit in Parliament, or bear any office of Magistracy or
Judicature, is warranted by no law of God, in old or new Testament, both which
contradict it: by no Laws or Statutes of these Kingdoms or Nations, which
absolutely disclaim it, and enact the contrary: by no prescription, custom or
usage, which are all against it; by no Original Law of Nature, which as all
Arist. Polit. l. 1. Bodin. de Repub. l. 1. c. 2. 3, 4, 5. D. F^eld of the
Church. l. 1. c. 1, 2.
Politicians and Divines assert, and the Scripture manifests, gives every
Father a Magisteriall and Judicial rule and power over his children, progeny,
Family; and makes him a King, Prince, Lord over them, without either their
choice or call; the Father and firstborn of the family, being both the King,
Prince and Lord over it, and Priest to it from the Creation till the Law was
given, as is generally acknowledged by all Divines.

6. Sixthly, I answer, that a particular, explicit actual choice and election
by the people, of any to be Kings, Magistrates, Judges, Ministers, Peers or
Members of Parliament, is neither necessary nor convenient to make them just
and lawful, except only when the Laws of God, of Nature, of Nations, or the
Kingdom expressly require it; but only a general implicit or tacit consent;
especially when the ancient Laws of the Land continuing still in full force,
and the custom of the Kingdom time out of mind, requires no such ceremony of
the peoples particular election or call; in which case the peoples dissent is
of no validity, till that Law and custom be repealed by general consent of the
King, Lords and Commons in Parliament. * Seldens Titles of Honor, part 2. Cook
4. Instit. c. ^. Cambdens ^^it.
Now the ancient Laws, Statutes and Customs of the Kingdom enable all Lords
who are Peers and Barons of the Realm to sit in Parliament when ever summoned
to it by the Kings Writ, without any election of the people; and if the Laws
and Customs of the Realm were, that the King himself might call two Knights,
Citizens and Burgesses to Parliament, such as himself should nominate in his
writ out of every County, City and Borough, without the Freeholders, Citizens,
and Burgesses election of them by a common agreement and consent to such a Law
and usage made by their Ancestors, and submited and consented to for some ages
without repeal, this Law and Custom were sufficient to make such Knights,
Citizens and Burgesses lawful Members of Parliament, and to represent the
Commons of England without any election of the people, the Laws made by our
Ancestors in Parliament, See Littleton, Fitz-Herbert, Brut. and Ashly. Tit.
VVarranty. Obligat. Covenant, etc.
obliging their posterity whiles unrepealed; as well as their Warranties,
Obligations, Statutes, Feofements, Morgages and alienations of their Lands, as
the Objectors must acknowledge, therefore they must of necessity grant, their
present sitting, voting and judging too in Parliament to be lawful, because
thus warranted by the Laws and Customs of the Realm.

4. If all Power in Government, and right of sitting, judging, and making Laws
or Ordinances in Parliament, be founded upon the immediate free election of all
those that are to be Governed; and of necessity that all those who are to be
subject and they ought to be represented by those who have power in Government,
the Sum of See M. Edwards his Gangraena. part. 3. p. 142. to 162.
Lilburnes Overtons, and the Levellers reasons against the Lords Jurisdiction,
then it will of necessity follow; that the orders, Votes, Ordinances and Laws
made by or consented to by the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses in Parliament,
ought not to bind any Ministers, Women, Children, Infants, Servants, Strangers,
Freeholders, Citizens, Burgesses, Artificers, or others, (who cannot well or
properly be represented but by persons of their own sex, degrees, trades and
callings, and so every sex, trade, calling in each County and Corporation in
England should send Members of their own to Parliament to represent them) but
only such Freeholders, and Burgesses who had voices in and gave free consent to
their Elections, not any who have no voices by Law, or dissented from those
elected and returned; yea then it will necessarly follow; that those Counties,
Cities and Buroughs whose Members have been injuriously impeached, suspended,
driven away, or thrust out of the House of Commons by the objectors and the
Armies practice and violence (contrary to all former presidents) are absolutely
free, exempted and not bound by any Votes or Ordinances made, or taxes imposed
by the Commons House, because they have no Members to represent them residing
in Parliament; and that those Counties and Buroughs whose Knights and
Burgesses are dead or absent are no ways obliged by any Votes, Ordinances, or
Grants in Parliament: And then how few in the Kingdom will or ought to yield
obedience to any the Acts, Ordinances, or Votes of this present Parliament, or
to any Mayors, Sheriffs Aldermen, or Heads of Houses made by their Votes and
Authority, (usually made by election heretofore) or to any Judges, Justices,
Governors, Generals, Captains, or other Military Officers made by their
Commission or appointment, without the generality of the peoples Votes, or
consent, especially when above half, or three full parts of the Members were
absent or driven from both Houses, by the Objectors violence and menaces.

These Answers premised, I shall now proceed to the proof of the Lords
undeniable Right and Authority to sit, Vote, and give Judgment in Parliament,
though not actually elected and called by the people, as Knights and Burgesses
are.

1. It is evident, by the Histories, Republikes of most ancient and modern
Kingdoms and Republikes in the world, that their Princes, Nobles, Peers and
great Officers of State, have by the Original Fundamental Laws and
Institutions, by right of their very 31. H. 8 c. 10 See M. Seldens Titles of
Honor, Cassanaeus Catalogus Gloriae Mundi: Alanso Lopez in Nobiliario, and
others who write of Nobility. Cambd. Brit. of the No^^lity and Courts of
Justice in England
Nobility, Peerage, and great Offices, without any particular election of the
people, a just right and title to sit, consult, Vote, enact Laws, and give
Judgment in all their General Assemblies of State, Parliaments, Senates,
Diets, Counsels; as might be mainfested by particular instances in the
Kingdoms Republikes, Parliaments, Diets, and General Assemblies of the Jews,
Egyptians, Grecians, Romans, Persians, Ethiopians, Germans, French, Goths,
Vandalls, Hungarians, Bohemians, Polonians, Russians, Swedes, Scythians,
Tartars, Moors, Indians, Spaniards, Portugalls, Danes, Saxons, Scots, Irish,
and many others: And to deny the like privilege to our English Peers and
Nobles, which all Nobles, Peers in all other Kingdoms, Nations, Republikes
anciently have done, and yet do constantly enjoy, without exceptions or
dispute, is a gross unjury, injustice and oversight, yea a great dishonor
both to our Nobility and Nation.

Secondly, By, and in the very primitive constitution of our English
Parliaments, it was unanimously agreed by the Kingdoms and peoples general
consents, that our Parliaments should be constituted and made up, not of
Knights and Burgisses only, elected by E. H 6. c. 7. 10. H. 6. c. 2. 32 H. 6
c. 15. Crumpton. Jurisdict. p. 1. 2. 3. Cook 4 Instit. c. 1.
Freeholders and Burgesses (not by the generality of the vulgar people, who
would now claim and usurp this right of election) but likewise of the King,
the Supreme Member, by whose Cook Instit. c. 1. n. 1. 10. Modus Tenendi
Parliamentum. Crompton Jurisdiction of Courts, Tit. Parliament. M. Seldens Tit.
of Honor. par. 2. c. 5.
writs the Parliaments were to be sommoned, and by the Lords, Peers, Barons,
(ecclesiastical and civil) and great Officers of the Realm, who ought of
right to sit, vote, make Laws, and give Judgment in Parliament by virtue of
their Peerage; Baronries and Offices, without any election of the people: the
Commons themselves being no Parliament, judicatory, or Lawgivers alone,
without the King and Lords as Modus tenendi Parliamentorum; Sir Edward Cook in
his 4. Institutes. chapter 1. Mr. Seldens Titles of Honor. part. 2. chapter 5. Vowell,
Camden, Sir. Thomas Smith, Cowell, Minshaw, Crompton with others who have
written of our English Parliaments, assert, and all our Parliament Rolls,
Statutes, and 33. H. 6. 16. Br. Parliam. 4. 39. E 3. 7. 35. 11. H. 7 27. Br
Parl. 107. 4. H. 7. 18. 7 H. 7. 14 Crumptons Iurisd f. 9. Co. 4. Institutes. n
15 35. Fit f. 20. Dyer. 92. Judge Huttons Argument of Mr. Hamdens case. p 32.
33.
Law-bookes, resolve, without whose threefold concurrent assents there is or
can be no Act of Parliament made.

Thirdly, This right of theirs is confirmed by prescription and custom from
the very first beginning of Parliaments in this Kingdom till this present,
their being no one president to be found in History or Record of any one
Parliament held in this Island since it was a Kingdom without the King
personally or representatively present (by a Protector, Custos or Regni,
Commissioners) as he ought to be, or without Lords and Peers; anciently styled
Aldermen, Heretockes, Senators, Wisemen, Nobles, Princes, Earls, Counts,
Dukes, etc. by our Historians; who make mention of their resorting to, fitting,
voting and judging in our Parliaments General Assemblies and Councels, under
those Titles, without the peoples Election, long before the Conquerors time; in
the anciented Parliaments and Councels we read of, witness Ingulph, Beda,
Huntingdon, Matthew Westminster, Florent^us, Wigorniensis, Malmesbury, Hector
Boethius, Speed, and other in their Histories, Antiquitates Ecclesiae
Britanicae, Spelmanni Concilia. Tom 1. Sir Edward Cook in his Preface to the
9. Report, and fourth Institut. c. 1. and above all others Mr. Seldens Titles
of Honor. part. 2. c. 5. Truth triumphing over falsehood, Antiquity over
Novelty. p. 56. to. 90. and Mr. Lambert in his Archaion: there being little or
no mention at all of any Knights of Sbires Citizens, or Burgesses in any of our
Parliaments and Councels, before the Conquest, or in the Conquerors time, and
his next Successors, but of Earls, Barons, Nobles, Archbishops, and Bishops
only for the most part; whom Sir Edward Cook and others conceive were
comprehended under the names of Sapientum, or wise men, Seniores populi,
(extending to Peers too, as they confess) or at least wise under these
phrases; Spelman C. p. 194.
praesentibus omnibus Ordinibus illius Gentis, cum vtris quibusdam Militaribus
(rather Soldiers than Knights,) of which we find mention in the Council of
Be^henceld. l Spelman Ibid p. 21^.
An. 697. or, omnium Sapientum Seniorum, and POPVLORVM totius Regni; coupled
with these pre-eminent Titles of Omnium Aldermannorum, Principum, Procerum,
Comitum, who met together in a general Council under King Jue. An. 713. Or
Spelman. p. 318.
cujuscunque Ordinis viros, in the Conncell of Cloveskro. An. 800. which
expressions we find are now and then mentioned in some ancient Councels and
Parliaments, though rarely: And if that of Hist. p. 870.
Ingulph and other our Historians and some Lawyers be true, (which First
institut. f. 108.
Sir Edward Cook, and Titles of Honor. part 2. ^. 5. sec. 3. p. 614 615. etc.
Mr. Seldom deny) (that King Alfred first divided the Realm into Counties, as
all grant he did into Hundreds and Tithings, and erected Hundred Courts wherein
Knights of the Shire were always, and yet are, and ought to be elected) there
could be no Knights of Shires at least (if any Citizens or Burgesses) to serve
in Parliament, before this division, though there were Earls, Dukes, and
Barons before his reign (who were present by the Kings summons, not peoples
elections, at our Parliaments, and General Councels) as Titles of Honor 2.
chap. 5. sec. 2. 3. 4. 5.
Mr. Seldom, and Glossarium. Tit. Comitis and Comitatus.
Sir Henry Spelman undeniably manifest.

Their sitting, voting, and judging therefore in Parliament, being so ancient,
clear and unquestionable ever since their first beginning till now; and the
sitting of Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses by the peoples election in our
ancientest Parliaments and Counsels not so clear and evident by History or
Records as theirs: we must needs acknowledge and subscribe to their Right and
Title, or else deny the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses rights in Parliament
rather than theirs, who have not so ancient nor clear a Title or right as they.

Common Law and Custom of the Realm, which binds all men; and the unanimous
consent of all our Ancestors, and all the Commons of England from age to age
assembled in Parliament, since we had any Parliaments, who always consented
to, desired, and never once opposed the Lords sitting, voting, power or
Judicature in Parliament, and by Magna Charta it self wherein they are first
mentioned and provided for. Hereupon King Henry the third (not long after Magna
Charta was granted, and at the same time it was proclaimed and confirmed with a
most solemn Excommunication in the presence of all the Lords, and Commons by
all the Bishops of England, against the infringers thereof) summoning a
Parliament at London in the year 1255. to aid him in his wars in Apulia; the
Earls and Barrons, absolutely refused to give him any assistance at all, not
only because he had undertaken that war without their advice, but also for
this reason; Math. Paris An. 1255. p. 884 885. Daniel. p. 172
That ALL THE BARONS were not summoned by him to this Parliament, AS THEY OUGHT
TO BE ACCORDING TO THE TENOR OF MAGNA CHARTA; whereupon they departing in
discontent, and refusing to sit longer, the Parliament was disolved. t Mr. St.
John's Speech concerning Shipmony p. 33. 1. H. 4. n. 21. 22 25. 36.
And upon this very ground, among others, the Parliament of 21 R. 2. with all
the Acts and proceedings therein were repealed and nulled by the Parliament of
1. H. 4. because the Lords who adhered to their King were summoned by him to
the Parliament, and some of the opposite party imprisoned, impeached, and
omitted, and many Knights of the shire were only elected by the Kings
nomination and Letters to the Sheriffs; And the Parliament it self kept by
force, viris armatis and sagittarijs minensis, brought out of Cheshire as an
extraordinary guard, quartered in the Kings Court at Westminster, and about
Charing Cross and the Muse; of which Chron p 389. 390.
Grafton, and other Historians writes thus. That they fell suddenly into so
great pride of the Kings favor, that THEY ACCOVNTED THE KING TO BE AS THEIR
FELLOW, and THEY SET THE LORDS AT NOVGHT; yet few or none of them were
Gentlemen, but taken from the plough, and Cart, and other Crafts. And after
these rusticall people had a while courted, they entered into so great a
boldness, that they would not let, neither within nor without the Court, to
beat and slay the Kings good subjects; to take from them their victuals, and
pay for them little or nothing at their pleasure: (as our free-quarterers do
now) falling at last to ravish men's wives and daughters: And if any man
fortuned to complain of them to the King, he was soon rid out of the way no
man knew how, or by whom, so as they did what they listed; the King not caring
to do justice upon them, but favoring them, in their misdoings, confiding in
them and their guards against any others of the Kingdom, which gave Lieges of
his Kingdom great matter of commotion and discontent. The bringing up of which
guard to Westminster to force, and overawe the Parliament to effect his own
designs is one principle Article exhibited against him by the Parliament, for
which he was deposed. I pray God our New armed Guard and Courtiers at Whithall
and the Muse (of as mean condition as those) fall not by degrees to the
selfsame exorbitances, contempt of the King, Lords, Parliament, and oppression
of the people, to their general mutining and discontent. In the Parliament of
6 E. 3, N 1. and Parl. 2. N. 5. 6. 8. 9. and most of the ensuing Parliaments in
this Kings reign, and in diverse Parliaments in Ric. 2. Henry 4. c. 5. 6. was
found in the Parliament Roules that the Parliaments have been proroged and
adjourned from the days they were summoned to meet, and have not sat, nor
acted at all; because some of the Lords were not come by reason of foul
weather, shortness of warning or other public employments; all their
personal presence in Parliament being reputed necessary and expedient. And 20.
R. 2. N. 8. The Commons themselves in Parliament required the King to SEND FOR
SUCH BISHOPS and LORDS WHO WERE ABSENT, to come to the Parliament, before they
would consult of what the Chancellor propounded to them in the Kings name and
behalf to consider of. To recite no more ancient Presidents in the Parliament
of 2. Caroli, the Earl of Arundell sitting in the Parliament being committed
by the King to the Tower of London about his sons marriage May 25 1626.
without the Houses privity and consent, whereby their Privileges were
infringed, and the House deprived of one of their Members presence thereupon
the Houses of Peers adjourned themselves on the 25 and 26. of May without
doing any thing; and upon the Kings refusal to release him, they adjourned
from May 26. till June 2. refusing to sit, and so that Parliament disolved in
discontent, his imprisonment in this case being a breach of Privilege,
contrary to Magna Charta. And not long after the beginning of this Parliament,
upon the Kings accusation and impeachment of the Lord Kimbolton and the five
Members of the Commons House An Exact collection part 1.
both Houses adjourned and sat not as Houses, till they had received
satisfaction and restitution of those Members, as the Journals of both Houses
manifest; it being an high breach of their Privileges, contrary to the Great
Charter. If then the Kings bare not summoning, of some Pears to Parliament,
who ought to sit there by their right of Perage; or impeaching or imprisoning
any Peer unjustly, to disable them to sit personally in Parliament, be a
breach of the fundamental Laws of the Realm, and of Magna Charta it self
(confirmed in above 40. succeeding Parliaments,) then the Lords right to sit,
vote and Judge in Parliament, is as firm and indisputable as Magna Charta can
make it; and consented to and confirmed by all the Commons, people and
Parliaments of England, that ever consented to Magna Charta though they be not
eligiable every Parliament by the freeholders, people, as Knights and Burgesses
ought to be: and to deny this birthright and Privilege of theirs, is to deny
Magna Charta it self, and this present Parliaments Declarations, and
proceedings in the case of the Lord Kimbolton, a member of the House of Peers.

Fifthly, The ancient Treatise (entitled. See Cook ^ Justit. p. 12. for the
Antiquity, and for the Authority of this Treatise.
The manner of holding Parliaments in England in Edward the Confessors time (
before the Conquest) rehearsed ( afterward) before William the Conqueror by
the discreet men of the Kingdom, and by himself approved and used in his
time, and in the times of his Successors Kings of England; if the Title be
true, and the Treatise so ancient as many now take it to be) determines thus of
the Kings and Lords right to be personally present in all Parliaments. The King
IS BOUND by all means possible TO BE PRESENT AT THE PARLIAMENT, unless he be
detained or let there from by BODILY SICKNESS; and then he may keep his
Chamber, yet so THAT HELYE NOT WITHOUT THE MANOR OR TOWN WHERE THE PARLIAMENT
IS HELD: and then he ougth to send for twelve persons, of the greatest and best
of them that are summoned to the Parliament; that is, two Bishops, two EARLS,
two BARONS, two Knights of the Shire, two Burgesses* and two Citizens to look
upon his person to testify and witness his estate; and in their presence he
ought to make a Commission and give Authority to the Archbishops of the Peace,
the steward of England, and Chief Justice, that they jointly and severally
should begin the Parliament and continue the same in his name, express mention
being made in that Commission of the cause of his absence then, which ought to
suffice and admonish the OTHER NOBLES, chief men in the Parliament, together
with the evident testimony of the twelve Peers of theirs. The reason is,
BECAUSE THERE WAS WONT TO BE A CRY OR MURMVR IN THE PARLIAMENT FOR THE KINGS
ABSENCE, BECAUSE HIS ABSENCE IS HURTFUL and DANGEROUS TO THE WHOLE COMMONALTY
OF THE PARLIAMENT and KINGDOM, WHEN THE KING SHALL BE ABSENT FROM HIS
PARLIAMENT. Neither indeed OUGHT OR MAY HE BE ABSENT BUT ONLY IN THE CASE
AFORESAID. After which it follows. The Archbishops, Bishops and other chief
of the Clergy ought to be summoned to come to the Parliament; and Also EVERY
EARL and BARON, and their PEERS OUGHT TO BE SUMMONED and COME TO THE
PARLIAMENT, etc. Touching the beginning of the Parliament. The Lord the King,
shall sit in the mi^st of the great bench, and is bound to be present in the
first and last day of Parliament. And the Chancellors, Treasurer and Barons of
the Eschequer, and justices were wont to record the defaults made in Parliament
according to the order following. In the third day of the Parliament, the
Barons of the Cinqueports shall be called, and after wards the BARONS of
England; after them the EARLS, Whereupon if the Barons of the Cinqueports be
not come, the Barony from whence they are shall be amerced at an hundred
marks; and an Earl at one hundred pounds: After the same manner it must be
done to those who are Peers to Earls and Barons. After which it relates the
manner, of place of the Earls, Barons and Peers in Parliament, Then adds. The
Parliament may be held, and OUGHT every day to begin at one of the clock in
the afternoon: at which time THE KING IS TO BE PRESENT AT THE PARLIAMENT and
ALL THE PEERS OF THE KINGDOM. None of all the Peers of the Parliament MAY OR
OUGHT TO DEPART alone from the Parliament, unless he have obtained (and that
in full Parliament) leave from the KING and of ALL HIS PEERS so to do; and
that with all there be a remembrance kept in the Parliament roll of such leave
and Liberty granted. And if any of the Peers during the term of the Parliament
shall be sick or weak, so as he is not able to come to the Parliament, then he
ought three days together send such as may excuse him to the Parliament, or
else two Peers must go and view him: and if they find him sick, then he may
make a Proxy. Of the Parliament, the King is the Head, the beginning and
ending. So this ancient Treatise, The Statute of 5. R. 2. Parl. 2. chapter 4.
enacts by COMMAND of the King, and ASSENT of the Prelates, LORDS and COMMONS in
Parliament; That all and singular persons and Commonalties, which from
henceforth shall have the Summons of the Parliament, shall come from henceforth
to the Parliament in the manner AS THEY BE BOUND TO DO, and has been
ACCVSTOMED within the Realm of England OF OLD TIME. And every person of the
said Realm which from henceforth shall have the said Sommons, (be he
Archbishop, Bishop, Abbot, Prior, DUKE, LORD, BARON, Baronet, Knight of the
Shire, Citizen of City, Burgess of Burgh, or other singular person or
Commonalty) do absent himself, or come not at the said Summons, (except he may
reasonably or honestly excuse himself to our Sovereign Lord THE KING) HE SHALL
BE AMERCED and OTHERWISE PVNISHED ACCORDING AS OF OLD TIME HAS BEEN USED TO
BE DONE, within the said Realm in the SAID CASE: Which relates unto and agrees
expressly with that forecited out of Modus tenendi Parliamentum. If then all the
Judges and Pears in Parliament are bound to attend the Parliament, and not to
depart without the Kings and Houses leave under pain of Amercement and other
punishment as this Statute resolves, and 3. Ed. 3. 19. Fit. 2. C^ron. 161.
Stamford. l 3. c. 1. f. 153. Cook Instit. p. 15. 16. 17. 43 18. E. 3. Mo. 1. 2
8. and 31. H. 6. n. 46. (What fine were imposed on absent Lords) manifest then
questionless they ought of right to sit in Parliament, else it were the height
of Injustice thus to fine them. In the tenth year of King ^. * Graf^o^^ Cron.
p. ^. (...). 350.
2. this King absented himself from his Parliament then sitting at
Westminster, residing at Eltham about forty days, and refusing to come to the
Parliament, and yet demanding from them four fifteenes for maintenance of his
Estate and outward Wars. Whereupon the whole body of the Parliament made this
answer, THAT UNLESS THE KING WERE PRESENT THEY WOULD MAKE THEREIN NO
ALLOWANCE. Soon after they sent the Duke of Gloucester and Bishop of Ely,
Commissioners to the King to Eltham, who declared to him among other things in
the Lords and Commons behalf; how that by AN OLD ORDINANCE THEY HAVE AN ACT if
the King absent himself 40. days not being sick, but of his own mind, (not
heeding the charge of his people, nor their great pains) and will not resort
to the Parliament, they may then lawfully return to their Houses. And now sir
( said they) you have been absent a longer time, and yet refuse to come
amongst us, which is greatly to our discontent. To which the King answered;
Well, we do consider, that our own people and Commons go about to rise
against us, wherefore we think we can do no better, then to ask aid of our
Cosen the French King, and rather to submit us to him, then unto our own
subjects. The Lords answered. Sir, that Counsel is not best, but a way rather
to bring you into danger etc. By whose good persuasions, the King was appeased,
and Promised to come to the Parliament, and condescend to their Petitions, and
according to his appointment he came, and so the Parliament proceeded, which
else had dissolved by the Lords departure thence in discontent, and the Kings
wilful absence.

Andrew Horn in his Mirror of Justices, in the reign of King Edward the
first, writes, That our Saxon Kings divided the Realm into 38 Counties, over
which they set so many Counts or Earls, and though the King ought to have no
Peers in his land, but PARLIAMENTS, all Writs and Plaints of the Moneys of the
King, Queen, and their Children, and of those especially, who otherwise could
not have common right of their wrongs. These Companions are now called Counts
after the latin word Comites. For to the Estates of the Realm King Alfred
assembled the COVNTS or Earls, and ordained by a Perpetual Law, that twice a
year or oftener, they should assemble at London in Parliament to consult of the
Government of the people of God.

Fleta. l. 2. c. 2. p. 66. writes thus in the same Kings reign. Habet enim Rex
curiam suam in concilio suo in Parliamentis suis, PRAESENTIBUS Praelatis,
COMITIBUS, BARONIBUS, PROCERIBUS, and alijs viris peritis vbi terminatae sunt
dubitationes, judiciorum, and moris injuriis eversis, nova constituuntur
remedia. And l. 17. c. 17. he writes thus. Rex in populo regendo superiores
habet, Vidilicet legem perfactus est Rex; and Curiam suam, (to wit of
Parliament.) videlicet, COMITES and BARONS. Comites enim a Comitia dicuntur,
qui cum viderint Regem sine froeno, Froenum sibi apponere TENENTVR, ne clament
sabditi: Domine Jesu Christ in Chamo and froeno maxillas eorum constringe. Sir
Thomas Smith in his Commonwealth of England. * Bracton l. 2. c. (...). l. 3. c
9. (...) the like in the same words in Henry the 3. his reign.
l. 2. c. 1. John Vowel, and Ralph Hollinshed, vol. 1. c. 6. p. 173. Mr.
Cambden in his Britania. p. 177. John Minshew in his Dictionary vuell in his
Interpreter Title Parliament; Powell in his Attornyes Academy, and others,
unanimously conclude. That the Parliament consists of the KING, the LORDS
SPIRITVALL and TEMPORAL and the Commons; which STATES represent the body of
all England, which make but one assembly or Court called the Parliament, and is
of all other the Highest and greatest Authority, and has the most high and
absolute power of the Realm: And that no Parliament is or can be holden
without the King and Lords, Mr. Crompton in his Jurisdiction of Courts,
affirms, particularly of the High Court of Parliament. f. 1. etc. This Court
is the highest Court of England, in which the King himself fits in person, and
comes there at the beginning and end of the Parliament, and AT ANY OTHER TIME
WHEN HE PLEASES ORDERING THE PARLIAMENT. To this Court come ALL THE LORDS OF
PARLIAMENT, as well spiritual a^ temporal, and are severally summoned by the
Kings writ at a certain day and place assigned; The Chancellor of England and
other great officers or Judges are there likewise present; together with the
Knights, Citizens and Burgesses; who all ought to be personally present, or
else to be amerced, and otherwise punished if they come not being summoned,
unless good cause be showed, or in case they depart without the Houses or
Kings special license after their appearance before the Sessions ended: And he
resolves that the King, Lords and Commons do all jointly make up the
Parliament, and that no Law nor Act of Parliament can be made to bind the
subject, without all their concurrent assents.

Sir Edward Cook not only in his Epistle before his ninth Report and
Institutes on Littleton. p. 109. 110. But likewise in his 4. Institutes (
published by Order of this present Parliament. c. 1. p. 1. 2 etc) writes thus
of the high and Honorable Court of Parliament. This Court consists OF THE
KINGS MAJESTY, sitting there, as in his royal politic capacity, and of the
three Estates of the Realm, viz. Of the Lords Spiritual, Archbishops and
Bishops, being in number 24. who sit there in respect of their Counties or
Barronies, parcel of their Bishoprics, which they hold also in their politic
capacity; and every one of these when the Parliament is to be holden, ought
exdebito Justitiae, to have a writ of summons. The LORDS TEMPORAL, Dukes,
Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts and Barons, who sit there by reason of their
dignities which they hold by descent or creation: And likewise EVERY ONE OF
THESE being of full age OUGHT TO HAVE a writ of summons EX DEBITO JUSTITIAE.
The third estate are the Commons of the Realm, whereof there be Knights of
Shires or Counties, Citizens of Cities and Burgesses of Burro. All which are
respectively by the Shires or Counties, Cities and Buroughs by force of the
Kings writ, Ex debito Justitiae; and none of them ought to be omitted: and
these represent all the Commons of the whole Realm, and trusted for them, and
are in number at this time 493. Headed. And it is observed that when there is
best appeareance, there is the best succession in Parliament. At the Parliament
holden in the 7. year of H. 5. holden before the Duke of Bedford Guardian of
England, of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal there appeared but 30. in all:
at which Parliament there was but one Act of Parliament passed and that of no
great weight. In An. 50. H. 3. ALL THE LORDS APPEARED IN PERSON, and not one by
Proxy: at which Parliament as appears by the Parliament Roll, so many
excellent things were sped and done, that it was called Bonum Parliamentum. And
the King and these three estates are the great Corporation or the body of the
Kingdom, and do sit in two Houses, and of this Court of Parliament the King
is Caput, Principium, and Finis. The Parliament cannot begin but by the Royal
Presence of the King either in person or representation, by a Guardian of
England, or Commissioners, both of them appointed under the great Seal of
England, etc. And 42. E. 3. Rot. Parl. number. 7. It is declared by the Lords and
Commons in full Parliament, upon demand made of them, on the behalf of the
King, That they could not assent to any thing in Parliament, that tended to the
disinherison of the King and his Crown whereunto they were sworn. And p. 35.
he has this special observation; That it is o^served by ancient Parliament
men out of Record that Parliaments have not succeeded well in five cases.
First, when the King has been in diffe^ence with his Lords and with his
Commons. Secondly, When any of the great Lords were at variance between
themselves. Thirdly, When there was no good correspondence between the Lords
and Commons. Fourthly, When there was no unity between the Commons themselves (
in all which our present Parliament is now most unhappy, and so like to
miscarry and succeed very ill.) Fifthly, When there was no preparation for the
Parliament before it began: every of which he manifests by particular
instances.

From all these and sundry Judge H^^rons Argument of Mr. Hampdens case. p. 32.
33. Daltons office of Sherriffs
other Authorities, it is most evident and transparent, That both the King
himself and Lords, ought of right to be present in Parliament, and ever have
been so, as well as the Commons: and neither of them to be excluded, since they
all make up but one Parliament ought of right and duty to be present at, and no
Lords and Commons to depart from it without special leave, under pain of
amercement and other penalties, because no binding Law can be passed without
their joint consents. And that the Commons alone are no more a Parliament of
themselves without the King and Lords, than the Common Council of London are
an entire Corporation without the Lord Major, Aldermen; or the Covent without
the Abbot; the Chapter without the Deane, or the legs or belly a perfect man
without the head, or neck.

Bills in Parliament begun in the Commons House in all Parliaments since the
Houses first divided, 33. H. 6. 17. Brook Parliament. 4 Cromptons jurisdiction
of Courts. f. 8. Mr. Hackuel of the manner of passing Bills in Parliament.
unanswerably demonstrates the Commons of Englands acknowledgment of the Lords
right to fit, vote, assent or disassent to Bills in Parliament. viz. SOIT'BAYLE
A SEIGNEURS: let it be delivered or sent up to the Lords. Yea, the Commons
constant sending up of their own Members, with Messages to the Lords, and
receiving Messages from them, and intertaining frequent conferences with them
in matters where their opinions differ, in which conferences the Lords usually
adhere to their dissents, unless the Commons gives emsatisfaction and
convince them, and the Lords often times convince the Commons, so far as to
consent to their alterations of Bills, Ordinances, Votes, and often to lay them
quite afide; is an unquestionable argument of their Right to sit and vote in
Parliament; and of their Negative Voice too: All which would prove but a mere
absurdity and superfluity if the Commons in all ages and now too, were not
convinced, that the Lords had as good right to sit and vote in Parliament, and
a Negative and dissenting voice, as well as they, never once questioned or
doubted till within this year or two, by some seditious Disciples of Lilburnes
and Overtons entering, who endeavored to evade their justice on them.

concerning the placing and sitting of the Lords and Great Officers of State in
the Parliament House; made by the Commons consent, It being in vain to make
such a Law, (continuing still till this very day both in force and use) if they
had no lawful right to fit and vote in Parliament, because they are not
elective, as Knights, and Burgesses are. And by the Statute of 39. H. 6. c. 1.
made at the Commons own Petition to repeal the Parliament and all proceedings
of it held at Coventry the year before, by practice of some seditious persons,
of purpose to destroy some of the great Nobles, faithful and Lawful Lords and
Estates, merely out of malice, and greedy and unsatiable coveteousnesse to
possess themselves of their lands, possessions, Offices and goods, whereby
many great Injuries, Enormities, and Inconveniences, well nigh to the ruin,
decay, and universal subvertion of the Kingdom, ensued. The very design of
our Lilburnists, Sectaries, and Levellers now; out of particular malice and
coveteousnesse, to share the Lords and all rich Commoners lands and estates
between them, being poor and indigent covetuous people for the most part,
scarce forty of them worth one groat, at least before these times.

themselves are summoned to the Parliament, but even of the writs for election
of Knights and Burgesses, the form and substance whereof are ancient, and can
receive NO ALTERATION NOR ADDITION but by Act of Parliament, as Institutes. 4
p. 10.
Sir Edward Cook resolves, By this writ the Prelates, Nobles and others of the
Realm are summoned to the Parliament there to treat and confer with the
King, of the arduous and ^rgent affairs of the Realm and Church of England:
as the first clause of the writ. Carolus etc. quia, etc. pro quibusdam arduis
and (...) negotiis Nos, Statum and defensionem Regni nostri Angliae, and
^^^l^siae Anglicanae concernent: quiddam Parliamentum nostrum and teneri
^^^^^avimus; and ibidem, cum Praelatis, MAGNATIBUS and PROCERIBUS dicti Regni
nostri COLLOQUIUM HABERIET TRACTARE, Tibi praecipimus, And the Commons are
summoned, to perform and consent to those things which shall there happen to
be ordained by this Com. Coun. of the Kingdom, etc. And if they are thus
summoned, not to treat amongst themselves as an independent and entire
Parliament, but to confirm and consent to what the King, Prelates, Great men,
and Peers, the Common Council, of the Realm shall ordain about such affairs,
as they must of necessity admit the King, Lords and Peers to be altogether as
essential (yea more principal eminent Members) of Parliament though not
elective, as the Knights and Burgesses, who are but summoned to consent to and
perform what shall happen there by common advise to ordain, or at least to
consult and advise with them, as their inferiors; not to overruled them, as
their superiors, and the only Supreme power in the Kingdom; and if they will
totally exclude either King or Lords from Parliament, who are distinct and
essential Members of it as well as the Commons, and have always been so
reputed until now, the Commons may sit alone as Ciphers, but not as a
Parliament, to vote or act any thing that is binding to the people; since
though in extraordinary cases for the saving of the Kingdom, they may securely
use extraordinary means and proceedings, yet regularly they are no more a
Parliament without the King, and Lords, the^ the King or Lords alone are a
Parliament without the Commons; or the trunk of a man, a perfect man without a
head or shoulders. If Dyer. 61. 62. Cook. 5 Report f. 90. 91. 94. 120. 121. v.
1. Rep. 111. 173 19. R. 8. 9. Br. executors 3. 15 11. 7. 12.
3. be jointly empowered or commissioned to do any act by Commission Deed, or
Warrant, any one or two of them can do nothing without the 3d. If many be in
Commission of the Peace, Sewers or the like and three of the Quorum jointly,
and act there jointly, if any one of the three be absent all the rest can do
nothing, In Parliament it self, If either House appoint a Committee of 3. 5.
or 7. to examine act or execute any thing, if but one of this number be absent
or put out, the rest can do nothing, that is legal or valid even by course of
Parliament, neither can either House sit and vote as a House unless there be
so many Members present, as by the Law and custom of Parliament will make up
an House as every man's experience can inform him. If these Levellers then will
absolutely cut off or exclude the King or Lords from the Parliament, they
absolutely null and dissolve it: and the Act ^or c^ntinuing this Parliament
cannot make nor continue the Commons alone together as a Parliament, no more
then the Lords or King alone without the Commons; the King or either House
alone being no Parliament, but both conjoined and enlivened with the Kings
personal or representative presence. The cutting of the head alone, or of the
head and shoulders, altogether destroys and kills the body Politic and
Parliament, as well as the body natural, If the King dies or resignes his
Crown, or be deposed, the Parliament thereby is actually dissolved, as it was
resolved in the Parliament of 1. H. 4. n. 1. 2. 3. and 4. F. 4. 44. And so if
the Lords or Commons dissolve and leave their House, without any adjournment,
the Parliament is thereby dissolved, as the forecited presidents, and the
latter clause of the writ for the election of Knights and Burgesses manifests.
And a new kind of Parliament consisting only of Commoners, when the old one
(only within the Act for continuing this Parliament made up both of King,
Lords, and Commons) is dissolved; neither will or can be supported or warranted
by the letter or intention of this Law.

Cook 4. Instit. c. 1.
The King with the assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament
has ordained, and be it enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, the Lords
Spiritual and temporal in this present Parliament assembled. The famous
Petition of Right. 3. Car. so much insisted on, beginning thus, Humbly show
unto our Sovereign Lord the King, the Lords spiritual and Temporal and
Commons in Parliament assembled; thus answered by the King; Let right be done
as is desired. The Act of continuing this Parliament made by the King and
Lords, as well as by the Commons, (who never intended to exclude themselves out
of this Parliament by that Act, or that it should continue if either of them
were quite dismembered from it,) with all Acts and Ordinances since. Yea the
Protestation, Solemn League and Covenant, taken by the Commons and Lords, and
prescribed by them to all others throughout the three Kingdoms, which couple
the Lords and Commons always together, (neither of them alone being able to
make any binding Ordinance to the subjects unless they both concur, no more
than one Member alone of either House can make a House) and rank the Lords
always before the Commons, and the King before them both; so firmly hold
forth, establish the Lords and Kings undoubted Right to sit, and Vote in
Parliament, and decry this new mounted Monopoly of a sole Parliament, of
Commons without King or Lords, and that absolute Sovereign Power these new
Lights have spied out and set up for them in Vtopia, that impudency it self
would blush to vent such mad, absurd, irrational Frenzies and Paradoxes as
these crackbrain'd persons dare to publish, and they may with as much truth and
reason argue, that one man is three, and that the Legs and trunk of a man are
a perfect man without head, neck, arms and shoulders; or that the Legs and
Body are and ought to be placed above the head, neck and shoulders; as that the
House of Commons are or ought to be an entire Parliament; the sole Legislative
Power, the only Supreme Authority paramount both King and Lords, who must not
have now so much as a Negative voice to deny or contradict any of the Commons
Votes, or Ordinances, though never so rash, unjust, dishonorable, prejudicial
or dangerous to the whole Kingdom.

Tenthly, These very Sectaries and Levellers themselves have acknowledged and
asserted this Right of Power of the Lords all along this Parliament till of
late, c See innocence and truth justified. p. 74. 75. Mr. Edwards Gangraena*
part. 3. p. 156 157. where his words and contradictions in this kind are
receited at larg.
as appears by their several Petitions and Complaints to them upon sundry
occasions heretofore; by their resorting to them for Justice against Strafford,
Canterbury, and others; Yea John Liburne himself, till his late quarrel with
them, not only acknowledged their very power of Judicature, but highly
applauded their Justice, in his own cause, Petitioning and suing to them not
only for reversall of the sentence against him in Starchamber, but likewise
for damages and reparations against his Prosecutors, ^leading his cause by his
Counsel before them, as his proper Judges; who thereupon by Judgment of the
House vacated the Decree against him, as illegal; voted him Damages, and
passed him an Ordinance for the recovery and levying thereof; all which he
himself both published in sundry of his printed Pamphlets, wherein he
acknowledges and extolleth their Justice. Take but one passage for all in his
Innocence and Truth justified p. 74. 75. If I be transmitted up to the Lords,
and confidently believe I shall get forward, out of the former experiences of
that Justice that I have found there, and I will instance two particulars.
First, when I was a Prisoner in the Fleet, and secondly May the fourth, one
thousand six hundred forty one. The King accused me of High Treason, and
before the Lords bar was I brought for my life, where although one Littleton,
servant to the Prince, swore point blanke against me, yet had I free liberty
to He did not then demurr to their Jurisdiction.
speak for my self in the open House; And upon my desire that Master Andrews
also might declare upon his Oath what he knew about my business, it was done;
And his Oath being absolutely contradictory to Master Littletons, I was both
freed from Littletons malice, and the Kings accusation at the Bar of the
whole House: And for my part Nota.
I AM RESOLVED TO SPEAK WELL OF THOSE THAT HAVE DONE ME JUSTICE; and not to
doubt THEY WILL DENY IT ME, till such time as by experience I find they do
it.

And at that time he was so much for the Lords, that he writes most
disgracefully, derogatorily of the Commons (and other his Confederates by his
example) and of their want of power, injustice, and proceedings, His ^etter to
a friend-Innocency and truth justified. His ^etters to the General Hen.
Martin, and L. G. Cromwell Englands Birthright See Mr. Edw. Gangraena. part 3.
p. 146. to 228.
quarrels only with them, and their Committees for their delays and
injustice toward him: telling them to their faces in many of his former, and
late printed Libels: That they have no power at all to commit or examine him,
or any other Commoner of England without the Lords: nor yet to give or take an
Oath: That they are but a piece and lowest part of the Parliament, not a
Parliament alone, That they can make no binding Votes, Ordinances or Laws, nor
commit, nor command any Commoner, without the Lords, and in one or two
Pamphlets he endeavors to prove them to be now no lawful House of Commons at
all, nor would he ever acknowledge them to be so, and that he would make no
more conscience of cutting theirs and the Lords throats, (the Tyrants and
Oppressors, at Westminster) then of killing so many Weasels and Polcats; with
many other like scurrilous and mutinous expressions. His own printed Papers,
Petitions and Actions therefore are an unanswerable confutation of his
malicious contradictions of their Authority and judicature since, for their
exemplary justice on him: and he must either now re-acknowledge their right of
sitting, voting, and judging in Parliament to be lawful, or else renounce his
own former Petitions and addresses to them for justice, retract all his former
printed Papers asserting their Power and judicature, and extolling their
justice; yea disclaim their judgment for vacating his own Sentence, in the
Starchamber, their awarding him Damages, and passing an Ordinance to recover
them, as merely null and void, being made before no lawful or competent
Judges, as now he writes, since not elected, by the peoples Votes. And let
those his followers who admire him for his Law, observe these his palpable and
invincible contradictions, and be ashamed and afraid to follow such an ignorant
and erroneous guide, who writes only out of malice, and faction, not of
judgment, as his contradictions evidence. 11ly. The Acts for preventing the
inconveniences happening by the long intermission of Parliaments. And to
prevent the inconveniences which may happen by the untimely adjourning
proroging, or dissolving the Parliament, made this Parliament, and assented to
by the King at the Commons importunity, confirm the Lords interrest and right
to sit and Vote in Parliament beyond all dispute, and give them an^w power to
summone a Parliament themselves in some cases.

^^ly. The ancient form still continued till this day of dismissing
Parliaments and dissolving them, by the Kings licensive, THE LORDS and COMMONS
TO DEPART HOME and TAKE THEIR EASE. 37. E. 3. n. 34. 38. E. 3. n. 18. 40. E. 3.
n. 16. 43. E. 3. n. 34. 45. E. 3. n. 8. 13. 47. E. 3. n. 7. and all Parliaments
since) proves their right of sitting in, and attending the service of the
Parliament in person (without special license of the King) during its
continuance, in dispite of all ignorant cavils to the contrary.

Having thus impregnably evinced the Lords undoubted right to sit and vote in
Parliament, though they be not elective by the peoples voices as Knights and
Burgesses are; I shall next discover unto our illiterate Ignoramusses, who
oppose this their right, the justice and good grounds and reasons of our
Ancestors, why they instituted the Lords and Peers to sit and vote in
Parliament by right of their Nobility and Peerage; which will abundantly
satisfy rational men, and much confirm their right.

wisest and best experienced Commonwealths men, best able to advise and
Council the King and Kingdom in all matters of Government, Peace, or War; as
our Historians, Antiquaries, Politicians and Records, acknowledge and attest;
whence they were anciently styled Mr. Selden^ Titles of honor part 3. chapter 5.
Sir Edward Cooks Epistle to the 9. Report: and ^ Instit. p. 120. 4. Instit. p.
2. Cambdens Brit. p. 177. Spelmanni Council. Tom. 1.
Aeldermen, Wisemen; Magnates, Optimates, Sapientes, Sapientissimi, and
Clarissimi viri: Conspicui Clarique viri, Primates, Nobiles, etc. in our
Historians and Records: and our Parliaments in that respect are frequently
styled in ancient times Consilium SAPIENTVM: upon which Grounds our Kings (and
1. E. 3. n. 36. 55, 56. 45 E. 3. n. 15, 16. 50 E. 3. n. 10. to 14. 1 R. 2. n.
10. to 27 47 50, 51. 112, 113. 17 R. 2. c. 1 2. 13 R. 2. n. 6, 7. 17 R. 2. n.
17 18. 8 H. 4. n. 31. to 92. 11 H. 4. n. 14. 28. 39. 44. 13 H. 4. n. 11.
Commons too, when ever they recommended Counselors of State to the King in
Parliament) made choice of See the Sovereign Power of Parliaments part 1. and
2.
Lords and other Peers for their Privy Counselors) and therefore it was
thought fit, just and equal the King should ever summon them to the Parliament
by his Writ, without any election of the people, Mr. Pryns Truth Triumphing
over falsehood. p. 56. to 70. Stat. de 4 E. 1. c. 2. Lambert Archaion.
for their own inherent wisdom, excellency and worth, the Original cause of
advancing and ennobling them at first, as is expressed in their Patents: and
evident by these Scripture texts. Esth. 1. 13, 14. Isay 59. 11, 12, 13. Jer. 5.
5. c. 10. 7. c. 51. 57. Dan. 2. 48. c. 6. 1, 2, 3. Genesis 41. 39, 40. Psalm. 101.
21, 22. compared together. This ground of calling the Nobles to the Parliament,
is intimated in the very words of the summons: Et ibidem VOBIS CUM Coloquium
habere and tractare de arduis and urgentibus Regni and Ecclesiae Anglicanae
negociis VESTRUM QUE CONSILIUM IMPENSUR: etc. Et hoc nullatenus omittatis;
which implies them to be men of wisdom and experience able to counsel and
advise the King in all his weighty and arduous affairs both of the Kingdom
and Church: I could give many instances wherein the Commons in Parliament have
extraordinarily applauded the Lords and Peers for their great wisdom, and
especially desired their wholesome Counsel, as persons of greater wisdom and
experience then themselves: but for brevity sake, I shall cite only two
Records; one of them most suitable to the present deplorable condition of our
State, and worthy imitation: In the Parliament of 21 Edw. 3. no. 45. William de
Thorpe in the presence of the King, Prelates, Earls, Barons and Commons
declared, that the Parliament was called for two causes: The first concerning
the Wars which the King had undertaken by the consent of the Lords and Commons
against His Enemies of France. The second, how the Peace of England may be
kept. Whereupon* the King would the Commons should consult together, and that
within four days they should give answer to the King and His Counsel what
they think therein. On the fourth day the Commons declare, THAT THEY ARE NOT
ABLE TO COUNSEL ANY THING TOUCHING THE POINT OF WAR; wherefore they desire in
that behalf to be excused: And that the King will thereof ADVISE WITH HIS
NOBLES AND COUNCIL; and what shall be so amongst them determined they the
Commons will thereto assent, confirm and establish. By which it is evident the
Commons then reputed the Nobles more wise and able to advise the King in
matters of War then themselves, who confessed their inability herein, and
therefore submitted to assent to whatever the Nobles and Council should therein
advise Him. 28 Edw. 3. n. 55. The Commons submit the whole business of the
Treaty of Peace with France, TO THE ORDER OF THE KING, AND OF HIS NOBLES. And
^6 Edw. 3. n. 6. The LORDS only advise the King touching Truce or War with
Scotland. In the first Parliament of 15 Edw. 3. n. 11. the Commons having
delivered in diverse Articles concerning the redress of grievances and public
affairs to the King, prayed, that unto the Wednesday ensuing their Articles
may be committed to certain BISHOPS, BARONS, AND OTHER WISE MEN there named, BY
THEM TO BE AMENDED: which the King granted: whereas the Lords exhibited their
Articles (...) to the King, and the Bishops their Articles apart in this
Parliament, and protested that they ought not to answer but in open Parliament
BY AND WITH THEIR PEERS; without joining with the Commons, number. 6, 7, 18, etc.
26, 27, 35, 37. which course they held in most following Parliaments.

I shall conclude with one President more most suitable to the present
deplorable condition of our State, and worthy imitation.

In the Parliament of 5 Hen. 4. Rot. Parl. number. 9. 10. The Commons having
presented to the King in Parliament diverse grievances, in the ill managing of
His Revenues, the decay of His Castles, Houses, and Parks; the great poverty
and pressures of His Subjects, and danger of the Enemies: thereupon they most
entirely and cordially prayed the King to consider the eminent perils of all
parts of the Realm by reason of the Enemies and Rebels, of which they had news
from day to day, and that as the case then stood, if such mischiefs were not
speedily and graciously remedied and reformed in this Parliament, it might fall
out upon sudden arivall of Enemies, or by some other means this Parliament must
of necessity be departed from by all and dissolved, so as the Lords and Commons
should never re-assemble again to redress the said Mischiefs and others, which
God defend. And therefore that it would please the King considering the HIGH
WISDOMS AND DISCRETIONS OF THE LORDS, and that THEY HAD KNOWLEDGE OF MANY
PERILS AND MATTERS which could not be so clearly known to the King, that he
would now in this present Parliament charge ALL HIS LORDS Spiritual and
Temporal, upon the faith they principally owe to God, and the faith, Homage
and Allegiance which they owe to our Lord the King himself, for the aid and
salvation of themselves, and of all the Realm, that the said Lords WOULD
COUNSEL and show Him their advice and WHOLESOME COUNSEL IN THIS BEHALF SEVERALLY
and ENTIRELY without dissimulation, or adulation, having regard to the great
mischiefs and necessity aforesaid. And thereupon our Lord the King most
graciously, with His own mouth in full Parliament, charged and commanded as
well the Lords, as the said Commons, that they should do their diligence, and
show unto Him their good and wholesome Counsels in this behalf, for the aid of
Him and all His Realm. And after the said Commons in the same Parliament, made
request to the said Lords, that seeing the King had given them such a charge
and command, and that in so high a manner of Record, that they would do their
diligence well and loyally, to persever the same without any courtesy made
between them in any manner, as they would answer before the most High, and
before our Lord the King, and to all the Realm in time to come; and that the
Commons themselves thereupon would do the like on their party. Which if both
Lords and Commons would now cordially and sincerely promise and engage to do,
without self ends or interests, we might see our Church and Kingdom speedily
settled in a peaceable and happy condition. In brief, the Lords in the very Writ
touching Knights and Burgesses, are styled, The Common Council of the
Kingdom, and the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, are called, to inform and
assent to that which they and their King shall Ordain, and 5 Ric. 2. Parl. 2.
n. 3. 6 R. 2. n. 8, 9, 11, 26. and Parl. 2. R. 2. n. 7, 9. they are called the
GREAT COUNCIL OF LORDS by waging of their extraordinary wisdom and abilities.
And therefore most fit to sit, vote, and judge in Parliament.

Secondly, The Lords and great Officers of the Realm, as such were ever
reputed persons of greatest Valor, Courage, Power, (in regard of their great
interests, Estates, allies, and retainers) and so best able to withstand, and
redress all public grievances, and enchroachments, of the King upon their
own and the peoples Liberties, in defense whereof they have in ancient times
been always most ready and active to spend not only their estates, but blood
and lives for, wherewith they have redeemed and preserved those Liberties and
Freedoms we now enjoy and contend for. And in this regard our ancesters in
point of wisdom, policy and right, thought meet, that they should always be
sommoned to, and bear chief sway in our Parliaments, in respect of their
Peerage, Power and Nobility only without the peoples election. This reason of
their sitting in Parliament, we find expressly recorded in Bracton, l. 2. c. 16.
fol. 34. and in Fleta, l. 1. c. 17. The King (say they) has a Superior,
namely, God; also the Law, by which He is made a King; likewise His Count, to
wit, THE EARLS and BARONS, because they are called Counts as being the KINGS
FELLOWS, and he who has a Fellow, has A MASTER. And therefore if the King
shall be without a bridle, that is, without a Law; debent ei fraenum imponere,
THEY OUGHT TO IMPOSE A BRIDLE ON HIM, etc. which the Commons being persons of
less power and interest were unable to do. Andrew Horn in his Mirror of
Justice, chapter 1.. 2, 3. renders the like reason. In all the contest and Wars
between K. John, Hen. 3. Edw. 2. and Rich. 2. concerning Magna Charta, and the
Liberties of the Subjects, the Lords and Barons were the Ringleaders and chief
Opposers of these Kings Usurpations and Encroachments on the people, as all our
See Mat. Paris, Matthew Westminster, Walsingham, Huntingdon, Holings head,
Polythronicon, Coxton, Grims^on, Stow, Speed, Trussell, Baker, Martin, Daniel,
How, and the Sovereign Power of Parliaments and Kingdoms, part. 1, 2. and 3.
10 R. 2. c. 1, 2. 11 R. 2. c. 1. to 7. 21 R. 4. c. 7. to 13. ^ H. 4. c. 2. for
proof hereof.
Histories and Records relate; whence they style the Wars in their times, THE
BARONS WARS: and before this, the Nobles were the principal Actors in
resisting the Tyranny of K. Sigebert, and K. Bernard, and disthroning them for
their misdemeanors, as is clear by Mat. Westminster in his Flores Historiarum,
an. 756. and 758. To give some brief hints to clear this truth.

An. Dom. 1214. In the 16. year of Mat. Paris: Hist. Angl. p. 233. to 282.
Daniel p. 140. to 144. Speed p. 558. to 567.
K. John a Parliament held at Paul's, July 16. the Charter of Liberties granted
to the people by K. Hen. 1. being read and confirmed, THE BARONS swore in the
Archbishops presence, that if need were, they would spend their blood. And
afterward at St. Edmonds Bury, the BARONS swore upon the High Altar, That if
K. John refused to confirm and restore to them those Liberties (the Rights of
the Kingdom) they would make War upon Him, and withdraw themselves from His
allegiance, till he had ratified them all by His Charter under Seal. Which they
accordingly performed. Tota Angliae Nobilitas in unum collecta, all the
NOBILITY OF ENGLAND COLLECTED INTO ONE appeared in this defense of their own
and the peoples Rights and Liberties against the King: whereupon it was
afterward enacted, That there should be 25 BARONS chosen by the LORDS (not
Commons) who should, to their utmost power, cause the Great Charter confirmed
by K. John, to be duly observed; That if either the King or His Justicier
should transgress the same, or offend in any one Article, 4. of the said
BARONS should immediately repair to Him, and require redress of the same
without delay: which if not done within forty days after, that then the said
4. BARONS and the rest should distrain and seize upon the Kings Castles, Lands
and Goods, till amends was made according to their arbitration: Such confidence
and power was then reposed in the BARONS alone.

Hist. Angl. p. 233.
Mat. Paris, speaking of the death of Geoffry Fitz-Peeter, one of the greatest
Peers of that age, writes thus of him, This year ( an. 1214.) Geoffry
Fitz-Peeter Justiciary of all England, a man of great power and authority, TO
THE GREATEST DETRIMENT OF THE KINGDOM, ended his days the 2 day of October. ERAT
autem FIRMISSIMA REGNI COLVMNA, for he was the most firm pillar of the Kingdom,
as being a Nobleman, expert in the Laws, furnished with treasures, rents, and
all sort of goods, and confederated to all the great men of England by blood or
friendship: whence the King without love did fear him above all men, for he
governed the raynes of the Kingdom. Whereupon after his death, England was
become like a ship in a storm without an helm. The beginning of which tempest
was the death of Herbert Archbishop of Canterbury, a magnificent and faithful
man, neither could England breath again after the death of these two. When K.
John heard of Fitz-Peeters death, turning to those who sat about him, He said,
By Gods feet* now am I first King and Lord of England. He had therefore from
thenceforth more free power to break His Oaths and Covenants which He had made
with the said Geoffry for the peoples Liberty and Kingdoms peace. Such Pillars
and Stays are great and stout Peers to a Kingdom, and Curb to tyrannical
Kings; and therefore of mee^ Right ought to have a place and voice in
Parliaments, for the very Kingdoms safety and welfare, without the peoples
election.

In the 43 year of K. Hen. 3. his reign. Mat. Paris p. 952. 953. Speed, p. 636.
Daniel, p. 178.
The Barons of England entered into a solemn Oath of Association upon the
Evangelist, to be faithful and diligent to reform the Kingdom of England,
hitherto by the counsel of wicked persons overmuch disordered, and eff ectually
to expel the Rebels and disturbers of the same; which Oath they made Richard
Earl of Cornwall to take, as well as others. In these Barons wars for the
Subjects Liberties, many hundred Lords and Barons spent both their blood,
lives, and estates: and among others Simon Mulford Earl of Leicester, the
greatest Pillar of the Barons, slain in the batail of Eusham; of who^ In his
Continuation of Mat. Paris, p. 968. and Daniel, p. 178.
R^shing ^r thus writes, Thus this magnificent Earl Simon ended his days, who
not only bestowed his estate but his person and life also, for relief of
oppression of the poor, for the asserting of Justice and the Right of the Realm.

In the 3, 4, 14, and 15. of K. Edw. 2. his reign, the Barons were the chief
Sticklers against Gaveston, and the Spencers, who seduced the King, and
oppressed the people: and principal Pillars of our Laws and Liberties, as our
Walsingham, Holingshed, Daniel, Speed, Stow, Grafton, Fabian, Baker.
Historians relate at large, and procured th^se ill Counselors to be removed
from the King even by force of Arms.

In 10, 11, and 22. of K. Rich. 2. the Lords were the principal opposers of
the Kings ill Counselors, and Tyranny and protectors of the Laws and peoples
Liberties, to the loss of some of their lives, h^ads and estates, as our
Statutes and Rolls of Parliament in those years, and Walsingham, Trussle,
Fabian, Holingshed, Grafton, Speed, Stow.
Historians witness: whence Walsingham writing of the Duke of Gloucester's
death, murdered by the Kings command at Calice, who was the principal
Anti-royalist and head of all the Barons, uses this expression, Thus died this
^^st of men, the Son (and Earl) of a King, in quo posita fuere spes and
solatium TOTIVS REGNI COMMVNITATIS, in whom the hope and solace of the
Commonwealth, of the whole Kingdom were placed: who resented his death so
highly, that in the Parl: of 1 H. 4. Hall, who had a hand in his murder, was
condemned and executed for a Traitor, and his Head and Quarters hung up in
several places, and K. Richard among other Articles deposed, for causing him
to be murdered.

Since then our Pe^trs and Nobles have been always persons of greatest valor,
power, estate, interest, most able and forwards to preserve the Laws and
peoples Liberties, which they have upon all occasions defended with the hazard
and loss of their Lives, Liberties, and Estates, and upon this ground were
thought meet by the wisdom of our Ancestors, to enjoy this privilege of
sitting, voting and judging in Parliament by virtue of their Peerage and
Baronnies: And since we must all acknowledge, that the Lords were the chief
instruments of calling this present Parliament, and were therefore in the Act
for Trienniall Parliaments, principally entrusted to summon and hold all future
Parliaments in the Kings, and Lord Chancellours, or Lord Keepers defaul^^: and
were very active in suppressing the Star Chamber, High Commission,
Councel-Table, Prelates, and other grievances, and those who first appeared in
the Wars against the King and his party, to the great encouragement of others,
(witness the deceased Lord General Essex, Brook, Bedford, Stamford, Will^ngh
by, Lincoln, (...), Manchester, Roberts, and others) it would be the extremity
of folly, ingratitude and injustice to deny our Peers this Privilege and
Honor now, which their Ancestors have purchased at so dear a rate; and a
means to dis-ingage them for ever from the Commons, and Republike, for such an
high dishonor and affront.

See Master S^ld^us Titles of Honor, Part 2 chap. 5. and Coke 4. instit. p. 1.
Nobles are persons of greater Estates Families and Fortunes then others, and
have more to keep and lose then other ordinary Commoners; and therefore have
greater interest in the Commonwealth and State-affaires then they. And
therefore our Ancestors thought it meet and just that they should have this
privilege among others above ordinary Commoners, to be present in all our
Parliaments, by Writ only, and that of right ex debit^ justitiae; and not by
election, as Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses are, being persons of meaner
estate and quality; and present in Parliament only in the right of others who
elect them, not in their own right, as the Lords are, whose estates anciently
were far more worth then many whole Burroughes put together; and their
families, retainers and followers far more in number. And so their engagements
to maintain the Laws, Liberties and Properties of the Subject, greater then
inferior men's.

to be Coke 4. Inst. p. 3.
constant, stout, inflexible, and not to be bowed or turned from the right and
public good, by fear, favor, promises, rewards. Now Peers of noble birth
and education, and more generous heroic spirits then the vulgar sort of men,
are not so apt to be overawed with regal threats, terrified with menaces,
tempted with honors, preferments, and wealth, (which they already enjoy in a
higher proportion then others) nor seduced with rewards and private ends from
the common good and interest, wherein their honor, wealth and safety are
imbarqued; as ordinary Commoners, and men of meaner rank and fortunes, as
experience of former Ages, and this present manifests. Therefore it was thought
just and reasonable by our Ancestors, these Nobles in this regard should sit in
Parliament in their own rights, * Modus tenendi Parliam Vowel. Coke 4 Inst. c.
1.
without the peoples election; and to leave the people to elect such other
persons to represent and vote for them in Parliament in whom they most confided.

Fifthly, our Peers in Parliament 12 R. 2. c. 1^. 23 H. 6. c. 11. 9 H. 6. c.
16. 31 H. 8. c. 11. 50 E. 3. n. 209. 1 R. 2. n. ^ 37.
(though they serve for the common good of the whole Kingdom, which have
always trusted in them, in matters of counsel, Judicature, and making Laws)
yet they represent up persons but themselves only, and bear their own
expenses: Wherefore there is no shadow of reason why the people should elect
them, since they do not represent them, nor pay them wages, as they do to
their Knights, Citiz^ns and Burgesses, who serve for, and represent them, and
therefore ought in reason, right and justice to be elected by them. And
therefore they may as well argue. That our Nobles ought to be elected by the
people to their Lands and Estates, which descend unto them from their
Ancestors, not from the common people, as to sit in Parl^ament by the peoples
election, only to represent themselves in their own right, not the people in
theirs. And that the Knights of the Shire ought to be elected to their dignity
of Knighthood (which the King only confers on them) and to their Lands and
Freeholds, which they enjoy in their own right, because they are elected by
the Freeholders to sit in Parliament in their right who elected them, not
their own alone, which Barons do not.

By all which premises it is most apparent, That our Lords and Barons sitting
and voting in Parliament, (who if you take them poll by poll, have in all ages
been more able Parliament men, and Statesmen in all respects, then the
Commons, though chosen by the people, who always make choice of the best and
wisest men, as experience manifests) is not only just and lawful in respect
of Right and Title, but originally instituted upon such grounds of Reason and
Policy, as no rational nor understanding man can dislike or contradict, but
must subscribe to as necessary and convenient, and so still to be continued and
supported in this their Right and Honor, to moderate the Excesses and
Encroachments both of King and Commons one upon the other and keep both of them
within their just and ancient bounds, for the Kingdoms peace and safety. The
rather for that the very Act made this Parliament for the preventing of
inconveniences happening through the long intermission of Parliaments, not
only enacts, but requires all the Lords and Barons of this Realm, to meet and
sit in every Parliament, under a penalty, but likewise prescribes an Oath to
the Lord Keeper and Commissioners of the Great Seal under severe penalties to
send forth Writs of Summons to Parliament, to them all, and in his default,
enabled and enjoined the Peers of the Realm, or any twelve or more of them,
to issue forth Writs of Summons to Parliament under the Great Seal of England,
for the electing of Knights, Citizens and Burgesses: which Act will be merely
void and nugatory, if their Votes and Right of sit in Parliament be denied, or
the House of Peers reduced to the House of Commons, which this very Statute
does distinguish.

The Kings and Lords sole right of Judicature in Parliament, without Commons
clearly evidenced.

The Lords Jurisdiction and undoubted Right to sit and Vote in Parl^ament,
being clearly evicted, and und^^^ably manifested by the Premises; I shall next
proceed to make good their Jurisdiction and lawful Right of Judicature, (never
questioned nor disputed till of late) without the Commons concurrence. To avoid
mistakes, and clear all scruples, you must take notice, that there is a
twofold proceeding in Parliament, by way of Judicature and Censure. First by
Bill of Attainder; and therein the King, Lords and Commons must all concur;
because such Judgment is given extrajudicially, only by the Legislative power;
wherein the Commons have of Right, a Vote and consent, as well as the King and
Lords; and in this course of proceedings, the King and Lords alone can do
nothing judicially without the Commons, no more then make an Act of Parliament
without them: Of this kind^ of Judgment and Attainder by Bill, wherein the
King, Lords, and Commons jointly concur, there are sundry presidents, both in
cases, Trespass, Felony, Treason, and the like, in our printed Statutes: 1 H. 4.
c. 6. compared with 9 H. 4. Exilium Hugonis de Spencer. 15 E. 2. 1 E. 3.
prologue and c. 2. 11 R. 2. c. 1, 2, 3. 5, 6, 7. 21 R. 2. c. 10, 11, 12. 9 H.
6. c. 3. 19 H. 6. c. 1. 3^ H. 6. c. 1. 25 H. 8. c. 12. 28 H. ^. c. ^8. 33. H. ^
c. 21. 32 H. 8. c. 25. 2 and 3 E. ^. c. 17, 18. 1 Mar. c. 1. 16. ^^ Eliz. c. 1.
3. 3 Jac. c. 2. to which the Attaindors of the Earl of Strafford by Bill, and
Archbishop of Canterbury this very Parliament may be added: Besides other
presidents in the Sea Plac. Coronae in Parl. 33 E. 1. Rot. 17. 22 John de
Segraves case, Plac. Corenae in Parl. 21 R. 2. n. 1. to 27 31 H. 6. n. 45. 64.
38 H 6. n. 9. to 26.
Parliament Rolls, many of which are cited by Sir Edward Cook, in his 3
Institutes, c. 1. ^. and M. S. John in his Argument as Law, concerning the Bill
of Attainder of High Treason of Thomas Earl of Strafford; printed by Order of
the Commons House, Anno 1641. The like Presidents are extant in the Statutes of
Ireland 28 H. 8. c. 1. for the Attainder of the Earl of Kildare and others, 11
Eliz. c. 1. For the Attainder of Shan^ (...), and others, ^3 Eliz. c. 6* and 7.
For the Attainders of John (...)-Gerald and others. An. 27 Eliz c. 1. For the
attainder of James Eustuce, and others. 28 Eliz. c. 8, 9. For the Attainders of
the E. of Resmond, John Brown, and others. 11 Jac. c. 4. For the Attainder of
the Earl of Tyro^^ and others.

Secondly, there is a formal Judgment given in Parliament in Causes, civil
and criminal, upon Writs, Petitions^ Indictments, informations, or
Impeachments, and that either against or between Peers themselves, or against
or between Commons who are ^^ Peers, in both which the Lords have a proper
Judiciary power without the Commons. That they have such a legal and sole
Judicatory, in the case of Peers, is Cooks Instit. on Magna Charta. c. 14. 29.
and 3 Instit. c. 1, 2. 1 H. 4. 1. Stamf. l. 3. c. 1. 10. E. 4. 6. Bro. Trial,
142. Treason, 33. 29. 13 H. 8. 11.
acknowledged by all; who neither may nor ought by Law, to be cried or judge
for any Treason or criminal cause (unless in cases of 10 E. 4. 6. Coronae,
34. Cook, 2. Instit. p. 49. Trial. Bro. 142.
Appeal at the suit of the subject) but only by the lawful judgment of their
Peers by the express provision of Chapter 14. 29. 20 H. 6. c. 9. 26 H. 8. c. 12. 1
El. c. 1. 5. 5 El. c. 11. and diverse other Statutes: See Ashes Tables.
Co^onae. 84. Challenge, 65. and 8.
Magna Charta with sundry other Statutes, and by the very Common Law. This
right of theirs, in case of Peers is clearly evident by the Judgment given in
against Earl Goodwin in a Parliament under K. Edward the Confessor, before the
Conquest, An. 1052. recited at large in M. Seldens Titles of Honor, Part 2. c.
5. p. 634, 635. in the Trial of Roger Earl of Hereford, in the 8. year of
William the Conqueror, who was sued and found guilty of Treason by his Peers.
Cook. 2. Institut. p. 50. by the Judgment given in the Parliament of
Northampton against Becket, Archbishop of Canterbury, which you may read at
large in Stephanides, and * M. Seldom; by the answer of Will. du Breose to K.
John's Ministers: Paratus sum and ero Domino meo, and sine obsedibus
satisfacere, secundum Judicium Curiae suae and BARONVM, Parium meorum. Which
right of theirs is asserted by Sir E. Cook himself, and proved at large in his
2 Institutes on Magna Charta. c. 14. 29. and in his 3 Institutes, c. 2. where
p. 31. he writes thus. A Peer of the Parl: being indicted of Treason or Felony,
or of misprision, and duly transmitted to the Lords, may be arraigned thereof
in the upper House of Parl. As FREQUENTLY IN PARL: Titles of Honor, Part 2. c.
5. p. 705. 706, 707.
ROLLS IT DOES APPEAR. As Rot. Parl. 21 R. 2 Plac. Cor. nu. 2 to 7. the Earl of
Arundels case. Rot. Parl. 5 H. 4. nu. 11, 12. 13. H. 6. nu. 49. Earl of Dovers
case. 28 H. 6. nu. 19. 50, 51, 52. Duke of Suffolks case. To which might be
added, 7 R. 2. nu. 22, etc. The Bishop of Norwich case, for delivering Gravelin
to the Enemy. Placita Corona in Parl. 21 R. 2. number. 1 to 26. Rot. Parl. 50 E.
3. nu. 27. The Lord Latymers case. 2 H. 6. Rot. Parl. nu. 18. The Impeachments
of the Commons this Parliament against the E. of Strafford, and Archbishop of
Canterbury who were prosecuted by the Commons, not tried only by and before the
Lords as their proper Judges and Peers. See 4 E. 3. nu. 14. 15 E. 3. nu. 6. 8.
44, 45. 51. 17 E. 3. nu. 22. 23 E. 3. nu. 7. to. 17.

The sole question men will be; Whether the House of Peers have any lawful
power of Judicature, in, or ^ver the causes and Persons of the Commoners of
England, in matter civil or criminal, so far as to judge their Causes, or
censure, fine, imprison, or condemn their persons in any case without the
Commons? This the ignorant sottish sectaries, Levellers, seduced by their
blind guides, Lilburne and Overton peremptorily deny, without the least shadow
of truth or reason; the contrary whereof I shall infallibly make good to their
perpetual shame, and refutation.

First our Histories, Law Books and Records agree, that in ancient times, our
Earls, who were called Comites, or Counts from the word County, had the chief
Government and Rule of most of the Counties of this Realmne under the King, and
that they, and the Barons were the proper Judges of the common peoples Causes
in the Tournes, County-Courts, County Barons; even by virtue of their Dignities
and Offices, as our Sheriffs have now; in which Courts they did instruct the
people in the Laws of the Land; and administer Justice to them in all ordinary
and criminal causes. For proof whereof you may peruse at leisure, M. Seldens
Titles of Honor, Part 2. c. 5. Sect. 5. Sir. Edw. Cooks Institutes on Magna
Charta, c. 35. His 4. Institutes, c. 53 Spelmanni Glossarium. Tit. Comites, M.
Lamberts Archaion, Horns Mirror of Justices, c. 1. Sect. 2, 3. If then they
were Judges of the Commons and People in the Country, by reason of their
Honors and Dignities, even in ancientest times, in ordinary Causes; there was
great right and reason too, they should be so, their Judges also in all their
extraordinary causes, as well criminal as civil.

7 R. 2. Parl. 2. n. 19, 20. 17 R. 2. n. 17.
5. c. 1. 32 H. 6. c. 15. and the very purport of the writs for their election
at the very day: and de qualibet Civitare Com. predict. DVOS CIVES, and de
quolibet Burg^, DVOS BVRGENSES, imports) who have better knowledge and skill in
Marchandice, and their several Trades then in matters of Judicature, Law, or
State. Therefore the Right of Judicature was thought meet, even by the Commons
themselves, to be lodged and vested in the House of Peers, who are the (...)
and fittest of the two, rather then in the Commons House, as I shall prove anon.

House of Peers has been ever furnished with the ablest Temporal and
Spiritual persons for their Assistants in judgment and advice, to wit, all the
Judges See Modus tenendi Parliamentum, Vowell, Cowell, Crompton, Sir Thomas
Smith, Coke, and others, 17 E. 3. n. 23. 21 E. 3. n. 7. 7. R. 2. n. 30, 31. 9
R. 2, n. 13. 2 R. 2. part. 2. n. 27. 31 H. 6. n. 26, 27, 28. 28 H. 6. n. 6.
of the Realm, Barons of the Ex^hequer, of the Coyse, the Kings learned
Council, the Masters of the Chancery that are Courtiers or Lawyers, the Master
of the Rolls, the Principal Secretaries of State, and other eminent persons
for parts and learning, and the Procuratores Cleri; all which are called by
Writ to assist, and give their attendance in the upper House of Parliament,
where they have no voices, and are to give their counsel and advice only to the
Lords when they require their assistance. For proof whereof you may consult the
Statutes of 31 H. 8. c. 10 Register 261. Fitz. Not: Bre: 229. a. b. M. Seldens
Titles of Honor, p. 2. c. 5. Sir Edw. Cokes 4. Instit. p. 4, 5, 6, 44, 45, 46.
and the Parl: Rolls and Authorities there cited by them, seconded by our
present experience. Now the House of Peers being thus assisted with the advice
of all the Judges of England, the Kings learned Council, and other ablest to
advise them in all Civil or Ecclesiastical matters: were and are in this
regard thought fittest by our Ancestors, and the Commons themselves in Parl: 1
H. 4. n. 79
who have no such assistants, to have the principal and sole power of
Judicature, in all or most civil or criminal causes between Commoner and
Commoner, that proper for the Parliaments Judicature by way of relief, redress
or censure.

S^e The Preeholders Grand Inquest, p. 2 5.
but when the King is personally or representatively present, sitting upon the
Tribunal, and where the proceedings are CORAM REGE: But the King sits
personally and representatively present in the House of Peers, not in the House
of Commons, where nothing is said to be done Coram Rege. And therefore in the
end of most ancient Parl: Rolls, we find the Title, Placita Corona CORAM DOMINO
REGE IN PARLIAMENTO SVO, etc. Therefore the House of Peers only, not the
Commons, are the true and proper judicatory; whence the King the supreme Judge
sits usually in Person.

Parl: without examination of witnesses upon oath, as in all other Courts of
justice. But the House of Peers alone have power to give, and examine witnesses
upon 7 R. 2. par. 2^ n. 16.
Oath; and the whole House of Commons no such power, but to take Informations
without Oath, which they nor their Committees cannot administer, unless by
Order and Commission from the Lords: Therefore the power of judicature in Parl
is inherent only in the House of Poers, and not in the Commons House.

Law and common Justice, Littleton, sect. 212. Coke, ibid. 4 E. 3, 7. 2 H. 6.
10. 14 H. 4. 8. 2 R. 2. 29. 5 H. 7. 8. Bur. Challeng. 23, 42, 71
that no man be an informer, prosecutor, and judge too of the persons
prosecuted, and informed against, it being against all grounds of justice. But
the Commons in all ancient, and in this present Parl: have been informers and
prosecutors (in nature of a Cokes 4. Instit. p. 24.
Grand Inquest* to which some compare them) summoned from all parts of the
Kingdom to present public grievances and Delinquents to the King and Peers for
their redress) witness their many impeachments, accusations and complaints
sent up and prosecuted by them in 50 E. 3. n. 5. to 37. 21 R. 2. n. 14, 15, 16.
28 H. 6. n. 14, to 52 31 H. 6. n. 45, 64. 38 H. 6. n. 38.
former parl: and this to the Lords not only against Peers, but Commoners, of
which there are hundreds of presidents this very Parl: Therefore the House of
Lords has the proper right of judicatory vested in them, not the Commons; who
are rather informers, prosecutors and Grand Jury men, to inform and impeach,
then Judges to hear, censure, or determine.

Judges in any Court of justice, whiles the cause is judging sit in their 25 E.
3. c. 2. 20 R 2. c. 3. 6 R. 2. c. 5. 14 H. 6. c. 3. ^ R. 2. c. 3. 2 R. 2. c. 10.
Robes, covered on the bench; not stand bare at the bar; swear and examine the
witnesses in the cause, not produce them or manage the evidence, and when the
cause is fully heard, argue and debate the business between themselves and
give the definitive sentence. But in cases that are to be tried and judged in
Parl: the Lords only sit covered and in their Robes upon the Bench, but the
Commons stand bare at the Bar: the Lords only swear and examine the witnesses
and judge of their testimony: the Commons only Coke 4. Instit. p. 24.
produce the witnesses, or press and manage the evidence; and when the
business is fully heard, the Lords only debate the business among themselves
and give the final Sentence and Judgment without the Commons; and that both in
cases of Comoners and Peers. Therefore the Lords, or house of Peers, are sole
Judges in Parl: not the Commons.

And that they are and always have been so de facto (unless by way of Bil of
Attainder or in such extraordinary cases when their concurrence has been
desired) I shall prove by most clear and infallible evidence. To pretermit the
Mr. Seldens Titles of Honor, part. 7. c. 5, p. 632, 633, 705, 706.
judgment of the Earls and Barons in Parl: in the case of Earl Goodwin for the
murder of Alfred in K. Edw. Conf. reign before the Conquest, and the judgment
of the Barons the Lords in Parl: against Tho: Becket Arch-b. of Can. in K. Hen.
2. reign, cited by M. Seldom, of which you may choose the same, with the
punctual authority of Andr. Horn in his Mirror of Justices, c. 1. 2.
forecited.

First, in Pleas of the Crown, and other Common Pleas plainly ^^able in Parl:
as well between Co^moners as Peers; the Pleas have been exhibited, heard, and
judgment given upon them by the King and Lords jointly, or the King alone, by
which the Lords assent, or by the Lords themselves, without the Commons; as is
evident by the Parli: Rolls and Pleas in Parl: in K. Ed. 1. 2. 3. 4. Ric. 2.
Hen. 4. 5. 6. where there are hundreds of instances to confirm it: some of them
printed in Sir Edw. Cokes, 3 Instit: c. 1, 2. and M. St John's Argument in Law
upon the Bill of Attainder against the Earl of Strafford.

18 E. 1. rot. Parl. t. 4 E. 3. n. 13. 21 E. 3. n. 65. 28 E. 3. n. 11, 12. 50
E. 3. n. 48. 1 R. 2. n. 28, 29, 104. 2 R. 2. n. 36, 37, 31, 32, 33. Parl. 2. n.
21, to 27. 3 R. 2. n. 19, 20, 21. 7 R. 2. Parl. 2. n. 23, 24. 8 R. 2. n. 14,
15. 13 R. 2. n. 15, 16. 15 R. 2. 22, 23. 17 R. 2. n. 13, 14, 15, 19. 18 R. 2.
n. 11, 10 16. 21 R. 2. n. 25, 55, to 66. 1 H. 4. n. 91. 2 H. 4 n. 47, 48. 5 H.
4. n. 40. 6 H. 4. n. 31, 61, 62. 3 H. 5. n. 19. 10 H. 6. n. 51.
Writs of Error brought in Parl: by Peers or Co^moners to reverse any erroneous
judgments touching their real or personal Estates, lives, or attainders, The
KING and LORDS ONLY ARE JUDGES, and the proceedings upon such Writs, are ONLY
BEFORE THE LORDS IN THE UPPER House, secundum Legem and co^suetudinem
Parliamenti. So Sr Ed. Coke in direct terms, in his 4. Instit. p. 21, 22, 23.
where he produces diverse presidents of such writs of Error out of the Parl:
Rolls, and present experience manifests as much in all the the writs of Error
brought this Parl: adjudged and determined by the King and Lords alone, without
the privity of interposition of the Commons. A truth so clear that Lilburne
himself in his Argument against the Lords Jurisidiction confesses it, and the
Parl: Rolls quoted in the Margin, with sundry others resolve past all dispute.
If then the Lords be the sole Judges in all writs of Error concerning the
goods, estates, free-holds, inheritances, lives, and attainders of the
Commoners of England, notwithstanding the statute of Magna Charta, c. 29. No
Freeman shall be taken, or imprisoned, or disseised of his Freeholder
Liberties, of Free-customes, nor outlawed, nor exiled, neither will we pass
upon him, nor condemn him, but by THE LAWFUL JUDGMENT OF HIS PEERS, etc. (the
grand and principal objection against their Judicature) then by the self-same
reason they are and may lawfully proceed against them in all other civil or
criminal causes, (especially breaches of there own privileges of which
themselves are the sole and only Judges, the cases of Lilburne and Overton)
properly triable in Parliament.

Co^moners for redress of grievances, the King and Lords are the sole and
proper Tuns and Judges, not the Co^moners, as appears by all the Parl: Rolls in
former times; wherein we find in the beginning of every Parl: some Assistants
of the Lords house appointed by them to be receivers of the Petitions of
England, Ireland, Wales and Scotland; others appointed receivers of the
Petitions of Gascoyne, and other parts beyond the Seas, and the Isles of Jersy
and Gernsey, etc. And some Lords appointed tryers of those Petitions, who had
power given them to call the Ld Chancellor, Treasurer, Steward, Chamberlain,
the Judges, Kings Sergeants and others to their assistance; prescribing also by
what day the Petitions should all be exhibited, and the place where they should
be examined. All particular persons usually presenting all their grievances and
petitions immediately to the King and Lords (without any address to the
Commons by Petitions, as now of late) there being no Petitions of record in the
Parl: Rolls addressed immediately and originally to the Commons, that I can
find. And toward the end of the Parl: Rolls, there is this Title usually. The
Petitions of the Co^moners (containing all Petitions of the Commons house for
redress of public or particular injuries and grievances) presented to the
King in the Lords house, and answered by the King alone, with the consent of
the Prelates Counts and Barons: with which answers the Commons rested satisfied,
whether granted or denied, as ofttimes they were. Of which you may read something
in Sr E. Cokes 4. Instit. p. 16. and more in the Records themselves.

King and Lords were the proper Judges; as is evident by Placita Coronae coram
Domino Rege in Parliamente sue, at the end of each Parliam: Roll; wherein the
King and Lords, or only the King and Lords alone generally gave Judgment of
imprisonment, fine, banishment and death it self, even against Co^moners
themselves without the Commons; the thing now principally controverted and
denied: for proof whereof I shall cite some few punctual presidents and
records, in stead of many which might be insisted on.

In the famous Parl: held at Claredon Mat. Paris p. 6 97. M. Seldens Titles of
Honor, part. 2. c 5 p. 703. 705
under K. Hen. 2. (...). D. 1164. there was a recognition made of all the
ancient Customs of the Realm, which all the Prelates, Abbots, Earls, Barons and
Nobles swore firmly to observe to the King and his Successors, whereof this was
one, That the Arch-b. Bishops, and other Clergy men who held of the King in
Capite by Barony; Sicut caeteri Barons debent interesse JVDCIIS CVRIAE REGIS
CVM BARONIBVS, Petrus Bles^sis, De Instit. Episcopi, Bibl: Patrum; tom. 12.
par. 2. p. 447
quousque perveniatur AD DIMINVTIONEM MEMBRORVM, VEL AD MORTEM: which proves
the power and right of Judicature even in those times and long before, to be
settled in the Barons as well in Parliament, as in the Sheriffs Turn, and that
in case of Commoners as Peers.

In the Parliament of 4. E. 3. number. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. Roger Mortimer, Earl of
March, a Peer, Sir Simon Bereford, Knight, of Council and assistant to the
said Earl John Mautravers Bose de Bayous, and John Deverall, for being guilty
of the death of Edward Earl of Kent, Thomas Gournay, William of Ocle, for
murdering King Edward the second, after his deposition, were attainted and
condemned of High treason, and some of them then in cu^^odie accordingly
executed by Judgment of the Lords and Peers alone; who AS JUDGES OF THE LAW
by the Kings consent gave judgment of death against them; as the Parliament
Rolls more largely relate.

It is true indeed, that after these Judgments given the LORDS the same
Parliament, number. 6. entered this Protestation; See Cook, 2. Instit. p. 50.
That alboit the Lords, and Peers of the Realm, AS JUDGES OF THE PARLIAMENT,
in the presence of the King had taken upon them to give Judgment of such who
were NO PEERS OF THE REALM, that he eafter NO PEERS should be compelled to give
Judgment ON ANY OTHERS WHO WERE NOT THEIR PEERS, according to the Law.

From this Protestation of the Lord (which Lilburne principally insists on) he
and Cook, 2. Instit. p. 50.
some others conolude; that the Peers in Parliament have no right at all to
imprison, fine, judge, or pass sentence of death against any Commoner for any
offense, no, not for breach of their own Privileges) but only the Commons.

To which objection I answer; First, that this is no Act of Parliament, as Sir
Edwards Cook mistakes, but a bare Protestation of the Lords, without Kings or
Common^ assent and that neither the House of Commons nor the Commoners then
attainted of Treason and judged to death by the Lords, ever demurred or
excepted against their Jurisdiction, as Lilburne and Overton do, but
acknowledged and submitted to it. Secondly, That in this very Protestation the
Lords profess and justify their right of BEING JVDGES in Parliament without
admitting or acknowledging any joint or sole right of Judicature with them in
Parliament in the Commons. Thirdly, That this Protestation was merely
voluntary, not in derogation, but preservation of their own Honor and Peerage,
and the Parliaments too; and the substance of it no more, then this; That the
Lords in Parliament should not be constrained against their wills by the Kings
command, and in his presence, to give judgment of death in ordinary cases of
treason or Felony in the high Court of Parliament, against such who were no
Peers, who in such case^ Magn. Chapter c. 29. 25. E. 3. c. 2. 4. 28. E. 3. c. 3.
37. E. 3. c. 8. 42. E. 3. c. 3. Cook 2. Instit. p. 50, 51.
by the Law might, and ought to be tried in the Kings Courts at Westminster,
or before the Justices of Oyer and Terminer by a Jury of their equals; but
only in such cases which could not well be tried elsewhere, and were proper
for their Judgment in Parliament, This is the whole sum and sense of their
protestation. To argue therefore from hence, That they cannot pass sentence,
or judgment against any Commoners in any case proper for their Judicature in
Parliament, because they protested only against being COMPELLED to g^ve
Judgment against such as were no Peers, in cases triable elsewhere, and not
proper for their tribunal (as the Objectors hence conclude) is quite to
mistake their meaning, and to speak rather nonsense, then reason or Law.
Fourthly, This Protestation was made only against the Lords giving sentence in
Felony and Treason, and that in the Kings own presence in Parliament (who
usually pronounced the Judgment himself, with the Lords assent and did not
charge the Lords to pronounce it, as here he did) not against sentencing,
fining and imprisoning any Commoner for railing and Lybelling against their
Persons. Jurisdiction, and proceedings; refusing to answer, and contemning
their Authority to their faces at the Bar; and appealing from their
Judicature in case of breach of Privilege of which themselves alone and no
others are or can be Judges; the case of Lilburne and Overton; whose
commitments are warranted by hundreds of Presidents, in this and former
Parliaments. Therefore for them to apply this Protestation to their cases with
which it has no Analogy, is a manifestation of their injudiciousnesse and
folly rather then a justification of their Libellous Invectives against the
Lords injustice. Lastly, this Protestation did not foreclose the Lords in this
or future Parliaments to give Judgment against Commoners in other cases of
Felony and Treason, even without the Commons: To prove this by some instances.

In the Parliament of 1. H. 4. Placita Coronae, number. 11. to 17. John Hall being
in custody of the Marshall of England, and brought by him before the Lords in
Parliament and there charged by him, by Walter Cl^pton, Lord chief Justice,
by the Kings command, with having a hand in the murder of the Duke of
Gloucester who was smothered to death with a featherbed at Calayes by King
Richard the seconds command, the whole relation whereof he confessed at large,
and put in writing before James Billing ford, Clerk of the Crown, which was
read before the Lords, upon reading whereof, the King and ALL THE TEMPORAL
LORDS IN PARLIAM^NT resolved that the said John Hall by his own confession
deserved to have as hard a death as they could adjudge him to, because the Duke
of Gloucester was so high a Person, and thereupon TOVTE LES SEIGNEIURS TEMPORELZ
per assent du ROY ADJVGGER^N^ all the temporal Lords by assent of the King
AJVDGED that the said Joh. Hall should be drawn from Tower hill unto the
Gallows at Tiburn, and there kenelled; and his bowels laid before him; and
after he should be hanged, beheaded, and quartered, and his head sent to
Calayes where the murder was committed, and his quarters sent to other places
where the King should please; and thereupon command was given to the Marshall
of England to make execution accordingly; and it was so done the same day.

Lo here the Lords in Parliament g^ve judgment against a Commoner in case of a
murder done at Calayes, (and so not triable at the Kings Bench, but in
Parliament) and pass a judgment of High treason on him, for murdering of a
great Peer only.

And which is most remarkable, all the Commons In this very Parliaments of 1 H.
4. nu. 70. Nov 3. made their Protestation, and further remonstrated to the
King, Nota.
Com: LES JVGGEMENTS DV PARLIAMENT APEIRTEIGNENT SOVLEMENT AV ROY ET AS
SEIGNEIVRS, ET NIENT AS COMMVNES: how the judgment of the Parl. appertained
ONLY TO THE KING and TO THE LORDS, and NOT UNTO THE COMMONS; except in case it
should please the King OF HIS SPECIAL GRACE to show unto them the said
JVDGEMENTS: purcase de eux, que null record soit fait in Parliament, encoutreles
ditz Communes quill soit ou serront parties ascunes juggements donez ouadoues
en Apres in Parliament. Whereunto it was answered by the Archbish. of Canterbury
by the Kings command, how the said Commoners are petitioners, and demanders,
and that THE KING and THE LORDS de tont temps ont eves et aueront DE DROIT LES
JVGGEMENT EN PARLIAMENT, en manner come me me les communes ount monstres. HAVE
ALVVAYES HAD AND SHALL HAVE OF RIGHT THE JVDGEMENTS IN PARLIAMENT, in manner as
the Commons themselves have declared, except in making Statutes or in making
Grants and Subsidies, or such things for the common profit of the Realm,
wherein the King will have especially their advice, and assent; and that this
order of proceeding shall be held and kept IN ALL TIMES TO COME.

By which record in Parliament it is apparent, by the House of Commons own
confession, First that the Judgments in Parliament even in cases of Commoners
appertain ONLY TO THE KING and LORDS, in the affirmative. Secondly, that they
appertain NOT TO THE COMMONS in the negative. Thirdly that the King and LORDS
HAVE ALWAYS HAD and ENJOYED THE RIGHT of Judgments in Parliament. Fourthly,
that they should always hold and enjoy this Right, IN ALL TIMES TO COME.
Fifthly that the Commons special advise and assent was and is required by the
King in Parliament, only in making of Statutes, Grants and Subsidies, and such
like things for the common profit of the Realm.

So full and punctual a Parliamentary decision of the present controversy, as
is incapable of any answer or evasion.

In the Parliament Roll of 17. See Cook 3. Instit. c. 2. p. 22.
R. 2. number. 20. 21. John Duke of Gayen and of Lancaster, Steward of England,
and Thomas Duke of Gloucester, Constable of England, the Kings Uncles,
complained to the King, that Thomas Talbot Knight, (a Commoner and no Peer)
with other his adherents, conspired the death of the said Duke in diverse parts
of Cheshire, as the same was confessed and well known, and prayed that the
Parliament might judge of the faul^, (to wit, whether it were treason according
to the clause of the Statute of 25, E. 3. c. 2. It is accorded that if any
other case supposed Treason which is not above specified, does happen before
any Justices, the Justices shall tarry without any going to judgment of the
Treason till the cause be showed and declared before the King and His
Parliament, whether it ought to be judged Treason or Felony) whereupon the KING
and THE LORDS IN THE PARLIAMEN^ (without the Commons though in case of a
Commoner) ADJVDGED THE SAME FACT TO BE OPEN and HIGH TREASON; and thereupon
they award two writs, the one to the Sheriffs of Darby, to take the body of
the said Sir Thomas, retornable in the Kings Bench, in the month of Easter
then next following; and open Proclamation was made in Westminster Hall, upon
the Sheriffs return, and the next coming in of the said Sir Thomas that the
same Thomas SHOULD BE CONVICTED OF TREASON, and incur the loss and pain of
the same; and that all such as should receive him after the same Proclamation,
should incur the same loss and pain. Sir 3. Instit. p. 22.
Edward Cook; relating this Judgment, adds his own opinion at the end: That
this judgment wanting the assent of the Commons was no Declaration, (of
Treason, within the Act of 25. E. ^. because it was not by the King and his
Parliament according to this Act, but by the King and Lords ONLY.

But the record of Parliament, and the Judges and Commons then admitted it to
be good; and process issued out, and judgment was given accordingly: the
parties concerned taking no such exceptions to it. See 21. R. 2. n. 15. 16.
So that this Record is a pregnant evidence. That the King and Lords are the
sole Judges in Parliament, in the case of Commoners, even in declaring and
judging, what is or what is not treason, within the Statute of 25. E. 3.
because the Commons are no Judges in Parliament, and so cannot Judge or declare
(unles in a legislative way by Act of Parliament) what is Treason or Pelony,
but the King and Lords alone.

To put this out of question, I shall cite one notable record more to this
purpose. (a) Cook. 3. Instit. p. 22. etc. 1. p. 10.
In the Parliament of 5. H. 4. 11. 12. on the 8. of February the Earl of
Northumberland came before the King Lords and Commons in Parliament, and by his
Petition to the King acknowledged that he had done against his Laws and
alegiance, and especially for gather of power and giving of Liveries, for which
he put himself upon the Kings grace and prayed pardon; the rather, for that
upon the Kings Letters, he yielded himself, and came to the King at York;
whereas he might have kept himself away. Which Petition by the Kings command
was delivered to the Justices to be examined, and to have their counsel and
advice therein: Whereupon the LORDS made a Protestation que le Juggement
appertient aeux tout soulement THAT THE JUDGMENT APPERTAINED ONLY TO THEM. And
after the said Petition being read and considered before the King and the said
Lords as Peers of Parliament, a queux tells ^uggementz apperteignent DE DROIT.
TO WHOM SUCH JUDGMENT APPERTAINED OF RIGHT, having had by the Kings command,
competent deliberation thereupon: and having also heard and considered as well
the Statute made in the 25. year of King Edward the Kings Grandfather that
now is, concerning the Declaration of treason, as the Statutes of Liveries made
in this Kings reign, ADJUDGED, that that which was done by the said Earl
contained within his Petition, was neither Treason, nor Felony, but Trespass;
for which the said Earl ought to make fine and ransom at the will of the
King. Whereupon the said Earl most humbly thanked our Lord the King, and the
said Lords his Peers of Parliament FOR THEIR RIGHTFUL JUDGMENT, and the
Commoners for their good affectious and diligence used and shown in this
behalf; And the said Earl further prayed the King, that in assurance of these
matters, to remove all jealousies and evil suspicions, that he might be sworn
a new in the presence of the King, the Lords and Commons in Parliament; and the
said Earl took an Oath upon the Crosier of the Archbishop of Canterbury, to
be a faithful and loyal lige to our Lord the King, the Prince his son, and
to the heirs of his body inheritable to the Crown according to the Laws of
England: Whereupon the King out of his grace pardoned him his fine and rausome
for the trespass aforesaid. After which number. 17. the Lords spiritual and
temporal, humbly thanked the King sitting in his royal Throne in the white
Chamber, for his grace and pardon to the said Earl of his fine and ransom:
and likewise the Commons thanked THE LORDS SPIRITUAL and TEMPORAL FOR THE
GOOD and JUST JUDGMENT THEY HAD GIVEN AS PEERS OF PARLIAMENT TO THE SAID EARL.

From this memorable record I shall observe, First that though this Declaration
of this Earls case was made by his Petition in the presence of the King, Lords
and Commons in Parliament according to the Statnte of 25. E. 3. yet the Lords
only by Protestation in presence of the King and Commons, claimed to be THE
SOLE JUDGES OF IT as Peers of Parliament, and belonging to them OF RIGHT.
S^condly, That this claim of theirs in this case was acknowledged and
submitted to both by the King and Commons: and thereupon the Lords only, after
serious consideration of the case and Statutes, whereon it depended gave the
definitive sentence and judgment in this case, that it was neither Treason nor
Felony, but Trespass only etc. Thirdly, That the Earl thanked the King, only
for his grace, the Lords FOR THEIR JUST JUDGMENT and the Commons only for
their good hearts and diligence, having no share in the judgment though given
by the Lords both in the Kings and their presence; and that the Commons
themselves returned special thanks to the Lords spiritual and temporal on
Parliament for their good and just judgment. Fourthly, That this judgment of
the Lords only, was final and conclusive, both to the King and Commons, who
aquiesced in it.

All that can be objected to evade this President, Object.
is that this Judgment was given in case of a Peer, wherein the Lords only are
the Judges, by Magna Charta, c. 29. but not of a Commoner, which is the
question.

I answer, Answ.
that though this judgment of theirs was in case only of an Earl, who was a
Peer, and triable See Cook 2. Inslit on Ma^na Charta, c. 29.
only by his Peers, yet the King and Lords in this Parliament, the very same
day gave Judgment of High Treason against Henry and Thomw Peircy (one of them
no Peer) and OTHERS who were in their company (who were but Commoners and no
Peers) for levying war against the King, and that without the Commons, as is
evident by the Parliament Roll of 5. H. 4. nu. 15. Et anxy mesme le vendreay
AIVGGES PAR LE ROY ET SEIGNEIURS EN PARLIAMENT, que levier de guerre fait per
les ditz Mounsieur Henry, and Mounsieur Thomas* furont tenuz pur treason: and
ceo si bien de eux mesmes come DE AUTERS qui fueront en lour compaigne, au
temps de dit lever; which quite takes off this Objection. Se^ Mr. Prynnes Doom
of Cowardice and Treachery. p. 2. 3. 4. 5. etc. where these records are cited
at large verbatim.


To put all out of question, I shall instance in some few ancient prefidents
more, which are full and punctual.

In the Parliament of 1. R. 2. number. 38. 39. 40. The Commons prayed, that all
those Captains who had rendered or lost Castles or Towns through default might
be put to answer it in this Parliament, and severely punished according to
their deserts BY AWARD (or Judgment) OF THE LORDS and BARONS, to eschew the
evil examples they had given to other Governors of Towns and Castles.
Whereupon Sir Alexander de Buxton, Constable of the Tower, was commanded to
bring BEFORE THE LORDS IN PARLIAMENT, William de Weston, and Lord of Gomynes,
(both of them Commoners) on Friday the 27. of November, to answer such Articles
as should be surmised against them on the Kings behalf. Being brought BEFORE
THE LORDS in full Parliament, they were severally articled against, at the
command of THE LORDS, by Sir Richard le Scrop, Knight, Steward of the Kings
House, and their several Articles, and answers to them in writing, being read
before THE LORDS; Which done, the Constable was commanded to bring them again
before THE LORDS on Saturday next ensuing, being the 20. of November; on which
day, it was showed unto them severally by the said Steward, by THE LORDS
COMMAND, That THE LORDS OF THE PARLIAMENT (whose names are particularly
mentioned in the Roll) had met together, and considered of their respective
answers, and that IT SEEMED TO THE LORDS AFORESAID, that the said William had
delivered up the Castle of Outherwycke to the Kings enemies without any
duresse* or want of victuals, contrary to his alleagiance, and undertaking
safely to keep it; and therefore THE LORDS ABOVE NAMED SITTING IN FULL
PARLIAMENT ADJVDGE you TO DEATH, and THAT you SHALL BE DRAWN and HANGED. But
because our Lord the King is not informed of the manner of the Judgment the
ex^cution of it shall be respited till the King be thereof in^ormed.

After which Judgeme^t given it was showed to the said John Lord of Gomynes by
the (...) Steward how the said LORDS had assembled and considered of his
answer: and THAT ^^^^^EEMED TO THE LORD sitting in full Parliament, that
without duresse or default of victuals or other necessaries for the defense of
the Town or Castle of Arde, and without the Kings command, he had evilly
delivered and ^urrendred them to the Kings Enemies by his own default against
all appearance of right or reason, against his undertaking safely to keep the
same. Wherefore THE LORDS aforesaid here in full Parliament ADJUDE YOU TO
DEATH. And because you are a Gentleman and a Baronet, and have served the Kings
Grandfather in his Wars, and are no Leige^man of our Lord the King* you shall
be beheaded without having OTHER JUDGMENT. And because that our Lord the King
is not yet informed of the manner of this Judgment, the execution thereof
shall be put in respite, until our Lord the King be informed thereof.

Lo here two express Judgments given in Parliament by the Lords alone,
without King or Commons, in case of Treason, even against Commoners themselves.
And an express acknowledgement of the Commons of the Lords right to award
Judgment in these cases, without the King or them; then which a fuller and
clearer proof cannot be desired.

In the self-same Parliament, 1. R. ^. number. 41 42, 43. Dame Alice Piers was
brought before THE LORDS, and charged by Sir Richard le Scrope, with sundry
misdemeanors which she denied; hereupon diverse Witnesses were examined against
her: Whereupon JVDGEMENT WAS GIVEN BY THE LORDS AGAINST HER, that she should be
banished, and forfeit all her lands, goods, and tenements whatsoever. To this
Judgment, neither King nor Commons were parties, but the Lords only.

To these I might add the cases of See the doom of (...) and treachery. (...)
14 15. where the record is transcribed.
Sir William de Eleuham, Sir Thomas Trivet, Sir Henry de Ferriers, and Sir
William Farnden, Knights; and Robert Fitz Ralph, Esquire; Rot. Parl. 7. R. 2.
number. 24. sentenced and condemned by judgment of the Lords in Parliament,
pronounced by the Chancellor, for selling the Castle of Burbugh, with the
arms and amm^nition in it, to the Kings enemies without the Kings license. 21.
R. 2. Parl. Rot. Plac. Coronae number. 27. where Sir Robert Pleasington is
adjudged a Traitor after his death, by the King, by ^SSENT OF THE LORDS, and
number. 15. 16. Sir Thomas Mortimers case, number. 17. Sir John Cobhams case, 31. H.
6. n. 45. 64. 65. ^. 3. n. 16. to ^8.
and number. 28. Henry Bonoits case, condemned in like manner of treason by the
Lords, with hundreds of Presidents more.

I shall only cite three more at large which are punctual.

In the Parliament of 8. R. 2. n. 12. Walter Sybell of London was arrested and
brought into the Parliament before the Lords, at the suit of Robert de Veer
Earl of Oxford, for slandering him to the Duke of Lancaster, and other Nobles,
for maintenance: Walter denied not but that he said that certain there named,
recovered against him the said Walter, and that by maintenance of the said Earl
as he thought. The Earl there present protested himself to be innocent, and put
himself upon the trial. Walter thereupon was committed to Prison by the Lords,
and the next day he submitted himself, and desired the Lords to be a mean for
him, saying, he could not accuse him: whereupon THE LORDS CONVICTED and FINED
HIM FIVE HUNDRED MARKS TO THE SAID EARL; for the which, and for his fine and
ransom, he was committed to prison BY THE LORDS. A direct case in point.

In the second Parliament in 7. R. 2. number. 13. to 19. John Cavendish a
Fishmonger of London accused Michael de la Pool Knight, Lord Cha^cellour of
England, first before the Commons, and afterward before the Lords, for bribery
and injustice; and that he entere^^ unto a Bond of x. l. to John Ottard, a
Clerk to the said Chancellor, which he was to give for his good success in
the business, in part of payment w^^^eof, he br^ught Herring and Sturgeon to
Ottard and ye was delayed and could have no justice at the Chancellours h^nds,
and upon hearing he cause and examining wi^^ o^fes upon Oath before THE LORDS,
the Chancellor was cleared; The Chancellor thereupon required reparation for
so great a slander: the Lords being then troubled with other weighty matters,
let the Fish-monger to Bail, and referred the matter to be ordered by the
Judges; who upon hearing the whole matter, condemned Cavendish in three
thousand marks for his slanderous complaint against the said Chancellor, and
adjudged him to prison till he had paid the same to the Chancellor, and made
fine and ransom to the King also: which the Lords confirmed.

In the Parliament of 15. R. 2. nu. 21. John Stradwell of Begsteed in the
County of Sussex, was committed to the fleet by JVDGEMENT OF THE LORDS, there
to remain during the Kings pleasure, for that he informed the Parliament, that
the Archbishop of Canterbury had excommunicated him and his neighbors
wrongfully for a temporal cause appertaining to the Crown and Common Law,
which was ADIVDGED BY THE LORDS upon examination and hearing to BE VNTRVE.

These three eminent Presidents (to which many more might be added) of the
Lords fining and imprisoning mere Commons, only for slandering Peers of
Parliament, even by false accusations against them in Parliament by way of
complaint, will ^^stify the Lords proceedings against Lilburn and Ov^rton for
their professed Libells both against their Persons and Jurisdictions too.

To proceed to latter times in Parliaments of 18. and 21. Jacobi, and 3. Car.
not only the Lord Cook 4. Instit. p. 23.
Chancellor Bacon, and the Earl of Middlesex, Lord Treasurer* upon complaint
of the Commons, were censured and judged by the Lords alone, but likewise Sir
Giles Mompesson, Sir John Michell, and Dr Manwering, (all Commoners) JUDICIALLY
SENTENCED and Doctor Pocklinton, and Doctor Bray, even for erroneous Books and
Sermons, were sentenced this Parliament by the Lords alone; since these Master
Clement Walker Esquire was imprisoned in the Tower, and fined by the Lords, for
some words pretended to be spoken against the Lord Say; and within these few
months on^ Morris, and four or five more of his confederates, were censured,
fined and impr^soned, by the Lords alone, for forging an Act of Parliament upon
Sir Adam Littletons complaint, with all the Commons privity or consents; and
above one hundred Commoner: more have been imprisoned by them or fined this
very Session of Parliament for breach of Privilege, contempts or
misdemeanors, by the Lords alone, without the Commons; yet no demurrer nor
exceptions were taken by them or the Commons to their Jurisdiction, who
applauded this their Justice in some of these cases.

From all these clear confessions of the Commons themselves in Parliament, and
punctual presidents in print in former, late Parliaments, and in this now
sitting, it is undeniable, That the King and Lords jointly, and the Lords
severally without the King, have an indubitable right of Judicature, without
the Common^, vested in them, not only of Peers themselves, but likewise of
C^mmoners, in all extraordinary cases of Treason, Felony, Trespass, and other
Misdemeanors* triable only in Parliament, which has been constantly
acknowledged, practiced, and submitted to, without dispute: much more then have
they such a just and rightful power, in case of breach of their own
privileges, of Cook, 4 Instit. p. 15.
which none are, or can be Judges but themselves alone. And to deny them such a
power, is to make the Highest Court of Judicature in the Realm inferior to
the Kings Bench, and all other Courts of Justice* who have power to judge and
try the persons and causes of Commoners, and to commit and fine them for
contempts and breaches of Privileges as our See Brook and Ashes Tables, Tit.
Contempts; Fines pur Contempt and Imprisonment.
Law books resolve, and every man's experience can testify.

The Lords right of Judicature being thus fully evicted against the false and
ignorant pretenses of illiterate Sectaries, altogether unacquainted with our
Histories and Records of Parliament, which they never yet read nor understood,
there remains nothing but to answer some Presidents and Objections.

The Principal president insisted on by Lilburne, Object. 1.
is the Protestation of the Lords, in the case of Cook, 2. Instit. p. 50.
Sir Simon Beresford, 4. E. 3. nu. 6. which I have already fully answered,
retorted, and shall therefore here pretermit.

The second is Sir Edward Cooks Authority, Object. 2.
and the presidents cited by him, in his 4. Institutes, p. 23. 24. of
Judicature in Parliament, where thus he writes; It is to be known, THAT THE
LORDS IN THEIR HOUSE HAVE POWER OF JUDICATURE; And, the Commons in their House
have power of Judicature* and both Houses together have power of Judicature.
But the handling thereof according to the weight and worth of the matter would
require a whole Treatise of it self* and to say the truth, it is best
understood by reading the Judgments and Records of Parliament at large, and
the Journalls of the House of the Lords, and the Book of the Clerk of the
House of Commons, which is a Record, as it is affirmed by Act of Parliament in
An. 6. H. 8. c. 16. To which he adds these marginall Notes Vide Placita in
Parlians Anno 33. E. 1. rot. 33. Nicholas Seagrave adjudg^. Par Praelatos,
COMITES, BARONS ET ALIOS DE CONCILIO. At the Parliament at York, Ap. 12. E.
3. Consideratum est per Praelatos, Comites, BARONS, ET COMMVNITATEM ANGLIAE;
the Lord Audleys care. At the Parliament at Westminster. 15. E. 2 Hugh le pier adjuge
per les SEIGNIEURS, and COMMONS. Rot. Parl. 50. E. 3. n. 34. Lord Nevils case.
Then he a^des. See Rot. Claus. 1 R. 2. n. 5. 8. 38. ^0. A tresage Council le
Roy Les SEIGNIORS, and COMMONS, etc. Rot. Parl. 2. H. 5. nu. 1^. Err^ra sinned,
THAT THE LORDS gave Judgment WIT^OVT PETITION OR AS^^NT OF THE COMMONS, Rot.
Parl. 28. H. 6. nu. 10. and many others in the Reign of King H. 6. and Kin, E.
4. And of later times see diverse notable Judgments, at the prosecution of the
Commons, By THE LORDS, at the Parliaments ^^^den 18. and 21. Iac. Regis,
against Sir Giles Mompesson Sir John Michell, Viscount St. Albon, Lord
Chancellor of England, the Earl of Middlesex, Lord Treasurer of England,
whereby the due proceedings of Judicature in such Caces does appear. Then he
cites the cases of 8. Eliz.
Thomas Long, 23 Eliz.
Arthur Hall, 2. A^^^l, 1. Ma^^^.
and Muncton, censured by the House of Commons only and by them fined and
imprisoned, without the Lords; And concludes thus; If any Lord of Parliament,
spiritual or temporal, have committed any Oppression, Bribery, extortion, or
the like, the HOUSE OF COMMONS, BEING THE GENERAL INQUISITORS OF THE REALM,
(coming out of all parts thereof) may examine the same, and if they find by
the Vote of the House, the charge to be true, then they TRANSMIT THE SAME TO
THE LORDS WITH THE WITNESSES and PROOFS. From which passages of his some
ignorantly have concluded. That the Lords have no power of Judicature without,
but only jointly with the Commons: That all Commoners ought to be judged only
by the Commons, not by the Lords: and That the Commons have a sole power of
Judicature in cases of Commoners; and the Lords no power but jointly with them,
or upon their preceding Petitions and impeachments, neither in case of
Commoners; nor Peers.

I answer, that Sir Edward Cooks words are much mistaken* and rightly
understood warrant no such inferences, but the contrary. For first, he clearly
confesses in direct terms, That the Lords in their House have a power of
judicature, even without the Commons; ha he de^med particularly in whose, and
in what cases out of the Judgments Records and Journals of Parliament at large
(to which he refers the Reader a being best understood by reading them; which
warrant the Lords judging, fining imprisoning and condemning to death not only
of Peers, but of Commoners themselves without the Commons; as I have fully
manifested; their could no such inference have been made. Secondly, ^e adde^,
That the Commons in their House have a power of Judicature. From whence
Lilburne and others infer. That they are and ought to be the sole Judges of
all Commoners, and not the Lords, in all cases triable in Parliament. But this
is a most gross mistake, Sir Edward Cook confining this Judicature of theirs,
only to these three c^ses. First, to matters and abuse concerning elections of
Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, being Members of the Commons House, the
judgment and determination whereof the Commons alone (of late times only) have
usually taken upon them without the Lords, which he proves by Thomas Longs
case, 8. Eliz. and no greater antiquities, of which elections the King and
Lords in former times have been sole Judges: for which I shall cite some
memorable records worthy the Lords and ^^mmons consideration, who now take upon
them to suspend eje^^ and Judge their own Members elections without the Kings
or Lords concurrence or privity, a practice not heard of in former ages and of
late original. In the Parliament holden at Westminster. 5. H. 4. Rot. Parl.
number. 38. Thomas Thorpe his case. Item, because that the writ of summons of
Parliament returned by the Sheriff of Roteland was not sufficiently nor duly
returned as the Commons conceived; the said Commons prayed our Lord THE KING,
and THE LORDS IN PARLIAMENT that this matter might be duly examined in
Parliament, and that in case their shall be default found in this matter that
such a punishment might be inflicted, which might become exemplary to others to
offend again in the like manner: Whereupon our said Lord the King IN FULL
PARLIAMENT, commanded THE LORDS IN PARLIAMENT TO EXAMINE THE SAID MATTER, and
to do therein AS TO THEM SHOULD SEEM BEST IN THEIR DISCRETIONS. And thereupon
the SAID LORDS caused to come BEFORE THEM IN PARLIAMENT, as well the said
Sheriff, as William One by who was returned by the said Sheriff for one of
the Knights of the said County, and Thomas Thorpe, who was elected in full
County to be one of the Knights of the said Shire, for the said Parliament and
not returned by the said Sheriff. And the said parties being duly examined,
and their reasons well considered, in the said Parliament, IT WAS AGREED BY THE
SAID LORDS, that because the said Sheriff had not made a sufficient return of
the said writ THAT HE SHALL AMEND THE SAID RETURN, and THAT HE SHALL RETURN THE
SAID THOMAS FOR ONE OF THE SAID KNIGHTS, as he was elected in the said County
for the Parliament: and moreover that the said Sheriff for this default SHALL
BE DISCHARGED OF HIS OFFICE, and COMMITTED PRISONER TO THE FLEET, and that he
should MAKE FINE and RANSOM AT THE KINGS PLEASURE. Lo here the Lords in
Parliament at the Commons request, and by the Kings command, examining and
giving judgment in case of undue election, even without the Commons. An
attendent on Sir Tho. Brook chosen one of the Knights to serve in Parliament
for the County of Somerset, being grievously beaten by one John Savage, was
upon a petition of the Commons relieved against this breach of Privilege by *
Ordinance or Act of Parliament, 8. H. 4. 23. 14.
made by consent of the King and Lords, which is printed in 5. H. 4. c. 6. And
in like manner Richard Strode Burgess of Plimton was relieved against breaches
of his privileges as a Parliament man, by a special act of Parliament
assented unto by the King and Lords upon the Commons petition, An. 4. H. 8. c.
6. the Commons alone being then unable to relieve them, or punish these
breaches, by their own authority, as of late they presume to do without King
or Lords; Quo Jure (having not the power of Judicature vested in them) I am yet
to learn, being contrary to the practice and presidents of all ancient
Parliaments before our present age; and the Statute of 11. H. 6. c. 11.
provided for this very purpose, which presents another remedy out of
Parliament, and not in only the Commons house.

In the Parliament of 16. R. 2. n. 6. The Wednesday after the Parliament began
Sir Philip Courtenay returned by the Sheriff of Devon for one of the Knights
for that County* came before the King in full Parliament and said, that he
understood how certain people had accused and slandered him to the King and
Lords, as well by Bill as by mouth, of heinous matters; and therefore prayed TO
BE DISCHARGED OF THE SAID EMPLOYMENT, until the said accusations and
complaints were tried, and found true, or not true: and because his said prayer
seemed honest TO THE KING and THE LORDS, THE KING GRANTED HIM HIS REQUEST, and
DISCHARGED HIM IN FULL PARLIAMENT. AND the Monday following, at the instance
and prayer of the COMMONS the KING GRANTED THAT HE SHOULD BE RESTORED and
REMITTED TO HIS PLACE according to the return of the said Sheriff, for to
counsel and do that which belonged unto his office; and after because he had
been good and treatable with those who had complained upon him, and
condescended to a good treaty, he was restored in full Parliament to his good
same. The charge against him is expressed in the same Parliament roll. number. 13.
14. where two Petitions preferred against him to THE KING and LORDS IN
PARLIAMENT, for putting Thomas Peutyngdon forcibly out of possession of the
Manor of Bygelog^ without just cause, and Richard Somestre out of other lands
and detaining them from them, he being so powerful in the County, that no
poor man durst to sue him. Which Petitions were referred by consent in
Parliament to certain Arbitrators to determine.

From which record it is evident, First, that Members of the Commons house may
be complained and petitioned against for misdeameanours, and put to answer
before the King and Lords in Parliament, and there fined and judged (not before
the Commons house) and that this was the ancient way of proceeding. Secondly,
that the Commons cannot suspend or discharge any of their fellow-Commoners or
Knights from sitting in Parliament, but only the King and Lords in full
Parliament, in whom the power of Judicature rests: much less then can they
expel or eject any of their members by their own authority without the Kings
and Lords concurrence and consents. Thirdly, that the power of restoring and
readmitting a suspended Member of the Commons house belongs not to the Commons
themselves, but to the King and Lords, to whom the Commons themselves in this
case addressed themselves by petitinn for Courtneys readmission unto his
office, after his submission of the complaints against him to the arbitriment
of those Members to whom the King and Lords referred the same.

In the Parliament of 17. R. 2. n. 23. It was accorded by the King and Lords at
the request of the Commons, that Roger Swinerton who was endited of the death
of one of their companions, John de Ipstones, Knight of the said Parliament for
the County of Stafford, slain in coming toward the said Parliament by the said
Roger, should not be delivered out of prison wherein he was detained for this
cause, by bail mainprise, or any other manner, until he had made answer
thereunto, and should be delivered by the Law, the Commons alone by their own
power having no authority to make such an order even for the murder of one of
their own Members, without the King and Lords who made this order at their
request.

In the Parliament of 35. Eliz. when Sir Edward Cook was Speaker of the Commons
House, there fell out some questions in the Commons House about the Amendment
of a mistake in the return of the Burgess of Southwark, * 5. R. 2. c. 4 8. H.
4. c. 14. 11. H. 4. c. 16. H. 6 c. 4. 8. H. 6. c. 7. 32. H. 6. c. 15 Ploud.
tol. 11. 8 etc.
and after long debate it was resolved that the House could not amend it, but
the Lord Keeper in Chancery, where the return was of Record, if he thought it
amendable by Law; and that Masten Speaker should wait upon the Lord Keeper
about it, which he did; who advised with the Judges concerning it, as appears
by the Journall. And the Statutes made for redress of abuse of Elections of
Knights and Burgesses were made by the King and Lords upon the Commons
petitions, as appears by 8. H. 4. n 83 1 9. 11. H. 4. n. 54. Neither of all
which statutes gives the House of Commons alone any power of Judicature to
judge the right of Elections, or punish abuses committed in them, but leaves
them to the Lords judicature as at first, and gives the party injured an action
at Law against the Sheriff and ^others for false returns.

Secondly, Sir Edmund Cooks words extend only matters of misdemeanor of any
Members of the House of Commons committed in or against the House it self, of
which the^ now, though not anciently, are the sole judges; without the Lords:
which he proves by Arthur, Halls case. Thirdly to breaches of Privileges of
the Commons House alone, in striking or arresting any of the Members, or their
privileged servants, which he proves by Munctons case, and 11. H. 6. c. 11. 5.
H. 4. c. 6. the two latter proving the contrary.

Yet in this case of breach of privilege even in arresting the Commons Members
and servants, the Commons house were no^ anciently the sole Judges, as now. In
the Parliament of H. 6. n. 25. 26. 27. 28. Thomas Thorp chief Baron was chosen
Speaker of the Parliament, and after his election, and before the Parliament,
(which was proroged) he was arrested and taken in execution at the suit of the
Duke of York: whereupon some of the Commons were sent up by the House to the
King, and Lords spiritual and temporal sitting in Parliament, desiring that
they might enjoy all their ancient and accustomed Privileges in being free
from arrests, and propounded the case of Thomas Thorp th^^r Speaker to them,
desiring his enlargement, whereupon the said Lords spiritual and temporal,
not intending to hurt or impeach the privilege of the Commons but equally
after the Courts of law to administer Justice, and to have knowledge what the
Law will weigh in that behalf, declared to the Justices, the premises, and
asked of them, whether the said Thomas ought to be delivered from prison by
force and virtue of the said privilege of Parliament or not? To the which
question the chief Justices in the name of all the Justices aforesaid
communication and mature deliberation had among them, answered and said, that
they ought not to answer to that question, for it has not been used aforetime
that the Justices should in any wise determine the privilege of this high
Court of Parliam. for it is so high and mighty in his nature that it may make
that law which is not and that that is law, it may make no law, and the
determination and knowledge of that privilege belongs to the Lords of the
Parliament, and not to the Justices; but as for declaration of proceedings in
the lower Courts in such cases as writs of Supersedeas of Privilege of
Parliament be brought and delivered, the said chief Justice said, that there be
many and diverse Supersedeas of privileges of Parliament brought into the
Courts, but there is no general Supersedeas ^rought to sur^e^se all Processes,
for if there should be, it should seem that this High Court of Parliament, that
ministers all Justice and equitity should let the process of the common
Laws, and so it should put the party plainant without remedy, for so much as
Upon this ground 1. R. 2. n. 20. 87. 114. 2. R. 2. n. 8. 49. 5. R. 2. n. 44. 13
R. 2. n. 10. 30. 33. 15. R. 2. n. 9. 17. R. 2. n. 10 We find the Commons and
Parliament very zealous to maintain the Common Law; and referring causes and
petitions to it when proper for it, and unproper for the Parliament.
actions at Common Law be not determined in this High Court of Parliament. And
if any Person that is a Member of this High Court of Parliament, be arrested in
such cases as be not for Treason or Felony or surety of the Peace, or for
condemnation before the Parliament, it is used that all such persons should be
released of all such arrests, and make an Attorney, so that they may have the
freedom and Liberty freely to attend upon the Parliament. After which answer
and Declaration it was thoroughly agreed, assentted and concluded by the Lords
spiritual and temporal, that the said Thomas, according to the law, should
remain still in Prison for the causes abovesaid, the privilege of the
Parliament, or that the same Sir Thomas was Speaker of the Parliament,
notwithstanding, And that the premises should be opened and declared to them
that were com^^ for the Commons of this land, and they should be charged and
commanded in the Kings name that they with all goodly have and speed proceed to
the election of another Speaker. The which premises, for as much as they were
matters of Law, by the commandments of the Lords, were opened and declared to
the Commons, by the mouth of Walter M^yle one of the Kings Sergeants at Law, in
the presence of the Bishop of Ely, accompanied with other Lords in notable
number: and there it was commanded and charged to the said Commons by the said
Bishop of Ely in the Kings name, that they should proceed to the election of
another Speaker with all goodly have and speed, so that the matters for which
the King called this his Parliament might be proceeded in: and this Parliament
took good and effectual conclusion and end. VVhereupon the Commons accordingly
elected Thomas Charlton Knight, for their Speaker the next day, and acquainted
the Lords therewith, and desired the Kings approbation of their choice, which
was accorded unto by the King.

In the Parliament of 39. H. 6. n. 9. Walter Clerk, one of the Burgesses of
Parliament for Chippenham, was arrested and imprisoned in the Fleet for diverse
debts to the King and others, upon a Capias U^lagat^m; whereupon the Commons
complained thereof to the King and Lords, and desired his release, and tendered
them an Act of Parliament ready drawn for that purpose to which Petition and
Bi^^ of theirs, the King by the ASSENT OF THE LORDS SPIRITUAL and TEMPORAL
assented; And thereupon he was freed. In like manner, Richard Chedder.

In the Parliament of 35. Eliz. Thomas Fitz-Herbert of Staffordshire was
elected a Burgess of Parliament, and two hours after, before the Indenture
returned, the Sheriff took him in upon a Capi^^ Utlagatum; Whereupon he
petitioned the House, that he might have a Writ of Privilege and be enlarged.
After many days debate and Argument of this case in the House by sundry
Lawyers, and Sir Edward Cook, then Speaker, it was agreed; That no Writ of
Privilege could in this case be returned into the House of Commons, being but
a Member of Parliament, and no Court of Record, but only into the Chancery or
House of Peers; And that this being a point of Law it was meet the Judges
should be advised with, and determine it, not the House: And at last he was
outed of his Privilege by the Houses resolution. In 28. H. 8. Dyer 60. The
case of Trewinnerd a Commoner, in point of Privilege of Parliament concerning
an arrest, was argued and debated before the Judges in the Kings Bench: And so
was Chedders case in 8. H. 4. 12. 13. So as the Commons only are not the sole
Judges of such Privilege (as many now concerve) but the House of Peers, and
Kings Council, and Judges as well as they. In these three cases only, and no
other that I find, Sir Edward Cook admits the Commons to be sole Judges now
(though not anciently) without the Lords. Therefore to extend it generally to
all, or any other cases of Commoners, but these is to pervert his words, and
extend them far beyond his meaning. Now Lilburnes and Overtons Cases are none
of these, but directly under the Lords sole Judicature, because infringements
of their Privileges, of which the Lords only are the Judges, as the Commons
pretend they are of their Privileges; as his following passages manifest.
Thirdly* he adds; that both Houses together have power of Indicature, but
determines not in what cases, nor in what way of Judicature, which has caused
the Object^rs mistake. But the Judgments, Records and Iournals of Parliament
to which he refers, and the cases he cites in the Margin, will affoyle this
doubt, and clear his meaning, which is this.

First, That in attainders and judgments of High Treason, Felony, or other
Misdemeaners in Parliament, where the proceedings are not by way of trial and
ordinary Judicature, but by See 31. H 6. n. 45. 64. 38. H. 6. n. 9. to 36.
Bill or Act of Parliament, there both Houses together (and the King too
jointly with them) have the power of Judicature: and this is all which is
proved by 15. E. 2. Hugh Spencers case, who was judged and banished by an Act
of Parliament, entitled Exilium Hugonis le Spencer (printed in old Magna
Chartaes) as Sir Edward Cook himself reports in Calvin's case, 7. Report, f.
11. b. and the Lord Audlyes case, 12. E. 2. is the same: the Commons having no
right to judge them being Peers by the very See Cook 2. Instit. f. 49. 50. 51.
Statute of Magna Charta, c. 29. but only the Peer, except in a Legislative
way, by Act or Bill.

Cook, 3. I^q^. p 7. where is Case of ^^grave is cited at large.
Sir Nicholas de Seagraves case proves 31. E. 1. rot. 33. Who being charged in
Parliament in presence of the King, Earls, Barons and OTHERS OF THE KINGS
COUNCIL, (not the Commons or Burgesses, but the Judges, and Kings learned
Council at Law See the Freeholders Grand Inquest. 2. 39. 40. 41. 42.
and Privy Council, who were assistants to the Lords, as I conceive, and
others of his Privy Council, which Sir Edward Cook would have to express the
Commons in Parliament) then and there present; that the King in the wars of
Scotland, being among his enemies, Nicholas Seagrave, his leigman, who held of
the King by Homage and fealty, and served him for his aid in that war, did
maliciously move discord and contention without cause with John de Crombewell,
charging him with many enormous crimes, and offered to prove it upon his body.
To whom the said John answered, that he would answer him in the Kings Court,
etc. and thereupon gave him his faith. After which Nicholas withdrew himself
from the Kings host and aid, leaving the King in danger of his enemies and
adjourned the said John to defend himself in the Court of the King of France,
and prefixed him a certain day: and so as much as in him was, subjected, and
submitted the Dominion of the King and Kingdom, to the subjection of the King
of France: and to effect this he took his journey toward Dover to pass over
into France. All which he confessed and submitted himself therein de alto et
basso to the Kings pleasure. And hereupon the King willing HABERE AVISAMENIUM
to have the advice of the EARLS, BARONS, LORDS ( magnatum) and OTHERS OF HIS
COUNCIL enjoined them upon the Homage, fealty and allegiance wherewith they
were obliged to him, quod ipsi fideliter CONSVLERENT, they should faithfully
ADVISE HIM, what punishment should be inflicted for such a fact thus confessed:
Qui omnes, habito super hoc diligenti tractatu, and avisamento, etc. Who all
having had thereupon diligent debate and advise, having considered and
understood all things contained in the said fact, DICVNT (not by way of
Judgment judicially pronounced but of answer to the Kings question propounded,
and as their opinion of the cause) Said, that this fact DESERVES loss of life
and members, etc. So as this offense (notes Sir Edward Cook) was then adjudged
in Parliament to be High Treason. But under his favor, First, here was no
Judgment at all given against the party himself, but only an opinion and
advise touching his case (not pending judicially in Parliament by way of
Indictment or Impeachment, but voluntarily proposed by the King) in answer to
the Kings question; and so it can be no proof of any actual proper Judicature
vested in both Houses. Secondly, For ought appears, this question was only
propounded to the Earls, Lords, Barons, and the Kings Council that assisted
them; and so only to the House of Peers, not to the commons: and answered,
resolved only by them; See the Freeholders grand Inquest. p. 39. 40. 41. 42.
aliorum de Concilio suo; not expressing nor including the Commons, as I
apprehend, being never so entitled in any Parliament Records for ought I can
find. And then it follows, that the LORDS ONLY IN THAT AGE were the Judges
even of Commoners cases. Thirdly, Admit the Commons were included yet it proves
only a right of advising and delivering their opinions with the Lords, when
required by the King, not of judging or pronouncing sentence. Fourthly, Sir
Edward Cook citing this president, to prove That both Houses together have
power of Judicature; must grant that even in 33. E. 1. there were two distinct
Houses of Parliament, who upon special occasions (as now at conferences, etc.)
met and advised together; and therefore the division of the Houses was before
Edward the third his reign, and very probable as ancient as this summoning of
Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the Parliament, which some make no
ancienter then King Henry the first, or King Henry the third, In the 40. year
of his reign, Father to King Edward the first. So as this president makes
quite against the Levellers and Lilburnians designs, The Freeholders Garnd
Inquest. p. 13. 14. 15.
and opinions.

Fourthly, Sir John at Lees case 42. E. 3. number. 20. (said to be adjudged by the
Lords and Commons) is somewhat mistaken. For the record only mentions, That the
21 day of May, the King gave thanks to the Lords and Commons for their coming
and aid granted; on which day ALL THE LORDS and SUNDRY OF THE COMMONS dined
with the ^ing. After which dinner Sir John at Lee, was brought before the King,
LORDS and COMMONS next aforesaid ( who dined with the King) to answer certain
objections made against him by William Latymer, about the wardship of Robert
Latymer, that Sir John being of power had sent for him to London, where by
duresse of imprisonment he enforced the said William to surrender his estate
unto him; which done, some other Articles were ob^ected against the said Sir
John, Of which for that he could not sufficiently purge himself, HE was
committed to the Tower of London, there to remain till he had made fine and
ransom at the Kings pleasure, and command given to the Constable of the Tower
to keep him accordingly. And then the said Lords and Commons departed: After
which he was brought before the Kings Council at Westminster, which COUNCIL
ORDERED the said ward to be released into the Kings hands: So as this record
proves not this judgment was given in the Parliament house, nor that the Lords
and Commons adjudged Sir John, but rather the King and his Council in the
presence of the Lords and Commons.

Fifthly, The judgment given against the Lord Latymer 15. E. 3. Parl. rot.
number. 27. (which was for his default in government against the profit of the
King and Realm, procuring of grants to the destruction of the Staple and Town
of Calayes, and levying Impositions upon woolls) was given in full Parliament
BY THE BISHOPS and LORDS who awarded him to the custody of the Marshall, and to
make fine and ransom at the Kings pleasure: Whereupon the Commons REQUIRED (by
way of petition) that he might lose all his Offices, and no longer be of the
Kings Council, which the King granted. The Commons not joining at all with the
Lords in his judgment, neither could they so join, he being a Peer.

And for the Lord Nevill in that Parliament: number. 33. he was only accused, not
judged by the Commons.

Sixthly, The case of 2. H. 5. rot. Parl. number. 15. that Error is there assigned
that the Lords gave judgment without Petition or assent of the Commons, is a
gross mistake: For the record only recites, That Thomas Mountague Earl of
Salisbury, Son and Heir of John Mountague Earl of Salisbury, exhibited his
petition in Parliament to reverse a judgment given against his said father in
the Parliament at Westminster in the second year of King Henry the fourth.
Whereupon he exhibited certain reversals of Judgments given in Parliament, as
making on his behalf, to the Lords consideration, reversed for some errors
assigned in those jadgements; to wit one judgment given against Thomas
heretofore Earl of Lancaster, before King Edward the second at Pomfract, the
monday before the feast of the Annuntiation, in the fifteenth year of his
reign; and another Judgment against Roger de Mortymer, late Earl of March,
in the Parliament of King Edward the third, the Monday after the Feast of St.
Katherine, in the fourth year of his reign, at Westminster. Which judgments
being distinctly and openly read, and fully understood; Jo seemed TO THE KING
and LORDS that the case of the death and execution of the said John late Earl
of Sarum, and of the judgment aforesaid against him given, is not, nor was
like to the case of the executing of the said Thomas heretofore Earl of
Lancaster, nor to the case of the killing of Roger Earl of March, nor to any
judgment given against the said Thomas and Roger, as aforesaid; but that the
judgment and declaration had and given against the said John late Earl of
Sarum WERE A GOOD JUST and LEGAL DECLARATION and JUDGMENT. Per quod
CONSIDERATUM FUIT in praesenti Parliamento PER PRAEDICTOS DOMINOS tunc ibidem
existentes, DE ASSINSU dicti Domini nostri Regis, quod praefatus nunc COMES
Sarum. NIHIL CAPIAT PER PETITIONEM aut prosecutionem suam praedictam, Et
ulterius TAM DOMINI SPIRITUALES QUAM TEMPORALE supradicti, JUDICIUMET
DECLARATIONEM praedicta versus dictum Ioannem quondam Comitem Sarum, ut
praem^ttitur habita five reddita DE ASSENSU IPSIUS DOMINI REGIS AFFIRMARUNT
FORE ET ESSE BONA, JUSTA ET REGALIA, et ea pro hujusmodi EX ABUNDANTI
DISCREVERUNT, and ADJUDICARUNT TUNC IBIDEM. This is all that is mentioned in
this Parliament Roll concerning this business.

It appears by the Parliament Roll of 2 H. 4. number. 30. That Thomas Holland
Earl of Kent, John Holland Earl of huntingdo^, John Mountagne Earl of Sarum
Thomas Lord de Dispencer and Ralph omely Knight were impeached of high treason,
before the King and Lords in Parliament, for levying actual War against the
King to destroy the King, and his Subjects, and for this taken and beheade and
hereupon ALL ^^E LORDS TEMPORAL BEING IN PARLIAMENT BY ASSENT OF THE KING
DECLARED AND ADJVDGED all the said persons TRAITORS for leavying War against
the King* and that as Traitors they should forfeit all the lands they had in
fee simple the 5 day of Jannary the first year of the reign of the King or
after according to the Law of the Land, with all their goods and chattells,
notwithstanding they were slain upon the said levying of War without
process of Law. So this Record. To reverse this judgment was this Petition of
Thomas Earl o^ Sarisbury in 2. H. 5. exhibited, without the error assigned,
as appears by the Par^iament roll: but if it were, that the Lords only gave
Judgment without Petition or assent of the Commons (as Sir Edward Cook
imagins*) (...) the King and Lords, who upon solemned bate overruled the
error abuses and Petitions, and found this judg^ment and Declaration of 2. H.
4. given by the Lords alone with the Kings assent without the Commons TO BE
GOOD JUST and LEGAL, as they did, ex abund^nti, is a most undeniable proof of
the King and Lords sole right of JVDGEING and DECLARING HIGH TREASON in
Parliament without the Commons, as well in case of Commoners as Lords. Ralph
Lomely being but a Commoner and Knight, though the rest were Peers; and yet all
jointly adjudged Traitors, and declared such only by the King and Lords without
the Commons: and the Judgment assured to be good by the Commons who in the
Parliament of 13. H. 4. number. 19. Petitioned, the John Lomley might be restored
by act of Parliament, and made capable to inherit his fathers lands thus
attainted, to which the King by ASSENT OF THE LORDS SPIRITVALL and TEMPORAL,
consented.

Seventhly, the Parliament Roll of 28. H. 6. number. 18. etc. contains only an
Impeachment of High Treason against the King, and other great misdemeanors
against the Kingdom, and wrongs to particular persons comprised by way of
Articles in two distinct Bills brought up by the Commons, and presented by
William Tresham their Speaker, to the King in the Lords House, the 7. day of
February, against William de la Pole, Duke of Suffolk, to which they desired
the Duke might give in his Answer by a certain day, which he did, absolutely
denying the Treason against the King, and denying and excusing himself of the
rest, without putting himself upon the Trial of his Peers. The Chief
Justice thereupon, the 14. day of March by the Kings command, asked this
Question of the LORDS WHAT ADVISE THEY WOULD GIVE THE KING, what is to do
futrher in this matter; which advise was deferred till Monday then next
following; whereon nothing was done in that matter. On Tuesday the 17. of
March, the King sent for all the Lords Spiritual and Temporal then being in
Town (being 42. in all into his Inner Chamber within his Palace of
Westminster, where when they were all assembled* he then sent for the Duke
thither, who coming into the Kings presence, kneeled down, and continued
kneeling till the Chancellor of England had delivered the Kings command to
him; and demanded of him, what he said to the Commons Articles, not having put
himself upon his Peerage? Whereupon the Duke denied all the Articles touching
the Kings Person and state of the Realm, as false and scandalous. And so not
departing from his said Answers, submitted himself wholly to the Kings Rule
and Governance, without putting himself upon his Peerage. Where thus the
Chancellor told him That as touching the great and horrible things contained
in the first Bill, the King holds him neither declared nor charged. And as
touching the second Bill, containing misprisons which are not criminal, the
King by force of his submission, by his own advise, and not reporting him to
the advice of the Lords, nor by way of judgment, for he is not in place of
judgment, puts you to his rule and governance, that before the first of May
next coming, he should absent himself out of the Kingdom of England, and
all other his Dominions, in France or elsewhere, for five years space; and
that he, nor no man for him, should show or wait any malice, nor hate, to any
person of what degree soever of the Commons in the Parliament, in no manner of
wise, for any thing done to him in this Parliament or elsewhere. And forthwith
Viscount Peamont in behalf of the said LORDS both Spiritual and Temporal,
and BY THEIR ADVICE, ASSENT AND DESIRE, said and declared to the Kings
Highness, that this that so was decreed and done by his Excellency,
concerning the person of the said Duke PROCEEDED NOT BY THEIR ADVICE AND
COVNSELS, but was done by the Kings own demeanor and rule. Wherefore they
besought the King that this their saying MIGHT BE ENACTED IN THE PARLIAMENT
ROLL FOR THEIR MORE DECLARATION HEREAFTER, WITH THIS PROTESTATION, THAT IT
SHOULD NOT BE, NOR TVRNE IN PREJVDICE NOR DEROGATION OF THEM, THEIR HEYRS, NE
OF THEIR SVCCESSOVRS IN TIME COMING, but that they may HAVE AND ENJOY THEIR
LIBERTY, AS THEY OR ANY OF THEIR ANCESTORS, PREDECESSORS HAD AND ENJOYED BEFORE
THIS TIME. This is the sum of this large record, which makes nothing to the
purpose for which it is cited; that it is error when both Houses join not in
judgment. For first, here is nothing but an impeachment only by the Commons
of a Peer, who ought to be tried, judged by his Peerage, not by Commoners
Secondly, there was no judgment given in Parliament in this case, but only a
private Award made by the King, out of the Parliament House in his own Chamber
in presence of the Lords. Thirdly, the Lords entered a special protestation
against it, as not made by their advice or consent. Fourthly, they en^er a
special claim in the Parliament Roll, for the preservation of their Right and
Freedom of Peerage for hereafter, both of being tried and judged only by
their Peers in Parliament; and so an express resolution, that they in
Parliament are and ought to be Judges, not the Commons. The last Records I have
cited at large, lest Sir Edward Cooks brief quotation and mis-recitall of
them should deceive the credulous or ignorant Reader.

Eighthly, the cases of Sir Giles Monpesson, Sir John Michell, Viscount S.
Alban, and the Earl of Middlesex, whom the Commons only impeached; and the
Lords alone (without the Commons votes or presence) judged and sentenced, are
direct proofs that the power of Judicature and Censure as well of impeached
Commoners as Lords, resides only in the Lords House; the Commons being but
general Inquisitors, to search out and present both Lords and Commoners
public offenses to the Lords, to whom they transmit the charge and witnesses;
the Lords the only Judges, to hear and determine the charge, examine the
witnesses upon oath, and pass and record the sentence, and see it executed;
and no more Judges in the Parliament, then the grand enquest are Judges at the
Assizes or Sessions.

The second and principal objection insisted upon by that Ignoramu^, Object. 2.
Lilburne, and his disciples the Levellers, is the Statute of Magna Charta,
chap. 29. That no Free man shall be imprisoned, outlawed, exiled, or any other
way destroyed; Nor we shall not pass upon him, nor condemn him, but BY THE
LAWFVLL IVDGMENT OF HIS PEERS, or BY THE LAW OF THE LAND. Whence thus they
argue: The Lords in Parliament are not Commoners Peers, but the Commons only,
therefore they cannot be judged in Parliament by the Lords, but by the Commons
alone; and if Peers there judge Commoners, it is a tyranny and usurpation even
against Magna Charta it self, though it be in case of privilege.

To take away this grand seeming objection, Answ.
and give it a satisfactory answer, I say: First, in general, that there is
scarce one Parliament ever since Magna Charta was first confirmed, but the
Lords have sentenced and given judgment against some Commoners capitally or
penally in body or purse, or both, without the Commons (and did so doubtless
before Magna Charta was made, as I have already manifested) yet never did the
Commons in any one of those Parliaments till this present, complain of it, as a
violation of Magna Charta, or a tyrannical usurpation, as Lilburne and Overton
style it; but acknowledged it as a just right in the Lords, even in 3. Caroli
it self when the Petition of Right was passed, in the Lords Judgment and
Sentence against Doctor Manwaring a Commoner, impeached by the Commons. And
therefore for this one Ignoramus alone, against the judgments of all the
Commons in Parliament, in all ages, to aver this a breach of Magna Charta,
for imprisoning and fining him for the highest affront and breach of privilege
over offered to any Parliament, is the extremity of ignorance, malice and
singularity.

Secondly, I answer, that the Statute of Magna Charta extends not to, nor was
ever intended of the high Court of Parliaments Judgments and Proceedings, but
only to the proceedings and Judgments in the Kings great Courts of Justice at
Westminster Hall, the Exchequer, his Privy Council, and other inferior Courts
held before Judges, Justices of Assize, and other Officers, as is evident by
comparing this objected Chapter with c. 11, 12, 13, 14, 18. 28, ^0, 3^, 37. by
the Statutes of 25. E. 3. Stat. 5. c. 4. 28. E. 3. c. 3. 37. E. 3. ^. 18. 38.
E. 3. c. 9. 42. E. 3. c. 3. 17. ^2. c. 6. and the Petition of Right it self,
3. Caroli, which so expound it; there being never any complaint against the
Parliament it self or House of Peers in any age, for breach of Magna Charta,
in censuring or imprisoning Commoners till now. Therefore this misapplying of
this Law to the Parliament and House of Peers, is a gross oversight.

Thirdly, the very literal sense of this Law is much mistaken by the
Objectors; For that any Freeman of England is a Peer to another Freeman,
quatenus such a one, within this Law, though of an higher degree in point of
honor, dignity, office, and estate; and this clause (...)
No Freeman shall be imprisoned, and but by the lawful judgment of his Peers,
extends only to exclude villains and those who are not Freeholders from being
Judges of Freemen and Freeholders in trials by Jury, (whence the Writs to the
Sheriffs to summon Jurors, require them always to return Liberos and Legales
homines) not to exclude Lords or Peers (who are Freemen in the higest degree)
to be Judges of Commoners who are Freemen. So as the Argument from the true
meaning of this Law can be but this, villains and those who are no Freemen are
not to be Judges, or impannelled in Iuries to condemn Freemen, because they
are not their Peers, nor Freemen as well as they: Therefore Lords who are
Freemen of the higest degree, may not give judgment against Commoners who are
Freemen, very learned nonsense, we all know that the Lord Chancellor of
England, Lord Keeper, Lord Treasurer, Master of the Court of Wards, and some of
the Judges of the Kings Courts in Westminster Hall in former times, with the
Chief Iustic^ar, and Justices in Air were anciently and of late too (as the
Earl of Holland and others) Peers of the Realm, not Commoners; and that all
the Peers of the Realm are in Commissions of Oyer and Terminer, and of the
Peace, yet did we never hear of any Commoner demurring or pleading thus to
any of their Jurisdictions in Chancery, Kings Be^ch, the Exchequer Chamber,
Eyres, Assizes or Sessions; Sir, I am a Commoner, and you are a Peer of the
Realm, but no Commoner as I am; besides, you sit here only in the Kings
right, doing all in his name, and representing his person, who is not any Peer,
but Sovereign. Therefore you ought not to judge my cause not condemn my
person nor give any sentence for or against me, it being contrary to Magna
Charta, which enacts, That no freeman should be judged or pressed upon or
condemned, but by the lawful judgment of his Peers. Certainly no person was
ever yet so mad or sottish, to make such a Plea before Ignoramus Lilburne; And
if Lords and Peers may judge the persons and causes of Commoners in the
Cancery, Kings Bench, Exchequer, Court of Wards, Air, and at Assizes and
S^ssions, without any violation of this clause in Magna Charta; much more may
the House of Peers in Parliament do it, who are certainly Peers to Commoners,
though Commoners be not Peers to them, within the meaning of Magna Charta, chapter
29.

Forthly, If the Lords in Parliament cannot meddle with or give judgment in
Commoners cause, without breach of this clause in Magna Charta, then why did
See his Innocence and truth justified.
Lilburne himself sue and petition to the Lords as the only competent Judges
to reverse his sentence in Star Chamber, and give him damages, because it was
against this very Chapter of Magna Charta: If Lords cannot give judgment in
the case of Commoners as now he holds without express violation of this Law;
then h^mselfe in petitioning the Lords to relieve him against the Star
Chamber Sentence, because contrary to this very Law and Chapter of Magna
Charta, was as great a violation of it as his Starr-Chamber censure, and his
sentence in Star Chamber remains still unreversed, because the Lords
examining and reversing of it, they being no Commoners as he is, but Peers,
was Coram non judice, and merely void, by the Statute of 25. E. 3. St^t. 5. ^.
4. because contrary to Magna Charta it self, as he now expounds it. Let him
therefore unriddle and assoyle thi^ his own Dilemma, or for ever hold his
tongue and pen, from publishing such absurdities to seduce poor people, as he
has done; and exa^perate them to clamor against the Lords, for being more
favorable in their censure of him, then his transcendent Libels and contempts
against them deserved.

Fifthly, This Statute is in the dis-junctive, by the Lawful of his Peers, OR
BY THE LAW OF THE LAND, which this Ignoramus observes not. (...)
Now by the^ Law of the Land, every Inferior Court of justice may fine and
imprison men for contempts and misdemeanors against them and their authority:
therefore the Lords in Parliament being the highest and supreamed Tribunal,
may much more do it, and have ever done it, even by this expr^^^e clause of
Magna Charta; the Law and Custom of Parliament, as well as they may give (...)
judgments in writs of Error againster for Commons, without the Commons
consent, as himself ^oth grant.

Fifthly, It is granted by Lilburne, that by this express Law, ^o f^eeman of
England ought to be judged or censured but only by his Peers, and that
Commoners are no Peers to Nobl^men, nor Noblemen Peer^ to Commoners; Then by
what Law of reason dared he to publish to the world, (...)
That the House of Commons are the Su^reme Power within this Realm and THAT BY
RIGHT THEY ARE THE LORDS JVDGES, certainly this is a Note beyond Ela, a direct
contradiction to Magna Charta in this very clause wherein he places his
strength, and subverts his very ground work against the Lords jurisdiction in
their censure of him. For if the House of Commons be by right the Lords ^udges,
then by Magna Charta, c. 29. they are and ought to be their Peers; and if the
Commons be the Lords Peers, then the Lords must be the Commons Peers too; and
if so, then they may lawfully be his judges even by Magna Charta, because here
he grants them to be no other then his Peers; Lo the head of this great
Goliath of the Philistin Levellers, cut off with his own sword; and Magna
Charta for ever vindicated from his ignorant and ^^ttish contradictory Glosses
on it; and to convict him of his Error in affirming the House of Commons to
be by right the Lords judges. I might inform him* that Magna Charta it self
^. 1. and 20 and Sir Edward Cook, (his chief Author) in his commentary on
them are express against him, that in the Parliament of 15. c. 3. chapter 2. in
print, it was enacted. That whereas before this time the Peers of the Land have
been arrested and imprisoned and their Temporalities Lands and Tenements, Goods
and (...) seized in the Kings hards, and some put to death, WITHOUT IVDGEMENT
OF THEIR PEERS, that NO PEER OF THE LAND, Officer or other by reason of his
office, nor of things touching his office, nor by other cause shall be brought
in judgment, to lose his Temporalities, Lands, Tenements, Goods, Chattels, nor
to be arrested or imprisoned, outlawed, exiled, nor forejudged, nor put to
answer, NOR TO BE IVDGED BUT BY AWARD OF THE SAID PEERS IN PARLIAMENT. which
Privilege of theirs was both enjoyed and claimed in Parliament, 4. E. 3. n.
14. 15. E. 3. n. 6. 8. 44. 49. 51. 17. E. 3. n. 22. 28. F. 3. n. 7. ^0. 16. 10
R. 2. n. 7. 8. etc. and sundry other Parliament Rolls See Cook. 4. Instit. p.
15. ^7. E. 3. 19.
And in 11. R. 2. n. 7. All the Lords in this Parliament as well Spiritual as
Temporal, claimed this their liberty and franchise that all weighty matters in
the same Parliament to be after moved TOUCHING THE PEERS OF THE LAND, ought to
be determined, and judged and discussed BY THE COURSE OF THE PARLIAMENT, and
not by the Civil Law, nor BY THE COMMON LAWS used in other inferior Courts
of the Relame. The which claim and liberty the King most willingly allowed,
and granted thereto IN FVLL PARLIAMENT. And hereupon in the Parliament of 14.
R. 2. n. 13. The King and LORDS (without the Commons) ADIVDGED the Earldom
and Seigniory of Richmond to be forfeited, by reason that John Duke of
Br^^tany then Earl of Richmond adhered to the French against his Allegiance.
This Paradox therefore of his, is against all Statutes, Law Books, and
Presidents whatsoever, and Magna Charta it self.

There is only one objection more of moment remaining, Object. 3.
which is this, If the House of Peers may without the Commons fine and imprison
Commoners; then if their fine and imprisonment be unjust and illegal, they
shall be remediless, there being no superior Courr to appeal unto, which
will be an intolerable slavery and grievance not to be endured among
freeborn people.

I answer, Answ.
first, that no injustice shall or ought to be presumed in the highest Court of
Justice, till it be apparently manifested. Secondly, If any such censure be
given, the party (as in Chancery) upon just grounds showed may Petition the
House of Peers for a reveiw and new-hearing of the cause, which they in justice
neither will nor can deny; and if they do, then the party grieved may petition
the House of Commons to interceed in his behal^e to the Peers for a rehearing;
but to discharge or free any Commoner judicially censured by the Lords, I have
hitherto met with no President in former Parliaments, nor power in the House of
Commons to do it, who cannot reverse Euro^ous judgments in any inferior
Courts by writ of Error, but the Lords alone; much less then the judgments
of the Higher House of Peers which is par^mount them, Though I conceive the
House of Peers, being the Superior Authority, and only Iudicatory in
Parliament, may relieve or release any Commoners unjustly imprisoned or
censured by the Commons house, or any of their Committees, and ought in justice
to do it; or else there will be the same mischief or a greater, in admitting
the House of Commons to be judges of Commoners; if there be no appeal from
them to the Lords, in case their sentences be illegal or unjust. Thirdly,
This mischief is but rare, Cook 4. instit p. 21, 22. 4. ^ 3. n. 14. Brook and
C^nmptons jurisdiction, and all Statutes for repealing former Parliaments Acts,
Judgments, or Attaindors.
and you may object the same against a sentence given, or Law made in
Parliament, by the King and both Houses, because there is no appeal from it,
or redress of it, but only in the next Parliament that shall be summoned by
petition. And there is a greater greevance in ill public Acts which concern
many, then in ^^ judgments which concern but one or two particular persons;
which yet cannot be repealed but by another Parliament; as the Errors and
decrees of one general Counsel cannot be rectified or reversed but by and
till another General Counsel meets to do it. The same mischief was and is
in Errous, Judgments, and Decrees given in the Kings Bench, Chancery, and
illegal commitments there; for which there is no relief out of Parliament,
but towait till a Parliament be called.

Finally, He that suffers by and under an unjust censure will have the comfort
of a good Conscience to support him till he be relieved; and therefore he Luke
^1. 19. 1 Pet 3. 14. He. ^0, 32, 33, 34.
must possess his soul with Patience, and rejoice under his cross, and not
rail, murmur, and play the Bedlam as Lilburne and his Companions, Overton,
Larner, and other Sectaries do, against our ^ Pet. 2. 15. to 21 c. 4. ^6.
I^^^. 53.
Saviors own precept and example, and then God in his due season will Psalm.
3^. and 37. and 46.
relieve and right them in a legal way; whereas their impatience, raving, and
libellous railing Pamphlets and Petitions (not savouring of a Christian, meek
and humble spirit) will but create them new troubles, expose them unto just and
heavy censures, and rob them both of the comfort and glory of all their former
sufferings against Law and Right.

Having answered these Objections I shall now earnestly desire all Lilburnes
and Overtons seduced Disciples, whether Members or others, seriously to weigh
and consider the premises, that so they may see how grossly they have been
deluded, abused, and misled by these two Ignes fatui, or New-lights of the Law,
and Circumscribers of the Lords and Parliaments Jurisdictions, which (God
knows) they no more know nor understand then Balams Ass, as the premises
demonstrate; and I shall seriously adjure them, (if they have any grace, shame,
or remainder of ingenuity left in them) ingeniously to recant, and publicly
to retract all their seditiou^ railing Libels, and Scurrilous Invectives
against the Lords undoubted Privileges, Jurisdiction, and Judicature, which I
have here unanswerably made good, by undeniable Testimonies, Histories,
Records, and the grounds of policy, and right reason, (which they are unable to
gain say) to undeceive the many ignorant over-credulous poor souls they have
corrupted and misled to the public destrubance of our Kingdoms Peace; Isay.
9. 16.
and let all their followers consider well of our Saviors caution, Mat. 15.
14. If the blind lead the blind (as these blinde-guides do you) both of them
shall fall into the ditch, and there perish together: O consider therefore what
I have here written to undeceive your judgments, and reform your practice;
consider that Dominion, Principality, Regality, Magistracy, and Nobility are
founded in the very Law of Nature, and Gods own institution, who subjected not
only all beasts, and living creatures to the sovereign Lordship of man, to
whom he gave Dominion over them, Genesis 1. 28, 29. c. 9. 2, 3, 5. by virtue
whereof men enjoy far greater Privileges then beasts; but likewise one man
unto another, as Genesis 3. 16. Exodus 20. 12. Ephesians. 5. 22. to 30. c. 6. 1. to 10.
Romans 13. 1, 2, 3. Tit. 3. 1. Col. 3. 20, 22. 1 Pet. ^. 13, 14, 18 c. 3. 15.
Heb. 13. 17. Josh. 1. 16, 17, 18. Matthew. 8 9.
children to their Parents, Wives to their Husbands, Servants to their Masters;
Subjects to their Kings, Princes, Magistrates, Soldiers to their Captains,
Mariners to their Ship-Masters, Scholars to their Tutors, People to their
Ministers; which order, if denied or disturbed, will bring absolute and speedy
confusion in all Families, Corporations, States, Kingdoms, Armies, Garrisons,
Schools, Churches, and dissolve all humane Societies, which subsist by order
and subordination only to one another; and seeing Monarchy, Royalty,
Principality, Nobility, yea Titles of Honor and Nobility (as Kings, Princes,
Dukes, Lords, etc.) are as ancient almost, as the world it self, universally
received, approved among all Nations whatsoever under heaven, See M^st^r
Seldens Titles of honor, Dr. Hu^^^^es and others of Nob^l^ty. Catane^s
C^ologus gloriae mundi.
and honored with special Privileges, as not only all k^ eminent Authors,
and experience manitest, but these ensuing Scripture Texts, Genesis 12. 15. c. 14.
1. to 10. c. 17. 6. 16. c. 20. 2. c. 21, 22, 23. c. 25. 16. c. 26. 1. 8. 26. c.
36. 15, 16, 17, 18, 29, 30, 31, to ^3. c. 9. 1, 2. c. 41. 40, to 47. c. 47. 2^,
26. Exodus 1. 8. Numb. 20. 14, etc. c 21, 1, 1^, 21, 33. c. 22. 7, 10, 14, 15,
40. c. 23. 17. c. 7. 2, 3, 10. c. 16. 2. c. 27. 2. c. 32. 2. Dent. 17. 14, 15,
16. Josh. 1. 16, 17, 18. c. 5. 1. c. 8. 9, 10 11, 12. Judge. 9. 6, 18. 1 Samuel 8.
5, 6. 2 samuel 11. 2. 1 Kin. 4. 34. c. 10 15, 28, 29. c. 20. 16. c. 23. 22. Job.
3. 14. c. 36. 7. Psalm. 2. 2. 10. Ps. 62. 12, 14, 29. Ps. 72. 10. Ps. 102. 15.
Ps. 136. 17, 18. Ps. 138. 4. Prove. 8. 15, 16. Prove. 30. 31. Eccles. 10, 16, 17.
Judge. 3. 5. c. 16. 8, 1 Samuel 5. 11. c. 29. 2, 6, 7. Dan. 4. 36. c. 5. 9, 10,
23. c. 6. 27. Mat. 8. 9, Mar. 6. 21. c. 10. 42. 1 Cor. 8. 5. Romans 61. 1, 2, 3,
4. 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2. Tit. 3. 1, 2. 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14, 15. Acts 9. 27. (which I
wish our Sectaries, Lovellers and Lilburnists to consider and study, with the
others forecited; it will be a mere desperate folly and madness in any man to
prove Antipodes to this instituiion of God, Nature, Nations; to run quite
contrary to all meu, and to level the head, neck, shoulders to the feet; the
tallect Cedars to the lowest Shru^s; the roof of every building to the
foundation stones, the Su^ne, Moon, Stars, Heavens, to the very Earth and
center, and even men themselves to the meanest beasts. I shall therefore
conclude with Saint Paul's serious admonition, which these refractory persons
have quite forgotten, Romans 13. 1, 2, 3. Let every soul be subject to the higher
Power for there is no po^er but of God the powers that be are ordained of God;
whosoever therefore resists (much more oppugneth, abolisheth) the Power,
resists (oppugneth, abolisheth) THE ORDINANCE OF GOD, and they that resist
(oppugn or endeavor to abolish these powers) shall receive to themselves
DAMNATION; for Rulers are not a terror to good works, but to the evil, and
wherefore YE MVST NEEDS BE SVBIECT, NOT ONLY FOR WRATH, but also FOR CONSCIENCE
SAKE. And for this cause pay you tribute also, for they are Gods Ministers,
attending continually on this very thing. Render therefore to all (such higher
Powers) their dues, tribute to whom ribute, custom to whom custom, fear to
whom fear, HONOR to whom HONOR IS DUE, (which Saint Peter likewise seconds
almost in the selfsame words, which you may do well to peruse and study, 1
Pet. 2. 12. to 20.) and then you will never dare to question or dispute any
more the Power, Iudicatory, Privileges of the Right Honorable House of Peers,
much less to Revile and Libell against their persons as now you do, to the
infinite Scandal of your Schismatic faction, and Religion it self, which
you profess only in show, but deny in deed and practice.

FINIS.

