SCOTLANDS PUBLIC ACKNOWLEDGEMENT OF GODS JUST JUDGMENT upon their NATION For
their frequent BREACH OF FAITH, LEAGVES, and SOLEMN OATHS made to their
Neighbors of England, in former Ages, to gratify their treacherous
Confederates of FRANCE.
Recorded in their own public Liturgy, Printed at Edenborough by Thomas
Bassandine, Anno Dom. 1575 page 54. 57. 58. under this Title, Prayers used in
the Churches OF SCOTLAND in the time of their Persecution by the FRENCHMEN (in
the year 1560.) from whose Tyranny and Vassalage, they were then delivered by
the Free Brotherly Assistance and Forces of the ENGLISH, to whom they had been
formerly so Perfidious.
Published to prevent the like Breach of Solemn Leagues, Oaths, and Covenants
between both Nations now (for fear of of incurring the like, or a worse
Judgment,) by a Well-wisher to both Kingdoms.
BUT Now, O Lord, the dangers which appear, and the trouble which increases,
by cruel Tyranny of forsworn Strangers, compels us to complain before the
Throne of thy Mercy, and to crave of thee protection and defense against their
most unjust persecution. That Nation, O Lord, for whose pleasure, and defense
of whom, we have offended thy Majesty, and Violated our Faith, See Tho.
Walsingham, Hist. Ang. an. 1383 p. 133. and Antiquitates, Eccles. Brit. p. 295.
296.
often breaking the Leagues of unity, and concord which our Kings and Governors
have contracted with our To wit, of England.
Neighbors, that Nation, O Lord, for whose alliance our Fathers and
predecessors have shed their blood, and we (whom now by tyranny they oppress)
have often sustained the hazard of battle, that Nation finally, to whom always
we have been faithful, now after then long practiced deceit, by manifest
tyranny do seek our destruction:

Worthily and justly may thou, Note.
O Lord, give us to be slaves unto such Tyrants; because, for the maintenance
of their Friendship, we have not feared TO BREAK OUR SOLEMN OATHS, made unto
others, to the great dis-honour of thine holy Name; and therefore justly may
thou punish us by the same Nation, for whose pleasure we feared not to offend
thy Divine Majesty. In thy presence, O Lord, we lay for our selves no kind of
excuse, but for thy dear Son Jesus Christ his sake, we cry for mercy,
pardon, and grace; Thou know, O Lord, that their crafty wits in many things
have abused our simplicity: For, under pretense of the maintenance of our
Liberty, they have sought, and have found the way (unless thou alone confound
their Counsels) to bring us in their perpetual bondage, etc.

This Text needs no Commentary: the sum of it is: National perjury will
certainly (...) punished with National Misery; and those who break their
Solemn Oaths, and Leagues wi^^ their neighbor Brethren, to gratify any other
Nation or Party, shall by Divine Justice be betraed, enslaved, or endangered
to be destroyed by that very Nation and Party, for whose ends they th^^
violated their Oaths and Covenants.

A strong engagement both to our Brethren of Scotland and us, to take heed of
Covenant breaking one with another, least thereby we expose our selves to
Heavens Vengeance, and to the Tyranny and slavery of the Common Enemy.

AMOS 1. 9. 10. Thus says the Lord; for three transgressions of Tyrus, and for
four, I will not turn away the punishment thereof, (...) they delivered up the
whole Captivity to Edom, and REMEMBERED NOT THE BROTHER^ COVENANT. Therefore
will I send a fire on the wall of Tyrus, which shall devour the palaces
thereof.

Printed at London for M. S. 1646.


