A New Discovery OF FREE STATE TYRANNY: Containing, Four Letters, together with
a Subsequent Remonstrance of several grievances and Demand of Common Right, by
WILLIAM PRYNNE Esquire; Written and sent by him to Mr. John Bradshaw and his
Associates AT WHITE HALL (stiling themselves, The Council of State) after their
two Years and three Months close Imprisonment of him, under Soldiers, in the
remote Castles of DUNSTER and TAUNTON (in Somersetshire) and PENDENNIS in
Cornwall; before, yea without any Legal Accusation, Examination, Indictment,
Trial, Conviction, or Objection of any particular crime against him; or since
declared to him; notwithstanding his many former and late Demands made to them,
to know his Offense and ACCUSERS.

Published by the Author, for his own Vindication; the Peoples common Liberty
and Information; and his Imprisoners just Conviction of their Tyranny, Cruelty,
Iniquity, toward him, under their misnamed FREE STATE.

Jer. 37. 18. What have I offended against thee, or against thy Servants, or
against this People, that ye have put me in prison?

Acts 25. 27. For it seems unto me unseasonable, to send a Prisoner, and not
with all to signify the Crimes laid against him.

Acts 28. 17. Men and brethren, though I have committed nothing against the
People, or Customs of our Fathers; yet was I delivered Prisoner from Jerusalem
into the hand of the Romans.

Qu. Curtius. Hist. l. 6. Verba Innocenti reper^^e facile est, modum verborum
misero tenere difficile.

London Printed for the Author, and are to be sold by Edward Thomas in Green
Arbor, 1655.



All flesh is Grass, the best men vanity;
This, but a shadow, here before thine eye,
Of him, whose wondrous changes clearly show,
That GOD, not men, swayes all things here below.
To the Reader.
Kind Reader, The memorable Speech of Philotus (imprisoned for a pretended
Conspiracy against Alexander the great, upon bare surmises without any
particular Accuser or Hearing) Qu. Curtlus hist. l. 6. p. 262
Quanquam Vincti homines non supervacua solum, sed etiam invisa defensio est,
quae Judicem non docere videtur, sed ARGVERE; tamen utcunque licet dicere,
Memet ipsa non deseram, nec committam, UT DAMNATUS ETIAM MEA SENTENTIA VIDEAM.
Equidem cujus criminis reus sum non video. Inter conjuratos nemo me nominat.
Non cognita vero causa, liberari ab absente non possum, quia a praesente
damnatus sum. May be a sufficient apology, both for the penning and publishing
of these Letters, and of this Remonstrance. The Occasions, Motives,
necessitating me to compile them, during my late causeless close imprisonment
in Dunster Castle, and Pendennys Castle in Cornwall, are at large therein
expressed. These Letters were all sent and delivered into Mr. Bradshawes own
hands, by my dear since deceased Brother, Dr. Bastwicke, with several other
Letters to diverse of his Associates at Whitehall (which I intend to publish in
due season) to neither of which I could ever receive the least Answer. As for
the Remonstrance, subjoyned to them, I having with much difficulty (in respect
of the restraints and Spies then upon me) con mitted it to paper, it pleased
God to give me an opportunity, to convey it safe to London, to a special
Friends hands, with a Letter, desiring him to transcribe, then to present it in
my Name, to those to whom it was directed; and after that to print if for my
vindication, the public Liberty, Satisfaction of the Nation, if he saw just
cause: upon his receipt thereof it was transcribed; but he being over-timerous,
and the times very perilous, for ought I can learn, he neither presented, nor
gave me the least account of it whiles he lived; which made me suspect, it had
miscarried before it came unto his hands, tomy great disappointment, having no
perfect Copy thereof to publish upon just occasion. In November last, having
some business to London, I occasionly met with diverse of late Whithall
casheired Grandees (in greatest power at the time of these my late Commitments
and restraints here complained of) who all positively disclaimed that they were
privy or consenting to my imprisonments or restraints, which they confessed, to
be most unjust. Whereupon I writ a Letter to Mr. Bradshaw, (whose hand alone
was to the Warrants) demanding from him, an Account, both of the particular
cause and Grounds thereof, with just reparations and damages for the same; who
by two several Letters to, and a subsequent Conference with me, professed;
that he did neither know, nor remember the special cause or information given
to him and his Associates at Whitehall, for which I was thus committed, and so
strictly restrained by them: and that, if upon perusal of his own Papers, or
the Books at Whitehall, he could find any particulars relating thereunto, he
would speedily inform me thereof; which having not since done in above 3
months space, nor during my near 3. year Imprisonment, though often solicited
by these and other my Letters and friends thereto; I thereupon made
diligent-Inquiry, after my Letters and this Remonstrance formerly directed to
him and his Whitehall Associates; which my deceased Friend, to whom I sent
them, by Gods good Providence secured in another Friends Custody; who very
lately presented me both with the Orignals and Transcripts thereof, beyond my
expectation, which divine Providence has encouraged me to publish them to the
world; both for the Vindication of my own Inocency, (against their new Free
State groundless Tyranny) under which I so long suffered, as if I had been a
Transcendent Malefactor) the Vindication of our highly violated Laws,
Liberties; the fuller conviction of my Imprisoners, of their unchristian,
unrighteous, causeless deportment toward me, (after all my former Sufferings)
against their own Votes, Judgments, Consciences, all Laws of God, and the
Land; and the manifestation of Gods extraordinary Mercy in preserving,
supporting me under all their Oppressions and Psalm. ^4 18. 19. 32. 2 Timothy 3.
10. 11.
delivering me-out of them about 5. Months after this Remonstrance, without
the least Petition, Submission to, or acknowledgement of their illegal,
usurped, and soon after scornfully cashiered Tyrannical Power; or entering
into any Bonds at all, not to act any thing for the future against their
present Government and Commonwealth, or to their prejudice; which they
endeavored to force me to by Duresse, and I peremptorily refused; assuring
them, upon the receipt of their Dated Febr. 5. 1652.
first Order for my Release upon my entering into such a Bond; That I would
rather die a Prisoner, then live a Bondsman; and sooner resolve to rot in
Prison, then go out of it, by entering into such Bonds, to the enslaving of my
self and the whole English Nation, by making such an ill President of Slavery,
after all my Writings, Sufferings for Laws, and Public Liberty and near 3.
years close Imprisonment in 3. several Garrisons without any hearing or cause
yet expressed: Whereupon they sent me at last an Dated Febr* 28. 1652.
absolute Release without any Bond or condition at all.

Whether the Jesuits (whose Jo. Cambilhonius de abstrusioribus Jesuitarum
Artibus et Studijs* Lud. Lucius Hist Jesuitica. l. 1. c. 7. p. 17^. l. 4. c. 1.
p 364. Speculum. Jesuiticum. P. 306. 307.
usual practice it is, to close imprison, persecute, bannish, vex and destroy
if possible, all such who discover, or oppose their secret treasonable plots,
practices,) had any hand in my last close restraints, I cannot certainly
resolve, seeing my Imprisoners themselves have protested to me, they know not
by whose, or upon what information I was Imprisoned. But this some of my
Restrainers have confessed to me, and my friends; That they believe the chief
reason of my long close Restraints was, to hinder me from writing any thing
against their late proceedings, and public Alterations, Laws, Liberties;
which I formerly averred in my Speech in Parliament and Memento, (when they
were first put them in execution) to be originally contrived and secretly
fomented by the Jesuits to destroy our King, Kingdom, and Religion. That
Speech of the Parliament of Paris to King Henry the fourth of France Anno.
1603. (when he resolved to restore the banished Jesuits against his
Parliaments arrest and advise) being then my constant asseveration, (...) Hist.
(...) l. 3. c. 2. p. 306.
Faxit Deus, ut sim falsus vates: sed prospicio animo tandem HOC REGNVM OPERA
JESUITARUM IN CINERES ABITURUM; and that I verily feared, and believed the
vissible Instruments most active in those dismal Proceedings, Changes,
Subversions then intended, and since effected, were but the Jesuits deluded,
seduced Instruments in reality. And that which may now at last convince them
thereof beyond contradiction is not only the irrefragable evidences lately
published in my Epistle to A Seasonable, Legal, an Historical, Vindication of
the good old Fundamental Liberties, Rights, Laws, Governments of England;
compared with the excellent Proclamations of See that of. 18 October. 1591. 15.
Nov. 1602.
Queen Elizabeth and King James against Jesuits; but likewise that memorable
Piece Thuanushist l. 138. Hospinian. Hist. Jesuit. l 3* and 4. Speculum
Jesuiti^um. p119 and Ludovicus Lucius. Hist. Jesuitica. l. 4. c. (...) where it
is printed at large.
presented to the states and Nobility of Poland, assembled in Parliament 1607.
to prevent the Seditious practices and tumults of the Jesuits in that Realm:
intitutled; Consilium derecuperonda, and in posteram stabilienda Pa^a Regni
Poloniae, per IESVITARVM ELECTIONEM. Which clearly demonstrated; That the
Jesuits Society was purposely instituted by the Pope and Spaniard, to advance
their intended universal Monarchies; and to be their principle Spies,
Intelligencers, Instruments for this purpose: the general of the Jesuits
being always a Spaniard by birth, or Allegiance, and keeping his constant
residence at Rome: and their Order a most dangerous sharp active sword, whose
blade secretly (heathed in the bowels of all other Realms, States, but the
bilt thereof always held in the Popes and Spaniards hands, who weild it at
their pleasure. That the Jesuits instill this Treasonable Principle into their
Scholars and Auditors, See Lud. Lucius Hist. Jesuitica. l. 2. c. 3. and
Hospinian Hist. Jesuit. l. ^.
That all Christian Kings and Princes (as well Papists as Protestants) who shall
by any means whatsoever fall under the Popes indignation or Sentence; or in
any sort hinder the Jesuits Projects, or not obey them in all things, ARE
HERETICS and TYRANTS; that thereby their Subjects are actually absolved from
all Oaths, Obedience and future Subjection to them? Whereupon not only the
people in general, but any particular person* MAY LAWFULLY KILL and DESTROY
THEM, not without punishmemt only, but likewise with GREATEST APPLAVSE, and
MERIT, even of a CANONIZATION FOR A SAINT. By which Jesuiticall Decree. THE
LIFE and DEATH OF ALL KINGS and ALL THE CIVIL MAGISTRATES OF EVROPE IS
SUSPENDED ON THE IESVITES PLEASURE. If they favor them they may live and
prosper; If not, THEY MUST PERISH. Which the Jesuits proclaiming of the State
of Venice, through all Italy See Lud. Lucius. Hist Jesuitica. l. 4. c. 8. p.
640.
for most PESTILENT HERETICS and ABOMINABLE TYRANTS, only for making laws to
bridle their covetousnes, and banishing them for their disobedience and
Treachery to the State, though professed Roman Catholics. Their fury against
Henry the 3. of France, in stabbing him to death^ though never accused of
Heresy, and continuing till his death in the Roman Communion, only for this
reason; Quod Seeptrum Regium non ei tradere volebat quem sibi Hi Socij tanquam
idoneum m^liti^num suarum administrum, gallicae Regem destinaverant, (and
branding him both for an HERE^ICKE and TYRANT for this cause alone, after his
death in several Books) REGIS BRITANNIAE PERPETVA PERICVLA; the perpetual
dangers of the King of great Britain (by the Jesuits) and the fear of all
others, who find this Order offended with them, abundantly testify. After
which ensues this considerable Passage, touching the Jesuits restless
e^deavours to subvert all Christian States, and the Fundamental Laws of all
Kingdoms cross to their Designs; especially such as concernc the Succession
of their Kings, or the Peace and Liberty of their Kingdoms and People; which I
desire the Newm^dellers of our Laws, Government, and Subverters of our
liberties sadly to consider. DIXI Lud. Lucius. Hist. Jesuitica. l. 4 c. 5. p.
53 5.
quanta vis sit Aculei Jesuitici contrareges, statumque regium, quoties hunc
molitionibus suis obstare inte Higunt; Hic autem vos notare velim EJVSDEM
PESTIS non minorem efficaciam esse IN OPPUGNANDA and EXPUGNANDA REPVBLICA,
ATTERENDIS LEGIBVS, quoties nempe sentiunt, se ab his, in institu^ a sua
venatione, impediri. Et quod AD LEGES attinet And did they not corrode and
devour our Laws of this Nature.
Hae politicae tineae illas praecipue arrodere consueverunt, et exedere, quibus
jus successionis in regno continetur, libertasque et pax publica confirmatur.
Qualem in Galliis praecipue invererunt, Legem illam Salicam, matriculam et
Fundamentum illius regni: perquam stirpis regiae mascula proles, exclusis
femeles, ad Regnum sola admittitur. Cujus Legis vigore successio Regni post
interfectum Henricum 3. ad Henricum 4. Regem tunc Navarrae, devolvebatur. Quod
ipsum cum SECTA JESVITICA suam interitum interpretaretur, Tantum efficere
potuit And have not they instigated the English themselves to do as much of
late?
ut Galli hoc reipublicae suae fundamentum ipsimet subruere conarentur; ascita
contra hanc legem Philippi. 2. Hispaniarum Regis Filia, quam ex Henrici. 2.
Galliarum Regis filia susceperat, in Regni sui haeredem. Operis totius
promotoribus and internuntiis Jesuitis. Quod autem Gallis Lex Salica praestat,
hoc Polonis ad huc Regum Juramenta conferunt: per quae hactenus Reipublicae
Liberae electionis jus conservatur, quam And is not ours more dangerously
corroded amongst us.
periculose vero Hoc etiam libertatis nostrae fulcimentum ab his
cetineisarrosum sit, egomet dicere nolo, necpublicum dedecus ipsomet divulgabo.
Ejusdem virtuti^ illustre specimen coram oculis nostris in vicina Hungaria,
Austria, Styria, Carinthia, etc. ediderunt; eo nimirum successu, Vt obtritis
legibus quibus praedictarum nationum libertas nitebatur partemearum Penitus
oppresserint, partem ad Extremam desperationem adegirint. Hoc quidem rumor
publicus hactenus constanter affirmat, in praedictis Provincijs alicubi
Illustribus et antiquissimae nobilitatis familiis, public diem dictum esse
intra quem se aut coram Jesuitarum tribunali sistant, aut relictis patriis
sedibus, alio migrent. Which a Noble Polonian Knight, in Lud. Lucius Hist.
Jesuitica. l. 3. c. 3. p. 329.
his Oration against the Jesuits seconded in that Parliament of Polonia; who,
relating the bloody wars and tumults, raised by these Gibeanites throughout
the Christian world and India, has this memorable Passage concerning, England
and Scotland. Eodem motuab istis Jesuiticis Gabaonitis excitato, impulsa est
Anglia* and Scotia: quae Regna cum antea, externorum hostium impetum
depulerunt, Nunc domesticis dissidijs debiltata, et ad interitum jam inclinata
sunt. Id vero totum acceptum referrendum est istis sanctissimis patribus
Gabaonitis Jesuiticis, Which he ushers in with this precedent Observation
concerning their carriage in America, to subject it to the Spanish vassallage.
Eisdem artibus et hoc Religionis Nomine, illas Provincias Hispanico Regi
potentissimo, subjicerunt: a quo illi emissi Ut exploratores, eo consilia omnia
retulerunt, Ut primum domestica dissidia excitarent deinde Hispanicos exercius
in regna convulsa, and dissidiis domesticis debilitata adducerent. Quod
assecuti sunt omnia caedibus and sanguine ita replent, ut non solum Consilij
Capiendi, sed etiam Ne respirandi quidem spacium relinquant, illis, a quibus
amanter and humaniter fuerant excepti. All which particulars being likewise
more largly justified, demonstrated in that elegant Solid Lud. Lucius. Hist.
Jesuitica. l. 3. c. 2. Hospinian Hist. Jesuitica. l. 4.
Oration of the Parliament of Paris to King Henry 4. Anno. 1603. against the
Jesuits restitution contrary to the former Parliamentary Arrest, for their
perpetual banishment out of France, (which they therein predicted would prove
fatal to him, as it did in truth) by their manifold attempts against, not only
against the French Kings lives, Crowns, but also against the Laws and
Liberties both of the Realm and Church of France, thus poetically expressed in
an Epigram presented to King Henry the fourth, the same year, upon the same
occasion, by a true French Philopater.

See Lud. Lucius. Hist Jesuitica. l. 3. c. 2. p. 318. 319.
Cui nam hominum ignotum est Has not this been their Study and Meditation of
late years amongst us?
'Jesuita nocte dieque
'Nil meditari aliud, quam qua ratione modove
'Prisca statuta queant patriasque evertere Lege
Inque locum' antiquis totum in contraria nobis
'Jura dare; and sanctos privata ad commoda Ritus
Flectere, nulli unquam, quod post mutare licebit.
'Antique deflet (proh) libertatis honorem:
'Auria libertas, sic, sic calcabere? Sione
'Illa tibi fraenum injiciet Jesuitica pestis?
Vltima Fex hominum, Satanaeque Excrementum:
Quo nil terra tulit pejus, necfaedius unquam.
Mortem norant animare,
Et Tumultos Suscitare
Hi submittant Proditores,
Hi subornant Percussores,
Excitant Seditiones,
Nutriunt Rebelliones,
Modo jubeat Romanus,
Vel sic postulat Hispanus;
Servit his Cor, Sermo, Manus.
Adds another, In Officinam Jesuiticam.

I now refer it to the consciences of all my late Imprisoners, and all other
Subvertors* Underminers, New-Modellers, of our ancient Fundamental Laws,
Liberties, Parliaments, Governments, Kings, and hereditary Regal Succession,
(contrary to their former Oaths, Protestations, Covenants, Declarations,
Remonstrances, Professions, Principles, Resolves, Commissions, Trusts, Advices,
Votes of the Majority of both Houses of Parliament, and our three Kingdoms)
sadly to consider, without passion or partiallity: whether all our late
intestine bloody wars, with their strange unparalleld Proceedings, and
Changes of this Nature, (which I opposed to my power) proceeded not originally
from the Jesuits projection, suggestion, and solicitation, to ruin our
Protestant Kings, Kingdoms, Laws, Liberties, Churches, Parliaments, and
whether they were not the very Jesuits real (though deluded* circumvented)
Instruments, in promoting, accomplishing them with all earnestness, violence,
zeal fury, against the votes of the secluded majority of both Houses and of our
three Protestant Nations, to the Jesuits and Papist great content, the grief
of most Zealous Protestants; the intolerable Scandal, Infamy, Dishonor of
the most Zealous professors of the Protestant Religion; and the exiting of many
late and present bloody persecutions against them, by Popish Princes in
Bohemia, Austria, Styria, Savoy, and other parts; as a generation of Seditious,
Factious, Antimonarchicall, turbulent, perfidious, disloyal, treacherous
spirits, and dangerous Regicides, as they now repute them, and publish us, be
in See Militiere, his Victory of Truth. Cornelius Cornelij Praefatio, ad S.
Trinitatem. Commentarlis in Minores Prophetas.
printed books; and hereupon let them now resolve their own consciences and
the world, with what color of Christianity, Law, Justice, they could so
illegally, maliciously, despitefully close imprison, restrain my person, seize
all my Papers, Records, etc. only to debar me from detecting, opposing these
their Jesuiticall Journey*workers with my pen; and endeavoring to translate
the Odium of these their true original Architects, the Jesuits, who are so
impudent and malicious: Vt etiam sua suorumque FACINORA AC PARRICIDIA EV
ANGELICIS TRANSCRIBERE NON VERANTVR as (Ludovicus Lucius proves by several
instances; to render the Doctrine and Persons of the Protestants odious and
detestable to the whole world. And whose principal scope and design is by
several stratagems, to engage all Protestant Princes, Kingdoms, States,
Churches in unchristian divisions, tumults, wars between themselves and
against each other; Vt continuis se vonficient et atterent viribus, ut COMMUNI
MOX SUPER VENTVRO HOSTI RESISTERE NEQUEANT. Sub nomine et praetextu Religionis
Catholicae, *praesidioque and authoritate Papae and Hispaniarum Regis, ubique
locorum sese insinuare; OMNIA DE NOVO PRO ARBITRIO SUO INSTITUERE, ET AD
JESUITICUM FUSORIUM CONFORMARE; omnes Evangelicos, igne, ferro, veneno, pulvere
tormentario BELLIS and alijs Machinationibus opprimere, and viriliter
extirpare: Sicque SEIPSOS DOMINOS AC MAGISTROS TOTIUS MUNDI EFFICERE: as those
who please may read at large in Johannis Cambilhonus, De abstrusioribus
Jesuitarum artibus and studijs; in Hasenmullerus, Hospinian, and Ludovicus
Lucius their Historia Jesuitica: Speculum Jesuiticum, Watsons Quodlibets, with
others, our New Statizers may do well most seriously to peruse and study, the
better to countermine the Jesuits pernicious plots against us for the future:
which have wrought such strange confusions, wars, alterations, various
Revolutions in Church and State amongst us in few years last past, as all
former ages can* not parallel.

If any of my imprisoners or others demand; why I did not during all the time
of my close Restraints, sue out an Habeas Corpus to procure my Liberty in a
Legal way, or why upon my Enlargement I brought not an action of false
Imprisonment against my Committers, or their under-Goalers, to recover Damages
for my illegal Restrains; or a Writ of Restitution to re-invest me in my
Recordership of Bath, of which I was injuriously dispossessed without cause or
hearing, by a Whitehall Letter, and another time-serving Member introduced,
during my restraint?

I Answer 1. That the want of See Cooks 4. Instit. c. 1. 6, 7. ^ 10. 11. 27. H
^8. c. 24. 26. Cromptous Jurisdiction of Courts; Brook, Rastall, Ash. Title,
Courts, Justices, and Coram non Iudice.
a true Legal Power, Jurisdiction and Court of Justice, from whom to demand, sue
and before whom to prosecute these Legal Writts, disabled me to pursue them.
And to demand them from, or prosecute them under those illegal Usurped, New
self-created Powers and Jurisdictions (of the Jesuits projection) which
illegally committed, and ejected me from my Recordership; had been a real
acknowledgment of, and submission to them on record as Lawful; against my
Science, Conscience, Judgment, Oaths, Protestation, Vow, League, Covenant,
our known Laws, Statutes and Parliamentary Declarations, which I durst not in
conscience or prudence violate to save my life, much less to procure my
Liberty, Damages, or Recordership. 2. Had I once moved for any of these
Writts; I must either have taken their monstrous illegal Engagement,
diametrically contrary to the Oaths of Supremacy, Allegiance, of a Recorder,
the Protestation, Vow, League, Covenant, (all which I had several times taken
upon sundry occasions, and from which none could absolve me) and to at least
thirty other Oaths prescribed, * See The Arraihnment of the engagment Pack of
old English Puritans, and other printed Treatises against the Engagement.
established by our Laws; and so have been guilty of manifold detestable
perjuries, to the wounding of my conscience, reputation, and damnation of my
Soul. Or else they would have presently pleaded in bar of these Writts; I had
not taken their Engagement, and so by color of their void, unrighteous,
barbarous Knack of January 2. 1649. (which their Tresylians strictly executed,
to their eternal infamy) they would have made me totally incapable of the
benefit of those Writts, and that common Law, Right, Justice, which belonged to
me both by Birthright and purchase; and by the express words of Magna Charta.
c. 29. ought to be denied or delayed to no English Freeman. Which consideration
induced me to sit still, till a fitter opportunity. 3. My close restraints in
remotest Prisons; the general temporizing Cowardice of those of the Long Robe
to move for, or grant such writs as these: The fearfulness of all under
Officers to execute them, if granted: And the improbability of any real
Justice or Right to be done unto me on them, seeing those then and since chief
Justices were either really, or virtually parties to the warrants for my
restraints and Injuries complained of, being then Mr Bradshaws Associates at
Whitehal; have hitherto persuaded me rather to wait with patience for
Enlargment; Reparations and Restitution in a Christian, Just, Honorable,
public way in Gods due season; then either preprosterously or posterously to
sue for them in such a course, wherein I can take no comfort for the present,
nor expect any just Reparations if pursued; and which others have
experimentally found, A Remedy as badde or worse then their Disease, and a new
expensive fruitless vexation, instead of a Just and Honorable, Reparation, of
their Sufferings and Damages sustained for the public: which will be fully
recompensed hereafter in Heaven, though never repaired, rewarded by Ingrate or
unrighteous men on earth.

If my Imprisoners or their Creatures, shall except against the Title hereto
prefixed, viz. A New Discovery of Free State Tyranny; or any phrases in my
Letters or remonstrance; as overharsh, I doubt not but the remonstrance of my
Several pressures therein comprised, will be a sufficient Apology for them. And
that speech of holy Job under Job. 7. 11.
his heavy affliction. Therefore I will not refrain my mouth, I will speak in
the anguish of my Spirit, I will complain in the bitterness of my Soul; will be
if not a Justification, yet at least an equit able excuse or extenuation of the
earnestness or bitterness of any expressions throughout in these Epistles or
Remonstrance, which I entitled as aforesaid, because in most things parallel
with, my New Discovery of the Prelates Tyranny; compiled, published soon after
my enlargement from my long Imprisonments and close restraints under them and
the Old Council Table at Whitehall whom my last Imprisoners (there succeeding
them) not only imitated, but in some particulars far exceed in Tyranny and
Injustice toward me. And seeing I never yet received from any of my former or
these late injurious Imprisoners, the least voted or voluntary Recompense, for
all my Losses, Damages, Expenses, Sufferings under them, to the endangering of
my Life, health and great impairing of my Estate; I hope they will give Loosers
leave to write, and allow me Liberty in some sort to Right and Recompense my
self in this their Default, to publish the groundlesnes of my Imprisonment to
the world, as I did to themselves in private, to repair my Innocence and
Reputation blasted in many men's Opinions, through an implicit faith of some
concealed guilt and High Crimes in me, for which I was so long, so strictly
restrained by them in remotest Castles, (injuriously thrust out of my power
Recordership of has) though I recover no other Recompense from them (as I may
do in due season) for my extraordinary Damages thereby sustained in my
person, Calling, estate. upon these accounts, I submit both them and the
grounds of their publication to thy Censure, recommending them to Gods blessing
for the whole English Nations future benefit and infranchisement, and to
deter other Grandees from the like Extravagancies toward me or others in
future ages. If thou or the public reap any good thereby, let God receive the
Glory, the Author only a share in thy constant fervent prayers; That as he has
formerly (like blessed Paul) 2. Cor. 11. 23.
been in Labors more abundant, in Prisons more frequent, then others; So he
may for the future more abound in spiritual graces, Christian Fortitude,
heavenly mindedness, inward consolations, public Services for God, Religion
and his Country, then others; notwithstanding all forepast discouragements and
ingrate requitals from men on earth, toward him, who expects his Math. 5. 12.
Rev. 22. 12.
reward from God alone in Heaven.

March 16. 1654. William Prynne.

Mr. Prynnes first Letter to Mr. John Bradshaw, touching his unjust
apprehension, and close restraint in Dunster Castle, by his illegal White Hall
Warrant.
Hab. 1. 2, 3, 4. O Lord, how long shall I cry, and thou will not hear? even
cry out unto thee of violence, and thou will not save?

Why do thou show me iniquity, and cause me to behold grievance? for
spoiling and violence are before me: and there are that raise up strife and
contention.

Therefore the Law is slacked, and judgment does never go forth: for the
wicked does compass about the Righteous: therefore wrong judgment proceeds.


To his Quondam kind Friend Mr. John Bradshaw, Sergeant at Law, at White Hall,
present these.
SIR,
YOur former intimate familiarity with, and pretended cordial affections
toward me, before mounted up to your B^ means I (...) against.
present Greatness, have emboldned, and my instant nnexpected new sufferings,
necessitated me to complain, That on the 30 of June last, being the Lords day,
about XI of the clock at It is the ^^^perty of (...) and Robbers, ^^ break up
and enter Men's houses in the night (being no legal time for arrests) (...) 2
(...) 43. Lu. 12. 39. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 2.
Night, a party of Horse under the command of Captain ^enkins and Major
Robinson, beset my House at Swainswick, in the County of Somerset (where I
lived a retired Country life) and endeavored to break open the doors thereof,
whiles I and my servants were sleeping quietly in our beds; who upon their
entry into it, seized my Person, searched my Study, Chambers, Rooms, with all
Trunks, and Boxes therein, for Papers, Books, records, taking away such as they
thought meet; and then marching with me through the City of Bristol in
triumph, with Trumpets sounding, as their Prisoner, in the head of two Troops,
and after that conveying me through the Country with Draggooners, brought me
prisoner to Dunster Castle. And all this by the Color of your White Hall
warrant, dated the 25 of June, directed to Major Robinson Governor of Dunster
Castle, thus signed with your hand: JOHN BRADSHAW PRESIDENT. Which Warrant
further enjoins him, not to suffer me to have conference with any but in his
sight and hearing; nor to send, or receive, of any, Letters, but such as he
shall peruse: and is accordingly executed, amounting to the strictest close
Impriso^ent. These Proceedings seem to me (who am conscious of no guilt) very
strange, Illegal, rigorous, yea destructive, not only to mine own, but to all
the Peoples Liberties, and all our good Laws, for their preservation; which you
and others in present Power, have of late years, more then once, solemnlie
covenanted, and made large Declarations, and Protestations inviolably to
preserve, especially in these days of Englands freedom from Tyranny, as some
term, if not proclaim them.

Strange in respect of your self, the only visible author, of them; mine
ancient Acquaintance, who formerly made so many large Professions of real
Friendship, toward me; and one of mine own Robe (much contemning the Kings
Starchamber Lords and Prelates illegal Warrants and Proceedings in this kind
against me) from whom I expected no such unjust exorbitant Warrant or Military
violeuce as this; yet Stranger, in regard of my self the Sufferer, who having
been such an Eminent Martyr, both in body and Estate, suffering near 8 years
Imprisoments, close restraints, exile, 3 Pillories, Stigmatizing, a ^^uble
loss^ of ears: and excessive Fines, for the defense of our re^igion, Laws,
Public Wealth, and Liberty of the Nation, without receiving one penny
recompense for all my losses, and snffrings, though promised, voted, many
Thousands; and one of the most devoted faithful Servants, to the old Republic
and late Parliament of England, in whose service I have spent my Estate, and
studies, ever since my enlargement, without enjoying the least Preferment,
which I was never ambitious of, or one farthing Salary or reward, (when others
less meritorious, have been bountifully rewarded with great Sums, Offices,
Pensions,) expected no such ungrateful Requital, as a new excessive tedious
close Imprisoment from my professed Friends, before the least notice of any
complaint against me, or summons to appear, or answer it. Which (all
circumstances considered) is a far greater Extremity of injustice, than I ever
yet suffered from my most Capital Enemies, who both in the High Commission and
Star chamber, did only summon me by a messenger, but never Attach me, or begin
with Execution, as you do; first citing me to appear, before them, and then
heard, before they committed me, or searched my Study and Papers: and that by
their Legal sworn Officers, not armed Soldiers; in the open day time, not at
midnight; on the week day, not the Lords day, and never made made me a close
Prisoner, at first, but only after hearing and sentence. And indeed this
cannot but seem strange to me and all men else, that I should be the first man
now mewed up afresh, in all the County for a If the late Kings definition of
the malignant party be true: Exact Collection P. 288. By ^^e Maligant party
they intend all the members of both Houses, who agree not with them in their
opinion, and all the Persons of the Kingdom, who aprove not of their Actions:
they who have stood ^toutly and manfully for the Religion, the Liberties, the
Laws, for all Public Intere^^: (so long as there were any to be stood for)
They who have allway s been, and are as ^ealous Professors, and able and
earnest Defenders of the Pro^estant Doctrine against Church of Rome, as any
are. They to whose wisdom, courage and counsel ^^e Kingdom owes so much as
it can to subjects, and upon whose unblemished w ays, ea^y ^t self can lay no
imputations, then I am a malignant, else not.
new Malignant, and dangerons Person, who was one of the first appeared in it
for the Parliament; when as others long in actual arms against it, now walk at
large; and one who took and subscribed the Kings Oath, against the Parliament,
renouncing and declaring them Traitors and Rebels, with others, whose base
unworthy cowardice lost and betrayed the whole County to the Enemy, (whom they
durst never face or encounter) are now employed, as great Commanders, in our
new raising Militia: who (as I have good grounds to suspect) are the original
Contrivers of this my injurious Restraint; out of mere malice, or envy to show
that they are now men of trust, and power, sufficient to Tyrannize over me as
well as others, who never did them the least injury, but only reprehended them
for their Injustice and Opressions, of which the whole County complained. The
sat^sfaction of whose malicious desires, in this illegal way, will purchase
you ten thousand times more dishonor, and do you more disservice, by
discontenting thousands of your Friends, and giving your Enemies just occasion
of rejoicing, than ever their valor or Military Service is like to do you
good, either in the County or Kingdom; and render you as detestable to the
People, as ever my former sufferings and Imprisoments did the Bishops or
Star Chamber, the greatest occasion of their downfalls,

Illegal, injurious, yea, Destructive to the Peoples Libertys, and also settled
Laws, for their Defense, in diverse respects; in which I must crave Liberty, a
little to expatiate, for fear my present silence or flender glances thereat,
should prejudice my own and the whole Nations Liberties, deeply concerned in
this new President of*Injustice on my self, so great a stickler against all
Arbitrary and Tyrannical Proceedings of this nature, and one of the greatest
Sufferers under them.

Not to dispute at present the Lawfulness of your present Power; which many
justly question. The utmost (I conceive) you do, or can pretend to, is only the
Power of the ancient privy Council or Council Table, under our Kings; not in
its utmost latitude, and exorbitances, but as regulatedby the late Act, against
the Star Chamber. Which Council Table (to my best remembrance) never issued
any Warant so illegal as this, in all particulars, against my self or others,
nor executed it by be mere Military Officers, on the Lords own day, as your
Soldiers did this; to proclaim to all the world, how little they esteem or
observ^ your new misnamed Act, against traveling or arresting any on the Lords
day; the penalty whereof none dare to levy on Soldiers; I shall only here
briefly argue and evince the Illegality of your Warrant, a Capite ad Calcem; as
well as my present restrained condition, and want of Books, and Time, will
permit me; that you and others may see, what ground you have to retract and to
be ashamed of it, as I hope you will upon the reading hereof.

First, I conceive it wholly illegal in respect of the Persons to whom it is
directed, and by whom it is to be, and was accordingly Executed; which are not,
legal civil Officers of Justice, (as Sherriffs, Justices of Peace, Majors,
Headboroughs, under Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables, Sergeants, sworn Messengers
and the like), the Sea B ooks Abridg^m^nt. Tit. Officers. Ra^^als ^bridgm^nts
Tit. Sherif^s Justices of Peace, constables, (...) Ma^ors etc. and Oath 9. E.
3. Stat. of Lincoln. 1. ^. 3. c* 4. 14. E. 3. c. 11. 13. E. 1. ^. 37. 13 ^. 2.
c. 7. 18. H. 6. c. 11. 27. El^z. c. 12 12. E. 1. c. 10.. 14 E. 1 c. 8. 28. E.
3. c. 6.
only lawful Officers to serve, and execute all legal Writs, Process,
Warrants whatsoever, by the Common Statute-Laws and Customs of this Realm; who
are and ought to be known Refients in the County, where they may be always
found; taking an Oath, duly to execute their respective Offices according to
Law; and Persons of Estate, able to render* Damages to the Presons they
attach, in case their Warrants be illegal or not legally pursued in the
execution. But mere Soldiers of fortune, Strangers, having no constant
residence, nor visible estates in the County, to render me or others Damages,
in an Action of Trespass or false Imprisonment, should we sue them; and no
legal Officers* known or allowed by out Laws to execute Processes or Warrants,
from any civil Power* no not in times of War (especially where there is no
necessity, nor precedent resistance, as in my case,) much less in times of
Peace, as now, wherein the S^eriffs and Justices only are to su^presse all
force, and sumults, if there be any need, by the Posse Comitatus; in which
cases Soldiers are only to assist them, as auxil ari^s* not as sole, as
princible Officers, or Executioners, as in and by your Warrants they are now
usually made, against Law, and the practices of all former ages. Which late
illegal Usage of employing Soldiers, in this kind, to arest men's Persons,
break up and search their Houses (reputed M. St. John's Argument at Law, at his
attainder.
High Treason, and a levying of War against the King and his People, in
Straffords case the very last Parliament) as it has already occasioned many
Barbarous Murders, dangerous Burglares, and Roberies in sundry places, and in
the very heart of Witness M. Lemot, aad others, near the ^xchange, and Sir
Edward Hales in White-Fryers.
of London it self by Soldiers and others, pretending Warrants from your New
Council of State, or others in present power, to apprehend Delinquents, or
search for Arms, Papers etc. so it is like to produce many more sad Tragedies
and outrages of this kind, to the endangering of all men's Persons, lives,
estates, thus prostituted to the violence, rapine, of every Rogue, Thief,
Villain, who shall but counterfeit himself a Soldier, and pretend your Warrant
for search of any man's house, study, or apprehension of any man's Person he has
a design to rob or murder* Which common mischief can be no otherwise
prevented, but by directing all warrants, only to known Officers, according to
Law and ^ public Declaration, to all the Kingdom, that no Soldiers or others
under Pain of death, shall dare presume to execute or counterfeit any such
Warrants for the future; it being no part of their calling or employment, and a
great oppression, and terror to the People, contrary to the express clause of
the Commissions of the Peace, and of Oyer and Terminer, against such who ride
armed in companies, to the Terrror of the Kings people, who cannot easily
distinguish who are Soldiers really employed, and who are Counterfeits; and
have sometimes been affrighted, not only to sickness and great distempers of
spirit, but even to death it self, by the sudden violent Attachments, and
searches of Soldiers; of whose rudeness and incivility in their executions,
others have much complained, though those who seized me, were as respective
toward me, as your warrant would permit, transgressing only in the
unseasonablenesse of the time, and illegalities you enjoined them.

2. Your warrant is directly contrary to Law, and the Subjects Liberty, in that
it commits me Prisoner, yea close Prisoner, before and without the least
Accusation, conviction of any particular Crime, any hearing, ^xamining^ what I
can say for my self; and so a mere forejudging of me, and going to ^xecution
before the fact examined* contrary to all forms of Legal proceedings in all
criminal causes whatsoever; where the accused Persons for any See Daltons and
Cromptons Justice of Peace, Poulton and others. 2 and 3. Phil. and Mac. 10. 11.
H. 7. c. 7.
Trespass, Felony, or Treason, are first sent for, and examined in the
presence of their Accusers, before they be committed. Contrary to the very
proceedings of the most exorbitant High Commisioners, who at first only
summoned, not attached me for my Perpetuity, and after that, for my Cosens
cozening Devotions, to appear and answer the same before them. Contrary to the
proceeding of the Lords atthe Council Table it self, for my Histriomast ix
(suggested to be Seditious and Scandalous, in the Superlative degree, to the
King, Queen, Court, Council, Kingdom, Government,) who yet thereupon only
summoned me by a single sworn Messenger, to appear in the Inner Star Chamber,
before them, to answer such things as should be there objected against me for
that Book, but never once seized or Committed my Person, until after they had
examined and heard me concerning i^, such was their Justice, and moderation
toward me in their first Process, whereas you now commit me close Prisoner at
a great distance, before, yea without any Summons, hearing or examination I
know not for what pretended writings: So much do you now outstrip them in
violence and injustice; Whereas if you had ought against me, you might have
summoned me to appear before you, whiles I was in London the last Term, in
commons, or since that residing openly, constantly at my country House, without
absenting my self, or being ever yet a fugitive, and examined me, as they did,
before you thus rashly committed me hand over head, in such a notorious way of
violence, in the face of all the County and Kingdom; who cannot but conclude,
you are more Tyrannically exorbitant herein, than ever the King or Prelates
were against me, and have hereby, most notoriously infringed Magna Charta. c.
29. the Statutes of 25. E. 1. c. 1. 2. 28. E. 1. c. 1. 5. E. 3. c. 4. 37. and
42. E. 3. With other Acts, collected by (Rastall in his Abridgment, tittle
accusation) the Petition of Right, the Resolation of the three last
Parliaments, and all our Law Books* which directly enact, adjudge, and declare,
That no Freeman ought to be attached or imprisoned upon any Accusation, or
suggestion made to the King, or his Council (much less then unto you) unless
it be by Indictment, impeachment, of his good and lawful Neighbors, or by
Process made by a writ original at the common Law: And if any thing be d^ne
against the same, it shall be reversed and holden for none. Which Laws you have
sworn, professed, covenanted to observe, and are bound to do it, as a Lawyer,
much more as a Christian; it being the very Law of the Pagan Romans, Acts. 25.
16. and of the very Jews themselves, John. 7. 44, etc. whose Officer^ refuse to
apprehend our saviors Person, upon the High Priests warrant, because never man
spoke as he did; and their Law Deuteronomy. 13. 12, 13, 14, 15. Josh. 22. 12. to 34.
judged not any man (to be apprehended, much less imprisoned) before it heard
him, and knew what he does. Wherefore, you cannot but recal^ and condemn this
Warrant, and its execution, as most repugnant to these Statutes, and the very
Law of Nature, of Nations, and Genesis 11. 5, 6, 7. c. 18, 21, 22.
Gods own Proceedings with the worst of men.

3. Every Warrant of Attachment (Sr. Edward Cook proves at large in his 2
Institutes On Magna Charta. c. 29.) ought to be, to summon, or bring the
parties to be examined, before they be committed: and every Mittimus after
examination, ought to express the cause justly, and time for which they are to
be imprisoned, as during pleasure, or till further order, or till they shall
put in bayl, or be delivered by Law; as likewise, the manner how they shall be
tried, for what they are accused: and not be absolute, as a Judgment or
sentence after hearing: But your Warrant is, a mere Judgment before hearing or
examination, without any such causes; committing me close Prisoner without any
limitation of time, (and so for ought I know, during life) or ever intending to
bring me to any legal examination or Trial. Therefore altogether illegal in
this respect.

4. The Statutes of 5. E. 3 c* 8. 23. H. 8. c. 2, and 5. H. 4. cap. 10. enact;
That the Prisons to which evil doors shall be committed for their evil
offenses, shall be in the most eminent and populous Towns of the County, where
the Assizes or Sessions are usu^lly kept, and where is most resort and repair
of People, that they may be the oftener visited, the better relieved by their
Friends and others; and THAT NONE SHALL BE IMPRISONED IN PRIVATE CASES. And the
Book of 21. E. 4. 71, Brook Imprisonment 80, is express; That no Court can
imprison any, but in their proper prisons belonging to them; and that the Fleet
is the proper Prison to the Star Chamber and Palace* whither they ought to
commit them: else men, through malice and Power, might be sent to obscure
Castles, and remote Prisons, and there starved or destroyed for want of
necessaries, or purposely As the Duke of Gloucester was at Calis, and Hunny the
Martyr was in Lollards Tower.
murdered out of malice or design be private Persons; which they cannot so
easily be in in common Goals, where are store of Company; and the Sea Rastals
Abridgement, Gaol and Gaolers.
common Goalers themselves (sworn and bound by Law, to treat their Prisoners
well,) may be indicted and punished for abusing them. Upon which Statutes and
grounds, the whole House of Common, resolved it thrice upon the Question, and
afterward the whole House of Lords thrice A New Discovery of the Prelates
Tyranny. p. 137. 138. etc. 165. to 179.
voted, and adjudged, my imprisonment in Carnarvan and Mount Orgu^il Castles,
Dr. Bastwicks in Lanceston and Syllye Castles, and Mr. Burtons in Lancaster and
Gernsey Castles, both by sentence of Star Chamber and the old Council tables
warrants, to be contrary to the Law and Liberty of the Subject. Your warrant
therefore for my imprisonment in Dunster Castle, (never yet a Prison) under the
Custody of Soldiers only, not of a Lawful Jailer (especially being no
Prisoner of war, nor ever in arms) is diametrically contrary to these Statutes,
Votes, Resolutions, the Law of the Land, and Subjects Liberties. And so much
the rather, because, tho there be good Air, and prospect, in the Castle, yet
there are no Provisions at all within it for the body or soul; No meat to be
had dressed, but at great distance from the Castle; which is very chargeable
and inconvenient to a close Prisoner: and no preaching Minister settled either
in Castle or Town, to comfort, or feed the soul, or to which by your Warrant I
may resort; and it is above 50 miles distant from my house, where I have no
Friend, nor accquaintance near to visit, or supply my wants: And so parallel to
my close imprisonment in Carnarvan and Mount-Orgueil Castles, yea worse in one
respect, ^hey being after a kind of public hearing and sentence, in a Court of
Justice, and this only by a priv^te warrant, before any hearing, examination,
or accusation that I hear of, by those who have been my friends, and for ought
I yet know, have no legal power to commit me in any case, as that Court had in
some cases, though not in such a manner or to such Prisons as then, or now.

5. Your warrant is defective and illegal in the very grounds of my commitment,
which are merely gener^ll and uncertain: viz. For his seditious writings and
practices against the commonwealth, without particularizing what these
writings or practices are; or when or where published, committed, or by whom or
in what manner sugg^sted, or proved before you; or, against what Commonwealth,
or f^rm of Commonwealth in particular; whether of England, Scotland, Ireland,
or of any particular County, Corporation or Society, within them, which are
Joan: Ang: Wondenhagen Polit. Synopt. l. 2. c. 1. sect. 10 where the various
acceptionsof the word Commonwealth are sp^cified.
real Commonwealths within themselves. Which general uncertain charge and
slander against me, so great an advocate for the true inter^st and Republic of
England, as all my writings evidence* imports just nothing, but either
malici^us suggestions, groundless suspicions, or feigned pretenses against me,
to deprive me of my Liberty; and were long since voted and adjudged in the
Parliaments, of 3, 4, and 16. Caroli, in the cases of Sr. John Eliot and
others, committed prisoners to the Tower, Fleet, and Gate House, by the Lords
of the Council, by the Kings special command, for stirring up sedition and
s^ditions Practices against the state (the very same your warrant suggests
against me) to be too general and ill^gal, and no grounds at all for a
commitment; no more then schismatious inveteratus, resolved to be too general
a cause of a clerk^ refusal by the ordinary in Sperots case 7. Report. f. 57,
58.
Cooks Reports.

6. Your Warrant charge the Governor, to imprison me in the Castle, and not
to suffer m^ to have conferenc^ with any, but in his presence and bearing; nor
to send or receive any Letters, but such as he shall peruse. A clause of the
highest restraint and oppression I ever yet suffered, or met with; For if the
Governor voluntarily, or necessarily absent himself, I must neither speak
with, nor write to any man, upon what urgent occasion soever, nor receive any
Letter of whatso ever importance; be shut up a close Prisoner night and day,
always guarded when I take the air in the Castle (as now I am) and not repair
to any Church or meeting, to hear, fast, pray, receive the Sacrament, nor send
my own Servant out of my Chamber, or the Castle, (as now I cannot) for any
necessaries, for fear of infringing this strict formidable Warrant, which puts
me into the self same condition I was in at Carnarvan and Mount Orgueil
Castles, and will prove as fatal to my own, and all Freemens liberties of
England (if not recalled and exploded with highest indignation) as those my
R^straints and close Imprisonments were (with my Brother Bastwicks and Burtons
too) by the Votes and Judgment of both Houses, whereof I think meet to give
you this full account. When I was first committed to the Tower by the Lords of
the Council for my Histriomastix, (suggested to be seditious and scandalous in
the highest degree) the words of the Lords Warrant to the Lieutenant were, A
new discovery of the Prelates Tyranny, p. 9. 142.
to require him to keep me safe Prisoner in the Tower, without giving free
access unto me, until he should receive farther Order: yet this warrant,
though all my friends had present free access to, and conference with me in
public and private, without any restraint or perusal of Letters to or from me
(not expressing any particular cause for my commitment) was by the unanimous
Vote of the whole House of Commons 20 Aprilis 1631. in these words, resolved to
be illegal; Resolved upon the question, That the imprisonment of Mr. Prynne (in
the Tower) by a warrant under the hand of Thomas Lord Coventry, and others
(therein named) IS UNJUST and ILLEGAL: And that they ought to give Mr. Prynne
satisfaction for his damages sustained by that Imprisonment. And in my Brother
Burtons case ^ committed close Prisoner to the Fleet by the Lords, for
preaching and publishing a seditious Sermon and Book (as they termed it)
entitled (For God and the King:) the House of Commons the 12 of March 1640.
passed this Vote, Ibidem p. 15, 16. 139. 140.
Resolved upon the Q^estion, That the Warrant from the Council Board, d ted at
White Hall Febr. 2. 1636. for the committing of Mr. Burton close Prisoner, and
the commitment thereupon* IS ILLEGAL, AND CONTRARY TO THE LIBERTY OF THE
SUBJECT: And that he ought to have reparations for his damages sustained by
this Imprisonment. And whereas we both, with Dr. Bastwick, for pretended
sedit^ous Books and Practices; were, after a kind of hea^ing in S^archamber,
sentenced, and ordered To be kept close Prisoners in 3 remote Castle; and after
that, by Ibid^m p. 85, 86, 87, 137. 138. 141. 142.
Order and Warrant of the old Council Table, removed into 3 Castles in the
Ifles of Jersy, Gerxsey and Silly; and there, for preventing the danger of
spreading our (pretended) schismatical and seditious opinions, ordered, to be
kept close Prisoners, and none to be permitted to have free conference with, or
access unto us, but only such faithful and discreet persons as should be
appointed to attend us; and that no Letters or Writings should be permitted to
be brought to us, or sent from us to any person or persons; and if there should
be any such brought or sent, that the same should be opened by the Governors,
or their Deputies; and if they contained any thing material or considerable,
that the same should be sent to one of his Majesty's principle Secretaries:
(the substance of your present Warrant, which seems but the Copy of it in this
particular,) the whole House of Commons three several times, upon the question
resolved; and the Lords upon our three distinct hearings, thrice adjudged,
Those Sentences, Orders, Warrants, and restra^nts therein cont^ined, And so
declared by the whole House of Commons, in their Remonstrance of the State of
the Kingdom, 15 D^cemb. 1641. Exact Coll. p. 6. 8. 11, 12, and confessed by the
King himself in his Declaration of Aug. 12. 1642. Exact Collect. P* 518.
TO BE AGAINST THE LAW AND LIBERTY OF THE SVBIECT, the Great Charter of England,
and other forecited Statutes; and that we ought to receive Damages for the
same, from those who had a vote or hand therein. Which illegal Sentences,
Warrants of Restraint, and Exile (as you and your associates well know) were
the principal occasion of Suppressing both the High Commission, Starchamber,
and Council Tables exce^ses, by two special Acts of Parliament, and one
principle charge against beheaded Canterbury. Wherefore, I cannot but stand
amazed, to find you not only imitating, but in some sort exceeding them in this
your Warrant, being privy to these Votes, and of Counsel to some of us,
declaiming as bitterly against such illegal restraints, and the Authors of
them, as any; which yet now you practice with an high hand, against all these
Votes, in my very case; which will fall heavy on you.

I beseech you therefore sadly to consider, what all my Friends, yea your best
Friends, and Enemies too, will think, report of you for the present, and
register to posterity; and what our whole 3 Kingdoms and Foreign Nations will
judge of you and your Associates for this your warrant and close restraint of
me thereby: Will they not report, publish to all the world, that you are more
cruel, tyrannical, extravagant, unjust, than the beheaded King, (condemned by
your own Sentence for a Tyrant) or than Canterbury, Strafford, the High
Commission, Starchamber, or old Council Table; and that your little singer is
now grown heavier than their whole loins, not only to your Enemies but Friends?
Yea, that you deal worse with me, than the most bloody Tyrant Nero did with
Paul, when Prisoner under him at Rome (though charged Acts 24. 6.
for a pestilent fellow, and stirrer up of Sedition among the Jews throughout
the World;) who yet See A New Discovery of the Prelates Tyranny, p. 170 to 181.
where this point is fully debated.
had there free liberty, without the least restraint, publicly and privately
to confer with, send for, yea preach to whom he pleased, and to receive all
persons (and Letters too) that came unto him, no man forbidding him: Acts 28.
14. to the end. Nay, worse than men by Law can deal with their Trespassers or
ill-Tenants Beasts; which ought to be kept in ^n overt open Pound, where the
Owners, and all others may freely visit, feed, relieve, replevy them at their
pleasures without restraint; and not shut up in a close room, where none may
see or feed them, but by the oversight and leave of others: as the Statute of 1
and 2 Phil. and Mary, c. 12. 5 H. 7. 9. with other Law Books resolve. Nay
worse* than the late Parliament dealt with Strafford, or Canterbury, when
impeached of High Treasons of the greatest magnitude, against the King and
Kingdom, by all the Commons of England; who had no such restraints of
Conference, or Letters on them, as you now lay upon me, but absolute freedom of
both, and full liberty of the Tower, till Strafford endeavored an escape from
thence. And will you deal more rigorously with me, than the Parliament did with
these Arch-Traytors? Let not such an oppression, an exorbitancy as this, be
ever heard of in 2 Samuel 1. 20.
Askelon, or published of you in Gath, lest all your and my Enemies should
rejoice thereat.

If you pretend necessity of State, or the public Peace and safety, for these
Illegal Proce^dings; it is but the very same Plea the Prelates pretended for my
close Imprisonment, and banishment heretofore; the Sea Mr. St. John's Spe^ch
concerning it at the Judges Impeachment.

And the Kings Answer to the Petition of both Houses, Exact Coll. p. 127. 518.
586. 879. 858, 882.


King, for the Loans, Excise, Shipmoney; and the Army for my last restraint,
violence to both Houses, and their secured secluded Members: A plea which soon
resolve^ into, Scelera sceleribus tuenda, and necessitates men at last, to
commit one violence, sin, and wickedness, after another, till they perish in
their villainies, and sink down quick into Hell, and is at this day the greatest
Argument, Instrument, the Devil has, to precipitate men (formerly moderate,
merciful, just, religious) into most ^xorbitant, scandalous, Whence the King
in his Answer to the Declaration of the Lords and Commons of the 19 of May
1641. Exact Collection p. 252. thus advises both Houses, To take heed of
inclining under the specious show of Necessity and Danger, to the exercise of
such an Arbitrary power they before complained of. The advice (says he) will
do no harm, and we shall be glad to see it followed.
violent unrighteous Actions, Designs, and to induce them to proceed
impenitently from one extremity to another, which they formerly most severely
censured, sentenced in others; yet now approve and justify in themselves, when
they find their own interest concerned, or their carnal f^ars or jealousies of
others really Innocent, suggesting any thoughts of some close designs against
their ways of violence and public desolation, instead of sincere repentance,
confession and reformation, of what their own consciences inform them secretly
to be evil and unjust. Wherefore I desire you in this case, to beware of this
most dangerous snar^ of the Devil, and that maxim now in many men's mouths*
unworthy men or Christians: Over shoo^s, over Boots: We are engaged, and
therefore can neither with honor, safety, nor prudence, recede from what we
have done amiss: When as all our honor, safety, prudence, and eternal
salvation too, consists only, in our 2. Ch^on. 28 6. to ^6. Ezech 18. 7. 12.
13. 16, 17, 18. Isay 58. 6, 7, 8. Obad. 10 to 17. Mic. 2. 1, 2, 3. Lu. 19. 8.
Acts. 16. 33, 34.
retreating, actual repentance, and satisfaction to the parties injur^d, in
suh c ases, by our unrighteous dealings and oppressions, because we have only
present power in our hands, to oppress and injure them.

6. Your warrant orders them, to search all my Chambers' studies and places in
my house for Papers, Writings, Records, and before any accusation or
conviction; the highest strain of Regal, Prelaticall, High Commission, and
councill-Table Tyranny, An exact Collection. p. 6. 11, 12. 31. 37, 38. 156.
500. A New Discoveoy of the Prelates Tyranny. p. 15. 138. 140. in the cases of
Dr. Bastwick, and Mr. Burton.
r^solved by the two late Parliaments and whole house of C^mmons, to be an high
intrenchment upon the Subje^ts Liberties, and property, contrary to Magna
Chart^, the Petition of Right, the Judgment in S^mai^s case; much censured by
Sir Edward Cook in his 4th. Institutes, in the Chapter of Justices of the
Peace: and in the cases of Ex^ct C^llection. p. 6. 11, 12. 35. 37, 38. and 156,
157*
Mr. Cre^, Mr. Pym, and other members o^ Parliament ^ and such a one I yet am,
if the former Parliament has a being since the Kings beheading, the Lords
suppression* and most Common^ ^eclusion, as you hold it has) an high
infring^^nt of the Privileges of P^rliament, of which whosoever are, or shall
be guilty, they are by several Orders, votes, and Ordinances of Parliam^^t,
declared, to be En^mies both to the Parliament, and Co^mon*weal^h* of England,
and to be appr^^ended and proc^^ded against as such.

In all which respects your present Warrant, and the execution of it, being so
diametrically contrary to the known The true custody and safeguard of all
public and private Interests, The inheritance of every Subject, and the sec^ty
he can have both of his l^fe, liberty, or estate: and the which being
dis-esteemed, or neglected, (under what specious shows soever) a very great
measure of infelicity, if not of irreparable confusion, must without doubt fall
upon them: as the King himself and both Houses declare. Exact Collection. p.
28, 29. 267. 284. 491, 492. 494. 503 694.
Laws and Statutes of the Realm, the votes and Declarations of both Houses of
the Parliament, in mine own and others cases, and the late Declarations of
Febr. the 11. and March 17. 1648. of those now acting; I shall of mere Right,
not any grace or favor, demand and expect from your self, and your Ass^ciates
of the long Robe (my quondam special Friends) who know all the premises to be
Law and this Warrant most illegal, a present revocation and condemnation
^hereof as such, and my present absolute enlargement, without any condition,
restriction, caution or engagement whatsoever; which I resolved never to enter
into (being liable only to punishment when, and if I do amiss, and am legally
convicted of it,) that so I may follow my Country affairs this harvest time,
without any such future interruption and vexation. And withal to send me the
names of my Accusers, and their particular Accusation, (if there be any such)
that so I may rec^ive reparations from them or you, for this most
injurious*restraint, to my great trouble, cost and prejudice; which I am
confident you neither will nor can in Justice or honor deny me. But if this
will not be granted; as this my unjust restraint, may then prove as
prejudicial to you, as my former Imprisonments did to the Canterbury, the
Pr^lates, and Star Chamber, and will cry as loud to heaven, against you as they
did against them; till God himself delivered me by some other means; I shall
then request this Justice only at your hands.

First, that you would take care that my soul be not starved, for want of
spiritual food, or free access unto it, when there are any sermons in the
Town: where there is yet no settled Minister, but a Lecture at some times and
days. A The denial whereof is charged by the Commons as a great illegal
Grievance and evil. Exact Collection p. 6.
Libert^ enjoyed during my former Imprisonments.

2. That you will allow, and take care for my diet, during my close restraint,
if you will needs keep me up a close Prisoner* my estate being exhausted by my
former sufferings, the loss of my calling, public Taxes, Free quarter, and
scarce able to support my family at home; now left like sheep without a
shepherd.

3. That if you will not be so just and charitable* that at least you will
cause the 800 l. due unto me as contractor (for which I never received o^e
farthing, though it cost and lost me double the value, and I should never have
demanded it, but upon this extraordinary occasion of expense) with all the free
quarter, certified to be due unto me for the last year, under (...)
Commissioners hands, and yet not satisfied, to be forthwith paid; to help
sustain me, during this my present extremity, (which I hope you will Magna
Charta* c. 29.
not delay, or deny) I shall till then remain,

Yours illegally restrained close Prisoner, WILL. PRYNNE.
Dunster-Castle July 5. 1650.
Mr. Prynnes second Letter to Mr. Bradshaw.
SIR,
I Informed you by my Letter the 5 of this instant July, of the forcible
breaking and searching of my house and Study at Swainswick, seizing and
carrying away my Person and Papers about Midnight, on the Lords Day, by a Party
of Horse, and my close imprisonment ever since in Dunster Castle, by pretext of
a Warrant signed with your hand; the illegality whereof, and of its execution,
I therein undeniably demonstrated, by Acts, Votes, Resolutions of Parliament in
my very case, and proved them more exorbitant, then the worst first proceedings
of the Prelates, High Commission, Council Table, or Star Chamber against me,
under the late King, whom you your self And think thou this O man that
judge them which do such things, and do the same, that thou shall escape
the judgment of God? Romans 2. 3.
condemned to have his head severed from his shoulders for a Tyrant, demanding
thereupon of mere right my present Enlargement from this unjust imprisonment,
with reparations for the same. To which as yet receiving no answer, after above
a fortnights restraint, contrary to expectation, and Magna Charta it self:
Nulli negabimus, nulli differemus justitiam aut rectum: and hearing, that by a
like illegal Warrant under your hand, made to Soldiers, not sworn Officers,
they have broken open my Study, seized all my writings and Trunkes at Lincolns
Inn, and carried them to White Hall, contrary to the Law of the Land, and
Liberty and property of the Subject; I am thereupon necessitated for the
Defense of mine own, and the Nations Liberties, (for which I have so deeply
suffered, in Defense whereof, we have of late years spent so many Millions of
Treasure, and Tuns of Gallant English blood) to make this solemn Protestation
to you, and all the world, That these Warrants and Proceedings of yours against
me, are altogether illegal, tyrannical and exorbitant, contrary to Magna
Charta, the Petition of Right, the Resolutions of the 3 last Parliaments, the A
new D^svery of the Prelates Tyranny. p. 15, 16, 120, 121, 128, 132, 137, 140,
225.
votes of both Houses in my very Case, and the Cases of my Brother Dr. Bastwick
and Mr. Burton, the Law of the Land, the Subjects Liberties and Property, and
many Declarations of the last Parliament, published to the World.

To begin with the breaking up of my House, Study, seizing of my writings and
Papers, Records, and imprisoning my Person, before any hearing, examining, or
legal accusation against me, by color of your illegal Warrant (the revived
Exorbitances of the High Commission, and old Council Table, under which the
Freemen of England formerly groaned, and most sadly complained) I shall desire
you and the whole Kingdom (by way of supplement to my former Letter) to take
notice,

1. First, That in the cases of my Brother Dr. Bastwick, and Mr. Burton, (whose
Houses, and Studies were broken open, searched, and their Writings, Books,
Persons seized, by color of a Warrant from the High Commis. and old
Council Table) the whole House of Commons, upon the report of their Cases,
passed these two Votes A new Discovery etc. p. 137, 138, 139.
Feb. 24. 1640. Resolved upon the Question; That the Precept made by the
Archbishop of Canterbury, and other high Commissioners for causes
Ecclesiastical within the Realm of England, for apprehending the body of Doctor
Bastwick; and for searching for, and seizing of his Books; and the making and
issuing thereof, and likewise the Messengers Act in searching Dr. Bastwicks
House and Study, and searching and taking away his Books and Papers, by that
Precept, ARE AGAINST* Nota,
LAW, AND THE LIBERTY OF THE SUBJECT. And March 12. 1640. Resolved upon the
Question; That the breaking open of Mr. Burtons House, and arresting his
person, before any cause depending against him in the Star Chamber; and his
close imprisonment thereupon, are against the Law and Liberty of the Subject.
That John Wragge has offended in searching and faising the Books and Papers of
Mr. Henry Burton, by color of the general Warrant Dormant from the High
Commission; and that that Warrant IS AGAINST THE LAW, AND LIBERTY OF THE
SUBJECT: and that S^rjeant Dendy, and Alderman Abel have offended, in breaking
open the House of Mr. Burton, and ought to make reparations to Mr. Burton for
the damages he sustained by breaking open his house. And that John Wragge ought
to make reparations to Mr. Burton for the damages h^ Justained by breaking open
his Study, and seizing his Books and Papers.

2ly. That after this, the whole House of Commons in their Remonstrance of the
State of the Kingdom, the 15 December, 1641. reciting many grievances therein
complained of (now acted over in a far See Exact Collection, p. 558. 559.
Witness Excise, Tonnage and Poundage, Monthly Contributions, Quarte^ing of
Soldiers; new Oaths and Judicatures without and against Law; ta^ing away men's
Arms, breaking open men's hous^s, imprisoning and confini^g their Persons.
higher degree than ever they were under the beheaded King) sadly remonstrated,
Exact Collection, p. 8.
That great numbers of his Majesty's Subjects for refusing unlawful Charges,
Taxes, New Oaths and Judicatures erected against Law, have been committed t^
long and hard imprisonments, and others have had their houses broken up, their
goods seis^d, and some have been restrained for their lawful callings. And
that the very next day after the Parliament ended, the fifth of May, 1640. Some
Members of both Houses, had their Studies and Cabinets, yea their Pockets
searched; which they declare to be contrary to the Law, and the Subjects
Liberty.

3ly. That in the Case of Members (and such a one I still am, if the Parliament
or House of Commons be yet in being, as you do and must affirm) the whole House
of Commons 3 Jan. 1641. published and printed this Order, Exact Collection, p.
35.
It is this day ordered upon the Question by the Commons House of Parliament,
That if any persons whatsoever shall come to the Lodgings of any Member of this
House, and there do offer to seal the Truncks, Doors or Papers of any Members
of this House (which is less than to break open, search, and take them quite
away by armed Soldiers, as in my case) or to foise upon their Persons; That
then such Members shall require the aid of the Constable, to keep such persons
in safe custody till this House do give further Order. And this House does
further declare; That if any Person whatsoever shall offer to arrest or detain
the person of any Member of this House, without first acquainting this House
therewith, and receiving further Order from this House, That it is lawful for
such Member, or any Person, to assist him, and to stand upon his or their guard
of Defense, and to make resistance, according to the Protestation taken, to
def^nd the Privileges of Parliament.

4ly. That afterward the Commons House in their Exact Col. p. 38, 39, 41.
Declaration of the same January (in case of the 5 impeached Members) published
to all the Kingdoms, further declared and ordered, That whereas the Chambers,
Studies and Truncks of Mr. Denzil Hollis, Sir Arthur Haslerigge, Mr. John Pym,
Mr. John Hampden, and Mr. William Strode, Esquires, Members of the House of
Commons, upon Monday the third of this instant January, by color of his
Majesty's Warrant, have been sealed up (not broken up, searched, and carried
away as mine are, which is far more) by Sir William Killigrew, and Sir William
Flemen, and others, which is, NOT ONLY AGAINST Nota.
THE PRIVILEGES OF PARLIAMENT, BUT THE COMMON LIBERTY OF EVERY SUBJECT*
Whereupon we are uecessitated according to our duty, to declare, And we do
hereby declare, that if any person shall arrest Mr. Hollis, Sir Arthur
Haslerigge, Mr. Pym, Mr. Hampden, and Mr. Strode, or any of them, or any other
Member of Parliament, by pretense or color of any Warrant issuing out from the
King only, he is guilty of the breach of the Liberty of the Subject, and of the
Privilege of Parliament, and a public Enemy to the Common wealth. And that the
arresting of the said Members, or any of them, or any other Member of
Parliament, by any Warrant Nota,
whatsoever (therefore by yours now) without a Legal proceeding against them,
and without consent of that House, whereof such Person is a Member, IS AGAINST
THE LIBERTY OF THE SUBJECT, AND A BREACH OF THE PRIVILEGE OF PARLIAMENT; And
the Person that shall arrest any of these Persons, or any other Member of the
Parliament, is declared a public Enemy of the Commonwealth. And we do further
Declare, That the Privileges of Parliament, and the Liberties of the Subject so
violated and broken, cannot be fully and sufficiently vindicated, unless his
Majesty will be graciously pleased, to discover the names of those persons, who
advised his Majesty to issue out Warrants for the sealing of the Chambers and
Studies of the said Members, to send a Sergeant at Arms to the House of Commons
to demand their said Members, to issue out several Warrants under his Majesty's
own hand to apprehend the said Members; Whereupon those who sealed up these
Members Studies and Truncks were committed Prisoners, and threatened to be put
by their places; as some of them then were.

From all which Votes, Resolutions, Declarations (to omit many Exact Collection
p. 77, 78, 156, 157, 458, 483.
others of this Nature) I must conclude and protest; that if the breaking up,
searching for, seizing, and bare sealing up of the Doors, Studies, Trunks,
Papers of Subjects, and Members of the Commons House, or apprehending their
Persons by Warrants from the High Commission, old Council Table and King
himself, by Pursevants and Clerks of the Council Table (who were sworn Legal
Officers) be such an high violation of the Law of the Land, the Liberty of the
Subject, the Privileges of Parliament, and render such as are guilty thereof
declared Enemies to the Commonwealth: Then your breaking up, searching my
House, Studies, Trunks, and seizing of my Writings, Papers, Person, by armed,
unknown, obscure Soldiers, who are no Legal Officers* after all these Votes
and Declarations, must much more be against the Law, and Liberty of the
Subject, the Privileges of Parliament, and render you, them, and all who were
active in it, notorious Enemies to the Commonwealth of England, unless you
give me speedy Satisfaction and Reparations for the Injury, and retract those
violent Proceedings with shame and indignation; which I Demand and expect of
Right, without further delay.

Next, I must acquaint you, that I and my Servant too, have now been kept up
close Prisoners, and restrained from all Gods public Ordinances, above this
fortnight, by color of your illegal Warrant; whereas the whole House of
Commons, in their ^x^ct Coll. p. 6.
Remonstrance of the State of the Kingdom, 15 December. 1641. reputed and Declared
this, as the Completing of cruelty, under the late King, That some Members
detained close Prisoners, after the Dissolution of the Parliament 4 Caroli,
were deprived of the necessary means of spiritual Consolation, in not suffering
them to go abroad to enjoy Gods Ordinances in Gods house. Which soul-murthering
cruelty I now suffer by your unjust restraint, and my Servant likewise.

I beseech you sadly to consider, not only the great Scandal, but impiety and
danger of such restraints from public Ordinances. The Scripture defines the
Devil himself to be the Original Author of such Imprisonments, Restraints of
Gods Saints and Servants, Rev. 2, 16. And further assures us, That Matthew. 25.
41. to 46.
Christ at the last Judgment, will say to those who did but only not feed,
cloth, and visit the least of his Saints, when they were in Prison; Depart from
me ye cursed, into everlasting fire prepared for the ^evil and his Angels: What
an heavy Doom then will he pass against those, who (against all Rules of Law
and Justice,) cast them into Prison, and will there neither feed, cloth, nor
visit, but starv^ their bodies and souls too, as much as in them lies, by
depriving them of Gods Ordinances, and all means of livelihood, as you do me,
after all my former great losses, and long-continued sufferings. I cannot as yet
be so uncharitable, as to believe you design the ruin of my soul, body, and
wasted Estate; but if you de facto do it, by this injurious restraint, your
sin is as great, as if you did design it.

If you think to justify or excuse these Irregularities and unjust violent
Proceedings against me, by pretext of Necessity and public Danger, the only
thing in Justification I yet hear alleged by your Instruments; As this will be
no Plea at all before Christ's Tribunal in the great day of Judgment; who Lev.
25. 14. Ez* c. 18. 12, 13 Psalm. 10. 14, 18. 1 Cor. 6. 8, 9. Col. 3. 25. Mich.
2. 1, 2, 3*
prohibits all kind of violonce, injustice, oppression, injury upon any
Pretense what soever, and will severely punish it; their Romans 3. 3.
Damnation being most just who do evil upon this unrighteous ground, that good
may come of it: So it will not hold water before man's Tribunal, being resolved,
declared, by the Exact Collection, p. 518, 838, 879, 882, 885, 886.
Judgment of both Houses, and an Act of Parliament in cases of Shipmony,
Excise, Loans, to be no cause nor Justification of a Distress, much less of
an Imprisonment. And it being a Necessity and Danger of your own making, not
mine, the Rule of Law is, Little on Chap. Remitter.
That noman shall take advantage of his own wrong to the prejudice of another.
The late Beheaded King in his Exact Collection, p. 127.
Answer to the Petition of both Houses, 26 Martii, 1 642. is so ingenious, as
to confess, That the violating of Laws by his Ministers, and the mischief that
then grew by Arbitrary Power, was made plausible to Us, by the suggestion of
Necessity and Imminent danger; and thereupon he gave both Houses this caution:
And take you heed, you fall not into the same Error, upon the same suggestions;
which in his Exact Collection, p. 252.
Answer to the Remonstrance of the Lords and Commons of the 9th of May, 1642.
he thus seconds, And therefore we had good cause to bestow that Admonition (for
we assure you it was an Admonition of our own) upon both Houses of Parliament,
to take heed of inclining, under the specious shows of Necessity and Danger, to
the exercise of such an arbitrary Power they before complained of; The
Admonition will do no harm, and we shall be glad to see it followed. And
therefore for you, or those now acting, after these two serious Admonitions, to
pretend Necessity and Imminent Danger, for these, with other Arbitrary courses,
Proceedings, condemned in and by the King himself, and the whole Parliament,
must be the hight of Oppression, Injustice, and will render you Romans 2. 3. 16.
to 25.
more detestable to the Nation and World, than ever they did the King, or his
Evil Counselors.

To trouble you no further at present; I shall only inform you. That the
Commons in their Exact Colle ction, p. 10 492.
Remenstrance of the State of the Kingdom, December. 15. 1641. Yea, both Lords
and Common^ in their Declaration of 4 August, 1642. among other Designs,
Practices of the Malignant Party and Counselors about the King, complained of
this, as one of the most dangerous; And is not this the present case of most of
the Nobility, the late s^eluded, secured Members; and all conscientious
Presbyterians throughout the Realm, wh^ dare not violate their former Oaths,
Covenants, Protestations, Declarations, Remonstrances, publ^shed to all the
world? and of my self*
That they endeavored to make those odious, under the name of Puritans, who
sought to maintain the Religion, Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom; and such
men were sure to be And is not this the present case of most of the Nobility,
the late s^eluded, secured Members; and all conscientious Presbyterians
throughout the Realm, wh^ dare not violate their former Oaths, Covenants,
Protestations, Declarations, Remonstrances, publ^shed to all the world? and of
my self*
weeded out of the Commission of the Peace, and out of all other employments of
Power and Authority in the Government of the Country. Many Noble Personages
were Counselors in name, but the Power and Authority remained in a ^ew of
such, as were most addicted to this P^rty; whose Resolutions and Determination^
were brought to the Table for countenance and execution, and not for Debate and
Deliberation; and no man could offer to oppose them, without disgrace and
hazard to himself; Nay, those that did not wholly concur, and actually
contribute to the furtherance of their Designs, though otherwise Persons of
never so great honor and abilities, were so far from being employed in any
Place of Trust and Power, that they were neglected, discountenanced, and upon
all occasions injured and oppressed. The Laws were no Defense or Protection to
any Man's Right; all was subject to Will and Power, which imposed what payments
they thought sit to drain the Subjects purses, and to supply those Necessities
which their ill Counsels had brought upon the King, and gratify such as were
Instruments in promoting these illegal and oppressive Courses. Is not this your
very practice now? witness the Proceedings against the R^fusers of the
Engagement, who are thrust out of all public Offices, ^laces ^f trust,
deprived of their Callings, Augmentations, Sequestrations, all present and
futu^e Preferments and Degrees in the Church, Universities, Innes of Court,
etc. yea deprived of the Law it self, their Inheritance and Birthright, like
Outlaws, the hight of Tyranny and Injustice.
They who yielded and complied, were countenanced and advanced; all others
disgraced and kept under, that so Men's minds made poor and base, and their
Liberties lost and gone, they might be ready to let go their Religion, and
submit to the subversion and alteration of the Laws and Government, which they
designed. And whether your Proceedings in the self-same kind against my self,
and others who have suffered and stood so much for Religion, Laws, and public
Liberties in the worst of former times, thus complained against; and securing,
restraining us to boot, in a more more violent way than the King and his evil
Counselors proceeded against us heretofore, will not draw a greater guilt,
disreputation, heavier judgment upon you and your Associates, then they
complained of did upon them, if you persevere impenitently in such execrable
Machiavilian carnal Practices, I leave to your own Consciences to determine?

Sir, I was never yet a flatterer of any Person or persons, how great soever in
arbitrary and illegal w^ys, and my present extremities will be a sufficient
Apology for this my boldness and plain*dealing with you, as well as others
heretofore in like cases, wherein the For that which is my Case to day, may be
many or any others tomorrow.
whole N^tions Liberties are concerned as much as mine own; wherefore I do once
more, upon the premised Votes and Gro^nds of right, demand my present
^nlargement, the restitution of my seized Papers, Writings, Records, Books,
Tr^^^ks from you and your Associates, with reparations for these injurious
proceedings against me from your selves, (...) the Origin^l Authors, and
Principal Actors in them. And so exp^cting your undelayed Answer to my former
and present Demands (who amidst your manifold employments, may spare as much
time to do me right as wrong) that so I may know how to steer my course; I
must, and shall till then remain

Your unjustly close restrained Captive, WILL. PRYNNE,
For his quodam kind Friend Mr. Sergeant John Bradshaw at Whitehall, these.
Dunster Castle, 16 July. An. Dom. 1650.
The third Letter to Mr. Bradshaw.
SIR,
I And my Servant attending on me, have for above 6 weeks space, against all
Rules of Law, Justice, and the Votes of both Houses in my very Case, been
already kept close Prisoners in Dunster Castle, debarred all free converse with
others, by Discourse or Letter, and access to Gods public Ordinances, by your
illegal Warrant; and although I have sent 5 several Letters to your self, and
others of your Colleagues, declaring the illegallity, the extremity of these
your Proceedings, and demanding nothing but Jnstic^ from you, which not only
one Christian, but Turk, Infidel, might justly challenge and expect from an
other; yet, I can neither receive answer, nor satisfaction from you in the
least measure; when as I never sought to the late King himself in my former
troubles, for any thing I desired, but he ever gave me some positive answer or
other, at the first, without one quarter of that solicitation which you have
had, who professed your self, my cordial Friend; Yea whiles I was close
Prisoner in Mount Orgueil Castle, he was so pio^s, as upon the very first
motion of the Governor (without any Petition from me) to grant me free access
to all Gods public Ordinances, Sermons, and the Sacrament, which I cannot yet
obtain from you (pretending far more Piety and Liberty) after so many Letters;
who are now so far from returning me any answer, that my Brother Bastwick (my
Solicitor) I know not by whose direction, informed me, he can obtain no
admittance to your presence, being put off, or denied entrance by your
Attendants. A strange carriage of any Mortal toward his fellow Creature, but
stranger in any Christian toward his Christiun Brother, and Professed Friend;
when a^ the most high, most glori^us, ^mnipote^t, incomprehensible God, who
dwells in the highest (a) Heavens, and in that light that no man can approach
nnto; though Psalm. 123. 8. Esaias 57. 15. 1 Timothy 6. 16.
1 Timothy 6. 15. Psalm. 47. 2, 7.
King of Kings, Lord of Lords, and a great King over over all the Earth, does*
so far humble* himself* (to teach the highest Mortals the like humility, and
charity to their lowest afflicted Brethren) as, always to give Ephesians. 2. 10. c.
3. 12.
fr^e access, a^ Ps. 34. 15.
open ear, a Psalm.
speedy audience, and ready answer to all the just prayers, and requests of the
very mean^st of his Creatures, Servants here on earth (especially in the times
of their D^stresse) and has registered this comfortable Precept, backed with a
Pr^mise, not only of audience, but Deliverance, for every faithful Christians
encouragement* Psalm. 50. 15. Call upon me in the time of trouble, I will
deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me, The accomplishment whereof has
experimentally been made good unto them, upon all occasions, and is thus
recorded to Posteriry by the Palmist in his own and others Cases. Psalm. 34. 4,
5, 6. I sought the Lord, and he he^rd me, and delivered me from all my fears.
They looked to him, and were lightened, and their faces were not ashamed. This
poor man cried, and the Lord heard him, and delivered him out of all his
troubles. Whose celestial example you are so far from imitating,
notwithstanding this Evangelical-Precept, Luke. 6. 35, 36. Be ye therefore
merciful, as your heavenly Father is merciful; for he is kind unto the
unthankful and evil; (then much more to the good) that as yet I cannot find
you so righteous, as that Dilatory Luke. 18. 2, 3, 4* 5, 6, 7, 8.
Judge, which feared not God, nor regarded man, who although for a while he
refused to avenge the importunate Widow of her Adversary, ^et afterward said
within himself; Though I fear not God, nor regard man, yet because this Widow
troubles me, I will avenge her, lest by her co^^inual coming she weary me. And
therefore you may justly fear what follows in the next ensuing verses. And
shall not God avenge his own Elect, which cry day and night unto him, though he
bear long with them? I tell you, that he will avenge them speedily, of all
those that injure, or refuse to do them right, according to that memorable
Scripture, Prove. 21. 7. The robbery of the wicked shall destroy them, because
they refuse to do judgment. If you still pretend, want of leisure to do me
right* I shall first mind you, that King Philip of Macedon, giving this ans^er
to a p^^r Petitioner, who demanded Justice at his hands, that he had no leisure
to do her right; received this bold reply from her, Plutar^^i Apothegmat^.
Noli itaque Regnare; Be you then King and President no longer over us, but let
those reign who will find leisure to to do us justice; Whereupon he immediately
did right, not only to this suter, but diverse others. It shall be my reply to
your Dilatory excuse, and I wish it may produce the like effects in you as it
did in Philip. Next I find, that si^ce my imprisonment in Dunster Castle, you
have found leisure enough to grant out an O^der for the slighting of it, and
removing the Garrison thence to Taunton Castle, and therefore I conceive you
might at the same time, have found leisure enough, had you not wanted will, for
my release from thence, who now am like to be tossed up and down by you, like a
Tennis-Ball, from one Castle, and illegal Prison to another, to my greater
trouble and expense, as I was by the late Tyrannizing Prelates malice, contrary
to Law, and the Subjects Liberty, as both Houses A New discove^y of the
Prelat^s Tyranny. p. 142. Resolved upon the Q^estion, that the War^ant dated 27
of August 13 Caroli, made for the Transportation of Mr. P^ynne from Carnarvan
Castle to the Isle of Jersey, and his Imprisonment there, and other restraints
therein mentio^ed, are against the Law and Liberty of the Subject, and that he
ought to be discharged of that imprisonment, and to have reparations for his
damages sustained thereby.
voted in my very Case, which will be a further addition to my oppression, and
your Injustice render you altogether as injurious, if not as malicious toward
me, as beheaded Canterbury, and add very little reputation to your new Regency
over us. And is this the only fruits of your pretended friendship and justice?
the only guerdon, recompense of all my former Labors, Losses, Sufferings, for
the Commonwealth, and Liberty of the Nation, even in the worst of times? is
this the only Native English Freedom* I and other Patriots of our Country must
n^w enjoy, expect, after so many years sufferings, wars, prayers, tears, fasts,
(both public and private) so profuse an expense of our Treasure* Blood, and
exhausted Estates, to regain, maintain our hereditary Liberties against all
invasions, to be now at last, without, before any legal pr^cesse, or
Indictment, upon m^er general surmises, fears* suspicions, thus violently
pulled out of our houses, banished our habitations, divorced from our families,
deprived of our Callings, disseised of our Offices, T^usts, Freeholds,
attainted in new kind of Premunires, put out of protection of those very Laws
to which we were born undoubted heirs; sequestered from all free converse with
our Friends, Countrymen, by conference or writing; debarred access to all
Gods publi^e Ordinances, for the instruction or consolation of our Souls;
plundered of our Papers, Writings, Records, Horses, Arms, at the arbitrary
Discretion of every Sowldier or New Condemned by the Declaration and Judgment
of both Houses, Exact Collection, p. 853, 854, 855, 8 87.
Militia-man, carried through the Country in triumph, like Turkish
Galleyslaves, consined, banished, imprisoned, tossed up and down from one
illegal Prison to another, from one illegal Judicatory to another, and ruined
by uncessant new Taxes, Excises, Payments, without and against all rules of Law
and Justice, contrary to so many solemn Protestations, Declarations,
Remonstrances, Leagues, Covenants, ratified, subscribed in Gods sacred
presence, with hands lifted up to Heaven; And that by a few of our mere
Fellow Subjects, who have not the least shadow of any lawful jurisdiction over
us from God or Man, much less of any such absolute, arbitrary, Tyrannical
Domination over our Persons, Estates, Liberties, Lives, as they now daily
exercise: which the beheaded King, yea the most oppressive of his Royal
Predecessors, never exercised, nor pretended to, but Exact Coll^ction. p. 242,
28, 29, 267, 500.
absolutely disclaimed and protested against, as both illegal and tyrannical?
And must we still be constrained to pay heavy monthly Contributions, Excises,
only to maintain Soldiers, to support such an oppressing Hab. 17.
Self-created Authority, power over us, and execute all their iregal Warrants,
to break up, search, command our Houses, ransack our Studies, writings, seize,
in prison our persons, plunder our goods, disseise us of our Freeholds, take
away our lives, and make us more absolute Vassals to our new Supremacy, than
the most Slavish Turks are to their Grand Seignior? Did ever the free people of
England (voted by the Army and those at Westminster the Jan. 4. 1648.
only Supreme Authority of the Nation next under God* and the only fountain of
all lawful Authority) ever transferr such an exorbitant Jurisdiction as this,
over themselves, or me, to those at White Hall, or any other, who style
themselves, their Representatives, or authorize them to do the least Action
contrary to Magna Charta, the Statutes of 25. E. 3. c. 4* 42. E. 3. c. 3. the
Petition of Right, the Statutes of 25. E. 1. c. 5, 6. 28. E. 1. c. 1. 34. E. 1.
De Tallagio non concedendo. 1, 2, 3, 4. 14 E* 3. Stat. 2. c. 1. 1. R. 3. c. 2.
35* E. 1. De Asp^rtatis Religiosorum, and other Acts, but lately made and
assented to by the late be-headed King, An. 1640? And if not, as is most
certain, then how can, or dare you, thus illegally ab^se, imprison, close
imprison m^, and sundry others, as you have done; and to levy See my
v^nd^cation of the Subjects L^^e^ty against ^llegall T^xes. Exact Coll^ct^o^,
p. 882, 883, 884, 885, 886.
illegal Contributions, and Taxes, on me since my chargable imprisonment, not
granted, nor imposed by the Common Consent of the Earls, Barons, Great men, and
Commons of the Realm in full Parliament, by Act of Parliament, only to maintain
Soldiers to apprehend* secur^, impriso^ my self, and the other freemen of
England, and Lord it ^ver us, by color of your unlawful warrants, contrary to
the express Letter of all these Acts and Resolutions of our two last
Parliaments?

Yet this is not all the Oppression I now groan under; but as if the former had
not been sufficient, some Malitia (rather then Militia) Gentlemen of our
County, (the original Contrivers of my present Commitment, if I be not
mis-informea) in the prosecution of their further malice toward me, on Tuesday
night last, sent a Warrant by the Constable to my house (I know not by what new
pretended Authority) to send in an horse and man, (such as they should approve
of) completely furnished, to their worships, at Wells (17. miles from my house)
the very next morning, without fail: To whom my Sister returned this answer;
that I was a close Prisoner, fifty miles off: that I had neither ^orse, nor
Arms to send, and it was impossible to provide any at so short warning, neither
would my estate bear such an heavy new Charge (being not chargable with an
horse, by their late instructions) He replyeth, that no excuse would serve, but
and horse and man must be sent, under I know not what heavy penal^y^; and none
beingsent upon these Grounds, I daily expect to hear of their utmost Ex^remitys
against this my pretended Default, being encouraged thereto by my present
restraint: The illegallity and dangerousnesse of which new Arbitrary Authority
in these Commissioners of the Militia, arraigning, Assessing men with Arms and
imprisoning, fining men at their arbitrary Discretion, without any legal trial
being largely argued, vored, resolved, (...) to the Kingdom, by the Exact
Col^etion. p. 380, 442, 462, 485. 469. 478. 550, 551, 850, to 890.
Declaration of the Lords and Commons concerning the Distractions of the
Kingdom, 1* 2. July 1642. By the Petition of both Houses, 20. July 1642. By
his Majesty's Declaration to all his Subjects, Aug. 12. 1642. and by the Lords
and Commons 2. Declaration, against the Commission of Array, 12. Ian: 1642. I
shall not dispute it here, but referr you thereunto. And for their present
practice, in dis-arming many well affected Gentlemen and Yeomen of best rank
and Quality, puiting their arms into Mercinaries hands, and not trusting them
with their own or the Kingdoms Defense; as it is against all Presidents in
former ages, cited either by the late King or Parliament, concerning the Array
or Militia; so it was thus publicly declared against by the Lords and Commons
in Parliament, in case of the King and his party, in their Printed Exact
Collectio^, ^. 575.
Declaration of 18. August 1642. A third observation is this; That Arms were
taken from the honest Gentlemen, Yeomen, and Townsmen; and put into the hands
of such desperate Persons as cannot live but by rapin^ and spoil. A fourth,
That not withstanding all the Vows and Protestations to Govern according to
Law, which have been dispersed throughout the Kingdom, to blind and deceive
the People. THE MOST And are not they sopractised now, in the very selfsam^, or
a ^^rr more dangerous in this and others Particulars*
MISCHEIVOUS PRINCIPLFS OF TYRANNY ARE PRACTICED THAT EVER WERE INVENTED; that
is, TO DISARM THE MIDDLE SORT OF PEOPLE who are the body of the Kingdom^, AND
TO MAINTAIN SOLDIERS BY FORCED CONTRIBVTION TO CREATE A PROVINTIALL GOVERNMENT
IN THE NORTH (but now throughout the Kingdom) CLEARLY AGAINST THE COMMON LAW,
AND THE JUDGMENT GIVEN THIS PARLIAMENT, for taking away the Court at York.
That the Contrivers and Instruments of ^h^se mischiefs, for their better
strengthening in these Designs, are about to join themselves in Association with
other Counties; That Directions are given that such as shall oppose and ^ot
join with them, shall be violently plundered and pillaged *of their horses and
Ar^^es, at least, if not of their goods and estates.) Upon all which
considerations, and unjust Oppressions, now imposed on, or threatened to me be
reason of my present restraint, I do once more, of mere common right, Demand my
unconditioned present Enlargement, that ^o my imprisonment may not survive my
now Demolishing new Prison, where there are near 300. Pioners at work to level,
not only the Castle Walls* but ^^^^lling house it self, to the very ground, by
pretext of your fresh warrant; though the best Seat in the County; yea the
ancient habitation of an Eminent Gentleman, and his Ancestors, who have been
always cordial to, and sustained many thousand pounds loss for the Parliament;
who yet, without any Notice, or 3 days warning, By an expres^e warrant of the
new, rash, inconsiderate Militia, grounded on yours at White*hall.
must have his house pu^led down over his head, before, yea without any veiw,
hearing, or recompense; himself, his Wife and Family* turned out into the
Streets (having no other habitation for the present,) and instead of receiving
recompense for his former Six thousand pound losses or more, be rewarded with
near ten thousand pound new Damages, for his fidelity toward you; to the great
rejoicing and triumph of all the Malignants in the County, who laugh in their
sleeves, to see how gratefully and bountifully you reward your best deserving
friends, for all their losses and Services for the public, with greater
Injuries, Damages, Affronts, Oppressions and restrai^ is, than ever they
received from the worst, and cruelest of their Enemies. Which is the present
condition o^ Mr. George Lutterell; the owner of my Demolishing Prison of
Dunster Castle; and of

Your much oppressed close Impriprisoned Vassal, WILL. PRYNNE.
From my Demolishing Prison in Dunster Castle.
The fourth Letter to Mr. Bradshaw, and his Associates.
Gentlemen,
THese are to mind you, that after all my heavy sufferings of three Pillories,
a double loss of my ears, stigmat^zing on both Cheeks, two Fines of 5000 l.
apiece, expulsion out of the University of Oxford and Lincolns Inn, degradation
in both, the seizure of my Papers, Books, Estate, near 9 years loss of my
Calling, above 8 years imprisonment in the Tower of London, Fleet, Carnarvan,
and Mount Orgueil Castle in Jersey, through the Tyranny of the late Prelates,
Starchamber and Council Table, only for my public Defense of the Protestant
Religion, Laws, and Liberties of the Kingdom, against Popery and Tyranny, in
the worst of times, when few durst openly stand up on their behalf, to my
Damage of ten thousand pounds at least; After above 8 years, faithful,
painful services, since my enlargement, in maintenance of the Kingdoms,
Parliaments just Rights, Privileges, Liberties, against all opposers; and other
public employments for the Common good, with the almost total neglect and
loss of my Practice, and expense of many hundred pounds out of my purse; After
3 Months costly, most injurious imprisonment by the Army, for discharging my
duty, and speaking my Conscience in the Commons House, whereof I was then a
Member (and am so still, if that House be yet in being, as you affirm, and so
not subject to your New Whit^hal Jurisdiction* contrary to Law and the
Privileges of Parliament; After sundry other Affronts, Injuries, Pressures, for
my sincerity, fidelity to my Native Country (for all or any of which unjust
sufferings, losses, meritorions services, by which our Religion, Republic,
Parliament, Nation, received many great advantages, I never yet received one
farthing recompense, nor the least advantage or preferment, of which I was
never ambitious,) I have (to augment my former damages, oppressions, in stead
of repairing them) received this great accumulation to them, by color of your
illegal Warrants under Mr. Bra^sbaws hand (who lately professed your selves my
Friends, and lamented my former injurious sufferings, though senceless of my
present) before and without the least notice, summons, Contrary to 2 and 3
Phil. and Mar. c. 10. and the common ^aw, Cook 2 Institu^es. p. 51, 52, 53, 54.
examination, or legal accusation; even a forcible infringement, search,
rifling of my Studies, Trunks, Writings, Papers in Lincolns Inn, and house at
Swainswick, by a company of armed Soldiers* who ^e^sed sundry of my Writings,
Papers, Bo^ks, (...) Records, against Law, and sent them Whitehall; together
with a violent Attachment of my own Person, (though no Fugitive, nor person in
Arms) not by any known, sworn, lawful Officers, but a strong Party of unknown
Troops, in my own house and Bedchamber, about eleven of the clock at night, on
the Lords day, the 30 of June last; who carried me through the County in
triumph, as their Prisoner to Dunster Castle, (no ordinary Prison but a private
Garrison) 50 miles distant from my habitation, where I have been kept close
Prisoner (with my Servant who attends me) by more than four Quaternions of
Soldiers (as Acts 12. 3, 4, 5, 6.
Peter was under persecuting Herod) above 3 months space, though the walls
thereof be demolished of late by your Order, to my ^xtraordinary expen^e* and
great damage, through my absence from my Family all the Harvest; during all
which time neither I nor my Servant have been permitted the least access to
Gods public Ordinances, on Lords-days, or Lecture days; nor to stir out of
the Castle (where are no provisions at all to be had for any thing I want) nor
to speak with any Person, but in the Governors presence, or hearing; nor to
receive or write any Letters upon any occasion, but what he must first peruse.
And although I have written at the least Seven Lett^rs to Mr. Bradshaw, and
others of you (my late i^timate f^iends, ^omol ining of this unparalleld
Injustic^ and Tyranny, answering all Pretenses of necessity and public Danger,
to justify or excuse it, and manifesting it to be contrary to MAGNA CHARTA c.
29. 25 E. 1. c. 12. 28 E. 3. c. 1. 5* E. 3. c 9. 25 E. 3. c. 4. ^8 E. ^. c. 3
37. E. 3* c. 18. 38 E. 3 c. 9. 42 E. 3. c. 3. 17. R. 2. c 6. 2 H. 4. Rot. Parl.
n. 60. the Petition of Right and other Statutes, the very Common Law of
England. the Liberty of the Subject, the Law s of God and Nature, the
Resolutions and printed Exact Collection, ^. 8 11, 12, 13. 312, 322, 666* 364,
462, 466, 470, 472, 483, 550, 551, 767, to 773, 812, 813. 845. 846, 851, 852,
854, 855, 887.

A Collection. p. 424, 425. 877, 879.


Declarations of the 3 last Parliamen^s, the expressed a N^w Discov ry of the B
shops Tyranny, p. 139. to 179.
Votes of the Commons, and Judgment of the Lords House, in my own particular
Case and my Fellow Sufferers; yea a Greater Cruelty and Tyin some respects,
than ever the late King, Star Chamber, or be headed Canterbury ^^flicted on me,
who at first only summoned me by a Messenger, to appear before them, but never
attached me by armed Officers or Soldiers; accused me of a particular bock
upon which they examin^d heard, before they restrained me, and never committed
me close Prisoner at first, nor laid any such restraints, upon me or my
servant, as you do now for above 4 years space; permitting me free access to
Gods public Ordinances; free conference in public and Private, with whom, and
Liberty to write to, and receive Letters from whom, I pleased, without any
over-hearing or Jutervising; and to send my Servant abroad, upon all occasions
(A Liberty which the Laws of England allow to all Traitors and Fellons
whatsoever, and which beheaded Strafford, and Cant^rbury enjoyed, though
impeached of the Highest Treasons by the whole Commons House, and yet deuyed
unto me, by you, such Great Pretenders to Public Liberty, both of Person and
Conscience, though hitherto accused, impeached of no Crime) yet
notwithstanding, I can hitherto receive no relief, nor satisfactory answer to
my just Demands from any of you; Whereupon I have been necessitated to address
this brief precedent Narrative of your harsh proceedings against me, to you all
in general, to leave you without excuse, and thereupon, as a Free*born English
man (who, as you well know, has written, suffered more than any, or all of
you, for the public Liberty of the Nation, without the least reward (upon
which account I may Justly challenge, as great an Interest in the Laws and
Liberty of the Nation, as any man this day breathing;) I shall make bold (being
thus enforced by you thereunto) to make some Proposals unto you (who have
Declaration of the 17 March, 1648.
Declared an unaccountable Power, or Officer in any State, to be A MONSTER both
in Nature and Politics;) for the public and your own particular good, and my
better relief, which I beseech you sadly to consider, because I fear, you now
meet with more * Sycophants than Faithful Adulatio perperuum m^lum Regum. Qu.
Curtius, ^ hi^l. l. 8.
Friends and Monitors to inform you of your extravagances.

First, whether these exorbitant Proceedings against me, contrary to all the
forementioned Laws, Statutes, Declarations, Parliamentary Votes and Resolutions
of both Houses in my very Case, be an inviolable maintaning, upholding,
preserving of the fundamental Laws of the Land, Liberty and property of the
people, according to the Exact Collection, p. 663. 666. A Collection, p. 227.
310, 420, to 428. 458, 459, 878, 879, 889.
Solemn Protestation, Vow, Covenant, you have made, subscribed, in the presence
of the everliving God, with a real intention to perform the same, as you shall
answer the contrary, at the great day of Judgment, or of your own Exact
Collection p, 267 666. 491, 492, 493, 852, 854.
former late printed Declarations, published to this Kingdom, Nation and the
whole world? And by what authority derived to you from God, or men you can
justify or excuse this extreme violation of all these Laws and Premises,
contrary to the very Letter of your Protestations, Covenants, and public 11
Feb. and 17 March, 1648.
Declarations, in this second year of Englands pretended Redemption from Tyranny
and Slavery, which never felt, nor complained so much of both of them, as now
under you.

2ly. How you, who profess your selves such Eminent Saints, yea Patrons of
public Liberty and Piety and justify the casting, detaining of Saints in
Prison, which is the proper work of the Devil, and his Instruments. R(...) Isay
14. 17. Acts 5. 18. c. 12. 3, 4, 5. Mat. 14. (...) 17 18, 21. but the opening
of Prison doors, the loosing, releasing Prisoners, the proper office, work of
God, Jesus Christ, and all good Angels, Psalm. 146. 7. Isay, 61. *1. Acts 5. 18,
19. c. 12. 5. to 20. ^he debarring me and my Servant above three months space,
from all Gods public Ordinances, on Lords days, and week days, and denial of
me so much freedom, Liberty, under your New Gaolers and Free State Government
in Christian England, as St. Paul (though accused for a Acts 24, 5.
Pestilent Fellow, and a stirrer up of sedit ion amongst the Jews throughout
the world) enjoyed under the Pagan, bloody persecuting Tyrant See a new
Discovery of the Bishops Tyranny, ^. 172, 173, 174.
Nero in Heathen Rome it self, Acts 28. 15. to the end: Yea, as all public
Traitors, Malefactors whatsoever, by the Laws of the Kingdom (...) enjoy, and
all late restrained Cavalliers in Arms have enjoyed? And how you will at last
escape that heavy Doom denounced against such, as do but only, not visit
Christ's imprisoned Members; or such as trouble and oppress, without
imprisoning them, recorded Mat. 25. 41. to the end, 2 These. 1. 4. to 10. if you
thus close imprison, starve, undo me, without any just or real cause, only
because you have present power in your hands, and the longest sword; against
which practice and ground of present power, there is an heavy woe and judgment
particularly denounced, Mich. 2. 1, 2, 3, etc. Which I desire you will
seriously read and consider.

3ly. Whether it will not be esteemed an argument of extraordinary Cowardice,
Guiltiness in you, who have all the Militia and power of the Kingdom, both by
Land and Sea, in your hands, and such great successes, as you publish; to stand
in fear of such a mean, unarmed, despicable Person as my self; and thereupon
only to mue me up close Prisoner, as you do, in a remote private Castle,
against all Rules of Justice, See 5 E. ^. c. 8. 5 H 4. c. 10. 29 H. 8. c. 2. 27
E. 4. 71. Brook imprisonment. 80. Cooks 2 Institutes p. 43.
Law, and Christianity?

4ly. Whether*if you pursue, equal, exceed the Injustice, oppressions, Tyranny
and greatest Exorbitances of beheaded Canterbury, Strafford, the suppressed
Star Chamber, Council Table, or late King (condemned, executed by you so
freshly, for a Tyrant, must you not in all justice, reason expect, and in gods
due time undergo the self same, or far worse Tragical, fatal ends, as they have
done, with eternal Damnation to boot, notwithstanding your present power,
Greatness, not half so well settled, bottomed, backed by Law, or otherwise, as
theirs was, when they sare and acted in State, where you do now? For which I
entreat you, advisedly to peruse, with sincere hearts. Romans 2. 1, 2, 3, 5, 6,
8, 9, 21, 22, 23, 24. Ezech. 18. 12, 13, 24. and Isay 14. 4. to 24.

These Proposals premised, I have only as ma ny Demands to make unto you; to
which I desire your undelay^d answer, not out of any favor, but mere right and
Justice.

First, that if you have an^ ^riminal or Capital Charge against me, by any
known Laws or Statutes of this Realm (as I am sure you have none) you will then
bring me to a speedy, Just and Legal Trial for it, upon an Indictment or
Presentm^nt of the good and Lawful People of the Neighborhood, where my
pretended Offense was c^mmitted, before a Law^ull Tribunal and Legal Judges;
(if there be See Magna Cha^ta ^. 12. 13. 29. 4^ ^. 3. c. 1 5 9. 13. 26* 20 E.
3. ^. 12. 13. 27. H, 8. c. 16. 24. 1. E* 6. c. 7. 10* which prove that there
are now.
any such now in being:) and that I may be tried by the Lawful Judgment of my
Peers, according to the good old Laws of the Land; and have all just exceptions
and challenges allowed me; and not to be murdered, destroyed as some lately
have been, by Tyrannical and Arbitrary Courts* Marshal, or mi^-named* New
Courts of high Justice, set up in direct opposition subversion and destruction,
of the very See Cooks 2* Institutes on Magra Charta c. 14. and 29. 3. Instit. c
12. etc. Brooks and Fi^cz. Title Trial and C^ron^, and so adjudged in
Parliament in the Earl of Lancasters case, Mo^t^mers case, and the 2 Spencers
case, and others. Cook 2 Instit. p. 48. 4E. 3. R^t. Par. n. 14. 15 E. 8. ^. 6
8. 44. 49. 51. 17 E. 3. n. 22. 28 E. 3. n. 7. 10. 16. ^0 R. 2. n. 7, 8. 2 H. 5.
n. 15.
Common Law of England, (the Highest Liberty of the Subjects, the very safety,
preservation of their Lives, their Job. 2. 4.
c^ief^st Bulworks against all Arbitrary Powers, which are all now prostituted
to the Lawless wills of others) and the express Statutes of Magna Charta, c.
14. 29. 25 E. 1. c. 1, 2, 3. 28 E. 1. c. 1. 1 E. 3. c. 19. 2 E. 3. c. 1. 4 E.
3. c. 1. 5 E. 3. c. 1. 9. 10* E. 3. c. 1. 14. E. 3. c. 1. 15 E. 3. c. 1, 2, 3.
20 E. 3. c. 1. 3. 28 E. 3. c. 2* 4. 28 E 3. c. 1. 31 E. 3. c. 1. 37 E. 3. c. 1.
18. 38 E. ^3. c* 1. 9. 42 E. 3. c. 1. 3. 45 E. 3. c. 1. 50 E. 3. c. 2. 1 R. 2.
c. 1 2 R* 2. c. 1. 3 R. 2. c. 1. 5. R. 2. c. 1. 5. 6* R. 2. c. 1. 7* R. 2. c.
2* 3. 8 R. 2. c. 1. 9 R. 2. c. 1. 12 R. 2. c. 1 13 R. 2. c. 2. 5. 14 R. 2. c.
1. 12. 1 H. 4. c. 1. 10. 2* H. 4. c. 1. 11. 19. and Rot. Parl. n. 60. 4 H. 4.
c. 1. 7 H. 4. c. 1. 9* H. 4 c. 1. 13 H. 4. c. 1. 2 H. 5. c. 6. 8, 9. 2 H. 5.
Stat. 2. c. 3. 3 H. 5. c. 1. 7. 4 H. 5. c. 1. 7 H. 5. c. 1. 2 H. 6. c. 1. 6 H.
6. c. 1. 8 H. 6. c. 10. 29. 9 H. 6. c. 3. 10 H. 6. c. ^0. 14 H* 6. c. 1. 15 H.
^. c. 5. 18 H. 6. c. 12. 20 H. 6. c. 9. 31* H. 6. c. 1. 33 H. 6. c. 2. 1 R. 3.
c. 3, 4. 11 H. 7. c. 1. 11 H. 7. c. 21. 4 H. 8. c. 2. 6 H. 8. c. 6. 22 H. 8. c.
2. 14. 23 H. 8. c. 3. 13. 25 H. 8. c. 6. 22. 26 H. 8. c. 5. 6. 13. 27 H. 8. c.
4. 24. 26. 28 H. 8. c. 1. 7. 15. 32 H. 8. c. 4. 33 H. 8. c. 12. 20. 23* 24. 35
H. 8. c. 26. 35 H. 8. c. 1. 2. 37 H. 8. c. 5. 6. 8. 1 E* 6. c. 1. 10. 12. 2 and
3 E. 6. cap. 1. 2. ^4. ^ and 6 E6. c. 4. 9. (...) 11. 14. 1 Mar. c. 3. 6. 1 and
2 Phil. and Mar. c. 10. 4 and 5 Phil. and Mar. c. 3. 4. 1 E. c. 1. 2. 5 Eliz.
c. 1. 4* 10. 11. 15. 21 Eliz. c. 3. 4. 13 El. ^. 1. 2. 14 Eliz. c. 1. 2* 3* 18.
Eliz. c. 1. 2^ Eliz. c. 1. 2. 27 Eliz. c. 1. 2. 29 Eliz. c. 1. 35 Eliz. c* 1^.
39 El. c. 15. 43 El. c. 13. 1 ^ac. c. 28. 11. 12. 27. 31. 3 Jac. c. 2. 4. 5.
13. 4 Jac. c. 1. 7 Jac. c. 1. 6 10. 13. 21 Jac. c. 4. with All P^n^l S ^t^^es,
c^e^ting any (...)nact, that No Of fe^ders shall be pun^shed by ^nd^ctment* and
freed by a Ju^y of*their Peers, acco^ding to M^gna Charta, and the Common Law,
and by the Statutes of 18 H. 6. c. 19. 2 E. 6. c. 2. ^ and 5 Phil. and Mar. c.
3. S^uldiers departing without license from their Service, are to be punished
with indictment, and tried by a Jury, not by Martial Law* Cook 6. Report. f.
27. and the Petition of Right. 3 Carol*
sundry other Acts, and the very Letter of the Petition of Right (so highly
magnified for the most excellent* most just, free and equal of any other Laws
in the World, by those now sitting at Westminster, in their Declaration of
March 17. 1648. for settling the present Government in way of a Free State,
wherein they solemnly engage inviolably to maintain them; and yet now trample
them all under feet by these illegal arbitrary ^udicatories, so much Exact
Collection. p. 8*
declaimed against heretofore) of purpose to destroy all sorts, degrees of
Subjects, and Freemen of England,) Though no Soldiers under Military
Discipline, contrary to all these Laws and Franchises of the Land; when and
where, no Legal Jury, nor Court of Justice; will or can condemn them; adju^ged
wilful murder here^ofore, and so resolved* in P^rliament, as Sir Edward Cook
Se^ chapter A^urder ^ ^^stit. p. 48. and 4 Insti^. (...) Co^^t.
informs us in his 3. Institutes (printed by Order of the House of Commons,)
and so esteemed by G^d himself, though colored by a ^re^ext of Law, Psalm. 94.
20; 21. 1* Kings 21* ^ ^o 2*5. John 19. 7. 16. 18. compared with Acts 2. 23. c.
3. 14, 15. c. 7. 52. yea a more transcendent publicly avowed Act of absolute
Arbitrary Power; and Tyranny, than ever the late King or any of his
Predecessers were guilty off, which endangers every man's life, and chopps off
every man's head, in taking off any ones, yea* such, as in conclusion, may prove
a new Perillus his Bull, to torture, destroy the first ^uve^tors by Gods just
judgments; the Heathen Poet ^vi^ observing, -- N^c ^nim Lex justio^ ulla,
Quam necis artifices Art perire sua.


Whereof we have a memorable Scripture President in that Tyrant, Adonibezek,
Judge. 1. 6, 7. and in the shedders of the blood of Saints, Rev. 16. 5, 6.
seconded with four Psam. 137. 8. ^er. 51. 34. 36, 37. 56. (...) 10. 14. I^ay.
31. 1. Judge. 15. 10, 11. f^r. 50. 15. 29. 2. Sa^. 3. 39. Ps. 94. 20, 21, 23.
Ps. 109. 15, 16. Isay. 3. 11.
formidable Comminations both in the old and new Testament, G^n. 9. 6. Ezech.
35. 5, 6. Obad. 10. 15. etc. Jam. 2. 13. Romans 2. 1, 2, 3. and with a most
observable example in Thomas* Lord Cromwell, recorded by Hall, and Sir Edward
Cook, in his 4 Institutes p. 37, 38. who in the height of his greatness and
power, endeavoring to procure an Act of Parliament, to take away some other
m^ns lives, without any Lawful Indictment Trial and by their Peers, contrary to
the forementioned Laws, by the mere Legislative power of the Parliament, was
the first and only man that suffered and l^st his head, without any Legal
Trial, by a bare Act of Parliament. 31. H. 8. c. 3. which kind of illegal
taking away men's lives, being next degree, and very near of kindred to a
private Assasination, or Public Massacre of those we fear or ^ate; and in one
respect worse than either of them, because disguised with a pretended show of
Justice, is for ever to be abominated and exploded by all Pretenders to Piety
and Public Freedom, and not *to be tolerated in any free Monarchy or
Republic upon any pretense of necessity or Public safety whatsoever: and so
much the rather, because the blood of such so murdered and destroyed, will See
Genesis 4. 10. to 16. c. 9. 5* 6. c. 42. 22. Nu. 35. 30, 31, 32, 33. Deu. 19. 10
to 14. c. 32. 43. 2. Sam. 4. 11. 12. 1. Kings 2. 5* 9. 31, 32, 33, 37. c. 21.
19. c. 22. 38. 2. K. 9. 7, 8. c. 24. 4. Ps. 9. 12. Ps. 19. 10. Ps. 94. 21, 22.
Prove. 1. 16. 18. c. 28. 17. Isay 59. 2. to 13. J^r. 19. 3, 4. c. 51. 35. Ez^^h.
16. 38. c. 22. 2. to 12. c. 24. 6. ^o 10. c. 35. 5, 6. Hos. 4. 29. c. 6. 8.
Joc^. 9. 19. Mi^h. 3. 9. 10. 12. c. 7. 2. 4. Hab. 2. 8. 12. 17. Math. 23. 35. c
27. 25. Acts. 5. 28. R^v. 6. 10. c. 19. 2. 2. Sam. 21. 12. etc.
cry loud to God for exemplary Vengeance, as Naboth^ did, 1. Kings. 21. 10. to
25. And if he that only hates his Brother, be a Murderer and has not ^ternall
life abiding in him. 1 John* 3. 15. Then certainly those who thus not only
hate, but illegally destroy and execute their Christian English Brethren, yea
s^ay their Brethren in Covenant, by thousands, with a rage reaching up to
Heaven, 2. Chron. 28. 9. 13. must much more be bloody ^am. 2. 11. Number. 35. 20,
21 to 34. Ps. 10. 8. 2 Kings. 6. 32. Isay 1. 21. Jer. 4. 31. Acts. 7. 52.
Murderers in Gods accoutnt, and sha^^ never inherit eternal Life, unless they
seriously repent and abandon all such Barbarons Cruelty, and new Butcheries of
men, which every Heroic Christian and true English Spirit cannot but with
highest indignation p^otest against, out of zeal to Gods Honor, his Native
Countries, hereditary Liberties, his own and posterities safety, which I desire
you to ^ay close unto your spirits, as you will answer the contrary before
Christ's Tribunal at the last, upon the seasonable information and admonition of
him, who has suffered so much for his Countries Freedom, and would rather dye
ten thousand de aths than see it (after so much expense of Treasure. blood in
defense, of the for ecited Laws, and public Freedom) enthralled to such a
strange new Butchery and Tyranny, as this (and that in Westminster Hall it ^elf
in the highest Court of Law and Justice in former times) under the monstrous
contradictory Title of High or Highest Justice; true only in the Proverbs
sense, Ci^^ro and E^asmi Adagia.
Summum jus summa Injuria.


2. If you have no particular Charge or Crime, for which by Law you can thus
restrain me; that you will then immediately enlarge me, without any limitations
or conditions whatsoever; and render me full Damages for my false
Imprisonments past; and not thus mo^est and oppres^e me for the future, against
all Rules of Justice and Piety.

3. That you will presently restore all my seized Trunks, Books, Records,
Papers, Writings, being most of them my own peculiar; the rest the only And
thereof Right be longing to me, as was resolved in Justice Ric^els case 1. H.
4. ro^. Pa l. Memb* 2* n. 1
Justification and Defense I have^, if ever I should be hereafter questioned
for any Treatises I have published concerning the late King, Canterbury or
others (out of my s^ised Originals or Transcripts) for the Common good; which
certainly deserve a far more honorable reward, and grateful requital, than
such a violent public search of my house, studies, seizure of my Truncks,
Papers, by Soldiers, and so long strict, chargeable a close imprisonment of my
Person, as I have sustained.

4ly. That, if you will still close imprison me against Law and Conscience, you
will then either defray the charges of my imprisonment, or else cause the
Treasurers of Bishops Lands immediately to pay me the 800 pounds salary due unto
me as a Contractor (for which I never yet received one cue, and should never
have desired any thing, but upon this extraordinary occasion of expense) and
the Committee for your Army, to pay me all such moneys, as are or shall be
certified to be due unto me for free quartering of your Soldiers, to help
support me in Prison, and defray those Debts, which your present oppression,
the loss of my Calling thereby, and your illegal heavy Taxes have contracted,
in stead of receiving any recompense for my former illegal sufferings, damages,
and manifold faithful Services for the public, according to The Kingdom of
England and Scotland in their joint De^laration of 3 Jan. 1643. A Coll. p. 417.
418* find themselves ^ound in Conscience to declare, that no man who h^th been
emin^nt in action, or has suffered any notable loss^ for public, shall be
neglected or slighted, but one way or other shall be thankfully remembered to
his own honor, and the good of his Post^^ity. And is your close imprisonment
of me and seizing of my writings, etc. a real fulfilling of thi^ promis^?
former public Engagements and Votes.

And so expecting your undeferred positive answer to all these just demands, I
shall till then remain,

Your over-oppressed close Prisoner and Captive, WILL. PRYNNE,
To Mr. John Bradshaw Sergeant at Law, and the rest of his Assessors at
Whitehall, present these. Dunster Castle, October. 30. 1650.
TO Mr. JOHN BRADSHAW, AND HIS ASSOCIATES AT WHITEHALL, (Stiling themselves the
The Council of State) his Imprisoners.
The Remonstrance of several Grievances, and Demands of Common Right by William
Prynne Esquire their 2 years and 3 months Close Prisoner under Soldiers, in the
remote Castles of Dunster, Taunton, and Pendennys in Cornwall, before any Legal
Accusation, Examination, Indictment, Trial, Conviction, or Objection of any
particular Crime after above 8 years former Imprisonments, and unrecompensed
great sufferings, Losses for the Public and Religion under their White Hall
Predecessors, and all his Faithful, Unmercenary Services for the Public Laws,
Rights, Privileges of the English Nation
Showing,
THat although he be a Freeman of England, both by Birthright, and Dear-bought
Purchase, having See a New Discovery of the Prelates Tyranny.
formerlysustained above 8 years imprisonments, and more heavy Sufferings in
his Person, Calling, Estate, than any of this Nation; merely for writing in
Defense of the ^ust Laws, Liberties, Franchises of the Land, and true
Protestant Religion, in the worst of former times, against the Invaders
thereof, and spent the greatest part of his life and estate in painful studies,
S^rvices, Sufferings, Duresses for the Public (without the least Recompense,
Reward, or Self advantage) our of a sincere Public Spirit, unbiassed with
private ends. And has in all his Relations, as a Lawyer, Magistrate,
Committee-man, Member of Parliament, of this Kingdom, and a Christian,
diligently endeavored Acts 24. 26.
to keep a good Conscience always in all things void of offense toward God and
Men; never to his knowledge perpetrating any Crime, deserving Bonds or close
Restraint, by any known Law of this Land, nor acting or writing any thing, but
what his own deliberate Judgment, Science, Conscience, clearly resolved him,
to be agreeable to, and warranted by the sacred Oracles of God, the Principles
of our Reformed Religion, the Fundamental, Common Statute-Laws, Franchiscs of
England, the Resolutions, Judgments, Declarations of our ancient and late best
Parliaments, and Sir Edw. Cooks 2, 3, and 4 Institutes. Mr. St. John's Speech
against Shipmon^y. Indgement and Argument at Law against Strafford. Mr.
Hackwells Argument against Impositions. Judge Crookes, and Huttons Arguments
against Shipmoney.
B^oks Printed by their Authority; and those solemn, serious Oaths,
Protestations, Covenants, imposed on, and often taken by him, by Parliamentary
Authority (which still lie as Number. 30. 2. P^. 15. 4. Josh. 9. 19, 20, etc. 2 Samuel 21. 1, 2, and Ps. 89. 33. 34. Heb. 6. 17, 18. Prove. 17. 12. to 24. Grotius
de Jure Belli and Pacis, ^. 2. c. 13. ^. 3. c. 19.
immnutable, inviolable, divine obligations on his Soul, till otherwise
convinced of his total and final Absolution from them, by the brutish Arguments
of the longest Sword, and long, illegal, close imprisonments under Swordmen)
in pursuance of his bounden duty to God, his Lawful Superior Powers, and
beloved Native Country, whose truest, greatest, weal, Peace, Settlement, he
has ever studied, advanced to his utmost power, by all Christian, honorable,
just and righteous means, though incountred therein with many Discouragements,
and ingrate requitals from most sorts of men.

That although by the express provisions of the Common Law, the Great Charter
of England, chapter 29. (confirmed in about 40 several Parliaments) the Statutes of
25 E. 1* c. 2. 28 E. 1. c. 1, 2. 1 E. 3. c. 5. 5 E. 3. c. 8, 9. 25 E. 3. c. 4.
28 E. 3. c. 3. 35 E. 3. rot. Parl. n. 20. 37 E. 3. c. 18. 42 E. 3. c. 1, 2* 3*
and rot. Parl. n. 42. 2 H. 4. rot. Parl. n. 10. 4 H. 4. c. 13. 5 H. 4. c. 10.
23 H. 8. c. 2. The Petition of Right, 3. Caroli. The Act for In pressing
Soldiers 17. Caroli, with sundry other Statutes; the The P^^nted Arguments and
Papers of the Commons House, 3 Caro^i in the G^ntlem^ns Cas^s, impriso^ed* for
the I^ans, Cot^o^i Posthuma, ^. 222. ^o 296. Exact. Collection. p. 6. to 13.
35, t^ 42. 147. 492 500. 845. 850. to 890. A new D^scove^y of the Pr^lates
Tyranny. p. 136 to 188.
printed Decl^rations, Remonstrances, Judgments, Votes of all our late
Parliaments, and the known Rules of Common Justice, no English Freeman may or
ought to be arrested, imprisoned, exiled, outlawed, or deprived of his Liberty,
Freehold, Writings, Papers, Members, Life, Franchises, without due Process of
Law, Indictment or Presentment by his Lawful Peers, executed by 9 E. 2.
Statutes of Sheriffs. 2. E. 3. c. 4. 4 E. 3. c. 9. 5 E. 3. c. 4. 14 E. 3. c. 7.
9.
known, Lawful responsible sworn Officers of Justice; after a Legal
Accusation, Examination, or Conviction of ^ome partic^lar Offense; nor enforced
to go out of his own Country, against his will, or imprisoned in any private
or foreign Castles, but only in Common usual Prisons, under sworn Gaeolers,
without debarring free Access of Friends and Letters to or from him, or
searching his House, Study, Truncks, Pock^ts for Writings, Letters, Books, to
pick out matter of Accusation against him, or examining himself, or others* Ex
officio, to that end, in an extrajudicial manner, before any Legal Charge
exhibited; Nor yet translated from one unusual Prison to another, without
hearing, or bringing him to any just, lawful Tribunal, the next 4 E. 3. c. 2.
27 E. 1. 2 E. 3. c. 2.
General Assizes or S^ssions held within the Country, wherein he is imprisoned,
or releasing him the next Goal delivery, if not then indicted and Legally
prosecuted for what he is imprisoned. That albeit his former professed,
oppressing Enemies, the old Council Table, Star Chamber, High Commission, Lords
and Prelates Exact Coll^ction. p. 8, 13, 15, 517, 518* The Acts for suppressing
the Star* Chamber, high Commission, and regulating ^he Council Tab^: The
Em^^u^^m n^^ and Acts of At a^nd^^ ^f Str^fford and Canterbu^y.
(condemned, suppressed, and some of them executed by most of your concurrent
suffrages, as the greatest Tyrants, the last Parliament, for their extravagant,
unjust Censures, and some exorbitant Proceedings against him and others) were
even then so candid and honorable toward him, at first (though accused of
pretended scandalous, seditious Passages in his Histriomastix against the King,
Queen, Court, State, Government, Prelates) as not violently to attach by
Troopers in the night, and close imprison him in remote unusual Castles,
without hearing, but only summoned him by a single n^armed, known, sworn
Messenger, to appear before them the next day, and upon his appearance charged
him for writing a particular pretended offensive Book, then produced and heard
him concerning it, before they committed him; and after sent him Prisoner at
large to their usual Prison, the Tower of London, under an honorable Guardian,
near his then residence, and friends, who with all others had free access to*
and conference with him, both in public and private, without restraint, or any
Evesdroppers, appointed to over-hear their discourses with him, and supervise
all Letters, Writings, Papers to and from him; which Liberty he there enjoyed,
even after his first severe Sentence, till the second Bill against him. And
when after they caused his Study and Chamber to be searched, employed only Mr.
Noy, then the Kings Attorney, and two Clerks of the Council (Responsible
Persons of eminency, learning, judge meant, able to judge of Books, and writings
fit for leisure, not rude illiterate Soldiers) in that service; who never
finally ransaked his Pockets, nor seized any Notes, writings, Letters, Books,
not relating to his Charge; which they speedily prosecuted in a usual Court of
Justice, continuing him, even after their first Sentence, a Prisoner at large
in the Tower. After which they See a new Discovery of the Prelates Tyranny.
exhibited a second Bill against him, Dr. Bastwick, and Mr. Burton in
Star Chamber, concerning particular Books thereto annexed, and heard them (in a
sat) at the Bar, before, they sentenced them to be kept close Prisoners in
remote Castles, and upon their removals thither, gave them convenient notice,
to provide necessaries, provided Horses, Coaches at the Kings own cost, to
carry them Prisoners thither, and afterward provisions and Ships to transport
them to Jernsy, Garnsey, and Silly Castles, promising to allow them competent
diet, during their close restraints (which the other two ordinarily received,
and he but for 3 weeks only in the Tower) never placing armed C^nti^els day and
night at their doors, dogging them at the heels, when ever they stirred out
thence, but to suck in Prisonair, or exonerate Nature, during their closest
Restraints; yet notwithstanding, such is his strange late unhappiness^, after
all his pristine Martyrdomes, and unmercenary eminent Services for Religion,
Laws, Liberties, and his Country, instead of receiving the least voted
satisfaction for them; as that by color of several illegal warrants from you
(though for the most part his late professed Christian Friends and Servants too
in verbal complements, as he was really some of yours, and the publikes upon
all occasions to his power) issued under Mr. B^andshaws hands, not to Legal*
known, sworn, responsible, public Officers of Justice (as by our 9 E. 2. ^ E.
3. c. 4. 4 E. 3. c 9. 5 E. 3. c. 4. 14 E. 4. ^. 7. 9. (...) Sh^^i^^s.
Laws they ought to be) but to unknown, unusual, unsworn, obscure, ignorant
Soldiers (unable to judge of scandalous or seditious Writings, Letters,
Papers, Books, Records, and never raised nor paid by the Nation for such
unlawful empIoyments, subverting all the foresaid Laws, and Subjects common
Liberties* for whose real (f) Defense they were first waged by the Parliament,
(l) This all Ordinances for their first ^a^^^ng, continuing, Pa^ and Contribu
ions, and Declarations concerning them or the wars, and Solemn L^ague and
Cov^na^^ jointly attest, and the Armies own printed Declarations likewise.
as violently to force and ransack Men's Houses, Studies, Papers, arrest,
imprison their Persons in private Castles, now turned into Common Gaols, and
they into Gaolers) his Chamber, Study, Truncks at Lincolns June* during his
absence thence, by a party of Soldiers (to him yet unknown) before the least
Summon^, accusation, examination, or objection of any special Crime against
him, on the 26 of June 1650. were forcibly searched, ransacked, and all his
Writings, Papers, Records, Letters, Truncks (as he was informed) carried away
by them thence (without giving any Inventory of them) to White-^all, with some
printed Books. After which, on the 30 of that Month, being the Lords day, a
strong party of Hors^, near Midnight, beset and forced his House at Swainswick
in Somersetshire (though he then openly resided, being never a Fugitive, nor
afraid to look any mortal or Tribunal in the Face all his life) seized his
Person in his Bed*Chamber, searched all his House, Study, Truncks, with his
Sisters and Servants Chests, and Boxes for Writings, Papers, Letters, Records,
Books, taking away what they pleased* and then bringing him Prisoner to their
quarters* carried him out of the way, through the whole City of Bristol, as
their Prisoner, in the head of two Troops in triumph, with Trumpets sounding,
like a transcendent Malefactor; After which they delivered him over to
Dragooners, who conveyed him clos^ Prisoner to Dunster Castle; (a Garrison 50
miles from his house) w^ere he and his Servant attending him (though he could
get no provisions dressed in it) were by your pretended Orders, detained close
Prisoners, under armed Guards, denied liberty to speak with any of their
friends, or others, about any occasion, but in the presence and hearing of
captious Evesdroppers, observing every word they spoke, or to receive or send
any Letters (though to your selves, by their Gardians own hands) or read any
Books, but what they first perused and approved, who were there his supreme
Governors, being two late beardlesse Apprentices, the one to a Baker, the
other to a Cutl^r in London, understanding neither Latin nor Law; nor able to
write true English, yet one of them a constant Chaplain to his Soldiers (who
for the most part seldom resorted to any Ordinances in public, reviled our
Ministers, Sacraments; some of them openly asserting, by word This one Turner
Servant to the Garrison, asserted in a written Discourse, Which he sent to me,
challenging me to answ^r his Arguments, which I did.
and writing, the mortality of men's souls, as being naught else but flesh, and
dying with their bodies, with other erroneous Arminian and Iesuitical Te^e^ts)
who most unchristianly debarred him and his Servant from all Gods public
Ordinances, notwithstanding many fruitless complaints unto you for redress of
this Exact Collection p. 6.
Soul-murthering cruelty* And so over-officious were they, as (without and
beyond your Orders) to keep a constant Court of Guard at his Chamber door, to
his great disturbance, and others there, to search, and six days imprison one
of his Servants, who brought him necessaries from his own only Sister, merely,
for offering to her by his command, a Copy of your Order for his imprisonment,
and of*a Letter to you for his enlargement, (formerly perused, allowed, and
sent to you by them) for her satisfaction; denying her afterward (when she had
taken a long winter journey thither, only to visit him) the least access unto
him for an whole night and day; and at last, upon her resolution to depart
without sight of him, admitting her to visit him, upon this precedent promise
and condition, not to stay with him above one quarter of an hour, though in
their Supervising, over-hearing presence; albeit she was formerly admitted to
him, without delay, scruple, Evesdropper, and to continue with him many times,
for sundry hours together, whiles he was close imprisoned in the Tower, by the
Star Chamber Lords and Prelates. After which, (upon their mis*informations) his
Laundresse Mrs. Carre in London, Mr. George Gear his Sisters Husband were both
examined, and committed Prisoners, and Mr. George Luttrel and his wife in
Dunste^ Castle strictly examined, upon special Articles by your Order, of
purpose to sift out, post factum, some matter of accusation against him, to
justify these Antecedent injurious Proceedings; and himself for the same end,
was there sent for to be examined ex Officio by Collonel*Pyne (his greatest
causeless Enemy and Prosecutor) concerning things done, and One inti^uled News
from Guildhall, The Title wh^r^of my Examiner read unto me.
Pamphlets printed in London, after his close Imprisonment at Dunster, which he
never heard of, nor saw before; to which revived Prelatical, High Commission
Proceedings (condemned in all ages, as unrighteous, tyrannical, and so lately
damned in full Parliament as such) he refused to submit, for the Reasons
mentioned in his Protestation, drawn up, and then promised to be sent unto you
by John Pyne his Examiner. Besides, his Servant there attending him, was
solicited by some of your Agents, not only to desert his Service, but also to
betray his Secrets and him, Soldiers there set, not only to listen at his
Door, Windows, but to creep behind the hangings*in his Chamber, (whereof they
kept the Key) whiles he and his Servant were at their private Prayers, to pick
matter from them to accuse him* And not only his Prison Chamber, Bed, Bedding,
Clothes, Hangings, but even his very Pockets were there forcibly searched by
his armed Ensign Bowr, and others*
Gardians, by pretext of your Order, and the Copies of his Letters, in answer
to theirs, with his very Collections out of, and Tables to the Books he there
read, violently taken away without Restitution, notwithstanding his Resistance,
Protestation, and reading of sundry Exact Collection. p. 8. 11. 12. 35. to 42.
197.
Declarations of Parliament there against it; declaring such searches, not only
against Law, and the Common Liberty of every Subject, which they might resist
with force, but those to be public Enemies to the State, who attempted them:
Whereunto his Gardians replied, This Ensign Bower twice averred, when he
forcibly searched my Pockets, with two other Soldiers more in the presence of
my Servant.
They were commanded by you to do it; and therefore must obey without dispute
against these Declarations: Adding, that they must and would Acts 27. 42. The
Soldiers counsel was to kill the Prisoners, but the Centurion willing to save
Paul, k^pt them from their purpose.
kill, hang, or cut his throat (though never ac^used, nor condemned of any
offense) if enjoined by you so to do, so well were they versed in the Jesuits
Doctrine, and Practice of blind Obedience, and Assassination too, upon all
occasions; Of all which particulars, though he earnestly complained to all and
sundry of you, by diverse Letters, yet he received not the least redress: But
was (to Mr. Lutterils and the Countries great charge and oppressing) kept*there
still clo^se Prisoner in Mr. Enforced to find them Lodging, Fire, Candles, and
to give you ten thousand pound Bond to keep his Castle against all Enemies,
after its walls, works, demolished, and the Ordinance and Ammunition thence
removed, else it must be totally demolished without recompense, though Mr.
Lutterils chief seat, Inheritance, Honor, of which many Manors are held by
Knights Service, such is your Free State, even to your Friends and Servants.
Lutterils domestic Castle Lodgings, with 20 Soldiers purposely to guard him
sundry Months after the Castle walls and Outhouses there demolished (before
any notice, or without the least ^atisfaction, given to the owner thereof* Mr.
Lutteril, damnified above 4000l. thereby to recompense his former 6000l. losses
by the Kings party, for his fidelity to the Parliament, whom he served gratis
as a Colonel) and the Garrison thence removed by your specia^ Order; which in
Law*reversed your Warrant for his Imprisonment there, and set him free.

After which on the 12 June 1651. by a Warrant from Colonel Desbrow, without
any from you, to increase his expenses and vexation, he was translated to
Taunton Castle (notwithstanding his Protest against it, as being then set at
Liberty in point of Law, by Dunster Castles dismantling, and that Garrisons
dissolution, to which only he was confined, and no Prisoner to this Colonel,
nor subject to his Military Power, by any Law he knew) whither being brought
close Prisoner, he was for want of Bedding (which the Governor could neither
borrow nor hire in the Town, so much did they detest his causeless close
imprisonment there) mued up close Prisoner in an Inn over against the Castle
(even when some Colonels formerly in arms for the King were there set free)
with two Soldiers to guard him, who had so much good manners, as not to permit
Captain Georges (though then a Colonel of the County Militia Horse) to see or
speak with him in their presence, unless he would first seek out his Governor
at the Castle, and gain his license; two others of them having the like
rudeness at Dunster Castle, as to quarrel with and affront two Devonshire
Gentlemen of quality (there visiting Mrs. Lutterel their Kinswoman* only
because one of them passing by your Prisoner, as he was walking, moved his hat,
and said, God bless you Sir, without the Governors previou^ license; and the
other recited only a consolatory Latin verse to him out of Virgil, whereupon
they saucily told him; he ought to speak no word or language but what they
understood, and should answer it to you if he did. And whereas he desired the
Governor at Taunton, being very near the Church, to permit him to go to the
public Ordinances there, he having no Order to restrain him from them, or so
much as to imprison him there from you; he peremptorily refused it, whereupon
he demanded leave to send a Note to Taunton Church, to desire the Prayers of
that Congregation from which he was debarred, to this effect; Mr. William
Prynne having for 12 Months space last past, been totally deprived of, and
debarred from Gods public Ordinances (which he enjoyed in his former close
restraints) and from free converse with men, without any particular cause yet
declared to him for this his strict restraint, desires the public and private
prayers of this Congregation (whereto he is now denied access*) for
restitution to Gods Ordinances, and his just Christian and Civil Liberty, after
full ten yeans imprisonments and sufferings, for Defense of our Religion, and
the Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom and Nation, which Note he enclosed in a
Letter to his Governor, proving it to be a chief part of Christian Liberty,
and a Gospel Duty, for him to desire, and them to make their public, private
Prayers to God for him in such a condition, By Acts 10. 5. 12. Romans 15. 31, 32.
2 Cor. 1. 9, 10, 11. 2 These. 3. 1, 2. 2 Timothy 1. 2, 3. Adding, that all the
world, and his own Conscience, would cry shame on, and condemn him, if he
should now deny him the benefit thereof. Upon which his Governor was so
surprised, that to prevent the infamy of stopping this Note, or reading it
publicly in the Church if sent; he ordered his Lieutenant to accompany his
Prisoner to the Congregation, with his two other Guardians.

About two weeks following, upon a bare Information, That Taunton was an unfit
place for his restraint (because he had some acquaintance, and good
accommodations for Soul and Body there, and was nearer his friends than before)
though not unfit for Colonels of that County, formerly in Arms against the
Parliament, there lodged in Innes and private houses, walking about the streets
at pleasure, with one single Soldier only to guard them) he was about the 27 of
June 1651. by your fresh warrant, upon few hours warning (before he could
procure a horse for his Servant, or necessaries for so long and costly a
journey) (notwithstanding his special open Protestation against his
transcendent vexation, and reading the late unanimous A New-Discovery of
Prelates Tyranny. p. 136. to 143.
Votes of all the Commons (and most of your selves) in Parliament against it
(in his own and his former fellow sufferers Cases) to his Condnctors) mounted
against his will upon a Troopers Horse, without his Servant, clothes or Linen,
by a party of Captain Warringtons Troop, and by them carried close Prisoner
that night to Crediton in Devonshire, and from thence by other fresh Parties of
other Devonshire and Cornish Troops (who were all generally very civil to him,
some of them having formerly conducted him voluntarily toward London in his
return thither from his pristine close restraints in ferein Castles, and
lamenting they were now forced against their wills, to conduct him to a new
close Prison, without an cause or crime at all expressed in their Warrant;) He
was on the 2 of July 1651. brought close Prisoner to Pendennis Castle, near the
extremest parts of Cornwall (50 miles further than the Star Chamber Lords, by
their last severest sentence sent Ibid. p. 167
Dr. Bastwicke and him, whether (p) Ibid. 32. 75. 133.
his very trespassing Beasts could not be driven by Law) being above one hundred
and fifty miles from his house, near two hundred and fifty miles from his
Library, and usual Residence at Lincolns Inn, out of all common roads; where
his kindred, friends, at such a vast distance can neither conveniently visit,
send to, hear from, nor supply him with necessaries, where he can have no
accommodation of Books to read, nor of Physic, Physicians, or other
conveniences in case of sickness, nor lodging fit for a Gentleman, being for
three Months space imprisoned in a narrow Chamber, newly made for him (for want
of other Lodgings) just over and besides the Soldiers main guard* from which
it was severed only with a few thin borders) where, by reason of the guards
continual noise, walking, talking, releasing, drumming, and the like, he could
enjoy no rest nor sleep, day or night; to the great impairing of his health,
eyesight, and interruption, not only of his Studies, but Meditations and
private Devotions.

After which (upon the enlargement of the Cornish Gentlemen, formerly in Arms
against the Parliament, there secured) he was removed to the best Chamber the
Marshalsee there afforded, being but mean, low, small, and by reason of the
natural situation of the place (upon the Top of an Hill next the Sea, near
surrounding it, without any tree or other shelter) is so exposed to winds,
storms, tempests, driving the rain through the Windows, Tiles, Chimney, and
Fire often times out of the hearth; and so subject to smoke, that the last
tempestuous winter, his Chamber was sundry times near over-flowen with water,
and he forced to set therein many whole, wet, cold days and weeks together,
without fire, and sometimes to extinguish it when kindled, lest the smoke
should su^focate him* or put out his eyes, (it being so moist withal, that it
presently moulds and rots, Clothes, Books, Shoes, Unguents, and other things;
and so dark in Winter, and cloudy weather, that he can hardly see to read
therein at Midday) By reason whereof his health has not only been impeached,
but his very life endangered, he having no place to walk within doors, and
there being no walking without doors in wet and windy seasons, here very
frequent.

And whereas some of the Cornish Gentlemen here secured by your order for*being
Colo^els and Officers in the late Kings Army against the Parliament, had so
much liberty from Captain Charles Shrubsoll (Deputy Governor of the Castle here
under Sir Hardresse Waller) as in those pretended dangerous times of the feared
Scottish Invasion, to repair home to their Friends and Houses only upon their
Pa^olls, to walk abroad out of the Castle, both about their occasions, and for
their recreations, to visit their fellow Pris^ners in Arms at St Maurs Castle
(who likewise often repaired to visit them here) and to consult together, and
write Letters concerning their enlargements, without any restraint; which
liberty* I no ways envy or dislike; yet such was his strange severity toward
your Prisoner (though a constant Servant, Friend, Adherent to, and Member of
the Parliament) as not only to place special A Practice borrowed from the
malicious Jews, and persecuting Herod. Mar. 27. 63, 64, 65, 66. Acts 12. 4. 6.
10. 18. c. 5. 23.
Sentinels at his door day and night) who followed him with their Matches
lighted, Musqusts at his heels, when ever he stirred out but to ease Nature, or
walk before his Chamber door, in the view of other Sentinels and Soldiers,
though he had the Marshal and his Servant besides to guard him) notwithstanding
his Protests against it (being no Prisoner of War) as a new Military
Oppression, Innovation beyond your Orders, and contrary to Law, exposing him to
the custody of as many new Gaolers, every day, as there were fresh Sentinels,
never imposed on him in the Tower or other Garrisons, whiles close imprisoned
in them by the Prelates, (which yet he still continued) but likewise to debarr
him from repairing to the Parish Church to Gods public Ordinances and
Sacraments, though there be no Chapel nor Minister in Orders in the Castle, but
only private meetings in the Storehouse, where a Chaplain never in orders, and
sometimes Soldiers pray and speak (as they phrase it) upon some Scripture Text,
without reading or singing any Psalm or Chapter, or using any Sacraments, (And
although this Captain and most of his Officers, seldom or never resort to
these, nor yet to any other Meetings, from which they withdraw themselves, as
being either above or against all Ordinances) yet he would by no means permit
this Remonstrant to resort to Gods public Ordinances at the Parish Church,
contrary to the express word and meaning of your Warrant for his removal
hither (occasioned by his forecited Note to his Governor at Taunton) to permit
him Liberty to repair to the public Ordinances of Gods worship, if he shall
desire it, which restraint he continued to his great spiritual prejudice,
oppression, and discomfort, notwithstanding his often desires and
expostulations too (till Captain Cosens upon the receipt of your late
explanation in August last) permitted him this Liberty. And not content
herewith, this Shrubsoll peremptorily denied him Liberty to send any Letters to
your selves, or other his Friends in London, to demand his Freedom, or procure
his enlargement, or to complain to your selves of these his unparalleld
Injuries, even after his perusal of the Laws, unless he would likewise first
give him Copies of them under his hand, and also trust him with their
conveyance, when and by whom he pleased; which restraint of Letters (beyond and
against your Orders) this Captain obstinately continuing above 8 months space,
notwithstanding his Remonstrants, several expostulations with him, and protests
against it, as most injurious, unreas^nable and tyrannical, never formerly
imposed on himself, or other Prisoners, by any Gardians of late, nor yet
anciently on the Prophet Jer. 16. (...) 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, etc, 28, 29, 32.
Jeremiah himself, when imprisoned under impious K. Zedechia, as a Traitor to
him and his Kingdom, wh^ writ and sent abroad his Prophecies against the^ in
his very Prison, and n^w writ and disp^sed them abroad again, with many
additions, when bu^nt by the King, without such restraint^; nor yet on St. Paul
by the bloodiest Pagan Tyrant Nero in heathen Rome it self, when sent Prisoner
thither, and publicly accused by all the Elders and High Priests, for a Acts,
24, 5.
Pestilent fellow, and mover of sedivion throughout the world, etc. who Acts
28, 16 to the and. Ephesians. 3. 1. c. 6. 21, 22. Phil. 2. 19. 23. c. 4. 18. 22. 2.
Tim. 4. 9, 10, 11. 21. Philemon 1. 9, 10, 23, 24. Colos. 8 to 19. and the
Postscrip^s of his Epistles.
writ most of his sacred Epistles to whole Churches, and particular persons in,
and sent them by his own friends and sp^^ial Messengers from his prison in
Rome, without his ke^p^rs supervisal, or demand of their Copies, trusting him
alone to send them at his pleasure; No^ yet by the cruel Pagan Emperor
Domitian the Persecutor on St. John, when confined by him to the Rev. 1. 9. 11.
c. 2. 1. 8. 12. 18. c. 3. 1. 7. 14. c. 21. 5.
Isle of Patmos, from whence he writ, if not his 3 Canonical Epistles, and
Gosple*too, yet his Apocalypse and 7 Epistles to the 7 Churches of Asia, and
sent them by his own Messengers, without any perusal or restraint by his
Heathen Gardians, (a tyrannical project* which would have suppressed a great
part of the sacred Scripture, if then in use, as now of late) nor yet imposed
by the last Parliament on Strafford, Canterbury, or any others, when impeached,
condemned for High Treason, nor on the vilest felo^s in our Common Gaols, nor
the very Gally-slaves in Turkey, who ever usually freely write and send Letters
thence to their friends, to ransom and enlarge them thence; Upon which
considerations, he told him, He would rather die in prison* than submit to this
his worse than Turkish Vassalage: Thereupon after so long a fruitless
Patience, this Remonstrant was necessitated for his relief herein, without this
Tyrants privity to use means to convey a Letter to Sir James Harrington (one
of your society) formerly, twice perused, and stopped by this Captain, Guardian,
upon the terms forementioned, to demand his Liberty, or removal hence from
under the power of such an Oppressing Guardian, who not only stand his perused
Letters, and detained him, from Gods Ordinances against your Orders; but denied
him leave so much as once to go with the Marshall into the Castle fields to
gather herbs, which* others ^new not, to make* Salves and Medicaments for lame
Impoten^ Soldiers of the Garr^son, and other poor People, out of mere Charity,
and debarred sundry lame diseased People of this County (where is neither
skillful Physician nor Surgeon near, that could or would help them) and
amongst others, two poor Eisher-men kept near 5 years Gally-slaves in Turkey,
lately returned thence with dangerous Ulcers in their Eyes, the least access
unto him even with a guard, to dress or direct them how to cure their
Maladies, to their great grief, only because (as he afterward pretended) they
had not taken the Engagement, though never in actual Arms. A more then Turkish
Bar^arisme, not only against the express Mat. 10. 8. c. 16. c. 12. 15. 22. c.
14. 14. c. 19. 2. Man. 3. 10. c. 6. 5. ^u. 4. 40. c. 5. 15. c. 6. 17, 18, 19.
c. 8. 2. 36. 47. c. 9. 11. 42. c. 10. 3. c. 35, 36. ^. 14. 4. Acts 5. 16. c. 8.
7. Jam. 5. 14. 15.
Precepts, Presidents of the Gospel, the Rules of common Charity, Humanity, but
the very Laws of God, of Natnre, of Nations, and War it self; Which oblige all
men to Romans 12. 20 Mat 5. 44, 45. Luke 6. 27. Prove. 25. 21. 2. Chr. 28. 15.
feed, dress, cure, and suffer to be fed, dressed, cured the very peirced
wounds of Strangers, of t^eir Professed Enemies taken in open battle in the
field, and make them liable to severe Punishments if they neglect or refuse it
(for which Sir. John Owen was of late criminally questioned for his life:) much
more then was he obliged to permit poor English Christian* Neighbors, and late
Turkey Captives, wounds, and Ulcers (never in Arms) to be dressed by a
charitable Prisoner; seeing the very Pagan Roman Centurion, who carried St.
Paul Prisoner to Rome, gave him both free Liberty and encouragement in his
voyage thither, to Acts. 28. 8, 9. 30.
to cure Publius Father, and all others diseased People in the Isle of Melita,
who freely resorted to him, and afterward in Rome it self, without restraining
them or him from so charitable a work, and the very Samaritan commended in the
Gosple by Christ himself, Luke 9. 1. 6. Acts. 10. 38.
who went about doing good, healing all diseases of the ungrateful people in
all places; and Luke. 22. 50, 51, 54.
healed Malchus his Ear, who came out to take him, whiles a Prisoner under the
High Pr^ests Officers and Soldiers, (for our Christian imitation ^n like
cases) did so far compassionate the man wounded and left half dead ^y Thieves
in the high way (though a mere Stranger to him of author Nation,) as to go to
him, bind his wounds, pouring oil and wine into them, set him, on his own
beast, bring him to his Inn, take care of him, and pay for his expenses and
cure, whose example is thus backed with Christ's own Gosple-Precept to every one
of his followers and others, Go, and DO THOU LIKEWISE. Luke 10. 29. to 38.
Which Presidents and Scriptures though urged to this Barbarian, could not
prevail on his stony heart for his admission to him for their cure; nor yet for
Engagers themselves with out special Officers and Soldiers, beside the
Marshall appointed to supervise his dressing of and directions to them; as if
this his very Charity and Compassion to p^^r Ephe. 4. 31, 32. c. 5. 1, 2.
distressed People, he never knew nor saw before, might prove Treasonable and
destructive to your free Estates. Sir James Harrington receiving this Letter,
and information, and moving you on this Remonstrants behalf, acquainted his
Friend who delivered it; you all declared, that he had free Liberty of the
Castle granted him, and of Letters to and from him, without restraint, who
writing him word of the delivery of his Letter to Sir James, and this his
Answer thereunto, this Governor upon perusal of the Letter (first brought to
him) instead of taking off these his former injurious Restraints, like an
inhuman Procrustes, reinforsed them all with greater severity, and withal
commanded the Marshall forth with under Pain of forfeiting his place, to lock
your Remonstrant up close Prisoner in his Chamber, (which was never done
before,) besides a Centinell always placed at his Door, to keep all Officers,
Soldiers of the Castle, as well as others, from him; and not to permit him to
stir out of his Chamber with a Centinell but in his company, or speak with any
but in his presence; Which being accordingly executed with all rigor, the
Remonstrant thereupon first by Letters, and afterward by discourse before
Officers, expostulated with him concerning this New Oppression, as not only
against your former Warrants, which ^ad not the words* close Imprisonment, much
less in his Chamber, A new Discovery, etc. p. 84. 86.
in them, as the Order for his close Imprisonment under the old ^ouncel Table
Lords had) but as an high contempt of your authority, and new Declaration
^ignifi^d by Sir James, desiring him, either presently to right him therein
himself, or to give him leave to compl^in thereof to you by writing; Whereunto
he replied, He would not take off these new nor the former restraints, but if
he would complain thereof to you, and state the matter of fact truly ^y
writing, he would not only f^eely send, but assist it too: Which he doing
accordingly, and directing it to Sir James to communicate to you, on his
be^alf, sent the draught thereof to him by the Marsh^l, to peruse and rectify,
if m^staken in any thing; and then to send it away according to his prom^s; who
after persual thereof, peremptorily refu^ed, either to send, correct, except
against, or restore it; stopping his other Letters to Sir James (though twice
alterd to his mind) complaining of this miscariage, and entreating him, to
certify under his hand, whether he used any such words or Declaration to his
friend or no, as aforementioned; he having in a bravado, to palliate this his
Tyranny, laid 5l. to 12 d. with the Prisoner (who delivered him 12d. in the
presence of his Officers, which he was to make 5 l. in money, if such words
were used) that Sir Ja. never spoke such words to his F^i nd as were contained
in his Letter, promising to give him leave to write to Sir James and his friend
to that end; and yet staying his Letters to both, when written, and denying
either to alter them, or write himself to that purpose, or restore the 12 d.
received, or to draw up the differences himself, and present them to you;
continuing him thus above 6 weeks Prisoner under lock and key, in his close
little Chamber, to the great impairing of his health, (so as his appetite and
digestion was quite lost for several weeks, insomuch that he could not eat or
^igest the Leg or Wing of a Chicken, nor any meat else but a little broth) and
leaving him (so remote from his friends) in this sad condition, destitute of
all means of complaint or relief herein, till Captain Cosens Deputy Governor
in his absence (using him more civilly like a Gentleman) since Shrubsols
occasions drew him hence to London, enlarged him from this close restraint, to
enjoy the freedom of the Castle, the purity of Gods public Ordinances, and
sending of Letters, when first approved by himself, such a Ward and School boy
is he, yet to this very hour, under your Free State, even after the Court of
Wards quite voted down.

And whereas all Colonels and Gentlemen heretofore in actual Arms against the
Parliament here, or elsewhere, secured (in their proper Counties only, not in
foraign) in the late times of danger, were a full year since enlarged from
their far more favorable restraints than his, by your general Order, and many
Thieves, Felons, legally deserving death, both pardoned and set free, without
any Petitions to you from them; and not only diverse Popish Recusants in A^mes,
but some Popish Pr^ests and Jesuits, imprisoned before your Government,
absolutely released under it, yea exempted from the very Oaths of Supremacy and
Allegiance 1 Eliz* c. 2. 5 Eliz. c. 1. 3 Jac. c. 4, 5. 7* Jac. c. 6. 17 Caroli.
The Act for Triennial Parliaments.
(specially provided, prescribed by the wisdom of many pious Parliaments, for
the detection and prevention of their manifold treasonable practices against
our Realms, Princes, Parliaments, Government, Laws, Liberties and Religion)
from some if not all old penal Laws, formerly made, and those See the printed
P^oposi^ions sent to the* King the last Treaty, and m^ Speech in Parl. p. 57,
58.
5 new excellent Bills and Oaths of Abjuration* for their better, speedier
discovery, and suppression, so Exact Coll^ction, p. 20. 208. 309. 9* 8, 909,
911.
earnestly pressed by our late zealous Parliaments, and consented too by the
late King (so Exact Col. p. 1, 4, 5, 12, 13. 665, 669.
much taxed by you for indulgence toward them) in the last Treaty without
scruple, yet since quite buried with ^im in oblivion, and some of them
(unwittingly, as is conceived) entertained as Troopers, Soldiers in pay in
your very Guards, for want of such strict inquiries after them, and such means
to prevent their coming over, and to detect them as formerly; and not one of
them (for oug^t he can hear) close imprisoned (if imprisoned at all) in remote
Castles, under such Guards, Sentinels, Restraints, as his forementioned; though
in Exact Col. p. 1 to 21. 91, 98. 106, 108, 145, 199. 206, 207. 308, 310. 461
to 465. 490, 491, 492. 508, 516, 567, 570, 574. 616, 625, 628, 637, 639, 640,
648, 651 to 656, 659, to 754, 755 764, 769, 786. 813, 814, 816, 827, 832, 834,
845, 861, 890, 891, 896, 902, 904, 907 to 919, 932. A Collection of O^dinances,
p. 23. 30, 39. 95, 96, 97, 98. 167, 169, 185, 187. 203, 204, 210, 217, 218,
227, 249, to 267, 275, 283, 309, 310, 314, 360, 363, 371, 379. 412, 413, 417,
424, 432, 457, 458, 470, 483. 514, 517, 537, 548, 576. 616, 623, 624, 666. 704,
705, 706, 724, 761, to 829, 834, to 870, 872, 880, 883. Appendix p. 1. 15*
near one hundred printed Declarations of Parliament* remonstrated to the World,
to be the Original Contrivers, the chief Incendiaries, Fomentors, Promoters of
the first late Wars between Scotland and England, and the late King and
Parliament, of purpose thereby to subvert the Protestant Religion both at home
and ab^oad, destroy that last, and all future Parliaments, our Laws,
Liberties, and former settled Government, and introduce Popery, Anarchy, Slavery
and Military Tyr^ ^y in their pl^c^s: Whereupon they are grown so audacious, as
not only secretly to infuse their Jesuitical Tenants, Pract^ces, Poli^icks of
most dangerous consequence (expr^ssed in sundry former 5 El. c. 1 13 El. c. 1.
23 El. c. 1. 27 El^^* c. 2.
Acts of P^rliament purposely enacted to prevent them) into the Soldiery and
People* now much infected with them, but likewise by their instruments, to
translate, print and vend publicly, throughout the Nation (without Inhibition
or Punishment) their Jesuitical Books even in folio; professedly ass^rting,
both the Popes Sup^emacy, pra^ing to Saints and Angels, Purgatory, Mass,
Transubstantiation, and all other points of grossest Popery for undoubted
Truths necessary to Salvation, and also positively maintaining our true
Protestant Religion to be gross Heresy, and our late famous Queen Elizabeth,
with all true professors thereof, to be damnable Heretics: Witness the
Jesuit Edmond Causin his Holy Court, printed in several folio Tomes in London
it self (translated into English by Papists, Jesui^es, and dedicated to the two
greatest Female Papists* Queen Mary, and the Duchess of Buckingham) sold
publicly under your Noses, and elsewhere, with the very Jesuits badge S. I.
(S^cietatis Iesis) in Capitals, in the Title Page; and this bold subscription,
Printed at London by William Bently, Anno 1650. (since his close imprisonment
by you) and are to be sold by John Williams in Paul's Churchyard; where all
these Popish Tenants are largely maintained, to the great Scandal and Offense
of all true Protestants, as you may read at leisure* Tom. 1. p. 30 to 38* 63,
64, 68, 74, 75* Tom. 2. p. 168. Tom. 3. p. 425 to 430. 461, 462. Tom. 5. p.
173, 174. 304 to 319 The Angel of Peace to all Christian Princes, p. 10, 11,
and elsewhere; to omit all other Iesui^ical, Arminian, Popish Erroneous Books
against our Religion, now publicly written, printed, vended See the Stationers
Reaco^ fired.
(by thousands) under you with impunity, though so lately charged, pressed by
the whole House of Commons See Canterburies Doom, p. 26, 27. 178 to 350.
against Canterbury as an Article of High Treason, for which amongst others he
lost his head, by Judgment of Parliament, and your own concurrent Votes and
Approbations. Yet he who out of pure love, zeal to his God, true Religion,
Country, Parliaments, has constantly stuck unto, and written most of any man
in times of greatest need and danger, in defense of the just In his Sovereign
power of Parliaments and Kingdoms.
Power, Rights, Privileges of our true English Parliaments and Nation against
all Opponents; against all late introduced In his Pe^petuity of a Regenerate
man's estate, Anti-A^m^anisme, etc.
Arminian, In his Breviate, Cosens cozening Devotions, Quench coal, Lame Giles
his Haltings. A Pleasant Purge for a Roman Catholic, Romes Master-P^ece, The
Popish Royal Favorite, Hidden works of Darkness brought to public Light,
Antipathy of the English Prelacy, Cant. Doom* Speech in Parliament.
Popish, Iesuitical Errors, Doctrines, Ceremonies, Innovations, Books, and
made the first, the fullest discoveries of and Oppositions in print of any man
(with no little pains* cost, loss, danger) against their manifold dangerous
Books, Practices, Plots, Conspiracies to undermine our Religion, Parliaments,
Laws, Liberties, Government, and involve all Protestant Kingdoms, States,
Churches, in bloody intestine wars, to their own mutual destruction, but these
Jesuits insultation, exul^ation, and that by approbation, authority of
Parliament, and most of your applauses; And has particularly informed some of
you by Letters, since his restraints, of admired indulgences toward Priests,
^esuites; of one particular noted Jesuit (who for a fortnights space together
disputed with a friend of his at St. Omers, with 5 other Jesuits more, about
August 1649, since listed a Trooper) in your Guards, and of this late printed
Jesuits folio Book, without any reformation or suppression of either, upon his
complaints thereof; during this their licentious Liberty and Freedom (to their
grand Rejoicing Advantage, and the great Grief, Offense, of most really
affected to our Religion, or the public weal) without any cause, hearing, or
release, must be shut up and continued close Prisoner by you, year after year,
and sent from one remote Castle to another* remoter and worser than it, and
there kept under strictest Guards, Sentinels Restraints, and most injurious
Duresses, as aforesaid, without any hopes of release; notwithstanding his
manifold Letters and Addresses to you jointly and severally (in such a way as
becomes him, though not by unworthy complyances in submission to the
self-created new Powers and Titles) complaining of these fore-remonstrated
Proceedings, Searches, Imprisonments, Translations and Restraints in foreign
Counties, Castles, under Soldiers, without any precedent Indictment, Trial and
Crime yet specified, and undeniably manifesting them to you, to be contrary to
all Laws of God, Nature, Nations, the Common L^w and Great Charter of England,
and other forecited known Statute^, Iudgement^, Declarations, Resolutions,
R^monstrances, of all our late Parliaments, the express A New D^scovery of the
Prelates Tyranny. p. 141, 142.
Votes and Resolves of both Houses of Parliament, in his own late particular
case and others; the indubitable Birthright, Franchises of eve y English
Freeman; of very dangerous President, Conseq^ence to Posterity, and in sundry
respects far more exorbitantly unrighteous than his former Grievances and
Imprisonments under the worst of your discarded, condemned, decapitated
Predecessors at Whitehall; as your own Judgments, Consciences, upon perus^l
hereof, cannot but acknowledge, before all Tribunals of God and Man.

And although he has hereupon earnestly pressed you jointly and severally from
time to time, both by Letters and Friends, for his own and the worlds
satisfaction, to specify the true cause of these your rigorous, anomolous
Proceedings, and wrongful long Restraints (inconsistent with your manifold
printed In the Declaration of 17 Martii 1648, and others.
Protests, for advancing every m^ns public Liberty, and abandoning all
Approaches toward abolished pristine Tyranny) And if it be only for difference
in Judgment and Conscience from you, concerning our late public Charges and
Affairs (the dangerous bloody Consequences whereof since experimentally
verified, he truly predicted in his printed Speech in Parliament, and other
writings, not then credited by you) as he and others conjecture; that then he,
and those of his opinion, being the far greatest part of the late undoubted
Parliament and English Nation, and having by all Laws of God and Men, as just,
as true, as real, full, large (if not 2* Sam. 19. 43.
larger) an interest in the Republike, as those in greatest present power, and
all others of a different Persuasion, being all Magna Cha ta c. 29. and C^^ks
Institutes thereon. 1 Samuel 8. 4, 19 20 22. 2 Samuel 19. 41, 42, 43. c. 16. 18. 2
Kings 2. 23, 24. 2 Chr. 23 t^^oughout, c. 26. 1. 23 24. 25. c. 36. 1. The Lords
and Comm^^s Declaration 23 Oct^b. 1642. Exact Collect. p. 660. We must own it
AS OUR DUTY, that the meanest of the Commonalty may enjoy their own Birthright
Freedom and Liberty of the Laws of the Land, BEING EQUALLY ENTITLED THEREUNTO
WITH THE GREATEST SUBJECT.
equally English Freemen and Peers herein, with you and them may not be
prejudged, convinced, without a free Legal public hearing, by mere Tyrannical
violent Iron Arguments and Prisons alone, as hitherto we have been, but that
you would like rational men pious Christians, A^sertors of Liberty of
Conscience and Common Freedom, admit him, for his own and their conviction and
satisfaction (it mistaken or erroneous in our Judgments or Consciences) to
debate these our D^fferences of highest public Concernment, in a free public
manner, by word or writing, in point of Divinity, Law, Reason, and true
Sta^e-Policy, with all or any of the ablest Divines, Lawyers, Scholars,
Statesmen of a different Judgment from him, or else quietly to enjoy and
follow the D ctates of his own resolved Conscience and Judgment therein,
without molestation, in this age, when not only Liberty but Licentiousness of
Conscience, in the chiefest Principles of Religion, and most other thin gs, are
so much practiced and patronised: Or, if it be any real transcendent Crime
against any known Law of the Land, deserving such severities before hearing or
trial, or a Capital punishment after them (whereof he believes himself really
innocent in the impartial verdict of your own Consciences) that then you would
of Common Right and Justice, according to Magna Charta, and other forecited
Laws, without further delay or denial, bring him to a lawful fair public
Trial, by his Lawful Peers and Legal Judges, in some usual Court of Iustic^,
before all the world, where he might openly make his full defense against your
Charge; and thereupon be either justly condem ed, if guilty; or immediately
enlarged, repaired for all his forementioned injurious Sufferings,
Imprisonments, and his Damages thereby sustained, if found Guiltless; or else
absolutely released (as well as imprisoned by you) without trial, and repaired
by his yet unknown clandestine malicious Accusers, if you have no such real
actual Crime to charge against him; Or, if neither of these might be granted
under your Free State, never yet denied any English Freeman under the greatest
former Regal Tyranny; that then you would either permit him Free Liberty to
transport himself into some strange foraign Climate, if unworthy to breath
freely in his own Native Country, after all his unrecompensed faithful eminent
Services, Losses, Sufferings for it, where he hopes to find better usage, and
more Freedom, Justice, amidst mere Strangers and Foraigners, than he had yet
enjoyed under professed Popish Prelatical Enemies heretofore, or pretended late
Christian real Friends in power since; Or otherwise, if you are resolved to
wear out the short Remainder of his expiring Life in remote obscure Prisons
without trial or hearing, of purpose to hinder him from doing the Church of God
or his Native Country any further service in this world, when others are acting
so much mischief and treason against them both; that then, according to Justice
and ancient Practice under our Kings, you would afford him a Competent
Allowance of Diet, in some more convenient usual Prison than this, where he
might have all fitting Accommodations in health and sickness: Or otherwise
forthwith pay him the 800l. public Debt long due unto him as a Contractor (for
which he never yet received one farthing, though he thereby lost and expended
many pounds, besides his pains) or order him some of his voted Damages to be
paid him by his former unrighteous Censurers sitting amongst you, to help
defray his Debts, and extraordinary Prison expenses, having exhausted his
private estate for the public, and to defray his extraordinary Prison
expenses, and lost the Practice of his very Calling, to support him, by your
strict Duresses; And albeit his only Sister (out of her natural affection to
him, without his privity) has thrice humbly Petitioned you (as he has heard)
and others of his Friends often earnestly solicited and petitioned you on his
behalf to the like effect; yet hitherto (such is his unhappiness, or rather
your hard-heartednesse, as some esteem it) that he and they could never
hitherto receive the least satisfactory Answer, to all or any of these his just
Demands, being still continued a close Prisoner by you, in sundry respects, in
this remote incommodious Castle; yea that which adds exceedingly to the
Transcendency of your In ustice, Oppression, and Tyranny toward him, is this;
That instead of enlarging, relieving, or answering his Sisters late Petitions
to you in his behalf, you have very lately (as he is credibly informed) voted
him out of his poor Recordership of the City of Bath, to which he was about 5
years since (without his privity or solicitation, freely elected by the
unanimous Vote of the whole City) and by two several Letters under all the
Aldermens and Mayors hands importuned to accept it, er^ he would embrace it;
And that on no other ground or cause, but only because you have so long
imprisoned him against all Law, without any cause yet expressed, before the
least hearing or complaint, against the express Letter of Magna Cha ta and
other fundamental Laws; and that upon the motive of one of your Whitehall
Members (his pretended great Friend and Servant) then in the Chair; who by his
Letter in your Names writ to the City to elect a new Recorder in his place,
being disabled to execute it by your imprisonment of him; and withal
particularly recommending his own Son in-Law James Ash (a Westminster Memb^r)
to the Office; which being seconded by his own Fathers solicitation (another
sitting Member, his near Neighbor) thereupon he was without any justice,
hearing, or other cause or trial, contrary to the Great Charter, Petition of
Right, and all Rules of Justice, outed of his Recordship, his 4 years salary of
x ls. per annum then in arrear detained from him (and never since paid him by
the City) and this other Member intruded into his Place; such is your new
Free State Whitehall transcendent Justice (worthy to be registered for your
Honor to all Posterity) toward this Remonstrant (instead of recompencing his
former voted Damages, Losses, Services for the public) to his extraordinary
Prejudice and Oppression, the exceeding grief of his kindred, friends, and most
religious truly public spirited men; to the great rejoicing of his Iesuitical
and Prelatical Malignant Enemies, and no great honor to your Justice or
Government; And that only (as most conjecture) in imitation of the A New
Discovery of the Prelates Tyranny P. 86, 87, 88.
Prelates heretofore, of purpose to disable and ^inder him from writing or
publishing any thing more in Defense or vindication of our endangered, invaded
Religion, Government, Laws, Liberties, Franchises, Properties, Freeholds,
Lives, against the manifold new encrochments on them, and subversions of them
under pretext of their support: or making any fr^sh discoveries of the
Jesuits, Papists and their confederates, various plots and practices (now very
rife and visible) to undermine them; and engage our own and all other
Protestant Kingdoms, States, Churches in destru ctiveunreconcilable Wars and
differences, agrees either to their mutual and the Protestants Religions
ruin; or to countermine these their designs, (as he has done formerly to his
power) Or else (as others conceive) to force him by tedious uncomfortable
imprisonments, and extreme penury to turn a practical Apostate and perjured
abjurer of all his former Orthodox loyal Principles, Writings, Books, Oaths,
Covenants, Protestations concerning King, Kingdom, Laws, Liberties,
Properties, Taxes, Parliaments, Government, Maintained in his Sovereign power
of Parliaments, licenced by the Commons. His plea for the Lords. The Levellers
Levelled. Antiquity triumphing over Novelty. A brief Historical Collection of
the ancient Parliaments of England, and Prynne the Member reconciled to Prynne
the Barrister. Ire^arches Redivivus.
Lords hereditary just right to sit, vote, judge in our Parliaments as Peers,
and thereby to verify all the Prelates malicious No Bishop no King, etc.
Conference of Hampton Court. The Bishop of Downs Sermon. The antipathy of the
English Prelacy to Unity and Monarchy: Epistle Dedicatory to the Parliament.
Aspersions upon all Puritans in general, and himself in particular, in their
two late Starchamber Bills and Speeches there exhibited against him, and render
him really guilty of beheaded Canterburies Treasons in an higher degree then
he, (after his enjoined printing and publication of his C^nterburies Doom,
Written and Printed by their special Order.
Charge, Trial and Condemnation for them, by the Commons House special Order)
to his eternal infamy here, and damnation hereafter; neither of which, through
the assistance of heaven, no Prisons, Tortures, Powers on earth, shall ever
compel or persuade him to do; or in case of his resolved Noncompliance
herein, under seigned Machivilian pretexts of his wilful obstinacy, and
contempt of your new-created authority (whose legality it must be no less then
High Treason, for him to dispute in law or conscience, being now as absolutely
to be submitted to by all men as the Popes it self in Rome, by an implicit
faith, and blind obedience) even to Psalm. 69. 19, 20.
break his heart with grief, if possible, by depriving him of the comfort of
his Friends, Kindred, Books, Calling, all free converse with men by Letters or
conference, all public Trusts, and private useful employments, to pass* away
his solitary hours, laying him quite aside, like a* Psalm. 31. 12.
broken useless vessel, restraining him under strictest Gards, as the most
dangerous enemy, instrument to his Countries weal, after all his real losses,
studies, sufferings, for its benefit; whose truest welfare he has ever
cordially studied to his private prejudice, (whiles others under pretext
thereof, have Phil. 2. 20, 21, 22.
wholly sought their own particular emoluments, to its irreparable damage, if
Vox Populi be truth) and by such ungrateful usage, ill requitals of all his
former merits, by his very late pretended Psalm. 55. 12, 13, 14.
friends, to hasten his passage from these strong earthly purgatives to a
better world. Or else if this plot prevail not, through Gods 2 Cor. 1. 4, 5, 6,
9, 10. C. 4, 8, 9, 10.
supporting power, as hither it has not; to starve or kill him outright in
forain incommodious prisons, for want of legal matter or proof, to take away
his head, after your Whitehall Predecessors double cropping off his ears, as
some of his friends conceive: You having of late refused (as he is informed) to
receive any more Petitions in his behalf, from his own Sister or any others,
or to release or remove him from his ill winter prison; or to pay his public
debt, allow him diet, or do him any common right, or justice; (which though due
Rex Omnibus and singulis Regni sui Justi^iae est debtor. Register of Writs,
and the Prologues of our ancient Statutes. Exact Collection, p. 494, 498, 712,
713, 714, 660.
Ex officio mero from all Kings, Powers, Governments, Magistrates whatsoever;
by the 1 Samuel 8. 5, 20. 2 Samuel 23. 3. 1 King. 16. 9. Chap. 10. 9. 2 Chronicles. 8 9.
Chap* 10* 5, 6, 7. 2 Samuel 8. 15. Chap 15. 2, 5. Psalm. 82 3. Prove. 8. 15. Jer.
7. 5. Chap. 23. 5. Chap. 33. 15.
Laws of God, Nature, Nations, and Oaths to their meanest subjects; and
particularly by our own Kings, Judges, Justices, and great Officers* usual
Exact Collection, p. 268, 269, 290, 291, 36^, 370, 706, to 716. 18, and 20. E.
3. Rastall Justices. Totel^ Magna Charta.*
Oaths; the great Charters and other Statutes resolutions, to every English
freeman) upon their respective demands of, or motions for it, (yea upon bare
information from others Brooks Office des Court. Job 29. 12, to 18. Isa. 65. 1.
without any suit or motion by, for, or from the oppressed, injured parties,
(in such cases as his is) without any formal Petition to them for it, as the
Questus est Nobis I. S. ex gravi querela I. S. occepimus, Petit Judicium, etc.
Register of Writs; and Natura Brevium.
Forms of most legal Writs (sued forth of course) and most Plaints and
Declarations manifest; every real demand of right by word or writing being in
truth, a real Petition for it (and every Petition of Right but a more bashful
demand thereof) as all Cal^pine Holi^k^, Rider, Eliot, Calvini Lexicon Medicum.
Dictionaries in the words, Peto, Petitio; the usual Law phrases Register of
Writs. Natura Brevium. Old and new Books of Entries, and all Declarations, etc.
Petere Debitum, Petere Judicium, etc. the ordinary motions of the Council or
Parties in all our Courts of Justice, for Law or Right, without written or
verbal Petitions for them; and the Luke 18. 1, 2, 3, etc. Mat. 7. 7, to 13. 1 John 5. 15.
Scripture it self resolve) yet such is your unparalleld injustice toward him
that unless he will present a submissive Petition to you, after the new mode
(wherewith he is unacquainted) subscribed with his own hand, you will neither
release nor right him in any kind. Which, as it seems very strange unto him, he
desiring not mere grace or mercy from you, but only common known right and
Justice against undeniable oppressions by your selves and instruments; so all
his former Letters and his friends addresses to you, being real, legal,
though not formal Petitions for right and justice (yet denied him) and formal
Petitions even for right it self by the resolution of our Fitzherbert, Brook,
Ash, Title, Petition and Prerogative.
Law Books, the Records of our ancient Parliaments, and late Petition of Right;
Petitions of this nature being originally due to our English Kings alone, as
their unseparable regal prerogative; not to any Subjects whatsoever, nor yet
to the very House of Lords, Commons, or any other Courts of Justice, Council,
Judges, Justices, Great Officers or Grandees whatsoever, being no King but
Subjects; which anciently were but the inferior peoples hands, or Masters of
Requests to See the beginning of most ancient Parliament Rols; Title, Receivers
of Petitions to the King only, not them; and the Kings Answers to the Petitions
of the Lords and Commons.
receive and present their formal Petitions to our Kings both in and out of
Parliament; and had no other Bills of Parliaments, but mere Petitions of Right
or Grace to the King, whose 1 Jac. c. 1. Cokes 4. Instit. c. 1. Brook Title
Parliaments. Cromptons Jurisdiction of Courts, Title Parliaments. Sir Tho.
Smith, De Republica Angl. l 2. c. 2, 3, 4. Mr. Hackwels manner of passing Bills
in Parliament.

The Petition of Right 3. Car. Exact Collection, p. 163, 164, 250, 310, 311,
317, 319, 320, 468, 477, 764, 768, 794, 872, 873. A Collection of Ordinances,
221, 222, etc. 110, 111, 756, 757.


Royal answer to them (by way of concession) made them Acts, Laws, and his
disassent mere Nullities, as our old Parliament Records, and the late Petition
of Right 3. Caroli, resolve. Which transcendent Prerogative of our Kings alone,
by Law (of mere Right, incommunicable to any other Subjects) he hopes you will
not now arrogate to your selves, by enforcing him through duresse to a formal
submissive Petition to you as his Sovereigns, before you will enlarge, or do
him common right or justice, having both abolished, and publicly engaged your
selves, and also others to your power against Kings and Kingship, as
Tyrannical, and overmajesticall; and with them (as he conceives) both exploded
and engaged against this their sublime Prerogative of suing only by Petition
even for common right; and that you will not still detain him close Prisoner
upon this account alone, for not suing to you by Petition, for what is due to
him, ex officio mero, as his Exact Collection, p. 660, 459, 28, 29, 852, 854.
birthright without any suit at all, by all Laws of God and the Land, before
any new Law or Statute made justly intitling you to this old regal
pre-eminence. The rather, because the Heathen Magistrates of Philippi, when
upon the peoples bare accusation of Paul and Silas, as 1 Thessalonians 2. 2.
Disturbers of their City, and teachers of customs contrary to their
Government, had taken and cast them into Prison, and commanded the Jailer to
keep them safely, without any legal Indictment or trial, but for one single
night, were so just and reasonable, as the very next morning (without their
Petitioning for liberty) to send their Sergeants voluntarily to the prison to
release and tell them, that they might depart their City in peace: And when as
Paul (like a true magnanimous Christian, careful to preserve his own liberty,
yea and all the Romans too invaded by this injurious proceeding) thereupon
replied thus to their Sergeants; They have beaten us openly, being Romans and
UNCONDEMNED, and CAST US INTO PRISON; and now do they thrust us out privately?
(without reparation of this our indignity and shameful usage) Nay verily, but
let them come themselves and fetch us out (with honor and confession of their
injustice, as they have cast us in with shame) Whereupon the Sergeants relating
his words to these Magistrates they The like we read of the Centurion who beat
and imprisoned him, mentioned Act. 22. 24, to 30.
feared, when they heard they were Romans; and in stead of expecting a Petition
from them, by reason of their high Magistraticall authority, they came
presently to the Prison, AND BESOUGHT (or petitioned THEM (to pardon and pass
by this great injustice) AND BROUGHT THEM OUT OF PRISON, AND DESIRED (not
imperiously commanded) them to depart out of the City. And hereupon they went
out of the Prison, and entered into the house of Lydia, visited and comforted
the Brethren there, and then departed, Act. 16. 12, to the end. And should not
you then who profess your selves Saints of the highest form, after your
injurious searches, apprehensions and other indignities offered to an English
Freeman, Parliament Man, an eminent Servant too, and Martyr for the public, a
Christian, a Patron of Religion, a Bencher of an Inn of Court (as honorable in
each respect as any ancient Roman, and as much privileged by our Laws) and
that not for one night only, but two whole years and three months close
imprisonment of him, even under stricter Gards then they, in three several
Garrisons, now incite and engage you voluntarily to send your Officers hither,
then enforce him to send to you, to set him free; and because you have so much
oppressed him, being better then a mere Roman, and so long cast him into Prison
unheard and uncondemned, that you should not now privily release, nor extort an
unworthy Petition from him before you set him free; but out of a conscientious
consideration of your apparent injuries and injustice to him, and a true
Christian fear of a strict account for it both to God and Man, if unrepented or
unrepaired by you, imitate these Heathen Philippian Magistrates (whose
president is recorded in the very Gospel for this end) and now at last come
your selves in person, and in stead of expecting his petition to you (who have
done him so much injury, and more invaded the whole -- English Nations,
Privileges, Liberties in his unrighteous sufferings under you, then the
Philippians did the Romans or St. Paul under them) beseech and petition him to
pardon and not to persecute these your illegal extravagances, upon your
unfeigned sorrow for, and public acknowledgement and reparation of them, and
then to bring him out of his present Prison, with as much public joy and
honor into London, as he was formerly brought in thither by some of your
selves, and A new Discovery, etc. p. 113, 114, 115.
thousands more from his long close imprisonment by your Lordly Whitehall
Predecessors, to all honest men's rejoicing, and the whole discontented Nations
satisfaction, as well now as then, and Reparation of all violations of their
common Rights and Liberties by the dangerous president of his late restraints,
your yet unrevoked, uncancelled illegal warrants, deserving as heavy a
Parliamentary censure of condemnation, as any of your Predecessors illegal
Warrants and Sentences against him, unanimously condemned, and for ever
vacated, as repugnant to the forecited Laws, Statutes, and destructive to the
Subjects common Liberty by the Ibidem.. p. 141, 142.
Votes of all the Commons House, and concurrent judgment of the House of Lords.

Upon serious consideration whereof, as he cannot in prudence or conscience,
submit to any such extorted Petition to you, as you by plain duresse (against
Law and Justice) would enforce from him, to the betraying of his own and the
whole Nations Franchises and Birthrights, by so ill a president, so being
injuriously deprived of all other legal means of Coke Instit. on Magna Charta.
c. 29. Brook Habeas Corpus.
Relief, by Habeas Corpus, or other writ or action of Law, of which common
inherent Exact Collect. p. 8, 20, 28, 29, 450, 660, 652, 894.
Birthright of all English freemen, he and all conscientious non-engagers,
(after all their late Losses, Sufferings, Writings, Fightings, expenses of
their *Estates, Treasures, Blood, Fasts, Prayers, and still continued incessant
heavy contributions for the pretended just preservation and defense thereof, by
a new invented MONSTROUS PRAEMUNIRE (transcending, in his judgment* all
unrighteous Acts, Edicts, Encroachments of regal Tyranny and injustice upon
the peoples Rights and Franchises by behead^d King Charles, or any other of our
English Kings) are most wrongfully disinherited, and of the benefit, protection
of all our Laws in all Courts of justice, at one blow by you and others in
power; against the express Letter of Magna Charta; the Petition of Right
(assented to and ratified even by decapitated King Charles himself) the usual
Oaths of all our Kings, Judges, Justices, Chancellers and great Officers
heretofore, the late solemn Protestation, Vow, Covenant; all printed
Declarations and Ordinances (concerning the Army or Moneys) the last
Parliament, your own Remonstrance for altering our Kingly Government into a
Free State, March 17. 1648. and sundry other your publications since; and that
without any hearing, Trial, Crime, Conviction or just forfeiture thereof upon
Record; as if he and they were now mere alien enemies in their Native Country;
new villains in gross, or regardant only to you their fellow subjects in
present power, even in your new-erected Free State, though never such to or
under their cashiered Kings. Whereupon he is now necessitated, for regaining,
preserving his own, and all other Freeborn Englishmens just rights and
Liberties (transcendently violated by these his illegalrestraints, who has
written, suffered most of any man for their maintenance, which otherwise might
and would be made a leading president to oppress all or any others in the self
same kind) by way of final address, to present unto you, this Large
Remonstrance of his several successive Grievances, illegal restraints, close
imprisonments, pressures under you and your Officers; (the only legal, real
petition you can in justice expect from him) whereby he does (after his full
two years and three months forementiond illegal close imprisonments and
Pressures under you, before any legal Indictment, Trial or Crime objected
against him) once more jointly and severally demand from you and every of you
of mere common right and Justice, without any further denial or delay, his
absolute freedom and enlargement from all his present restraints, with full
undelayed reparations for all his damages, losses, expenses sustained thereby,
and by all other his remonstrated injuries from the authors and instruments of
them, according to all the forecited Laws, Statutes, Oaths, Protestations,
Vows, Covenants, Declarations, Remonstrances, and your bounden duty by Gods
own sacred Edicts: And that he having already wasted above ten whole years of
his short expired life in ten several prisons, only for his free unmercenary
defense of public Liberty, Laws and Religion, out of pure conscience, zeal,
duty, he may be no longer enforced without guilt or Trial (upon any carnal
State policies, or old Exact Collection, page 252, 278, 285, 289, 869, 871,
883, 885, 866, 559, 560.
exploded Whitehall pretenses of necessity, danger or public safety (the
damned Pleas for his former illegal close imprisonments, sufferings, exile,
and his present likewise) to consume the short remainder of his declining
days, (like a Mat. 5. 15. Luke 8. 16. Chap. 10. 35.
lighted candle under a bushel, or (s) A new Discovery, p. 86, 87, 88.
Psalm. 31. 12.
a dead man out of mind, in obscure Prisons, at farthest distance from his
friends, where he can neither enjoy their sweet society, nor serve his God, his
Country or private family with that freedom and improvement of his Talents
for their best advantage, as he does desire; nor any longer detained prisoner
under the custody of such Martial Gardians, who are for the most part
professed enemies both to our Laws, Lawyers, Ministers, Ministry, Gods public
Ordinances, Sacraments, Churches, Chapels, Glebes, Tithes, and whatever else
the piety or bounty of former times has devoted to the maintenance of Gods
worship, Religion or Learning; and therein to our Religion and Learning it
self, under a pretense of transcendent sanctity, and a new monstrous kind of
zeal, to reform Religion, propogate the Gospel, and support true Preachers of
it, by the readiest unrighteous, sacrilegious, irreligious ways that the
Jesuits or worst enemies of the Gospel could invent, eternally to extirpate
it and all true Ministers of it, now as violently and publicly, impiously
pursued by them and some other Army Officers; contrary to the pious practices
and sacred presidents, of all godly martial Kings, Generals, Colonels,
Captains of thousands, hundreds, and Armies, recorded by God himself in the old
and new Testament; who were so enamoured, ravished and eaten up with the love,
zeal, beduty of Gods House, Temple, Tabernacle, Sanctuary, public ordinances,
Worship, Priests, Ministers, so careful to frequent, maintain, advance,
encourage them, that they cheerfully and bountifully contributed, not only the
Tithes, Firstfruites, and oblations of all their estates; but the very tenths
of all their spoils, with all the Precious stones, Jewels, Ear rings, Rings,
Chains, Bracelets, Tablets, vessels of gold and silver, Treasures, Brass and
Iron taken in the Wa^s, to the building, adorning, repairing of magnificent
Tabernables, Temples, Houses, Synagogues, Churches devoted to Gods public
service, and maintaining of Gods public worship, Ministers, Priests, Levites
and other Officers attending thereupon in these public Edifices, to which they
joyfully, constantly and zealously resorted, without separation from them: as
Genesis 14. 20. Exodus 35. 20, -- 30. Chapter 38. 1, -- 10. Numb. 31. 28* -- 54. 2 Samuel
8. 10, 11, 12. 1 Chronicles. 21. throughout. Chapter 26. 26, 27, 28. (a memorable text)
Chapter 29. 1, -- 10. 2 Chronicles. 15. 11. Luke 7. 1, 5, 6. Heb. 7. 4, 6. Psalm. 5. 7.
and 21. 6. and 26. 8. and 27. 4. and 36. 8. and 42. 4. and 52. 8. and 55. 14.
and 65. 4. and 66. 13. and 69. 9. and 84. throughout. and 42. 1, 2. and 116.
13. and 102. 1, 9. and 134. 1. and 135. 1. Isa. 2. 2, 3. Mich. 4. 1, 2. Joh. 2.
16, 17, 18, 20. Luke 2. 27, 37. Chapter 20. 1. Chapter 24. 53. Act. 2. 46. Chapter 3. 1, 8.
Chapter 5. 20, 21. Rev. 7. 15. resolve. To the shame of those his irreligious
Gardians of a different judgment and practice, who debarred him from all resort
to Gods public Ordinances and Ministers in the Parish Churches of the Garrisons
wherein he has been restrained, dedicated to Gods worship; and still detain
him close Prisoner (as aforesaid) by color of this your void illegal Warrants
bare Transcript, without date, thus subscribed by them as a true Copy.

SIR,
WE have been informed, that Taunton is an unfit place for the imprisonment of
Mr. Prynne, where he now is; we therefore desire you to give order for the
removal of the said Mr. Prynne to Pendennis Castle; and that HE BE THERE KEPT
UPON THE SAME WARRANT UPON WHICH HE HAS BEEN PRISONER AT DUNSTER CASTLE AND
NOW AT TAUNTON, till further Order. And that whiles he is there in restraint,
he may have liberty to go to the public Odinances of Gods worship, if he shall
desire the same.

Signed in the Name and by Order of the Council of State, by authority of
Parliament. John Bradshaw, President.
This is a true Copy,

John Disbrowe.


This is a true Copy of the aforesaid Copy,

Charles Shrubsoll.




This Copy only, or your Original Warrant, (as the science and conscience of
every Lawyer amongst you, and his who signed it, must inform you) is meerl^
void, illegal, and no justification for these his foremen^ioned Restraints or
Imprisonment in Pendennis Castle, before any tribunal of God or Man, for these
following Reasons.

1. Because contrary to all former Council Table Warrants of this nature. All
old Council Table Orders, Warrants, for his and others imprisonments were
fig^ed and subscribed, not only by the President alone, but by all the Lords
and Council consenting to them then present, as by Law they ought, that so
they might know all those that Imprisoned them, and whether enough to make a
Council, and whether to bring their actions against all or any of them if
wrongfully imprisoned; as you may read in A new Discovery of the Prelates
Tyranny, page 9, 10, 15, 16, 18, 69, 85, 86, 90, to 97.

2. Because this single signing of Warrants by one of you alone against ^ll Law
and former Presidents, disenabling the Prisoner to know who they were who
committed and translated him from prison to prison, except the first and sole
subscriber John Bradshaw, (the rest it seems being ashamed to subscribe or own
it, or the former Warrants for his restraints, being so unjust and defective in
Law) And the subscriber alone being no Council, and having no power solely to
act any thing, but only, jointly with such a number of Associates, who cannot
translate their power or trust to him, but must execute it themselves; This
Warrant (and the former so signed) must needs be void in Law and unwarrantable,
or else all John Bradshawes companions, though absent or dissenting to its
guilt, though issued in their Name and by their Order, without their parties or
consents.

3. Because it contains no crime, nor just cause at all, for which he was
formerly kept Prisoner at Dunster Castle or Taunton, or since Imprisoned in
Pendennis; as it ought to do by the express provision of the Petition of
Right, and all ancient Statutes therein recited; the Votes and Resolutions of
Parliament in the large debates of that Petition, with all other Parliaments
since; the Resolves of both Houses, and most of your selves in his own and Mr.
Burtons late cases; the judgments of all our Judges, Law Books, and Sir Edward
Cokes Institutes on Magna Charta, Chapter 29. Printed by the Commons House special
Order; and the Statute of 42 E. 3. c. 12. declaring all such general Warrants
against these Statutes and Magna Charta, to be void and null in Law to all
intents.

4. Because it is grounded upon no precedent legal Examination, Conviction of,
or Process, or Indictment against him, as by these Statutes, Laws, Law Books,
Resolves it ought to be.

5. Because it enjoynes (or rather desires) him, to be kept Prisoner in
Pendennis C^stle* not upon it, or any lawful Warrant specially directed unto
the Governor thereof; but upon the same Warrant upon which he has been
Prisoner at Dunster Castle, an^ then was at Taunton, when this was issued.
Which Warrant for his first imprisonment at Dunster, being likewise general
and void in Law, because it contains no particular offense at all for which
he was there imprisoned; and if good in Law, yet directed personally to Major
Robinson alone, then Governor of Dunster Castle, and none other; not to
Colonel Disbrow, or Captain Shrubsoll, or any Governor of Taunton or Pendennis
Castle; and restraining him and his imprisonment only to Dunster Castle, not to
Taunton or Pendennis Castle, above 120 miles distant from the former, and
situated in another Country. And your first Warrant being in Law quite nulled,
expired, by your demolishing Dunster Castle, and removing the Governor (Major
Robinson) and the whole Garrison (who there kept, and to whom only you committed
him) totally and finally thence; and he being no Prisoner at all at Taunton,
upon that or any other Warrant from you; it is both impossible, absurd,
unwarrantable, illegal, and beyond all extravagant Presidents of former times,
to keep him up close Prisoner so long in Pendennis Castle upon the same void,
nulled, expired, illegal warrant only directed to others, upon which he has
been Prisoner at Dunster Castle, to which it only confined him, but never
really to Taunton; and it must needs be a great Solecisme in Law and Clerk-ship
at least, if not in State policy, and Statesmen, to^ issue out such a Warrant,
and imprison any intelligent Lawyer or English freeman in three remote Castles,
under several Governors, by color of one mere void illegal Warrant, to
imprison him only in and under one of them, a thing never heard of in the world
before.

6. Because it ordered him to be removed against his will, perforce, out of his
one Native County, and sent to, and kept Prisoner in a remote Castle, in a
forain County, in the extremest Western part of the Island, not properly
belonging to the restraining jurisdiction of any Legal Court, Council or
Power by any known Law; where he can neither-be legally tried, nor proceeded
against for any real or pretended crime only acted in other Countries, nor
this, for which he is thus restrained; contrary to express Statutes of 5. E.
3. c* 8. 28. H. 8. c. 2. 5. H. 4. c. 10. 1. E. 1. c. 5. 4. H. 4. c. 13. 23. H
8. c. 9. 1. 2. Phil. Mar. c. 12. 21. E. 4. f. 71. Brook Imprisonment, 80.
Protestation, 18. the late Votes and Resolutions of Parliament, as well of the
Commons as Lords, in his own and fellow sufferers cases, sent first close
Prisoners by the Star-chambers sentence, and after by the old Council Tables
orders, to such forain Castles, Prisons, against these acts and the subjects
Liberty; for which ill president (now pursued and exceeded by you) both Houses
and most of your selves voted the Starchamber Lords, and your Whitehall
Pred^cessors to be Delinquents, and to render -- A new Discovery. page 137, to
143.
Damages to them, though done by and after a Bill and Sentence, when as ye now
do it before any Sentence or Impeachment at all, much less any hearing or
sentence against him.

7. Because this Warrant is directed only to Colonel Disbrow, not commanding*
but only desiring him to give order for his removeall from Taunton to Pendenn
is Castle, and that he be there kept upon the same Warrant upon which he has
been Prisoner at Dunster and then at Taunton. Which Colonel being no known
sworn Officer of Law or Justice in the Counties of Somerset or Cornwall; but
only a Military Commander, and he being no Prisoner of War, or Soldier,
subject by any Law of England to his Military power; nor yet his Prisoner
there, or since that time; and this Letter of yours (rather then Warrant)
making his inherent power and Order alone, the only authority both for his
remove and restraint at Pendennis, without any special or legal derivation of
any such power from yourselves, (who in truth have no more lawful power for it
then he, who had none at all;) Therefore it can in no Court of Law or Justice,
be any legal Warrant for a Colonel or any other, to remove him hither, or
detain him Prisoner here, upon it, or the former Warrant.

8. Because the sole ground for his remove from Taunton, within his native
County, to this forain County and Prison, is only a bare information to you,
without hearing of him to disprove it; That Taunton is an unfit place for his
Imprisonment, which as it is no crime, nor ground at all in it self for his
imprisonment elsewhere; so it is a strong Argument of the injustice of his
imprisonment at Taunton, and of your warrant, and of his translation to and
imprisonment in Pendennis Castle in the remotest County; it affording no such
fitting accommodations in any kind for his soul or body in sickness or health
(when reof it is wholly destitute) as Taunton does; and being a mere private
Castle only in a forain Shire, not a Market Town, where the Assizes and
Sessions are usually held (as Taunton is;) wherein alone all Prisons and
Prisoners in all Counties ought to kept, under known sworn Gaolers and
Officers, (not in private Castles under Soldiers) by the express Statutes of
5. E. 3. c. 8. 5. H. 7. c. 10. 23. H. 8. c. 2. and that for their better
relief, accommodation, security and more frequent visits by their friends.
Therefore this must be a far juster ground for you to release or to translate
him from Pendennis now, then to send him thither at the first, or detaining him
still close Prisoner there.

9. Because neither this nor the former Warrant is directed to the Governor or
any other Officer of Pendennis Castle, to detain him Prisoner there; as by Law
it ought to be; for the first warrant is directed by you only to Major
Robinson, the second only to Colonel Disbrow; who are neither Military nor
Civil Governors nor Officers in Pendennis, and keep your original Warrants
for their own indemnity, sending only a bare copy of them, (without time or
date) to the Governor of Pe^dennis (to whom neither of them are directed by
you) to detain him Prisoner by, which can be no Plea nor Warrant in Law in any
Court to justify his imprisonment in this place by Captain Shrubsoll, who yet
without any other Warrant but this Copy alone of yours to Disbrow, has
injuriously -- restrained, oppressed and close imprisoned, and kept him from
Gods public Ordinances, as aforesaid, beyond and against all Warrants, by
color only of this his datelesse Copy forecited.

10. Because this Warrant does not so much as mention his known Christian name
WILLIAM, as by Law it ought; but his Surname only; nor so much as expressly
command him, to be kept Prisoner, but barely kept at Pendennis Castle (which he
may be, and yet not as a Prisoner, or close Prisoner) upon the same (void,
illegal, expired) Warrant, upon which he has been Prisoner at Dunster:
Besides it neither commands or requires, but only desires Colonel Disbrow, that
he may be removed and kept here; not for any certain time, or till delivered by
Law, or brought to his legal Trial for that (nothing in this warrant) for
which he stands here committed; but merely, till further Order from you; (which
may be till death or doomesday, if you please, and yet seem to resolve:) for
all which causes (as well as the former) it is both void and illegal, as Sir
Edward Coke resolves in his Institutes on Magna Charta, c. 29. ratified by the
Commons own Order for its impression.

11. Because it gives no express command nor precept, either for his
translation hither or restraint here* nor concludes as all legal Warrants do;
And for your so doing this shall be your Warrant, and hereof fail not, at your
peril; but barely desires his removal by Disbrow and keeping here, rather as
a cuortesie then commanded duty; concluding only* And WE DESIRE YOU to certify
(any other as well as you, for us is not expressed if intended) what you shall
do herein, in his removal thither; not in his keeping there, where he is no
Officer nor Governor. Therefore illegal and no Warrant at all.

12. Because if this Copy be true (as they both attest under their hands) then
this Warrant has neither time when, nor place where it was dated* nor person
to whom it was directed. Therefore illegal, null, invalid.

Now how much it will redound to the Honor of your wisdom, justice,
reputation of your Clerks and those Lawyers associated with you, to advise you
in points of* Law, to issue forth such a def^ctive, null, void, illegal,
absurd, imp^ssible, nugatory Warrant, as this in all the 12. forecited regards,
and so long to restrain, imprison, close imprison him in this remote Castle
upon a bare Copy thereof, and still to detain him Prisoner thereupon,
notwithstanding all former addresses to you by himself or friends for his
enlargement hence; and what all rational men in present, in future ages will
judge of your strange exorbitant proceedings of such nature, or how you will
clear, justify or excuse them before any future Parliament or new (pretended,
but as most now think never really intended) Representative of the Nation (so
often promised, but still as long deferred as his liberty) or any other
impartial Court of Justice on earth, if ever there legally examined upon
complaint; or before Christ's own inpartiall, 2 Cor. 5. 10. Read Master Strongs
his Printed Sermon thereon.
unavoidable Tribun^ll at last, where you must shortly render a strict account
thereof to this Righteous Judge of all the earth (without any armed Gardians to
secure you against his Justice) in the presence of Mat. 25. 31, 32. 2 Thessalonians. 1*
7, 8, 9, Jude 14, 15. Jer. 51. 6, 11.
all his holy Angels, and the whole world of Mankind; Where himself has
resolved beforehand in his very Gospel, that he will pass this irrevocable
sentence against all such who only refuse or neglect to resort unto, visit,
feed, cloth and relieve his imprisoned believing members for this their bare
omission: Go ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his
Angels: FOR I WAS SICK AND IN PRISON AND YE VISITED ME NOT, etc. And will
therefore certainly pronounce a severer doom against all such unrighteous
Grandees who actually without cause, crime, trial, maliciously cast his
formerly suffering members into Prisons and detain them close Prisoners, under
terrifying armed Gards and Sentinels in remote obscure Castles, far from all
friends or acquaintance, of purpose to disable, deter all others from visiting,
feeding, clothing, and relieving, comforting them in their necessities, or
sickness therein, and yet year after year most inhumanly refuse upon their
Oaths, frequent sad complaints and impo^tunities, to release, visit, relieve,
or right them. And what you will then be able to allege for your selves to
prevent any human censures here, or such a fatal sentence from Christ's own
mouth hereafter for the premises, he most seriously refers to your own awaked
consciences, and most serious contemplations, if now after this his
Remonstrance and full information of your Warrants Illegality and Nullity, by
which he has been restrained, you shall wilfully neglect or peremptorily
refuse immediately to release and fully to repair him; who by color thereof
has been kept a clos^r Prisoner under you, before any charge or hearing, then
formerly under your tyrannical condemned Predecessors at Whitehall, after two
bills, hearings and their severest censures; and denied so much Prison freedom,
as very Popish Priests and Jesuits formerly obtained, did and still enjoy (if
you have any such now Prisoners) under your Regency even in their very
strictest prisons when convicted, condemned even of the greatest highes^
treasons both against King and Kingdom.

And seeing you have freshly exhorted, enjoined all sorts of person in the
Nation to make public and private confessions to God of all their personal
and national sins, which have provoked his wrath, kindled new wars with our
very formerly confederated Brethren, and threaten many heavy judgments to the
Nation if not cordially lamented, speedily and really reformed; and for this
end have appointed a general solemn Fast and day of Humiliation on the 13. of
October next, to divert Gods incumbent imminent judgments, and procure peace.

And for as much as God himself, the God of Isa. 26. 9, 11.
Judgments, Psalm. 94. 1, 2, etc. Romans 12. 19.
Vengeance, Exodus 15. 3. Isa. 45. 7.
War, Psalm. 59. 10. 17.
Mercy, Romans 15. 33. 16. 20. 2 Cor. 13. 11.
Peace, has frequently declared in his sacred Oracles, that Psalm. 12. 5. and
72* 4. Isa. 49 26. Jer. 6. 6. and 22. 15, to 20. and 51* 35, 36. Ezekiel. 7 11, to
25. and 8* 17, 18 and 12. 19, 20. and 21. 6, 7, 8, 9, 12, 13, 20, 21, 29, 30*
and 45 9. Isa 33. 1, 2. Jer. 22. Job 20. 15, to 29. Amos 2. 1, 2, 3* etc and 3.
throughout. Hab. 2. 7, 8* ^oel 3. 19. Obad. 8. 9, 10, to 21. Zeph. 3. 5, 6.
L^k. 3. 19, 20* Act. 12 1, to 10. Exodus 3, 7, 8. and 2. 23, 24, 25. Mat. 25*
41, 42, 43.
Oppression, Inj^stice, Violen^e, Spoil, Cruelty; depriving any of their just
Liberties, Rights, Inheritances, Estates, by mere arbitrary Power, and the
oppressing Sword, without just cause, Right, Title or Legal trial imposing
heavy y^akes of bondage on the necks, and intolerable burdens on the backs,
Estates of men by illegal Taxes or Exactions, (next to Apostasy, and most
gross Idolatry) are the greatest Wrath-procuring, State*subverting,
Realm-destroying, Warre-ingendring, Land-desolating, Soul condemning sins of
all others, which have utterly destroyed, subverted, extirpated and brought to
naught, not only many potent Kings, Princes, Potentates, Nobles, Grandees of
all sorts with their posterities, but even whole Kingdoms, States, Republics,
beyond all humane probability, as the Histories of all former ages, and recent
Presidents of your immediate Whitehall Predecessors, experimentally confirm*
whose injurious oppressive proceedings, Sentences against See Exact* Collection
p. 917, 918. An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons ^xhorting all to Repentance,
Confession and Humiliation for our enormous sins procuring Gods wrath.
him, causeless long imprisonments of^this Remonstrant, were one A New
Discovery of the Prelates tyranny p. 115, 116.
principal occasion of their downfall, and of that very Star Chamber Court
wherein they censured him. And because God has likewise positively resolved
Isa. 58. 6, 7, 8. That this is the chiefest, the only fast which he has
chosen, and appointed, to pacify his wrath, avert his judgments, cease all
Wars, restore, establish Wealth, Peace, Setlement and prosperity (the proper
effects, fruits of Isa 32. 17.
Righteousness and true Justice) to an afflicted Realm or Nation, to loose the
bonds of wickedness (and such are all injurious, illegal Warrants, close
Imprisonments, Restraints, and his fore-remonstrated in the highest degreen;)
to undo the heavy burdens (and are not his, and the other long continued
unwarrantable public Taxes, Excises, extraordinary Prison expenses, and
grievou^ unredressed pressures impos^d by you, such*) to let the oppressed go
free (and is not he such an one in the highest degree, as well now as
hereto^ore, in his person, freedom, calling, estate, friends, and all earthly
comforts* by your forain close imprisonments so long continued on him, after
all his ancient oppressions?) and that ye break every yoke (and are not his
present restraints from all free private or public converse with any ranks of
men by word or writing, by muing him up in for^in Prisons, under armed Guards,
Sentinels, debarring him from all Gods own Ordinances, all legal ways or
writs for his enlargement, yoaks, nay iron yoaks to him? Your keeping o^ him
and the whole Nation so many years together* when the King and both Houses See
the Vindication of the secured and secluded Members, and my Speech in
Parliament.
would and might have settled a most desired blessed Peace without further arms
or bloodshed, under the over^wing, Parliament-subverting, Law-oppressing
Sword, Power, Discipline of a disobedient Army, subverting those very ends,
powers, persons, for whose preservation and defense they were professedly
raised, waged, continuing them still in extraordinary pay, both Winter and
Summer, with little or no diminution of their number, to the total consumption
of all the Lands, Rents, Revenues of Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes, Chapters,
King, Queen, Prince, of many thousands of Delinquents, the Jer* 46. 16. and 50.
16.
undoing of some thousands of well affected persons, the general impoverishing
of most men throughout the Nation, and threatening a speedy consumption of all
yet remaining -- if longer continued, and that rather to enslave then
enfranchise us; to promote their own Officers and others private Wealth,
Greatness, then our real, public weal, liberty, safety, or our Religion: The
maintaining of many superfluous Garrisons, Castles, more to imprison, secure
him, and the other causeless Prisoners in them, then defend the Nation by
them; the usefullest of them, even at the entrance of our chiefest Harbors,
being experimentally found to be mere Scare-crowes, to fright cowardly
unexperienced Seamen only; but unable with all their mounted Canons (discharged
suddenly if there be occasion only one by one, at Rovers and great uncertain
distance, and that but once or twice at most with round bals, by none of the
skilfulest Gunners) unable to hit (unless by chance) much less to stop, hurt,
spoil, strike any single Ship or Vessel passing in or out of the Harbors;
when as old, late and present experience in our latest Sea fights prove that
10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 100* whole broad sides, and greater, better tyres of
Ordinance then any in our Forts discharged together at one stout ship by
skilfullest Gunners, at nearest distance, with better aim, with key or cross
chain shot, will hardly split or sink it, (which no Fort, no Castle that we
read of ever yet did) nor stay, take any resisting Vessel without grappling
with and boarding her; which Forts cannot do: much less can they hinder the
ingresse, egresse or regresse of any considerable Squadron of Ships or a whole
Navy; or impeach the landing of an Army by or under their very noses, or in
places out of their Guns command, as ignorant people dream, as the forcible
landings of your forces, though small, in the late reduced Islands of Silly,
Jersie, the Barbados under their very Forts and Canons, without the loss of
any one Ship or Vessel by their Canons and Blockhouses; and of the loss of
very few Mariners or Land Soldiers (with the taking of Cadez and many
fortified Towns in the Indies heretofore by Sir Francis Drake and others,
without the loss of any one ship by Canon-shot) manifest beyond all
contradiction; such Forts serving only in truth, to maintain many ^asie Gunners
and Montrosses at, 8, 10, 12 l. pay a week or more in many Forts, merely to
shoot away vast proportions in a year of Powder and Bullet in mere complement
and salutes of men of war and other Ships, who waste more Powder, Bullet in
saluting, resaluting Ships, and in other idle frolicks upon Visitants and News
of good successes, then their salaries amount to; and to maintain many
thousands of lasie, idle Soldiers (whose labor would be far more profitable
to the Nation then their service) at 5 s. 10 d. pay each week, and their
Officers at double, treble, 4, 6, or 8. times as much more, only to burn Match
to take Tobacco, stand Sentinel, to walk or look about them some two or three
hours, in three or four whole days space or more, which they call Duty; and
exercise once in two or three months time for so many hours, to shoot away
their powder; when as poor Laboring men of all sorts must work hard all the
week long for lesser gain and wages, then these idlebees receive for this their
lasie useless duty, and yet pay heavy weekly Taxes duly (under pain of
plundering) to maintain these Lurdanes to so little purpose: Are not these
think you Jer. 28. ^3, 14. and 27. ^. Ezech. 30. 18. and 34. 27.
yoaks, nay heavy unsupportable Iron yoaks, far 2 Chronicles. 10. 10, 14.
heavier then those wooden ones (of a little Shipmony only once a year) under
which we formerly groaned, till we brake them; fit now to be broaken on your
Fast Day, after so long a continuance of them by you on our Nations galled,
wearied necks?) There is yet a second part of that Fast, which God now calls for
from you; to deal your bread to the hungry (and are there not now many such
amongst us by your unrighteous depriving them of their Liberties, Callings,
Employments, Revenues, Husbands, Servants, Children, Estates, public Offices,
and the benefit of our very Laws to regain their own, and detaining their
public debts, as you do his) To satisfy the afflicted soul (and is not his
soul such, by your remonstrated pressures, and thousands of souls more by other
grievances?) To bring the poor that is cast out (as he is by you from his
House, Liberty, Calling, Family, Kindred, Friends, all worldly comforts,
public Trusts and Employments, into remotest Prisons without cause, against
all Laws) into your houses; (who will not so much as once permit him, to return
into his own house, and so long debarred him from Gods own houses) If you see
the naked, that you cloth him; (and you have almost made him naked by depriving
him of his Calling, Friends, Employments, detaining his public oft-demanded
debts, his extraordinary prisonexpences and late Militia charges, enforcing his
friends to sell all his stock, superadded to all his other payments, reducing
him to his very worst old Jersie Prison rags and clothes to cover his
nakedness by these merciless undoing extremities) And that you hide not your
selves from your own flesh (as you do from him by not receiving some, breaking
up others of his Letters of complaint without reading them, slighting all the
rest, and answering none of them but by denials; refusing to hear, dispute, or
speak with him face to face, for ought you can charge him with, as persons
either ashamed, afraid, or unable to encounter or behold him, after so many
indignities, or to make good your own cause, or proceedings against him, by
Divinity, Law, Religion, or any sole hearing; and yet hide him from his own
flesh too, by keeping him from his Friends, Kindred, and them from him by
strict restraints in remotest Garrisons from them, of purpose to deprive him of
their visits:) Give him leave then upon all these grounds, in the name and fear
of God, as your former true Christian friend and present impartial monitor,
without all carnal fear or sordid flattery, seriously to exhort, and
faithfully to persuade all and every of you, not so much for his own interest,
as your own truest good, salvation, and our whole Nations welfare, both before
and on your Solemn Fast Day, to lay all his former Remonstrated pressures and
long illegal close restraints, as close as may be to your souls, and both
publicly and privately with deepest sorrow, shame and detestation to confess,
acknowledge, bewail, abhor, renounce, redress, repair them by his present
honorable enlargement, and other proportionable recompenses to him and the
grieved Nation, as crying, Godprovoking sins, which if not then thus seriously
acknowledged, repented, and rerlly redressed, may and will draw down as
exemplary Justice and Vengeance on your heads, and present exorbitant Power, as
his former sufferings of this natnre did upon beheaded Canterbury, with other
you immediate Predecessors at Whitehall and their exorbitant authority, though
then better settled, secured by our Laws and long Prescription, then you or your
present slippery peace. And withal, before, or on that day at furthest,
effectually, sincerely by real performances and actual ex^cutions, to keep
and render unto God that practical forementioned Fast which he has chosen,
and expects at your hands, in all the respective branches thereof, both in
relation to himself, and all other oppressed, afflicted, impoverished ones
throughout our three Nations, now groaning, languishing and almost expiring
under manifold bonds of wickedness, heavy burdens, oppressions, yoakes,
already hinted to you; without which all your prayers will be but mere Hos. 7*
14.
howlings in his ears; all other feigned humiliations, a mere atheistical
abuse of this most sacred Ordinance, to mere politic sinful ends, to which it
is often abused; nay a Isa. 58. 4. Like A^abs to take away Naboths Vineyard 1
King. 21. 9, 12.
Fast for strife and debate, and to smite with the fist of wickedness, as God
there resolves; by making it a general engine to raise, foment, encourage,
countenance, justify new unchristian, inhumane, unrighteous, impolitick
divisions, factions, Wars with and again our very Fellow Christians (s) See
Exact Collection. p. 21. 310. 634, to 638.
upon slight pretenses, dissents and private differences, without just
substantial grounds, warranted by Gospel principles, presidents, precepts;
which instruct all Christian men and States too, Romans 12. 10. and 13. 8, to 12.
Gal. 5. 13, 14. Ephesians. 1. 15. and 4 2. and 5. 2. Col. 2. 2. 1 Thessalonians. 3. 12. and
4. 9. Heb. 10. 24. and 13* 1. 1 Pet. 1. 22* and 2. 17. and 3. 8. 1 John ^. 11,
to 24. and 4. 7, 11, 12.
to love like Brethren, to pass by and forgive their enemies injuries and
offenses; Ephesians. 4. 9.
to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace; 2 Cor. 13. 11. 1 Thessalonians.
5* 13. Heb. 12. 14. 1 Pet. 3. 11,
to live in peace, and follow peace with all men; Phil. 2 2, 4.
to seek one another welfare; 1 John 3. 16.
to lay do^n their life's for their brethren; 1 These. 4. 11.
to study to be quiet; to 1 Timothy 2. 2.
live in all Peaceablenesse and honesty; to 1 Cor. 10. 32. 2 Cor. 6. 3. 1 Cor.
8. 13. Romans 13. 10.
give no scandal nor offense, and do no wrong nor violence one to another; to
Isa. 2. 4. Mica. 3. 3* 4.
beat their Swords into Plow-shares, their Spears into pruning hooks; not to
lift up a sword one against another, or learn war any more; Mat. 26. 5^.
to put up the sword into the sheath, because all those that take the sword,
shall perish with the sword; Not to Gal. 5. 15.
bite and devour one the other, lest they be consumed one by another;
resolving, all Jam. 4. 1. and 3. 13, 14, 15, 16.
Wars and Fightings amongst them, to come only from their lusts, that war
in their Members; and all wisdom to raise, soment and manage them, not to
descend from heaven above, but to be carnal, sinful, devilish.

And if your public Fast be now secretly designed to any such unchristian
purposes as aforesaid, or not accompanied with that real Fast forespecified;
it will be so far from allaying, that it will far more incense Gods wrath; so
far from procuring, obtaining public peace, that it will increase your Wars
and enemies; so far from establishing your new republic, that it will suddenly
and certainly subvert it, if not by others, yet by the very Army and arms of
flesh you most depend on; so far from securing our sinful Nation (or Religion)
from forain enemies and plunders thereof, that it will expose them to their
combined invasions on all hands, to their great molestation, devastation, if
not final extirpation out of the long enjoyed Land of their Nativity (as the
Britains of old) for all your and their late increased, desolating, crying
sins, which has been, and yet is, the grounded fear, and is and shall be the
daily fervent deprecation of your oppressed close Prisoner, necessitated by
your defaults to this prolix Remonstrance of his Grievances, and final demand
of Right, Liberty, Justice from you; which God himself will both hear and
grant, if you now prove more deaf and dumb thereto, then the Luke 18. 2* to 9.
unrighteous Judge in the Gospel, after all former Solicitations, Letters,
Suites, and this ultimate address unto you, by

Your two years and three months William Prynne.
From his ill, moist, close Prison-chamber in Pendennis Castle, 26. Septem.
1652.
After this Remonstrance sent, upon the motion of some of my friends, this
Order and Warrant thereon was made at Whitehall, and sent to Pendennis Castle,
for my release. Tuesday first of February, 1652. At the Council of State at
Whitehall.
Ordered,
THat Mr. William Prynne be discharged from his Imprisonment, he giving his
Bond to the sum of one thousand pounds, That he will not for the future act
any thing to the prejudice of this Commonwealth, and the present Government
thereof.

Exam. John Thurlo, Clerk of the Council.

SIR,
THe Council has thought fit, that Mr. William Prynne now Prisoner with you
in the Castle of Pendennis, shall be discharged from th restraint upon him, he
giving his own Bond of one thousand pound, that he will not for the future, act
any thing to the prejudice of the Commonwealth, and the present Government
thereof. The Council have thought fit, that the taking of his Bond, should be
left to your care, and do therefore desire you, to see the same entered into by
the said Mr. Prynne, according to usual form, and the condition above
mentioned; which Bond when the said Mr. Prynne has entered into accordingly, as
is hereby directed, you are to return the Bond to the Council, and to set Mr.
William Prynne at Liberty. Whitehall Feb. 2. 1652.

Signed in the name, and by Order of the Council of State appointed by
authority of Parliament.

Exam. John Thurlo Clerk of the Council.


JOHN BRADSHAW, President.
To the Governor of Pendennis Castle, These.


Upon reading of this Order and Warrant, brought me by the Deputy Governor, I
peremptorily resused to enter into any Bond at all upon any terms; the
Illegality and Tyranny of which Bond and Condition, I at length expressed in a
Letter to a Member of Whitehall that sent them; resolving rather to die a
Prisoner then live a Bondsman in my Native Country, where I was borne a Freeman:
Whereupon they sent this absolute Order for my enlargement, without any Bond or
limitation whatsoever, upon which I was thence released. THese are to will and
require you forthwith upon sight hereof, to discharge and fet at liberty the
body of Mr. William Prynne from his Imprisonment, if he be under restraint with
you for no other cause, then that is expressed by the Order of the Council for
his Commitment, of which you are not to fail, and for which this shall be your
Warrant. Given at the Council of State at Whitehall this 18. day of February,
1652.

Signed in the name, and by Order of the Council of State appointed by
authority of Parliament.

Exam. Jo. Thurlo Cler. Council.


To the Governor or Commander of the Castle of Pendennis. JOHN BRADSHAW,
President.



Upon my repair to London in November last, I writ and sent this ensuing Letter
to Mr. Bradshaw. SIR,
UNderstanding you are now returned to Westminster, I thought meet to mind
you, that by sundry illegal Warrants under your hand, during your cashiered
Whitehall superlative power, my study in Lincolnes Inn, and house, study at
Swainswick, were searched; my Records, Writings, Papers taken away; my person
forcibly seized by, and close Imprisoned, in three several remote Castles
under Soldiers, for two years and eight months space: my Prison-chamber and
very Pockets ransacked; my notes, tables to the Books I read in prison,
violently taken from me; all persons prohibit^d to speak with me, but in the
presence and hearing of my Gardians; all Letters to or from me, inte^cepted,
pe^used; the liberty of sending Letters to demand my freedom, debarred;
access to Gods tublick Ordinances, denied me; my Laundresse, Brother in Law,
Servant, with some others, imprisoned and examined extrajudicially against me;
and that before, without the least legal accusation, hearing, trial, or any
particular crime, or cause objected against, or hitherto signified unto me;
contrary to all rules of Law, Justice, the great Charters of England, the
Pe^ition of Right, and the Votes of both Houses of Parliament in my very case
(as you well know, and I then informed you at large by several Letters,) to
the prejudice of my health, decay of my estate, and extraordinary damage,
after all my former unrecompensed great losses and martyrdomes for our
Religion, Laws, Liberties, under the beheaded King, Prelates and old exorbitant
Council table. The true cause of whose Tyrannical proceedings against me,
being yet unknown, even to such of your late Whitehall associates, as I have
hitherto met with, (who are ashamed of these Barbarismes, and remit me wholly
to your self for the true reason of them, of which they profess themselves
ignorant) I thereupon held it necessary and just, now at last to demand from
you by writing, the true real cause of these irregular restraints and
proceedings against me; together with full damages for the same, in private,
before I demand them in such a public manner, (if necessitated thereunto) as
may expose you to greater obloquy and infamy, then ever beheaded Canterbury
sustained for his ^xorbitances against me. For my own part, I was never of a
revengefull spirit; yet I cannot be so stupid, as to put up these transcendent
iujuries, and illegal oppressions I sustained under you* because I underwent
them, not as a private person, but as A MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT; and that in and
for the public cause of the whole English Nation, I then supported; whereupon
I must no^ pass them by in silence without public satisfaction, even for the
present and future benefit of the Nation, and vindication of the liberties and
p^iviledges of Parliament, according to the Tenor o^ the Covenant: lest by my
sil^nce they should prove dangerous presidents to prejudice posterity, I b^ing
then a Member of Parliament, i^ the former Parliament continued in being, as
you affirmed it did in your very Warrants for my restraints. Wherefore seeing
we are once more become fellow* commoners again, I do hereby in justice require
and expect from you an undelay^d ^ccount, both of the grounds of my
forementioned illegal unchristian injuries and restraints, with full
reparations for the same, as I did from Canterbury, and my quondam Lordly
Whitehall unjust censurers; which I presume you will not disdain to render to
him, who through Gods mercy, maugre all men's Tyranny, still continues to be,
what you ever found him,

Your long oppressed, yet still William Prynne.
From my Chamber at Lincolnes Inn, Nov. 24. 1654.



To this Letter Mr. Bradshaw returning a long unsatisfactory answer in writing,
dated the 1 of of December, I thereupon sent him this Reply thereto. SIR,
UPon my return late last night to my Chamber, I found your answer to my former
lines, under my door; which by reason of company, I had no time to peruse till
now, wherein as I find not the least satisfaction touching the particular
grounds of these illegal proceedings against me, I informed you of;
justifiable (as you well know) by no Laws of God or Man; so your hand alone
being to the Warrants, prescribing and occasioning them, contrary to the
presidents in former times, and all my commitments by the old Whitehall
council, to which all my committers subscribed their hands, or had their names
superscribed by the Cle^k of the Council, as you may see in my New discovery
of the Prelates Tyranny; I could resort to none but your self, both for
satisfaction and reparation; being wholly ignorant, who else concurred with you
therein. For any pretended mercy showed to me by you or others of your
associates in my restraints under you, I must yet account them such mercies
only as Solomon defines them, Prove. 12. 10. and you such friends alone, as Job
and David complain of, Job 19. 13, 14, 19, to 24. and 6. 14, 15. Psalm. 41. 9.
and 55. 13, etc. As for the surmised benefit you did me at last, by your
casting voice, which (you say) brought me out of Prison, when as your hand
alone cast me into it; Let Seneca the Philosopher resolve you what it is, De
beneficiis, l. 6. c. 26. NEQVITIA EST ut extrahas mergere, evertere ut
suscites, VT EMITTAS INCLVDERE. Non est BENEFICIVM INJVRIAE FINIS; Nec unquam
id detraxisse MERITVM EST, quod ipse qui detraxit intuberat. Non vulneres me
malo quam sanes. Potes inire gratiam, si quia vulneratus sum, sanas; non si
vulneras, ut sanandus sum, etc. That others joined with you in the injury, etc.
was but Canterburies old exploded plea, and and rather aggravates then
mitigates your offense, by Gods own resolution, Exodus 33. 2, 7. Yet
notwithstanding I am not so vindictive or implacable, as to deal with you as
you did with me; to surprise you without the least notice, to begin with
execution, without any precedent process or parle, as my former lines attest.
Neither shall I take advantage of the present season by way of revenge, which
others perchance would do, but only end^vour to right my self in a just and
Christian way, for the damages sustained in my estate and person, to prevent
the like future injuries, and to advance public liberty so far, that my
illegal restraints under you, may become no presidents to prejudice, but
benefit posterity. And seeing I find you inclined to a friendly conference
when and where I shall appoint, (which would have done better before my
commitment then now) if you nominate any Chamber in any of the four Innes of
Court, where me may meet to morrow, or Thursday morning about ten of the clock,
I shall (God willing) then and there expect such further satisfaction from you,
as is due in justice and conscience to

Your injured, oppressed quondam Friend, and Martyr for the public, William
Prynne.
Lincolnes Inn, 5. December. 1654.



To this Letter I received a large impertinent answer, dated the 6. of
December, giving no account of the cause or justice of my Restraints, but
proffering me a meeting at Mr. Else his chamber in. Grayes Inn the Saturday
following, about 8. of the clock in the morning, freely to debate the business
in a friendly manner, without prejudice to either side: Where I meeting Mr.
Bradshaw accordingly, he seriously protested to me, That he neither knew nor
remembered the Informers names, nor any particular informations given in against
me, whereupon I was thus imprisoned, restrained; but he would peruse all his
own papers, and the Books at Whitehall with all possible speed; and if he could
find any particulars relating to my commitment in them, he would give me a
speedy account thereof. After which he said, That he had sundry things in the
general to allege for himself in relation to the proceedings against me,
which did quiet his conscience: the sum whereof (which he amplified with many
words) was this alone.

1. That he and the Council at Whitehall (as he styled them) had their
authority derived to them from a true and unquestionable Parliament of England.

2. That this Parliament gave them particular instructions to pursue, for the
preservation of the Peace and safety of their new Commonwealth; which they
accordingly pursued according to their judgments and consciences, without
malice or partiality.

3. That there were many desperate plots and conspiracies set on foot against
this poor infant Commonwealth by the enemies thereof, threatening utter ruin
thereunto, had they not been carefully prevented, about and during the time of
my commitment, which enforced them to extraordinary proceedings.

4. That though he knew not the particular grounds or cause of my restraints,
yet he was persuaded, that it was done in order only to public safety, and not
out of any malice, but rather out of a tender respect of the Council toward
me; and that he did naught therein but only by the Councels command, which he
was bound to obey.

To which I presently returned him this answer, That I much wondered with what
face or confidence he could condemn the late King for a Tyrant, and yet soon
after become more arbitrary, unrighteous, and Tyrannical himself in his
proceeding against me, (his late special friend) then ever the King or his
Council were.

For first of all, they only sommoned me in the day time to appear before them
by a single sworn Messenger the next day, without any attachment of my person:
But he at the very first attached me near midnight in my own house, by a party
of horse, without any sworn legal Officer.

2. They summoned me to appear before them to answer such things as should be
objected against me: but he attached and sent me as far off from him as
possible, to remotest Castles, without bringing me ever before him; as being
afraid or ashamed to see my face.

3. They when I appeared before them, objected a particular book to my charge,
as scandalous and offensive and heard me concerning it before they committed
me* But he at first objected no particular crime or Book against me, nor would
he afterward during my long restraints, signify any special cause of my
close imprison^ent, though often importuned by my Letters; which he would have
done for his own reputation, and my own or the worlds satisfaction, had there
been any. And now at last he protests, That be neither knows, nor remembers any
particular informations given in against me for which I was so long committed;
my papers, records, writings seized, and my very pockets, as well as my House,
studies, and Prison-chamber ransacked; But he will seek if he can find out any
particulars, which would have been found out long ere this, had there been any
such, even since my first Letter to him in November last.

4. They committed me only a prisoner at large, as first to the Tower of*
London, their usual Prison, near my friends and place of residence; without
any restraints of Letters or conference with any. B^t he sent me to three
remote Castles one after another, every one worse then another, the last near
150 miles distant from my house and friends; and there kept me under the
strictest restraints and armed gards; contrary to sundry express Statutes, and
the Votes of both Houses of Parliament in my former case; debarring me for a
long time the liberty of Gods public Ordinances; which I enjoyed under them.
In all which respects, after the Parliaments censures against the old
Councell-table, Prelates, Canterbury, and his own sentence against the King; he
had manifested himself a worser Tyrant then they, and might therefore justly
expect as heavy, or a far worse censure as any of them sustained, in case he
repented not of, and gave not satisfaction for these transcendent injuries. As
for the general grounds he alleged, to excuse or justify his exorbitant
proceedings against me; I told him, they were frivolous, and would rather
aggravate then mitigate his offense before any Legal Tribunal.

To the first of them I then immediately answered, that I much admired, how any
man who professed himself a Lawyer, or ware a Gown upon his back, durst
affirm, That about 50 or 60 members only of the late Commons house,
confederating with the Army Officers to destroy, (a) Modus Tenendi
Parliamentum. Cokes 4. Instit. chapter 1.
condemn and behead the King, the * head of the Parliament, abolish the whole
house of Lords, the ancientest, honorablest, chiefest of branch our English
Parliaments. Wherein the judicial (b) See my Plea for the Lords and Collection
of the ancient Councels and Parliaments of England.
power of Parliaments wholly or principally resided; and secure seclude the
majority or five parts of four of the whole Commons house (only, for voting
according to their consciences and endeavoring to settle the Peace of the
Kingdom, after eight years bloody wars,) and to subvert all future real
English Parliaments, contrary to their trusts and duties, the very express
words of the writs and retornes of those by whom they were made and elected
members; contrary to the direct tenor of the 1 Eliz. c. 1. 5 Eliz. c. 1. 3 Jac.
c. 4, 5. 7 Jac. c. 6. 16 Caroli. The Act for Trienniall Parliaments.
Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, which they took and must take before they
could sit or vote as Members; contrary to the Solemn Protestation, Vow, League
and Covenant, which they all made and took after they were Members; contrary to
their manifold printed Declarations, Remonstrances, Ordinances, Votes, whiles
there was a real Parliament, and they actual Members of it; contrary to the
Desires, Petitions of those who entrusted them; yea contrary to the principles
of the Protestant Religion, the Privileges, Rights of Parliaments, the
fundamental Laws of the Land, which they professed, covenanted, engaged
inviolably to maintain, as they were Members; should be a true and
unquestionable Parliament of England, of themselves alone, without either King
or House of Peers, or the mainity of the secured and secluded Members;
especially after the Kings beheading, which See my Plea for the Lords. My
legal Vindication against illegal Taxes.

Prynne the Member, reconciled to Prynne the Barrister.


actually dissolved the Parliament, and sitting still under the overawing
guards and force of the Army? demanding of him in an earnest manner, by what
Parliamentary or Legal Records, Histories, Law Books, resolutions of our
Judges or Courts of Justice, he could prove that unparliamentary Juncto, to be
a lawful English Parliament, when as his own science and conscience must
attest, that they all declare and resolve them to be no Parliament at all?
Whereunto he replied, he must needs confess, that all Records, Histories and
Law books were clear against him; that they were no legal Parliament; but yet
yet in this case of extremity, wherein we then were, It was lawful for the
minor part of the Commons Houses to seclude the King and house of Lords, with
the major part of their fellowcommoners, when they would have endangered the
ship of the Commonwealth to preserve it from drowning; as I my self granted in
one of my Books, that the Mariners might secure the master of the Sip, and
thrust him from the stern, in case he would wilfully split it against a Rock
or Quicksands, to preserve the ship and themselves from perishing: to which I
rejoyned; that the similitude suited not with the case in question. For the
secluded majority of the Commons and Lords house, according to their trusts,
duties, at the earnest desires of the generality of our three Kingdoms,
endeavored to preserve and secure the ship of the Commonwealths of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, and bring it into a safe harbor, by a happy close with
the late King, upon far more honorable terms and propositions for the subjects
benefit, liberty, weal, security, to which the King consented, then ever we or
our ancestors enjoyed, or our posterities can hereafter hope for; and labored
to their power, to prevent those bloody intestine wars between our Protestant
Realms and Allies, and that prodigal expenses of many millions of treasure,
which this vi^lence upon the King, Peers and Commons house, have since
produced, and is still likely to occasion, by these few Members confederacy
with the Army; who in stead of saving have quite wracked the ship both of our
true ancient Parliaments, and Republics, and of their new infant Common wealth
too, and left us in a more desperate distracted unsettled condition, then they
then found us (which he con^essed to be true). Therefore he could no ways
justify this their violence, much less infer from thence, that they were an
undoubted true English Parliam^nt, for by like reason he might make the Army,
or General Council of Army Officers (the chief authors and actors in this
violence only) to perpetuate their own armed power and our intestine wars for
their own private ends (as now all clearly see) a true English Parliament* as
well as that Fag end of the house of Commons confederating with them; who now
too late repented of this their folly, treachery, and heartily wish, they had
joined with us in our really endeavored, and near accomplished settlement upon
the Kings confessions, which now they despair of more then ever, to enjoy under
any New Government.

To the second I replied, that admit them to be a true English Parliament
(which I could not grant) yet certainly they neither would nor could grant him
or his Whitehall associates any such unlimited arbitrary instructions and
Tyrannical power, to close-imprison me or others in remote Castles under
Soldiers, to break open, ransack our houses, studies, seize our writings,
records; deny us liberty of Gods O^dinances, or free commerce with others by
conference or Letters, which the whole Parliament and themselves so lately
condemned, sentenced and publicly voted, declared against, as repugnant to the
great Charter, Laws, Liberties, properties of the Nation in my own and others
cases, and made new acts against. And if any such exorbitant, tyrannical power
had been granted them upon any pretense, yet the Statutes of 25 E. 1. c* 1, 2.
E. 3. c. 1. declare them, to be null and void, and himself knowing them to be
such in law, could neither in justice nor conscience pursue them to mine or
others prejudice.

To the third I subjoyned, That the many desperate plots and conspiracies
against the true real Commonwealth of England, were on his and his associates
part, who subverted our old Fundamental Laws, Government, Monarchy,
Parliaments and the free course of justice, by arbitrary power, force, and
Courts of highest injustice, not on mine, or the secured and secluded Lords and
Commons, who detested, opposed all their apparent late plots and conspiracies
against them; and that now, by Gods retaliating Justice, they poor infant
Commonwealth (founded in Treachery, Perjury, Violence, Injustice, Blood,
Tyranny) was suddenly subverted, destroyed, by that very armed power which
first erected and engaged to support it still. But admit the allegation true;
yet this was very ill Logic, and worse Law and Policy; because there were many
plots and conspiracies against their new infant Republic by others; Ergo, he
and his Whitehal associates might close-imprison me (after all my sufferings
and services for the public) and all else they pleased, in remotest Castles,
without cause or hearing, though guilty of no real crime, plot or conspiracy;
which strange exorbitancy, in my judgment, was our principal cause of their new
Commonwealths and Whitehall Councels suddenunexpected downfals: However, I
being a Member of Parliament that had then a being; neither he nor his Whitehal
associates, could thus imprison and secure me by any general instructions,
without a special order of Parliament, without the highest breach of
Parliamentary Privileges; and if there were no real Parliament in being which
gave them their usurped authority, (as in truth there was not) they were then
but a company of private men, destitute of all legal authority and had no more
lawful authority to restrain or imprison me upon any pretext, then I had to
imprison him or them, since Par in parem non habet imperium; as he well knew,
without some special law authorizing him.

To the fourth I related; that if he knew not the particular grounds of my
Imprisonment, then he could not positively resolve, that it was in order to the
public safety. That to injure and oppress me, who had written, acted, and
suffered so much for the public safety heretofore, was the high way to
occasion, hasten, not prevent their public damages, and must certainly favor
of much private causeless malice of some men toward me, rather then of
public safety, or their private respects toward me. That I was so conscious
of my own innocence, that I neither feared nor declined, but often desired a
public legal Trial for any thing he or his associates could object against
me; which I could not attain; and to say now at last, that all they did was
only out of tender respects and favour-towards me; was a very absurd and
pitiful excuse; especially seeing he professed, he knew no ground nor reason
for it. That Canterbury and the Prelates, might have made the same absurd
allegation for my former close restraints as well as he, and that if himself
should be so long close imprisoned in three remote Castles, under such armed
guards, and unchristian restraints as I sustained under him, by me or any other
his pretended friends, without any legal cause, hearing, trial; I doubted
not, but he would interpret it, as an act of highest malice, Tyranny, and
injustice, not as a special favor and tender respect toward him. That
himself well knew, in the cases of many late Delinquents, illegal commands and
commissions too from the King, Council, or any others, had been frequently
resolved in Parliament, and elsewhere, to be no excuse, nor justification at
all for those who obeyed or executed them; and therefore his pretended
counsels, illegal commands to him, in relation to me, could neither extenuate
nor justify his illegal warrants and restraints, in the least degree. That he
was sorry to hear such poor excuses from a Lawyer; and that he should be so far
overseen, as to expose himself alone to answer and satisfy all the illegal
actions, and exorbitant Warrants he issued by their unjus^ commands, b^th
against me and others; which they now totally disclaimed, and so lest him in
the lurch to bear both the odium and damage of them.

In brief, after near two hours discourse, being unable to reply to my premised
answers; he promised, to make a dil^gent speedy search after the particulars
that were suggested against me, and to give me an undelayed account thereof, if
there were any at all extant; as I presumed there were none; Whereupon we
departing, and I hearing not from him in five weeks space, I thereupon sent
this ensuing Letter to him. SIR,
I Presume by this time, according to your former promise, you have made an
exact search and discovery, both of the Informers name, and particular
Informators, upon which you committed me close pri^oner near three years space,
to three remote Castles, without any hearing or trial, against all rules of
Law or Justice; of which I desire to be presently informed, that so I may know
how to steer my course in righting my self against this public injury (lest it
prove presidentiall to prejudice posterity) in such sort as may most redound to
my own vindication, and the common good of all English Freemen; which shall be
the endeavor of

Your Quondam close Prisoner, William Prynne.




Since which I never receiving the least account or answer from him, I take
this long silence for a satisfactory evidence of my innocence and his injustice
in committing and injuring me as aforesaid, without any particular cause at
all, yet discovered or declared, after so long a respite; whereupon to right my
self the best I may at present in point of reputation, (till a time of future
reparation in some other kind shall offer it self) I thought it both just and
necessary for me to publish all the premises to the world; supporting and
solacing my self in the mean time with these old Christian Cordials, of which I
have had frequent experience, Psalm. 37. 5, 6, 37, 38, 39, 40. Commit thy way
unto the Lord: trust also in him, and he shall bring it to pass. And he shall
bring forth thy righteousness as the light, and thy judgment as the noonday.
Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright, for the end of that man is
peace. But the transgressors shall be destroyed together, the end of the
wicked shall be cut off. But the salvation of the righteous is of the Lord, he
is their streng^h in the time of trouble. And the Lord shall help them and
deliver them: he shall deliver them from the wicked; and save them, because
they trust in him. Mich. 7. 8, 9, 10. Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy:
when I fall, I shall arise; when I sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a light
unto me. He will plead my cause, and execute judgment for me: he will bring me
forth to the light, I shall behold his Righteousness. Then he that is mine
enemy shall see it, and shame shall cover him which said unto me, Where is the
Lord thy God? mine eyes shall behold him, and now shall he be trodden down as
the mire of the streets.

FINIS.
A Useful Seasonable Corollary to and from the Premises.
WHen I seriously contemplate with deepost grief of Heart and confusion of
Spirit, how my late Imprisoners, with other of their Confederates (who made the
greatest Profession of transcendent Piety, Justice, Uprightnes, Clemency,
Humility, Self-denial; cordial affection, and transcendent Zeal to the
Fundamental Laws, Liberties, Franchises, Privileges, Ease, Weal,
Establishment of their Native Country; published so many large See An Exact
Col^ction of them, in quar to and another in Folio, with an other of their new
Knacks since, and their Declarations of Febr. 10. and April. 17. 1648.
Declarations, Remonstrances to the world, in print, asserting the same, and
declaring their utter detestation and total extirpation of all arbitrary
Government, Tyrany, Injustice, Oppression, Violence, illegal Proceedings,
Imprisonments, Restraints, Seisures of Papers, ransacking of Houses,
Executions, Taxes, Excises, Imposts, Arrayes exercised by the late King,
Strafford, Canterbury (whom they impeached, condemned, beheaded as the Greatest
Tyrants) and by the old Council Table, Star Chamber, High Commission, and
House of Lord, which they totally suppressed as intolerable Greivances to the
people; No sooner engrossed into their own hands (by force and fraud) the
Supreme Power over their fellow-brethren, and our Realms, but they presently
degenerated by degrees in to more absolute Tyrants, greater Oppressors,
Self-seekers, Invaders, underminers, Subverters of the Laws, Liberties,
Properties of the Subject, the Rights, privileges, freedom of Parliaments,
then the very worst of their condemned Predecesso^s, transcending them in all
kinds of unrighteous Exorbitances, and act^ of Injustice, Cruelty, Oppression;
and that not only toward their declared common Enemies, but fellow members,
and most indeared, best respected, meritorious Christian friends;
notwithstanding all sacred Oaths, Protestations, Vows, Leagues, Covenants,
Christian and civil Obligations to the contrary: and that only for their
constant Loyal^y, Fidelity, and adhesion to their first Principles, Oaths,
Protestations, Covenants, Trusts, Duties; without the least Apostasy; for which
they deserved their highest respects; and for opposing them in, dissuading them
from those violent unrighteous Proceedings, and destructive public Changes
which have occasioned so much effusion of Christian blood, such vast expenses
of Treasure, and produced so many sad calamities to our 3 whole Nations, only
as yet to make them more unsettled, more enthralled to all sorts of illegal
Pressures then ever heretofore. It experimentally instructs both me and all
others capable of any good instructions.

First, of the infallible verity of these sacred Oracles Jer. 17. 9. The heart
(of man) is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked; who can know
it? and Ps. 62. 9. Surely, men of Low degree are vanity, and men of high degree
are a lie, to be laid in the balance, they are altogether lighter then vanity.

Secondly, of the sad, tragical, dangerous fruits of ambitious affectations
of Sovereignty, greatness; which instigates men often times, to violate all Oaths,
Laws, Trusts, Obligations, Relations, natural, civil, sacred, public,
private, transforming them into savage*beasts, yea Saints themselves in
external show, into incarnate Devils, and monsters of iniquity, treachery,
cruelty. Witness. Judge. 9. 5. to. 57. 1 Kings 15. 27, 28, 29. c. 16. 9. 11,
12. to 21. 2 Kings. 8* 13. 15. c. 10. 1. to. 15. c. 11. 1. c. 15. 10. 13, 14.
25. 30, The Quintus Curtius Hist. l. 10. Justin. H^st l. 12. 13. 14. 15 16. 17.
18. Arrianus Hist* Alexandri. Jacobus usserius Annals ve^eris Testamenti,
Plutarchi Cassander, Eum^nes, Diodorus Siculus, and others.
Barbarus treachery, cruelty, ingratitude of Cassander and other Captains to
Alexander the great: who notwithstanding all their oaths, obligations* and
pretended affections toward him, as their sovereign, general, advancer, first
traitorously destroyed him with a poisoned potion, then murdered his own Mother,
Wives, Children, Brother, Kindred, interfectis etiam omnibus, quicunque
Alexandrum etiam longinqua cognation^, etc the better to secure his dominions
and treasures to themselves, which they devideth between them. After which they
falling out between themselves, Warred upon and betrayed each other, till they
were all slain and destroyed by one another. With sundry other foreign and
domestic presidents, recorded in histories; many* whereof are collected by Sr.
Walter Rawleigh in his Preface to the History of the world; and Dr. Beard in
his Theater of Gods judgments. Book. 2. c. 3, 4, 5, 10. 17. 41. where all who
are guilty of this sin, or really dete^t it, may profitably peruse-them at
their leisure: with this observation of Justin. Hist. ^. 16. touching Gods
retaliation upon such perfidious traitors and their families. Atque ita
universa Cassandri domus Alexandro magno, seu necis ipsius, seu stirpis
extinctae paenas, partim caede, partim supplicio luit. Sufficiently refuting
that received Parodox of the Tragaedian, Seneca.
Psalm. 73. 6. to 12. ^ Isay. 14. 5. to. 18
Imperia quolibet precio constant been.

Thirdly, of the extraodinary dangerous, sinful, poysonful leaven, usually
attending grand powers, offices, Preferments, whcih frequently transform not
only proud ambitio^s carnal persons, but even the most humble, mortified,
meek, just, upright, pious, self-denying Saints, and greatest Patrons of
Religion, *Laws, justice, public liberty, (without Gods extraordinary
restraining grace) into the very worst of tyrants, oppressors, Extortioners,
especially when suddenly advanced by unlawful means or from an inferior
condition to the highest pinnacle of sovereignty or Empire. This In ^utropium
l. r. See Roger Houeden, Annal. pars posterior. p. 680.
Claudian a heathen Poet, long since observed, and thus elegantly expresses.
Asperius humili nihil est cum surgit in Altum.
Cuncta ferit, dum cuncta timet; desaevit in omnes
Ut se posse putent; nec Bellua tetrior ulla,
Quam servi rabies in libera colla furentis.


Yea such a strange corrupting transforming venom usually is there in Sovereign
powers and dignities, (which ought really to make men 2. Sam. 23. 3. 4. 2,
Chr^n. 9* 8. c. 10. 5. 6. Isay. 32. 1. 2. Romans 13. 3. 4. 6. Psalm. 78.. 71. 72.
2. Sam. 5. 12. c. ^. 15.
Like to God himself, whose Deputies, Ministers, all lawful Kings and
Magistrates are) in justice, righteousness, Clemency, Goodness, and zeal for
their subjects welfare) that they frequently produce such strange alterations
in men's minds, actions, and so wonderfully metamorphise them from what they
formerly were, and thought themselves to be, that if God himself by a special
Prophet from Heaven, should predict such a mutation to and in them, they would
not believe him. Of which we have a memorable Scripture president. 2. Kings 8.
11, 12, 13. Hazael a Servant to the King of Syria being sent to Elisha by the
King, to enquire, whether he should recover of his disease? the Prophet setting
his countenance on him till he was ashamed, Wept. Whereupon Hazael said; Why
weepeth my Lord? and he answered; Because I know the evil that thou will do
unto the children of Israel: their strong holds will thou set on fire, and
their young men will thou slay with the sword; and wilt dash their Children
against the stones, and rip up their Women with child, and Hazael said; BUT
WHAT IS THY SERVANT A DOG* THAT HE SHOULD DO THIS GREAT (or strange cruel)
THING? And Elisha answered (only this) The Lord has showed me, THAT THOU SHALL
BE KING OVER SYRIA. Intimating that his unexpected advancement to and aspiring
after the sovereign Power, should work such an incredible alteration as this
in him. And so it did. For presently after, he smothered and murdered his own
sick Sovereign in his bed, then invaded his Crown and reigned in his stead. v.
15. and not long after he invaded the Israelites with an army, slaying, and
cuting them short, burning their Cities, oppressing and tyrannizing over them
(as Elisha predicted) in all the coasts of Israel. 2 Kings. 10. 32, 33. ^. 13.
3. 22. 25. Should Elisha himself have risen again from the dead, and foretold
to Mr. Bradshaw and his confederates at Whitehall, Westminster and in the Army,
but three or four years before their advancements to their New self created
Supreme Powers; that they should so far degenerate from their first
Principles, professions, Practices within few years space, by unexpected
advancements and Su^ces^es, that contrary to all their former Oaths,
Protestations, Vows, covenants, Leagues, Declarations, Remonstrances,
Commissions, Trusts, Obligations, Relations, Judgments, Resolutions, and all
bonds o^ Loyalty, Duty, Friendship, Law, Justice, they should forcibly
undermine, subvert the Fundamentals of the Kingdom, the Rights, Privileges,
Freedom (yea being) of parliaments and their members, more avowedly and
desperately then ever beheaded Strafford, Canterbury or others had done in any
former age. That they should engage the parliaments own Officers and Army
against the Houses, Members, Privileges, and constitution of Parliaments
themselves; forcibly secure, seclude, asperse in print, imprison, close
imprison not only sundry Noble Lords, but my self, with many of the sincerest,
Eminentest members of the Commons House, whom they then most honored for their
Piety, Ability, Fidelity to the public Interest: impeach, condemn, behead
their Lawful Protestant King, disinherit his Posterity; Sec^ude the greatest
part of their fellow Commoners, vote down the whole house of Lords, create 50.
or. 60. of themselves A Parliament of England, without King, Lords, or their
secluded Associates. Arraignes, execute, the King, Nobles, Peers, Knights and
other English Freemen in a New misintituled High Court of Justice (created by
themselves alone) without any Lawful Trial by their Peers: alter the ancient
Hereditary Monarchical Government of our three Kingdoms into a pretended Free
State, Common Wealth, and other New-modles; erect New forms of Parliaments,
s^als, Coins, Writs, Courts, Legal Procedings; create New Treasons
diametrically contrary to old ones: Suppress the Presbyterian Government and
party for which they were then so Zealous: cut off the head of a Presbyterian
Eminent Minister of their own party; imprison, sequester diverse other godly
Ministers whom they then most countenanced* preferred. Suspent all Penal Laws
against Heretics, S^hismatickes, Blasphemers, Priests, Jesuits: Sell all the
ancient Church Revenues formerly devoted by their Ancesters and voted by
themselves for the better maintenance of the Ministry, and propagation of the
gospel; With the ancient Crown Revenues which should defray the Ordinary
expenses of the government. Repeal the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance,
which themselves had taken as Members, together with the Solemn Protestation,
Vow, League, Covenant, made and prescribed by themselves under strict
penalties; and set up a New Engagement, point blank against them (by which they
were all abjured) under such disabilities, forf^itures, pains, as they
inflicted on such who out of conscience and detestation of Perjury could not
submit thereto: impose strange illegal, oppressing uncessant oft-condemned
Excises, Imposts, Tonnage, Poundage, Monthly Contributions, Shipmony, Arrayes,
Militiaes, and public Charges on the whole Nation without grant or consent in
any free or Lawful English Parliament, as no former times can parallel* and
themselves so frequently voted, declared, and passed particular Acts and
Judgments against at the beginning of the Parliament; together with forcible
Presses of Soldiers, Mariners, Seamen, from time to time against sundry New
Acts and Declarations to which themselves were parties: and that only to keep
up a constant standing Army in the three Kingdoms, to enforce these Illegal
Taxes from them, and keep them under perpetual Bondage to their arbitrary new
illegal self created Powers. That they should hostily invade their nearest,
dearest Protestant Christian brethren of Scotland with an Army, against the Act
of Oblivion, Solemn League, Covenant, and all their late Obligations to them
for their Brotherly assistance; assault, beseige, pillage all their Cities,
Castles, strong Holds, and burn some of them with ^^re; slay many thousands of
their bravest Soldiers who assisted them, and their stoutest young men with the
sword, (yea hack, wound, maime thousands more of them in a barbarous manner) 2*
Chr^n. 28. 9.
with a rage reaching up to heaven; slay some, persecute, imprison others of
their eminentest Protestant Ministers, Nobles, Gentry, in remotest Castles;
sell many of them for Bondslaves to remote Plantations; forage, Wast, de^troy
much of their Country with fire and sword, kill many of them with famine; keep
all their whole Nation (like Bondslaves) under constant Garrisons, and
Tributes; subvert their old Civil and Ecclesiastical Laws, Parliaments,
Government, imposing New upon them by the sword; and be so far from repenting,
or being greived, humbled for these unchristian Cruelties toward them (upon no
other known account, but their Loyalty to their lawful King, and
conscientious adhering to their former Government, Lawful Oaths, Covenants;)
that though some of them appointed General day of humiliation throughout the
land by an Exact Collection. P. 927. 928.
Ordinance of the 15. Febr. 1642. For the cruel and crying Sin of blood shed,
especially of the Protestants in Queen Mary's time, and before, amounting but
to some hundreds: yet they should after prescribe days of publikethanksgiving
for the bloody slaughters of many thousands of their godly Protestant Brethren
and victories over them, and hang up all their Captivated Ensigns in triumph
in Westminster Hall, for a perpetual testimony of this their unprotestant,
unbrotherly carriage toward them, contrary to the Judge. 21. 1. to. 18. 2. Sam.
1. 12. to. 20. 2. 2. Chron. 28. 5. 1. John. 3. 10. 11. 12. 1. Cor. 12. 25. 26.
Practice of all godly people in former ages, and many Judge. 21. 1. to. 18. 2.
Sam. 1. 12. to. 20. 2. 2. Chron. 28. 5. 1. John. 3. 10. 11. 12. 1. Cor. 12. 25.
26.
Gosple Precepts. That after this they should pick a quarrel with our old
Protestant Friends and Confederates of the united Provinces by putting New
restraints upon their Trading, beyond all former presidents, seizing their
Ships, Merchandise as consiscate, and then engage them in a most bloody war
and fights against them by Sea, to the destruction of many thousand Merchants,
Mariners and their Families, the impoverishing of both Nations, the great
decay, obstruction of Trade, and grand advantage, rejoicing of our Spanish and
other Popish Enemies. That they should pull down the Kings Arms by special
Order out of all Churches, Courts and other public places, yet set up the
bloody Cross (as the only Coat of England for the future, as it has since
been and is still like to be) in its place; though they formerly pulled down,
demolished all Crosses in such places by special Orders, as Superstitious, and
still permit the Kings Arms and Images too upon his coin, where they yet pass
current. That whereas Christ himself in his Gospel commands all Christians; not
only to 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2. Math. 5. 43 to the end Rom 12. 20. 21.
make Prayers, Supplications and Intercessions for all men in general, and for
KINGS and their very enemies in particular; but also not to hate, but love
their Enemies, to do good to them that hate them, and pray for those who
dispitefully use and persecute them; That they may be the Children of their
father which is in heaven: For he makes his Sun to rise upon the evil and the
good, and sends rain both on the just and the unjust. Backing it with this
reason. For if you love them that love you, what reward have you? do not even
the Publicans the same? Be you therefore perfect as your heavenly Father is
perfect; Therefore if thine Enemy hunger feed him, if he thurst, give him
drink. Be not overcome with evil, but overcome evil with goodness. In
pursuance of which Precepts our King Receptus erg^ Edgarus et magno donativo
donatus est, pluresque annos in Caria mancus; liber am.

A genti quotidie in stipendi^ accepi^bat. Will. Malmesburiensis De G^stis
Regum Angliae l. 3. ^. 103. Math. Paris Hist: Angl. p 6. Speeds History. p. 442
Hiero. de Knyeth^on. de Eventibus: Angliae. l. 2. c. 3 col. 2350.


William the I. (though now branded for an inhumane tyrant by many) was so
christianly Charitable, Noble, Heroicke toward Edgar Athelirig (after he gained
the Crown of England from the perjured usurper Harold by the sword) that
although he was right heir, and his only Competitor to the Crown of England,
twice set up in Arms against him by the English Nobility and King of Scots to
force him from the Thron; yet after all his Forces broken, when he was quite
deserted by his friends, upon his addresses to him in Normandy; he courteously
received him into his favor, entertained him for sundry years together even
in his own Court; Allowed him an Honorable pension of one pound of Silver
every day, besides a large Donation. After which Edgar going to the holy wars
into Apulia with many Ships and Soldiers, he was in return from thence,
courteously entertained and had many benefits bestowed on him by the Emperors
of Greece and Germany, who disired to retain him in their Courts; Which
Courtesy he refusing out of love to his Native Country, returned again into
England where he lived quietly all his Reign. And although Simcon Dunelmensis
Hist. An 1086. 1091 1097. Col. 213 216. 223. Chro^, Joannis Bromton. Col. 973.
William Rufus his Son, upon some differences arising between them (amounting
to a competition to the Crown) banished him into Scotland for a time; Yet at
l^st he received him both into his favor and Court too; and in the 7. year of
his reign, sent him Chief Commander with an Army into Scotland, to establish
his Cosen Edgar Son of King Malcombe, King in the Throne, and to expel his
Uncle Dufenald, who had usurped it by violence. (Such was the Nobleness of
these successive Kings to this-right Heir to their Crowns) That yet ^hey
notwithstanding should contrary to these Gospel Precepts, and this domestic
memorable president; contrary to the resolution of a very Heathen; Seneca de
Ira. l. 2. c. 3 4.
Nihil est iniquius quam aliquem Heredem paterni odii Fieri: To Gods own
resolution, Ezec. 18. 17 2 Chronicles. 21. 6. 7. c. 28. 27. c. 33. 20. etc. and of
our English Nobles and Nation, in the case of K. Hen. 3. whom they crowned for
their K. notwithstanding his Father K. John's faults; Quia propria patris
iniquitas ut CUNCTIS VIDEBATUR, Filio non debuit imputari: be so unchristian,
uncharitable toward their beheaded Kings Royal Posterity, and Right Heir to
the Crown, though Protestants; as not only to prohibit all public Prayers
unto God for them, under pain of High Treason and severest Penalties; to banish
them out of all their Realms and Dominious, to which they were See 1 Jac. c.
1. 2.
borne Heirs, under pain of High Treason and death it self, if ever they set
footing in them, not to allow any of them, the least breathing place therein;
nor the least standing Pension for their necessary support in other Climates,
out of their own Hereditary large Revenues which they have seized on; to
prohibit any other within their Territories, publicly or secretly to aid or
relieve them under pain of High Treason, loss of Liberty, Life, Estate: But
likewise to treat with other foreign Protestant States and Princes, to banish
both them and their Protestant Adherents out of their Territories; thereby to
necessitate them (^o the intolerable Scandal of our Religion and Nation) to
live upon the mere Alms of Popish Princes, and For^aig, ners, like distressed
Exiles, to the great peril of their Souls, and apparent hazards of their
seduction from our Religion, by exposing them to so manifold temptations
provocations to renounce it. Of which the S^ Militiere his Victory of Truth.
Jesuits and Papists make great advantage to draw others from us to their
Romish Superstitions: And not content herewith, to treat with those Popish
Princes, Stats, where now they are entertained, to remove them out of their
Dominions, and withdraw all Charitable Supplies for their relief, that so they
may inevitably perish, and have neither being nor subsistence in this world,
nor place to r^st their heads in. Which transcendent unparalleld Proceedings
(as many intelligent Protestants conceive) have been the principle inpulsive
cause and argument the Jesuits have made use of, to incite the Emperor of
Germany to As several^ printed Diurnals. etc. An* 1653. 1654. 165^. relate, and
Merchants Letters thence.
banish all the Protestants by severest Edicts out of Bohemia Austria, Styria,
and other his Hereditary Dominions? and incensed the Duke of Savoy by severe
Proclamation, and by a bloody Army of Irish and other Papists, to massacre many
thousands of them, and endeavor their utter extirpation out of his
Territories, and will probably instigate all Popish Princes, States of
Christendom to unite their forces together, to extirpate us and all other
Protestants out of the world, for these premised unchristian Exorbitances,
which In his Victory of Truth.
Militiere and other Papists in late printed Books impute to the Principles of
the Reformed Religion. Should Elisha himself, I say, have predicted all or any
of these particulars to them before they were acted by them? and that they
should publicly justify them before all ^he World in many Printed Papers, and
most Christian, Righteous, Just, Heroical Actions, without the least remo^se
or shame (as they have done) I appeal to their own consciences; whether they
would not have bin as incredulous thereof, nay more discontented with the
Prophet for meddling in them, as Hazael was, and would not have returned him the
self same Answer as he did? or a worse; What are thy Servants Dogs, n^y Devils
incarnate, and the Monsters of men, that we should do all these great, strange
incredible things; And yet since they have acted them all over and pursued them
with eagernes instead of repenting of them; and esteem all such their Capital
Enemies, yea little less then greatest Tratyors to them and their New
Republike, who out of cordial Love to their Souls, mere Conscience toward
God, and duty to their Native Country, shall dare presume to dissuade them
from, reprehend them for, oppose them in, or move them to sincere repentance
for the same: Which I beseech them now in the fear of God, seriously to reveiw,
retract, reform, if ever they expect grace or pardon before any Tribunal of God
or Men, where they must sooner or latter be 2. Cor. 5. 10. 11. Rev. 6. 15. 16.
17. c. 20. 12. 13. 14.
called to account for them, notwithstanding all their present Power or armed
forces to secure them from humane Justice; unable to resist divine.

From this perilous corrupting, transforming leaven usually accompanying
Empire and great Honors, the very Heathen Philosophers and others deduced these
three Proverbs See Erasmi Adagia.
Honores mutant Mores: Magistratus virum indicat; vis nosse virum, committee
imperium: And De Vera ^t falsa Religio ne cap. De Magistratu.
Huldricus Zuinglius renders this reason of it. Adeo late vast^t hominum mentes
rei gloriaeque ^upid^, tametsi interim pulchre celet omnia, and non alia res
est quae latentes cupiditates magis exulcerat, QVAM IMPERIVM: tunc enim
occasionem se invenire arbitrantur, qua maxim grassari possunt. Caeterum ubi
jam via patet, nemo retrahere potest ut vel moderate videantur concupivisse,
etc. He instanceth in two examples to prove what strange alterations, Empire
and power, operate in men's minds and manners. First in King Saul; next in
Pythagoras the Philosopher: See Plutarch Diogenes Laertius, Diodorus Si^ulus,
and others in his Life.
who although whiles a private person, he was such an extraordinary, humble,
meek, pitiful, mortified, self denying, and cynical a person, that he would
neither kill, nor eat any living creature whatsoever, nor any pulse or thing
that had red spots or color of blood upon it; renounced all worldly honors*
pleasures, profits, pomp, pride; would seldom converse with men, or utter any
word in any company, injoyning almost perpetual silence to himself and five
years taciturnity to all his Scholars ere they should presume to speak in
public; yet no sooner was he made a King by the people, for his transcendent
virtues seemingly against his will; but he became a transcendent bloody Tyrant:
OMNIVM ingurgitavit and haud aliter at que ii qui vino adobruuntur ebrius
esset, and IN INNOXIOS FVRERET, etc. Vnde PERICV LOSSISSIMA RES EST QVIQVAM
COMMITTERE IMPERIVM. To pretermit all other foreign presidents of like nature,
enough to fill whole Volumes; I shall instance only in one domestic one, not
unseasonable for, and very parallel to our times; related by sundry of our
Historians.

Math. Paris Hist. Angliae. p. 151 155. 156. 160 161. Gul. Nubrigensis. Rerum
Angl. Hist. l. 4. c. 14. to. 19. Roger Hoveden. pars posterior. p. 687 700. to
708. 718* 719. 720. 735 etc. Fox Acts and Monuments. p. 114 123. 124.
Holinshed. p. 121. 129. 130. 131. 132. Godwins Catalogue of Bishops p. 247. to.
261. Speeds History. p. 531. and My Antipathy of the English Lordly Prelacy to
Regal Monarchy and Civil unity p. 202 to 211.
William Langchamp being advanced from an inferior condition by King Richard
the first, to be Bishop of Ely, Popes Legate, Lord Chancellor, Chief Justice
and Protector of England (the first who enjoyed that title to my remembrance)
during the Kings absence in the holy Wars, Ann. 1191, etc. Was so strangely
infatuated, intoxicated, metamorphosed by these his new honors and powers,
that he acted many things, not only indiscreetly and untowardly, but also most
arrogantly, insolently tyranically, unconscionably covetuously and cruelly;
tyrannizing beyond all measure over his Fellow*Commissioners the Kings own
Brethren, all the Nobility, Clergy, Gentry and Commonalty of the R^a^me whom he
perpetually greived, oppressed with manifold continual and needless illegal
exactions, pressures, proud insolent Speeches and behavior, purveyances,
proling Officers, Troopers, Guards, Garrisons, who by some means or other got
all the wealth of the kingdom into his and their hands; by placing, displacing
all Officers, and disposing all Offices, preferments in the Realm at his
pleasure, by imprisoning, crushing, trampling under feet all such who durst
oppose, or appeal against his Tyrannical Exactions, Procedings, Usurpations
against their ancient Liberties, Privileges, Rights, Laws, AS GUILTY OF HIGH
TREASON OR SEDITION. And to keep the Nobility, Clergy, People in this servile
condition under him, he kept a perpetual Guard of Frenchmen and Flemings about
him, never riding abroad with less then 1500. Horse to guard him, and
commanded all the Nobility and their Sons to attend upon him, and matched his
Neeces and kinswomen to them, the better to secure and strengthen himself: Yea,
he displaced all the Officers appointed by the King, and under pretext of
suppressing Thieves and tumults, placed garrisons of his own creatures, rather
to destroy then govern it; who kept great troops of cruel and barbarous
Soldiers, which rode about armed in every place to terrify the people, and be
the most wicked executioners of his Violence, rapine, coveteousnes, Exactions;
sparing neither Clergy man, Monk, nor Layman, and committing many outrages,
and cruelties in all places without punishment. And not contented herewith
(being sensible of the Nobilities, Clergies and peoples indignation against him
for these his Exorbitances and Oppressions) he sent for div^rs foreign forces
of his Friends and Confederates, placing them in the Castles and Garrisons of
the Kingdom for his greater security. By which Tyranicall courses, Multis
Terrorem incussit, Siluit*Regnum Angliae a facie ejus, nec fuit, qui
obmurmuraret ^um sibi in Anglia nihil ad ex^vgnandum restaret, writes Matthew
Paris. In brief Nu^rigensts records, That the Laity o^ England experimentally
found him MORE THEN A KING; And the Clergy MORE THEN A POPE, but both of them
AN INTOLERABLE TYRANT. Solis complicibus et copri^toribus suis innoxius:
caeteris indifferentur, non tantum PECVNIARVM AMBITV, verum etiam DOMINANDI
VOLVPTATE ERAT INFESTVS, For by reason of HIS DOUBLE POWER (or rather treble,
civil, Ecclesiastical and Military) he usurping the Militia into his own hands
alone) HE PUT ON THE PERSON OF A DOUBLE TYRANT most arrog^ntly domineering both
over the Clergy and people, making use of both his powers, the more easily to
accomplish his designs, and crushiug those with his Military and royal power,
whom he could not subdue with his Ecclesiastical Authority. Non erat qui se
absoonderet a calore ejus cum and secularis in eo virgam vel GLADIVM
Apostolicae potestatis timeret: His pomp and pride was more then royal almost
in all things; Yet, such was his secret Necesse est ut multos timeat, quem
multi timent. It a natu^ ra constituit, ut quod al^en^ m^tu magnum est, a suo
non vacet. Quicquid terret, et trepidat.

Seneca de Ira* l. 2. c. 11.


fear in the midst of his greatness: That Clericorum stipatus Catervis
MILITVMQVE VALLATVS AGMINI^VS, Orientalium more Regum TANQVAM IN EXPEDITIONE
JVGITER POSITVS ARMATORVM CIRCA CVBICVLVM SVVM HABERE EXCVBIAS VOLVIT; keeping
great armed guards about him day and night; wheresoever he was, or went.

Hereupon the Nobility and People unable to suffer his intolerable insolences
and oppressions any longer, complained most greivously of them ^o the King; who
thereupon writ to some Nobles to examine and redress these Greivances; And
upon the instigation of Earl John the Kings Brother, the Nobles of England
raising great forces, to suppress and eject this Tyrant, met in a kind of
Parliament the Saturday after Michaelmas, Anno. 1191. at L^don Bridge between
Reading and Winds^r; and after that in Paul's Church, and on the East part of
the Tower of London, where all the Archbishops, Bishops, Earls and Barons there
assembled agreed, and resolved the unanimous conscent of all; Vt talis de
caetero in Regno Angliae non dominaretur, per quem Ecclesia Dei ad ignominiam,
et POPV^VS AD INOPIAM TRAHEBA^VR. Ipse enim Cancellarius et satellit^s ejus,
OMNES REGNI DIVITIAS IT A EXHAVSERANT, Vt nec viri Baltheum argento redimitum,
ne faeminae monile, nec viri nobili annulum, vel Judaeo relinquerent the
saurum, vel quidlibet precio^i. The sauru^ quoque domini regis adeo
evacua*verant* ut in scriniis au^ ^lit^llis, Nihil praeter c^aves et vasa vacua
possent de elapsa Biennio inveniri. Provisum est etiam. Vt o^^ia castella, quae
pro libitu suo idem cancellarius cu^todiae satellitum suorum commisserat,
redderentur, and in primis Ipsa turris Londinensis. This insolent Oppressor now
finding himself unable to resist the nobles (most of his Friends, rebellious
forces deserting him in his distresses) fled to the Tower of London, refusing
to appear before the Lords, for fear of violence, notwithstanding security
tendered to him; but at last being necessitated thereunto, he swear to perform
whatsoever the Lords had Decreed, giving sureties to surrender up all the
Castles to them, and to depart the Realm. Whereupon laying down his Offices and
Legates Cross, he came to Dover; thinking in a clandestine manner to pass the
Seas: and the better to deceive the Mariners eyes, he disguised himself in
women's apparel; virum in faeminum convertit, dum vestem Sacerdotis in
meretricis habitum commutavit; tunica virida faeminea indutus. But being
casually discovered by a Mariner to be a man, (who desired to make use of him
as his strumpet) and that hateful Chancellor whom so many had cursed and
feared, a company of women and vulgar people in great despite, threw him to the
ground, spit upon and beat him very sorely, dragged him by the heels along the
Sands, and would (no doubt) have torn him in pieces, had not some of the
Burgesses of the Town rescued him out of their hands, and thrust him into a
Seller, where he was detained prisoner till they knew the Lords pleasure
concerning him. Se^ Godwin in his Life.
Thus he who but a few months before was honored and feared by all men like a
demy-god, attended with so many Officers, Nobles, Guards, and pretended Friends
being once down and standing in need of his Friends help, had no man to defend
or speak for him, no man that moved a tongue or finger to rid him out of his
present calamity, lying long in this sad pickle, till at last being set at
liberty by some Bishops means, he passed with scorn and contempt into Normandy,
his native Country. Let those who now imitate him in his Tyrannies,
Oppressions, Insolences, Rapines, and imposing armed Guards and Garrisons on
the Nation to enslave them, take heed they follow him not in his sudain
shameful downfall.

From these and infinite other Presidents of men's strange Degeneracies and
Transmutations by their high Honors, Powers, in all ages, we may well cry out
with godly De vera et falsa Religione. cap. De Magistratu.
Zuinglius Quis nunc tuto cuiquam committat Imperium, cum simplicissimos and
sapientissimos videamus imperio immutatos esse? And let all conscientious
Christians truly fearing God, learn these profitable Instructions from the
serious contemplation of them.

1. Not over severely to aggravate, censure the Exorbitances of our late or
former Kings, or their Officers, Counselors, Courts; since other late
Reformers who have most eagerly declaimed against, censured, condemned and
totally suppressed them as the greatest Grievances and Tyrants, have far
transcended them ever since in their very worst Exorbitances, and degenerated
into more absolute Tyrants, Oppressors, Grievances in most kinds then they were
hertofore, as their late Acts, Edicts, Actions and Speeches proclaim to all the
world.

2. Not greedily or ambitiously to seek after Empire, Sovereignty, Power,
Magistracy, great Offices, or Preferments ( Gal. 6. 1. 2.
Miserimam ergo necesse est non tantum brevissimam vit am eorum esse, qui magno
parant labor, quod majore possideant; operose assequuntur quae volunt anxij
tenent quae asscuta sunt maximae quaeque, boxae solicit sunt, neculli
fortunae minus been quam optimae creditur, Aliae faelicitate ad tuendam
faelicitatemopus est et pro ipsis quae successarunt votis, vota facienda sunt.
Seneca De Brevitate vitae c. 17.
being so full of perils, cares, fears) especially, by violent, fraudulent,
corrupt, unlawful meane^, but rather modestly and carefully to decline them,
for fear of being depraved, altered, and brought if not to temporal, yet to
eternal ruin by them, as thousands have been.

Thirdly in case they be lawfully called, urged, and in a manner enforced
against their wills, without their solicitation to any places of great Power,
Trust, or Honor, to be very cautious how they undertake them, to examine their
own abilities faithfully to discharge them, with the strength of their
Christian graces to resist, conquer, those manifold temptations unto sin, and
gross Corruptions, which usually att^nd them; and earnestly to seek to God by
prayer for special direction in the acceptance or rejection of them.

Fourthly, If God and their own Consciences upon warrantable grounds incline
them to embrace such Powers or preferments, then to make it their earnest
prayer to God (as 2 chro^. 1. 8. 9.
Solomon did) to bestow upon them an extraordinary measure of Grace, Wisdom,
Knowledge, Courage, Diligence and sincerity, to manage them rightly to Gods
glory, the peoples weal, happiness; and to avoid all those corruptions,
temptations to Oppr^ssion, Injustice, Pride, Violence, etc. which usually
attend them.

Fif^hly, To engrave these sacred scriptures alwaye^ in their hearts and
memories: 2 Samuel 23. 3, 4. He that rules over men must be just, ruling in the
fear of God: with 2 Chronicles. 19. 6, 7. Romans 13. 3, 4. 2 Chronicles. 9. 8. Jer. 7. 5.
8. c. 23. 5, 6. Zech. 7. 9, 10. Execute true Judgment thoroughly, for ye judge
not for man, but for the Lord, who is with you in the judgment: take heed what
you do; and show mercy and compassion every man to his Brother. And oppress
not the widow nor fatherless, the stranger nor the poor, and let none of you
imagine evil against his brother in his heart. Matthew. 7. 12. All things
whatsoever you would that men should do unto you, do ye even so to them, for
this is the Law and the Prophets. As likewise Romans 11. 21. Be not high minded,
but fear: For if God spared not the natural branches, take heed left he also
spare not thee: 1 Cor. 10. 12. Wherefore let him that thinks he stands,
take heed lest he fall. And withal to imitate our pious Saxon King Edelwolf,
of whom Abbot De Gene^logia Regum Anglorum. Col. 351.
Ethelred gives this Encomium, Hi^ in Regno terreno semper meditabatur c^leste;
ut manifest daretur intelligi, eum non victum cupiditate, sed charitate
provocatum, alienae necessitati regnando consulere, non suae voluntati
dominando satisfacer^.

Sixthly, To beware how they give the least way, to any unjust or unrighteons
Project, Judgment, Commitment, Imposition, action, See. 2. E. 3. c 8* 20. E* 3.
c. 1. 2 and 18* E. 3 Oath of the Just^ces.
contrary to the known Laws of God or the Land, to the prejudice of any private
Person, or the whole Nation, upon any pretended Necessity, Extremity,
Convenience, public advantage, or to satisfy the unjust desires, or commands
of an^ Powers or Persons whatsoever: least it prove an inlet, and leading
president to far more, worse, greater Exorbitances, Injuries, Oppressions,
Sins, and necessitate them at last to defend one wickedness or act of
Injustice, by another, till they plung themselves over head and ears, beyond
recovery in sin and damnation, to their temporal and eternal ruin. Ovid. De
R^medio Am^ris.
Principiis obsta: is the best resolution in such cases.

Seventhly, Diligently to examine by the rules of law conscience and right
Reason, every Action, Project, Design proposed to, or imposed on them, by
these three notable Interrogatories of Saint De Consideration^. lib* 1.
Bernard: Whether it be Lawful? Decent? Expedient? And if upon due
confideration, it fail in any of these three circumstances, then peremptorily
to reject it, proceed no further in the execution; but rather willingly to quit
their Offices, Honors, Powers, then their Justice, Honesty Consciences in such
cases; according to our Saviors advice, Matt. 16. 26. and the Apostles
resolution, Acts 4. 19, 20. and c. 5. 29. We ought to obey God (and the Laws
too) rather then men.

Eighthly, To Psalm. 141. 5. 6. Prove. 19. 20. 25. c. 9. 8. 1 Samuel 25. 18. to 36.
listen with a willing ear and thankful heart to the informations,
admonitions, oppositions, reprehensions of their reallest Christian friends,
and eminentest sincerest Patrons of their Countries Laws, Rights, Liberties, in
all cases of public concernment; rather then to mere creatures and* dependents
of their own, or to the suggestions of projecting self-seekers. And when they
are opposed by such in any of their designs, to consider that excellent saying
of Seneca, which will not only mitigate their anger against such, but reclaim
them from such injurious prosecutions and designs. De Jra. l. 3. c. 28. 29.
Quidam vero non tantu^ JUSTAS CAUSAS standi contra nos, sed etiam Honestas
habent. Alius Patrem, alius Fratrem, alius Patruum alius amicum: (alius
Patriam) His tamen non ignoscimus id facientibus, quod nisi facerent,
improbaremus. Immo, quod est incredibil^. Saepe de facto been existimamus, de
faciente male. At me hircule vir magnus and justus fortissimum quemque ex
hostibus' suis. Et pro liberate ac salute Patriae pertinacissimum suspicit:
and Talem sibi civem, talem militem contingere optat turpe est odisse quem
lauds, etc. Which had my injurious imprisoners duly considered before they
committed me close prisoner, they would have been more ashamed to commit me,
then now they are ashamed of my long injurious imprisonment, without any legal
ground or cause.

If any in present or future Power, contemning these Christian Instructions,
and all Laws of God and Man, shall think to support themselves in any
Arbitrary, violent, illegal, oppressive ways to the general oppression of
the people, by the power of armed Forces. Let them remember that of Psalm 33.
16. There is no King saved by the multitude of an Host: a mighty man is not
delivered by much strength. And know that all the Hosts, Guards under Heaven
can neither save nor secure any unrighteous violent Tyrants or, Oppressors from
the Justice of that Omnipotent God, who has decreed, Psalm. 140. 11. Evil
shall hunt the man of violence to his overthrow: that bloody, violent and
deceitful men shall not live out half their days, be brought down by him into
the pit of destruction. Psalm. 55. 23. And that all those who take the Sword,
shall perish by the sword. Mat. 26. 42. Which the Histories of all ages,
places, Zach. 9. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Isay. ^4. 10. to 20. worthy their saddest
perusal with the forecited president of William Lanchamp sufficiently
confi^me; their very Armies, Guards themselves becoming many times their
Executioners, as Seneca de Clementia l. 1. c. 25, 26. most elegantly records.
Yea sometimes the most victorious Generals, Armies, when they prove treacherous
too, and mutinous against their Sovereign Lords and Masters, contrary to their
Oaths, Trusts, become mutually treac^erous and destructive to each other in
conclusion: Of which I shall give you only one memorable example. When Alexander
the great, his Captains had after all his Conquests poisoned him, murdered his
Mother, Wives, Sons, and all his Kindred, and divided his Kingdoms,
Dominions and Conquests between them, by divine Justice for his unjust,
ambitious invasions of others Crowns, and Territories; their own ambition and
covetousness, presently armed them against each other, till they and their old
victorious conquering Army with thousands more were totally slain and
destroyed one by another. Amongst the rest See Justin, Hist. l. 12. to 18 Qu.
Curtius. Hist. l. 10. Plutar^hi. Alexander, Antigonus, Eumenes, Dr. Usher
Annals veteris Testamenti. pars. 1.
Eumenes (the greatest Politician of them all, and inferior to none of them in
valor) to whom Cappadocia and Paphagonia were asigned; having gained two
victories against his Opposites; and routed Antigonus and his Army in a third
Battle with part of his forces; The Arggraspides (Alexanders old invincible
Army, by whom he obtained all his Conquests) growing mutinous and contemning
his commands, because some of Antigonus forces in that battle had taken their
Wives and Children, Prisoners, with all the spoils and rewards of their long
warfare. Thereupon they refused to fight any more to regain their Wives,
children, plunder and openly reviled Plutarch. in his Life. Justin Hist. l. 12.
12 14.
Eumenes as the cause of this great loss of all they had gained in the former
wars, by engaging them in new wars in their old age, with vain deceitful
promises. And presently (without their Captains knowledge) sen^ secret
Messengers to Antigonus, petitioning him, to restore their Wives, Children and
plunder to them; who promised to restore them, if they would deliver up Eumenes
to him. Whereupon they forthwith seized upon Eumenes, as he was endeavoring to
escape their hands, and bound him in chains to carry him captive to Antigonus:
Upon which craving leave to speak to the Army, which was granted: He used these
expressions to them, showing them the chains they had treacherously laid upon
him against their Oaths. * Cernite Milites habitum atque ornamentum Ducis
vestri; quae non hostium quisquam imposuit: nam hoc etiam solatio foret* VOS ME
EX VICTORE VICTVM, VOS ME EX IMPERATORE CAPTIVVM FECISTIS: QVATER INTRA HVNC
ANNVMIN mea VERBA JVREJVRANDO OBSTRIATI ESTIS: and ista mitto. Verum oro: si
propositorum Antigoni in meo capite summa consistit, inter vos me velitis mori:
Nam neque illius interest, quemadmodum aut ubi eudam, and ego fuero ignominia
mortis liberatus. Hoc si impetro, soluo v^s Jurejurando, quo toties vos
Sacramento*mihi devovistis. Aut si ipsos pudet roganti vim adhibere, ferrum huc
date, and permittite quod vos facturos pro Imperatore jurastis, Imperatorem pro
vobis sine religione juramenti facere. When they would neither slay him
themselves, nor permit him to kill himself, upon this his patheticall request,
turning his entreaties into imprecations against them, for their perjuries,
treacheries to him, and their other Generals, he said. At vos devota capita,
respiciant Dii perjuriorum vindices, talesque vobis exitus dent, quales vos
ducibus vestris dedistis. Nempe vos iidem paulo ante, and Perdi^ae sanguine
estis aspersi, and in Antipatrum eadem moli^i. Ipsum denique Alexandrum, si fas
fuisset eum mortali manu cadere, Interempturi; quod ^aximum erat, seditionibus
agitastis. Vltima nunc ego perfidorum victima: ^as vobis diras atque inferias
dico, ut inopes, extorresque omne ^vum in hoc castrensi exilio agatis,
devorentque vos arma vestra quibus^plures vestros quam hostium Duces
absump^istis. After which commanding his Keepers to go before with him to
Antigonus his Tents; The whole Army followed their General whom they thus
betrayed, who being himself a Captive, led the triumph of himself and his army
likewise into the Tents of his conquered Enemy, delivering up all the fortunes,
successes of King Alexander; all the palms and Laurels of so many wars and
victories, together with themselves into Antigonus his hands; together with the
Elephants and Eastern Auxiliaries following them, that nothing might be wanting
to the triumph. Antigonus overjoyed with this unexpected success, more
glorious to him then all Alexanders victories, in that he had thus overcome
those by whom Alexander had Conquered the World; divided these Conquerours of
the World, through out his Army; restoring what was taken from them, according
to his promise. But in a few days after Plutarchi Eumenes.
Ibricius by his command, put all these mutinous Argyraspides Conquerours and
Plunderers of the World to the sword, destroying every man of them, not so much
as one escaping; and prohibiting Eumenes to come into his presence, verecundia
prioris amicitiae, committed him to custody, and soon after caused him to be
slain; being not long after slain himself in a battle by his former fellow
Captains under Alexander, who destroyed each other by the sword. This was the
tragical end of Alexander himself, and of all his victorious old Conquering,
Plundering, Treacherous Officers and whole Army too; which our conquering,
domineering Army, Officers, Soldiers now, with all depending on their support,
may do very well advisedly to consider, upon this information of their late
long causeless Prisoner, under their strictest guards; who shall close up all
with Solomon's words, (which he hopes to find experimentally verified, for this
his impartial Discovery): Prove. 28. 23. He that rebukes a man, afterward
shall find more favor, then he that flattereth with the tongue: and Prove. 9.
8, 9. Rebuke a wise man, and he will love thee, Give instruction to a wise man
and he will yet be wiser; teach a just man, and he will increase in learning.

FINIS.
Courteous Reader, I shall desire thee to excuse these many Errata's through
the Authors absence by the Printers.
IN the Epistle to the Reader, p. r. l. 2. read Philotas, l. 6. r. hominus, l.
8. r. ipse, p. 2. l. 29. r. years, p. 4. l. 1. r. to our laws, l. 3. r.
putting, l. 18 r. and, l. 26. r. posterum, pace, l. 27. ejectionem, l. 34.
blade was secretly, p. 6. l. 27, 28. r. hisce tineis, p. 7, 19. r. quod cum
assecuti, l. 36. Jesuitas, p. 9. l. 16. r. odium of them to these, p. 10. l. 3
r. whom our, p. 11. l. 29. r. preposterously or preproperously.

In the Letters p. 4. l. 24. r. all our, p. 8. l. 23. as Sir, l. 27. cause
justly; the certain cause, p. 15. l. 17. r. and that before, p. 16. l. 11. r. I
am resolved, l. 23. r. to Canterbury, p. 27. l 12. r. that Justice, p. 39. l.
15. r. to Whitehall, p. 36. l. 4. 12. r. 1, 2. l. 5. 18. Ed. 1. l. 12. Tyrany,
p. 39. l. 33. c. 19. r. 1, p. 41. l. 21. r. and Trial.

In the Margin of the Letters, p. 5. l. 11. E. 3. r. 2, l. 18, 19. E. 1. r. 3,
p. 9. l. 4. Hunny, r. Hunne, p. 10. l. 2. r. Wenderhagen, l. 11. Sperots, r.
Specots, p. 39. l. 151. r. 551, l. 14. r. dangerous manner, p. 39. l. 6. 12. r.
1, 2. l. 10. r. now no such, l. 30. E. 8. r. 3, p. 40. l. 8. r. but by, l. 9.
freed r. tried, l. 27. with r. by, p. 42. l. 10. there. r. therefore.

In the Remonstrance, etc. p. 3. l. 3. 10. r. 60, l. 24. r. Tuall, p. 4. l. 21.
r. forceably, l. 28. r. sort, p. 5. l. 11. r. hand, p. 6. l. 35. r. to carry to
her p. 7. l. 12. Gear. r. Clerk, p. 9. l. 10. r. Gorges, l. 38. r. years, p.
11. l. 3. r. any, l. 20. borders. r. boards, p. 22. releasing. r. relieving, p.
12. l. 27. r. and muskets, p. 13. l. 26. r. Letters, l. 32. r. this, p. 14 l.
1. r. dispersed, p. 15. l. 8. eyes. r. legs, l. 18. r. putrid, p. 16. l. 2. r.
bind up l. 15. estates. r. State, p. 18. l. 1. r. Liberty, p. 21. l. 7. in, r.
or, the r. your, l. 37. r. changes, p. 23. l. 3 r. dele, and to defray his
extraordinary prison expenses, p. 24. l. 17. r. motion, l. 27. r. Recordership,
p. 25. l. 9. r. against each other, p. 26. l. 15. r. strange Purgatories, l.
25. r. and all other Petitions, p. 28: l. 11. r. all, l. 24. r. they had, p.
29. l. 23. r. you rather p. 30. l. 3. r. prosecute, l. 13. r. by your, l. 29.
r. at law, p. 32. l. 7. r. expuing, l. 34 r. as impiously, p. 32. l. 15. or. r.
of, p. 35. l. 15. r. parties to, l. 26. r. privities, l. 29. 12. r. 1. 2, p.
36. l. 35. one. r. own, p. 37. l. 36. for a r. this colonel, p. 38. l. 16. r.
be kept. l. 18. H. 7. r. H. 4, p. 40. l. 37. dele and, p. 42. l. 22. him, r.
and, p. 44. l. 34. Matrosses, p. 47. l. 1. r. really, l. ^. r. power, p. 48. l.
14. r. sensual, l. 27. r. Plunderers, p. 49. l. 26. the, p. 51. l. 1. if, p.
52. l. 22. which, p. 54. l. 28. r. intelligat, l. 30. sim, p. 58. l. 16. r.
branch of, p. 60. l. 17. concessions, l. 37. 2. r. 42. E. 3, p. 61. l. 10. r.
their, l. 25. if that, p. 62. l. 5. r. dangers, l. 11. r. obtain.


