A REVINDICATION OF THE ANOINTING and PRIVILEGES OF FAITHFUL SUBJECTS.

OR, A Brief Reply to an idle Pamphlet, entitled, An Answer and Confutation
of that groundless Vindication of Psalm. 105. 15. (Touch not mine Anointed, and
do my Prophets no harm) From some traiterous Exposition of Schismatics:
Declaring to the World, That this was spoken principally and peculiarly of
Kings, and not of inferior Subjects, etc.

Wherein the Insufficiency and Ridiculousnesse this Answerers No-Answer, is
briefly demonstrated, the Vindication justified, and the text of Romans 13.
cleared from some misconstructions (against subjects taking up mere defensive
arms in any cases) which the Answerer (out of Dr. Fernes Resolution of
Conscience, for want of matter of his own) has thrust upon it, to delude some
scrupulous Consciences.

With a brief exhortation to Peace, with Truth, Righteousness, and Holiness.

Esaias 10. 27. At that day shall the burden be taken away from off thy
shoulder, and his yoke from off thy neck, and the yoke shall be destroyed
because of the ANOINTING.

Esther 8. 6. For how can I endure to see the evil that shall come upon my
people? Or how can I endure to see the destruction of my kindred?

Zech. 11. 4, 5. Thus says the Lord my God, Feed the Flock of the slaughter;
whose possessors slay them, and hold themselves not guilty: and they that sell
them say, Blessed be the Lord, for I am rich; and their own shepherds pity
them not.

Zech. 8. 19. Heb. 12. 14. Therefore love the Truth and Peace. Follow peace
with all men, and holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord.

Printed, 1643.

A brief Reply to an idle Pamphlet.
THe wisest of all Kings, Solomon, has given us two seemingly repugnant
precepts, Prove. 26. 4* 5. the first is this; Answer not a fool according to his
folly, least thou also be like unto him. In obedience whereunto, I shall
forbear to give any answer to this Pamphletters extravagant railing Prologue;
to his two last sorts of anoyntings, Effusione vini and Infusione cervisiae;
with which two unctions, I fear this Priest of Bacchus was anointed, when he
penned this absolute Answer, half in the Tavern, half in the Alehouse) with
other his impertinences following them, fitter to exhilarate those profane
Cavalieres, who have lately turned some of our Churches into Stables, and
Pulpits into Close-stooles, then to satisfy doubtful consciences; or
sober-minded men. The latter this, Answer is fool according to his folly, lest
he be wise in his own conceit; in pursuance whereof. I shall only give a short
reply, to so much of his answer as may seem pertinent to the point in
controversiy: which is but this:

Whether that of Psalm. 105. 15. Touch not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no
(...): was spoken principally and peculiarly of Kings; or of inferior
subjects? And whether subjects may be called Gods anointed? The Vindicator
truly asserts, that this was spoken principally and peculiarly of inferior
subjects fearing God, and not of Kings; which he manifests in his Vindication,
by two unanswerable arguments:

1. Because this was originally and immediately spoken and intended of Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, and their families; who were no actual Kings; (for they
lived many hundred years before the Israelites had any actual King, of which
Saul was the first:) and that not in the time of their wealth, and greatness,
ruling like Princes in their own Territories; but as the Psalmist expressly
resolves in this Psalm, verse. 12, 13. When they were but a few men in number,
yea, VERY FEW, and strangers in the Land: When they went from one Nation to
another; from one Kingdom, to another people; being most remote from any royal
condition.

2. Because these words were directly spoken to Kings, not of Kings, which he
proves, by v. 14, 15 Yea, he reproved KINGS for their sakes, saying, (even to
Kings themselves) Touch not mine anointed, etc. and by Gods prohibiting King
Pharaoh, and King Abimelech, so much as to touch or hurt Abraham, Sarah, Isaac
or Rebekah, whiles they sojourned within their Dominions, Genesis 12. 10. to 20.
c. 20. etc. 26. to which the Psalmists words relate. And therefore being thus
immediately directed to Kings themselves cannot be meant of Kings, but
subjects, unless you will make this nonsense Exposition of it, That Kings must
not touch nor hurt themselves; or that it is unlawful for one King to touch,
hurt, make war against, imprison, depose or kill another.

To the latter of these two reasons, absolute answerer and confuter replies not
so much as one syllable, because in verity it is unanswerable; and so yields
the cause: To some part only of the first reason, he endeavors to give some
show of answer, yet such, as being examined, does justify the Vindicator, and
confute himself; for first he concur^ with the Vindication in this, That the
anointed which the Prophet David speaks of here, were the blessed Patriarchs,
NO DENIAL OF THAT: he calls them here by their names, Abraham; Isaac, and Jacob,
touching which (primo intuitu, and prima intention) this strict charge is
given, that they be not touched here. This is his own conclusion, naturally
derived from the course and ser^^s of the History. Lo here confitentem reum:
this notable confuter, refuting not the Vindicator, but himself. After which
confession ^he subjoynes this frivolous evasion, These Patriarchs were
principal persons, and (as I may say) Princes in their generations, and for
such reputed by such amongst whom they lived: We may safely averi^: for of
Abraham it is by express terms said, by the Hethites, that he was a mighty
Prince; (...). 23. v. 6.
H^^re us my Lord, thou art a mighty Prince amongst us. And the Patriark Isaac
in a Princely manner lifted up his head above his follows: (...) what (...) the
King said to Isaac the Patriarch, Gen 26. 16.
Go from us, f^r thou art much mightier than we. And Jacob must come in for his
principality too, behold his Scepter stands upon earth, and reaches up to
heaven: Genesis 27. 28.
God gave to him the dew of heaven, and the fatness of the earth: They were
Rulers of the people, Princes, Kings: Pator was in them, and Arche too, the
Fatherhood of the Church, and government of the State; and what find we more
in Kings? etc. So the Answerer: The sum of whose words is; That the Patriarcks
were actual Kings, and in that regard only called Gods anointed, and this
text (Touch not mine anointed) was spoken of them, as they were Kings and
Princes, not Subjects: therefore it belongs peculiarly to Kings, not Subjects.

To which I briefly reply: Touch not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no
harm, were spoken not only of these three Patriarchs themselves successively,
but likewise of their wives and families; as is clear by Genesis 12. 15. to 20.
c. 20. 2. to 17. c. 26. 11. c. 34. 30 c. 35. 6. and by the express words of
this Psalm, ver. 12. 14. When THEY were but a few men in number, yea very few,
etc. He suffered no man to do THEM wrong, but reproved even Kings for THEIR
sakes, saying, Touch not mine anointed, etc. all in the plural number. Now
admit these Patria^kes themselves (as this Answerer would persuade us) were
Kings and Princes, yet their wives children and servants were no King nor
Princes; therefore these words being spoken of their wives, children, and
servants, as well as of themselves, they were uttered of them not as Kings and
Princes, but inferior subjects, and Gods faithful chosen servants: as is
resolved Psalm. 105. 6. Esaias 41. 8. cap. 44. 1, 2.

2. These words were uttered of them, not in the time of their greatness and
prosperity, when or where they ruled like Kings and Princes, and had the
government of Church and State, as this Answerer dreams; but as the Psalmist
directly resolves, ver. 12, 13. When they were but a few men in number, See
Genesis 12. and 20. and 26.
yea very few, and strangers in the Land, when they went from one Nation and
Kingdoms to another, and sojourned privately in an obscure manner, in Egypt and
Gerar, under King Pharaoh and Abimelech, not as Kings and Rulers, but as
strangers and subjects: therefore they were spoken of them, not as Kings and
Princes, but as strangers and subjects fearing God.

3. These Patriarcks were no actual Kings nor Princes, as this Answerer
fableth; for 1. they had no Kingdoms, Principalities, or Teritories of their
own, over which to reign, but only their own familes; which were very small,
as the Psalmist determines, verse. 12. When they were but few men, yea very few
in number; and Jacob himself too, Genesis 34. 30. And I being few in number, (but
70. souls at most, Genesis 46. 26, 27.) they shall gather themselves against me,
and slay me, etc. Yea; they with their families had then no certain habitation,
but went like pilgrims and strangers from one Kingdom and Nation to another,
confessing that they were but pilgrims and strangers upon earth, Psalm. 105. 13.
Heb. 11. 13. Genesis 17. 8. c. 36. 7. c. 37. 1. Deuteronomy. 23. 7. Ps. 39. 12. therefore
they were no actual Princes, Kings, and Rulers. 2. The Scripture never calls
them Kings or Princes; and if they had carried themselves as such, they should
have been but usurpers upon those Kings and Princes, Crowns and Royalties, in
whose Kingdoms they always sojourned, not at Kings and Princes but strangers,
and subjects in some sort. True it is, that the Scripture calls them and others,
Patriarcks, but it was many ages after, and that in the New Testament, not the
Old, not in regard of any Regal power or authority actually vested in them, as
Kings; but because they were the Heb. 7. 42 Act. 7. 8, 9. e, 2, 29.
fathers and most eminent men of their families, both for antiquity, and piety:
Whence Abraham is styled not only Number. 1. 2. c. 20. 15. Psalm. 21. 4.
father Abraham, but the Acts 7. 2. 12, 15. c. 3. 17. R^m. 9. 5. Heb. 1. 1. 1
Ioh. 2. ^3 John 8. 13. Luke 1. 55.
father of the faithful. 3. This answerer confesses, that the Regal
government preceded the Patriarchall; (therefore the Patriarchall was not
Regal, nor the Patriarcks Kings by his own confession.) Which words of his, if
absolutely intended, to wit, that those three Patriarcks, Ioh. 8. 39, 53. Romans
4. 1, 12. Iam. 2. 11. Luke 1. 73. c. 16. 24.
Abraham, Romans 4. 11, 16, 17, 18.
Isaac, and Jacob, were before there were any Kings, are falls; for there were
Kings before them, Genesis 14. 1. to 19. If relatively, in reference only to the
Israelites, then it is true, that the Regal government succeeded the
Patriarchicall, yet nor immediately, for they were governed by Josh. 1. 5, 16,
17. 18. Judges throughout 1 Samuel 12. 6. to 13.
Moses, Iosuah, and sundry Judges (who were no Kings) many hundred years after
these Patriarchs, their government being not Regal till Saul was anointed their
king by Samuel, at their earnest request. Which very desire of changing the
government into a Monarchy, and setting up a King in stead of Judges; is
charged on them as a great sin, 1 Samuel 8. 6, 7, 8. 19 20. c. 10. 19. c. 12. 17,
19, 20, 25. Saul then being their first King, these Patriarks and Judges were
certainly no Kings, as this blind Doctor fancieth them, against Scripture and
story. (...)

a King. I answer, that the Hebrew phrase, (as the Margin of our Bibles renders
it) is not a mighty Prince, a Prince of God amongst us; that is, a spiritual
Prince, not temporal; or, one whom God does principally bless and favor, so
Genesis 26. 28, c. 32. 28. Psa. 45. 16. Rev. 1. 5. 6. compared together, expound
it. 2. Though the word Prince in Scripture, does sometimes signify a King, yet
usually it denotes nothing but a great, Noble man, the head or chief person of
a Tribe or family; some great Officer, Counselor of State, or Ruler under
Kings, or superior Magistrates; witness Genesis 34. 2. c. 12. 15. Number. 1. 16. c.
7. 2. 3. 10. 11. c. 17. 2 6. 7. Josh. 9. 15. 18. c. 22. 14. 32. 1 Samuel 29 3. 2 Samuel 10. 3. 1 Chro. 4. 38. 2 Chro. 12. 5. 6. c. 32. 3. Ester 1. 3. 11. 14. Neh.
9. 32. 34. prove. 28. 2. Jer. 2. 28. 1 King. 14 7. c. 16. 2.
with infinite other texts. The stiling then of Abraham, a Prince, is no proof
at all, that he was a King: for then all great Subjects and Officers of State,
usually called princes, should by this argument become actual Kings, and Gods
anointed in a politic sense as well as their Sovereigns; which this Answerer,
under pain of high treason, dares not grant. 3. This injunction, Touch not mine
anointed, was given to King Pharaoh and Abimelech, with reference to Abraham,
Isaac, and their families, whiles they were but in a low condition, and their
household, very few in number, v. 12. 13. not when they were in their princely
greatness, and rich estate. This text therefore will no ways prove, that it
was spoken of them as Kings and Princes. As for Abimelecks speech to Isaac, Go
from us, for thou art much mightier then I; and Gods giving Jacob the dew of
Heaven, and fatness of the earth; it proves them no more to be actual Kings
and Princes, then the Scriptures styling all the men Josh 10. 2. 2 Samuel 23. ^,
16, 17.
of Gedeon, mighty men; and Boaz, with others mighty men of wealth, shows
them to be Kings and Princes too. All which considered, I think all
indifferent men will and must conclude for the Vindicator, against the
Answerer, that, Touch not mine anointed, Ruth. 2. 1, 2. Kin. 15 20.
was not spoken principally and peculiarly of Kings; or of Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, as they were Patriarks, Kings, and Rulers; but of inferior subjects,
and of those Patriarks, as they were strangers, and subjects fearing God: And
that this is no traiterous exposition of Schismatics, as this Answerer most
blasphemously styles it; but the genuine, proper exposition, and true sense of
the text, as Augustine, with all orthodox Interpreters resolve.

For his second part of the question, Whether Subjects fearing God, may not
truly and properly be styled Gods anointed, as well as Kings? This Answerer
not only denies subjects this title, averring, that, touch not mine anointed,
not only concerns them not, that they cannot enter-common in the title of
anointed; but likewise proclaims it, to be a turning of Monarchy, into a
Democracy; a making of unctos non unctos, a traiterous exposition, a dangerous
tenet, a casting of the Throne into the dunghill, etc. and no less then high
treason, to call subjects fearing God, Gods anointed ones, in a spiritual
sense. So the vulgar Latin reads it.
Yet in the mean time he forgets so much as to mention, much less to answer,
those pregnant reasons and Scriptures cited in the Vindication, to prove all
faithful Christians, not only unctos, but Christos meos, Gods anointed; yea,
honored with the very name and title of Christ, 1 Cor. 12. 12. Ephesians. 4. 12. 13.
And is this an absolute answer and confutation of that groundless Vindication;
not to answer so much as one text or reason in it? or rather, a plain
confession, that the texts and reasons in it are unanswerable, because neither
answered nor confuted? In one word, this Answerer, in his Margin,
acknowledges; That other Saints and servants of God, may in a secondary way be
said to be anointed And in his text, Others may be Uncti, not Christi;
anointed, but not anointed of the Lord. A pretty Bull, and gross
contradiction; for Christi and Vncti, are one and the same in sense, both
signifying anointed, the one in Greek, the other in Latin; whence the vulgar,
with other Latin Bibles render this text; Nolite tangere CHRISTOS meos; and
Arias Montanus, Iunius, with many other, translate it, VNCTOS meos; using these
two words promiscuously as the very same in sense, in substance, and differing
but in sound: And why all true Christians (who derive this very name from
Christos, and are in direct terms styled CHRISTOS, by the holy Ghost himself,
1 Cor 12. 12. Ephesians. 4. 12, 13.) may not as properly be termed Christi, as Vncti,
or Vnctic. Christo and his quireius sunt communis est, quia ejusdem unctionis
sum and ipsi participes: quamobrem and nos participatione Christi Christiani
dicimur: ^ychus in levitic: l. 2. ^. 8.
Christiani, I desire this Answerer to instruct me in his next absolute
confutation; which I would advise him to anoint and temper Effusione Olei, not
Effusione vini, and Infusione cervisiae (to use his own distinctions) with the
spirit and language of sobriety; not with the vomit, the scurrility of the
Tavern and Ale-truth, wherewith his whole Answer and Confutation is absolutely
defiled, not anointed. (...)

nor confutation at all to any one text or reason in the Vindication; and
pretermitting in silence above 12 parts thereof, if divided into 13. without so
much as endeavoring any answer or refutation thereof; least he should seem to
have lost his Oil, and spoken nothing at all to purpose, varnisheth and
patcheth up his deformed Babble with sundry railing invectives, against ignorant
mechanicke Divines. Lay-preachers, Shee-divines (who had need instruct this
learned Doctor in the way and mind of the Lord more perfectly, as Aquila and
Priscilla, two mechanics, did that great Apollos, Act. 18. 26.) Sectaries,
Schismatics, etc. with many extravagant impertinences, concerning the
traducing of most virtuous and religious Princes; (which I pretermit) and
diverse malicious slanders against the Vindication; which because he could not
answer, he would at least calumniate and traduce with gross lies and
mis-reports. I shall instance but in two particulars of many, by which you may
discern his detestable forgeries.

First, See Council. Toletanum 12. Surius. Tom. 3. p. 3. 4.
he avers, that the Vindication, buzzeth into the peoples cares, that they
only are Gods anointed; none but they, and not Kings: that the King was not
Gods anointed; thereby to turn Monarchy into Democracy, and expose the sacred
persons of Kings to open violence, etc. Whereupon he takes much superfluous
pains, to prove Kings, Gods anointed: when as this false Accuser, had not he
been wilfully blind, or his eyes changed into, or closed up with pots of Ale
(to use his own dialect) might have seen the Vindicator there willingly and
cordially profess, that Kings in sacred Writ are commonly called Gods
anointed, etc. In which regard, their persons are sacred, and no violence ought
to be offered to them, especially by their subjects; citing sundry texts to
prove it. Peruse his words, and be ashamed of this impudent calumny.

Secondly, he proclaims, that it blows a Trumpet of sedition and war, to work
confusion in Church and State: Os durum! When in verity it wholly tends, and
earnestly persuades to peace, and unity in both, and a speedy laying down of
all offensive and defensive arms, now unhappily raised amongst us.

After this, for want of matter of his own, to fill up his empty pages, he
borrows some passages from Doctor Fern, propounding this case of conscience;
Whether upon such a supposition, as is now frequently proposed; (the king will
not discharge his trust, but is seduced to subvert religion, laws, and
liberties, and has raised an army to that purpose) the subject (to wit, by the
Parliaments direction and command) to preserve the Kingdom, and Parliament,
may take (defensive) arms to resist their Sovereign, or his plundering
Cavaleers? (I have added some words to state the question fuller.) Dr. Fern,
and he from To. 13 1. to 8. resolve expressly, that neither in this, nor in
any other case, the subjects ought to resist by force of arms, but only
passively by way of disobedience, under peril of damnation.

This question having no relation to the Vindication, and tending to the very
dissolution of Soveraigney on the one hand, and the peoples safety and liberty
on the other, if not dexterously handled, with much caution and moderation, I
shall here forbear to discuss it; referring those who desire satisfaction,
how far forth, and in what cases it is lawful for subjects to take up
offensive and defensive arms against Princes and Magistrates, and in what
cases it is unlawful, to Sleidan, Hist. l. 8. 18. and 22. Bishop Bilson his
true difference between Christian subjection, and unchristian rebellion, par.
3. p. 510. to 520. David Paraeus his Comentary on Romans 13. Dubium. 8. p.
1347, etc. and his sons justification thereof; to Dr. Willet his sixfold
Commentary on Romans 13. Question 16. and Controversy, 3. p. 588. 589. etc.
608. to Richardus Dinothus, De bello Civili Gallico religionis causa suscepto,
in sundry pages especially, p. 231. 232, etc. 225. to the History of the
Angronians in Mr. Foxes Acts and Monuments, Edit. 1641. vol. 2. p. 213. 214.
King James his answer to Cardinal Perron, Fox Acts and Monuments, Ed. 3. fol.
1. p. 88. to Mr. Goodwins Anti-cavalarisme, M. Buroughs his Glorious name of
God the Lord of Hosts newly published and others, who have amply handled this
controversy (which I pray, and wish from my very soul, we may have no more
occasion to debate.) And to that notable ancient resolution of the most
excellent heathen Emperor Trajan; who Ecclesiasticae. Hist. l. 3. c. 23.
Speed, hist. p. 9^.
(as, Nicephorus Calistus records) was so studious of law and justice, and so
far estranged from dishonesty, that upon a time be gave a sword to a governor
of the City in the public view of all, saying, take this sword; and if I
shall govern the Empire well, use it for me; sin aliter, CONTRA ME: if
otherwise, USE IT AGAINST ME. A pregnant evidence, that this best of all the
heathnish Roman Emperors (who upon his election, sent an Op^us opus Chr(...).
Edict to the (...) his command) was of this Judgment; that no^ only an
inferior King, but even the Roman Emperor himself (the greatest and most
absolute Monarch) might be lawfully resisted with force of arms, by the
Governor of Rome, much more then by the Roman Senate it self, which not only
elected (...) con firmed; but often times exercised a judiciary power over their
Emperors to coerti^n, deprivation, and death it self, as the Suetonius,
Eu^ropius, ^^p^scus, Her^^ian, Sabellicus, Opme^rus, and Grimston in the ^ives
of Nero, Domi^ian, Nerva, A^rian, Commodus, Didius, Iu^ianus, Heliogaba^^is,
Maxi^inus, Gallienus Philip Iovinianus, Tacitus, Probus, and others.
Roman Histories manifest against Dr. Fernes mistake; though the Christians
used no force against them; being then but private men, not the Senate; and
their religion quite contrary to the religion, laws, and government of the
Empire; in which case, whiles these laws were in force, and they no Senators,
they might only fly or suffer, and resist only with prayers, tears, and
passive disobedience, not with force of arms, prohibited in such cases by this
text; which no ways resembles the case now in question. All I shall say to this
text of the Romans, and to this case of conscience; shall be briefly comprised
in these subsequent propositions, which I hope will rectify all extremities,
and mistakes on both sides.

First, that this text expressly commands subjection and obedience to all
civil Magistrates whatsoever, whose Soveraignties and powers are either
ordained or approved of God, in all their lawful commands, and penal
executions; extending as fully to all Governors, Rulers, and subordinate
Magistrates, as to Kings themselves; as is evident by the express words of the
text, and by Tit. 3. 1. 1 Timothy 2. 2. 1 Pet. 2^ 13, 14. Heb. 13. 17. Ephesians. 6.
1. 5. Col. 3. 18, 20, 23. 1 Timothy 6. 1, 2. Josh. 1. 16, 17, 18. Ezra 7. 25, 26.
Therefore to the Parliament (the highest Court) as well as to the King.

Secondly, that it enjoynes subjection, obedience, and prohibits resistance to
higher powers and rulers, only so far forth as they are Gods Ordinance, and as
they are Council. Paris^a. An. 829. l. 2. c. 8.
lawfully executed for the common good of the people, the praise and
encouragement of well doers, and the just punishment of malefactors; as is
evident by, v. 3. 4. 6 For Rulers are not a terror to good works, but to evil:
will thou not then be afraid of the power? do that which is good, and thou
shall have praise of the same; For he is the Minister of God to thee for good;
but if thou do that which is evil, be afraid, for he bears not the sword in
vain; For he is the Minister of God, a revenger, to execute wrath upon him that
does evil, etc. For they are Gods Ministers, attending continually upon this
very thing: compared with 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14. Submit your selves to every
ordinance of man for the Lords sake; whether it be to the King as to the
supreme; or unto the Governors, as unto them that are sent by him: for the
punishment of evil doers, and the praise of them that do well. And with Esa.
32. 1, 2. c. 56. 1, 2. c. 9. 7. c. 16. 5. 2 Samuel 23. 3. 2 Chr. 9. 8. Ezekiel. 44.
15, 16, 17. c. 45. 8, 9. Deuteronomy. 17. 15. to the end. Ps. 78. 72, 73. 74. 1 Timothy
2. 2, 3. Prove. 1. 3. c. 21. 3. c. 20. 8. 26. c. 29. 4. 14. Psalm. 101. 2. to the
end. 1 Samuel 8. 20. 2 Samuel 8. 15. Ier. 22. 15. Amo. 5. 15. 1 King. 3. 9. 28. c.
10. 9. Ps. 97. 2. Ps. 122. 5. Mich. 3. 1, 2, 3.

Thirdly, that subjects are no ways obliged by this text to obey, or not
resist the higher powers, as they are either abused or perverted by unjust or
wicked Magistrates, to oppression, injustice, rapine, subversion of religion,
laws, liberties, state, people; or when as they command unlawful things
contrary to the laws of God, or the states they govern; but in such cases as
these (quite out of this Scriptures verge and intention) they may and must be
disobeyed; and in some cases not only passively, but actually resisted; as is
evident by Exodus 1. 15. to 20. Number. 22. 12. 13. 18. 22. 34. 35. c. 23. 7 8. 11.
12. 13. 20. 21. 22. 23. 25. 26. c. 24. 1. to 15. 1 Samuel 14. 38. to 46. c. 22.
17. 18. c. 12. to 27. 1 King. 11. 20. to 25. 2 King. 1. 9. to 16. c. 6. 31, 32.
2 Chro. 11. 4. c. 26. 17. to 22. Esther 3. 2. 3 4. 1 King. 21. 2. 3. 4. Dan. 3.
8. to 29. c. 7. 4. to 15. Ioh. 7. 33. to 46. Act. 4. 19, 20. c. 5. 28. 29. 40.
52. 2 Kin. 11. 4. to 17. Ezekiel. 21. 25. 25. 26. 27. 2 Kin. 18. 7. By the Rex a
recte agend^ vocatur, si ^uste pie and ^^isericorditer regit (...) Rex
appellatur, si his caruorit, non Rex, sed ^yrannus est Council. Pa^is. An. 829
l. 2. c. 1, 2.
practice and resolution of all the protestant Churches in Germany, Bohemia,
France, Scotland, Holland, Switzerland, approved, yea assisted in their
defensive wars against their popish Sovereigns, both by See Selida^. Hist. l.
8. 18, 22. Bishop Bilson, his true difference, etc. part 3. 509, to 522. K.
James, his answer to Perron.
Qu. Elizabeth, our learned K. James, and our present Sovereign K. Charles,
with the consent of their Parliaments and people; and by the express
resolution not only of our King, and present Parliament, in their late Act of
pacification and oblivion, but of 4. ancient Parliaments more in these 4.
several Kings reigns: namely. 15. E. 2. in the Act entitled, Exilium Hugonis
de spencer. etc. 1 E. 3. c. 1. 2. 3. 11. R. 2. c. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 1 H. 4. c. 2.
3 4. which you may read at large, and find the very case of resistance now in
question, resolved in them to be lawful* and in the great* Speed, hist. p.
1193, 1194. 12^6 1237. Beza Epist. Ded: in Com. in (...).
Council of Basil. to. The reason is clear because their illegal actions,
commands, and wars upon their subjects, proceed not from their In Fox Acts and
^onuments (...).
just and legal power, which can do no wrong, but from their private illegal
wills and lusts, which are no power and (...) cease to govern according to law,
in and as to it they cease to be Kings, and (...), as King Spee(...)
Parlia(...) Eluther(...) Epist. S(...)manni. C(...)cil. T(...) p. 34. F(...)
Acts an(...) Monum(...) v. 1. p. 88.
James with others resolve.

4ly. That this Scripture, as it enjoynes obedience to subjects, so it
prescribes bounds to Magistrates, and the highest powers, which they must not
exceed: which truth, as it is intimated in the word ordained: (the powers that
are, are ordained of God: that is they are circumscribed with certain bounds
and laws of justice and honesty, within which, unless they contain themselves,
they exorbitate from Gods ordinance.) So it is expressly resolved in the
following words: For Rulers are not a terror to good works, but to evil, etc.
For he is the Minister of God to thee for good, etc. The Minister of God; and
avenger, to execute wrath upon him that does evil; for they are Gods ministers,
attending CONTINVALYON THIS VERY THING. By which it is evident, that God has
given Kings and Rulers no commission or power at all to plunder, murder,
oppress, destroy, or vex their subjects upon any occasion, or to subvert
religion, laws, liberties, and the states they govern; but only, to punish Ps.
10 (...) to the e(...) Isa. 32. 1(...) 2 Samuel 2(...) 2 Chapter 9(...)
malefactors, in a legal way; (not shelter them from public justice) to
protect, reward, and seek the temporal and spiritual Neh 2. (...) Jere. 38.
(...) 2 Samuel 5. (...) 1 Samuel 8. (...) 20 Isa. 4(...) 4. c. 49. 2(...)
welfare of their good subjects, to execute equal justice to all, without
respect of persons, and to rule them in such sort as God himself has
commanded, and would have them governed, whose ministers they are. If they do
otherwise they do but pervert that power which God and men have entrusted them
with, and rise up in 1 Samuel (...) 22, 23, 24. Isa. 1. 20. Eccl. 3. 1. Amo. 1.
2(...) Ma. 3. 1. 2(...)
rebellion against God himself the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; who by way
of just retaliation ought, causes their subjects to 2 Chr(...) 10. 15, 1(...)
18, 19 c. 1(...) 4. c. 13. 5(...) 7. 2 Kin(...) 24. Rom(...) 1. 1. c. 3. 5(...)
rebel, and rise up in arms against them, to their ruin and vexation.

5ly. That this text is meant only of the lawful power and authority of
Magistrates and rulers, which is always just and good, and the ordinance of
God; and so not to be resisted; not of their exorbitant ^il^, which are often
times Dan (...) 21. Ezec(...) 21. 23. 2 King. (...) and 24. Ps. 94, 20, 21.
Mich. 3. (...), 3.
vile, wicked, yea detestable both to God and man. Or if you will; it is
intended of Magistrates considered merely and chiefly in their just politic,
not natural capacities: whence it is, that the text uses the word, higher
powers, the powers that are, the power, etc. in the general; nor naming any
particular kind, of power, or pensons invested with it: which consideration,
together with that of Bracton. l. 3. f. 107. answers the main arguments of Dr.
Fern and others against resisting superiors or Kings, even when they prove
subverters of laws, liberties, religion, and turn open bloody tyrants. Say
they, The powers then (when the Apostle forbids to resist) were subverters of
that which was good, and just, and persecutors of religion, Caligula, Chaudius,
and Nero, being Emperors about that time. If these then, by the Apostles
doctrine, though such public enemies to the republike, religion, and
transcendent tyrants, were not to be resisted, but submitted to; then no other
Kings nor Magistrates, though they trace their footsteps. To which I answer,
that these men confound their lawful power and unjust pleasures, wills, lusts
and persons all together, which the Apostle really distinguishes. Their
Imperial power and sovereignty was just. good, ordained of God to punish evil,
and countenance good ^in; therefore the Apostle commands every soul to submit
thereto, and not resis^ it: but their persons invested with this power,
together with their wills and actions were evil, perverting their authority,
(against Gods institution) to tyranny, bloodshed, subversion of religion, laws,
liberties, and in this regard their unjust illegal commands, and proceedings
of this nature, not warranted by their just power, nor any part thereof were not
to be obeyed or submitted to, but resisted; as I have formerly proved by other
Scriptures in the third proposition: This the Doctor himself confesses, when
he writes, That personal defense is lawful against the sudden illegal
assaults not only of the Kings messengers, but of the King himself, thus far;
to ward his blows, to hold his hands, and the like, not to endanger his person,
etc. And indeed, how ever the Christian Romans, expounded this text of the
Apostle, certain I am, the pagans amongst them, were so far from believing they
might in no case resist those tyrannizing Emperors, that they made no
conscience to murder them, See Suet(...)nius Eurr(...)pius, Zon(...)ras,
Opme(...)rus, Grimston, and others in their th(...) lives.
Charea and his confederates giving Caligula no less than 30 wounds whereof he
died. Claudius was poisoned; Nero, by the Sena^us(...) sententia constitut(...)
est ut mud(...) perpublic(...) ductus fur(...)c^llo eius inserta, vi(...)gis
usque (...) mortem (...) deretur, (...).
Senato assembled, for his tyranny, and oppression, was adjudged an enemy to
his Country, and condemned to die for it; to avoid which judgment, bring sought
for, he became his own executioner, murdering himself without (...) his death
being known in Rome, the joy which the Senate and people conceived was
incredible, and (...) (Christians and Pagans) came sorth into the streets to
congratulate one another, with bonnets on their heads, which was a sign of
liberty. The Dr. therefore might well have forborne to instance in these examples
and to question what the Senate then might do.

6. Admit this text prohibits the resisting of the abused power, and persons of
Kings and Magistrates themselves in any case; yet questionless it extends not
to their wicked unlawful instruments, and armies raised, to plunder, (...)
murder destroy their subjects persons, houses goods, laws, liberties, or to
subvert religion; but that these, (...) Realm, to commit such outrages, and
being in truth mere robbers, thieves, ^elons, murderers, and trespass^^^ (if
not rebels and traitors to their Country) by the laws of God and man; may
lawfully be resisted and in a mere just, necessary, desensive war destroyed
without any danger of murder and damnation, threatened by this text* the very
(...) Co^^^, 192, (...), 258, (...), 246, (...), 21 H. (...) 9. 24 H. (...) 5.
stam. (...) 2, 14. Co. 5. ^1, 92, Matthew. (...) is, Hist. ^^^gl. An. (...) 15,
12 16 ^64, 265, ^6.
common law of the Realm, and of nature, allowing all men, to beat, repel, and
slay others in some cases, in defense of their own persons, families, houses,
goods, and liberties, if unjustly assaulted or invaded. I have now quite done
with the un-answering answer, O that we had also totally ended and composed our
uncivil dissensions, that so we might now join with the blessed Angels, in
their sweet Christmas Car^l, Kin. 1. 9 16. c. 6. (...) 32, 33. (...) 8. 11,
(...) c. 9. 1. 17.
Glory be to God in the highest, on earth peace, good will toward men. O that
the Nativity of the (...) 2. 14. ^a. 9. 6. Kin. 20. (...) Psa. 85. (...) Zach.
8. (...) 19.
Prince of peace which we now celebrate, might be the joyful season both of
the conception, birth, growth, and perpetual reestablishment of our much
desired peace. It was a most memorable speech and resolution of the Emperor
Oth^ the first, (...). 29. 19. (...) ^^sthe. 8. 6. ^rimston, ^^etonius, (...)
us, (...) Sabelli^^^ in his (...).
when Vitellius his competitor for the Empire, and he, had fought some two or
three bloody battles, wherein diverse brave Roman soldiers were slain on either
side, and yet the controversy undecided, the greatest part of the Senate and
his soldiers coming to him with show of great courage, offering to die, in
his service, and afford him means to maintain the war: He made this Oration to
them. That seeing his enemy was neither Hannibal, nor Pyrrhus, or any other
common enemy to the people of Rome, but Romans themselves, and the Lords
thereof, so as the Conquerors and conquered did wrong their Country, if they
contended any longer, seeing that the joy of the victory was to the loss and
prejudice thereof; And that he could no way so advance the Roman Empire, by
winning battles in war and contention, as by making a sacrifice of himself for
the peace thereof, seeing by his death only a general concord would ensue.
Wherefore he was content Vitellius should be Emperor, without any more
bloodshed, and he desired no revenge or rule by the prejudice of his citizens,
neither to diminish the Commonwealth, by the loss of such armies: and that as
others had purchased honor and fame by wel-governing and supporting the
Empire, so he would likewise procure himself a good name by leaving it
resolutely, to the end he would not damnifie it; which spoken, he slew himself
presently with his Rapier, saying, That he was not so considerable, that a
civil war should be raised and continued for his sake. O that all the
delinquents and malignanta about the King, would now (after so much civil
bloodshed, occasioned by their means, to shield themselves from public
justice) use such like orations to His Majesty, and voluntarily, yield
themselves up to their legal trials, saying, That they in truth are not so much
worth, as that any more English blood should be unnaturally spilt, a civil war
any longer maintained, and the whole kingdom ruined for their unjust protection
or designs: Then certain I am, our present wars would soon be determined, our
differences composed, our armies disbanded, and our peace restored, yea
established in truth, and righteousness. How ever these men stand affected, yet
this shall be my constant prayer and endeavor, that truth and peace,
righteousness and holiness, may kiss each other, all our days, and that God
would* bless us his people with true peace: for (alas)^ how can I (or any
other true Christians) ^ endure to see the evil (that is come) that shall come
unto my people? or how shall I endure to see the destruction of my kindred,
Nation, Country? O let me never live to behold that dismal day, wherein
Englands condition, shall be like that of Isreal's, (as now it is in some sort)
Zeph. 11. 4, 5, 6. Thus says the Lord my God, feed the flock of the slaughter,
whose possessors slay them, and hold themselves (...) guilty; and they that
sell them say, Blessed be the Lord, for I am rich; and their own shepherds
pity them nor; for I will no more pity the inhabitants of the lands* says the
Lord; but to, I will deliver the men, every one into his neighbors hand, and
into the hand of his Quosdam (...) ^speximus ^^ges, ex^ua^ia vi^us popul^^^m,
and (...) Reges it vocati fen^ionem (...) vastatio^m conver^^, qui va^^tionem
^^ensione ^ere debu^^unt, Conc^etanum ^ ^rius, Tom. p. 865.
King, and I shall smite the land, and out of their hand, I will not deliver
them. Through the wrath of the Lord of Hosts, is the land darkened, and the
people shall be as the fuel of the fire; no ^an shall spare his brother, and ^e
shall snatch on the right hand, and ^e hurgry; and ^e shall ^ate on the left
hand, and they shall not be satisfied; they shall eat every man the flesh of his
own arm. Manasseh, Ephraim; and Ephraim, Manasseh, and they together shall be
against Judah: For all this his anger is not turned away, but his wrath is
stretched out still, a They have made the pleasant portion a desolate
wilderness; The spoylers are come upon all high places through the wilderness,
for the sword of the Lord shall devour from one end of the Land, even to the
other end of the Land, no flesh shall have peace. The whole Land is made
desolate, because no man lays it to heart, This is a sad condition indeed: it
is Irelands already altogether; and Englands in a great measure. It is the
observation of ^er. 12. 10, ^^, 12.
Paulus Orosius, that when Christ the Prince of peace was born, the temple of
Ianus was closed, and the whole world in peace without any wars, the better to
entertain this Prince of peace: O that this time of Christ nativity might
produce such a universal peace throughout England, and the Christian world! O
that we could know in this our day the things which belong unto our peace, and
public safety; and that they may not he hid from our eyes any longer: O that
now at last we would quite abandon those customary sins, lusts, and abuses
which accompany this solemnity* from whence our wars and fightings come; and
for which Hist. l. 1 and ^^iropius. ^. p. 38.
God has now taken away his peace from our Land* O that we would now become an
(...). 19. 42 (...). 16. 5. ^an. 8. 24 (...).
holy people; and then we should soon be a peaceable and happy people. I shall
(...)


