A SOVEREIGN ANTIDOTE TO PREVENT, APPEASE, AND Determine our unnatural and
destructive Civil Wars and dissentions. WHEREIN Diverse serious
considerations tending to this purpose are propounded both to the King and
Subjects, the Parliaments and Sir John Hothams proceedings at Hull and in the
Militia justified, Sr John Hothams actions proved to be neither Treason,
Felony, nor Trespass, by the Laws of the Land, nor any just ground or c^use at
all for his Majesty to raise an Army, or a most unnatural Civil war in his
Kingdom.

With a most serious Exhortation both to the King and subjects to embrace and
preserve peace and abandon Civil Wars, with other matters worthy of
consideration.

PROVE. 12. 20. To the Counselors of peace is joy. MAT. 6. 9. Blessed are the
Peacemakers, for they shall be called the children of God. LONDON, Printed in
the Year 1642.

A SOVEREIGN ANTIDOTE TO PREVENT APPEASE, AND Determine Our unnatural and
destructive Civill-Wars and Dissentions.
THE present deplorable condition of our bleeding and almost expiring Kingdom,
machinating its own unevitable ruin by a causeless, groundles Civil War,
intended (as the Parliament informs us) by the King, In sundry Declarations,
and in certain Propositions concerning the raising of Horse, etc.
(seduced through pernicious Counselors) against the Parliament and the
Kingdom, which intention is now apparent by his besieging of Hull, and raising
an Army in the North, has in a manner constrained me (though altogether unable
for such a service) to attempt the speedy redress of this transcendent
calamity, by propounding certain material considerations, both to the King
and Kingdom, and then by examining; whether there be any just cause or ground
at all on his Majesty's part to levy war against Hull, the Parliament, his
people, especially whilst the Civill-wars in Ireland have continuance.

To avoid prolixity and obscurity, I shall reduce my considerations unto these
ensuing four Propositions, and the deductions from them.

First, That it is the bounden duty of every good Christian King and Subject,
to the uttermost of their powers, to preserve and maintain the peace and
prosperity of the Kingdoms wherein they live, and to prevent all Civil wars
and Dissentions in them.

This Proposition being of greatest consequence, I shall be more prolix
therein, and it is thus proved.

First, by these general precepts given by God, both to King and people, Seek
peace and pursue it, Psalm. 34. 14. 1 Pet. 3. 11. Follow peace with all men,
Heb. 12. 14. As much as in you lies live peaceably with all men, Romans 12. 18.
Live in peace, be at peace among yourselves, etc. 2 Cor. 13. 11. 1 These. 5. 3.
Ephesians. 4. 3. Col. 3. 15. Romans 14. 19. Have peace one with another, Mar. 9. 50.

Secondly, more particularly by the 1. Tim. 1. 2. I exhort therefore, that
first of all, Prayers, Intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all men,
for Kings, and for all that are in authority, that we may lead a quiet and
peaceable life in all godliness and honesty: compared with Ier. 29. 7. And seek
the peace of the City, whether I have caused you to be carried away Captives,
and pray unto the Lord for it, for in the peace thereof shall ye have peace.

Thirdly, by that injunction of King David himself, given to all his people by
Divine command, Psalm. 122. 6. 7, 8. Numb. 6. 26.
Pray for the peace of Jerusalem, they shall prosper that love thee, peace be
within thy Walls, and prosperity within thy Palaces, for my Brethrens and
Companions sake, I will now say, peace be within thee.

Fourthly, by that speech of good Hezechia, Isa. 29. 8. 2. King. 20. 19. Good
is the word of the Lord which thou have spoken, for there shall be peace and
truth in my days.

Fithly, by the titles given to God and Christ in Scripture, where God is often
styled, The God of peace, Romans 15. 33. c. 16. 10. 2 Cor. 13. 11. Phil. 4. 9. 1
These. 5. 23. 2 These. 3. 16. Hebr. 13. 10. And Christ the Prince and King of
peace, Isa. 9. 6. Heb. 7. 2. By the several promises of God in Scripture, to
give his people peace in their Land, to bless his people with peace, to
ordain peace for them; to keep them in perfect peace, etc. Levit. 26. 6. Psalm.
29. 11. Isa. 26. 3. 12. c. 32. 17. c. 59. 13. c. 55. 12. c. 66. 12. Ezech. 34.
25. Hag. 2. 9. Zech. 8. 16. 19. By Christ's own Legacy, Who bequeathed his peace
unto his people, John 14. 27. Now if God be a God of peace, and Christ a Prince
and King of peace, and both of them give and promise nothing but peace unto
their people; Then Kings, who are Gods 2 Chronicles. 9. 8. R^m. 1^. 1, 2. 4. 6.
Vicegerents, and ought to imitate his example, must endeavor to be Kings of
peace, and study to the uttermost to preserve the Kingdoms and subjects in
perfect peace and prosperity, and not to make war against them.

Sixthly, this is evident by two excellent speeches of David. Psalm. 78. 70, 71,
72. He chose David his servant, and took him from the Sheepfold; from
following the Ewes great with young, he brought him to feed Jacob his people,
and Israel his inheritance: So he fed them according to the integrity of his
heart, and guided them by the skilfullnesse of his hands. By which text it is
most most evident, that Kings are not absolute See 1 Pet. 5. 2, 3, 4.
Lords, but only Sheepheards or Pastors of their people, set over them by God,
not to worry or slay, but to feed, guide and seek their Neh. 2. 10. 2 Chronicles.
1. 10. 2 Chronicles. 9. 8. 2 Samuel 23. 3, 4.
Welfare, in the integrity of their hearts, to rule them with all gentleness,
care and vigilance, provide for their security, Isa. 40. 11. Ezech. 34. 10. to
30. and if occasion be, to lay down their very lives for the safety of their
flocks, as good Sheepheards are willing to do. John. 10. 11. 15. and as King
David desired to do, in this 2d. speech of his, worthy all Princes
consideration; He seeing the Angel that smote the people, spoke thus unto the
Lord, Lo, I have sinned and dealt wickedly, but these Sheep what have they
done? Let thy hand I pray thee, be against me and my fathers house, but not on
the people that they should be plagued. 2 Samuel 29. 17. 1 Chronicles. 21. 17.
Answerable whereunto is that speech of the matchless Governor Moses (most
zealous for his peoples safety) who desired God to blot him out of his Book,
rather then to destroy the Israelites under his charge for their sin of
Idolatry, Exodus 32. 32. And when God said unto him, Let me alone that I may
consume them; for they are a stiffenecked people, and I will make of thee a
great Nation: He utterly refused this offer, and continued expostulating the
case with God in Prayer in the Israelites behalf, Beseeching him to turn from
his fierce wrath, and to repent of the evil against his people, till he
caused God to repent of the evil which he thought to do unto his people,
Exodus 32. 9. to 15. Numb. 14. 11. to 21. O that all Christian Kings and Princes
were now so zealous of their peoples safety (as in truth they ought to be) they
durst not then leavy war against them, much less excite them to shed one
another blood.

If these divine precepts and examples be not sufficient to clear this
shining truth, I shall add some humane authorities to ratify it, and that
both of Pagans and Christians: To begin with Pagans Resolutions, it was a
worthy saying of Plutarchi Apothegmata.
Pelopidas, when, going forth to Battle, his wife wished him to save himself,
others (quoth he) are to look to this, but a Prince and Emperor ought to take
care how he may save his Subjects, Hist. l. 10. p. 486.
a good Prince (writes Q^. Curtius) esteems the safety of his subjects more
dear unto him then his own life. It is an excellent Observation of De
Clementia l. 1. c. 19.
Seneca, that though all other Bees have stings, which they leave in the wound
yet the King among the bees has no sting at all, for nature would not have him
to be cruel, nor revengefull to his cost and therefore has taken away his
sting, and left his anger unarmed* This should be a great example to mighty
Kings, let them be not ashamed to learn manners from small creatures, seeing
the minds of men ought to be more moderate, by how much the more vehemently it
may do harm: Security is to be gained by mutual security, etc. Kings have one
impregnable fortification, the love of their subjects; which they shall then be
sure of, when they deem the Commonwealth not to be theirs, but they to be the
Commonwealths. And he concludes thus, Ibidem. cap. 26.
There is no Ornament more worthy and more becoming a Princes Highness, then
that Crown ob c^ves servatos, for preserving and saving his subjects: Not
hostile Arms taken from the conquered, not the Chariots of the Barbarians died
with blood not the spoiels gained in war. Many more instances of this nature,
I pretermit for brevity, to pass from Pagans to Christians, Zonarus Annal.
Tom. 3. p. 117.
Constantine the great was wont to say, that an Emperor ought to spare, no not
his own members, for the preservation of the peoples tranquillity. Pope
Elutherius in his Spelma^ni Council. p. 34. and in sundry other of our Wri^ers.
Epistle to our King Lucius, the first Christian King, about the year of our
Lord 169. writes thus to him. The Nations and people of the Kingdom of
Britain are yours, which being divided, you ought to congregate and reduce
into one, to concord and peace: and to faith, and the law of Christ, and to the
holy Church, to cherish, protect, maintain, govern and defend them from
injurious and malicious persons and enemies. A King is named from governing not
from a Kingdom; Thou shall be a King whilst thou rulest well, which unless
thou shall do, the name of a King shall not remain in thee, and thou shall
loose the name of a King which God forbid.

Finally to close up this Proposition; the Kings of England (and so the
Emperors with most other Christian Princes) does take this solemn oath, and
make this serious Protestation to their subjects at the Coronation, See Totles
Magna Charta, 1571. The Parliaments Remonstrance 26. of May, 1642. p. 9 And his
Majesty's Answer thereto. p. 16. ^7.
I will keep peace and godly agreement entirely (according to my power) both
to God, the holy Church, the Clergy and the People. By which oath they are
obliged, under pain of highest perjury, to preserve the general peace of the
Kingdom and people; to avoid all civil Wars, unless in case of their
subjects open Rebellion, not any otherwise to be suppressed but by a war
against them: and not to arm one subject, to assault or destroy another.
Neither is this a late devised oath, in Henry the fourth his time, but King
Henry the first, King Stephen, Richard the first, King John, and Henry the
third, (as Matthew Paris records in their lives) took the same oath at their
Coronations, and promised faithfully to fulfill it, and all our other Kings
since have done the like.

From this first Proposition, Conclusions deducted from the former Proposition.
thus abundantly ratified, these conclusions necessarily ensue.

First, that his Majesty cannot without great sin and wilful perjury raise a
Civil War against the Parliament and Kingdom, and excite his loving
subjects (who have lived in peace for so many years, and are all of one
Nation, one Religion, one flesh and blood) without any just cause, most
unnaturally to destroy and murder one another, and so to ruin their own
native Country and undo themselves and their Posterity.

Secondly, that no faithful subjects ought to foment or promote such an
unreasonable, unnatural Civil War, or give any assistance to it in the
least degree upon any considerations whatsoever, but to the uttermost of his
power by his prayers and all other lawful means to prevent oppose and
withstand it, for the preservation both of the King, Kingdom, Parliament,
their own Liberties, Inheritances, Lives, Persons, Families E^tates and
Religion, and to unite all their Forces to ^^^inguish the ^^^ames of civil
dissentions already kindled among us.

Thirdly, that those malignant spirits who counsel and instigate his Majesty
to a Civill-warre against his Parliament and people, are most unnatural
Vipers, and Traitors to their Coun^rey, desperate Rebels against God, and
most execrable wicked persons, and so God himself has proclaimed them to all
the world, Isa. 59. 5. to 10. They hatch Cokatrice eggs, and weave the Spiders
Webb; he that eats of their eggs dies, and that which is crushed breaks
out into a Viper, their works are works of iniquity, and the Act of violence
is in their hands, their feet run to evil, and they have to shed Innocent
blood, their thoughts are thoughts of iniquity, wasting and destruction is in
their paths, the way of peace they know not, and there is no judgment in their
goings, they have made them crooked paths, whosoever goes therein shall not
know peace. And Romans 3. 13. to 19. Their throat is an open Sepulere, with their
tongues they have used deceit, the poison of Aspes is under their lips, their
mouth is full of cursing and bitterness, their feet are swift to shed blood,
destruction and misery are in their ways, and the ^ay of peace they have not
known, there is no fear of God before their eyes. O, miserable unhappy Princes
who are advised, seduced by such pernicious Counselors! O rash i considerate
wretched people, who are besotted by them, so far as to take up Arms against
their native Country, to b^come their own, their Brethrens, the Parliaments,
and Kingdoms Executioners, and thereby most Nullihostes digniores supplicio
sunt quam ij qui contra patriam arma sum unt. (...) ad Qu. Iretrem.
detestable Traitors! as all such who take up Arms against the Parliament are
adjudged, to be in the Parliament of 11. R. 2. the record whereof was published
in print by Order of both Houses, May 27. 1642. to which I shall refer you.

Fourthly, that if the King against his Oath and Office, will without just
cause make war upon his Parliament and Kingdom, they may lawfully take up
Arms for the preservation of the Kingdoms peace, and their own just defense,
for when the King who should protect them, will against the trust and duty of
his Royal Dignity, set himself to destroy them; they having no other
protection, may justly protect and defend themselves, even as Soldiers,
Children, Wives, Servants, may by the equity of all Laws, lawfully by open
force defend themselves against the bloody assaults and violence of their
Generals, Parents, Husbands, Masters, who seek to take away their lives,
though in all lawful things they ought to be subject and obedient to them: If
a King should causelessly run at a subject with a naked sword to kill him, the
subject may lawfully put by his thrust and defend his life, which a King ha^h
no power to take away, See 1 Kings 21. throughout 2 Kings 9. 25. Exodus 1. 16.
to 22.
but upon just grounds after a legal trial, and that in a legal, not an
extraordinary way, Much more then may the whole Parliament and Kingdom
withstand a Kings open causeless hostility against them, to preserve
themselves and the Kingdom from destruction. This is evident even by divine
Authority, as namely by the example of David, who though a subject 1 Samuel 22.
to 27.
took up Arms and raised an Army to defend himself against King Saul his
Sovereign, who causelessly made War against him and sought his life, and
though he still avoided Saul, and twice refused to hurt or murder his Person,
when he was in his power, because he was Gods anointed: Yet no doubt had Saul
assaulted him with his Army, he would have defended himself against him in
Battle: Nay, this is manifest in an Higher Degree by that most Observable
Passage in the 1 of Samuel 14. 39. to 46. Where when King Saul had made a Rash
vow, that whosoever had tasted any thing that day, (contrary to his command,
whiles he pursued the Philistines) he should dye the death, though it were
Jonathan his Son, who procured that Victory and the Lot fell upon Jonathan,
who did but taste a little Honey on the top of his Rod, who said, and lo I must
dye for this; Saul answered, God do so, and more also, for thou shall surely
dye Jonathan; the people thereupon said to Saul (notwithstanding, he were their
King, and had made two such solemn Oaths) shall Jonathan die, who has wrought
this great deliverance in Israel God forbid; as the Lord lives, that shall
not one hair of his head fall to the ground, for he has wrought with God this
day, so the people rescued Jonathan, that he died not. Here the people not only
justly defend, but rescue Jonathan, being an Innocent from death, not only
contrary to the resolution, but vows and Oaths of their own King, to put him
to death, and so doubtless they would have defended themselves by force in the
like case. There is a notable place to this purpose in the 1 of Kings 12, 13.
to 25. 2 Chronicles. 11. 1. to 5. Where when the ten Tribes (through Rehoboams
following of the rash Counsel of the young men) revolted and rebelled against
him, being their lawful King, and made Jeroboam King over them, Rehoboam, as
soon as he fled from them and came to Jerusalem assembled all the Tribe of
Judah, and the House of Benjamin, an hundred and fourscore thousand men, which
were Warriers, to fight against the House of Israel: (who rebelled and
revolted) to bring the Kingdom again to Rehoboam the Son of Solomon. But
the word of God came to Shemajah the man of God, saying speak unto Rehoboam
the King of Judah, and unto all the house of Judah and Benjamin, and to the
remnant of the people, saying. Thus says the Lord, You shall not go up to
fight against your Brethren the Children of Israel, (though Rebels) return
every man to his house, for this thing is from me. They hearkened therefore to
the word of the Lord, and returned to depart, according to the word of the
Lord, from going against Jeroboam and their Brethren. Here God himself
prohibits both King and people to raise a Civill-warre against their Brethren,
though Rebels and Revol^ers in the highest degree, and they both lay down
Arms hereupon for the present. And when Rehoboam and Abijah his son
afterward made war upon them; they did lawfully resist and oppose them, 1
Kings 14. 30. c. 15, 6. 2 Chronicles, 12, 15. and chap. 13. throughout. So the men
on Tirzah, being beseiged by King Omri to take Zimri, lawfully defended
themselves for a time, 1 Kings 16, 17, 18. and thus did those of Bethmaachan
against Ioab, 1 Samuel 20, 14. to 23. To pass from Scripture presidents.
Infinite are the examples in histories of subjects (who by the very dictate law
of nature, which instructs every creature to defend it self against unjust
violence) defended themselves in all ages against the assaults oppressions and
groundless Wars of their unnatural Princes. But the many late examples of
this kind of the Protestants in France, Germany, and Bohemia, who have by open
force defended their persons, estates, Religion, against those Popish Kings and
Governors, who have causelessly levied War against them, (which act of theirs
all Protestants affirm to be lawful both by the laws of nature, God and man)
and our own domesticke examples of the long continued Barons Wars both in
King John's, See M^thew Pa^^s, Ho^^^, Wa^singham, Speed, Stow, G^^ston, Matthew
Westminster, (...), and others.
King Henry the thirds, Edward the seconds, and Richard the seconds Reigns who
took up Arms against these Princes, for the just defense, preservation, and
establishment of the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom (which these Princes
contended to subvert) even in times of Popery; which act of theirs, by the
Prelates, Clergy and people of those times, and by all succeeding Ages since;
was and has been resolved, not only lawful, but Optin (...) qui et omnibus
Laudibus (...), qui sua corpora pro (...) def^^sione peri^uris ab jecerunt,
Isocra^es p. 108.
honest, just and honorable, and worthy eternal Encomiums, by means whereof
our Kingdom has quietly enjoyed those Laws and Liberties, which they
contended for, ever since, which otherwise had been long agone utterly lost,
and the Kingdom with them; will abundantly suffice to clear and ratify this
conclusion, beyond all contradiction or excep^ion of any malignant Spirits.

Fifthly, that it is lawful and necessary for the Parliament for the
preservation of the Kingdoms peace, Nihil est praestabilius viro ^orti, quam
per^^u^^s patriam libera^e, Cicero, pro An. Milone, Orat, Mortes pro pa^^^
appo^^ae, non so^u^ glo^^^ Rheto^ibus, sed et^a^ beatae v^der. solent. Cre^^o.
^ust. Quaest. lib. 2.
and safety, its necessary defense, and the better prevention of Civill-warres,
to settle the Militia, and secure the Magazines of the Realm by such means as
may most effectually advance and accomplish this great much opposed work,
since His Majesty has refused to pass a Bill to accomplish it. Neither is
this way of settling the Militia a Novelty, but the most ancient practice and
custom of this Kingdom, for it appears by King See Cooks (...) on Magna
Char^a, f^l. 17^, 175. And Leges Edwardi Regis cap. de Her^tochijs in Lamberds
Archion.
Edwards Laws, that in his and former ages the Lievtenants and supreme
Commanders of the Mlitia in every County, were elected; per commune Concilium,
pro communi v^ilitate regni, per provincias et patrias vniversas, et per
singulas Comitatus, in ^leno Fulkemots* by the Common-counsell, for the common
utility of the Realm; through every Province, Country and County, in a full
Falkmoth or County Court by the Freeholders of the County. And if the
Freeholders in ancient times did thus in every County elect their Lievtenants
and Captains of their Militia, to Train and Order them; yea, and the high
Sheriffs too, who had the command of the whole power of the County, whom they
then likewise elected as appears by the same Law of King Edward) by the same
reason, and greater may the whole Parliament in this case of necessity lawfully
elect them now, without any impeachment to his Majesty's Prerogative.

Sixthly that His Majesty's late Commissions of Array, to enforce one subject
to take up Arms against another, in effect to maintain a Civill-warre, and to
imprison those who refuse, contrary to the express Letter of Magna Charta, c.
29. the late Petition of Right 3. Caroli, (in the Answer whereunto His Majesty
professes that it is his Maxim, That the peoples Liberty strengthens the
Kings Prerogative, and that the Kings P^erogative is to defend the peoples
Liberties:) Is directly See the Commons Declaration concerning the Commission
of Array July 1. 1641. Wh^re it is fully proved.
against the Law, and His Majesty's Coronation Oath, as the Parliament has now
lately proved it.

Seventhly, That to dissuade and divert His Majesty from this Civill-warre,
and shedding the blood of his innocent subjects, will be a most acceptable and
meritorious service both to God, the King himself, and the whole Realm. To
God it must be so because he is a God of peace, abhorring all unnatural
Civill-warres, as is formerly demonstrated. To the King himself it must be so,
because it will exempt him from the guilt of perjury in violating his Oath,
from the guilt of innocent blood and murder, in causing his people causelessly
to sheath their Swords in one another Bowels; and from many other sins and
mischiefs. To the whole Kingdom it must be so, which desires peace and unity,
and abhors the very thought, much more the sight of an unnatural Civill-warre,
which will now in all probability, as things stand abroad and at home procure
abundance of misery, if not utter ruin both to King and people. When 1 Samuel,
25.
David by reason of Nabals churlish Answer, had taken up a peremptory
Resolution, By the morning light to slay every one of Nabals household that
passed against the Wall Abigail Nabals wife hearing of it, went and met David
and his Army in his March to do this execution and by her presents and prudent
speech, diverted him from this his Resolution. Whereupon David said to Abigail,
1 Samuel 25. 32, 33. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel which sent thee this day
to meet me, and blessed be thy advice, and blessed be thou, which have kept me
this day from coming to shed blood and from ave^ging my self with mine own
hand. O, that some discreet man or woman, could now divert His Majesty from
his intended Civill-warre against Hull, the Parliament and Kingdom, as Abigail
here did David, cert^^nely it would cause his Majesty upon due consideration,
to break out into David's words, and to bless both God, their advice, and
them, for keeping him from shedding his own subjects innocent blood, and from
avenging hims^^lfe with his own hand; neither of which becomes a gracious
Prince and may prove destructive both to himself, his people, and Kingdoms.

The second PROPOSITION.
THE second Proposition is this: That the King ought not to deny or deferr
justice or right to any of his subjects, much less to the whole Kingdom. This
is manifested both by the express words of Magna Cha^ta c. 29. Nul^^ vendemus,
nulli negabimus vel differemus justisiam v^l rec^^^ and by many excellent
Statutes since, as 2 E. 3. c. 8. 14 E. 3. c. 14. 20 E. 3. c. 1, 2. 1 Rev. 2.
cap. 11.

It will then be worthy His Majsties serious second thoughts to consider.

First whether his voluntary withdrawing himself from his Parliament to York,
(which has much retarded, if not wholly frustrated all Parliamentary
Proceedings, since for the safety and welfare both of this Kingdom and (...))
be not an apparent violation of this part of his Royal Duty.

Secondly, whither his peremptory refusal to pass some necessary useful Acts
for the good of the whole Realm upon a pretended discontent against the
Parliament and Sir John Hot^am, and a private vow (as some report) not to pass
any Act whatsoever, till he received justice in Parliament against Sir John
Hotham, for the business of Hull, and his refusal to settle the Militia, for
the safety of the Kingdom by Act of Parliament, or otherwise, be not an
apparent breach of this trust and parcel of his Kingly office.

Thirdly, whether his detaining of the Lord Keeper and great Seal at York,
whereby many subjects processes, and causes have been delayed, their suites
retarded, and some of them quite lost, be not an apparent deviation from this
Proposition.

Fourthly, whether his absolute denial to disclose the Accusers and Informers
against the Lord of Kimbolton, and other 5 Parliament men, that so they might
acquit themselves, and have right and justice against them for their malicious
false suggestions, runs not point blank against this irrefragable Proposition,
and be not a flat denial of common Right and Justice to those eminent Persons.

Fifthly, whether it be not an apparent Uiolation and denying of Justice, for
his Majesty to proclaim Sir John Hotham a Traitor, and demand Judgment
against him as such a one before his cause was rightly stated, or resolved to
be Treason by any Court of Justice, or the Parliament.

Sixthly, whether his Majesty's raising of a Civil-warre at this very season in
England, his beseiging of Hull, with his slighting and opposing the Parliament
in open Declarations, even now during the heat of the bloody wars in Ireland
(by means whereof those Irish Rebels are exceedingly encouraged, the
Protestant Party and our Soldiers there much discouraged, and the Parliament
now quite disabled to supply them with Provisions of Ammunition and money which
they want, by means whereof the Rebels (now half subdued are like to regaine
the Forts they formerly lost, and in time wholly to conquer that Kingdom: and
so utterly to extirpate the English Nation and Protestant Religion thence) be
not a real tacit denying and delaying of aid right and justice to that
distressed bleeding Kingdom, which now lies and calls to his Majesty and the
Parliament for present succors and supplies, which this now Civill-warre will
in all probability totally frustrate to the great advancement of Papists and
Roman Religion.

If all these particulars upon serious deliberation prove cross to this
Proposition and his Majesty's Regal Office, I presume his graciousnesse, his
Royal Love to right and Justice, and his compassion to almost expiring Ireland
and England, is such that he will speedily redress all former errors of this
kind, put a speedy period to our domesticke Civill-warres, and move him never
to run into the like exorbitances again.

The third PROPOSITION.
THe third Proposition, That his Majesty has no such private or particular
interest in the Forts and Towns or Magazines of the Realm, as the subjects
have in their Lands and goods, to give sell, or dispose of them at his
pleasure, but only a public interest by way of trust, for the defense and
preservation of the Kingdom, and the security and tranquillity of his people. A
truth worthy consideration, when ignorance and incredulity has lately
occasioned many grand inconveniences and mistakes.

This is most apparent by this familiar demonstration, for as much as the King
has no right or interest in these Forts, Towns, or Magazines, as he is a
private person, but only in right of his Crown, as he is King of England, and
the public Minister or Servant of the Kingdom to provide for its security and
tranquillity in times of war or danger, and its prosperity in times of peace.
We all know, that by the Law of the Land: the King cannot sell or alien the
Lands or Revenues of the Crown, yea our Law Books and Judges have resolved,
^5. H. 6. 19. Fitz. Devise 5.
that the King by his will cannot demise any of his Lands: M. ^. H. 5. Fitz
Executors. 108.
That though the King make a will and give Legacies of his own private goods
which he has, yet he cannot demise the Jewels, Plate, Coronets and goods of
the Crown. And if the (...) Fitz Qu. Imp. 35 55, 5^. 11^. 118. 189. Live y.
23. Prese (...) 1.
King has the body of a Ward, the temporalities of a Bishop by way of
sequestration in his possession, or right to present to a Church that is void,
and make his executors and dye, his Executors shall not have the Ward,
temp^^^lties, or presentation though chattles, as a common persons executors
shall have but the succeeding King. So if Subsidies be granted, and the King
dye before they are l^vyed, his Executors shall not enjoy them, though a
chattle; but his Successor. So the successor King, not the Kings Executors
shall have all his Ships. Ordinance, Powder Arms and Ammuni^ion, though
chattles, because they are not the Kings, but Kingdoms and purchased with the
Kingdoms money 1 Eliz. ^, E. 4, 45, b,
cap. 19. 1 ^ac. c 25. because the King has not only his Lands but even these
very Chattles in right of his Crown as King not as a private person, for the
benefit of the Kingdom. When King John most unworthily (with the consent of
some of his Barons) resigned his Crown and Kingdom of England to the Pope.
P^^lip the French King though his enemy, declared this Act void. Matthew Paris
Have Min^r; in Joan. Dr, Crakenthorpe of the Popes temporal Monarchy, c. 2.
p^ge 13^. to 25^.
Because no King nor Prince can give away the Kingdom, which is the
Commonwealths, and all the Noblemen of France there present, begun to cry with
one voice, that they would stand to this truth even to death. This matter of
this Kings grant made to the Pope, being proposed and discussed in full
Parliament in the 40 year of Edward the third, To, P^rl. An. 40, L, 3. nu, ^.
Upon full deliberation the Prelates, Dukes, Earls, Barons, and Commons
answered, and resolved with one accord; That neither the said King John, nor
any other, can put him, nor his Re^lme nor his people under such subjection
without their assent, and as by many evidences it appears* if it were done,
it was done without the ra^^^nt and contrary to his own Oath at his Coronation
And besides this, the Dukes, Earls Barons, Gentlemen and (...) accord and
agree, that in case the Pope shall enforce or attempt by Proc^s or by any other
manner of d^ing t^ constrain the King or his subjects to perform this (as it
is said he will) these parties wi^^ resist wi^^ all their puissance So that by
the Resolution of this whole Parliament, the King cannot grant away his whole
Kingdom, without his p^oples consent, in Parli^ment, and by the self same
reason not any part, parceil, Town, or Fort thereto belongi^g they being the
Kingdoms, not the Kings own right. The Civilians of foreign parts disputing
of the pretended Donation of Constantine the great of Rome, Italy, and Supreme
jurisdiction there, to the Pope, resolve this See Doctor Crakenthorps Defense
of Constantine c. and p (...) 13 to 175.
Donation void, because the Emperou^ by Law cannot give away any of his Empire
it being contrary to his Coronation Oath: wherein he swears, Mat. Paris Anno
1^10. p. 306. Baldus in Pro^^^ de Feud, nu. 32 Lu^a^ de Penu^, Cod. de omni
agro de^e^^^ Quicunque desertum: f. 185. col, ^.
to maintain the Dignities and Rights belonging to the Empire that he (...)
impa^re the goods and state of the Empire, but keep inviolable the Rights of
his Kingdom, and the honor of his imperial Crown. By virtue of which Oath,
they hold the Emperor strictly obliged in duty both to God and the Empire, to
take to themselves, not only all those large and fair Territories, which the
Pope has taken, either by force or fraud inv^ded; decking himself with the
Eagles plumes; but specially they ought to resume that Dominion in those very
Lands which the Pope now challenges as his own, by force of this forged
grant. In Pro^^ mi^^^ Feud. nu. 32, 33.
Baldus a learned Civilian writes: That the Doctors of the Law determine, That
Constantines pretended Donation neither is nor possibly can be of force, to
pass away, either the propriety or supreme Dominion in these Territories, or
the Imperial jurisdiction over them. For to say that the Emperor would by his
Donation mutilate, or cut away the Members of the Empire is a kind of folly.
In Rubric. (...) verbo oblig^t.
Arctine not only assents to Baldus, but much commends his judgment therein,
Baldus (says he) does elegently teach, that the Emperor cannot give away any
quotient, neither a third, nor 4th. part, nor half of his Empire. Whereby
Baldus means, that the Empire being an entire and universal power, the
Emperor by giving ought, cease not to be universal Lord of all belonging to
the Empire. Col. de Omni (...) ser^^. l. Qu. (...)
Lucas de Penna, is very pregnant in this point. The Royalties of the Empire
(writes he) cannot be alienated from the Emperor. Yea, though the Emperor
should swear, that he would not revoke such Royalties as were alienated to
the prejudice of his Crown and Dignity, yet notwithstanding this his Oath he
might recall such alienations, because the Emperor swears at his Coronation,
to keep safe the honors and rights of his Kingdom: ^ut by alienating his
demaines and Territories, he does not preserve but impair the Imperial
Rights. De (...) cunq. prae, (...). l, Been a Zenone. nu. 4. f. ^. c. 4.
Albericus de Rosate is copious in this case. Let us see (says he) whether
Constantines Donation could be of force to pre^udice his Successors, Accu^stus
holds it could not, so does John de Parisiis, And he gives this reason thereof:
Because none deputed to an office, may do ought against his own office. But it
is against the office deputed to the Emperor, to impair his Empire, or cut or
take away any part from it. For by the same reason that he cuts away one part,
he may cut away also another, and so may his successors, and so the Empire at
last should be b^ought to nothing, and utterly destroyed which is against the
public good, and the end why the Empire is ordained; Whereupon I do believe,
that the foresaid Donation by law cannot be of ^orce to prejudice the Empire or
the Successors. The same Doctrine is delivered for Law by Boethius Epon Herric.
qu. qu. 3. nu. 43. quest. 5. nu. 19. 27. 34. by Didacas Coverrumius Practic.
qu. c. 4. nu. 1. by Franc. Vargas. De Author. Pontifi Axiom. 1 Number. 2.
Gulielmus, Benedictus, Caralus, Degrossatus* Felinus, with others. All which I
have cited, to show the concurrence of the Civil with our common law in this
particular, and to resolve all opposites in this point, who scruple at it.

First, From all these Premises it is apparent; Deduction^ from hence.
1. that the case of Sir John Hotham, and the Town of Hull, was not rightly
stated by His Majesty in his Declaration sent in a Message to both Houses, the
21. of May. 1642. To wit, that his Majesty has the same Title to his Town of
Hull, which any of his Subjects has to their houses, or Lands, and the same to
his Magazine and Munition there, bought (as he says) with his own Moneys.
When as many, or most of the Arms there, were against law, violently taken
away from the subjects in Essex, and other Counties (who bought them with their
own Moneys) without paying any consideration for them, and the other was
purchased with the Sea 1 Eliz. c. 19. 1 Iacobi. c. 33,
Kingdoms Money, with which his Majesty was but entrusted which any of his
subjects have to their Money, Plate, or Jewels, and therefore that they ought
not to be disposed without his consent, no more then the house, Land, Money,
Plate or Jewels of any subject ought to be without or against their
Remonstrance in answer to that Declaration, May 26. page 4, 5, 6. To which I
shall refer you

Secondly, That the King having no interest in Hull, or the Magazine there, but
only as King and the public Minister o^ the Kingdom, for the Kingdoms use
and benefit, and the preservation of its security and peace, it is and was
lawful, for the whole Kingdom assembled in Parliament, (upon probable grounds
and Informations and proofs that his Majesty seduced by some pernicious
Enemies to the Kingdoms tranquillity, intended to seize upon this I own and
Magazine by surprise, thereby to let in foreign forces, and raise a
Civill-warre against the Parliament and Kingdom to the disturbance of the
public peace and hazard of the Realms of England and Ireland, and contrary
to the public trust reposed in him, (the breach whereof does in some sort
determine it for the present) to turn those Arms and Ammunitions provided for
his subjects safety, upon them to their destruction) to seize upon and secure
them for the present, for the prevention of this danger and abuse of them, the
Kingdoms better security (the true ends for which this Town and Magazine was
first fortified and provided:) And that without any danger of Treason and
disloyalty in them or their Agents, employed in this service. Neither is this
any new case, for both in the well known See Matthew Paris, Holinsheed, Speed,
Graston and others, in the lives of King John, Henry 3. Ed. 2. Rich. second.
Barons Wars in this Realm, and late stirs in Scotland, the Barons and Scots
seized upon the Kings Towns, Castles and Ammunition, for the security and
peace of these several Kingdoms, without any danger or charge of Treason. And
if it were no Treason in the Scots within these two years to seize upon all or
most of His Majesty's Towns, Forts, Magazines and Ammunition in Scotland, and
on New Castle in England, for the common peace and safety of their Kingdom and
prevention of Civill-warrs, See the Acts of Pacification 12. H. 8. 2. 22. E. 4.
35. l. 1 H. 7. 7. 5. H. 7. 6. Ba^^e.
as his Majesty and the Parliaments both of Scotland and England have
resolved, why should it be Treason or Felony in the Parliament or Sir John
Hotham their Agent, peaceably to possess themselves of the Town and Magazine
of Hull, for the safety of the Realm the prevention of Civill-warres and
preservation of the public peace, when as they keep (...),
them only for his Majesty's and the ^ingdomes use and are ready to redeliver
them into his Majesty's actual possession, if they may be secured: that they
may not be misimployed against them. If a Constable or any other person break
into another man's house and take away his sword and (...), and arrest him to
preserve the peace and prevent murder, he may by the common Law ^ustifie this
Act, and detain the others weapons till the fray be over, and the peace
secured; Yea, if a man should detain his Majesty's sword or Pistol from him,
in case he intended causelessly or unjustly to murder any of his subjects with
it, till his wrath were past, I presume it would be neither Treason, Felony,
nor any illegal misdemeanor, much less can it be any Treason, or offense in
the Parliament, or Sir John Hotham their Instrument, upon just suspicions to
possess themselves of the Town and Magazine of Hull, in a peaceable manner,
and to sequester and detain them from his Majesty for a season, till they may
have good assurance, that neither of them shall be misimployed, by the
instigation of mischievous Counselors, to the hurt or destruction of the
Kingdom, and them, as they are informed Wars are intended to be. But more of
this hereafter in Deduction 4.

Thirdly, admit the case of Hull and the Magazine there, such as his Majesty
puts it, yet then by his Majesty's Argument, every subject has as good and
firm an interrest, and property in his own goods, Lands, Houses, as his
Majesty has in his Town of Hull, or his Magazine. By what Law or Justice
then has his Majesty seized lately upon his subjects Arms and Magazines in
diverse Counties, bought with their own Moneys, for their own private, and the
public defense of the Realm against Thieves and Foreign Enemies, and
forceably taking them away without paying for them, and now employed them in a
Civill-warre, against Hull and his subjects? Doubtless the Parliament may with
far more justice and equity, seize upon the public Magazine of the
Kingdom, and Hull (a frontire Town well fortified) for the security of the
Realm, and prevention of Civill-warres, then his Majesty seize upon his
subjects Arms and Magazines of powder to make a Civil war. And seeing the
Arms at Hull were many of them violently and illegally taken from the subjects
without consideration, why the Parliament may not lawfully seize them to
restore them to their owners, who have petitioned for them, I cannot yet
discern.

Fourthly, In cases tending to the common good and safety, even by the common
Law of the Land, a man may lawfully commit a trespass, and do an injury to
another man's Lands, Houses, and Inheritance without crime and offense: if an
enemy invade the Realm, a^y 8 P. ^. 23. Br. Custone, 145.
General Captain or subject to resist them may lawfully enter into any other
man's Land, and there dig Trenches build Forts and Sconces (if they be
necessary) to resist the Enemy: 29 H. 8. Dyer. 36. 6. Br. Trespass, 406.
Yea, he may enter into any of the Kings Forts and Towns which are only for
the public good (as the experience of all ages testify) without any previous
special License* yea fortify and defend them: because it tends to the safety
of the Realm and common good to which all private interests, and much more the
Kings public in such cases must give place. Upon this reason it is agreed in
our ^3, H. 8. 16. 9 E. ^. 35b. Br. Trespass 406.
Law-bookes, That fa^lowne or City be besieged, or endanger to be beleagured by
an enemy, and the Suburbs may endanger the taking thereof by yielding harbor,
or a convenient battry to them, The inhabitants or Soldiers within the Walls,
may lawfully burn or destroy the Suburbs for the Towns or Cities
preservation, and the common safety. Nay, if an house be on fire in a Town,
men may justify the pulling down thereof, and of the next adjoining houses if
there be cause, to prevent the burning of the whole Town, it being for the
Common good: Yea, 8 E. 4. 1^. Fi^z. Bar. 93.
Fishers at Sea may justify their going on other men's ground adjoining to the
Sea, because their fishing is for the common profit of the whole Realm. If
then private persons, may thus legally prejudice other particular men in these
cases in their Lands and Houses, for the common good, then much more may the
whole representative body of the Kingdom in Parliament seize upon Hull and the
Magazine there for a season (being the Commonwealths, and the Kings only in
right of, and for the service of the Kingdom) for the public peace and
safety, and the prevention of Civill-warres, without any danger of trespass,
much less of Treason, in making Sir John Hotham their Agent in this Service:
They having a common interest therein, since Soldiers, Citizens; and other
private persons may lawfully raise Forts and Trenches on others grounds, or
pull down any houses and suburbs for the public good, though they have no
particular interest in their lands or houses, but only a temporary common
interest upon these public occasions.

The fourth PROPOSITION.
THe fourth Proposition is this. That in all doubtful cases of Treason, not
within the express Letter and words of 25 E. 3. Parl. 5. c. 3. neither the
King himself, nor his Judges, but the Parliament, and King in Parliament, (if
he will be there) ought to declare and determine what act is Treason, and what
not.

This is clear by these express words of 25. E. 3. c. 3. of Treason. And it
is accorded, that if any other case, supposed Treason, which is not above
specified (in this Act) does ^appen before any Justices, the Justices shall
^arry without any going to judgment of the Treason, (...) the cause be showed
and declared before the King and his Parliament, whether it ought to be judged
Treason or Felony. Which clause was afterward ratified by 11 R. 2. c. 3. 1 H.
4. c. 10. and by 21 R. 2. c. 11. where Judge Thorning affirms, That the
Declaration of Treason not declared belongs to the Parliament, which part of
declaring Treason some hold is utterly taken away by 1 Ma^^a. Session. 1 R^s^al
Treason, Sect. 20. (which others deny) and that no other Treason is, or can be
at this day (unless by special Act of Parliament,) but what is within the
very Letter of 25. ^. 3. c. 3.

This being indubitable, these Conclusions will necessarily follow.

First, that neither his Majesty alone, nor yet accompanied with his privy
Counsel or Judges, has any legal power or right at all to declare or
determine what is Treason and what not, or to declare or adjudge any particular
Act to be Treason, unless it be clearly within the express Letter of 25 E.
3, c. 3. Therefore his Majesty's own private See his Majesty's Answer to the
Declaration May 4. 1642 P 3. 10. 11.
Declaration of Sir John Hothams Act (in seizing the Town and Magazine of
Hull, and his refusal to admit his Majesty into the Town when he came to
dispossess him of it) to be Treason, being out of the Letter of the 25. Ed. 3.
and his proclaiming of him to be a Traitor, must necessarily be both void and
illegal.

Secondly, The Kings Judges and Justices, even in Courts of Judicature, where
they may finally determine and resolve what is law in all other cases neither
can may, nor ought to declare and determine what is Treason, and what is not,
in any cases out of the very Letter of 25. E. 3. but ought to resert to the
Parliament and receive a resolution from them whether it be Treason or not. So
are the express words of this Act of 25. E. 3. and others since. If then the
Judges are thus to be resolved by the Parliament only, what is Treason and
what not, then there is no reason or sense, why the Parliament should be sent
to the Judges to be advised and resolved by them, what is Treason: or why the
Parliament should be taxed for Voting Sir John ^othams Act not to be Treason,
without consulting first with the Judges to know of them whether it were
Treason or not. Since the Parliament in this case of Treason, are to direct and
resolve the Judges, not the Judges them.

Thirdly, both Houses of Parliament upon the Kings Appeal to them for justice
against Sir John Hotham as a Traitor, for not admitting him into Hull, and
upon Sir John Hot^ams Letter to them, relating the truth of his whole carriage
to the King in this cause, have acquitted Sir John Hotham, and See the printed
Votes.
Voted this Act of his, (warranted by the command of both Houses) not only to
be no Treason nor Felony, but not so much as a Misdemeanour, seeing all he did
was only in discharge of the trust which the Parliament had reposed in him, for
the safety and peace of the whole Kingdom and prevention of a Civill-warre.
Since then the whole Parliament, the only proper Judges of Treason, upon the
Kings and Sir John Hothams several appeals to them, have both voted and
resolved Sir John Hothams Act to be no Treason, nor Crime, nor he to be any
Delinquent, neither the King himself (who often professes in his late
Declarations to rule and govern all his people only according to the Laws of
the Realm according to his Oath) nor his Counsel, nor Judges can by any
proclamation or Declaration, or by any Judgment in any Court of Justice, which
has Conusance of Treason, declare this Act of his to be Treason, or him a
Traitor or Offender. Let all of them, and the whole Kingdom both for the
present and future, rest fully satisfied, and concluded by the ^arliaments
Votes and Resolutions: whom our Laws declare, to be the only proper Judges of
this cause pretended to be Treason, and so Sir John Hotham must go scot-free.

Having thus passed through these four Propositions, and the Deductions from
them, I shall now draw toward a conclusion of this Discourse.

Sir John Hothams case and Pulls truly stated and debated.

The only, if not principal pretense of his Majesty's late raising an Army in
the North, and of a most sad and unseasonable Civill-warre (which if proceeded
in, may soon prove destructive to all his Majesty's three Kingdoms) is Sir
John Hothams seizing on the Town of Hull, and the Magazine there by Order from
the Parliament, for the peace and security of the Realm, and his denying his
Majesty entrance into the Town, when he came to take possession of it: Which
Acts his Majesty has in his Proclamations and Declarations, declared and
proclaimed to all his subjects to be no less then high Treason, and Sir John
^otham to be a notorious Traitor.

The sole question then will be, Whether these Actions of Sir John Hotham be
Treason or not by the Laws of the Realm? And under correction, I conceive it is
as clear as the Noonday Sun, that they are no Treason.

That his taking possession of this Town and Magazine is no Treason, no nor
yet so much as a Trespass or offense in point of Law, I have sufficiently
demonstrated in the Proposition third ^e^uction 2. 4. and elsewhere.
premises. Whether his denying his Majesty to enter Hull, and his keeping
possession of it, be high Treason, will there be the sole question, which
before I shall determine, I shall truly state the case.

See the Declaration and Votes of the House in Sir John Hothams case, which
they there truly state, April 28. 1642.
Sir John Hotham by Order of both Houses of Parliament was enjoined to keep
possession of the Town and Magazine at Hull, for the prevention of
Civill-warres, and preservation of the peace and safety of the Realm (which
some malignant Spirits advised his Majesty to seize on, and turn against the
Kingdom) and not to deliver them up to any whatsoever, without their special
Order.

The King on the 23 of April rode to Hull, attended with about 400. Horse,
(the Duke of York and Prince Elector, being at that instant royally
entertained by Sir John Hotham in the Town, who came thither the day before)
and required Sir John Hotham to deliver up the Town into his hands. Who
perceiving his Majesty to be accompanied with such force as might have
mastered the Garrison of the Town, and having received Intelligence of an
intention to deprive him of his life, if the King were admitted, informed his
Majesty, of that trust reposed in him by both Houses, that he could not admit
him into the Town without breach of that trust, and therefore humbly beseeched
his Majesty to give him leave to send to the Parliament to acquaint them with
his Majesty's commands, and to receive their directions thereupon; which he
would do with all expedition. His Majesty rejecting this Answer, presently
caused him and his Officers to be proclaimed Traitors before the Town Walls,
and dispatched a Message to both Houses, charging Sir John Hotham with high
Treason, aggravating his offense, and demanding Justice against him. The
Parliament upon true Information and stating of the case, the 28. of April
1642. resolved upon the Question.

That Sir John Hotham according to his Relation, had done nothing but in
obedience to both houses of Parliament. That this declaring Sir John Hotham
Traitor, being a Member of the house of Commons, is an high Breach of
Privilege, and being done without process of Law, is against the liberty of
the subject, and the Law of the Land.

This being the true state of the case; I shall clearly manifest by the Law of
the Land, this Act of Sir John Hothams to be no Treason, and he no Traitor.

It is irrefragably evident by the Statutes of 1 E. 6. c. 12. and 1 Mariae 1.
Session Rastall Treason 20. that there is no Treason at this day but what is
within the very Letter of 25 E. 3. c. 3. all other Treasons being repealed by
these Acts or expired. The Question then will be, Whether this case be within
the very Letter of 25. E. 3? Certainly there is not one syllable in this Act
which concerns this case. The King pretends it is within these words, If any
man do levy War against our Sovereign Lord the King in his Realm, that it is
Treason by the Letter of this Act. But here there is no levying of war, no act
of hostility or war was exercised by Sir Io. Hotham, against the K Sir to.
Hotham was only passive and defensive not active, he only denied his Majesty
the possession of the Town by order from Parliament, to prevent war and
preserve peace and if he be a Traitor, the whole Parliament must be much more
Traitors who put him upon this service, Qui^ plus peccat Author quam Actor, as
our Law determines. Therefore this neither is, nor can be any leavying of War
against the King, or Treason within this clause: This is most apparent by the
Statute of 5. and 6. Ed. 6. c. 11. Which because the detaining of the Kings
Forts from him, was not within the words or intention of 25. Ed. 3. did
specially enact, That of any person or persons after the first of June
Rebelliously (mark the word) do detain keep or withold from our Sovereign
Lord his heirs and successors, any of his or their Castles, Fortresses, or
holds within this Realm or any other the Kings Dominions or Marches: Or
Rebelliously keep detain or withold from his said highness his he^res or
successors any of his or their Ships, Ordinances, Artillery or other
Ammunitions or Fortifications of War, and do not obediently render and give
up unto our said Sovereign Lord, his heirs or successors or such persons as
shall be deputed by them, such Castles, Fortresses, Fortilesses. Holds, Ships,
Ordinances, Artillery, or other Munitions, or Fortifications of War,
rebelliously kept or detained within six days nex after they shall be
commanded by our said Sovereign Lord his ^eires or Successors, by open
Proclamation under the great Seal, the same Proclamation to be made in such
place and order, so as the party and parties to be charged by this Act may
conventently have notice or knowledge thereof, that then every such person or
persons so offending in any the Premises, their Abbettors, etc. Being lawfully
convicted of the Rebelliously keeping or detaining thereof according to the
Laws and Statutes of this Realm, shall be adjudged Traitors, and shall suffer
pains of death, and lose and forfeit all their goods and chattles, Lands and
Tenements unto the King, as in cases of high Treason. This Act makes the
detaining of any of the Kings Castles, Forts, etc. Treason, But yet with these
three Limitations.

First, that they must be Rebelliously kept and withheld; which Hull was not,
but only by Order of Parliament for the Kingdoms peace and safety.

Secondly, that they must be ^etained six days at least, after command to
surrender them: But the King proclaimed Sir John Hotham a Traitor for not
delivering up Hull the same day and hour he demanded it, without giving him
any respite, which is contrary to this Act.

Thirdly, There must be a Proclamation under the great Seal to demand the
Forts and Castles and the same Proclamatio must be so made that those who
detain them may have notice of it. But in this case there was no such
Proclamation made against Sir John Hotham but by an herald by word of mouth,
and so no Treason within the Law, admit it were in force: But this Law and
clause (which if in force might have given some color to his Majesty) as all
Judges and Lawyers resolve, was totally repealed by the statute of 1 Mariae.
R^stall Treason 20. (which expressly repeales all other Treasons but those
within the very Letter of 25. E. 3.) and so the detaining of any Forts or
Castles at this day from the King is no Treason because not within the words of
25. E. 3. chap 3. the only Standard and surviving Law to judge Treasons by.

This Statute of 5. Ed. 6. c. 11. being repealed, and this case being not
within the Act of 25. ^. 3. the Parliament in 14. Eliz. was enforced to make a
special Law (which was to endure only among the Queens l^fe, as appears by
the (...) in it) whereby they enact, that if any person or persons (...)
discover, do unlawfully (...) or t^eir own Authority, (which is none of Sir
John Hothams case, who did nothing but by order of Parliament) compass,
imagine, conspire, or advise, (...) ways or means wit: fo^ce or craft etc.
Maliciously or Rebel^iously (which he did not but by authority of Parliament)
to take, detain, or keep from the Queen, any of her Castles, Towers,
Fortresses, or holds, etc. And do advisedly by any express word, speech, act,
deed or writing, utter or declare his said malicious and rebellious intents,
that then every person or persons so offending in the Premises, being thereof
lawfully convicted according to the Laws of the Realm, shall be adjudged a
Felon ^ Felons, and suffer pains of death as in cases of Felony, etc. And if
any person or persons, do at any time hereafter with force Maliciously and
Rebelliously (which is none of Sir John Hothams case, who did all by the
Parliaments command) detain, keep or with hold from the Queens Majesty any
of her Castles, Towers, Fortresses, or holds within the Realm, or any of her
Dominions or Countries, or Marches of the same, or do Maliciously and
Rebelliously or with force detain, keep or withold from her Majesty any of
her Ships, Ordnance, Artillery, or other Munitions or Fortifications of Wars,
and do not render and give up the same to our Sovereign Lady, or such persons
as her Majesty shall appoint to receive the same to her use within six days
next after he or they so offending, shall be commanded by our Sovereign Lady
the Queen, by open Proclamation under the great Seal of England, to be made in
any place or Market Town within the County where any such offense shall be
committed, etc that then every person or persons so offending, their Ayders
Counselors and Abbetters, being thereof Lawfully convict according to the
Laws of the Realm shall have and suffer such pains of death, and also shall
forfeit and lose, as in cases of high Treason limited and acustomed,

By this expired Act, which was to continue only during the Queens life it is
evident.

First, that this detaining of the Kings Castles, Forts, Ships and Ammunition,
is no Treason within 25. 6. 3. (for then this Law had been idle and
superfluous, especially being to continue, but during the Queens life) and so
there can be no Treason at this day in Sir John ^othams Act.

Secondly, That no detaining or withholding of such Castles, Forts, Ships and
Ammunition is Treason within these particular acts, but that which is done
maliciously and Rebelliously and continued six days after a Proclamation under
the great Seal, and proclaimed in the Cou^ty, to deliver them up unto the
Queen, or her substitutes for her use. Now Sir John Hotham detained Hull, and
denied his Majesty to seize and enter it, not Maliciously and Rebelliously,
but in obedience to the Parliaments command, which entrusted him to keep it
for the present both for the King and Kingdoms use, for the prevention of
Civill-warres and danger to the Realm, and the excluding of foreign forces
which might be landed there, neither did his Majesty make any Proclamation
under his great Seal, or give him six days space to deliver it up. Therefore
this Act of his is and can be no Treason, neither within the particular expired
forecited Acts were they in force, much less within 25. E. 3. which extends
not to this case. And so his Majesty was utterly mistaken in the Law, in
proclaming Sir John Hotham Traitor, and declaring this act of his to be
Treason, of his own head, without consulting with his Judges or Council
learned in the Laws, who would questionless have informed him; That this Act
of his is now neither Treason nor Felony by the Law, had he done it of his own
voluntary accord much less seeing he did it only by the Parliaments direction
and command, as their Servant for the common safety of the Realm, exclusions
of foreign forces and Artillery and prevention of an intended Civill-warre,
without any thought of the least disobedience or disloyalty to his Majesty
into whose possession he declared he was and is ever ready to surrender up the
Town, as soon as the Parliament shall command him. In a word the Scot^ late
seizing upon all his Majesty's Towns Castles in Scotland, and on New castle
here, and detaining them against him after demands, has by his Majesty and
both Kingdoms in Parliament been tacitly if not expressly resolved and
declared to be no Treason, being done for the public peace and safety of the
whole Realm of Scotland and England. Therefore much more must Sir John Hothams
seizing but of Hull one single Town, and his detaining it for a season only
for his Majesty's and the Kingdoms use, and the peace and safety of the whole
Kingdom, and that by the Parliaments express command as their Instrument, be
adjudged no Treason, Felony, no nor Misdemeanor. And since both Houses of
Parliament the only proper Judges of Treason, to whom both the King and Sir
John appealed for justice, have upon full hearing and debating of the cause,
voted and adjudged it, to be no Treason or offense, and published these their
Votes in print to all the world, I cannot discern, how by any Law, his
Majesty, or his Malignant Counselors, can possibly fasten any charge of
Treason, Felony, or Misdemeanour, on Sir John; but must all conclude him to be
an innocent Noble and weldeserving Gentleman, for so faithfully and
courageously discharging the trust reposed in him by the Parliament for the
whole Kingdoms peace and security, and his Majesty's safety too. As for his
late drowning of the Country about Hull, to the spoil of much Grasle, Corn,
and great prejudice of particular men, with which his Majesty charge him in
his last Letter to the Houses, it is only for the better preservation and
defense of Hull for the common safety, and therefore he may by Law justify
this Act, even as men in times of War may justify the burning or demolishing
of a Suburb for the whole Cities safety, and the making of Eorts and Trenches
in another man's ground, for to resist an invading Enemy. Which I have formerly
proved Lawful by our Lawbookes. Moreover, this drowning was through his
Majesty's own occasion (on whom the blame must originally rest) who came to
beseige Sir John Hotham as a Traitor, and take Hull out of his custody,
(contrary to the trust reposed in him by the Parliament) by force of Arms with
an Army of Horse and Foot, to the open violation of the Kingdoms peace, the
endangering of the whole Realm and Parliament, against whom this war is
principally raised and intended, under pretext of being avenged of Sir John
Hotham, who has done naught but by the Parliaments direction, as their
servant, and trustee for the safe keeping of Hull, not against the King, but
only for the King and Kingdoms use, till it may without danger to the Realm,
by Order of Parliament be rendered up into his Majesty's actual possession, who
has no particular Right or Title to it, but only a general as the Kingdoms
Servant and trustee for the peoples safety, which is now endangered through his
Majesty's listening to evil Counselors; Who whisper to him in private, and
have engaged him in a Civill-warre against his Parliament and people, and not
hearkening to his Parliament, the Graund Counsel both of King and Kingdom,
whose public impartial advice, his Royal Progenitors have always most
highly esteemed, and followed; and thereby made themselves great and
honorable, and the Kingdom happy.

The Conclusion.
I shall now wind up all in a few words, I suppose I have made it most
apparently evident to every indifferent man's judgment that Sir John Hothams
forecited Actions (with which his Majesty is so much incensed) are neither
Treason nor Felony by the Laws of the Land, (by which his Majesty has often
lately protested to rule, and be guided, the Sea Stephen Gardiners Letter to
the Lord Protector. Fox Acts and Monuments first Edition p. 741. b. where he
affirms (that he being Ambassador to Henry the 8. in the Empeperours Court,
did there in a case of Jewels defend and maintain by commandment of the
King) that the Kings of this Realm were not above the orders of their Laws.
Kings of England by their Coronation Oaths being subject to their Lawet, not
their Laws to them) and by the Parliaments Resolution, not so much as a
Misdemeanour or offense, but a lawful act done by the express commands for
the public peace and safety of the Realm and prevention of a Civil war. I
appeal then to his Majesty, to every English man's or other Subjects
Conscience, and advise them all in the presence of God (as they will answer the
contrary at the great approaching day of Judgment) seriously to consider, and
then resolve within their breasts; whether these inoffensive Acts of Sir John
Hotham, accompanied with all the praerecited Circumstances, be a just and
sufficient ground, to the King or any of his subjects, in point of conscience
or policy (especially in this season, when Ireland is in danger of losing and
England almost exhausted with necessary public payments, With voluntary
contributions and much d^^^acted and divided in it self) to raise an
unnaturally bloody civil war against Hull, and in it against the Parliament
and Kingdom, by which the King and his Par^isons will be by degrees so far
engaged against the Parliament and his Kingdom, and they by way of just
defense so far engaged against the King and them (without Gods merciful
prevention) that we shall all now (after so long enjoyed peace) most
unnaturally sheath our swords in one another bowels, out one another
throats, shed one another blood, burn, spoil, waste, destroy and prey upon
one another houses Lands, Goods, possessions, make our whole Kingdom a very
Field and Sea of English blood, and in conclusion (without Gods interposing
mercy) utterly rain both our King Kingdom, Parliament Religion our selves and
our posterities and make our Land a Prey to Popish foreign enemies, who now
rejoice at our Divisions, (which they much foment) and thereby hope to surprise
and wholly conquer us ere it be long. And if our consciences answer us, (as
they will) after full deliberation that these Acts of Sir John ^otham be no
just cause or ground to warrant such unnatural, bloody, fatal destructive
civil war, O let us not then once venture or presume to take up Arms against
our own dear native Country which has bred us, against the Parliament who
sit night and day, and spend both their Fortunes time and Spirits to redress
our grievances, prevent our immanent dangers, advance our happiness and
prosperity and preserve our long enjoyed Tranquillity; against our dear loving
brethren, kindred friends, and Countrymen, who never did us the least injury,
against our selves, our children, families, which a Civill-warre may quickly
ruin, nor yet to countenance, justify or side with those unnatural vipers,
and unreasonable ^ottish Brutes who either maliciously or inconsiderately
foment, and promote such an unnatural impious causeless civil war. But let
us all put forth our utmost best endeavors, and power out our fervent prayers
to God to prevent and cease these civil combustions, to aid and preserve our
dear Native Country, Kingdom, Religion, the Parliament our selves and our
pos^erity against these malignant Incendiaries, who seek their utter
destruction. O let no true bred English man or Christian be so degenerous, so
B^rbarous and brutish, as to become his own, his dear brethrens posterities,
Countries, Kingdoms bloody Executioner, to do such disservice to his Country
in a few days or hours, which he shall with brinish tears repent for over! I
shall likewise humbly presume to beseech his Majesty upon the bended knees of
my soul, most seriously to consider all the Premises, and if upon persual of
them, there shall appear no just or lawful cause in point of conscience and
true Christian (not Machivillian) policy, necessarily to enforce him to make a
civil war upon his Kingdom, only for the act of one particular Subject, (as
is yet pretended) which in truth amounts not by the Law either to Felony or
Treason, if to a trespass or Misdameanor, that then he would be most
graciously pleased according to his Oath, his Royal Duty, and many reiterated
Protestations, to preserve his people and Kingdom in a sweet peace and blessed
unity, to disband his present Forces and tumultuous Cavaliers, discard all
bloody Counselors who have advised him to a most unnatural unseasonable,
dangerous civil war, to return with speed to London, and close with his
great and best Counsel, the Parliament, for the preservation and present aid
of bleeding Ireland, the settling and composing of his peoples present fears
and distractions, the effecting of of a perfect thorough Reformation and Union
in Church and state the redress of all remaining grievances, the advancement
of Truth of the flourishing estate of his three Kingdoms, and his own Royal
Honor, Revenues and Greatness, which will eternally gain his Majesty the
servent Prayers, hearts, affections, purses, and ready service of all his
Kingdoms and subjects together with immortal honor, whereas if he shall
still proceed in prosecution of this desperate civil war against his people,
Kingdom, Parliament, the guilt of all his subjects innocent blood, which shall
be shed in this unnatural causeless war, will light heavy upon his
conscience, be required at his hands, and in conclusion both himself, his
Kingdoms and loyal people will be brought to the very extremity of misery. If
not to utter ruin after such a long enjoyed flourishing peace both under his
own and his predecessors peaceably reigns. I shall conclude with that of the
Poet.

Silius Italicus. Pan. Bella^. l. 11. f. 142.
Pax optima Rerum
Homini novisse datum est; Pax vna Triumphis,
Innumeris po^^r; Pax custodne salutem
Et Cives aquare potens: Te petimus omnes.
O Most gracious Lord God, though thou justly plague us with thy other
Judgments for our sins, yet give us not over to the sword, the forest of
all thy Judgments, an unnatural bloody civil war, but since thou art a
Heb. 19. 20 Rom 15 33.
God of peace, and have promised, Psalm. 29. 11.
to give thy people the blessing of peace, (which we of this Land have now
uninterruptedly enjoyed almost an hundred years together through thine
extraordinary mercy) do thou out of thy superaboundant goodness continue and
Is^y 26. 3.
preserve us still in perfect peace whose hearts are stayed on thee. And let
there be no end of our peace with thy heavenly Majesty, with our own
consciences, and one with another (King with Parliament, Kingdom, and People
and they with King) till Jesus Christ the Isay. 9. 6.
Prince of peace, his second coming, who shall give all his Isay. 51. 11. c.
61. 7.
everlasting peace and bliss in his celestial Kingdom. Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

