PRYNNE The MEMBER reconciled to PRYNNE The BARRESTER. OR An Answer to a
Scandalous Pamphlet, Entitled, PRYNNE against PRYNNE. Wherein is a clear
demonstration, That William Prynne, Utter Barrester of Lincolnes Inn, in his
Sovereign Power of Parliaments and Kingdoms, is of the same Judgment with,
and no ways contradictory to William Prynne Esquire, A Member of the House of
Commons in his MEMENTO. Wherein the unlawfullnesse of the Proceedings against
the King, and altering the present Government is manifested out of his former
writings and all cavils and calumnies of this scandalous Pamphleteer fully
Answered.

By William Prynne Esquire, Barrester at Law, and a Member of the House of
Commons.

Tit. 1. 12. 13. One of themselves, even a Prophet of their own, said; The
Cretians ARE ALWAYS LIARS, evil beasts, slow Bellies: This witness is true:
wherefore rebuke them sharply, that they may be sound in the faith.

LONDON Printed Anno Dom. 1649.

To the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
MEeting this morning with a printed Pamphlet entitled Prynne against Prynne;
Or the answeer of William Prynne, Vtter-Barrester of Lincolnes Inn; to a
pamphlet, lately published by william Prynne Esquire; a Member of the House of
Commons, entitled, a brief Memento to the present unparliamentary I unto;
touching their present intentions and proceedings to Depose and Execute CHALES
STEWARD, their lawful Sovereign: with an Imprimatur of Theodore Iennings,
Jan. 25. 1648. prefixed to it: written (as I am credibly informed) by a
Colonel, a Member of the Commons House, and one of his Majesty's present
Judges, to represent and render me an Apostate, and turne-coate to the world
(like himself) and to gain some color for this unjust and illegal
proceedings, (if possible) from my writings, who ever from my Soul abominated
and declared against them as Jesuiticall and Treasonable in all my writings; I
held it my duty to return this short and speedy Answer thereunto; both to
vindicate my wounded reputation, against all imputations of inconstancy, and
mutability in my principles, or actions, which have been always loyal,
uniform, aiming only at the Common-good, not vertiginous, mutable; perfidious,
and selfish, as his and his Confederates appear to all men. It is Gods own
glory to be, Mal. 3. 6.
unchangeable, Iam, 1. 17.
unvariable, and without shadow of turning: Heb. 13. 8.
yesterday, to day, and the same for ever. Camdens, Elizabeth, Speed, and
Hollinshed.
SEMPER EADEM, was Qu^een Elizabeth's Motto: and Semper idem, shall be (through
Gods assisstance) mine: who as I am commanded by God himself, to be 1 Cor 15.
58.
always steadfast, unmovable, and Prove. 24* 21.
not to meddle (or confederate) with those who are given to change; So, I
trust, to manifest my self in this ensuing Tract, (in despite of calumny) to
be still the same I was heretofore, both to the Kings and Kingdoms true and
real interest, which now lie both at Stake, likely to be speedily and
irrecoverably lost by some false rooking Gamesters, who play badly for
themselves. Which is the fear and apprehension of their and his poor
Countries friend, and wel-wisher, (for which he is once more like to become a
Martyr.)

January 29 ^648. William Prynne

PRYNNE the Member, reconciled to PRYNNE the BARRESTER.
HAd the Compi^er of the late absurd Pamphlet, entitled Prynne against Prynne,
as many guts in his Brains as he has in his Belly or as much Honesty and
Sincerity in his Head and Heart, as he has disloyalty and insincerity in both,
he could ^ot have been so irrational or dishonest, as to have published such a
piece of Folly and Nonsense as this, instead of answering the Memento; which
(though a Right worshipful Colonel and a Member too) yet he dares not
encounter; his brains being all sunk into his guts; and his Pen as blunt as
his sword, that never yet slew nor wounded one Cavalier, though he has gained
and received some thousand of pounds for his Grand Services in these late
Wars. When this Great Champion dare op^nly appear in the field against any
thing I have written, with his name thereto affixed, (of which it seems he is
ashamed) I dare assure him, William Prynne, the Barrester, or William Prynne
the Member; will hand to hand encounter. W. P. the Colonel, or W. P. the
Burgess of W. though a Giant in bulk, but a Pigmy in most things else. But to
come briefly to the matter.

It is very true, which he relates, page 1. That William Prynne Esquire a
Member of the House of Commons, did in his Brief Memento endeavor to diswade
the rest of the Members sitting in Parliament from acting or proceeding against
the King. And had they been so provident, wise and loyal, as to have given an
ear to his seasonable and timely advise, they had never plunged themselves and
the Kingdom into such difficulties and confusions as now they have done by
their unjust and illegal trial and condemnation of the King, to have His head
severed from his shoulders, by a New erected high Court of Justice; without
authority, law, justice, or any legal or judicial proceedings: for which they
found no warrant nor president in William Prynne the Barrester his Soverain
Power of Parliaments and Kingdoms; but many arguments against and dehortations
from it.

First, The very Title of his Book (had the purblinde Pamphleter perused it)
might have deterred him and his fellow members from such a ^esuiticall and
popish proceeding, to the eternal infamy and scandal of our Religion: it is
this. The treachery and disloyalty of Papists to their Sovereigns in Doctrine
and Practice, together with the first part of the Sovereign power of
Parliaments and Kingdoms. Wherein the Traitorous Antimonarchicall Doctrines,
practices and attempts of Papists upon the Persons, Crowns Prerogatives of
their Sovereigns: with the dangerous designs, affests and consequences, of
their present illegal arming, and access to the Kings person, by means of
evil Counselors, are briefly discovered. The Jurisdiction, Power, privileges
claimed, exercised by our popish Parliaments, Prelates, Lords and Commons, in
former ages, exactly paralleld with those now claimed by the Lords and Com^mons
in this present Parliament: which are manifested to be far more loyal,
dutiful, moderate; more consistant with, less invasive (...), and destructive
to the pretended Sovereign power and Prerogative of the King, then those in
former ages. And the High Court of Parliament proved by pregnant Reasons and
Authorities; to be the mos^ sovereign power of all other in this Kingdom,
etc. By William Prynne, Utter-Barrester of Lincolnes Inn, with this License of
the Commons House affixed to it. It is this second day of May 1643. Ordered by
the Committee of the House of Commons in Parliament for printing: that this
Book entitled the Treachery and disloyal^y of papists to their Sovereigns
etc. be printed, by Michael Spark Seino^, John White: Whence the Argument
stands thus.

Master Prynne the Barrester, though he maintained the High Court of Parliament
to be the most Sovereign Power of all others in this Kingdom; in his
Sovereign Power of Parliaments: yet he and the Committee of the Commons House
which authotized it, does in the very Title of that Book, in express terms
condemn the Papists and popish Parliaments, of Treachery and Disloyalty to
their Sovereigns, both in Doctrine and practice, and of Traiterous
Antimonarchiall ^ractises and attempts upon the Persons, Crowns* and
Prerogatives of their Kings, in deposing and murdering them. And manifests the
Jurisdiction, Power and privileges claimed b^ the Lords and Commons (not the
Commons alone without the Lords, or the tenth part of the Commons under the
Armies force, whiles the rest are imprisoned and secluded by them) to be far
more loyal, dutiful and moderate then those claimed and exercised by our
popi^^ Parliaments, Prelates, Lords and Commons: Ergo, he refu^es William,
Prynne a Member of the House of Commons: in his breife Memento to the present
unparliamentary Iunto, wherein he diswades them from their present dislo^all
proceedings to depose and execute Charles Stewad their lawful King; as being a
Jesuitical and popish practice, contrary to the practice and principles of all
protestant Parliaments; and the manifold Petitions, Remonstrances,
Declarations, Protestations, Solemn Leagues, Covenants and Engagement of this
present Parliament. Whether Prynne be against Prynne in this, and whether
Prynne the Barrester and Member, be not both unanimous against their
proceedings herein, let the world, and this ignorant mistaken Pamphleter now
judge.

Secondly, Mr. Prynne the Barrester, in the four first Pages of the first Part
of his Sovereign Power of Parliaments, in as positive and earnest manner as
can be, condemns and censures the Ies^its and Papists doctrines and practices,
in deposing and murdering Kings and Princes, as treasonable, damnable, wicked
and heretical: and particularly, charge them for attempting to destroy and
murder Hi^ Majesty and (...) ^osterity, as well as Queen Elizabeth, and King
James, alleging many protestant Writers of our own Church, as Doctor John
Whi^^^ Bishop Jewel, Bishop Bilson, and others, condemning them for this their
doctrine and practice, which can stand neither with peace nor piety. Ergo, Mr.
Prynne the Member, who does the very same in his Memento; are both accorded,
and not against one another, but both against this Pamphleters, and his
Confederares, Jesuitical, popish Assertions, and practice.

Add hereunto, that Mr. Prynne the Barrestet, not only in his Truth
triumphing over falsehood, antiquity over novelty, printed by Order of the
Commons House 1644. and in his sword of Christian Magistracy supported Anno
1646. has asserted the Power and Prerogative of Christian Princes and Kings,
as much as any man in Ecclesiastical matters; but in his third part of the
Sovereign power of Parliaments and Kingdoms, p. 62* 63 determines thus.
Thirdly, Neither is this any parcel of the Controversy (between the King and
Parliament.) Whether Subjects may lay violent hands upon the persons of their
Princes; wittingly or willingly, To deprive them, of their Lives, or Liberties:
especially In cold blood, when they do not actually, nor personally assault
their lives or chastityes, or for any public misdemeanors, without a
precedent sentence of imprisonment or death against them given judicially by
the whole State or Realm, As in some elections and Heathen Kingdom, in (...)
times.
* where they have such authority to araigne or condemn them, for all
unan^mously disclaim, yea abominate such traiterous practices, and Jesuitical
positions, as execrable and unchristian. Fourthly, Neither is this the thing in
difference, as most mistake it: Whether the Parliament may lawfully raise an
Army, to go immediately and directly against the person of the King, to
apprehend, or offer violence to Him, much less intentionally to destroy Him,
or to resist his own Personal attempts against them, even to the hazard of
his life. For S^^ (...) Collection of all Remonstrances. etc*
the Parliament and their Army too, have in sundry Remonstrances, Declarations,
Protestations, and petitions renounced any such intention or design at all*
for which there is no color to charge them: when neither the Parliament nor
their forces in this their resistance, have the least thought at all to offer
any violence to the Kings own person, or to oppose his legal just sovereign
authority. The very words and languages of Mr. Prynne the Member in his
Memento, who is still consonant to himself in both: And p. 92. to 98. he
adds, (...) proves, Cook. 7. Report. (...) case of f. 11* P^il^^. A^ch. de
(...) Vinda^i. c. 17^.
That hereditary Kings are Kings before their (...) coronation, which is but a
ceremony: That it is false and (...) to affirm, that Heredit^ry Kings before
their Coronations, ti^^ they are anointed, are not sacred, nor exempt from
violence. That Saules person was sacred, exempt from his Subjects violence, not
because he was anointed, as if that only did privilege him: but because he
was a King appointed by the Lord himself* That these texts and speeches of
David, 1 Samuel 24. 6. 10. c. 26 v. 21. 23. 2 Samuel 1. 12. 16. The Lord forbid
that I should do this thing unto my Master the Lords anointed, to stretch
forth my hand against him, seeing he is the Lords anointed. I will not put
forth my hand against my Lord, for he is the Lords anointed; And David said to
Abishai, (when he would have slain Saul) Destroy him not, for who can stretch
forth his hand against the Lords anointed, and be guiltless? The Lord forbid,
that I should stretch forth my hand against the Lords anointed. For wast thou
not afraid to stretch forth thy hand against the Lords anointed? Thy blood
shall be upon thy head, for thy mouth has testified, that thou have sl^ine the
Lords anointed, etc. Prove, That Subjects ought not wilfully or purposely to
murder or offer violence to the Person of their Kings, especially in cold
blood, when they do not actually assault them. That David and his men might
not with safe conscience, stretch forth their hands, nor rise up against their
Sovereign King Saul, to assault or kill him thus in cold blood, without any
assault or present provocaetion: which had been treachery and unpiety in a
Son in Law, a servant, a subject, a successor, who slew the Amalekite, that
came and brought him tidings of Saul's death, (together with his Crown and
bracelet) instead of giving him a reward, (a^ he likewise (...)
put Baanah and Richab to death as Traitors, who having murdered King
Ishbosheth, though his enemy, and corrivall instead of rewarding them, and
hanged up their hands and feet) because he reported himself had slain him, to
gain a reward from David: which concludes that it was not lawful for any of
Saul's own men to slay him, (no not in an exigent) by his own command. And he
concludes. That the evasion of Doctor Fern: That David's dem^^nor etc. was
extraordinary, derogating exceedingly from the personal safety of Princes;
yea, and exposing them to such perils, as they have cause to con the Doctor
small thanks for such a bad invention, I shall reject it* as the extraordinary
fancy of the Doctor and other Lo^alists (or Jesuists) void both of truth and
loyalty* Now what Mr. Prynne the Member could have written more in point of law
and conscience positively and directly against the unlawfulnes and disloyalty
of the Junctoes, and their High Courts arraigning and putting the King to
death, and that in cold blood (contrary to their faith, Oaths, Engagements,
even after the Treaty, and above two years after his first imprisonment) then
what he has thus written and printed as a Barrester, (by the House of Commons
own Order and approbation, dated May the 8. 1643. prefixed to the third part,)
or whether these passages do not most fully and punctually concur with what
he has published and asserted in his MEMENTO, to the eternal reproach and
shame of this malitions Impostor and perverter of his words and opinion, let
all sober and unb^assed men resolve. And if these passages be not sufficient,
his Histriomastix printed Anno 1633. p. 516, to 520. 825. 826. 943. with his
answer to the Bill concerning it, in the Star Chamber, wherein he did upon his
oath, condemn and abhor from his heart, the popish Doctrine and practice, of
murdering and deposing Kings, as contrary to the Oaths of Supremacy and
Allegiance, which he had taken as a Barrester. His Epistle before his
Quench-coal Published. Anno 1638. wherein he interminis condemns this Popish
and Jesuiticall doctrine and practice, as faction, rebellion and treason. His
pleasant Purge for a Roman Catholic, p. 104. to 112. printed 1642. where (as
an Vtter-Barrester) he particularly refutes and censures the Popes and Jesuits
doctrine and practice of killing or dep^sing Kings, and absolving Subjects from
their Oaths and Allegiance, answering all their arguments and texts to prove
it. And the Antipathy of the English Lordly Prelacy, both to Regal verity and
Civil unity: or, an historical Collection of the several execrable Treasons.
Conspiracies, Rebellions, seditions, State schisms, Contuma^ies, Oppressions,
and Antimonarchicall practices, of our English, British, French, Scottish and
Irish Lordly Prelates against our Kings, Kingdoms etc. published by him as an
Utter-Barrester, and dedicated to the Parliament, Anno 1641. will abundantly
absolve him from this scandalous scriblers misrepresentation of his loyalty,
and false surmises contrariety of his writings, as a Barrester and Member,
which have been always loyal and harmonious against killing or deposing of
Kings, aiming at nothing but the Honor, peace and happi^esse both of the King,
Kingdom, Parliament, Church, without any private or sinister ends whatsoever,
as all impartial PERVSERS of them cannot but acknowledge.

Thirdly, Mr. Prynne the Barrester, in the same first Part, page 7 asserts and
proves. That popish Parliaments, Peers and Prelates, have heretofore
challenged and exercised a greater Jurisdiction over their Kings, then this
Parliament, or any other since the embracing of the Protestant Religion ever
claimed, and do in a great measure disclaim. For proof whereof he showed,
That they had challenged a just and legal Power, (as they deemed it) to depose
their Kings: produces presidents to prove it, and among others the presidents
of King Edward the 2d. and Richard the 2d. who were first enforced to resign
their Crowns, and after that, (not arraigned and condemned to lose their
heads, in a High Court of Justice, as now) had a sentence of deposition drawn
up against them, but were to be honorably treated and maintained all their
lives, page 7. 8. 78. to 80. and p. 9. he writes. That our popish Parliaments,
Peers and Prelates have often translated the Crown from the right Heirs, and
settled it on others who had no right nor title to it, producing examples to
prove it: In the close whereof he writes thus. Such a transcendent power and
jurisdiction as this, to disinherit the right Heir, and to transfer the
Crown to whom they thought meetest, Neither this present, nor any other
protestant Parliaments, Peers or Subjects ever exercised, though popish
Parliaments, Lords and Commons have thus frequently done it. And p. 86. he
adds. True it is, Our protestant Parliaments never challenged nor exercised
such Jurisdiction, and I presume they will not do it. And good reason had he
thus to write, because the E^^act C^llection. p. 657* 658.
Lords and Commons in Parliament, in their Answer to his Majesty's Declaration,
after his late victory against the Rebels on Sunday the 23. of October 1642.
had but a few months before made this Protestation to all the world concerning
the allegations, That the Army raised by the Parliament, is to murder and
depose the King. We hoped the contrivers of that Declaration, or any that
professed the name of a Christian could not have so little charity, as to raise
such a scandal: especially, when they must needs know the Protestation taken
by every Member of both Houses, whereby they promise in the presence of
Almighty God to defend his Majesty's Person. The promise and protestation made
by the Members of both Houses upon the nomination of the Earl of Essex to be
General, and to live and dye with him, wherein is expressed: That this Army
was raised for Defense of the Kings person, our often earnest and humble
addresses to his Majesty to leave that desperate and dangerous Army, wherewith
he is now encompassed, raised and upheld to the hazard if his own, and the
Kingdoms ruin. And to come in person to his Parliament, where he should be
sure to remain in honor and safety. And our humble Petition directed to be
presented to him by the hands of the Earl of Essex, before any blow given, to
remove his Royal Person from that Army, a request inconsistant with any
purpose to offer the least violence to his person, which has and ever shall be
dear unto us. And concerning the Imputation laid to our charge, of our raising
this Army to alter the frame of Government, and establish the Laws of the
Land, we shall need to give it no further answer then this. That if to raise an
Army in our just defense, when another is marching toward us, to destroy us
and our laws, be to alter the frame of Government, then is that ARMY raised
for that purpose, otherwise it is for our own, and the laws necessary
preservation.

And not long after, the Ex^ct Coll^ct on p. 695. ^^6*
Lords and Commons in their Remonstrance November. 2. 1642. in answer to his
Majesty's Declaration the 26 of May 1642. concerning the Commission of Array,
has these notable Passages; But most injuriously, most maliciously it is
affirmed by the contrivers of this Answer, That we told the King that we might
without want of modesty and duty depose him. Did we so much as once name that
word, the signification whereof we professed, that we did not suffer it so much
as to enter into our thoughts? Did we say, that with duty and modosty we might
depose the King, because we said, we never suffered it to enter into our
thoughts? Or do not they rather say it, that will needs make Presidents to be
rules and patterns? Sure when we said, That some Presidents were such, as that
they ought not to be rules for us to follow, we might by any ingenious Reader,
with much more probability been thought to have intended those of deposing
Kings, then to have said that with duty and modesty Kings might be disposed,
because we affirmed that we had not suffered such things to enter into our
thoughts.

And although they would persuade his Majesty that there is little confidence
to be placed in our Modesty and duty, yet as God is witness of our thoughts, so
shall our actions witness to all the world, that to the honor of our
Religion, and of those that are most zealous in it, (so much stricken at by the
Contrivers of that Declaration under odious names) we shall suffer more from
and for our Sovereign, then we hope God will ever permit the malice of wicked
Counselors to put us to, and though the happiness of this and all Kingdoms
depends chiefly upon God, yet we acknowledge that it does so mainly depend
upon his Maj. and the Royal Branches of that Root, That as we have heretofore*
so we shall hereafter esteem no hazard too great, no^ reproach too vile, but
that we shall willingly go through the one, and undergo the other. That we and
the whole Kingdom may enjoy that happiness, which we cannot in an orderly way
of providence expect from any other fountain or Streams, then those from whence
(were the ^oyson of evil counsels once removed from about them) we doubt not,
but we and the whole Kingdom should be satisfied most abundantly.

Therefore Mr. Prynne the Barrester as well as M. Prynne the Member, and both
Houses of Parliament too, are point blanke against the present arraigning,
deposing and executing of the King, condemning it as a Popish and Jesuitical
Practice, never owned, but disclaimed by every Protestant Parliament, and by
this Parliament in two express Declarations, two solemn Protestations, and in
the solemn League and Covenant since; all which this Pamphleter took, and
assented to, as readily as any other Members; and therefore cannot excuse
himself from most detestable prevarication and perjury, in violating these his
solemn Protestations. League and Covenant, with his Oaths of Supreamacy and
Allegiance to boot, which he has often times taken, the guilt and infamy whereof
must rest upon his conscience, and eternally cry for vengeance against him,
unless he expiate it by timely and deep repentance.

Fourthly, Mr. Prynne the Barrester in his Epistle to the Reader before his
fourth Part, thus expresses himself. For my own pa^e as I have always been,
and ever shall be an Honor, a Defender of Kings and Monarchy, (the best of
Government. whiles it keeps within the bounds which law and conscience have
prescribed) so I shall never so far degenerate below the duty of a man, a
Lawyer, a Scholar, a Christian, as to misinforme or flatter either, nor yet
(out of any popular vainglory) court either Parliaments or people to the
prejudice of KINGS JUST ROYALTIES, but carry such an equal hand between them,
as shall do right to both, Injury to neither, to preserve, and support their
just and legal Soveraigntyes, jurisdictions, Rights, within their proper
limits without tyrannical invasions, or seditions encroachments one upon
another, This is Mr: Prynne the Barresters sense.

And in the third Part of his Sovereign Power of Parliaments and Kingdoms:
page 147. he concludes thus. Let Gods curse and men's for ever rest upon all
those, who are in love with any war, especially a civil, within their own
dearest Countries bowels; Or Dure abuse my loyull sincere Lucubrations, to any
disloyal sinister designs to the prejudice of their Sovereigns, or the
States wherein they live; which he never published, to countenance or encourage
any tumultuous, REBELLIOUS factions, ambitions, Traiterous Spirits, to mutiny
or Rebel against their Sovereigns: but only out of a cordial desire to effect
such a speedy, honorable, safe, religious, sempeternall Peace between King and
Parliament, as all true Christian English hearts, both cordially pray, long
for, and endeavor. Ergo Mr. Prynne the Member, and Barrester, is still one and
the same man, an assertor of Monarchy and Loyalty, and no ways contradictory
to himself in any of his writings; and Gods curse and man's must rest upon this
unpurified Pamphleter, for his malicious perverting of his words, against their
scope and purpose, to justify the deposing and murdering of the King; and
altering of our Monarchy.

5ly. Mr. Prynne the Barrester, neither in his 4. Part of the Sovereign Power
of Parliaments, nor in his Appendix to them, has produced any one President
(no not of any one Popish Parliament or Kingdom) that ever judicially
condemned or executed their lawful King, were he never so Tyrannical, impious
or flagitious; much less any Protestant Parliament or Realm, who condemn and
abhor both the Doctrine and Practice of murdering or destroying their Kings,
as Jesuiticall, Papal, impious, Heriticall and damnable; abjured by the very
Oath of Allegiance; as he proves expressly. Part. 1. p. 1. 2. 3. 4. Therefore
Mr. Prynne the Member, in his Memento, is of the self same Judgment, as he
was in his Sovereign power of Parliaments: in both which this Pamphleter (a
Member of the high Court of Justice, who condemned the King to death) may read
his Neck-Verse, and fatal destiny if he repent not.

All other Passages truly quoted out of Mr. Prynne the Barrester, to prove the
Sovereign Power of Parliaments and Kingdoms, (not of a Piece of a Parliament,
or Kingdom, much less of a ninth part of a Commons House sitting under a
force, who are neither a Parliament nor Kingdom) Mr. Prynne the Member still
averres, in this and his own genuine sense, as they are printed in his Books,
not as they are mangled, and misapplied by this idle Scribler, to those few
Commons now sitting, p. 5. 6. etc,

2dly Whereas he alleges p. 7. 8. 9. 10. That William Prynne the Member his
first Argument against the Iunto is: That their proceedings against the King is
an Offense within the Statute of 25. E. 3. concerning Treason. I William Prynne
the Barrester do remember, that in the beginning of this late War the
Cavaliers used the same Argument against the Parliaments raising Arms, and I
then made this Answer to it, p. 107. of my said first Part: That The Parliament
and Whole Kingdom, being the Highest Power, cannot by any public Acts or
Votes of theirs consented to in Parliament become Traitors or guilty of High
Treason against the King, either by the Common Law, or the Statute of 25. E. 3.
c. 2. of Treasons; which extends, not to the whole Kingdom, or Court of
Parliament representing it (of which no Treason was ever yet presumed) etc.
William Prynne the Barrester and Member is still of the same opinion, and not
repugnant to him self; who speaks there, of a WHOLE KINGDOM, AND COURT OF
PARLIAMENT (as this Page. 5 6 8 9.
Pamphletter relates his words, and the Titles of all his 4. Parts manifest)
consisting of Lords and Commons, and that in a condition of freedom and safety,
sitting in a full and free Parliament: But he never meant nor intended it, of
the House of Commons alone, acting and voting without and against the House of
Lords; nor of a House of Commons sitting and acting under a horrid Arme^ force,
as now much less of a remnant of a Commons-House sitting and Voting when near
nine parts or ten of their fellow members are by a mutinous Army imprisoned,
secluded and driven away from the House: or of 40. or 50 Commons sitting under
a force and usurping to themselves without and against the consent of their
secluded Fellow Members, the supreme Authority of the Kingdom, making Acts of
Parliament, and erecting a New High Court of Justice without the Lords or their
Fellow Nembers consents, to indite, arraigne, condemn and execute the King as
a Traitor, and without the whole Kingdoms, or Scotlands and Irelands joint
consents, of which he is likewise King. Such a Parliament, as this consisting
of some 50. or 60 Commons only without King, Lords, or the rest of their Fellow
Commoners, he never heard nor read of in any age, and so could never intend it:
and therefore in his Memento, might very well mind them of committing Treason,
within this Law; whatever they Vote, order, or ordain, or Enact in such a thin
House under a force, whiles the other Members are secluded, being by Mr.
Speakers own Declaration of July 30. 1647. and the Ordinance of both Houses
August 20. 1647. declared to be merely null and void to all intents even at the
time of its Voting Ordering, Ordaining enacting, and ever after: and so no prea
at all (...) justify such Members in the case they be indicted, and arraigned
of High Treason for it.

3 Whereas this Pamphletter, p. 11 suggesteth. That Will Prynne the Member in
the rehearsal of the Statute of 25. E. 3. has foulely miscarried and falsified
the words of it (in his Mement^) For where as the Statute mentions nothing at
all touching deposing the King; he urges the Statute thus. That it is no less
then High Treason for any man by overt act to compass or imagine the deposition
or death of the King: Adding the word deposition; which is no where found in
the whole Statute.

To this Mr. Prynne the Member answers. 1. That this Ignoramus, has foulely
mis-recited and falsified his words, by omitting part of them: which are these.
First, I shall mind them, that by the Common Law of the Realm, (which he
omits) the Statute of 25. E. 3. and all other Acts concerning Treasons (omitted
likewise by this Scribler) it is no less than High Treason for any man, by
overt Act to compass or imagine the deposition or death of the King: quoting
Cook and Stamford in the margin: and 21. R 2. Plac. Cor. number. 4. 6. 7. in the
Text.

Now though the word deposing, be not in the Statute of 25. E. 3. yet it is in
the Lawbooks which he cites, and in the Parliament Roll of 21. R. 2. which this
Dulman never read.

Therefore this absurd observation and censure of his might well have been
spared. Secondly To compass the deposing (or imprisoning) of the King is in
express Words declared to be Treason by the Statutes of 26 H. 8. c. 13. 1. E.
6. c. 12. 1. Eliz c. 6. 13. E. c. 1. and is no less then High Treason within
the meaning and intention of 25 E 3; c. 2. though not within the Letter, as our
Cook 3. instit. chapter ^ p. 5. 6. 12 13. and 7. Rep. 10, 11
Law Books and all the Judges of England have resolved. Therefore Mr. Prynne
the Member stands rectus in Curia, against this ignorant false aspersion.

4ly, What Mr. Prynne the Barrester writ concerning the Oath of Supremacy,
quoted p. 11 12: he does still aver as to the first branch of it, (which is
distinct from the latter) as applied to the whole Parliament, not to the House
of Commons alone, or those few Members now sitting in it, under a force; of
which he never intended that passage, to whom it is here misapplyed: Only he
must inform; this Gentleman; that the latter clause of this Oath; And do
promise that from henceforth, I shall bear true allegiance to the Kings Highne,
his heirs and lawful successors; and to my power shall assist and defend all
Jurisdictions, Privileges, and Preheminences granted or belonging to the Kings
Highness, his Heirs and Successors on, united and anexed to the Imperial
Crown of this Realm: So help me God. etc. Is a distinct clause from the
former; which he and his Confederates in their late proceedings have quite
forgotten: and shall one day answer for such wilful perjury, in this or the
world to come, if they repent not of it.

5thly. Whereas he adds p. 13. That the Oath of Allegiance relates only to the
Popes unlawful exercise of Authority and Jurisdiction within the Kingdom: And
that William Prynne the Member in his rehearsal makes the Oath to run thus.

That the Pope neither of himself, nor by any Authority of the Church of Rome,
or by any other means, nor any other has power, etc. and so instead of the
words with any other, implying the Authority of the Pope joined with others, he
makes it a distinct clause, nor any other, and so upon this forgery including
the Parliament within those words, nor any other, he would make this proceeding
against the King to be contrary to the Oath of Allegiance. Mr. Prynn^ the
Member answers; First, that though this Oath does principally relate to the
Popes unlawful exercise of Authority and Jurisdiction within this Realm; yet
it relates not only and solely to it, as he pretends. The whole scope of this
Oath is; To secure our Kings from being deposed, or murdered by their Subjects,
or any other: The greatest danger the Parliament then feared, as to those two
Treasons and Mischiefs, was principally from the Pope and his Popish
Instruments, who maintained and averred, the lawfullnesse of deposing and
murdering Christian Princes excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, by their
Subjects, or any other. Against which mischife this Oath and Statute
principally provides; it being contrary to the Doctrine and Practice of all
Protestant Churches and Subjects. But can any man argue. This Oath provides
against the deposing and murdering of our Kings by the Pope or Popish Subjects
or Parliaments, by any influence or authority from the Pope. Ergo it is lawful
for Protestant Subjects and Parliaments to depose and murder their Kings
without infringing this Oath? Does not that Law and Oath which provides against
the greatest and most likelyest Assassinates and Deposers of our Kings provide
likewise against the lesser and more unusual? and is not a Protestants deposing
and murdering of his Prince as treasonable, as unlawful as a Papists, yea and
far worse in this respect, because it hardens and justifies them therein,
scandalizeth and crosses the very practice and principles of the protestant
Religion? If so, then both are alike within the intent and meaning of this Law
and Oath, though the Pope and his instruments be pincipally intended.

2dly. These clauses in the Oath: That the Pope neither by himself* nor with
any other has any power or authority to depose the King etc. That I will bear
true Allegiance to his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, and him and them will
defend to the utter most of my power, against all attempts whatsoever, (a
universal affirmative from or by the Pope or any others) which shall be made
against his or their persons, their Crown, and Dignity, by reason or color of
any such sentence or Declaration, or otherwise: Which last words in the
dis-junctive coupled with the former general ones: and compared with the
following clause: And that neither the Pope nor any person whatsoever, has
power to absolve me from this Oath, or any part thereof etc. and with the first
branch of it. I do truly and sincerely acknowledge, profess, testify, and
declare in my Conscience, before God and the world, that our Sovereign Lord
King Charles, is lawful and rightful King of this Realm, and of all his
Majesty's Dominions and Countries: with this addition, that all Protestant
Subjects are enjoined to take this Oath, as well as Papists, and more
especially every member of the Commons house of Parl. without taking whereof he
is utterly disabled to be a Member, Do infalliby evidence, that this Law and
Oaths related not only, though principally, to the Popes Usurpations in this
Realm, but to all other Subjects usurpations to depose or murder the King by
any usurped or pretended Authority, or High Court of Justice whatsoever.

But that which clears it unanswerably is this; That this very Act provides,
That every Gentleman or person of higher degree, or any person or persons,
which has born or shall bear any Office or place of Captain, Leiutenant, or
any other place, charge or Office in Camp army, or Company of Soldiers, or
Conducters of Soldiers, shall go or pass voluntarily out of this Realm, to
serve any foreign Prince, State, or Potentate (be it Protestant or Popish,)
before that he shall become bound by obligation with two such suertyes as shall
be allowed of by the Officers therein limited to take the same Bond, unto our
Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty, HIS HEIRS and SUCCESS^R; in the sum of
^wenty pounds of current English money at the least, with condition to the
effect following, shall be a Felon. The Tenor ^f which condition follows:
viz. That if the within bounden shall not at any time thereafter be reconciled
to the Pope, or Sea of Rome, nor Shall enter into or consent unto any practice,
plot or conspiracy whatsoever against the Kings majesty his heirs and
Successors: or any of his or their Estate or Estates, Realms or Dominions: but
shall within convenient time after knowledge thereof had, reveal and disclose to
the Kings majesty his heirs and Successors, or some of the Lords of his or
their Honorable Privy Council all such practices, plots and conspiracyes,
that then the said Obligation be void. Which condition being general,
extending to any Plot, practice or conspiracy whatsoever, against the King, His
Heirs and Successors or any of his or their Estate or estates, Realms or
Dominions; without any limitation to the Pope, or other sorraigne Prince, State
or Potentate, or to popish Recusants only; and reaching as well to plots,
practices and conspiracies by any Subjects whatsoever, as well within the
Realm as without; be they protestants, papist, or whatsoever Sect or Religion:
fully clears and proves the Oath of Allegiance to extend though principally to
the pope and foreign Princes and States, and their Treasons and Conspiracies,
yet only unto them; but likewise to the Treasons, Plots, Practices and
conspiracies by any subjects whatsoever within the realm, and to the presert
disloyal votes, acting and Iesuitical proceedings of the members now sitting.

Thirdly, For the pretended perverting of the words of this oath by Mr. Prynne,
viz: Nor any other; for, nor with any other, It is but the Printers oversight
and omission, Nor does it alter the sense in substance, For if the Pope cannot
joining with any other, (suppose the Members now sitting in the Commons house
or the high Court of Justice) lawfully depose nor murder the King, then
certainly those Any other, cannot lawfully depose, nor murder him without the
Pope; within the true meaning of this Oath, under pain of deepest perjury and
Treason to boot: which I desire this Pamphletter now seriously to consider, if
he has any honesty or conscience lest within him.

6thly. What is objected out of Mr. Prynnes Appendix p. 14 is already
sufficiently answered and cleared in the first and second section; and there is
nothing in it, which can justify the late trial, arraignment and condemnation
of the King in the least degree, triable by no law of God or man by such an
usurped and illegal Jurisdiction, amounting to Tyranny in the superlative
Degree. And for the condemnation and beheading of Mary Queen of Scotts; it was
not by her own Parliament and Subjects in her own Kingdom, for any Treason
against them; but for Treason committed in England against Queen Elizabeth,
where she was a Subject and no Queen at all; and that by a surprise, as some
relate.

7thly. To that objected, p. 15 Touching the name and Title which WILLIAM
PRYNNE the Member is pleased to give to the Parliament (he means the 45
Commons; who are no Parliament) now sitting, calling it, A present
unparliamentary Iunto. I William Prynne the Barrester do call to mind, that
when the King and diverse of the Lords and Commons in the beginning of our late
Troubles had deserted the Parliament, I did then in my said first Part of the
Sovereign Power of Parliaments p: 43, 44 maintain and prove; That the
remaining part was a Parliament, notwithstanding the personal absence of the
rest; and that, as long as those absent are Members of the Parliament, they
shall still be legally present, whether they will or no.

To this Mr. Prynne the Member answers. First, That what he has written as a
Barrester in these two Pages of his First Part, will prove fatal to this
Pamphletter and his Junto now sitting, if well considered, and truly recited.
For first, he there proves; That there can be no Parliament without the King,
who ought to be always personally present, in or near his Parliament: which
he has more fully manifested as a Barrester, in his Plea for the Lords, p. 7.
to 13. by many Authorities and Records. The 45. Commons therefore now sitting
without the Lords and their Fellow Members concurrence, and against their
Votes, having illegally and traitorously condemned the King to loose his Head;
and acting as an entire Parliament, without the King, Lords or their Fellow
Members, can be no Parliament at all, but a mere unparliamentary J^nto, by Mr.
Prynne the Barresters Resolution, to which this Scribler refers. And so much
the rather, because they will quite dissolve this Parliament, by putting the
King to death. For the Parliament being but the Kings Parliament and great
Council, and an Authority not an Interest, originally called and authorized to
sit by the Kings Writ alone, which abates and expires by his death; and enables
not to consult without, but only with the King of businesses concerning The
King and His Kingdom; as these clauses of the Writ import. Carolus etc. cum
NOS de advisemento et consensu Consillij NOSTRI pro quibusdam arduis et
urgentibus negotijs NOS, Statum and defensionem Regni NOSTRI ANGLIAE
concernent: quoddam PARLIAMENTVM NOSTRVM etc. tenere ordinavimus: Et ibidem
vobiscum etc. Regni NOSTRI COLLOQVIVM HABERE etc. Quod personaliter intersitis
NOBISCVM etc. super DICTIS NEGOTIIS tractaiur. Et ad faciendum et consentiendum
his quaenunc et. ibidem, de Communi Consilio dicti Regni NOSTRI contegerit
ordinari super NEGOTIIS ANTEDICTIS etc. The King therefore being put to death,
the Parliament must of necessity be dissolved by it, since it can be no more
his Parliament, his Council, nor confer with HIM about HIS and HIS Kingdoms
affairs for which they were called, and elected to treat of as the Peoples
Attorneys or Trustees: the King being both the Head, the beginning, end and
foundation of the Parliament (which cannot subsist without him, no more then a
natural body without an head, or an house without a foundation) as our Modus
(...) Parliamentum Cook 4. I^stit. c. p. 1. 2. etc. Cromptons Jurisdiction of
Courts. f. 1. 2. So my Ple^ for L^^ds p. 7. to 12.
Law books resolve: and so was it expressly adjudged and agreed 1. H. 4. rot.
Parl. n. 1. 14. H. 4. Cook 4. Instit. p. 46. and 4. E. 44. 44. b. That by the
death of the King the Parliament is ipso facto dissolved, as all other Courts
held only by his Writ or Commission are. Neither will the Act made this
Parliament in the 17. year of this King, To prevent Inconveniences which may
happen by the untimely adjourning, Proroguing or Dissolving of this present
Parliament, which enacted: That this PRESENT PARLIAMENT now assembled shall not
be DISOLVED, prorogued, or adjourned unless it be by Act of Parliament to be
passed for that purpose: continue this Parliament in being after the Kings
death, for these reasons. First, because the scope and intent of this Act (made
before our late Wars) was only to disable the King to adjourne prorogue, or
dissolve this Parl. by any Proclamation or Royal Act of his, without the
consent of both houses; as the very title, prologue and close of it resolve:
But never to continue it still a Parliament in case of the King death, against
which it never intended to provide, it being a legal and absolute dissolution
of it by the very fundamental constitution of Parliaments, and the Common Law
of the Realm.

Secondly, Because the King is the head and principal Member of this present
Parliament; and the first person in the enacting Parl. Be it declared and
enacted BY THE KING etc. and therefore when he cease to be and is cut off,
the Parliament must of ne^ cessity cease to be, as well as if the Lords and
Commons had all bin dead or murdered by the Army, in which case the Parliament
had bin ended notwithstanding this Act, which cannot make a thing in being
which is actually destroyed, no more then a dead man to be alive, Because it
was never the intention of the King, Lords and Commons who were all parties to
this act, to set up a new kind of Parliament without either King or Lords, or
the Majority of the Commons house or to vest the Name, power and authority of
the Parliament in an eight or ninth part of the Commons house alone, (as now)
when the King, Lords and residue of the Commons were cut off and forced away by
the Armies violence.

Such a thought as this never once entered into their heads. Therefore the
murdering of the King, the laying aside the Lords house, and secluding of most
of the Commons, must of necessity dissolve this present Parliament
notwithstanding this Act, as Master Prynne the Barrester, proved long since,
before he was a Member, in his Plea, for the Lords. p. 14 15. and so much the
rather, because without them, no Act of Parliament can possibly be made this
Parliament, to dissolve it, within the words or meaning of this Act. The
Commons therefore now sitting, having by their late exorbitant proceedings and
cutting off the Kings and Lords too in Mr. Prynne the Barresters judgment
disolved this present Parliament, and thereby consequently dissolved all
Parliament Comittees in City and country, together with all Ordinances of
Parliament, and all Cook 7. Rep. f. 29. 30. 31. Dyer 165. 4. E. 4. 44. 1. E. 5.
^. a. 1. H. 7. 2 1. E. 3. 6, 7.
Commissions, of the Commissioners of the Great Seal, Judges of the Kings
Courts, Justices of the Peace, Sheriffs, and the like, and the Generals and
all other Officers of the Armies Commissions likewise, and put the Kingdom and
Army into a miserable confusion

Master Prynne the Member conceives he could then and now give them, no other
Title, but that, in his Memento, which he fears the present age and posterity
will have just cause to give them, for the miseries they have brought, and are
like to bring upon them* by their Vn-parliamentary and violent proceedings,
which he doubts will end in their own ruin.

Secondly, Master Prynne the Barrester in those very Pages proves,

That not only the KING, but all the Lords and Commons ought to be present at
the Parliament, and fined if they absent themselves without just cause; and
that all things ought to be acted in Parliament by the Kings, Lords and Commons
joint concurrence; only he adds, That if any of the Lords or Commons when
summoned, shall wilfully absent themselves, that the rest may sit and proceed
without them, and by the Kings consent make wholesome Laws for the Common
wealth. But he neither there nor any where else affirmed that the Lords and
Commons could make binding Laws or Ordinances of Parliament without the King;
or that the Commons alone could make Acts of Parliament without the Lords; as a
few of them now they presume; or that the eight or ninth part only of the
commons house sitting under a force, when the rest of the Members are
imprisoned, secluded and driven away thence by the Armies violence, were a
complete Parliament, or House of commons to vote, order or act any thing
(except only to adjourne, and take Order to remove the force) or that what they
voted or acted under a force, was valid and binding to their fellow MEMBERS, or
any others: but he expressly affirms the contrary: that whatever is voted or
enacted whiles the Parl is under a force is void and null Part: 2. p. 86: And
that no proceedings ought to be in Parliament when most of the Members are
absent or driven away from it. Part. 2. p. 7: which he proves more largely
whiles a Barrester and be fore he was a Member; In his Levellers Levelled: and
his Plea for the Lords.

Therefore this Pamphletter has much abused Master Prynne in this his
misquotation and misapplication of his words

3dly. Mr. Prynne the Barrester in the first part of his Sovereign power of
Parliaments, which this Scribler quotes p. 28. cites and censures, the
unwarrantable Practice of King Richard the 2d (for which he was articled
against in the Parliament of 1H. 4. when he was deposed Gr^fton p 329. Mr.
Saint John's Speech. 1640. p: 33. 1. H4 n 21. 22. 48.
) That in the 21 years of his Reign, he unduly packed a Parliament, and by his
extradordinary armed Guard of 4000: Cheshire Archers overawed and forced it to
Repeal the Parliaments of 10 and. 11 Ri^h. 2. and to attaint and condemn the
Duke of Gloucester, Earl of Warwick, and Earl of Arundell (then likewise
executed) of High Treason: After which adjourning the Parliament to Shrewsbury,
(...) 2^. R. 2. c. 12. 16. 1. H. 4. c. 3. Walsingham Hist. Angliae p. 394.
Gra^ton Holinshed
he there subtly procured an Act to pass by common consent. That the power
of the Parliament should remain in some few persons, who (AFTER THE PARLIAMENT
DISSOLVED) should determine certain petitions delivered, but not answered
therein. By color whereof, these Committees proceeded to other things
generally touching the Parliament, and that by the Kings appointment in
derogation of the state of the Parliament, and discommodity and pe^nicious
example of the whole Realm. And by color and authority thereof, he caused the
Parliament Rolls to be altered, against the effect of the foresaid grant For
which cause the said Parliament and all Acts and proceedings therein were
nulled and declared void in 1. H. 4. c. 2. 3. This very president Mr-Prynne the
Member cites in his Memento, p. 9* 10. as the nearest p^tterne he could meet
with, parallel to the present sitting Iunto. Who without any Act of
Parliament, being not above the 9th. or 10th. part at most of the Commons
House, and sitting under an Armed force, have taken upon them, not only the
name and power of the whole Parliament, to alter, null, repeal Votes, Orders
and Ordinances made in a full and free House, Vote out their fellow Members,
and lay aside the Lords House, but likewise presumed to repeal old, and make
new Acts of Parliament, to erect a new High Court of Justice to try, condemn
and execute the King himself without any witnesses legally and publicly
produced against him; to adjourn and put off the Term it self to the great
obstruction and delay of Justice, to order a new Great Seal of England, to be
made without the Kings Effigies or Motto: to alter all the ancient Writs,
forms and proceedings at the Common Law in the Kings name and Style, to enact
Commissions of Judges, Sheriffs and Justices of Peace and the like to continue
after the Kings death, which are absolutely Cook 7. Rep. 30. 31. Dyer 165. a.
null and expired by it: to enact and proclaine it to be High Treason for any
man to proclaim Prince Charles, King of England after his Fathers death (who
is King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland immediately after his Fathers
execution, as is adjudged by all the Judges of England in Calums case Cook 7.
f. 10. 11. and Cook 3. Instit. p. 7. 1. ^ac. chapter 1.) though bound thereto by
the Common Law, the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, the solemn League and
Covenant, and the Statute of 1. Jacobi chapter 1. Wherein the Lords and Commons in
full Parliament where All the whose body of the Realm and every Particular
Member thereof, were either by person or representative by the Laws of the
Realm deemed to be present, did with all possible public joy and acclamation,
as A memorial so all posterities, among the Records of the High Court of
Parliament for ever to endure of their Loyalty, obedience and hearty and humble
(...)* publish, declare and ENACT; That they being boun^en there unto both by
the laws of God and Man did recognize and acknowledge; that the Imperial
Crown of the Realm of England, and of all the Kingdoms, Dominions and Rights
belonging to the same, did immediately by inherent birthright, and lawful and
undoubted Succession descend and come to his ^ost excellent Majesty (...) being
Lineally, Justly and lawfully ne^t and sole Heir of the blood Royal of this
Realm. And that by the goodness of Almighty God and lawful right of Descent,
his Majesty was of the Realms and Kingdoms of England, Scotland France and
Ireland the most mighty and potent King: and thereunto they did most humbly and
faithfully submit, NOTE.
and oblige themselves, their News and Posterities for ever, until the last
drop of their bloods be spent: Beseeching his Majesty to accept of the same, as
the first fruits in that High Court of Parliament, of their loyalty and faith
to his Majesty and his royal progeny and posterity for ever. And to Vote and
declare High Treason, to be no Treason; and Loyalty and Allegiance it self, to
be High Treason (contrary to all rules of Law, Justice, Honesty, Religion,
Reason, Conscience and 1. H. 4. c. 10 1. ^. 6. c. 1^. ^ 1 Ma^iae c. 1. Cook. 3.
Inst^t. p. 2. 21. 22. 23.
express Acts of Parliament) to terrify and scare poor ignorant people from
their Loyalty and duties: when as all wise men admire, decide, scorn such
pitiful exorbitant Bulls and Bugbeares; which will affright themselves most
at last when Scelera, sceleribus ^^enda, Licentia scelerum est quae regna
invisa tuetur; and armed violence be grown out of date; as they will (no doubt)
ere long. And then this Iuncto, will wish with all their souls (but over late)
they had harkned better to Mr. Prynnes timely M^mento, which will then rise up
in judgment against them, and this Pamphletter, to condemn and leave them
without the least excuse.

Upon the whole matter then, it will appear to all the world. That Mr. Prynne,
both as a Barrester and Member is semper idem, and no Changling, turn-coat, or
Apostate from his first principles and Engagements, as this perjured Pamphetter
is; to whom he wishes more Grace, Truth, Honesty, and less Deceit, Falsehood
and Hypocrisy in his heart, and next Impressions, wherein he expects he will
answer the principal Considerations in his Memento, with the Declarations,
Remonstrances, Protestations, Petitions, Promises of both Houses, and the
Solemn League and Covenant, therein recited, to which he has not in this
Pamphlet attempted to return the last shadow of an Answer, such a worthy
Champion has he showed himself, and so unable to encounter his Antagonist, Mr.
Prynne, either as a Barrester or Member of the Commons House, Who having
written more then any man in def^nce of the Sovereign Power of Parliaments and
Kingdoms, considered only as they are rightly constituted and qualified; is
thereby engaged more then any man, to oppose the abuses extravagances, and
unparliamentary, disloyal Proceedings, of any, who shall presume to wrest,
abuse and pervert his Loyal Orthodox writings contrary to his sense and
meaning to justify their unwarrantable, illegal, Tyrannical and Treasonable
Actions, as this Pamphletter, and some others of late have done.

POSTSCRIPT.
COl. P. is credibly reported, to be the Author of Prynne against Prynne, by
diverse; yet others report, that his Son in Law Mr Abb^t (a Member) is the
Author, and the Col. only the surperviser of it at the presse^ however it is
agreed by all that one of them is the Author; and the Col. owning it at the
press, I must repute him the Father of this spurious birth.

FINIS.

