SCOTLANDS Ancient Obligation to ENGLAND and public Acknowledgment thereof,
For their Brotherly Assistance to, and Deliverance of them, With the Expense of
their Blood, and hazard of the State and Tranquillity of their Realm, from the
Bondage of the FRENCH, in the time of their greatest Extremity. Anno Dom. 1560.

PSALM 133. 1. Behold how good and how pleasant it is, for Brethren to dwell
together in Unity.

EZECH. 37. 22, 23, etc. And I will make them ONE NATION in the Land upon the
Mountains of Israel, and one King shall be King to them all, and they shall be
no more TWO NATIONS, neither shall they be divided into TWO KINGDOMS any more
at all. Neither shall they defile themselves any more with their Idols, nor
with their detestable things, nor with any of their transgressions: but I will
save them out of all their dwelling places, wherein they have sinned and will
cleanse them: So shall they be my people, and I will be their God. And David my
servant shall be King over them, and they all shall have one Shepherd; they
shall also walk in my Judgments, and observe my Statutes and do them. Moreover
I will make a Covenant of Peace with them, it shall be an everlasting Covenant
with them; and I will place them and multiply them, and set my Sanctuary in the
midst of them for evermore.

LONDON, Printed by John Macock, for M. S. 1646.

Scotlands Ancient Obligation to England, and Public Acknowledgement thereof,
for their Brotherly Assistance to, and Deliverance of them, (with the Expense
of their Blood, and hazard of the State and Tranquillity of their Realm) from
the Bondage of the French, in the time of their greatest Extremity; Anno Dom.
1560.
NOt only our own Historians (as Holinshed, Cambden, Speed, Stow, etc.) but
our Brethren of Scotland in their Printed Histories (especially Buchanon and
the late published History of the Reformation of the Church of Scotland, lib.
3. page 217. to 255. Printed at London, Anno 1644.) make honorable mention of
the Brotherly Releife, and comfortable Support, which the English Nation,
readily and freely afforded to their Protestant Brethren of Scotland, in the
year of our Lord 1560. in their greatest extremity, when as their Religion,
Liberties, Estates, Lives, were ready to be sacrificed to the Tyranny of their
Popish QUEEN MARIE, and fury of an Insulting merciless Foreign Popish French
Army, introduced to extirpate or enthrall them. How free that Relief of Ours
was, without any expense at all to, or pay from our Scottish Brethren; how
Puissant and well-provided Our Forces then were, both by Land and Sea; how
Expeditious in their Marches, inoffensive in their Carriages, Valarous in their
Encounters, Patient in their Extremities, faithful in their Engagements,
Successful in their Expedition, Quick in their Return, and fair-carriaged in
their Departure thence, to their Eternal Honor (the most part of the Scottish
Protestant Nobility, honorably convoying and accompanying them, as indeed they
had well deserved:) the History of the Reformation of the Church of Scotland,
Records at large: For which extraordinary Brotherly Assistance, in such a time
of Need, Our Brethren of Scotland most thankfully acknowledged this their
pre-ingagement unto Us, many years before we of England were re-ingaged unto
them for any such reciprocal Aid: The memory whereof they gratefully Recorded
in their public Liturgy, Printed at Edinburgh, An. Dom. 1575. which I find
not only in the original Book it self p. 63. but likewise thus lately
reprinted at London for France Constable, Anno 1641. By some Well-wishers to
both Nations, with this ensuing Preface thereunto.

To the Courteous Reader.
THis Ancient Prayer coming accidentally into the hands of some English
well-wishers of the Scottish Nation, and finding it, in a manner by special
Providence, now produced, in the time of our happy pacification with that
Nation, there being no greater blessing upon earth than the peace between the
two Kingdoms, under one and the same Governor; it was thought fit and
seasonable to publish this to all, which whosoever shall read, will easily
perceive the constant perseverance of their affection to the English Nation,
since the year of their Deliverance from France.

A Thankesgiving unto God, taken out of the Form of Prayer and Administration
of the Sacraments used in the Church of Scotland after their Deliverance from
the tyranny of the Frenchmen, by the English: with prayers made for the
continuation of Peace between the Realms of England and Scotland. Printed at
Edinburgh by Thomas Bassandine, Anno Dom. 1575.
NOW, Lord, seeing that we enjoy comfort both in body and Spirit by reason of
this quietness of thy mercy granted unto us, after our most desperate
troubles, in the which we appeared utterly to have been overwhelmed; we praise
and glorify thy mercy and goodness, who pitiously looked upon us when we in
our own selves were utterly confounded. But seeing, O Lord, that to receive
benefits at thy hands, and not to be thankful for the same, is nothing else
but a seal against us in the Day of Judgment; we most humbly beseech thee to
grant unto us hearts so mindful of the calamities past, that we continually
fear to provoke thy Justice ^o punish us with the like or worse plagues. And
seeing That we by our own power were altogether unable to have freed our selves
from the tyranny of strangers, and from the bondage and thraldom pretended
against us, thou of thine especial goodness did move the hearts of our
Neighbors (of whom we had deserved no such favor) to take upon them the
common burden with us, and for our deliverance, not only to spend the Note.
lives of many, but also to hazard the estate and tranquillity of their Realm
and Commonwealth. Grant unto us, O Lord, That with such reverence we may
remember thy benefits received, that after this, in our default, We never enter
into Hostility against the Realm and Nation of England. Suffer us never, O
Lord, to fall to that ingratitude and detestable unthankfulness, that we shall
seek the destruction and death of those whom thou have made instruments to
deliver us from the Tyranny of merciless strangers. Dissipate thou the
Councels of such as deceitfully travel to stir the hearts of the Inhabitants
of either Realm against the other. Let their malicious practices be their own
confusion, and grant thou of thy mercy that love, concord, and tranquillity may
continue and increase amongst the Inhabitants of this Isle, even to the coming
of the Lord Jesus Christ, by whose glorious Evangel thou of thy mercy do call
us both to Unity, Peace, and Christian Concord. The full perfection whereof we
shall possess in the fullness of thy Kingdom, when all Offenses shall be
removed, iniquity shall be suppressed, and thy chosen children be fully endued
with that perfect glory, in the which now our Lord Jesus Christ reigns. To
whom with thee, and the Holy Ghost, be all honor, praise, and glory, now and
ever. So be it.

In the History of the Reformation of the Church of Scotland, l. 3. f. 251.
252. 253. I read, that on a public Day of Thanksgiving at S. Giles Church in
Edenborough, for this great Deliverance and settlement they received by the
English, (at which the whole Nobility and greatest part of the Congregation of
Scotland assembled,) after the Sermon made for the purpose, public thanks were
given unto God for this merciful Deliverance concluding in form as follows,
the same in substance, but a little different in words from that forementioned,
recorded in their Liturgy.

But seeing that thou have mercifully heard us, and have caused thy Virtue to
triumph in us; so we crave of thee continuance to the end that thy godly Name
may be glorified in us thy creatures. And seeing that nothing is more odious in
thy presence (O Lord) then is Ingratitude and violation of an Oath and Covenant
made in thy Name. And seeing thou have made our Confederates of England the
Note.
Instrument by whom we are now set at this liberty, and to whom in thy Name we
have promised mutual faith again. Let us never fall to that Unkindnesse (O
Lord) that either we declare our selves unthankful unto them or prophaners of
thy holy Name. Confound thou the Counsel of those that go about to break that
most godly League contracted in thy Name, and retain thou us so firmly together
by the power of thy holy Spirit, that Satan have never power to set us again
at variance not discord. Give us thy grace to live in that Christian charity,
which thy Son our Lord Jesus has so earnestly commended to all the members of
his body, that other Nations provoked by our example, may set aside all ungodly
War, Contention, and strife, and study to live in tranquillity and peace, as it
becomes the Sheep of thy Pasture, and the people that daily look for our
final deliverance by the coming again of our Lord Jesus. To whom with thee
and the holy Spirit be all honor, glory, and praise now and ever. Amen.

A prayer very fit to be publicly used now.

The Contract made at Barwick with the Kingdom of England, by our Brethren of
Scotland, dated the 10 of May 1560. whereupon we were induced to send them this
Brotherly Assistance, was thus Prefaced by themselves; Recorded in the
self-same History, p. 233.

JAMES, Duke of Chattellarault, Earl of Arrane, Lord Hamilton, and others of
the Council, Nobility, and principal Estates of Scotland; To all and sundry
whose knowledge these presents shall come, Greeting. We have well considered
and are fully persuaded, in what danger, desolation, and misery, the long
Enmity with the Kingdom of England has brought our Country heretofore: how
Note.
wealthy and flourishing it shall become, if those two Kingdoms, as they are
joined in one Island by Creation of the World, so they may be knit in a
constant and assured friendship. These considerations grounded upon a most
infallible Truth, ought no less to have moved our Progenitors and forefathers
then us. But the present danger hanging over our heads, by the unjust dealing
of those, of whom we have always best deserved, has caused us to weigh them
more earnestly then they did. The misbehaviour of the Note.
French Monsieurs, I had almost said Monsters, here, has of late years been so
great. The oppressions and cruelties of the Soldiers, the tyranny and ambition
of their Superiors and Rulers, so grievous to the people, the violent
subversion of our liberty, and conquest of the land, whereat they have by most
crafty and subtle means continually pressed, has been, I say, so intolerable
to us all; that at last when we could not obtain redress by humble suits, and
earnest supplications presented to the Queen Dowager, who both for duties sake,
and place she does occupy, ought to have been most careful of our state; we
have been by very necessity constrained, not only to assay our own Forces, but
also to implore the Queens Majesty of Englands aid and support, which her
Majesty has most willingly granted, upon certain conditions specified in a
Treaty past at Barwick, betwixt the Duke of Norfolk, Leiutenant to her Majesty,
on the one part, and certain our Commissioners on the other part, whereof the
Tenor follows. etc.

These Public professions of our Scottish Brethrens deep Engagements to our
Nation heretofore, to omit our Brotherly Aid and large contributions toward
them in the year 1641. and denial to grant any Subsidies to the King himself
against them, when extremely pressed in the dissolved Parliament, Anno 1640. as
they were forcible Enducements (by way of Retaliation and Gratitude) to enduce
them to contribute the like Brotherly Assistance unto us in our Necessities
(though upon our own Expense, Pay, and for the preservation of their own
Kingdom and Liberties as well as ours;) so I presume the publication of them
to the World, will be a most strict Obligation to them inviolably to maintain
that ancient League of Friendship, into which they then entered with us, and
have of late more solemnly renewed by their most solemn Vow and Covenant, then
before, and to demean themselves in these Distracted times, (when so many seek
to divide and dash us one against another even now we have vanquished the
common Enemy) with that Syncerity, Integrity, Simplicity, and Candor toward
us, without giving the least just occasion of Jealosie or Complaint unto Our
Nation by Speech, Action, or violating the least Title of their Covenant and
Articles of Agreement with the Parliament; as may exactly answer our ancient
and late brotherly square carriage toward them; and their last fair and
honorable Retreat from hence into their own Country, to the silencing of all
Malignant, Jealous, Spirits: and most inseperably unite, most cordially glue us
one to another for Eternity, and frustrate all the Machivillian Plots and
remaining hopes of our inveterate Enemies, who have now no other Policy left to
raise themselves and ruin us, but our Division after so solemn and sacred an
Union. Si collidimur frangimur; The prevention whereof, is the only end and
Motive of this seasonable Publication.

FINIS.

