THE QUAKERS UNMASKED, And clearly detected to be but the Spawn of 'Romish
Frogs, Jesuits, and Franciscan Friars; sent from Rome to seduce the
intoxicated Giddy-headed English Nation. By an Information newly taken upon
Oath in the City of Bristol, Jan. 22. 1654. and some evident Demonstrations.

By William Prynne of Swainswick, Esquire;

1 Samuel 14. 15. And there was Trembling ( or Quaking) in the Host, in the
field, and among the people: The Garrisons and the Spoylers, they also
trembled, and the earth Quaked; so it was a very great Trembling (or Quaking.)

2 Timothy 3. 5, 6, 7, 8. Having a form of godliness, but denying the power
thereof; FROM SUCH TURN AWAY. For of such sort are they which CREEP INTO
HOUSES, and LEAD CAPTIVE silly women, laden with sins, led away WITH DIVERSE
LUSTS; Ever learning and never able to come to the knowledge of the Truth. Now
as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so do these resist the truth; MEN OF
CORRUPT MINDS, Reprobate (or of NO JUDGMENT) concerning the Faith.

The Second Edition Enlarged.

London, Printed for Edward Thomas in Green Arbor, 1655.

The Quakers unamasked and clearly detected to be but the Spawn of Romish
Frogs, Jesuits, and Franciscan Popish Friars; sent from Rome, to seduce the in
toxicated Giddyheaded English Nation.
THe 2. Pet. 2. 1, 2, 3. But there were also false Prophets among the people,
even As there shall be false teachers among you, who privily shall bring in
damnable heresy, even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon
themselves swift destruction. And many shall follow their pernicious ways, by
reason of whom, the way of Truth shall be evil spoken of, and through
covetuousnesse shall they with seigned words make Merchandise of you; whose
judgment now of a long time lingr^th not, and their damnation s^umbreth not
etc. is both a prophecy of our times and lively Character of our Nation, who
had never more cause to mind and practice that caution of our blessed Savior,
Math: 7. 15. 16. 17. Beware of false Prophets which come to you in sheeps
clothing, but inwardly they are Ravening wolves, ye shall know them by their
fruits: then they have at this day, when such multitudes of Romish wolves,
Locusts, Caterpillars, of all Sects, Orders (as Jesuits, Franciscans,
Benedictines, Dominicans, and the like) come freely over in whole Troops from
foreign Seminaries* and Gels, act their several parts and (...) on the
Theater of our distrac(...) Enemies. (...)* all the ^nds round about (...)ble
all the Beasts of the (...) to (...). Many pastors have destroyed my Vinyard,
they have tro(...) my, (...)n under (...) have (...) my* (...) po^^ion a
desolate wilderness. They have made it desolate, and being desolate, it
mourns unto me; the whole land is desolate, because no man lays it to
heart. And may it not be our complaint, (at least in respect of the purity,
sincerity, practical power of Religion, Church Discipline and order, if not of
our civil Rights and Liberties) at this very instant. Compare but the
Stationers Beacons fired with Ramsy the Jesuits examination at Newcastle (June
1653) my Romes Master Piece, The Popish Royal Favorite, Hidden works of
Darkness brought to public Light, my Epistle to the Second part of A
Seasonable* Legal and Historical Vindication of the Fundamental Liberties
and Laws of-England, and this ensuing late Information, taken before the
Town- Clark and Magistrates of the City of Bristol concerning the New Sect of
QVAKERS or SHAKERS (derived rather from profane Belshazzar, Dan. 5. 9. and
those the Prophet David thus prays against, Psalm. 6. 9. 23. Let their eyes be
darkened that they see not, and MAKE THEIR LOINS CONTINVALLY TO SHAKE; then from
that perfect Evangelicall Spirit and love of God which casts out fear,
shaking, torment, and makes the Saints always rejoice in Gods love and favor,
1 John. 4. 4. Phil. 4. 4. Romans 5. 2.) lately brought into and set up in England
by Franciscan Friars and Jesuits sent from Rome, who spread themselves like
Gangreens or Locusts over most parts of the Nation: and make the very Pillars
of our Church, State and whole Land to shake and (...) and then* me may (by way
of seasonable admonition) conclude of them, their Disciples, all other New
Sects and (...) Conventicles, of late years erected amongst us by them and
their Confederates, in every corner, in St. John's word^, 1. Epist. 2* 18, 19,
Little children it is the last time* and (...) have heard that Antichrist shall
come* EVEN NOW ARE THERE MANY ANTICHRISTS: whereby we know that it is the last
time. They went out from us* but they, were not of us, for if they had been of
us, they would no doubt have continued with us; but they went out, that it
might be made manifest, that they were not at all of us: which will evidently
appear by;

The INFORMATION of George Cowlishaw of the City of Bristol aforesaid
Ironmonger, taken the 22. day of January 1654.

Who informs ON HIS OATH; that in the Month of September last, this Informant
had some discourse in Bristol with one Coppinger, an Irish man, formerly a
School fellow of his, that came purposly thither for his passage into Ireland,
who told this Informant, THAT HE HAD LIVED IN ROME AND ITALY eight or nine
years, and had taken upon him THE ORDER OF AFRYER OF THE FRANCISCAN COMPANY:
And he told this Informant, that he had been AT LONDON lately for some months,
and whilst he was there, he had been at all the Churches, and Meetings,
public and private, that he could hear of, and that none came so near him,
As the Quakers: And being at a meeting of the Quakers, he there met with two of
his acquaintance in Rome (the which two persons were of the same Franciscan
order and company) that were now become chief speakers amongst the Quakers, and
he himself had spoke among the Quakers in London about thirty times, and was
well approved of amongst them. And this Informant further says, That the said
Mr Coppinger asked him, what kinds of opinions in Relion there were in Bristol?
and this Informant told him That there were several opinions and judgments:
and not naming any opinions of the Quakers; the said Mr. Coppinger asked him,
whether there had been any Quakers in Bristol? And the Informant answered him,
NO. Whereupon the said Mr. Coppinger told him, the said Informant, 2 or 3.
times, That if he did love his Religion and his Soul, he should not hear them:
Whereupon this Informant told him, That he thought none of them would come to
Bristol: who expressly replied, that if this Informant would give him five
pounds, he would make it five hundred pounds, if some Quakers did not come to
Bristol within three weeks or a month then following. And on the morrow
following the said Coppinger departed this City for Ireland, his native place,
and about eighteen days after, there came to this city [Most likely his two
f^llow Franciscan Friars fore mentioned, who have there done much hurt and
gained many Dsciples, some where of disturbed two of the Ministers publicly in
the Church, and assaulted, reviled one of them in the streets very lately] two
persons that bear the name of Quakers.

This is a true copy of the original Information taken upon oath at Bristol as
aforesaid, the 22 January last: from whence the Reader and whole Nation may
take notice, especially those in present power, who should prevent such
dangerous growing mischeifs with greatest care, not connive at them any longer:

1. That there are See Cromwels Speech in the Painted Chamber, Sept. 4. 1654.
p. 16, 17.
multitudes of Romish Emissaries and Vermin now residing and wandering up and
down freely amongst us, to seduce and divide the people, by setting up New
Sects and Separate Congregations in all places, and Broaching new Notions and
opinions of all sorts, or old Heresies or Blasphemies; not saying Masses,
praying to Saints and Images, or crying up the popes Supremacy etc. as
heretofore. 2. That they are the chief Speakers and Rulers in most Separate
Congregations, and particularly amongst the Quakers, amongst whom the
Franciscan Friars act their parts as well as the Jesuits.

3. That they have their several Missions and Directions into all parts from
their generals and Superiors, of their respective orders, residing commonly in
London ( Cromwels Speech p* 16, 17
where they have a CONSISTORY AND COUNCEL sitting, that Rules all the Affairs
of the things of England;) besides fixed officers in every Diocese) and are
all foreacquainted both with the places and times of their several Missions;
seeing Coppinger could so certainly predict the time of their Mission and
coming to Bristol; where they have done much harm and assaulted, disturbed the
Ministers both in public and private.

4. That the Popes and these his Emissaries chief endeavors are, to draw the
people from our Churches, public Congregations, ordinances, Ministers,
Religion and to See Thomas Campanella de Monarchia Hispanica c. 25 27.
divide and trumble us into as many Sects, Separate Conventicles as they have
Popish orders; and thereby into as many civil parties, factions, as possibly
they can, to ruin us thereby. Math: 12. 25. 27.

5. That by this their New Stratagem and Liberty, they have (under the
Disguises of being Quakers, Seekers, Anabaptists, Independents, Ranters,
Dippers, Anti-Trinitarians, Anti-Scripturists and the like) gained more
Proselytes, Disciples, and done more harm in eight or nine years space to the
Church and Realm of England, more prejudice, dishonor, scandal to our
Religion and Ministers, then ever they did by saying Mass, or preaching,
printing any points of grossest Popery in 80. years time heretofore. And if
not speedily, diligently, restrained, repressed, will soon utterly overturne
both our Church, Religion, Ministry, and State too in conclusion, having
already brought them to sad confusions and distractions.

Now that which gives great cause of suspicion, that these Quakers are either
disguised Franciscan Friars, or their seduced Disciples and Emissaries, is

1. Their rambling about from place to place by two and two together, to vent
and spread their Errors; as the Franciscan Friars use by the Sea Regula Frairum
minorum sub Franciso Militantium. Ven. 150^
Rules of their order are bound to do, and the Queens Franciscans did here of
late. 2. Their use of vile and course array and condemning not only all Pride
and Luxury, but lawful decency in apparel in themselves and their Proselytes*
in imitation of the Sea Surius and Ribadeniera, in vita and Regula Fratrum
Minorum Sancti Francisci.
Franciscans.

3. Their persuading people to desert their lawful Callings, imploiments, and
to embrace a kind of idle Monkish lasy life, and ramble about from place to
place to vent their pretended Visions, Revlations, Prophecies, Messages, and
New Lights; A practice usual with Franciscan. Friars and St Francis their
Founder. 4. Their rude and uncivil behavior in refusing to salute, or show
any reverential respect, honor, or humble deportment toward Magistrates or
other persons of what quality so ever, either in words, Jestures, (of which the
rude cynicall Franciscans are most guilty of all other Popish orders) contrary
to express Scripture Precepts and Presidents. Exodus 20. 12. Deutr. 5. 19.
Math. 15. 4. Ephesians. 6. 2. 5. Romans 13. 1. 2. 7. Hebr. 12. 9. 1 Pet. 2. 13. 14.
17. 18. (an observable Text against them) Tit. 3. 1, 2. 1 Timothy 6. v. 1, 2, 3.
(a notable Text) Ephesians. 5. 33. Genesis 18, 2, 3. c. 19. 1. 2. c. 23. 7. c. 24 v.
31. c. 27. 19. c. 33. 3. 4. 6. 7. c. 37. 9, 10. c. 41. 43. c. 42. 6. c. 43. 26.
28. 29. c. 48. 12. c. 49. 8. Exodus 11. 8. Ruth. 2. 10. 1. Sam. 20. 41. c. 24.
8. c. 25. v. 23. 24. 25. 41. c. 28. 14. 2 Samuel 9. 8. c. 14. 22. 33. 1 King. 1.
16. 23. 31. 47. c. 2. 19. 2 Kin. 2. 15. c. 4. 26. 27. 37. 1 Chro. 21. 21. Est.
3. 2. which compared with Math. 10. 12. c. 5. 4. Mar. 9. 15. Lu. 1. 40. Acts.
18. 22. c. 21. 7. c. 25. 13. 1 Cor. 16. 21. 2 Cor. 13. 13. Phil. 4. 21. 22.
Col. 4. 10. 12. 15. 18. Romans 16. 15. 7. 9. to. 17. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 17. may teach
these rude Quakers and their Disciples far better manners and civility, both in
their gestures, behaviors, and words, then now they exercise.

5. Their Doctrines, That the Saints are perfectly holy in this life, and do
not sin, being able to stand perfect in their own power: That they are as
equally holy, just, good, and Free from sin, as Christ and God himself:
maintained by The Perfect Pharis^^ p, 1, 2, 11, 14.
Fox, Naylor affirmed of St Francis, the Father of the Franciscans, and
justified by them, in their writings: as you may read in Surius and Ribadeniera
in the life of St Francis, and the blasphemous Book Conformitatum Bea^i
Francisci ad vitam Jesu Christi, lib. 3. cum addition. Heir. Bucchii. Bon.
1590. first writ by Bartholomaeus de Pisa, and approved by a General Chapter
of the Franciscans held at Assise. Aug. 2. 1389. and ratified by their Popes.
Antonini Chronicon. Tit. 24. c. 1. 2. Vincentius Belvacensis. Speculum Hist. l.
3. c. 97. and Mornay his Mystery of Iniquity. London. 1612. p. 347, 348.

It is the observation of many learned intelligent And of G. E^m^^ a late
reclaimed Quaker in his Northen Blast.
Protestants, who have pried into the opinions and Practices of all our late
New Sects, That in their Books, Writings, Speakings, Preachments, Witness
Extreme u^ction, used by many separate Congregations, and their recusancy to
hear our Ministers, or come to our public Ordinances and the like.
Practices, are interlarded, and mixed with some Jesuiticall and Popish
Tenants, opinions, Ceremonies and Practices; by which we may as visibly
discover a Jesuit, a Popish Priest or Friar in them, as we may a Lion by his
paw. And nothing (in my judgment) more clearly detects the Popish Friars,
Priests, Jesuits, to be the principal inventers, erectors of, Actors, Rulers,
Speakers amongst our Quakers, and other New sects; then their pretended, See G.
Emmot his Northern Blast. with Gilpins Book, both relenting Quakers.
extraordinary sudden extravagant Agonies, Trances, Quakings, Shaking,
Raptures, Vis^ons, Apparitions, Conflicts with Satan, Revelations,
Illuminations, instructions in new divine Mysteries and Seraphicall Divinity,
where of they pretend they were wholly ignorant before, being illiterate
persons; their intimate familiarity and immediate communion with God and Jesus
Christ, in, and after their agonies and ecstasies; their extraordinary callings,
Missions, Messages to such and such particular orders, sects, places, persons;
their sudden speaking, understanding of several languages which they pretend
they never learned, but got by inspiration: all which are the very same in form
and substance with those ridiculous lying Enthusiasms, Impostures, Cheats,
Agonies, See VVierus de Praestigiis Daemonum. l. 1. c. 01. and. 17. in J^:
Gerson de Probatione Spirituum.
Revelations, Visions, Raptures, Illuminations, Inspirations, Apparitions etc.
of Popish Saints, Friars, Priests, Jesuits, Nuns, recorded in the lving
Legends and lives of their Romish Canonized SAINTS, by Capgrave, Surius,
Lippomanes, Ribadeniera, Mafeus, and other of their fraternity, especially in
the Lives of St. Francis, Ignatius Loyola (the Founders of the Franciscans and
Jesuits orders, the principal actors, speakers amongst the Quakers, and other
late Enthusiasts, if fully examined) and of St Dominick, for men: and of St
Katherine of Sienna, and St Imitated by some women Quakers.
Briget of Sweden, for women. Out of this St Briget Life and Revelations,
printed in Folio at N^remb^rg, An. 1524. most of our Male and Female Quaker
Extravagant new Revelations and Impostures are extracted, as those who will but
compare them may at first discern. And though they conceal their Jesuitisme and
grossest points of Popery from their Disciples at first, baiting their hooks
only with pleasing Novelties, shows of Superlative Sanctity, and Se G. Emm^t
his Northen Blast. p. 1. 13. 14. The perfect Pharise. p. 9. 10. 11. 14. 29. 35.
etc.
invectives against our Ministers, Ordinances, Church, Tithes, Presbyterian
Government, and the like; that so they may more easily catch the silly people;
yet they discover their Jesuiticall Positions and Popish Doctrines, more openly
by degrees; at last, (as Evangelicall perfection, Justification by our own
inherent righteousness and holiness, etc. crying them up for new Gospel Light
amongst the ignorant vulgar; and crying down our Protestant Ministers,
ordinances, sacrements, the Articles of our Creed, Church Liturgies, Gods Ten
Commandments, the Lords Prayer, our Churches, and sometimes the Leter of the
old and New Testament as Popish and The Jesuits, Popish Priests and Friars
condemned our Minister sheretofore as unlawful Ministers, because they derived
not their ordination from the Church of Rome: now they turn the scales and
affirm them to be no lawful Ministrs but Antichristian and popish upon this
false pretext, That they derive their ordination and Ministry from the Pope
and Church of Rome.
Antichristian: as the Friars and Jesuits did heretofore in their Books and
Discourses in their very language. And it is evident by some late instances,
that they are Anti-magistratical as well as Anti-ministeriall. Yea that these
Sec John Gilpins, and others printed Relations concerning the Quakers in the
North.
Quakers use enchanted Potions, Braclets, Ribons, Sorcery and witch craft, to
intoxicate their Novices and draw them to their party; As Simon Magus
bewitiched, the people of Samaria with his Sorceries, Acts. 6. 9 11. and other
seducing false teachers, bewitched the foolish Galatians, that they should not
obey the truth Gal. 3. 1. which Enchantments, Sorceries, Charms, Fascinations
and Exorcismes are very frequent amongst Popes, and Popish Priests, Monks,
Friars, Jesuits, as you may read at large in Joannes, Wierus de Prestigiis
Daemonum and Incantationibus. Basile. 1568. especially l. 2. c. 7. l. 5. c. 2,
3. etc. Platina, Benno Cordinalis, Baleus, and others in the lives of Popes
Silvester, 2. Benedict the 9. John. 20 and 21. and other Popes, who were all
most infamous Magicians, Sorcerers, and Inchanters, by which black arts they
got the Papacy. And Del Rio his Disquisitio Magie, and John Jee his Foot out of
the Snare, London, 1624. will prove the Jesuits and Priests in England are
still accustomed to them, to win and seduce their Proselytes. Whence we find
this Scripture expression concerning Romish Babylon Revel: 18. 23. By thy
SORCERIES were ALL THE NATIONS DECEIVED. Now for our Quakers and others better
instruction, I shall inform them by way of Caution of these considerable
particulars, relating to their Agonies, Inspirations and Revelations.

1. That the Joannes Wierus de Praestigiis Daemonum. l. 1. c. 11. P^trus
Thyaraeus de Demoniacis et obsessis. pars. 1. c. 3. to. 9. pars. 2. c. 25. 27.
Georgius Pistorius de Demonum ortu, Officiis, Illusionibus etc. Isagoge.
Basiliae. 1563.
Devil by Gods permissions frequently does cause and produce, by his own
immediate power, extraordinary strange Convulsions, Contractions, Distortions,
Agonies, Tremblings, Quakings, Shakings, Motions, Jestures of the Bodies,
Members, Joints, Nerves Muscels both of Men and women, when, where, and in what
manner he pleases; as we see by common experience in such persons as are
either possessed by the Devil himself, or bewitched by his Instruments; and
by the Convulsions, Trances, Quakings, Shakings, gestures of Witches, Sorcerers
and other, acted or possessed by the Devil; of which we have many examples in
History and experience; and one recorded in the Gospel it self. Mar. 9. 17. to.
28.

2. That it was the usual practice and custom of Devils heretofore by their
Idolatrous Pagan Priests and prophets to give answers in their temples, and
oracles to their worshippers in Greece and other places, which of later times
and at this day is likewise frequent amongst the Pagan Idolatrous Indians, by
human voices, Nods, antique Gestures; affictis sub inde gestibus FURENTIUM,
nonnunquam EBRIORUM, alias TREMENTIUM, aut RIDICVLAE GESTICVIANTIBUS, as De
Praestigiis Daemonum. l. 1 c. 1. p. 63.
Joannis Wierus, relates out of Strapo Geogr: lib. 16. Their Priests (who were
and are See Purchase Pilg. l. 8. c. 6. l. 9. c. 6. Wierus de praestigiis Daem:
l. 2. c. 3.
usually Witches and Sorcerers) when they prophesied and gave answers to the
people, being cast into strange real or feigned Ecstasies, Trances and Quaking
fits, using sometimes the Gestures of Madmen, sometimes of Drunkerds, other
times of QUAKERS, TREMBLERS, and of ridiculous Antiques; often times Howling,
SHAKINGS THEIR BREASTS, foaming at the mouth, and falling down in a swown (as
some of our Quakers do now) as if they had the falling sickness, the Devil in
seeming entering into and acting in them; as you may read at leisure in Wierus,
and Mr Samuel Purchase his Pilgrimage. l. 9. cap. 5. l. 8. cap. 6. and elsewhere
in his Voyages. Whether our Quakers Shaking Fits, Convulsions, Tr^nees,
Agonies, running As William Strickland and other did at Kendall. See the
perfect Pharise London 1654, p. ^0, 42. 43.
about naked into the open Streets sometimes, and to particular Persons,
Towns, Ministers, Magistrates with pretended Messages, Prophecies and oracles
from God, (but realy from the Devil himself) like so many distracted Bedlams,
Drunkards, Antiques, Furies and Enthusiasts are not exactly paralleld with, and
originally derived from these Idolatrous Pagan Idol-Priests, and the very Devil
himself; I refer you to John Gilpin (a reclaimed Quaker) his late printed
Relation, touching his own Shaking Fits, and Actions, (proceeding from the
Devils possessing of, and acting in him, as he and others believed) and to
those who have seen them in their Fits and Raptures; the wisest whereof, are of
that opinion, and many of the vulgar people too. These Quaking Fits and Trances
were really and feighnedly taken up, and imitated of late times by many Popish,
Priests, Monks, N^^ts and female Saints, as you may read at leisure in Surius,
Ribadeniera and other Collectors of their Lives and Legends: and which verified
Coppingers relation, and Cowlishow his oath; Mr Tillam the Administrator of the
Anabaptisticall new-dipped Congregation at Hexam, near New Castle (a See a
False Jew discovered An. 1653, p, 6, 1* 1,
Papist or Popish Priest of late though now a zealous Anabaptist and Dipper) in
his Banners. p. 24. professes; That these Shakings, Tremblings and Ecstasies
(now used by the Quakers) were derived FROM THE FRANCISCAN FRIARS, as Mr Tho:
Weld, Richard Priderux, Sam: Hammond, William Cole, Willian Durant (5 reverend
Ministers in and near New Castle) assure us in their Perfect Pharisee, under
Monkish Holiness, manifesting it self in the generation of Men called QUAKERS.
London, 1654. p. 13. who by their Emissaries first infected the Northern parts
about Kendall and Lancaster with this Sect, and now the western parts, by
George Fox, John Audland, James Nayler and other of their Disciples sent from
thence, whose Heretical, Erroneous, Blasphemous opinions, and unchristian
Practices, are solidly and fully refuted in this their Treatise.

3. That as Heretics, Schismatickes and seducers, do derive their Heresies,
Doctrines, Practices, from the very Devil himself, the Father of Lies, Lying
Prophecies, Heresies, Errors, as the Scripture attests in positive terms: 1
King. 22. 21. 22. 23. 2 Chronicles: 18. 21. 22. Zech: 13. 2. 3. Rev: 18. 2 John 8.
44. 1 Timothy 4. 1, 2. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9. 10, 11. Rev. 16. 13. 14. Acts. 13. 10. 1
John. 3. 8. who frequently (to delude and seduce men with more facility)
transformes himself and his Ministers into Angels of light, and Apostles of
Christ, as if they were the only Saints and Ministers of righteousness; when as
in truth they are still but Devils, false Apostles, and deceitful workers or
Impostors, as the Scripture expressly defines them; 2 Cor: 11. 13, 14, 15: as
that Devil who tempted our Savior to cast him self down from the pinnacle of
the Temple, with a Scripture misapplied, and mutilated, was still a Devil,
though he alleged Scripture to accomplish his designs (as his seducing
Instruments now do) Math: 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. Lu. 4. 9. to. 13. So some Heretics
and Seducers of old, as Simon Magus, Marcion, Menander, Thedatus, Carpocrates,
Eulyches, and others have actually traded with, received their Heretical
Tenants from, and been possessed by the Devil himself; as Lib. 3 de Excid:
Hei^:
Egesippus, De Anima, li
Tertullian, Hist: l. 5. c. 16 33
Eusebius, Lib. 1, and 4. Fab:
Theodorel, Here Is: 22. l. 3. c. 3.
Epiphanius, De Daemoniaels. pars 2. c. 21. p. 55.
Petrus Thyareus, with others record: yea, Many Popish Monks, Friars, Priests,
Nuns, Papists, specially Females, have likewise been actually possessed,
seduced, cast into strange, real, or feigned Ecstasies, Agonies, Shakings,
Convulsion Fits, Trances, and inspired with strange Revelations, Visions,
Dreams, Fancies, opinions, Prophecies and Enthusiasms by the very Devil
himself, as you may read at large in Joannis Wierus De Praestigiis Daemonum;
in Petrus Thyareus (a Jesuit) his Daemoniaci: hoc est, De obsessis a Spiritibus
Demoniorum Hominibus. Coloniae Agrip: 1598. and in Sr. Edwin Sands his Europe
Speculum. 1629. p. 169 where thus he writes. That the multitude of Indemoniati;
(or persons possessed with the Devil) WHEREOF MOST ARE WOMEN, is so hugh in
Italy, even as of Witches in Savoy: of which some are daily cured in show, by
their Exercismes (being most of them Impostors to cheat the people) but for one
that is h^lpen, almost twenty are either past their curing, or otherwise (as in
Counterfeit^) unwilling to be cured.

4. That William Lindan. Dialog* 3. Dubitantii and Petrus Thyreus De
Daemoniatis pars. 2. c. 21. p. 56. 57. 58. write expressly; That some of the
Ringleaders and Captains of the Anabaptists, and some of their new Converts,
have not only communion and familiarity with the Devil, but in all probability,
are likewise actually possessed by him, though they be not raging mad, and
furious: Because some of them have (not only such raptures, Agonies, Fits and
Quakings as persons actually possessed by the Devil use to have) so soon as
they have deserted the Catholics Religion, and adhered to that Sect: but Mox,
post hau^^um poculum, aut sumptam ^^^cellam norant Sacras liter^s legere, etc.
Presently after the drinking of some potion, or eating of a Sop, which their
theife Apostles give them, they know how to read the sacred Scriptures without
any teaching, though they could not read before; to dispute of divine things
they knew not before which they allea^ge to opp^^n the true faith and Religion;
and forget so soon as they re^^m to the true Religion; of which Thyreus gives
two instances on his own knowledge; one of a Tailor; the other of a Country
peasant. Now who (writes he) can doubt, that this proceeds from the evil spirit
dwelling in ^^em. For it is apparent that neither the S^p, Meat, nor drink they
to^^, (...) any such virtue as to instill the knowledge of the Sacred Scriptures
into them. Neither is it God who conferrs this learning on them, seeing they ^re
enemies to his true faith and Religion, and lead (usually) a most impure life.
Therefore since they get it no^ by study, nor the instruction of any man, from
whence should they have it, but from the Evil Spirit that dwell within them?
Besides, what is the cause, that so soon as they return to the Tents of the
(...) again, they forget all or most of the things they remembered before, and
know not how to read, though they could read as well as most, whiles they
continued in their Heresy: but that the Devil, their Tutor for sakes and leaves
them to themselves? Upon which grounds, some men justly suspect and conceive,
THAT IT IS NOT THE ANABAPTISTS PROPERLY WHO SPEAK SCRIPTURES THUS BY
THEMSELVES, sad Daemones in Anabtptistis loqui; BUT THAT THE DEVILS SPEAK IN
THE ANABAPTISTS: even as when persons possessed by the Devil speak strange
Languages they knew not before, See Tostatus Abulensis in 8 Math: qu: 114
it is not themselves but the Devil in them who form the voices and the
sounds. which he proves more largly. pars: 1. c. 17. p. 44. 45.

From all these particulars, I refer it to the most serious consideration of
all our Quakers, Shakers and other Anabaptisticall Enthusiasts, as likewise of
those who are addicred to their ways, or tolerate their cour^es without
opposition; whether all their Shakings, Quakings, Ecstasies, Relvelations,
Inspirations, Prophecies, and New Illuminations, which are real and not
counterfeit (as many of them are) proceed not from the very See the perfect
Pharisee p. 41. etc.
Delusions and Inspirations of the Devil himself, and his Instruments,
Ministers sent over from Jesuiticall and Popish Seminaries, Cells, Monasters,
to seduce them by such Sorceries and Impostures as these from our Reformed
Church and Religion, rather then from the Impulses, Dictates, Illuminations,
Revelations of Gods holy Spirit? And so much the rather because many of their
Doctrines, Positions, Practices are not only mere Monkish and Popish, but also
directly contrary and destructive to the two Great ordinances of God in the
world, Magistracy and Ministry, so much commended by Gods Spirit in the Gospel;
yea some of them most Atheistical, irreligious, Blasphemous, Diabolical,
unchristians Un evangelicall, diametrically contrary to the Scripture and
Fundamental Principles of the Gospel, dictated by Gods Spirit; as you may read
at large, in The perfect Pharise under Monkish Holiness etc. in the Generation
of men called QUAKERS; to which I shall refer the Reader, where in the
Blasphemies, Heresies, Popish Tenants of John Autland, George Fox and James
Nayler (three of the principle Quakers sent to Bristol) are so sully detected
and solidly refuted, that it made them a shamed to continue in their former
Quarters, and to pretend a New divine Mission from God, to spread their
Heresies and Blasphemies in the West (though not so fit for Quakers as that
Northern colder Climate of England and Scotland, where many Shake and Quake for
cold alone, without the Spirits motion) whether they deserve to be sent packing
gain, or into some sorraign Franciscan Cells or Jesuits Seminaries, from whence
their Sect was immediately propagated, by Jesuits and Friars sent from thence,
to act the parts of Independents and Sectaries, to blow up differences and
Contentions amongst us; as you may read at large in Mr Edwards his Gangrena;
part third. p. 99. and in a Grandees printed Speech in the painted Chamber. 4.
Sept: 1654. p. 16. 17. to which I shall refer you for fuller Conviction.

Let all our Rulers, Ministers and people therefore, who have any care of their
own or others Souls; or our Churches, Kingdoms, sasty and settlement, now
seriously consider that speech of our Savior Christ himself, John 10. 1. 10.
11. 12 Verily verily, I say unto you; He that enters not by the Door into the
Sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, (as these new Romish Apostles and
wandering Predicants do) THE SAME IS ATHEEF and A ROBBER The thief comes not
BUT FOR TO STEAL, AND TO KILL, DESTROY. The good Shepherd gives his life for
the Sheep: But he that is an hireling, and not the Shepherd, whose own the
Sheep are not, sees the woolf coming, and leaves the Sheep and flees, and
the woolf catches them, and scatters the Sheep. And such false Shepherds and
hirelings (whether Ecclesiastical or Temporal) who through negligence,
cowardice, or any other design, shall See my Sword of Christian Magistracy
supported: and ^r Thomas Edwards treatise against Toleration.
suffer such Romish Woolves, Thieves and Robbers as these, to scatter and
devour their sheep in St Bernards verdict are PASTORES NON OVIUM, SED LUPORUM:
Pastors only of the Woolves, not Sheep; and in the opinion of Christ, and all
real Christians likewise.

Fredericus Broeckrous in his Epistle Dedicatory to the States of Holland and
WestFrizland, before his, Antidotum Errorum pr^cipu^rum i^ Tractatu de Deo etc.
D. Conrad^ Vorstii; observes and proves at large; that no thing is more
dishonest; or more pernicious to mankind and humane society then the
toleratio^ and propagation of false religious, contrary to the Doctrine of the
Prophets and Apostles. 1. Because men are hereby 2 Pet. 2. 1. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10,
11 compared with John 17. 3 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2, etc. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10, 11. Gal. ^.
20, 21. Romans 16. 17, 18. 1 Timothy 4. 1, 2, 3. 2 Timothy 3. 1. to 9. 2 Pet. ^. 1. to
the end. Jude 4. to 20.
with drawn from the true God, the fountain of all happiness. 2. Because truly
they are deprived of the possession of Eternal life. 3. Because false
religions are the most deadly poisons to men's Souls, which being a speedy, and
infallible death: and damnation to all Eternity i^ persisted in. 4. Because by
them men are made twofold more the children of hell than they were before. Mat.
23. 16. 5. Because thereby all Piety is undermined, abolished; and to christian
States all Wickedness, Impiety Cruelty, Folly and Wretchedness, instilled into
the hearts of men. 6. Because by differences and multiplicity of opinions and
controversies in Religion; the greatest of people are brought. 1 To doubt of
the truth of Christian Relgion. 2 To slight and neglect it, together with the
Ministry and Public Ordinances. 3. To give over prayer, and private family
Duties. 4. To oppose Religion, and resist the propogation of the Gospel. 5. In
conclusion, to renounce all Religion; and turn professed Scepticks, Seekers,
Atheists (as we find by sad experiences.) 6. Because Pagans, Infidels, and
others, are discouraged from embracing the doctrine of Christianity; when they
find so many controversies and desputes ever amongst Christians themselves: And
the common Enemies of the true reformed Religion, and Romish Emissaries hereby
take occasion to calumniate that true Religion we profess, and to seduce the
ignorant people from it, to embrace their damnable and superstitious practices,
upon which considerations, Eusebius de vita Constantini Socrates. Eccles. Hist.
l. 1. c. 9. Theodore^ Hist. Eccles: l. 5. c. 6.
Constantius the great, In my Sword of Christian Magistracy supported, and
Truth Triumphing over falsehood.
Theodosius, and all zealous Christian Emperors, Kings, Princes, and Governors
truly fearing God; in all ages, have made it their principle care and study to
maintain peace and unity, concurred in the purity and principles of Religion;
to suppress all Heresies, Errors Scismes, repugnant thereunto, both by Laws
and penalties, as I have elsewhere largely, evinced against all oppugners of the
civil Magistrates coercive power, and (...) in matters of Religion, who never
yet returned the least reply thereunto in sundry years, though challenged to
do it.

We shall conclude all with this word to Magistrates, Cant: 2. 15. Take for us
the Foxes, little Foxes that spoil the Vines, for our Vines have tender
grapes. Search after, restrain, secure, prosecute, punish all Romish Foxes,
Wolves, Conspirators, Enemies, Traitors to our Church, and Religion (according
to our Laws and Statutes yet in force against them) with as great diligence,
care, zeal, as you no^ search after; restrain, secure, prosecute any real, or
imaginary Plotters, Conspirators, Enemies, Traitors to the Kingdom, Nation, or
to your selves: And ^e as vigilant, as industrious to secure Gods and our
Churches cause, interest, a^ your own; that so you may turn away Gods wrath,
and inherit Phineas his praise and benediction for his zeal in this kind, Numb:
25. 11. 12. 23. with these four Apostolical Admonitions and Cautions to the
people, recorded in the Gospel, as the best Preservatives against Seducers,
Romans 16. 17. 18. Now I beseech you Brethren mark them which cause DIVISIONS and
OFFENSES, contrary to the Doctrine which you have received and AVOID THEM* For
they that are such, serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own bellies, and
by good words and fair speeches, deceive the hearts of the simple. But evil
men and seducers shall wax worse and 2 Timothy 3. 13. ^^.
worse deceiving and being deceived. But continue thou in the things which thou
have heard and have been assured of, knowing of whom thou have learned them.
Ephesians: 4. 14. Henceforth be no more children, tossed to and fro, and carried
about with every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning
craftiness whereby they lie in wait to deceive. And 2. John 10. 11. If there
come any unto you, and bring not this Doctrine, receive him not into your
house, neither bid him bid speed, for he that bids him God speed: IS
PARTAKER OF HIS EVIL DEEDS, with this sad Memento to such who are seduced by
these Impostors. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9 10. 11. 12 whose coming is after the working of
Satan with all power, and Signs, and lying wonders; and with all dec^i^^blen^s
of unrighteousnes, in them that perish, because they received not the love of
the truth, that they might be saved: And for this cause God shall send them
strong delusions, that they should believe a lie; That they all might be
damned, who believed not the truth* but had pleasure in unrighteousness: and
like the unjust Judge, Luke. 18* 2 4. Neither fear God, no^ Regard or Reverence
Men* 2. Cor. 11. 13. 14 15. For such are false Apostles, deceitful workers,
transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ. And no ^arvel* for Satan
himself is transformed into an Angel of light. Therefore it is no great thing
if his Ministers also be transformed as the Ministers of Righteousness* whose
and shall be according to their works.

With the Sacred Scriptures to these New quaking male Prophets whom God never
sent a broad to seduce the people of England, but the Very Father of Lies. ^er.
14. 14* 15, 16* ch* 23. 21. to 33. chapter 27. 15. chapter 29. 31. These Prophets
prophecy Lies in my name, I SENT THEM NOT, NEITHER HAVE I COMMANDED THEM,
NEITHER SPOKE UNTO THEM: They prophecy unto you a falls vision and di^ination,
and a thing of naught, and the deceit of their heart. I have not sent these
Prophets yet they run, I have not spoken to them yet they prophesied* I have
heard what the Prophets said, that prophicied Lies in my name; saying, I have
deceived, I have deceived; How long shall this be in the hearts of the Prophets
that prophicie Lies? yea they are Prophets of the deceit of their own heart;
which think to cause my people to forget my name by THEIR DREAMS which they
TELL EVERY MAN TO HIS NEIGHBOR. Therefore behold, I am against the Prophets
says the Lord, that steal my word every one from his Neighbor; that use their
Tongues and say, he * See Alfonsi de Vargas. Relatio. p. 317. to 330.
says: Against them that do prophecy false dreams, and do tell them, and
cause my people to err by their Eyes; yet I sent them not* nor commanded them:
therefore they shall not profit this people at all says, the Lord* FOR THEY
PROPHICIE A LIE unto you; for I have not sent them says the Lord, yet they
prophecy a Lie in my name, that I might (...) yo(...), and that ye might
perish; ye, and the prophe^s that prophecy unto you; for I will pow^^ their
wickedness upon them. With these Gospel texts to our New Quaking Female
Prophetesses, who now ( in imitation of the New Order of Jesuitisses, who out
of a Pretended zeal of propagating the Gospel, and converting Souls to God,
presumed to ^^nder abroad, and preach publicly in England and ^^s^where to
women and others, about the imbeeility, and beyond the Modesty of their sex for
sundry years, to the great scandal of Religion, till at last they were
excommunicated and totally suppressed by Pope Urban the third, his Bull Anno
Dom. 1631. printed at Rome 1632. (...)) presume to speak publicly to the
people in some of their Congregations as well as to deliver personal pretended
Messages from the Lord (who never sent them) to private Ministers and others. 1
Cor. 14. 33. 34. 35. 37. Let your Women keep silence in your Churches (or
Assemblies) FOR IT IS NOT PERMITTED UNTO THEM TO SPEAK; but, they are
commanded to be under obedience; as also says the Law. And if they will learn
any thing let them ask their Husbands (if married) at home. For it is a shame
for women to speak in the Church: For God is not the Author of confusion, (or
tumult) but of Peace, as in all the Churches of the Saints. If any man thinks
himself to be a Prophet, or Spiritual; let him acknowledge that the things
that I write unto you (and this against women speaking publicly in the Church)
Are the Commandments of the Lord: Therefore their speaking against Gods
Commandments in this sort; is only by the instinct; mission, and command, of
the very Devil, in opposition to these Gospel precepts: thus seconded again by
the Holy Ghost. 1 Timothy 2. v. 11. 12. 13. 14. Let the Women learn in silence
with all subjection: For I suffer not a woman to teach, to Vsu^p Authority over
the Man; but TO BE IN SILENCE, for Adam was first framed, then Eve: and Adam
was not deceived but the Woman being deceived, was in the Transgression. And
let those who run after and listen to these Feminine Predicants remember that,
of Isay 27. v. 11. The Women come and set them on fire; for it is a people of
no understanding; therefore he that made them will not have mercy on them, and
he that formed them will show them no favor.

And with this complaint and prayer to God himself, Psalm. 60. 1. 2. O God thou
have cast us off, thou have broken us, thou have been displeased: O turn thy
self to us again: Thou have made the land to tremble; thou have broken (and So
the old Translation renders it.
divided it) O heal the breaches thereof FOR IT SHAKES.

FINIS.
A Postscript.
THat the Jesuits (The Sea Ludovicus Lucius Hist. Jesuitica, p. 297, 325, 328,
336, 447 5^2, 624.
Pests and Perturbers of all Republikes, who domineer by discords, tumults,
sects and sch^s^^^) have (as well as Franciscans Friars) have a principle hand
in erecting, promoting the new sect of Quakers or Shakers lately sprung up, and
much increased amongst us, and that by Diabolical delusions, sorceries,
enchantments, practices, to divide us as much as possible, and extirpate our
Ministers and Religion; these particulars superadded to the premises, may more
than probably persuade, if not satisfactorily convince all intelligent English
Protestants, and our Quakers likewise; for whose information I have made them
public, being unknown to most, who are utterly Ignorant of the stratagems of
these Imps of Satan, to seduce them, to their eternal ruin.

1. That Ignatius Loyola, the Father of the Jesuits, and first Founder
General of their Order (at first a Soldier by profession) when he began to
play the Impostor, Seducer, and institute his New Sect, pretended a divine Call
from God, and Jesus Christ; appearing to him, whereupon he left his former
Profession, House, Habitation, cast of his costly apparel, (which he gave away
to the poor) clothed himself in course Sackcloth and ragged beggarly clothes,
lying upon the bare ground without a bed, wandered up and down in them from
place to place, like a pilgrim, professing the study of poverty, penance,
Mortification and contempt of the world, leading a most austere life for a
time, mostly eating little else but course bread, drinking nothing but cold
water, fasting the greatest part of the week, except on the Lord's Day;
conversing with the poorest and meanest sort, teaching and preaching to them
often gratis in the open streets and woods, and all other places where he came
without any Ordination or license at all from the Bishops or Clergy, exhorting
them to repentance ansterity of life and contempt of all earthly things,
whereby he got great estimation amongst the rude people, (especially for his
pains in instructing their children and them without any Reward) gained many
followers and some Scholars likewise to be his Companions: as Massaeus Vegius,
Ribadeniera, Joa^^is Eusebius Niremberger, Hasenmullerus (all Jesui^es) record
as large in his Life, with Hospinian, and Ludovis Lucius in their Historia
Jesuitica. And is not this the very practice of our Quakers and Shakers now,
who exactly imitate him herein.

2. That Ignatius upon his first resolution to enter into this New strict kind
of Life, and erect his New Jesuiticall Order, fell into a fit of Quaking and
Trembling, as Ribadeniera (his Disciple) and other record in his Life: Yea,
Hasenmullerus (who was a Jesuit sundry years, and lived in diverse Jesuits
Colleges) in the end of his Jesuitical History, with Ludovicus Lucius Histori^
Jesuiti^ae.l. 1. c. 1. p. 8. record in express terms, from the Testimony of
Terrianus the Jesuit. That Ignatius ITA A DAEMONIBUS EXAGITATUM, was So vexed
and SHAKEN BY DEVILS (not God or his spirit) both in his Dinner, Supper,
MASSES; and likewise in his Recreations, that he powereth forth the most cold
sweat of death in great plenty; tandem ver^ CVM TREMORE ipsum objisse, and that
at last he died Quaking, or with a TREMBLING, having a most black countenance.
Yea, See Speculum Jesuiti^um, p. 3, 4. 26.
Ribadeniera himself, in the life of Ignatius l. 1 c. 5. 17. records; That
Ignatius had many conflicts with the Devil, who frequently appeared to him in
the form of a Serpent, and that he whipped his companion Xavier whiles he was
praying. And l. 5. c. 9. That the Devil painted Ignatius so lively and exactly
in his colors, that Lugnes his companion much admired at it: And yet cap. 8.
and 10. he relates. That Ignatius cured one possessed with a Devil with one
word: that the Devil in another possessed one, was cast out by the Jesuits
only naming Ignatius to him; saying, name not Ignatius to me, whom I most hate
of all: And another Devil, in a Maid possessed, said; That Ignatius his
greatest enemy, was in heaven after his death among other Founders of holy
Religious Orders. Let our Quakers and their Disciples hereupon seriously
consider and examine, whether their Quaking fits, be not derived from this
Father of the Jesuits; and proceed not originally from the very Devils
themselves, as his fits did? Yea, let them take heed they be not vexed and
shaken by Devils as he was, and dye Quaking and Trembling as he did, with a
most black countenance, as if he had been strangled by the Devils, which made
him a Quaker first, and then a seducer; whose Disciples have made most
Christian Kingdoms, Churches (especially our own of late years) both to
Quake and Tremble and Shake them in Pieces.

It is the observation of learned Gulielmus R^^delatius. Methordus curandi
Morbos c. 23. 39. See VVierus de Praestigiis Daemonum. l. 1. ^. 1^.
Physicians; That Shaking Palsies, Quakings, Tremblings of the Members and
Joints, are very dangerous diseases, proceeding from the coldness and weakness
of the Brain or Nerves, cold phlegm, extraordinary cold weather: (which makes
most shake without any divine influences of Gods Spirit) sudden fears or
frights, extraordinary Venury, Drunkenness, frequent handling of Quicksilver,
Poisonous sumes of Henbane, white Poppy or the like: And some times from
Sorcery and the Devil himself contracting, shaking the Nerves and Muscles of
the body in a violent manner: That if they grow inveterate they are hardly
curable, and bring certain Death. Let our Quakers and new Trembling
Paraliticks, examine, whether their Quakings and Tremblings (if real, not
feigned, as some of them doutlesse are) be not rather Diseases and Infirmities,
then the motions of Gods Spirit in them, proceeding from some of these natural
causes ( especially overmuch Venery some of them having been lately taken
shaking with their female Proselites between the Sheets in a warm bed, as I am
credibly informed) or from the Devils or his Instruments Sorceries,
Enchantments; and let them speedily seek out for cure, least they prove deadly
to their Bodies and Souls too, in conclusion as Ignatius his Quaking fits did.

That many Jesuits and their Scholars study the art of Sorcery and Magic,
and are Arch-Magitians; affirming blasphemously, that Paul himself received so
great Revelations from Heaven by being instructed in the Art of Magic: that St
John had skill in this Art; yea that Christ himself, was the most absolute
Magition of all others; as Johanis Cambilbonus (once a Jesuit in Syria) in his
Relatio de abstructoribus Jesuitarum Artibus, and Studiis, Printed. 1608. and
Ludovicus Lucius Hist. Jesuitica lib. 1. cap..8. p. 172. 173. record. Yea these
two Authors, together with the Sea Ludovicus Lucius Hist. Jesuitica p. 172,
396, 432.
University of Paris, in their Answer to Peer Cotton the Jesuit (Confessor to
King Henry the 4. of France) Thuanus Hist. l. 132. phisiogmonia Jesuitica,
printed Lugduni 1610. and Speculum Jesuiticum p. 106. and all attest; That this
Father Cotton was an Arch-Magitian, and the best skilled in this black art of
any of their Society: That the Jesuits themselves affirmed, he had a Magycal
Glass, wherein he would plainly represent to the King what ever he desired to
know; and that there was no thing done or consulted so secretly in the most
Private Cabinets of other Monarchs, which he could not disclose and reveel by
the help of that constellated, or rather condiabolated Glass. That by the help
of this Magitian, the Jesuits hoped to convert one of the greatest Protestant
Princes of the Empire to their Religion and Party: That he consulted with the
Devil many times, and demanded his resolution of sundry quessions and doubts;
which he entered into his Magic book, which Devil possessed one Adrian Fresna
a Maid at Saint Victors in France, which he used as his instrument to predict
many strange things: particularly, he demanded of the Devil that possessed her
these Questions. What should be the issue of the Conversion of the Lord
Lavalife, and of the Counselors of the City of Genua? How long Herely should
continue? What hopes there were of the Conversion of such and such particular
Persons? How Heretics might be most easily secluded from the Court? What was
most profitable for the Conversion of all Heretics? By what Sermons, Books,
Means, the people might be most benefited? What danger might be created by the
Devils against the Jesuits Society? Whether God would permit him to know by
him, the time wherein the Heresy of Calvin should be extinguished? And (that
which most concerned England) Qua ratione converti Rex Anglicae, ^egina and
Regnum maxim and facile quaeant? By what means THE KING, QUEEN AND REALM OF
ENGLAND, MIGHT MOST OF ALL AND EASILY BE CONVERTED TO THE ROMAN RELIGION?
Whether our Jesuiticall Impostors, Quakers, and Enthusiasts do not now study,
practice the self same Art of Magic, Sorcery, and consult with the very
Devil himself in their Diabolically inspired, possessed Prophets and
Prophesies, demand not the like Questions, Resolutions from them, and the Devil
acting, speaking, Prophesying in them, as this Jesuit Cotton did from this
possessed Girl, and the Devil in her, let their own practices and consciences
resolve them and others? And how truly they act the Jesuits parts in these
particulars? See Speculum Jesuiticum. p. 59. 60, 62, 63.
Hasenmullerus (a reclaimed Jesuit) in his Histori^ Jesuitied cap. 8. records.
That John the Jesuit in his Sermon. 15 October. 1583. publicly (...) ^elieve
me, the Devils follow us Jesuits every where. That the Monks of Uldarie would
have cast out a Devil out of one possessed, but he would not depart: Being
interrogated, why he would not? He answered, I will not depart before my three
Sons (so he termed the Jesuits) who are passing from Delinga hither, are
come, who no sooner entered the house; but the Devil departed out of the person
possessed: most likely to enter into these Sons of his, whom the Devils every
where follow. Yet the Hasen mullerus Hist. Jesuitica c. 8. Speculum Jesuiticum
p. 62, 63. Petrus Thyraeus de D^moniacis.
Jesuits boast of many Devil^ ejected by them, out of their seminine proselytes
and others: particularly, the Rector of the Jesuits at Vienna records; that a
Maid possessed with Devils, who could not be dispossessed by any E^orcismes,
coming at length to their Jesuits Church was there freed, and no less then
15615^: Devils (if the Jesuit computed a right) were there cast out of her;
the last of them seeming to him to be Luthers Tut^r, because after the manner
of the Lutherans, he spoke many things against their Society and Religion.
Surely this Jesuiticall Rector, had very intimate familiarity with these
Devils, who knew both their Number (being so incredulous) and could so
accurately distinguish between them. Yet some Devils there were in women, whom
they could not dispossess, and derided all their Jesuiticall Exorcismes. Let
all Christians then beware these incarnate Devils and their Emissaries, lest
they be really possessed by the Devil with whom they are so familiar and who
accompanies them every where.

4. That the Jesuits send forth their Emissaries and Agents into Protestant
Kingdoms, Churches, States, under the disguises of Soldiers, Merchants,
Mechanics, Physicians, Chyrurgions, Travelers, Exiles for Religion, and
pretended Converts to the Protestant Religion, in all sorts of habits,
disguises, the better to conceal their persons, the easier to intimate
themselves into Courts, Company of all Protestant Princes, Nobles, Ministers,
and persons of all ranks, to fish out their Secrets, insinuate themselves into
their favors, poison them with their Errors, divide them in their Judgments,
excite them to war upon and distroy each other by their mutual discords, and
accomplish their Treasonable designs against them, to their ruin: Permitting
and dispensing with them freely, to resort openly to the Sermons, Churches, and
Assemblies of Protestants, to dispute and speak against Popery, to eat flesh on
fasting-dayes, and allowing their perverted Disciples to do the like, to feign
themselves the most Zealous Protestants, to be present in the Senates,
Parliaments and Councils of those of the Reformed Religion; to consent to the
apprehension and dissipation of Papists by severe Laws against them, together
with the rest, that so they may the better conceal themselves, discover, divert
or hinder the Consultations against the Papists, promote the Popes and Papists
affairs with more facility, propagate the Popish Religion upon all occasions,
and give them timely notice of any intentions against them upon any urgent
necessity: provided always that they be secretly Catholics, and submit
themselves wholly to the beck and counsels of the Jesuits, as their Instruments
and Intelligencers: as you may read at large, in Jesuitica per Vnitas Belgii
Provincias Negocitaio, printed Ano. 1616 (containing the Instructions in this
kind given to Jesuits by their Superiors sent into the Netherlands to imbroyl,
divide, ruin them) in Joannis Cambilbonus de Abstructiorbus Jesuitarum Artibus
and Studiis: printed 1608. and Ludovicus Lucius Hist. Jesuitica p. 170. 175.
676. 677. 678. Therefore it is no wonder, that their Emissaries, and Disciples
to effect the utter ruin of our Protestant Kingdoms, Churches, Religion, now
thus disguise themselves amongst us, to promote their most dangerous defignes
against them, by the self same means and stratagems now:

5. That the Jesuits make and profess it, one of their principle designs, to
withdraw, alinate the peoples affections from, stir them up against the true
Protestant Ministers and Preachers of the Gospel, and to cast them out and take
them quite out of their way, that so they may with more facility and speed
seduce, devour their Flocks, domineer and set up Popery in all places without
opposition. Witness See Ludovicus Lucius Hist. Jesuitica, l. 1. c. 1. p. 2.
Gregorius Baderus Provincial of the Jesuits in Bavaria, his words at
Landsperge. We and ours shall have no peace in Augusta (or Germany) unless we
take care, Evangelicos Concionatores ejici ac tolli; that the Preachers of the
Gospel be ejected and removed out of the way. By our Councils THE EVANGELICAL
PREACHERS WERE CAST OUT OF VIENNA: Whereupon Society do now there teach in
peace, and rule all things according to their hearts desire. Seconded with
their * practices, in ejecting, imprisoning, banishing, suppressing,
persecuting Hospinian and Ludovicus Lucius Hist. Jesuitical. 4. Grimstons
Imperial History. p. 821. Romes Master piece. Speculum Iesuiticum: p. 175 176.
all the Protestant Ministers in Bohemia, in the years of our Lord, 1602. 1607.
1621, and 1652. to the extirpation of the Protestant Religion, and Protestants
there: and their ejecting, suppressing above thirty of the Protestant
Preachers, and shutting up their Churches in the Dukedomes of Julius, Cleve,
and Bergen; Anno 1628. To omit other later presidents in Austria and elsewhere.
And is not this the Quakers and their disciples principle design, endeavor,
labor now, to withdraw the people wholly from, and excite them against, and
stir them up to reject, suppress, renounce all our lawful Orthodox Ministers,
and evangelicall Preachers, as false guides, dumb Dogs, Seducers of the
People, Deceivers, Antichrists? etc. Their railing Pamphets, preachments, and
pretended messages to them from heaven; enjoining them to come down out of
their Pulpits, to Preach no more hereafter etc. contrary to Christ own
express commands unto them. Math: 28. 19. 20. Mar: 16. 15. Acts. 10. 42. c.
16. 10. Romans 10. 15. 1. Cor. 1. 17. Phil. 1. 16. 17. 18. 2. Tim. 4. 17. 1. Tim.
2. 7. 1 Pet. 1. 12. especially. 1. Cor. 9. 16. Though I preach the Gospel, I
have nothing to glory of; for NECESSITY IS LAID UPON ME; and woe is me if I
preach not the Gospel. and 2. Tim. 4. 1. 2. 3. I charge thee before God and the
Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearance
and his Kingdom. PREACH THE WORD BE INSTANT IN SEASON and OUT OF SEASON,
reprove, rebuke, exhort with all long-suffering and Doctrine (Mark the reason,
suitable to our times and Quakers) FOR THE TIME WILL COME (and now is the time)
that they WILL NOT ENDURE SOUND DOCTRINE, but after their own lust shall they
heap to themselves teachers, having itching ears: And they shall turn away
their ears from the truth, and shall be turned unto Fables. But watch thou in all
things, endure affliction, do the work of an Evangelist, make full proof of thy
ministry. Certainly then those Quakers, and their seduced Disciples; who say
unto the Seers, see not, and to the Prophets prophecy not, prophecy not unto
us right things, speak unto us smooth things, prophecy deceit: Get you out of
the way, turn aside out of the Path, cause the holy one to cease from before
us; are like those Jews of old, Isay 30. 10, 11. Wherefore let them there read
their Doom, Character, and what spirit they are of, v. 8, 9. (and I beseech
them, with all others to observe it well) from Gods own mouth. Now go, write it
before them in a Tabernacle, and not in a Book, that it may be for the time to
come, for ever and ever; that this is a rebellious people, lying children,
children that will not bear the Law of the Lord: But is this all? No, there is
a judgment with a witness, pursuing all such: Verse 12, 13. 14. Wherefore
thus says the holy one of Israel: Because ye despise this word and trust in
fraud and perverseness and stay thereon; therefore this iniquity shall be to you
as a breach ready to fall, swelling out in an high wall, whose breaking comes
suddenly at an instant. And he shall break it as the breaking of a potters
vessel, that is broken in pieces: He shall not spare; so that there shall not
be found in the bursting of it, a sheard to take fire from the hearth, or to
take water out of the Pit: (Let those Statesmen or Magistrates, who out of
design, or self interest, tolerate or secretly countenance such dangerous
Rebels against God, his Word or Ministers, remember it as well as these
Seducers and their followers, least God break them thus to powder suddenly and
irrepairably together, and our whole three Kingdoms too) And if this Text be
not sufficient to convince them of and deter them from this their Sin; let them
read at leisure, Mich. 2. 4, 5, 6, 7, 10, 11. Amos 7. 10, to the end: and quake
and tremble at the reading of them. But if they hold these to be obsolete and
Old Testament only; Let them then consider, who they were, and what
transcendent sin it was in those, who prohibited (not seducing false Apostles
and Jesuitical Emissaries, as these Vagrant Quakers are) but Christ's
commissioned, Math. 28. 18, 19, 20. Mar. 3. 14. c. 16. 15. Acts 10. 42. c. 1
22, etc. c. 14. 23. c. 13. 2, 3. Romans 1. 1. Romans 10. 15. John 15. 16. 1 Timothy 2.
7. Tit. 1. 5. 1 Timothy 4. 14. c. 5. 22. Heb. 5. 1. to 6.
lawfully called, instituted, Apostles and Ministers, to preach any more in the
name of Jesus, and dispense his Gospel: Acts 4. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. cap. 5. v.
17. to 42. compared with 1 Thessalonians. 2. 15, 16. Even those, who both killed the
Lord Jesus, and their own Prophets, and have chased us out, and they please not
God, and are contrary to all men, FORBIDDING US TO SPEAK TO THE GENTILES THAT
THEY MIGHT BE SAVED, TO FILL UP THEIR SINS ALWAYS: for THE WRATH IS COME UPON
THEM TO THE UTTERMOST.

6. That the Jesuits professed doctrine and practice is, that if they cannot
suppress, destroy, extirpate, protestant Ministers, Kings, Princes, Churches,
States and all professors of the protestant Religion, by raising Schisms
Seditions, Divisions, Civil Wars and Commotions amongst them, and dividing
them one from and against another to their mutual ruin; which has been their
great design of late years, whereof we have felt the sad effects: As you may
read at large in Hospinian, and Ludovicus Lucius, their most excellent Historia
Jesuita, Speculum, sive Jubilaeum Jesuiticum, and the Epistle to my
VINDICATION, etc. of the good old Fundamental Liberties and Laws of England;
which if they cannot effect by these means, then to excite all Christian Kings
and Princes to accomplish in conclusion, BY FIRE, SWORD, WAR, and THE POWER
OF AN ARMY; as you may there be satisfied by undeniable Testimonies of Jesuits
themselves, and presidents of former and later times: More particularly by the
Words and Writings of Jacobus Crucius, the Jesuit, in his Explication of the
Rules of the Jesuits, and his Sermon. Anno 1584. Thomas Stapleton; his
Speculum pravitatis Haereticae. Duaci 1580. Thom, Capian: his Concertatio
Ecclesiae Catholicae Treviris. 1583. page 22. Paulus Windeck: De Extirpandis
Haereticis. Antid. 10. and 11. Franciscus Verona, his Apologia pro Joanne
Castle, part. 5. cap. 13. Cunradus Brunus de Haereticis lib. 3. cap. ult.
Cornelius Cornelii, his Praesacio ad S. Trinitatem increatam, Commentariis in
Minores Prophetas praefix^. Wherein, Blesleth the Trinity, for opening the eyes
of Christian Kings, and stirring them up all against Calvinisme, as the plague
of their Realms: For inabling the King of France, Spain, and Emperor in a
short time to overthrow, conquer, expel and destroy the Arch-hereticks; the Sea Hasenmulerus Hist. Jesuitica l. 5. Speculum Jesuiticum p. 61.
Hussites and Calvinists in France, Austria, Bohemia, Mor^via, Silesia,
Hungary, and both the Palatinates, as the firebrarnds of Rebellion, to their
eternal glogy: concluding thus. Agite Principes generost, pergitis animis, opus
f^licibus adeo auspiciis caeptum CONFICITE; paribus studiis REBELLEM CALVINI
HAERESIN, pene evulsam, STIRPITVS VBILIBET ERADICATE, etc. And by Antonius
Possevinus the Jesuit (to omit See Ludovicus Lucius Hist. Jesuitica l. 1. c.
1, 2.
all others) in his Miles Christianus (published when Pope Paul the fifth, sent
an Army into France against the Enemies of the Church, wherein he asserts. That
all Christians are bound of right, to defend the Roman Religion against the
doctrine of the Gospellers (or Protestants) with all their forces; and the
effusion of their blood. That neither Peace nor the public good can be
preserved in the Roman Church unless these her enemies BE QUITE EXTIRPATED.
Exhorting the Captains of the Army, to permit nothing at all to these
Heretick^; not to keep their plighted faith with them; to suborn secret
Inquisitors against them; We may see by this, who were the raysers and
original contrivers of our late inrestine wars, etc.
DOMESTICA ET INTESTINA BELLA INTER ILLOS EXCITARI CURENT: To take care to
stir up Domestic and Intestine wars between themselves: Proditores ac
Sicarios, omnibus locis, contra illos instituant: and to institute Traitors and
Murderers against them in all places: Asserting, that the Captains who did
otherwise, sinned against the Roman Church, and were rendered inexcusable and
damned. Now seeing Barisonius the Jesuit, in his Letter to See Ludouicus Lutius
Hist. Jesuitica. l. ^. c. 8 p. 164. 166.
a Noble Venetian (who deserted their order,) dated at Bononia 21. April 1608.
printed 1609. amongst other things thus boasts of the excellency, power and
perfection of their Jesuiticall Order, PRO LIBITV NOSTRO, ET BELLVM ET PACEM
MVNDO APPORTAMVS. That they can at their pleasure bring both War and Peace to
the World, as the chief Authors of both. That they lawfully may and do sow
discords and divisions between King and Subject, Man and Wife, Father and
Children, Brothers and Kindred, and usurp absolute Dominion and Tyranny over
any private men, Cities, or whole Kingdoms they suspect, for the benefit of
the Church and See of Rome, in whose Service and Greatness true piety and the
highest Point of Religion consists; and that for this end they may in their of
which read Ludovicus Lucius. p. 129. 199. 200.
Chamber of meditation, animane their Assisinates to murder Heretics, Enemies
and Rebels to the Church of Rome, not only though private Persons, but though
the greatest of princes and Kings, by representing to them the heroical fact
of Ehud, recorded in sacred Scripture, and promising them a seat in heaven
amongst the Saints and martyrs for such an heroicke deed. And seeing the
Jesuits (dispersed like Locusts over the world) are increased in few years to
so great a Number, that they boasted long since, Ludovicus Lucius. l. 1. c. 7.
p. 156. 172.
that they had no less then two hundred thousand Scholars in Europe: and
Claudius Aquaviva, their late General, vaunted; that he could bring into the
field, and that in a shorter time, more soldiers, then any one christian king:
and proffered Pope Paul the 5th. (during the interdict of Venice, when they and
he were in some danger) to aid him with forty thousand men, so as those of
them slain in the wars, might be reputed Martyrs; so infinite are the Numbers
of their Society, Novices, Disciples, Treasures, Revenues; yea all their
Colleges in foreign parts, so many strong Castles, Forts and Magazines of
Arms, Ammunition, Powder, and all military provisions (as they bost, and
Speculum Jesuiticum. p. 207. to. 213. Lud. Lucius Hist. Jesuitica. l. 1. c. 6.
p. 156. 157. 238. 171.
others write) And seeing these Jesuits, who make it their Masterpiece to
weaken and destroy all others by divisions, Schisms, Factions, Tumults,
prescribe it as the principle part of their own Policy, Safety, Power,
Successes and Growth, to maintain Unity, Peace, Amity, and prevent all Schisms
and Divisions amongst themselves, Regulae Jesuitarum. printed 1627. and
Ludovicus Lucius. Hist. l. 1. c. 3. p. 18. 19. 21. 24. 26. 31.
prescribing sundry Rules and Orders for this end, to which they are all sworn
to yield exact Obedience; I refer it to the consideration of all prudent,
Zealous Protestants and Statesmen in our whole 3. Nations; How dangerous a Plot
and 1. Kings. 12. 26. to the end. c. 13. 2. etc.
Jeroboam like desperate Policy it may in a short time prove, to all our
Churches, zealous Ministers and Professors of the Protestant Religion (yea to
our present Governors, swordmen, and their Posterities likewise) any longer to
tolerate these Jesuiticall, fiery, treacherous Agents, with other Romish
Emissaries, freely to vent their Errors, Blasphemies, Heresies, Fancies, and
set up Separat Congregations in all places, to multiply our divisions,
dis-unite us all one from another, and augment their strength and party,
predominating in most Counsels, Places; the better to secure any in actual
Power for the present; though to hasten their, with our whole Kingdoms,
Churches, Ministers, and reformed Mat. 12. 25.
Religions ruin by it in conclusion, even by force of Arms, and Tumults, when
they see their opportunity, as we have all just cause to fear? I shall therefore
close up all, with the words of De vera and Falsa Religione cap. De Magistratu.
printed, 1525.
Huldrycus Zwinglius against those Dippers and Anabaptists in his age, who
denied the Office and Coercive Power of christian Magistrates (specially in
matters of Religion) as most of our Anabaptists, Quakers, disguised Jesuits and
Franciscans now do. Propter istos ipsos qui negant, Christanum posse gerere
Magistratum, maxim egemus magistratu; quum vitam omnium talem esse videatis,
ut rigidissimo magistratu opus habeat. Quod si 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2.
propacato statu orare licet; licet et nimirum orare, ut Deus pium magistratum
concedat, quo co^modius pax et concordia concilientur, Quin omnes hoc agimus,
ut vitam innocentissimam ducamus, et nibil nos premet magistratus: Romans 13. 3.
For Rulers are not a terror to good works, but to evil; will thou not then be
afraid of the powers do that which is good, and thou shall have praise of the
same. Hoc ipsum Oro, ut diligenter expendant, qui Magistratum detrectant. Si
potestatem odio habent aut timent; quod rectum est faciant. Expendant simul
Principes ne recte factis timori sint. Qui ergo jam NOVIS EXACTIONIBVS,
TRIBVTIS, VECTIGALIBVS, non modo expilant miseram plebem, sed onerant,
excarnificant, excindunt, ut videantur esse in communem nati perniciem; Qui
malis delectantur, and bonis minaciter imminent, Principes non sunt; sed
Tyranni, sed Tortores, sed Lanii. Qui ergo omnium malo praesunt, videant quo
pacto Christi nomine glorientur; qui non modo ut Praedones and Furts in omnium
bona, sed ut Pestes quoque in omnium corpora grassantur. Sunt autem and isti
Ministri Dei, sed quomodo Satan Minister Dei est, qui ubique adversatur,
circumvenit, perdit. Omnia in manibus sunt cupidissimorum hominum, u^ jam non
unum Tyrannum habeant, qui sub talibus Imperiis degunt, sed sexcentos. A
Character of our times.
Friget omnis justitia, fervet cupiditas imo dominatur, putant enim si Tributa
sint quacunque ratione amplissima, jam recto administraci Imperium. Ne ergo
tenure summam rerum imprudentibus, pueris, stupidis, CVPIDISVE nedamus, sed iis
quorum probitas, fides, prudentia, longo usu perspectae sint, alioqui frustra
nos aliquando queremur, quod dicitur, non putavisse: Tribuat nobis omnipotens
Pater, Magistratus tales, qui nullum aliud exemplum spectent, quam ejus, cujus,
ordinatione ad hoc cocuneris inautorati sunt, ut ad modum Creatoris nostri sese
gerant quo Patres nos multos habere gloriari possimus: Nec queri cogamur, quod
Propheta Mic. 7. (ver. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6,) queritur. Vae mihi. etc.

Amen.
A brief Reply to John Audlands Railing Paper.
Christian Reader,
MEeting (since the premises sent to the Press) with a printed Pamphlet lately
published, entitled: The Innocent delivered out of the Snare, etc. full of
unchristian Raylings against our Ministers, Magistrates in general, and my
self, with others in particular; written by John Audland, an Arch-Quaker (who
cannot write six lines of true English together;) and finding in the Title Page
and p. 36. etc. thereof, this inscription. An Answer to a Scandalous Paper put
forth by William Prynne; entitled: The Quakers unmasked and clearly detected:
wherein his Slanders are made to appear; and he is clearly unmasked and
plainly detected, being taken with A LIE in his mouth: I thought meet, by way
of Reply, to so much only as concerns my Paper, to give thee this breife
account thereof, in the close of this Enlarged Edition.

1. That his chief Exception is against Cowlishaw his Oath, as untrue; only
upon this slender ground: p. 37. Two of us whom the world reproachfully calls
Quakers, came from the North (being moved of the Lord,) in the Month of June;
we came into the City of Bristol the 12. day of the Month called July; and on
the morrow being the 13. day, we were at two meetings; the one with the people
called Anabaptists; the other with the people called Independents; and we were
moved by the Lord; to speak at both their meetings, which we did: as several
of those people can bear witness. Thou says; in September, George Cowlishaw
being asked by Coppinger; if there had been none of those people called Quakers
in Bristol? He answered, NO. Now this is false. For Some of us who Two verbes
singular are coupled with us, a plural; and so thorowout the Book.
is so called (mark his English) was then at Bristol: For we had meetings at
the Fort and Redde-Lodge in Bristol. the 10. and 13 of September: at which was
several hundreds of people; which will all witness, That THY Oath IS FALSE.
But does this convince the Oath to be false? No verily: but rather confirms it
for truth: For though two of you went to two private meetings of Anabaptists
and Independents in Bristol, and spoke there to them on July 13. yet that was
unknown to Cowlishaw and most others: and you spoke to those people then, not
under the name or notion of Quakers, but only of Whose Opinions they justify
against Infant Baptism in this new Pamphet. p. 20. 31. 32.
Anabaptists and Independents: And your speaking to sundry after in and about
Bristol on the 10. 13. 15. 17. 19. of September (at which time you began to
take upon you the name of Quakers, and to be known in Bristol by that Title)
was after Cowlishaws conference with Coppinger: who adds; that about 18. days
after, there came to this City two that were named Quaker: Now several of you
coming thither (like the Franciscan Friars two by two after each other) just
about that time he deposes, by your own relation; convinces Audland of an
apparent slander, and double Lie. First, in accusing Cowlishaw (known to be a
person of truth and honesty,) for making a false Oath, which his own Answer to
it justifies to be true. 2. In averring, * That he and his Companions were
moved by the Lord and his eternal Spirit, to leave their own habitation and
callings in the North, to come to seduce the people of Bristol (to believe
their new Revelations) That they are the Messengers, and Ministers See. p. 6.
7. 26. 37. 44. 45. at the end.
of the Everlasting Gosple of God, sent and moved by the Lord to speak to the
City of Bristol, etc. When as in truth, they are those that trouble that City,
and would pervert the Gospel of Christ therein Gal. 1. 7. yea the very false
lying Prophets prophesied of and described. Zech. 13. 3. 4. 5.

2. He excepts against Cowlishaw: That he accused not Coppinger to the
Magistrate, confessing himself to be a p. 38.
Franciscan Friar; but concealed, and let him go. Whereupon he taxes the
Magistrates of Bristol for injustice, in not punishing Cowlishaw, and yet
making out warrants against the Quakers. But this is very frivilous. 1. Because
his printed oath, is no concealment, but a clear discovery of him, and all his
conference with him, to the Magistrates, deserving praise, not punishment. 2.
Coppingers hasty departure the very next day into Ireland, disabled him and the
Magistrates to seize him. 3. The suspension of the Laws by some in Superior
power against such Romish Vermin at that season, will excuse both him and the
Magistrates from any punishment or blame, in not seizing on him; could they
have conveniently done it. 4. Their granting out warrants against the Quakers,
for disturbing both the Peace, Ministers, and Government of the City, was
just, legal. And their public abuse both of the Mayor and Governors of the
City in print, in the two last pages of this Pamphlet, stiling them Brethren
and Companions, but it is in iniquity; who have confederated themselves against
Christ and his anointed. etc. deserves a sharper Censure, then a small fine,
temporary imprisonment and an obligation to the good behavior, though not yet
inflicted on them.

3. His exceptions against me; are, for averring. 1. That the Quakers are but
the Spawne of Romish Frogs, Jesuits, and Franciscan Friars; To refute which he
alleges only: That they It is but his own testimony; and none can tell what
abod^ or profession he or Fox formerly had there, after diligent enquiry made
concernning it?
all came from the North, that their birth and being was in Westmoreland near
Kendal, where they lived and walked, none of them having ever been out of
England. To which I answer. 1. That their coming out of the North; is a shrewd
argument of their badnesse. The Scripture informs us Jer. 1. 14. chap. 4. 6.
chap. 6. 1. 22. That out of THE NORTH AN EVIL SHALL BREAK FORTH UPON ALL THE
INHABITANTS OF THE LAND. That EVIL APPEARS OVT OF THE NORTH AND GREAT
DESTRVCTION shall be brought from THE NORTH. Which the Latin Proverb Omne malum
ab Aquilone; with the English Adagy; All evil comes from the North, seconding,
we have just cause to conclude; That these Quakers coming from thence, are fit
Instruments, only to bring evil and destruction upon all the Inhabitants of
the Land; not Gods Messengers, Ministers, sent thence to save men's Souls. 2.
Westmorland is well known, to have abounded with Jesuits, Popish Priests
Friars, Recusants, and persons Popishly affected, ever since the Reformation:
Witness the Sea Speeds, History, Camdens Elizabeth, Stow, How, and others in
Ann. 1569.
Rebellion of the Earl of Westmorland and the Northern Papists under him, to
advance the popish Religion and destroy Queen Elizabeth and the protestant
Reformation. Anno 1569. with the late power of the Lord William Howard, Ducket,
Leyborn, Fleming, and other Popish Families in that County. And therefore we
may justly fear an emanation of Jesuitical, Franciscan Frogs and Emissaries
from thence now. 3. Mr Tillam (late, or still a Popish Priest) Administrator of
the Anabaptisticall Congregation at Hexam, not far from Kendal, avers in print;
See the perfect Pharisee. p. 13.
That these Quaking Agonies were derived from the Franciscan Friars; and the
premises sufficiently prove, that they were derived to us from them and the
Jesuits, who took their Pattern from the Idolatrous pagan priests quaking
Transcies and Agonies. Therefore his own bare verbal negation thereof, will no
way disprove my Assertion. The rather, because the Jesuits, Franciscans,
Benedictines, and others have their private Coledges, Societies, and General
of their Orders in England, and may secretly admit their Disciples into their
Orders here, with out going beyond the Seas; as I have proved at large in my
Romes Masterpeece; The Popish Royal Favorite, Hidden works of Darkness
brought to public Light, and my Epistle to a (late) Seasonable Legal and
Historical Vindication; to which I shall refer the Reader, and our Quakers
for Now in Bat^ gaol for disturbing the Minister there in the midest of his
Sermon the 27. of May last.
fuller Satisfaction. 4. Some of them, wearing rough Hair-cloth and Cords about
their bodies, like the Franciscan Cordiliers; is a very probable Evidence, that
they were spawned from them, and that they are the persons prophesied of Zech.
13. 3. 4. 5. Which prophecy Lies in the name of the Lord, and wear a garment of
hair to Ly and deceive the people, which Murford and others of them use. 2.
For affirming, that they use inchan^edpotions, Bracelets, Ribands, Sorcery, and
Wicheraft, to intoxicate their Disciples. Which being sufficiently evidenced in
the premises, and See John Gilpins printed relation of himself.
apparent by many instances, in most places where they ramble, I shall no
further insist to prove it. But close up all with these two Scripture
Exhortations to the people of England. 1. Cor. 16. 13. Phil. 1. 27. Watchye,
stand fast in the faith, quit you like men, be strong; in one Spirit with one
mind, striving together for the faith of the Gospel, and 1 Pet. 5. 8. 9. Be
sober, be vigilant, because your adversary the Devil walks about (in his
Instruments as well as Person) like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may
devour, whom resist steadfast in the faith. And with that of Gal. 1. 7. 8. 9.
But there are some that trouble you, and would pervert the Gospel of Christ:
But though they, we, or an Angel from Heaven preach any As two Quakers did
lately in Westminster Hall May 14. denied the scriptures to be the Word of God
etc. Heaven, Hell, and the Resurrection of the dead etc. as the Diur^als print.
other Gospel unto you, LET HIM BE ACCURSED. As we said before, so say I now
again: IF ANY MAN PREACH ANY OTHER GOSPEL UNTO YOU, THEN THAT YOU HAVE
RECEIVED, LET HIM BE ACCURSED. And let all sincere Lovers, Professors of the
Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, through out our Nation and the Christian
world, add a zealous Amen Zech. 5. 13. cap. 8. 6. Ps. 41. 13. Psalm. 72. 19.
Psalm. 89. 52. Psalm. 106. 48.
and Amen thereto.

Math. 15. 19. They be blind leaders of the blind: And if the blind lead the
blind, both shall fall into the ditch.

Rev. 12. 12. Woe to the Inhabitants of the Earth and of the Sea, for THE DEVIL
IS COME DOWN UNTO YOU having great wrath, because he knows he has but ashort
time.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Kind Reader, I pray correct these Errors at the Press, occasioned by the
Authors absence.

PAge 2. line 30. read 69. p. 3. l. 36. Religion, p. 5. l. 12. crumble, p. 6.
l. 10. or gestures, p. 7. l. 7. del. in, l. 39. Brigets, p. 8. l. 2 Quakers, l.
38. Magiae: Gee: p. 9. l. 19. others, l. 30. Strabo, l. 36. Shaking, p. 10. l.
25. verifies, l. 32. Prideaux, p. 11. l. 22. Theodotus, p. 12. l. 8.
Daemoniacis, l. 17. Catholic, p. 13. l. 5. Anabaptistis, l. 20 Monasteries, p.
14. l. 7. again, l. 37. Broeckerous, p. 15. l. 7. truly; thereby, l. 9. being,
bring, l. 13. and to in, l. 27. ever, even; l. 32. Constantine, l. 35.
concurred, concord; p. 17. l. 16. the these, l. 27. deceived (theirs) r.
dreamed, p. 18. l. 9. about, above, p. 20. l. 3. del. have, l. 4. Franciscan,
p. 21. l. 1^. Maffaeus, l. 23. Ludovicus, l. 29. others, l. 34. Tunianus, p.
22. l. 9. Lugnes, Laynes, l. 28. shaken, p. 23. l. 17. 3. That, l. 24. Styria,
l. 31. and do all, p. 24. l. 12. Lavalii, l. 13. Gema Geneva, l. 21. Anglae, p.
25. l. 37. intimate, intrude, l. 38. the Courts, p. 27. l. 9. or in, l. 21.
Juliers, p. 28. l. 21. Tabernacle, r. Table, l. 22. not in, note it in, p. 29
l. 23. cannot can, to l. 36. accomplish it, p. 30. l. 22. pergitis pergite
magnis.

In the Margin, p. 5. l. 8. Francisco, p. 22. l. 5, 6. Rondeletius, Methodus.


