SUSPENTION SUSPENDED.

OR, The Divines of SYON-COLLEDGE late claim Of the Power of suspending
Scandalous Persons, from the LORDS SUPPER (without sequestring them from any
other Public Ordinance, or the society of Christians) and that by the very
Will and Appointment of JESUS CHRIST ( not by virtue of any Ordinance of
Parliament) from whom they receive both their Office and Authority; briefly
examined, discussed, refuted by the Word of God, and Arguments deduced from it;
and the contrary Objections clearly Answered.

Wherein; a bare Suspention of Persons from the LORDS SUPPER only, without a
Seclusion of them from other Ordinances, is proved to be no Censure or
Discipline appointed by JESUS CHRIST in his Word: That some Texts commonly
alleged for proof of such a Suspention and of Excommunication, do really
warrant neither.

That the Lords Supper is frequently, not rarely to be Administered as well to
unregenerate Christians to convert them, as to regenerate to confirm them:
Whether it be a Seal of Grace or not, and in what sense? debated; and some
common mistakes therein rectified.

By WILLIAM PRYNNE of Lincolnes Inn, Esquire.

JER. 14. 14. Then the Lord said unto me; the Prophets prophecy lies in my
name; I sent them not, neither have I commanded them, neither spoke unto them:
they Prophecy unto you a false vision and divination, and a thing of naught,
and the deceit of their heart. 1 JOHN 4. 1. Beloved, believe not every Spirit,
but try the Spirits whether they be of God; because many false Prophets are
gone out into the world. LONDON: Printed by T. B. for Michael Spark at the
sign of the Blew-Bible in Green Arbor, 1646.

To the right Honorable HENRY Earl of Kent, and the rest of the COMMISSIONERS
for the Great Seal of England.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
THE Lords Supper being commonly termed by Divines, both in their Writings and
Sermons ( though never by the spirit of God in sacred Writ) a Sacrament, and a
Seal; yea, Gods GREAT SEAL of Grace, and of the Covenant of Grace; where of
our Syon College Ministers now preted themselves the divine LORD KEEPERS,
asserting that by the will and appointment of Jesus Christ himself, they have
both Commission and Authority to suspend al such whom they shall deem Ignorant
or Scandalous from this SEAL ( though they earnestly thirst and hunger after
it, and be not actually excommunicated from any other public Ordinance, or
the society of Christians:) I conceived I could not so fitly Dedicate this
Brief Examination and Refutation of their Divine claim and new Institution of
sole suspention from the Sacrament ( so much contested for) to any others, as
to Your Honors, the present Commissioners for the Custody of THE GREAT SEAL OF
ENGLAND; to whose Noble Patronage I humbly recommend it, so far forth only
as it shall appear to be consonant to the Word of Truth.

My little Treatise, entitled, The opening of the Great Seal of England, was,
through Gods blessing on it, one special means of passing the first Ordinance
for the New great Seal of England, which has ever since continued in your
keeping; and I have some good hopes, that by the like divine Benediction on
this smaller Pamphlet, the Lords Supper ( the GREAT SEAL OF HEAVEN, as many
style it) shall be opened, and communicated to many poor souls cordially
desirous to receive it, who otherwise might have most injuriously (by color of
the pretended Will and appointment of Jesus Christ) been suspended from it.

Where this Will and Appointment of Christ is to be found in Scripture, it
rests on the Divines of Syon-Colledge to demonstrate; for my part, after many
diligent inquiries to find it out either in the old or new Testament, I always
returned with a Non est inventus: only this I have observed in my reading, that
when ever any matters of Ecclesiastical or Pontifical Jurisdiction have come
to be debated, the Clergy in all Ages have made very strange Interpretations
and perversions of Scripture to maintain their pretended Divine Authority.
What ridiculous Inferences the Popes of Rome, with their Parasites have
published in print to support their usurped Antichristian supremacy over all
Bishops, Churches and Kings themselves, from, Thou art Peter; arise Peter kill
and eat; Lanch out into the deep; Feed my sheep; God made two great lights;
Behold, here are two swords: Ye shall find an Ass and a Colt tied, loose them
and bring them hither: Tell it to the Church, etc. is known to all who peruse
their Books of this controversy; Whether some of our Divines have not incurred
the like solecismes, and made almost as gross Misapplications of Scripture as
they, in maintenance of their new Church Government and Discipline, I submit to
the determination of such who without partiality have perused their la^e
Discourses of that subject: For my part, having neither any private interest
nor Design to misbyas my judgment, 2 Cor. 3. 8
I a can ( I dare) do nothing against the Truth, but for the Truth in this
present controversy. My impartial debate whereof, though it may displease
some, will I trust conduce much to the settlement of our public peace ( which
the unhappy controversies about Church Government have disturbed) and find
acceptance with all lovers of Truth in general, and your Honors in
particular, from the hands

Of your Devoted Servant, WILLIAM PRYNNE.

SUSPENTION SUSPENDED. OR, SYON-COLLEDGE Claim of the Power of Suspending
Scandalous persons from the Lords Supper by the Will and Appointment of JESUS
CHRIST, and Authority derived to Church Officers from him, Examined, Discussed,
Refuted by the Word of GOD.
WE Read, that one one of the first and fiercest contestations which brake out
among Christ's own Apostles, even when he sent them out to Preach, and when he
was about to institute the Lords Supper, was concerning Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, Luke 9. 46. cap. 22. 24, 25 26. Mat. 20. 20. to 29. Mark 10. 35.
to 46.
which of them should be the greatest: which though then severely checked and
determined by Christ himself, yet I know not by what unhappy uninterrupted
succession it has disturbed the peace of the Church and whole Christian world,
more or less, in all succeeding Ages; and in this last Age of ours, as much or
more then in any precedent Century whatsoever; the wisdom of our wisest
Counselors, united altogether in our greatest and wisest Counsel, the high
Court of Parliament, being unable to quiet and conjure down this ambitious,
restless spirit of Domination and contention about Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, still predominating in the Clergy.

To instance but in one particular: The Parliament, after long and serious
debate, was pleased to approve and set up a Presbyteriall Government in our
Church, and at the Clergies extraordinary importunity, in a prudentiall way, to
give Ministers and Presbyteries power, to keep ignorant and scandalous persons
from the Lords Supper, confining them to a particular enumera^ion of scandals,
not leaving it arbitrary and indefinite; investing them with this authority,
not as a Jurisdiction bequeathed to them by the will and appointment of Jesus
Christ, being not satisfied in their consciences, that Christ had given them
any such divine power in his Word, but as an authority derived to them by
Ordinance of Parliament and humane institution, without declaring it to be of
divine right.

The Ministers of London, Westminster, and within the Lines of Communication,
not satisfied with this New indulged Jurisdiction, meeting at Syon College,
June 9. 1646. agreed upon certain Considerations and Cautions, which they soon
after published in print* wherein (contrary to the Parliaments intention and
Ordinances) they professedly claim this new authority, and the exercise
thereof by a Divine institution, and from Jesus Christ himself, not from the
Parliaments grant: witness this passage, p. 5. We conceive the power of
Church Censures, and in particular, the keeping of ignorant and scandalous
persons from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, to be in Church Officers, BY
THE WILL AND APPOINTMENT OF JESUS CHRIST, AND FROM HIM THEY RECEIVE THEIR
OFFICE AND AUTHORITY. Upon which ground they further Remonstrate; That the
Ordinances (touching Presbyterial government) do not hold forth a complete
rule, nor are in all points satisfactory to their consciences; and thereupon
conclude thus; Resolving by Gods grace to walk IN ALL THINGS ACCORDING TO THE
RULE OF THE WORD (not Ordinances) and according to the Ordinances SO FAR AS
WE CONCIVE IT CORRESPONDENT TO IT; (so as they thrust the Ordinances and
directions of Parliament quite out of door;) and in so doing, we trust we
shall not grieve the spirits of the truly godly, either at home or abroad, nor
give any just occasion to them that are contrary minded to blame our
proceedings; let the Parliament take it how they please.

For my own opinion, I really profess the Presbyteriall Government to be most
agreeable to Gods Word, and the Independent way to be a Seminary of Scisme,
Libertinisme, Heresy, Errors, and a Babell of confusion: And* for the
Ministers assembled at Syon College, who agreed upon these Considerations, and
Cautions, though I cordially love and reverence their persons; yet as others
much blame their Discretions in publishing them; so I cannot subscribe to this
their New Paradox dogmatically asserted in them, That the power of suspending
Ignorant and scandalous persons only from the Lords Supper, is in Church
Officers, by the will and appointment of Jesus Christ, and that they have
received this Authority from him; because I read of no such will or appointment
of Jesus Christ in his Word, nor of any such Authority exercised by him (who
admitted See a Vindication of four serious Questions, page 17. to 28. Thomas
Becons Catechism, vol. 1. fol. 481, 482, 484.
Judas himself to his last Supper) or expressly delegated to any of his
Apostles, or any other Church Officers by what names so ever distinguished.
True it is, that Ministers of the Gospel have power given them to Instruct,
Exhort, rebuke the Ignorant and scandalous with all Authority, Tit. 2. 15. To
inform and warn them of the great danger of unworthy hearing the Word, and
receiving the Lords Supper; to dehort them under the pain of their own
souls, and incurring of Gods judgments not to come unpreparedly to them, Luke
8. 18. Jam. 1. 22, 23, 25. 1 Cor. 10. 21, 22. c. 11. 20. to 34. And when they
have thus done, they have discharged their duties, freed their own souls, and
are guiltless of the sins of such who will not be kept back from these
Ordinances, and prove unprofitable hearers or receivers, as Ezekiel. 3. 17. to 22.
c. 33. 7. to 17. Acts 20. 26, 27, 28. resolve, and I have A Vindication of four
serious Questions, p. 28. to 48.
elsewhere proved at large. But that they have any Ministerial or Magisteriall
Authority to keep back any unexcommunicated person from the Lords Supper
only, who earnestly desires to receive it, and promises reformation, without
suspending him from all other Ordinances, and that by the very will and
appointment of Jesus Christ, seems a mere erroneous paradox unto me; contrary
to Isay 55, 1. Mat. 11. 28. John 7. 33. Revel. 22. 17. and other Scriptures;
which (without any Relation at all unto, or opposition against the Ordinances
of Parliament, for the suspending of Ignorant or scandalous persons from the
Lords Supper, by virtue of a mere Parliamentary Sanction) I shall here
summarily discuss and refute, with reference only to that pretended divine
Authority, will and appointment of Jesus Christ, by which our Divines now
claim it for the present, and resolve to execute it for the future.

I shall contract the whole Controversy into this one Question, wherein the
very marrow and substance of it consists, not hitherto exactly debated by any
to my knowledge.

Question 1.
WHether Ministers or Presbyteries Jurisdictionall Suspention of scandalous
Church Members from the Lords Supper only who desire to receive it, without
excluding them from all other public Ordinances (as Prayer, Preaching,
Reading, Fasting, Catechizing, singing of Psalms, Baptizing of Infants, etc.)
he a divine Institution, vested in them by the Word of God, and the very will
and appointment of Jesus Christ?

For my part, with submission to better judgments, I hold the negative, upon
these ensuing Reasons.

My first Reason is,

If any such be to be found, I shall desire them to inform me thereof, (since
I could never hitherto upon my exactest enquiry, find out any such) and then I
shall either clearly answer, on submit unto it.

My second Reason is, divine Institution, directly militate against it, arguing
a total suspension, exclusion from all public holy Ordinances and
Church Assemblies, for ceremonial or moral uncleanness, not from the
Passover or Lords Supper only: I shall give you a taste of some of the
principle Texts whereon our See Master Rutherfords divine right of Church
government, cap 3. to 15.
Opposites rely, that you may discern how clearly they make against them.

The first is, Levit. 13. 3, 4* 21, 26, 31, 46. and cap. 14. 3, 8, 9, 11. He
that was infected with the plague of Leprosy among the Israelites, was to be
See 2 Kings 7. 3, 4. cap. 15. 5. 2 Chro. 26. 20, 21, 23.
shut up by the Priest, and during all the time of his Leprosy* and
uncleanness he was to dwell ALONE WITHOUT THE CAMP, (for fear of Infecting
others:) Upon which ground Miriam, when leprous, was shut out of the Camp
seven days, and after that, received in again, Numb. 12. 10. to 16. Ergo, he
was secluded from all public Ordinances and religious society, not from the
Passover or Lords Supper only, if putting out of the Camp imply so much.

The second is, Numb. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4. And the Lord spoke into Moses, saying;
Command the CHILDREN OF ISRAEL THAT THEY PUT OU^ OF THE CAMP every Leper, and
every one that has an Issue, and whosoever is defiled by the dead: both male
and female shall be put out, without the CAMP shall ye put them, that they
defile not their Camp, in the midst whereof I dwell: And the children of
Israel did so, and put them out without the Camp. Ergo, they equally secluded
them from all public Ordinances, Sacrifices, and their common society, not
from the Lords Supper or Passover alone; if this putting out of the Camp were
an Ecclesiastical censure and exclusion from Gods Ordinances and society of
the faithful, as is pretended.

The third is, Levit. 16. 26, 27, 28. Numb. 19. 3, 7. cap. 31. 19. 24. Deuteronomy.
23. 10. to 15. where we read of others, who for other ceremonial uncleanness
and nocturnall pollutions, were to go out of the Camp, and not to come within
it till they had washed themselves, and then when they were cleansed, and the
Sun was down they might come into the Camp again. Ergo, during the time of
their exclusion they were equally debarred from all public Ordinances
whatsoever, and not admitted unto any other Ordinance more then to the
Passover, Numb. 2. 6. to 13.

From these Texts, much Master Rutherfords divine right of Church Government,
cap. 5 and elsewhere.
urged for proof of an Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, vested by divine
institution and the will of Jesus Christ in Priests under the Law and Ministers
and Presbyteries under the Gospel, to excommunicate and suspend from the Lords
Supper scandalous and unclean persons; I shall only propound four Questions to
the Objectors of them, wherein I desire satisfaction.

First, Whether the Camp of the children of Israel was not rather a Type of
their Religious Civil State and Republic, then of their Church? and the
exclusion of Lepers, and those that had Issues, with others out of the Camp,
for these natural infirmities and ceremonial uncleanness, were not rather a
temporary civil sequestration to prevent infection and diseases in the Camp,
then an Ecclesiastical censure of Excommunication orsuspention from the
Tabernacle and public Ordinances used in it, to prevent spiritual infections
of the soul, or profanation of the public Ordinances of Gods worship? The
reason why I propound this Quere is, because Exodus 37. 7. to 12. expressly
resolves, that the Tabernacle of the Congregation, representing the Church of
the Jews, wherein God himself manifested his special presence in the Cloud
and Pillar, where all public Sacrifices and duties of Gods worship were
performed by the Priests and people, and where God met with Moses, and answered
him and the people face to face, was not placed within the Camp of the
Israelites, but a far off without it, witness the express words of the
Text; And Moses took the Tabernacle and pitched it WITHOUT THE CAMP A FAR
OFF FROM THE CAMP, and called it the Tabernacle of the Congregation: And it
came to pass, that EVERY ONE THAT SOUGHT THE LORD, went OUT unto the
Tabernacle of the Congregation, which WAS WITHOUT THE CAMP, etc. Which is
likewise fully seconded, confirmed by Numb. 11. 24, to 30. And Moses gathered
the seventy men of the Elders of the people, and set them round about the
Tabernacle, and the Lord came down in a cloud, and spoke unto him, and took of
the spirit that was upon him, and gave it unto the seventy Elders: And it came
to pass, that when the spirit rested upon them, they prophesied and did not
cease: But there remained two of the men in the Camp, and the name of the one
was Eldad, and the name of the other Medad; and the spirit rested upon them,
and they were of them that were written, but went not out ( to wit, of the
Camp) unto the Tabernable, and they Prophes^ed in the Camp: And there ran a
young man and told Moses, and said, Eldad and Medad do prophecy in the Camp;
and Joshua the Son of Nun* the servant of Moses, one of his young men, answered
and said: My Lord Moses forbid them: And Moses said unto him; Enviest thou for
my sake? would God all the Lords people were Prophets, and that the Lord would
put his spirit upon them: And Moses gat him into the Camp, he and the Elders of
Israel. compared with Levit. 17. 3. to 7. By which it is most clear, that the
Tabernacle stood without the Camp, where they used both to sacrifice and
prophecy, not within it: Hence it is, in regard the Tabernacle was placed, and
all the Ceremonial Sacrifices under the Law killed and sacrificed to God
without the Camp, that Christ himself, of whose passion they were Types,
suffered without the gates of Jerusalem (typified by the Camp) that his death
might the more exactly answer to these Types; as the Author to the Hebrews
thus resolves, chap. 13. 10. to 15. We have an Altar, whereof they have no
right to eat, which serve the Tabernacle; for the bodies of those Beasts whose
blood is brought into the Sanctuary by the high Priest for sin, ARE BURNT
Numb. 19. 3 11. Exodus 23. 13, 14: Levit. 4. 11, 12, 21. c. 8 17. c. 16. 26, 27.
WITHOUT THE CAMP; wherefore Jesus that he might sanctify the people, SUFFERED
WITHOUT THE GATE: Let us GO FORTH THEREFORE TO HIM WITHOUT THE CAMP, bearing
his reproach: For we have here no continuing City, but we seek one to come. If
then to be put out of the Camp, were to be secluded from the public
ordinances, and excommunicated from the society of the faithful, as our
Opposites most Mr. Rutherfurds Divine right, etc. p. 179.
confid^ntly affirm* Then the Apostle by this exhortation, Let us go forth
therefore unto him WITHOUT THE CAMP, bearing his reproach; should excite
Christians to excommunicate and suspend themselves from all public Ordinances
and Christian society with Gods people, which were a madness to affirm.
Wherefore this Champion argument for proof of the divine institution of
excommunication among the Jews under the Law, and of suspention from the Lords
Supper among Christians under the Gospel, must be quite casheered, thrust of
our Opposites Camp as Leprous, and excommunicated out of all their Presbyteries
for an Ienoramus. If then the Tabernacle of the Congregation, the place of Gods
special presence and public worship, whether all the Priests and people
resorted to adore him, with their Oblations, sacrifices, Prayers, was thus set
up quite without the Israelites Camp, some good ^stian^e from it; and no part
thereof, nor placed within it; I may probably, if not infallibly conclude from
thence, That their Camp was rather an Emblem of their Religious state and
Republic, then of their Church; and the exclusion of these ceremonially
unclean persons from it, rather a temporary disfranchisement or banishment to
prevent corporal infection and diseases, then any Ecclesiastical censure of
Excommunication or Suspention, to prevent spiritual infection, or punish
moral pollution and public scandalous sins; The rather because Master The
Divine Right of Church Government, p. 241, 242.
Rutherfurd and others affirm, that excommunication and suspention from holy
Ordinances is expressed in the Books of Moses by another phrase, to wit, by
Levit. 19. 8. c. 18. 29. c. 22. 3. c. 23. 29. Numb. 9. 13.
cutting off from Israel, or from the CONGREGATION of Israel (that is, from the
Tabernacle of the Congregation, where the Israelites assembled to worship God)
as they interpret it, Exodus 12. 15. 19. Levit. 7. 20, 21, 25. chap. 12. 4. 9,
10, 14. a thing different from, and not the same with putting out of the Camp,
which most* resolve to be a civil cutting off by death, not an Ecclesiastical
by excommunication, as is clear by Genesis 17. 14. compared with Exodus 4. 24, 25.
Levit. 20. 3, 5, 6, 17, 11. Numb. 4. 18, 19. However, let it be one or other,
it intimates and proves a total cutting off for the present from all pubblick
Ordinances, and the society of the faithful, not a bare suspention from the
Passover or Lords Supper only.

Secondly, I shall demand, Whether the exclusion of these unclean persons out
of the Camp was executed either authoritatively or ministerially by the high
P^iest, Priests, or Levites, who, for ought we read, had no judicial or
ministerial authority in the Camp it self, but only in and See Numb. c. 3.
and 4.
about the Tabernacle; or not rather by the Field Officers or Marshals of the
Camp, since the command of removing them out of the Camp is expressly given (not
to the Priests and Levites, but) to the children of Israel; and the children of
Israel did accordingly put them out of the Camp, Numb. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4. And if
so, then what shadow of argument can be hence deduced for any Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction vested in Priests or Presbyters by divine right, to excommunicate
scandalous sinners, or suspend them from the Sacrament? True it is, that the
Priest was to judge who was a Leper, and to shut him up in a house when removed
out of the Camp, Levit. 13. 3, 4, 21, 26, 31, 36. but not to turn or put him
out of the Camp, which our common Law writ, De Leproso am^vendo proves, it
being directed to the Sheriff, Mayor, and Temporal Officers, not to
Ecclesiastical persons. If then this putting of these uncleans persons out of
the Camp proves any Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction vested by Divine Institution
in any persons to Excommunicate or suspend scandalous sinners from the Lords
Supper, it is only in the Christian Magistate or people, not in Priests or
Presbyters, as is pretended.

Thirdly, whether the thrusting of Lepers and other such like unclean persons
out of the Camp, be any infallible Argument, that they were thereby totally
secluded from all access unto the Tabernacle of the Congregation, till they
were readmitted into the camp? since the Tabernacle where Gods public worship
was celebrated, stood not within, but without the Camp, as I have proved. If
not, then it warrants no Excommunication, nor suspention of unclean for
scandalous persons from any public Ordinances, and so is most impertinently
produced for proof thereof. If yea, then it secluded them from all public
Sacrifices and duties of Gods worship alike, or from the Passover only, o^
some other particular Sacrifice? If from all alike, then it warrants my
conclusion, that no scandalous person is to be suspended from the Lords Supper,
but he that is likewise excommunicated or sequestered from al other public
Ordinances: If from the Passover, or some other particular Ordinance only,
not from all in general (which cannot be proved) then it is no proof of an
Excommunication from all public Ordinances and the socity of Gods people, for
which some now over-confidently allege it.

Fourthly, Whether those who were thus shut out of the Camp for ceremonial or
corporal uncleanness, were not admitted to wash and purify themselves (in
the Exodus 30. 18 19, etc. c. 38 8 c. 40.
Laver, standing between the Tabernacle and the Altar, as is probable) and
likewise to offer their Oblations, Trespass and Sin Offerings in the
Tabernacle before their readmission into the Camp? as is more then probable,
if not infallible by Numb. 19. 1. to 11. Levit. 14. 1. to 33. Deuteronomy. 23. 10, 11.
If so, then their exclusion out of the Camp was no excommunication or
suspention of them from the Tabernacle and all public Ordinances in it, as is
pretended; Yea, then it necessarily follows, that ceremonial and corporal
(much more then moral) uncleanness, are to be expiated and purged away by
admission to public Church Ordinances, not seclusion from them: True it is,
that by Levit. 7. 20, 21. and chap. 22. 4. to 16. That person which had any
ceremonial uncleanness on him, was prohibited to eat of the Sacrifice of the
Peace Offerings, which pertain unto the Lord, under pain of being cut off
from his people; but yet he might bring a Sin Offering, and a Trespass
Offering to the Lord, as is clear Levit. c. 1. to c. 8.
by other Texts. All which considered, these Texts much insisted on by Master
Rutherfurd and others, will prove no power vested by divine authority in
Priests or Presbyters, to excommunicate or suspend men from the Lords Supper.

The fourth Text produced, is 2 Chronicles. 23. 19. And Jehojadah set the Porters at
the gates of the House of the Lord, that none which was unclean in any thing
should enter in: If this Text (with that of the 2 Chronicles. 26. 19, 20. coupled to
it) make ought for excommunication of ceremonial unclean persons from the
Temple, and all public Ordinances of Gods worship there solemnized, as some
pretend, (though here is only a keeping, not casting out of the Temple of
such, by Jehojadah his appointment alone, not by any divine institution that we
read of, and that by the Porters only, who 1 Chronicles. 9. 17 18. c. 15. 18. c. 16
38, 42. c. 23. 5. c. 26. 1. 12. 2 Chronicles. 23. 4 c. 34 ^3 c 35. 15 (...) 7 7.
(...). 7. ^ 45 c 1^ ^9 (...) 4^. 11.
were not Priests but Levites; out of the house of the Lord it self, not out
of the Court before it, where we read of Oblations offered up to God on the
Altar as well as in the Temple it self; 1 Kings 8. 64. 2 Chronicles. 7. 7. nor yet
out of the Sinagogues, the places of Gods ordinary worship) yet certainly it
makes point blank against any bare suspension only from the Passover or Lords
Supper, (not here particularized) since here is a total exclusion of unclean
persons from the Temple it self, and all public Ordinances performed in it
not from some alone, even in the Objectors opinion.

The fifth is, Ezekiel. 44. 7, 8, 9. Thus says the Lord God, no stranger or
uncircumcised in heart, nor uncircumcised in flesh shall enter into my
Sanctuary, of any stranger that is among the children of Israel. In respect of
which command, the Jews accused Paul, Acts 21. 28, 29. for bringing Greeks
into the Temple, and polluting that holy place. Which Text, if it make any
thing for excommunication (as some pretend, though others upon good reason
deem the contrary, it speaking only of excluding uncircumcised Heathens, not
any unclean or scandalous circumcised Israelites out of the Temple at
Jerusalem, not the Jewish Sinagogues, nor of secluding or excommunicating any
baptized Christians under the Gospel from the Church though uncircumcised
either in the flesh or heart) yet certainly it proves nothing for any sole
suspention from the Passover or Lords Supper, since such strangers were
totally secluded both from the Temple and all Ordinances therein used, not
suspended from one Ordinance alone, but admitted to all others.

The sixth Text is Matthew. 18. 17. If he neglect to hear the Church, let him be
to thee as a Heathen and a Publican: that is, as our Master Rutherfurds Divine
right of Church Government, cap. 8. and Due right of Presbyt^ries c. 4. sect.
5. p. 187.
Opposites expound it; a person cut off and secluded from the visible Church
and people of God, and all communion in holy Ordinances, as Ezekiel. 44. 7, 8, 9.
Acts 21. 28, 29. Ephesians. 2. 11, 12. insinuate. Which if objected for proof of
suspention from the Lords Supper only, not from other Ordinances, then the
meaning and sense of the place must be no more but this; Let him be to thee as
a Heathen and a Publican; that is, let him be suspended only from
communicating at the Lords Table, once a month, a quarter, a year, but let him
constantly resort unto, and communicate in all other Ordinances and duties of
Gods worship every Lords day and Lecture day, without the least suspention or
impediment, which Heathens never used to do, and very few Publicans: A very
pretty exposition of this much controverted Text.

The seventh Scripture is, John 9. 22, 34, 35. chap. 12. 42. chap. 16. 2. Where
we read, that those who professed Christ, were put, or cast out of the
Synagogue by the Jews: Ergo, they were debarred from preaching, reading of the
Word, prayer and all other publjck Offices of Gods worship used in the Jewish
Sinagogues, not from the Passover or Lords Supper only, never administered in
any Sinagogue that we read of in Scripture: And to intepret putting out of the
Sinagogue, to be nothing else but a bare suspention from the Lords Supper,
without any exclusion from other Ordinances, is a mere Bull, and miserable
perverting of these Texts, it being an unlawful act done by the unbeleeving
Jews, not against scandalous offenders, but faithful believers and professors
of Jesus Christ.

The eighth is the 1 Cor. 5. where the Apostle writes to the Church at Corinth,
To take away from among them the incestuous person; to deliver him to Satan: To
purge out the old Leven that they might be a new lump; not to keep company with
a Brother that is a fornicator, etc. with such a one no not to eat; and to put
away from among themselves that wicked person: From which place our Master
Rutherfurds Divine right of Church Government. c. 4. qu. 1. p. 238. to 240.
Opposites instruct us, That to deliver to Satan, is to cast out of the Church,
and to declare such an offender to be of the number of the wicked world, of
which Satan is Prince, and to be purged out of the Church, least he should
infect the Sheep, and Christians are not to bear company with him, nor to eat
with him; and he was judged to be cast out as a heathen and Publican, and
deprived of the comfortable communion of the Saints, and of the prayers of the
Church, and means of Grace. Ergo, by their own argumentation, confession,
exposition, this Text enjoynes a total excommunication from all public
Ordinances, means of grace and communion of the faithful, not a naked
suspention only from the Lords Supper, with free admission to all other
Ordinances: But if this Text be meant of a Suspention only from the Lords
Supper, then the delivering of that incestuous person to Satan, the purging out
of the old leaven, the not keeping company, the not eating with him, the taking
and putting away of him from among them, must be all reduced to this one
negative act; not to admit him to the Lords Table once a month, a quarter, a
year, yet to communicate with him in all other Ordinances every day and week
in the year, without scruple or scandal: an interpretation as point blank
against the very words and meaning of the Text as may be.

The ninth is Romans 16. 17. Now I beseech you Brethren mark them that cause
divisions and offenses, contrary to the Doctrine ye have received, and avoid
them: To which I shall annex, Master Rutherfurds Divine right of
Church Government, p. 249* 269, etc. 12. qu. 8. Mr. Walkers Model of the
Government of the Church. p. 17.
2 These. 3. 14. And if any man obey not our word by this Epistle, note that
man, and have no company with him, that he may be ashamed: And 2 John 10. If
there come any unto you and bring not this Doctrine, receive him not into your
house, neither bid him God speed. Which if meant of public communion,
conversation in Ordinances of Gods worship with Schismatic, Heretical,
scandalous Christians, as well as in private; prohibit communion with them in
all other public Ordinances, as well as in the Lords Supper; but if
appropriated to a single suspention only from the Lords Table, then they must
run into this absurdity; that to avoid such persons, not to keep company with
them, not to receive them into our houses, or bid them God speed, is only not
to eat the Lords Supper with them, and to suspend them from it alone; which
neither the words nor meaning of these Texts will bear.

The tenth is Tit. 3. 10. A man that is an Heretic, after the first and second
admonition, reject: That is, as our Mr. Rutherfurd and Mr. Walker, ibid.
Opposites interpret it, excommunicate and cast him out of the Church: But if
objected to prove a bare suspention from the Eucharist, then reject must
signify, suspend him from the Lords Table only, not from any other Ordinance,
he may preach and broach his heresies still, to poison and canker others: To
which I shall subjoyne, Rev. 2. 20. Notwithstanding I have a few things against
thee, because thou suffer that woman Jezabel to teach and to seduce my
servants to commit fornication and to eat things sacrificed unto Idols: Which
if it proves ought for excommunication, yet certainly makes nothing for a sole
suspention from the Sacrament, but against it.

The eleventh is the 3 John 9, 10. Neither does Diotrephes himself receive the
Brethren, and forbids them that would, and casts them out of the Church:
that is, excommunicates them, as all accord. Which if objected for proof of
suspention of scandalous persons from the Lords Table only, then not to receive
the Brethren, and to cast them out of the Church, is merely to debar them
from the Lords Supper only; which the words will no ways bear.

The twelfth is the 1 Cor. 16. 22. If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ,
let him be Anathema Maranatha: Admit this Text to contain the highest degree
of excommunication in the Church, as many Master Rutherfords divine right of
Church Government, p. 372. with others.
dogmatize, yet to interpret Anathema Maranatha, to be no more but let him he
suspended from the Lords Table, is to contradict all Expositors, and to speak
little better then pure nonsense.

These several Texts of Scripture produced by our Antagonists for proof of
Excommunication by divine institution, do utterly subvert the maine thing they
now contend for, to wit, a divine Authority vested in Ministers and
Presbyteries not to excommunicate scandalous impenitent sinners from all
Ordinances and Christian society, but barely to suspend those they repute
scandalous, from the Lordr Supper only, though they desire to receive it,
without sequestring them from any other public Ordinances, to whom Doctor
Drake in his sixteen Anti-queries, in the Preface and p. 6.
some of them are likewise so indulgent, as to assert in print, that a
scandalous person, yea Heathen may be present at the Lords Supper, and all the
Sacramental actions, and that with a great deal of profit, only they must
not actually receive the outward Elements: But when we demand a proof from
Scripture for justificarion of this new Paradox, they c^n produce none at all.

My third reason is, because it is directly contrary to the very end of Christ's
pretended giving excommunication to the Church, which in Divine right of
church government, cap 4. sect 4. qu. 5 p. 76.
Master Rutherfurds own words is thus expressed: The power of Excommunication
is given by Christ to a Congregation, not upon a positive ground, because it is
a visible institute Church, or as it is a Congregation; but this power is given
to it upon this formal ground and reason; Because a Congregation is a number
of sinful men, who may be scandalized and infected with the company of a
scandalous person; this is so clear, that if a Congregation were a company of
Angels, which cannot be infected, no such power should be given to them, even
as there was no need that Christ, as a member of the Church, either of Jews or
Christians, should have a morrall power of avoiding the company of Publicans
and sinners, because he might possibly convert them; but they could no ways
pervert or infect him with their scandals and wicked conversation; therefore is
this power given to a Congregation, as they are men, who through frailty of
n^^^re mey be levened with the bad conversation of the scandalous, who are to
be excommunicated, as is clear, If a little body of a Congregation in a remote
Isle have power from Christ to cut off a rotten member, least it infect the
whole body, shall we doubt but our wise Lawgiver has given the same power to
a greater body of many visible Congregations, which is under the danger of the
same contagious infection?
1 Cor. 5. 6. Your glorying is not good, know ye not that a little leaven
leaveneth the whole lump? Therefore are we to withdraw our selves from
Drunkards, Fornicators, Exportioners, Idolaters, and are not to eat and drink
with them, verse 10. and from those who walk inordinately and are disobedient,
2 These. 3. 12, 13, 14. And from Heretics, after they be admonished, least we
be infected with their company; just as nature has given hands to a man to
defend himself from injuries and violence, and horns to Oxen, to hold off
violence; so has Christ given the power of Excommunication to his Church, as
spiritual armor to ward off and defend the contagion of wicked fellowship:
Now this reduplication of frail men which may be levened, agrees to all men
of many consociated Congregations, who are in danger to be infected with the
scandalous behavior of one member of a single Congregation, and agrees not to
a Congregation as such: therefore this power of Excommunication must be given
to many consociated Congregations, for the Lord Jesus his Salve must be as
large as the Wound, and his mean must be proportionable to his end.

Since then by Mr Rutherfurds own assertion, Master Walkers Model, etc. p. 18.
and others concurrent suffrages who write in defense of Excommunication, the
very ground and end of instituting Excommunication in the Church, is to prevent
infection, contagion, by the company, bad conversation and wicked fellowship of
scandalous persons, and to cut off a rotten member, least it infect the whole
body: It must necessarily follow, that contagious scandalous Church Members
continuing obstinate and impenitent in their sins, ought not to be suspended
barely from the Lords Supper, but likewise from all other public Ordinances
and Christian society, as well as it; nay, rather from any other Ordinance then
from the Lords Supper, upon these ensuing grounds.

First, because the Lords Supper is now more rare and infrequent then any other
public Ordinance, administered in few Churches above once a month, in many not
once a quarter, nay scarce once in a year or two, in these late unhappy times,
an^ then but once in a day; whereas we have prayers, preaching, reading of the
Word, Baptism, singing of Psalms, exposition of Scriptures, Catechizing in
many Crurches every day of the week, at leastwise morning and evening in all or
most of our Churches, every Lords day, if not on week days too; besides
public monthly Fasts and frequent Thanksgivings: Now there is far greater
danger of infection, contagion by scandalous sinners in conversing with them in
these common public Ordinances every week or day almost morning and evening,
and in keeping company with them in private (of which few or none make
conscience) then there is in eating and drinking with them at the Lords Table
once a month, a quarter, or happily scarce once a year, as common reason will
inform us; therefore we should rather exclude them, from those public
Ordinances wherein they daily or weekly at least converse with us, then from
the Lords Supper, whereat we more rarely meet or communicate with them; it
being a strange kind of madness or folly to shun the company of a Leper, or
one infected with the pestilence* one half hour only in a month or year, at
a Supper, and yet to fit with him at, Breakfast and Dinner two or three hours
every day or week.

Secondly, because few or no scandalous persons are so desperately wicked or
cauterized (as experience informs us) but when they come to receive the Lords
Supper they will promise a great deal of repentance, of reformation, and
behave themselves very piously, devoutly in outward show, laying aside all
their scandalous courses on the whole day at least whereon they receive it, and
come with some preparation thereunto: In which regard, there is the less
danger of deriving infection from them in and by this Ordinance of any other,
whereas they come usually to all other Ordinances without any examination,
preparation, promise of repentance or future reformation, making no such
conscience of abstaining from their sinful courses on Lecture days or Lords
days, as they do on Sacrament days, coming unto them with, and in their
scandalous fin^: therefore they ought rather to be suspended from all other
Ordinances then from the Lords Supper only, at which they are least
contagious, and seem to be most Penitent, most Reformed both in heart and Life.

Thirdly, those who are truly pious, or at least not scandalous, are less
capable of receiving infection, contagion from scandalous sinners at the Lords
Supper, then at other public Ordinances; because as those scandalous persons
are then least scandalous, and most reclaimed in their carriage, so these holy
Communicants, in regard of their solemn preparations to the Sacrament, their
previous examinations of their own hearts, lives, their serious Vows,
Covenants to watch and war more against all sins, al occasion of sin for the
future; and of those heavenly meditations which take up their thoughts,
spirits, are less capable to be infected or polluted by them, then at other
common Ordinances, to which they come not with such solemn preparations,
watchfulness, seriousness and Antidotes against sins contagion, as to the
Lords Supper.

Fourthly, scandalous persons converse with fewer Christians at the Lords
Table, to which but few resort, and those well antidoted against their
contagion, then they do at any other Ordinances, to which all promiscuously
rush without distinction or much solemn preparation; therefore there is more
danger of contagion in admitting them to, and greater reason to sequester them
from all other common Ordinances, then the Lords Supper only.

Fifthly, it is every way as scandalous and contagious to others, as dangerous
to scandalous sinners themselves, to admit them to other sacred ordinances, as
to the Lords Supper. First, because the same Texts which suspend them from one
Ordinance, suspend the^ equally from all others, as the premises. Psalm. 50. 16,
17. Mat. 7. 6. chap. 15. 26, 37. evidence, therefore it is as scandalous, as
unlawful to admit them to any other, as to the Lords Supper. Secondly, because
the same sins, scandals equally disable, unsit them for the holy performance of
one Ordinance as another, Psalm. 50. 16, 17. Psalm. 66. 18. Prove. 1. 28. chap.
28. 9. chap: 15. 8. chap. 21. 17. Isa. 1. 10. to 21. chap. 58. 1. to 8. chap.
66. 3. Jer. 7. 7, 8, 9. chap. 14. 12. chap. 11. 11. Ezekiel. 8. 18. Micah 3. 4.
Job 27. 9. John 9. 31. 1 Pet. 2. 1, 2. For example, drunkenness, whoredom,
covetousness, murder, malice, pride, and the like, as much disable, unfit
Christians to pray, read, hear, meditate, sing Psalms, Fast, as to receive
the Lords Supper; and such men's praying, hearing, fasting, is as unacceptable
to God, as unprofitable, as sinful, as dangerous, as damnable to themselves as
their u^worthy receiving. Thirdly, because the defect or want of saving faith
and Gods spirit makes all Ordinances alike ineffectuall to us, and unacceptable
to God; we can no more pray, sing, fast, hear or read the Word of God with
profit or acceptance without faith and the assistance of the spirit, then we
can receive the Lords Supper, as is clear by James 1. 5, 6, 7. chap. 5. 15.
Romans 8. 26, 27. John. 6. 65. 1 Cor. 14. 15. Ephesians. 6. 18. Heb. 4. 2. chap. 10.
38. chap. 11. 1. to 40. But especially by Heb. 11. 6. Without Faith it is
impossible to please God; and Romans 14. 13. He that doubts is damned if he
eat, because he eats not of Faith, FOR WHATSOEVER IS NOT OF FAITH IS SIN.
Fourthly, because all Gods Ordinances are holy, if not of equal holiness; the
Word, Prayer, Preaching, Fasting, etc. are all holy as well as the Sacraments,
and to be kept from profanation as well as they, Mat. 7. 6. Therefore
impenitent, scandalous persons ought to be excluded from the one as much as
from the other. Fifthly, because they have the self same right to one Ordinance
of God as to another, and the self same command to communicate in, or abstain
from the one as from the other, as they are visible actual members of the
visible Church, to which all Christ's Ordinances are bequeathed, and wherein
they are to be dispensed to all that do unfainedly desire them: He that
commands us to Heb. 3 7, 12 13. c. 4. 2, 3. Luke 8. 18.
hear, and to take heed how we hear; to James 1. 6, 7. c. 5. 15.
pray, and to pray in faith, nothing doubting; commands us likewise, Take, eat,
this is my body, etc. Drink ye all of this etc. Do this, as often as ye do it
in remembrance of me, etc. But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat
of that Bread, and drink of that Cup, etc. 1 Cor. 11. 23. to 34. therefore all
visible members of the visible Church, endued with competent knowledge to
examine themselves, must be admitted to all Ordinances alike, or suspended from
all alike, since the Scripture makes no difference herein, and allows us no
more liberty to abstain from, or neglect one Ordinance then another, nor gives
Ministers, Presbyters any more power to suspend men from one then from another,
as is evident by the forecited Texts, compared with Psalm. 119. 6. 1 These. 5.
21, 22. James 2. 10, 11.

From all which reasons I conclude, that a judicial suspension of scandalous
obstinate sinners from the Lords Supper only, without excluding them from all
other sacred Ordinances as well as it, is no divine censure nor institution
sufficiently warranted by the Word of God, though our Divines now eagerly
contend for it as a such; the execution whereof they plead to be vested by
divine authority in Presbyters and Presbyteries, but by what Scripture charter,
I am yet to seek.

The chiefest argument and reason I can meet with to justify this sole
suspention of scandalous persons from the Lords Supper only, Objection 1.
but not from other public Ordinances, is this; Doct. Drakes sixteen
Antiquaeries, p. 6. Master Walker Master Palmer and others.
Suspention from the Eucharist, is a step and degree to Excommunication, and
they who have power to do the greater may do the less; he who has power to
hang, has also power to mulct or scourge; and why should nor they have power
to suspend from one Ordinance, that have power to cast out of the Church, and
so to keep back from all Ordinances?

I answer, Answer 1.
First, that the Scripture no where prescribes any such suspention from the
Lords Supper only, much less does it make it a step or prodromus to a total
Excommunication, as I have formerly evidenced; therefore Presbyters or
Presbyteries have no divine authority to prescribe or make it such, if they
will keep to their own principles, See Master Rutherfurds divine right of
Church government, sect 1, 2, 3, 4. cap. 1. qu. 1. etc.
That the Scripture ought to be the only rule of all Church Discipline, for
whatsoever is not of faith is sin, Romans 14. 13. Secondly, that where the
Scripture commands a total Excommunication from the Church and all public
Ordinances in it, there Ministers and Presbyters have no more authority to
suspend from one alone, and give free admtitance to all the rest, then Sam. 15.
2. to 34.
Saul had to spare Agage and the best of the Sheep and Cattle: or Josh. 7. i.
to 16.
Achan to save the Babilonish Wedge and Garment; Numb. 31. i. to 20.
or the Israelites to spare the Moabitish women, when God commanded them to be
all destroyed, for which sinful partiallity they were severely checked,
punished. Now the Scripture commands a total excommunication of obstinate
scandalous sinners from all public Ordinances whatsoever (if from any) as the
Texts forecited manifest, and our Opposites in their discourses concerning
excommunication confess; therefore they cannot without sin and contempt of
Gods command, exclude them only from the Lords Supper, and yet freely admit
them to, and communicate with them in all others. Thirdly, to answer Master
Doctors mistaken Law; Where a Judge by the Law (as in cases of Treason, Murder,
Burglary, etc.) has power, and is prescribed to hang the party offending,
there he cannot exchange or extenuate the penance at his pleasure, by
inflicting a mulct or whipping; which punishments must be inflicted only when and
where the Law inflicts them, not for capital offenses, as all our common
Law Books, Lawyers will inform him; our Judges being bound by Oath, to judge
only according to Law, not arbitrarily at their pleasure: If then Judges may
not alter the penalties prescribed by the Laws of men, much less may
Ministers or Presbyteries change or mitigate the censures prescribed (as they
now contend) by the Law of God himself. Fourthly, suspention from the Lords
Supper only, without sequestration from all other Ordinances together with it,
is but a mere groundless Invention io justle out the censure of
excommunication so much contended for, and strip it naked of all its terror and
Majesty: for if excommunicate persons may resort freely to hear the Word and
to all other public Ordinances but the Sacrament, yea be present at all the
actions of the Sacrament it self, and be secluded only from the actual
participation of the Elements, it will make Excommunication nothing formidable,
yea quite subvert the very end, use and substance thereof, to make scandalous
persons ashamed.

Reply.
But our Master Rutherfurds Divine right of Presbyteries, p. 227, 273, 274,
280, 281
Antagonists reply; That an excommunicate person may freely be admitted to
hear the Word, and ought not to be excluded from it; Sixteen Antiquaeries, p.
6.
Where ( writes the Doctor) is it said that an excommunicate person, shall not
have so much as the privilege of one that is without? 1 Cor. 14. 24, 25. Might
an Infidel hear the Word for his conversion, and shall an excommunicate
person be denied the benefit of that Ordinance? I grant by excommunication he
is as an heathen, but why he may not have the privilege of one that is
without, I desire Master Prynne to instruct me, and I shall thank him for it:
We deny not but the meditation of Christ's death, the words of institution, and
the Sacramental Elements and actions may do much ( toward conversion) and
let Master Prynne show me in Scripture, why either an excommunicate person or
an Infidel may not be present at all these, yet neither of them may be
admitted to partake of the Ordinance, etc.

Rejoinder.
To this I rejoyne, First, that Master Rutherfurd cites many Canonists and
others in the same place to prove, That excommunicate persons ought not to be
present at Prayers, Preaching, or any other public Ordinance, the general
opinion of Antiquity and the Schools; nay, he proves from Ezekiel. 44. 7, 8, 9.
and Acts 21. 28, 29. That unconverted Heathens were prohibited to come into
Gods Sanctuary, or enter into the Temple at Jerusalem; and that those who are
thus excommunicated as Heathens, are in this sense persons quite excluded the
Church and Commonweal of Israel, as Heathens were, Ephesians. 2. 11, 12. else no
excommunication could be evinced from Matthew. 18. 17. Let him be to thee as an
heathe; therefore Heathens, whiles such, were excluded from the preaching of
the word de jure, in Christian Churches and Congregations, of which they were
no members: True it is, the Apostles were commanded to preach the Gospel to
all Nations and Infidels to convert them, Matthew. 28. 19. Mark 16. 15. But
whether Ministers at this day have the like Commission, or are to admit mere
Infidels ordinarily to hear the Word in their Congregations, is not yet
resolved, neithr will the 1 Cor. 14. 24, 25. evince it, which speaks of such
Ministers only, who were endued with the supernatural gift of miracles and
tongues for the conversion of Infidels, which are long since ceased. Secondly,
admit that Heathens and Infidels, if they casually come into Christian Churches
to hear the Word ought not to be excluded, but admitted to hear it, yet it
follows not that excommunicate persons should therefore be admitted into the
Church to hear the Word preached, whiles actually excommunicated for their
obstinacy and incorrigibility in scandalous sins; First, because they are
judicially, by way of public censure and punishment, actually cut off from,
and excluded out of the visible Church, and sequestered from all public
Ordinances, all Christian society, for scandalous offenses, till their
repentance and readmission, as is clear by the premised Texts, and most
Canonists, Casuists, School men, who write of Excommunication, which mere
Heathens who desire to hear the Word that they may be converted, are not:
therefore during this censure and their impenitency, they ought not to be
admitted entrance into the Church, or to be present at any other Ordinances in
it till their readmission, though Heathens may, who are not judicially
excluded. To illustrate this by an instance of like nature; If a native English
man be by lawful sentence banished the Kingdom for any crime, or a Freeman
of London expelled the lines of Communication for his Delinquency till his
conformity, it is not lawful for the one of them to return into the Kingdom,
or the other to come within the City, till their sentences be revoked; yet
Aliens and Foreigners may freely enter the one and other without restraint,
because there is no such sentence of banishment or exclusion passed against
them: So a scandalous impenitent Christian cast out of the Church, banished the
society of Christians, and excluded all public Ordinances by a legal
sentence, ought not to be admitted till repentance, though a mere Heathen may.
Secondly, because an impenitent, obstinate, scandalous Christian, by Paul's
own resolution, is more to be avoided then a mere Heathen without the Church;
witness 1 Cor. 5. 10, 11, 12, 13. I wrote to you in an Epistle, not to keep
company with fornicators; yet not altogether with the fornicators of this
world, or with the covetous, or with extortioners, or with Idolaters, for then
ye must go out of the world: But now I have written unto you not to keep
company, if any man that is called a Brother be a fornicator, or covetous, or
an Idolater, or a Rayler, or a Drunkard, or an Extortioner, with such a one NO
NOT TO EAT (of which few make any conscience that press this place so much:)
for what have I to do to judge them that are without, do ye not judge them
that are within? But them that are without God judges: Therefore put away from
among you that wicked person. In which words the Apostle informs us, First,
That scandalous Christians are Which Master Ruthe^furd affirms, Divine right
of Church Government, p. 357.
worse then Heathens that are scandalous in the same kind: Secondly, That
Christians in some cases may keep company So 1 Cor. 10. 27, 28.
and eat with the one, but not so much as keep company or eat with the other:
Thirdly, That they ought to judge, censure, put away from among themselves the
scandalous Christian, but not the Heathen; which had the Doctor well observed,
he would never have desired me to instruct his ignorance in this kind:
Fourthly, had the Doctor considered Matthew. 7. 6. Give not that which is holy
unto the dogs, neither cast ye your Pearls before swine, least they trample
them under their feet, and turn again and rent you: spoken principally of the
preaching of the Word, not of the Lords Supper, then not known nor instituted:
Or Matthew. 10. 14, 15. Mark 6. 11, 12. And whosoever shall not receive you, nor
hear your words, when ye depart out of that house or City, shake off the dust
of your feet for a testimony against them: Verily I say unto you it shall be
more tolerable for the Land of Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of Judgment, then
for that City: Or Acts 13. 45, 46, 50, 51. But when the Jews saw the
multitudes, they were filled with envy, and spoke against those things that
were spoken by Paul, contradicting and blaspheming: Then Paul and Barnabas
waxed s^ bold and said, It was necessary that the Word of God should first have
been spoken to you, but seeing you put it from you, and judge your selves
unworthy of everlasting life, lo, we turn to the Gentiles: But the Jews
stirred up devout and honorable women, and the chief men of the City, and
raised persecution against Paul and Barnabas, and expelled them out of their
coasts; but they shook off the dust of their feet against them, and came unto
Iconium: Or Luke 14, 16, 17, 24. A certain man made a great Supper, and bade
many, and sent his servants at Supper time, saying to them that were bidden,
Come, for all things are now ready; but they all with one consent began to make
excuse, etc. So that servant came and showed his Lord these things: Then the
Master of the house being angry, said to his servant, Go out into the lanes
and streets of the City and bring in hither the poor and the maimed, and the
halt and the blind, etc. and compel them to come in, that my house may be
full; For I say unto you, that none of those men that were bidden, shall taste
of my Supper: Or Luke 19. 41. And when he came near the City, he wept over it,
saying, if thou had known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things
which belong unto thy peace, but now they are hid from thine eyes; with sundry
other Texts of this kind: He might have learned from them, That such Christians
who contemn and neglect the Gospel and word of Grace when offered to them, may
be justly deprived of and secluded from them, when as others, though Pagans,
may be admitted to enjoy them, according to that express Text Mat. 21. 33. to
45. where the Lord of the Vineyard, when his servants were beaten and his son
slain by the husbandmen from whom he required fruits; threatens he will
miserably destroy those wicked men, and will let out his Vineyard to other
husbandmen, which shall render him their fruit in due season; Christ himself
thus closing up the Parable, with reference to the obstinate Jews; Therefore I
say unto you, the Kingdom of God, shall be taken from you, and given to a
Nation bringing forth the fruits thereof; which you may read fully executed and
ratified, Romans 11. 7. to 26. 1 These. 2. 15, 16. Isa. 5. 1. to 8. This Objection
therefore will no ways fortify our Opposites weak Cause, but confirm my
tenets.

But it is secondly objected by our Antagouists, Objection 2. b M^ster
Ruthe^f^rds Divine right of Presbyter^e^, p. 361, 362, 524, 525.
that the Word may and must be preached to mere Pagans and Infidels, to
convert and instruct them; but the Lords Supper is not to be administered to
such, as all acknowledge: Therefore there is a vast difference in this respect
between the preaching of the Word, and receiving of the Lords Supper; and so by
consequence, scandalous persons which are as Heathens, may and ought to be
suspended from the one, though they be admitted to the other.

I answer, Answer.
First, this Objection, if examined, is but a mere fallacy, and inconsequent,
the controversy not being, Whether Infidels, Turks and Pagans ought to be
admitted to the Lords Table before they publicly embrace and profess the
Christian faith? But, Whether scandalous Christans externally embracing,
professing the faith of Christ, endued with competent knowledge, professing,
unfain^d repentance for their sins past, promising reformation for the
future, and earnesily desiring to be admitted to the Lords Supper, may by any
institu^io^^ or appointment of Jesus Christ be suspended from it; when not
secluded from, but admitted free access to the Word, and all other pulick
Ordinances? Therefore to argue thus, the Lords Supper ought not to be
administered to Turks and Infidels; Ergo, not to scandalous Christians, is a
mere Nonsequitur, and departing from the point in issue. Secondly, the reason
why the Lords Supper and Baptism ought not to be administered to Turks and
Pagans before their external conversion to the Christian faith, though the
Gospel may be preached to them, is not because preaching of the Gospel is a
converting Ordinance, and the administration of the Sacraments only a
confirming, but not converting Ordinance; (as is pretended;) but because the
Sacraments (as all Calvin, Peter Martyr, Aretit^, Jewel, Beacon, Paraeus,
Willet, others, and Master Rutherfurd himself, Divine right of Presbyteries,
cap. 4. sect. 5. p. 212.
Divines accord) are badges of our external Christian profession; yea, solemn
Covenants or Oaths to oblige us to yield all obedience and subjection unto
Christ, and distinguishing signs to difference Christians from all Infidels
and Pagans in the world; therefore not to be administered to any but such who
actually embrace and profess the faith of Christ, and are admitted members of
his visible Church; whereas the bare external hearing of the Word preached
(wherein the hearers are only passive, but no ways active or stipulative,
unless they embrace it) is no such badge or emblem of Christianity, nor such
an external Oath of Alleagiance to tie us to the obedience of Christ, as
Baptism and the Lords Supper are, which belong to none but such who profess
themselves Christians and are members of the visible Church of Christ. Thirdly,
It is generally agreed by all orthodox Divines, that Baptism and the Lords
Supper are by the will and appointment of Jesus Christ, given not simply and
solely to the elect and invisible Church of Christ, (certainly known to God
alone, not to any Ministers or Presbyteries upon earth) but to all the visible
members of the visible Church, not cut off from it by a legal Excommunication,
or hindered by some natural disabilities, who have a true right to, and
interest in them, though not actually regenerated and endued with saving faith.
Upon which grounds Master Due right of Presbyteries, cap. 4. sect. 6.
throughout.
Rutherfurd, and Master A defense of Infants Baptism^, part 3. p. 106. to 130.
Marshall expressly maintain, the lawfulness of baptizing the children of
excommunicate persons, Heretics, Schismatics, and Christians unregenerate,
even for the external profession of the Christian faith by their ancesters,
though their immediate Parents be Heretics, or persons excommunicated from the
visible Church: Which being granted, resolved as an undoubted truth in the
Sacrament of Baptism, must likewise thus far hold in case of the Lords
Supper, That a visible member of the visible Church endued with competent
knowledge, and not actually excommunicated, ought not to be suspended from it
for any pretended scandalous crime, in case he desire to receive it, since his
very membership in the visible Church intitles him thereunto, as well as
himself or his children to Baptism, and gives him a right to receive it,
Objection 3.
yea makes him guilty of sin, in case he neglect to participate thereof, when
publicly invited to receive it, as our ow^e Homilies concerning the receiving
the Lords Supper resolve: which fully answers this fallacious Objection.

Thirdly it is objected, Master Rutherfurds div^ne r^ght of Church Government
c. 5. and Due right of Presby ^ries c. 4. sect 5
That the Sacrament of the Lords Supper is a Seal of Grace, and of the
Covenant of Grace, as it is a Sacrament, which the preaching of the Word is
not; therefore scandalous persons ought to be suspended from it, though they be
admitted to the preaching of the Word and other public Ordinances, else we
should put a sezle unto a blank.

I answer, Answer.
First, that the Lords Supper is by no Text in Scripture styled a Seal, or
Seal of Grace, or of the Covenant of Grace, though many Divines (without any
Scripture authority) style it so. Secondly, it is true, that Circumcision is
once only in the Now Testament, to wit, Romans 4. 11. styled, The SIGN of
Circum^ision, A SEAL of the righteousness of faith, which Abraham had yet
being uncircumc^sed: Whence Calvin, Peter Martyr, Paraeus and Doctor Willet on
Rom 4. Aretii Problem. Locus, 77. Amesii Bellarminus Enerva us, Tom. 4. qu 4.
and others.
Divines infer, That Baptism and the Lords Supper are both Sacraments and
Seals of Grace, and of the Covenant of Grace: But that it should hence
necessarily follow, that Baptism and the Lords Supper are Sacraments, are
Seals of Grace, and of the Covenant of Grace (though never so called in
Scripture, nor yet the Passover) because Circumcision is called a Sign and a
Seal of the righteousness of faith, which Abraham had yet being
uncircum^ised, is expressly denied by Stapletoni Antld. p. 225. Pererius Disput.
4. number. (...) Bellarminus, l. 2. c. 10. De Sacram. Remonstr. in Apol. c. 23.
Episcopius Disp. 29. These. 8. Smalci. cont. Franzium Disp. 9. p. 199. Socin. de
offic. Hom. Christ. c. 4 and others
some, doubted by others, and cannot infallibly be inferred thence, for ought
appears to me. Thirdly, admit the Lords Supper be a Seal of Grace, as
Circumcsiion was of faith, yet in what sense, or in what respects it is or may
be See Willets six-fold Comentary on Romans 4. qu. 7.
styled a Seal, and what kind of Seal it is, is questioned by many, and very
difficult to determine. Origin thinks Circumcision was called a Seal of the
righteousness of faith, because in Circumcision was sealed and lay bid the
righteousness of faith, which should afterward be revealed and unfolded in
Christ, and a Seal to the unbeleeving Jews, shutting them up in unbelief,
until they should be called in the end of the world: Chrysostom, Theodoret
and others, expound it to be a Seal, that is, a testimony only of faith
received: Aquinas thinks it was called a Seal, because it was an express
Sign, having a similitude of the thing received: Others affirm it was termed
a Seal, because it distinguished the Israelites from other people, as Seals
distinguish one Merchants Goods and Letters from another: But Calvin, Paraeus,
Fayus, Aretius, Peter Martyr, Marlorat, Willet, and the stream of modern
Divines term it a Seal, because it is a visible confirmation of Gods
promises to his people, as Kings and other m^ns Seals confirm their Patents
and Deeds, being added to them for better assurance: And in this last sense our
Divines generally term Baptism and the Lords Supper, SEALS, that is,
external visible confirmations of Gods promises: Indeed though I find not the
Lords Supper or Baptism called Seals in Scripture, yet I read therein of a
six-fold use of Seals. The first is, to conceal and close up things from
public view, as Cant. 4. 12. Isa. 29. 11. Job 41. 15. Dan. 9. 24. chap. 12. 9.
Revel. 10. 4. chap. 22. 10. chap. 5. 1. to 10. chap. 6. 1. In which sense the
Greeks term Sacraments Mysteries or hidden things, the phrase used by Paul,
Ephesians. 3. 9. chap. 5. 32. and Decana Dom. and Baptismo Se^m.
Bernard, with others, styles a Sacrament, Satrun secretum, a sacred^secret.
The second, to preserve, shut up, and keep things safe, Deuteronomy. 32. 43. Dan. 6.
17. Job 34. 16. chap. 37. 7. Matthew. 27. 66. Job 14. 17. The third, to
distinguish one thing from another, 1 Timothy 2. 19. Revel. 7. 3. to 9. chap. 9.
10. The fourth, to appropriate things, and mark them for our own, 2 Cor. 1,
22. 2 Timothy 2. 19. chap. 7. 2. to 8. Ephesians. 1. 13. The fifth to authorize and
give commission, John 6. 26. The sixth, to confirm, ratify, assure charters,
Dee^ Promises, Covenants, Nehem. 9. 38. Ester 8. 8, 10. chap. 3. 12. Cant. 8.
6. Jer. 32. 10, 15, 44. Dan. 6. 17. 2 Cor. 1. 22. Ephesians. 4. 3. 2 Timothy 2. 19. 1
Cor. 9. 2. In some of these senses the Lords Supper may perchance improperly be
called a Seal by way of allusion, but yet not properly and directly, since
Master Rutherfurd himself puts many differences between it and a civil seal,
Due right of Presbyteries, c. 4. sect. 5. p. 212, to 218.
and Christ himself ordained it not to be a Seal, but Remembrance, memorial,
representation of his Death and Passion, as is clear by Luke 22. 19. 1 Cor. 11.
24, 25, 26. This is my Body which is given for you, Doethis IN REMEMBRANCE OF
ME; This cup is the New Testament in my blood, this do ye as often as ye drink
it in REMEMBRANCE OF ME, For as often as ye eat this Bread and drink this Cup, YE
DO SHOW THE LORDS DEATH TILL HE COME. Now being a Remembrance and
Representation of Christ's Death by divine institution, which has no Analogy
with a Seal, which serves not to commemorate or represent any thing, and being
no where termed a Seal in Scripture; I conceive it far more proper to style
the Lords Supper (as the Bishop Jew^ls Defense of the Apology, part 2. cap. 13
Divis. 1. p. 251
Fathers usually do) a Figure, Sign, Remembrance, Memory, or Representation
of Christ's Death, then a Seal; which phrase is the original ground of men's
bare suspention from it. Fourthly, It is admitted by all, that Baptism is a
Seal of Grace, and of the Covenant of Grace, as well as the Lords Supper; I
would then gladly be informed by our opposite Brethen, by what authority, will
and appointment of Jesus Christ, those who are admitted to be partakers of one
of the Seals of Grace, and whose children by their own resolution ought to be
admitted unto Baptism, even for these their Parents external profession of
Christianity and membership in a visible Church, should be thus suspended,
excluded from the Lords Sxpper, the other Seal, not being totally secluded
from all other Ordinances, having as good a title to the one Seal as the
other, to the Lords Table as to Baptism or the Word it self? If they reply,
as usually they do, that it is, because we must not put a Seal unto a blanke,
nor give the Seal of grace to those that have no grace. I answer, First, that
this reason is a mere whimsey of their own, warranted by no Scripture.
Secondly, it is contrary to Scripture, their own practice and confession; who
Master Rutherfurds Due right of Presbyteries, c. 4 sect. 5. Master Marshals
De^f ^ce of Infants Baptism.
grant; First, that the Sacrament and Seal of Baptism may and ought to be
given to the persons, yea Infants of those who externally profess the
christian Religion, though they be not truly regenerate, yea to the infants of
Ignorant and Scandalous Christians, though excommunicate, even for these their
Parents external profession of Christianity. Secondly, that unregeherate
persons who are not ignorant or notoriously scandalous, cannot be suspended
from the Lords Supper, but must be admitted to it, if they desire it. Thirdly,
that in this case a Seal is not put put unto a blank, for if their very
baptizing at first was no sealing of a Blank, then by the same reason, their
receiving the Lords Supper cannot be so. Now that their baptizing was not so, I
shall prove by Master A defense of Infant baptism London, 1646. (Dedicated to
the Assembly of Divines) p. 117, 118.
Marshals own resolution, approved by the Assembly; You conclude (writes he
against Master Tombs) that if there be not a promise of these saving graces to
Infants, in vain are they baptized, and the Seal is put to a blank.

My meaning is indeed according to the sense of the Directory, and according to
that direction I do pray, That God would make Baptism to be a Seal to the
Infant of adoption, and the rest of the saving graces of the Covenant; yet I
utterly deny your consequence, that unless there be absolute promises of
saving grace to infants, the scale is set to a blank; for give me leave but to
put the same case; First, for the Infants of the Jews, was the seal put to a
blank with them, or had they all promises of saving graces? Secondly, let me
put the same case in grown men, who make an external visible profession, and
thereupon are admitted to baptism; can any man say, that all the saving graces
of the Covenant or the spiritual part of it, is promised to all visible
professors? is it not abundantly known, that in all Ages, even in the best
times, even in the Apostles time, multitudes were baptized, to whom God yet
never gave saving graces, and therefore never promised them? for had he made a
promise, he would have performed it: But I shall desire you a little to
consider the nature of a Sacrament, in what sense it is a Seal, and then you
need stumble at this no longer; These three things are necessary to be
distinguished: Note.
First, the truth of the thing signified in a Sacrament; and secondly, my
interest in that thing; and thirdly, my obligation to do what is required in
or by that Sacrament: I say therefore, that in every Sacrament, the truth of
the Covenant in it self, and all the promises of it are sealed to be Yea and
Amen; Jesus Cbrist became a Minister of the Circumcision, to confirm the
Promises made unto the Fathers; and so to every one who is admitted to partake
of Baptism, according to the Rule which God had given to his Church, to
administer that Sacrament, there is sealed the truth of all the promises of the
Gospel, that they are all true in Christ, and whosoever partakes of Christ,
shall partake of all these saving promises: this is absolutely sealed in
Baptism; but as to the second, which is interesse meum, or the receivers
interest in that spiritual part of the Covenant, that is sealed to no receiver
absolutely, but conditionally; in this particular, all Sacraments are but Signa
conditionalia, conditional Seals, sealing the spiritual part of the Covenant
to the receiver upon condition, that he perform the spiritual condition of
the Covenant; thus our Divines use to answer the Papists; thus Doctor Ames
An^wers to Bellarmine, when Bellarmine disputing against our Doctrine, that
Sacraments are Seals, alleages, then they are falsely applied oftentimes; he
di^ wers to Bellarmine, Sacraments are conditional Seals, and therefore not
seals to us but upon condition: Now for the third thing, the obligation which
is put upon the receiver, a lo^^ or tie for him to perform, who is admitted to
receive the Sacrament; this third, I say, is also absolute, all circumcised and
baptized persons did, or do stand absolutely engaged to perform the
conditions required on their part, and therefore all circumcised persons were
by the circumci^^on obliged to keep the Law; that is, that legal and typical
administration of the Covenant which was then in force, and Infants among the
rest, were bound to this, though they had no understanding of the Covenant, or
that administration of the Covenant, when this Seal was administered to them:
Now then, since in Baptism there is such an absolute Seal of the truth of the
Covenant of Grace in it self, a conditional Seal of the receivers interest
in the Covenant, and an absolut^ obligation upon the receiver to make good the
Covenant on his part; IS THERE ANY REASON YOU SHOULD SAY, THAT THE SEAL IS PUT
TO A BLANK, WHERE THE SPIRITUAL PART OF SAVING GRACE IS NOT PARTAKED OF? This
answer of Master Marshall to Master Tombs (approved by the Assembly of
Divines, and Commissioners of the Church of Scotland, to whom it is Dedicated)
in the case of Baptism, gives a full answer to the self-same objection of our
Antagonists in case of the Lords supper, they being both Sacraments and Seals
alike, and subverts the very maine foundation of Suspention only from the
Lords Table; for if the Lords Supper be in truth a Seal of Grace, as is
alleged, yet seeing it is only a conditional Seal of the receivers interest
in the Covenant, but an absolute Seal to every worthy and unworthy receiver of
the Covenant of Grace in it self, and an absolute obligation to make good the
Covenant on their parts, as Master Marshall determines, and Master Rutherfurd
himself concludes against the Anabaptists, in his Due Right of Presbyteries,
cap. 8. sect. 5. p. 214, 215, 216. Nay more (which I shall add) if it be a
visible memorial, Remembrance and Representation of the Passion of Jesus
Christ to every receiver, a badge of distinction to difference Christians from
Turks, Pagans, Insidels, Jews, and a strong incitation and engagement to them
to many Christian virtues duties, as namely to Faith, Hope, Charity,
Thankfulness, Mortification of their carnal lusts, Patience under the Cross,
unfeigned love to the Lord Jesus Christ and all his members, hatred of, and
watchfulness against sin, and universal obedience to Christ, (as Aretius,
Calvin, the Harmony of Confessions, and Master Rutherfurd himself, Due right
of Presbyteries c. 4. sect. 5. p. 212.
Divines unanimously accord;) and if it be in truth but a mere visible Word,
or Preaching of the Gospel and Christ's passion to the eye, as all accord, no
scandalous unexcommunicated person ought to be suspended from it, that is not
actually suspended from hearing the Word and all other public Ordinances; the
rather, because Doc^or Drake in his sixteen Anti-queries, in the Preface and p.
6.
Doctor Drake himself asserts, That not only a scandalous Christian, but a
very Heathen may be present at the Lords Supper, and hear the prayers and
exhortations, see the Elements consecrated, and all the Sacramental actions,
and that with a great deal of profit, if the Lord please to sanctify these
things to him, yet neither of them may be admitted to partake of the Ordinance
it self, or outward Elements, though of all the concomitants and actions of
it; a prettty novell, Popish whimsey, contrary to Antiquity, and the practice
of the purest times, who admitted none to be present at the Sacrament but such
as did actually receive it, as Thomas Beacon proves at large in his Catechism,
vol. 1. f. 462. Finally, it is asserted by all our Master Rutherfards Due right
of Presbyteries, c. 9. sect. 9. etc. 4. sect. 5. p. 186.
Opposites, That the true Saints of God endued with saving faith, may fall into
scandalous* sins as well as unregenerate persons; for which they may be
justly suspended from the Lords Supper, though admitted to other Ordinances:
Now such cannot be suspended from the Lords Supper, if they desire to receive
it, as it is a Seal of Grace, because they have a true interest in the
Covenant of Grace, and by reason of their frailty and lapse into sin, have
more need of this confirming, sealing Ordinance to strengthen, increase their
graces, and fortify them the more against all future relapses after their
falls, then before: Wherefore this Objection extends not unto such.

To close up my Answer to this grand Objection; admit the Sacraments to be such
Seals of the Covenant of Grace, as Divines now make them, I would then be
resolved by them; First, Whether the Covenant of Grace and promises of
salvation, which God has ratified Heb. 6. 1^, to 20.
with an Oath, and by the death and passion of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 1. 19, 23.
in whom all the promises of God are Yea, and in him Amen, to the praise and
glory of God, be complete, firm, valid in themselves, without these Seals
annexed to them; or merely void and null in Law, as Kings, or men's Deeds and
Charters are without a Seal to ratify them? If firm, valid, complete without
them; then how are they seals and ratifications of the Covenant of Grace, as
seals are of royal Charters? If incomplete, infirm, invalid; that were
extremely derogatory to the Covenant, promises themselves, to the Oath, the
truth of God, the death of Christ, yea directly contrary to Genesis 17. 7, 8.
Exodus 6. 4, 5. Levit. 26. 42. 1 Samuel 16. 15, 16, 17, 18. 2 Chronicles. 6. 14. Nehem.
1. 5. chap. 9. 32. Psalm. 89. 28, 29, 34. Psalm. 105. 10. Psalm. 111. 5, 7, 8, 9.
Isa. 54. 7. to 11. Isa. 55. 3. Isa. 61. 8. Jer. 31. 31. to 38. chap. 33. 20,
21. chap. 50. 5. Ezekiel. 37. 26, 27. Heb. 6. 17, 18. chap. 13. 20. Therefore they
are not properly seals. Secondly, Whether these Seals are inseparably annexed
to the Covenant and promises of Grace in the Old or New Testament, as parts or
parcels of them, as seals are annexed to Charter? If yea, then show us to what
Covenants and promises, and in, and by what Texts they are thus inseperably
annexed; and how any can be saved or made partakers of the benefit of the
Covenant and promises of Grace, who do not actually receive these Seals of
Grace; when as your selves, with all Harmony of Confessions, sect. 13. 14.
orthodox Divines must grant; that many who were never baptized, and infinite
who never received the Lords Supper, are and may be saved, and are made
partakers of the Covenant, the promises of Grace, without receiving or enjoying
these Seals of Grace. If no, then how can these be termed, Seals of the
Covenant and promises of Grace, which are not inseparably affixed to them, as
seals are to Charters? since many receive the Covenant and promises of Grace
without these Seals, and others receive these Seals without the Covenant or
promises, the benefit whereof they never enjoy. Thirdly, By what reason, or
upon what solid grounds they can deny the Seals of the Covenant and promises
to those very scandalous or ignorant Christians once a moneh, a quarter, a
year, to whom they every day or week, without any scruple, preach, tender, hold
forth the very Covenant and promises of Grace, to which they say these Seals
are annexed? Can men have an interest in any Covenant, Deed, Charter made,
tendered (...) them, and yet have no right nor interest in the Seals annexed to
them? an interest in a Coporation Patent, or Charter of pardon, and yet no
right nor interest in the seals thereto affixed? This certainly is a monster,
a solecisme in Law, why not them in Divinity too, especially in this point,
wherein Divines turn Lawyers, and allude to Law assurances? If then they will
grant the Lords Supper to be a Seal of the Covenant and promises of Grace,
they must either deliver and give this Seal to all those visible
Church Members, to whom they daily preach and tender the Covenant and promises
of Grace, which is the maine (the Seal being but the Accossorium s^quitor
principale.
A^cessary, which necessarily follows the principle, as Lawyers determine) or
else deny to preach or tender the Covenant and promises to those to whom they
deny the seal and so by consequence must exclude all ignorant, at lestwise
scandalous Christians from hearing the Word read or preached, as well as
suspend them from the Lords Supper; which by their own assertition is but a
Seal, and appendant to the Covenant and Promises of Grace, and must not be
divided from them.

Fourthly it is objected, Objection 4.
Antiquaeries, Master Rutherfords divine right of Church Government, p. 523,
etc. Answer.
That the Lords Supper is no converting Ordinance, to confer and bege^grace
where it is wanting, but only to confirm it, where it is already wrought;
therefore scandalous persons ought to be suspended from the Lords Supper,
though admitted to the preaching of the Word.

I answer, First, that I have sufficiently re^^ted this Objection See a
Vindi^ation of four serious Questions, page 40. etc.
elsewhere, and proved the the Lords Supper to be a converting Ordinance to
beget grace, as well as a confirming to increase it, by reasons not yet
answered; and (as I conceive) unanswerable, which I shall not here repeat; yet
because Sixteen Antiquaeries, the Preface, p. 1. and 6.
Doctor Drake and others (out of their ignorance or wilfulness) style this A
NEW PARADOX AND MISTAKE OF MASTER PRINNES, as if I were the first broacher of
this truth; I shall only add something de novo for refutation of their
mistake.

First, it is most apparent, that in the Primitive Church the Lords Supper was
administered to Christians every day, at l^ast every Lords day, and that the
Ministers and Fathers in those times pressed all their Auditors to a frequent
participation of this heavenly Banquet; upon this very ground, that those who
always sin, might always receive the medicine of this heavenly Sacrament
against their sins, and daily receive it, that they might be daily healed by
it; and because nothing was more effectual to an holy and unblamable life,
then the frequent participation of it: This is irrefragably proved by Justin
Martyr, Apolog. 2. Ignatius, Epist. ad Ephesianos; Tertullian, Apologia;
Ambrose, de Sacramentis, l. 4. c. 6. l. 5. c. 4. Augustine, Epist. 108. ad
Januarium Ep. de Ecclesiast. Dogm. c. 53. and in soan. 6. Tract. Hierom ad
Lucinium Epist. Chrysostom Orat. de B. Philogonio and Hom. 6. ad Pop. Antioch.
Cyprian de Caena Domini: Gratian de consecrat. Did. 2. Ivo Carnotensis Decret.
pars 2. c. 24. to 35. Durandus Rat. Diu. Offic. l. 4. with Harmony of
Confessions, sect. 14.
sundry others, and largly manifested by Thomas Beacon in his Cat^chisme, vol.
1. f. 463. When this pious custom began to be discontinued, we find diverse
Decrees and Canons made to enforce them to a frequent reception of this
heavenly repast; Platina in vita ejus, and The Becons Catechism, fol. 463.
Anacletus Bishop of Rome decreed, That Christians should receive the Eucharist
every day, and that those who would not thus communicate, should be
excommunicated: But some of his Successors finding people more backwards to
this holy Ordinance then formerly, condiscending to their humors in some sort,
enjoined by their Decrees, That ALL persons should, if not more frequently, yet
at leastwise thrice every year receive the Lords Supper; to wit, at Easter,
Pentecost, the Nativity of Christ, and every Lords day in Lent; witness the
Decrees of Pope Fabian and Silverius, recorded by De Consect. Did. 2.
Gratian, Decretalium pars 2. c 27, 29,
Iv^ Carnotensis; and Ivo Carnotensis, Decret. pars 2 c 28. Lutheri Carechismus
major
Saint Hilary decreed, That if a man's sins were not so great as that he were
to be excommunicated, non debet a medicina corporis Domini seperari, he ought
not to be sequestered from the medicine of the Lords Body; unde timendum est ne
DIU abstractus a Christi corpore, alienus remaneat a salute; nam manifestum est
vivere, qui corpu^ attingunt Christi, etc. Besides these, the Surjus Council.
Tom. 1. p. 712. Gratian de Consecr. Did. 2. Ivo Decret. pars 2. c 33.
Council of Agatha about the 440. yeer^ after Christ, decreed, That secular
men who rece^v^d not the Lords Supper in Christ's Nativity, Easter and
Pentecost, should not be reputed Catholics, nor numbered among Catholics;
which is seconded by sundry other foreign Councils, as Bochellus decret,
Eccles. Gal. l. 2 Tit. 7. c 5. l 3. Tit. 1, c 20, 23, 24, 93, 95, 103, 104,
105, 106, 138.
Synod. Turon, 3. sub. Kar. Magno. Council. Burdig, 1582. Council. Bitur, 1584.
Aquens. 1585. Theodulphus Aurelian, Epist. An. 835. Synod. Carnot, 1526.
Council. Rhomense, 1583. and Synod. Paris 1557. Yea, our own ancient British
Councils, as Spelmanni Council. Tom. 1. p 519, 548, 615, 616.
Council. Aenhamense Generale, An. 1009. the Ecclesia^icall Laws of King Knute,
An. 1032. with other ancient chapters, pres^ribe, that every Parishioner should
receive the Sacrament at least thrice every year: and the Bubrick in the old
Common Prayer Book after the Communion, with the 21 Canon, made Anno 1505*
enjoin, That EVERY PARISHIONER shall receive the Lords Supper at lest three
times every year, of which Laster to be one; And that in Cathedral and
Collegiall Churches, where be many Priests and Deacons, they shall all receive
the Communion with the Minister EVERY SUNDAY AT THE LEAST, except they have a
reasonable cause to the contrary: Yea, our learned In his Catechism, vol. 1. f
461, 463.
Beacon reckons up this as a great abuse, and POPISH INNOVATION; that whereas:
the Lord Christ Jesus would have the holy communion of his blessed. Body and
precious Blood to be often times received of the: faithful for a remembrance of
his death and passion, and for the worthy, earnest, diligent consideration of
this inestimable benefit which we have obtained of God the Father, through the
Son his passion and death: the custom of the Popes Church is, that the
people receive the Sacrament usually but once in the year, that is to say, at
Easter; by See (...) p. 542. (...) 550. to like purpose.
which means the commandment of Christ is broken, the Sacrament is neglected,
the death of Christ not so earnestly remembered, the people become unthankefull,
dissolution of life breaks in, vice increases, virtue decreaseth; which he
condemns as contrary both the Scripture and Antiquity; informing us, That
among the Greeks, even at this day, if any man absent himself from the Lords
Table by the space of fourteen days (except be can render a reasonable cause
of his absence) he is excommunicate, and put from the company of the faithful;
and that in all those mighty, large, populous Kingdoms under that most
puissant King Prceious John, the holy communion of the Body and Blood of the
Lord has from the beginning been DAILY ADMINISTERED TO THE PEOPLE, and yet is
at this present day, as Histories make mention: All which, as it justly refutes
and censures the late unwarrantable, that I say not impious, popish,
tyrannical practice of sundry of our Ministers, who (I know not out of what
new whimseys and pretended scruples of conscience) contrary to Antiquity,
Scripture, Law, the constant practice of the Church in all Ages, refuse to
administer the Sacrament to their Parishoners for whole years together or more,
denying this heavenly Ordinance of Christ, as well to the religious among them
who desire it, as to the ignorant, scandalous, profane; prostituting this
Institution of Christ himself to their own ambitious designs, to encroach a
jurisdiction over it and their peoples consciences by this irreligious
stratagem, no ways justifiable before God or men; so it yields me an
unanswerable argument to prove these two conclusions, necessarily slowing from
the premises.

First, that the Lords Supper, by the judgment of Antiquity and the practice
of the Church in all Ages, belongs to all visible members of the visible
Church, able to examine themselves, not actually excommunicated, though they be
not truly regenerated; because all of them are thus equally enjoined frequently
to receive it, as well as to hear the Word.

Secondly, that the Lords Supper by the resolution of all these Fathers,
Authors, and the Christian Church in all Ages, is a converting, regenerating,
as well as a confirming or sealing Ordinance; for since every parishoner and
member of each Congregation being of years of discretion, was thus exhorted,
obliged to receive it at least three times every year, under pain of
excommunication and not being reputed a christian; the greatest part of whom,
as the Scripture and experience inform us, were unregenerate persons, not
inwardly converted, and void of saving faith; the eating of this heavenly
Banquet could not be prescribed unto such, as a bare sealing or confirming
Ordinance of saving grace already received, much less as a means of their
condemnation or aggravation of their sins; but only as an instrument of
their inward conversion and regeneration, to beget saving faith and spiritual
life within their souls, and unite them unto Christ.

Hence the Bochellus de cret^ Eccles. Gal. l 3. Tit. 1. c 2. p 356.
Synod of Lingon An. 1404. defines thus; Sacramentum Sanctae E^charistiae est
excellentissimum Sacramentum, pro eo quod non solum IN EO GRATIA CONFERTUR and
sanctificat, seu sanctitatem causat, sicut alia Sacramenta; sed etiam quia
continet in se actorem totius gratiae and sanctificationis, Dominuin nostrum
Jesum Christum. Hence the Synod of Bochellus de eret. Eccles. Gal. l 2. Tit. 1.
c 34 p 152, 153.
Sennes, An. 1521. refuting such who deny the power of conferring grace to the
Sacraments, not only proves, Baptismi Sacramentum sua virtute confer
Gratiam, stiling it, Lavacrum regenerationis quo denuo nastimur; but likewise
resolves thus of the Lords Supper; Quis autem VIVIFIC UM neget Eucharistiae
Sacramentum, quod tam apertis Scripturae testimoniis comprobatur? Calix enim
benedictionis cui benedicimus, nonne communio sanguinis Christi est? and panis
quem frangimus, nonne participatio corporis Domini est? etc. Quibus luce
clarius constet, hoc sacrosanctam Eucharistiae Sacramentum non solnm GRATIAM
CONFER, etc. Which thus interpreted and seconded by the Synod of Bochellus
ibid. c. 32. p. 148
Paris, Anno 1557. may pass for orthodox truth; Sacramentum juxta nominis
etymologiam, id significat QUO QUID SACRATUR. Sacramentum itaque ex more
Catholicae Ecclesiae, dicitur sacrae rei signum externum and sensibile,
efficaci significatione, insinuans internam and invisibilem gratiam Dei, aut
effectum gratuitum ex divina institutione ad salutem mortalium destinatum:
Sacramenta duabus potissimum de causis a Deo esse instituta videntur. Vna est,
ut sint invisibilis sanctificationis insignia and externa signa Christiani,
ini, illius quae magnae Congregationis, quae est Ecclesia, sigilla, ne Domini
familia, aliarum gentium admixtione, fiat incerta: Altera causa est, ut
Sacramenta ipsa non tantum significent, sed etiam sanctificent and conferant
invisibilem Dei Gratiam; non propria aliqua rerum externorum vi, aut merito
ministri, sed Domini secretius operantis quod instituit. Itaque etsi decet
bonum esse Sacramentorum ministrum, tamen malus etiam potest utiliter
dispensare. Quum dicimus Sacramentum causam esse justificationis nostrae,
intellegimus non principalem sed instrumentalem, and sine qua res fieri non
solet, quamvis sine ea fieni possit; nec enim virtus Domini and potentia
alligata est Sacramentis. Ecclesiae Sacramenta, sunt a Christo in morborum
animi remedium and curationem instituta; quorum haec vis est, ut sacros
sanctosque faciant, qui ea digne suscipitunt; quando non signa quidem solum
sunt gratiae, sed ipsus causa; his non modo signando sed and efficiendo
sanctitatem Christus nobis confer voluit. Sacramenta igitur non tantummodo
signa sunt quae infusam gratiam contegant and occultent, sed quae efficiant,
and reipsa prestant and cujus notae sunt and signa; est autem Sacramentum
divinae gratiae signum and ^igura, acinstrumentalis causa, efficiens
instrume^taliter quod sensibiliter figurat. Henc^ Bochellus ibid. c. 5. p. 142.
the Council of Bordeaux Anno 1582. defines the like in these terms: Cum
Ecclesia nihil habet preciosius, nihil ad aeternam salutem cons^quendam magis
necessarium, quam a Christo instituta Sacramenta, quibus omnis justitia vel
INCIPIATUR, vel caepta augeatur, vel amissa reparatur, ac Domini Dei gratia,
quam ipsa Sacramenta, seu vasa quaedam divina continent, eamque rite
suscipientibus CONFERUNT, nobis abunde communicetur, pastores omni studio and
diligentia commissum sibi Christianum populum exhortare debent ad frequentem
Augustissimi Eucharistiae Sacramenti usum: And Concilium Bochellus ibid. c* ^.
p. 14^.
Bitur, Anno 1584. concludes thus; Cum per primum parentem violata est
originalis justitia in qua creatus fuerat, and peccato suo omnes p^st^r^s
infecit, etc. Providus Deus singulls morbis singula adhibuit remedia;
Sacramenta scilicet, quibus* peccata remittuntur; ^ominis vita reg^^vr, ^ides
augetur, and totius Ecclesiae politia continetur ac conservatur: NAM
SPIRITUALEM HOMINI VITAM CONFERUNT BAPTISMUS, EUCHARISTIA, etc. By all which it
is apparent that the Lords Supper and Baptism are converting as well as
confirming Ordinances, and were so reputed in most See Occam, (...) 4. sent.
qu. 1 and Aretius Problem. Theol. loc 76.
former Ages till this present.

Secondly, it is undeniable that Justin Martyr, Dyonisius Arcopagita,
Athanasius, Basil, Ambrose, Cyprian, Augustine, Bernard and other Ancients from
Gal. 3. 17. Romans 6. 3. Ephesians. 5. 26. Tit. 3. 5. 1 Pet. 5. 31. style Baptism, the
Sacrament of divine Generation, the laver of Regeneration, A New Birth, the
Regeneration of the soul, the Mother of our Adoption, etc. and call Baptizing,
giving Gods Grace; denying it, denying Gods Grace, as Master Defense of Infant.
Baptism par. 1. and^
Marshall proves at large, and many of them hold That those who dyed without
Baptism could not be saved; Yea, most In 4 sent Did. 1. 4. and ^n the^^
Treatises of baptism
Papists hold, and many Protestants assert, that Baptism is not only a badge,
but isntrumental means of our regeneration and first conversion unto God; and
if this Sacrament be a converting as well as a sealing Ordinance, then the
Lords Supper by like reason must be so too.

Thirdly, all Popish Schoolmen, Writers, Councils unanimously assert, That
Sacraments (especially Baptism and the Lords Supper) not only confirm, but
confer and beget grace, even the very first grace of conversion and
justification, and that either in a physical way ex opere operato (as most of
them affirm) or as Master Ruther^urds Due right of Presbyteries, c. 4. sect.
5. p. 212.
moral causes (as others teach) and that they are the vessels in and by which
the merits of Christ are conveyed to, and conferred on us: Witness Pascatius
Rathbertus, de Corpore and Sanguine Domini, c. 3. Aquinas, Durandus, Occam,
Bonaventura, Scotus, Media Villa, Brulifer, Egidus Romanus, Joan de Carthagena,
Hadrianus Florentius, Dom. a Soto, Holcot, Gabriel Biel, Aliacensis, and other
Schoolmen, in lib. 4. Sent. Did. 1. Alensis, Summa Theologiae, pars 4. qu. 5.
mem. 3. Art. 5. Aquinas p. 3. q. 6. 2. and 63. Art. 6. Greg. de Valentia, in 3.
part. Thomae Disp. 3. qu. 3. and de Offic. Sacr. c. 2. Vasquez. in 3. Thomae,
Tom. 2. Disp. 132. c. 4. Tannerus in Thom. Tom. 4. Disp. 3. qu. 3. dub. 5.
Gamachaeus in 3. part Thom. qu. 62. c. 5. Sum. Angelica. Tit. Sacram. Victor l.
6. De Sacramentis, part 9. cap. 2. Henricus quod l. 4. qu. 37. Gabriel Biel
Super Can. Missae, Lect. 85, 86. Petrus Binsfieldius, Enchirid. Theologiae pars
1. c. 2. 6. Joan de Lugo de Sacram. Disp. 4. sect. 4, 5. Bechanus Theolog.
Scholast. pars 4. Tract de Sacram. qu. 7. Bellarmine De Sacram. l. 2. c. 1. to
6. and 11. the Council of Trent Sess. 7. Can. 5, 6, 7, 8. de Sacramentis, with
sundry others. Therefore this is no new opinion invented by me.

Fourthly, though See Harmony of Confessions, sect. 12, 13, 14 Calvin, Instit.
l. 4. c. 13, 14, 15. Peter Martyr in Romans 4. Aretius Problem. Theol. ^o cus 76,
77 Willets Synopsis Pasmipi cent 2. Err. 97. 98. Amesius, Bellar. Enerva ^s
Tom. 3. c. 5.
Protestant Writers unanimously and justly oppose the Papists in this, That the
Sacraments by a physical virtue, or ex opere operato, confer grace, yet they
generally grant, that they are the means, Organs, or isntrumental causes of
conferring, confirming grace, through the concurrence of Gods Spirit working in
and by them, as well as by the Word, where they are worthily received by faith;
but that they originally beget saving grace, faith and spiritual life in such
in whom they were formerly wanting, is denied by some of them, yet affirmed by
others: Indeed the Author of the Confession of Harmony of confessions, sect.
12. p. 279, 280, 281. l. 4. c. ^4.
Bohemia, Decad. 5. Sermon. 7
Calvin, Tract* Theol* p. 350, 357.
Bullinger, Vrsinus, seem to deny the Sacraments to be converting Ordinances,
but confirming only: Yet others (especially the Lutherans) hold the contrary.
Peter Martyr in his Commentary on Romans 4. writes, That one chief end of the
Sacraments is, Vt accendant in nobis fidem, Dei; and that they do CONFER
GRATIAM in that sense as Paul calls the Gospel, the power of God unto
salvation; quod sane nihil aliud est* quam vim and potentiam Dei qua peccata
remittit, GRATIAM LARGITUR, and denique servat his instrumentis and mediis uti
ad salutem nostram: Ad quod efficiendum quemadmodum utitur verbo Evangelii, and
praedicatione Sacrarum Literarum, ita etiam adhibet Sacramenta: Per utraque
enim praedicatur nobis liberalis Dei prom^^sio. Therefore in his opinion the
Word and Sacraments are both alike converting Ordinances.

Martin Luther in his In concordia Lutherana^ p. 378.
lesser Catechism demanding this question. What does it profit us to eat and
drink the Lords Supper? returns this answer; Id indicant nobis ^^c verba, pro
vobis dat^r^^ effunditur in remissionem peccutorum: Nempe, qu^d nobis per verba
illa in Sacramento, REMISSIO PECCATORUM VITA, JUSTITIA ET SALVS DONENTUR, Vbi
enim remissio peccatorum est, ibi est and vita and salus: Therefore he So do
his followers; see Brochman, list. Theol. To n. 3. de Sacram. c. 21. qu^ 1. and
6.
deemed it a regenerating and converting, as well as a confirming Ordinance:
A^etius, Problem. Theolog. Locus 77. Sect. 7. determines thus; Deo permittend^
est libera agendi facultas; alias regenerat an^e, alias post, alias Plane nemo
dubita^e debet quod in alvo Baptismi, priusquam Infans a font surgat, spiritu^
sanctus in animam renascentis in funditur, etc. Pascatius Rathhertus de corporo
and sanguine Domini, c. 3.
IN BAPTISMO; sio alias ante Coenam, alias post, alias IN ILLA CONVERTIT AD
VERAM P^NITENTIAM; sed quotquot regenerat and convertit ad veram paenitentiam
illa bona in eis obsignat usu Sacramentorum: Hence Augustine in Psalm. 73. torms
them, Sacramenta DANTIA SALUTEM: And Hilary l. 8. de Trinitate, writes thus of
the Sacramental Elements, thus accompanied with the spirit; Haec accepta atque
exhausta EFFICIENT, Us nos in Christo and Christus in nobis sit: Therefore by
their resolutions the Lords Supper and Baptism are converting as well as
confirming or Sealing Ordinances: Yea, Victor Antiochenus in cap. 14. Marci,
together with Chrysostom and Summa Theolog. pars 4. qu. 11. Artic. 1. sect. 3.
Alensis, affirm, That Christ admitted Judas to his Supper for this very
reason, That he might leave no means unattempted to reclaim, convert and
reduce him to a sound^nind; which clearly proves it to be a converting
Ordinance in their judgments.

The opinion of Augustine is notorious, that the Sacraments both of Baptism
and the Lords Supper are so necessary, that none could be saved without them,
and therefore ^e and the Church of Carthage maintained, That not only Baptism,
but the Epist. 23. contra Pelagianos Hypognost* l. 5. cont. duas Epist. Pelagii
ad Bonefacium, lib. 1. c. 22. and l. 4* c. 4. contr. Julianum Pelag. l. 1. and
2. Tit. 3. 1 Pet. 3.
Lords Supper also ought to be given unto Infants, else they could not be
saved: I shall quote but one place of his instead of many: De peccatorum
Meritis and Remissione, and de Baptismo parvulorum, l. 1. c. 24. Optime Punici
Christiani Baptismum ipsum nihil aliud QUAM SALUTEM, and Sacramentum corporis
Christi, nihil aliud QUAM VITAM VOCANT; Vnde, nisi ex anti qua, ut existimo,
and Apostolica traditione, qua Ecclesiae Christi insitum tenent, praeter
Baptismum and participationem Dominicae mensae, non solum ad regnum Dei, sed
nec AD SALUTEM ET VITAM AETERNAM posse quenquam hominum per^enire? Hoc enim and
Scriptura testatur, secundum ea quae supra diximus: Nam quid aliud tenent, qui
Baptismum nomine salutis appellant, nisi quod dictum est; Salvos nos fecit per
lavachrum regenerationis; Et quod Petrus ait, sic and vos simili forma
Baptismus salvos fecit: ^oan. 6.
Q^id aliud etiam qui Sacramentum mensae Dominicae VITAM vocant, nisi quod
dictum est; Ego sum panis vitae qui de Coelo descendi; and panis quem ego
dedero, caro mea est pro seculi vita: Et, Si non manducaveritis carnem filii
hominis and sanguinem biberitis, non habebitis vitam in vobis: si ergo ut tot
and tanta divina testimonia continunt, NEC SALUS, NEC VITA AETERNA sine
Baptismo and cortore and sanguine Domini cuiquam ^peranda est, frustra sine his
promittitur parvulis. After which he concludes; Proinde parvuli si PER
SACRAMENTUM QUOD AD HOC DIVINITUS INSTITUTUM TUM EST, IN CREDENTIUM NUMERUM NON
TRANSEANT, profecto in his tenetris (peccatorum) rema^^bant: Therefore by his
and the Church of ^arthage resolution, yea the Sea Capit. Karol. and Ludovici,
l. 1. c. 161.
Churches judgment from the Apostles days (it being an Apostolical tradition
embraced by the Church, as he avers) these Sacraments are the original primary
means both of conversion, spiritual life, and salvation, and so converting as
well as confirming Ordinances. Cypriam de Coena Domini, writes, That the Lords
Supper, Ad totius hominis vitam salutem qu^ profic^^, simul medica^mentum and
holocau^ium ad sanandas infirmitates, and purgandas miquitates existens*
Therefore a converting Ordinance as well as a confirming. Cyrill of Alexandria,
De Justificatione in Christo, lib. 3. affirms, That Death fed upon men on
earth until the institution of the Lords Supper, wherein we eat the living
Bread from Heaven; from which time death has ceased, and the inhabitants of
the holy City, the Church, are perfected unto sanctification by that living
bread: Therefore in his opinion, it is a means of our spiritual life and
sanctification, and so a converting Ordinance: The sayings of the Fathers to
this purpose are almost infinite; I shall therefore pretermit them, challenging
my Opposites to produce any solid Antiquity to the contrary, to prove them not
converting as well as corroborating institutions.

Neither is this Doctrine a stranger in our own Church; for Bishop Jewel in
his Defense of the Apology of the Church of England, part 3. chapter 15. Divis. 2.
p. 349. determines thus: But TO BREED AND INCREASE FAITH IN US, there are more
ways then can be reckoned: Some men are moved only by the hearing of Gods
Word; some others by the beholding and weighing of Gods Miracles: Justinus the
Martyr was first allured to the faith by the cruelty of the Tyrants, and by the
constancy and patience of the Saints, etc. Among OTHER CAUSES, THE SACRAMENTS
SERVE SPECIALLY TO DIRECT AND TO AID OUR FAITH; For they are, as Saint
Augustine calls them, Verba visibilia, visible words and Seals, and
testimonies of the Gospel, etc. Our learned Thomas Beacon in his Catechism,
f. 425, 426. thus defines a Sacrament; A Sacrament is an holy Action and
exercise of Christ's Church IN which the redemption and partaking of our Lord
Jesus Christ IS GIVEN TO US through the Word, and the Signs INSTITUTED FOR
THIS PURPOSE OF GOD.

After which he propounds this pertinent Question: What need have we of
Sacraments, seeing we have the holy Ghost and the sacred Scriptures of God to
lead us unto all necessary truth, which can abundantly inform us of the grace,
favor, mercy and good will of God toward us? Which he answers thus:

Christ the wisdom of the Father, knowing our grossness and dullness in
understanding matters that belong unto our salvation, wishing our health and
commodity, and minding to remedy and help this our great infirmity, and to
bring us unto some knowledge of Gods mysteries, that we may be saved, has not
only given us his holy spirit to inform, instruct and teach our inward man,
but to make us perfect both in body and soul; he has also given his Word to
instruct our ears, and his Sacraments to serve our eyes: For whatsoever the
holy Ghost says inwardly unto us, the very same does the Word of God unto our
ears* and the Sacraments to serve our eyes, preach, declare and set forth
outwardly, Note.
that we may be taught both corporally and spiritually. Again* who knows not
that things seen with eyes are more surely fixed in the minds of men, then
those things which are only heard? And therefore a Sacrament may right well be
called a visible word: For whatsoever the word is to the ear, the very same
thing is the Sacrament to the eye: The Word of God says to mine care, the Body
of Christ was broken for thee; the very same thing does the Sacrament preach to
mine eye, while in the holy action of the Lords Supper, I see the bread broken
and the wine shed: Therefore Christ the Lord to inform and instruct our
outward senses, ordained these outward signs and Sacraments, that by the
consideration and beholding of them, the thing might the more easily slide into
our minds, which has been inculked and beaten into our ears through the voice
of the Preaher: If we had been without bodies, Christ would have given unto us
those spiritual gifts nakedly and simply, which are given to the faithful in
the deliverance of the Sacraments; but forasmuch as we have bodies joined to
our souls, therefore in sensible things he does communicate unto us the gifts
of grace; and this has been the property of God not only in the New, but also
in the old Testament.

If then the Sacraments be but visible words, which preach the self-same things
(yet in a more lively and sensible manner) to our eyes, as the Word preached
does unto our ears, as this Author, with all Calvin, Melanchton, Peter Martyr,
Zerchius, Aretius, and others.
Orthodox Divines, and Due right of Presbyteries, c. 4. sect. 5. p. 121.
Master Rutherfurd himself, unanimously accord; it must needs follow, that the
Sacraments (especially the Lords Supper) most lively representing Christ's
passion to us, must be a converting Ordinance, as well as the Word read or
preached: Upon which ground, the Ancient Catholic Fathers (as our own
Concerning the Sacrament part 1. p. 189 190.
Homilies resolve) styled the Lords Supper; A comfortable medicine of the
soul, the salve of immortality, and sovereign preservation against death, the
Pledge of eternal Health, the defense of faith, the food of immortality, the
be^lthfull grace, and the conservatory to everlasting life; therefore they
deemed it a converting as well as con^irming Ordinance. Master Richard Ward in
his Commentary upon Matthew, page 399. in the written Copy, writes, Sacraments
do not confer Grace upon all, nor by a physical power give grace unto any;
but sometimes GOD IN AND BY THE SACRAMENTS CONVEYES GRACE INTO HIS ELECT
CHILDREN, and sometimes by the Sacraments confirms grace which he has
formerly conferred.

Not to multiply Authorities in so clear a case, the very Directory it self
(composed by the Assembly, and ratified by both Houses of Parliament) page 25.
enumerates the Word and Sacraments among the special means of Grace and
salvation in these words; To give thanks to God for all his benefits, and
especially for* ALL MEANS OF GRACE, THE WORD AND SACRAMENTS* And for this
Sacrament in particular, by which Christ and all his benefits are applied and
sealed up unto us; making them both equally in the self same manner means of
grace, and coupling them both together in the self same predication; therefore
if the Word be a means of begetting grace where it was wanting, and of
obtaining salvation, the Sacraments must be so too. In fine, Due right of
Presbyteries, c. 4. sect. 5. p. 217.
Master Rutherfurd himself writes thus: You say, Sacraments do not make a
thing that was not, but confirm a thing that was before; while you would seem
to refute Papists, who vainly ^each, that Sacraments ex opere operato do
confer grace, yet do you make the Sacrament but a naked sign, and take part
with Arminians and So^^nians, whose very Arguments in express words you use;
for if a Sacrament make not a thing which was before, and if God give not, and
really produce, confer, exhibit grace, and a stronger measure of faith and
assurance of remission of sins, at the due and right use of the Sacrament,
the Sacrament is a naked sign, and not an exhibitive Seal; but if Christ
give, and in the present exhibit as surely remission of sins as the Infant is
washed with water, as our Divines and the Palatinate Catechism teaches, and
the Confession thereof and the Synod of Dort teaches, then by the Sacrament of
Baptism (and so by consequent of the Lords Supper) a thing ^s made that which
it was not before; therefore by consequence it is a regenerating and converting
Ordinance. This he more plainly expresses in Master Rutherfurds divine right
of Church Government, p. 523, 524.
another discourse in those terms: Master Prynne might have spared his pains
That the Lords Supper is a converting Ordinance, because it applies Christ to
us; WE GRANT IT TO BE A CONVERTING, QUICKENING AND LIVELY APPLICATORY ORDINANCE:
But how? He may know, that whatever Ordinance adds a new degree of Faith, OF
CONVERSION, of living Application of Christ and the Promises, MUST BE A
CONVERTING ORDINANCE; but it is so converting, that it is a confirming
Ordinance, and necessarily it presupposes faith and conversion already wrought
by the Word; it is not a first converting Ordinance, so as is the Word, etc. I
say not this as if the Church could give the Supper of the Lord to none but
such as are inwardly and really regenerated, but to show that the Church takes
such as are externally called, to be internally called, whence they dispense
the Supper to them.

In which words, we have a most clear confession, That the Lords Supper is both
a converting and quickening Ordinance: But yet this must be controlled with a
distinction not found Scripture or Antiquity: It is so a converting Ordinance,
that it is a confirming Ordinance: I grant it: So is the reading and preaching
of the Word* it converts, yet so as it confirms and edifieth us too in our
most holy faith, yet it is a converting Ordinance.

Yea, but it is not the first ^^^^erting Ordinance; it is not the means of our
first ^^nversion from formal profession to inward embracing the Gospel: For
the Word must go before; and not simply the external Letter of the Word, but
the Word first believed and received by the efficatio^s working of the holy
Ghost, etc. This is only affirmed, but not substantially proved by this
learned Divine, who takes upon (...) to limit God and his Spirit, so as to
deprive them of their absolute (...) to work and beget grace by the Sacraments
when and where they please, as well as by the Word; and confines the Spirits
first inward conversion of men only to the Word, John 3. 7* (...)
Who breaths where and in what Ordinance ^e lists, the breath of spiritual
life into our souls. True it is, the Word preached i^ the first ordinary and
most usual means both of external and internal conversion, but yet the
Sacraments as well as the Word are very frequently made the instruments, though
not of external conversion of m^n from Paganism to Chrstianity (not here in
question,) yet of carnal Christians See Ta^^^^^ in Thomam, Tom. 4. Disp. 3.
qu. 3. Du. 50
first inward and real conversion from sin and satan unto Christ, and a m^st
effectual means both of begetting, increasing grace and spiritual life in
their souls, as I have elsewhere largely evidenced.

Hence Loci Communes printed 153^. Lo^^ de Sacramentis.
Phillip Melanchton (in a Book Dedicated to our King Henry the VIII) though he
deny, that the Sacraments ex opere operato confer grace and justification;
yet he expressly resolves, that they were principally instituted to be signs of
Gods good will toward us, incurring into our eyes, that they may admonish us
TO BELIEVE the promise proposed in the Gospel: Thus we conjoyne the Sacrament
and promise; now as the promise is to be received by faith, so also in the use
of the Sacraments faith ought to be added, which may assure us, that those true
things shall happen which are propounded in the promise: Augustine aptly
compares the Word with the Sacrament, when be says, The Sacrament is a visible
Word; that is, As the Word is a certain note which is received with the ears,
so the Sacrament is a spectacle or Picture which runs into the eyes: As
therefore the Word is a note signifying something of the will of God, and as
God is laid hold on in the Word upon our belief, so likewise is he apprehended
in the Sacrament when we believe: Wherefore as the Word is an instrument by
which the holy Ghost is effectual, as Paul says, The Gospel is the power of
God to every one that believes: Also, Faith is by hearing, etc. So BY THE
SACRAMENTS the holy Ghost IS EFFECTUAL; namely, when they are received by
faith; FOR THEY ADMONISH AND MOVE US TO BELIEVE AS THE WORD DOES: Therefore by
his resolution the Sacraments are converting Ordinances, and means of
begetting grace as well, and in like manner as the Word, and not confirming
Ordinances only of grace begun. Yea, he Ibid* loc. de Sacramentorum numero.
positively affirms, (and so did our English Apostle Dialogorum l. 4. c. 1. f.
101. ^imiliter praedicatio verbi* Apostolici; Videtur esse Sacramentum ^o quod
est* ^ignum sanctitatis auditorii, and ita significanter in ^ide Scripturae in
jung (...) exerc^ium alte^ius Sacraments, etc*
John Wickliffe long before him) That the very preaching of the Word is a
Sacrament instituted in the G^spell* Maxim autem placet mihi Ordinem, ut
vocant, inter Sacramenta numerari, mod^ ut intelligatur ipsum ministerium
Evangelii, and voca^io ad hoe ministerium docendi Evangelium and administrandi
Sacramenta, etc* Hoc modo numerare Ondinem inter Sacr^menta^ fuerit
utilissimum, scilicet, ad illustrandam dignitatem ministeri^ verbi^: And he
adds, That Prayer likewise may be called a Sacrament, because it has great
promises anne^ed to it. If then Sacraments do only confirm grace where it is
begun before, not confirm and beget grace where it is wanting, then by this
new Divinity, neither the Ministry of the Word nor Prayer shall be converting
and regenerating, but only confirming Ordinances* Since in Melanchtons and
Wickliffes opinions (to omit^ others) they are and may be called Sacraments as
well as the Lords Supper or Baptism; which Wickliffe Dialogorum l. 4. ^. 1.
terms, primum Sacramentum CONFERENS GRATIA* PRIMAM SPIRITUALITER GENERANTEM:
Asserting likewise in the same Chapter, Etsi diffinitio Sacramenti sit, sacrae
rei signum, videt^r quod omne signabile sit e^iam Sacramentum: Quia omnis
creatura signat suam creationem, and etiam creatorem, and sic rem sacram
signat, and Deus multas sacras creaturas signat and seipsum: Quod si
Sacramentum sit invisibilis gratiae visibilis forma, ut fimilitudinem gerat,
and causa existat: Cum visibilis forma in proposito signat quamcunque formam,
vel quidditatem sensibilem; videtur, quod quaelibet sensibilis creatura SIT
ETIAM SACRAMENTUM, quia est visibili^ sorma invisibilis gratiae creatoris, and
geret similitudinem Idaearum, and causa existit similitudinis suae, and
intelligentiae creaturis: Quomodo sunt ergo solum septem Sacramenta distincta
specivoce? Which I wish my Opposites to consider, who advance the Sacraments so
much above the Word which makes them Sacraments, and appropriate the tilet of a
Sacrament only to Baptism and the Lords Supper, from which they exclude and
suspend all scandalous persons (and their children too from Apology of the
Churches in New England against the exceptions of Richard Bernard, chapter 8. See
Mr. Rutherfurds due right of Presbyteries c. 4. sect. 5 p. 221, etc.
Baptism in New England) upon pretense they are only confirming Ordinances,
Sacraments and Seals of grace; upon which pretext, they may as well suspend
them from the Ministry of the Word and prayer, and from the use of any of Gods
Creatures, which may be termed Sacraments as well as these, if these two
eminent Divines mistake not.

I shall close up this point with the resolution of the whole Church of
England, both in the Articles of Religion, compiled and published in King
Edward the VI* his Reign, Anno 1553. Artic. 26. refined and confirmed by Act
of Parliament, Anno 1562. in Queen Elizabeth's Reign, Art. 25. of Sacraments;
which determines thus: Sacraments ordained of Christ are not only badges and
tokens of Christian men's profession, but rather, they be certain sure
witnesses and EFFECTUAL SIGNS of Grace and Gods good will toward us, by the
which he does WORK INVISIBLY IN US, and does NOT f ONLY QUICKEN, The holy
Spirit does seal Christians, Ephesians. 1. 13 c. 4. 30. Romans 8 10, 11. Yet it
regenerats and converts them tos, John 3. 6. to 9. Romans 8. 10, 11. 2 Cor. 3.
18. So do the Sacraments by its concurrence with them.
but ALSO STRENGTHEN AND CONFIRM OUR FAITH IN HIM: Therefore by our own
Churches resolution, which all our Ministers have actually subscribed to; the
Sacrament of Baptism, and the Lords Supper too, is both a converting and
regenerating Ordinance to quicken and beget, as well as a confirming Ordinance
to strengthen and confirm grace; and so it is no New Paradox of mine, but an
ancient resolved truth, yea the very received Doctrine of our Church, and of
the Churches of Christ in former Ages; and the contrary opinion a mere upstart
error, maintained purposely by some Divines (against their own subscriptions,
if not their consciences too,) to justify and support the sole suspention of
scandalous persons from the Lords Supper, as a Divine institution by the will
and appointment of Jesus Christ; which else would necessarily fall unto the
ground, if this maine pillar of it be subverted.

As for Master Rutherfurds, Objection 5.
Doctor Drak^s* and others maine reason to the contrary, That no man can
receive the Lords Supper worthily, unless he come unto it with a true lively
faith, and sincere repentance; which graces he cannot enjoy without he be first
really converted, else he eats and drinks dam^^ation, not conversion to
himself: Ergo, This Sacrament is no first converting, but only a confirming
Ordinance.

I answer, Answer.
First, that the argument is but a mere fallacy, which will either nullify
all Ordinances, or prove no Ordinance (no not the preaching of the Word or
Prayer) to be converting, but merely confirming; for the very preaching of the
Word will neither profit, nor externally nor really convert any that hear it,
unless they hear it with faith, as is resolved by Heb. 4. 2. But the Word
preached did not profit them, not being mixed with faith in them that heard it,
and Romans 1. 16, 17. Heb. 11 4. 6. Mar. 16. 15, 16. 1 Pet. 2. 1, to 9. So Prayer
without Faith is vain, ineffectuall, and receives nothing from the Lord, Jam.
1. 5, 6. chapter 5. 15. Ergo, by this reason (if allowed) a man must have says and
spiritual life wrought in him before he can either hear or pray with profit
as he ought, and so must be first converted ere he can hear the Word or Pray:
What then shall we conclude hence, that men neither may nor ought to pray,
hear or receive the Lords Supper until they be actually regenerated and
inspired with saving faith? God forbid; for then Godshall have no worship, and
men no public Ordinances: we must therefore know, that God has appointed both
the Word, Sacraments and Prayer, as the ordinary means or instruments whereby
he begets true spiritual life, faith and grace within us, by the effectual
concurrence of the spirit in and with them; whereupon he frequently Isa. 55. 1,
2, 3. Pro. 8 32, 33, 34. c. 9. 3, 4, 5. c. 7. 1, 2, 3 James 1. 56, 7. 19, 18,
19, 21. 2 Timothy 2. 25, 26.
commands us, to resort unto the Ordinances with care and conscience, to the
end we may be convert^d, and quickened by them when we want grace, as well as
strengthened or confirmed when we have grace begun within us: Hence is that
speech of our Savior, John 5. 21, 24, 25, 26. For as the Father raises up the
dead and quickneth them, even so the Son quickneth whom he will: He that
hears my Word, and believes on him that sent me, has everlasting life, and
shall not come into condemnation: Verily, verily I say uno you, the hou^e is
coming and now is, THAT THE DEAD (in sin and natural corruption) SHALL
HEAR THE VOICE OF THE SON OF GOD, AND THEY THAT HEAR IT SHALL LIVE. Which
is thus seconded, Ephesians. 2. 1. to 8. And you has he quickened (to wit, by the
Word and other Ordinances accompanied with the Spirit) WHO WERE DEAD IN
TRESPASSES AND SINS; But God who is rich in mercy, for his great love
wherewith he loved us, EVEN WHEN WE WERE DEAD IN SINS HAS QUICKENED US
together with Christ, and has raised us up together and made us sit together
in heavenly places in Christ Jesus, etc. For by grace ye are saved through
Faith, and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God, etc. a pregnant
Text: As Christ's speech to Lazarus lying dead and buried in his grave, to wit,
Lazarus come forth; was the isntrumental means both of his raising from the
dead, and coming forth of the grave accordingly, John 11. 43, 44. And as his
words to the dead Rulers Daughter, Mark 5. 4^, 42. Damsel arise; and Peter's
speech to dead Tabitha, Acts 9. 40, 41. Tabitha arise, were the isntrumental
means and cause both of their raising and reviving; and as Gods command in the
very first creation, Let there be light, etc. was the isntrumental cause of
creating light and all other creatures before they had a being: Genesis 1.
So the Word, Sacraments and Prayer are Gods ordinary instruments whereby he
quickens those who are dead in sins, and begets saving faith with other
graces in such who formerly never had them, by his Spirit working in and by
these means: Hence is that notable speech of Christ to Paul, Acts 26. 17, 18.
Now I send thee to the Gentiles, to open their eyes, and to turn them from
darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that they may receive
forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among them that are sanctified by faith
that is in me. These Ordinances do not find us living, worthy or regenerate,
but make us such; do not presuppose faith and repentance already in us, (for
what should work them?) but the contrary; and therefore are ordained to beget
faith and spiritual life even in those who are dead in sins, Mark 16. 15,
16. 2 Timothy 2. 25, 26. Acts 16. 14, 15. chapter 2. 37, 38. chap. 10. 44. Ephesians. 2. 1,
etc. and after that, to confirm and strengthen all spiritual graces wrought
within us; by means whereof, when wrought, the Ordinances which first
instrumentally begat them, become more profitable and comfortable to us then
before: This is so clear, that Master Due right of Presbyteries, c. 4. sect. 5.
p. 285, etc.
Rutherfurd is forced to confess, That the Church may, nay ought to give the
Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper, even to such as are not truly
regenerated, if they externally profess the Gospel, as well as preach the
Gospel to them, (though contradicting himself, as I conceive, he affirms
Which Master Rutherfurd affirms, Divine right of Church Government, p. 280.
elsewhere, That to come to the Lords Supper is not commanded to all, not to
Pagans, not to children, rot to the unregenerate, BUT ONLY TO THE
REGENERATED;) Of which no other reason can be given, but that they are means
of begetting, as well as increasing grace, and converting as well as confirming
Ordinances, from which none who desire them (if not actually excommunicated for
obstinate impenitency and contempt against the Ordinances) ought to be
secluded, unless natural disabilities hinder them.

Hence Concordia Lutherana p. 542. to 250.
Martin Luther in his Greater Catechism, exciting men by many arguments to the
frequent receiving of the Lords Supper, the neglect whereof makes our devotion
and love to Christ grow every day colder and colder, causes us at last-to grow
brutish, yea extremely to conte^^ne both the Sacrament and Word too, as he
there avers from his own experience (which I wish those Divines who put off and
deny the Sacrament to their people for months, nay, years together, would now
at last consider;) removes one maine Objection which deterred many from the
Sacrament (to wit, their own unworthiness sinfulness and unpreparednesse to
receive it) with this encouraging argument; That this Sacrament was not
instituted for those that are worthy, and purely cleansed from their sins,
but cloane contrary, even for miserable and wretched sinners, sensible of
nothing but their own unworthiness: Therefore let such a one say, Lord, I
would very willingly be worthy of this Supper, but yet I come unto it induced
by no worthiness of mine own, but trusting on thy Word alone, because thou
have commanded me to come, etc. For the Sacrament is not to be looked upon as
an hurtful thing, from which we should run with both our feet, but as a saving
and wholesome medicine, which may heal thy diseases, and give life both to thy
soul and body: Why then do we so shun it, as if it were a poison (as some
Master Rutherfurds Divine right of Church Government. page 252, 253, 254 etc. A
brotherly and friendly censure* p. 6, 7. An Antidote against four dangerous
Q^aeries, with others.
Divines now term it, to scarre people from it) which being received, would
bring present death unto us? Yea, but some may say; I am not so sensible of my
sins and unworthiness as I should be: To such as are in this condition, I
can give no better advice, then to look into their own hearts, and to see
whether they be not flesh and blood, and may not say with Paul, Romans 7. I know
that in me, that as in my flesh dwells nothing that is good: In sum, by how
much the less thou art thoroughly sensible of thy sins and defects, the more
reasons thou have of coming, and frequent seeking help and physic. The
substance whereof is but this: That the frequent receiving of the Lords Supper
is an effectual means to So the Lutherans generally hold. Hinkelman, de
Anabaptismo, Disp. 9. c. 1. Er. 6.
beget and work repentance, sense of sin, spiritual life, health, true grace
within us when we want them, as well as to increase, confirm them when we have
them; whence it is generally termed by Divines, A MEANS OF GRACE; therefore
we must frequently resort unto it in obedience to Gods command, as well to
obtain faith, repentance and spiritual graces by and in it, when wanting, as
to corroborate and augment them when wrought in us.

Secondly, this Argument necessarily implies, that the Sacraments must be
administered to none but the Elect and truly regenerate: For since none are
endued with saving grace, faith, repentance, but only the Elect, and none
ought to be admitted to the Sacraments but such who are endued with saving
grace, faith, repentance, as the Objection concludes; It inevitably follows,
that none but the elect and persons truly regenerate, must be admitted to the
Sacrament: But this the Objectors themselves deny and refute, both in the case
of Baptism and the Lords Supper too: Hence Master Rutherfurd determines in his
Due Right of Presbyteries, chapter 4. sect. 5. page 185. The Church may orderly and
lawfully give the Seals of the Conant to those to whom the Covenant and
promises of grace do not belong in Gods Decree of Gods Election: refuting the
contrary opinion as Anabaptisticall: Defense of Infant Baptism. part 3.
Master Marshall does the like, and that upon these grounds:

First, because Christ and his Apostles admitted diverse to Baptism and the
Lords Supper, who were never elect or truly regenerate, as Judas, Simon Magus,
and others. Secondly, because no Ministers without special revelation, but 2 Chronicles. 6. 33. 2 Timothy 6. 19.
God alone infallibly know who are Elect and truly regenerate, Jer. 17* 9.
the hearts of men bring deceitful above all things, and Mat. 22. 14.
many called, but few chosen* and so they cannot tell certainly who to admit,
or who to seclude from the Sacrament: Upon which ground Master Defense of
Infant Baptism p 111. and 140.
Marshall himself concludes thus against Master Tombs: And truly Sir,
whosoever will grant that a Minister in applying the Seal, must do it de
fide, in faith, being sure he applies it according to rule, must either grant
such a right as I plead for, that many have right to be visible members, and be
partakers of the external administration of Ordinances, though they be not
inwardly sanctified; or else he must by revelation be able to ^ee and know the
inward conversion of every one he applies the Seals unto, for certainly (...)
has no written word to build his Faith upon, for the state of this or that
man: And for my own part, when once you have disproved this, that there is
such a visible membership and right to external Administrations as I have here
insisted upon, I shall not only forbear baptizing Infants, Note.
but the Administration of the outward seal to any, what profession soever
they make, until I may be de ^ide assured that they are inwardly regenerate.
Thirdly, because Christ has ordained the Sacraments to be means of
distinguishing Christians from Pagan^, yea, to be an accidental means of ^
Cor. 11. 27 28, 29. 2 Cor. 2. 25, 26. Articles of the Church of England, Art.
29.
aggravating men's sin, ingratitude, damnation, and to leave those without
excuse who unworthily receive them, which end should be wholly frustrated, if
unregenerate Christians should be secluded from them; therefore this argument
which subverts our Opposites own Tenet, and with the Anabaptists appopriates
the administration of the Sacraments to the Elect alone, must wholly be
exploded as false and dangerous.

Wherefore the Objectors must be driven of necessity to renounce this
Objection, together with that of In cap. 4. 2d Romans p* 39. 2. and Explic.
Catech. qu. 81. Art. 1.
Paraeus, which seduced them, Sacramenta non sunt instituta justificandis, sed
justificatis; hoc est non infidelibus, sed conversis; which if meant only of
persons inwardly converted, is an error; if of Pagans not converted, as he
perchance means it, is quite mistaken by the Opposites.

Finally, Objection 6.
See Master Rutherfurds divine right of Church Government, c. 5 qu. 1. p. 242*
243. etc. 15.
they object. That the Priests were to put difference between holy and unholy,
between unclean and clean, Levit. 10. 10. Hag. 2. 11, 14, and that they are
checked by God himself, Ezekiel. 22. 26. for putting no difference between the
holy and profane, the unclean and clean: Ergo, Church Officers and the
Ministers of the Gospel have power by the will and appointment of Jesus
Christ, not only to excommunicate, but likewise to suspend scandalous and
ignorant persons from the Lords Supper.

I answer, Answer.
that the Argument is a mere Nonsequitur: For first, these Texts belong only
to the Aaronicall Priests under the Law, Heb. 7. 11. to the end, etc. 8* and 9.
and 10.
Abolished by Christ, not to the Ministers of the Gospel: Secondly, they speak
only of c^remoniall Holin^ss^ and prophannesse, cleanness and uncleanness,
Acts 10. 10. to 17. Col. 2. 14. to 23. 1 Timothy 4. 5.
abrogated by Christ, not of moral: Thirdly, not of persons morally holy or
unholy, clean or unclean; but rather of me^ts, or creatures ceremonially holy
and unholy, clean and unclean, or at leastwise of persons, meats and creatures
promiscuously, only as ceremonially clean and unclean: Fourthly, the putting
of difference here mentioned, was not any actual secluding unclean^ persons
from the Passover or Lords Supper, or suspending them from all public
Ordinances by any judicial power vested in the Priests, but only the Priests
instructing of the people what was holy and unholy, clean and unclean, as is
evident by Levit. 10. 10. That ye may put difference between holy and unholy
(things) unclean and clean (things:) But how was this to be done? Only by
instruction, as the next words manifest; And that ye may teach the children of
Israel all the Statutes which the Lord has commanded them by the hand of
Moses; ( viz. concerning the holy and unholy, unclean and clean creatures,
mentioned in Levit. 10. and Deuteronomy. 14.) compared with Ezekiel. 22. 26. Her Priests
have broken my Law, and have defiled my holy things, they have put no
difference between the holy and profane, neither have they showed the
difference between the unclean and the clean: and Ezekiel. 44. 23. And THEY
SHALL TEACH MY PEOPLE THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE HOLY AND PROPHAN^, AND CAUSE
THEM TO DISCERN BETWEEN THE UNCLEAN AND THE CLEAN: So that the Priests
putting difference between holy and unholy, clean and unclean in Lev. 10. 10.
is both by the t^nth verse, and these Texts of Ezekiel expressly interpreted to
be nothing else, but a teaching or showing the children of Israel to put a
difference and to discern between the holy and profane, unclean and clean
things prescribed by the ceremonial Law; not a judicial power or
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction to excommunicate unholy and unclean persons from
the public Ordinances, or society of the holy and clean, much less a power
to suspend them only from the Passover or Lord Supper, as is pretended by the
Objectors: This I shall further clear by Haggai ^. 11, 12, 13. the place
objected: Thus says the Lord of Hosts, Ask now the Priests concerning the
Law, saying, If one bear holy flesh in the skirt of his garment, and with his
skirt do touch bread, or pottage, or wine, or any meat, shall it be holy? and
the Priests ^nswered, No: Then said Haggai, if one that is unclean by a dead
body touch any of these, shall it be UNCLEAN? And the Priest, answered and
said, It shall be UNCLEAN: And by Levit. 20. 25, 26. Ye shall therefore PUT
DIFFERENCE between CLEAN AND UNCLEAN BEASTS, and between UNCLEAN FOWLS AND
CLEAN, etc. And ye shall be holy unto me, for I the Lord am holy: and Levit.
11. 46, 47. where after God had made a large description what flesh, Birds and
Beasts were ceremonially unclean and not to be eaten by the Israelites, and
what clean and to be ea^en by them, he concludes thus; This is the Law of
Beasts, and of Fowls, and of every living thing that moves in the waters, and
of every thing that creeps upon the earth, THAT YE MAY PUT A DIFFERENCE (not
the Priests) between the unclean and clean, and between the Beasts that may
be eaten, and the Beasts that ought not to be eaten: If then this be the
genuine meaning of these Texts, as is clear in my apprehension by paralelling
them together, then all the argument that can be thence deduced is but this
inconsequent:

The Aaronicall Priests were to teach the people to put a difference between
Beasts, Fowls, Meats that were clean and unclean, and between things holy
and unholy by the Leviticall Law.

Ergo, Presbyters and Presbyteries under the Gospel, have a judicial
Ecclesiastical authority vested in them by the will and appointment of Jesus
Christ, to suspend ignorant and scandalous persons from the Lords Supper, and
excommunicate obstinate sinners from the Church and public Ordinances.

What ill logic, sense and coherence is in this argument, I refer to the
meanest capacity to determine: Yet this is all these Scriptures yield our
Opposites for proof of excommunication or suspention, though they much insist
upon them; they might as well, or rather better argue hence, that the people
themselves, not the Priests, ought to excommunicate or suspend scandalous
persons from the Lords Supper, because the people were to put a difference
between creatures clean and unclean, and the Priests themselves were but to
teach the people to put the difference between the holy and unholy, clean and
unclean, as these Texts resolve; the rather, for that the Apostle Jude in his
Epistle verse 1, 22, writes to all Christians who are called and sanctified
(not to Ministers and Presbyteries) to have compassion of some, MAKING A
DIFFERENCE, and others to save with fear, etc.

Fifthly, admit the Priests had power to put a difference between holy and
unholy, clean and unclean persons as well as Beasts, by virtue of these
Texts, as is pretended; yet putting a differerence is no infallible proof of a
power vested in them (much less in the Ministers of the Gospel or
Presbyteries) to excommunicate unholy or unclean persons, or suspend
scandalous or ignorant ones from the Lords Supper only, since every private
Christian is to put a difference between spiritually holy and unclean persons,
and those that are morally unholy and unclean; yet it follows not thereupon
that he may judicially excomm^icate or suspend them from the Sacrament; the
Ministers and private Christians must put a differente between such as these:
First, in their affections and esteem of them; they must John 13. 34, 35. Ephesians.
1 15 c. 5. 2. 1 John 3. 11, 14. Psalm. 15. 2.
love and honor the one, but 2 Chronicles. 19 2. Psalm. 15. 4* Psalm 139 21, 22. Prove
29. 27. 2 Kings 3 13, 14.
hate and disrespect the other: Secondly, in their carriage toward them, they
must Titus 1. 13. c 2. 15. Luke 13 3, 5. Levit 19 17. Ephesians 5. 11
admonish and sharply rebuke the one, denou^cing Gods judgments against their
sins, but Isa. 41. 1, 2. Col. 3. 16. Gal 6. 1, 2.
exhort, encourage and comfort the other with Gods promises; they must Psalm.
16. 3. Psalm. 101. 6. Acts 2. 44, 44,
familiarly converse with, and lovingly embrace and delight in the company of
the one, but avoid all 1 Cor. 5. 9, 10, 11. 2 These 3. 14. 2 John 10, 11. Tit.
3. Psalm. 101. 4, 7, 8.
familiar conversation and intimacy with the other: Such a putting of
difference as this between holy and unholy we admit of, but any other then
this, is no ways warranted from these objected Texts.

I shall therefore conclude from all the Premises (till convinced by better
Scripture Authorities, Arguments, Reasons, then ever I could yet meet with in
any Foreign or Domestic Writers;) That Suspention of scandalous persons from
the Lords Supper only, who desire to receive it, without excommunicating them
from all other public Ordinances and Christian society, though it be somewhat
ancient in the Church, introduced, prescribed at first by the Canous See
Council. Ancyranum, can. 5, 6, 7, 8. Nicaenum 1. can. 11, 12, 13. Eliberinum
can. 1, 2, 3. A relatense 2. can. 11, 12. apu^ Laur. Suriam. Council. Tom 1.
of certain Councils, in special cases of Apostasy in times of persecution,
as a mere Ecclesiastical punishment of humane institution, as the Canons
themselves demonstrate (which seem very unreasonable or fictitious) and De
Rebus Ecclesiast. cap. 17.
W^llafridus Strabo intimates, who terms it, A sanctis Patribus constitutum, a
constion of the Fathers, not of Christ; (in which sense I oppugn it not, nor
as prescribed by the Parliament in a prudentiall way) yet it is no Divine
Censure or Institution; and that there is no power to inflict any such
suspention vested in Ministers, Presbyteries, or Church Officers by the will
and appointment of Jesus Christ revealed in the Scripture, as many now most
confidently aver both in Press and Pulpit, without any solid reason or
authority to justify their assertion.

Wherefore consider seriously what I have written, and the Lord give us
understanding in all things, that we may no longer disturb the peace both of
Church and State with any groundless pretended divine Censures and
Jurisdictions, which Christ never exercised, nor instituted in his Church, nor
deprive the people of those divine repasts at the Lords Table, which should be
frequently administered to them for their conversion, edification and spiritual
consolation, upon mere new crochets and grounds of conscience, never once
insisted on heretofore, till this new project of claiming an Ecclesiastical
power of suspention from the Lords Supper only, by the will and appointment of
Jesus Christ, was set on foot; but rest satisfied with the Apostles resolution
and council, with which I shall conclude, Romans 14. 16, 17, 18, 19. Let not
then your good be evil spoken of; for the Kingdom of God is not meat and
drink (I may add, nor yet Excommunion nor suspention from the Lords Supper, as
some now make it) but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost; for
he that in these things serves Christ is acceptable to God and approved of
men; let us therefore follow after the things which make for peace, and things
wherewith one may edify another; not domineer or tirannize one over another,
and the Lords Supper too.

Alensis Summa Theol. par. 4. qu. 22. mem. 1. Art. 4. Pluribus conceditur
clavis absolutionis, quam gladius excommunicationis; quia pauci sunt qui sciunt
hoc ense percutere; unde propter periculum, paucorum manibus tradi debet.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 1. line 8. dele one. p 4 l 20, for 2 read 9. l 36, for 37 r 33: p 5 l 40,
thrust ou^. p 7 l 3, for, or. p 11 l 31, Churches. p 12 l 44, unfit. p 13 l 44,
dele a. p 23 l 27, Charters. p 25 l 42, the, to: p 27 l 33, conferunt. l 44,
all, many.

In the Margin. p 5 l 2, 23 r 29. l 10, 179, r 278.


