NEVVES FROM IPSWICH: Discovering certain late detestable practices of some
dominiering Lordly Prelates, to undermine the established Doctrine and
Discipline of our Church, extirpate all Oxthodox sincere Preachers and
preaching of Gods Word, usher in Popery, Superstition and Idolatry.

VVoe be unto the Pastors that destroy and scatter the sheep of my Flock,
says the Lord.

Ierem. 23. 1. Only Canonical prayers no afternoon sermons

Alter Cringing Priest.

Church wardens for Articles.



First printed at Ipswich, and now reprinted for T. Bates. 1641.

News from Ipswich.
CHristian Reader, this is the deplorable news of our present age, that our
Presses, formerly open only to Truth and Piety, are closed up against them
both of late, and patent for the most part, to naught but error, superstition,
and profaneness; witness many profane, erroneous, impious books, printed
within these 3. years by authority (point blanke against the established
doctrine of the Church of England and his Majesty's p^om declarations) in
defense of Arminianisme, and Popish ceremonies; and which is yet more impious
and detestabl^, against the very morality of the Sabbath and 4. Commandment:
the divine institution, title and entire religious sanctification of the Lords
day Sabbath, and the necessity of frequent preaching (exceedingly pressed in
our Homil^es and book of Ordination) which some of our unpreaching, dominiering
secular Prel^ts (our of their A^ch-piety toward God, and Archcharity to the
peoples souls which they seek to eradicate) now so far derest, that they not
only give over preaching themselves, as no part of their function; and
suppress most wickedly Lectures in diverse countries: but have likewise lately
shut up the mouths of sundry of our most godly, powerful, painful Preachers
(who have won more souls to God in a year, then all the Lord Bishops in
England or the whole world have done in diverse ages) out of mere malice to
religion, and the peoples salvation, contrary to the very laws of God and the
Realm; strictly prohibited, under pain of suspension, in sundry Diocesses,
all afternoon Sermons on the Lords own day, that so the profane vulgar might
have more time to dance, play, revell, drink, and profane Gods Sabbaths, even
in these days of plague and pestilence, to draw down more plague, and
judgments on us for that sin of Sabbath-breaking, when as not only the Synod
of Dort, but sundry Popish Synods and Bishops have been so religious, as to
prefer the two Sermons every Lords day at least in every Parish Church, to
keep the people from such prophanations of this sacred day. Alas! what could
Beelzebub the Prince of Devils, had he been an Archbishop or Lordly Prelate here
in England (as there were many such Bishops in Bernards age, and most sure
there are too many now) have done more against the strict entire sanctification
of the Christian Sabbath day, to abuse the Lords day, and to advance Popish
innovations on it; or against the frequent powerful Preachers, and preaching
of Gods word, and salvation of the peoples souls, then some Luciferian Lord
Bishops have lately done? whose impiety in this kind transcends all prefidents
whatsoever in former ages. And yet these profane Atheistical persecuters of
all holiness, piety, sincerity, godly Ministers, and preaching of Gods word
(yea in these pestilentiall times, as means to spread the plague, though the
Scripture and all former ages have prescribed fasting, preaching and praying,
as the chief antidotes and cure against it) will needs be Lord Bishops Iure
divine, by the holy Ghosts own institution (who never yet instituted any
unpreaching, rare preaching Prelates, or persecuters and suppressors of
preaching) and shame not to style themselves the Godly holy Fathers of our
Church, and pillars of our faith, when as their fruits and actions manifest
them to be naught else but very Stepfathers and Caterpillars, the very pests
and plagues of both. Take one fresh instance for an example: these desperate
Archagents for the Devil and Pope of Rome, and Master underminers of our
Religion, as they were the only instruments of delaying the present general
Fast in the beginning of the pestilence, when it was most acceptable and
requisite: so, to show their inveterate malice against preaching (the thing
that the Devil wrastleth most against, all whose study has been to decay the
office of preaching, which should not be diminished) they (contrary to his
Majesty's pious intention, who has so often protested against all innovations)
have cunningly caused all Sermons (the very life and soul of a Fast, as being
the only means to humble men for their sins, and bring them to repentance) to
be prohibited on the Fast day, both in London and the Suburbs, and in all other
infected places, during the time of the infection in them; in Parishes not
infected, (as if preaching only of all Gods ordinances were pestilentiall, and
that on the Fast day, not on others) contrary to the presidents of all former
ages, and the orders for the general fasts in the two last great plagues,
which prescribed two Sermons of one hour long apeece, forenoon and afternoon
every fast day, and that as well in Parishes infected, as others: even in the
Summer season, when the infection was more contagious and raging then now. By
which device they have not only made this fast distasteful to all sorts of men
in infected places, who have little heart unto it, robbed the poor of much
charitable relief, and deprived the people of the spiritual food and physic
of their souls, when they need and desire it most, to their intolerable grief
and discontent, but quite suppressed all settled Wednesday Lectures in London
and other infected towns, as long as the infection shall continue in any one
Parish, though it should last these 7. years (the thing they principally aimed
at:) forced many Ministers and people to fly out of infected places into the
Country, to keep their Fasts where there is preaching; brought in a famine of
Gods word, the greatest plague of all others, to the increasing and further
spreading of the present pestilence, and drawing down of Gods wrath upon us to
the uttermost, by inhibiting Ministers in the time of greatest need, to preach
unto the people, that they may be saved. O heavens! stand amazed at this
unparalleled practice of impious Popish Prelates. But is this all? No verily:
for whereas his Majesty commanded, That the book of common prayer for the fast
formerly set forth by his authority upon the like occasion, should be
reprinted; these Romish Inquisitors have miserably gelded it, after it was new
printed, in sundry particulars. First, they have purged out the prayer for
seasonable weather, one cause of the shipwracks and tempestuous unseasonable
weather since its publication. Secondly, they have dashed the Lady Elizabeth
and her children, in the old Collect, quite out of the new; as they have
expunged both them, with our gracious King, Queen, and their children, out of
the catalogue of Gods elect by blotting out this clause, (who art the father of
thine Elect, and of their Seed) out of the Collect for them in this and all new
Common prayer books, as if they were all reprobates, and none of the number of
Gods elect, either to a temporal or an eternal Crown. O intolerable
impiety, affront, and horrid treason! Thirdly, they have left out this
Collect: It had been best for us, etc. in the new book (though the most
effectual prayer of all) because it magnifies continual, often preaching of
Gods word, and the Scriptures, and c^lls our powerful Preachers, Gods
serv^nts. A sign^ these Prelates have conspired together like so many execrable
Traitors, to extirpate our frequent powerful Preachers, and continual
preaching of Gods word (as they have done in many places of late) though
prescribed by God himself and our Homilies. Fourthly, they have dashed this
remarkable clause out of the first Collect: Thou have delivered us from
superstition and idolatry (two grand causes both of many former, and our
present plagues no doubt) wherein we were utterly drowned, and have brought us
unto the most clear and comfortable light of thy blessed word by which we are
taught how to serve and honor thee, and how to live orderly with our
neighbors in truth and verity: the rest of the Collect remaining as before.
Now what can be the cause of this strange purgation, but a resolved professed
conspiracy of these Romish Prelates, even now again utterly to drown us in
Popish superstition and idolatry (which have now drowned us in Gods judgments,
by their stupendous late increase among us) and to remove us out of the most
clear and comfortable light of Gods Word, by the which we are taught how to
serve and honor him (the true cause why they now suppress Lectures,
Preaching, and suspend our powerfullest Preachers every where) that so we may
walk on in Romish, hellish darkness, serving and honoring the Pope and
Devil in stead of God, and live in all disorder without truth of verity.
Fifthly, in the sixth order for the fast, they have pared away this passage: To
avoid the inconvenience that may grow by by the abuse of fasting; Some
esteeming it a meritorious work, others a good work, and of it self
acceptable to God, without due regard of the end, Only to gratify the
Papists, whose doctrine is this, and to place some merit in this present fast:
adding this clause to it; in places where Sermons are allowed by the
Proclamation; on purpose to put down Wednesday Lectures, and preaching in
London, and other places where any Parish is infected. If these Prelates be
thus desperately wicked and Popish, as to take advantage of Gods judgments to
suppress the preaching and Preachers of his word when it is most necessary and
useful, and to countenance, justify, and set up Popery, superstition,
idolatry, error and disorder (the chief causea of our plagues) even in these
days of pestilence, and that is the very Fast-book to abuse and mock God to
his face, to dishonor his Majesty, and grieve his peoples souls; how
transcendently impious and Popish will they prove, when God shall stay this
plague, if they be not deservedly punished for these their notorious impieties?
And is it not high time then for his Majesty to punish such Archtraytors to our
Faith, Church, Religion, and such true-bred sons to Roman Antichrist (from
whom Dr. Pocklington boasts, they are lineally descended) and to execute
judgment on them for these strange purgations, and other Romish innovations,
whereat the whole kingdom cries shame, which breed a general fear of a
sudden alteration of our Religion? Certainly, till his Majesty shall see these
purgations rectified, superstition and idolatry removed, Gods Sabbaths duly
sanctified, the suppressed Preachers and preaching of Gods word restored, and
purge out some of the Romish Prelates and Inquisitors, we can never hope to
abate any of Gods plagues, or draw down any of his blessings on us by such a
Fast and Fastbook as this, but augment his plagues and judgments more and more,
which have strangely increased since this fast begun, contrary to all humane
reason and probability, whereas it much decreased before; the total number
dying of the plague the week before the Fast. being but 458. and 58. Parishes
infected, and the very first week of the fast 838. (treble the number the two
last greatest plagues) and 67. Parishes infected, in Cambridge, Norwich,
Hampton, Bath, and other eminent places clear before, being likewise visited
since this Fast begun, a clear evidence that God is much offended with these
purgations, and the restraint of preaching on the Fast day; against which some
Prelates are so mad, that they have silenced and persecuted diverse Ministers
since the Fast proclaimed, there being now so many suspended in our Norwich
Diocese, only for not yielding to Popish innovation, that in sundry Churches
they have neither prayers, preaching, nor fasting which has brought the plague
among them, and made the people at their wits ends, many Ministers and people
there having left the Kingdom, and thousands more being ready to depart the
Land, there being never such a persecution and havoc made among Gods Ministers
since Q. Mary's days, as a proud insolent Prelate has there lately made,
against all Laws of God and man, to the astonishment of the whole Realm. What
then can we expect but plagues upon plagues, till such desperate persecuters be
cut off, and Gods Word and Ministers restored to their former liberty by our
most gracious Sovaraigne? Persecution of Gods Ministers and People, being one
chief cause of plagues. Wherefore, O England, England, if ever thou will be
free from pests and judgments, take notice of these thy Antichristian Prelates
desperate practices, innovations, and Popish designs, to bewail, oppose,
redress them with all thy force and power. O all ye English Nobles,
Courtiers, and others, who have any love or spark of religion, piety, zeal,
any tenderness of his Majesty's honor, or care for the peoples, the Church,
or Kingdoms safety, yet remaining within your generous breasts, put to your
helping hands and prayers to rescue our Religion and faithful Ministers now
suspended, from the jaws of these devouring Wolves, and tyrannizing Lordly
Prelates, who make havocke of them both. O our most pious King Charles, as thou
have in two several Declarations, protested before God, to all thy loving
Subjects, that thou will never give way to the licensing or authorizing of any
thing whereby any innovation in the least degree, may creep into our Church;
nor never connive at any Backsliding to Popery: And that is my hearts desire to
be found worthy of that Title which thou esteemest the most glorious in all thy
Crown, Defender of the Faith. So now behold these desperate innovations,
purgations, and Romish practices of thy Prelates, in open affront of these thy
Declarations; and now or never show thy self (as we all hope, believe and
pray thou will) a Prince more worthy of this glorious Title, then any of thy
Royal progenitors, by rooting all Popery, Superstition, Idolatry, Errors,
Innovations, out of this Church and Kingdom, by restoring the preaching, the
Preachers of Gods Word, and purity of his Worship, and taking vengeance on
these perfidious Prelates, who have thus gelded thy Fast-booke (and intend to
make an Index Expurgatorius upon all other ancient English Writers ere they be
reprinted, a thing considerable) thus openly abused thy only Sister; and her
Children now present with Thee, oppressed and grieved thy faithful subjects,
dishonored thy God, betrayed thy Religion, increased the plague among thy
people; and as much as in them lies, robbed thee both of thy Gods and peoples
loves, and pulled thy Crown off thy Royal head, to set it on their own
ambitious pares, by exercising all Ecclesiastical power; yea, Papal
jurisdiction over thy subjects in their own names and rights alone: and by
trampling all thy laws and subjects liberties like Cob-webs, thy subjects like
Dogs and dirt under their tyrannical feet. If thou thus execute judgment on
them, and ease thy people from their intolerable tyranny, no doubt, this plague
shall be ceased, and this Fast be pleasing to the Lord; else he will not
accept it, but proceed to plague more and more. O blessed Sovereign, that thou
did but hear the several cries and outcries of thy people against these
persecuting Prelates in many places; especially in our Norwich Diocese, where
little Regulus has played such Rex, that he has suspended above threescore
of our sincerest, painfullest, comfortablest Ministers, both from their Office
and Benefice, so as many of our Churches (as the like was never since King
John's days) are quite shut up, and Lord have mercy upon us, may be written on
their doors. The people cry for the bread of their souls, and their Ministers
are prohibited to give it them. This not only wounds, but breaks their
hearts, and makes them amazed. O therefore! Gracious Sovereign, help now, and
hear the petitions, cries and tears of thy poor people, and punish these
Popelings for these and other innumerable oppressions, extortions, innovations
and harms, who suspend, imprison, and ruin others for mere toys and
trifles; yea, for defending your Royal Prerogative against their Papal
usurpations.

This is all the news I shall now impart in this Coranto; the next week God
willing, you shall hear of Mr. Dade his excommunicating of Ferdinando Adams, a
Church warden in our Town, for not blotting out of this sentence of Scripture
written on Mr. Wards Church wall over his Court; It is written, My house shall
be called an house of Prayer, but ye have made it a den of Thieves: which
excommunication is recorded in Star Chamber, of our Bishops commanding. Woe is
me if I preach not the Gospel; out of Mr. Scots Church: and of the strange
proceedings at Colchester against Mr. Samuel Burrowes for inditing Necoman for
railing in the Communion Table Altarwise, and causing the Communicants to come
up to the Rail to receive, in a new unaccustomed manner, contrary to the
Statute of 1. Eliz. c. 2. and his Majesty's Declarations this last Michaelmas
Sessions: which indictment the Grand-Iury has found, but his Majesty yet can
get no judgment. In the mean time I shall conclude my News with the words of
Patrick Adamson, Archbishop of St. Andrews, in his public Recantation in the
Synod of Fyff, April 8. 1591. That the office of a Diocesan Bishop has no
authority at all to support it in the Word of God: That it is only founded on
the politic device of men: That the Primacie of the Pope, or Antichrist
sprung from it: That it is worthily condemned: And that it has been for five
hundred year and more, the chief original and instrument of the suppressing
the preaching of Gods Word in all Kingdoms, as all Ecclesiastical Historians
testify. I therefore shall close up all with the Collect on St. Matthias day;
A mighty God, which in the place of the traitor, Bishop Judas, did choose thy
faithful servant Matthias, to be of the number of the twelve Apostles, grant
that thy Church being always preserved from false Apostles, may be ordered
and guided by faithful and true Pastors, through Jesus Christ our Lord. And
with the Collect on St. Peter's day; Almighty God, which by thy Son Jesus
Christ, has given to thy Apostle S. Peter many excellent gifts, and command
him earnestly to feed thy flock; make (we beseech thee) all Bishops and Pastors
diligently to preach thy holy Word, and the people obediently to follow the
same, that they may receive the Crown of everlasting glory, through Jesus
Christ our Lord and Savior.

AMEN.
From Ipswich, November 12. 1636. Thine in the Lord, Matthew White.


