Mr. Pryns Letter AND PROPOSALS, TO Our Gracious Lord and Sovereign King
Charles: AND His Majesty's Gracious Resolves to all His Loving Subjects, of
what Degree or Quality soever.

Published for general Satisfaction.

London, Printed for Nathaniel Cotes, 1660.

Mr. Pryns Letter TO His Sacred Majesty King Charles. AND His Majestes Gracious
Declaration thereupon.
FOrasmuch, as there has been many Objections, Excuses, and Pretenses,
purposely made to justify, extenuate or excuse the drinking of Healths,
notwithstanding the odious, sinful and unheal^hful drinking thereof; It was
judged meet to publish Mr. Pryns Dedicatory Letter to his Majesty (annexed to
his Compendious Discourse, called, Healths-Sickness) prefixed in these words;

To the most High and Mighty Prince, Charles By the Grace of God, King of Great
Britain, etc.
Most Gracious and Dread Sovereign,
THe Reasons which swayed and imboldened me to Dedicate so small a Pamphlet
unto so great a Patron as your Majesty were chiefly these.

First, Because your Highness in regard of these infinite and many Healths,
which are daily caroused in your Royal Name throughout the Kingdom, and
elsewhere, are more interested in the Theme and Subject of this compendious
Discourse, then any other that I know.

In that your sacred Health, your Name, your Crown, and Dignity, by means of
Healths, are made the daily Table-complement, Grace, and first salute of every
jovial Courtier, and chief Allegiance of every petty Corporation, Court or
Country-Officer; the phrase and valor of every deboist and roaring Soldier;
the Livery and Table, Buttery and Cellar-talk of every good-fellow-serving-man;
the first ingredient of every Drunkards cup; the first pot-service of every
great or mean man's table; the only Reign or Poll-axe to assault, to force, and
overcome the Sobriety and temperance of all true-hearted, real, practical, and
blessed Christians, who make a conscience of excess (because the Scripture
does condemn it;) the chief alective Bait, or Stratagem, to draw men unto
Drunkenness; and the only Protection and Patronage to justify and bear out
the intemperance and riot of all such who deemed Excess and Drunkenness, a
Virtue, and no Sin at all (at least but venial) if your Majesty's Health
occasion it. And is not this a great affront, indignity, and Dishonor to your
Majesty, that your Sacred health, your name, and Royal Crown should be thus
profaned and banded up and down in every Drunkards mouth, in every Cup and
Can; in every Tavern, Taphouse, Hall or Cellar; that every degenerous,
infamous, and stigmatical Belialist, every deboist and brutish Pot-companion,
should so far debase and undervalue them; as to prostitute them to their
swinish sins and lusts.

Secondly, as Healths do thus dishonor, so they do likewise prejudice and
wrong your Sacred Majesty in two respects.

First, In merging and quenching the fervency of prayers, turning them into
profane, hellish Healths; the only means to draw down Curses and Diseases,
yea Woes and fatal Judgments on King and Kingdom deeming it a greater breach of
Allegiance not to pledge your Majesty's Health then not to pray for it.

Secondly, By interessing and engaging your Majesty in the excess and
Drunkenness of many others; Your Name being made a party to it; Four Health
an occasion, Apology or justification of it.

Thirdly, Because none is so able in respect of ^ and Power, none more obliged
in regard of Duty, To purge these Hydropical noxious and superfluous humors,
and unhealthy Healths, out of the Body of our State and Kingdom, now so
distempered and overcharged by them.

Your Majesty's loyal and humble Subject, WILL: PRYNNE.


At the beginning of his incomparable Book, He urges many solid Arguments
against drinking of Healths; proving it to be a vain, Carnal, Heathenish, and
Foolish Custom; and that which is against the Rules of Charity and Justice; so
that it must needs be sinful and utterly unlawful, because it is a violation of
the Law of God, of Man, and Nature, etc.

And whereas his Gracious Majesty having set forth a Proclamation, prohibiting
the spending of time in Taverns, Tipling-houses, and Debauches, further Care is
now taken to prevent all such Riotings, and infamous Actions.

And whereas several Gentlemen at such times, have entered upon private
quarrels, by Duel and single Combat, upon slight, and, which ought not to be,
upon any provocation, His Majesty out of his pious care to prevent unchristian
and rash effusion of Blood, has set forth a Proclamation, strictly charging
and commanding all loving Subjects of what quality soever, That neither they,
by themselves, nor by others either by Message, Word, Writing or other ways or
means, challenge or cause to be challenged any person or persons to fight in
Combat or single Duel; nor carry, accept or conceal any such challenge or
appointment, nor actually fight such Duel with any of his Majesty's Subjects,
or others; or as a Second, or otherwise, accompany or become Assistant therein.
And His Majesty has further declared, That every person or persons who shall
offend contrary to his Majesty's express Command, shall nor only incur his
highest displeasure, but thereby become incapable of holding or entertaining
either Office or Employment in his Majesty's Service, and never afterward be
permitted to come into his Court or Presence. And further, He or They to suffer
such other pains and punishments, as the Law shall inflict, upon Offenses of
that horrid Nature.

FINIS.

