A PLAIN, SHORT, AND Probable Expedient, To settle the present DISTRACTIONS OF
BOTH KINGDOMS.

Printed in the Year. 1647.

A Plain, Short, and Probable Expedient, to settle the present Distractions of
both KINGDOMS.
THE Kings former and late Refusals to sign the PROPOSITIONS tendered him by
the Parliaments and Commissioners of England and Scotland, for the
Establishment of a lasting Peace in both, has well nigh put them to a loss,
how to proceed farther, and what course next to resolve on, for the future
settlement and security of both Realms, in this their Distracted Condition.
D^^^rs men (according to their different Principles and Interests) have
proposed Various ways. Some a public impeachment in Parliament to be
presently drawn up against the King, to the hazard of his Crown and Life (as
in the cases of Kingd Edward; and Richard the second of England; and of (...)
the first, (...) and other Kings of Scotland) to which the Sectaries and
Agitators most incline. Others, a present change of the Monarchical Government
into a Democraticall, (which the Anabaptists endeavor) or into an
Aristocraticall, (which the Independents seem to drive at. The Presbyterians
and Erastians, apprehending these former proposals very dangerous, and
inconsistent both with their Principles and Solemn Covenant, meditate some
milder and safer courses* but what particularly to fix on, they are yet
altogether unresolved.

These varieties of Opinions multiplying our Divisions have occasioned the
Proposal of this short and clear Expedient, (not hitherto thought on) humbly
submitted (as a probationer) to the test of more exquisite Judgments, as the
most advantageous, honorable and secure for both, Kingdoms to fasten upon,
being warranted by diverse Presidents of like nature in both Realms, and most
consonant to the Solemn League and Covenant, by which they are mutually engaged
and uni^^^ each to other.

It is evident by sundry Presidents in Histories and Records that the
Parliaments of England and S^ (as well as of most other Kingdoms) have during
the Minority, absence, sickness, frenzy, dotage, or other ^^^^rall,
accidental, or criminal disabilities of their Kings to discharge their Royal
Office, and Duty usually constituted a Viceroy, Regent, Protector, or Custos
Regni (being commonly a P^^^e of greatest Wisdom, Power, and Honor, and of
Royal extraction) to guard both their Persons and Realms, and execute all
Regal Acts belonging to the King himself; but more particularly, to summon and
hold Parliaments, and to give the Royal Assent to Laws and Statutes, and issue
out all Commissions under the great Seal, in the Kings Name and stead: The
Reigns of King Richard the 1. and ^ Henry 3. 5. and 6. Ed. 3, 4, 6. of England;
and of King ^erleg, Ruthe^, T^^r^, Gill^, Corbred* Ethodius (first and second)
Kenneth the third and his Law, John Bayvil James the 1. 3. and 6. Queen Mary
and others of Scotland, and one Scripture president of King Vzziah during his
Leprosy, 2 Kings 1^. 5. 2 Chro. 25. 21. will furnish us with variety of
Examples of this kind; in which France it self has abounded, and affords a
present instance in this infant King. If then the Parliaments of both Kingdoms
shall think meet to create a Viceroy, Regent, Protector or Custo^ Regni in each
Realm forthwith (as they have frequent- done in former times) to execute all
Regal Acts, summon and hold Parliaments, and give the Royal Assent to all such
Bills and Statutes as shall be necessary for the present settlement of both
Kingdoms Peace, according to their respective Propositions tendered to his
Majesty; end establish by Act of Parliament in both Realms this ensuing Oath,
or the like for the King and all his Successors Solemnly to take before their
admission to the Royal Government; extracted out of the Coronation Oaths of the
Kings of England, Scotland, Aragon, Navarre, Bohemia, Hungary, Poland, Sweden
and* Denmark (conceived a better security for both Kingdoms then any hitherto
propounded.)

We C. R. in the name and presence of the most high God; do solemnly swear to
all our Liege people of England and Scotland, and the Dominions thereunto
belonging; that we will all the days of our life, inviolably maintain, keep and
preserve all just Laws, Customs, Rights, Franchises and Liberties heretofore
granted to them, or any of them, by our Royal Predecessors or Our self,
together with the respective Rights and Privileges of the Parliaments of both
Kingdoms; the true Reformed Religion and Church Government now established in
them. That we will do the best of our skill and power, endeavor entirely to
preserve Peace and Amity between all our Realms and People, and cause equal
Justice to be administered to them in Mercy and Truth, without Partiality,
affection, hatred or delay.

That we will neither proclaim, nor make any open War, Peace or Truce, nor raise
any Forces in, nor invite, nor bring any Forraigns power into any our Realms
and Dominions; nor impose, nor levy any Tax, Tallage, Subsidy, Contribution or
Benevolence, within our said respective Kingdoms and Dominions; nor embase, nor
enhance the current coin thereof; nor alianate any Honors, Manners, Castles,
Forts, Folds, Rents, Revenues, Jewels, Ships, or Ordinance belonging to our
respective Crowns; Nor dispose of ourself, or of our heir apparent to the
Crown in marriage; Nor dispose of any the great Offices of State or Judicature
in our respective Realms; Nor creat any New Peers therein, but by common
consent of our respective Parliaments of both Kingdoms.

And that we will likewise give our Royal assent from time to time, for the
altering or repealing of all such public Laws and Statutes as shall be held
prejudicial, and the passing of all such New Laws and Statutes as shall be
judged necessary and beneficial for our people, and presented to us as such, by
the Parliaments of our respective Realms.

And if we shall at any time (which God defend) wilfully violate all or any the
premised Particulars, to the griev^^ces or oppression of our people, and shall
not upon due information t^ereof, given us by our respective Parliaments,
Nobles, Counselors, Officers, or Commons of both Kingdoms, duly reform the
same, to their general satisfaction; We do here freely and voluntarily profess
before God and all the World, tha^ then, and from thenceforth, we do and shall
hold all our people totally discharged from all bonds of duty, and Oaths of
Alegiance made unto us, til such satisfaction be given them. And that in such
cases, it may and shall be lawful for then, and any of them, if they think meet,
and necessary freely to assemble together, and to unite their Counsels, Purses
and Forces, and to crave and bring in foreign Forces from their confederate
Princes and Nations, to withstand and redress, all wilful violations of our
said Oath, and to suppress all such persons and forces, as shall be ayding or
assisting to us therein, in maintenance of their just Rights, Laws, and
Liberties, and the public safety (to which they were obliged by the Laws of
God, Nature, Nations, and of this Realm) without incurring the guilt of
Treason* Insurrection, Sedi^ion, Rebellion, or any crime, Forfaiture or penalty
for the same. And that all and every person or persons, who shall be wittingly
ayding or assisting to us against our Oath and people in such cases: shall be
declared, and judged, and proceeded against, to all intents and purposes, as
Traitors, and public enemies to us and our respective Kingdoms.

All this we do cordially and sincerely swear and protest without any
Equivocation or mental Reservation, and that we will neither directly nor
indirectly seek to be absolved from this Our Solemn Oath. So God us help.

The speedy establishing of such Laws, and this Solemn Oath by the Parliaments
of both Kingdoms in manner aforesaid, and securing the Kings person in a safe
and honorable way, til he shall really accord there^y, and fully comply with the
desires both of his Parliaments and Kingdoms, is humbly conceived the safest,
best and speediest Means (by Gods effectual concurrence) to produce a firm
happy Peace and Settlement in, and cordial Union between both Kingdoms, without
any breach of Covenant, or danger to his Majesty's person; the only end of
publishing this Expedient; which deserves consideration til a better be
propounded.

FINIS.

