SIX SERIOVS QVAERIES Concerning the KINGS Trial by the New High Court of
Justice.
1. WHether a King of three distinct Kingdoms, can be condemned and executed
by one kingdom alone, without the concurrent consent, or against the judgment
of the other two?

2. Whether, if the King be indicted or arraigned of high treason, he ought not
to be tried by his Peers? and whether those who are now nominated to try him,
or any others within the kingdom, be his Peers?

3. Whether if the King be triable in any Court, for any Treason against the
kingdom, he ought not to be tried only in full Parliament, in the most
solemn and public manner, before all the Members of both Houses, in as
honorable a way, as Strafford was, in the beginning of this Parliament? And
whether he ought not to have liberty and time to make his full defense, and the
benefit of his learned Council, in all matters of Law, that may arise, in or
about his trial, or in demurring to the Jurisdiction of this illegal new
Court, as Strafford and Canturbury had?

4. Whether one eight part only of the Members of the Commons house, meeting
in the House, under the Armies force, when all the rest of the Members are
forcibly restrained, secluded, or scared away by the Armies violence, and
representing not above one eight part of the Counties, Cities, and Boroughs of
the Kingdom, without the consent and against the Vote of the majority of the
Members, excluded and chased away, and of the House of Peers, by any pretext
of Authority, Law, or Justice, can erect a New great Court of Justice to try
the King, in whom all the rest of the Members, Peers and kingdom (being far
the Major part) have a greater interest then they? Whether such an high Court
can be erected without an Act of Parliament, or at least an Ordinance of both
Houses, and a Commission under the Great Seal of England? And if not, whether
this can be properly called a Court of Justice? and whether it be superior or
inferior to those who erected it? who either cannot or dare not try and
condemn the King in the Commons house; though they now style it The Supreme
authority of the kingdom; And whether all who shall sit as Judges, or act as
Officers in it, toward the deposing or taking away the Kings life, be not
really guilty of high Treason, and all those who were aiding or assenting to
the erection thereof in such an irregular manner, by the Law, and statutes of
this Realm?

5. Whether those who are professed Enemies to the King, and by their
Remonstrances, Speeches and actions, profess they desire his blood and seek
his life, can either in Law or Conscience be reputed competent Judges to try
him for his life? It being a just exception to any Iury-man, who is to try the
basest or poorest felon, and a legal challenge for which he must be withdrawn;
that he is a professed enemy and prosecutor who seeks his life, and therefore
no lawful nor indefferent trier of him for it.

6. Whether the trial and taking away of the Kings life by such an illegal
and arbitrary high Court of Justice, as this, will not prove a most dangerous
inlet, to the absolutest tyranny and bloodiest butchery ever yet heard off or
practiced in this, or any other Nation? and a ready way to teach us, how to
chop of one another heads; till we are all destroyed? For if they may take
away the Kings head in it without, and against all rules of Law: then by the
same or stronger reason, they may in like manner chop off the heads of any
Nobleman, Peer, Member, Gentleman, or inferior Subject for any imaginary
treason or offense, and confiscate their estates, there being no assurance they
will stop at the Kings; And if those who are confessed to be the Maiority of
the Commons house, and therefore excluded, or the Prince of Wales next Heir to
the Crown, or the Malignant Party, or any other faction whatsoever which may
arise, The An^^^^ of the General Council of Officers, touching the secured
and secluded Members Jan. 3. 1648.
should at any time hereafter get the upper hand by the peoples general
adhearing to them, or any divisions of the Army, or by any means Gods
providence should administer (who has thousands of ways to pull down the
proudest Tyrants, and dissipate the strongest Armies in a moment, as he did
Shenacharibs, the Midianites, the Moabites and Ammonites, with sundry others
recorded in sacred writ, and profane stories, and the Scotch Army but few
months since) they may by like Authority and president erect the like new
Court, to cut off the heads of all the Members now sitting, and of the present
General Council of the Army, and all the Commissioners acting in this new
Court, and so fall a murdering and butchering one another, till we were all
destroyed one by another, and made a spectacle of most unnatural Tyranny and
cruelty to the whole World, Angels, and men, and a prey to our commmon Enemies.
Upon which consideration, let every man now seriously lay his hand upon his
own breast, and sadly consider, what the bloody tragical issue of this new
Phaleris Bull, may prove to him or his? and whether every Free-bornne
Englishman (especial of Noblest birth and amplest estate,) be not deeply
obleiged in point of prudence and conscience to use his utmost endeavor with
hazard of life and estate, to prevent the Erection of such an exorbitant and
illegal Authority, in the very rise and foundation, ere it be overlate; and
not patiently suffer a rash inconsiderate number of Hotspurs (of mean
condition and broken desperate Fortunes for the most part,) out of private
malice, fear or designs to secure and enrich them selves by the ruins of
others of better fortunes and quallity; to set up such a new Shambles to
Butcher and Quarter the King, Nobles, Parliament Men, Gentlemen, and persons of
all conditions, as was never heard of among Pagans or Christians, from the
Creation to this present, and will no way suite with our English soil, already
overmuch watered with English blood; and so deeply engaged against all
Arbitrary and Tyrannical Usurpations and proceedings (especially capital) in
any hands whatsoever, which have cost us so much blood and Treasure, to oppose
and fight against for seven years last past.

FINIS.

