THE Long Parliament TWICE DEFUNCT: OR, AN ANSWER TO A SEDITIOUS PAMPHLET,
ENTITLED, The Long Parliament Revived. WHEREIN The Authors undeniable
Arguments are Denied, Examined, Confuted: AND The Authority of this present
Parliament Asserted, Vindicated. By a Zealous yet moderate oppugner of the
Enemies of his Prince and Country

Christianae perfectionis est, pacificum esse etiam cum Pacis inimicis, Spe
correctionis, non consensu Malignitatis: Vt si nec Exemplum nec cohortationum
Discretionem sequantur; causas tamen non habeant, quibus odisse nos debeant.
Aug.

London, Printed for Henry Brom at the Gun in Ivy-lane, 1660.

To the Reader.
It Was not an Ambition to speak in Print, nor to lay lime-twigs for any other
advantage, which encouraged my Pen to this undertaking: These are toys to
delude those who understand little of the World, and less of their own Merits.
Would thou know the Occasion? It Was this. About a week since, I had the
happiness to visit some of my Learned and judicious friends. Their discourse
was a while various, till it was fixed on The Long Parliament Revived. And
therein (having no Learning in the Common Laws) their judgments were
fluctuating and uncertain But the Novelty of the question and the confidence of
the Author, had inclined them, though not to an Assent, yet to a favorable
Censure of his Opinion. A stranger among them would needs prove it to be true,
and produced only that it was the sense of the City for his evidence. At length
they demanded my judgment. I discoursed the question at large, answered their
objections, refuted their Arguments, and in the end left them well satisfied
that it was but a Parradox. One of them (whose commands are to Me more
obligeing then the Acts of a Posthumous Parliament) enjoined me to commit my
thoughts to paper, and has since condemned them to the Press. Whether he were
in this my friend or my enemy, be thou the judge. I have been forced in this
Argument to make most use of reason, deduced either from its first principles,
or the common notions of our Law. For the question is a transendent and in vain
it were to look presidents either in our Law Books or Histories. Several
Arguments are used, but those upon the exposition of the Act it self 17. Car. I
conceive to be of themselves a full Answer to the Authors principle objection.
This question might have been the triumph of a more able Pen: But that the
Eagles do not quarrey upon flies. And if some one of the Sages of the Law had
undertook this task; the Author might have pleaded, Qui bonam tuetur causam,
dum victus est, non vincitur, That he was conquered by the man, not by the
truth. But now against any such suggestion, the undertaking of the question by
one of a less Name, is a sufficient Counterplea. I shall willingly abide the
sentence of the judicious. But to censure before thou understandest, is to
condemn a man unheard. If I have brought any Light to the Question or benefit
to my Country by this small Labor; my desires herein are in their Haven. As
for thy favor I shall neither Flatter it, nor Refuse it. Farewell.

Anno 17. Caroli Regis.
An Act to prevent inconveniences which may happen by the untimely adjourning,
proroguing, or dissolving of this present Parliament.
WHereas great Sums of money must of necessity be speedily advanced and
provided for relief of his Majesty's Army and people in the Northern parts of
this Realm, and for preventing the imminent danger this Kingdom is in, and for
supply of other his Majesty's present and urgent occasions, which cannot be so
timely effected, as is requisite without Credit for raising the said moneys:
Which Credit cannot be obtained until such obstacles be first removed, as are
occasioned by fears, jealosies, and apprehensions of diverse his Majesty's*
Loyal Subjects, that this present Parliament may be adjourned, prorogued, or
dissolved, before Justice shall be duly executed upon Delinquents* public
grievances redressed; a firm Peace between the two Nations of England and
Scotland concluded, and before sufficient provision be made for the repayment
of the said moneys so to be raised. All which the Commons in this present
Parliament assembled having duly considered, do therefore humbly beseech your
most excellent Majesty that it may be declared, and Enacted.

And be it Declared and Enacted by the King our Sovereign Lord, with the assent
of the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the
Authority of the same, that this present Parliament now assembled shall not be
dissolved unless it be by Act of Parliament to be passed for that purpose. Nor
shall be at any time or times, during the continuance thereof, prorogued, or
adjourned, unless it be by Act of Parliament to be likewise passed for that
purpose. And that the House of Peers shall not at any time, or times, during
this present Parliament, be adjourned, unless it be by themselves, or by their
own Order: And in like manner, that the House of Commons shall not at any time,
or times, during this present Parliament, be adjourned, unless it be by
themselves, or by their own Order. And that all, and every thing, and things,
whatsoever done, or to be done, for the adjournment, proroguing, or dissolving
of this present Parliament, contrary to this Act, shall be utterly void, and of
none effect.

THE LONG-PARLIAMENT TWICE DEFUNCT, Or, An ANSWER To a Seditious Pamphlet,
called The LONG-PARLIAMENT Revived.
THE Contrivers of evil Designs, are not more sollicitous to accomplish their
mischievous Ends, then they are Crafty to palliate and mask the course of their
undue proceedings. For deformity and an ill-favored aspect, is entayl'd upon
wicked and unhandsome Actions, and the soul of Man has retained so much of its
original Righteousness and primitive Light, that it starts, and feels the
effects of Antipathy upon the first discovery of a foul and vicious Object,
when ever it ventures it self abroad undiscovered and appearing in its own ugly
proportions. And therefore evil minded Men find it both the safest, and the
surest, and the easiest way to hide their pernicious purposes under the fair
and plausible pretenses of Virtue, or Religion, or the public good. That great
Heretic in Religion and Policy, Machiavil has taught them the same Lesson,
who though he rejects Conscience in the substance as no good Guide, yet he
persuades his disciples to embrace the empty show of it, as the best Vizard in
the World. But Truth is Eagle-eyed and can look through all their thin
pretenses, and measure their perverse intentions by the end to which their
actions are naturally tending, and the effects which they are likely to
produce. Herein can be no Hypocrisy, no Disguises to elude the inquiries of a
wise Observation. The means they use do certainly point out the Ends they aim
at, as he that shoots at a mark will be thought to intend to hit it if he
could, whatsoever he tells us to the contrary.

The Author of the late Pamphlet called The Long-Parliament Revived, has
rendered himself an example of the truth of this Assertion, who being great with
Child of a Paradox destructive to the peace of this Nation, could not be
satisfied till by the Midwifry of the Press he was delivered of his Chymerical
Birth, though with the hazard of his Liberty in the production.

For though the whole scope and design of his book be only to ferment the
Minds of the Vulgar, and as he calls them, injudicious sort of people, and to
blow the Trumpet of Sedition to the disturbance of the public happy peace: Yet
he has the Forehead to preface his old rags with plush, and to begin with
these crafty Insinuations, viz.

To the End the peace of this Nation may be established upon a firm and lasting
foundation and that after one shipwreck hardly escaped, we run not again upon a
more fatal and irrecoverable Rock of Confusion, The Author of this small paper
out of tender Compassion to his native Country, and with all humble respects
of allegiance to his Royal Majesty that now is, has thought fit to offer
Arguments to the world, etc. which if timously harkened unto, may yet prove a
healing Remedy against the sad breaches of this shattered Kingdom and prevent
Mischeifs.

Sure this man was an Apothecary he is so good at gilding of his bitter Pills.
Let us therefore inquire whether the substance of his discourse do correspond
and suite with these fair and plausible pretentions of Loyalty, and the public
benefit of these Nations. Which will the better appear if we Consider,

First, the rancour of his heart against the present Government, expressed in
the fourth page of the Pamphlet, to this effect, viz. That when the subjects of
this Nation have seriously considered of his Arguments, which (as he would have
it) do prove the being and Legal authority of the Long Parliament visibly
existent by virtue of the Act 17. Car. They will doubtless see they have no
reason to hold themselves safe in their lives, liberty and estates till it have
made provision in that behalf, and be legally dissolved. What is, if this be
not to sow Sedition, and to lay the foundations of a new War, and to angle
for proselytes of Rebellion, which the Fantastic baits of the vindication of
Laws and the Subjects security? We have (one would think) bought the experience
of trusting the pretense of fears and jealousies at too dear a rate, to be
again involved in the sad consequence of a pernicious Credulity. The present
age is too wise to thrust themselves into a true and real slavery, to avoid a
painted one. And therefore the Author might have spared that clause which gives
the lie to his proemial flourishes, and is not likely to serve to the ends he
intended it, the generality of the people (blessed be God) being now of true
and loyal principles and of a Conformable temper to the government established.

Secondly, the Consequence of the opinion he defends, will plainly demonstrate
that the Author is no such great friend to the public good of his native
Country, as is pretended. For then he would have it to follow, that the
present Parliament is of no authority to bind the subjects of this Nation, and
that their Acts have not the force of Laws, and if so, then all their Acts are
void and of no force that they have made in order to those excellent ends of
restoring his sacred Majesty to his just birthright, and the Laws and
liberties of the people to their free exercise and splendour, which this present
Parliament have, to their eternal glory and honor, with great prudence and
moderation effected? How will the Author and the Nation be sure of another Act
of Oblivion, of so full and comprehensive Mercy as that which is already passed
and published. If that should not be an Act of Parliament, it is only the Kings
Declaration which is pleadable in no Court for any man's discharge. Besides his
Majesty's Declaration from Breda referres to this Parliament now sitting, and
by his letters to them, he obliged himself by his Royal word to pass those
Laws which are already Enacted, and others now in Agitation for the quiet
settlement of the Nation, and therefore he is not concerned in Honor or
Conscience (for otherwise he is not obliged) to give his Royal Assent to those
Acts when they shall be presented to him by the Long-Parliament if they could
get a being quasi ex post liminio as the Author has conceited it. And let him
be confident the desires of the Nation are utterly against it, who will never
willingly be brought to seek a plaster from those very men that have broken
their heads.

Thirdly, the Authors malevolent nature appears in this, That relying upon one
distinction only, that there is a difference betwixt the nature of a Parliament
in its ordinary constitution, and a Parliament strengthened by a special Law
made to that purpose, and some few shreds out of the third Institutes, he dares
to cross the general opinion of learned men, and like a pigmy upon the
shoulders of a giant, bid defiance to all opposers; it is a cursed cow that will
be fighting though she has short horns, and he has a great mind to swimming
that will adventure to cross the Seas in a cockboat.

P. 3.
But not to dwell in the porch; it will be agreed to the Author, that
Parliaments rightly constituted in the general, are very instrumental for the
safety and happiness of this Kingdom, and that the Members of Parliament ought
to enjoy their due privileges. But his inference will not hold in applying the
general rule to every particular Parliament. For though the general
constitution be good and convenient to the nature of our Government, yet some
of the particular instances may be defective and erroneous in their judgment
and proceedings. And no wonder, seeing the rule in Livy is generally true, in
consilijs major pars plerumque vincit meliorem. We have had insanum
Parliamentum of old. And the effects of the late Long Parliament, caused by the
faction and perverseness of some predominant parties amongst them, even to the
dissolution of our Government, is a sufficient proof in the judgment of sober
and unbiassed persons, that the general thesis ought to be understood with
several limitations. And although the Members of Parliament ought to enjoy
their lawful privileges, yet it does not follow that therefore those men
should be permitted to sit whose Authority is determined by the course of Law,
as shall be hereafter most manifestly proved.

His particular Arguments are drawn from the body and preamble of the Act of 17
Caroli. P. 4.
First from the preamble he endeavors to prove by way of Implication, That
that Parliament intended to secure themselves against all the causes of
dissolution, as well by the Kings Death as otherwise, and thus he argues in
effect, That the Parliament being necessitated to borrow money for the public
Service (for he waves the other ends mentioned in that preamble of that Act,
and therefore I shall take no notice of them in the discourse) and seeing no
body would trust them because it was hazardous, they might be dissolved before
repayment, therefore was the Act made to establish their continuance till the
money being satisfied they did dissolve themselve by Act of Parliament; But
says the Author, If they had been notwithstanding dissolvable by the Kings
Death, the Act had been of no effect, because their dissolution was still
hazardous; the Kings life (says he) being more uncertain then other men's, and
so ex absurdo he reasons, That the Parliament shall not be intended to omit
this cause of their dissolution out of the said Act.

To this I answer, That the principle end of this Act being only to secure the
payment of the public debts, which they were then contracting. If the
security of those debts did not so depend upon the Parliament, that they would
be necessarily lost, if they were unpaid at the time of their dissolution; then
that Parliament was not absolutely necessitated to secure their sitting till
those debts were paid, it being sufficient to establish themselves against
being dissolved by the Kings will, which had most often recurrence, and whereof
they stood in most danger. But those debts which they then contracted, were
either secured by Act of Parliament, actually made and passed at the time of
the money borrowed, or they were not. If they were secured by Act of
Parliament, that Act was as good a security after the Parliament dissolved, as
it was while the Parliament continued. But if they were not so secured, the
debts were as likely to be paid, and the Creditors had the same security (viz.
the Honor and Justice of the Kingdom, which is all the security or compulsive
power Creditors have against Parliaments) for the repayment thereof by a
subsequent Parliament, as by the Parliament then sitting which borrowed the
money, which is apparent; first, because the Parliament then sitting, by the
Authors own confession, took no care for repayment of the said money, and
another Parliament could not possibly be more remiss; Secondly, because those
debts were the public debts of the Kingdom, contracted by their
Representatives in Parliament, in their public, and not in their individual
Quality, and therefore every following Parliament, coming under the same
Representation, ^^ere bound to take the same care for the payment ^hereof,
being a part of their public Service or Employment. And it is no strange
thing for a latter Parliament to pay sums which were drawn on the Kingdom by a
precedent Parliament, witness the paying off the Soldiers by the Honorable
Assembly now sitting, which Soldiers were the most part of them first set on
work by the Long Parliament, since which time, till now, we could never have
the happiness to shake hands with them, So that it appears that there was no
such great necessity, as the Author insinuates, to Bulwark themselves against a
dissolution by the Kings Death, which was a remote possibility. But that in
case that accident had happened (which was unlikely) the debts notwithstanding
would not have been lost, but had been in as much likelihood to have been paid
by the next Parliament, as if the Parliament in 17 Caroli had not been
dissolved by the Kings Death.

Secondly, at the time of this Act made, there was no danger of the Kings
death, nor any suspicion that it would happen within so short a time as was
sufficient for them to have raised the said moneys, and therefore they shall
not be reasonably intended to have made provision against the Kings death. For
his late Majesty of ever blessed Memory was sprung of longaevous Parents, and
was in the Meridian of his age, of a strong and healthful constitution, and of
great temperance in his diet and recreations, which are all symptoms or causes
of a long life; and therefore it is unlikely they should mistrust he would die
within one or two years, which was time more then sufficient for the raising
and payment of the sums borrowed.

Thirdly, if the case had been so that his Majesty had been of a languid and
valetudinarious habit of body, yet the Act had not been fruitless. For a
Parliament may be dissolved either by the Kings pleasure, or by discontinuance,
or by the Kings death. But seeing by this Act they were defended against being
dissolved by the Kings pleasure (as is agreed by all parties) whereof there was
most danger: I conceive the Author will not deny, but that their Session was
more established by this Act then it was when it lay open to all the three
accidents or causes of dissolution. An estate determinable upon the surrender
or forfeiture of the particular tenant is a less defeasible estate then
another estate determinable by his death, surrender or forfeiture.

And now reader, you may breath a little, and consider the emptiness of the
Authors argument conceived upon the preamble of this Act, which appears to be
like the crackling of Solomon's thorns under a pot, makes a great blaze and a
great noise, but contributes little of solid heat to the vessel that hangs over
it.

Yet to be further quit with him before I dismiss the preamble, I shall
thereupon frame this argument which I think flows more naturally from it then
his deduction, That it appears from the preamble the Parliament only intended
to suspend the Kings prerogative and the ordinary course of dissolving them
till they had cleared their credits and repayed the money borrowed, for this
they make the principal end and drift of that Act, and when the end of an Act
of Parliament is satisfied, the Act looses its force, Aquisito fine cessat
operatio, which is proved by those temporary Statutes for Assesments etc. when
the money is paid, the Statute is become of no further use or effect. And
therefore if all the ends for which the Act 17. Caroli was made be satisfied
accordingly by the payment of the money therein mentioned, to be borrowed upon
the security of that Parliament, Then is the suspension taken off, and the
Kings prerogative, and the ordinary course of dissolution of Parliaments is
revived again as it was before that Act made, and by consequence they are
dissolved by the Martyrdom of his late Majesty. Now the Learned and worthy
Patriot Mr* Prynne asserts that the ends of this Act are all satisfied, Perfect
Narrative*
and the Author does not endeavor to prove the contrary. But if the moneys by
them borrowed be not paid. Yet I suppose the authority given them by that Act,
ceased before the Kings death for not performing the ends of that Act within
the time which was limited them by the construction of Law and Reason. And for
proof hereof, and our more orderly proceeding we will inquire what time was
allowed them by a rational interpretation of that Act to perform the ends in
that Act designed.

There is no man, I think, so irrational as to imagine, that by this Act they
are a perpetual Parliament; First, because it is contrary to the end designed
in the preamble. Secondly, because it is against the fundamental Constitution
of the politic government of this Kingdom, and against all the presidents and
books of Law, which always mention successive Parliaments; Thirdly, it is
against the Liberty of the Subject, which a Parliament cannot alter in so
principal a part, especially seeing the Lawmakers may be intended reasonably to
do it for their own benefit, who in their own cases, by the Law of Reason, can
be no co^petent Judges. And that for many inconveniences, In successive
Parliaments the Country have every time power to choose a new, and it is not
often (though sometimes) seen, that one man is chosen in many successive
Parliaments: which variation is necessary for several Reasons; Sometimes
because they would ehuse persons aptly qualified in parts or Affections, or
both, to the Matters of State then in agitation; Sometimes they elect persons
having interests by their own greatness or alliance to procure some particular
business of Consequence effected for the County or Corporation for which they
serve, So that to endeavor a perpetual Parliament, would prejudice the peoples
repeated election, which is not to be allowed. Besides, this inconvenience
would follow a perpetual Parliament, that the persons chosen may be altered in
Body, Mind or Morals, and so unfit for that service, yet their authority would
be continued; 3d Instit. 8, and 12.
For a Knight, Citizen or Burgess can make no proxy, and Sickness, etc. is
no cause of Removal. And further, if those persons should grow old in that
power, they would engrosse the offices of the kingdom into their own hands, and
by great means, and friends, and privilges overtop their Countrymen and make
them mere Under-woods.

And if it be proved that this Act does not establish this Long Parliament in
an absolute perpetuity, Then it is to be considered what is the time of their
duration, within the meaning of this Act; for if it be construed that they have
a continuance till they dissolve themselves, without restraining their
continuance to the time of the performance of those ends for which the said Act
was made: This is potentially a perpetuity, and cannot be abridged but by (...)
own wills, which would never militate (as he phrases it) against their own
advantages. So that then this exposition labors under the same Absurdities and
Inconveniences with the former, and therefore not to be supposed.

Therefore I conceive the most natural and genuine interpretation of this Act
is, to make the drift and purpose of this Act, the limits of its continuance,
and this drift is the payment of the said debts; And seeing by the rules of the
Common Law, Cor l. 6. f. 31.
which may be confirmed by Reason, when an indefinite time is given for the
performance of a voluntary Act possible to a third person, the Act ought to be
done within convenient time; hence I infer, that if the public debts which
were the end of the making of this Act, be not satisfied by the Long
Parliament; yet because they have had time and power more than sufficient
between the making of that Act, and the Kings death, to have raised and paid
them off, and did actually levy moneys, amounting to a far greater sum, which
were otherwise employed. The Gentlemen of that Parliament ought not to take
advantage of their own neglect; but having surpassed the time which by Law and
Reason was sufficient to accomplish those ends, they lost the advantage they
gained by that Statute, the Kings Prerogative, and the ordinary course of
Dissolution relapsed into its old Chanel, and consequently the said Parliament
was by the Kings death actually dissolved. And so much is argued by way of
Admission, That the Act of 17 Car. did provide against all the Causes of
Dissolution, but not granting it; for I doubt not, but I shall prove the
contrary afterward in this Discourse. But now we must hasten to the body of
the Act.

His second Argument is drawn from the body of the Act, P. 5.
the words whereof are these, viz. That this Parliament be not dissolved unless
by Act of Parliament to be passed for that purpose. Whence he concludes, that
this negative Clause is exclusive of all the causes of Dissolution; which I
deny: But before I give my reasons I shall observe.

That seeing this Act is derogatory in a matter of the highest nature to the
Law and Custom of Parliament, but especially to the Kings Prerogative, which
the Law supports and cherishes as a balance to the two other Estates, to
preserve the perfect Crasis and equal Temper of the Politic Government. The
general words thereof shall be expounded strictly in reference to the thing
altered, and beneficially as to the reviviscency of the Law and Custom of
Parliament, and of the Kings Prerogative, which in obedience to some necessity
was for a time laid afleep and suspended; for it is a rule, that bonum
necessarium extra terminos necessitatis non est bonum.

This being premised I doubt not but I shall give a full Answer to the Authors
second Argument.

First Argument
And therefore I make a Question, whether an Act of Parliament by express and
apposite words, which is stronger than our Case can continue their own being
after the death of the King in whose life it was summoned.

First, because that after the death of the King, if they be a Parliament, they
are either such by the Common law and custom of Parliament (which is a
principal and fundamental part of the Common law of the Land) or by the special
Statute, so by both they cannot be a Parliament. But they are not be a
Parliament by either of those two ways, for the reasons hereafter alleged,
Not by the Common law and custom of Parliaments; because (as the learned Mr.
Prynne has proved in his said book, and the Author agrees it, and it is not
doubted by any man that has any understanding in the Law) That Parliament, as
it was a Parliament by the Common law, naturally determined by the demise or
death of the King: Nor are they a Parliament by the especial Statute, because
then it would be another thing distinct from that Parliament which was summoned
in the Kings life, to which the power of Representation, which was conferred
upon the Members thereof, by the people in their Election cannot extend; for
the Country being enabled to choose them by the Kings writ, the persons elected
received no power from them, but according to the tenor of the Kings writ,
which determining with the Kings life, the power of representing the people,
wbich they received at their Election was then likewise determined, and by
consequence they were no longer the peoples Representatives; and therefore no
Parliament.

Or to express it in plainer terms, If they be a Parliament after the Kings
death by the force of their own Act, as I have proved, they must be, if they be
a Parliament; Then it would follow, that a Parliament by their own Act may only
create another Parliament, to exist after they themselves so constituted are
dissolved; and the consequence of this would be, that the people should be
bound by the Laws of that other Parliament to which the people never consented
being made by persons that were not chosen by them to be their immediate
Representatives, which is absurd*

There is nothing materially to be objected to this in my opinion, but that the
people are parties by representation to the Act that constituted the second
Parlrament, and so the second Parliament might sit by their mediate, though not
by their immediate choice and election. To which I answer,

That the power that the people gave to their Representatives at their Election
was limited and confined to their persons in that quality, and is not
transferrible either to other persons, or to themselves in another quality;
because all Authorities are confidences in the persons authorized to some
certain end; and therefore are personally and strictly taken, and cannot be
communicated to others, or themselves in another manner than they were at first
given. As for ample, If I submit my self to the arbitration of a Stranger to
stand and fall by his judgment and decree; though I am bound to stand to his
sentence, yet if he transfer over the power I gave him to another, I am not
obliged by the award of the 3d person. So if there be Arbitrators which are
limited to make their arbitration during the life of a third man, If they award
within that time, that what award they themselves shall make after the death of
the third person, shall be good and binding to the parties concerned; Such
award would be void, because they are not arbitrators after the death of the
third person, by the choice and submission of the parties concerned; but by
their own award; which was beyond the intention of the parties that gave them
power, and if they could hand over their authority beyond the date of the first
limitation of its continuance, they might do the same thing infinitely, which
is absurd and inconvenient, and against the nature of an Authority.

Secondly, Second Argumen:
I conceive it will be a hard a matter for the Author to prove, that a
Parliament has a legal power ordinarily as a Parliament, to alter the
Fundamental laws, which are so concorporate with the essence of Government,
that one cannot subsist and be the same without the other, unless it be in a
case of great and invincible necessity, which dispences with the punctilio's of
all Laws, or by the peoples consent specially signified, and the employed
consent by their ordinary Election shall not be suffiicient. And it is not a
general sentence cited by the Author out of the 3d* Institutes will evince the
contrary. Which position I prove,

First, 3d Instit. p: 14.
because the Author might have found in his beloved third Institutes, That it
is the course for the Members of Parliament to desire leave to consult with
their Counties before they consent to any new Law of extraordinary and
important alteration.

Secondly, it being the Root and foundation of all the Liberties of the
Subject, not to be bound by any new Law to which they are not parties by their
imdiate Representatives, and to make successive Elections: It will not be
reasonably intended, That the people did entrust them with their authority to
those ends, viz. to change the Government, or to deprive them of their
fundamental privileges, as I have before showed is done by this Act, according
to the Authors interpretation.

Thirdly, the Laws of England are of two sorts, either they concern the being,
or the well-being of the Policy of this Nation; Those of the last kind are the
proper work and object of Parliamentarie power, 3 Instit. 35, 37.
these may be enacted, repealed, revived, corrected, expounded, and as to them
a Parliament has unlimited jurisdiction, as by the particular examples cited
by my Lord Cook appears; But those Laws that concern the Being of the
Kingdom, as it is a Government, are inalterable, except in the special cases of
Necessity or the peoples special Consent; Because first, those first and
fundamental Laws are the foundation and the Measure of the usefulness or
disadvantage of all the other Laws, which are collateral to the Essence of
Government; All Laws being fitted to the nature of Government, as a garment is
shaped to the body, and therefore those Laws ought to be as Standards to
support and regulate all the rest. 3 Instit. 41.
Secondly, because an Error in such alteration would be fatal, and next door to
an Impossibility to be redressed; If the Walls or the Roof of a building be
altered, there is no great danger, but to move a stone in the foundation,
threatens the whole structure with a certain downfall. I may say of it as my
Lord Burleigh to his Son in another case, To attempt a change in the essentials
of Government, is like a Stratagem in War, wherein to fail once is to be
undone for ever. And that the limits of the natural duration of a Parliament,
is part of the Fundamental Laws of this Nation is so clear, and common a Truth,
that it needs no further proof.

Fourthly, every Statute has the formality of a Law, by the Law and Custom of
Parliament, because a Constitution agreed on by persons chosen by the people
with the Royal Assent, without the material Circumstances required by the Law
and Custom of Parliament, is ordinarily no binding Law, which proves that the
Law and Custom of Parliament, gives the essence and formality of every
possitive Law, as it is a Law; and therefore it cannot be altered in the
substantial part of it, except in the cases before excepted; For all the power
and force which a Statute has to command obedience as it is a Law, being
derived from the Law and Custom of Parliament, if this Law might be altered by
a Statute, it would then follow, That the force and effect of one and the same
Law, could be bent against it self, and have an efficiency to its own
destruction; which is repugnant and unnatural, and not to be imagined.

And for a further proof of the premises, I do affirm, That there be several
things which a Parliament cannot do by their Act de jure, though de facto,
sometime it be done, Hobard 87.
as to make a Law that a man shall be Judge in his own cause, or any other
thing which is against natural equity, the Act is void, quia jura naturae sunt
immutabilia. So if an Act be made to Condemn and Attaint a man of Treason, 3
Instit. 37.
without hearing him in the way of a legal Trial, although my Lord Cook says,
that the attainder stands of force, because there is no higher Court to
control it, yet he adds this clause to show it is not good de jure, viz.
Auferat oblivio si potest si non, utcunque silentium tegat, for (says he) the
more High and Honorable the Jurisdiction of the Court is, the more Just and
Honorable ought they to be in their proceedings, and to give example to
inferior Courts. I shall not mention the Books cited by Mr. Prynne, Libr.
which pertain hither, Citato.
but refer the Reader to his Book.

But to come nearer, it is the Judgment of a whole Parliament, in these words,
viz. To Parl. 42 E. 3. number. 7.
It is declared by the Lords and Commons in full Parliament, upon demand made of
them on the behalf of the King, 3 Instit. 14.
That they could not assent to any thing in Parliament that tended to the
disherison of the King and his Crown, to which they were sworn. Ibid. in
Margin.
And my Lord Cook says, That although it might be done ( i. e. de facto) yet
it is against the Law and Custom of Parliament.

Now the said Act of 17 Caroli according to the Authors Interpretation, is
expressly against the Prerogative of the Kings Successor, to call his own
Parliament, and has many other inconveniences, which need not to be here again
repeated, and therefore in the words of the Parliament in Edward the 3d. his
time; They could not make an Act to bear such an Interpretation, to the
disherison of the King and his Crown, etc.

Yet I will not deny but that the Kings Majesty might bind up his own hads,
and suspend his ordinary power from an actual dissolution of the Parliament;
morally* by his promise, or legally, by an Act made for that purpose. For a
Parliament may be dissolved either by an external principle which is
accidental, viz. the declaration of the Kings pleasure; or by an internal
principle which is natural, viz. the want of entering their Continuances, or the
Kings death, whereby the Kings writ, which is the authority they have to
convene together, is determined. Now the King (as over his Subjects) so he has
a sovereignty over his own Will, and being obliged by his Royal assent to that
Act, he might and ought to stave off the accidental cause of their dissolution.
But for the aforesaid Reasons, I doubt whether the Kings Majesty, or his two
Houses, or altogether, could legally change the substance of the Parliament,
and defend it against the natural Causes of its Dissolution. This being
understood under the limitations expressed in my first Thesis or Position.

But that which I will rely upon is this, Arg. 3.
that admitting it be in the power of a Parliament with the Royal assent by
their Act to make themselves a Legal Parliament after the Kings death by apt
words; Yet in the Act of 17. Caroli there are no such words, as according to
the rules of Law will bear any such construction. For the words, That this
Parliament shall not be dissolved unless it be by Act of Parliament, are a
general negative, which by a proper interpretation cannot extend to all the
causes of dissolution, but only to that which most often happened, and which
was the pretended grievance at that time, viz. the dissolution by the Kings
will and Pleasure: For it belongs to the Judges to expound the general Statute
Laws according to reason and the best convenience, Hob. 346.
and to mould them to the truest and best use. And in all times the Judges have
excepted particular cases out of the general negative or affirmitive words: of
Statutes, though such particular cases have come within the comprehension of
the general words. Where the letter of those Statutes in the largest extent of
it does entrench upon the Kings Prerogative or the nature of the thing, or
enforces to an inconvenience or an impossibility.

By the Satute of Magna Carta c. 11. 2d Instit. 23.
it is enacted, That common pleas shall not follow (or be sued in) the Kings
Court (or Bench) which is a general negative clause, yet notwithstanding
because it is a maxim in Law that the King is present in every Court (and
cannot for that reason be nonsuited) It is clear Law and so holden, that the
King is not within these general words, but may sue in his Bench or in any
other Court at his pleasure.

In the Marquess of Winchesters Case, Co. l. 3. f. 2.
though there was an Act of Parliament 28. H. 8. that the Lord Norris should
forfeit all his rights, etc. Yet adjudged that a right of action being an
inseparable incident to the person attainted could not by general words be made
separable contrary to its nature; and therefore were not given to the King by
the generality of that Law.

So in Englefields Case, Co. li. 7. f. 13.
though the Statute 33 H. 8. gives all conditions of persons attainted to the
King, which being a general word comprehends all sorts of conditions, yet a
condition of revocation of uses by any writing under the hand of the Duke of
Bedford that was attainted being appropriated to his own personal act was not
forfeited within that general Statute.

The Statute of Winchester is a general Statute, Co. l. 7. f. 6.
that the Hundred, etc. shall make satisfaction for all Robberies and Felonies
done within the Hundred; Yet Resolved, that the Hundreds shall make no
satisfaction for the robberies of a house, because the house was the Owners
Castle, and he might have defended himself, and so it was inconvenient that the
Hundred should be put to take care of him that had ability to preserve himself
and his goods: Nor for a robbery done in the night, because it was the
Travelers folly to travel by night, and it was impossible that the Hundred
(who by intendment were in their beds) should take notice of such a Robbery.

The Statutes of Marlebridge, Plowd 204, 205.
cap. 4. Westminster. 2d. cap. 49. and 25 E. 3. cap. 16. are in the general Negative;
Yet the Judges have so expounded those Statutes, that they extend not to many
particular special cases which are within the general Comprehension of those
words. It were infinite to enumerate all of them; Mr. Pryns true and perfect
Narrative, p. 24.
Therefore to apply this. Seeing it is agreed by the Author, and otherwise
proved, That it is the nature of a Parliament ordinarily to be determined by
the Kings death; and the contrary is (as I have proved) against the liberty of
the Subjects election, and in prejudice of the Kings Successors prerogative of
calling his own Parliament, and this general Clause may be very fully satisfied
by suspension of the Kings prerogative to dissolve them at his will and
pleasure; It Is against all reason and president, that it should be extended any
further to change the essential nature of a Parliament, abridge the subjects
Liberty, and shackle the prerogative royal, without any special and express
words to manifest certainly that the intention of the Lawmakers was such,
without any manner of Question. For if they had intended to preserve themselves
against discontinuance, and the Kings death, they would have added such special
words as these, viz. That this Parliament shall not be dissolved by the Kings
Majesty, nor by neglect of the due entering of Adjournments, nor by his
Majesty's death, but only by Act of Parliament: Which would have made their
Intention manifest; and in such Case they would never have been contented with
general words, which are uncertain and ambiguous.

And lastly, Argum 4.
if I should admit, which can never be evinced, That the said negative Clause
should fortify the Parliament against all the causes of dissolution, as it
stands singly by it self; yet upon consideration of the other part of the same
Statute, it will appear that there are other words which do restrain the
generallity of the former negative clause or sentence, and show, that the
intent of that Parliament was never to continue themselves a Parliament after
the Kings death. And to prove this: It is a good Rule in Law, that it is most
natural and genuine to expound one part of the meaning of a Statute by an
other. The first general clause of the Statute 17 Car. respects the Effect,
viz. That they shall not be dissolved, etc. and this I call Conservatory. And
after comes another clause, which respects the Cause of their dissolution, viz.
And that all and every thing and things, done or to be done for the
Adjournment, proroguing, or dissolving of this present Parliament, contrary to
this present Act, shall be utterly void and of none Effect. Which Clause is
prohibitory of the Cause of their dissolution. And in this last Clause it
appears, that the Cause of dissolution which they intended to prevent, was
something that should consist in Action, by the words (thing or things done or
to be done) Which words could be applicable only to an actual dissolution by
the Kings Pleasure. For the non-entry of continuance upon adjournments, is not
a Thing, but a Defect, nor Done, but Omitted; and the Kings death is not a
Thing, but a Cessation of his personal Being, and of the dependents thereupon.
Nor is an Action, but a Termination or Period. So that the last clause which
respects the cause of their dissolution, extending only to a dissolution by the
Kings pleasure, the Author cannot with any Reason or Modesty strain or extend
the negative words of the former general Sentence, which Respects the Effect,
to any of the other ways of Dissolution, unless he would have the Effect, as
it is an Effect, to be broader and more capacious than the Cause, which is not
to be endured. So that it is evident, that this later Sentence restrains the
general words of the former, to the particular kind of dissolution by the Kings
pleasure; and upon the whole, that the Long Parliament had no establishment of
their continuance against a dissolution by discontinuance or the Kings death,
which having both happened during their Session, they are twice dead instead of
being once revived.

And now let the impartial and understanding Reader judge what reason the
Author had to trouble the world with this Paradox, which is built by him upon
so sandy foundation, that it is no glory to demolish and kick it down. It is
the humor of some Men to make Election, rather to do Mischief, than to do
Nothing. Though I cannot but speak him ingenuous; yet I could wish he had
exercised his Curiosity in a matter of less dangerous consequence to himself
and the Peace of these Nations.

There remain some Little things to be discussed and answered in the Authors
discourse of the Existency of the Long-Parliament, which I shall touch only,
and dismiss the Question.

To Mr. Prynnes first Argument he answers, That the Kings death legally
dissolves a Parliament; but not such a Parliament as is established by an Act
of the three Estates, and requires a president to the contrary. This
distinction is fully answered before in this Discourse by my arguments upon the
body of the Act: So that Mr. Prynnes Objection stands in its full force and
efficacy. And for his president, this is iniquum petere, to demand an example
of that which is without a parallel in any of the former Ages. It suffices,
that we have evinced by Reason and a legal interpretation of the Act of 17 Car.
that the Long Parliament has no legal existence.

To Mr. Prynnes second Objection he furnishes out the same distinction; for he
has no weapons to fight with but a fork, and if that break he must despair of
Victory. But he fortifies his distinction with an Interrogatory, upon which he
frames a Dilemma, which is answered before, viz.

That a Parliament cannot de jure extend its continuance beyond the Kings life
in whole time they were summoned, but by the peoples special consent, or an
invincible necessity: And this is not to be such a pedling necessity as the
pretense of borrowing of Money in our particular case. He says, That
Parliament security was ever looked upon as inviolable, viz. (as I think he
means) just and punctual, and it has been always so esteemed before and since
that Act, and moneys have been always borrowed in great Sums upon their
Security, without scrupling their Dissolution. Ask any Citizen of London, he
will give you a president of it which is not beyond the memory of man. Yet I
confess, that if the Moneys borrowed by the Long Parliament in 17 Car. were
not paid by that Parliament (although they sat till the Kings death, which was
many years afterward) it is most certainly true, that the general Rule did fail
in that particular instance. And till now very few of this Kingdom did ever
know or suppose that that Parliament had left the Nation in Debt: So that the
Author has no Reason to expect the Thanks of the House at their resitting, for
making this discovery so public.

To Mr. Pryns third Objection he opposes the same magnanimous distinction,
which surely is not of French extraction, for it shrinks not at the 3d. charge.
But it is now almost out of breath, and therefore to second it, he says, that
the King virtually waved the authority of his Writ of Summons, and fearing that
for all this it may be repulsed, he sounds a Barley by another Interrogation,
which is in effect but his old distinction wheeled off and re-enforced, and
this as I have said, is all answered before in this discourse, and I would not
tire my Reader with repetitions.

To Mr. Pryns fourth Objection he says nothing material, only that passage
must not escape unanswered, viz. That the King is a part of the Parliament in
his politic, rather then in his natural capacity; and therefore when the King
dies, the Parliament dissolved not, because the politic capacity remains after
his death. To which I answer, That the intent and use of a Parliament, is to
advise that particular King that summons it, and all their counsels must be
directed to him as he is a Man capable of Advice and assent: And when he writes
Le Roy le veult, it is his personal act, though as this act gives the
instrument which he signs the validity and efficacy of a Law, it is done by
his Royal Authority. 3d Instir. 6. 28.
And further, every Parliament ought to begin and end by his personal presence,
or by him in representation; which shows, that every Parliament depends upon
the person of the King; And this is further evident, by the ordinary
dissolution of the Parliament at his death. And to the Authors application,
that a Parliament may be such though the Kings person be utterly withdrawn,
because his politic capacity lives and is present with them. This is an
out-worn and thredbare Distinction, which the common story of the Knights being
perjured in his politic, and going to Hell in his natural Capacity
sufficiently confutes. For the politic capacity is a second Notion, Plowden
213.
and cannot subsist but in the natural; To which it is so strictly united, that
it is inseparable otherwise than by our understanding, which cannot alter the
nature of any thing. The Murdering of his late Majesty, as it was Treason, was
an offense against his politic capacity as he was a King, though that horrid
and shameless Butchery was committed against his natural person as he was a
Man.

But that saying that the King is a part of the Parliament must be cautiously
understood, because a mistake in it, has been a great cause or pretense of all
our late Civil Wars. For, hence some would infer a Coordination of power in the
Parliament, which cannot, I conceive, be made good by Reason or the Laws of
this Nation; For the King has undoubted power to call and dissolve
Parliaments, which are properties inconsistent with a coordinate power. 3d
Instit 25.
The Style of all Acts anciently was by way of Petition, (that it may be
enacted) which does not smell of coordinate authority, 3d Instit. 35.
and the Act of 17 Car. was in like form. The Members cannot consent upon
condition, which shows, that the binding power of an Act, as it is a Law, does
not pass from them, (for cujus est dare, ejus est modificare) but only a bare
assent, which is necessary to perfect the Act of another, as in Atturnments.
The Members during the Continuance of Parliament may be committed, and be
punished for Treason, which could not be, if they were in a Coordination with
the King; And the Writs of Summons, under favor, (notwithstanding my Lord
Cooks marginal notes) do confirm this assertion. I shall conclude with the
Testimony of the learned Grotius, l. 1, c. 3. ^ 18.
Jure Belli, in these words, Multum falluntur, qui existimant, cum Reges act a
sua nolunt esse rata, nisi a Senatu, aut alio Coetu aliquo probentur,
partitionem fieri potestatis: nam quae acta, eum in modum rescinduntur,
intelligi debent, rescindi Regis ipsius imperio, qui eo modo sibi cavere
voluit, ne quid fallaciter impetratum, pro vera ipsius voluntate haberetur. And
yet it is most true, Fortesc. cap. 9.
that in our Legal Monarchy the King cannot make or alter any Law without the
assent of his Peers and Commons in Parliament: So that upon the whole it
appears, That the King is so a part, as he is the head of the Parliament and
Nation; and though it be true, that totum est dignius sua part, yet the head
must be a part of this totum, or else that Maxim is untrue and fallacious.

To Mr. Pryns fifth Objection, he chops in again the distinction of the Kings
politic and natural capacity, which my former confutation has rendered
toothlesse. But he says the dissolution of the Parliament by the Kings death,
might prove dangerous and pernicious to the Kingdom, I answer, he that intends
to be believed, must not affirm things in general terms, which do nihil ponere,
and to which no certain answer can be given. Again, it is presumption in the
Author to think himself wiser then all the ages that lived before him, who
finding no inconvenience, have derived the custom down to our times, and it is a
known good Rule, Oportet neminem esse sapientiorem Legibus.

To his answer to the sixth Objection, affirming, That the Parliament was not
dissolved by the Act passed lately, upon the Admission of the Secluded Members,
for their dissolution, because it was but an Act of the House of Commons only,
which is no Act of Parliament. I answer that it is most true, That it was no
Act of Parliament according to Law; But by the Authors favor, those very men
(that were the greatest part of the Commons of the Long Parliament then living)
ought not themselves, nor their advocate, to say that they were no Parliament,
for they imposed an Assessement upon the Nation, and styled their Instruments,
Acts of a Parliament, so that those men shall never in reason aver any thing
in disability of their own Acts, though they were otherwise not agreeing with
the rules of Parliamentary proceedings. Besides that Act at least amounts to a
Declaration of their Judgment, that they were dissolved, and it was true, for
they were long before dissolved by the Kings death.

To his answer to the seventh Objection, That this Act 17 Car. is not void,
although the Bishops (who were outed before this Act passed) did not assent to
it. I shall say obiter, That it is the hope of the greatest part of the Learned,
Loyal and Moderate party of this Nation, that this present Parliament, (if the
necessity of other more important affairs would permit) or some other
Parliament, will out of their zeal to Common Justice, and the honor and safety
of the Kingdom, take the Case of the Reverend Bishops into consideration, and
restore unto them their ancient honors and privileges of sitting in the House
of Peers: Their undoubted and very ancient right, and the necessity of their
Re-establishment, in order to the preservation of the ancient policy of this
Nation, for the better support of the Royal Authority, for the ballancing of
the other two Estates, for the benefit of the Clergy of this Nation, who have
no Representatives in Parliament, for the preservation of the rights and
privileges of the Church, and for the better establishment of the integrity of
Orthodox Religion; being strong and important advocates for their so just
Restitution.

After which short digression, I answer, That if an Act of Parliament, that
divests so many Members of the same Parliament of their rightful and ancient
privileges, and lawful inheritance, without any crime committed or alleged, or
without being called to answer in any judicial way of proceeding, be good and
valid, then the Authors position is true, and not to be denied; But if such an
Act be against natural justice and equity, and against the law and custom of
Parliament, (for I shall desire the liberty to be skeptical in this particular)
then on the otherside it will appear, that the Bishops were excluded against
their Wills, and they being so great a part of the House of Peers, that their
voices if they had been present, might by joining with other Lords of the same
opinion, have carried the Act of 17 Caroli in the Negative; It follows that the
Seclusion of the Bishops rendered that Act, and all other Acts made after their
Seclusion, void and of none effect.

And this case of the Bishops has no similitude with the point in Mr. Bagshaws
reading (lately printed) because there the Bishops are supposed voluntarily to
absent themselves, P. 17.
or being present to dissent, and so an Act passed by the greater number of
voices.

Nor does the case cited by the Author, come up to the case in question. For
there the Baronies being appropriate to the Abbots, as they were Abbots, when
by Act of Parliament their Abbeys were given to the Crown, and the Covent or
Society of Regulars dissolved; the Correlative, viz. the Covent being
destroyed, they ceased to be Abbots, and consequently their Baronies which they
enjoyed as Abbots (the foundation failing) were naturally annihilated. But the
Bishops though they were Barons of the Realm, Seldens Titles of Honor p. 282,
347.
ratione fundi and officii Episcopalis: Yet the Act which ousted them of their
Peerage, left them Bishops as they were before the Act, and it was the
Bishopric that was the Foundation of their Temporal Dignity. Grotius de jure
Belsi l. 2. c. 21. sect. 10.
And there is a great difference between the taking away of an Estate, which by
consequence destroys a Dignity that depends upon it, and an Act which directly
and intentionally strikes at the substance of the Dignity it self, which
appears by the particular instance, that the Abbots were not quarreld at for
their Baronies, but for the Dissoluteness and Enormity of their Abbeys.

And to his project, That if the King would please to permit the Long
Parliament to sit; To prevent their perpetuating themselves, (which (says he)
may inslave the King and Kingdom to such a yoke of Bondage, P. 18, 19.
as we may never be able to break off our own necks, or the necks of our
posterity any more) his Majesty may Summon them before their sitting, and take
their personal Promise and Engagement to confirm the Acts of this Parliament,
and the first thing they do within a certain time to dissolve themselves. I
would willingly know what colorable ground or pretense there can be for such a
proposal? For

First, they are dissolved and of no authority, as I have before manifestly
proved.

Secondly, the security of their performance is only a Promise or Engagement,
which are easily broken, and if it were an Oath, and they should by mischance
do contrary to it, it is very probable that the Author would pretend he could
Salve up their Credits and their Consciences too; again, with his usual
Distinction of their natural and politic capacity.

Thirdly, if they should break their Promise or Engagement, by the Authors own
confession (for he says, the Objection is very rational) both the King and
People are enthralled to a perpetual bondage, and where there is so little
assurance on the one side, and so much danger on the other, the Prince cannot
in common Prudence put his own and his Kingdoms safety and honor upon so
great a hazard, as to depend upon the Honesty of a certain number of Men; who
possibly may fail his expectation, especially (as in this case) for their own
Advantages.

To the Postscript.
HE begins his Postscript with a falsehood; P. 18.
and it is not likely that he will penetrate far into the House that stumbles
in the Porch: For there are not any great nor general dissatisfactions
concerning the legality of this present Parliament, whose authority he
endeavors to shake, because

First, P. 19.
the Lords had no writs of Summons.

Secondly, the Commons were not chosen by the Kings Writ.

Thirdly, That this Parliament began not with the Royal presence.

To the First I answer, that the use of a Summons is but to give notice to the
Peers of the certainty of the Time and Place of their Convention, and to
authorize their Meeting, which is the substantial part of the Summons. Now the
King at his coming into the kingdom found them all met together, and therefore
the ends of a Summons being* already satisfied by their being met at one time
and place, and this meeting being authorized by the Kings personal presence,
there was no need of an actual Summons; And the writ is but a legal
circumstance: so that a Failer herein, is but a defect in Formality, and not in
Substance.

To his Second I answer likewise, they are the Authors own words, page 10. of
his Book, that the calling of Parliaments in this or that Kings name, to
consult or advise with this or that King, these are but Circumstantial things,
and nothing of the essentials of Government and the Kingdoms welfare; Which is
true, if it be rightly applied. And the Substance or end of the Kings writ is
to authorize the Country to Elect, and to notify the time and place of their
Meeting, which was signified by that Writ whereby this Parliament was called.
And as to the deficiency of that Writ that it ran in the Name of a
Commonwealth, that fault is but in the point of formality. And every one knew
that at that time, though the writs spoke a Commonwealth, yet they meant the
Kings Majesty. And the Author cannot deny, but that all the circumstances of a
free and legal Election were pursued in the choice of those honorable and
worthy persons that are now sitting in this present Parliament, which shows,
that herein likewise there is no deficiency in Substance, but only in
Circmstance.

Now the Substantial part being well observed, the necessity of the then
present State of affairs in England, was and is a good justification and excuse
of the defects alleged only in Circumstance and Ceremony: Necessitas Legum
irridet vincula; For even the divine Laws do admit a dispensation in the
particular instances of an invincible necessity, as the Laws of the Shewbread,
1 Kings c. 21.
and that of the Sabbath. And therefore much more ought it to prevail against
the smaller Ceremonies in question, Matthew. 12. 1.
enjoined by the Law of this Nation, which is a human Law. And this may be
proved,

First because that in the Case in Question it will not be reasonably supposed,
That they who first laid the foundations of the policy of this Nation did
intend that those punctilio's in the writ of Summons should be so strictly
observed, That in a Case of so great Necessity as ours was, the non-observance
of them should vitiate their Acts, who are not deficient in any of the material
and substantial requisites to a Legal Parliament. ^. 1. c. 4. sect. 7.
And this is the argument of Grotius in his Jure Belli in a like case.

Secondly, seeing the circumstantial instances, which the Author excepts
against in this Parliament do only regard convenience, (for the Kings pleasure
is the substance of the power that is given to the Lords to meet, and to the
Counties and Boroughs to elect Members to serve in Parliament, and the end of
the Writ of Summons is only for the more convenient and certain manifestation
of the Kings pleasure, in order to a consultation for the public good:) It
follows that when by reason of some extraordinary evil or danger, which
oppresses or threatens the kingdom, it appears to be utterly inconvenient to
the weal-publique, and impossible, to use those Circumstances (as it was at the
Calling of this Parliament;) That in such a special case those Circumstances
ought to be omitted, because herein they are useless, nay opposite to the ends
to which they were ordained in their first Institution.

Thirdly, it is common (as in all other Laws) so by the Laws of England, to
allow a special privilege to all those cases which are ushered in by a
Necessity not to be resisted, as you may read at large in Plowden, Fogassas
case, fo. 9. and 13, 18, 19. Not to trouble my Reader with particular cases, in
a matter that will brook no Denial.

Now who knows not, that at the Time of the Calling of this Parliament, there
was an Armed power in this Kingdom inimical to the restoration of his Sacred
Majesty, and the ancient and legal Government of this Nation; And that to have
summoned the Peers at all, or the Commons, in the Kings name, might then have
been the occasion of a Civil War, and have hindered all those excellent Defigns
which by a more calm and prudent managery have been since effected and brought
to pass: And therefore it is plain, that there was a necessity of calling the
Parliament; because nothing but a Parliament could repair the breaches of the
Nation, and the Parliament could be called in no other Manner, then it was
without the hazard of a new War, and (Victory being uncertain) of the
dissolution of Government.

But it may be Objected, That the Necessity ended with the Kings coming into
England, and therefore another Parliament ought afterward to have been legally
called. To which I answer,

That the Necessity which occasioned the Calling of this Parliament, was not
only to invite home his Majesty, but to confirm and secure him in the Throne,
and to do such other things for the Safety and Peace of the Nation as could be
only done by them with security to the King and Kingdom; And therefore the
Necessity of their sitting continued:

First, till they had passed the Act of Oblivion; because it being offered of
the Kings free grace, who was not otherwise bound but by his Royal word in his
Declaration from Breda, which referred to such Exceptions as this present
Parliament should make: It had been unsafe for the Nation, and would have be
got fears in a great number of guilty minds, which might quickly have broken
out into open Commotions, if this Parliament had been dissolved before that Act
had been passed for their Pardon and Indemnity.

Secondly, The King and kingdom were not safe, whilst an Army was on foot, that
was but a reconciled Enemy; and had not the authority of this Parliament
overawed them till, and in, their disbanding, No man is certain (and it had
been great Folly to have put a matter of that import into hazard) whether they
might not have broken their Faithes and Allegiance, being spurred on by
Despair, to have attempted some great Rebellion, which might have brought us
into a Relapse of all our Miseries, before an other Parliament could have been
summoned and Convened. They who know the History of that Army, will not think
such an accident impossible: And therefore this Parliament was necessitated to
sit till they had disbanded the Army, and effected all the other businesses
that were depending thereupon, or in order to that End, which are now well
nigh, but yet not fully perfected.

Thirdly, I conceive that the Kings Majesty is the only and proper Judge when
this necessity will be at an end, wherein (as in all other things) there is no
doubt but he will govern his Counsels with such care and prudence, as will
describe him not to be more desirous of the love and affection of his
particular Subjects, then he shall be tenderly cautious, for the establishment
of the peace and happiness of the Nation in general.

As to the Authors third Exception, That the Parliament was not begun with the
Kings personal or representative presence, what I have already said is a full
Answer. But I might say further, that there is no necessity that I should yield
to him, that this exception is true. For all the Acts of this Parliament which
have the effect of Laws, were made with the Royal Assent, since his Majesty was
personally present with them, and though they met sometime before, yet that
does not hinder but that it might begin to be a Parliament upon his Majesty's
first access to the two honorable Houses.

And in the general, I affirm that the power and faculty of determining what is
a Parliament, according to the Laws of this Nation, lies not in any Subject as
such, but in the Kings Majesty, or the Parliament, or both together, or in the
Judges of the Land. But the King and Parliament have by their Act, entitled,
An Act for removing and preventing all Questions and Disputes concerning the
assembling and sitting of this present Parliament, with particular mention of
all the Authors three Exceptions, determined the Question against the Authors
rash and inconsiderate opinion. And the Judges of the Land do every day
impliedly adjudge the same thing, by allowing the benefit of the Act of
Oblivion to all those that are within the words or meaning of the said Act. So
that the Author ought not to have interposed his little opinion, seeing it is a
certain truth, That the judgment of the Judges of the general Courts of Record
is the Law of the Land, till it be altered by something else, of as high or a
higher nature and quality.

Again, the principal defects which are alleged in the assembling of this
Parliament, are the want or defect in the Writs of Summons, which is only a
legal signification of the Kings command or authority for their Election and
Convening; And this is supplied by the Kings confirmation afterward, in the
aforesaid Act. It being a rule in Law, That Omn-is rati habitio mandato
aequiperatur, a confirmation afterward is looked upon in Law as the same thing
with a command in the beginning. There is no need to cite any Cases to prove
this, whereof there is no scarcity of Instances, if I asserted a long discourse.

Not to insist upon his unmannerlinesse with the present honorable Houses, I
shall only wonder at his boldness and folly, who might have been fore warned
by that passage in the 3d Instit. chap. Parliament, which he so much
Inculcates, viz.

Arthur Hall, a Member of the House of Commons, for publishing and discovering
the Conferences of the House, 3d Instit. 23.
and writing a Book to the dishonor of the House, was adjudged by the House of
Commons to be committed to the Tower for 6. months, fined at five hundred
Marks, and expelled the House. Yet I know the Authors case is somewhat
differing, he being (it is said) no Member of the House of Commons.

But to conclude, Conclusion.
It Is a strange thing that there should be some who cannot be contented either
with rain or sunshine, Seneca.
Neque morbos nostros nec Remedia nostra far possumus, was an old complaint,
but much more applicable to the dregs of time, wherein we are fallen. We were
before tormented with the anguish of our wounds, and now we quarrel with our
Plasters; and like the great City mentioned by Aristotle, Politio^.
because we cannot find, we make the causes of our own Distempers. But the
body politic has had already too much of Bloodletting, and there is no man
but has found a miserable experience too of the Phlebotomy of Purses. Why then
being poor, should we by our folly seek to banish from our selves the only good
Companion of Poverty, Quietness? There was never any Government so perfect but
it had some Naevi in the Constitution, and some Errors and Miscarriages in the
Practice. He must take order to go to Heaven, that will not brook Defects on
Earth. And therefore we ought not critically too ensure the Actions of our
Superiors, because we know not all the circumstances that encouraged and gave
occasion for their Counsels, and if we did we must make abatement of some
grains to humane frailty, and the short-sightednesse of our knowledge, and the
multitude of Accidents which can neither be foreseen, nor prevented. Such are
the Judgments of the Wise and Moderate. But Detractors are the Authors of
their own Blindness, and are like Flies which refuse the sound parts of the
body, but suck and aggravate the unsound and the Raw. They have Pharisaicall
consciences, and make that which they account Virtue in themselves, to be a
Crime unpardonable in all the World besides, Nil mihi vis and vis cuncta licere
tibi; Martial.
There is no need to apply it. I shall only add one Lesson that the late wars
have taught me, To resist the Prince (besides the sting of Conscience) can tend
to no good End in Policy. For every unlawful change is destructive or hurtful
to the first instruments of that change: (The most of those men that were the
first movers in the late Wars, or their Executors, will make affidavit of the
truth hereof.) And if the Prince prevails (which is most likely) the Rebels are
undone in their Lives, Relations, Estates. If the Rebellious prevail, the
stirring spirits among them will rule and tyrannize over the Rest, till by
supplanting one another they make way for the Princes Restitution: Machiav. in
Princ.
so that after all the Calamity, loss and danger of a war, and the
subjection to the Tyrannical government of their Equals, the greatest and best
end of all is this only; to be as they were; and like the Dove of Noah, after a
tyresom and dangerous journey in the Air, to return into the Ark again for rest
and safety. I hope the Nation will not any longer be deluded by Impostors, who
make Religion and the Liberty of the Subject the stalking horses to their own
private Designs; but that if they must needs contend, they will rather strive
who shall be most forward to be an instrument for the advancement of Religion,
and the settlement of this hitherto distracted Nation upon the Pillars of
Justice and a Lasting Peace. Eritis insuperabiles, si fueritis inseperabiles.

FINIS.

