Mr. PRYN'S last and final DECLARATION To the COMMONS of ENGLAND, Concerning
the KING, PARLIAMENT, And ARMY. AND His Remonstrance and Proposals to the
Kingdom, showing, That it is High Treason, to compass or imagine the
deposition or death of our Sovereign Lord King CHARLES. WITH The Oath of
Allegiance to His Majesty, taken by the Parliament men, before their admission
into the House as MEMBERS. By WILLIAM PRYN, of Lincolns-Inne, Esquire.

Printed in the Year, 1648.

Master PRYNS Declaration to the KINGDOM Concerning The apparent danger of his
Majesty's Royal person, and the present proceedings of the Parliament and Army
in order to the deposing of Charles Steward, their lawful King of England, etc.
Gentlemen, and Fellow Commoners,
Whereas my self, and above 200 Members more being forcibly secluded from
siting in the house of Commons, by the Officers of the Army, I therefore held
it my duty, to impart unto you these ensuing Proposals.

First, That by the common law of the Realm, the stat. of 25 E. 3. and all
other Acts concerning Treason, it is no less then high treason for any man to
compass or imagine the deposition or death of the King, or of his eldest Son
and heir, though it be never executed, much more if actually accomplished, and
that many have been arraigned, condemned, and executed, for such intended
treasons in sormer ages, as the E. of Arundell, and others, by judgment in Parl.

Secondly, That in the Oath of Allegiance whlch you have all taken, immediately
before your admission into the house as Members; You do truly and sincerely
acknowledge, profess, testify and declare in your consciences, before God and
the World, That our Sovereign Lord King Charles, is lawful and rightful King
of this Realm, and of all other his Maj. Dominions and Countries.

Thirdly, That your selves, among other members, have in above one hundred
Remonstrances and Declarations, professed, both to the King himself, kingdom,
world, and foreign States, that you never intended the least hurt, injury, or
violence to the Kings person, Crown, Dignity, or Posterity; but intended to him
and his Royal posterity, more honor, happiness, gr^atnesse, and glory, then
ever was yet enjoyed by any of his Predecessors, that you have proposed no
other ends to your selves, but the performance of all duty and loyalty to his
Maj. person, That his personal safety, honor, and greatness, are much dearer
to you then your own lives and fortunes, which you do most heartily dedicate,
and shall most willingly employ for the maintenance and support thereof, That
the Parl. will ever have a care to prevent any danger which his Majesty may
justly apprehend to his person: with many other such like expressions. Which,
whether your present Actings and Councels do not directly oppose, contradict,
and give the lie unto, to your eternal infamy, and breach of public faith, as
much as in you lies, let the world and all men judge; as they will do in due
season. The rule in the Old Testament is, not to take any wicked Kings from
their Thrones, and behead them: but (Rom: ^3: 1, 2, etc.) Take away the wicked
from before the King, and his Throne shall be established in Righteousness.
And the rule in the new Testament. To be subject to Kings, and the higher
powers, and to submit unto them, even for Conscience and the Lords sake: and to
make prayers, supplications, and intercessions for them, that under them we may
lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty: for this is
good and acctptable in the sight of God our Savior: not to depose or shed
their blood, for which there is no precept. And is not this plain way of God,
the safest for you and the Army to follow, yea the only short cut to peace and
settlement? Ruminate upon it, and then be wise, both sor your souls good, and
the welfare of poor England.

Fourthly, Remember, that no protestant King or State, ever yet defiled their
hands, or stained the purity and honor of their Reformed Religion, with the
deposition, or blood of any of their Kings and Princes, much less of a
protestant king or Prince, of a temperate and sober life, as the King is; who
never imbrued his own hand in any one man's blood, in any tyrannical or bloody
way before or since the wars (for ought I can hear) but only in a Military.

Fifthly, Consider, that the Scots delivered the King to our Commis. at
Newcastle, upon this express condition, That no violence should be offered to
his person, etc. according to the Covenant. How then can you un-king, depose
him, or take away his life upon pretext of Justice, which if you do, you engage
both kingdoms to war against you, and to crown the Prince of Wales their King,
as being next heir apparent.

WILL: PRYN.

A Declaration touching the King.
AFter mature deliberation upon the proceedings of the Lord General Fairfax,
and the General council of Officers, in relation to the establishing of a firm
and lasting peace within this bleeding, torn, and tottering kingdom, and the
erecting of a pure and sound Government according to the Law of Nature, and the
fundamental laws of this Realm, and after several conferences and disputations
in order thereunto, diverse of the Presbyterian party frequented to Westminster,
and other places, where they had several disputations and conferences with the
Officers, and other members of the Army; and after some debate upon the
Foundation, of the grounds and principles of the Agreement of the People, the
Presbyterians declared a great dislike thereof, remonstrating, That it was not
founded upon a firm Rock; to which objections, several answers were made, for
clearing such scruples and cautions, as seemed difficult to many; And as for
the person of the King, they further declared, that notwithstanding the present
Ordnance of Attainder against his Maj. yet they conceived it requisite and
lawful, that the prayers of the Ministry be still continued in every
Congregation throughout his Maj. Realms and Dominions; desiring, that he may
have a legal trial, and that He may not be degraded of his Titles and
Honors: Concerning which, be pleased to peruse this ensuing Letter from
Holland, touching the degrading of his Majesty.

Sir, We are here in a kind of amazement, to hear that your King should be
designed for the grave before his time: Believe it, there is nothing more
characterizes men wise in the opinion of the wisest mere man, then that they
see a far off, not the plague of the body only, though that, but judgments
sometimes for evildoing, sometimes for acting indiscreetly in matters that may be
done. That which may lawfully be done, it may be absurd to do at some time:
The taking away life, which is that prized above all, by him that all account
wise, is not just (say some) at any time, unless there be a law that makes the
thing done death, and death to him that does it: The supreme power of England
that forbids any to judge of treason in a constructive way, but themselves have
retaind in themselves a power to judge such and such practices and endeavors to
amount to treason or death. In particular, supose there were law, or it were in
the power of the Lords and Commons to take awoy the life of the present King,
yet if England, Scotland, and Ireland shall be made more miserable thereby in
reason, and the waas renewed, to the probable ruin of the Nations, and chiefly
to those who pretend most to piety and justice therein, it were better not.
That it is dangerous this may be said: If you cut off, you must set up,
vacuities of that nature suddenly introduce confusion: If you set up, it must
either be a new King, or a new Government; if a new King, then the next of
kin, and if him, then let his ^complyance be what it will, his Fathers death
cannot be ^orgot; no, the danger of his mothers influence, who will remain in
banishment, be easily got over, refuse he to come in, as it is most like, he
has the aforementioned written upon his breast, hesides his hereditary claim, his
marriage, which no man that has a purse, but will endowry with a daughter,
raise an army of 20000 to restore a son in law, and make his daughter Queen of
3 kingdoms, which by reason of situation, and inherent accommodations may
(well managed) be the ballancing power of Christendom. If any other, or a new
Government, the objections are the same, and all the line and that successively
are made enemies to boot; besides has the Parl. or army yet got so much love?
are they so deep in the hearts of the people, that they can assure themselves
the newtrals, or those who have gone far with them will quiesce? But the
answer is ready, we have an Army that cannot be over come, neither by what can
rise here, or come from abroad. So had Alexander, but Alexander was poisoned,
and what then became of his Army? ruin approached. Some will boast they fear no
colors, nor danger, for they have the swiftest horse in the Kingdom; but what
if that horse stumble, and throw his Rider: where is the man, the horse
wandering up and down, as the fed Hauk for food, comes to the hand of a child?

Hague 2 Jan. 1648.
The Heads of the Armies Deolaration.
1 That they were great promoters of the Kings design. 2 Of promoting the Kings
design in Scotland, obstructing the Lord Lisle, and promoting the L. Inchequin.
3 That they encouraged the force that was set upon the Houses by the London
Apprentises, hindered and obstructed such things a^ tended to the settlement of
the Kingdom, etc. That therefore to the end that there might be a speedy way
for settling the same, they excluded them the House, and intend very speedily to
send in the Charge against them.

FINIS.

