THE LEVELLERS Levelled to the very GROUND. WHEREIN This dangerous Seditious
Opinion and design of some of them; That it is necessary, decent, and
expedient, now to reduce the House of Peers, and bring down the Lords into the
Commons House, to sit and Vote together with them, as one House. And the false
absurd, grounds whereon they build this Paradox, are briefly examined, refuted,
and laid in the dust.

By William Prynne, Esquire.

PROVE. 19. 10. Delight is not seemly for a Fool; much less for a Servant to
rule over Princes.

ECCLES. 10. 5, 7. There is an evil I have seen under the Sun, as an error
which proceeds from the Ruler; I have seen Servants upon Horses, and Princes
walking as Servants upon the earth.

LONDON: Printed by T. B. for Michael Spark. 1647.

THE LEVELLERS LEVELLED.
IT was the Apostle Paul's Doctrine; and that he likewise gave in special
charge to Titus c. 3. 1. Put them in mind to be subject to principalities and
Powers, to obey Magistrates, to be ready to every good work: But this Doctrine
now is little less then Heresy, and mere Arbitrary Tyranny, in the opinion
of a New Generation of Levellers, and seditious Sectaries, sprung up among us
since the Wars; the very persons of whom Peter prophesied in the latter
times; 2 Pet. 2. 11.
Who despise Dominion; presumptuous, selfe-willed, they are not afraid to
speak evil of Dignities, and the things that they understand not, and shall
perish in their own corruption. How active and industrious these Firebrarnds
of Sedition have been by writing and petitioning to extirpate Monarchy and
Magistracy, Nobility and Gentry; and how they move every stone to pull down
the House of Peers, and level the Lords to the Commoners, by bringing them
down into the Commons-House to sit and vote together with them as one, or else
not to sit or vote at all, is visible to most; and how many thousands of
ignorant simple people they have engaged to confederate with them in this
pernicious design, has been already discovered in part to the Houses; the
false suggestions and dangerous consequencies whereupon it is grounded, I shall
succinctly discover, to undeceive the seduced people, and take them off from
such a desperate attempt, which will prove destructive both to the Parliament,
and themselves too in conclusion.

These Lilburnists and Levellers pretend, that it is not fit the Lords should
fit and vote in a distinct House by themselves, as they have done of latter
times, but that they and the Commons should now sit all together in one House,
(to wit, the House of Commons, the Lilburns and Overtons Petitions, and late
Letters. The agreement of the people. The remonstrance of many 1000 to their
own House of Commons, and others.
ONLY SOVEREIGN POWER OF THIS KINGDOM, as they style it) as they did of
Methinkes these New Lights should not cry up and and revive old Presidents and
Patterns, no more then old clothes, fashions or Ceremonies.
old at first, and be new molded into a single House; that so Bills,
Ordinances, Votes, and businesses of Parliament might pass with more
expedition upon one Debate and Vote, and not stay the Debates and Votes of two
distinct Houses ere they be consummate. And because the Lords are but few in
number, the sons of Conquest, not of election, representing only themselves,
but not the Commons of England, represented only by the Knights, Citizens and
Burgesses chosen and entrusted by them; therefore it is just and reasonable the
Lords should be levelled and brought down to the Commons House to sit and Vote
with them; and not enjoy any distinct or negative Votes among themselves, as
now they do.

To answer these pretenses, I shall not insist upon the Sea Mr. Seldens Tit* of
Hon. par. 2. c 5 Spelm. Council. Tom. 1. Mr. Lamb. Archa. Modus tenendi
Parliamen orum, Truth triumphing over falsh^od, p. 56. to 76. Cooks 9. Report,
The Preface, and 4. Inst c. 1.
Lords ancient and undoubted Right to sit and Vote in Parliaments long before
the Conquest, from the first beginning of Parliaments to this present: Nor on
their activity and readiness in all ages, to oppose with the loss and hazard
of their estates, heads, lives, the encroachments of our Kings upon the
Subjects Liberties, and vindicate the peoples freedoms, in the Sea Mat. Pa.
Mat. Westminster. Walsingham, H^linshed, Speed, Graf. on Trussel, Daniel and The. 1*
2. 3. Par. of the Sovereign power of Parliaments.
Reigns of King John, Henry the 3. Edward 2. Richard 2. and other oppressive
Princes, against whose invasions of the Kingdoms Laws and Rights they have
ever been the principal Bulwarks; and of late the chief procurers of this
present Parliament, and undertakers of our defensive war against the King,
wherein the Earl of Essex, Lord Brook, Lord Willoughby, and others of them
first appeared; Nor yet to debate their ancient and undoubted power and right
of Judicature in civil and criminal cases of Commoners as well as Peers, in
all times and Ages since there were Parliaments, of which there are infinite
presidents in Histories, Parliament Rols and Journalls, and sundry disclaimers
of the whole House of Commons of being Judges in Parliament, as in 1. R. 2.
Rot. Parl. n. 38, 39, 40. 1 H. 7. Rot. Parl. n. 79. and Plac. Coronae. nu. 11.
to 17. and other Rolls: I shall wholly address my self to answer such
Allegations as are most pertinent, touching the point of reducing both Houses
into one, in such manner as is projected.

First then I answer, what though it be probable by Modus tenendi Parliamentum,
that the King, Lords and Commons anciently sat in one room, and went in at one
common door in King Edwards the Confessors time; yet it follows not, they all
sat and voted together, as one entire house: no more then it follows; all the
Judges and Officers of the Kings Courts of Chancery, Kings Bench and Common
Pleas sit in one common Room, and go in at one door, at Westminster Hall:
therefore they all sit, judge and hear causes together, and are or ought to be
reduced to one Court; and do not judge, and hear causes severally, nor ought
to do it: there being no one Author or record of credit extant, which proves
directly, that the Lords and Commons did ever sit, vote, or act together as one
entire house, and pass Bills, Judgments, Ordinances, Orders, by one
undivided and united Vote; the thing which should be proved.

Secondly, when, by whom, and upon what occasion the Houses first came to be
divided, is altogether uncertain, for ought appears by history or records. 4.
Instit. p. 2. and. ^n.
Sir Edward Cook conceives, that both houses sat together in 5. and 6. Ed. 3.
and that about that i am, or a little after, they were first divided, when the
Commons first chose a Speaker. But the Records of these Parliaments do not
necessarily warrant his conjecture herein; since they speak only of the meeting
together of the three Estates in Parliament, (as now they often times do, on the
first and last day of the Parliament, at conferences, passing Bills, and upon
other occasions) not of their sitting and voting together. For my part, I
conceive the division of the Houses far more ancient, for this reason,
because our historians writing of our ancientest Parliaments, as well before as
after the Conquest, do many times make mention only of our See Spelman Council.
T^m. 1. Seldens titles of honor. part 2 c. 5.
Kings, Archbishops, Bishops, Earls and Barons present in them, not of any
Elders of the people, Senators, Knights or Commons to represent the people,
(which at other times they speak of) as present in our Parliaments, Truth
triumphing over falsehood. p. 56. etc.
and Counsels: occasioned only as I conceive, by the distinction of their
sitting places and debates. unless it be granted, that many of our ancient
Parliaments were held without Commons, Knights, and Burgesses, (as some affirm)
but never without Peers and Lords; which would much invalid the Commons
authority, and that supreme jurisdiction of theirs which the Levellers now
plead for. But admit they sat together in one room in Edward the third his
reign, yet it is cleart o me, their debates, votes, judgment, were long
before distinct as now they are, by that memorable passage in Stephanides
(transcribed out of him by Titles of Honor, part 2. Chap. 5. p. 705. 706
Master Seldom; concerning the jugdment given in Parliament at Northampton
against Thomas Becket Archbishop of Canterbury, in the eleventh year of King
Henry the second, Anno Domini 1165. Where the Bishops, Earls, and all the
Barons of England, resolving upon the Kings motion there, that Becket refusing
to appear in Parliament, upon summons to answer the complaint against him,
being neither hindered by sickness, nor sending any reasonable excuse for his
not appearing, should forseit all his moveable goods, and be at the Kings
mercy: thereupon there arose a difference between the Bishops, and Barons,
which of them should pronounce the judgment: the Barons alleged, that the
Bishops ought to pronounce it, because he was a Bishop, and they but Laymen;
the Bishops Ecclesiastical persons, and his fellow Priests, and Bishops. To
which one of the Bishops answered; it belonged to the Barons and not to them,
because it was no Ecclesiastical but Secular judgment; that they sat there as
See Petrus Blesensis.* De Inst^t Episcopi B^bl. Patrum Tom. 12. pors 2. p. 447.
Barons, not as Bishops: you are Barons, and we are Barons: here we are Peers.
But you insist in vain upon the reason of our Order: for if you regard in us
our Ordination, you ought likewise to consider the same in him: Now in this
that we are Bishops, we cannot judge our Archbishop and Lord. The King hearing
this controversy about pronouncing the judgment, was moved, and thereupon
this controversy ceased: and the Bishop of Winchester, (then Henry de Bloys)
being at last enjoined to give the judgment, pronounced it against his will.
There being no mention, speech, or inter locution of the Commons in this whole
Parliamentary debate or censure, but only of the King, Bishops and Barons; it
makes it more then probable to me, that even then the Houses were divided; at
least, that they sat and voted not together but distinctly: and if the Commons
were present, yet it is most clear, the Barons only were the Judges, and gave
and pronounced the sentence in Parliament, even without the Commons. Of which
more in some other Treatise.

Thirdly; admit, the division of the Houses no ancienter then King Edw. the
third, yet their division being made at first upon good grounds, to prevent
confusion and delays, and to pass things with more mature advise and
deliberation upon double debates, and second cogitations, and continued
constantly ever since upon good grounds, without any alteration oropposition.
And this division of them being ratified and approved by the Law and custom of
Parliament, The Parl. Rolls, and Journalls, yea confirmed by sundry And the Act
for Trienniall Parliament, made this Parliament.
Acts of Parliament, and among others by 31. H. 8. c. 10. 33. H. 8. c. 21. 3.
Jac. c. 1. it can be no way just, nor safe, nor convenient, nor honorable, to
confound them both together now, in the manner propounded, yea a clear
dissolving of the Parliament being contrary to the Act for its continuance, and
a breach of the solemn League, Covenant, and all engagements, to obey and
defend BOTH HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT; and a great dishonor to to the Lords, who
cannot without apparent perjury and ignominy submit thereto: without whose full
and free consents, and the Kings too by special act of Parliament, it is no
ways feasible, if by it,

Fourthly, it will introduce a world of contradictions, confusions,
absurdities, and inconveniences, as these particulars evide^ce. First, both
these houses, as they are now divided, have, (and always since their divisions
have had) their several distinct Speakers, and one chief cause of the division
(as Instit. 4. p* 2.
Sir Edward Cook conceives) was the Commons choosing of a continual Speaker. If
then you will unite both Houses into one; you must have either these two
Speakers in that one house (which would breed confusion and disturbance, and be
like two heads upon one man's neck;) Or but one, both for Lords and Commons, who
then cannot debate nor Vote distinctly, but jointly with the Commons. If but
one, then which of the two shall be the man? Not the Commons Speaker, because
they had no Speaker at all before the Houses were divided, and so can claim
none when reunited. And the Lords Speaker being of greatest antiquity, Dignity,
and Superior to the Commons in place and degree, ought of right to be
preferred, and enjoy the Speakers place upon the reducement. And how a Peer;
who is not Cook 4. In^stit. p. 8. 46. 47
elected either a Member or Speaker by the Commons, can by the Law of the Land,
or custom of Parliament be Speaker of, and for the Commons, as their mouth and
representative; or a mere Commoner, a Speaker to the Lords to represent them,
transcends my Law and skill; and will require 7 years time to settle and
resolve. Secondly, if the Houses be united, then how and where shall the Lords,
and their assistants sit, and how and where the Commons? If all promiscuously,
this would unlord, unpeere them, and make the meanest Commoner their equal: If
distinct, then why not in distinct Houses still, as well as Classes and Seats?
Or shall the Lords sit covered and the Commons sit bare, as now they dote
meetings and conferences of both Houses? This would be but ill Physic for the
Commons this winter season, and too great a penance to such of them who have
crazy heads, and weak legs, to stand bare so long, and some of their spirits
(especially those who are the Levellers best friends) I doubt are so high, they
would hardly brook such a penance and daily observance. Thirdly, If the Houses
be reduced into one, then their Cook 4. Instit. p. 34. 35.
manner of voting and dividing being distinct and different, as all know: the
one by a general Ay, and No; the other by a particular Content and not
content, beginning at the puny Lord: the one determined by dividing the House,
to take the Poll; the other without dividing: the one having no power to enter
a Protestation of dissent, the other enjoying it: the one power to vote by
Proxy, the other only in person without proxy: then whether shall both retain
these their differences still in voting, which will bring absolute confusion,
and much delay: or else the Lords vote as the Commons do, or the Commons as the
Lords? If the Lords only as Co^moners, that were a disparagement and
disadvantage to them, and a means to deprive them of their privileges and
votes as Peers, the Commons now having above twenty to one for number. If the
Commons shall vote as Lords, that would make them Peers; and make each Vote if
given particularly by the poll, and the entering of protestations, sp^nd above
half their time. Fourthly, if both houses should be mingled together, then the
Lords alone must be judges, and give Oaths and judgment as now they do, in
writs of Error and other causes, with which the Commons are not to intermddle;
or the Lords and Commons jointly. If the Lords alone, then why should both
Houses be united, or they the only Judges in the Commons House, or presence,
which their greatness doubtless would not well digest? If Lords and Commons
jointly, this would subvert and alter the ancient proceedings and judgments of
Parliament, and give the Commons a new power of Judicature and giving Oaths,
and reversing errors, they never claimed nor enjoyed.

Fifthly, if the Houses be thus confounded, then what will become of their
distinct Servants, Officers, Clerks, Doorekeepers, etc? Shall both continue?
that were a superfluity and needless charge: Shall one of them be discharged?
then whether the Lords on Commons? and whether the black Rod will not be quite
casheered with the Lords house? will be a great question, and require much
time to resolve. Sixthly, if both Houses be new-modelled into one, then what
will become of all the Assistants of the Lords house? they certainly must be
cashiered, especially such who are only employed as Messengers to the Commons
House, of which there will be no use at all when they sit together. Eighthly,
what will become of the form of endorsing all Bills sent from the Commons to
the Lords: Soit bail al Seignieurs: les Seigneurs ont assentus: and the old
form of reading Bills thrice in both Houses ere they can pass them; and so of
our Acts of Parliament? In respect therefore of all these several
contradictions and inconveniences which can hardly be reconciled, and no ways
altered, but by special Act of Parliament (if by it) without dissolving the
present Parliament, to please a company of seditious ignorant Lovellers and
Sehismaticks, who never pondered all these particulars; it can neither be
convenient nor safe to confound both Houses together into one, as is
endeavored and desired.

Fifthly, the Act of 16. Caroli Regis, entitled* An Act for the preventing of
inco^veniences, happening by the long intermissions of Parliaments; (made with
abundance of care and pains this Parliament, before the King's departure)
distinguesheth the house of Commons from the house of Lords; prescribes an oath
in haec verba, to the Lord Chancell our, Lord Keeper, and Commissioners of the
great Seal of England, You shall swear, that you shall truly and faithfully
issue out, and send abroad all Writs of Summons to Parliament FOR BOTH HOUSES.
And in default thereof, enacts, That THE PEERS of this Realm shall be enabled
and ENJOINED to meet in the old Palace of Westminster, AT THE VSVALL PLACE
THERE, on the third Monday on November: and that they, or any twelve or more of
them THEN AND THERE ASSEMBLED shall issue out Writs in usual form, under the
hands and seals of twelve or more of them, to the respective Sheriffs, and
other Officers, for the electing of Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of
Parliament. That on the third Monday in January, and second Tuesday in March,
ALL AND EVERY THE PEERS OF THE REALM shall make their appearance and assembly
at THE PALACE aforesaid; and shall EACH OF THEM be liable unto such pains and
censures for his and their NOT APPEARING AND SERVING then and THERE in
Parliament, as if be or they had been summoned by Writ under the great Seal of
England, and had not appeared and served, and to such further pains and
censures as BY THE REST OF THE PEERS in Parliament assembled THEY SHALL BE
JUDGED UNTO: And that the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses assembled IN THE
COMMONS HOUSE of Parliament, shall be liable to such pains and censures as he
or they shall be adjudged unto.

After which it enacts, That neither the HOUSE OF PEERS nor THE HOUSE OF COMMONS
shall be adjourned within fifty days at least, after the meeting thereof,
unless it be by the free consent OF EVERY THE SAID HOUSES RESPECTIVELY: And
that the PEERS assembled in Parliament, may FROM TIME TO TIME choose and
declare such person TO BE SPEAKER FOR THE SAID PEERS as they shall think fit:
And that the said Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, shall and may FROM TIME TO
TIME DURING THEIR ASSEMBLY IN PARLIAMENT, choose and declare one of themselves
to be SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE OF COMMONS, as they shall think fit: Which said
SPEAKERS, as well for the said PEERS as HOUSE OF COMMONS RESPECTIVELY, shall be
perfect and conpleat Speakers FOR THE SAID HOUSES RESPECTIVELY, and shall have
as full and large power, jurisdiction and privileges, to all intents and
purposes, as any SPEAKER OR SPEAKERS OF EITHER OF THE SAID HOUSES RESPECTIVELY
heretofore have had and enjoyed. Therefore the levelling and reducing of both
Houses into one, or abolishing the Lords House and Peerage, will utterly null
and repeal this Act, (the best that was ever yet made for the Kingdoms safety,
and Parliaments advantage) and deprive both Parliament, Kingdom and people of
all future benefit by it, (which I wish our Levellers and Lilburnists seriously
to consider) and likewise null and repeal the Act to prevent Inconveniences
which may happen by the untimely adjourning, proroguing or dissolving of this
present Parliam. An. 17. Car. which enacts, That THE HOUSE OF PEERS shall not at
any time or times be adjourned during the present Parliament, unless it be BY
THEMSELVES OR THEIR OWN ORDER: And in like manner, that THE HOUSE OF COMMONS
shall not at any time or times during this Parliament, be adjourned, unless it
be BY THEMSELVES, OR BY THEIR OWN ORDER. Which I hope both Houses, as they
desire their own continuance, and being of the Parliament, will well advise of;
and all those whom Lilburn or his Emissaries have seduced to engage against the
House of Lords, or level them to the Commons.

Sixthly, admit the Houses might without any inevitable mischiefs and
contradictions, be modeled, and united into one, yet to bring down the Lords
into the Commons House, to sit and Vote like Commons with them, is no ways
tolerable, or to be thought on but with indignation, for these reasons. First,
because the whole Commons House it self* when they present their Speaker to
the King and Lords (which will be abolished by this union) or when any Bills
are to be passed by the Royal Assent, upon the Cook 4* Inst. p. 28. 33 H. 8.
c. 21. 3 Jac. c. 1.
beginning and ending of every Parliament, and upon some other special
occasions have always used to go up and wait upon the House of Lords in
person, yea to stand bare at their Bar, and to send their Members in person
See 5. R. 2. n. 16.
up to the Lords upon any Message, Conference, or other occasion; but never did
the whole House of Peers in any age come down in person to the Commons House,
or any Peers of late bring Messages to them, but only send them by some
Assistants, as Judges, Masters of Chancery, etc. Therefore now to talk of
bringing down the House of Peers to sit with the Commons in their House, (all
one, as to reduce a Noble man's Dining-roome to his Hall or Kitchen, and level
the roof and upper rooms of a house with the lowermost floor) is such a
dishonor and affront to the Lords, that none but degenerate and ignoble
spirits can so much as hear or think of it with patience, nor no Peer resent
it but with just scorn and contempt, and rather dye then consent unto it,
without whose consents it cannot be done without both Houses ruin: And to
bring up the House of Commons to sit and Vote jointly with the Peers, would be
to advance the Commons* above their degree, not level the Lords; to make some
men Lords before they are Gentlemen, and every Commoner no less then a Lord,
which would too much puff and bladder them with pride, and make them slight
those whom they represent* who being but Commoners, cannot be represented by
Peers, or any sitting and Voting in the House of Peers, by the true
fundamental Law and Custom of Parliaments, as Sir Instit. 4. p. 8, 46, 47.
Edward Cook resolves. Secondly, if the Lords should be brought down into
the Commons House, (which is much like the reducing of the head and shoulders
of the natural body, into the belly or legs, which would make a Monster and
destroy the man) there would be no room for them, their Officers and
Assistants, unless enlarged and metamorphosed into another form. Thirdly, If
the Lords must be brought down into the Commons House, then the Sea Cook* 4.
Inst. p. 14, 15.
King and Prince as well as they, or else they must be totally excluded the
Parliament, or sit alone by themselves in the House of Lords, without any Lords
to attend them* An indignity which no King or Prince can brook, and no modest
Commoner seriously think of but with detestation; nor Lord, nor King consent
to, but by force and violence; and without their voluntary consents it will not
be valid, but destructive.

Seventhly, The false pretext for it, of expediting Bills, Ordinances, and
Votes, is an absurd and ignorant fancy of overhasty spirits, who would act all
things in a hurry without good deliberation: For first, nothing ought to be
done in Parliament but upon full and mature debate and deliberation of all the
circumstances and probable consequences of it in future time (a thing now
seldom considered:) Diu deliberandum quod semel statuendum, and, Festina
lent, are safe rules in Parliament, especially in passing public Acts and
Ordinances, in making War or Peace, or any National Leagues and Agreements.
Secondly, Hasty Dogs bring forth blind Whelps: and hasty Votes, over sudden
Councels and Motions, lame, blind, contradictory, unjust, and inconsiderate
Orders, Ordinances, Acts, which must either be corrected, supplied, or repealed
by Additionals, of which we have had too many experiments since this
Parliament; which in many Votes, Ordinances, Orders, and Impeachments has made
more haste then good speed; and Voted sometimes both absurdities and
impossibilities (witness the Commons Votes, for the Trial of Mac-Guire and
Mac-Mohun in the King's Bench, the very first day of the Term, before any
Indictment drawn, found, or any Jury summoned to find it; for the Trial of
Judge Jenkins in the King's Bench, by a short day, for Treason aleaged to be
committed in Wales, before any Indictment found in the Country, or removed into
Court, and the like;) which I only mention to satisfy and answer the
Objectors, nor to defame the House or Houses, whose Honors and Reputations
have been much blemished, through the inconsiderate rashness of some ignorant
Members, who poasted on such Votes and Impeachments. Thirdly, this dividng the
Houses will breed infinite disorder and confusion, 4. Instit. q. 2.
not expedition, in their proceedings, as the premises manifest, and destroy
their very forms and method; upon which ground Sir Witness Dr Levtons, Dr.
Bastwicks, Mr Burtons, my own, Mr. Walkers, Mr. Foxleys, the Chesterwars and
many others, about Shipmoney, and other grievances.
Edward Cook writes they were first divided. Fourthly, it will be a great
retarding and obstruction to public Justice, especially in Writs of Error,
and all such things which the Lords may dispatch or judge without the Commons
House; where many hundreds of Petitions and businesses heard and Voted above
seven years since, do yet stick without report, or transmission to the Lords
(to the great dishonor and scandal of their proceedings and speedy justice)
which had been dispatched and ended many years past, had they first petitioned
to the Lords for redress. So as the Lords House is clearly no cause of delay,
but the Commons rather, through their long debates or want of method, which
debates would be increased and lengthned by adding of the Lords unto them, who
can now debate and determine things apart, and resolve two or three things, or
more, whiles the Commons are debating one: And therefore, if delay be the only
cause of reducing the Lords House to the Commons, the Commons certainly are
rather to be reduced then the Lords, and may be better spared of the two (even
by His letter to a friend, his letters to Henry Martyn and Cromwell, Innocence
and Truth justified, Englands Birthright, the late Petition of many freeborn
people of England.
Lilburnes and his Confederates Libells and Petitions) their delays being not
a quarter to one so many, nor one quarter so long as the Commons, as themselves
must and do acknowledge. Eighthly, this whole design is a direct breach of the
solemn League and Covenant, a subversion of the Law and Custom of Parliaments,
a device to destroy both Houses, under pretext of reducing them into one; an
engine to dissolve this present, and all future Parliaments; to alter the
fundamental Laws and Government of this Kingdom, to unking the King, unprince
the Prince, unlord the Lords, and quite destroy their House (almost effected by
expulsions, and impeachments of most of their Members by degrees, who have
scarce enough left to make up an house, which it is high time for them and the
Commons to observe;) yea, a project to extirpate Monarchy and Nobility, and set
up a popular Anarchy and Polarchy: And therefore who ever has plotted and
fomented it, is more guilty of high Treason then Strafford, Canterbury, or the
Gunpowder Traitors, and deserves a severer punishment then they underwent,
even by the hands of the Parliament it self, and all that are wel-wishers to
Parliaments or Kingdom, though no friends to Peers.

Ninthly, this division of the Houses is; First, a great honor to the
Parliament and Houses, savouring of greater Majesty, State, and Order, then
their joining into one, and giving every estate its 31 H. 8. ^. 1^.
du^ place and rank. Secondly, a great ease and benefit to the Subject, who
may make his Addresses and Petitions to either at his election for relief.
Thirdly, a great dispatch and expedition to all public affairs, one House
fitting and preparing them for the Debat, and concurrence of the other, at one
and the same time, as Committees of each House prepare and expedite businesses
for the whole House. Fourthly, a means of more speedy justice, by the Commons
preparing of Articles and evidence for complaints and impeachments, presented
by them to the Lords, whiles they are dispatching other businesses; and their
hearing Writs of Error, and other causes, whiles the Commons are upon other
debates; which they could not do in one house, but jointly together, and
successively, not with so quick dispatch, and such good order as now. Fifthly,
a thing very necessary and advantageous to the Kingdom and people, and safest
for the Parliament, in that the Lords upon their second debates and conferences
with the Judges and others, many times amend and rectify diverse errors,
imperfections, and mistakes in the overhasty Votes, yea and deliberate Orders,
Ordinances, Bills and Declarations of the Commons, which the Commons acknowledge
by their assents unto their amendments; and often times the Commons stay some
Votes, Orders, Bills, Ordinance, sent down to them by the Lords; and their
several amendments and dislikes, with the conferences and debates occasioned
thereupon, and second considerations of Businesses, Votes, Ordinances, Orders,
Bills, Declarations, and the like, make them more profitable, complete and
valid, and less liable to exceptions and evasions then else they would have
been. In all which respects, this division of the Houses, and the Lords and
Kings negative voices rightly considered and used, are not only convenient,
but expedient and absolutely necessary for the public good, whatever Lilburn
and his ignorant Levellers fancy to the contrary.

I shall therefore close up this with that wholesome and seasonable advice of
Solomon, Prove. 24. 21, 22. My son fear thou the Lord and the King, and
meddle not with those WHO ARE GIVEN TO CHANGE; For their calamity shall rise
suddenly, and who knows the ruin of them both?

There is only one Objection to be removed, Object.
wherewith I shall arm the Levellers, that so I may leave nothing unanswered,
that may be hereafter insisted on. And that is, this passage in Modus tenendi
Parliamentum, We must know, that for the granting of such help and aid (to the
King) it hehooveth THAT ALL THE PEERS OF THE PARLIAMENT AGREE: And we must
understand, that two Knights which come to the Parliament for the Shiers and
Countries out of which they come, have a greater voice in Parliament TO GRANT,
then THE GREATEST EARL in England: And after the same manner the Procters for
the Clergy, or Clerks of the Convocation-house for one Bishopric, have a
greater voice in Parliament, if they all agree, then the Bishop himself: And
this is true in all things which ought to be granted or denied to the party, or
are to be done therein. And this is manifest, BECAUSE THE KING MAY HOLD A
PARLIAMENT WITH THE COMMOMALTY AND COMMONS OF THE KINGDOM WITHOUT BISHOPS,
EARLS AND BARONS; yet so, as they be summoned to the Parliament, although no
Bishop, Earl or Baron come according to their summons: BECAUSE IN TIMES PAST,
NEITHER WAS THERE BISHOP, EARL OR BARON; and yet EVEN THEN KINGS KEPT THEIR
PARLIAMENT. But it is far otherwise on the other side; for though the
Commonalty, to wit, Laity and Clergy were summoned to the Parliament (as of
right they ought to be) yet for some certain causes they would not come; as if
they did pretend, that the King did not govern them as he ought, and in
speciality point out the Articles in which he misgoverned them, as he ought;
TUNC PARLIAMENTUM NULLUM EST OMNINO; So the Latin, the English being nonsense,
and mistranslated in many places.
then there is no Parliament at all, though all the Archbibishops, Bishops,
Earls and Barons, and and all the Peers should be present with the King: And
therefore it behooveth that all things which ought to be affirmed or informed,
granted or done by the Parliament, should be granted by the Commonalty of the
Parliament; which consists of three degrees or kinds assembled in Parliament,
to wit, of the Practors of the Clergy, the Knights of the Shires, the Citizens
and Burgesses, who represent the whole Commonalty of England, and not of Noble
men; because every one of them is for his own proper person present at the
Parliament, and for no other: Which Master Holinshead Chron. of Irel. p. 127,
128.
John Vowel in his Order and Usage how to keep a Parliament; seconds in these
words:

If the King in due order have summoned all his Lords and Barons, and they will
not come; or if they come, they will not yet appear; or if they come and
appear, and will not do no^ yield to any things THEN THE KING WITH THE CONSENT
OF THE COMMONS MAY ORDAIN AND ESTABLISH ANY ACTS OR LAWS WHICH ARE AS GOOD,
SVFFICIENT AND EFFECTVALL, AS IF THE LORDS HAD GIVEN THEIR CONSENTS. But on the
contrary, if the Commons be summoned, and will not come; or coming will not
appear, or appearing will not consent to do any thing, alleging some just,
weighty or great cause, the King in those cases cannot with the Lords devise,
make or establish any Law. The reasons are these; When Parliaments were first
began and ordained, there were no Prelates or Barons of the Parliament, and the
temporal Lords were very few or none, and then the In what age was there ever
such a Parliament of King and Commons only?
King and his Commons did make a full Parliament; which authority was NEVER YET
ABRIDGED. Again, every Baron in Parliament does represent his own person, and
speaks in the behalf of himself alone; but in the Knights, Citizens and
Burgesses, are represented the Commons of the whole Realm; and every of these
gives consent, not only for himself, but for all those also for whom he is
sent: And the King with the consent of the Commons, A gross mistake without
president to warrant it.
HAD EVER A SVFFICIENT AND FVLL AVTHORITY TO MAKE, ORDAIN AND ESTABLISH GOOD
AND WHOLESOME LAWS FOR THE COMMONWEALTH OF THE REALM: Wherefore the Lords being
lawfully summoned, and yet refusing to come, sit or consent in Parliament,
CANNOT BY THEIR FOLLY ABRIDGE THE KING OR THE COMMONS OF THEIR LAWFVLL
PROCEEDINGS IN PARLIAMENT. So he.

From which two passages it may be probably inferred; first, that a Parliament
may now be held, and Acts and Laws made by the King and Commons alone, without
the Lords; but not by the King and Lords without the Commons; and so their
sitting in Parliament is not simply necessary, so as they may quite be taken
away and reduced to the Commons house. Secondly, that they have no negative
voice, but ought to assent to whatever the Commons shall vote to be good and
necessary for the Commonwealth.

To which I answer; Answer.
first, that the compiler of the first Treatise, is both unknown, and the time
when it was first compiled, not so ancient as is imagined by some hundreds of
years: It is said in the preface, it was first composed in Edward the
Confessor's time, and showed to William the Conqueror, and approved and used
by him: but he that made this Preface to it (adds) That it was used IN THE
TIMES OF HIS SVCCESSORS KINGS OF ENGLAND, and therefore lived long after the
Conquerours time) and so writes but at random, not of his own knowledge, there
being no History nor Record to warrant any such thing: and by his Discourse
touching the Members places and sitting in Parliament, manner of Marshalling
the Bishops and others, and by other passages, it should seem, a great part of
this Treatise is but of late composure: As for its exemplification by King
Henry the second, and his sending it into Ireland, and King Henry the second,
and his sending it into Ireland, and King Henry the fourth his exemplification
of it there, I find no warrant for it, but Sir Instit. 4. p. 12.
Edward Cooks assertion, and that grounded upon a bare report from another:
these exemplifications (for ought I can learn) being neither of them extant,
nor yet so much as once mentioned by Master Richard Bolton (a great Antiquary)
in his Collection of the Statutes of Ireland: Besides, the election of See the
Freeholders grand Inquest. p. 5, 10 16.
two Knights to serve for every County, two Citizens for every City, and two
Burgesses for every Borough, and the Procurators of the Clergy, cannot be
proved by any History or Records extant, to be formally chosen by Writ, and
sent to the Parliament, in Edward the Confessors reign; nor that all those
assistants which this Treatise mentions did then sit or were present in
Parliaments, in such manner and form as is expressed in this Treatise: Yea, the
very objected passage, and reason therein rendered, proves it self to be of
pun^er date then the Confessors or Conquerours days. Secondly, admit it as
ancient as the Confessor or Conqueror, then it is apparent, that even in those
times the Houses either sat not, at least voted not both together, as is
pretended: For first, this Treatise distinguishes the Bishops, Earls and
Barons, as distinct ranks and degrees of Parliament, both from Knights,
Citizens and Burgesses, throughout the Treatise: Secondly, it distinguishes
them in the times and days of their calling in the beginning of the
Parliament, and in their fines for not appearing: Thirdly, in the charge the
King gives to them: Fourthly, in the places and manner of their sitting, all
the several orders of Peers, and Assistants of the Lords house being
mentioned, as sitting together, without any Knights, Citizens or Burgesses
sitting among them. And he adds, that between the Bishops, Earls, Barons, all
must keep their places, and the Steward of England is to look to this, THAT
NONE SIT BUT AMONG HIS PEERS AND EQVALS: Fifthly, he subjoyns, That the Justices
of England are no Justices in Parliament, unless so far forth as new power
shall be assigned and given them then by the KING AND THE PEERS of the
Parliament: That the Peers of the Parliament are to examine Petitions BY
THEMSEVES: That the King shall assign five skillful Clerks of the Parliament:
the first whereof shall be Minister to serve the Bishops; the second, the
Procters of the Clergy; the third, the Earls and Barons; the fourth, the
Knights of the Shire; the fifth, the Citizens and Burgesses: who shall write and
register their several answers and doubts to the King; that all doubtful
cases are to be put in writing, and delivered to the Clerk of every degree;
that so every DEGREE BY IT SELF MAY GO THERE BY IT SELF AND DEBATE IT, and
then bring their ANSWER AND ADVICE IN WRITING; and if any discord arise, that
the business be handled and amended by all the Peers of the Kingdom: And that
none of all the Peers may depart from Parliament, unless he have obtained
leave OF THE KING, and of ALL HIS PEERS. All which proves the devision and
distinction of the Houses in that Age, in Votes and Debates.

Thirdly, both these Writers grant; First, that the Commons can do or conclude
nothing without the Kings prefence and consent: Secondly, that all the Lords
ought to be summoned to the Parliament, and if they appear not, that they shall
be amerced: Thirdly, that ALL PEERS OF THE REALM OUGHT TO AGREE TO WHAT IS
GRANTED OR PASSED IN PARLIAMENT; so are their words: Therefore if all the
Peers, or the major part of them disagree, no aid can be granted nor Act
passed, by their own confessions: and by the same reason they affirm, that the
King and Lords, or either of them alone, without the Commons, can grant or
enact nothing that is firm or stable; nor yet the Commons themselves without
the Kings assent; they must of necessity grant, that the King and Commons
without the Lords can do nothing, that is binding to the Kingdom, the Lords
assent being as requisite as theirs, and they entrusted by the Laws, Statutes
and Custom of the Realm, to consent and dissent in the granting of aids, and
making Laws as well as the King and Commons, and have a share inboth as well as
they.

Fourthly, the holding of a Parliament, granting of aids and making Laws by
the King and Commons, without the Lords, is only in one special case of
obstinacy and extremity in the Lords; which never yet fell out, nor is likely
to happen: To wit, when the Lords are all summoned to Parliament, and yet
wilfully refuse to appear, sit or agree to any thing propounded by the King and
Commons jointly, without giving a sufficient reason for their so doing: To
conclude therefore from such a remote possibility of a case which never yet
fell out, nor is likely to do, the necessity of the Lords reducement at this
present, or in future times to the House of Commons, or the abolition of the
House of Peers, or their negative voice, is as great nonsense and frenzy, as to
argue; that all the Lords and Commons ought presently to be sent to Bedlam,
because one of our Parliaments was styled, Insanum Parliamen^um, The mad
Parliament, and they may possibly prove now as mad as the Parliament was then
reputed; as they will do in good earnest, if they should go about to level the
Lords, and detrude them to the Commons house, as these mad Sectaries and
Levellers would persuade them.

Fifthly, neither of these Writers were good Lawyers, Historians or Antiquaries
versed in Parliament Records: for first, our 22 E. 3. 3. b. ^ H. 7. 14. 11 H 7.
27 B^. Parl. 107. Plowdens Count. 79. Crompton's Jurisdiction, f. 8. Fortescue,
c. 18 f. 20. 4 H. 7. 6. ^. Die 92. Bro. 134, 39 E. 3. 7.
Law Books are express in point, That no Law nor Act of Parliament can be made
by the King and Commons without the Lords concurrent assent, no more then by
the King and Lords without the Commons: And Sir Edward Cook (the greatest
Lawyer in this latter age) is positive, in his 4. Inst. c. 1. (where he writes
particularly of Parliaments) f. 25. There is NO ACT OF PARLIAMENT BUT MVST HAVE
CONSENT OF THE LORDS, the Commons, and royal assent of the King, as appears
by RECORDS AND OUR LAW BOOKS: Therefore this fancy of theirs, that the King and
Commons may make Laws without the Lords, is a clear mistake even in point of
Law; which the very form and penning of all our Statutes ( Be it enacted by the
King, etc. THE LORDS SPIRITVALL AND TEMPORAL, and Commons in this present
Parliament assemblea; and the like) refutes: Secondly, all our Historians and
Antiquaries concur herein, That there can be no Parliament, nor ever was in any
age since Parliaments were in England, held by the King and Commons alone
without the Lords; there being no such Parliament ever heard or read of,
neither do these Authors instance in any one President; therefore this ground
of their opinion, That in times past our Kings kept their Parliaments, when and
before there were any Bishops or temporal Lords, is a mere groundless
assertion, contradicted by all our Antiquaries and Historians; which always
make mention of Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Dukes, Princes, Earls, Lords and
Barons in our ancientest Parliaments, but See Mr. Seldens Titles of Honor,
part 2. c. 5. Spelmanni Council. Tom. 1. Truth triumphing over falsehood, p 50,
to 70. The grand Inquest, p. 8, to 16.
no mention at all of any Knights of Shires, Citizens and Burgesses: Thirdly,
all our Parliament Rolls contradict this fancy, that there can be no Act nor
Ordinance of Parliament without the Lords consent as well as the Commons; as is
evident by the penning of all our printed Acts, and by 6 Edw. 3. Rot. Parl. n.
5. 17 E. 3. n. 59, 60. 43 E. 3. n. 3, and 10. 14 R. 2. n. 14, 15. 13 H. 4. n.
25. with many more: yea, the Lords presence in Parliament has at all times
be^n so absolutely necessary and expedient; that our Parliaments from time to
time have been adjourned from the day that they were first appointed to sit,
till some few days after; upon this very reason, That ALL THE LORDS ( by reason
of the foul weather, shortness of summons, or some other occasion) were not
yet come up to the Parliament, OR SOME OF THE LORDS NOT COME; and the
Declaration of the causes of calling the Parliament by the Lord Chancellor, or
chief Justice, and all Parliamentary business deferred till their coming, (as
well as because some of the Knights and Burgesses were not come, nor all the
Writs for their elections returned:) upon which reason, and the absence of some
Lords, the first day of the Parliaments sitting, has been often adjourned, as
the Parliament Rolls of 6 E. 3. nu. 1. 6 E. 3. Parl. 2. n. 5, 6, 8, 9. 13 E. 3.
Parl. 2. n. 4. 15 E. 3. n. 5. 17 E. 3. n. 2. 6. 18 E. 3. n. 1, 2, 5. 20 E. 3.
n. 5. 21 E. 3. n. 4. 22 E. 3. n. 1. 25 E. 3. n. 1. 29 E. 3. n. 4. 36 E. 3. n.
1. 37 E. 3. n. 1. 42 E. 3. n. 1. 50 E. 3. n. 1. 51 E. 3. n. 3. 1 R. 2. n. 1, 2
R. 2. n. 1. 3 R. 2. n. 1. 4 R. 2. n. 1. 5 R. 2. Parl. 1. n. 1. and Parl. 2. n.
1. 6 R. 2. Parl. 1. n. 1. and Parl. 2. n. 1. abundantly And 8 H. 4. n. 28, 30,
54. ^ H. 4. n. 1. 1; H. 4. n. 1.
manifest, it being the custom of all former Parliaments to Debate, Vote and
determine nothing but in FVLL PARLIAMENT, when all, or the most part of the
Members of both Houses were present, and not in a thin or empty House, when
above half or three parts were absent: an innovation of dangerous consequence,
brought in of later times, and fit to be redressed, for which some Parliaments
and Parliamentary proceedings have been See 31 F. ^. n. 16. 1 H 4. Rot. Parl.
22, 25, 66. 39 H. 6. c. 1. Statutes of Ireland, 10 H 7. c. 23. 21 R. 2. c. 12.
31 H 6 c. 1. 17 E. 4. c. 7.
repealed and judged void by Parliament; especially when accompanied with any
armed forces and violence, over-awing the Houses or their Members: to prevent
which in former ages, by the Cook 4 Inst. p. 14 and 2 E. 3. c. 3.
ancient law and custom of Parliament, a Proclamation usually was and ought to
be made at Westminster in the beginning of every Parliament THAT NO MAN, UPON
PAIN TO LOSE ALL THAT HE HAD, SHOULD DVRING THE PARLIAMENT, in London or
Westminster, or the Suburbs, etc. wear any privy coat of Plate, OR GO ARMED,
or use any Games, Plays, Justs, and other pastimes, or showing Shows during
the Parliament: The reason whereof was, That the high Court of Parliament
should not thereby be disturbed, nor the Members thereof (which are TO ATTEND
the arduous and urgent business of the Church and Commonwealth) be thereby
WITHDRAWN OR FORCED AWAY: as is apparent by 5 E. 3. nu. 5. 6 E. 3. nu. 2, 3. 6
E. 3. Parl. 2. n. 2. 6 E. 3. Parl. 4. n. 4, 5. 13 E. 3. n. 1. 14 E. 3. n. 1. 14
E. 3. Parl. 21. n. 2. 15 E. 3. n. 2. 17 E. 3. n. 3. 20 E. 3. n. 1. 24 E. 3. n.
1. 25 E. 3. n. 5, 8. and Stat. 2. n. 4. A law and custom now fit to be
revived. Fourthly, the very Writs of Summons for the Lords, and of election of
Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, refutes this gross mistake, requiring them
all to appear personally in Parliament, on such a day, at such a place, and
there to treat of the great and urgent affairs of the Realm, not only with the
King himself, but cum Praelatis, MAGNATIBUS ET PROCERIBUS dicti Regni nostri;
with the Prelates, Noblemen and Lords of our said Realm: And therefore to dream
of holding a Parliament, or making Laws without the Lords, is a sign of an
intoxicated brain. Fifthly, I find in 21 E. 3. nu. 58. 21 E. 3. n. 60. 37 E. 3.
n. 12, 34. 50 E. 3. n. 12, 13. and the yeer-book of 39 E. 3. 7. b. that the
King and Lords in Parliament See the Free holders grand Inquest.
have made binding laws without the Commons, in some cases, but not the King
and Commons without the Lords: And in the Parliament of 6 E. 3. Parl. 2. n. 7.
the Commons had license to depart the parliament, but the Lords were commanded
to attend the King the next morning, to advise him: So that there is far more
color in point of Presidents to prove, that the King and Lords may make Laws
and grants of aids, (as the Lords did by and for themselves, 3 E. 3. n. 4, 5.
and Parl. 2. 13 E. 3. n. 7.) without the Commons, then the King and Commons
without the Lords.

Sixthly, to this, that the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses in parliament, have
a greater voice then the greatest Earl in parliament, because they represent
the Countries, Cities and Buroughs from whence they come, and the Earl but
himself.

I answer, first, that the reason holds not; for if this were true then every
Knight, Citizen and Burgess that serves for the greatest Counties, Cities and
Buroughs, should have a greater voice and power in the Commons house, then
those that serve for lesser, and the smallest, because they represent, and
assent, and vote for more Freeholders, Citizens and Burgessers then they; and
by the same reason, the lesser and poorer Peers should have a lesser voice in
the Peers house then the greatest and richest; which we know is false and
absurd. Secondly, many Peers are of greater worth, value, estate and interest
in relation to the Kingdom, then many poor Buroughs; and therefore by this
reason their voices should be greater then both Burgesses serving for them.
Thirdly, every Peer votes not only for himself, but for all the Nobility and
whole State and Kingdom whereof he is a member, as well and as much as any
Commoner; and therefore his voice is as great as theirs.

As to the Lords negative voice in Parliament, I answer, first, the King,
common Laws and Statutes of England, have ever allowed and acknowledged it in
all Ages: Secondly, to deny them this Privilege, is to make the whole house of
Peers meaner then the meanest Burgess, who has a negative voice in all
debates and votes that pass the Commons house; yea, to deny them to be
freemen, and make them worse then the Philistine Lords, who had a negative
voice, 1 Samuel 29. 2, to 12 And to make them give their co^sents to whatever the
Commons shall carry by their plurality of Votes (though it be but by one or
two) is to set up Popish blind obedience, and implicit faith, yea, to destroy
that liberty of conscience and judgment which the Objectors, Levellers and
Army do pretend they fight, and so earnestly contest for. Thirdly, there are
sundry presidents in our Parliament Rolls, of the Lords negative voices in
Parliaments; I shall instance only in two or three, The first in print, in the
Statute of Marlbridge, 20 H. 3. c. 3. The Bishops and Clergy importuned the
Lords, that they would consent, that all such as were born before Matrimony
should be legitimate, as well as those who were born within Matrimony, as to
the succession of Inheritance, for so much as the Church accepts such for
legitimate. And ALL THE EARLS AND BARONS WITH ONE VOICE answered, NOLUMUS, etc.
WE WILL NOT CHANGE THE LAWS OF THE REALM which hither to have been used and
approved. Here the Lords negative voice hindered the alteration of the common
Law, against the Bishops and Clergies importunate Vote to change it. So in the
Parliament of 28 E. 3. nu. 25. the Commons desired, that any man attainted upon
a writ of Oyer and Terminer, might bring his Attaint hanging the suits against
the other. To this the answer on the Roll is, THE LORDS WILL NOT ALTER THE
ORDER OF THE LAW. The like negative answer you may read in 21 E. 3. n. 12, 29.
1 R. 2. n. 34, 69, 111. 2 R. 2. n. 57, 58. Parl. 1. and Parl. 2. n. 48. and
sundry other Rols. Therefore to infer any thing from these erroneous passages
against the Lords Louse, Votes, Judicature or negative voice, is but the blind
following of the blind, and contradict all Parliament Records, History,
Antiquity and Law it self, and approve and establish their authority,
judicature and distinction from the Commoners.

Finally, it is evident by the Parliament Rols of 6 E. 3. Parl. 2. n. 3. 13 E.
3. Par. 2. n. 7, 8. 15 E. 3. n. 6, 7, 9, 17, 18, 35, 37. 17 E. 3. n. 9, 11, 12,
59. 18 E. 3. n. 10. 21 E. 3. n. 4, 5, 70. 22 E. 3. n. 3, 4, 29. 22 E. 3. Parl.
2. n. 6, 7. 27 E. 3. n. 4. 29 E. 3. n. 10. 36 E. 3. n. 6, 7. 40 E. 3. n. 8. 42
E. 3. n. 7. 47 E. 3. n. 5, 6, 12. 50 E. ^. n. 3, 8, 9, 10 14. 51 E. 3. n. 18,
19. 1 R. 2. n. 12, 13. 2 R. 2. n. 10, 23, to 29. 2 R. 2. Parl. 2. n. 6. 4 R. 2.
n. 9, to 16. 5 R. 2. n. 13, to 31. 6 R. 2. n. 9, 10, 1^. 6 R. 2. parl. 2. n.
14, 15. 6 R. 2. parl. 3. n. 8, 9. 7 R. 2. n. 11. 7 R. 2. Parl. 2. n. 10, 11. 13
R. 2. n. 6. 15 R. 2 n. 15. 16 R. 2. n. 6. 17 R. 2. n. 6, 17, 18 20 R. 2. 8, 9,
10, 12, 13, 16, 17. 21 R. 2. n. 8, 9, 16, to 21. That the Lords and Commons in
the Parliaments of King Edward the third, and Richard the second, were distinct
both in their debates, con^ultations, councels, p^titions, votes, and places of
sitting too, 50 E. 3. n. 3, 8. Sir John Knevet Chancellor of England, having
declared the causes of calling that Parliament before the King, Lords and
Commons, willed them to go together, THE LORDS BY THEMSELVES, AND THE COMMOS
BY THEMSELVES, and speedily to consult and give answer. After which the Commons
were willed to d^part TO THEIR ACCUSTOMED PLACE, b^ing the Chapter house of the
Abbot of Westminster, whither they went. In which place they likewise sat, 2
R. 2. n. 10. and 4 R. 2. n. 9. And in 15 E. 3. n. 17. 47 E. 3. n. 5, 6. 50 E.
3. n. 8. 9. 51 E. 3. n. 18, 19. 1 R. 2. n. 12, 13, 14. 5 R. 2. n. 14. 6 R. 2.
Parl. 2. n. 15. 7 R. 2. Parl. 2. n. 10, 11. The Commons came to THE LORDS
HOUSE, and required that certain of the Lords, there named, WOULD VOUCHSAFE TO
CONFER WITH THE COMMONS; whereupon they went to the Chamberlains chamber to
confer with the Commons: And at other times they were appointed to go and
consult with the Commons at some other place by the Lords order. In 2 R. 2.
Parl. 1. n. 23. the Commons required, that some five or six of the Lords might
be appointed to come and discourse with them; THE LORDS DENIED THAT, saying,
The same was the guise of two or three Parliaments before. But the use was,
That the Lords should among themselves choose a certain number, and the Commons
the like, and that they should confer together, which they would do: for if the
Commons would not dissever themselves, neither would they the Lords: To the
which order the Commons agreed. And 4 H. 4. n. 10. The Commons desiring the
King that certain special Lords might be assigned to treat with them about
affairs for the common benefit of the Realm: It was condescended unto, with
this protestation specially entered by the Kings command, that it ought not to
be done of right OR CUSTOM, BUT ONLY OUT OF THE KINGS SPECIAL GRACE; which
the Commons then acknowledged.

A pregnant evidence both of their distinct Houses and consultations, except
only at private Committees and Conferences; Yea, the Commons had anciently
such an high esteem of the Lords fidelity, wisdom, abilities, council and
experience, that in 15 E. 3. n. 17. The Commons pray that unto the Wednesday
then next ensuing, the Articles they then presented to the King, might be
committed to certain Earls, Barons, Bishops and other WISE MEN there named by
them, TO BE AMENDED: which t^^e King granted. And in 13 E. 3. Parl. 1. n. 11.
21 E. 3. n. 5. 7 R. 2. Parl. 2. n. 19, 20. 17 R. 2. n. 17. and sundry other
Rolls, The Commons profess THEIR INABILITY AND INSUFFICIENCY TO ADVISE THE
KING in some MATTERS OF PEACE, WAR, and safeguard of the Seas, for that THEY
PASSED THEIR CAPACITY, AND UNDERSTOOD NOT THE TERMS OF THE CIVIL LAW, and some
words in Truces: and therefore WHOLLY REFERRED THEMSELVES in these things to
THE KING AND THE LORDS, AND THE KINGS COUNSEL, to do therein as they should
seem meet, being men of greater wisdom and experience in State Affairs of this
nature, then themselves, in which they had little or no insight. And in 2 H. 4.
n. 11. The whole house of Commons claim, and the King grants and confirms; and
in 9 H. 4. n. 21. (entitled, The indemnity of the Lords and Commons) The
Lords and Commons seriously claim this as a special ancient privilege
belonging to both the Houses, to sit and debate upon things in Parliament
severally by themselves in their distinct Houses, in the Kings absence (whose
presence might overawe them, and hinder their free debates;) which they both
claimed, and the king confirmed to them IN ALL TIMES TO COME, and that no
report should be made to the King of any debate, vote or aid granted, till the
Lords and Commons be all agreed, and that by THE SPEAKERS MOUTHS. Which
ancient privilege so long since claimed, granted, confirmed and enjoyed ever
since, not only proves the ancient distinction of both houses, but utterly
subverts the Levellers project, who would strip both Houses at once of this
great privilege, which the Commons deemed their greatest immunity (seeing they
durst speak their minds, and vote more freely among themselves, then in the
presence of the King and Lords, for fear of incurring their displeasures) by
reducing both houses into one. The serious consideration whereof, and of the
premises, will I trust for ever take them off from their dangerous absurd
design of Levelling and reducing the Lords House to the Commons, and lay the
ignorant, illiterate prosecutors of it, level with the dust: the rather,
because the King and Lords in Parliament, have not only jointly and severally
judged Commoners themselves in Parliament for such Treasons, and other
misdemeanors as are properly triable in Parliament, not at the common Law, as
is evident by 4 E. 3. n. 3, to 8. 21 E. 3. n. 65 50 E. 3. n. 15, to 38. 1 R* 2.
n 35, to 44 4 R* 2. n. 17, to 25 7 R. 2. n. 15, to 26. etc.
infinite Presidents; but even Knights of the Shire, and other Members of the
Commons House it self, in point of misdemeanors, undue Elections, and
privileges of Parliament; as is appare^t by 16 R. 2. n. 6, 13, 14. Sr Phillip
Courtney's case, returned one of the Knights for the County of Devon, 17 R. 2.
n. 23. Roger de Swinerton's case, 5 ^. 4. n. 38. Thomas Thorp. his case,
elected knight for the County of Rotland, whose election was heard, examined
and adjudged by the Lords in Parliament to be good, at the Commons request; and
31 H. 6. n. 25, to 30. Baron Thorp's case, Speaker of the Commons house, whose
privilege was solemnly debated before, and adjudged against him by the Lords
in Parliament; who thereupon by the King's direction, commanded the Commons to
choose and present a new Speaker; which they accordingly did the next day. Yea,
the whole House of Commons in the Parliament of 1 H. 4. n. 79. Remonstrated to
the King, and voluntarily confessed. That THE JUDGMENTS IN PARLIAMENT APPERTAIN
ONLY TO THE KING AND TO THE LORDS, and NOT UNTO THE COMMONS; and that THE KING
AND LORDS EVER HAD IN ALL TIMES, AND SHALL HAVE OF RIGHT THE JUDGMENTS IN
PARLIAMENT: And the King then declared to the Commons, that this Order shall be
observed and kept IN ALL TIMES TO COME, and that in cases of Commoners and
Members of the Commons house it self, as well as of Peers; as is clear by
Thorp's case forecited, and by 5 H. 4. n. 71, 78. the printed Statute of 5 H.
4. c. 6. Richard Chedders case, and 4 H. 8. c. 8. Richard Strode his case,
Burgess for Plimton in the County of Devon; where the King and Lords at the
Prayer and Petition of the Commons, provide remedies against the breaches of
the privileges of the Commons themselves and their servants, which themselves
alone had no sufficient power r^ right and determine; the power of judicature
being not in them, but in the King, Lords and houses of Peers alone; who long
before the Conquest had the power of Judicature, as is evident by Brampton, and
Master Titles of Honor, part 2. c. 5. sect. 6.
Seldom, in the case of Earl Goodwin, in a Parliament held in the year 1052.
wherein Edward the Confessor appealed to THE EARLS AND BARONS against this
Earl, for the murder of his Brother Alfred in these words, Domini COMITES and
BARONS terrae, etc. Volo quod inter Nos in ista appellatione RECTUM JUDICIUM
DECERNETIS and DEBITAM JUSTITIAM FACIATIS. And therefore it is the very
extremity of injustice to deny them this their ancient Heredetary right, and
privilege now, and transfer it to the Commons house, who never enjoyed it in
any former Age, and can make no right, nor lawful claim unto it at this
present.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 3. line 1. H. 7. read H. 4.


