The General JUNTO, OR THE COUNCIL OF UNION, Chosen equally out of England,
Scotland and Ireland, for the better compacting of three Nations into one
Monarchy, etc.

-- Trojugenis Paries quid amantibus obstas?
Quantum erat, ut sineres toto nos corpore jungi?
Printed, Anno Dom. 1642.

Sir,
IN a Person of so great Worth as Your self, Virtue and Goodness must needs be
not only diffusive, but attractive also, and that far more then in inferior
men. The boldness therefore assumed by me at this time, in tendering to Your
View and Judgment this poor Essay (a weak endeavor of Service to our Country
(of which You are so true a Lover) will appear (I hope) the more excusable: For
as those Parts which deserve Admiration in You, cannot but command Offices of
Hommage and Gratitude from all good men; so those Parts which render You
humble, and gentle, and willing to pardon other men's Mistakes, will induce you
to interpret well that Hommage and Gratitude. Sir, I have a very low conceit of
this Constitution, as it is now by me fashioned; but I have a strong
Imagination, That it might prove Publicly advantageous, if it were by wise
and considering men better formed and completed. I have therefore purposely
left a large Margent to my short Discourse, that a better pen, and direction
might change and supply my failing Invention, and take the same liberty to
expunge the vanities of my tedious expressions. If there be any thing here tha
may but administer the least Occasion or hint to your Worth to be a more
beneficial Patriot, I shall think it a happy Service; if not, yet let not my
fruitless wishes want your excuse; and you shall oblige me to be

Sir, Yours most humbly devoted in all Service and Observance to my utmost
power, H. PARKER.

The General Junto, or the Council of Union, etc.
TO persuade to Union, and commend now the benefit of it to England, Scotland,
and Ireland, would (I think) be unnecessary: it will be sufficient to make an
Overture, how a further, and more intimate Union may be maintained amongst us.
Divide, and impera, is fit Advertisement for a Nero to take, which aims only
at the dissipation and perdition of his Subjects; and for a Machiavel to give,
which aims only at the pleasing of such Masters as Nero was: Good Princes,
from honest Counselors, have ever received contrary advice; and indeed it were
impossible, that the very essence of God should be Love, Peace, and Unity, if
there were any good to be expected from Dissension; or that it should be
Satan's proper title to be a Spoyler, a Murderer, and a Scatterer from the
beginning, if Amity and Concord could be dangerous. It is true, Unity in large
and spreading Dominions, is not altogether so easy to be preserved, as in
States of narrower bounds; nor is Government so feasible over several Nations,
in several Continents divided, and by several Laws, and Customs eloigned, as
over one Country close situated and compacted. And yet it is frequently seen,
That Art and Industry in prudent Princes, overcome natural hindrances and
obstructions, and many times by Politic Nerves and Ligaments happily knits
and conjoyns men together, whom Nature has placed far asunder. The Poet
having in contemplation before him a fair Pile of building curiously cemented,
gives these words to his admiration; Si lapis est unus; dic qua fuit Art
levatus?
Si duo, vel plures; dic ubi congeries?


The juncture of many stones in a building may be scarce perceivable; and where
it is not altogether so exquisite, yet (if Art be not too much wanting) they
may prove as firm, as fit for duration, and do as faithful Offices to the
whole Fabric, as if they were all one solid Rock or Quarry. And after the same
manner in Political Bodies, an Artificial coalition or coagmentation
sometimes proves as vigorous, as that which is more Natural, if it be wisely
constituted, and orderly disposed. Howsoever, as no kindly means of Union
amongst Nations ought to be neglected, so no violent means ought to be used,
for both extremes may prove equally pernicious and destructive to the ends
which we propose. Philip in the Netherlands was too rigorous a prosecutor of
Union; for whilst he would confide in no Union betwixt the Dutch and Spanish,
but such as should wholly change the One Nation, and covert it (as it were) to
all purposes, into the other, he wholly rent Both of them asunder, and
temerated that tie, which otherwise in time by gentle means might have grown
sufficiently valid. And in my opinion, we in England, Scotland, Ireland have of
late, in our endeavors of Union, and Consociation, been as much too remiss, as
Philip was too intense, and have neglected to prepare such further Bars, and
hoops as might have bound us yet more near together. To make this appear, is
the intent of this discourse at this time; wherein, for Methods sake, I shall
confine my self to these three points:

In the first place, I shall endeavor to unfold What the nature of Union is.

In the next place, I shall set forth that Union which is already settled
betwixt England, Scotland, and Ireland, and wherein it is yet imperfect.

In the last place, I shall give some Demonstration of a new Ordinance, whereby
Union may be further improved, and perfected in all His Majesty's several
Dominions.

Political Union is observable for its several kinds, orders, and degrees.
One Union is more External, and another more Internal in kind; But that
which is Internal, and seated (as it were) in the hearts of Nations, and is
held together by the bonds of true Amity, is far to be valued before that
which is External only, and consists in mere Political Acts, and Pacts, be
they never so many or strong. Thus the Scots have formerly affected the French,
and the Irish the Spaniards, by I know not what kind of Natural Sympathy; and
had not many other strange Obligations crossed the same, their hearts could
hardly ever have been tempered for Unity with the English. It is therefore
truly noted, That Vires Imperii in consensu sunt Obedientium, and Omnis
potestas fundata est in Voluntate: and says another, Errat long qui credit
Imperium stabilius aut firmius esse, quod vi adjungitur, quam quod facilitate
and clementia. The Romans being to grant peace to a Neighbor Nation lately
subdued, asked first upon that Peace granted, What fidelity they should expect
from the Petitioners: it was answered, That if the Conditions of Peace were
granted with Clemency, they could not but be entertained with sincerity; but if
the terms of the Conquerours were rigorous, the engagements of the Conquered
could not but be the less faithful. And this stout answer in Suitors did not
disrelish their more stout Victors. Had Portugal joined hearts with Spain, as
it did hands (as doubtless it had, if Love or Charity, and not too much
violence had made the Contract) this late Divorce had not so soon happened; for
it were very behoovefull for both those Nations, if they could agree to yoke
sweetly together, and their mutual conflicting against each other may probably
draw on the ruin of both. Dum singuli pugnant, Omnes vincuntur. Two Nations
seated together in one competent proportionable Continent, are like two
Merchants trading at Sea in one Bottom, being both equally owners of the same;
an unfriendly partition makes each Moity unserviceable, but a wise partnership
does not only preserve, but enrich both. I wish therefore the Government may
be ever sweetened amongst us in England, Scotland, and Ireland, by Justice, and
Equality; for what attracts love amongst Nations, we all know; and how far the
Attraction is generalrally helpful, we all know; and how far Nations
naturally desire that help, we all know. Smaller Dominions are less subject to
intestine distempers and miscarriages in Government, but are more obnoxious to
foreign violence of Invaders; and therefore if equal Conditions might be
equally rendered, it were unnatural for Nations not to affect Union. The
Canton Towns in Helvetia, though of several professions in Religion, and
Aristocratically governed, yet adhere lovingly in one Symmetricall Body
together, and this is by the sweetness of Equity; for certainly the Ligaments
of one and the same Religion under Rule Monarchical, were much more available
to facilitate and corroborate Union.

The Orders of Union are next observable; for the foot is united to the head as
well as the heart, but not after so honorable a manner; the heart obtains
priority and superiority above the foot, notwithstanding the force of Union:
Now this Order is to hold only in One and the same Body particularly
considered, but not in such Principal Integrall parts as may be considered in
several bodies for some purposes. Where several Kingdoms are united, one must
not be the head, the other the foot; Integrall parts may have such order in
themselves, but not among themselves; for all must equally partake both of
superiority and inferiority: some in each Nation may enjoy command, and undergo
burden; and it is not necessary that this Nation be assigned wholly to command,
and that to burden; for Order may be sufficiently preserved by Inequality in
each Nation, without inequality of any one Nation over the other. Rome in this
was not more noble then wise, for as she did admit all Nations to an Equality
of Privileges, and Franchises with her self, so by the same admission she did
extend her bounds into all Nations, she merited to be called Terrarum Dea,
because she would truly be Communis Patria, and Mundi compendium.

Haec est in gremium quae victos sola recepit,
Humanumque genus communi nomine fovit.
Matris, non Dominae ritu.
The number of the Senators wanting a recrew in the Reign of Claudius, some
dispute was thereupon between the French, and the Italians; the French sought
to have their Nation honored with an equality of Election to that degree; the
Italians held it derogatory that other Nations should participate therein: but
Caesar, like a true Roman in that, gave his decision in favor of the French,
alleging for his reason, That his Ancestors had enlarged the Empire by this
courteous Association of Strangers; and that the Lacedaemonians by their rigid
Inhospitality, and disdain of others, had frustrated their own Victories, and
withstood their growing Fortunes. That miserable Schism and Revolt of the Ten
Tribes from the Line of David, was occasioned by an unequal distribution of
favor and indulgence; and (Oh) how great a wound did the true Worship of God
receive in the bloody pursuance of that unnatural Quarrel? Judah claims to be
nearer in Blood to the King, then Israel; Israel being so injured, claims to
have ten parts in the King by a more considerable interest, then that of Blood:
and how cursed a thing was it, that such fond claims should one moment of time
rest undecided? I cannot here but assume the Kings Person, and thus expostulate
with both contesting Parties. YOU MEN OF JUDAH, I am bound to love and honor
you by the ties of more immediate Consanguinity; but in Civil Negotiations by
the Laws of Sovereignty, which exceeds Natural Affections, I am as firmly
obliged, and as nearly allied to Israel as to you. You are to me Both as One
and the same Body, and to be organized by a virtue and residence in every part,
as well as in the whole Total. You men of Israel, You are the greater and more
considerable proportion of my Subjects; and if I must needs be dilacerated, and
suffer a dissection by your absurd Contention, you are to receive the greater
share of me. But to what purpose is such violence, or what Justice can be in
it? for the right of Judah to me, is the same in Nature as yours, and wholly
incorporated with yours, that it can suffer no just Partition; and if it could,
your Advantage thereby would be none at all. Royalty is as the Sun, and sends
forth beams indivisible, and sufficient for all; and if all were blind as one
man, that one man should enjoy no more light then he did before, when all did
partake in his happiness. You men of Judah and Israel, Let the peace of the
Natural members compose this your groundless dispute, the left hand quarrels
not with the right for precedence, they both receive from the Head in equal
measure, and remain officiously tributary to the Head in equal manner. When I
put on Magistracy, I did withal put off Affinity in matters of Justice.

Tros, Rutilusve fieret nullo discrimine habebam. As I shall expect from you
nothing but equal service and loyalty, so do you expect from me nothing but
equal Love and Protection. Had Israel and Judah been thus treated, when the
Coals of Emulation were first blown by malignant Mutiners, so great a flame had
not risen therefrom: for Partiality is the fuel of Discontent; and where that
is taken away, the beam of Justice keeps all in Peace and Awe.

Justa pari premitur veluti cum pondere libra:
Prona nec hac plus part sedet, nec surgit ab illa.
Nevertheless, though it were commendable in Cleo, at his first Arrival unto
Public Rule, to call his friends together, and discard them as to all
Public Affairs; so this condemns not Themistocles, if in Domestical, or mere
natural offices, he gratify his former friends before others. But this is
obvious, and I come now to the Degrees of Union.

As that Union which is betwixt Brothers, is of more vigor then that between
servants, because it is more internal, and that betwixt servants of the same
Rank and Condition, then where great distances and disparities are, because it
is more equal; so that Union is most sure and inviolable, and most intense in
Degree, where both these Atrributes ( internal, and equal) do most eminently
meet and concenter: where the most zealous affection of the Heart naturally,
and the most exact Equality of Interests Politically does cement and close
People together, there Union is in it is most excellent strength and perfection;
then it is more properly styled Unity it self. This is that Union, which I
shall pray to see established betwixt England, Scotland, and Ireland; then
which, there can be none more intimate in kind, more equal in Order, more
perfect in Degree.

2. In the next Place therefore, having this for our Aim, we must consider
what advantages these three Nations have already, conducing to such Union, and
what the Hindrances are, which seem most to indispose us, and make us averse
from the same.

Those things which are of favorable Aspect, and more propitious to the
uniting of England and Scotland are,

First, That both Nations are ruled by one Head, and owe Allegiance to the same
Master; and even this has a strong Unitive power in it, and such as works
internally, as well as externally; for we see the English and Netherlanders are
many ways engaged in the same Interests, and have had many interchangeable
Obligations and endearments (as things are now balanced in Europe) and yet by
reason of their dependence upon several Potentates, there cannot be settled
betwixt them that certain Correspondence and Confidence, as might be, if one
Scepter commanded both. And we see the Union of England, and Scotland under one
Prince, has planted new Affections in both Nations, as has been attestated by
many Noble Offices of Friendship, needless now to be repeated.

Secondly, There is the same Profession of Religion in both Kingdoms; and this
of all Bonds ought to be the most indissoluble, for it is something more then
merely Physical, or Ethicall.

Thirdly, The same name of Britain is common to both, the same Language spoken
by both; and this, together with their great similitude in Complexions, and
dispositions, testifies the same Ancient extraction, and kindred.

Fourthly, The same Sea surrounds both, immuring them from all the world
besides, and by Consequence, the same ends ought to steer both, since no other
Nations can be more helpful by Union, or pernicious by Disunion: and since
both joined together make up but one, and that no very considerable large
Monarchy.

Fifthly, The same Laws of God and Nature are reverenced and known by Both; and
if their Laws of Monarchy, Municipall Customs, and Statutes be not the very
same, they are very little disagreeing; that variety which is in them is very
consistent with Harmony.

Sixthly, The same Impressions have been made upon both by late Offices of
Love, and such Brotherly Assistance has been yielded, that not only all old
Enmities are drowned therein, but also both Nations for the future are more
enflamed to merit of each other.

All these things tending to the great Advancement of Union, those things which
seem repugnant to the same by able Politicians might be much corrected, or
wholly removed. As for the Independence of each Kingdom, that is no bar at
all to Union; for whilst the line of King James remains unspent, the Crowns are
utterly inseparable, and as really married together, as to all purposes of
mutual defense and compliance, as Castile, and Arragon, or any Kingdom
whatsoever. And if any doubt were of Separation by the extinguishment of that
Royal Race (which God avert) I do not see but that by consent of both
Kingdoms, that doubt may be prevented, without injury to either. And as for the
Distance and Extension of both Kingdoms, that can be no bar to Union; for
France in its Circuit and dimensions is equal to England, Scotland, and
Ireland, and yet is but one entire Monarchy, and has been assembled in one
General Parliament, and therein consists the soul of Union. And the mere
holding of several Parliaments in several Counties, possibly at the same
time, the same Head regulating all by faithful Dispatches, and Missives is no
hinderance, but that the same understanding may be in all, and work the same
effects, as One and the same could. If there be any thing worthy to be insisted
upon seeming opposite to Union, it is the different Revenues of both Kingdoms,
and some disadvantages caused thereby to each: for it will be said, That
England, as the richer, draws away some Privilege thereby from Scotland; and
Scotland being the less plentiful in Treasure, draws away much of the English
Patrimony. But I shall answer this hereafter; and so for the present I set my
Sayls for Ireland.

Those things which are apt to promote Union betwixt England and Ireland, are,

First, That both Kingdoms have not only one Head, but are one Body also,
inseparably knit to that Head, no independance or possible severance remaining,
but such as shall be violent and injurious. England has formerly been subject
to several Princes, but all those independent Principalities are now
incorporated, and connaturalized by Act of Paliament, and reduced to a perfect
Unity of Dominion; and yet all England is not more it self, and one with
England, then Ireland is in all that is Essential to Dominion. By the Laws of
England and Ireland, both the Kingdoms are so connexed and coinvested, that
Wales and Cornwall are not more individed from England, then Ireland now is.
Wales is still a Principality, and Cornwall a Duchy, but neither are
independent. So that nothing in truth remains, but the mere names or titles;
and the independance of Ireland being in the same manner taken away, the
Kingdom of Ireland is indeed but an Integrall member of the Kingdom of England;
Neither is Ireland dependent; because it is independent, we term it rather
annexed, and by that we mean wholly consubstantiated. The addition of Ireland
to England is like the Natural growth of a man at full years, which makes him
not another Creature then what he was, in the narrow confinement of the Cradle,
but still leaves him One and the same. England and Scotland are united by two
Royal Lines centring in our King; but one and the same Line conveighs England
and Ireland, and that Line is indivisible; so that though the King be Owner of
England and Scotland, yet he is not Owner of England, quatenus Owner of
Scotland, or Owner of Scotland, quatenus Owner of England, but he is Owner of
Ireland quatenus of England.

But because some of the Rebels now pretend to an independence, and some
upbraid the Rebels with a mere servile dependence, I will a little step out of
the way, to encounter with both these Incendiaries, and perturbers of our Peace.

Against the Irish Rebels I shall maintain, That the Kings Title to Ireland is
of a mixed Nature, partly by the Victories of his Ancestors, and partly by
Consent of the Natives, and in both points strongly fortified by a long,
unquestioned, uninterrupted possession. And what more can be added? No Prince
of Christendom can hold one foot of Land by any title more clear and
undefeseable then where all these clayms are wreathed together. And in this
respect Ireland is further united to England then Scotland is, for England and
Scotland are two Bodies joined under one Head; but England and Ireland are but
one Body, and have but one Head, they are not separable justly as Scotland is.
Conquest and Consent both have conjoined them, and except the same, nothing can
dilacerate them. And thus upon the Norman Conquest England lost it is
Independence, and became One with Normandy; for if nothing but the hand of War
twisted their Titles, nothing else can untwist them.

Against the enemies of Ireland, which object the right of Conquest (as some
did lately at my Lord of Straffords Trial, to justify his cruel oppressions)
I shall maintain, That the right of Conquest does not afford any true Warrant
for Oppression. In Conquest three things ought to be searched into, Whether it
be just, total, and pure or no. If it be just (as we will suppose the Normans
to be) it only ejects the Desseisor, and it ought to look no further then the
Prostration of the Competitor. If Harold will not do right to William but by
Compulsion, this shall not inslave the whole English Nation; nay, Harold being
in possession, those of the English which take up Arms, and wait the Decision
of the sword, in a case to them doubtful, cannot justly be charged of Treason.
It Was not sufficient that William did forbear to dispossess those of our
Ancestors, which had born no Arms against him, he ought to have holden his
hands also from those which had been Active in their former Masters Service,
the Cause of both being disputable. Of unjust Conquests nothing needs to be
said.

In the next Place also, if Conquest extend it self over a whole Nation, if the
Conqueror have no Considerable Party therein to favor his Claym, if he enter
without any Professions of Clemency (as scarce any Prince ever entered) yet even
thus he is not disobliged and acquitted of the Laws of God and Nature; nor is
entitled to a Right of spoiling, wasting, and inthralling of Gods People. Gods
Law is indefinite, and reaches to all Kings, as well clayming by the Sword, as
by any other Paction, That they shall not heap up Treasure, or multiply Horses,
or lift up Themselves against their Brethren. Our Magna Charta does not limit
our English Kings so far, it restrains not from filling the Exchequer, or
increasing their Guards; and if they will arrogantly contemn us as slaves, and
not embrace us as Brethren, it affords us no clear Remedy. But we see Gods
Charter intimates that Princes were ordained for the Protection of the People,
and not the People created for the Drudgery of Princes. And therefore it does
not only prohibit all Actual oppression (as the Law of England does) but it
further restrains from all Power of Oppression, nay it curbs all haughty
thoughts, the very seeds of Oppression. Parasites may ascribe nothing but
Divinity to Princes, and insult over Subjects as mere Beasts of labor, and so
as a main Axiom of State, above all things inculcate the raising of Money and
Ammunition, and dejecting of the People. But God prescribes the Contrary, His
Law aims at the humbling of Monarchs, and endearing of their Charge to them,
and dissuading from all strength and Confidence, but in the unfailing Magazin
of the Peoples hearts. Of that Conquest then which is not Universal, and
without all Assistance from the Country Conquered, 'little needs be said; for
it is most evident, that neither England nor Ireland was ever so overrun.

The last thing to be enquired after in Conquest, is it is Absoluteness from
all Quarter, and freedom from Conditions offered, or accepted: and if it be
the most pure Conquest that can be imagined, yet it does not absolve the
Winners from the ties of common Piety, and Civility. I need not instance in
Religious Moses, who out of zeal to save the Community, from destruction,
offered to forgo his Interest in Heaven; or in holy David, who to exempt Gods
Flock from the raging Plague, prayed that it might be diverted upon him their
Shepherd. Paganism may instruct us sufficiently in this. Alexanders Conquests
in the East were as pure and unmixt as any, yet it is a great Addition to his
fame, That he treated the Persians with the same indulgence as the Macedonians,
showing himself an equally tender Shepherd to both, and complying therein
rather with Plato's Politiques then Aristotle's. Adrian also an Emperor, as
unlimited as any, confessing himself born for his Country, not for Himself,
made these words good: Ita se Rempublicam gesturum, ut sciret populi rem esse
non Propriam. Pastor populi non sui-ipsius, sed subditorum quaerit commodum,
and Officio suo semper fungitur utilitati consulens and societati. I wish a
Christian had spoke this, or that no Christian did disapprove it; it were vain
to pursue this further. Howsoever, I deny not the due Operation of a just,
total, and unmixt Conquest (though I scarce ever read of any such) for
Conquerors coming in by Violence, cannot be assured in a strange Nation,
without some Violence at first, but that which is Policy before Establishment,
is not Justice after it. And secondly, Though Victors ought not to induce any
Conditions contrary to Gods Law, or grievous to the Conquered; yet perhaps they
are not bound to restore all former extraordinary Immunities in so ample a
manner as they were before enjoyed. And thirdly, Conquests have great force in
taking away Competitions, and extinguishing concurrent pretense of Titles; and
as to the Crown it self, they cut off all independency, as is now apparent in
Ireland, and in other parts of England now incorporated, and consolidated into
one numericall Mass thereby. But they are most wretched Politicians that
ground upon Conquest (be it rightful, total, and without Conditions granted
by the Conqueror, or contracted by the Conquered, or not) a Right of destroying
and inthralling, and an exemption from all Law for the present: And yet they
which by Conquest abolish all Rights of the People, and that beyond all Power
of Restitution for the future are further opposers of truth, and Enemies to
Mankind. Had the Conquests of England and Ireland at first been just over the
whole Nations, and that without all Pactions of Grace (as they were not) and
without all Consent of the People; yet that therefore all subsequent Oaths and
Grants of our Kings, and Agreements of the Nations should be utterly void, and
all the Laws of God and Nature of no Virtue, but that our Kings are left still
to their own Discretions, and Arbitrary, Absoute Prerogatives is an inference
to be wondered at amongst Rational Creatures.

The second thing that qualifies Ireland for Union is, That the Protestant
Religion is so far dilated and known there. The well-wishers of Popery
pretend for the upholding of their own blind superstition, That Conscience is
not to be forced, and that without Bloody force Papists are not to be reduced.
This weak Pretense has done unspeakable Mischief both in England, and Ireland
(as appears this day by our unnatural Wars) and we have been not only very
ignorant, but very wicked, I fear, and very guilty in admitting it. That force
which borders upon Cruelty is not to be used, I would not that it should be
done to Babel by way of Retaliation, as Babel has done to us; But certainly
Magistrates are responsible for all those souls, whom they may reclaim by
Politic severity, and do not; and we see what effects Politic severity has
produced in Denmark, Sweden, Scotland, etc. without effusion of blood; and he
that will deny the same, that it might have been as effectual in England and
Ireland, must allege some strange or unexpected Reason. It Is not so difficult
to draw from falsity, as from truth, to make a Turk a Christian, as a Christian
a Turk. And as for the Populacy of any Nation, we know they are to be driven by
Shoals, almost into any Religion, where the Magistrate, and Spiritual Minister
cooperate together: The frequent and sudden Conversions, and Perversions of
sundry Nations in all Ages, testify this to be a matter of no great
difficulty. And as for some few of the more knowing and Conscientious sort, the
mere want of a Toleration, their own Paucity (if some other Encouragement be
not supplied by Connivence, etc.) in some reasonable time would wear them out.
And if the breeding of their children within these last 60 years had not been
omitted; nay, if countenance under hand had not been afforded to Papists, these
Wars had never happened: But now things so standing, it is just in God that
Papists be so cruel to Us in Temporalls, as we have been to Them in
Spiritualls. 'Twere Advantageous for Union, that we were All of One, but more
especially of the true, pious, charitable Protestant Religion. And though this
Advantage has been hitherto neglected, yet still we have Power enough, by the
Grace of God, to provide better for the future.

The third help to Union is, That Nature has placed both our Islands like
twins in a remote Angle of the World; and as if she intended more to estrange
Ireland then England, she has further seated her from the Commerce of
foreign Nations; and it may be supposed, that they are both divorced from
Others, that they may be wedded to Themselves. And surely as Ireland's love and
vicinity is very useful unto England, so Englands cherishing fidelity must
needs be totally necessary unto Ireland. Did the Irish depend upon the
Protection of Spain, or some other distant Country to guard them from the
Forces and Armado's of England, that Protection could not but cost them very
dear; for besides the Calamities of endless War, in a Nation so intermingled,
the very Burdens of Protectors would perhaps prove as grievous, as the
encounters of their Assaylants. Flanders now by its subjection to Spain, is
made the Theater of affliction, almost beyond hope of Redress; and though she
draw from Spain many Millions for her defense, yet without doubt she is more
wretched by serving Philip, then Philip is weakened by supporting her.

It is fourthly probable, that both Nations were anciently descended from the
same original Plantations and Colonies, and if the name of Hiberno-Britaines
may not be applied to the Irish, as Cambro-Britaines is to the Welsh; yet now
Scottish, English, Welsh, and the mixed Irish being so indifferently blended in
Ireland, and congregated (as it were) at a general determinate Randevouz, and
the same Language being so generally current, and the temperature of the Clime,
and the Congruity of the Ancient Natives in disposition so inclining to Union,
it must be wilful neglect in Us, if we do not close yet more amiably together.

Fifthly, In Laws, Customs, and Constitutions for Peace and War, there are
lively Resemblances.

Facies non una duabus,
Nec diversa tamen; qualem decet esse sororum.
Nay if there be not altogether the same Lineaments in both, yet there is more
then a Sisterly correspondence.

Sixthly, Though some execrable Offices have of late been done in Ireland
against our Nation, yet we must account that Quarrel to be Religious, not
National; for we see they have not spared the Scots; they have not spared the
English Irish; they have been cruel to all Protestants, of what Country
soever. The same Whorish Inchantresse also, which is now bloody in Ireland,
has ever been so in all Countries: the Scripture characters her by making her
self drunk with the blood of the Saints, and dipping her Garments in the same
Dye. The same false Religion has formerly made England flame with merciless
Executions, and Spain groan under Diabolical Tortures, and France swim in
inhumane Massacres.

Quae Regio in Terris, Nostri non plena cruoris? Let Cruelty be the certain
Test of false religion, and let England and Ireland, and all Nations abide the
trial of the same. For Protestants are so far from destroying their known
Enemies, that they are cruel to themselves in sparing, where they hope less
of being spared. Protestants are not bound always from doing, as they have
been done to by their enemies, or from disabling and repressing future Malice
in their enemies; yet Ireland is a witness this day, that they are more prone
to favor unappeasable foes, then to prevent the most horrid treasons. But I
leave this as remediable hereafter. As for the separation and divulsion of that
Sea, which runs betwixt England, and Ireland, I conceive it to be no
considerable hinderance of Union; for we see Venice, and Cyprus, and diverse
other Countries by the Art and happiness of just Government, love and embrace
at a further distance, though other People are also interjacent, as are not
here. And if any other heart-burning or distaste have happened of late betwixt
the Nations, by Injustice, or Mis-government (as perhaps has befallen as
eminently amongst our selves) the Redress and Cure thereof will not be
hopeless.

3. I come now to my Overture it self; whereby further Union may be promoted
and confirmed amongst us. That Ordinance of State which shall most equally
diffuse, and breath abroad into all Nations governed under the same Scepter,
the self-same Measure of right and benefit, shall be most effectual and
virtuous to unite those Nations. Now it seems to me, that such an Ordinance is
now wanting in England, Scotland, and Ireland, and yet that nevertheless it is
not difficult to be framed and reduced into Act. In England there are diverse
Courts of Justice, and Counsels of State, whereby Government rises from the
Basis to the Pyramid, by a far Symmetricall Conus; and there is not any
matter of concernment to the Crown of England, for which there is not a proper
Place appointed, and proper Persons assigned to attend, and transact the same
for, and under, or together with the King. The same Policy also is in Scotland,
and Ireland, for matters peculiar to Scotland and Ireland: but in England,
Scotland, and Ireland for matters concerning all three Kingdoms, or that
remain in debate betwixt any two of them, besides the Kings sole Breast (thereby
too much over-burthened) there is not any other Judicature assistant, and
common to all the Nations to which the same may be committed. And yet in my
opinion, this Chasma in Government is more irregular, and of more dangerous
Consequence, being it concerns Great General matters, and high Points, then a
lower defect would be, in business of a more narrow and private Nature; for if
the King be served and attended by such Counselors so chosen and qualified as
He is Lord of our Kingdom, is it not more expedient, that he have the same
Service and Assistance as He is Lord of three Kingdoms? Some few years since,
some of the Kings Subjects under an English Commission, and others under a
Scottish, met it Greenland to fish, and upon a Qnestion of their several
Grants blood was drawn, and force carried it for the English: out of this fire
a National flame might have been kindled, and till this day the blood remains
unexpiated, and the Controversy undertermined. Not long since also the King
was deeply incensed against the whole Scottish Nation, and the Scots complained
of Violations to them offered. In this unhappy Dispute the King so engaged, was
the sole Judge; and yet the English being neither Parties nor Judges, nor
having any Cognizance, or witnesses, or otherwise, were to incur general
danger of Ruin, to decide this with their swords. Although in all private
Suits and Questions of Right betwixt the King and any Vassal of any one of His
Kingdoms, the King ever refers Himself (according to his Oath) to qualified
and indifferent sworn Judges, yet here the lives of Millions being endangered,
and the Honors of Nations engaged, the King only by the Sword must give
judgment. That which then happened to Scotland upon as small a ground, may
perhaps hereafter become the case of England, and (for ought I know) is now
happened to Ireland. But to what reason or equity can this seem commensurate,
that whole Nations should be worse provided for in points of judgment, then
the poorest Members of each Nation. And as it is in Common Pleas, and Pleas of
the Crown, so it is also in matters of Honor, and Acts of State, it is
injurious and repugnant to Union, that any one Nation should be debarred from
an Equality of Privilege, or Advantage, or interest in the King and His most
general Actions and Counsels.

My Result then is, That to make Union perfect betwixt the three Nations some
Common Court of Justice and Council of State must be erected, to which each
Nation, or any Member of each Nation, in a National difference, may have
recourse with equal Confidence for the redressing of all Injuries, for the
deciding of all Controversies, for the preventing of all Dangers, for the
removing of all Jealousies, and for communicating of all State or
Court-Benefits, and for the transacting of all matters of General concernment.
Charles the eighth, then made Brettaign One with France, when he levelled and
equalized both in Parliament, possessing both Nations One of Another, par my,
and par tout; for by this means the same Crown overshadowed and spread its
wings over Both, investing both with the same Propriety in it self. In the same
manner also Wales and England did Inter marry, and of two became One; for there
is no Burden of the Crown whereunto the Englishman is not now as liable as the
Welsh-man, mediately or immediately, nor no Privilege of the Crown whereunto
the Welsh man is not equally entitled with the Englishman. The same must also
be brought to pass betwixt England, Scotland, and Ireland, or else the same
perfection of Amity and Unity can never be established; and that can never be,
but by the same, or very like means. Where there is the same Law to limit the
Judge, and the same Judge to pronounce and execute according to the true intent
of that Law, and where both contesting Parties are equally interessed, both in
the Judge and Law, the judgment is ever final and satisfactory to Both; and
thus it is with England and Wales, but thus it is not as yet with England and
Scotland, and therefore between England and Wales there is no fear of Division,
but betwixt England and Scotland there is; and the King alone ought not in all
Cases to be both the Judge and the Law, or can fully satisfy all; for the King
may have more near Natural relation to one Kingdom then another, and by other
respects more by as't to favor the one Kingdom then another, and without
assistance he is not competent for all things. And therefore the Qualification
of that Assistance that it be equal and impartial, and trusted by all, is of
great and weighty moment. And this is true in matters of State, where no Law is
written, but in matters of Right, where Laws are as requisite almost as Judges,
it is necessary that both Parties be as fully assured in the Laws which are to
regulate the Judges, as the Judges which are to enlive the Laws. And this
cannot be, unless all our three Nations have equal Consent and concurrence in
Parliament, to sit as Judges, and to pass Laws, or to convene representatively
and vertually in some less Court and Council, branching (as it were) out of
the Parliament, several, and approaching also in power as near thereunto as
may be. National Parliaments shall still move in their proper Orbs, taking
Cognizance of all particular National Affairs, and this new erected Seat or
Table, though it may have much of Parliamentary vigor in it, especially in the
vacancy of Parliaments, as to Cases of General Consequence; yet it shall have
no Jurisdiction at all in mere National Expedients.

By this means (as I conceive) the Three Kingdoms shall be contempered into
One indivisible Monarchy, and be made One solid Natural Body, and such Union
entertained as shall be to the Advantage of all three Nations, and to the
disadvantage of no One; such as shall distribute all Privileges equally to be
enjoyed, and all services equally to be born, and leave behind no show of
inequality to be a ground of envy or disunion. It Is true, the King cannot be
corporally present in all the Nations at once, but whatsoever the benefit of a
Royal Court may be, the disposing of that is left Arbitrary to the King; and
this may seem perhaps great Inequality to those Nations which have less
attraction in them. The mere Residence of a Prince, if it be a Commodity, it
goes many times accompanied with diverse great Discommodities; and as the Sun,
though it be the most auspicious of all Celestial Bodies, yet it does not
always enrich those Tracts of Earth most, which it most violently heats with
its torrid perpendicular beams: so neither does the Majesticall Court of a King
always make those Territories most happy, which enjoy it at least Distance.
But be this Benefit what it will, in this, England intrusts as much to the
Kings mere Discretion, as either Scotland or Ireland, knowing that without
unnatural force he cannot be restrained in it, nor without cutting Monarchy
into Mammocks, that all Countries or Corporations can be thus satisfied; and
presuming that no King will ever withdraw Himself where he may be most useful,
or so confine His Person to one Place, as that His influence shall be wanting
in any part of His Dominions, no Umbrage can be taken of Emulation in this. And
as for all other things, Equality, that unmovable Center of the Universe, and
Impartiality, that blessed Balance of Government, shall be most exactly and
Mathematically pursued in this new erected Synedrion; the Heptarchy of England
shall not be more abolished then the Tritarchy of England, Scotland, and
Ireland. I need not therefore say any more of this General Junio, or Court it
self, or of the end for which it is so convocated, it is sufficient that I have
fancyed it to be equally chosen out of all the Three Nations, for the making
them into One by an equal dispensation of all Rights and Privileges, and an
exact Distribution of Burdens and Chastisements. I shall only now add
something of some Requisites, and Qualifications due to it.

That this Counsel may be effectual for those ends for which it is ordained,
all Parties should equally confide in it, for which Purpose it must be
dependent upon the King, as Parliaments now are, and also be chosen equally out
of all Three Nations by Parliament, and in each Nation of the Lords and
Commons, or several Ranks in number proportioned for their mutual Assurance.
For Example, I will suppose a Trienniall Parliament in each Nation settled, and
the same Parliament to nominate a convenient number in each Nation for their
own Order to be endued with power as their standing Committees, to continue
from one Parliament to another, and no longer, unless for an Honor and
Testimony of Public Confidence they be then longer continued. I will wish
also, that in all Cases nothing be determined by fewer then one of the
Nobility, and two or three of the Commonalty of each Nation, and that Plurality
of Votes in gross, may not carry any thing but Plurality of Kingdoms. And if
any high difficulty arise betwixt Kingdom and Kingdom, let it be reserved for
further Resolution in all three Parliaments. And if it happen that there be not
one of the Nobility, or two or three of the Commonalty surviving from
Parliament to Parliament, then the King to choose and supply that Temporary
fail. Considering it also as a Council of State, Let it assist the King in all
Embassages, and Public Treaties, and under Him superintend all foreign
Plantations and Mysteries of Trade. Let it have a confined Power to mingle the
Nations in Blood by Inter-marriages, to conform them in Language, Manners, and
Religion, and to reward all National offices of friendship, and to punish all
Public Enmities; and let it is authority be greater then that of the Privy
Council. And considering it as a Court of Justice, Let it hold Cognizance of
all Public Quarrels and Divisions; Let it suppress all Incendiaries,
declaring themselves either by words or Actions; Let it uphold all Orders of
Equality, and cut off all opposers of the same. And for this purpose let it
obtain a Jurisdiction in such Public National Causes, equal at least to
that of the Kings Bench. And that they may the better establish General Union
by preventing and removing all Occasions of Division and Emulation, and by
supplying and corroborating the surest Nerves of mutual Affection and
Correspondence, Let the Persons of these grand Counselors be sacred, their
Maintenance Honorable, at the Charge of their respective States, and let
several Parliaments derive or consigne Power to them, and demand Account from
them, as Occasion shall require. Let the place of their Residence, and the
times of their convening be designed by the King, as reason of State shall
bear, and let them attend His Pleasure as the Lords of the Council, and as the
Judges of the Kings Bench now do. Let all Wars, especially with foreign
States, be undertaken by their Advice; And let the Levies of Men, Money, and
Ammunition be proportioned in all the three Kingdoms by their Discretion, and
let all Truces and Leagues be made and preserved as they shall counsel.

To conclude, My hope is that by some such wholesome Constitution Ireland may
be better reduced, and the like Rebellions for the future prevented, and
perhaps other States, by the Harmony of our Union, invited into an
Incorporation with us, till we all grow up into a Body equal, and able to
poyse with any State now in Europe. But I leave the further Maturation of this
Overture to men of profounder knowledge, and stronger judgments.

Let the Motto of King James be never forgotten,

Faciam Eos in Gentem Vnam.

