PRACTICAL LAW, Controlling and countermanding The Common Law: AND The Sword
of War the Sword of Justice.

Against all the late Declarations and publications of the Army, That they
fight for the Peoples Liberties and Laws.

Printed at Exeter 1648.

The Preface.
THe strange and unparalled insolency of the General and Council of War,
in presuming to grant Injunctions to stay Suits and proceedings at Common Law,
against Malignant Cavaliers, who have plundered them of all their estates,
under pretext of Exeter Articles, etc. which they presume extend to all
Malignant Constables, and others who have plundered and imprisoned the
Parliaments best friends by their commands, though not within the minds nor
intent of the Articles, and to enjoyne them to come before the Council of
War, 200. or 300. miles to show cause why they should not surcease their
Actions against these plunderers, and release their just judgment against
them, and presuming to evince the Judges, Attourneyes, and others, not to
proceed in such trialls: a more higher and tyrannical power then ever the
Councell-Table exhausted, so that all the Kingdom must now be ruled, and the
Common Law of the Land it self overruled and staid by the Marshall Law, to
the undoing of the Parliaments best friends, and rejoicing of Malignants, who
enjoy their plunder and estates without recompense.

Practical Law controlling and countermanding the Common Law, and the Sword of
War the Sword of JUSTICE.
WHereas Sir Richard Vyvyan of Tresewarren in the County of Cornwall Knight and
Baronet, has petitioned his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, that Edward Anthony
of the City of Exeter Goldsmith, has sued and impleaded him the said Sir
Richard Vyvyan, contrary to the Articles of the said City of Exeter, within
which the said Sir Richard Vyvyan is comprised: the General to the end he
might be satisfied of the truth of the particulars of the said Petition,
referred the same to the Examination of the Officers of his Army, who at a
public meeting, and upon a full Examination, found every particular in the
said Commission to be very clearly and punctually proved to be true, that Sir
Richard Vyvyan was Master of His Majesty's Mint in the City of Exeter by
Commission of his Majesty, that he is comprised within the said Articles of
Exon, and by which he is to be indempnified for matters relating to the late
differences between his Majesty and the Parliament, and that the said Edward
Anthony has sued and impleaded him the said Sir Richard Vyvyan for Plundered
from him to his undoing, being a Goldsmiths.
Plate sent unto the said Mint for his Majesty's use by Sir John Berkly Knight,
then Governor of the said City of Exeter, and has recovered by Verdict
against him the said Sir Richard Vyvyan, two hundred ninety one pound three
shillings damages, besides costs. Now forasmuch as they the said Officers have
thereupon certified the General the premises to be true, and that the said
Action and Verdict and all proceedings thereon are against the Articles of
Exeter, and therefore are of opinion, and desire the General to command the By
what Law or Commission can any such Order be granted by the General or
Advocate.
Judge Advocate to take care that the said Edward Anthony do forthwith reveal,
or otherways O happy Malignants that can find such Patronage! O unhappy
Parliament friends and sufferers who must be thus enforced even after Judgment
and Verdict to lose both their costs and damages justly recovered against
Cavaliers and Plunderers, and thus tossed up and down to their utter undoing
against the express Letter of the Covenant, and many Declarations of both
Houses to repair losses, and right them out of Malignants estates!
discharge him the said Sir Richard Vyvyan of and from the said Action, Verdict
and all proceedings thereon, or in default thereof to appear at the Head
Quarters to show a good cause to the contrary, and that all further proceeding
be stand in the mean while by the said Edward Anthony and his Attourneys;
These are therefore to desire and require the same Edward Anthony immediately
upon sight hereof to release and discharge the same Sir Richard Vyvyan of and
from the said Action and Verdict of 291. l. 3. s. damages and costs of Suit,
and all proceedings thereon, or otherwise appear at the Headquarters on
Monday the 6. day of March next coming, by nine of the clock in the forenoon,
to show good cause to the contrary, and all Attourneyes and Solicitours are to
take notice hereof, that there be no further proceedings in the said Suit in
the mean while, or to show cause to the contrary: Whereof they and every of
them are not fail. Dated at Where there is now a new Council Table erected
(it seems) far more extravagant then ever the King had any.
White Hall this 19. of Febr. 1647.

Hen. Whaley,
Advocate. Who will ever adhere to, or act, or suffer for the Parliament
hereafter, or contribute toward the Army, if they must be thus requited for
all their losses, and made the very scorn and derision both of their enemies
and friends? O heavens blush at this impious ingratitude.



To his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax Knight, General of the Parliaments
Forces by Nota.
Sea and Land. The most humble Petition of John Collacot the elder, of the
Parish of Shebber within the County of Devon.
Humbly shows,
THat your Petitioner being Constable during some part of the times of these
unhappy differences betwixt His Majesty and the Parliament, was in the time of
his being Constable particularly commanded by the Warrants annexed, to be
assisting unto Captain Yeo: in the apprehending of John Perryn senior.

That he was commanded by the said Yeo: and compelled by Thomas Hewes Provost
Marshall and his Troopers, to attend the said Captain Yeo: in the execution of
the said Warrants, which he durst not refuse, the Kings party being then
prevalent in the Country.

That for this cause only the said Perryn has commenced a Suit at Law against
your Petitioner, which will come to trial this Assizes to the Petitioners
utter rain, the Articles of Exeter (in which your Petitioner is comprehended)
being not pleadable at Law, unless your Excellencies accustomed goodness be
extended for his relief herein, which is according to your Excellencies
engagement upon the rendering the said Garrison.

That the said Captain Yroman is comprised within the Articles of Exon, as
appears by your Excellencies Certificate annexed, and has made his
Composition at Goldsmiths-hall, for his said Delinquency, within the eour
months mentioned in the said Articles, as appears by Certificate ready to
be produced.

The Petitioner therefore beseeches your Excellency, that he may have the
benefit of the said Articles of Exon, he acting by and under the command of the
said Captain Yeo: who has compounded: And that your Honor would be pleased
to By what Commission I pray, without the Houses Orders, and contrary to their
Protestations, to protect Malignants against their plunderers and undoers.
give command for the stay of all proceedings at Law against the Petitioner.

And your Petitioners shall ever pray, etc.

Queen Street, March 8. 1647.
If this Petition be true, I desire the Judge to take care that the Articles of
Exon be made good to the Petitioner, and that the parties complained of do
forbear further proceedings at Law, or By what Orrinance, Law, or Commission,
they being no Soldiers, but persons imprisoned and plundered of their estates,
for their zeal and good affections to the Parliament.
show cause to the Court Marshall to the contrary.

T. Fairfax.

Whereas John Collacot the elder of the Parish of Shebber in the County of
Devon being a Constable in some part of the times of these unhappy differences,
was in that time particularly commanded by Capt. Yeo: a Commander in the Kings
Army, to be assisting unto him in the execution of a Warrant from Col. Sir John
Berkley Governor of Exon for the apprehending Iohu Perryn the Elder and
others, which accordingly he did. That the said Captain Yeo: was a person
comprised within the Articles of Exon, and has made his Composition at
Goldsmiths-hall: That the said Collacot is sued at Law by the said Perryn for
apprehending him as aforesaid, which is If so, then all malignant Constabl^s
Of^icers, and others, that murdered ravished, robbed, imprisoned, plundered or
execut^d any of the Parliaments best f^iend, by command of any person or
Officer of the Kings within the Articles of Exon, Oxen, etc. shall be totally
exempted from all actions and prosecutions, though not within these Garrisons,
when seized or surrendered, and if so, all who have borne Ar^s against the
Parliament shall be freed from Sequestrations and Suits upon such a general
extravagant construction.
contrary to the twelfth Article of Exon, the said Collacot having done nothing
but by the procurement of the said Capt. Yeo: all which particulars being
proved before me to be true: These ar^ therefore to require the said Perryn
within one and twenty days next after sight hereof, personally to appear
before the Court Marshall of his Ecellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, Then they must
follow him and it from one end of the Kingdom to the other, and was there ever
such a grievance or vexation heard of before? or tyrannical arbitrary
usurpation.
wheresoever the same. is or shall be held to show cause why the said Collocot
should not have the benefit of the said Articles, or else discharge or release
the said Collacot of his said Action; and in the mean time, there be no
further proceedings at Law, and all Attourneys, Solicitours, and others whom it
does concern, are required to take notice hereof, the honor of his Excellency
Sir Thomas Fairfax and Army being so The Laws of the Kingdom, and Rights and
Liberties of the greatest friends to, and sufferers for the Par^iament, ought
to oversway the General and Armies honor, and their Patronage of Malingants.
much concerned, for making good the said Articles. Dated at White Hall this
13. of March, 1647.

Copia Vera. Henry Whalley
Advocate.
Captain Yeo: is authorized to make diligent search and apprehend John Perryn
the elder, John and Richard Perryn his fonnes, Mathusala Bligh, Philip
Kingford, Robert Martin and James Slowman of the parish of Holsworthy, John
Coals and James Hobs of Milton Damrell, John Hearding of Shebber, Thomas
Wellington of great Torrington and John Markeham of Littleham, and to bring
them into safe custody, or cause them to be brought to the Provost Marshall of
the City of Exon, there to remain in safe custody until they and every of them
shall answer all such matters as shall be o^jected against them and every of
them; and Thomas Hewes the Marshall of the North Division of the said County of
Devon, and the Constables of Shebber with all other his Majesty's Officers and
loving Subjects within the said County, are straightly charged and commanded to
be aiding and assisting unto the said Captain Yeo: in the due execution hereof,
wherein they and every of them are not to fail, as they will answer the
contrary at their utmost perils.

Given under my hand and Seal at Betford-house in Exon the 6. of March, 1643.
John Berkley.
Vera Copia

R. H.



FINIS.

