MINORS NO SENATORS.

Or A Brief Discourse, proving, That INFANTS under the Age of 21. years* are
incapable, in point of Law, of being Members of Parliament, and that the
Elections of any such are mere Nullities; Yea, injurious, prejuditiall,
dishonorable to the whole Parliament and Kingdom, in sundry respects.

Written by a Common-Lawyer (a true lover of his Country, and Honourer of the
Parliament) to a Friend and Client of his, for his private satisfaction, and
published for the Common-good.

Job 12. 12, 12. With the ancient is wisdom, and in length of days is
understanding: With him is wisdom and strength, he has Council and
understanding.

Galath. 4. 1, 2. Now I say the Heir as long as he is a Child differs
nothing from a servant, though he be Lord of all, but is under Tutors and
Governors, until the time appointed of the Father.

Isay 3. 1. 2, 3, 4. For behold the Lord of Hosts does take away from Jerusalem
the stay and the Staff, the prudent man, and the Ancient; the Honorable man,
and the Councellor, and the Eloquent Orator. And I will give Children to be
their Princes, and Babes shall rule over them. And the People shall be
oppressed every one by another, etc.

1 Cor. 13. 11. When I was a Child, I spoke as a Child, I understood as a
Child, I thought (or reasoned) as a Child: but when I became a man, I put away
Childish things.

Chrysostom, Hom. 4. in 1 Cor. cap. 1. Non ferunt Pueri ut de ulla re utili
curam gerant; sape autem cum nos loquamur de rebus necessarijs, eorum quae
dicuntur, nihil sentiunt.

Printed at London, Anno 1646.

Minors, no Senators, OR A Brief Discourse against the Election, Admission,
and Permission of any INFANTS under the Age of 21. Years, to be Members of
PARLIAMENT.
SIR;
WHereas you have requested me to deliver my opinion in point of Law concerning
this question now in controversy.

Whether an Infant under the age of one and twenty ye^^es be Capable of being a
Member of Parliament? And whether his Election be not merely void in Law?

I conceive the final resolution of this Quere, belongs only to the Houses of
Parliament, Cooks 4. Institutes, p. 15 to 20.
The proper Judges of their own respective Privileges, Members, and of the
Legallity or Nullity of their Election^; Yet notwithstanding since every
Lawyer, may without breach of Privilege of either house, declare, what he
believes the Law to be in any disputable point that concerns Elections or
Members; the Committee of Privileges in all Parliaments, admitting Lawyers
(some of the most necessary, useful, active, able Members in a Parliament,
whatsoever some Englands Birthright Advertisments for the Election of
Burgesses, confuted by Master Cook.
Ignoramusses have lately scribled, to the contrary, as experience manifests)
to debate all questions concerning Elections of Members before them, by the
rules of Law and right reason, and that Committee, with the whole House of
Commons always Voting Elections good or bad by these very Rules, I have
adventured without any scruple freely and impartially to deliver my Judgment
touching the propounded Quere, with all humble submission to the Parliament,
(the proper Judge thereof) and the opinions of more able Lawyers then my self.

For mine own opinion in this point, I am really persuaded, That Infants under
the Age of twenty one years (which the Littleton sect. 103. 104. 110. 259. and
Cooks Institutes, Ibidem. Glanu: l. 7. c. 3 Ploudens com: f. 267. See Brook's
Abridment, and Fitz. Tit. Cover^^re, Enfant, No^hability.
Law resolves to be their full age, when they come to full discretion) are
altogether incapable of being Members of the Commons House, and that the
Elections of such Members are mere Nullities in Law. The reasons swaying me
to this opinion are various, weighty, and I think unanswerable, I shall reduce
them to these four heads.

1. Reasons extracted out of the very bowels of the Writ it self for the
Electing of Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses. 2. Reasons taken from the very
Nature of the High Court of Parliament, both as it is the highest Court of
Justice, and greatest Council of the Realm; and from the importance of the
public affairs therein transacted. 3. Reasons from the inconveniences that
may arise from admitting Infants competent Members of this supreme Court and
Council. 4. Reasons from Presidents of Foreign Senates, Parliaments, Councels
appliable to our own great Council, and one express printed authority.
First, the writ it self for electing Knights and Burgesses (which is very
ancient approved by all Par^iaments, and Cooks 4. I^stit. p. 10. 4^ 7 H. 4. c.
15. 8. H. 6. c. 7.
unalterable but by Parliament, furnishes me with three Arguments against the
Election of Infants, and their incapability of being Members of Parliament.

The first of them is couched in this clause, comprizing the subject matter for
which Parliaments are summoned to treat and consult about; to wit Cromptons
Jurisdictions of Courts, f. 2. 3. Cooks Instit on Lit. f. 110. his 4th.
Institute, p. ^.
De quibusdam arduis and urgentibus negotijs Statum and Defensionem Regni
Ang^^a and Ecclesiae Anglicanae concernentibus. And Infants certainly are
uncapab^e (for want of Judgment experience wisdom, Learning) to debate, and
determine such arduons, urgent, grand affairs, concerning the safety, the
defense both of the Rea^me and Church of England, since in Judgment of Law,
they are incapable to manage their own private Estates, as I shall more ful^y
prove herea^ter: Therefore not capable to be elected Members of this supreamest
Council of the Realm.

The 2d. is more transparent, and positively expressed in these ensuing words
of the Writ, which thus describe the quality of the persons to be elected.
Crompton and Cook qu^
Elogi facias duos Milites gladijs ^inctos, MAGIS IDONEOS ET DISCRETOS, (d)
Dyer. fol. 60. a^el est intend des ^outs homes queils sont les plus Sages et
discreet persons Deins le Realm.
and de qualibet Civitate Com. praedict. duos Cives, and de quolibet Burgo Duos
Burgenses DE DISCRETIORIBUS ET MAGIS SVEFICIENTIBUS Eleg^ facias.

In relation to which clause of the writ the Sheriffs, and Majors use to make
this form of Return; Virtute ^stius Brevis feci cleg^ duos Milites, MAGIS
IDONEOS ET DISCRETOS, etc F^ci etiam Praeceptum virtute hu^us Brevis quod de
eodem Burg^ Elegi facerent duos Burgenses DE DISCRETJOR BUS ET MAGIS
SVFFIENTI^VS, etc. Now I would demand of any rational man, Elector, or Member
of Parliament, whether he believes in his conscience, that in the judgment of
common reason, Law, the compilers or issuers of this Writ for Elections,
Infants, who have Littleton sect. 103. 104. 110. 269.
not arrived at the years of full, of ordinary discretion, and are so
indiscreet in judgment of Law, that they are incapable to manage or dispose of
their own private estates, and therefore are in ward to others, can possibly
be deemed. THE MOST FIT AND DISCREET MEN to be e^ected Knights in any County,
OR THE MORE DISCREET AND SVFFICIENT PERSONS; that can be culled out to serve as
Citizens, and Burgesses for any City or Borough? Certainly they are so far
from being the most discreet persons that the Cooks Institut. on Littletons. 3.
Law [and Gospel to] resolves, they are within the years of perfect discretion,
the most indiscreet of all others, not able to dispose of their own private
estates: yea so far from being the most sit persons to be Judges, or
counselors in this supreme Court, 1 Cor. 13. 11.
that they can neither be Stewards, Judges, Attorneys, nor Officers in any
Court of Law or justice; so far from being the most sufficient men [to wit for
wisdom, skill experience, judgment the sufficiency here intended, that they
are the most insufficient of any, nnlesse all the whole County, City, or
Borough which elected them be Fools, Children, or more indiscreet then those
very Infants they choose to serve in Parliament, as most discreet and sufficient
persons.

There is yet a third clause in the Writ, discribing, what persons must be
elected Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of Parliament, even such only, Qui
plaenam and sufficientem Potestatem PRO SE ET COMMVNITATE Civitatum and
Burgorum pradict: AD FACIEDVM ET CONSENT I^NDVM HIS, quae tunc ibidem de
communi consilio dicti Regni nostri super negotijs ante dictis contigerint,
ordinari. Ita quod pro defecta potestatis hujusmodi, seu propter improvidam
electionem Civium ac Burgensium pradictorum, dicta N^gocia infecta non
remaneant quovismodo, Now are Wards or Infants under the age of 21. years, such
persons as these? Have they, or can they have any full and sufficient power for
themselves or for the Communaltie of the Counties Cities or Buroughs for
which they serve, to do and consent to those things concerning the arduous and
weighty affairs of the Church and state of England which shall be ordained by
common consent in Parliament? doubtless not* Our common Law resolves, Littleton
Sect. 259. Fitz. Abridg. Tit. Enfant. and Brook. Tit. coverture.
that Infants have no full power to do or consent to any thing for themselves.
If they Levy a Fine, acknowledge a statute, or recognisance, which are matters
of record, they may avoid them by a Writ of 21. E. 3. 24. 22. H. 6. 31. ^. 2.
R. 3. 1. ^. 20. and 18. ^d. 4. 13. Fitz. N. Br. f. 21. D. Cook 2. Rep. 57. 18.
E. 3. 29 Audita Querela 26. 27. 35.
Error, or an Audita Quarla by the Common Law, during their Minorities.

Their feofments, Gra^ts, Releases are all either void or voidable, as will at
their full age as before, and that not only by themselves but their heirs to,
by entry, or a writ of Littleton Sect. 406. 4^6. Brook Dum fuit infra aetatem.
Dum fuit infra aetatem: yea, their assents are merely void in Law, not binding
themselves, as our Law Books resolve. Upon which very reason M. 11. E. 3.
Assise: 87. It was resolved, that if one enter upon the freehold of an Infant
with his assent, this is a disseisin, because an Infant cannot consent to an
entry. And if he cannot consent fully for himself, much less for others being
unable to be an 1. H. 5. 6. Fitz. ^^^ant. 3 21. E. 4. 18.
Attorney or Proxy to assent for others in any Court of Justice, much more then
in a Parliament the supreamest Court. Therefore for defect of such a power, and
by reason of such an improvident, Election of Infant-Citizens and Burgesses,
the affairs of the Realm must needs remain altogether, or in a great measure
unfinisht, contrary to the purport of the Writ of Election; And so in all these
respects, such Infants Elections must needs be merely void in Law.

My second sort of reasons shall be drawn from the nature of the High Court of
Parliament it self, as it is the supremest Court of Justice, the greatest
Council of the Kingdom, and from the consideration of the great public
affairs therein debated, transacted, resolved, settled.

First the high Court of Parliament is the Cook 4. Instit. ^. 1.
most absolute and supreme Court of Justice in the Realm, wherein the
Judgments proceedings of all other Courts, Civil Ecclesiastical or Marine
are examined finally determined, confirmed or revoked, without any further
Appeal: if then an Infant be incapable of being a Judge either of matters of
fact or Law, in any iuferiour Court of Justice, much more then in this supreme
Sovereign Court which control's all others.

Master Lit^leton in his Chapter of Parceners, Sect. 259. and Sir Edward Cook
in his Institutes on it* f. 155. 172. 175. resolve. That an infant before the
age of 21. cannot be a Se 13. E. 3 Enfant. 9. 1 E. 2. Account 121. 21. E. 3. 8
10. H. 4. 14. 2. H. 4. 13. 26 E. 3. 63. b. 27. E. 3. 77. a. 29. E. 3. 5. a.
Bayliffe nor Receiver (for want of skill and ability in intendment of Law to
make any improvement or profit of lands or goods) nor yet sworn at all in any
Inquest as a Juror; The reason is, because, Cooks Instit. on Littl. f. ^55.
See Kitching 41*
Jurors are Judges of all matters of f^ct, which Infants have no competent
knowledge, experience or Judgment in eye of law to determine or Judge a right
of any matters coming juditially before them, and therefore are not such
legales homines, as the Venire requires M. 40. and 41. Eliz. B. Rs. in a case
between Scambler, and Walkers, reported in Sir Edward Cooks Institutes on
Littleton, fol. 3. B. it was resolved, That an Infant is altogether incapable
of a Stewardship of a manner, in possession or reversion, or of any Office
which concerns the administration or execution of Justice or the Kings Revenew,
or the Common wealth, or the interest, benefit or safety of the Subject:
because the Law intends he wants both skill and judgment juditially to
manage either of them. If then an Infant be utterly incapable of being a
Judge, Officer, or Executioner of Justice in a Court Baron, Leet, or in any the
most inferior Courts, or of being a Justice of Peace, Major, Bayliffe,
Sheriff, Auditor In H. 5. 6. Fitz: Enf. 3. 21 ^. 418. Br. coverture. 55.
or but an ordinary Attorney, and the like, where the meanest businesses
between man and man are transacted; much more is he incapable of being a Judge,
in Parliament, the suprem^st Court of Justice, where the most difficult
businesses, the most weighty public causes are See the Sovereign Power of
Parliaments, part 1 p. 34 39, 46. Sir Thomas Smith his Common Wealth of
England, l. 2. cap. 1. 2. Cooks 4. Institut. ^. 1.
finally examined, debated, judged without any further appeal, the very
judgments of the greatest, learnedest Judges, re-examined, and oft-times
reversed; the very lives, liberties estates of all the Subjects, yea the
Prerogatives, Rights, Revenues of the Crown it self judicially determined, to
the Kingdoms Weal or woe.

Upon this very ground, in the House of Peers, The King is not bound of Right
to send forth his Writ of Summons to any Peer, that is under Age, neither does
he use to Summon such to sit as Judges in that house, though Peer, by Birth:
But when any Peer is of all age, then he ought to have a Writ of summons Ex
debito justitiae, (not before) as Sir Edward Cook informs us in his 4.
Institutes fol. 19. and 41. Nay, if the King himself be an Infant, [as King
Henry the 3d. Rich. the 2d Hen. 5. Hen. 6. Edward 5. and 6. and some others of
our Kings were] the Sea the Sovereign power of Parliaments, part 1. p. 50, 51.
part 2. p. 56. 57, 65, 67, 71
Parliament has in such cases, usually created a L. Protector over him, in
nature of a Guardian, to supply his place in Parliament, to give his Royal
assent to Bills; and execute that Royal Authority which himself by reason of
his Infancy is unable to discharge; That of Rom: Hist. l. 24. sect. 4. p. 517.
Liuy concerning Ierom the Infant K. of Syra^use, who had his Protectors* being
true, Nomen Regium penes puerum Regem, regimen rerum omnium penes Tutores. If
then our Peers themselves during their Minorities are thus incapable of being
Judges in the House of Peers, where they represent their own persons only, and
our Kings too, in some respects, then much more are other Infants incapable of
being Members of the House of Commons, where they Cooks 4. Institut cap. 1.
represent whole Counties, Cities, Buroughs, yea the Commons of all England,
and Vote and judge in their behalf.

Secondly, As the Parliament is the Supreme Court, so the Cooks 4. Institut
cap. 1.
Greatest Council of the Kingdom. Hence it is usually styled in our Ancient
Writers, (especially before the Conquest) Beda Eccl. Hist l. 3. c. 5. 12 13,
14. Hen: Hunting. Hist. l. 3. 5. Matthew. west. An. 905. Will. Malmes: de Gest:
Pont. Angl. l. 2. c. 13. Houed: p. 427 Flor: wigo^niensis. An. 977. Antiqu.
Eccl: Bri^. p. 19 20. 59. 60. Lam. Archaion Seldens Titles of Hon. p. 63^ Cooks
4. Insti. p. 2. Spelman council: p. 182. 183. 219. 293. 300. 301. 334. 335. 375.
387. 390. 408. 419. 424. 494. 510 513. 534. 559. 552. 566.
Concilium SAPIENTUM, ore SAPIENTUM POPULI* Concilium SENATORUM, SENIORUM NATU
MAJORUM ALDERMANNORUM; etc. and are Infants such? The Members of it
representing the House of Commons, are commonly called, Sapientes,
Sapientissimi viri, Senatores, Seniores populi, ^rudentissimi viri, Authoritate
and Scientia pollentes: Conspic^i clarique Viri; and are Infants such? Or can
they be styled such? If not, then certainly they are no fit Members of such a
Council, neither were they so reputed informer ages; why then should they be
deemed fit Members now? when greater, weightier businesses of all sorts
concerning Church and State are imagitation, then in any former age whatsoever,
or all our Parliaments put together? Nay, why should they be deemed meet
Members to sit and Vote in this greatest Council of the Realm at this time,
who are not thought fit persons to be admitted in any our most inferior
Counsels [authorized either by Law or custom,] at any time? Who ever heard or
saw an Infant elected a Common Council man in any of our Cities, Corporations,
Fraternities, Guiles; much less a Major, Alderman, Master, or Warden, in any
of them? Did ever any of our Kings make choice of Infants for their Priv^e
Councillors of State? for their Council of War, Law, Physic? Or were ever
any such elected to be Members of any Convocation, Synod, Council? our 19. H.
6. 13. Issue 67. 13. Eliz. c. 12.
present Laws, and Ancient Canons prescribe, that no man shall be made a
Minister before the age of 24. (y) See Truth triumphing over Falsehood, etc.
years; much less then can be a Member of any Synod or Convocation, before
that age: And shall Infants then be capable of being Members of the supreme
Council of Parliament before the age of 2^. wherein all Acts, Canons made in
Synods, or Convocations must be [x] ratified before they become obligatory?
Certainly this would be a great solecisme, disparity, absurdity. Every Senater
and Member of the greatest Council of the Realm (as Bodins Commonweal* l.
3. c. 1. Cooks 4. Institutes, cap. 1.
Politicians, and others resolve] ought to be endued with these several
qualifications to discharge that place, which Infants commonly want.

1. With deep solid wisdom, and gravity. 2. Sound judgment. 3. Grand
experience. 4. Impartial Justice. 5. Inflexible undaunted courage and
resolution, not to be overcome with flattery or threats. 6. A prudent foresight
to prevent all gro^ing mischiefs. 7. A competent measure of Learning and
skill, especially in the laws, constitutions, and Histories of his own and
other States, and in State affairs; Now what Infant is there to be found
endowed with all these qualities in such an eminent manner as to make him a
fitting Member for so great so public a Council as the Parliament, to which
none are to be admitted, but such who are qualified in some good measure for
it.
Thirdly, The matters to be debated and transacted in Parliament will easily
resolve, that they are too ^igh, weighty, difficult for Infants to debate,
order, as determine aright: As namely*

See Cooks 4. Instit. c. 1. Beam, l. 3 c. 1. Sir Th. Smiths Commonwealth of
England, l. 2. cap. 1. 2. Vowels Order and Usage how to keep a Parliament.
Cambd^ns Brit. page 173. The Sovereign power of Parliaments and Kingdoms
First, All matters touching the King, his Prerogative, Crown, Revenewes.
Secondly, All matters concerning the State of the Kingdoms of England, and
Ireland, as well in times of War as Peace. Thirdly, All affairs which
concern the defense of the Kingdom by Sea or Land. Fourthly, The preservation,
Reformation of the Church Government, discipline of the Church of Engl. and true
Religion established therein. Fifthly, The enacting of, new Laws, with the
amendment, or repeal of old ones. Sixthly, All matters concerning the Courts,
Officers, and administration of Justice. Seventhly, All things concerning
trade, commerce, the several arts and professions of all sorts of men.
Eighthly, Crimes, grievances* oppressions of all sorts. Ninthly, The liberties,
properties, estates, lives, limbs, of all the people. Tenthly, The Privileges
of this high Court, and of the Members thereof; Alas what Infant, (yea what
ancient experienced States man almost) is sufficient for all these things of
moment? Yea, if we look only upon the great arduous Ecclesiastical, Civil,
Millitary affairs, wherein this Parliament has spent above five years
deliberation and debate, we shall find them so intricate, difficult,
ponderous, dangerous, arduous and transcendent, as I am confident all that know
them will conclude, they transcend the capacity of any Infants to understand,
much more to debate, determine resolve, settle in a ^ight and stable way for
our Churches, Kingdoms future preservation. And shall we make or suffer Infants
to be Members of this greatest Council of the Realm to settle, determine such
difficult weighty things as these, which their capacities, skill, abilities are
unable to comprehend much less to resolve, regulate, settle? Verily if we
should do this, I fear the whole Kingdom and Christian world would censure
and condemn us (as Children) for it.

Finally our 9. H. 3. c. 20. H. 3. c. 6. 7 52. H. 3. c. 17 3. E. 1. c. 21. 13
E. 1. c. 34. 15. 16. 14. E. 3. c. 13. 18. E. 1. of fines. 1. R. 3. c. 7. 4. H.
7. 124. 21. Ian. c, 16. See Ashes Tables Enfant 33. 32. H. 8. E. 2.
Parliaments themselves have in all ages provided and taken special care of
Infants educations, persons, estates enjoining their Gardians, and others, to
take the care and custody of them during their minority, and exempting them out
of sundry Acts in cases of Lackes, Nonclaime, fines, as persons incapable to
dispose of themselves or their estates yea void of competent wisdom and
discretion to manage their own privat^ affairs: A direct Parliamentary
judgment and resolution in all ages, that they are much more incapable to
order, settle, manage the greatest affairs of the Church, State, in the
supreamest Court and Council of the Realm.

3ly. The reasons drawn from the inconveniences and mischiefs of admitting
Infants to be Members, are many.

First, it is of one of the saddest judgments God threatens to his people That
he will give them Children to be their Princes and Babes to rule over them Isa
3. 4. Eccles. 10. 16. and then what follows. The people shall be oppressed
every one by another and every one by his Neighbor; the Child shall behave
himself proudly against the ancient, and the base against the Honorable;
Children are their oppressors, and women rule over them, O my people those that
load thee cause the to err, and destroy the way of thy Paths. Isay 3. 5. 12.
Therefore it must needs be mischeivous and an heavy judgment to have Children
and Babes in Law, Members of our Parliaments, which should be a Council of the
sagest, discreetest Senators, and Elders of our Realm.

2ly. It is of very dangerous consequence for Infants to be admitted Members,
especially in these times of greatest consultation, action, danger, and
reformation. For first, if any one Infant may de jure be a Member of Parliament
then by consequence a second, third, and so in infinitum, till the House be
filled with such for surety, if one Infant be capable of being a Member, then
another as well as he: And if an Infant of twenty years, then of ten, twelve
or less by like reason since if you once break the Rules of Law you can set no
bounds* to any number, or age of Infants, and so by consequence, instead of
having Concilium Sapientum, Senatus Seniorum, etc. as Parliaments were
ancient^y styled; we shall have Parliamentum Puororum, Senatus Infantum, a
Parliament of Children, a Senate of Babes, if all Cities, Burgesses, were so
Childish so foolish, and injurious to the public in their elections of such,
as some [through the importunity of friends] have bin. Now how dangerous this
may prove to the Kingdom, let all wise men judge, by the example of King 2.
Chron. 10
Rehoboams young Counselors, who discontented his people and lost his Kingdom.

3ly. Admit the Commons House should determine, how many Infants they would
allow to be Members, (perhaps not above five or six to prevent this
inconvenience) yet the mischief and danger of admitting so few may prove very
great, not only in regard of the illness of the President in these signal
times of Reformation, but of the probable dangerous consequences of it. It was
a prudent speech of a blunt Burgesle when he was solicited to give his voice
for a young novice; NOTE.
This is no Parliament to enter whelps in, therefore we must think of some
graver person. Verily there are so many weighty and difficult debates almost
every day in the House of matters of highest concernment, wherein the House is
often divided in their Votes, that two or three Infants misguided voices, for
want of judgment to vote a right, may infinitely prejudice, endanger our three
whole Churches, Kingdoms in a moment, especially, if the wheel of fortune
should turn against the Parliament by any treachery, or disaster. Therefore it
is very perilous to admit any Infants to sit as Members, in such a dangerous
overreaching age as this.

4ly. It is inevitably perilous, and mischeivous (as Commonweal l. 3. p. ^55.
Bodin truly informat us) upon this consideration. That the Council of young
men [especially of Infants] though never so wise, virtuous and discreet, will
never be so readily entertained, nor their Commands, Advices, Ordinances, Laws,
so chearefully submitted to by the people, young or old, as the Counsels,
Edicts, Votes of grave, wise and ancient men, but be either slighted, vilified
or disobeyed: For those (writes he) of equal age, will think themselves
altogether as wise at they, and those who are ancienter will deem themselves
much wiser then such young Counselors of state, and thereupon scorn,
contemn, deride their Votes, Ordinances, Resolutions, (especially when any new
Laws or forms of Government are to be introduced by them, and the old laid
quite aside, as now:) And in matters of state (if in any thing in the world)
opinion has no less, and oftentimes more force then the truth it self;
Neither is there any thing in a Commonweal more dangerous, then for Subjects
to have an ill opinion of their Councellers, Governors Lawmakers; for then
how shall they obey them? and if they obey them not, what issue is to be
expected? surely disobedience, sedition, Rebellion, ruin, It behooves therefore
our present Parliament, if they would prevent this dangerous mischief, to
expel all Infant (as well as Malignant) Members, which may draw a very great
disparagment, contempt, or disesteem upon their Councels, Votes, Ordinances,
Laws, not only in the opinions of Royalists and Malignants, but of grave, wise
well affected persons of Eminency and Ability, who perchance will tacitly deem
it no small disparagement, if not injury and folly for them, to submit their
Lives, Liberties, Estates, Laws, and consciences in some measure, to the
votes, Resolutions, and Commands of Infants under age, though backed with the
most mature suffrages, Advices, of many aged, wise and eminent Members of
greatest integrity and sufficiency. It is a memorable observation of Solomon
Eccles. 10. 1. Dead flies cause the ointment of the Apothecary to send forth a
stinking savor: so does a little folly him that it in reputation for Wisdom
and honor. And no man knows what an evil savor o^ contempt, disobedience,
disrespect, the apprehention of a little folly in some Infant Members may draw
upon the whole Parliament, [their Ordinances and proceedings,] though otherwise
in great reputation for wisdom and honor. Se^at^^ t^tius Or^^^lum Civitati^
De Oratore, lib. 2.
Cicero defined the Roman Sonate to be, the Oracle of the whole City. And
^liny resolves; Nef^s est adversus auctritatum Senatus tendere Romans Hist. l. 5.
It is a wicked Act to go against the Authority of the Senate. It therefore
behooves all Freeholders, Citizens and Burgesses of the Realm to take special
care, that they elect not, and the Honorable Houses that they admit not any
unfit Members, whose illegal presence or Votes therein may derogate in the
peoples Opinions from their incomparable wisdom, or irresistible Authority.

Fifthly, It is mischievous in this, that as it opens the mouths of Royalists,
Papists, Malignants, Sectaries, and the Prelaticall party to Revile,
Calumniate, censure, vilify, not only the new Recruits, Votes, Ordinances,
Proceedings of the Commons House for the present, so if they should get power
enough hereafter (which God forbid) it may give them occasion to undo, unvote,
repeal, yea nullify all their Acts, Ordinances, proceedings for the future;
because some Infants [uncapable by Law of being Members, or of consenting for
themselves or others) had a Vote and Concurrence in their passing, whose Acts,
Votes, Consents, are either void, or voydable by Law. Certainly when I read the
printed Act of 39. H. 6. cap. 1. Which repeales and makes void the Parliament
held at Coventry the year before, and all Acts, Statutes, and Ordinances
therein made, upon this very ground among other, that a great part of the
Knights Citizens and Burgesses appearing in it, were unduly Elected against the
course of the Kings Laws, and the Liberties of the Commons of this Realm, by
the means and labors of some seditions persons: And when I consider, that our
unconstant persidious King Henry the 3d. nulled and avoided for a time Matthew
Paris, Anno 226. p. 324. 325. ^^niells Hist. p. 151. 152
the great Charter of the Forest (though confirmed in Parliament) upon this
pretext, that he was a Minor under the Age of 21. when he first granted it and
in Ward, etc. And when I revolve the Statutes of 28. H. 8. c. 7. and 1. Edw. 6.
c. 11. which authorized the heirs of the Crown to King Henry the 8. and King
Edw. the 6. even out of Parliament to repeal all Acts and Statutes made and
assented to by them in Parliament before their age of 24. years, after they
came to the Age of 24. years: And when I consider upon what other See 15. E. 3.
Stat. 2. 11. and 21. R. 2. cap. 12. 1. H: c. 2. 3. 4. 31. H. 6. cap. 1. 17. E.
4. cap. 7.
slight pretenses some former Parliaments and their Acts have bin totally
nulled: It makes me tremble and fear, what future ages may attempt against the
proceedings of our present Parliament [if the Malignant Royal party should
grow potent] upon the like pretenses, [especially of undue Elections of
Infants, and others now complained of,] unless the Parliament take timely care
to redress them, and severely prohibit, censure all undue underhand practices
in new Elections, of which we have so many sad complaints in diverse parts. The
prevention therefore of this grand future mischief, will undoubtedly move them
to apply a present remedy to it, for fear of after-claps.

Fifthly, By the ancient Law and custom of Parliament, as our 3. E. 3. 19
Cooks 4. Institutes, p. 15. ^^ 20. 38, 39. Fitz: C^^^n^: 16^,
Law (...) resolve and the statute of 5. R. 2. cap. 4. enacts; Every Member of
Parliament who absents himself, or departs from it, without just ex^^^e and
License, shall be amerced, and otherwise punished (by imprisonment and the
like) as often time has bin used. But C. 8. Rep: 66, c. 3. E. 3. Fitz: Enfant
14. 14. Ass 17 43. Ass: 45. 17 E. 3. 75. Fitz: Damages, 127. Imprisonment 8.
^0, 16, 17.
our Law Books all resolve, that an Infant cannot be fined, amerced, or
imprisoned for any Laches, default, absence or negligence, because he is not of
full discretion: Therefore he cannot be a Member of Parliament by the express
resolution of these Authorities and this statute; even for this very mischief,
because he cannot be amerced imprisoned or punished, as other Members are and
ought to be, in case of absence, or undue departure rom the Parliament.

Sixthly, Admit the forementioned mischiefs should all prove but contingent,
and future, yet this one present mischief happens by Infants Elections, that
they keep out abler Members, and deprive the Parliament, Kingdom of the
assistance, Council, abilities of more discreet, wise, active, experienced.
Venerable persons then themselves, who by reason of their Infancy, and want of
experience, are no ways serviceable, active in the House or in Committees,
where they commonly sit as Ciphers, to keep out Figures, and men of greater
parts and eminency. I have ought times admired at the sotishnesse of people in
resigning up their Lives, Liberties, Estates, Laws, Religion, all, into the
hand^ of such Novices and unconfiding Members whom they Elect to represent and
Vote for them in Parliament, as themselves would disdain to advise with, or
make use of in any other employment. No man is so foolish as to make choice of
a young raw unexperienced unskilful Practitioner to be his Pilot, Physician,
Lawyer, Advocate, Commander, especially if the Voyage, Disease, Case Service,
be dangerous or difficult; but will resort to the skilfulest Pilots,
Physicians, Lawyers, Advocates, Soldiers, in such cases. And should they not
much more do thus in their choice of Members of Parliament, especially in these
dangerous and tempestuous times, when the ship of our Church, State are
extremely endangered by storms and rocks; the whole body of our three
Kingdoms, Churches desperately diseased, wounded, lacerated, their case very
dubious if not desperate; and their service so hot, so difficult, that it
requires the Conduct of the most experienced Commanders to bring them off with
safety? Certainly if they do it not, the Election of some few unable Members
and preterition of others of greater abilities in this juncture of time of
affairs of highest concernment, may ruin us and our Posterities for ever. The
consideration therefore of these recited mischiefs should, and will no doubt
enduce the Parliament, to remove all such Infants and illegal Members, (as
well as Malignants and Monopolists) out of the Commons house, or Prelates and
Popish Peers, out of the house of Lords.

Seventhy, It is mischievous even in this regard, that it is an extraordinary
dishonor to our whole Parliament and Nation, to suffer Infants to sit as
Judges, Counselors in the supreamest Judicature and Council of our three
Kingdoms, which gives Laws to England, Ireland, all the Kings Dominions except
Scotland on which it has a great influence to, by reason of the mutual
brotherly League between both Nations,] especially in such a time of
Reformation, Consultation, Circumspection, and action as this is. What think
you will foraign Nations report of our Parliament, our Nation, if they shall
hear of Infants, Wards, Minors sitting yea Voting as Members as Judges among
our Knights, Citizens, Burgesses now the greatest matters ever debated in any
Parliament are in agitation? will they not say, our Kingdom is either void of
wise experienced Senators, that we Elect such Novices; or that all our wise
ancient men, or our electors are turned Children. Naturalls in making such a
choice, and our Parliament very neglectfull of their own honor in petmitting
such Associats to sit among them, in case the Kingdom can afford them others
of more Antiquity Ability, and experience? To prevent therefore this dishonor
abroad, and the scoffs of Royalists and Malignants at home (who jeare us with
these Childish Infant Members, as well as with our Independent Women-preachers)
I make no doubt but the House of Commons will unanimously resolve, their
Elections void in Law, and their Electors worthy public censure, for putting
such a dishonor both on our Parliament and Nation, and enjoyne them hereafter
to make better choyces, under pain of forfeiting their right of Election.

4ly. For presidents in foreign States, I could produce many; I shall
instance only in some few of chiefest note, which will bear most sway, and in
one domestike printed Authority.

First, I shall begin with Scripture Presidents; the best of any. We read, that
when God would have Moses to make choice of a Parliament, or Senate to assist
him in the Government, he gave him this direction concerning the quality of the
persons to be elected to that public Senate. Number. 11. 16 And the Lord said
unto Moses gather unto me seventy men of THE ELDERS of Israel, whom thou
know to be THE ELDERS of the people, and Officers over them, etc. and they
shall bear the burden of the people with thee, that thou bear it not alone,
which he accordingly performed. v. 24. 25. whence they are styled, the SEVENTIE
ELDERS of the people, both in respect of their age and dignity. Hence the great
Council Senate, and Sanhadrim of the Jews resembling our Parliament is styled:
The Assembly of the ELDERS: Ps. 107. 52. The ELDERS of Israel Deutr. 27. 1 c.
29. 10. c. 31. 9 28. Judge. 21. 16. 2 Samuel 3. 17. c. 5. 3. c. 17 4. 1 Kings. 8.
1. 3. c. 20. 7. 8. c. 21. 11. 2 Kings 23. 1. 1 Chronicles. c. 11. 3. c. 15. 25. ^^
21. 16. 2 Cron. 34. 29. Ezec. 20. 1. 3. Job. 2. 16. Mar. 15. 1. Math. 16. 11.
both in the Old and New Testament: and often times the ANCIENTS of the people,
as Isay. 3. 4. Jer. 19. 1. in respect of their age and gravity; none being
admitted into their Senate, Parliament, or Council of State, but ancient men.
Hence we find Isay. 3. 2. 3. 4. 12. 14. The prudent the Ancient man, and the
COVNCELLOR, coupled together, and that in opposition to Children and Babes,
whose ruling over the people is threatened by God, as the s^arest Judgment of
any. Hence is that expression of the Prophet, Eze. 7. 26. COUNCIL shall perish
from the ANCIENT* because none but such were Counselors in the Jewish State:
with that of David, Psalm. 119. 100. I understand more then the ANCIENTS; and
that of Job. ^c. 12. 12. With the ANCIENT is Wisdom, and in length of days,
understanding: Hereupon Solomon's and Rehoboams Counselors of State, with whom
he first advised, what answer to return unto the people when they came to make
him King, are expressly termed 2 Chronicles. 10. 6. and 13. 1 Kings 12.
OLD MEN; who gave him very savory Council, had he followed it; which he
forsaking and following the Council of his young Courtiers, lost both his
peoples affections, and his Kingdom too, over ten of the Tribes, who set up
another King. If then you will follow Scripture presidents, no Infants under
age, or Children, but Elders, Ancients of the people, for years, wisdom and
experience, ought to be Members of our supreme Council especially in such a
time as this.

The 2. president I shall instance in, is the Roman Senate, who admitted none
into their Senate, as Members of it, but those who were 24. years old at
least, as the Alexander ab Alexandrol. 4. c. 10 Martinus Phileticus in Cic. l.
1. Ep. fam. 1.
marginall Authors testify; their Senators being ^tate graves, spectataeque
probita is.

The 3d president is the Alexander ab Alexand. l4. c. 11
Laced^monian Senate, which consisted of 32. ancient men, into which none were
admitted unless they were above sixty years old.

The 4th. the Alexander ab Alex. ibid.
Bythinians, who admitted no man into their Senate unless he were thirty
years old at least.

The 5th. Goodwins Roman Antiquities l. 3. c. 3:
the Bodins Comon-weal^^ l. 3. c. 1. p. 256.
Athenians* who permitted none, but those who were fifty years old, to
consult of that which should be good and profitable to the Commonweal^.

The 6th. is that of Solon, who forbad any young man to be admitted into the
Senate, seemed he never so wise; Lycurgus before him having composed the Senate
of the elder sort.

In few words, Commonweal l. 3. c. 1. p. 255. 256
John Bodin informs us, that the Greeks and Latins composed their Senate of
Seniors, or aged men, as being the wisermen, and men of greatest experience.
And that not only the Greeks and Latins have given this prerogative unto the
aged, to give Council unto the Common weal, but also the Egyptians,
Persians, [r] Bodin ibid.
and Hebrews, who taught other people well and wisely to govern their estates;
for that by presumption the Elders are wiser, of better understanding, of more
experience, and fitter to give Council then the younger sort. Neither do I
find that ever any foreign Kingdom, State admitted Infant Members into
their Senate, Parliament, Council, they deeming it altogether injurious and
absurd. Therefore there is no reason why our Parliament and great Senate should
admit of any such Infant Members among them.

I shall conclude with the opinion and resolution of reverend and learned Sir
Edward Cook (the oldest and best experienced Parliament man in this age) who in
his 4. Institutes printed by Authority of Parliament: Chapter 1. f. 46. 47. NOTE.
under this Title; Who be eligable to be a Knight, Citizen or Burgess of
Parliament? resolves thus, One under the age of 21. years IS NOT ELIGIBLE,
neither can any Lord of Parliament sit there until he be of the full age of
21. years. A punctual Resolution in direct terms.

Having thus given you a brief Account of the reasons of mine Opinion
concerning the Question propounded, I shall in the next place return a short
Answer to some Objections; and so conclude.

The 1. Object.
Objection is this: That the Election of Knights, Citizens, Burgesses, and
Members of Parliament belongs to the Freeholders, Citizens, Burgesses and
Freemen who elect them; if they therefore shall make choice of any Infants as
the fittest or ablest persons to serve for them in Parliament, their Election
must stand good, otherwise they shall be deprived of the liberty and privilege
of a free Election.

To this I Answer, 1. That no Freeholders, Citizens or Burgesses, have any
absolute power to elect what Members they please, (...).
but only such as are most fit able discreet, and such as the Laws and Statutes
of the Realm approve. They 1. (...), 5, c. 1. ^. H. 6. c. 7 Cooks 4. In^^it.
p. 47
cannot elect a sheriff a Minister, a man beyond the Seas, a Judge or
attendant in the Lords house, to be Knight of any County, because it is
contrary to Law, express statuts and the Writ it self: and if they make
choice of any such, the House may adjudge the Election void, and put them to a
better election of sitting Members. They cannot elect these or Peer of the
Realm, an Idiot, a Non Compos, Alien, Woman, etc. to be a Citizen or Burgess
of Parliament: and if they do so the election is void, because the persons are
incapable. Therefore by the selfsame reason they cannot elect an Infant. Where
a person is incapable by Law, the Electors cannot make him capable of being a
Member.

2ly. The House of Commons, not the Electors, are the sole Judges of the
Fitnes, the capability of the persons elected and if any Counties, Cities,
Buroughs be so indiscreet and injurious to the Kingdom as to elect unworthy
Members, contrary to the Writ and their duty, the house may justly cast them
out again, notwithstanding the Election, which concludes them not. This the
presidents of former Parliaments in expeling unworthy and unsitting Members,
together with the practice of this sitting Parliament in ejecting all
Monopolists, Projectors at the first, and all Malignant Members since, who
deserted, or betrayed their trust, abundantly manifests. Therefore by the
selfsame reason, they may and ought to expel Infants the House, as unfitting
and illegal Members, as well as Projectors, Monopolists and Malignants as
unworthy ones.

3ly I dare confideutly affirm, that no City, or Borough did ever freely of
their own accords make choice of any Ward, or Infant to serve in Parliament
for them; as the ablest or fittest of any other, to do themselves and the
Kingdom service in Parliament; or as the sufficientest, ablest and discreetest
persons, according as the writ directs them, but merely through the
over-earnest solicitation, threats or over-rulling power of the Infants
friends, to whom they stood engaged for favors, or durst not offend, least
they should turn their foes, not out of mere public respects, which all
electors in justice and prudence should only aim at. Therefore it is
altogether unreasonable, that the election of Infants, grounded merely on such
base private respects as these, should defraud the Parliament and whole Kingdom
of the choice of abler Members; since Cooks 4. Instit. p. 14.
every Member elected for any particular Borough, when once admitted, Votes and
serves not only for it, but for the whole Kingdom too, to whom those who make
unworthy elections for private ends or Interests do most apparent wrong which
the House has power to right, else we might have our Parliament stuffed with
Infants, Malignants, etc. if people be so foolish to Elect them in all places,
as they have been insome.

The 2d. Object. 2.
Objection is this. That some Infants under the age of 21. have bin permitted
to sit as Members in former Parliaments: Therefore by like reason they may be
admitted in this upon our new Elections. Answer


I Answer, First, that no Infant ought See Cook 9. Rep. f. 49.
de jure to sit in any Parliament as I have manifested; therefore not in this.
2ly. None ever sat in former Parliaments of right, but only by connivance,
when either the House took no notice of them, or their Elections were not
questioned; or if questioned, (as they have sundry times bin) and not ejected
the business has bin comprimised without coming to any solemn debate and
resolution in the House.

3ly. The connivance of former Parliaments in this kind is no president to
overruled or bind our present Parliament, for these ensuing respects. ^.
because there are more weighty, difficult affairs concerning our Church, State
and three whole Kingdoms to be consulted upon debated and settled in this
Parliament then in any, yea all the Parliaments of former ages united.

2ly. Because there are greater differences, distractions between the King and
Parliament, and more laboring to make parties in the House to serve ends [if
possible then in any former Age.

3ly. Because a greater reformation is now expected, promised, endeavored in
Church, State, Parliaments then in any preceedent times.

4ly. Because the Acts, and Members of this Parliament more concern the
Kingdom to be free from all just exceptions, and are likely to be more
narrowly scanned, sifted, both for the present and future times, then the
Members or proceedings of any former Parliaments, and the least just flaw
against them may in after ages prove dangerous if not fatal to revoke or shake
what ever shall be concluded by them now if not timely prevented.

5. Because this Parliament is more lasting then any other, and happily may
prove diuturnal, if not perpetual.

6. Because both Houses have made a more exact purgation of unsitting, unworthy
Members, in this, then in any Parliament in former ages, and therefore in
Justice ought to displace all unable or unsitting Members (as well Infants as
any others) to avoid the just censure of partiality.

7. Because more exceptions, cavils are and will be made against undue
elections, Members now, by Malignants, Royalists, Prelates, then to any
Members, Elections in former ages; Therefore the House should be more careful
what Members they now admit, then they were in former times, when there were no
such unhappy divisions between the King and Parliament as now.

The 3d. Object. 3.
Objection is this: That the Infants in the House are not many, and they are
led by the Votes of wiser and more able Members; therefore the danger is not
great.

I Answer, 1. That if no Infant be capable of being a Member, then none ought
to be admitted, Answer.
be they many or few. 2ly Though they be but few for the present, yet there may
be more hereafter elected, there being new endeavors to bring in more. 3ly.
One or two in judicious Infant Members Votes in matters of momen^, when the
House comes to be divided, may prove very dangerous. 4. Every Parliament man
ought to Vote according to his own judgment not another only, and it is very
dangerous for any to Vote with such and such persons only in the House, and to
make their Votes the sole ground of their concurrent Ay or No; is the high way
to factions.

The 4th. Object. 4.
and principal Objection is this: That it will be both convenient and
expedient that young Gentlemen under age of Honorable Families should be
Members of Parliament during their Minority, the better to enable them to serve
their Country therein, when they come to r^per years it being the best School
of Experience to educate, to improve young Gentlemen and sit them for public
Action: Upon which ground the eldest Sons of Peers are admitted to sit in the
Lords House and hear their debates, to enable them the better to serve the
Kingdom when they come to be Peers; and former Parliaments have connived at
Infants being Elected Members, and at their sitting in the Commons House.

I Answer, Answer.
1. That this Argument is a mere fallacy if examined: For though most Members
of Parliament, as well old as young may learn much knowledge and experience by
sitting there, (as all Judges, or other Officers do by sitting in Courts of
Justice, and execu^ing their places) yet they learn it not as Scholars or
Auditors in a School, but as Judges and Councelors of state, in the supreamest
Court and Council of the Kingdom; to discharge which trust, they must have
some competent abilities of wisdom and experience requisite for Judges and
Counselors of state, (which Infants want) before they can be admitted Members
into this highest public School, into which none ought to be elected, but
such wise men, who know both times, Law, and Judgment: Esth. 1. 13. especially
in such times as these. 2ly. It is an absurdity, if rightly stated* implying,
asserting, that Infants may be elected to sit and Vote as Members in Parliament
for the present, to enable them to be s^t Members in it for the future though
unsitting for the present; when as in truth, none should be chosen to such a
place of public t^ust but those alone who are able and See Cooks 8. Rep s.
41. b. 42.
sit to discharge it at the very instant when they are elected, Is any Father,
Schoolmasters so inconsiderate or absurd, to send his Son or Scholar to the
University, before he be fit for a Grammer-Schoole, the better to fit and
enable him for the University? will the King, or Parliament, think it just or
reasonable to make a puny Barrester Lord Chief Justice of England for the
present, the better to enable him to be a Judge or Chief Justice for the
future in his riper years, though unfit, unable at the time of his Parent to
be a puny Judge? Will any be so senseless, as to create a puny Schoole-boy
chief Master of any Free-schoole during his Minority, the better to abilitate
him to discharge that Office twenty years after, when he comes to perfect
age? Why then should any Infants be elected Parliament men for the present,
before they are actually fit or capable, upon this poor surmise, that it will
the better instruct them to be able Parliament men in future times? Certainly
this is and must be like the corrupt practice of the late Prelates, who would
first admit men to benefices with cure of souls, which they were unable to
discharge for the present and then grant them dispensations to be resident in
our Universities for five or six years space together, of purpose to fit them
to execute their cures and discharge their Ministry some five or six years
after their institutions and inductions to their Benefices. 3ly. I dare aver,
that Infants by following their studies close in the University and Innes of
Court during their minorities, will arre better improve themselves to serve
their Country in Parliament in after times when they come to years of full
discretion, then by spending their time idly in the House, where they
commonly sit like Ciphers with out speaking or observing ought that is
material, which takes them often from their present studies, and bladders them
with selfe-conceits of their own superlative worth, and abilities. 4ly. Admit
the Objection true, yet the prejudice and dishonor the Kingdom, whole
Parliament shall undergo by the permission of such unable Members, is no ways
recompensed, by that little wisdom or experience which two or three Infants
may possibly gain by being Members for the present, who happily may never live
to serve in future Parliaments, or prevatica^e in this. 5ly. The argument
drawn from Peers eldest sons admission into the House of Peers, as Auditors
only, not Members, is as strong an argument as possible against the Objectors,
they being permitted (like the * Alexander abAlexand. l. 3. c. 10.
Sons of some of the chief Roman Senators of old to come into the Senate) not
as Peers, Members, Voters, but Auditors or spectators only. Therefore the
selfsame Law and reasons which exclude Infants from being Members of the House
of Peers should likewise d^barre them from being Members in the Commons House,
into which if any Infants should be admitted out of favor it must be only a^
Auditors* not Members, as Infant Lords and Noble men are admitted into the
House of Lords; the rather, because they are no Knight^ or Burgesses by birth
as Noble men are Peers, but only by undue Elections, void in Law.

To close up all; I heartily wish our honorable Parliament to prevent all
future sinister, undue Elections (of which we hear so many just complain ^ of
late, to the shame of those who ^ccasion them) would caus^ this (...) Statut^
concerning Elections to be duly executed, (...), The Statute of 3. ^^^ 1. c. 5.
which runs the See Cooks 2 Instit. p. 168 169.
And because Elections ought to be free, the King commands upon great
forfeiture, that no great man nor other by force of A^mes or menacing, shall
disturb any free Election to be made, ^ith this ^^st excellent Law concerning
the Election of Justices, and other inferior Offic^rs, to be strictly observed
in point of Parliamentary elections, both in reference to the Electors, and
persons Elected, to wit 12. R. 2. c. 2. It is accorded that the Chancellor,
Treasurer, Keeper of the Privy-Seale, Steward of the Kings House, the Kings
Chamberlain, Clerk of the Rolls, the Justices of the one Bench and of the
other, Barons of the Eschequer, and all other that shall be called to (...),
name or make Justices of Peace, Sheriffs^ Escheators, Customers, Controlers, or
any other Officer or Minister of the King* shall firmly swear, that they shall
not ordain, NOTE.
nam^ or make Justice of Peace, Sheriff, etc. for any gift, brocage, favor,
affection, nor that none which pursues by him, or by other privily or openly
to be in any manner office, s^all be put in the same Office or in any other,
but that they make all such Officers and Ministers OF THE BEST AND MOST LAWFVLL
MEN, AND SVFFICIENT to their estimation and knowledge. These two Laws alone if
revived, and applied to the Elections of Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of
Parliament, with severe censures on the Infringer of them, as they would save
that Vb^q^itary pertu^^er, of Solicitor and stickler at most of our late
Elections [Mr. Hugh Peter,] a great deal of unnessary un^itting pains,
solicitation, and abuse of the Pulpit, to the peoples great disgust, [*] See
Cook 8. Report. f. 41 42. and 9. Rep. 4^.
for his own private luchre and advaucing the designs of his party, so it
would certainly prevent al undue Elections of Infants and unworthy Members, ^ll
the House with the ablest, lawfullest Cooks 4. Instit. p. 10. and 2. Instit.
p. 169
most sufficient men, according to the purport of the writ for Elections of
Knights and Burgesses, who ought to be freely chosen by the Electors [g] si^^
prece, (...) precio, fine pr^^cepto, without S ^^brocage o^ overa^ng commands,
without solicitation or supplantation, which now to many practice to their
Infamy.

Thus I have given you a brief account of min^ opinion touching the propounded
Question, together with the reasons swaying me thereunto. If your self or
others reap any satisfaction from it for the public good, it is the only Fee
I expect in this Common Cause, that concerns not your self alone, but the
whole Kingdom, which suffers more mischief, dishonor, prejudice by unworthy
Elections, then any private Competitors justly greived by them. I shall close up
all with that of Solomon, Eccles. 11. 10. Childhood and Youth are vanity; I am
sure they are so in our Parliaments, where they should have no place, if he
divine ^right, who desires to approve himself, upon this, and all other good
occasions.

Febr. 12, 1645. Your most affection Friend and Servant W. P.

FINIS.

