Mr. William Wheelers Case from his own Relation.
HAving been employed in Norfolk, Suffolk, and some other Countries, as
Engineer for Sea-breaches, drayning of Fennes, Architecture, Plantations, etc.
I found that the Name of a Traveller, and the foreign acquisition of skill did
add that credit and repute to Artists, which no Native is allowed in his own
Country amongst his own kindred, and acquaintance: whereupon I took the
resolution to imbarke for Holland, and there either to improve my abilities, or
the value of my abilities by conversing with strangers.

Being arrived there about Christmas, 1638. I spent some time in passing from
place to place, viewing the Mills and Waterworks of that Country, and it soon
appeared to me, that there were great defects therein, which I (God assisting
me) by my own inventions was able to alter, and amend to the exceeding benefit,
and profit of the States. By the advice therefore and assistance of Sir William
Boswell (to whom I addressed my self first, as being His Majesty's Resident in
those parts) I made Propositions to the States General with some overtures of
my particular Inventions, and did refer the same to ocular demonstrations, and
public experiments. The Propositions were entertained, and proofs by Plots,
and Models were demanded; but because the benefit of my undertakings would
arise to so vast a revenue, if I could accomplish them (as was obvious to every
common understanding prima facie) therefore I was the more distrusted. The
heads of my Propositions were: To Draine; or to Drown Lands; to raise great
waters to reasonable heights, from three Foot to six, etc. to raise reasonable
quantities of water to great heights, and both these* cheaper by one half then
before, and double in quantities, if not more. Likewise to bore Timber with a
wooden Augur, bigger and cheaper: to put and drive great piles into the ground
without beetles, or the usual moliminous Instruments of contusion. And lastly,
to raise, and carry from place to place all ponderous weights more easy, and
cheap, then had ever been yet discovered.

Within the space of half a year some small Models were perfected, and viewed
by three of the States General at the L. Rippedays House (He being one of the
said 3 Commissioners appointed for that purpose) and public approbation was
given thereunto. In June, 1639. I had a Patent granted by the States General
for the putting in execution, and for the sole usage of those my Inventions for
twelve years: and in July following I obtained an other special grant of the
same from the States of Holland, and West-Freisland. After this I began to
frame bigger and larger Engines, and in September following, I gave proofs of
their efficacy, and operation in public, at the Hague; and then it was
manifest, that as the Models did more then answer my promises, so the Engines
did more then answer that which was expected from the Models.

The Prince of Aurange upon a sight of my Models graced me with a present of 20
guilders to buy me a pair of gloves; and afterward when the force of my
Engines was openly tried at the Hague, the States General gave me 400 guilders
as a testimony of their liking, and allowance. My Engines were various, of
several fashions, and for several uses, so framed that they were easily
portable, and removable from place to place, readily to be erected any where in
a little time. One of these Engines tried its efficacy upon a Graft or Mote at
the Hague in the presence of diverse of the States General, as also of Holland
and West-Freisland, and the Lords of Leydon having several Artists with them
out of several other Towns, and at that time it carried a thousand barrels an
hour being moved only by the hand of one or 2 men raising the water to 2 foot
or more, and greatly satisfying all spectators.

For my further encouragement also in Jan. 1641, my Patents were renewed from
12 years, and a prolongation to 18 was granted; and the words did mention that
the Inventions were new, never before practiced by any, and that they were of
public benefit, and thereupon a greater penalty was added against all such as
should trespass upon me by imitating, or using the same to my prejudice
without my leave. But presently upon this the scene began to change with me;
for whilst I was uncredited, I was below envy, and so I found offices of
friendship from many, and no ill offices from any; but as soon as I had
attained to any belief, and so to eminency, by abiding the test, both my
skill, and the incredible advantages which seemed to attend the same, drew upon
me infinite enmities, and oppositions. This nevertheless I must observe, that
my chiefest adversaries were such, as were my own Countrymen, such as I
expected most friendship from, such as I had most entrusted, or most engaged
(as I thought) by my service, and credence, and so by consequence had most
power and opportunity to undo me. And that I may not asperse any unjustly,
this shall be a particular account to the world, what Sir Rob. Honywood, Sir
Will. Boswell, Mr. Gwyn his Secretary (and some others his servants) what
Palmer my Solicitor, Robinson my man, one Horn the Fabric of Leydon, but of
English extraction; as also one Sasse a game-keeper to the Prince of Aurange,
with diverse other under-instruments have done to ruin me, hoping to wrest out
of my hands thereby either the Honor, or the profit of my performances.

The first mischief which encountered me in the heat of action, whilst I was
industriously pursuing my infant contrivances was this: As I was one Evening
going home to my lodging in the company of Cap. Lucas, upon the Spie-bridge I
was assaulted by two of the Prince of Auranges servants (and some others of his
guards) and others about 20 in all, and in this unexpected fray Cap. Lucas had
two deep cuts in the head, I had one stob in my body, and by the same lost the
use of my left arm, never to be recovered, both of us were left for dead upon
the place, and for nine days after, there was no hopes of life in me. The
assaylants fled presently to Colenbury for sanctuary, and those of them which
were the Princes servants, as soon as his Highness had notice thereof by the
beating of a Drum were sommon'd home, and very nobly satisfaction was orderd
to us; but after 18 months suite in that cause (though the delinquents were
condemned both in the Hagues Court, and the Court of Holland) and 3000 guilders
were particularly adjudged for my damage, yet I could recover nothing, but
lost my time, spent my money, and became daily further entangled in more and
more troubles, and contestations. Whilst I lay in the greatest extremity of
my hurts, not able to take any order for my affairs, the aforementioned Sasse, of
whom I had rented some rooms for my Engines, and Works, sent to me for such an
exacted sum of money, or else to throw my Engines, and Works out of door. I
was not able at that time to procure the money, Sir Will. Boswell denied me the
loan of 5. li. to prevent this mischief, though formerly upon my Bond He had
done greater courtesies, and so my Works were broken, thrown out, and exposed
to the view of all men.

These troubles also brought me into the acquaintance of Sylvester, and one
Palmer, who undertook as my Solicitor, but secretly were Traitors to my
proceedings, and such as under hand wrought my overthrow many several ways
long before I began to suspect them.

The next potent adversary I had to grapple withal, was Horn the Survey or
Fabric of Leydon; and He being present at the Hague with my Engines were first
proved before the Lords of Leydon, and many other of the States, and by some
secrets which I had communicated to Him, and by the help of some of my workmen,
whom He had inveigled to his service had most opportunity to stand in
competition with me; for I was not only overcome by his insinuations at first,
and won to some confidence in his friendship, but also I was necessitated to
lay my Art the more open to him, and some other Fabrics, upon whose judgments
the States relied, that by satisfying them, I might convay satisfaction to
those which employed them. I was now therefore put to a vexatious, and
expencefull trial before the Lords of Leydon, after all my former experiments
in public, and my several Octroys granted thereupon, to evince again the
noveltie, raritie, and commodity of my Frames, and Mils: and by this means I
was forced to send to diverse places for attestation, and for some Forms, and
Works, which at last by a double operation visibly disproved Horns pretenses,
and in the judgment of all gave me the victory.

Nevertheless Horn would not so desist at Leydon, but in opposition to my
Patents, did make use of my Inventions, whereupon I brought my Action upon my
Octroyes, and at last though with much difficulty, did overthrow him, and get
for damages 1500 li. which R^binson my man compounded without my privity and
consent for 300 guilders in part. This placed me above all open attempts, or
controversies in Law, but the more I was secured by public Justice, the more I
was envied, and made the mark of treacherous conspiracies.

In all places I had quarrels urged upon me, at all times I found snares spread
for me; eleven several bargains I had m^de for the erecting of my Mills in
eleven several places, but all were frustrated by letters sent from the Hague,
directed by I know not whom: and now as these disasters had brought me into
great wants, so my extreme wants engaged me still further into many worse
disasters.

One maine disadvantage that my indigence brought me into was the acquaintance
of Robinson who by accommodating me with some moneys (yet paid after) in my
necessities, and making himself officious to me when my fortunes were low, got
into my service, and good opinion, and by that means after proved a fatal
traitor both to me, and all my designs. This fellow held correspondence with
Palmer, and both of them incited Sir Willam Boswell against me, and by the
correspondence which they both held with Sir Will. Boswell, and all the rest of
my enemies I found my self every way surrounded, and cut off from all escape.

Robinsons part was, to discover my Art, to practice it himself, to reveal it
to others, to grant Licenses without my knowledge to my prejudice, to compound
with defaulters without my leave to my loss, to impute his own failings to the
imperfection of my Works, to combine with my greatest Adversaries.

Palmers part was, to confound me in matters of Law, to cast me in all Courts
of Justice, and particularly to create new enemies, as Sir Will. Boswell
amongst the States, and Sir Rob. Honywood at the Queen of Bohemias Court. He
had failed in England of a monopolizing Patent for steel, and therefore he
depended now upon his shifts beyond the Seas, and was a professed Enemy to all
men more ingenious then himself.

One Mr. Hobart (to my knowledge) made a new Proposition in Holland for
brewing, baking, etc. without smoke, and with less expense of fuel, etc. and
had prospered in his fair, beneficial design had not this Palmer enviously
quash't his proceedings. With the same impudence also He came to me, and told
me, that I sought to ingrosse too vast a revenue: and that if I would admit Him
to partake, I should prevail: otherwise not. His jeer was this, Mr. Wheeler, I
can stop your wheels at my discretion: if I say to Sir Will: Boswell they shall
move on, they shall: if I say, He shall forbid them to move; they shall not
dare to stir.

Sir To. Honywoods part was, to exclude me of all favor at Court, and
therefore diverse times He commanded me to avoid the presence, and once He set 2
Irish Halberdeers of the Queens guard to fall upon me, who accordingly did not
only deny me access, but also tore me by the hair of the head, and this they
confessed they did by Sir Rob. Honywoods command. He became also an adventurer
with Robinson and Palmer, and did disburse (as I have heard) 140 li. in
assayes, and trying to bring some Works (begun by me) to perfection, but all
proved frustrate, and successelesse.

But the most powerful of all those aspects which boded ill to my fortunes was
Sir Will. Boswell; and as (I am confident) without his concurrence all my other
opposites could not have so far oppressed me; so without their instigations, He
would not (I persuade my self) have entertained any thoughts of ill toward me.
Howsoever long it was before I could be induced to think, that Sir Will.
Boswell had ends upon me, much less such extremely avaritious ends, such as
nothing but my utter ruin could satisfy. But my eyes were by degrees opened;
for first I perceived He gave too much ear ta my worst enemies, and then in
the Patent for England which He procured for me I saw He had put in his servant
Cropleys name, and that device (besides other competent rewards) cost me 50 li.
to compound. A Patent likewise for Ireland was promised me, but I have it not,
and I hear it is granted in Sir Williams own Name, and reserved for his own use:
lastly, my Patent for Holstein, and Denmark, is still detained in his own
hands. I found moreover that by some dangerous questions put to me at
sometimes about my pedigree, He was not without some aims of having my life
at his mercy by the stroke of the Law, if need were. My necessities made me
upon an occasion become a suitor to Him for the loan of some moneys, but the
conditions proposed by Him were strangely rigorous, insomuch that in a jesting
manner I asked. Him, if He were good at drilling. Hereupon He grew much enraged,
and causing His servants to lay violent hands upon me, He disarmed me first,
and then broke my head to the skull; spurned me with his foot, and offered
diverse other ignoble indignities to me in his own House. About that time also I
was reduced to so pinching extremities, that for 25 days (besides Gods
infinite mercy) I had no more then 10 Stivers to preserve me from famishing:
and which way soever I turned my self for relief I found my way blockt up with
difficulties, so evil an eye there was over me, that I was prevented of Trust,
nay my very pawns were refused, and could not be taken. Far was I now from
proceeding in my Fabrics; those Mils and Frames, which I had begun, and
perfected with great trouble, and expense, I could not keep: after my goods and
materials had been part broken, part stolen, part thrown into the streets by
the exaction of Sasse, when Sir Will. Boswell refused me 5 li. to save them, I
had built a place my self in a piece of ground belonging to one of the Lords in
the Town, thinking to secure my Engines, and Utensils from further violence, but
the place was soon broken open, the boards were taken away, the Mils were
spoiled, and no remedy could be procured. My fortune was also to take two of
the thieves in the manner, whereupon with my sword in the scabbord I struck
them, not knowing how to bring them to condign punishment: but they presently
escaped from me, and searce any thing ever proved more mischievous in the event
then this revenge of mine so taken upon them: for not long after as I was
walking in the backside of the Town, by the Moat that runs by the Princes
garden, being alone and unarmed, I was incountred by the same two Thieves (as I
conceive) and about 8 more, who with spades and shovels and other weapons fell
upon me and cruelly wounded me, so that to save my life I was enforced to take
the Moat and to dive to the bottom for brickbats to defend my self.

At my rising out of the water one of the Princes Fishermen (who had been a
ringleader before in the other fray upon the Spie-bridge at that time when I
was wounded with Cap. Lucas) took hold of my hair and kept me down in the
water, under his boat until I was almost spent; and then plucked me out half
dead, as if He had been courteous in saving me. Being drawn out so wet in a
cold season, and so hurt, by the help of Robinson, who then appeared, I got
home to his house not far distant from the place, and there shifted my
cloths. But the said Robinson and his wife by that opportunity got my keys
out of my pockets, went to my lodging, ransackt there my trunks, took away
diverse Models, and secrets of value, together with some attestations concerning
my business, as also other writings, and an ancient pedigree of my
Grandfathers, out of which they eraced diverse names. Some of these they carried
to Sir Will. B^swell (for I have my self seen them since at his house) the rest
they kept, or dispersed into diverse parts of the Country, is knowing that they
were proofs to difference my works from other men's, and to manifest the
noveltie, and rarity of my Inventions. For about a fortnight also during my
abode in Robinsons house, whilst I was weak the house was much visited by some
of the Queen of Englands Train, who were very desirous often to converse and
drink with me, and I accordingly did several times gratify them with my
company.

Amongst other conference they invited me to undertake the charge of an
Engineer in the war against the English Parliament, making me believe they
did expect great and eminent service from me, if I would accept of employment:
and when I was not inclining thereunto, they endeavored to divert me some
other way, offering me employment in Brabant, and soliciting me also much to
turn my Religion. These propositions taking no effect with me, I found cause to
suspect that the cups wherein I had drunk in their company had been secretly
mixed with some veneficall or magical ingredients, for I found my self
strangely driven into fits of Lunacie, and not only distempered, but also
tortured both in body, and mind. My understanding nevertheless did not wholly
depart from me, and therefore I demanded my keys of Robinson, but could get no
other answer, but that they were delivered to Sir Will. Boswell. I desired then
that a new lodging might be taken for me in some place more convenient, quiet,
and nearer to my Works then my former was: wherein Robinson promised presently
to accommodate me.

Upon this pretense He went forth, and at his return in the Evening He
undertook to wait on me (having an other in his company) to my new taken
chamber: but I suspecting no plot or treachery in Him was led into a Dulhouse
or Bedlam. As soon as I had entered the chamber Robinson and the other stepped
suddenly out, and the door was locked, and bolted upon me, and I was there left
alone enclosed to be treated as a man utterly mad, and raving. The place was
solitary, and far from resort of people, and as I had no hopes of any help but
by calling out aloud, so my loud calling or hollowing was interpreted as the
symptom of my distraction. Seeing my self remedilesly thus lost to all the
world, but such as had conspired my destruction, I betook my self to God, and
submitted my self to be removed from room to room, and to be ordered in my
diet, and other things as they pleased, and for nine months space the miseries
of my martyrdom was exceeding sharp, and exquisite. Mr. Gwyn with other of Sir
Will. Boswels servants, and my man Robinson came upon visits often to me
pretending to pity my Lunacie, and to do charitable offices; but their common
practice was to force potions upon me which my nature abhorred; and when I
could not choose but be reluctant to them, five or six at a time of them fell
upon me with clubs, and staves, using inexpressible cruelties till I had drunk
them off. After I had drunk their compositions I was possessed after an unheard
of manner, but these reasons make me think that what I did and suffered in my
fits were not the effects of mere phrenzie, but some diabolical art, and
sorcerie: for first, My senses remained so with me, that I my self sensibly
condoled my own condition: and held my self as a slave under those commands,
which I would fain have disobeyed, but could not.

Secondly, I was never subject to the like ravings before that time, or since.

Thirdly, my yard did begin to be drawn up into my belly, my hands, limbs, and
whole body was contracted, or benumbed, or some way tortured, till I did act,
and speak according to the commands which were upon me: the force thereof broke
out of my flesh, brought my nails from my fingers, and almost my eyes out of my
head, and this is not the operation of that, which Physicians call laesa
Phantasia.

Fourthly, diverse odious sents almost poisoned the room to the taking away of
my breath, and leaving me near suffocated; as also diverse spirits in antic
forms appeared to me in dances, and one in the likeness of a Cat kept near my
room, and for diverse months removed not till I had acted all those parts
over, as they thought fit. Some things I did as a Playstrer; some as a
Bricklayer, some as an other Artist or Tradesman, doing all things in all Arts
whatsoever: sometimes I was constrained to declare my Religion, sometimes my
affection to that Country, and I could enjoy no quiet at all till I did obey
in all.

Fifthly, these charms most especially enforced me either to discover the
secrets of my Profession, and that ability and knowledge which was requisite to
the finishing of my Works: or else to use violence to my self, by running my
head against the wall, or otherwise. But in these two the mercy of God most
admirably fortified me: so that I did conceal my chief skill, as knowing that
then they would no longer let me live: and whereas they had fixed nayls in the
wall purposely for me to beat my head against, I did knowingly avoid the same.

Sixthly, some things were done by my hand at that time which no mortal man
naturally could do, much less could I being under lunacie, for when they had
set paper and pen and ink beside me, I wrought half a quire of paper in an
hour, and drew some Mathematical lines without Instruments as exactly as if I
had had Instruments.

Seventhly, whereas I was enforced to eat my own dung, and drink my own water,
to sit stark naked in the bitterest frosty nights of Winter, and to take some
purgations when my body was empty, and so could void nothing but blood upwards,
and downwards, I yet overcame all these things, and came off with life which (I
think) none could have done, that was not miraculously preserved, as well as
diabolically tortured.

Nine woeful Months of Martyrdom were now run out, and yet the faculties of
my memory and intellect were not wholly broken, though much weakened; and now
Robinson and Palmer who during my imprisonment had conspired with Sir Robert
Honywood to imitate my Works, and usurp them as their own, saw their skill
failed, and their hopes frustrated therein. 140 li. or thereabouts had been
disbursed by them in new assayes, and in trials to perfect some Works begun by
me, and operate without me, but all would not do: and therefore it was thought
fit that I should be again enlarged, and encouraged to accomplish those things,
which they could not. Some things therefore upon my release I did bring to
expedition, and some Engines of my own which were of 100 guilders in their
hands, I did make serviceable, and sold for a thousand guilders to an
understanding Engineer, one Captain Flood, but I would not be induced to assist
Robinson the Traitor in any of his Works, or such as belonged to his
confederates. Being at liberty also I traveled about in the Country to
observe what imitations of my Works had been made, and I found that in diverse
places they had attempted, but not perfected the same, yet at Leydon and some
other places by my Inventions, and the advantage of some of my Models taken out
of my Trunks (as aforesaid) they had brought some Works to a good perfection,
even to a double improvement of what they had been before. I was resolved
therefore by one address more to Sir Will. Boswell to make one further attempt
in the reviving of my business, and in order thereunto about March 1643. I put
my self upon his friendly assistance as my utmost refuge, and desired his
favor to procure 10000 guilders for me, but his conditions proposed were
extreme, and rigorous, and no less then a total forfeiture of all my
fortunes was inwrapped in them. Hereupon I plainly perceived, it was absolutely
impossible for me to grapple with so many disasters, conspiracies, injuries,
necessities in a strange Country, having at Court, in the City, in the
Country, every where malicious, subtle, perfidious Enemies to crush my hopes:
and so in April following I set sail for England.

Since my arrival here, I understand vast debts are in my absence charged upon
me in Holland, the greatest part whereof were incurred by my sicknesses, or
wrongful imprisonment, or by Robinsons false accounts, (skores which He has
wrongfully set upon my head) or by other men's unjust pretenses, wherein I am
condemned without being able to make defense, or wage Law. And now for these
debts my Patent (taken from me when I was in the Dulhouse) and all my right is
by public Order sold, and disposed of as I hear. For a further prosecution
also of so dejected a helples a man, lest I should hereafter recover breath, or
strength to rise again, I am still pressed by Sir Will. Boswell in his letters
to Mr. Bullen here in Tower-street, and to others of his correspondoes: He
still cuts me off from all hopes of future recrutes by disabling my credit,
vilifying my Works, disparaging my abilities, and depraving my intentions.

This being my hard Case truly stated, and faithfully represented and since it
appears hereby, that as my past sufferings have been beyond the strength of
such a man as I am, so my future oppositiones are likely to transcend all
ordinary resistance: I make it my most humble submissive Request to the High
and Mighty States, That they will by a public, extraordinary hand of Justice
afford me a redress, and support suitable to the nature of my unequalled
grievances. Two things I undertake to make sensibly demonstrable: 1. That the
Waterworks in the Netherlands have been exceedingly improved to the great
public advantage of the united Provinces by my discoveries, since the
publishing of my Inventions in 1640. 2. That for the time to come, if due
encouragement and means may be allowed me, I will (by Gods assistance) yet
bring to further perfection, and doubly advance the same Waterworks as they
are already improved, and for a further addition also make a new discovery of
some other Works, and Engines which shall be of rare use and service to the
public in experiments of an other nature. If these Overtures be thought worthy
to be taken into consideration, I desire the Conditions and proceedings
thereupon may be managed with sufficient caution on both parts: if these things
seem of light credit, yet thus far I have strived to be true to my own honor,
and to do right to a most honorable and fair Cause.


