AN OLD PARLIAMENTARY PROGNOSTICATION MADE AT WESTMINSTER, FOR THE NEW-YEER,
and YOUNG MEMBERS there assembled in Consultation.

Fore-shewing The probable Final issue of all their intended new Moddles,
Acts, and Ordinances, from four Old Printed Statutes, and Ahortive nulled
Parliaments, not unworthy of their knowledge most Serious Consideration and
saddest Meditation; (and the whole three Kingdoms too,) in regard of the
present Face of our public Affairs.

Prove. 24. 20, 21, 22. There shall be no reward to the evil man, the lamp of the
wicked shall be put out. My son, fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not
with those that are given to change; For their calamity shall rise suddenly,
and who knows the ruin of them both?

Isai 8. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. Associate your selves, O ye people, and ye shall
be broken in pieces, take Counsel together, and it shall come to naught* speak
the word and it shall not stand: for God is with us. For the Lord spoke thus to
me with a strong hand, and instructed me, that I should not walk in the way of
this people; Saying, say ye not A Confederacy to all them to whom this people
shall say A Confederacy, neither fear ye their fear, nor be afraid: Sanctify
the LORD OF HOSTS HIMSELF; and let him be your fear and let him be your dread.
Isai. 19. 13. 14 The Princes of Zoan are become fools: the Princes of Noph are
deceived, they have also seduced Egypt, even they that are the stay of the
Tribes thereof. The lord has mingled a spirit of perverseness in the midst
thereof, and they have caused Egypt to err ^n every work thereof, as a drunken
man staggereth in his vomit. London printed for the Year 1655

An Old Parliamentary Prognostication made at Westminster, for the New Year,
and Young Members there assembled in CONSVLTATION.
Prove. 19. 20. Hear Counsel, and receive Instruction, that thou may be wise
in thy latter end. Eccles. 1. 15: The thing which has been, is that which
shall be; and that which is done, is that which shall be done, and there is no
new thing under the Sun.
7. Henry 4. Chap. 3.
ITem, Whereas the Monday next after, the Feast of the Exaltation of the holy
Cross, St^t. 1. Printed in the old Stat^tes at large.
the 2^. year of the Reign of the said late King Richard, a Parliament was
summoned and holden at Westminster; and from thence adjourned to Salop; at
which Town a certain power was committed by authority of the Parliament, to
certain persons, to proceed upon certain Articles and matters comprised in the
Roll of the Parliament thereof made, as by the same Roll may appear in which
Parliament, and also by Authority aforesaid, diverse Statu; tes, Judgments,
Ordinances, and Stablishments were made, ordained and given erroniously and
dolefully* in great disinherison and final destruction and undoing of many
honorable Lords and other l^ige people of the Realm, and of their heirs for
ever. Our Sovereign Lord the K^^g considering the great mischiefs aforesaid,
by the advice and assent of all the Lords Spiritual and temporal, and of all
the Commonalty, has judged the said Parliament, holden the said 21 year, and
the authority thereof (given as before is said) with all the circumstances and
dependants thereupon, be wholly reversed, revoked, voided, undone, repealed and
adnulled for ever.

31. Henry 6. Chap. 1. Whereas the most abominable Tyrant, horrible, odious,
and errant false Traitor John Cade, calling and naming himself sometime
Mortimer, sometime Captain of Kent, which name, fame, act and feats, be to be
removed out of the speech and mind of every faithful Christian man
perpetually; falsely, and traitorously purposing and imagining the perpetual
destruction of the Kings said person, and final subversion of this Realm,
taking upon him royal power, and gathering to him the Kings people in great
number, by false, subtle, imagined language, and seditiously made a stirring
rebellion, and insurrection under color of justice for reformation of the Laws
of the said King, robbing, slaying, and spoiling great part of his faithful
people. Our said Sovereign Lord the King, considering the promises, with many
other which were more odious to remember, by advice and assent of the Lords
aforesaid, and at request of the said Commont, and by authority aforesaid, has
ordained and stablished, that the said John Cade shall be reputed, had named
and declared a fase Traitor to our sovereign Lord the King, and that all his
Tyranny, Acts, Feats, and false opinions, shall be voided, abated, adnulled,
destroyed* and put out of remembrance for ever; and that all indictments, and
all things depending thereof, had and made under the the power of Tyrany, shall
likewise be void, adnulled, abated, repealed, and holden for none, and that the
blood of none of them be thereof defiled nor corrupted, but by the authority of
the said Parliament clearly declared for ever. And that all indictments in time
coming in like case under power of Tyrany, Rebellion, and stirring, had, shall
be of no record nor effect, but void in Law: and all the petitions delivered to
the said King in his last Parliament holden at Westminster the 6th day of
November the 29 year of his reign, against his mind by him not agreed, shall
be taken and put in oblivion, out of remembrance undone, voided, adnulled, and
destroyed for ever, as a thing purposed against God, and conscience, ann
against his royal estate and pre-eminence, ana also dishonorable.

39. Henry 6 Chap. 1 Whereas it has been showed to the King our sovereign
Lord, by his Liege and faithful Commons, in this present Parliament, that
diverse seditious and evil desposed persons having no regard to the dread of
God, nor to the damage of the prosperous estate of our said sovereign Lo^d the
King, nor his Realm sinistrely and importunely did labor the said King to
summon a Parliament to be holden at the City of Coventry, the second day of the
Month of November, the 38. year of his noble Reign, only to destroy certain of
the great Nobles faithful and lawful Lords; and estates of the Kings blood,
and other of the faithful liege people of the same realm of England for the
great rancor, hatred, and malice, which the said seditious persons of long time
have had against them, and of their greedy and insatiable covetise to have the
Lands, Hereditaments possessions, offices, and goods of the said Lords* and
faithful liege peoyle, by which sinister labor certain Acts, Statutes and
ordinances, against all good faith and conscience, in the said Parliament were
made finally to destroy the said lawful Lords estates and liege people, and
their issues, as well innocents as other, and their Heirs for ever: which
parliament was unduely summoned, and a great part of the Knights for diverse
Countyes of this Realm, and many Burgesses and Citizens for diverse Boroughs and
Cities in the same appearing were named returned, and excepted, some of them
without due and free election, some of them without any election, against the
course of the Kings Laws, and the Liberties of the Commons of this Realm, by
the means and labors of the seditious persons, whereby many great Jeopardies,
Enormities, and inconveniences, well nigh to the ruin, decay, and universal
subversion of the said Realm, have ensued; our said ^overaigne Lord the King,
considering the premises, and that the said Lords Estates, and other his liege
people, against whom the said Acts, Statutes, and Ordinances were made, have
always had great and faithful love, to the preferment and surety of the Kings
person, according to their duty, and that few of the Acts, made in the said
Parliament holden at Coventry were made for the weal of the King, nor of his
said Realm, but the greater part of the Acts, Statutes and Ordinances there
made, were labored by the conspiracy, procurement and excitation of the said
evil disposed persons, for the introduction and accomplishment of their rancor
and inordinate covetise; By the advice and assent of the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and at the request of the said Commons, in the said Parliament
assembled, and by the same Authority has ordained and established, That the
said Parliament holden at the said City of Coventry be void, and holden for no
Parliament, and that all Acts, Statutes and ordinances by the Authority of the
same made, be reversed, adnulled, undone, repealed, revoked, void, and of no
force nor effect.

17 Ed. 4 Chap 7, Whereas in the most dolorous absence of our Sovereign Lord
the King out of this Realm, being in the partis of Holland, before his
victorious regress into the same Realm, in a pretenced Parliament, unlawfully
and by usurped power summoned, by the Rebel and enemy to our Sovereign Lord
the King, Henry 8 late in deed and not of right King of England, holden in the
Palace of Westminster, the 26 day of November the 9th year of our Sovereign
Lord the King that now is, under the colored title of the said Henry, the xlx
year of the inchoation of his pretenced Reign, and the first year of the
redeption of his usurped power and estate; diverse and many matters were
treated* communed and wrought to the destruction and disherison of our
Sovereign Lord the King, and of his blood royal, by the labor and
exhortation of persons not fearing God, nor willing to be under the rule of any
earthly Prince, but inclined of sensual appetite, to have the whole governance
and rule of this Realm under their power and domination: which communications,
treaties, and workings, does remain in writing, and some exemplified, whereby
many inconveniences may ensue to our said Sovereign Lord the King and his
blood royal, which God defend; and all Noble men at this time attending about
the King, and all his other liege people and Subjects, unless due remedy be
provided in this behalf. Our said Sovereign Lord the King, by the assent of
the Lords spiritual and temporal, and at request of the Commons in the said
Parliament assembled, and by Avthority of the same, for the surety of his noble
person, his noble issue, and the inheritable success of the same, and for the
surety of all the Lords, Noblemen, and other his servants and subjects, has
ordained and stablished, that the said pretenced Parliament, with all the
continuances and circumstances, depending upon the same, be void and of none
effect; and that all acts, statutes, ordinances, treaties, communications,
conventions and workings in the said pretenced Parliament, treated, communed,
accorded, wrought, had, or by the Authority of the same Parliament enacted and
ordained; and all exemplifications made upon the same; or any part of them and
every of them, shall be reversed cancelled, void, undone, revoked, repealed,
and of no force nor effect.

Ezekiel 17. 26. 27. Thus says the Lord God; remove the Diadem and take off the
Crown; this shall not be the same; exalt him that is low, and abase him that is
high: I will overturn, overturn, overturn it, and it shall be no more, until He
come whose right it is; and I will give it him.

Isai. 29 14. 15. 16. Therefore behold I will proceed to do a marvelous work
amongst this people, even a marvelous work and a wonder; for the wisdom of
their wise men shall perish, and the understanding of their prudent men shall be
hid; Woe unto them that seek deep, to hide their counsel from the Lord, and
their works are in the dark, and they say, who sees, and who knows us?
Surely, your turning of things upside down shall be esteemed as the potters
clay.

Psalm. 92. 5. 6, 7, 8, 9. O Lord how great are thy works, and thy thoughts are
very deep: a brutish man knows not, neither does a fool understand this;
when the wicked spring as the grass, and all the works of iniquity do flourish;
it is, that they shall be destroyed for ever, but thou Lord art most high for
ever more. For lo thine enemies O lord, for lo thine enemies shall perish; all
the workers of iniquity shall be scattered, but my horn shall thou advance, as
the horn of an Unicorn, I shall be anointed with fresh oil.

Hab. 2. 9. 10. 12. Woe to him that coveteth an evil covetousness to his house,
that he may set his nest on high, that he may be delivered from the power of
evil. Thou have consulted shame to thy house, by cutting off many people, and
have sinned against thy soul. VVo to him that builds a Town with blood, and
stablisheth a City by iniquity.

Isai. 17. 12. 13. 14. VVo to the multitude of many Nations, which make a
rushing like the rushing of mighty waters. The Nations shall rush* like the
rushing of many waters, but God shall rebuke them, and they shall fl^e far off,
and shall be chased as the chafe of the Mountains before the wind; and like a
rolling thing before the whirl wind; and behold at evening tide trouble, and
before the morning he is not. This is the portion of them that spoils us, and
the lot of them that rob us.

Dan. 8 23. 24. 25. And in the latter time of their kingdom, when the
transgressions are come to the full, a King of fierce countenance and
understanding dark sentences shall stand up. And his power shall be mighty, but
not by his own power: and he shall destroy wonderfully, and shall prosper, and
practice, and shall destroy the mighty, and the holy people. And through his
policy also he shall cause craft to prosper in his hand, and he shall magnify
himself in and by peace shall destroy many: he shall also stand up against the
Prince of Princes, but he shall be broken without hand.

Ezekiel. 13. 5. 10. to 16. Ye have nor gone up into the gaps, neither made up the
hedge for the house of Israel to stand in the battle in the day of the Lord.

Because, even because they have seduced my people, saying, peace, and there
was no peace: and one built up a wall, and lo others daubed it with untempred
mortar.

Say unto them which daub it with nutempred mortar that it shall fall, there
shall be an overflowing shower, and ye O great hail stones shall fall, and a
stormy wind shall rent it.

Lo, when the wall is fallen, shall it not be said unto you, where is the
daubing wherewith ye have daubed it?

Therefore thus says the Lord God, I will even rent it with stormy wind in my
fury, and there shall be an overflowing shower in mine anger, and great hail
stones in my fury to consume it.

So will I break down the wall that ye have daubed with untempred mortar, and
bring it down to the ground, so that the foundation thereof shall be
discovered, and it shall fall, and the shall be consumed in the midst thereof,
and ye shall know that I am the Lord.

Thus will I accomplish my wrath upon the wall, and upon them that have daubed
it with untempred mortar, and will say unto you, the wall is no more, neither
they that daubed it.

Gal. 5. 14. Am I therefore become your enemy because I tell you the truth?

Psalm. 107. 43. Whosoever is wise and will observe these things, even they shall
understand the loving kindness of the Lord.

FINIS.

