THE OPENING OF The Great Seal OF ENGLAND.

Containing certain Brief Historical and Legal Observations, touching the
Original, Antiquity, Progress, Use, Necessity of the Great Seal of the Kings
and Kingdoms of England, in respect of Charters, Patents, Writs, Commissions,
and other Process.

Together with the Kings, Kingdoms, Parliaments several Interests in, and
Power over the same, and over the Lord Chancellor, and the Lords and Keepers
of it, both in regard of its New-making, Custody, Administration for the better
Execution of Public Justice, the Republique necessary Safety, and Vtility.

Occasioned by the Over-rash Censures of such who inveigh against the
Parliament, for Ordering a new Great Seal to be Engraven, to supply the
wilful absence, defects, abuses of the Old, unduely withdrawn and detained
from them.

By WILLIAM PRYNNE, Utter-Barrester of Lincolns Inn.

Esther 8. Write ye also for the Jews, as likes you, in the Kings name, AND
SEAL IT WITH THE KINGS RING: for the Writing which is written in the Rings
name, AND SEALED WITH THE KINGS RING, may no man reverse.

It is this fifteenth day of September, Anno Dom. 1643. Ordered by the
Committee of the House of Commons, concerning Printing, that this Treatise,
entitled, The Opening of the Great Seal of England, be forthwith Printed by
Michael Spark Senior. JOHN WHITE.

LONDON. Printed for MICHAEL SPARK Senior. 1643.

TO THE READER.
COurteous Reader, having copiously answered, refuted all Royalilists,
Malignants, Papists, clamorous Objections and Primitive Exceptions, against the
Proceedings of this present Parliament, in FOUR several Treatises, lately
published, concerning The Sovereign Power of Parliaments and Kingdoms; which
have given good satisfaction to many, and silenced the Penns, the Tongues of
most Anti-Parliamenteers, who have bin so ingenuous as seriously to peruse
them: I yet find a New grand Objection lately started up, and much insisted on
among these Opposites, by reason of the Commons late Order for making a New
Great Seal (now almost finished) to supply the wilful absence, defects, abuses
of the old, to the extraordinary prejudice, damage, danger, of the Houses,
Kingdom, and delay of public Justice; which, though sufficiently answered in
the general by sundry passages and Histories scattered in the former
Treatises; yet because not so particularly or fully debated, as the consequence
of this extraordinary weighty Act, and the querelousnesse of the clamorous
Opposites require; I have therefore (upon the motion of some friends) to stop
up this New-Breach and Clamor, speedily collected and published by Authority,
these ensuing Historical and Legal Observations, concerning the Original,
Antiquity, Progress, Use, Necessity of the Great Seal of the Kings and
Kingdom of England; with reference to Sealing of Charters, Patents, Writs,
Commissions, other Process; and given thee a summary account of the Kings,
Kingdoms, Parliaments, several Interests in, and Power over the Great Seal,
(and the Lords Keepers of it too) both in respect of its New-making, Custody,
Administration, for the better execution of public Justice, the Republike
necessary safety and utility, clearing all contrary Objections of moment; which
I here submit to thy charitable Censure and Acceptance; imploring thy Pardon
and Direction, in case I have casually erred, out of Ignorance or Humane
Frailty, in tracing this Untrodden dangerous narrow Path, wherein I find no
Footsteps, or only very obscure ones, to direct my course.

Farewell.
THE OPENING OF The Great Seal OF ENGLAND.
NOt to enter into any impetinent tedious Discourse of the Antiquity or use of
Seals in general, which were very anciently used both by the Nations and
Kings of the Jews, Persians, Medes, Babilonians, and others, (as is manifest
by Genesis 38 18. 25 Exodus 28. 21 c 3^. 6. Deuteronomy 31 43. Job 14. 17. c 33. 16 c. 37 7
c. 38. 14 c 41. 15. 1 King 21. 8. Neh 9. 38 c. 12. 1. Est c. 3 12. c 8 8.
(...). Ier. 22 10, 11, 14, 24. Cant. 8. 6. Isa 8. 16. Dan 6 17. c. 12. 4 9. ^.
9. 24 Ezekiel 28. Mat. 27 66 John 3. 33. Rom 4. 1. 1 Cor 9. 2 Timothy 2. 19 Revel. 5,
1, 5 9. c. 6 1, 3. 12. c 7. 1, 3 c. 8 1. c 9 4. c. 10. 4 c. 20. 3. c 22. 10
Polyd Virgi. (...). 8 c 2.
sundry Texts of Scripture, to omit profane Stories;) it is a question much
debated among Antiquaries, Historians, Lawyers, How ancient the use of Seals
has been among the Kings of England, and in what age, upon what occasion, by
what degrees they grew to be absolutely requisite for the ratification of
Charters, Patents, Writs, Commissions, and other Processes?

The first original, Antiquity of Seals among our Kings, is very uncertain;
for it is apparent, past all contradiction, See Ingulp. Hist. p. 901. Terms of
the Law. Tile Fai^s, ^. 94 Cooks Institutes on Littleton, ^ 7. a.
that our ancientest Kings Charters, Patents had no Seals at all annexed to
them, being ratified only with the Sign of the Cross, (oft-times in golden
Characters) the subscription of our Kings names, with the names of diverse
Bishops, Abbots, Nobles, Clerks, and others, under them, as Witnesses; who all
made the sign of the Cross, before or after their subscriptions; as is most
evident by sundry ancient Charters of our English Saxon Kings, yet extant in
old Ledger Books of Abbeys, in Sir Robert Cottons Library, and by the printed
Copies, of them in the Histories of Ingulphus, M^lmesbury, Hoveden, Matthew
Paris, Matthew. Westminster, Holinshed, Mr. Fox, Mr Cambdens Britannia, M.
Seldens Titles of Honor, History of Tithes, Notes to Eadmerus, Sir Henry
Spelmans Councils and Glossary; Sir Edward Cooks Preface to his 4 and 6
Reports, his Institutions on Littleton, and Magna Charta, Joannis Pitseus,
Relatio. Histor. de rebus Angl. Cl. Reynerus Apostolatus Benedictinorum in
Anglia; M. Lambard his Perambulation of Kent and Archaion, Bishop Vshers
Britannicarum Ecclesiarum Antiquitates, with others; which Charters, though
without a Seal, have See 3 H. 7. 25 26. Cooks Preface to the 4. Report.
Terms of the Law. Ti^le Faits.
ever been reputed as valid, firm in point of Law from time to time, and so
admitted by our Judges, Kings, Parliaments, as any punier Charters sealed with
our Kings Great Seals. To give you some few instances of the ancientest
Charters of our Kings before the Conquest, which I find not sealed, but thus
subscribed. King Spelman. Council. Tom 1. p. 118, 119. to 126.
Aethelbert, Anno 605. made two Charters, the first to the Church of Saint
Pancras, the other to the Monastery of Peter and Paul to be erected at
Canterbury; which are thus confirmed with the Sign of the Cross, not sealed;

Ego Aethelredus Rex Anglorum, hanc donationem meam Signo sanctae Crucis
propria manu confirmavi.

After which follow diverse other witnesses, who confirm it with the same sign.
There is extant a Bull of Augustine, the first Bishop of Canterbury, of an
exemption granted by him to this Monastery, with a Leaden Seal annexed to it,
the form whereof you may view in Spel. Gloss. Tit Bull. p 108. Pol. Virg. De
Iuven. Rerum, l 8. c. 1.
Sir Henry Spelman, who suspects both these Charters, with Augustines Bull and
Seal, (the sealing of Bulls being not so ancient, and Leaden Bulls being first
brought in by Pope Adrian, about the year of our Lord, 774. as Polydor and
others observe) to be mere Counterfeits, upon good grounds. There is another
Charter of the same King, of Lands given to the same Monastery, dated, Ar. 610.
subscribed as the former. The next ancient Charter I find, is, that of
Spelman. Council Tom. 1. p 189 to 194.
Withred King of Kent, dated, An. Dom. 695. who the same year confirmed the
great Council of Beca(...) with the sign of the Cross, and such
subscriptions as are aforesaid. To these I shall add the (suspected) Charter
of Spelm. Ib. p. 207, 208, 209, 210.
King Kenred and Offa. Anno 709. with the Charters of Egwin Bishop of
Worcester, Anno 709. The Charter of Ingulph. Hist. ^ 851. 852 Spelm Concit. p.
256, 257.
King Eth Ibald, An, 718. made to Saint Guthlar, and the Abbey of Croyland,
with his General Charter of Privileges granted to all Churches and
Monasteries, dated, Anno 749. The Charter of Spelm. Ib p. 227, to 231
King Ina granted to the Abbey of Glasterbury, (supposed to be spurious) Anno
725. Of Ingulph. Hist. p. 853, 854.
King Offa to the Abbey of Croyland, Anno 793. The Spel. Council. p 324. 324.
Decree of Adardus Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Council of Clovesho. An.
803. The Charter of Ingulp. Hist p 854, 855.
King Kenulphus to the Abbey of Croyland, Anno 8^6. The Spel. Council. p. 335
338, 339
Decrees of the Synod of Clevesh^, under King Beornwulfe, Anno 824. and of the
Council of London under King Egbert, Anno 833. The Charter of Ingulph. Hist. p
855 to 857 868. to 862.
Witlasius King of M^rcia, to the Abbey or Croyland, Anno 833. The Charter of
King Bertulphus to the same Abbey, An. 851. with the Spel. Council. p 346, 347.
Canons of the Council of Kingesbury, confirmed and subscribed by this King,
and others the same year, with the sign of the Cross. The Charters of Ingulp.
Hist. p. 862. Matthew. Westn. An 854, 834. Spel Co^c. p 350, to 354. M^lm
shurtensis. De est Reg. Angl l. 1 c. 2. p 41.
Aeth Iwulphus to the Abbey of Croyland, Anno 855. and to all Churches and
Monasteries, which he offered up to God upon the Altar of Saint Peter t
Winchester, where the Bshop received it, and sent it to all Churches to be
published. The Charter of Ingulp. Hist. p. 8^3 864.
B^orredus King of, Merciae, to the Abbey of Croyland. Anno 860. of Cooks Ep.
to the 6 Report.
Queen Aethelsw^th to Cuthwulfe, An. 868. of king Ma^mesh. de Gestis Regum, l.
2. c. 7. p. 53, 54
Edmund to the Abbey of Glastenbury, An. 944. of Ingulph. hist. p. 874. to 877.
Spelman Council. p. 428.
king ^^dred to the Abbey of Croyland, An. 948. the charters of Ingulph. hist.
p. 880. to 886.
king Edgar to the Abbey of Croyland, An. 966. 970. 974. to the Malms. de
Gestis Regum, l. 2. c. 8. p. 56, 57 Spelman Council. p. 485. 486. 488. 489. 432.
to 435 I. Seldeni ad Eadmerum notae p. 1, 9, 160 Cooks Preface to the 4 Report.
Abbey of Glastenbury, An. 965. 971. and to the Abbey of Malmesbury. An. 974.
his charter of Oswelds Laws, An. 964. his charter to his new Monestery of
Winchester, An. 966. and another charter, Ar. 964. the charter of Cooks Preface
to the sixth Report.
King Aeth^lred, An. 995. to Vlfric. with Spelman Council. p. 504. to 510.
his charter of privileges granted to the Church of Canterbury, An. 1006. the
Spelman p. 533.
charter of king Knute, or Canutus, to the Church of our Savior at Canterbury,
An. 1018. and to the Abbey Ingulph. hist. p. 893, 913, 914.
of Croyland, An. 1032. of Thorold to the Abbey of Croyland, An. 1051. and of
King Edward the Confessor to the same Abbey about the year 1050. All these
ancient Charters of our Kings before the Conquest had no seals at all annexed
to them, but were only ratified with the sign of the Cross subscribed by the
Kings themselves, and these who made them, together with their names, and with
the names and crosses of the witnesses. And it is observable, that all or most
of these ancient charters of our kings, which granted any lands or privileges
to Abbeys or Churches, were made in full Councels and Parliaments, with the
unanimous consent and approbation of the Bishops, Prelates, Abbots, Dukes,
Earls, Lords, and great men therein present, who commonly subscribed them; the
reason was, because none of our ancient kings (as I have proved) had any power
to grant or alien the lands of the Crown (which they enjoyed only in the
kingdoms right, and for its use) to any, without the consent of their Nobles,
and people in full Parliament: and in most of these Charters, Abbeys and
Church Lands were exempted from all taxes, tallages, and temporal services
whatsoever, except the repairing of high ways, bridges, and castles, for the
common good: and Remonstrance against shipmoney pt
thereby were anciently exempted from Danegeld, as I have elsewhere manifested.

Which of our kings first used a seal, is not certainly determined: Sir Edward
Cook in his Institutes on Littleton, fol. 7. a. records, that the charter of
King Offa, whereby he granted Peter Pence, does yet remain under his seal;
Now this charter, as Council. tom. 1 p. 308, 310, 311, 312.
Sir Henry Spelman, and our Huntindon, Antiquitates Ecclesiae Brit. ^o^
Polychronicon, Holins^. Grafton, Speed, and others.
Historians generally in his life, record, was dated in the year of our Lord
793. or 794. and is the first charter scaled (if true) by any of our kings.
There is another Cooks Instit. on Lit. f. 7. a
Charter of King Edwin, of certain land called Iecklea in the Is^le of Ely,
bearing date Anno 956. sealed with his own seal, and with the seal of Elfwin
Bishop of Winchester. I read in Francis Thin his Catalogue of Chancellours,
and in Sir Henry Spelman his Glossary, fol. 126. 132. that our Saxon kings
Aethelstan, Edmund, Edred, Edgar, and Aethelred, had their several
Chancellors; but whether they had any seals or not, is uncertain: if they had
any, it is certain (writes Glossar. p 127 See Terms of the Law, title Fairs.
Sir Henry Spelman) that they scarce used them at all, or very rarely, most of
their charters having no seals at all, but only crosses, or subscriptions of
these Kings names, and witnesses. The very Speeds hist. p. 415. terms of the
law, f. 94.
first of all our Kings who used a large br^ad seal, was Edward the confessor,
who, being brought up in Normandy, introduced that, with some other of the
Normans Guises with him, and had three Chancellors: Under this Spelman Gl^ssar
p. 126.
seal he granted a Charter of sundry liberties and privileges to the Church of
Saint Peter's in Westminster, Anno Dom. 1066. which was sealed by his Chancellor
Reynbaldus, as is evident by this his subscription to that deed; Ego Reynbaldus
Regis CANCELLARIVS relegi and SIGILLAVI. This is the first Charter, for ought
appears, that ever was sealed with a Royal broa^ Seal, or by a Chancellor.
But that all this good Kings charters, or any of his writs, or commissions were
thus sealed by this great scale, or that the Chancellor then had the custody of
the seal (which the Chancellors in the reign of Charles the great, and
Ludovicus Pius, had not in France, as Sir Henry Spelman proves in his Glossary,
p. 127. out of Capit. l. 2. c. 24. and Eg^lismensis in vita Caroli, p 15. and
the passage of Ingulphus concerning the office of the Chancellor in his time,
cited in Spelman, seems to disprove) is a non liquet unto me. The exact form
of this Kings great seal you may behold in Hist. of Eng. p 409.
John Speed, together with the various effigies of all our succeeding Kings
broad seals, prefixed by him before their several lives.

Two things there are, which in this enquiry after the original use of our
Kings great seals, seem somewhat dubious unto me. First, when, how, and by
what law or means it came to pass, that our Kings Charters and Patents ought
of necessity to be sealed with the great seal, contrary to the primitive usage
in former ages, or else to be reputed invalid, and mere nullities in law?
Secondly, when, and by what law or grounds, and in what Kings reign, Writs,
Commissions, and other Process of law, began to be issued out under the great
seal, or else to be disallowed as illegal? it being evident unto me, that
Charters, and Patents were usually sealed by some of our Kings, before any of
their writs, commissions, or legal process issued under their seals.

These two doubts, I confess, are beyond my skill exactly to assoile; yet this
I conjecture as most consonant to truth; That Terms of the Law, Tit. Faits, f
94. Speed hist. p. 415.
Edward the Confessor being trained up in Normandy, and addicted to the
customs of the French, which he introduced with him, did first of all bring in
the sealing of deeds; which I gather from the words of Hist. p. 895.
Ingulphus Abbot of Croyland, who flourished in his reign, and writes thus of
him: Coepitergo tota terra sub Rege, and sub aliis Normannis introductis,
Anglicos ritus dimittere, and Francorum mores in multis imitare: Gallicum
idioma omnes Magnates in suis Curits tanquam magnum Gentilitium loqui; CHART AS
ET CHIROGRAPHA SVA MORE FRANCORVM CONFICERE, and propriam consuetudinem IN HIS,
and in alius erubescere. Now the French Kings long before his days, used to
seal their charters with golden Bulls, as In Apparatu a Stemmata Lintharogie.
Franciscus Rosierius, and Sir Glossar. tit. ^ulla aurea, p. 106, 107.
Henry Spelman testify; there being diverse charters of King Dagobert,
Sigebert, and Pipin yet extant under golden Bulls, as they record: and Charles
the Great, descended of Pipin, was the first Emperor of the Romans which
sealed charters with a golden Bull, as De Invent. Rerum, l. 8. c. 2. ^ce Joan.
Zonarae, An Tom. 3. f. 147. c.
Polydor Virgil attests, Host. ^^len. Eccl. l 3. c. 17.
Flodoardus also recording, that Charles the Bald An. Dom. 867. sealed with a
Bull of his name, Bull a sui nominis sigillavit. In imitation of whom Speeds
hist. p 415. Terms of the law, f 94
Edward the Confessor, as it is probable, caused a great Seal to be made
(which none of his Predecessors used) and there with sealed two of his three
Charters of privileges and Donations granted to the Abbey of Westminster (to
which he was a special benefactor) the copies of which you may read in Council
Tom. 1. p. 630. to 637.
Sir Henry Spelman: witness this close of his second charter; Chartamistam
conscribi, ET SIGILLARI IVSSI, and ipsam manu mea signo sanctae CRVCIS
impressi, and idoneos te^^es annotari praecepi ad corraborandam: After which
his own subscription with the sign of the cross follows, and the
subscriptions and crosses of sundry Bishops and Abbots: after them, Ego
Raynbaldus CANCELLARIVS; then follow the subscriptions of Dukes, and other the
Kings Officers, with this conclusion, Acta apud Westmonaster. quinto kal.
Ianuarii, die sanctorum Innocentium, Anno Dominicae Incarnationis 1066.
Indictione tertia. Anno Regni serenissimi Edwardi Regis 25. Swyergarius
Notarius ad vicem Reynbaldi Regiae dignitatis Cancellarii, hanc Chartam scripsi
and subscripsi, in Deinomine foeliciter, Amen. With this close of his third
Charter dated the same year and day; Vt ergo hac auctoritas nostris and futuris
temporibus, circaipsum sanctum locum perenniter firma and inviolata permaneat,
per omnia tempora illaesa custodiatur atque conservetur, and ab omnibus
Optimatibus nostris, and Iudicibus publicis and privatis, melius ac certius
credatur, Manus nostrae subscriptione subter eam decennius roborare, and
idoneos testes annotare, ATQVE SIGILLO NOSTRO IVSSIMVS SIGILLARI. ^.

Ego Edwardus Deigratia Anglorum Rex, hoc privilegium jussi componere, and
compositum, cum signo Dominicae CRVCIS confirmando impressi.: then follow the
subscriptions of diverse Bishops and Abbots with crosses: next to them, Ego
Reynbaldus Regis CANCELLARIVS relegi ET SIGILLAVI.: next ensue the
subscriptions of some Dukes, Officers, and Knights, with crosses: next the date
of the place, day, year of Christ, and the Kings reign; with Ego Alfgeatus
Notarius, ad vicem Reynbaldi Regiae dignitatis Cancellarius, hoc privilegium
scripsi and subscripsi, In Dei nomine foeliciter. Amen.

From which Charters and Subscriptions we may observe,

First, That this King Edward, though he added his great Seal to his Charters,
yet he retained the ancient form of confirming them with the sign of the
cross, and the subscription of his own name, and the names of witnesses;
which continued long after, till Edward the first his reign, if not longer,
though since discontinued.

Secondly, That the Chancellor in his days, though he subscribed his name
after Prelates and Bishops, yet he did it before Dukes, Earls, and all other
temporal Lords; therefore he was then, no doubt, the chiefest temporal
Officer, and has so continued ever since. What the dignity and office of the
Chancellor was in this Kings reign and before, appears by Ingulphus his
history of Turketulus Thin^ Catalog. of Chancelors in Holinshed vol. 3. col.
1160. etc. Spelman Gloss. p. 132.
Chancellor both to King Aethelstan, Edmund, and Edred successively, and the
second Chancellor we read of in our Realm) who was then PRIMVM, PRAECIPVVM ET
A SECRETIS FAMILIARISSIMVM. This Ingulph hist. p 872. to 892. Spelman. Gloss.
p. 126.
Turketulus (writes he) descended of the blood royal, being Nephew to King
Edward the elder, who for his merits would have matched him to diverse rich
Noblemens daughters, but he refused them, leading a single life: After which he
would have promoted him to a Bishopric for his learning and holiness,
proffering him first the Bishopric of Winchester, and afterward the
Archbishopric of Canterbury very often, and to prefer him before all his
other Clerks; but he rejected those dignities with various excuses, and utterly
abhorred them all his life, tanquam tendiculas Sathanae ad subvertendas animas,
As the snares of Satan to subvert souls: Such were Lord y Bishoprics
esteemed, even in that blind age: which may be further ratified by this
monkish story, related out of the Promptuary of the Disciple, and Arnoldus in
Fol. 227. printed by Winkin de Word at London, An. 1521.
the Flower of the Commandments of God; That a Monk of Clervaulx was chosen to
be Bishop, the which refused it, against the will of his Abbot and of the
Bishop, and soon after died: Who appearing after his death to his familiar, he
demanded of him, if the disobeysance before said had noyed him? he answered,
that nay, and afterward said, If I had taken the Bishopric, I had been
damned; and said moreover an horrible word, The state of the Church is come

unto this, that she is not digne to be governed But of ill Bishops, etc. But
to return to our story. Tarketulas refusing the glory of this terrene dignity
and transitory honor of a Bishopric; the King at last made him his
Chancellor: ut quaecunque negotia temporalia vel spiritualia Regis judicium
expectabant illius consilio and decreto (tam sanctae fidei and tam profundi
ingenii tenobatur) omnia tracturantur, and tractata irrefrag^bilem sententiam
sortirentur Consilio ergo illius, multa bona opera etc. off^cis: After which he
adds, he was a man of greatest power and authority with these three Kings,
both for his incomparable wisdom and valor, he had sixty Manners of his own
(six whereof he gave to God and the Abbey of Croyland where he became Abbot,
and the residue to the King) and vast treasures of jewels and money, yet in all
this greatness his Title of Chancellor was his highest dignity, as Ingulphus
manifests: Therefore it was then, no doubt, the most eminent office.

Thirdly, that in those times See Spelmanni Glossar. tit. Cancellarius p. 125.
to 127.
it was one chief part of the Chancellors office, by himself or his Notaries
and substitutes, to dictate and write all the Kings Charters, Patents, Writs,
and to subscribe them as a witness: whence Turketulus when he was Chancellor,
writ or dictated most of the Kings charters made to the Abbey of Croyland: Rex
Edredus dedit Monasterium Croyland per Chartam suam, dictatam ab eodem
Turketulo, writes Ingulphus, p. 874.

Fourthly, That the Chancellor in his reign, sealed the Kings charters with
his seal; yet Spelmanni Gloss. p. 127, 128
whether he only did it, or had the sole custody of the soale, is uncertain.

But though King Edward the Confessor Speeds hist. p. 415.
first brought in the great seal; yet the custom of sealing charters, patents
therewith, with other men's sealing Deeds, grow not common, universal, or
necessary, See Rastals Terms of the Law, tit. Faits.
till the latter end of the Conquerours reign; as History p. 901.
Ingulphus in these direct terms avers, from his own experimental knowledge:
Et non tantum hunc morem (of making Knights) sed alias etiam consuetudines
(William the Conqueror and his Normans, of whom he writes) immutabant; nam
chirographtrum consectionem Anglicanam, quae antea Vsque ab Edwardi Regis
tempora, fidelium praesentium subscriptionibus cum Crucibus Aureis, aliisque
saerts signaculis firma fuerunt, Normanni condemnantes, chirographa chartas
vocabant; Et chartarum armitatem cum cere impressione per untuscujusque
speciale sigillum, sub instillatione trium vel quatuor testium astantium
(whereas ancient charters had twenty or more witnesses) conficere
constituebant. Conferebantur etiam prime multa praedia nudo verbo, absque
scripto, velcharta, tantium cum Domini gladio, vel galea, vel cornu,
velcratera; and plurima tenementa cum calcari, cum striguli, cum arcu, and non
nulla cum sagitta. Sed haec initio Regni sui; posterioribus annis immutatus est
isle modus. Tantum tunc Anglicanos abominanti sunt, etc. So that by this
Historians express testimony (a man of great eminency in that age, being Abbot
of Croyland, and much frequenting the Court, yea taking more pains to search
out and preserve ancient Charters then any in that age) William the Conqueror
and his Normans (who Malmesbury Matthew Paris, Ladmerus, Huntindon, Hoveden
Polycron, Holinshed, Speed, Daniel, and others in his life.
endeavored to reduce the English to the customs laws, and ceremonies of
Normandy, especially in all matters of government, law, and justice, his
charters being of far other tenor, form, and brevity, then those before or
since in use) were the first who introduced, by insensible degrees, the French
custom of sealing charters and deeds with seals; and this King, with his
Officers (as all our Historians complain) being extraordinary covetous and
oppressive, using sundry new d^^^ses to fill their own purses, by exhausting
the peoples; it is very likely (as Ingulphus words import, and Speeds hist. p.
440, 450.
others insinuate) that he and his Chancellors (of which I find In Thinns
Catalogue, and Spelman Gloss. p. 132.
nine in his reign) to make a benefit and project of his great seal, did in
his latter days ordain, that all charters, patents should be thenceforth
sealed with his royal seal, or else be reputed invalid in law. Three charters
of his I find recorded in our writers: The first, made to the Abbey of Croyland
at the suit of History p. 912.
Ingulphus who registers it, subscribed by some witnesses, without mention of
any seal of his thereto annexed. The second, to the Abbey of Battle, sealed
with his great seal, and subscribed by four or five Bishops, which Patent and
Seal to you may view in Page 165, 166. see the form of his seal in Speeds
Hist. p. 435.
Mr. Seldens Notes on Eadmerus. The third, to the City of London, granted at
the suit of William their Bishop, written in the Saxon tongue, confirmed with
green wax, whereas the Saxons before used only to sign with gilt crosses; the
copy whereof you may read in Lamberts parambulation of Kent, Holinshed, and
History p. 450, 451.
Speed. As for that charter of his, recorded by John Stom, and Speed in his
life, out of the Book of Richmond: I William King, the third year of my reign,
Give to thee Norman Hunter, to me that are both leefe and dear,
The Hop and the I doubt Hoplands, hops and hop-yards were not then in use
Hopton, and all the bounds up and down,
Under the earth to Hell, above the earth to Heaven,
From me and mine, to thee and to thine,
As good and as fair, as ever they mine were:
To witness that this is sooth, I bite the white wax with my tooth,
Before Judge, Maud, and Margery, and my youngest son Henry,
For a Bow and a broad Arrow, when I come to hunt upon Yarrow.


I deem it either a forgery, or a charter granted only in merriment; which
Rast all in his Terms of the law, f. 80. attributes rather to King Edward the
third, then to the Conqueror; concluding, that s^aling was not commonly used
till the reign of Edward the third: which if true perchance of deeds between
private persons, yet not of Royal charters. King William Rufus, Henry the
first, Stephen, and Henry the second, had all their several great seals (the
portraytures whereof you may behold in John Spreds History before every of
their lives) and their several Chancellors too, whose names you may read i^
Holinshed vol. 3. col. 1260 to 1280.
(...) Francis Thinns Catalogue, and Glossarium, p. 132, 133.
Spelman; which Chancellors, as is most likely, kept their seals, sealing both
Patents and charters with them.

I read, that Matthew. Paris p. 53, 54. Eadmerus l. 3. p. 55. Malmes. de Gest.
Reg. L^. Hoveden, Holinshed, Matthew. West. ^abian, Polychron. Caxton, Grafton
Stow, Damel in 1 Hen. 1. Speed p. 407.
King Henry the first, in the first year of his reign, granted a Charter of
Liberties to his Subjects (according to his promise and Oath, before and at his
Coronation) much like to Magna Charta, subscribed with Witnesses: ET SIGILLI
SVI TESTIMONIO ROBORATVM, as Eadmerus, and others write: To this Charter he set
both his hand AND SEAL, commanding as many copies as there were Counties in
England to be transcribed, and kept in the Monasteries of every Province: he
was made a King by right of Election, not of Succession, his brother Robert
being right heir. In this Kings reign, I find one Writ to Anselme Archbishop
of Canterbury (who used Delatae literae repos^^ in tuo sigillo, ^adme. l. 4. p.
86.
a seal wherewith he sealed his letters written to this King) with Fa^merus
ibid. and p. 101.
Test Walricho CANCELLARIO apud Merlebergam. And another Eadmer. Nov. l. 4. p.
101.
Writ directed to him, to respit the consecration of Thomas Archbishop of York
till Easter, SIGILLO REGIS INCLVS AS; the first Writ I, to my remembrance,
find sealed with any Kings Seal, though Patents were commonly sealed before
this time. Malms. Novel. l. 1. p. 170. Huntind. Matt. Paris, Hoveden, Mat.
West. Speed Holmsh. Daniel* in his life, An. 1.
King Stephen, coming to the Crown by the Nobles Election, not by right of
inheritance, as next heir, vowed to confirm their Liberties by his Charter
and SEAL; which he did at Oxford in the first year of his Reign: this
Charter you may read in the Marginall Authors, being like to Magna Charta in
substance. That King Henry the second used to seal his Charters and Patents, I
find apparent testimonies in our Historians. For his Oath of Purgation which
he made concerning the death of Thomas Becket (registered at large by Annal.
pars post. p. 529, 530. see Matt. Paris p. 120, 121, 122, 124, 125.
Roger de Hoveden) was put into writing in form of a Charter, and then sealed
with his Seal, and the Seals of the Cardinals, as this Author attests. Et ut
haec in memoria Romanae Ecclesiae haberentur, Rex Pater FECIT APPONI SIGILLVM
SVVM SCRIPTO ILLI, in quo superdicta capitula continebantur, una CVM SIGILLIS
praedictorum Cardinalium (Theodine and Albert.) Atque ut in memoria Roman
Ecclesiae sirmiter habeatur, SIGILLVM VESTRVM PRAECIPISTIS APPONI. Hoveden
Annal pars posterior p. 560. to 566. Mat. Par: p. 127. see Holinsh. and Speed
in his life
Anno Dom. 1177. Sancho King of Navarre, and Alphonso King of Castile being at
variance, about breaches of Articles in a former truce, referred their
differences to the determination of King Henry the second: who calling his
Nobles and Parliament together, made these kings Ambassadors to put their
differences in writing, and then to swear to stand to his, and his Councels
arbiterment: which done, he made a Charter of his award, subscribed with the
names of many Bishops, Nobles, Clerks, and Laymen, as you may read at large in
Hoveden, which Charter questionless was sealed with his seal, though it be not
expressed. Hoveden An. pars post. p. 570. 571. Mat. Paris p. 128. see Holinsh.
Grafton, Speed, Daniel, Fabian.
The same year, on the 7 day of October K. Lewis of France, and king Hen. 2.
made a final concord and league for mutual offense and defense, which was put
into writing, sworn to, subscribed by many witnesses of note and SEALED;
witness the words of Hoveden (who records it at large.) Et ut hoc statut^
firmiter teneatur, and ratum permaneat, scripto commendari, ET SIGILLI SVI
AVCTORITATE CONFIRMARI FECIT. And the same year Audebert Earl of March selling
his Earldom to King Henry, made a Charter thereof, registerd in Annal. pars
post. p. 572.
Hoveden, which concludes thus: Ne autem haec mea venditi^ solemniter celebrata
aliqua posset in posterum malignitate divelli, EAM SIGILLO MEO MVNIVI: after
which many Bishops, and other witnesses subscribed it. In this Kings reign it
is apparent, that the great Seal remained in the custody of the Chancellor; for
I read Matthew. Paris hist p. 94. Antiquitates Eccles. ^rit. p. 122. Godwins
Catal gue of Bps in the life of Becket, Thins Catalog. of Chancelors, Holinshed
in Hen. 2.
that this king making his Chancellor Thomas Becket, Archbishop of Canterbury,
he thereupon, An. Dom. 1162. (contrary to the kings good liking and
expectation, who was then in Normandy) sent messengers over with the Seal,
Cancellariae renuntians, ET SIGILLVM RESIGNANS, renouncing the Chancellorship,
and resigning up the Seal unto him; Because he could not attend the Court and
Church at once; so as the Chancellor then kept the seal of England with him
here, when the King was absent in Normandy, for the better execution of public
justice. This will yet more plainly appear by the ensuing passage of Annal.
pars post. p. 748.
Hoveden, and Writ of King Richard the first;

Richardus Dei Gratia Rex Angliae, etc. Willielmo de Sancta Mariae Ecclesia,
and Nugont Baro^lpho, salutem, sciatis quod didicimus, quod in morte Patris
nostri sine praecepto suo, and conscientiae, habuerunt literas DE SIGILLO SVO
Gaufrdtus de Mu camp de habendo Archidiaconatu de Cliveland, and Willielmus de
Stigandebi, and Magister Erardus de praebendis habendis in Ecclesia Eboracensi,
quae tum vacabat, and erat in mann nostra: Et ideo praecipimus, quod praefatos
ab Archidiaconatu and Praebendit dictis sine mora dissaisietis, repetentes ab
eis quicquid ex inde perceperunt, postquam illos redditus ita fraudulenter and
per surreptionem sunt adepti. Test m^ipso tertio die Novembris apud Mamerz.
Proh pudor!

Turpe est doctori cum culpa redargu^t ipsum.
Idem enim Geoffry.
Archiepiscopus dum adhuc esset CANCELLARIUS REGIS Patris sui, SIGILLVM ILLVD
IN CVSTODIA HABVIT, per quod praefatus Archidiaconatus, and praebendae illae
datae fuerant praenominatis personis.

By which passage and writ it is apparent: First, That the Chancellor in Henry
the seconds Reign, had the custody of the great Seal. Secondly, That
presentations to Churches, Archdeaconries, and Prebendaries, were then granted
under the Great Seal. Thirdly, That Chancellours did sometimes fraudulently
grant and seal Patents without the Kings privity; and that these Patents, when
discovered, were reputed fraudulent and void. Fourthly, That writs at Common
Law were usual in Henry the second his Reign; which appears most plentifully
and irrefagably by Ranulphus de Glanvilla, chief Insticiar under this King,
his, Tractatus de Legibus and consuetudinibus Regni Angliae, tempore Regis
Henrici secundi compositus: wherein most Original Writs of the Common Law, and
the Proceedings upon them, yet in use, are collected and registerd for the
benefit of posterity. In this Kings time, I conceive, our Writs of Law were
reduced by this Ralph Glanvill and his fellow Justices, into a set form, and
began to issue forth under the Kings Seal, to avoid forgery; but whether under
the Great Seal, or special Seal of every Court (as Sir Edward Cook in his
Institutes on Magna Charta, page 554, 555, 556. conjectures) I cannot certainly
define. In his Reign I first find, that the connterfeiting of the Kings
Charter was reputed Treason; as Glanv^ll expressly declares it, lib. 1. cap. 2.
and lib. 14. cap. 7. Illud tamen notandum, quod si quis convictus fuerit de
Charta falsa, distinguendum est, Vtrum fuerit CHARTA REGIS, an privata, Quod si
CHARTA REGIA, tunc is qui super hoc convincitur, condemnandus est, TANQVAM DE
CRIMINE LESAE MAIESTATIS. Si vero fuerit charta privata, tunc cum convicto
mitius agendum est. Now that which he terms counterfeiting the Kings Charter,
Lib. 2. Tit. de Crimine lesae Majest.
Bracton, Lib. 1. c. 8. f. 16. Stanfords Pleas lib. 1. c. 1.
Britton, and the Statute of 25. E. 3. of Treasons, style, counterfeiting the
Great Seal, or Privy Seal of the King: and therefore this of Glanvill relates
principally to the counterseting of the Kings Seal annexed to his Charter. I
find in Annal. pars poster. p. 551, 552, 553.
Roger Hoveden, a Charter of William, King of Sicily, which he made to Joan
daughter of King Henry, touching her Dower, dated Anno Domini 1177. Mense
Februarii Indicti* decima, subscribed with the names of diverse witnesses,
Subjects to King William, and among others, Ego Mattheus, Domini Regis
VICE-CANCELLARIVS: Which Charter concludes thus: Ad hujus antem donationis and
concessionis nostra memoriam, and inviolabile firmamentum; privilegium praesens
per man^^ Alexandri, notarij nostri scribi, ET BVLLA AVREA NOSTRO TYPARIO
IMPRESSA, ROBORATVM NOSTRO SIGILLO, jussimus decorari. In quo familiares
nostri, and aliae personae pr^ecepto nostro se scripserunt hoc modo; the Form
of which Kings great Seal you may behold engraven in Hoveden. p. 553.

In fine, this Henry the second, being Mat. Pari^ hist. Angl. p. 157. Hoveden
p. 358. Fabian par. 7. p. 353, 354. Polychron. l. 7. c. 24. Speed p. 522.
chosen King of Jerusalem (which Kingdom was wholly elective) and earnestly
importuned by Heraclius Patriarch of that City, the Christians there, and by
Pope Lucius his Letters, to accept that Honor; An. 1185. Mat. Paris p. 47. 64,
69.
He thereupon summoned a Parliament as London on the 10. of April; wherein he
charged all his Subjects with many adjurations, to advise and resolve him, what
was best to be done in this case for the salvation of his sense; and that he
was resolved by all means, to follow their advice herein; Whereupon the
Parliament conferring on the premises, resolved; that it was much more
wholesome for the Kings soul, Hoveden Annal. pars poster. with others.
that he sholud govern his own Kingdom with due moderation, and defend it
from the eruptions of the Barbarous French, then to provide for the safety of
those in the East in proper person. Which I only note in the by (having
omitted it in its due place:) First, to manifest what high esteem our Kings
have had of the resolutions and advise of their Parliaments, to which they
wholly submitted their own judgments, acquiescing in their resolves.
Secondly, to evidence the Soveveraigne power of Parliaments over our Kings
then, who might not desert the Realm, not take any new honor or dominion upon
them, without their previous consents and advice: Thirdly, to show the duty of
Kings to their Subjects and Kingdoms.

King Richard the first succeeding his Father Henry the second, rather by
Election, then Succession, (and Speed hist. p. 530.
not styled a King, by our ancient Writers, before his Coronation) was the
first of all our Kings (as Our Speed hist. p. 541. Daniels hist. p. 125. Cook
Instit. on Littletons. 7. a.
Writers accord) who sealed with a Seal of Arms, all our former Kings seals,
being but the Picture of the King sitting in a Throne, on the one side of the
seal, and on horseback on the other side in diverse Forms, with various
inscriptions of their Names and styles; which you may view in Speed; But this
King bare two Lions Rampant combatant in a shield, in his first, and three
Lions passant in his latter Seal; borne ever after by our Kings, as the Royal
Arms of England. His first See Hoved^n, Mat. Paris, Nubrigen. Mat. Westminster.
Holinsh. Speed, Grafton.
Chancellor, was William Longchamp Bishop of Ely, Legate to the Pope, whom he
made his Viceroy and Iusticiar of England, when he went to the Holy Land
against the Saracens, committing the Kingdom to his Government, chiefly; who
infinitely oppressed and tyrannized over it, as all our Historians evidence:
Hist. Angl. p. 155, 156.
Matthew Paris give, this Character of him, Erat idem CANCELI ARIVS MAXIMUS
inter omnes occidentales, REX ET SACERDOS in Anglia, qui omnia pro nihilo
ducebat, cum Episcopali tantum dignitate non contentus nimis alta se sperare
denotavit. In prima namque Literarum suarum front, vanitatem and elationem
expressit, cum dixit. Willielmus DEI GRATIA commonly used before, in, and since
that age by and to Bishops, Popes, Abbots, in public Writs, as well as Kings,
as the Eadmerus, hist. p. 12. 36. 201. Hoveden, Annal. p. 459, 498, 504, 505,
509, 512, 513, 523, 524, 530, 538, 575, 643, 611, 670, 677, 707, 712, 718, 721,
741, 763, 766, 782.
Marginall Authors manifest) Eliensis Episcopus DOMINI REGIS CANCELLARIUS,
totius Angliae Iustitiarius, and Apostolicae sedis Legatus, etc. Has autem
dignitates, quos pretio obtinuerat, immoderato excessu exercuit, volens
locellos, quas in earum impetratione evacuerat, reficere, etc. This Chancellor
(as is probable) had the custody of one part of the Seal in this Kings
absence, for the better administration of justice, though the King carried the
other part of the great Seal with him into the wars, pretended to be there
lost, as you shall presently hear. I find diverse of this Kings Charters,
Letters, Writs, before and after his voyage to the Holy Land, recited in Annal.
pars. post p. 658 662 667* 676, 698, 700, 726, 730, 732, 734. 743. 748.
Hoveden. These Charters, which questionless were sealed with his Seal, were
subscribed by sundry witnesses; the Writs and Charters concluding with a Test
meipso apud Chinonem, etc. The Charter of the Manor of Sadburgh to Hugh Bishop
of Durham, Matthew. Paris p. 106. Spelmanni Council. p. 142, 395. Mr. Seldens
Titles of Honor, p. 123. to 128. Register pars. 1: f. 286, 392. to 328: pars
2. 2. f. 3. p. 22 3. 30, 33, 35, 38, 44, 54, 55, 60, 62, part. 35. 22. 26. 29.
31. 35. 42. 47. Fitz. Not. Bre. f. 132.
is thus dated. Datum anno primo regni nostri 18 die Septembris apud Eatingat,
per manum Willielmi de longo campo, CANCELLARII NOSTRI. During this King
Richards imprisonment in Germany, Henry the Emperor sent Letters to the Nobles
of England for this King, by William Longchamp his Chancellor, AUREA BULLA
IMBULLATAS in hac forma, sealed with a golden Bull in this form. And soon
after, this Hoveden Annal. p: 726, 7^9 730.
Chancellor, William Briwere, and others, concluding a peace between this King
and Phillip King of France, authorized thereto by the Kings Letters Patents;
these Commissioners not only swear to, but sealed the Articles of this truce,
as this close of it manifests. Quae omnia praedicta, ut rata permaneant and
inconcussa, ego Willielmus de Rupibus, and ego Joannes de Pratellis, and ego
Willielmus Briwere, per praeceptum Regis Angliae Domini nostri, SIGILLORUM
NOSTRORUM ATTESTATIONE ROBORAVIMUS. Actum Meduneae Anno ab incarnatione Domini
1193. octav^ Idus Julii. And the very next year the Hoveden. Annal. pars.
post. P. 741, 742 743.
Letters and instrument of the truce made between these two Kings by Drogo and
Anselme, and sworn by them in the French Kings behalf, have this conclusion.
Et nos ut omnia praedicta firma sint, and stabilita, universa praedicta
SIGILLIS NOSTRIS ROBORAVIMUS. Actum inter Vernelium and Thilers, Anno incarnati
verbi 1194. 23 die Iulii.

King Richard being released this very year (which was the sixth of his reign)
out of prison, and new crowned, among other oppressve projects to raise moneys
to maintain his wars (which made him an extraordinary oppressiour of his
people) Hoveden Annal. pars. po^t p. 746. 785. Speeds Hist. p. 541. Daniel
(...) See Holinshed, Grafton, and others.
caused a NEW BROAD SEAL TO BE MADE; (the portrayture whereof you may view in
Speed) pretending that the old was lost, when Roger his VICE CHANCELLOR was
drowned before Cyprus, and that his CHANCELLOR during his imprisonment, had
abused THIS SEAL, whereupon he took it from him: requiring and commanding,
that all persons as well Clergy men as Lay men, who had Charters or
confirmations UNDER HIS OLD SEAL, should bring them in to be renewed UNDER HIS
NEW SEAL; and unless they did so, that nothing which had been passed BY HIS
OLD SEAL, should be ratified, or held good in Law. By which device he drew a
great mass of Money to his Treasury; subscribing his new-Sealed Charters thus:
This was the tenor of our Charter under our first Seal, which because it was
lost, and at the time of our being captive in Almayne, in the power of another,
WE CAUSED TO BE CHANGED, etc. Which Annal. pars. post* p. 746, 785.
Hoveden thus relates, Et imputans Cancellario suo, hoc per ipsum fuisse
factum, ABSTULIT AB EO SIGILLUM SUUM and facit sib! NOVUM SIGILLUM FIERI; tum
quia CANCELLARIUS ille operatus fuerat inde minus discrete, quam esset necesse,
tum quia SIGILLUM ILLUD perditum erat, quando Rogerus malus catul^o,
VICE-CANCELLARIUS SUUS submersus erat in maeri ante insulam de Cypro: and
praecepit Rex: quod OMNES, tam clerici quam laici, qui Chartas habebant,
venirent AD NOVUM SIGILLUM SUUM ad Chartas suas renovandas: and nisi fecerint;
NIHIL quod actum fuerat PER SIGILLUM SUUM VETUS, RATUM HABERETUR. Praterea Rex
statuit, torniamenta fieri in Anglia, and Chartasua confirmavit, etc. (making
them also a money matter.)

By which passages it is apparent: First, that all these Kings Patents,
Charters, were sealed with his great Seal. Secondly, that the abuse, loss or
absence of the great Seal, is a sufficient cause to make a new one. Thirdly,
that the profit made by the great Seal, and project of raising moneys by new
Charters sealed with it, was the true original cause all sealing of Charters
and Writs with his Seal, and making it simply necessary in Law; there being
no public resolution or declaration declaring Charters or Writs not sealed
with the great Seal, to be void in Law, (for ought I find) before this
project; unless that forementioned, touching the Conqueror, pass for a Law,
and judgment in this particular. Fourthly, that the Chancellor in this Kings
reign had the custody of the Great Seal; the indiscreet use and abuse
whereof, was good ground in Law to deprive him of its custody.

What the Office and dignity of the Chancellor really was in that age,
appears by this description of it, written in or near that time. Spelmani
Glossarium, p. 128.
Cancellarii dignitas est, ut SECUNDUS A REGE in Regno habeatur; ut ALTERA
PART SIGILLI REGII (QUOD ET AD EIUS PERTINET CUSTODIAM) PROPRIA SIGNET
MANDATA. Vt capella Regia in illius fit dispositione and cura. Vt vacantes
Archiepiscopatus, Episcopatus, Abbatias and Baronias cadentes in manum Regis
ipse suscipiat and conservet. Vt omnibus Regiis assit consilis, etiam non
vocatus accedat. Vt omnia SIGILLIFERI CLERICI REGII sua manu signentur, Item,
ut (suffragantibus ex Dei gratia vitae meritis) non moriatur nisi
Archiepiscopus, vel Episcepus si voluerit. And by the black Book of the
Exchequer attributed to Gervasius Talburiensis. par. 1. c. 5. Cancellarius
ficut in Curia, sic ad Scaccarium MAGNUS est: adeo ut sine ejus consensu vel
consilio, nihil magnum fiat, vel fieri debeat. Verum hoc habet officium dum
residet ad Scaccarium. ADIPSUM PERTINET CUSTODIA SIGILLI REGII, quod est in
Thesauro; sed inde non recedit nisi cum praecepto Id est Capitali^ Justici^^
Angliae.
Justiciae; ab inferiori ad superius Scaccarium, a Thesaurario vel Camerario
defertur, ad explenda solum negotia scaccarii. Quibus peractis in loculum
mittitur; and loculus a Cancellario consignatur, and sic Thesaurario traditur
custodiendus, etc. The custody therefore of the great Seal was then reputed an
unseparable part of the Chancellors Office and honor.

King John succeeding his brother Richard, by the Nobles and peoples election,
rather then by descent, as Hist. Angl. p. 189. 190.
Matthew Paris, with others observe; had both a great Seal and See Spelman and
Then.
Chancellors who kept it, with which he sealed diverse Charters. Among others
one Letters Parents SIGILLO NOSRO MUNITAS to the Archbishop of Canterbury,
Monks, and other Prelates persecuted by him, Matthew. Paris Hist. Angl. p. 225,
227, 237, 246, to 254, Matthew (...) Holnished, Speed and others.
restoring them to their liberties and possessions, which was dated the 13. day
of May in the 14. year of his reign. Another dated. (...) 15. of the same
month at the house of the Templars near Dover (Chartam SIGILLO NOSTRO
MUNITAM) of his most detestable resignation of the Kingdom and Crown of
England to the Pope, delivered to Pandulph the Popes Legate (to whom he did
homage for England and Ireland after this surrender) which Charter first sealed
with Wax, and after delivered to Pandulph, was the same year, afterward, in
the Cathedral Church of Saint Paul, before the high Altar, in the presence of
the Clergy and people, AURO BULLATA EST, sealed with gold, and delivered to
Nicholas Bishop of Tusculan, the Popes Legate, to the use of the Pope and
Church of Rome, to whom he then did homage, to his eternal infamy; which so
much discontented his Nobles, Prelates and people, that they took up Arms
against him, and enforced him in an Assembly and Treaty at Running-mead, to
grant them the great Charter of their Liberties, and Charter of the Forest,
ratified with his SEAL, Oath, Witnesses, Subscriptions, the Bishops
Excommunications, and Popes Bull; and then sent his Letters Patents to all the
Counties of England, commanding the Sheriffs to swear all the men within their
Bailywicks, to observe the said Laws and Liberties, thus granted and ratified,
in the 17. year of his reign. In brief, the Charter of the truce between
King John and King Philip of France, registered in Annal. p. 814, 815.
Hoveden was sealed with his Seal, concluding thus. Qua ut perpetuum robur
obtineant, prae sentem Chartam authoritate SIGILLI NOSTRI corrobora^^^, Anno
1200. mense Maii.

In this Kings reign the Chancellors place (through the benefit of the Seal)
became so gainefull; In dor^^ Rotfinium huj^^ Anni; and Spelmanni Glossarium,
p. 131, 132. Th^^s Catalogue of Chancellors.
that Walter de Gray (afterward Archbishop of York) proffered the King 5000
Marks, pro habenda CANCELLARIA (which was then no Court, but the Office of
making and sealing royal Writs and Charters) Domini Regis tota vita sua, and
pro habenda inde Charta Dom. Regis; which great place he then obtained, or
rather, purchased by his money, not merits.

King Henry the third, coming to the Crown (by the Lords and Commons Fox Acts
and Monuments edit. ult. vol. 1. p. 1334. Speed, p. 591.
election, rather then by descent) when he was but nine years and some odd
months old, in the ninth year of his reign, ratified Matthew. Paris Hist. p.
311. Speed p. 599. See Polychronicon, Fabian, Holinshed, Magna Charta it self.
Magna Charta, and the Charter of the Forest in Parliament, under His hand and
Seal, with Witnesses thereunto subscribed; and commanding as many Charters to
be engrossed as there were Counties in England, ET REGIO SIGILLO MUNITIS, and
ratified WITH THE ROYAL SEAL, he sent one of the great Charters into every
Shire, and one Charter of the Forest into every County where there were
Forests, to be there reserved. But this unconstant King coming to age, within
two years after, Matthew. Paris p. 324, 325. Daniel, p. 151. 152. Holinshed,
Speed, Grafton.
in a Parliament at Oxford (a fatal place for ill advice to our Kings) through
ill Council, to the great discontent of his Nobles and Commons, annulled the
Charter of the Forest, declaring it void, as granted in his nonage, when he
had no power of Himself, NOR OF HIS SEAL, and so of no validity; and causing
Proclamation to be made, that has the Clergy and all others, if they would
enjoy those Liberties should renew their Charters AND HAVE THEM CONFIRMED UNDER
HIS NEW SEAL (which he had then caused to be made, only by way of project to
raise moneys, as Richard the first had done;) For which they were constrained
to pay, not according to their ability, but the will of the chief Justice,
Hugh de Burgh, to whom was laid the charge of this mischief: which procured
him the general hate of the Kingdom; and begat a new insurrection of the
Lords and Commons, who taking up Arms hereupon, enforced the King to call a
Parliament, and therein to new ratify those Charters at his full age. In this
Kings reign all Patents, if not Writs and Commissions too, usually issued
under the Great or Lesser Seal, of which there are diverse presidents extant in
Matthew Paris, and in the clause and Patent rolls of this King, to which I
shall refer you. And such notice was then taken of the dignity and necessity
of the Kings Seal to Charters and Writs, that Henry de Bracton, a famous
Lawyer in those days, writes expressly, That it was no less then Treason to
counterfeit the Kings Scale. Bracton. l. 2. De (...) lesae Majestatis, see
Stamfords Pleas f. 2.
Est and aliud genus criminis lesae Majestatis, quod inter graviora numeratur,
quia ultimum inducit supplicium and mortis occasionem; scil: crimen falsi, quod
in quadam sui specie, tangit coronam Domini Regis. Vt si quis accusatus fucrit
vel convictus FALSIFICATIONIS SIGILLI DOMINI REGIS, CONSIGNANDO INDE CHARTAS
VEL BREVIA (Writs then were sealed with the Kings Seal as well as Patents) and
apponendo signa adulterina; quo casu, si inveniatur inde culpabilis vel
seisitus, si Warrantum non habuerit, pro voluntate Regis judicium sustinebit.
How the Lord Chancellors were elected, and the Great Seal disposed of by
Parliament in this Kings reign, I have See the second part of the Sovereign
power of Parliaments p. 48. to 93.
elsewhere related, and shall touch again anon.

King Edward the first coming to the Crown, and proclaimed King during his
absence in the holy Land, his Matthew West. and Daniel. in 1. Ed. 1.
Lords and States without his privity, made both a new great Seal and
Chancellor to keep it; (c) Confirmatio (...). 25 E. 1. and Cooks Institutes
on it Walsingham hist. Ang. p. 35. to 48.
with which in the 25 year of his reign he confirmed the great Charter, and
Charter of the Forest, in Parliament. And in another Parliament, in the 28
year of his reign, it was enacted: That the great Charter of the liberties of
England* and Charter of the Forest shall be delivered to every Sheriff of
England UNDER THE KINGS GREAT SEAL, (d) Articuli super Chartas chapter 2. See
Cooks Institutes on these Acts.
to be read four several times in the year before the people, in the full
County. And for these two Charters to be firmly observed in every point and
Article (wherein no remedy was before at the Common law) there shall be CHOSEN
in every Shire Court, BY THE The people then had power to elect these their
Judges and Justices even by Act of Parliament.
COMMINALTY OF THE SAID SHIRE, three substantial Knights, or other lawful,
wise, and well disposed persons to be Justices; which shall be assigned BY THE
KINGS LETTERS PATENTS UNDER THE GREAT SEAL, to hear and determine (without
any other Writ but only their Commission) such plaints as shall be made
against all those as commit or offend against any point contained in the
foresaid Articles, in the Shires where they be assigned, as well within
Franchises as without, etc. Also, Chap. 2.
That all the Kings Takers, Purveyors, or Ratours, FROM HENCEFORTH shall have
their warrant with them UNDER THE KINGS GREAT OR PETY SEAL, declaring their
authority and the things whereof they have power to make price or purveyance,
the which Warrants they shall show to them whose goods they take, before that
they take any thing. And Chap. 6 There shall NO WRIT FROM HENCEFORTH that
touches the Common law, go forth UNDER ANY OF THE PETY SEALS.

These are the first Statute laws extant, prescribing, that the Kings
Charters, Patents. Commissions, Warrants, Writs, should issue forth under the
Great or Pety Seals though they did so usually before his reign, rather
through custom, which crept in by little and little by degrees, from Edward
the Confessors days, unto this very Parliament, as the premises evidence,
till it got the reputation of a received common Law and usage, and at last was
thus established, as simply necessary, by these present Acts; which se^led the
law in point of necessity of sealing all Writs, Charters, Patents, with the
Great Seal, and added such Majesty to the Seal it self, that Britton, an
eminent Judge and Lawyer flourishing in this Kings reign, (writing his book,
as in this Kings name) reso ves expressly, c. 3. f. 10. etc. 8. f. 16. that the Sea 3 Ed. 1. cap. 15.
counterfeiting of the KINGS SEAL IS HIGH TREASON; and that the Justices ought
to enquire concerning the falsifiers of THE SEAL: Not only whether any have
actually connterfeited it? but also, whether any have hanged ANY SEAL by an
Engyn to any Charters without license; or having stolen or taken away ANY
SEAL, or otherwise finding it, HAVE SEALED WRITS without other authority. And
Chap. 48. Exceptions aur Brefe. f. 122. He writes, It is a good exception to
abato a Writ s^ule Brete ne fuit unques enseale de nostre Seal; ou si le
Ordinance et le Seal de nostre Chauncery us s^it point contenu. And Andrew
Horn, another great Lawyer, living in, or near this time; in his My^rour of
Justices, cap. 3. sect. 6. p. 191. Among Exceptions to the power of the Judge,
enumerates this for one: IF THE COMMISSION BE NOT SEALED WITH THE KINGS GREAT
SEAL OF THE CHANCERY: Car al Privy Seal le Roy, ou al Sealed' l' Eschequer,
ou Autre Seal, forsque Solement al Seals que est assign dee conud' le
Cominalty del peopls, and nosmement en Jurisdiction, and Bres Originals, ne
estoit a null obeyer des letes and usages ^el Royalme, st non solement pur le
Roy. Du elle puira ee viciouse Pur le Seal counterfoit, ou anterment fausse:
This falsifying of the Kings Seal to Writs, cap. 1 sect. 6. De Fansonners,
page 28, 29. he makes a crime next to high Treason; which forging, he says,
may be indivers manners: As where a Writ is SEALED whereof the gross and
matter, or the form is not avowable by the King, nor by the Law, nor by the
rights and customs of the Realm. If a man seal after that the Chancellor, or
other Keeper knows that he has lost his Warrant, by death, or any other
manner. When a Writ or Letter passes the Seal against the Kings defense. When
men seal with counterfeit Seals, or seal by ill art, or Warrants not
avowable; and so it is falsehood in those who seal and have no authority. And
Chap. 4. Sect. 2. p. 233. Thus To wit, in 1 Edw. 1. or when the great Seal was
first introduced in Edward the Confessors days.
OUR ANCIENTS ORDAINED A SEAL, AND A CHANCELLOR FOR TO KEEP IT, and to give
remeliable WRITS to all persons without delay. Then describing what manner of
Writs must issue, he concludes thus, And now may Justices, Sheriffs, and their
Clarks withdraw, raze, amend, and impair them, without discerning or pain,
for the Writs that are made close, to the abuse of right. Wherefore THE SEAL
ONLY is the jurisdiction assignable to all Plaintiffs without difficulty. And
to do this, the Chancellor is chargeable by Oath in allegiance of the charge
of the King, that he shall Magna Chart. cap. 29.
neither deny, nor delay to render right or a Writ remediable to any one.

Thus have I given you a brief Historical and Legal Narration of the
Original, Growth, Progress, Use, and Necessity of the Great Seal of England,
and of the manner of making, subscribing, and sealing Charters, Patents, Writs,
with other Instruments in our Realm, from King Aethelberts first Charter, Anno
605. till the end of King Edward the first his reign, when Seals and See 9
Edw. 1. the correction of the twelfth Chap. of the Statute of Gloucester: 20
Edw. 1. De Non ponen^o in Assissts. 34 Ed. 1. cap. 6.
sealing grew more common, and our ordinary Law Books (which recite few or none
of the premises) begin to make mention of Seals and sealing; of whose
autiquity, kinds, and present use in point of Law, if any desire further
satisfaction, let them consult with Polydor Virgil, De inventoribus Rerum, lib.
8. cap. 2. Henrici Spelmani Glossarium title, Bulla, Rastals Exposition of the
Terms of the Law, title: Faits, Sir Edward Corkes Institutes on Magna Charta,
page 554, 555, 556. his 11 Report. f. 92. and Ashes Tables, title: Seals; it
being not my intention to trouble the Reader here with trivial common things
concerning Seals or sealing, but only with such Antiquities and rarities as
are not commonly known, nor mentioned in our Law Books.

The Kings and Parliaments several and joint Interests in, and power over the
new-making, keeping, ordering of the GREAT SEAL of ENGLAND.
HAving thus traced out the original, progress, use, and necessity of the
GREAT SEAL, through the obscure paths of abstruce Antiquity, with as much
Verity, Perspicuity, Brevity as possible; I shall in the next place summarily
examine, What several or joint interests the King, Kingdom and Parliament
have in; what power or jurisdiction over the Great Seal of England, both in
respect of the newmaking, keeping, or using thereof?

For the better assoyling of which grand Question, now in public agitation, I
shall premise these three Propositions and Distinctions, which will much
conduce to the clearing and resolution of this doubt.

Our ancientest S^atutes call it indefinitely The great Seal; as 2 Ed 3. Stat.
3. c. 8. with others.
THE GREAT SEAL OF ENGLAND; in our Acts, as in 14. and 15. Hen, 8. c. 4. 34
and 35 Hen, 8. c. 26. 1 Ed. 6. c. 44. 3 and 4 Ed. 6 c. 12. 2 and 3 Phil. and
Mar. cap. 20. 1 Eliz. cap. 1. 5 Eliz. cap. 1. 8 Eliz. cap. 1. 13 Eliz cap. 6,
7, 9. 18 Eliz. cap. 2. 23 Eliz. cap. 14. 39 Eliz. cap. 6 43 Eliz. cap. 4. 5
Eliz. cap. 18. An Act declaring the authority of the Lord Keeper OF THE GREAT
SEAL OF ENGLAND (frequently thus styled in this Act) and the Lord Chancellor
to be one: 1 Jac. c. 28. 1 Car. c. 2. 16 Car. c. 1. with sundry other Acts, to
omit Law-Bookes and Historier. And being thus become the great Seal of
England, (the Parliament the representative body of the whole Realm of
England) must necessarily have an interest in, and jurisdiction over it in all
public respects, even so far as to new make it when there is need, and to
dispose it for necessary affairs of Parliament and the Realm, when the old
Seal (the proper Seal of the Parliament) is purposely subtracted, yea,
denied them for necessary public uses.

Secondly, that after the great Seal became common and necessary to most
public The Kings Great Seal, As first, in cases of general or particular
Charters of pardon. Secondly, of Indenization or Enfranchisment. Thirdly, of
erecting new Corporations, or confirming old. Fourthly, of dispensing with some
kind of Laws, Penalties, and Forfeitures. Fifthly, of conferring some kind
of less public Offices, and Annuities for services performed or to be
executed. Sixthly, of granting new Liberties or Franchises of grace to
Corporations or private Subjects. Seventhly, of creating or conferring new
honors on deserving men. Eighthly, of Licenses for mort-maines,
impropriations, alienations, consecrations of new Churches or Chapels, etc.
Ninthly, of public collections for persons or towns distressed through fire,
shipwreck, or other casualties. Tenthly, of private negotiations with foreign
Princes, States, or Subjects, and some kind of Protections, Commissions of
grace rather then right or justice. In all these, and such like particulars of
mere grace, or less public concernment, the Kingdom and Parliament neither
properly have, nor pretend to have any public right or jurisdiction over the
great or petty Seals, but leave them absolutely free to the King as if they
were his own private seals alone, so far forth as his Charters, Pardons,
Grants, Licenses, Dispensations, Protections, Commissions of this kind are
consonant to the Laws and Statutes of the Realm, and not repugnant to them.

Thirdly, the Parliament and whole Kingdom, as to all public affairs of state
and England in trust to the King, as to the supreme Magistrate and Justitiar:
over which they never claim a constituting or disposing jurisdiction, whiles
it is rightly managed according to Law. But if this Seal be either wilfully
abused or subtracted contrary to Law, or trust, to the prejudice of the
Kingdom, the obstruction of public Justice, or violation of the privileges
of Parliament, and not redressed after several complaints and Petitions of the
Houses to the King for reformation of this grievance; Whether the whole
Kingdom, or Parliament in such a case as this, who have authority to remedy
the grievances, the abuses, or wilful absence of the great Seal, have not
likewise a lawful sovereign power to make a new great Seal, and appoint a
Keeper of it, for supplying the absence, regulating the abuses of the old,
removing obstructions of public Justice, filling up the Commons House by
issuing Writs to elect Knights and Burgesses in the places of such as are dead
or justly expelled (now denied;) sealing of Writs of Error in Parliament and
other such public Parliamentary affairs necessarily requiring the presence of
the great Seal (the proper Seal of the high Court of Parliament, which has
no other Seal but it) and Lord Chancellor (the ordinary Speaker of the Lords
House, by virtue of his very Office in all ages,) and so his and the great
Seals presence absolutely necessary, unless dispensed with by the House upon
inevitable occasions of absence; is the sole question now in debate? And under
correction, in this case, and for these public ends alone, I humbly conceive,
the Parliament both lawfully may cause a new Great Seal of England to be
engraven, constitute a Chan^ellour to keep it, and seal Writs for new
Elections, Writs of Error in Parliament, with other necessary Writs and
Commissions with it, for the public administration, expedition of Justice, the
better transaction of all Parliamentary State affairs now obstructed, to which
the great Seal is requisite.

This I shall endeavor to make good by Presidents, by reasons of Law and
State Policy; beginning with the new making, and then proceeding to the keeping
and ordering of the Seal, during the present differences and necessity.

Matthew. West. An. 1272. page 352. Horns Myr. p. 233. Here. p. 15. Daniels Hist.
page 185. See Walsing. Hist. Aug. p. 1, 2. Speeds Hist. p. 646. Walsing. Ypod.
Neustr. p. 67.
King Henry the third departing this life, whiles his son Prince Edward, was
militating in the Holy Land against Christ's enemies; hereupon the Nobles and
States assembled at the new Temple in London, the day after the Kings funeral,
proclaimed Prince Edward his son King, ordained him successor of his Fathers
honors, though they knew not whether he were living; ET FACTO SIGILLO NOVO,
writes Matthew Westminster. And CAUSING A NEW SEAL TO BE MADE (so Daniel) they
appointed faithful Ministers and KEEPERS for the faithful custody both of the
Seal, Kings Treasure and Kingdoms peace. Lo here a new great Seal made by the
Lords and States in the Kings absence, without his privity, for the necessary
execution of justice, either in an assembly out of Parliament (as some suppose
this meeting was;) or at least wise in a Parliament, assembled, held, yea
ordaining a new great Seal, new Officers of King and State, without the Kings
presence or privity, and then it is our present case in effect: For if this
Assembly of the States, even out of, or in Parliament, in this case of
necessity, during the Kings inevitable absence, might lawfully make both a new
great Seal, Chancellor, Treasurer, Judges, Justices of peace, and other
Officers of King and State (as they did, and conceived they might justly do,
none then or since disavowing or censuring this Act of theirs, for ought I
read, but all approving, applauding it as legal,) then certainly this
Parliament assembled and ratified by the King himself, being the greatest
sovereign power, and having far more Jurisdiction then any Council or
Assembly of Lords out of Parliament, may much more justly and loyally cause a
new great Seal to be engraven, and appoint a Keeper of it, during the wilful
absence both of the King, Keeper, and old great Seal from Parliament (contrary
to all Law and former Presidents) for the better expedition of Justice, and
transaction of the affairs of the Parliament, being the Parliaments proper
Seal, and anciently appointed by it, as Horns Page 15.
preceding words import.

The second president is, that of King Henry the 6, his reign, who being but
an Hall. Store-Speed, Holinshed, Grafton,
infant of 9. months age when the Crown descended to him: there 1 H. 6. p. Rot
Parl, 1. H 6. Number. 1. etc The second Part of the Sovereign power of Parliaments
and Kingdoms (where I have transcribed these Records at la^ge) p. 65 to 70.
issued forth a Commission in this Babes name, to Humfry Duke of Gloucester,
his Uncle, then Protector, to summon and hold a Parliament in his name; which
being assembled, Number. 14. The Bishop of Durham Lord Chaeuncellor to Henry the
5th. resigned up the old Seal of England to King Henry the 6. in the presence
of divars credible witnesses, and the Bishop of London, Chancellor of the
Duchy of Normandy. resigned up also the seal of that Dukedom to him, After
which Number. 15. It was enacted and provided by the Lord Protector Lords and
Commons in that Parliament; That for as much as the inheritance of the
Kingdoms and Crowns of France, England, and Ireland were now lawfully
descended to the King which Title was not expressed in the Kings SEALS,
whereby great peril might accrue to the King, if the said Inscriptions were not
reformed according to his Title of inheritance; that therefore IN ALL THE KINGS
SEALS, as well in ENGLAND, as in IRELAND, GVYEN, and WALES, this New Style
should be engraven: Henricus Dei Gratia, Rex Franciae, et Augliae, et Dominus
Hibemiae, according to the effect of his Inheritances; blotting out whatsoever
was formerly in them superfluous, or contrary to the said style. And that
COMMAND should be given to All the Keepers of the said Seals of the King, to
REFORM them WITHOUT DELAY, according to the FORM AND EFFECT OF THE NEW SEAL
aforesaid, Number. 16. The Lords and Commons in this Parliament constitute and
ordain a new LORD CHANCELOVR OF ENGLAND, Lord Treasurer, and KEEPER OF THE
PRIVY SEAL; granting them saverall Letters Patents of these Offices in
Parliament in the Kings name. And Number: 17. The Liberties, Annuities, and
Offices granted by King Henry the 5. and his Ancestors to Soldiers in foreigne
parts, were confirmed in Parliament, and their Parents ordered TO BE SEALED
WITH THE KINGS NEW SEALS, with our paying any Fee.

Here we have not only the Great, but Privy Seal, yea all the Kings Seals in
England, Ireland, France, Wales, Resigned, Altered, Ordered to be new made, and
the Chancellours and Keepers of them expressly Created by the Lords and Commons
in Parliament, without any Personal actual consent of the King, (then an
Infant) for the necessary administration of Justice, and great Affairs of the
Realm; No man ever questioning, much less censuring this Act of theirs, as
illegal, or treasonable, within the Statute of 25. E. 3. of counterfeiting the
Kings Seal; but all approoving it as just and necessary. Therefore, doubtless
the present Parliament may do the like in this unparalled case both of the
Kings, L. Keepers, the great and privy Seals wilful absence and substraction
from the Parliament, of purpose to obstruct all proceedings in Parliament, and
the course of common Justice.

These two famous Presidents are not singular, but backed with the Authority of
Judge Horn, forecited, p. 15. and many other of like nature, and reason, even
in printed Statutes.

The Statute of Acton Burnel made in the 13. year of King Edward the first,
for the more speedy recovery of the Merchants Debts, gives the Mayors of
London, York, and Bristall authority to take Recognisances of Debts before
them to be made by the Clerk appointed for that purpose: whereunto the SEAL
of the Debtor shall be put, with THE KINGS SEAL, THAT SHALL BE PROVIDED FOR
THAT PVRPOSE; the which SEAL SHALL REMAIN IN THE KEEPING OF THE MAYOR and
CLERK A FORESAID. And THE KINGS SEAL shall be put unto the sale and delivery
of the goods devisable for a perpetual witness. We have here a New Seal of
the Kings, with special keepers of it, appointed for Recognisances, and the
uses thereof limited, by a special Act of Parliament: confirmed in another
Parliament, touching Statute Merchants, made the same year; 13. E. 1. which
further enacts, That ANOTHER SEAL SHALL BE PROVIDED, that shall serve for
Faires, And that the same shall be sent unto every Fair, under THE KINGS
SEAL, by a Clerk sworn, or by the Keeper of the Fair. And of the Commonalty
of London two Merchants shall be chosen, than shall swear, and THE SEAL shall
be opened before them, and one piece shall be delivered unto the foresaid
Merchants, and the other shall remain with the Clerk: 13. H. 8. c. 6. 2. and
3. E. 6. c. 31. second those Acts. 27. E. 3. Parl. 2. c. 1. 9. enact. That the
Mayor of the Staples shall have power to take Recognizances of debts, which a
man will make before him, in the presence of the Constables of the Staple, or
one of them. And that in every of the said Staples BE A SEAL ORDAINED,
remaining in the CVSTODY OF THE SAID MAYOR of the Staple, UNDER THE SEALS of
the same Constables: which is again enacted. 15. R. 2. chapter 9. and. 8. H. 6. c.
18.

The Acts of 12. R. 2. c. 3. and. 7. ordain, That A SEAL OF THE KINGS shall
be made, assigned, and delivered to THE KEEPING of some good man of the
Hundred, Rape, or Wapentake, City, or Borough, after the discretion of the
Justices of Peace, to be kept to this intent, to make Letters Patents to
Servants, Laborers, Vagabonds, Pilgrims, who shall have occasion to depart
out of the Hundred, Rape, or Wapentake where they lived, to serve or dwell else
where, etc. And that ABOUT THE same SEAL shall be written, the name of the
County, and OVERTHWART THE SAID SEAL, the name of the Hundred, Rape, or
Wapentake, City, or Borough. And 14. R, 2. 11. enacts That SEALS BE MADE FOR
THE SERVANTS, and DELIVERED UNTO THE KEEPING OF SOME GOOD MEN OF THE COUNTY,
after the purport of the said Statutes: Here the Kings new Seal, form of it,
and keepers too, are ordered by Parliament.

The Statutes of 27. E. 3. c. 4. 3. R. 2. c. 2. 15. R. 2. c. 10. 17. R. 2. c, 2
prescribe A NEW SEAL to the Kings Aulnegeors and Collectons of Subsidies,
wherewith all clothes shall be sealed before they be sold, under pain of
forfeiture, 1. H. 4. c. 19. and 9. H. 4. c. 2. It was enacted; That certain
Clothes should not be SEALED by them for three years, 4. H. 4 c. 6. enacts,
That one sufficient man should be assigned by our Sovereign Lord the King, to
SEAL the Clothes that shall be wrought and ful^ed in London, and the Suburbs
of the same, WITH A SEAL OF LEAD, as of old time was used in the said (...) and
Suburbs, 11. H. 4. c. 6. ordaines, That A NEW SEAL, HAVING A SIGN and MARK
DIFFERING FROM THE OLD SEAL of the Office of the Kings Aulnegeor, SHALL BE
MADE and DELIVERED TO THE AVLNEGEORS. And that after the same so NEWLY MADE and
delivered, Proclamation shall be made in the West, and in other places through
the Realm, that no Clothes shall be sold (of such sorts mentioned in the Act)
before the Aulnegeor has searched and measured them, and set THE NEW SEAL OF
HIS OFFICE TO THEM, which is confirmed by 13. H. 4. c. 4. This Seal by 11. H.
6. c. 9. is styled, THE KINGS SEAL thereunto ordained, and prescribed to be
put to Clothes, So 18. H. 6. c. 16. a line, is prescribed to be sealed for
the measuring of cloth, 8. E. 4. c. 1. enacts, That broad Clothes shall be
SEALED by the Kings Aulneger, or sealed with the SEALS of the Subsidy and
Aulneger therefore ordained, AND IN WAX. And 4. E. 4. c. 1 That for Kersies and
short Clothes A SEAL OF LEAD SHALL BE ORDAINED, and by the Treasurer of
England for the time being, provided, and hanged at the lower part of the edge
of the said cloth: And that the Treasurer of England for the time being, shall
have power and authority to make SUCH, and so many KEEPERS OF THE SAID SEALS
as he shall think necessary; so that no stranger born be made any of the said
Keepers, 17 E. 4. c. 1. 1. R. 3. c. 8. and other Statutes enact the like, 25.
H. 8. c. 8. 27. H. 8. c. 3. and 4. E. 6. c. 2. 5. E. 6. and 6. 2. and. 3. Phil.
and Mary. 12. 4. and 5. Phil. and Mary, c. 5. 8. Eliz. c. 12. 23. Eliz. c. 9.
with other Acts, prescribe diverse sorts of SEALS of LEAD, to seal clothes
withal, containing the length, or length and breadth of the said Clothes;
some of the seals for ill clothes, to have FAULTY engraven in them; others,
that are dyed and madered, the letter M. and the like; some to be kept and
affixed by the Aulnegers, others by the Searchers appointed in every County,
Town, or Borough; Such variety of Seals, and Keepers of them have these
several Parliaments prescribed only for cloth, which yet they style THE
KINGS SEALS; though neither made, kept, disposed of, nor the form prescribed
by him, but the Parliament. See the like for Leather, 5. Eliz. c. 8.

The Statute of 11. H. 6. c. 6. makes mention, of SEALS assigned to the
Customers Office, and punishes the abuses of them, set to blanke scrowls, with
forfeiture of goods, as in case of Felony.

12. Ed. 4. c. 3. The statute of Tunnage and Poundage for guarding the Seas;
enacts, cloth of Gold, Silver, Baudkin, Velvet, Damask, Satyn, Chamlets,
Silks, etc. brought from beyond the Sea shall be sealed in one end thereof
before it be sold, with THE SEAL or mark ESPECIALLY TO BE ORDAINED FOR THE
SAME, whereof the Collectors of that Subsidy shall have the one part, and the
Comptroller the other part, severally in their custody: which is confirmed by
4. H. 8. c. 6. and 21. H. 8. c. 21.

14. and 15. H. 8. c. 3. appointes a several Warden of the Worsted-makers in
the Towns of Yarmouth, and Lynne, to be annually chosen, and serve to surveigh
and search the Worsteds there made; and that the Warden of Yarmouth so elect
and sworn; shall ordain and appoint A SEAL with the letter Y: and the Warden
of Lynne A SEAL with the letter L, to be engraven in the same SEAL: and to seal
in Lead with the SAME SEALS so to be appointed and engraven, and none other,
all Worsteds and Flannins within these Towns and their Suburbs: 14. and 15. H.
8. c. 5. ordaines a special common Seal for the Corporation and College of
Physicians in London.

27. H. 8. c. 27. Which establishes the Court of Augmentations, and prescribes
the several Officers in it, with the Oaths they shall take; enacts likewise,
That this Court shall have ONE GREAT SEAL, and ONE PRIVY SEAL, to be engraven
and made after such form, fashion, and manner as shall be appointed by the
Kings Highness; that the Chancellor of this Court shall have THE KEEPING OF
THESE SEALS, which shall REMAIN and BE ORDERED as in that act is at large
declared. The statute of 33. H. 8. c. 39. which erects the Court of
Surveighers, prescribes a particular SEAL for that Court, the person by whom
it shall be kept, and how it shall be used, together with all the Officers of
that Court, their Oaths and Fees. So 34. H. 8. c. 26. enacts; that there shall
be several Original and judicial SEALS MADE for the several Counties and
Circuits of Wales; prescribes the several parties that shall keep these
seals, what Writts and Processes they shall seal with them, and what fees
they shall take for them; as you may read at large in the Act. In like manner
the statutes of 32. H. 8. c. 45. and 33. H. 8. c. 22. enact the Court of Wards
and Liveries, to be a Court of Record; and that they shall have ONE SEAL to be
engravin and made after such form, fashion, and manner as shall be appointed by
the Kings Highness, which shall remain and be ordered as is afterward declared
in those Acts; prescibing who shall keep it, how it shall be used, and what
Fees shall be paid for it: And 32. H. 8. c. 45. ordaines a particular SEAL for
the Court of first Fruits and Tenthes, which it erects, with the Officers that
shall keep it, their Oaths, and Fees for sealing with it. True it is, these
Statutes leave the form and fashion of these Seals last mentioned to the
Kings appointment (which they might have likewise prescribed, as in the former
Acts) being is matter of no great moment; but the Keepers, use, ordering, and
fees of all these Seals, are punctually limited by the Parliament, and not
left arbitrary to the King.

And to trouble you with no more Acts of this nature, the statute of 1. E. 6.
c. 2 enacts, That all Archbishops, and spiritual persons, under the pain of
a Praemunire, even in the Kings Ecclesiastical Courts, shall make out all their
Processes in the Kings name, with the Kings style, as it is in Writs original
and judicial at the Common Law, and shall from the first day of I^ly, have IN
THEIR SEALS OF OFFICE, THE KINGS HIGHNESS ARMS DECENTLY SET, with certain
Carects under the Annes, for the knowledge of the Diocese, and shall use NO
OTHER SEAL OF JURISDICTION, but wherein his Majesty's Arms be engraven, Here
the express form as well as use of these seals is prescribed by the
Parliament, and not left Arbitrary to the King or Bishops.

If then our Parliaments in all these cases have thus prescribed New Seals of
the Kings for his Courts and Officers, together with the form, custody, use,
and fees of them in these several Acts; why they may not likewise enjoy the
making of a New broad Seal to supply the absence of the old, in the cases
forementioned, I cannot yet discover, it being the Parliaments Seal, and GREAT
SEAL OF-ENGLAND, and so commonly styled in sundry printed statutes, as well as
the Kings, in respect of the public justice and affairs of the Realm of
England, and Parliament which represents it; If the Major, Bayliffes, Bishop,
Dean, President of a College, Mr. of a Company, Abbot or Prior, or chief
Justice shall detain or withdraw the common Seals of their several
Corporations or Courts; the Common Counsel, Aldermen, Chapter, Fellows,
Livery-men and Courts, may doubtless lawfully make new Seals without, yea
against their consents, and use them too for their common affairs, without
injury or forgery: And why the Parliament then may not in such cases, make a
new great Seal of England, by like reason without the Kings consent, when the
old (their only Seal) is purposely withdrawn, and kept from them to hinder
their proceedings, I cannot yet discern.

If any here object; Object. 1.
First, that it is High Treason both by the Common and Statute Law, to
counterfeit or make the Kings great Seal without his privity or consent, as is
evident by Glanuil, Bracton, Britton, here forecited. 3 E. 1. c. 15. 25. E. 3.
Stat. 5. C. 2. of Treasons. 5. H. 4. C. 15. 27. H. 8. C. 2. 1. E. 6. C. 12. 1.
Mar. Parl. 1. C. 6. Stamford, L. 1. C. 1. Brook, Treason. 3. 13. 17. Cromptons
Jurisdiction of Courts. 69. and generally all our Law-bookes. Therefore for the
Parliament, or any else by their command, to make and use a new broad Seal.

I answer: Answ.
1 That this is true only of private men who make a broad Seal by their own
particular Authority, in deceit of the King and Kingdom, not of the
Parliament, or any employed to make or use it by their Authority; The
Parliament the Supreamest Power of all others, being incapable of Treason, and
out of the words and intention of the seand all Acts concerning Treason, as I
have Sovereign power of Parliaments part. 1 p. 107. to 112. part. 2. p. 25. 26.
elsewhere proved at large; to which I shall refer you. Secondly, the King
has his great Seal of England, not in his own particular, but the Kingdoms
and peoples right alone, as their public Minister and servant, for their use
and benefit, the Kingdom, and Parliament which represents it, being the Ibid.
part. 2. p. 3. to 20. Appendix p. 163. to 271.
Proprietors of this Seal, which upon the Kings decease is ever surrendered to
the successor King, as belonging to the Kingdom, as the seals of other
Corporations go to the Mayors, Bishops, Deanes, Abbots, Presidents, Succesors,
not their Heirs, Executors, or Administrators, as other men's Seals do. The
Kingdom and Parliament therefore being the true Proprietors of it, as it is the
public Seal of the Kingdom, not the King, may lawfully give order for the
new making of it, even without the King, in case of necessity, when it is
unduly withdrawn, withheld, Thirdly, the Forging of the great Seal is high
Treason only, as it is the Ibid. part. 3. p. 7. 8. part. 2. p. 25. 26.
Kingdoms common Seal, not the Kings private and particular Seal; and an
offense against the Kingdom, and King himself only in his politic public
capacity, as head of the Kingdom, not in his private: whence counterseiting of
the Kings sign manual, privy signet, or privy Seals were no high Treason at
Common Law, (being no public, but rather private Seals of the Kings) till
they were made so by 27. H. 8. c. 2. since repealed by. 1. E. 6. c. 12. 1.
Mariae Sest. 1. c. 1. Rastall Treason, 13. and so no Treason at this day: even
as the compassing of the Kings death is no Treason, considered only as he is a
private man, but as a Ibid. part. 3. p. 7. 8.
public person, invested with his politic Royal capacity. If then the
Parliament (the representative body of the Kingdom, against which all treason
in counterfeiting the Great Seal are principally committed, and the true
proprietory of this seal) shall order a New great Seal to be made, or used,
for the service of it self and the Kingdom in this case of necessity, it
cannot possibly be high Treason in them or their Agents, for then they should
be Traitors to and against themselves, and suffer for an Offense against
themselves and the Realm, done by their own Votes, and assents in Parliament.
Fourthly, the counterfeiting of the Great Seal, mentioned in those Law books
and Statutes, is that only which is secret, fraudulent, traitorly in deceit of
the King, Kingdom, Subjects (f) like to counterfeiting of false many, (ever
joined with it) by private persons, as our Law Books, and all cases of this
nature adjudged High Treason, attest; whence it is styled, Crimen falsi:
falsificatio sigilli, etc. by (f) Bracton and others, and such like offenders,
Fanscors des sealx: and the Inditements must be, that they did it PRODITORIE:
neither of which can be intended of, (g) Grimstons History of the Netherlands
P. 556. to 667 See the Appendix 184. 185
or applied to the new making of a great Seal by authority of Parliament, for
the necessary administration of Justice and benefit of the Realm, when the
great Seal is subtracted, as now. Fifthly, the Lords and Parliaments making a
new great Seal in the absence of Edward the 1: and infancy of Henry the 6
without their privity or consent, to supply the defects of justice, which else
would have ensued, was never reputed Treason, but a lawful Act: Therefore the
present making of a new Seal, to remedy the wilful absence of the old,
without the Kings consent, (who withholds it and the Keeper from the Parliament
Magn. Charta c. 29,
against all Law and former Presidents) can be no Treason but a lawful Act.
And since the Parliaments of England in the absence, infancy and dotage of
their Kings, have usually of right made Lord Protectors, and Chancelours, who
had power over the great Seal (as I have Sovereign power of Parliament part 2
p. 4^^ to 87.
elsewhere largely proved) they may be the selfsame reason, make a new great
Seal likewise, to supply the wilful absence of the old. Finally, all the
objected Statutes and Law books adjudged it high Treason, to counterfeit the
Kings money as well as his Seal, and join them both together in one clause But
the Parliament has a long time coined money at the Tower, and made new stamps
to do it, when the old were broken or worn out, without any charge or tax of
Treason: therefore they by like reason may make a New great Seal without
Treason.

If any secondly object: That to make a new great Seal (of Engand) is all one
in effect, as to make a new King of England.

I answer 1. that to deface the Kings old Seals and Signets, by public Acts
of State, as the Hollanders did the King of Spaines, when they cast off his
Government for his Tyranny (which they, Alvarus P^lagius De planctu Ecclesiae.
L. 1. Art. 56 62. F. 56. Si non ex praesumptione privato, sed authoritate
publica et communi Rex in Tyrannum conversus, vel alius Tyrannus destruetur,
vel ejus potestas ipsa refrenetut; non est putanda talis multitudo infideliter
agere Tyrannum destituens te si in perpetu u^ance a sibi sc subjecerat quia hoc
ipse meruit in multitudinis regimine se non sidelater gerens, ut exigit Regis
officium, quod ei pactum a subditis non servetur, etc. See the Appendix P. 137.
188
and Popish Authors held they might lawfully do,) and to appoint new Seals in
every Province only, with the names and Titles of the private Governors and
Provincial Consuls of every Province, without the name and Title of the King
of Spain, whose authority they abjured with a solemn Oath; would in truth be
to set up a new King, and government; But to make a New Seal, only like, or
not much different from the old, to supply its absence, with the Kings own
Picture, Arms, style and Title, is no ways to impeach, but confirm his
Royal Authority, being done in affirmance, only, not dis-ffirmance of it, as
Lawyers speak. Thus their making of a new Seal in Edward the 1. and Henry the
6. his Reign forementioned, was the highest confirmation of their Authorities,
and the greatest expression of the subjects Loyaltyes that might be; And why
the Parliaments making of a new great Seal to supply the absence and defects
of the old, should be deemed a setting up of a new King against his Majesty,
more than the Parliaments frequent constituting of Lord Protectors, in former
times to supply the infancy absence, dotage, or imperfections of our Kings (of
which I have cited you many Presidents elsewhere) which all esteemed to be a
ratification, not nullification or alteration of their Royal Authority, (or
the coining new money now, to supply the want of old,) transcends my
understanding to apprehend: since those who may lawfully make a Viceroy to
represent the Person, or execute the Sovereignty of a King in his name and
right, may with as good reason and authority to, make a new great Seal, to
supply the defects and affected absence of the old, the Seal being less than
the person and Sovereignty of the King, and the proper seal of the Parliament.

2. This will further appear by considering in the second place, what power
and Authority our Parliaments have claimed and exercised as of right, over the
Custody and disposing of the Great Seal of England. First, they have usually
chosen and nominated the Lord Chancellor, and Keepers both of the great and
privy Seal of England, together with the Lord Protectors, Lord Treasurers,
privy Counselors, and other great Officers of the Realm, as I have See Francis
Thin in Catalogue of Lord Chauncellors of England: and The 2 Part of the
Sovereign power of Parliaments. P. 41. to 73.
elsewhere plentifully manifested, and committed the Great Seal to the
Chancellours custody only. Secondly, They have ordered, Matthew Paris, Hut.
Ang. p. 415. Matthew. West, Anno 1222. p. 1^3. Daniel p. 157. Godwins Catalogue
of Bishops p. 386. Francis Thin Catalogue of Chauncellors Holinshed Vol. ^. p.
1275 The 2 part of the Sovereign power of Parliaments and Kingdoms p. 48. 49.
that the Chancellor should not be put from the custody of the Seal, nor the
Seal taken from him without the common Counsel and consent of the whole
Realm in Parliament; upon which ground, Ralph Nevill Bishop of Chichester,
Anno. 1236 when King Henry the third upon a displeasure, earnestly demanded the
Great Seal of him, being then Lord Chancellor, absolutely refused to deliver
it to the King; saying, That he could by no means do it, seeing he had
received it BY THE COMMON COUNSEL OF THE REALM, and THEREFORE he neither could,
nor would resign it WITHOUT THE COMMON COUNCIL OF THE KINGDOM, to wit the
Parliament: Yea the Matthew Paris Hist; Ang: p. 619, to 623. Daniel 161: 162:
Sovereign power of Parliaments part 2. p: 49. 56.
Parliament, An. 28. of Henry the third, to prevent the abuses of the Great
Seal which the King then began to take from the Chancellor into his own
custody, abusing it to ill ends) Voted; That if the King by any intervement
occasion should take away the Great Seal from the Chancellor (who should
always be chosen by the Parliament, or its assent,) what soever should be
sealed in the interim should be reputed VOID and FRVSTRATE; till restitution of
it were made to the Chancellor: After this, the Walsingham Hist. Ang. p. 143.
300. 3 (...) 312 See the Sovereign power of Parliaments part 2 p. 57. 58.
Parliament in Richard the second his Reign, disposed both of the Chancellours
place and the great Seal; and Henry Scroope made Lord Chancellor by it,
refused at first to deliver up the Seal to the King who demanded it of him;
and when he extorted it from him, the whole Kingdom were much displeased, and
murmured against it.

Thirdly, The Chancellor of England, See the 2 part of the power of
Parliaments p. 70 71
has resigned up his Office and Great Seal of England, in and to the
Parliament, who have disposed of it to a new Chancellor in Parliament, as you
may read in the Parliament Roles of 4. H. 6. Nu. 14. 15. without the King. And
the Speed Holinshed Grafton in 1. R. 5
Archbishop of York L. Chancellor of England, when K. Edward the 4 th. dyed,
was much blamed, for delivering up the Great Seal of England to the Queen
Mother: whereupon the Seal was taken from him; and delivered by the L.
Protector to Dr. Russel Bishop of Lincoln. In regard of which disposing power,
both See 5 Eliz. c. 18. 13. Eliz. c. 7. 14. Eliz. c. 6. The Act for Trienniall
Parliaments.
of the Chancellor and Great Seal by Parliament; both of them are usually
styled in statutes, the Act for Triennial Parliaments, histories, (p) The
Chancellur and Great Seal of England. How the Parliament has ordered and
appointed the custody of the Kings other Seals from time to time, I have
showed in the forecited Acts, and will not repeat; but conclude, That if our
Parliaments have enjoyed such a power and Jurisdiction over the great Seal, the
Chancellours and Keepers of it heretofore, when there was just cause; they may
exercise the selfsame power over them now, especially when both of them have
bin purposely withdrawn, and detained from the Parliament so long, to retard,
annihilate its proceedings contrary to Law, and the Act for its continuance.

Thirdly, The Parliament has exercised a power over the great Seal, and other
Seals of the King; as the Duchy Seal, Exchequer Seal, Seal of the Court of
Words and Liveries, of the Court of Augmentations, of first fruits and Tenths,
Staples, Surveyors, Seals of cloth and other Merchandise, safe conducts,
Customs, Ecclesiastical Courts, and the like; in prescribing what Patents
Charters, Commissions, Protections, Warrants, Grants, Writs, Pardons should be
passed under them or any of them, and what not; And where the great and priety
Seal shall be used to promote right, and where not used to stay right or
justice in any case whatsoever. This is evident by the several Statutes of 13.
E. 1. of Acton Burnell, and statute Merchants, 25. E. 1. c. 1. 28. E. 1 c. 1.
2. 6. 20 18. E. 2. Statute E. 1 Prses. 2. E. 3. c. 8. 4. E. 3. c. 4. 5. E. 3.
c. 2. 14. E. 3. c. 14. 15. Stat. 3. c. 1. and Stat. 4. 15. E. 3 c. 3. 18. E. 3.
Stat. 2. c. 1. 36. E. 3. c. 2. 42. E. 3. c. 9. 1. R. 2. c. 6. 5. R 3. c. 9. 10.
14. 6. R. 2. c. 4. 18. R. 2. c 1. 12 R. 2. c. 8. 13 R. 2. c. 2. 13 R. c. 2.
Stat. 2 c. 16. R. 2, c. 6. 2. H. 5. c. 4. 5. H, 5 c. 7. 10. H. 6. c. 7. 15. H.
6. c. 3. 20. H. 6. c 1. 31. 13. Eliz c. 7. 14. Eliz. c. 6. H. 6. c. 2. 1. E. 4.
c. 1. 3. H. 7. c, 1. 4, H. 7. c. 14. 14. and 15. H 8. c 4. 21. H. 8. c. 16. 17.
20. 23. H. 8. c. 7. 25. H. 8. c. 19. 21. 22. 27. H. 8. c. 2. 5, 11. 15. 16. 27.
34. and 35. H. 8. c. 16. 21. 26. 1. E. 6. c. 2. 5. 8. 12. 14. 3, and 4. E. 6.
c. 8 39. Eliz. c. 5. 43. Eliz. c. 4. 11. 12. 5. and 6. E. 6. c. 1. 1. Eliz. c.
1. 5. Eliz. c. 1. 4. 2, and 3. Phii. and Mar. c. 20. Above all by 16. Car. c. 1.
the Act for the preventing inconveniences happening by the long intermission
of Parliaments, made this Parliament when fullest by his Majesty's and both
Houses unanimous assents; with infinite other Statute. And as the Parliament
has thus ordered and limited the use of the Kings own Seals, so likewise the
Seals of Sheriffs, Coroners, Corporations, Mayors of Staples, Justices,
Judges, Searchers, and other Officers; together with the Seals of Jurors,
Electors of Knights Burgesses of Parliament and sundry other persons, as to
public uses. Witness the Statute of Rutland. 10. H. 1. 13. E. 1. the Statute
of Acton Burnell, and of Statute Merchants. 13. E. 1. c. 13. 31. 39. The
Statute of Quo Warranto 18. E. 1. 1. E. 3. c. 8. 2. E. 3. Stat. 3. c. 5. 5. E.
3. c. 2. 10. E. 3. c. 3. 14. E. 3. c. 16. 25. E. 3. Parl. 5. c. 1. 5. 21. 27.
E. 3. Parl. 2. c. 4. Parl. 3. c. 1. 9. 42. E. 3. c. 3. 43. E. 3. c. 1. 12. R.
2. c. 7. 8. 13. R. 2. c. 11. 18. 1. H. 4. c. 19. 2. H. 4. c. 17. 4. H. 4. c. 6.
7. H. 4. c. 13. 9. H. 4. c. 2. 11. H. 4. c. 6. 1. H. 5. c. 9. Parl. 2. c. 5. 3.
H. 5. c. 3. Stat. 2. 6. H. 6. c. 4. 8. H. 6. c. 18. 9. H. 6. c. 10. 11. H. 6.
c. 9. 16. 15. H. 6. c. 6. 18. H. 6. c. 19. 33. H. 6. c. 7. 1. E. 4. c. 1. 4. E.
4. c. 1. 8. E. 4. c. 1. 1. R. 3. c. 8. 14. and 15. H. 8. c. 3. 23. H. 8. c. 7.
25. H. 8 c. 19. 26. H. 8. c. 14. 1 E. 6. c. 14. with other Acts. Therefore the
Parliament may by the same, or a like reason, exercise a Jurisdiction in making
a new great Seal, and directing the ule of it for the common good, to supply
the absence of the old.

Fourthly, the Parliament has caused this new Seal to be made, principally to
complete the House of Commons by sealing Writs for new Elections of Knights and
Burgesses, in places of the old who are dead, or justly expelled: and what
power the Kingdom and Parliament have anciently exercised in this, or the like
cases, I shall give you a brief account. First, the Lords and Commons have
sundry times in former ages, not only enforced our Kings to summon Parliaments
against their wills, when necessary, but likewise sent out Writs to summon a
Parliament, and elect Knights and Burgesses, under the great Seal of England
in our Kings names, without their privity and assent, as I have The sovereign
power of Parliaments part 1. f. 8. to 16.
elsewhere manifested by sundry Presidents: And by the very Act for the 16
Carol. c. 1.
Trieniall Parliament, (assented unto by His Majesty, and all the Lords and
Commons who are, or were with him at Oxford; this very Session of Parliament)
it is expressly provided, That in case the King refuse or neglect to summon a
Parliament every three years, next after the last day of the last Parliament
preceding it, by Writs under THE GREAT SEAL OF ENGLAND (so frequently styled
in this Act;) that then every Lord Chancellor of England, the Lord Keeper of
the great Seal of England, and every Commissioner and Commissioners for the
keeping of the Great Seal of England for the time being, within six days
after the tenth day of September in every such third year, shall in due form
of Law, without any further Warrant or direction from His Majesty, His Heirs
or Successors, SEAL, issue forth, and send abroad several Writs of Summons to
the respective Peers of the Realm, and Writs of Election to the Sheriffs of
the several Counties, Cities and Boroughs of England and Wales, etc. for the
electing of Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses to serve in Parliament:
prescribing, that every Lord Chancellor, Keeper, and Commissioner aforesaid,
shall take an Oath, truly and faithfully to issue forth and send abroad all
Writs of Summons to Parliament for both Houses, at such time and in such manner
as is expressed in this Act; under pain of being disabled ipso facto from
their places, in case of refusal or neglect. And then the Lords are ordered to
meet at Westminster without Writ or Summons, and any twelve of them are
enabled, to grant out Writs of Summons under their hands and Seals, to all
Sheriffs of Counties, Cities, and Boroughs, which shall be of the same force to
all intents as the Writs of Summons to Parliament under the great Seal of
England. And in case the Lords neglect or refuse to issue such Writs, then the
Sheriffs, Majors, and Bailieffs of Counties, Cities, and Boroughs, without any
Writ at all: and in their default or neglect, the Freeholders and Citizens of
each County, City, and Borough, are enabled to elect Knights, Citizens, and
Burgesses, without any Writ at all, and the Election and Parliament to be as
effectual, as if summoned under the great Seal of England. If then a
Parliament may be thus summoned by the Lord Keeper himself, by a Writ under
the great Seal, without the Kings privity, or contrary to his Command; or by a
Writ under the Lords Seals only; or without any Writ at all, in some cases, and
that by express provision of an Act made this Parliament: why this Parliament
may not, by as good or like reason (now it is assembled and perpetuated by
another Act) make a new great Seal to seal Writs of Election, or grant out
their Writs without the great Seal, by an Ordinance of Parliament only, to
complete the Houses, now the great Seal has been so long absent, and such
Writs refused to be issued under it, though often desired (without any danger of
Treason, or derogation to the Kings Prerogatives I cannot yet dicerne. It being
far less, for a sitting Parliament in this case, to make a new great Seal,
or issue out Writs of Election without the Kings privity (now in Arms against
it) to recrute its own Members, then for the Chancellor, Keeper, Lords, or
Commons themselves out of Parliament thus, either with, or without Writ, to
summon and hold a Parliament, without, yea against the Kings assent, his
Proclamations or Inhibitions to the contrary. And those fundamental principles
of Law, State Policy, with that sovereign power of the Parliament and
Kingdom, above our Kings, which induced both Houses thus to make, and his
Majesty readily to assent to this late Act, for the common benefit and safety
of the Realm, in case of His Own or the Lord Keepers wilful neglect, or
refusal to do their duties; will doubtless enable the Houses now sitting, to
make a new great Seal, or issue out Writs of Election, Error, and the like,
either under it or without it, during the voluntary absence of the King, Lord
Keeper, and great Seal from the Parliament (contrary to Law, Custom, Duty,
Oath) of purpose to complete the Houses, and expedite public Justice,
obstructed by their absence. And the rather may the Parliament do it in case
of Writs of Election, because such Writs, with the Elections made by virtue of
them, have usually been ordered, formed, issued our, determined, judged only
by the Parliament; and Writs for new Elections (by reason of death or removal)
have constantly issued out, of course, by Order or Warrant from the Speaker or
Commons House only, without special Warrant from the King himself without
refusal or denial, as is evident by the Statutes of 5 Rich. 2. cap. 4. 7 Hen.
4. cap. 15. 11 Hen. 4. cap. 1. 8 Hen. 5. cap. 1. 6 Hen. 6. cap. 4. 8 Hen. 6.
cap. 7. 10 Hen. 6. cap. 2. 23 Hen. 6. cap. 11. 32 Hen. 6. cap. 15. 8 Hen. 8.
cap. 16. 35 Hen. 8. cap. 11. Br. Parliament 7. Dyer f. 60. Cromptons
Jurisdiction of Courts f. 3, 4, 16. Neither can they be denied, o^ the Houses
kept incomplete against their wills by his refusal, without apparent breach of
the privilege of Parliament, yea, of Magna Charta it self, as the Lords
resolved, An. 1256. in Henry the third his reign, and the whole Parliament
since 1 Hen. 4. Rot. Parl. number. 21, 22. as I have See the second part of
Sovereign power of Parliaments. p. 7. 42.
elsewhere proved.

From all which Authorities I humbly conceive, the Parliament may lawfully in
the case fore-stated, both make a new broad Seal and Keeper of it, to fill up
the Houses, and redress the obstructions of Justice, of Parliamentary
proceedings, occasioned by the great Seals absence.

To these authorities I shall annex the ensuing Reasons both of Law and State:

First, the Parliament the supreme power and Judicature in England, having the
chief interest and propriety in the GREAT SEAL OF ENGLAND, in respect of ^^s
public use, may lawfully new make and use that Seal which is it own in
respect of property and use; and the Kings only as their public Minister.

Secondly, that the Parliament being the chief State-physician of the Realm,
may, and ought by Law to redress all public grievances: therefore the
grievances and obstructions of Justice, occasioned by the old great Seal and
Lord Keepers absence or abuse, by making new.

Thirdly, the Parliament may and ought to supply all defects, defaults of State
Officers, Laws Affairs, prejudicial to the Realm: Hence it always has
supplied the Minority, Detage, or Absence of our Kings by constituting a
Viceroy of their own election to exercise all royal Authority; the absence of
the Lord Keeper or Speaker of the lower House, when sick by substituting
others to supply their places; the defects of the Common Law by new
Statute-Laws; and providing new Laws Courts, Seal, against new mischiefs, not
remediable by old Acts. This appears most lively by the Act for Trieniall
Parliaments forecited, wherein the wilfulness and negligence of the King, is
ordered to be supplied by the Lord Keeper; the Lord Keepers, by the Lords; the
Lords, by the Sheriffs of Counties, Majors, and Bailiffs; and theirs by the
Freeholders, Citizens, and Burgesses. The Council of Basil, and others The
sovereign power of Parliaments part 1. edit. 2. p. 13.
forecited are to like purpose: and the Statute of 25. Hen. 8. c. 21. which Law
abolishing the Popes authority, enables the Archbishop of Canterbury, to grant
all Ecclesiastical Licenses and Dispensations here, which the Pope alone
formerly granted at Rome; and then provides, that in case the Archibishop
should wilfully and obstinately refuse to grant such Licenses and Dispensations
to those who demanded them without a just and reasonable cause; that then an
Injunction should issue out of the Chancery under the great Seal to him,
commanding him to grant them; and if he then wilfully refused to do it, that
then the King upon every such default and wilfulness, should grant a
Commission under the great Seal to any two Prelates or spiritual persons that
would grant them, by an instrument in writing under THEIR SEALS. The
Parliament therefore now summoned and sitting, by like reason lawfully may, and
is bound in duty to supply the present wilful absence of the Lord Keeper and
great Seal, (treacherously carried from it beyond expectation, contrary to
promise, and so long detained thence) by constituting New ones in their places.
It was one principal Article preferred by Halls Chron. 2^ Hen. 5. c. 19.
Grasion p. 1191
the Parliament against Cardinal Wolsey, That when he was sent Ambassador
into Flanders, to the Emperor, he carried the Great Seal with him without the
Kings consent; for which he was displaced and fined. Much more then may the
Parliament displace the Lord Keeper, for carrying away the great Seal (the
only Seal of this high Court) in a surreptitious manner from them, contrary
to his duty, without and against their consents, and make a new great Seal and
Keeper in lieu of the old.

Fourthly, the Parliament is bound to take care, That public Justice
(according to 9 Hen. 3. c. 29. 2 Edw. 3. c. 8.
Magna Charta (and other Acts) be not delayed nor denied to any Subjects that
desire or need it, being the supreamest Court of Justice, to punish all
offenses, neglects, supply all defects in the highest Officers of Justice:
Therefore to provide a new broad Seal and Keeper of it, since public Justice
is denied to most, obstructed, delayed to all, by the unlegall wilful absence
of the old great Seal and Lord Keeper from the Parliament, and Courts at
Westminster.

Fifthly, The Houses of Parliament, in point of honor, trust, duty, more
especially since their late Protestations and Covenants, are bound universally
to preserve their own just Privileges, Rights, and Liberties; whereof these
are indubitable ones. That the Lord Chancellor and Keeper of the Great Seal of
England, together with the Seal it self remaining in his custody, ought
always constantly to attend the Parliament and be present with it. First, See
Modus Tenendi Parliament; Cambden, Holinsh. Vowel, and Sir Thomas Smith, lib.
2. cap. 1. in their Treatises of the Parliament of England. with all the
Journals and Parliament rolls.
because the Lord Chancellor or Keeper of the Great Seal is always a
necessary member of the Vppor-House, and the Speaker of it, by virtue of his
very Office. Secondly, because not only constant custom, but 14 E. 3. c. 5.
15. E. 3. c. 4, 5. Stat. 1. 31. H 8. c. 10.
sundry Acts of Parliament, require the Chancellours, and Keepers special
presence in Parliament, in direct terms. Thirdly, because the Chancellor, and
Great Seal are, and ought to be necessarily present in Parliament, being the
only proper Seal of this highest Court, for diverse public ends. 1. To issue
out Writs Brook Parliament 7. Dyer. 60. a.
of summons and new elections, for summoning the Members of both Houses, as often
as there is need, to keep the Houses complete. 2. To seal Writs of 1 H. 7. f.
19, 20. Ashes Tables Error 65.
Error, brought in Parliament. 3. To Seal Dyer f. 59. 60, 5 H. 4. c. 6. Br.
Parl. 11. 1. Jac. c. 23.
Writs of Privilege for members of Parliament, or their meniall servants. when
there is cause. 4. To issue and Seal such Stat of Winchester, 13 E. 1. c. 24.
28. Register, f. 271.
new Writs as shall be devised in Parliament, upon new occasions. 5. To issue
out and seal such 14 E. 3. c. 5. and all Acts for Subsidies.
Commissions as shall be necessary upon public employments, Trials criminal
or judicial, Taxes or Subsidies, appointed in and by Parliament. 6. To seal
such See the Sovereign power of Parliaments, pars. 2. p. 25. 61, 66, 67, 68,
70, 71. and here p. 2. 3.
Patents and Charters of Honors, Lands, Privileges, Offices, and the like,
which shall be thought meet to be granted in Parliament, as most old Charters
were. 7. To seal Parliament pardons and all Proclamations, exemplifications of
private Acts of Parliament, and such Acts as are to be proclaimed, to such who
require them, 2 H. 5. c. 4. 1 R. 2. c. 6. 1 H. 7. f. 23. 25. Coronc. 49. 33 H.
6. 17. Parl. 1. 21 E. 4. 56. Dyer. 135. Cook l. 8. f. 7. 8. 28. 43 E. 3. c. 5.
2 H. 5. c. 46. 1 H. 6. c. 2. 26 E. 3. c. 16. Ashes Tables Proclamation. 39.

In all these respects, with others, the Lord Chancellours, Keepers, and great
Seals presence being simply necessary in Parliament, (where by Law and custom
they ever have been, and ought to be, till this late president,) The Houses
lawfully may, and in point both of honor and justice, ought, for the
maintenance of their own undoubted privileges, to constitute a new great
Seal, and Keeper of it, if the old be not returned to them speedily, having
been wilfully, above twelve Month space, withdrawn, detained from them, on
purpose to dissolve the Parliament, retard or frustrate all its proceedings,
and stop the common course of justice, contrary to all Law and Justice.

In few words, this Parliament, without any exception of King, Courtiers,
Malignants, or any other I have yet heard of; have made a new master of the
Mint, at least restored an old one to his place, who was dispossessed; coined
money, and made new stamps for that purpose, where the old were broken or worn
out, without the Kings consent, or any tax of treason, or disloyalty:
Therefore, by the selfsame Law and reason, they may lawfully make a new Great
Seal, and Lord Keeper of it for the ends aforesaid, to supply the absence,
defects, and prevent the gross abuses of the old, without any Treason or
disloyalty.

The VOTES of the House of COMMONS, together with their reasons for the making
of a new Great Seal of England, presented by them to the LORDS at a
Conference, July 4. and 5. Anno 1643.
Resolved upon the Question. (June 14. and 26.)
1. THat the Great Seal of England ought to attend the Parliament. 2. That the
absence of it has been a cause of great mischief to the Commonwealth. 3.
That a Remedy ought to be provided for these mischiefs. 4. That the proper
remedy is, by making a New Great Seal.
The mischiefs occasioned by conveying away the Great Seal from the
Parliament (represented to the Lords at a Conference July 5. 1643.) are these:
1. IT was secretly and unlawfully carried away by the Lord Keeper, contrary to
the duty of his place; who ought himself to have attended the Parliament, and
not to have departed without leave; nor should have been suffered to convey
away the Great Seal, if his intentions had been discovered.

2. It has been since taken away from him, and put into the hands of other
dangerous and ill affected persons; so as the Lord Keeper being sent unto by
the Parliament for the sealing of some Writs, returned answer, That he could
not Seal the same, because he had not the Seal in his keeping.

3. Those who have had the mannaging thereof have employed it to the hurt and
destruction of the Kingdom sundry ways. By making new Sheriffs in an
unusual and unlawful manner, to be as so many Generals or Commanders of
Forces raised against the Parliament. By issuing out illegal Commissions of
Array, with other unlawful Commissions, for the same purpose. By sending forth
Proclamations against both Houses of Parliament, and several Members thereof,
proclaiming them Traitors, against the Privileges of Parliament and Laws of
the Land. By sealing Commissions of Oyer and Terminer to proceed against them,
and other of His Majesty's good Subjects adhearing to the Parliament, as
Traitors. By sending Commissions into Ireland to treat a peace with the Rebels
there, contrary to an Act of Parliament made this Session. Besides, diverse
other Dangerous and illegal acts have been passed under the Great Seal, since
it was secretly conveyed away from the Parliament, whereby great calamities and
mischiefs have ensued, to the Kindomes prejudice.

The mischiefs proceeding through want of the Great Seal.
1. THe Terms have been adjourned; the course of justice obstructed.

2. No original Writs can be sued forth without going to Oxford; which none
who holds with the Parliament can do, without peril of his life or liberty.

3. Proclamations in Parliament cannot issue out, for bringing in Delinquents
impeached of High Treason or other Crimes, under pain of forfeiting their
estates, according to the ancient course.

4. No Writs of Error can be brought in Parliament, to reverse erroneous
judgments; nor Writs or Election sued out for choosing new Members, upon death
or removal of any; whereby the number of the Members is much lessened, and the
Houses in time like to be dissolved, if speedy supply be not had, contrary to
the very Act for Continuance of this Parliament.

5. Every other Court of Justice has a peculiar Seal; and the Parliament, the
supremest Court of England, has no other Seal but the Great Seal of England;
which being kept away from it, has now no Seal at all; and therefore a new
Seal ought to be made.

6. This Seal is Clavis Regni; and therefore ought to be resident with the
Parliament, (which is the representive body of the whole Kingdom) whiles it
continues sitting; the King, as well as the Kingdom, being always legally
present in it during its Session.

FINIS.
Errata: and Omissions.
IN the Humble Remonstrance, p. 6. l. 2. 5, R. 2. c. 2, 3 10 E. 4. c. 3.
omitted p. 21. l. 26. Sancitum, p. 25. l. 37. Acres, r. Hydes. p. 27. l. 21.
And. p. 29. l. 9. Mariners. p. 31. l. 7. nec. In the Opening, etc. p. 5. l. 4.
hoc, r. hanc.


