Prynn against Prinn.

OR, The Answer of William Prynne, Utter Barrester of Lincolnes Inn: TO A
Pamphlet lately published by William Prynne Esquire, a Member of the House of
COMMONS.

ENTITLED A Brief Memento to the present Vn-Parliamentary Juncto, Touching
their present Intentions and proceedings to Depose and Execute Charles Steuart,
their lawful King.

January 25. 1648.

Imprimatur THEODORE JENNINGS.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Ibbitson. 1649.

Prynne against Prynne, OR, The Answer of William Prynne, to a Pamphlet
entitled, A Brief Memento to the present un-Parliamentary JUNCTO.
I William Prinne Utter-Barrester have lately perused a Pamphlet, entitled, A
brief Memento to the present Unparliamentary Juncto, Touching their present
proceedings to depose and execute Charles Stuart their lawful King, and set
forth by William Prin Esquire a Member of the House of Commons, And I have
weighed the Reasons whereupon the said William Prinne the Member would
endeavor to dissuade the rest of the Members now sitting in Parliament from
acting or proceeding against the King. And I William Prinne the Barrester, do
call to mind That I did heretofore publish a large Treatise called the
Sovereign power of Parliaments and Kingdoms. Which I have divided into four
parts, And in this Treatise I William Prinne the Barrester have pleaded the
Parliament and Kingdoms Cause against the King and his party, And I have
asserted this truth as the sum of all; That the Parliament is the highest
Sovereign power of all others, and I have in my Epistle to the Reader before
my first part, second Edition affirmed this.

That I have proved the particulars contained in that Treatise with Arguments
and Reasons, seconded and fortified with such Domestic and Foreign Presidents
and Authorities of all sorts, as well divine as human, polliticall,
historical, and legal, as may (effectually convince the obstinate wills,
abundantly satisfy the most seduced prejudicated judgment, and resolve the
most scrupulous conscience, and eternally silence the ignorant and most
malicious tongues and pens) of all Royalists and Antiparliamentary
Malignants, who are not wilfully wedded to their long espoused errors, or
more inamored with fordid Court flattery for private self ends, then fairest
though (hated ungainefull verity) which aims at nothing but public good.

And further, I William Prinne the Barrester, have in my said Epistle protested
before the great Judge of Heaven and Earth; that I have therein wittingly
maintained nothing at all, but what my judgment and conscience unbyassed by
any sinister end, or private respect, as aiming at naught else but the glory of
God, the settled weal and tranquillity of our distracted bleeding, dying
Church and State, the only motives engaging me in this service) inform me to
be a well grounded ancient pregnant (though lately overclouded, undiscovered,
neglected, much oppugned truth: And that albeit most of the particulars
contained and debated in that Treatise, have for many years been decried (that
I may not say stigmatized) for seditious, dangerous, Antimonarchicall
Paradoxes, if not worse by the general Torrent of Court Parasites, Lawyers,
and Theologues: That yet I doubt not but when seriously examined by the true
Principles of Religion, nature, Law, policy, the various presidents and
authorities of former Ages, and thoroughly digested without prejudice or
partiallity. They will appear, yea shine forth to be most necessary,
profitable, loyal, State securing, peace procuring, verities, yea as the very
nerves and sinews to unite, the pillars to support, the bullwarke to protect
both Church and State against all Invasions of Heresy or Tyranny, and to keep
all the potent Members of them within their several bounds.

And the truth of this my Position.

That the Kingdom in Parliament assembled, is above the King.

I William Prinne the Barrester have special reasons in my said first part.
Page 6.

Because the King was first created and instituted by the kingdom and people;
and not the kingdom and people by the King.

Because the King was ordained only for the kingdom and peoples service and
welfare, not the kingdom and people for him.

Because as the kingdom and people first created, So they still limit and
confine the Kings Jurisdiction by Law; to which they are and ought to be
subject.

Because the kingdom and people obliege the King by a solemn Oath to rule
according to Law, and to be obedient unto Law.

Because the kingdom and people have power to depose the King, in case he
contemn the Law, and violently rob and spoil his Subjects.

Page 100. Because the whole kingdom and people are the original supreme
sovereign power, by whose common consent and authority all lawful Kings,
kingdoms, and Royalties were at first created and instituted, and from whom
they derived all their Regal Jurisdiction.

Likewise I William Prinne the Barrester, have showed, page 7, 8. That
Parliaments have challenged and executed a just and legal power (as they
deemed it) to depose their King for not governing according to Law, for
following and protecting evil Counselors, for oppressing their Subjects, and
for making war against them: And I have instanced in thirteen Kings of this
Realm, who have been so dealt withal, whereof five since the Conquest,

And Page 29. I William Prin the Barrester have inserted inter alia, the
Articles whereupon King Richard 2. was deposed, with these words for addition,
page 30. (which how parallel they are to the Court practices and doctrines of
our times, let wise men determine) and page 80. I have made further
Observations and Justifications upon the President of deposing Richard the
second, and I have inserted the whole proceedings touching that deposition.

And page 78 I have set forth the Passages upon the deposition of R. c. 2. and
likewise made further observations and justifications thereupon. Likewise I
William Prin the Barrester have showed page 9. That the Crown has often been
translated by Parliaments from the right Heirs, and settled on others who had no
lawful right or title to it. And I have instanced in twelve particulars of
this kind, whereof seven since the Conquest: And particularly that after the
death of William Rufus, The Clergy, Nobles, and Commons refused to admit of
any King but with capitulations and caveats to their own liking; and upon which
terms they elected King Henry the first though he were not next heir to the
Crown. All which particulars with much more of the like nature, I the said
William Prin the Barrester have set forth in my said first part of the
Sovereign power of Parliaments, and though I have mentioned them to have been
acted and done by Popish Parliaments, Popish Barrons, Prelates, and Commons,
yet I have not instanced, That any of them were done upon any Popish
principles; but for better clearing of the general reason of them all, I
William Prin the Barrester have added p. 20. of the said first part; That these
Jurisdictions were thus practiced by the people to preserve themselves and the
Kingdom from slaverie and desolation; and that the Actors therein have been
styled, Anglie Reipublice zealatores.

And as touching William Prin the Member his first Argument, That their
proceeding against the King is an offense within the Statute 25 Edw. 3.
concerning Treason.

I William Prin the Barrester do remember, That in the beginning of this late
war, the Cavaliers used the same Argument against the Parliaments raising
Arms; and I then made this Answer to it, page 107 of my said first Part; That
the Parliament and whole Kingdom being the highest power, or any Member of the
Parliament cannot by any public Acts or Votes of theirs, consented to in
Parliament become Traitors, or guilty of High Treason against the King, either
by the Common Law or the Statute of 25. Edw. 3. cap. 2. of Treasons which
running in the fingular number ( If a man etc.) That is any private man or men
by their own private Authority (shall leavy War) against the King it ought to
be judged high Treason, and extends not to the whole Kingdom or Court of
Parliament representing it (of which no Treason was ever yet presumed) the
rather because the Parliament by this very Act is made the judge of all
Treasons that are doubtful, and was never yet included within the words or
meaning of any Law concerning Treason, and therefore cannot be guilty of it.
Hence the depositions of Archigallo and Emerian two, ancient British Kings, by
the unanimous assent of the Lords and Commons for their Rapines, Oppression,
and Tyranny and of Edward the second, Richard the second, Henry the sixth,
Edward the fourth by Acts of Parliament, the creating of Richard the third
King, with the frequent translocations of the Crown from the right Heir at
Common Law to others, whohad no good Title by the whole Kingdom or Parliament
(no less then high Treason in private persons) was never yet reputed, much
less questioned for or adjudged high Treason in the whole kingdom or
Parliament, or any chief active Members in those Parliaments which by the law
are unrepealable of. Treason, for any their judicial actions and Resolutions
in such cases, being only tercious, and erroneous, reversible by other Acts in
Parliament, not traiterous and rebellious, as appears by all the fore quoted
Statutes, and by the statute 13 Eliz. cha. 1. which makes it high Treason for
any person to affirm that the authority of the Parliament of England is not
able to make Laws and Statutes of sufficient force, to alter, limit, and bind
the Crown of this Realm, and the descent limitations and inheritance and
Government thereof, or any man's Title or Right thereto.

And for direct Authorities in this very point Rob. Trisilian and Belknap (then
chief Justices Holt, Fulthorpe and Burgh, Judges) Lockton Kings Sergeant, and
Blake the Kings Council, in the Parliament of 11. Richard 2. were some
condemned, and executed others, and banished the Realm as guilty of high
Treason; Only for affirming under their hands and seals, That the Duke of
Gloucester, the Earls of Arundell and Warwick were (and that other Lords and
Commons might be) guilty of high Treason for procuring a Commission and other
proceedings Voted in Parliament, and might be punished for it as Traitors;
which opinion of theirs was also at another Parliament prima Henry 4. chap, 2,
3, 4. held a traitorous opinion, and the Judgment given against those Judges
for this Traitorous opinion, tending to the utter subvession of Parliaments,
was resolved and enacted to be just.

This Judge Belknap foresaw, and therefore was unwilling to put his Seal to
this opinion; saying, there wanted but a hurdle, a horse, and a halter, to
carry him where he might suffer the death he deserved: for quoth he, if I had
not done this I should have died for it, and because I have done it, I deserve
death, for betraying the Lords. Which makes me wonder at a passage in Speed who
Records it, now frequent in Malignants mouths, That the very shop where the
Barrons, original Treasons were forged was the Parliament house, wherein from
time to time they forced on the King ( Edward the second) presumptuous and
treasonous ordinations, not only to reform the Kings house, and council, and
to place, and displace all great Officers, But even claimed a joint interest in
the Regiment of the kingdom, together with the King, which William Juge (a
Judge of the Common Law) with other like sticklers, Traitorously persuaded them
was according to Law, which gross slander of the Parliament House, would have
been capital at least in former ages, and may now endanger the necks of those
who speak or maintain the same of this present Parliament.

And I William Prinne the Barrester have added these words, page 108. Never did
any of our Kings charge any Parliament with high Treason hitherto, much less
indict or wage war against their Parliaments as Traitors, though they have
questioned and deposed Kings for offenses against (and for being enemies or
Traitors to) the kingdom. Let none then dare to affirm, that the Houses of
Parliament, are or can be Traitors now, for providing for their own and the
Kingdoms safety. Ad to this, for a further answer to the said argument of
Treason, produced by William Prynne the Member in his present Pamphlet, that in
his Rehearsal of the said Statute, he has foulely miscarried and falsified
the words of it.

For, whereas the Statute mentions nothing at all touching deposing the King,
he urges the Statute thus: That it is no less then high Treason for any man by
overt act to compass or imagine the deposition or death of the King: Adding
the word deposition, which is no where found in the whole Statute.

And as touching William Prinne the Member his argument, that this proceeding
against the King is contrary to the Oath of Allegiance.

I William Prinne the Barrester did heretofore meet with the like objection,
touching the Oath of Supremacy, in relation to the late war.

Viz. That the King is the only supreme Governor of this Realm, and that
Bracton, Fleta, and our Law Books resolve, that the King has no Peer in the
kingdom, for so he should lose his Empire, since Peers (or Equals) have no
command over one another, much more then ought he not to have a superior, or
mightier, for so he should be inferior to those who are subject to him, and
Interiors cannot be equal to Superiors.

The King ought not to be under man, but under God and the Law: If then justice
be demanded of him by way of Petition (because no Writ runs against him)
(though anciently some Writts did) if he do not justice, this punishment may
be sufficient to him, that he may expect God will revenge it, Nemo quidem de
factis suis presumat disputare, multe for^^^^ contra factum sum venire, etc.
Therefore the King is above the Parliament and whole Kingdom, not they above
him.

And this objection, I William Prinne the Barrester answered thus in my said
first part, page 104. That the meaning of all these Books is, that the King is
above every one of his Subjects, and has no Peer nor Superior, if they be
taken particularly and distributely as single men, as the words parem and
superiorem, in the singular number, and the like (explain the meaning of the
Books to be) but it we take them collectively in Parliament, as they are one
Body, and represent the whole kingdom, then these very Authors resolve (in
their fore-quoted words) that they are above the King, and may, yea, ought to
restrain and question his actions, his male admistrations, if there be just
cause.

Secondly, Bracton explaines himself, how he is highest, and without a Peer,
to wit, in distributing justice: That is, he is the highest Justiciar in the
kingdom, but as low as any in receiving justice.

And further, that the Oath of Supremacy (that the King is the only supreme
Governor) relates only, or at least principally, to the Popes and Foreign
Princes authorities formerly usurped in this Realm, as the Title, words, and
scope of the Statute of 1. Eliz. cap 1. and the very next words in the Oath it
self undeniable manifest; therefore it referres not at all to Parliaments, or
their jurisdiction, Power, Superiority, Pre-eminence, or Authority: nor are
they so much as once thought of by the prescribers of this Oath, which had its
creat on and authority from the Parliament. And I William Prinne the Barrester
having thus answered the Oath of Supremacy, This semblable answer may be added
touching the Oath of Allegiance, that the Statute 3. Jacobi 4. which creates
this Oath, is entitled an Act for better discovering and repressing Popish
Recusants, and that the Oath it self relates only to the Popes unlawful
exercise of authority and jurisdiction within this Kingdom, and that it so
appears to be, by the said William Prynne the Member his own Rehearsal of it.
In this objection, save that in this Rehearsal, he has dealt as before, and
has made bold in this particular also to satisfy the words of the Oath, which
in truth runs thus.

That the Pope neither of himself, nor by any Authority of the Church of Rome,
or by any other means, with any other, has power or Authority to depose the
King.

But the said William Pryn the Member, in his said Rehearsal makes the Oath to
run thus.

That the Pope neither of himself, nor by any authority of the Church of Rome,
or by any other means, nor any other, has power, etc. and so instead of the
words with any other, implying the Authority of the Pope joined with others, he
makes it a distinct clause nor any other; and so upon this forgery, including
the Parliament within those words nor any other, he would make this proceeding
against the King to be contrary to the Oath of Allegiance.

And touching William Pryn the Member his Arguments, That there is no President
in the old Testament of any one King judicially impeached, arraigned, deposed,
or put to death by the Congregation.

As also that no Protestant Kingdom or State, did over yet depose their King.

I William Pryn the Barrester do refer the Reader to my Appendix annexed to my
fourth part of the Sovereign power of Parliaments, manifesting p. 1. by sundry
Histories and Authors, That in the ancient Roman Kingdom and Empire, in the
Greek and German Empires derived out of it, in the old Grecian, Indian, Italy,
Hungary, Bohemia, Denmark, Poland, Sweden, Scotland, yea of Judah, Israel, and
others mentioned in the Scripture, the Supreme Sovereignty and power resided
not in the Emperors and Kings themselves, but in their Kingdoms, Senates,
Parliaments, People, who had not only a power to restrain, but to censure and
remove their Emperors and Princes for their Tyranny and mis-government: In
which Appendix also is an Answer to the principal Arguments which are produced
to prove that Kings are above their kingdoms and Parliaments, and not
questionable or accountable to them, nor censurable by them for any Exorbitant
actions; and p. 2. are these words.

I shall infallibly prove, That in the Roman State and Empire at the first, in
the Greek Empire since; in the German Empire heretofore and now; in the ancient
kingdom of Greece, Egypt, India, and elsewhere; in the Kingdoms of France,
Spain, Hungary, Bohemia, Denmark, Sweden, Poland, Scotland, and most other
kingdoms in the world, yea in the kingdoms of Judah and Israel, and others
mentioned in Scripture, the highest Sovereign Authority both to elect,
continue, limit, correct, depose their Emperors and Kings, to bound their Royal
power and prerogatives to enact Laws, create new Offices, and forms of
government, resided always in these whole Kingdoms, Senates, Dyets,
Parliaments, People, and not in the Emperors, Kings, or Princes persons.

Lastly, as page 110. in the deposition, of Mary Queen of Scots mother to King
James is set forth: Together with the approbation of the fact by the State of
England at that time: Touching the name or Title which William Prin the Member
is pleased to give to the Parliament now sitting, calling it A Present
Unparliamentary Juncto.

I William Prin the Barrester do call to mind, That when the King, and diverse
of the Lords, and of the Commons in the beginning of our late Troubles had
disserted the Parliament, I did then in my said first part of the Sovereign
power of Parliaments, page 43, 44. maintain and prove, That the remaining part
was a Parliament, notwithstanding the personal absence of the rest; and that
as long as those absent are Members of the Parliament, they shall still be
judged legally present whether they will or no.

FINIS.
Jan. 25. 1648.

Imprimatur Theodore Jennings.


