The Treachery and Disloyalty of Papists to their Sovereigns, both in Doctrine
and Practice.
WHen I seriously consider the memorable Preamble of 3 Jac. chapter 4. That it is
found by daily experience, that many of his Majesty's Subjects who adhere in
their hearts to the Popish Religion, by the infection drawn from thence, and
by the wicked and divellish counsel of Jesuits, Seminaries, and other persons
dangerous to the Church and State, are so far perverted in the point of their
loyalties and due obedience unto the Kings Majesty, and the Crown of England,
as they are ready to entertain and execute any Treasonable Conspiracies and
Practices, as evidently appears by that more then barbarous and horrible
attempt to have blown up with Gunpowder, the King, Queen, Prince, ^ords and
Commons in the House of Parliament assembled, tending to the utter subversion
of the whole State, lately ^dertaken by the instigation of Jesuits and
Seminaries, and in advancement of their Religion by their Scholars ^ught and
instructed by them for that purpose. With the Statutes of 35. Eliz. chapter 2. and
3 Jacobi chapter 5. which ^^act: That all Popish Recusants shall be restrained to
some certain places of abode, and confined to their private ^uses in the
Country, and not at any time after to pass or remove above five miles from
thence, under pain of forfeiting ^^ their Lands, Goods, and Chattels, during
life. That none of them shall remain within ten miles of the City of ^ondon,
nor come into the Court or house where his Majesty, or Heir apparent to the
Crown of England shall be; nor ^ave in their own houses, or in the hands or
possession of any other at their disposition, any Armor, Gunpowder, or
Mu^tion, of what kind soever, And all this, for the better discovering and
avoiding of such Traiterous, and most dan^rous Conspiracies, Treaso^^*
Practices, and attempts, as are daily devised, and practiced against our most
gracious ^overaignes Person, and ^^^ Commonweal, by rebellious and traiterous
Papists. And when I read in Dated January 10. 1606. and Februa. 22. 1603.
two of King ^^mes his Proclamations: That those adhering to the profession of
the Church of Rome, are blindly led (together ^ith the superstition of their
Religion) both unto some points of Doctrine which Note this.
cannot consist with the loyalty of Sub^cts toward their Prince, and often times
unto direct actions of conspiracies, and conjurations against the State wherein
^^ey live, as has most notoriously appeared by the late most horrible and
almost incredible conjuration (grounded up^ points of Doctrine in that Church
held and maintained, and contrived, and practiced with the privity and warrant
of ^any of the principal Priests of that profession) to blow up our children
and all the three Estates in Parliament assem^ed. And when we consider the
course and claim of the Sea of Rome, we have no reason to imagine, that
Princes of ^r Religion and profession can expect any assurance long to
continue, unless it might be assented by the meditation of other ^rinces
Christian, that some good course might be taken (by a general Council free,
and lawfully called) to pluck up ^ose roots of dangers and jealousies which
arise for cause of Religion, as well between Princes and Princes, as be^eene
them and their Subjects; and to make it manifest, that no State or Potentate,
either does or can challenge pow^ to dispose of earthly Kingdoms, or
Monarchies, or to dispense with Subjects obedience to their natural
Sovereigns; Which was never yet attempted, much less effected.) And in the
Book of Thankesgiving appointed for the ^^h of November, (set forth by King
James, and the Parliaments special direction) this observable Prayer ^omewhat
altered by the now Who confesses and Justifies it, in his Speech in
Star Chamber, June 14. 1637.
Arch-prelate of Canterbury in the latter Editions to pleasure his Friends the
^pists) To that end strengthen the hand of our gracious King, the Nobles and
Magistrates of the Land, with Judge^ent and Justice, to cut off these workers
of iniquity (the Papists) whose Religion is rebellion, whose faith is facti^,
whose practice is murdering of Souls and Bodies, and to root them out of he
confines of this Kingdom. I cannot but star damazed, yea utterly confounded in
my self, at the Impudency and Treachery ofthose pernicious ^ounsellors, who in
affront of all these Laws and premises, have issued out sundry See the
Parliaments late Declaration.
Commissions, under ^s Majesty's hand and seal, to diverse notorious Papists,
not only to furnish themselves with all sorts of ^mes and Munition; but
likewise to meet together armed, and raise Forces in the Field, to fight
against the ^rliament, Kingdom and Protestant Religion, (even contrary to
diverse his Majesty's late Printed Declara^ns, and Protestations, to all his
loving Subjects) advanced them to places of great trust and command in his
^ajesties several Armies; and procured them free access unto, if not places
of trust about his sacred person, ^ if they were his loyallest Subjects, his
surest guard (as many now boldly style them,) and more to be confi^ed in, then
his best and greatest Council, the Parliament; whom they most execrably
revile, as Rebels, ^^d Traitors, the more colourably to raise an Army of
Papists to cut their throats, and the throat of our Pro^stant Religion first
(as they have already done in Ireland,) and then last of all his Majesty's, in
case he refuse to become the Popes sworn vassal or alter his Religion, which
he has ost protested (and we believe) he will never do.

But I desire these ill Counselors of the worst Edition, to inform his
Majesty, or any rational creature, how it is either probable or possible, that
an Army of Papists should secure his Majesty's person, Crown, Dignity, or
protect the Protestant Religion, the Parliament, or its privileges; to all
which they have showed themselves most prosessed enemies. We all know that
Popish Recusants See King James his Apology against Bellarmin, Laurentius
Byerlincke, Opus Chronogr. p. 319. Deus et Rex: The Lord William Howards Sons
late Book in Defense of Papists taking the Oath of Allegiance.
obstinately refuse to take the Oath of Supremacy, or Allegiance (some of them
that took it, having been excommunicated by their Priests for a reward) The^
sum of which Oath is, 3 Jac. c. 4.
That they do truly and sincerely acknowledge and profess; That the Pope
has ^^ authority to depose the King, or to dispose of any his Kingdoms, or to
authorize any foraine Prince to invade his Countries, or to discharge any his
Subjects from their Allegiance to his Majesty, or to license any of them to
bear arms, o^ raise tumults against him, or to offer any violence or hurt to
his royal Person, Government, Subjects. That notwithstanding any Declaration,
Excommunication, or deprivation made or granted by the Pope, or any Authority
derived from him, against the King, his Heirs, and Successors, or any
absolution from their obedience, they will beare^ faith and true allegiance to
them, and them protect to the uttermost of their power against all conspiracies
and attempts whatsoever against their Persons, Crown, and Dignity, by reason
of any such sentence or Declaration, or otherwise. And that they do from their
hearts, abhor, detest, and abjure as impi^us and heretical, this damnable^
Doctrine and position: (prosessedly maintained by English Papists, else why
should the Parliament prescribe and they absolutely refuse to take this Oath?)
that Princes excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, may be deposed or murdered
by their Subjects, or any other whatsoever. Willthose then who refuse to take
this Oath, or abjure this King deposing, King-killing Doctrine; harboring a
Seminary Priest in their Tents, and a Pope in their*hearts, prove a faithful
guard to his Majesty's Person, Crown or Kingdoms: Will those who so o^^
conspired the death, and attempted the murders of Queen Elizabeth, and King
James, only because they were Protestants, and Defenders of the Protestant
Faith, now cordially protect and assist King Charles, without attempting any
thing against his Crown or Person, who has lately made and published so many
Protestations, and Declarations, that he will never embrace, nor countenance
Popery, but most resolutely Defend, and Advance the Protestant Religion; and
makes this one principal motive (how truly, he takes Heaven and Earth to
witness) of his present taking up of Arms: Will they (think you) spend their
lives for King and Parliament, who but few years since) lost their lives for
attempting by a train of Gunpowder to blow up both King and Parliament? Will
those secure his Majesty in his Throne, now he is actually King of England, who
would have murdered him in his Cradle, ere he was Prince, to forestall him of
the Crown of England: ca^^ those prove really loyal to his Majesty and his
Royal Posterity, who would have blown up him*and all royal House at once,
even long before he had posterity? In a word (if ancient presidents will not
convince us) are those who for See Dr. Jones his Book of Examinations.
two years last past or more, have been laboring with might and maine to
uncrowne his Majesty, and utterly extirpate the Protestant Religion by horrid
conspiracies and force of Arms, in Ireland and are now there acting the last
Scene of this most barbarous bloody Tragedy, now likely to spend their dearest
blood in fighting for the preservation of his Majesty's Crown and the
Protestant cause in England, if thi^ only be the real quarrel, as is
specioully pretended? Or will any of that Religion, who within these thre^
years, have by force of Arms, both in Catalonia, Portugal, and elsewhere,
revolted from, and cast off their allegiance to their own most Catholic
King; to setup others of the same Religion in his Tribunal; put t^^ their
helping hands to establish his Majesty (the most Protestant King) in his regal
Throne, admit it were really, not fictitiously endangered to be shaken:
Certainly, if the ground of this unnatural war be such a^ these ill
Consellors pretend, they would never be so far besotted as to make choice of
such unfitting Champions as Papists, for such a design, who are very well
known to be the greatest enemies and malignants o^ all others, both to King,
Kingdom, Religion, and Parliament, whose joint destructions (what ever these
ill Counselors pretend) is questionless the only thing really intended, by
the Popish party in this war, a^ the proceedings in Ireland, the introducing
of soraine, the raising of domesticke popish Forces, the disarmin^ of
Protestants, and Arming Papists with their Harness, clearly demonstrate to
all whom prejudice has no^ blinded.

Now that I may evidence to these pernicious Counselors, and all the world,
how dangerous and unsa^^ it is for his Majesty and the Kingdom to put Arms
into Papists hands, and make use of them to protect the Kings Person, or Crown;
I shall desire them to take notice both of the Papists traitorous Doctrine, and
Practice in these three particulars they maintain.

First, That the Pope by a mere divine right, is the sole and supreme Monarch
of the whole world, and all ^^^ Kingdoms in it, to dispose of them at his
pleasure, to whom and when he will, without giving any account of his actions.
That all Emperors and Kings are but his vassals, deriving, and holding their
Crowns from him by base u^worthy services, worse then villenage; that they
call, and repute them their Popes vassals, curs, pack asses wi^ Bells about
their necks, and use them like such, if they offend the Pope. For full proof
whereof out of their ow^ Authors and practice, I shall refer them to Doctor
Dedicated to King James, printed at London 1621.
Richard Crakenthorps Book, Of the Popes Tempore^ Monarchy, chap. 1. p. 1. to
27. worthy any man's reading, to John Bodins Commonwealth, Lib. 1. cap. 9. a^^
Doctor John Whites Defense of the way to the true Church, chap. 10. p. 43.

Secondly, That the Pope alone without a Council, may lawfully excommunicate,
censure, depose both Emperors, Kings, and Princes; and dispose of their
Crowns and Kingdoms unto others; That it is meet and necessary he should
^xcommunicate and deprive all Kings, who are either Heretics or Apostates (as
they repute all Protestant Princes) ^^r oppressers of the Common wealth: That
as soon as such Princes are actually excommunicated, or notoriously known to
^^e Heretics or Apostates, their Subjects are ipso fact^ absolved from their
government, and Oaths of Allegiance whereby they were bound unto them; and
may, yea ought to take up arms against them to deprive them of their kingdoms.

Thirdly, That such tyranicall and oppressing Kings may be killed, poisoned, or
slain by open force of Arms, not only lawfully, but with glory and
commendations; That this is to be executed by Catholics; and that it is not
only an heroi^all, but meritorious act, worthy the highest Encomiums.

These two last pro positions you may read abundantly proved by the words of
Popish writers, and 40. examples of several Emperors, Kings and Princes, which
Popes and Papists have excommunicated, deprived, violent^y assaulted and
murdered, in Dedicated to King James, and printed at London, 1624.
Doctor John Whites defense of the way to the true Church, chap. 6. page 14. to
22. and chap. 10. page 43. 44. in his Sermon at Paul's Cross, March 24. 1615.
page 11. 12. in Bishop Bilsons true difference of Christian Subjection, and
unchristian rebellion, part 3: throughout. Aphorismi doctrinae Jesuitarum: King
James his Apology against Bellarmine, with his Answer to Cardinal Perron; and
sundry printed Sermons, preached on the fist of November, to which I shall
refer the Reader; What security or protection then of his Majesty's royal
Person, Crown, or Kingdoms, can now be expected from our Popish Recusants,
(infected with these traytorous Principles, and branded with so many ancient,
modern, nay present treasons and Rebellions against their Sovereigns) let the
world and all wise men seriously judge; What fair quarter and brotherly
assistance the Parliament, Protestants, Protestant Religion, Laws and
Liberties of the Subject are like ^o receive from this Popish Army, the late
Gunpouder Treason, the Spanish Armado, the English and French book of Martyrs,
the present proceedings in Ireland, Yorkshire, and elsewhere will resolve
without dispute: And what peace and safety the Kingdom may expect in Church
or State, whiles Popery and Papists have any armed power or being among us, In
his Sermon there, Mar. 24. 1615. p. 43, 44.
Doctor John White has long since proclaimed at Paul's Cross (and now we feel
it by experience) in these words; Papistry can stand neither with peace nor
piety; the State therefore that would have these things, has just cause to
suppress it. Touching our peace, it bath not been violated in our State these
many years but by them, nor scarce in any Christian State, since Charles the
great his time, but the Pope and his ministers have had a hand in it.

All that these ill advisers (to color their close See Plain English.
design of reestablishing Popery, principally intended) can allege Obj.
Crimination. 1.
for arming Papists against Law, is; That the Parliament has traytorously
invaded the Kings Prerogatives in a high degree; claymed a power and
jurisdiction above his Majesty in sundry particulars, and ^surped ^o its self
a more exorbitant, unlimited, arbitrary authority in making Laws, imposing
taxes, etc. then any Parliaments challenged in former ages; to repress which
insolences, and reduce the Parliament to its due limits, his Majesty is now
necessited to raise an Army, and pray in avde of Papists, who in former ages
have been more moderate in their Parliaments, and are like to prove most
cordial in this service.

To answer which pretense more fully, though it be for the maine of it, most
palpably false, yet (by way of admission only) I shall suppose it true, and
with all possible brevitie manifest; That Parliaments, Prelates, Peers and
Commons in times of Popery, have both claimed and exercised far greater
authority over our Kings and their Prerogatives, then this or any other
Protestant Parliament has done: Wherefore Papists of ^ll others, have least
cause to tax the Parliaments proceedings, and those ill Counselors small
reason to im^loy Answ.
or trust Papists in this service. To descend to some particular heads of
complaint, involved in this general.

First, it is objected, that the Parliament and some of its The observations, A
suller answer to Doctor Fern, with others.
Advocates, with its approbation, affirm; that ^e Parliament being the
representative body of the whole Kingdom, is in some respects of greater power
and authority ^hen the King; who though he be singulis major, yet he is,
universis minor; which is contrary to the oath of supremacy, (wherein every
Subject, 1 Eliz. chapter 2.
does utterly testify and declare in his conscience, that the Kings highness
is THE ONLY SVPREAME GOVERNOR of this Realm, etc. as well in all spiritual
or Ecclesiastical causes, as Temporal:) and a kind of unkinging his Majesty,
no ways to be endured.

To which I answer, first, that if this Doctrine be either Traytorous or
Heretical, the Papists were the first broa^hers of it long ago; For Hen. de
Bracton a famous English Lawyer, who writ in King Henry the third his ^eigne,
lib. 2. cap. 16. f. 34. a. resolves thus, Rex habet superiorem, Deum etc. Item
legem per quam factus est Rex-Item Curiam s^^^: viz. Comites, et Barons, quia
Comites dicuntur quasi socis Regis, and qui habet socium habet m^^istrum: Et
ideo si Rex fuerit sine fran^ (i) fine lege, DEBENTEI FRAENVM IMTONERE, etc.
But the King has a SVPERIOVR, to will God: Also the Law, by which he is made a
King: likewise his Court; namely the Earls and Barons; because they are called
Comites, as being ^e Kings fellows (or companions;) and he who has a fellow
(or associate) has a Master: and therefore if the King shall ^e without a
bridle, that is, without Law, they OUGHT to impose a bridle on him, unless
they themselves with the King ^all be without bridle; and then the Subjects
shall ery out and say, O Lord Jesus Christ do thou bind their jaws with it
and bridle, etc. A clear resolution, That the Law, with the Earls and Barons
assembled in Parliament, are ^bove the King, and ought to bridle him when he
exorbitates from the Law: which he also seconds in some sort, ^b. 3. cap. 9. f.
107. This Doctrine was so authenticke in those days, and after times, that in
the great Council of Basil. Anno 143^. when this mighty question was debated;
whether a Pope were above a general Council, or a Council above him? such a
Council was at last resolved to be above the Pope, upon this reason, among
others Fox Acts and Monume. Edit. 1641. Vol. 2 p. 879, 880. Aeneas Sylvius de
gestis concilii Basiliensis, and Surius council* Tom. 4.
The Pope is in the Church as a King is in his Kingdom, and for a King to be
of more authority then his Kingdom, it were too absurd; Ergo, Neither ought
the Pope to be above the Church. In every well ordered Kingdom, it ought
specially to be desired, that the whole Realm should be of more authority then
the King; which if it happened contrary, were not to be called a Kingdom, but
a Tyranny. And like as oftentimes Kings, which do wickedly govern the
Commonwealth and express cruelty, are deprived of their Kingdoms; even so it
is not to be doubted, but that the Bishop of Rome may be deposed by the
Church, that is to say, by the general Council. At the beginning (as Lib. 2.
Cicero in his Offices says) it is certain there was a time when as the
people lived without Kings. But afterward when Lands and possessions began to
be divided according to the Custom of every Nation, then were Kings ordained
for no other causes but only to execute justice* for when at the beginning the
common people were oppressed by rich and mighty men, they ran by and by to some
good and virtuous man, which should defend the poor from injury, and ordain
Laws, whereby the rich and poor might dwell together. But when as yet under
the rule of Kings, the poor were oftentime^ oppressed, Laws were ordained and
instituted, the which should judge, neither for hatred nor favor, and give
like ear unto the poor as rich: whereby we understand and know, not only
the people, but also the King to be subject to the Law. For if we do see a
King to contemn and despise the Laws, violently rob and spoil his Subjects,
d^flower Virgins, dishonest Matrons, and do all things licentiously and
temerariously, do not the Nobles of the Kingdom Assemble together, deposing
him from his Kingdom, set up another in his place, which shall swear to rule
and govern uprightly, and be obedient unto the Laws. Verily as reason does
persuade, even so does the use thereof, also teach us: It seems also
agreeable unto reason, that the same should be done in the Church, that is, in
the Council, which is done in any Kingdom. And so is this sufficiently
apparent, that the Pope is subject unto the Council; Thus the Bishop of
Burgen* Ambassador of Spain, the Abbot of Scotland, and Thomas de Corcellis,
a famous Divine reasoned in this Council, which voted with them. Here we have
a full resolution of this great Council (which the Papists call a general
one, being Surius, Council. tom. 4. p. 1. etc. And Aeneas Sylvius hist. council.
Basilliensis.
approved by the Greek and Roman Emperors, and most Christian Kings, and
States, and ours among others:) That the Kingdom in Parliament Assembled, is
above the King, as (...) General Council is paramount the Pope: which they
manifest by five reasons.

First, because Kings were first created and instituted by their Kingdoms and
people; not their Kingdoms and people by them.

Secondly, Because they were ordained only for their Kingdoms and peoples
service and welfare, not their kingdoms and people for them.

Thirdly, Because their Kingdoms, and people, as they at first created, so
they still limit and confine their royal Jurisdiction by Laws, to which they
are and ought to be subject.

Fourthly, Because they oblige them by a solemn Oath, to rule according, and
to be obedient unto the Laws.

Fifthly, Because they have power to depose them in case they contemn the
Laws, and violently rob and spoil their Subjects. This then being the
Doctrine of Papists concerning the Power and Superiority of Parliaments,
Peers, and Kingdoms over their Kings, they have least ground of all others,
to tax this Parliament or its Advocates, as guilty of Treason, and usurpation
upon the Crown, for a more moderate claim then this amounts to.

Secondly, I answer, that Popish Parliaments, Peers, and Prelates have
heretofore challenged and exercised a greater Jurisdiction over their Kings,
then this Parliament, or any other, since the embracing of the Protestant
Religion, ever claimed; and do in a great measure disclaim* For, first of
all, they have challenged and executed a just and legal power (as they deemed
it) to depose their Kings, for not governing according to Law; for following
and protecting evil Counselors, and Officers; oppressing their Subjects, and
making war against them. This is evident, not only by the forementioned
passages of the Council of Basil, with infinite presidents in foraine Empires
and Kingdoms, which I pretermit, b^^ by sundry domesticke examples; of which I
shall give you a short touch. Speeds Hist. p 207. 266, 267. Matthew. West* An.
445. 454 etc. See Holinshed, Grafton, and others
Anno Dom. 454. King Vortigern, when he had reigned for years space, for his
negligence and evil Government (for which Vodine Archbishop of London told
him, he had endangered both his Soul and Crown) was deposed from his Crown
by (his Subjects) the Britains general consent, imprisoned, and his Son
Vortimer chosen and Crowned King in his stead; After whose untimely death
(being poisoned by Rowe^a) Vortigern was again restored by them to the Crown,
and at last for his notorious sins, by the just revenging hand of God,
consumed to ashes by fire, kindled by Aurelius, and V^er, as heavens ministers
to execute its wrath.

Sig^bert Speeds Hist. p. 229. Matthew. West. an. 756. Holinsh. Graft. in his
life.
King of the West Saxons, setting aside all Laws and rules of true piety,
wallowing in all se(...) suall pleasures, and using exactions and cruelties
upon his Subjects, and ^laying the Earl Cumbra, his mo(...) faithful
Counselor, for admonishing him lovingly of his vicious life: the Peers and
Commons thereupon seeing their State and lives in danger, and their Laws thus
violated, assembled all together; and provida omniu(...) deliberatione, rose up
in Arms against him, deposed, and would acknowledge him no longer their
Sovereign* whereupon flying into the Woods as his only safeguard, and there
wandering in the day like a forlo^^e person, and lodging in dens and caves by
night, he was slain by Cumbra his Swin-herd in revenge of his Masters death,
and Kenwolfe made King in his stead, Anno Dom. 756. Speeds Hist, p. 245. 246.
Matthew. West. an. 792 See Holinsh. Graf^on, and others.
Osred King of Northumberland, for his i(...) government was expelled by his
Subjects, and deprived of all Kingly Authority, Anno 789. So Ethelred (th(...)
Sonneof M^llo) his next successor, being revoked from exile and restored to the
Crown of which he was * Matthew. West m. An. 758. p. 275.
formerly deprived, thereupon murdering diverse of his Nobles and Subjects to
secure his Crown, so far offended his Subjects thereby, that Anno 794* they
rose up in arms against him and slew him at Cob^e. Thus Anno 758. the people
of the kingdom of Mercia rising up against Beornerd their King, because be
governed the people not by just laws, but tyranny, assembled all together, as
well Nobles as ignoble; and Offa, a most valiant ^oung man being their
Captain, they expelled him from the Kingdom: which done, unanimo omnium
consensu* by the unanimous consent of all, as well Clergy as People, they
crowned Offa King. Matthew. West. An. 821. Speeds Hist. p 255.
And Ceolwulfe King of Mercia, Anno 820* after one years reign was for his
misgovernment expulsed by his people, abando^ing his Crown and country for the
sa^ery of his life.

Not to mention any more such presidents before the Conquest: We find the
Matthew. Paris, hist. Angl. p. 264 to 280. Speed p. 585, etc. Hollinshead,
Grafton, Stow, Daniel, Walsingham.
Popish Barons, Prelates, and Commons disavowing King John, whom they had
formerly elected King, for making war upon them, and ^asting, burning and
spoiling the kingdom like an enemy, and electing Lewis of France for their
King, to whom ^hey did homage and fealty: There are none so ignorant but know,
that the Popish Prelates, Lords and Commons in Parliament, Walsingham, Hist.
Angl. p. 398 etc. Fabiun part 7. p. 345. Polychron. l. ult. c. 9. Hollinshead,
Grafton, and Speed p. 758. to 766.
An 1327* deposed King Edward the second their natural King, for his
misgovernement, and following and protecting ill Counselors, enforcing him by
way of complement to resign his Crown, threatening else, that they would never
endure him, nor any of his Children, as their Sovereign, but disclayming all
homage and fealty, would elect some other for King not of his ( r) blood, whom
themselves should think most fit and able to defend the kingdom. After which
they elected and crowned his son Edward the third for their King: That An
1399* Walsing. Hol. Fab. Sp. p. 680. to 697.
King Richard the second, for sundry misdemeanors objected against him ^n 32.
Articles in Parliament, and breach of his Coronation oath, was judicially
deposed by a Popish Parliament, by (...) definitive sentence of deposition
given against him, which you may read at large in our Historians, and Hen^y the
fourth elected and created King in his stead: In both which depositions the
Popish Prelares were chief (...)ctors. Speed, p. 869. 878. 879. 887.
Holingshead Polychronicon, Fabian, Grafton, Hall, Stow, Caxton in their lives.
Anno 1462. King Henry the sixth, Queen Margaret and Prince Edward their Son
were by a Popish Parliament disinherited of their right to the Crown; and
Edward the fourth made King: after which King Henry was by another Parliament
recrowned, and reestablished in his Kingdom, and Edward the fourth declared
(...) Traitor and usurper of the Crown. And not long after, Edward taking King
Henry prisoner, and causing him to be murdered in the Tower, another Popish
Parliament, Anno 1472. abrogated King Henry's Laws, and ^eestablished King
Edward. All this have our Popish Parliaments, Prelates, Lords and Commons
formerly done, and that rightly and legally, as they then supposed; which far
transcends the highest st^aines of pretended in^roachments on his Majesty's
royalties by the present Parliament; which detests such presidents.

Secondly, our Popish Parliaments, Pecres and Prelates have often translated the
Crown from the right heirs, and settled it on others who had no lawful right
or title to it, electing and acknowledging them for their one^y Sovereign
Lords; in which actions the Popish Prelates and Clergy were commonly the
Ringleaders: witness their Speed, p. 410. 411. 425* 426. 404. to 407. 410.
416. 418. 419. 455* 456. 466* 467. 548* 549. 550. 590. 591. See Matthew Paris,
Matthew. Westminster, Malmesbury, Hunting don, Eadmerus, (...)bian, Walsingham,
Caxton, Polychronicon, Polydo^, Virgil, Hall, Gr^^t^n, Stow, How, Hollinshead,
Haywar^, M^^tin, Daniel* and Sir (...) their several lives of these Kings.
electing and crowning of Edward, who was illegitimate, and putting by Ethelred
the right heir after ^dgars decease, An. 975. The electing and Crowning
Canutus King, a mere forrainer, in opposition to Edmund ^he right heir to
King Ethelred, An. 1016. Of Harold and Hardiknute, both elected and crowned
Kings successive^y without title, Edmund and Alfred the right heirs being
dispossessed, and the latter imprisoned and tortu^ed to death, An. 1036. and
1040. yet after Hardiknutes decease Edward (surnamed the Confessor) was chosen
King by consent of Parliament. And the English Nobility, upon the death of
King Harold, enacted, That none ^f the Danish blood should any more reign over
them. After this Kings death, Edgar Etheling who had best title was rejected
and Harold elected and crowned King; so after William the Conquerors decease,
Anno 1087. Robert ^he elder brother was pretermitted, and William Rufus the
younger brother crowned and established in the Throne: After whose death Henry
the first, his younger brother (though not next heir) was elected King ^y the
Clergy, Nobles and Commons, ( who refused to admit of any King but with
capitulations and caveats to their ^wne liking) upon fair promises for
resorming bad and rigorous Laws, remission of Taxes exacted on the Subjects,
and ^unishment of the chief causers of them, and a solemn oath to frame good
Laws, and ratify Saint Edwards Laws; ^ll which he really performed. So after
the death of Richard the first, John Earl of Morton was elected and crowned
King, and his Nephew Arthur, the right heir, disinherited. And he dying, his
son Henry the third was ^lected and crowned, and Lewis (made King in his
fathers life by the Barons) removed. The like we find in ^he case of King
Henry the fourth, King Edward the fourth, and Richard the third, made Kings by
Acts of Par^^ament, by our Popish Prelates and Nobles with the Commons consent
upon unlawful or doubtful Titles, ^y way of usurpation, and the right
hereditary line put by. Such a transcendent power and ^urisdiction as this
(...) disinherite the right heir and transfer the Crown to whom they
throught meerest, neither the present nor any other Protestant Parliament,
Peers or Subjects ever claymed or exercised, though Popish Parliaments,
^relates, Lords, and Commons have thus frequently done it; of which you may
read more in 25. H. 8. c. 22. 26. (...). 8. c. 12. 28. H. 8. c. 7. 35. H. 8.
c. 5.

Thirdly, the Lords and Commons in times of Popery have sent our writs and
summoned a Parliament in the Kings name, and forced the King to call a
Parliament without and against his full consent. Thus they summoned and held a
Parliament in Ireland, Anno 1341* refusing to come to a Parliament there
summoned by the Kings officers and authority, as the In Camdens Britania
English, p. 188.
Irish Annalls do more at large record. Thus they Walsingham, Hist. Ang. p.
107. 398. Speed, p. 681. 757.
summoned and held two Parliaments here in England to depose King Edward the
second, and King Richard the second without these Kings consents; and by two
several Acts of Parliament (4. E 3. c. 4. and 36. E. 3. c. 10.) enacted That
for the maintenance of the Laws and Statutes* and redress of diverse
mischiefs and grievances which daily happe^eth, a Parliament shall be holden
every year once, and more often if need be; whereas this Parliament was (...)
called but by the Kings own free consent, and has moderated these former
Acts, by changing the annual into (...) triennuall Parliament by a special
Bill, to which his Majesty gave his full and free assent. Myrror. c. 1. sect.
3. p. 10. Co. instit. on Littleton, f. 110. Spelman, Council. p. 347.
Long before which Acts, King Alfred in an assembly of Parliament, ordained
this for a perpetual custom; that a Parliament should be called together at
London twice every year, or oftener in time of peace, to keep the people of God
from sin, th(...) they may live in peace, and receive right by certain
usages and holy judgments.

Fourthly, Our Popish Barons, Prelates and Commons, have refused to meet in
Parliament when the King ha(...) summoned them by his writ. Matthew. Paris, An.
1233. p. 344 473, etc. Speedes Hi. p. 607. to 613.
Anno Dom. 1233. King Henry the third summoned his Earls and Barons to appear
at a Parliament at Oxford (where the King now resides) but they all jointly
sent him an express messag(...) that they would not come upon his summons; for
that the Kings person went guarded with Poictovines and oath(...) strangers,
who swayed and miscounselled him (as ill Counselors do now the King) so as
they could no(...) there appear with safety: at which message the King grew
very angry, resolving that they should be on(...) twice and thrice summoned to
appear: Whereupon Roger Bacon who usually preached before the King freely told
him, That if he did not remove from him Peter Bishop of Winchester, and Peter
de Rivallis (his malign(...) Counselors) he could never be quiet: And Roger
Bacon a Clergy man also of a pleasant wit, seconding Robert advise, told the
King, that Peirae and Rupes were most dangerous things at Sea, alluding to the
Bishops name Petrus de Rupibus. The King hereupon coming a little to himself,
and taking that good advice of Who now give the King no such advice.
Scholars which he would not of his Peers, summons another Parliament to be
holden at Westminster, giving th(...) world to know withal, that his purpose
was, to amend by their advice whatsoever was to be amended. But the Baro(...)
considering, that still there arrived more and more strangers, men of war,
with horse and arms (as now alas we s(...) they do) and not trusting the
Poictovine Faith (as we have now cause to mistrust the perfidious Papists, and
malignant Cavaliers) and seeing no footstep of peace (our present condition)
refused to come at the appointe^ day; sending the King word by solemn
messengers, that he should without any delay remove Peter Bishop of Winchester,
and the other Poictovians out of his Court; which if he refused, they all of
them by the common consent of t(...) whole kingdom, would drive him, with his
wicked Counselors, out of the Kingdom, and consult about creating (...) new
King. Thesethings thus acted, the King was much dejected in mind, and all his
Court, hanging down(...) their heads, and fearing not a little, lest the errors
of the Son should become worse then the fathers errors, whom hi(...) Subjects
endeavoring to depose from his royal Throne, almost detruded him to that
name, which was give(...) him by a certain presage; John the Banished:
Wheresore he could easily have been drawn to redeem(...) the love of his
natural Liegemen, with the disgrace of a sew strangers.

But the Bishop of Winchester, with other his ill Counselors, and Poictovine
Cavalieres, counseled hi(...) to take up arms against his rebellious
Subjects, as they styled them, and to give their Castles and Lands to them,
w(...) would defend him and the kingdom of England from these Traitors, (The
Counsel now given to his Majesty, (...) his ill Counselors and Cavalieres)
Hereupon the King inclining to the worser part, raises an Army of Poictovine,
and Foraine Soldiers, which came to him being sent for out of Flanders, (from
whence the King no(...) has many old Soldiers, and Commanders sent him)
seiseth a Manor of Guilbert Bassers, a Noble man, give(...) him by King John,
calling him Traitor* when he demanded it; sets down a day, wherein all his
Lords he suspected should deliver him sufficient pledges of their loyalty; and
being at Gloucester with his Army, whith(...) the Lords resused to come, being
required, the King thereupon, as if they were Traitors, burns their Manor(...)
destroys their Parkes and Ponds, besieges their Castles, and without the
judgment of his Court, and of they(...) Peers, denounces them exiles and
banished men, gives their Lands to the Poictovines, and adding grief to
grie(...) wound to wound, commanded their bodies to be apprehended where ever
they were within the Kingdom he likewise sends a Defiance to the Earl
Marshall, whose Lands he had wasted, who thereupon understood himself
discharged of that obligation by which he was iyed to the King, and free to
make his defense; Whereupon, h(...) seeing Note.
neither Faith, nor Oath, nor peace to be kept by the King, or his ill
Councillors, who contrary to their promise and Oath, refused to deliver up his
Castle, which they promised to render to him, upon demand; h(...) raises a
great Army, and takes his Castle. On this the King upon better consideration,
did again promise(...) and affirm; That by advise of his great Council, all
that was amiss should be rectified and amended; And at th(...) day* and place
appointed, he holds a great conference with the Lords; But the evil
Counselors he followed, suffered him not to make good his promise. For when
diverse there present, greatly in the Kings favor, with sundry Preachers and
Friars, whom the King was wont to reverence and hearken to, Humbly beseeched,
and earnestly exhorted the King to make peace with his Barons and Nobles, and
to embrace them with due affection, being The Parliments present case.
his natural Subjects, whom without any judgment by their Peers he had
banished, destroying their Manors, Woods, Parkes, Ponds; and being led and
seduced by evil Councels, less regarded his faithful Subjects, (whose native
bloo(...) would not permit them to bow down) then Forainers; and which is
worse, called them Traitors by whom ^e ought t(...) settle the peace, order the
Councels, and dispose the affairs of his Kingdom: The Bishop of Winchester
(of^ended it seems at Peers) takes the word out of the Kings mouth, and
answers; That there are not Peers in England, as in the Realm of France; and
that therefore the King of England by such Justiciars as himself pleases ^o
ordain, may banish any offenders out of the Realm* and by judicial process
condemn them. Which insolent ^peech the English Bishops relished so harshly,
that they presently with one voice threatened to accurse and excommunicate by
name the Kings principal wicked Counselors; of whom Winchester being the
foreman, appealed; whereupon they accursed (and I would our Bishops would do
so now, if the God-dam-me Cavaliers accurse ^ot themselves sufficiently) all
such as alienated the heart of the King from his Subjects, and all others that
per^urbed ^he peace of the Realm; and so the hoped accommodation vanished into
greater discontents. Hereupon, the Earl Marshall and other Lords with their
Forces, sell pell mell upon the Kings Army, slew diverse of his for^einers; and
in conclusion drew him to such straits, that enforced him to be capable of
better advise: Then Edmund ^rchbishop of Canterbury elect, with other suffragan
Bishops, bewayling the estate of the Kingdom, presented themselves before the
King at Westminster, telling him as his loyal liegemen (and O that some Bishop
or faith^ull person, if there be any such about his Majesty, would now deal
thus clearly with him, touch^ng his evil Counselors) That the Council of
Peter Bishop of Winchester, and his accomplices, which now he had and ^sed, was
not sound nor safe, but evil and dangerous to himself and his Realm: First,
for that they hated and de^ised the English, calling them Traitors, turning the
Kings heart from the love of the people, and the hearts of the people from him;
as in the Earl Marshall, whom (being one of the wort^iest men of the Land) by
sowing false tales they ^rave into coffeehouse. Secondly, that by the
Counsel of the said Peter, his Father King John, first lost the hearts of ^is
people, then Normandy, then other lands, and finally wasted all his treasure,
and almost England also, and never after had quiet. Thirdly, That if the
Subjects had now been handled according to justice and law, and not by their
ungod^y Counsels, these present troubles had not happened, but the Kings lands
had remained undestroyed, his treasure unex^austed. Fourthly, that the Kings
Council is not the Council of peace but of preturbation, because they that
cannot ^aise themselves by peace, must raise themselves by the troubles and
disinherison of others. Fifthly, That they had the Trea(...)re, Castles,
Wardships, and strength of the kingdom in their hands, which they insolently
abused, to the great hazard ^f the whole estate, for that they made no
conscience of an Oath, Law, Justice, or the Churches censures. Therefore, we
(...) King, speak these things faithfully unto you, in the presence of God and
man, and do counsel, beseech and adm^nish ^ou, to remove such a Council from
about you; and (as it is the usage in other Realms) govern yours by the
faith^ull and sworn children thereof. To which the King in brief answered*
That he could not suddenly put off h^^ Council; and therefore prayed a short
respite. Nothing ^ad hither to preserved the King more, Then that he could
without grief forgo^ any favorities, if he were nearely pressed; the contrary
quality whereof has been the cause of ^i^all desolation to so many Princes.
For though choice of Counselors ought to be free, yet by common in^endment
they should be good; or how ever they are, or are not; it is madness to hazard
a Crown, or lose the love ^f a whole Nation, rather then to relinquish or
diminish a particular dependence, for which the public must not be ^azarded,
nor subverted; The King therefore, in this point not unfortunate, commands
Bishop Peter from his Court, to keep residence at his Cure without once
meddling in State affairs, removes all his evil Counselors, derives them of
their Offices, and puts good men in their places, and commands all Poictovians
and Foraine forces to de^art the Realm, receives all his Nobles into favor,
restoring them to their lost Offices, Lands, Castles, admits them (...)to his
Court and Council; puts all his ill Counselors, and Delinquent Officers to
their legal trials and fines. And ^r Peter Rivales his Treasurer, he was so
vehemently inc^nsed against him for his ill Counsel, that he swear (...) would
pluck out his eyes, were it not for reverence of his holy Orders. And at his
Arraignment at Westminster (...)e King sitting in person with his Justices,
upon the Bench, and shooting Rivales through with an angry eye, ^ake thus to
him. O ihou Traitor by thy wicked advise, I was drawn to set my Seal to those
treacherous Letters, ^r the destruction of the Earl Marshall, the contents
whereof were to me unknown; and by thine and such like Coun(...)ll, I banished
my natural Subjects, and turned their minds and hearts from me. By thy bad
counsel and thy com(...)lices, I was moved to make war upon them to my
irreparable loss, and the dishonor of my Realm, in which ^n^rprise I wasted
my Treas^re, and lost many worthy persons, together with much of my Royal
respect. Therefore I (...)act of thee an account, and thou shall be carried to
the Tower of London to deliberate till I am satisfied. And (...)us were these
civil wars and differences reconciled, ill Counselors removed, enormities
reformed, De(...)nquents punished, (not without reducing store of coin to the
King) and peace established in the King^ome. Which History, I have more largely
recited, because most of its passages are Parallel to the Kings, (...)d his
evil Counselors present proccedings, on the one hand, and to the Parliaments
in some sort, on the o(...)er hand in the premises; and I doubt not but they
will prove parallels in the conclusion, to the terror of (...) ill
Councillors and Cavalieres, the just punishment of Delinquents, all good
Subjects joy and content^ent, and the reestablishment of our peace in truth and
righteousness.

To end the point proposed; Walsingh. Hist^. p. 84. 44. and Ypod. Neust. p. 101
Anno Dom. 1315. King Edward the second by his Writ summoned a Par(...)meant at
London; But many of the Lords refused to come, pretending causes and
impediments, by which their ab(...)nce might well be excused, and so this
Parliament took no effect, and nothing was done therein. In this Parti(...)lar
then Popish Prelates, Lords and Commons, have exceeded Protestants in this, or
any other Parlia^ent.

Fifthly, Popish Parliaments, Prelates, Lords and Subjects have by Force of
Arms compelled their Kings to grant and confirm their Laws, Liberties,
Charters, Privileges, with their Seals, Oaths, Proclamations, the Popes
Bulls, Prelates Excommunications; and to pass, confirm, or repeal Acts of
Parliament against their wills. Thus the Barons, Prelates, and Commons, by open
war and Arms enforced both Mat. Pa. An. 1214, 1215. p. 240 to 256. Mat.
West* and Walsingham, Ypodig. Neu. An. 1214, 1215* Fabi. Caxton, Hol. Graf.
Daniel in the life of K. John and Hen. 3. Sp. Hist. p. 578. to 637.
King John, and King Henry the third, to confirm Magna Charta, and Charta de
Foresta (both in and out of Parliament) sundry times with their hands, Seals,
Oaths, Proclamations, and their Bishops Excommunications, taking ^ solemn
Oath one after another at Saint Edmonds, upon the High Altar, An. 1214. That if
King John should refuse to grant these Laws and Liberties, they would wage
war against him so long, and withdraw themselves from their Allegiance to
him, until he should confirm to them by a Charter ratified with his Seal,
all things which th^^ required: And that if the King should afterward
peradventure recede from his own Oath, as they verily beleev^^ he would, by
reason of his double dealing, they would forthwith, by seizing on his Castles,
compel him to give satisfaction; Which they accordingly performed, as our
Histories at large relate. Yea, when they had enforce^ King Matthew. Par. p. 252.
Sp. Holinsh. accordingly.
John thus to ratify these Charters, for the better maintenance of them, they
elected 25. Barons ^^ be the Conservators of their Privileges, who by the
Kings appointment (though much against his liking, ^ afterward appeared) took
an Oath upon their Souls, that with all diligence they would observe these
Charters, and Regem cogerent; and would COMPEL THE KING, if he should chance
to repent, to observe them; All the rest of the Lords and Barons, then likewise
taking another Oath, to obe^ the commands of the 25. Barons.

After this Matthew. Paris. An. 1258. p. 9. 940, 941. Matthew. West. 1258. Sp. p.
635. Hol. Graft. Dani. Polychron.
An. Dom. 1258. King Henry the third summoned a Parliament at Oxford, whither
the Lord came armed with great Troops of men for fear of the Poictovines, to
prevent treachery and civil wars, a^^ the Kings bringing in of Foraine
force, against his natural Subjects; to which end they caused the Sea Ports ^^
be shut up, and guarded. The Parliament being begun, the Lords propounded
sundry Articles to the King which they had immutably resolved on: to which they
required his assent. The chief points whereof we^^ these: That the King should
firmly keep and conserve the Charter and Liberties of England, which King
John ^ Father made, granted, and ratified with an Oath, and which himself had
so often granted, and sworn to maintai^ inviolable, and caused all the
infringers ofit, to be horribly excommunicated by all the Bishops of England,
in h^ own presence, and of all his Barons; and himself was one of the
Excommunicators. That such a one should be man their Chief Justice, who would
judge according to Right, without respect to poor or rich. With other things
concerning the kingdom, to the common utility, peace, and honor of the King
and kingdom. To these their necessa^^ Councels and provisions, they did
frequently, and most constantly, by way of advice, desire the King to
condescend, swearing and giving their mutual Faith and hands one to another;
That they would not defis^ ^ prosecute their purpose, neither for loss of
money or Lands, nor love, nor hare; no nor yet for life or dea^ of them or
theirs; till they had cleared England (to which they and their forefathers were
borne) from up starts and aliens, and procured laudable Laws. The King hearing
this, and that they came exquisitely arm that so he and his aliens might be
enforced, if they would not willingly assent, took his corporal Oath (a^ his
Son Prince Edward also) that he would submit ^o their Councels, and all those
their Ordinances, f^^ fear of perpetual imprisonment; The Lords having by an
Edict, threatened death to all that resisted: Whi^ done, all the Peers and
Prelates took their Oath; To be faithful to this their Ordinance; and made
all wh^ would abide in the Kingdom, to swear they would stand to the ^ryall
of their Peers; the Arch-bishop^ and Bishops solemnly accursing all that
should rebel against it. And Richard King of Romans, the Kings younger Brother
coming soon after into England to visit the King and his own Lands, the
Matthew. Par. p. 952, 953. Spe. p. 636.
Barons enforce him (according to his promise sent them in writing before his
arrival) to take this Oath, as soon as he la^ded, in the Chapter House at
Canterbury. Hear all men, that I Richard Earl of Cornwall, swear upon ^^
holy Gospels, to be faithful and forward to reform with you the kingdom of
England, hithert^ by the council of wic^ed men so much deformed. And I will be
an effectual coadjuto^ to expel the Rebels and troublers of the Realm f^^
out of the same. This Oath will I observe under pain to for feit all my Lands
I have in England.

To such a high strain as this, did these Popish Parliaments, Prelates, Peers
and Commons scrue up their ^^risdictions, to preserve themselves and the
Kingdom from slavery and desolation; whom Matthew Paris ^^ continuer, for this
service styles, History Angliae, p. 95^.
Angliae Reipublicae Zelatores: the Zelors of the English Republicke. Neith^ is
this their example singular, but backed with other presidents. In the second
and third years of King E^ward the second, Walsing. ^p^digma. Neust. An. 1309,
1310 Hist. Ang. p. 70. to 77. S. p. 608. etc. with Holin. Stow. Graf. How, and
others. F^x Act. and Mon. v^l. ^. Ed. ult p. 480, 481.
Piers Gaveston his great, proud, insolent, covetous, unworthy Favorite,
miscounselling a^ seducing the young King (from whom he had been banished by
his Father) and swaying all things a^ ^^ pleasure: the Pe^res and Nobles of the
Real^e, seeing themselves contemned, and that foraine upstart p^^fe^red before
them all, came to the King, and humbly entreated him, That he would manage the
Affairs of ^ Kingdom, by the Counsels of his Barons, by whom he might not
only become more cautious, but more safe from inc^^bent dangers; the King Voce
^enus, consented to them, and at their instance summoned a Parliament at Lond^^
to which he commanded all that ought to be present, to repair. Where, upon
serious debate, they earn^^ly demanded of the King, free liberty, for the
Barons to compose certain Articles profitable to himself, to his kingdom,
and ^o the Church of England: The King imagining that they would order Piers to
be banished, a lo^^ time denied to grant their demand, but at last, at the
importunate instance of them all, he gave his assent, a^ swore he would
ratify, and observe what ever the Nobles should ordain: The Articles being
drawn up, and agreed by common consent, they propounded them to the King; and
by their importunity, much against his well-liking, caused him to ratify them
with his Seal, and to take his corporal Oath, to observe them: Which done,
the Archbishop of Canterbury with his Suffragans, solemnly denounced a
sentence of excommunication against all who should contradict these Articles;
which they caused to be openly read in Paul's Church London, in the presence of
the Prelates, Lords and Commons of the whole Kingdom, the King being present;
Among which Articles they demanded; That Magna Charta, with other provisions
necessary to the Church and Realm, should be observed, that the King ^s his
Father had commanded, should thrust all Strangers out of his Court and
kingdom, and remove ill Councillors ^^om him: That he would thenceforth order
all the affairs of the Kingdom by the Counsel of the Clergy and Lords; and
begin no war, nor depart any where out of the kingdom without common
consent. The King (notwithstanding ^ll these things seemed hard and
insupportable to him) consented to the Articles, and banished Piers into
^reland. No Note the credit of Princes Regal promises and Protestations.
sooner was the Parliament dissolved, but the King* neglecting his Fathers
solemn adjurations, together with his own Oath, never to reduce Piers, sends
for him back to his Court, marryeth him to the Countess of Gloucester, his
own sisters daughter, shows him more favor then ever; Resolving with
himself ^o retain this Gaveston, maugre all his Earls, Barons, and for the
love of him, to put his Crown and life in ^erill, when time should serve: In
which, whither the King or his favorite showed less discretion, it is not ^t
the first easily determined; it being as unsafe for the one with so offensive
behavior to affect immoderate ^^ew and use of grace, as for the other, to the
injury of his name and Realm, to bestow the* same. But upon ^he Queens
complaint to the King of France her Brother, of Piers his insolence and
prodigality, and on the ^arons message to the King by common consent; That he
should banish Piers from his company, and observe the ^ffect of the foresaid
Articles, or else they would certainly rise up against him as a perjured
person by a like vow (which ^peech seemed hard to the King, because he knew not
how to want Piers, but yet discerned that more danger would spring ^p if he
obeyed not the Lords Petition;) Piers rather by the Kings permission, then good
liking, did the third ^^me abjure the Realm with this proviso; that if at any
time afterward he were taken in England, he should ^e forthwith put to death as
a perilous enemy to the Kingdom: yet he returning in Christmas to the King at
York, the Lords spiritual and temporal, to preserve the Liberties of the
Church, the Kingdom, and remove this ^iper, elected Thomas Earl of Lancaster
for their General, and sent honorable messengers to the King, re^uesting him,
to deliver Piers into their hands, or drive him from his company out of
England, as being persuaded, ^hile that King-^ane breathed, peace could never
be maintained in the Realm, nor the King abound in treasure, nor the Queen
enjoy his love. But the wilful King (preferring the dearness of one
stranger, before the love of the ^hole Realm) would no^ condescend. Whereupon
the Lords thus contemned and deluded, presently raise ^n Army, and march with
all speed toward Newcastle, not to offer injury, or molesta^^on to the King
(writes ^alsingham, the case and purpose of the present Parliaments Army) but
that they might apprehend Piers himself, and judge* him according to the Laws
enacted. Which when the King heard, he fled together with Piers (like a
proscribed and banished man) to Tynemouth, and from thence to Scarborough
Castle. Where Piers was forced to yield himself, upon condition to speak but
once more with the King. And then carried to Warwick Castle, where he had his
head struck off, at the command, and in the presence of the Earls of
Lan^aster, Warwick and Hereford; as one who had been a subverter of the
Laws, and an open Traitor to the Kingdom, and that without any judicial
proceedings or trial of his Peers, though an Earl, and so dear a Favorite
of the Kings. Which bred a lasting ha^red between the King and his Nobles: Who
being afterward charged by the King in Parliament with their contempt against
him, in the spoils committed by them at Newcastle; and wick^dly killing Piers:
They stoutly answered: That they had not offended in any point, but deserved
his royal favor, ^or that they had not gathered force against him, but
against the public enemy of the Realm: And then obtained an Act ^f Pardon,
that no man should be questioned for Gavestons return or death, printed in old
T^tles Magn^ Charta, part 2. f. 50* to 57.
Magna Charta. Not long after, this unfortunate King doting upon the two
Wal^ing. Hist. p. 90. to ^10. ypodig. Neust. p. 105. to 111* Speed* Hist. p.
674. to 683. See Fabi^n, Holm. Graf. Tho^^^de ^^ More, Higd^^ Caxton, in his
life.
Spencers as much as ever he did on Gaveston, to whom they ^ucceeded, not
onely*in pride, rapine, oppression and intolerable insolences, but even in
height of familiarity and power with the King. So as they ruled and lead the
King as they pleased, in so much that no Earl, Baron or Bishop was able to
dispatch any thing in Court without their advise and favor, which made them
generally envied of all, because they domineered over all: The Lords and Barons
hereupon, confederated together to live and die for ju^tice, and to their power
to destroy the Traitors of the Realm, especially the two Spencers: And meeting
together with their forces at Sbirborne, Thomas of Lancaster being their
Captain; they took an oath to prosecure their design to ^he division of soul
and body: Then they spoiled these Spencers and their friends goods, take their
Castles by vio^ence, waste their Manors through malice, slay their servants,
utterly omitting the usual ways of Law and equity, and following the
impetuousnes of their minds they march on to S. Albans with Ensigns displayed,
and sent solemn messengers to the King then at London, commanding him* not only
to rid his Court, but kingdom too, of the Traitors of ^he Realm, the
Spencers, condemned in many Articles (which they had framed against them) by
the commonalty of the Realm, if he loved the peace of the Kingdom. And they
further required the King to grant letters Patents of indemnity, to themselves
and all such as had bore arms in their company, that they should not be
punished by the King or any other for their for epast or present trangressions.
The King denied both these demands at first, as unjust and illegal; swearing,
that he would not violate his Coronation Oath, in granting such a pardon to
contempiu^us Delinquents. Whereupon running to their arms, they marched up to
London, entered the City, and to avoid dange^* the King (through the Queens
and others mediation) condescended to their desires, passing an Act for the
Spensers banishment, and the Barons indemnities; which you may read in ancient
Part 2. ^. 50.
Magna Chartaes. Upon this the Barons departed, neither merry nor secure,
despairing of the Kings Benevolence; which made them go always armed, and to
retire to safe places. The King soon after, recalling the Spensers, reversed
the sentence against them as erroneous, gathers an Army, encounters and defeats
the Barons, and puts many of them to death by these Spencers procurements; who
not content with their blood, procured also the confiscation of their goods a^^
^nheritances: Whereupon getting into greater favor and power then before,
puffed up with their good success and new honors, they discontented not only
the Nobles, but Queen too; who going over into Fran^ with her son, the
Prince, (whose lives these favorites attempted) She raised an Army beyond the
Seas, and returning with it into England, most of the Lords and Commons
resorted to her, and fell off from the King^ who being destitu^e of friends and
means, demanded assistance of the Cirie of London, whose answer was That they
would honor with all duty the King, the Queen and Prince, but would shut
their gates against Foreine^ and Traitors to the Realm, and with all their
power withstand them. And under the name of John of Eltham the Kings second
son, whom they proclaimed Custos of the City and of the Land, they got the
Tower ^^ London into their possession, placing and displacing the Garrison and
Officers therein as they pleased. The King hereupon (after he had commanded all
men to destroy, and kill the Queens partakers, none excepted but her self ^er
son, and the Earl of Kent, and that none upon pain of death, and loss of
all that they might lose, should aid ^^ assist them, and that he should have a
1000. l. who did bring the Lord Mortimers head:) flies to Bristol, in the
Castle whereof the elder Spenser was taken, by the Queens Forces, and without
any formal trial, cruelly cut ^^ alive and quartered; being first at the
clamours of the people, drawn and hanged in his proper armor upon the common
Gallows without the City: After which the King forsaken of all his Subjects
flies into Wales for shelter, where he was taken prisoner, and then by his
Lords and Parliament forced to resign his Crown to his son; confessing That
for his many sins he was fallen into this calamity, and therefore had the
less cause to take it grievously: That ^^ much sorrowed for this; that the
people of the kingdom were so exasperated against him, that they should
utterly abh^^ his any longer rule and Sovereignty, and therefore be besought
all there present to forgive and spare him being so afflicte^ Soon after he
was murdered in Barkly Castle: And so the sickness, and wounds which the
Commonwealth sustaine^ by his ill reign, upon the ch^^ge of her Physician,
recovered not only health and strength, but beauty also and ornamen^* writes
John Speed.

After all this Walfing. Hist. Ang. p. 349. to 400 ^podigm. Newstriae. p. 144.
to 158 Speed Hist. p. 747. to 762. Holin. Graft. St^w, Fabian, Caxton, and
others.
King Richard the second in the ninth year of his reign summoned a
Parliament, where^^ Michael de la Pole Earl of Suffolk, for cheating the King
was put from his Lord Chancellorship of England by the Parliament, and the
Seal taken from him against the Kings will, and given to Thomas Arundell
Bishop of Ely Whereupon both Houses gave half a tenth and half a fifteen, to
be disposed of as the Lords thought fit, for the defense of the Realm. The
Parliament was no sooner dissolved, but the King recals de la Pole and other
ill counselors to the Court, showing them greater favor then before: In so
much that at Christmas, the King mad^ de la Pole sit at his own table, not in
the usual garment o^ a Peer, but of a Prince, out of a stomach and hatred
against the Peers, whom from thenceforth he never regarded but feinedly: and
then falls to plot the death of the Duke of Gl^cester and other Nobles, who
opposed his ill Counselors; For which purpose he appoints a meeting at No^^ing
ha^^ Castle, with a few persons generally ill-beloved, ill-advised, and
ill-provided. The course agreed upon by the King and that ill-chosen Senate
was, first, to have the opinion of all the chief Lawyers; (who says Spe^^
seldom fail Princes in such turns) concerning certain Articles of Treason,
within whose nets they presum^^ the reforming Lords were; and if the Lawyers
concluded those Articles contained Treasonable matters, th^^ under a show of
justice they should be proceeded against accordingly. The Lawyers (who were the
very me^^ which in the last Parliament, gave advice to the Lords to do as they
did) now meering were demanded: Whether by the Law of the Land, the King might
not disa^ull the Decrees of the last Parliament? They jointly answe^ed, he
might, because he was above the Laws; (a most apparent error) confessing;
that themselves had in the Parliament decreed many things, and given their
judgment, that all was according to Law, which they acknowledg^ to be
altogether unlawful. The King thus informed, appoints a great Council at
Nottingham, and witha^^ sends for the Sheriffs of Shires, to raise Forces
against the Lords; who denied, saying, that they could not rais^ any competent
Forces or Arms against them, the whole Counties were so addicted to their
favors; and being furthe^ willed; to suffer no Knights to be chosen for their
shieres, but such as the King and his Counsel should name; they a^swered; that
the election belonged to the Commons, who favored the Lords in all, and would
keep their usual customs; (a good president for our present Sheriffs)
whereupon they were dismissed. Then were the Lawye^ and Judges ( Robert
Tresilian and his companions) called before the King, to determine the
judgments of Treason against the Lords to be legal and to set their Seals
thereto, which they did: Mean time the King and Duke of Ireland sent
messengers to hire what Forces they could, That they might stand with them if
need we^^ against the Lords in the day of battle: Note this.
Many of which answered, that they neither could nor would stand against the
Lords, whom they knew for certain intimately to love the King, and to
endeavor all things, study all things, do a^^ things for his honor: yet many
out of simplicity, thinking themselves to be hired, promised to be ready upon
the King^ ^o^^ce* The Lords hearing of these proceedings were much sadded;
being conscious to themselves ^^ no (...) ^^rthy the Kings so great
indignation. The Duke of Gloucester sent his purgation upon Oath by the Bishop
^^ London, to the King; w^o inclining to credit the same, was in an evil hour
diverted by de la Pole* ^he Duke hereupon makes his and their common danger
known to the rest of the Lords: upon which ^ey severally gather forces, that
they might present their griefs to the King; How he favored Tray^rs, not
only to them, but to the Public, to the imminent danger of the Realm,
unless it were spee^ly prevented. The King on the other side (by Traiterous
Co^unsellours advise) sought how to take ^em off single, before they were
united: but in vain, by reason their party was so great. Mean time, ^me
peaceable men procured, that the Lords should repair safe to Westminster, and
there be heard. Thi^er approaching, they are advertised by some, (who had
sworn on the Kings behalf for good dea^^g to be used during the interim) that
in the Mewes by Charing-Crosse, a thousand armed men (which without the Kings
privity Sir Thomas Trivet, and Sir Nicholas Brambre Knights, were reported to
have ^^d for their destruction) attended in ambush. The King swears his
innocence, promising safe con^^ct to the Lords if they would come; who
thereupon came strongly guarded, and would trust no longer* ^he King sitting in
royal State in Westminster Hall; the Lords present themselves upon their knees
before ^m: and being required by the Lord Chancellor; Why they were in warlike
manner assembled at ^aring gye Park, contrary to the Laws? their joint answer
was: That they were assembled for the good of the ^ing and kingdom, and to
weed from about him, such Traitors as be continually held with him: The
Traitors ^ey named to be, Robert de Vere, Duke of Ireland; Alexander Nevill,
Archbishop of York; Michael de ^ Pole, Earl of Suffolk; Sir Robert
Tresilian, that salse Justiciar: Sir Nicholas Brambre, that false Knight ^
London, with others: To prove them such, They threw down their Gloves, as
gages of challenge for a tri^l by the Sword. The King hereupon replied, as
knowing they were all hidden out of the way; This ^all not be done so, but at
the next Parliament (which shall be the morrow after Candlemas) all parties
shall ^ceive according as they deserve. And now to you my Lords; How or by what
authority durst you presume to levy ^orces against me in this Land? did you
think to have terrified me by such your presumption? Have not I men and ^mes,
who (if it pleased me) could environ and kill you like sheep? Certainly in
this respect I esteem of ^u all no more then of the basest Scullions in my
Kitchins. Having used these, and many like high words, ^e took up his Uncle
the Duke from the ground, where he kneeled, and bade all the other rise. The
^st of the conference was calm, and the whole deferred till the next
Parliament, then shortly to be hol^^n at Westminster. In the mean time (that
the world might see, how little able the King was to equal ^s words with
deeds) a Proclamation was set forth, in which the King (before any trial)
clears the ^ords of Treason, names those persons for unjust accu^ers, whom
the Lords had before nominated. The ^ords nevertheless thought not good to
sever themselves, but kept together for fear of the worst; which ^ll out for
their advantage: For the Duke of Ireland (with the Kings privity, such was his
false dissim^^tion) had gathered a power in Wales, and Cheshire: which they
intercepting near Burford and Bablecke ^ew Sir William Molineux, leader of the
Cheshire men, and made the Duke to fly in great fear. A^ong the Dukes
carriages was found (as the devil, or rather God would have it) certain
Letters of the ^ings to the said Duke, by which their Counsels were plainly
discovered. The Lords hereupon ^arch with speed up to London, having an Army of
forty thousand men, the Lord Major and City doubt^ll whether to displease the
King or Lords, upon consultation receive the Lords into the City, and sup^y
their Army with provisions in the Suburbs; Which the King hearing of, seemed to
slight them, say^g; Note the peril and policy of protracting.
Let them lie here till they have spent all their goods, and then they will
return poor and empty to their ^uses, and then I shall speak with and judge
them one after another. The Lords hearing this, were exceed^gly moved, and
sw^re, They would never remove the^e, till they had spoken with him face to
face. And ^rthwith sent some to guard the Thames, lest the King should slip out
of their hands, and then sco^^e at ^em. The King being then in the Tower, and
seeing himself every way encompassed, sent a message ^^ the Lords; that he
would treat with them; who thereupon desired him, That he would come the ne^^
^y to Westminster, where they would declare their desire to him: The King
replied, That he would not treat ^ith them at Westminster, but in the Tower, To
which the Lords answered, That it was a suspicious place, ^^cause trains might
there be laid for them, and dangers prepared to destroy them; Whereupon the
King ^nt word, They should send thither two hundred men or more, to search and
view all places, lest any fraud should ^e hid. Upon which the Lords repaired to
the Tower, and in the Kings Bedchamber, laid open to ^^m briefly, all his
conspiracy, in causing them indirectly to be indicted; They object to him his
mutability, ^d underhand working, producing his own Letters to the Duke of
Ireland, to raise an Army to destroy them; ^gether with the French packe^s they
had intercepted; whereby it appeared he had secretly practiced to fly with ^e
Duke of Ireland into France, to deliver up. Callice to the French Kings
possession, and such pieces as the ^rowne of England held in those parts;
whereby his honor might diminish, his strength decay, and his fame ^erish. The
King seeing this, knew no^ what to do, especially because he knew himself
notably ^e^ressed. At last craving leave, they left him confounded and shedding
tears, yet upon condition, that ^e should come to Westminster the next day,
where he should hear more, and trea^^ of the necessary affairs of the
Kingdom: Which he promised to do, retaining the Earl of Darby to sup with
him. (...) before he went to bed (O the fickleness of weak Princes, and
faithlessenesse of their royal words a(...) Protestations!) some whisperers
telling him, that it was not decent, safe, nor honorable for the King(...) go
thither, he changed his resolution. The Nobles hearing this, were very sad, and
discontented, a(...) thereupon sent him word, That if he came not quickly
according to appointment, they would choose them anoth(...) King, who both would
and should obey the Counsel of his Peers. The King struck with this dart,
came t(...) next day to Westminster, there attending his Nobles pleasures.

To whom (after few discourses) the Nobles said; That for his honor and the
benefit of his kingdom, all T(...)tors, whisperers, flat*terers, evil
instruments, slanderours, and unprositable persons should be banished out of
b(...) Court and company, and others substs^uted in their places, who both knew
how, and would serve him more honora(...) and faithfully. Which when the King
had granted (though with sorrow) they thought fit that Al(...)an^er Nevill
Archbishop of York, John Fordham, Bishop of Durham, with sundry other Lords,
Knights a(...) Clergy men should be removed and kept in strait prison, to
answer such accusations as should be object(...) against them the next Parlia.
Whereupon they were apprehended forthwith and removed from the Co(...) After
the feast of Purification, the Parliament (much against the Kings will, who
would have shifted it (...) at that time) began at London. The first day of the
Session, Fulthorpe and all the rest of the Judges w(...) arrested,* as they
sat in judgment on the Bench; and most of them sent to the Tower: for that
having fi(...) overruled the Lords with their Counsels and direction, which
they assured them to be according to Law, (...) afterward at Nottingham, gave
contrary judgment to what themselves had determined formerly. Tresilian t(...)
chief Justice prevented them by flight, but being apprehended and brought
back to the Parliament(...) the forenoone, had sentence to be drawn to
Tiburne in the afternoon, and there to have his Through(...) cut, which was done
accordingly.

The King seeing these proceedings by advise of his ill Counselors, Grafton,
p. 348, 349. 150, 151.
absented himself from his Parliament, and sent Michael de la Pole then Lord
Chancellor to demand four fifteenes in his name, ^f the Common(...) for that
without less he could not maintain his estate and outward war. To which the
body of the Parliame(...) made answer; that without the King were present, they
would make therein no answer; and that unless the Ki(...) would remove him
from his Chaneellorship, they would no further meddle with any Act this
Parliament. Th(...) King upon this sent to the Commons, that they should send
to Eltham, (where he then lay) 40. of the wis(...) and best learned of the
Commons, who in the name of the whole house should declare unto him their
mind. Up(...) which message the House were in more fear then before; for
there went a talk, that the King intended (...) betray diverse of them, which
followed not his mind, either that way, or at a banquet appointed to be made
purpos^ly a^* London, if Nicholas Exton the Mayor of London would have
consented thereunto; at which time t(...) Duke of Gloucester should have been
taken. Wherefore the Lords and Commons assembled together, agree(...) with one
assent, that the Duke of Gloucester, and Bishop of Ely should in the name of the
whole Parliament be se(...) to the King to Eltham; which was done, and the King
well pleased that they should come. When they came(...) into his presence they
most humbly saluted him, and said. Most high and redoubted Sovereign Lord, the
Lor(...) and Commons of this your Parliament assembled, with most humble
subjection unto your most royal Majesty, desi(...) your most gracious favor;
so that they may live in tranquillity and peace under you, to the pleasure of
God a(...) wealth of the Realm. On whose behalf we also show unto you, that
one old statute and laudable custom is approve(...) which no man can deny;
That the King our Sovereign Lord may once in the year lawfully summon his
high Cou(...) of Parliament, and call the Lords and Commons thereunto, as to
that which is the highest Court of this Real(...)* In which* Court all equity
and justice must shine, even as the Sun when it is at the highest, whereof
poor and ri(...) may take refreshing: where also must be reformed all the
oppressious, wrongs, exactions and enormities within t(...) Realm, and there
to consult with the wise men for the maintenance of the Kings estate. And if
(...) might be known that any persons within the Realm or without intended
the contrary, there also m(...) be devised how such evil weeds might be
destroyed. There also must be studied and foreseen, that if a(...) charge do
come upon the King and his Realm, how it may be well and honorably supported
and sustained; Hither(...) to it is thought by the whole Realm, that your
Subjects have lovingly demeaned themselves to you in ayding (...) with
substance to the best of their powers; and they desire to have knowledge, how
and by whom these goods be spe(...) One thing rests, yet to declare in their
behalf unto you: Not^. The King should be present in Parliament once in 40.
days.
how that by an old Ordinance, they have an Act, if t(...) King absent himself
40. days not being sick, but of his own mind (not heeding the charges of
his people, (...) their great pains) will not resort to his Parliament; they
then may lawfully return home to their houses: And (...) sir, you have been
absent a longer time, and yet refuse to come amongst us; which greatly is our
discom(...)fort. (And our Parliaments present case:) To this the King answered
by these words. Well we do con(...)der that the people and Commons go to rise
against us; wherefore we think we can do no better then to ask a(...) of our
Cousin the French King, and rather submit us to him, then to our own Subjects.
The Lords answered: S(...) that Counsel is not best, but a way rather to bring
you into danger For it is well known, that the French King(...) your ancient
enemy, and your greatest adversary: and if he set foot once within your Realm,
he will rather dispo(...) you, invade you, and depose you from your estate
royal, then put any hand to help you, etc. And as th(...) King cannot be
poor that has rich people; so cannot he be rich that has poor Commons. And
all these inconven(...) (...)es be comne by the evil Counsel which are about
you. And if you put not your helping hand to the redress ^he premises, this
Realm of England shall be brought to naught and utter ruin, which clearly
should be laid (...) our default, and in your evil Counsel: Seeing that in
the time of your Father, this Realm throughout all the (...)rld was highly
esteemed, and nothing ordered after these ways. Wherefore we be sent unto you,
to exhort you, to (...)uester all such persons as might be the *occasion of
ruin either of you or else of your Realm. By these good (...)swasions the
King was appeased, and promised within three days after to come to the
Parliament, and to (...)descend to their Petitions; And according to his
appointment he came. Where soon after John Fordham (...)hop os Durham was
discharged of the Treasurourship and the Bishop of Hereford ser in his place;
de la (...)le was put from his Chancellourship for diverse crimes, frauds,
briberies and treasons, by him com(...)tted, to the prejudice of the King and
his Realm, committed to the Tower, and fined 20. thousand (...)rkes to the
King, in releeving of the Commons: Diverse other Judges, Knights, and
Delinquents of all (...)ts were condemned, and executed, others banished and
their states confiscated; others put out of office (...) this Parliament, as
you may read in our Histories, and in the 10. R. c l* 11. R. 2. c. l, 29 3, 4,
5, 6. 2*. R. 2. c. 2. 3. 12.
Statutes at large: in which Statutes the (...)schievous effects of these evil
Counselors to King, Kingdom and people are at full related, whereby (...)e
King and all his Realm were very nigh to have been wholly undone and
destroyed: the Lords ^ay^g of Forces against them resolved to be lawful; and
these traytorous Delinquents made incapable of (...)y pardon; See the Records
of this Parliament, published by order of both Houses, Aug. 27. 1642.
and their raising of Arms against the Parliament and kingdom, (though with
the Kings (...)ne consent and his command) declared and enacted to be high
Treason. These proceedings ratified (...)d assented* to in Parliament by the
King, much against his will, wrought an intolerable secret (...)tred and desire
of revenge in his heart against the Lords, which for want of power he concealed
near (...) years space; but in the 20. year of his reign, being somewhat
elevated in his spirit with a rumor (...)at he should be elected Emperor; he
suddenly apprehended the Duke of Gloucester, the Earls of Warwick (...)d
Arundell (the chief sticklers in the premises) committing them to several
prisons: And to blind the (...)ples eyes, lest they should riseup in Arms to
rescue these Lords; the King sent out a feigned Proclamation, which he caused
to be proclaimed throughout the Realm) that these Lords were apprehended only
for (...)w Treasons committed against him, for which he would he prosecute them
in the next Parliament, and not for the (...) trepasses: After which he
proclaims those Lords Traitors.

Which done he summoned a Grafion, p. 329. etc. Mr. Saint-Johns Speech, 1640.
p. 33. 1. H 4. No. 21. 21. 48.
Parliament at Westminster, to this Parliament the King commanded to (...)me
all such as he had best confidence in, omitting the rest; and the Knights were
not elected by the Commons, (...)custom required they should be, but by the
Kings pleasure; yea, he put out diverse persons elected, and put in other
(...)their places to serve his turn: which was one Article objected against
him when he was deposed. Against (...)e time of this Parliament, the King
received a guard of 4000. Archers, all Cheshire men, as if he would (...)ve
gone in battle against enemies, so that diverse came armed to the Parliament out
of fear. These (...)eshiere men were rude and beastly people, and so proud of
the Kings favor, As the Cavaliers do now.
that they accounted the (...)ng to be their fellow, and set the Lords at
naught, though few of them were gentlemen, but taken from the (...)ough and
other trades. After these ^usticall people had a while courted, they grew so
bold, that they (...)uld not let neither within the Court nor without to beat
and slay the Kings good Subjects (as the Cavaliers do (...)w) and to take from
them their victuals at their pleasure, paying little or nothing for them, and
to ravish their (...)ves and daughters: And if any man persumed to complain to
the King of them, he was soon rid out of (...) way, no man knew why, nor by
whom: so that in effect they did what they listed. In this Parliament (...)
King having made the Speaker, and a great part of mercinary, proud, ambitious
men of the Commons (...)use to be of his side, to act what he required them; he
then prevayled likewise with the upper house, (...) with the Prelates, then
with the Lords, more out of fear of him, then any reason, by means where(...)
the Commission, Charters of pardon, and Acts made in Parliament in the 10. and
11. year of his reign (...)re quite revoked and declared void in Law, as
being done without authority and against the will and (...)ertie of the King
and of his Crown: And withal they declared the Judges opinions for which they
were (...)demned in that Parliament, to be good and lawful, and attainted the
said imprisoned Lords of high (...)eason, and confiscated their lands. The two
Earls hereupon were beheaded, and the Duke (by reason (...)is p^pulat^tie)
smothered, only for their former actions; which done, the King adjourned the
Par(...)ent to Shrew^bury where he subrilly procured an 21. R. c. 12.
Act to pass by common consent, that the power (...)he Parliament should
remain in seven or eight persons, who (after the Parliament dissolved) should
deter(...)e certain petitions delivered that Parliament; and not dispatched.
By color whereof, Those Commit(...) proceeded to other things generally
touching the Parliament, and that by the Kings app(...)meant, in derogatien ( p)
21. R. 2. c. 16. Walsing. Hist. Aug. Ann^* 1398. p, 394*
(...)he state of the Parliament, the dis^ommodity and pernicious example of
the whole Realm* And by color (...) Authority hereof, the King caused the
Parliament Rols to be altered and defaced, against the effect of the (...)said
grant. After which he much vexed and oppressed his people with diverse forced
Loanes, Oaths, (...)positions, and oppressing Projects to raise money, seeking
to trample them under his feet* and (...)roy the Realm; and took all the
Jewels of the Crown with him into Ireland without the Kingdoms (...)sent*
Which rendered him so odious to his people, that Henry Duke of Lancaster,
landing in England, the whole kingdom came flocking to his aid, so that he
had an Army of 60000. men in a short time; who v(...)ed to prosecute the Kings
ill Counselors. Whereupon King Richard returning out of Ireland, hearing
(...) the Dukes great Army assembled against him, and knowing that they would
rather dye then yield, (...) of their hatred, and sear of him, he dismissed
his Courtiers, hiding obscurely in corners till he was a(...) prehended, and by
a Parliament summoned in his name (though against his will) judicially deposed
(...) his misgovernment.

Among which Articles of his misgovernment, for which he was judicially
dethroned, these are rema(...)able. First, Graft. p. 400, 401, 402, etc.
That he was^fully spent the Treasure of the Realm, and had given the
possessions of the Crow(...) to men unworthy, by reason whereof daily new
charges more and more, were laid on the necks of the poor C(...)monalty. And
when diverse Lords were appointed by the High Court of Parliament to commune and
t(...) of diverse matters concerning the Commonwealth of the same, which being
busy about those Commissions, he (...) other of his affinity, went about to
impeach them of high Treason, and by force and threatening, compelled (...)
Justices of the Realm at Shrewesbury, to condescend to his opinion, for the
destruction of the said Lords; (...) so much that he began to raise war
against John Duke of Lancaster, Thomas Earl of Arundell, Rich(...) Earl of
Warwick, and other Lords, contrary to his honor and promise.

Item, He assembled certain Lancashire and Cheshire men, to the intent to make
war on the fores(...) Lords; and suffered them to rob and pillage without
correction or reproof.

Item, Although the King flatteringly, and with great dissimulation made
Proclamation throughout (...) Realm, that the Lords before named, were not
attached for any crime of Treason, but only for extortions (...) oppressions
done in the Realm, yet be laid to them in the Parliament, rebellion and
manifest Treason.

Item, He has compelled diverse of the said Lords servants and friends, by
menace and extreme pains, (...) make great sines to their utter undoing. And
notwithstanding his pardon to them granted, yet he made the fine of new.

Item, That he put out diverse Note.
Sheriffs lawfully elected, and put in their rooms, diverse of his own
Mi(...)ons, subverting the Law, contrary to his Oath and Honor.

Item, For to serve his purpose, he would suffer the Sheriffs of the Shire to
remain above one year or two.

Item, He borrowed great sums of money, and bound him under his Letters
Patents for repayment of the sa(...) and yet not one penny paid.

Item, He taxed men at the will of him and his unhappy Council, and the same
Treasure spent in folly, not pay(...) poor men for their victual and viand.

Item, He said, That the Laws of the Realm were in his head, and sometime in
his breast, by reason of wh(...) fantastical opinion, he destroyed Noble men,
and impoverished the Commons.

Item, The Parliament settling and enacting diverse notable Statutes for the
profit and advancement of the Co(...)monwealth, he by his private friends and
solicitors, caused to be enacted; Such a kind of proviso was endeavored to
beadded to the Petition of Right, 3 Caroli
That no Act then enacted should (...) more prejudicial to him, then it was to
any of his Predecessors, though with proviso he did often as he listed, (...)
not as the Law meant.

Item, That he at his going into Ireland, exacted many notable sums of money,
besides Plate and Jew(...) without Law or custom, contrary to his Oath taken
at his Coronation.

Item, That without the assent of the Nobility, he carried the Jewels, Plate,
and Treasure of the kingdom o(...) the Sea, in to Ireland, to the great
impoverishing of the Realm. And all the good Records for the Comm(...) wealth,
and against his extortions, he privily caused to be imbezeled and conveyed away.

Item, When diverse Lords and Justices were sworn to say the truth of diverse
things to them committed in cha(...) both for the honor of the Realm, and
profit of the King, the said King so menaced them with sore threatening (...)
that no man would, or durst say the right.

Item, He most tyrannically and unprincely said, that the lives and goods of
all his Subjects were in the Prin(...) hands, and at his disposing.

Item, He craf^ily devised certain privy Oaths, contrary to the Law, and
caused diverse of his Subjects, f(...) to be sworn to observe the same, an^
after bound them in bonds for the firmer keeping of the same, to the great
(...) doing of many honest men.

Which how parallel they are to the late and present Court Practices, and
Doctrines of our times, (...) wise men determine. The King being thus
Judicially dethroned in Parliament, Henry the fourth (...) the same Parliament,
(which continued notwithstanding Richards deposition who summoned it) (...)
created King, who in the ^ H. 4. c. 1. 2, 3, 4.
first Parliament of his Reign, reversed, and annulled as illegal, the
P(...)liament of 21 Rich. 2. with all its Acts, Circumstances and dependants;
and revived that of 11 Rich. 2. (...) all points, as made for the great honor,
and common profit of this Realm. To these I might add t(...) Walsing. hist.
Angl. p. 416. 417. Ypodig. p. 168. 170. Pol. l. 8. c. 10. Caxt. p. 430. Hal
Chr. par. 1. f. 25 Hol. p 529. Speed p. 775. Maroin Fabian, Grafion, and others.
Rebellious insurrectious of Richard Scroope, Archbishop of York, the Earl
of Northumber land, a(...) their Accomplices, against King Henry the fourth, Anno
1405. to reform the State and government, (...) lieve the Church and Common
weal, and Depose King Henry in and by a forced Parliament. The Spee. p. 486
Hunting. lib. 8.
insurrection of the Popish Nobles against King Stephen, for violating his
Oath, touching Forests, and (...) there immunities of Church and Commonwealth,
which they would force him ^o confirm; the several Wal^ing* ham. Hist. Angl.
p. 258. to 281. Speed* ^. 849. etc. 734. etc.
insurrections of Jacke Cade, Jacke Straw, Wat* Tyler, and their Popish Vulgar
rabble, to force their King* to call Parliaments, to alter and repeal old
Laws, enact new, displace offensive great Officers, promote new ones of their
nomination, to ratify what propositions they required, and subvert the
government of the Real(...): with the Speed. p. 1032* to 1049* 1112. to 1120.
See Hall, Grafton, Holinshed, Howes, Martin in the lives of H. 8. Ed 6. and Q.
Eliz.
several Rebellions of the Popish Lincolne-shire and Yorke-shire men, under
Doctor Mackarell, a Monk, and some men of quality in Henry the 8* his reign;
Of the Cornish men, Norsolke men, Ket* and others in Edward the 6. his rule; of
the Popish Earls of Northumberland, Westmoreland, and other Northern Papists
in Queen Elizabeth's days, by force of Arms to compel^ these several Princes
to summon Parliaments to repeal all Laws against Moss and Popery, and for
the establishment of the Protestant Religion, with other Acts concerning the
government of the Commonwealth, to enact diverse new Laws and propositions;
which they demanded, to remove great Officers and privy Counselors from
their places, and the like* All which transcend the Acts and proceedings of
this or any other our Protestant Parliaments or subjects, being done without
any preceding Order or resolution of both houses, representing the whole
Kingdom, and against the general consent of the people. But I shall conclude
with one ancient* president more, in one of our be^^ Kings reigns, In 25. E.
1. Walsig. Hist. Angl. p. 36 37* 38. 39* 40. 41. 42, 44. 48. Ypoaigm^.
Neustriae. p. 83. 84. 85. 86. 97. Cooks Magna Charta p. 530. to 580.
The Lords and Commons in Parliament grievously complained and Petitioned to
the King against diverse taxes, tallages, and pris^ges wherewith they were
oppressed by him, to the great impoverishing of the Realm; against the
violation of Magna Charta, the Charter of the Forest, the imposition upon
Woolls, and their sommons to go with him into Flanders, to which they were not
bound by Law* The King excusing these taxes, by reason of his necessity to
mainetaine the wars, and giving them a dilatory answer; the Earl Marshall,
and Hereford withdrew themselves from Parliament, and with their accomplices,
commanded the Barrons of the Eschequor not to levy the 8. penny of the people,
granted to the King at S. Edmonds; and induced the Citizens of London to join
with them to recover their Liberties. Whereupon the King sending to them for
peace, they would condescend to no peace but on these terms; That the King
should confirm Magna Charta, and Charta de Forresta, with the other Articles
to them annexed; that he should enact and take no ayds, tax, or tallage from
the Clergy or Commons without their common consent in Parliament, and that he
should remit all offenses to these Earls, and their confederates, all which
the King ratified by his Articuli s^per Charta^.
Charter at large, by his oath, and by a solemn excommunication of the Bishops
twice every yeate, of all those who should transgress this Charter of his; For
which the Laity gave him the 9* and the Clergy the 10. penny of their goods.
And because this confirmation was made in Scotland, the Kings, and diverse
others promised for him, that he should confirm it when he came into England,
which they pressing him to do in a Parliament at London, in the 27. year of
his Reign; after some delays, he ratified it with this addition in the close;
saving the right of our Crown, which when the Lords heard, they departed home
in great discontent; but the King re-sommoning them at quinidena Pasche,
granted all things absolutely according to their desire, committing the
per-ambulation of the Forests throughout England to 3. Bishops, 3 Earls, and
3. Barrons, to settle their bounds according to God and justice: which not
being speedily executed but neglected (the King having purchased a dispensation
of his oath, wherewith he had ratified his foresaid Charter, from the Pope)
(...)ereupon the King holding a Parliament at Stamford, the 29. of his Reign,
the Lords and Barrons repaired thither with great store of horses and Arms,
with a purpose to extort a^ull execution of the Charter of the Forest hither
to deferred: upon which the King, considering their earnestness and
importunity, condescended to their will in all things.

Sixthly, Parliaments, Lords and Prelates in former times have affirmed; that
when a Parliament was once met together by lawful sommons, it might not be
dissolved or discontinued again at the Kings mere pleasure, till all the
public affairs for which it was called were dispatched, all grievances
redressed, and all Petitions exhibited therein, fully heard, and answered;
agreeable to the resolution of the great Surius Council. Tom. 4. p. 103* etc.
Fox Act. and Monuments. vol. 1. ^dit*ult p. 879 etc*
Councils of Basil, Constans, and diverse Popish John White his way, etc. Sect
37 n. 30. p. 102*
Writers, that a general Council once lawfully sommoned by ^he Pope and met,
cannot be dissolved by him again at his pleasure, without the Councels
consent, before all the Churches affairs be therein settled: Upon which
resolution th^se Coun^ells continued together and deposed sundry Popes
notwithstanding their Bulls to dissolve them, to keep themselves in their
chaires. This is apparent; first by the Ancient Treatise, Of the manner of
holding Parliaments in England: which informs us; That the first day of the
Parliament, public Proclamations ought to be made in the City or Town where
the Parliament is kept; That all those who would deliver Petitions or Bills to
the Parliament, should deliver them in a certain time: That the Parliament
should not depart so long as any Petition made thereto ^angeth undiscussed or
undecided, or at the least to which there is not made a determinate answer: the
Kings Majesty being desirous of his grace and favor to give the ^ubject
redress of any injury, not to suffer his people to go unsatisfied. Hence
departing of the Parliament OUGHT TO BE in such manner. First IT OUGHT TO BE
demanded, yea and publicly proclaimed in the Parliament, and within ^he
Palace of the Parliament, whether there be any that has delivered a ^etition
to the Parliament, and ^ath not received answer thereto? If there he none such,
it i^ supposed that every one is satisfied, or else answered unto at the least,
So far forth as by Law it may be. And then all may depart. Hence it wa^, that
in 21. R. 2. c. 16. 17. 18. 19. diverse Petitions not read nor answered in
Parliament by reason of ^ See Wal^ingham, Mat. Paris, Fabian, Holinshed,
Grafton, Martyn, Speed, in their lives.
shortness of time, and not determined sitting the Parliament, were by
special Acts of Parliament referred to diverse Lords and Commons, to examine,
answer, and plainly determine all matters contained in the said Petitions, as
they should think best by their good advise and discretion; even out of
Parliament; which they heard and determined accordingly, and made binding Acts
thereupon, as appears by the statutes themselves. This Doctrine was very well
known to King John, Henry the 3. Edward the 2. Richard the 2. Henry the 6. and
Edward the 4. the Parliaments which opposed, and deposed most of them, sitting
and continuing sitting, both before and after their deposing sore against their
wills, as the fore-remembred histories manifest; else no doubt they would have
broken up all these Parliaments at their pleasure, and never permitted such
Acts and Judgments to pass against themselves, Favorites, ill Counselors,
pretended Prerogatives, had they lawful power to dissolve them, summoned in
their names, or the Parliaments actually determined by their depositions, or
resignations, as we find they did not, and none ever yet held they did. King
Richard the 2 fearing the loss of his Crown, or some restraints by Laws, in
the 11. year of his reign, proposed this question among others, to his Judges
at Nottingham Castle; which (for ought I find) was never doubted before. See
21 R. 2. c. 12.
Whether the King whenever pleases him, might dissolve the Parli^ment, and
command his Lords, and Commons to depar^ from thence or not? Whereunto it was
of one mind answered, that he may: and if any would proceed in (c)
Wal^ingham, Holinshed, Fabian, Graft. Speed. in 11. R. 2. and the Statuts at
large that year.
the Parliament against the Kings will, he is to be punished as a Traitor. For
which opinion and others, some of these Judges and Lawyers (as Trysi^ian and
Blake) were condemned of high Treason the next Parliament 11. R. 2. drawn upon
a hurdle to Tyburne, and there executed, as Traitors to the King and
Commonwealth: others of them ( who delivered their opinions rather out of fear
of death, and bodily tortures then malice) were yet condemned as Traitors and
banished the Kingdom, only their lives were spared. True it is, that the
packed and over-^wed Parliament of 21. R. 2. (terrified by the Kings unruly
great guard of Cheshire Archers forementioned) 21. R. 2. c. 12. being
specially interrogated by the King; how they thought of these answers of the
Judges, said; That they thought they gave their answers duly and faithfully,
as good and lawful l^ige people of the King ought to do: But yet the
Parliament of 1 H. 4. c. 3. 4. repealed this Parliament of 21. R. 2. with all
its circumstances and dependents, revived the Parliament of 11 R. 2. with the
judgments and proceedings, given against these treacherous temporising Judges,
as a thing made for the great honor and common profit of the Realm. Besides,
the Cook 9. Rept. f. 1. in the Epistle. 4. E. 3. c. 14. ^6. E. 3. c. 10.
Statutes of King Alfred, and Edward the 3. (which enact, that a Parliament
shall be holden once every year, and oftener if need be, for redress of
mischiefs and grievances which daily happen) strongly intimate, that if a
Parliament ought in Law to be called as often as need is, of purpose to
redress the Subjects grievances and mischiefs; then it ought not in point of
Law to be dissolved, till these greivances, and mischiefs (f) Magna Charta.
1556. part. 2. f. 164.
be redressed; else the sommoning of it would be to no purpose, and bring a
great trouble and charge to the whole kingdom, without any benefit at all;
Moreover the King by his Oath, is bound to do equal justice and right to all
his Subjects in all his Courts of justice: In Magna Charta c. 29. he makes this
Portestation; We shall deny nor defer to no man, either Justice or right: and
by sundry other 18. E. 3. Stat. 3. 20* E* 3. c. ^.
Acts, all the Kings Judges are sworn and commanded, to do even Law and
execution of right to all his subjects rich or poor, without having regard to
any person, and without letting or delaying to do right for any Letters,
Writs, or Commandments that shall come to them from the King or any others,
and shall do nothing by virtue of them, but go forth to do the Law, and hold
their Courts, and Processes where the Pleas and matters be depending before
them, notwithstanding, a^ if no such Letters, Writs, or Commandments, were
come unto you. The makers therefore of these O^thes and Laws (in days of
Popery) and the Parliaments of 2. E. 3. c. 8, 14. E. 3. c. 14. 1. R. 2. c. 2.
which Enact. That it shall not be commanded by the great seal or little seal,
to delay or disturb common right, and though such commandments do come, the
Justices shall not therefore leave to do right in ANY POINT, that Justice and
right be indifferently ministered to every of the Kings Subjects: did certainly
believe, that the King neither by his great nor privy seal, nor by Writ or
Letter could without just or lawful cause assigned, prorogue or adjourne the
Te^me or sitting of any Courts of Justice, much less prorogue or dissolve his
highest Court, and grand Counsel of the Realm, the Parliament, or disable
them to fit to redress the Kingdoms and subjects several grievances, or
secure the Realm from danger; Which if he might lawfully do at his pleasure,
without the Houses joint assents, there would necessarily follow, not only a
deferring and denial, but likewise a fayler of Justice in the highest Court or
Session; which these Acts disable the King (who is so far inferior to the
Law, that he cannot so much as delay the smallest proceedings of it in any
Court or Session; by his supreme power, by any means whatsoever) to effect in
his meanest Courts, much less then in the greatest; from whence the subvertion
of Laws, Liberty, Justice, and the whole Realm would ensue. If any therefore
cavil at the All for the continuance of this Parliament, till both houses
shall agree to adjourne or dissolve it; or at the Bill for Trienniall
Parliaments, which when they meet, shall not be dissolved without their
consents for 40. days space next after their first meeting: Let them now
learn, that this is no Innovation, nor encroachment on the Crown, but an
ancient Privilege of Parliament, both claimed, practiced and resolved in times
of Popery, in an higher degree then now it is. And thus you see how in these
particulars, the Popish Parliaments, Prelates, Lords and Commons in former
times, have claimed and exercised far greater Privileges and Jurisdictions,
then this or any other P^orestant Parliament has hitherto claimed or
practiced: which I hope will for ever silence the clamourous tongues of all ill
Counselors, Courtiers, Royalists, Malignants, Papists, and Cavaliers against
the present Parliament, of whose highest (ye^ moderate) proceed^ngs, themselves
alone have been the occasions, and therefore (of all others) have least cause
to complain against them.

But to return again to the first grand Objection. Thirdly I answer, that the
High Court of Parliament, and whole kingdom which it represents, may in diverse
respects be truly and properly 3. The Parliament and kingdom proved to be
above the king.
said, to be the Highest Sovereign power of all others, and above the King
himself; which because it may ^eeme a dangerous paradox, and tends much to the
vindication both of the Privileges, Honor, and ^urisdictions of our High
Court of Parliament, (now so much undervalued, because not really known to
most) and to the justification of the proceedings in this present Parliament,
which many out of ignorance and malice so much declaime against both by Word
and writing, in a most licentious manner; I shall take a little liberty to
demonstrate the truth of it, by such convincing reasons of Authorities, as no
rational man (I hope) shall be able to contradict, but must necessarily submit
to.

First, it is undeniable that See Cromptons jurisdiction of Courts Title
Parliament. Brook Title Parliament. Holinsh. Description of England c. 8. p.
173. Chron. of Ireland, p. 120 to 130. Sir Th. Smiths Commonwealth of England.
l. 2. c. 1. 2. 3. Cowel and Minshew. Tit. Parliament, Camdens Brit. p. 177.
the Court of Parliament has a lawful power, to question all the Kings
Pa^ents, Charters, Commissions, Proclamations, Grants, Warrants, Writs, and
Commitments whatsoever, whether they be Legal? yea to cancel or repeal them
in case they be illegal, mischeivous, or onerous to the Subject, not only
without but against the Kings consent, and mandate to the contrary; as appears
by infinite presidents in this and all former Parliaments, the scourges of
Monopolists, Patentees and Projectors, the Pests of the Commonwealth. The like
power have all other Courts of Justice within the Kingdom in some degree, when
such Charters and Writs of the King are brought judicially before them, because
they are Courts of the Law, to which the King and all his Actions are and must
be subject. Now that which can thus question, cancel, disanull, revoke the
Kings own royal Charters, Writs, Commissions, Patents, etc. though ratified
with the great seal and regal power, even against his will, must certainly
be a Sovereign power and Authority, which in point of Law and Justice is
fu^eriour to the King, This is Bractons resolution, l. 2. c. 16. f 34 a, and
Fletaes l. 1. c. 17. Where ^hey affirm, the Law and Parliament to be above the
King, because they may censure, judge, and rescinde the Kings Acts and
Charters, legally and judicially, even against his personal, though not legal
Will, which ^s the Law.

Secondly, It is unquestionably true, that in all cases of difference between
the King, and all or any of his Subjects, though they concern the Kings
Prerogative and the highest branches thereof, the Parliament is the supremest
and most proper judge, and its resolution (from which there is no appeal ^o
any higher tribunal) shall finally bind not only all the subjects, but the
King himself, notwithstanding his own personal disassent. This is manifest
by the many late resolutions given in Parliament against sundry Patents,
Commissions, Writs, Charters, Impositions, Loanes, Shipmoney, ( i) See 21.
Jacob. c. 3. Co. l. 8. f. 125. to 130. l. 10. f. 113. l. 11. f. 84. to 89. Fitz
Brook, and Ash. Tit. Charters, and Grant le Roy, Comissions, Habeas Corpus,
Bail, and the Judges arguments against Shipmoney.
Forrest-Bounds, Marshall Law, Pressing and ^illetting soldiers, Imprisonment
by special Command of the King or his Privy Counsel, Tonnage and Poundage,
Knighthood and Taxes, The Commission of Array, and ^he like, which obliege both
King and Subject; the King in receiving justice, in such cases, being subject
^o the Law as well as the meanest of his subjects; as Rex in justitia re^
pienda minimo de ^egno suo comparatur: minimus esse debet vel qua^i in judicio
suscipiendo, Bracton. l. 1. c. 8. f. 5. b. and l. 3 c 9. f. 107.
Bracton truly avers, against all Royalists mistakes. Now that which can thus
finally conclude and bind the King himself, even volens nolens, ^n cases of
highest concernment, entrenching farthest upon his Prerogative Royal, must
doubtless ^e the most Sovereign power, Superior to the Kings. And in this
sense every Court of Justice whose just resolutions, and every petty Jury,
whose upright verdicts obliege the King (because war^anted by the Law which is
paramont, the King (as Bracton, Lib. 1. c. 5. 17.
Fleta, Cap. 9. to 15.
Fortescus, Speech in Parliament. 1609
King James, In his ^awes in Fox Acts and Mon. Edit. vol 1. p. 214.
Edward the Conf^ssor; yea and (q) Aristotle, resolve) may be truly said to be
above the Kings ^erson, which they bind; but not above the Parliament, which
by its suparlative power may examine ^ll 1 H. 7. 1. Br. parliament, 92. Ash.
tab. 65. 67.
judgments and verdicts in other Courts by way of error, or appeal, and
reverse them if there be ^^use, when as the King in person cannot by law
examine or reverse them, but only in his Courts ^f Justice, by his Judges.

Thirdly, Parliaments often times do, and may as they see cause, enlarge the
Kings Prerogative and Royal ^ower in sundry particulars, in which the King had
no such jurisdiction before these Acts; witness the ^tatute de Praerogativa
Regis. 25. H. 8. c. 19. 20, 21. 26. H. 8. c. 1. 3. 31. H. 8. c. 8. 9. 34. and
35. H. ^. c. 23. 27, H. 8. c. 15. 28. H. 8. c. 7. 17. 3. and 4. E. 6. c. 11.
12. 1. Eliz. 1. 2. with sundry more. Now (^) Lib. 1. c. 8. l. 3. c. 9. f. 107.
(r) polit. l. 3. c. 1^* 11. 12.
that Parlimentary power, which only can create and confer on Kings a
greater regal Authority and Prerogative then they had before; must needs be
the Original and supreme authority: for as we rightly argue See 1 Eliz. c.
1. Rastal. Tit Sewers: or Commissioners. Rastall. Tit. Justices, etc.
that the Kings Authority is superior to all other his greatest Officers and
subordinate Ministers of Justice, because their power is by Patent, or
Commission derived from his: So we may from the selfsame reason conclude;
that the High Court of Parliaments power (the representative body of the whole
kingdom) is the most primitive, sovereign, and greatest authority of all
other, yea larger and higher than the kings; Qui^quid ^fficit tale est magis
tale, and nemo potest dare quod non habet: are true in this case.
because it only can enlarge the Kings prerogative, whose original or
additionall Royalties, proceed not from the king himself, or his Ancestors
own inherent hereditary power, (for what king could justly without his peoples
consents, usurp a Crown or lawful royal Prerogative to himself, over an
whole Country?) but merely from the voluntary consent and grant of his people
in the Parliament. This is irrefragably evident not only by the various See
Alex. ab Alexandro. ^. 3. c. 2. Facile perspici potest and regni multa esse
genera, nec eandemimperii formam, in omnibus esse regibus. Regalis potentiae
gen^ra numero sunt quatuo^. Aristot. Polit. l. 3. c. 10. 11. See Dan. c. 8. and
11.
kinds of kings; whereof some are of greater power and authority, others of
less; some by Election, others by succession, by reason of their Subjects
original institution; by the diverse alterations of the Monarchy in this
kingdom, which has* been sometimes divided into 7. sometimes into 5.
sometimes into 3. or two kingdoms, and at last reduced unto one; by the great
changes and alterations made in all foreign Realms, which have sometimes
multiplied, sometimes diminished the number and power of their Princes, and
sometimes quite abolished the royal form of Government, changing it into an
Aristocraticall or popular rule: by the divine Authority of S. Peter, who in
this regard calls Kings and their Supremacy, a 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14. Alex ab
Alexandro. Genesis Dier^m l. 3* c. 3. l. 4. c. 23.
humane creature, or Ordinance of man, because instituted, limited, and molded
into several degrees of power by men over whom they r^igne^ by two express
determinations of Aristotle in these terms Politicorum l. 3. c 10. p. 209 2^0.
Regna patriis moribus and legibus FVNDATA and CONFIRMATASVNT. And Ibid l. 5,
c, ^3 p. 367.
Verum Regnum est imperium, majoribus and praestantioribus viris VOLVNTAT ^
CIVIVM DELATVM: seconded by De Officiis, l. 2. Caeli^^ Rhodi Antiq. Lect l 8.
c. 1 Alexander ab Alexandro Genesis Dierum l. 4. ^. 23. Livie. Hist Romans l. 1.
Sect. 17. p. 14. 15. and l. 4 p. 144. 145. Pl^^archi Num^ ^ompilius.
Tully, Livie and others, but likewise by Andrew Horn, an eminent Lawyer in
Edward the 1. his reign, in his Myrro^r of Justices: Chap. 1. Sect. 2. p. 7.
8. 9. where he thus writes of the original institution of our English
Monarchs. After that God had abated the Nobility of the Britans, who rather
used force then right, he delivered it to the most humble and simple of all the
neighbor Nations, the Saxons; who came from Germany to conquer it, of which
Nation there have been 40. Kings, all which held themselves to have
COMPANIONS. These Princes called this Land England, which before was named
Greater Britain. These after great wars, elected from among them a King to
Reign over them, to govern the people of God, and to maintain and defend
their persons and goods in peace, by the Rules of Law (or Right:) And at the
beginning they caused the King to swear, that he will maintain the holy
Christian faith to the utmost of his power, and guide his people by p See
Matthew Paris, Speed, Holinshed, Grafton, and others.
Law, without respect to any person, and shall be obedient to suffer (or
undergo) Law, as well as others of his people. And afterward this Realm was
turned to an heritage, according to the number of his Companions, who divided
the Realm into 38. Counties, and delivered each one a County, to keep and
defend from Enemies, according to every ones estate. And although the King
ought to have no P^^res in the Land, yet because if the King of his own wrong
should offend against any of his people, neither he, nor any his Commissaries,
can be both Judge and Party; OF RIGHT IT BEHOOVES, that the King should have q
Livie Hist. Romans l. 1. Arist Polit. l. 2. c. 8. Goodwins Romans A^tiq.
COMPANIONS, for to hear and determine in Parliaments all the Writs and
Plaints of the wrongs of the King, the Queen, and their children, and of those
especially, of whose wrongs they could no^ otherwise have common right These
Companions are now called Counts, after the Latin Comites; and so at this day
these Countries are called Counties, and in Latin Comitatus, etc. Henry de
Bracton, who writ in Henry the 3. his reign as in his forecited Passages; so
in others, resolves; Lib. 1. c, 8. f. 5. lib. 3. c 9, f* 07.
That the King is under the Law, because the Law makes him a King, by giving
him dominion and power: Now how does the Law thus make him a king, but by the
Parliament, the kingdoms great Counsel, by whose counsel and consent alone
all Laws were first enacted, and yet are, as the Hujusmodi leges Anglicanae
cum. ^uer^m approbatae, and Sacramento Regis confirmatae mutari non poterunt,
etc. Idem l. ^* c. 2, f. 1. 6.
same Author informs us, who further adds* That the King ought to be under
the Law, because Christ whose Vicar he is on Earth, when he came to redeem
mankind, made choice of this way especially to destroy the works of the
Devil, using not the strength of his power, but the reason of his justice, and
so would be Gal. 4. 4. ^.
under the Law, that he might redeem those that are under the Law; Thus the
Virgin Mary the mother of our Lord, who by singular privilege was above the
Law, yet to show an example of humility, refused not to be a subject to Legal
Ceremonies. So therefore the King, lest his power should remain unbridled,
there ought not to be a greater then he in the Kingdom in the exhibition of
Justices; yet he OUGHT TO BE THE LEAST, or AS THE LEAST IN RECEIVING IVDGMENT,
if he require it. ^ract. ^^^. 3. c. 9. f. 107. lib. 1. c. 8. f. 5. l. 2. c. 16.
f. 24.
That a King is created and elected, (by whom but by his kingdom?) to this
purpose, to do justice unto all. That a king cannot do any thing else in
earth (seeing be is Gods Minister and Vicar) ni^^id solum quod de jure a Luke
2. 22. 23. 24.
^otest: but that only which he can do by Law. That God, the Law, and his
Court (to wit) the Earls and Barons (in Parliament) are above the King, and
ought to bridle him, and are thence called Comites vi^: quia a Comitatu ^ive a
societate nomen sumpserunt, qui etiam dic^ possunt Consules a consulendo; Reges
enim tales si^^ associant ad consulendum and regendum populum Dei. ordina^tes
eos in magna potestate, honor and nomine etc. Idem. l. ^. c. 8. f. 5. 6.
Co^ites; because they are the Kings Companions. Fleta an Ancient Law-booke,
written in King Edward ^he third his reign, lib. 3. c. 3. and 17. uses the
self same words that Bracton does; and concludes that the King has a
Superior, to wit, God, and the Law, by which be is made a King, and his Court
of Earls and Barons; to wit, the Parliament. De Laudibus Legum Argliae. c. 9.
to 15.
Fortescue a great Lawyer, Chauncellor to King Henry the 6. ^roves at large,
That the King is not above but under the Law that be cannot alter the Law of
Ergland, ^or ^ay any Taxes at all on his Subjects but by Parliament. That all
lawful Kings and Kingdoms were at ^^rst created and erected only by the
unanimous free assent of the people: that the kingdom of England is a Po^cie,
or Aristocraticall mixed Government, not an absolute royal Soveraignety; That
the Hanc potestatem a pop^lo effluxam ipse habet etc. p. 25.
King has his ^^yall power DERIVED TO HIM FROM THE PEOPLE, whereby it is
unlawful for him to ^le his people by any other power: which he prosecutes in
sundry chapters too tedious to transcribe, and in one word, Chap. 8. vol. ^.
page 173.
Raphael Holinshed, John Vowell and others, in their Description of England,
^rinted Cum Privilegio, resolve thus of the Parliaments power. This House, has
the most high and ^bsolute power of the Realm, for thereby kings and mighty
Princes have from time to time been ^eposed from their thrones, and Laws are
enacted and abrogated; Offenders of all sorts punished, and cor^pted Religion,
either disanulled or reformed. It is THE HEAD AND BODY OF ALL THE ^EALME, and
the place where every particular man is intended to be present, if not by
himself, yet by ^s Advocate and Attorney: For this cause any thing that is
there enacted, is not to be withstood but obeyed ^^ all men, without
contradiction or grudge: and to be short, all that ever the people of Rome
might do, ei^^er Centuriatis Comitiis, or Tribunitiis, the same is and may be
done by the Authority of Parliament. Now the Romans in their assemblies had
power to enact binding Laws, to create and elect ^^eir Kings and Emperors,
and likewise to judge, censure, and depose them: to create and elect all kinds
^^ Officers, and to See Bodine l. 2. c 5. l. ^. c. 10 Eutropius and Grimston in
the life of Nero, Maximinius, Heliogabalits and others. Livy* Romans Hist. l. 1.
and ^^
change the very form of their State and Government (as I shall hereafter
manifest) Therefore by these Authors resolution, the Parliament has an
absolute power to do the like, when ^hey see just cause. Sir Thomas Smith one
of the Principal Secretaries of State to King Edward the 6. and Queen
Elizabeth and a Doctor of Law, in his Commonwealth of England, l. 2. c. 1. in
the old, but ^^* in the last Edition, has the same words in effect with
Holinshead, and adds, that the Parliament gi^eth form of Succession to the
Crown, etc. Our kings royal power being then originally derived to them,
conferred on them by the peoples and kingdoms common consents in Parliament,
and all their ^ew additionall Prerogatives too; as the premises evidence, it
cannot be denied, but that the whole ^ingdome and Parliament, are really in
this sense above him, and the most Sovereign prime power, ^^om whence all
other powers were, and are derived. See Fortescue, c. 9. to 15.

Fourthly, This is undeniable, because the whole kingdom in Parliament, may
not only aug^ent, but likewise * abridge, allay, abolish, and resume some
branches of the Kings royal power and ^^erogative if there be just cause, as
when it becomes onorous, mischievous and dangerous to the Sub^ects*
inconvenient to, or inconsistent with the kingdoms, peoples welfare, peace,
safety, Liberty, or ^he Laws; this is most apparent by Magna Charta; Charta de
Forresta, Statutum de Prerogativa Regis; and De Tall^gio non-concedendo. 1. E.
3. c. 6 7. 2. E. 3. c. 2. 8. 3. E. 1. c. 35. 9. E. 3. c. 12. 5. E 3. c. ^. 10.
E. 3. c. 2. 3* 14. E 3. c. 1. 14. 18. E. 3. c. 8. 25 E. 3. c. 4. Stat. 3. c. 1,
2. and Stat. 5. c. 8. 11. 36. E. 3 c. 10. ^ 7. E. 3. c. 18. 42. E. 3. c. 3. 10.
R. 2. c. ^. 11. R. 2. c. 1. to 7. 1. R. 3. c. 2. 4. H. 4. c 13. 21. Jac. c. 2.
3. 24. 7. H. 8 c. 3 ^he Petition of Right. 3. Caroli. most Statuts against
Purveyens, Pardons, Protections, the Acts made this Parliament against
Ship Money, Knighthood, Forrest-bounds, Pressing of Soldiers, the
Star Chamber, High Commission, the Trienniall Parliament, the Continuance of
this Parliament, whiles they please, with See the Arguments against Shipmoney
and Impositions, and the Declarations against the Commission of Array.
sun^ry other Acts, which restrain, abridge, repeal* and resume diverse real
and pretended branches of the ^ings royal Prerogative, because they proved
grievous, and mischievous to the people, and dangeous and pernicious to the
kingdom. This then answers that irrational, groundless position of Doctor
Fern; That Resolving of Conscience Sect: 4. 5.
the Subjects neither lawfully may, nor ought in any case to resume al or any
part of that Regal power wherewith they have once invested their Kings by
common consent. Which as it is contrary ^o that received principle of nature
and reason: Eodem modo quo quid constituitur, dissolvitur, That ^ll Governments
created by men's consents, may be altered, diminished, or repealed by their
consents, ^^ See Joshua, Judges, Samuel Kings, Chron. Daniel throughout ^saiah,
Jeremy, Ezickiel in sundry chap.
sundry Presidents and Prophesies in Scripture concerning the alterations, the
Subversions, and Dimi^utions of kings and kingdoms; to the constant practice
of See Sleidan. de 4. or Imperiis: Mat. West. Livy, Justin, Opmerus, Purchase,
Chronicon ^hronicorum; and all general Histories.
all Realms and States whatsoever, from ^dam till this instant, who have
undergone many strange alteratians, eclipses, diminutions, yea Pe^^ods of
Government: to the Resolution of Polit. l. 2, 3, 4, 5. Plato de Republica,
Bodius Common wealth: The Repub* of ^undry Nations*
Aristotle and al other Polititions, who hold all forms of Government
changeable and revocable, without any injustice, if necess^ry or convenient; So
likewise ^o the very end for which kings haveregall power (as well as other
Governors, and Governments) were ordained; to wit, their kingdoms, peoples
Romans 14. 1, to 6. 1 Pet. 2. 13. 14. 2 Samuel 5. 12. Aristotle Pol. l. 3. 4. 5.
Caelius Rhodig. l 8. c. 1. Bracton. l. 3. c. 9. f. 107.
welfare, safety, peace protection, etc. Salus p^puli, being not only that
Suprema Lex, but principal end for which all royal power was institute^ by
God and man, and to which they must submit in case it become in compatible, or
cannot consist together without damage or danger to the public safety: what
therefore that learned Father Augustine Bishop of Hippo, long since resolved
touching the (now much contested for) Lordly State of Episcopacie, which he and
near 300. African Bishops more, were then ready to lay down for the Churches
peace; I may fitly apply to the now over*much contended for supposed, royal
Prerogatives of kings, to effect Peace in the State, in these times of uncivil
military (that I say not bloody) dissentions, raised about them between king
and Parliament. An vero, etc. Augustinus de Geftis cune Emerita Donatist. Epis.
Tom. 7. pars. 1. p. 782. 783.
What verily did ou^ Redeemer descend from heaven into humane members, that we
might he his members, and shall we, le^t his very members be rent in pieces
with cruel division, fear to descend out of our thrones? we are ordained BP^
for Christian peoples ^ake, what therefore may profit them for Christian peace,
that let us do with our Bishoprics Quod autem sum propter te sim, si tibi
prodest, non sim, si tibi obest What I-am, I may be for thee* if it profit
thee; I may not be, if it be hurtful to thee. If we be profitable servants,
why do we envy the^ eternal gains of our Lord for our tempot all sublimities
or Prerogatives? Our Episcopal dignity will (o) See all Acts of Repeal, and
others which alter the common Law. See Smiths Commonwealth. l. 2. c. 2. 3.
be more fruitful to us, if it shall more unite the flock of Christ then
disperse it if retained. If when I will retain my Bishopric I disperse the
^lock of Christ, how is the damage of the flock the honor o^ the sheapheard?
etc. Old statute Laws, yea and the common Law of England may be, and often are
repealed and altered by Parliaments, (though above the king and his
Prerogative) when they become mischievous ^^ inconvenient, therefore any
branches of the kings Prerogative, inferior to these Laws, when they prove
grievous or dangerous to the subjects. It is the kings own professed Maxim, in
full Parliamen; At the end of the Petition of Right. 3. Caroli.
Printed and enrolled by his special command, in all his Courts. That the
Kings Prerogative is but to defend the Peoples Liberties: when therefore it
either invades or subver^ them, it may justly, it must necessarily be
restrained, diminished or resumed by the Parliament, from whose assent or
grant, it first proceeded. The Emperor See Eutropius, Sabellicus, Grimston,
Speed, and others of his life.
Otho the first, and our king Richard the second (as Speeds History p. 757.
some imagine) voluntary resigned, relinquished their Crowns, to their
immortal honor, to prevent the effusion of their Subjects blood, by civil
wars, and settle peace within their Realms: and shall not other kings then
most joyfully part with some Punctilioes of their real, o^ branches of their
supposed Prerogatives for the selfsame ends, if their Parliaments see good
cause to resume them, and of right may do it?

Fifthly, The king though he be the chief and principal (yet he is only one
member of the Parliament and kingdom, the least (because but one person)
though the highest branch; the Lords and Commons (not elected by, but assigned
Counselors to the king, by the kingdom and people) being the greatest and
most considerable part, as representing the entire body of the kingdom. Now
common reason, Law, and experience manifests See Br. Tit. Corporations.
that the whole, or greatest part in all politic or natural Bodies, is of
greater power and Jurisdiction, then any one particular member. Thus in all our
(t) Corporations, the Court of Aldermen and Common Council is of greater power
then the Major, though the chief Officer: the Chapter of greater authority
then the Deane, the Deane and Chapter then the (s) Keckerman Systema Logic. l.
1. c. 22.
BPP; the whole Bench, then the Lord chief Justice, the whole Counsel then
the President; the whole Parliament then either of the Houses, and by like
reason then the king; especially, since one of the three Estates is lesser then
the three Estates together, who in Parliament, by the fundamental Constitions
of the Realm, are not See the fuller answer to Dr. Fern. p. 2. 3.
Subordinate, but Coordinate parts of the same great Common Council of the
kingdom. It is Aristotle's express determination, Quod eorum qui rempublicam
gerunt majori parti placue^it, id est ratum ac ^^mum. Arist. Polit. l. 4. c. 8.
and l. 3.
that in an Oligarchie, Aristocrasie, and Democrasie, whatsoever seems good to
the Major part of the Governors of the Commonwealth, that is ratified, and
that it is unfit the part should be above the whole: And in all Courts of
Justice, Corporations, and Elections, Br. Corporations. 34. 8. H. 6. c. 7.
the major part have always had the greatest sway, and constantly overruled
the less, though it be but by one casting voice; as is evident to all in the
Elections of Knights, and Burgesses of, and votes in the Parliament; in which
the 14. H. 8. f. 3. b.
King, Lords and Commons by the Common Law make up but one entire Corporation*
since then even in Parliament it self, the Major part over swayes the rest,
yea the king himself (who has no absolute negative voice, but only in
refusing to pass some kind of Bills not all (of which more hereafter)
doubtless the whole, or Major part of the Parliament (which in Law is the
whole) is above the king, the chief member of it. Which consideration,
together with the Statutes of 5. R. 2. Stat. 2. c 4. 6. H. 8. c. 16. Enacting,
That none elected to be in any Parliament shall depart or absent himself from
the same Parliament till it be fully ended or proroged, without special
license of the Speaker of the Commons to be entered of record in the jornall
Book, under pain of amercement, loss of wages, and other punishment; nor See
the manner of holding Parliaments in England: newly Printed, London. 1641 and
Dyer. f. 60. 2.
any member of the upper House without that houses license under pain ( a)
Major Pars est totum* Brooks Corporations 34. Smiths Commonwealth of England:
l. 2. c. 3.
^f indictment, imprisonment or fine; as appears by the Bishop of Winchesters
case, 3. E. 3. 19. Fitz. ^orone 161. and Stamford, l. 3 c. 1. f. 153)
completely answers that fond cavil of the Malignants and Royalists against
this Parliament; that the king and many of the other members have wilfully
^bsented themselves from the House, of purpose to dissolve it if they could,
notwithstanding the late ^peciall Act made by their joyntconsents for its
continuance, Ergo this unlawful Action of theirs to effect this pernicious
design) must nullify, or at least invalid (in their new nonsense Law and
^ogicke) the lawful proceedings of those worthy faithful members who continue
in it, to preserve ^oth Parliament, Kingdom, Religion, Laws, Liberties, from
ruin and dissolution. If these ab^ent members be the greater number, why do
they not come and over-vote the rest in the House in peaceable, legal, usual
Parliamentary way, rather then challenge them into the field in a military,
^legall, unusual bloody manner, unheard of in former ages? If the lesser
party, then present or ab^ent the Major part must overruled them volensnolens,
as it has ever used, unless they will be wil^^ller (I cannot say wiser) then
all their predecessors put together.

As for his Majesty's absence from Parliament by the pernicious advise of Evil
Counselors; so Object.
^uch insisted on by Malignants.

I answer. 1. That it was without any just cause given by the Parliament.
Secondly, It was much Answ.
against their wills, who have See their Messages and petitions to the king to
this purpose.
often importuned, petitioned, and used all possible means to procure ^is
return. 3. His absence was procured, and is yet continued by those alone, who
most unjustly ^axe the Parliament for it, and would take advantage of this
their own wrong. Fourthly, though ^e be personally absent as a man; yet he is
still Legally present in Parliament, (called the kings pre^ence, as he is a
king; as he is in all other his Courts of Justice, where all proceedings are
entered, See Camdens Brit. p. 163. which styles the Parliament the kings
presence. The Register of Writs. Old and New Natura Brevium: old and new book
of Entries. Cooks Institures on Littleton, f. 71. 6*
Co^am Rege, though the king never yet sat personally in either of them, as he
has often times done in his Parliament; for the continuance whereof he has
passed such an Act, as will inseperably tie his ^oyall presence to it, though
his Cavaliers about him should by force withdraw his person from it, ^ot only
as far as York, but the remotest Indies; yea he must first cease to be king
of England, ere ^e can be legally absent from his Parliament of England. This
his wilful personal absence from ^is greatest Counsel which desires and
needs it, is (as many conceive) an Act of the highest in justice that ever any
Prince could offer to his Parliament, worse then ^ King. 12. and 2 Chronicles. 18.
Reh^boams forsaking the counsel ^f his ancient Sages, to follow the hare
braind advise of his young Cavaleers; for though he follow^d not their ancient
prudent counsel, yet he withdrew not himself from them, as his Majesty ^oth
now sever himself from his Parliament, not only without but against all
prefidents of his ^oyall predecessors, except king (b) Richard the second (who
once absented himself from his Parlia^ent above 40. days, yet then returned
to it upon better advise) and the very common custom and ^aw of the Land,
(which he is obliged by his Coronation oath, and many late protestations added
^o it, constantly to maintain.) This appears most clearly by the ancient
Treatise, of the man^er of holding of Parliaments in England, both before and
since the conquest, See Minshes Dictionary: Title Parliament, f. 526.
tende^ed to and ap^roved by the Conquerone himself (newly printed 1641) which
in the Section, touching the kings ^bsence from Parliament, resolves thus. The
king is BOUND by all means possible TO BE PRESENT AT THE PARLIAMENT; unless
he be detained or let therefrom by bodily ^icknesse, and then he may keep his
chamber, yet so as he lie not without the Manor or Town ^t the least, where
the Parliament is held: and then he ought to send for 12. persons of the
grea^est (t) Grafton, p. 348. 349. 350.
and best of them that are sommoned to the Parliament, that is, 2. Bishops, 2.
Earls, 2 Ba^ons, 2. Knights of the shire, 2 Burgesses, and 2. Citizens to
look upon his person, to testify and ^itnesse his estate, and give A uthority
to the Archbishop of the place, the Steward of England, and chief justice,
that they jointly and severally should begin the Parliament, and continue the
same ^^ his name, express mention being made in that commission, of the Note
this.
cause of his absence there, which ought to suffice. The reason is, because
there was wont to be a cry and murmr in the Par^iament for the kings absence,
because his absence is hurtful and dangerous to the whole commo^alty of the
Parliament, neither indeed OUGHT, OR MAY HE BE ABSENT, BUT ONE^Y IN THE CASE
AFORESAID. And whereas Malignants clamor, that most of the ^ords are absent as
well as the king, and therefore this can be no lawful Parliament; The same
^uthor will in form them, that if the Lords be once sommoned to Parliament,
and then appear ^ot or absent themselves, the king may hold the Parliament
with the commonalty and commons ^f the kingdom (every of which has a greater
voice in Parliament then the greatest* Earl in Eng^^nd, because he represents
a whole county, town or city, the other himself alone) without Bishops
^arles, or Barons; because in times past, before there was either Bishop,
Earl, or Baron, yet even ^hen kings kept their Parliaments; but on the
contrary, no Parliament can be kept by the king and ^eeres, if all the Commons
(for the kings misgovernment, or such like cause) should absent them^^lves.
This is the judgment of In Holinsheads Chronicle of Ireland. f. 127. 128.
Master John Vowel too, who writes in this manner: Yet ne^^rthelesse, if the
king in due order have sommones all his Lords and Barons and they will not
come, or if they come, they will not yet appear: or if they come and appear,
yet will not do or yield ^^ any thing, then the king with the consent of his
Commons, may ordain and establish any acts or Lawe^ which are as good,
sufficient and effectual, as if the Lords had given their consents. But on the
contrary, if the Commons be sommoned and will not come, or coming will not
appear, or appe^ring will not consent to do any thing alleging some just
weighty and great cause; the King in these cases Cromptons Jurisdiction of
Courts, f. 8. 4. H. 7. 18. 7. H. 7. 14. 11. H. 7. 27. Parliament 42. 76. 33. H.
6. 17. adjudged accordingly Br. Prerogative. ^34.
cannot with his Lords devise, make or establish any Law. The reasons are
these; when Parliaments were first begun and ordained, there were no Prelates
or Barons of the Parliament, an^ the temporal Lords were very few or none; and
then the king and his Commons did make a fu^^ Parliament, which authority was
never hitherto abridged. Again, every Baron in Parliament do^ represent but
his own person, and speaks in the behalf of himself alone. But in the
Knights Citizens, and Burgesses are represented the Commons of the whole
Realm, and every of these g^veth not consent only for himself, but for all
those also for whom he is sent. And the king wit^ the consent of his Commons
had ever a sufficient and full authority, to make, ordain, and establis^ good
and wholesome Laws for the Commonwealth of his Realm. Wherefore the Lords
being lawfully sommoned and yet refusing to come, sit, or consent in
Parliament, cannot by their folly ^ bridge the king and the Commons of their
lawful proceedings in Parliament. Thus and mo^^ John Vowell in his Order and
usage how to keep a Parliament; Printed Cum Privilegi^o. But we need^ not
retire to this last refuge; the Honorable faithful Lords now present, though
not so many ^ could be desired, are the entire House of Peers in judgment of
Law, (as those present at the Election of Knights of the shire, or Burgesses
(though the major part be negligently or wilfully absent are the whole shire or
Borough) and the wilful absence of the residue, though the greater number
being See Stamford ^. 38. 155. 3. E. 3. 19. Coro. 161.
contrary to Law, contrary to the Privileges of Parliament, and their late
Protestation^ tending to the very subvertion of Parliaments (for which they and
their posterities too, may justly b^ disabled for ever to sit as members of
that House, which they have so dishonourably, if not treache^ rou^ly deserted,
even as Dyer f. 60. n.
well as Knights and Bargesses, whose personal attendance is so necessary, the
if during the Parliament they absent themselves from it about any businesses of
their own without leave ^ the House, they may be presently expelled, and
others chosen in their place to make the House complete,) ca^ no more disable
those now present from being a true and lawful House of Peers; then the
multitudes departing from the true Church of God, to the false, disproves it to
be the true Church of Christ Luke 12. 32 Mat. 13. 23. Mat. 7. 13. 14*
whose true flock is but little. In a word See Bishop Jewel Defense of the
Apology, part. 6, c. 7. Di^is. 1. Bishop Bilsons^^ true difference of
Christian Subjection, and unchristia^ Reb part 3. p. 540. 541. 542. Bishop
Pilkington of the burning of Paul's steeple. Keilway. f. 184. b. Cromptons
Jurisdiction of Courts f. 19. 20. 10. E. 4. f. 6. Stamfords Plees, l. 3. 6. 1.
f. 153. Br. Corone. 135. Antiq. Ecclesiae Brit. p. 299. 300. Speed p. 1156.
Martyns Hist p. 450. to 454. John Vowel^ Chronicle of Ireland. p. 127. 128.
diverse Parliaments, have been kept and held, and 25. E. 3. stat. 6. de
Provisionibus, 31. E. 3. c. 4. 36. E. 3. c. 8. 3. R. 2. c. 12. 1^. R. ^ Preface
etc. 3. 12. 1. E. 3. c. 2. 14 E. 3. stat. 3. Preface. See 20. H. 3. c. 9. 21.
H. 3. stat. of Leape-yeare. 4. H. 3. stat. of Marlbridge. 4. E. 1. de Big.
Prolog. etc. 6. 6. E. 1. stat. de Gloucester. Preface 13. E. 1. Acton Burnel. 13.
E. ^. c. 43. ^^ ^^alefact. in part. 21. E. 1. Eschetors. 3. E. 1. Quo warranto.
9. E. 2. Artic. Cleri. Pref.
Act^ made without Bishops or Abbots heretofore, even while they were reputed
members of the Lords House; an^ one of the 3. Estates in Parliament; therefore
this Parliament (which has taken away Bishops Vote for ever ^ may be lawfully
held, notwithstanding any Lords or Commons, wilfuls absence from it i^ person;
who yet as long as they are members of the Parliament, shall still be adjudged
legally present, wherher they will or no. One puny Judge in the Courts of
Westminster may and does usually give judgment, and make binding Orders though
the Chief Justice and his fellows be absent.

Sixthly, It is most apparent both by Sam. 19. 20. 2 Samuel 5. ^ 12. 2 Chronicles. 9.
8. Isay 49. 23. Romans 13, 4. 5. 1 Pet. 2. 13. 14.
Scripture, the verdict of all Atist. Polit. l. 3. and 5. Plato: Age^ilans.
Xenophon de In^^it. Cyri. Hist. Caelius Rhodig. Antiq. Lect. ^8 c. 1. Bodin de
Republica. Osorius de Rege and Regum In^^it.
Politicians and writers ^ note, the The preambles of all ancient statutes,
Bracton. l. 1. c. 8 l. 3. c. 9. Fleta l. 1. c. 5. 17. Fortescue. c. 9. to 15.
Statutes of our Realm and Lawyers, that Kingdoms, Subjects and Parliaments,
were not created by God for the wills, pleasures, profit or benefit of Kings,
who by birth and nature differ not at all from the meanest of their Subjects;
but Kings were at first constituted, and still continued for the protection;
welfare benefit, service of their Kingdoms, Parliaments, People, whose public
Servants, Ministers, Sheapheards* Fathers, Stewards, and Officers they are. Now
nature, reason, and Genesis 1. 26. to 31. c. 9. 2. 3. 4. Psalm. 8. 6. 7. 8.
Scriptures resolve, that he wh^ is instituted merely for the benefit and
service of another (as all the (n) Creatures were created for man^ use, and
therefore are inferior unto man in dignity and power) is of less dignity,
power, and jurisdiction, then the entire body of those for whose good he was
instituted; as the Ephesians. 6. 5. Col. 3. 22. 23. 24.
servant is inferior to his Master; the Genesis 8. 18. c. 3. 16. 1 Cor. 11. 3. 8.
9. Ephesians. 5. 23. 24* 1 Pet. 3. 1. 1. and 3. 18.
wife to her husband, for whom they were created; the Major to the whole
Corporation; and the King to his whole Kingdom and Parliament: which
consideration has caused sundry Kings and Emperors, not only to adventure
their lives in bloody battles, but to lay down their Crowns for the peace and
safety of their Subjects; (witness See Eutropius, Grimston, and others in his
life.
Otho the first, and others) with the Examples of Moses* m 1 Cor. 3. 21. 22. 23*
Exodus 32. 9. to 15. 32. Numb. 14. 11. to 15. of David, ^ Sa^. ^9. ^7. 1 Chronicles.
21. 17. and John 10* ^1. 15. with other presidents which I pretermit. The King
then being made King, only for the Kingdoms, Parliaments, Peoples, service,
must needs (^n this regard) be inferior to, not Paramont them in absolute
Sovereign power; though greater, 2 Samuel 18. ^
better then any particular Subjects.

Seventhly, the Parliament (as our (q) Law* books, and Cromptons Jurisdiction
of Courts. f. 1. etc. Bracton. l. 1. c. 2. 19. H. 6. 63 a. 64. b. 31. H. 8. c.
10. Dyer 60 a. Cooks Institutes on Littleton, f. 109. 110.
Writers resolve) is the most high and ab^olute power, the supreamest and most
ancient Court of the Realm of England, and has the power of the whole Realm,
both Head and Body; and amorg other Privileges this is the highest, that it is
above the Law ^t self, having power upon just grounds to alter the very common
Law of England; to abrogate and repeal old Laws, to enact new* Laws of all
sorts, to impose taxes upon the people: yea it has power to declare the
meaning of any doubtful Laws, and to repeal all Patents, Charters, Grants,
and ^udgements whatsoever of the King or any other Courts of Justice, if they
be erroneous or illegal, not only without, but against the Kings personal
consent, so far as finally to obliege both King and Subjects. Now it is clear
on the contrary side; that the King has not the power of the whole Realm
^ested in his person, that he Fortescue c. 10. to 1^. Bracton. l. 1. c. 8. l 3.
c 9. Fleta. l 1 c. 5. 17. Brook. Patents. 25. 41. 12. 51. 53. 69 73. 100 and
Prerogative 15. 103. Commissions 15. 16. See Judge Crooks and Judge Huttons
Arguments against Ship Money Petition of Right 3. Carol. Br. Parliament. 42.
and his Prerogative are not above, but subordinate to the Laws of the Realm;
that he cannot by his absolute regal power, altar the Common Law of the Realm
in any particular point whatsoever, that he cannot repeal any old, nor enact
any new Law whatsoever, norimpose the least tax or common charge upon his
people, nor imprison their persons, distraine (s) Sir Thoma^ Smith, of the
Commonwealth of England: l. ^* c. 1. 2. Holinshed Description of England. c. 8.
p. 173. Cambdens Brittania p. 173. John Vowels Order and usage how to keep a
Parliament: in Holinsheads Chronicles of Ireland p. 101. to 120. Minshewes
Dictionary Tit. Parliament.
their goods, declare any Law, or reverse any judgment in the meanest of his
Courts, without or against his peoples joint consents in Parliament; For
Potestas sua Juris est and non Injuriae, and Nihil ^liud potest Rexin terris,
ni^i ID SOLVM QVOD DE JVRE POTEST. Bracton. l. 3. c. 9. f. 107. Therefore
without any peradventure, the Parliament in this regard is the most Sovereign
Authority, and greater in jurisdiction than the King. Of the Commonwealth, l.
2. c. 10. p. 159.
John Bodin that great Lawyer and Politician, resolves; That the chief mark
of an absolute and Sovereign Prince is to give Laws ^o all his Subjects in
general, and to every of them in particular without consent of any other
greater, equal, or less than himself. For if a Prince be bound not to make
any Laws, without the consent of a greater than himself, he is then a very
Subject: if not without his equal, he then has a Companion (as l. 2. c. 16.
f. 34. a. and l. 1. c. 8. f. 5. b. and Fleta. l. 1. c. 17. Walfingham, Hist. p.
36 37. 40.
Bracton and others forecited, say our English King has; namely his Earls and
Lords thence-stiled Comites:) if not without the consent of his inferiors,
whether it be of his Subjects or of the Senate, or of the people; he is then no
Sovereign. Whence it follows, that the Kings of England, who cannot make any
Law to obliege either all or any of their Subjects, nor impose any * Taxes, nor
repeal any Common or Statute Law, but in and by their Parliaments, are no
absolute Sovereign Princes (as some Royalists and Court Divines, most falsely
aver them to be) but mere mixed Sovereigns, inferior to their Laws and
Parliaments, the ^ole Lawmakers and Law-alterers, though not against, but with
the Kings assents, considered not abstractively as Kings, but copulative as a
branch and member of the Parliament. And indeed to speak impartially, though
the kings *Royal assent See Sir Thomas Smiths Common wealth of England: l. z.
c. 1. 2. 3. Holinshed Description of England. c. 8. p. 173. and Chronicles of
Ireland. p. 101. 102. M. Hackwels manner of passing B(...)* Sect. 8. p. 74.
Brook Parliament 4. 107. 33. H. 6. 33. 33 H. 8. c. 21. Cromptons Jurisdiction
f. 7. b. Br. Parliament. 26. 39. 40, 41.
be generally requisite to pass and ratify Laws, yet I humbly conceive, that
the original, prime Legislative power of making Laws to bind the Subjects
and their Posterity, rests not in the kings own royal person, but in the
Kingdom and Parliament which represents it. For, first, admit the king should
propound any Laws to his people (as kings and Lawgivers usually did at first)
yet these Laws would no ways obliege them, unless they voluntarily consented
and submitted to them in Parliament; and the sole reason why our Acts of
Parliament bind the Subjects in former times, and at this day is, not because
the king willed them 4. H. 7. 18. 7. H. 7 14. 11. H. 7. 27. 33. H 6. 17. Bro.
Parliament. 4. 40. 76. 107. Cromptons Jurisdiction. f. 8.
but because the people gave their Bro. Ancient Demesne. 2^. 10. H. 7. 20. a.
33. H. 8. c. 17.
general consents unto them in Parliament, as Sir Thomas Smith in his
Commonwealth of England, Holinshed, the Prologues to most Ancient Statutes,
(the King by the advice, and assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
Commons, and at the special request of the Commons in Parliament assembled,
and by THE Sea 2. 7. 8. 12. 14. 17. 4. H. 7.
AUTHORITY OF THE SAME PARLIAMENT, does grant and ordain, etc) and all our
Law-bookes resolve, and that upon this received Maxi ne of Law; Quod tangit
omnes ab omnibus debet approbari The king does but like the Minister in
Marriage, declare it to be a Law; but it is the parties consents which makes the
marriage, and the people only that makes it ^ Law to bind them; whence those
in Cook 7. ^^luins case. 7. H. 6. 35. b. Dyer. 373. Br. Parliament* 98.
Scotland, Ireland, Man, Garnsey, ^^^ Jer^^e are not bound by our English
Statutes, (nor we by theirs) nor tenants in Ancient demesne, because they
consented not to them. Therefore the chief Legislative power is in the people
and both Houses o^ Parliament, not in the king: as it was in the Roman State,
Where the Livy Hist* ^. 1. and 2. Bodin Commonwealth, ^. 1* c. 10.
people had the So^eraigne Jurisdiction of making and confirming Laws to bind
them, not their Kings, Emperors, o^ Senate, as I shall hereafter manifest.

Secondly, this appears by the case of Fiz. Assise 413. Avowry 74.
Praescri^^ion. 67. Broo* Custom. 31. Co. 5. Rep. f. 63. 64. 67. 68 Kit^chin.
45. 73* ^0.
Customs and By-Lawes in Corporations and Mano^^s, which bind all the
Corporation and Tenants (if they be reasonable) without the Kings or Lords
consents, by reason of their mutual assents alone; and as these private
By-^awes oblig^ all those who consent to them by reason of their own free
assents only, so do all public Acts of Parliaments obli^ge all Subjects,
only because of their general assents to them in their Knights, Citizen^ and
Burgesses, elected by and See ^ ^ac* c. 1.
representing their persons.

Thirdly, all 33. H. 6. 17. Br. Parli. 4. M. Hackwell, of Pas^^ng Bills, Cromp.
Iuris. ^. 8. Chron. of Ireland. f. 127. ^^ ^ 30.
Acts of Parliament are usually made* framed, altered, thrice read, engrossed,
voted and fully agreed upon in both Houses, without the Kings personal
knowledge or privity for the most part, before they come to have his royal
assent. And when they are thus agreed on by both Houses, the king cannot alter
any one word or letter in them (as the Houses may do) but must either
absolutely assent to, or consider further of them, as the Houses tender them.
And if the king send any Bill he desires to have pass, it must be thrice read
and assented to in both houses (which have power to reject, after, enlarge, or
limit it as they think meet) else it can be no Act at all. A^ clear
demonstration, that the chief power of enacting and making Laws is only in
the people* Commons, and Peers, not the king: who by his Writ does purposely
sommon them to meet an^ enact Laws, as the chief Legislators* witness this
notable clause in the Cromp. Iuris of Courts. f. 1. 2. and at the end of the
Manner of ^olding Parliaments in England.
Writ for the Election of Knights, and Burgesses: Ita quod iidem Milites plenam
and safficientem ^ote^^atem pro S E and COMMVNITATE Comitatus praedicti, and
dicti Cives and Burgenses pr^ se and COMMVNITAT^ Civitatum and Burgorum
praedictorum divisim ab i^sis babeant, AD FACIENDVM E^ CONSENTIENDVM HIS quae
^^ne and ibidem DE COMMVNI CONSILIO DICTI REGN^ (not Regis) nostri contigerint
ORDINARI super negot^^s antedictis. Ita quod PRO DEFECT^ POTEST AT^S HV^VSMODI,
etc. dicta negotia INFECTA NON REMANEANT quov^ modo: answerable to which is
that clause in * Pope Elutherius his Epistle to our first Christian king Lucius
about An. 185. Exillis Deigratia, PER CONSILIVM REGNI VESTRI SVME LEGEM^ and
per illam D^i potentia vestrum reges* Britaniae regnum.

Fourthly, all public Acts are the whole Kingdoms Laws, made principally
and solely for the subjects benefit, if good; their prejudice, if ill*
therefore the whole kingdom (represented i^ and by both Houses, not the king)
knowing much better what is good or bad for themselves, the^ the king alone, it
is See ^^tv before.
just and reasonable that they, and not the king, should be the principal^
Lawmakers, to bind or bu^then themselves with any new Laws, penalties or
restraints.

Fifthly, it is clear that all Acts which give any Subsidy, Tax, Penalties,
or forfaitures to the king are made only by the people in Parliament, and not
principally by the king, since the king cannon be said in any propriety to give
any thing to himself. This is undeniable by the form of penning all subsidy*
Bills granted by the Commons or Clergy. Your Commons assembled in your Hig^
Court of Parliament, etc. humbly present your Majesty with the free and
cheerful gift of two entire s^bsidies, which we humbly beseech your Majest^e
graciously to accept, etc. Your Majesty's faithful subjects the Prelates and
Clergy, etc. with one agreement and uniforme consent, have given and granted,
and by these presents do give and grant to your Highness, etc. four entire
Subsidies, in manner and form as follows. And by the kings assent to these
Bills, Hackw^ls passing of Bi^s, sect. 8 p. 78*
Le Roy remercy ses Loaulz. subjects accept LOVR BENEVOLENCE, etc. the Commons
having the sole power to grant or deny See Rostal Taxes and Tenthes. The Acts
of Subsi^ies, 21. Iac and ^^is present Parliament* Speed* p. 745.
Subsidies and Ta^es when they see cause, and to limit the proportion of them,
the manner and time of paying them; and to order how and by whom they shall be
received and employed, a^ all Acts of this Nature ^anifest. If then they be the
chief Lawmakers in these Acts which lay^ any imposition upon the Subjects
goods or restraint on his person; then by like ^eason in all other penal
publik* Laws.

Six^ly, All Acts of Pa^liaments made in the reigns of ^surpers who have no
Title to the ^rown, nor right to assent to Laws* are See 1. E. 4. c, 6. 4. E.
4. 10 9. E* 4. 1. 2. ^r. Charters d^ ^ardon, 22. 13. Eli^* c. ^*
firm and good in Law* and shall bind the right heirs to the Crown, as i^
evident by the Laws made by king John, Henry the 4. 5. and 6. (reputed
usurpe^s by Edward the 4.) and Richard the third acknowledged an usurper, whose
Laws are yet in force* The reason is (as is clear by 1. E. 4. c 6.) because
the Laws, and all other Judicial Acts in Court^ of Justice, are the Acts of
the Parliament and Courts themselves, which are lawful; not of the king who is
unlawful. Therefore certainly the Legislative power is more in the
Parliament, thenin the king, if not wholly in it, there being Laws and
Kingdoms before kings were.

Seventhly, admit the king should dye without heir, no doubt the kingdom and
Parliament have a just right either to alter the government, or dispose of the
Crown, to what family they please (as ^he constant practice of all kingdoms
in such cases manifests, and The tr^e difference, etc. part. 3. p* 416.
Bishop Bilson himself assures us; that all Nations once members of the Roman
Empire, when the right heirs failed, were suffered to elect their Governors,
where they pleased, as the Romans themselves might do) and no doubt they might
make binding public Laws during the Inter-reg^um: yea, if the king be an
infant (as Henry the 3. Henry the 6. Edward 3. 5. and Richard 2. with other ou^
kings were, when the Crown ^escended to them) or non Compos Mentis, or taken
with a dead palsy or Apoplexy, or an Idiot by ^irth or Age, or a
Monkeprofessed, as Fox Act^ and Monument* vol. 1. p. 173. Speeds. Hist. p. 244.
some kings have been; or absent in a Pilgrimage to Rome, or ^^ voyage to the
Holy Land, or other remote foreign Parts by reason of wars, as See
Nubrigenfis, Speed Holinshead, Mat. Westminster and others in the lives of R. 1. H.
1. 2. 3^* 4. 5. 6. 8. Ed. 1. 2. 3. 4.
diverse of our Kings heretofore have been; and so unable personally to consent
to laws; no doubt in all such ^ases, the right of creating a Protector to
execut^ regal power, sommon Parliaments, assent to Laws, is ^nely in the
Walsingh* Hist. Angl. A. 1422. p. 458. Speed. p. 1108. Grafton. p. 496. 447.
648. Fabian. p. 470. Hall. f. 176. to 183. Hov^den. Annal. pars posterior* p.
702. 703. 705. 706.
Parliament, which may in these cases make any public Acts without the kings
personal ^resence or assent; and the assent of the Regent or Protector usually
created by them, shall as firmly ^inde the king, as if he had personally
consented, as is evident by all the Acts of Parliament passed ^uring the
Minority of Acts and Monuments Old Edition. p. 705. See Holinshead* Speed
Grafton in their lives.
Henry the 3. who was but 9. years old, Edward the 3. who was but 1^. Richard
the 2. who was but 11. years old, Henry the 6. who was not 9. months old,
Edward the 5. ^ut 12. years, Henry the 8. not 18. years, Edward the 6. but 9.
years of age when they began their ^aignes, and so incapable of giving any
personal consent to Laws by themselves (of which they could not Judge, but by
their Protectors;) and by all Acts made in the absence of King See Hoveden
Annal* pars posterior* ^. 702. 703. 705. 706.
Richard the ^. Edward the 1. 2. 3. 4. Henry the 3. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6: and others
out of the Realm, all good, as ap^eares by 28. H. 8. c. 17. which altered, and
33. H. 8* c. 22. which declares the Law in these particu^ars. A clear
demonstration, that the Parliament is the most absolute Supreme power, and
Law^iver, not the king.

Eighthly, the king has little or no hand in making, but only in assenting to
Laws, when they are made by the Houses; as the usual form of passing Acts (
Le Roy ^e veult, The King wills (or ^ssents ^o) it, not before, but after they
have passed both Houses, imports: which assent of his, if the Bills ^e public
and necessary for the Common good, is not merely arbitrary at the kings will,
but the king by oath and duty is bound to give it, and the Lords and Commons
may in justice demand it of mere right, as I shall show anon. His Royal
assent then, though it be the last act which compleats Acts, and makes them
Laws, yet since it is but an assent to a Law formerly made by both Houses,
which he cannot alter in any point, yea an assent which the king in honor,
Law, justice, duty, by ^ertue of his ^oronation Oath, is bound to give, as
appears by the Prefaces of most statutes, the sta^ute of Provisours, 25. E. 3.
Parl. 6. 20. E. 3. and other Acts) is so far from proving the king the
Supreme power and Lawgiver, that it manifests the contrary, that this power
principally resides in ^oth the Houses, not the king.

Ninthly, this is apparent by those Coronation Oaths which Parliaments and the
kingdom in See Edward ^he ^onfessors Laws c. 17. in La^bard and Fox.
king Edwards days, even before the Conquest, have anciently prescribed to our
kings, before they would accept of them for their Sovereigns, of which I shall
give you a short account. Math. Westminster An. 1088. Eadmer^s Hist. l. 1. p. 13. 14.
Ma^^aris, Hist* p. 12. 13. Speed Hist. p. 456. Graften. p. 21. 22. Malmes^ury.
l. 4. p. 119. 120.
After the death ^f William the Conqueror, William Rufus his younger son, in
the absence of Robert the elder bro^her, hastens into England, to obtain the
Crown; and finding the greatest part of the Nobles against him; he gave his
solemn Oath and faith to Lanfran^e Archbishop of Canterb^ry his Tutor, that ^f
they would make choice of him for their king, he would abrogate the over-hard
Laws of his father, and ^romise to observe justice, equity and mercy
throughout the kingdom in every business, and defend the ^eace and Liberty of
the Church against all men; and ease them of all hard taxes. Upon which
conditions, ^olentibus omnibus Provincialium animis, by the voluntary consent
and voices of all, he was chosen (k) Sir Thomas Smiths Common. wealth of
England l. 2. c. 2. 3. Cromptons Jurisdiction. f. 7. ^. John Vo^el. Chronicles
of Ireland, f. 122. to 130. M. Hackwels Manner of passing Bills. Sect. 8.
and crowned king. Which promise and Oath he soon after breaking, saying, Who
is it that can ^^^^ill all his promises? Many of the Nobles, levied war
against him, adopting Robert his elder Brother king. Mat. Pa^^s p. 52. 53. ^4.
Eadmerus Hist. l. 2 p. 55. Will. Masmes. ^. 5. p. 1^6. H. ^untin. l. 7. p. 378.
Roger Hoveden. Annal p^^s. 1. p. 4^8. Polych. ^ ^. c. 11. F^bian part 7. c.
226. p. 318, Graft. p. 32. Speed. p. 466. 467.
William Rufus dying, Henry the 1. his younger brother, in the life of Robert
the right heir assembling all the Glergie and people together to London, to
procure their favor and love to choose him for their king and Patron, he
promised the reformation of those Laws, by which England had been oppressed
in the reigns of his Father and Brother. To which the Clergy and Nobles
answered; that if he would with a willing mind reform those rigorous Laws,
remit the Taxes imposed upon the Subjects, and by his Charter confirm those
ancient Laws and customs which flourished in the kingdom in the time of Holy
king Edward, they would unanimously consent to him, and consecrate him for
their king. Which he willingly assenting to, and affirming with an oath, that
he would perform; he was by the assent both of Clergy and people consecrated
king at Westminster, promising by oath, to confirm king Edwards Laws, and
renounce all oppression; in pursuance whereof as soon as he was created, he by
his Chartar confirmed and reformed diverse Laws for the ease and benefit of his
Subjects, recorded at large by Matthew Paris, Speed, and othe^s. The beginning
of this Charter is observable. Henry by the Grace of God of England, etc. Know
ye, that by the mercy of God, and COMMON COUNSEL of the Barons of the kingdom
of England, I am crowne^ king. And because the kingdom was oppressed with
unjust exactions, ^ out of respect to God, and the love I bear toward you
all, make the Church of God free, etc. and all the evil custome^ wherewith the
kingdom of England was unjustly oppressed, I take from thence, which evil
customs I here in part set down. And in the end of his Charter, he confirmed
and restored to them king E^wards Laws, with those amendments of them which
his father made by the consent of hi^ Barons. After which, those Laws of his
were published through all England, and Ranulph Bishop of Durham banished the
Court and committed to the Tower, for his oppression, bribery, and other crimes
Henry deceasing Mat. Par* Hist. p. 73. Mal^es. Novellae Hist. l. 1. p. 178.
179. 180, Henry* Hunti* l. 8 p. 386 387. Hoveden* p. 481* 482. Mat. West. A^.
^^ 36 p 35. Speed p. 483. 484. Graf. p ^1* 42
Maude the Empress his right heir (to whom the Prelates and Noble^ had sworn
fealty in her fathers life time) was put by the Crown by the Prelates and
Barrons; wh^ thought it baseness for so many and great Peers to be subject to
a woman, and that they were free^ of their oath by her marying out of the
Realm, without their consents, and Stephen Earl of Mortain^ (who had no good
Title) assembling the Bishops and Peers at London, promising to them an
amendment of the Laws according to all their pleasures and liking, was by them
all proclaimed king^ whereupon they all to^ke their oaths of Allegiance to him,
conditionally, to obey him as their king; so long as he should p^es^rve the
Churches Liberties, and keep all Covenants, and confirm them with his
Charter; according to the old proverb: Quamdi^ habebis me pro Senatore, and
^go te pro Imperatore. All this the king at his Coronation swore, and promised
to God, the people, and Church to performe^ And presently after going to
Oxford, he (in pursuance of his oath) there sealed his fore promised Charter of
many indulg^u^ favou^s: the sum whereof was this. That all Liberties,
Customs* and Possessions granted to the Church, should be firm and in force;
that all bad usages in the lan^ touching Forests, exactions, and annual Taxes
which his Ancestors usually received should be^ e^^rnally abolished; the
ancient Laws restored; prefacing therein, Assensa Cleri and Populi in. Reg ^e
Angliaeelectus M^lm. p. 179.
That he obtained the Crown^ by election only: Haec ^^tem special^ter, and
ali^ ^ulta generaliter, se servatur^m juravit; sed nihil ^onum quae Deo
promiser^t, observavit, writes Matthew Paris, Hovenden, and Huntingdon. Pene
omni^ perperam mutavit, quisi ad hoc tan^um jur^ss^^, ^t praevaricatorem
Sacramenti se regno toti ostenderet, says Ma^mes^ury* See Speed. p. 483. 484.
granting those in^^^^^ties rather to blind their eyes, than with any purpose
to man^cle his o^ne hands with such pa^chment chains: Such faith is to be
given to the so^emnest Oaths of kings. But this his perj^ry was like to cost
him his Crown, his Prelates and Peers thereupon revolting unto Maude* The
form of King Henry the second his Oath I find not; only I read Hoveden. p.
491. Graft. p. 50.
that upon his ^oronarion he caused the Laws t^ be reformed, by advise of
disc^eet men learned in the Law, and by his Proclamation commanded that the
good Laws of his grand father Henry should be observed and firmly kept
throughout the Realm. When ^^ore it is probable, he took the same oath that he
did. Mat. Par. p 147. Hoved. p. 657 Wa^si^. ^podigma Neustr. An. 1189. p. 45.
46. Speed. ^. ^^^*
Richard the first, succeeding, at his Coronation in Westminster Church,
coming to the High Altar, before the Clergy and people took this solemn
oath upon the Holy Evangelists, and many Saints relics, 1. That all the day^s
of his li^e he would bear peace, honor, and reverence to God, and h^ly
Church, and the ordinances thereof. Secondly, that to the people committed to
his charge, he would exercise Right* Justice and E^uiti^. Thirdly, that he
would abolish naughty Laws and Customs if any were brought upon his kingdom;
and would enact good Laws, and the same in good sort keep, and without
Mal-engy^. Which oath most solemnly taken Baldwin Archbishop of Canterbury*
standing at the Altar, forbad him in the name of Almighty God, to assume that
^^n^^r, UNLESS HE HAD ^ FVLL PVRPOSE TO* KEEP WHAT HE HAD SWORN: Whereunto
Richard ASSENTING, and promisi^g by Gods help to perform all the premises
WITH^VT FRAVD; With his own hand humbly taking ^he Imperial Crown from the
Altar, delivered it to the Archbishop, who set it on his head. Hoveden. p. 793.
Mat. Par. p. 189. 190. Speed. p. 548. 549, 550. See Polydore Virgil, Holins.
King Richard deceasing, John his younger Brother, to put by Arthur the next
heir to the Crown, came ^eedily out of Normandy into England; where the great
assembly at Northamp^on, to preserve their ^ights and Liberties were content to
accept of him for their king, and yield fealty to him, to keep ^ith and Peace
to King John upon condition only, if he would restore to every of them their
Rights; which ^fterwards was the occasion of great dissentions. And-comming to
London to be crowned, Hubert ^rchbishop of Canterbury, (the Pillar of the
Commonwealths stabilitie, and incomparable for deep ^aching wisdom) steps
forth in the midst of all the Bishops, Lords, Barons, and others there as^mbled
at his Coronation, and spoke thus unto them. Hear you all, you are in
discretion to know, ^at no man has right, or any other fore-title to succeed
another in a kingdom A strange Archiepiscopall Doctrine*
unless first (with invo^tion for grace* and guidance of Gods Spirit) he b^ BY
THE BODY OF THE KINGDOM THEREUNTO CHOSEN, and ^e indeed some choice man, and
picked out for some ^menencie of ^is virtues, according to the example and
similitude of Saul the first anointed King, whom God set over ^is people,
though neither the Son of a King nor of any royal descent. So after him
likewise David ^e son of I^sse; the one for being valorous, and a person
fitting Royal dignity* the other for being holy and ^^ble minded. To show,
that whosoever in a kingdom excels all in valor and virtue, ought to
sur^ount all in Rule and Authority: yet so, as that, if any of the Of spring of
a deceased King surp^sseth o^ers, it is fit jointly to consent in election of
such a one. This therefore we have spoken in favor of eminent ^arle John, who
is present, the brother of our most illustrious King Richard ^ow dece^sed,
wanting ^^ heir of his body; who being provident, valiant, and truly noble,
we havi^g invocated the grace of the ^oly Spirit, have all unanimo^sly ELECTED,
as well in regard of his Merits, as of his royal Blood. Neither durst any doubt
or demurre on these things, knowing that the Archbishop had not thus de^ned
without cause Wherefore Earl John and all men approving this speech* they
ELECTED and ASSVMFD the Earl for their king, and cried out saying; Let the
King live. But the Arch^ishop being afterward demanded, why he had spoken
these things? answered; that he was assured ^^ some divining foresight, that
king John would work the ruin of the kingdom, corrupt the Crown* and
precipitate it into great confusion. And that he might not have the reins free
to do this, he OUGHT TO BE CHOSEN BY ELECTION, NO^ BY SUCCESSION. King John at
this ^is Coronation was involved in a threefold Oath* namely, That he should
love holy Church and its Mi^isters, and preserve it harmless from the
in^ursion of Malignants; That abolishing perverse Laws, be ^ould substitute
good ones, and exercise Right. Judgment in the Kingdom of England After which
he ^as adjured by the Archbishop, in the behalf of God, and strictly
prohibited, not to presume to accept this honor unless he fully purposed in
his mind, actually to fulfill what he had sworn. To which he answe^ng,
promised that by Gods assistance he would bona ^ide keep those things which he
had sworn. After which he rightly settled the affairs of England by the
counsel of his Nobles, and then passed over in^o Normandy. But how ill he kept
this his Oath, and others of this Nature; and how he violated the ^tatutes of
Magna Charta and D^ Forresta, which he had confirmed with his hand, seal,
oath, Pro^amations, the Bishops Excommunications, and the Popes Bull within
three moneth^ after he had on firmed them, and procured a dispensation of his
oath and abrogation of these Laws, making ^loody wars upon his Barrons and
Subjects (who confiding to those confirmations and royal pro^ises expected no
such strange performances) spoiling, robbing, and destroying his people every
^here in the selfsame manner as we now are plundered; See before p. 5. 8.
Graf. p. 11. Mat. Paris. p^ 243. to 247. worthy reading and consideration.
the Histories of his life too manifestly ^^ late; which often put his Crown in
danger of utter los^e, Lewis of France being crowned king by the ^^rons in his
steed, who renounced their allegiance to him, for his perjuries and breach of
faith, and ^aking war upon them. John departing this life, his son Henry
being but 9. years old, was pro^aimed king, through the pe^swasion of the
Earl Marshall and of Pembroke (afterward made his ^rotector,) who informed
the Lords and Commons, Fox Acts and Mon. Ed. t^lt. v. 1. p. 334, Speed. p. 591.
that though King John for his evil demeanors ^eserved their persecution and
l^sse of his crown, yet his young child, tender in years, was pure and
inno^nt from his fathers doings. Wherefore ^ith every man is to be charged with
the burden of his own trans^ressions, neither shall the child (as scriptures
teach) bear the iniquity of his Fathers, they o^ght of duty and conscience, to
bear themselves ^ildly toward this tender Prince, and take comp^ssion of his
age. And ^r as much as he was John's natural and eldest son* and ought to be
their Sovereign, let us with one joint ^llistance APPOINT HIM our King and
Governor, let us renounce from us Lewis the French kings ^onne, and suppress
his people, which are a confusion and shame to our Nation, and the yoakes of
their Ser^itude let ^s cast from our shoulders. Upon which persuasions Henry
was presently proclaimed and crowned king at Glocesler: And though he were but
an infant, yet being Mat. Paris p. 278. 305.
set before the High Altar, he swore before the Clergy and people upon the Holy
Evangelists and diverse Saints Relics Ioceline Bishop of Bath dictating the
Oath; That he would bear honor, peace and reverence to God, to ^^ Church and
Priests, all the days of his life. He likewise swore, that he would maintain
right Justice among the people committed to his Charge: And that he would blot
out ill Laws and unjust customs, if that should be any in the kingdom, and
observe good ones, and cause them to be kept by all men* How well ^ observed
this solemn oath, with many others of like nature made to his Lords and
Subjects, f^ confirmation of Magna Charta and their Liberties, In his Edition
Tiguri. 1589. p. 876. 938. 958. 959 960.
Matthew Paris will inform us; who writ^ that the King in all his Oaths and
promises did so far transgress the bounds of truth, that the Prela^^ and
Lords knew not how to hold this Proteus, the King, for where there is no truth,
there can be no ^ix^ confidence: That thought he sometimes humbled himself,
confessing, that he had been often bewitched ^ ill Counsel, and promised with
a great Oath solemnly taken upon the Altar and coffin of Saint Edwar^ that he
would plainly and fully correct his former Errors, and graciously condescend
to his natural Subject good counsel; yet his frequent preceding breaches of
oaths and promises, sepenitus incredibilem reddider^^ made him altogether
incredible, so that (though he usually heard three Mosses every day, but
seldom a^ Sermons (as Hist. Angl. P. 1.
Walsingham notes) yet none would afterward believe him, but ever fear and
susp^^ his words and actions: and to avoid the infamy of perjurie which he
feared, he sent to the ^ope^ absolve him from those Oaths he repented of, who
easily, granted him an absolution. Such faith and assurance is there in the
Oaths and Protestations of Princes to their Subjects; whose Politic
capacities often times have neither soul nor conscience. This perfidiousnesse in
the king, made his long raig^ full of troubles, of bloody civil wars, and
often times endangered the very loss of his Crown a^ kingdom, as our
Historians inform us, for which he repented and promised amendment at h^ death.

Lib. 3. c. 9. f. 107.
Bracton an ancient Lawyer in this kings days, writes. That the king in his
Coronation OUGHT by an Oath taken in the name of Jesus Christ, to promise these
three things to the people subject to hi^ First that he will command and
endeavor to his power, that true peace shall be kept to the Church and ^
Christian people in his time. Secondly, That he will prohibit rapines (or
plunderings) and all iniquities ^ all degrees. Thirdly, That in all Judgments
he will command equity and mercy, that so God who is gracious and merciful
may bestow his mercy on him, and that by his justice all men may enjoy firm
peace. F^ (says he) a King is SACRED and ELECTED (to wit by his kingdom) for
this end, to do justis unto all; for if there were no justice, peace would be
easily exterminated, and it would be in vain to make Laws and do justice
unless there were one to defend the Laws, etc. And before the Conquest, I re^
in Fox Acts and Monuments. Edition. 1641. vol. 1. p. 214. and Lambards
Archaion: Leges Edwardi. c. 17. Bilson. par, 3 p. 494.
King Edward the Confessors Laws, not only the Office, but Oath of the King
(whom he an^ Bracton often styles, Gods and Christ Vicar upon earth) thus
excellently described. A King ought abo^ all things to fear God: to love and
observe his Commandments, and cause them to be observed through h^ whole
kingdom: He ought also to set up good Laws and customs, such as be wholesome
and approved, s^^ as be otherwise to repeal them and thrust them out of his
kingdom. Item he ought to do justice an^ judgment in his kingdom, by the
counsel of the Nobles of his Realm. All these things ought the King ^ his
own person to do, taking his oath upon the Evangelists and the blessed
Relics of Saints, swearing ^ the presence of the whole state of his Realm
(as well of the temporalty as of the spiritualty) before he ^^ crowned of the
Archbishops and Bishops. Three servants the King ought to have under him as
Vassals, fleshly lust, avarice and greedy desire, whom if he keep under as his
servants and slaves, he shall reign well an^ honorably in his Kingdom. He
must do all things with good advisement and praemeditation: and the properly
belongs to a King: for hasty rashness brings all things to ruin;
according to the saying of the Gospel; Every Kingdom divided in it selfeshall
be brought to desolation. Master Vol. 1. p. 214.
Fox informs us that William the Conqueror through the peoples clamor
promised to confirm this King Edwards Laws but the most part of them he
omitted, contrary to his Oath at his Coronation. Indeed I find not that the
Conqueror took this Oath when he was crowned; but I read in History. p. 440.
441.
Speed and others; that William the Conqueror abrogating for the most part,
the ancient Laws of the Land, and introducing ne^ hard Laws of his own
written in the Norman tongue which the people understood not, and the Judges
wrested at their pleasures to the forfeiture of Goods, Lands, Life; hereupon
the Nobility, and Natives, seeking to cast off these snares and fetters of his
Laws, set up Edgar Athelin for the^ General once again, and ^ell into a new
conspiracy, raising great forces and resolving to make the sword their Judge.
The King hereupon by Lanfrankes advise, (who as Re^oboams sages, gave him
counsel, somewhat to bear with their abuses, rather then to hazard the ruin
of all in fight) appointed a meeting at Berkham^teed Anno 1172. where the King
entering parley with the English Nobility, did so far wind himself into their
good opinions, that they all forthwith laid down their weapons. And he for his
part fearing to lose the Crown with shame, which he had gotten with effusion
^f so much blood, gave his Oath upon the holy Evangelists, and the relics of
Saint Albane the Martyr (the same being ministered to him by Abbot Frederick)
swearing to observe and inviolably to ^^epe the ancient Laws of this Land, and
most especially those compiled by King Edward the Confessor; though (as the
event soon showed) he little meant to do as he promised. Peace thus
established, ^is conference ended, and the Kings oath received, the English
Armies disband themselves, as drea^ing Note this.
they had now good fortune by the foot, and hoping the greatest storms of
their dangers were ^a^t; which presently proved but a vain surmise. For king
William having compounded with the ^anes, began extremely to hate the English
Nobles, and with full resolution of their destruction, ^^ddenly set upon them
apart, which he durst not attempt when they were united; so that See H^ntindon,
Hist. l. 7. p. 369. Mat. Paris Hist, p. 6.
s^aying any, imprisoning others, and persecuting all of them with fire and
sword, well was he that could ^e first ^^ne. Such little faith, or assurance is
there in the solemn Oaths and Protestations of Kings to ^^eir Subjects; which
are seldom really performed, and intended only as snares to entrap them, if
^^ey confide and rely upon them without any better security. The form of the
kings Coronation ^er since Edward the a has been this, and is thus
administered. Magna Charta Printed Cum Privilegio. London. 1558. part. 2. f.
16^^ Iudamentum Regis quando corona^u^. Remonstrance Nov 2. p. 25. to 38.
The Metropolitan or Bishop ^^at is to Crown the King with a mean and
distinct voice shall interrogate him, if he will confirm with an ^ath the
Laws and customs granted to the people of England, by ancient, just and
devout kings toward ^od, to the samepeople, and especially the Laws and
Customs and Liberties granted by glorious King Edward to the Clergy and
People. And IF HE SHALL PROMISE that he will assent to all these; ^et the
Metropolitan or Bishop expound to him, what things he shall swear, saying
thus. Thou shall ^epe to the Church of God, to the Clergy and people Peace
entirely, and concord in God, according to thy ^^wer; The king shall answer: I
will keep it. Thou shall cause to be done in all thy judgments, equal
^dright justice, and discretion, in mercy and verity, according to thy power.
He shall answer; I will do it. ^^ou grantest just Laws and Customs to be
kept, and thou do promise, that those Laws shall be protected ^d confirmed
by thee to the honor of God, QUAS VULGUS ELEGERIT, which the people shall ^se,
according to thy power. He shall answer; I do grant and promise. And there may
be added to ^e foresaid Interrogations, what other things shall be just. All
things being pronounced, he shall confirm that he will observe all things with
an oath upon the Altar presently taken before all. There ^ath been a late
unhappie difference raised between the Sea the Parliaments Remonstrance of the
26. of May. p. 9. His Majesty's Answer thereto: p. 16. 17. and the Parliaments
Reply* Nou. 2. p. 2^. to 38.
king and Parliament about the word ELEGERIT; the Parliament affirming the word
to signify, shall choose; according to sundry written ^oles and Printed Coppies
in Latin and French, the King on the contrary affirming, it should be ^^th
chosen; But he that observes the words of the ancient Oaths: Populo tibi
commisso rectam ^^liciam exercebis, malas leges and iniquas consuetudines, si
aliquae fuererint in Regno tuo, delebis, and bonas servabis, all in the future
tence: and the verbes, servabis, Facies fier^, protegendas, cor^oborandas in ^e
former and same clauses of the Oath now used, all of them in the future, with
the whole Scope ^tent and purport of this part of the Oath, must necessarily
grant, shall choose to be the true rea^ng; and that it referres to the
confirmation of Judge Huttons Argument against Shipmoney, p. 32. determines so.
future Laws to be afterward made in Parliament, not those only in being
when the Oath was administered; else kings should not be obliged by their
^athes, to keep any Laws made after their Coronations by their own assents,
but only those ^^eir Predecessors assented to, not themselves, which were most
absurd to affirm.

From these several Oaths and Passages, the usual form of the Nobles
proclaiming such and ^^ch Kings of England, with other Page 4. ^^
forecited Histories, it is apparent: First, that Popish Parliaments, Peers,
and Subjects, have deemed the Crown of England not merely successive and
he^dita^y, though it has usually gone by descent; but arbitray and elective,
when they saw cause, man of our kings coming to the Crown without just
hereditarie Title, by the Kingdoms, Peers, ^d peoples free election only,
confirmed by a subsequent Act of Parliament, which was then re^^ted a
sufficient Right; by virtue whereof they then reigned and were obeyed as
lawful kings, ^d were then and yet so acknowledged to be; their Right by
Election of their Subjects being seldom or never adjudged an illegal
usurpation in any Parliaments, whence the statute of 1 E. 4. c. 1. ^ d ^. E. 4.
^. 2. declare king Henry the 4. 5. and 6. to be successively kings of England
indeed, and not right, yet not usurpers because they came in by Parliament.
Only Richard the third, (who treacherously murdered Edward the 5. his
Sovereign, and violently usurped his Crown, at first, before any Parliament
^^ve it him, compelling the Lords and Commons afterward to Elect him King out
of fear, after his slaugh^^ in Bosworth field,) was declared an usurper by Act
of Parliament 1. H. 7 c. 6. and so adjudged to by 1 E. 4. c. 1. 8. H. 7* c. 1.
9. E. 4. f. 1. 2. and Henry the 7. had the Crown set upon his head in the
^^ld, by my Lord Standly as though (says Page 8* ^* ^^.
Grafton) he had been elected king by the voice of the people, ^ in ancient
times past in diverse Realms it has been accustomed. Secondly, that those
kings who have enjoyed the Crown by succession, descent, or election, have
still taken*it upon the condition and covenants contained in their Coronation
Oaths; which if they refused to swear to the Pee^^ and people, really and
bona fide to perform, they were not then to be crowned or received as kings,
^^ adjured in the name of God to renounce this dignity. And though in point of
Law, Cook 7. Report. f. 10. 11. Calvin's case. Mar^il. Patauinus Defen. Pacis
pars. 2. c. 25.
those who enjoy ^^ Crown by Succession, be Kings, before their Coronations;
yet it is still upon those subsequent Littleton. sect. 378. 379. and Cooks
Instit. Ibid. f. 232. 233. 234.
Condition in Law, contained in their Coronation Oaths, which impose no new,
but only ratify the old conditions ^ separably annexed to the Crown by the
Common Law, ever since Edward the Confessors days, if not ^^fore, as the
Oaths of all our kings to their people; really to perform th^se Articles and
Condition fully demonstrate. Thirdly, that these Oaths are not merely
arbitrary or voluntary at the ki^^ pleasure, to take or refuse them if he will,
but necessary and inevitable, by the Law and const^^ ^sage of the Realm, yea
of all Baldus Proaem. de Feud n* 32. Dr Crakenth. defense of Constantine. p.
163. to 175. Grimst. Imperial Hist. p. 653.
Christian kingdoms whatsoever, which prescribe like Oaths to t^^ kings. From
all which I may firmly conclude, that the whole Kingdom and Parliament, are
^^ Supreme Authority, and Paramount the king, because they may lawfully, and
do usually prescr^^ such conditions, terms, and rules of governing them to
him, and bind him by Oath faithfully to perfo^^ the same, as long as he shall
continue king; which oath our kings usually took, or at least faithfu^^
promised to take to their Subjects in ancient times; before ever they did or
would take an Oath ^ fealty, homage or Allegiance to them, as the premises
evidence. and Claus. Rot. 1. R. 2. M. 44.

Tenthly, Our Parliaments and kingdom anciently in times of Popery, and
Paganism ^^ both challenged and exercised a Supreme power over the Crown of
England it self, to transfe^^ it from the right heir and settled it on whom
themselves thought meet to elect for their King; ^^ likewise to call their
Kings to an account for their misgovernment and breach of Oath to the prejudice
of their people, so far as to article against them, and either by force of
Arms, or a judic^^ sentence in Parliament, actually to depose them, and set up
others in the Throne, as many See Fortescue, c. 12. to 15 Johan. Mar. de Rege
and Regis Instit. l. 1. ^ 7. 8. 9.
foreci^^ presidents (together with the examples of Archigallo, and Emerian,
two ancient British Kings, and Edwin King of Mercia, deprived of allhonour and
Kingly dignity, by the unanimous consent of their Subjects for their Tyranny,
Oppression, misgovernment, and vicious lives, and others elected and made Kings
their places) evidence; which Acts of theirs they then reputed just and Legal.
Those Parliament then and National Assemblies, which have thus disposed of the
Crown and Kings themselves and exercised such jurisdiction over them, must
certainly be above them, and the highest Soveraing^ power. True it is, our
Protestant Peers, Commons and Parliaments, never challenged nor exercised such
jurisdiction, and I presume they will never do it. However it is neither
honorable n^^ safe for Kihgs, and the most destructive policy their ill
Counselors can suggest unto them, so fa^ to oppress their Subjects or
exasporate their Parliaments, as to provoke them to use the extremity ( x) See
p. 4. 5. 6.
their power, and revive dead sleeping presidents, (the consideration whereof
when they were fresh* m^^ succeeding Kings more just and moderate in their
governments, and reclaimed many Vicious and Oppress^^^ * See Mat. West. Jeofry
Monmouth, Polych. Fab. Graft. Holin. Speed, in their lives.
Princes, as Archigallo and others witness) for their relief We know what
Solomon says; Eccles. 7. 7.
Surely ^^pression makes a wise man mad; and if Kings or their evil
Instruments, shall so far mad their Subject and Parliaments (either by
oppressions, rapines, misgovernment, destroying, making war upon them,
putting them out of their protections) as to make them cry out as they did
against King John. Mat. Par. p. 264. 265. 268. Grafton. p. 111. 112. Bishop
Bilson. part. 3. p. 480.
Rex Ioh^nes factus est de Rege Tyrannus, imo de homine in ^estialem
praerumpens feritatem. Ve^ tibi Iohanni Reg^ ultime; Anglorum Principum
abominatio, Nobilitatis Anglicanae confusio: Heu Anglia vastata, and ^ plius
vastanda, etc. Whereupon presently ensued, a Nolumus hunc regnare: Tandemque
decretum ^ ut aliquem potentem in Regem eligerent, per quem possint ad
possessiones pris^inas rev^cari, credentes ^ nu^lus Iohanne peior, vel durior
possit dominari, and tale miserabile statuentes argumentum.

-- Fortuna miserima tuta est,
Nam timor eventus deterioris abest.
Cumque aliquandi^, quem eligerent ^ae^it^ssent, demum in hoc pariter
consens^runt, ut Ludovicum fil^^ Philippi Regis Francorum sibi praeficerent,
and ipsum in Regem Angliae sublim^rent; Which they did, King John's, their own,
and the whole kingdoms great prejudice. We know what the ill advise of R^^
boams rough young Counselors produced: 2 Chronicles. 10. And the King answered the
people roughly ^^ the advice of the young men, saying; My father, made your
yoke heavy, but I will add thereto; ^ * See 2 Chro. 10. and 11.
father chastised you with whips, but I will chastise you with scorpions. And
when all Israel saw, that ^ king would not harken unto them, the people
answered the King (though he came to the crown by succe^^ on) saying: What
portion have we in David, and we have none inheritance in the Son of Iesse;
every man your tents O Israel: and now David* see to thine own house. So all
Israel went to their tents, and ele^^ Jeroboam for their King, and fell away
from the house of David to this day, being never after united to ^ but
continuing a distinct Kingdom from it. wherefore the best policy Kings can
use, to perpetuate their Thrones to them and their Posterity, is to ^^ ^at
their Subjects so, Seneca de Cleme^^^a, l. 1.
as may win their hearts and affections, and not to strain their pretended
Prerogatives beyond the bounds of Law; this being a most certain experimented
rule which Polit. l. 5. c. 10, 11. p 367, 368, See Polybius Hist. l. 6.
Aristotle (the Prince of Politicians) gives; That there are two intestine
causes most perilous and frequent of all others, by which a kingdom is usually
lost, and subverted. The first is, if the Nobles and people dissent from the
King himself. The second, if Kings will Reign tyrannically, and usurp a
greater domination or prerogative, then the Laws of their kingdoms give them.
Then he adds, Verily a kingdom is preserved by contrary remedies, specially,
by a moderate kind and temperate form of Government. For by how much the (c)
Deuteronomy. 17. 19 20. See Prove. 16. 12. c. 20. 28 c. 29. 4. 14. c. 25. 5.
more moderate the King shall be, and contented with smaller and fewer
prerogatives, by so much the more constant and longer-lasting shall his
kingdom necessarily be; For by this means it recedes farther from the
domination of Tyrants, and it comes nearer to the equability of manners and
humanity of life, and is less envyed by their Subjects, which he proves by the
notable speech and example of King Theopompus. And indeed this is the
principal policy which God himself has prescribed a King, to prolong his
days in his kingdom, he and his children after him; to keep all the words of
this Law, and those Statutes to do them, (that ^s, to govern himself and his
Subjects only by Law, not power) to do justice and judgment, avoid
oppression, and not to liftup his heart above his brethren; as if they were his
vassals and no^ men, or Christians of the same kind and quality as himself
is. Wherefore I shall close up this with old Bractons resolution. Lib. 3. c. 9.
f. 107. and Fleta lib. 1. c. 17.
Potestas itaque Regis, juris est, and non injuriae. Exercere igitur debet Rex
potestatem Juris, ^icut Dei vicarius and Minister in terra* quia illa potestas
SOLIUS Dei est: potestas autem injuriae, Diaboli and non Dei: cujus horum
operum fecerit Rex, ejus Minister erit, cujus opera fecerit. Igitur dum facit
justitiam, vicarius est Regis aeterni, minister autem Diaboli dum declinat ad
injuriam. See Leges Edwardi Confessoris cap. 17. in Lambards Archaion. f. 130.
accordingly.
Dicitur enim Rex a been regendo, non a regnando: quia Rex est dum been regit.
Tyrannus dum populum sibi creditum violenta opprimit dominatione. Temperet
igitur potentiam suam per legem, quae fraenum est potentiae, quod secundum
leges viva^, quia hoc sanxit Lex humana; quod leges suum ligent latore^; and
alibi in eadem, digna ^ox Majestate regnan^^s est, legibus alligatum se
Principem profiteri. Item, nihil t^m proprium est imperii quam legibus vivere:
Et majus imperio est legibus submittere Principatum; and merito debet
retribuere legi, quia Lex tribuit ei* facit enim Lex quod ipse sit Rex. Item,
cum non semper oporteat Regem esse arma^um armis sed legibus, addiscat Rex
sapientiam and conservet justitiam. (All which is notably seconded by Judge
Fortescue De Laudibus Legum Angliae, c. 9. to 15. worthy any Princes serious
perusal:) And thus doing, neither he nor his Posterity need ^eare this
Supreme Prerogative Power of Parliaments, which has ^aine dead and buried for
many ages; Et pereat positum rubigine telum.

11. All Papists See p, 2, 3. and the Authors there quoted* Bishop Jewels View
of a seditious Bull, and of the Popes Supremacy. Cassanaeus Catagloria mundi,
part. 4.
attribute far more divine authority and Sovereign Jurisdiction over
Emperors, Kings, Princes Kingdoms, Subjects, to the Pope their Lord and God,
whom they make the Supreme Monarch of the World and all kingdoms in it, and
give him greater Authority to summon, ratify, and dissolve general Councels,
then ever any Christian King or Emperor, challenged or usurped: yet those who
maintain these Paradoxes of the Popes Supremacy, confess, See John Whites
Way* sect. 36. n. 30. 34, 35. p. 102. 104 105. Surius Tom. 3. and 4.
that a general Council is above the Pope; and may upon just cause, not only
convent and censure him for his misdemeanors, but likewise actually depose him
and set up another in his stead* as the Councels of Pisa, Constans, Basil,
(which deposed four Popes, namely, Gregory the 12. Benedict the 13. John the
23. and Eugenius the fourth) the Council of Chalcedon against Pope Leo, the
Council of Sinuessa against Pope Marcellinus, the sixth, seventh, and eighth
general Councels against Honorius, the Councels of ( q) Worms and Brixia
against Hildebrand, the Council of Pisa, summond 1511. of purpose to depose
Pope Julius for his perjury, and See John Whites Way sect. 36. n. 30 p. 102 and
n. 34, 35. p. 104, 105.
sundry Popish Writers acknowledge. Now the Council of Basil (as I showed See
p. 4.
before) defined: That the whole Kingdom and Parliament has as great a power
over their Kings, as a Council has over the Pope* therefore by Papists
verdicts it is above the King in point of Sovereign power* as a Council is
above the Pope, which John Mariana, De Rege and Regis, Instit. lib. 1. c 3. to
10. professedly proves at large.

12. That Court which may lawfully conjure, question, depose, banish, execute
the Kings greatest Favorites, Officers, Judges, yea Lord Protectors themselves,
the highest Peers of the Realm, (notwithstanding such are said to be Psalm.
82. 1, 2. Exodus 22. 2^. John 10. 34.
Gods, Romans 13. 1, 2, 3, 4.
Ordained of God, Gods Ministers, To Prove. 8. 15.
decree Judgment (g) Fox Acts and Monuments, vol. 1. p 231. 235. 879 to 890.
962.
by God, to be the higher powers, etc. in Scripture, as well as Kings*) and
that not only with, but against the Kings Good will; must questionless be the
highest power and Jurisdiction in the Realm, else the King and their Authority
might protect them against its Justice. But the Parliament may lawfully
censure, question, depose, banish, execute all or any of these, not only
without, but against the Kings consent, witness the proceedings in Parliament
against Hoveden p. 702, 703. 705, 706. with Speed, Holinshed, Grafton, Stow,
Matthew Paris, Polychronicon, Fabian.
William Longchamp, Bishop of Ely, Chief Justicia^, Lord Chancellor, and
Viceroy of England, in Richard the first his Reign, during his absence in the
Holy Land,) from which Offices he was by the Peers and Commons deposed for his
misd^meanours, and oppressions. Walsingh. Speed, Holinsh. Fabian, in Edw. 2.
Froyssards Chron. part. 1. c. 12, 13.
Piers Gaveston and the two Hugh Spensers, in Edward the seconds Reig^e, often
banished by Parliament, and violently p^t to death, though the Kings highest
Officer, and darling Minions. Walsingham Holinsh. Speed, Grafton, Stow, in 11
R. 2. c. 1. 6, 7. Froysards Chron. part. c. 97.
Michael De La Pole, wi^h other great Officers, and Favorites to King Richard
the second, condemned, deprived of their Offices, banished and executed by the
Peere^ in Parliament, together with Trisilian, Belknap, and their fellow
Judges, who misadvised him in point of Law: Hall, Stow, Speed, Holinsh.
Grafton, Fox. in H. 6.
Humph^ey Duke of Gloucester, Protector to King Henry the sixth, arrested of high
Treason in a Parliament at Bury, and there murdered; Hall, Holy. Grafton, Stow,
in H. 8.
Cardinal Wolsey, that powerful favorite ^o King Hen^y the eight, accused
and put from his Chancellorship and other Offices by the Parliament; Fox,
Speed, Holinshed, Stow Grafton in Ed. 6*
The Duke of Sommerset, Lord Protector to King Edward the sixth, accused and
attainted of high Treason in Parliament, for which he lost his head; the great
Earl of Strafford, Lord Depu^y of Ireland, who lost his head this Parliament
for Treason, full sore against his Majesty's and the Queens wills, with
infinite others, mentioned in our Stories and Records: Nay Queens themselves
have undergone ^he censures of Parliament, (of which we have sundry precedents
in See Fox, Hall, Speed, Holinshed, Grafton in his life, 28. H. 8. c. 7. p. 35.
p. 8. c. 1.
King Henry the eight his Reign) not only to divorce, but loss of their very
heads: and shall any Delinquent then think to be protected by any power
against the Parliaments justice now?

13. Not to mention the Parliaments Sovereign Power and Jurisdiction Matthew.
Paris p. 560. 562. 933, 934, 935. Speed p. 750. Grafton, p. 188 189. 240, 241.
221, 222, 223. The several Acts for Subsidies and Rastal War, Truce, Arms,
Money Mint, Musters, Taxes, Tonnage and Poundage. The Parliaments two
Remonstrances concerning the Militia; C^oks Instit. on Artic* Super Chartas.
in Making or proclaiming war or Peace, in which they have often ti^es not
only advised, but overswayed the King; in creating the highest Officers, in
Ordering the Militia of the Kingdom by Sea and Land by settled Laws (of which
more an on;) or in ordering the coin and Money of the Land, together with the
Mint, or designing how the Subsidies and Aids granted by them to the King,
shall be disposed of to the Kingdoms use, of which there are sundry
precedents. All which are strong See Bodines Commen wealth, l. 1. c. 10.
evidences of its Sovereign Authority: together with the Acts concerning his
Purveyance and all Revenues* royal. Nor yet to remember this infallible
Argument, to prove Kingdoms greater, and more valuable then Kings; that Kings
as public Servants to their Realms, ought to hazard their lives for their
Kingdoms safety and preservation (as many have done in wa^^es against enemies)
but never ought the whole kingdom to be lost or hazarded to preserve its Kings
P^erogatives, that of John 11. 48, 49, 50. and chap. 18. 14. being an undoubted
rule in Divinity and Policy. * That it is expedient that any one man (though a
King) should dye for the people, that the whole Nation perish not: rather then
the whole Nation dye for him.

There is one clear Demonstration yet remaining, to prove the Supreme power
of Parliaments above Kings themselves, which is this: That it is the highest
Court and power to which all See Sir Thomas Smiths Common*wealth, l. 2. c. 1.
2. Holinsheds Description of England, c. 8. p. 173* and Chronicles of Ireland,
p. 127. to 130. Cromptons Jurisdiction.
Appeals are lastly, and finally to be made from all other Courts and Judges
whatsoever, yea from the Kings own personal resoluti^ns, in, or out of any
other his Courts: and such a transcendent Tribunal from whence ^here is no
appeal to any other Court or person, no not to the King himself, but only to
another Parliament. If any erroneous judgment be given in the Kings Bench,
Exchequer Chamber, Chancery, Court of Wards, or any other Court within the
Realm, or in the Parliament in Ireland, it is finally to be reversed, o^
determined in Parliament by a Writ of 1 H. 7. 1. Br. Parliament. 92. 98. Error,
65, 88. 137. See Ash. Error, 65, 66* 67, 68, 70.
Error, or upon a Petition or Bill: If any sentence be unjustly given in any
Ecclesiastical Courts, or before the Delegates, the final Appeal for
redress must be to the Parliament. Illegal sentences in the (now exploded
extravagant) Courts of Star Chamber, or High Commission; Injuries done by the
King and his privy Council at the Council Table, are examinable and
remediab^e in this High Court. Nay, if the King himself should sit in person
in the Kings Bench, or any other Court (as sometimes our Kings have done) and
there give any judgment, it is not so obligatory or final, but that the party
against whom judgment is pronounced, may appeal to the Parliament for
relief. But if the Parliament give any judgment, There See 22 E* 3. 3 Error,
8. 8 H 4. 12, 13*
can be no Appeal to any hig^er Tribunal, Court, or Person, no not to the
King, but only to the next or some other Parliament, as is evident by
experience, by all 21 R. 2. c. ^. to 15. 1 H. 4. c. 2, 3, 4. 8 H. 4. 12, 13.
See 1 Mariae c. 1. 1 Eliz. c. ^. 3. 21 Jac. c. 28. And all Acts for restitution
in blood of Persons Attainted, and Acts of repealing S^atutes, Bracton, l. 1.
c. ^*
Attainders of Treason, by or in Parl^ament, by all inconveent and unjust Act^
passed in Parliament, which concern either King or Subject; Which cannot be
reversed nor repealed though erroneous, nor the right heir restored in blood
by any Charter from the King, but only by an Act of repeal or restitution in
blo^d by another Parliament. Now this is an infallible Maxim, both in the
Common, Civil, and Canon Law, that The Court or person to w^om the last
appeal is to be made, is the Supreamest power; as the Sea Ashes Tables, Error
65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70.
Kings Bench is above the Common Pleas, the Esc^equer Chamber * See Matthew
Paris, p. 268. Legimus quod multi al^ Reges, imo and Reguli, usque ad mortem
dimica^unt, etc.
above the Kings Bench, and the Parliament above them all, because a Writ of
Error to reverse erroneous judgments given in the Common Pleas, lies in the
Kings Bench: Errors in the Kings Bench may be reversed in the Eschequer
Chamber; and errors in all or either of them, may be redressed finally in
Parliament, from whence there is no further appeal. Hence the Canonists
conclude, a Bodin, l. 1. c. 10. Summa Angelic^, and Rosella Tit. Appellatio.
Lindwood, lib. 2 de Appellationibus, Fox Acts and Monuments, Vol. 1. p. 448,
449. 452. 506. 24. H. 8. c. 12. All Papists and Protestants, in their
Controversies of the Popes Supremacy, and of general Councels
General Council above the Pope, the Pope above the Archbishop, the
Archbishop above the Ordinary, because men may Appeal from the Ordinary to the
Archbishop, from him to the Pope (but now with us to the Kings Delegates) If
there be any difference between See Grafton p. 512, 513. 161. Matthew Paris,
p. 954. Fox old Edition, p. 508.
King or Subject, touching any inheritances, Privileges or Prerogatives
belonging to the Crown it self, or any points of misgovernment; yea, which is
more, if there be any suite, quarrel, or difference between our Kings in Act,
and any other their Competitors, See Hoveden, p. 724, 725
for the Crown it self, which of them has best title to it, who of them
shall enjoy it, and how, or in what manner it shall be settled, the Lords and
Commons in Parliament are and ought to be the sole and final Judges of it.

Not to give you a^y instances of this kind between King and Subjects, which
I have formerly touched* nor to relate how our Walsingham Hist. p. 514. Speed
p. 647* 648.
Kings, Edward the first, King John Matthew Paris, p. 273. 274, 275.
condemned to death by a Parliament in France, by French Peers, for slaying
his Nephew Arthur trecherously with his own hands; and likewise to lose the
Crown of England) Henry the third, and other our Kings have Appealed to the
Parliaments of France and England, upon differences between the Peers and
Kings of France and them, concerning their Lands and Honors in France. Or how
King Edward the third, and Philip of France submitted both their Titles to the
Kingdom of France, to the determination in a French Parliament, where they
were both personally present, which adjudged the Crown to Philip; Nor yet to
repeat the page 5.
forementioned precedents, how the Lords and Commons when the Title to the
Crown has been in dispute have transferred it from the rightful Heirs to
others; I shall give you some other pregnant evidences, where the Parliament
has finally determined the Title to the Crown, when it has been in
competition, and settled it in a legal manner to avoid debates (by way of
Appeal to them by compe^itors, or reference from the Kings themselves) as the
only proper Judges of such a superlative controversy. Not to mention any
stories of our British Kings to this purpose, where the Sea Matthew Westminster.
Fabian, Grafton, Holin.
Kingdom, Lords and Commons then, disposed of the Crown in cases of minority,
want of He^res, misgovernment, and c^ntroversies ab^ut the Title to the Crown.

Polichron. l. 6. c. 18. Speed, p. 399. See Grafton and Holinshed accordingly.
Canutus after the death of King Edmond, Anno 1017. claiming the whole Realm
against Edmonds Brethren and Sons, referred his Title upon the agreement made
between Edmond and him for this purpose, to the Parliament; who resolved for
Canutus Title, and thereupon took an Oath of feal^y to him, Offering to defend
his right with their swords against all others claims. After his decease, the
Matthew Westminster and Malmes^wy, Anno 1036. Holinshed, l. 17. c. 13. p. 398.
Speed, p. 404. 406. Huntingdon, Walsingham. Anno 1036. 10^0.
Title to the Crown being controverted between Hardicanute the right Heir,
and Harold his elder, but base Brother; it was referred to a Parliament at
Oxfo^d, who gave their voices to Harold, (there present) and presently
proclaimed and consecrated him King; Anno 1036. After whose death, the States
of England sent and adjudged the Crown to Hardicanute, then in Denmark. He
dying, Huntindon, l. 6. Polychron. l. 6. c. 18. Speed. p. 410. Matthew West^n.
An. 1042. p. 415.
Edward the Confessor, by a general consent of the Nobles, Clergy, and People
(who presently upon Harolds death, enacted by Par^iament,) (g) Matthew Paris,
p. 893. 925. 930. 948. 954, 655. Grafton, p. 188, 189 Speed, p. 687, 688, 785,
786.
That none o^ the Danish blood should any more Reign over them) was elected
King, and declared ^ight Heir to the Crown. Anno 1126. Hoveden, Hun^ingdon,
Matthew Westminster, Matthew Paris, Walsingham, Polychronic^n, Fabian, Anno
1126. Speed p. 477. See Ho^inshed, Grafton, Stow, Anno 1126.
King Henry the first having no issue male, but only one Daughter Maude, to
fucceed him, summoned a Parliament in the presence of himself and David King
of Scotland, wherein the Crown was settled upon Maude after his decease, being
of the ancient Royal English Blood; whereupon Stephen, his Sisters Son, and
all the Nobles presently swore fealty to ^er, As much as in them lay, after
King Henry's death (if ^e dyed without issue male) to establish ^er Queen ^f
the Monarchy of great Britain. But Stephen after his decease, usurped the
Crown against his Oath, (h) Polyd. Virgil, l. 19. Claudius Seyse^^us, his
French Monarchy.
By the unanimous consent and election of the Lords and Commons: And after
seventeene years civil wars, ^o the devastation of the Realm Walsingham,
Ypod An. 1113, Matthew Westminster. An. 1153, p. 42. Matthew Paris ^. 82, 83. Speed
p. 497. Hoveden p. 490. Hun^indon, Hist. l. 8 p. 598. Fox. Vol. 1. p. 261.
King Stephen and Henry the Son of Maude came to a Treaty ^ Wal^ingford,
where by the advice of the Lords, they made this accord; That Stephen if he
would, should ^eaceably hold the kingdom during his life, and that Hen^y
should be his adopted Son and Successor, enjoy ^he Crown as right Heir to
it after his death; and that the King and all the Bishops and Nobles should
^weare, that Henry after the Kings death, if he su^vived him, should P^ssesse
the Kingdom without any conradiction* Which done the civil wars ceased, and
a blessed peace ensued: and then coming to Oxford, in a Parl^ament all the
Nobles did fealty to Henry, who was made chief Justiciar of England, and
determined all the affairs of the Kingdom. In the 8. and 25. E. 3. there was
a 25. E. 3. Parl 2. in the Statuts at large
doubt moved in Parliament, whether the children of the King, or others borne
beyond the Seas within his Allegiance, should in^erit lands in England? The
King, to clear all doubts and ambiguities in this case, and to have the La^
herein reduced to ce^tainty; charged the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and other
wise men of his Council assembled in Parliam^nt in the 25. year of his
Reign, to delibera^^ of this point; who with one assent resolved* That the Law
of the Realm of England is, and always has been such, that the children of
the Kings ^^ England in whatsoever parts they be borne, in England or
elsewhere, be able and owe to bear inheritance after the death of their
Ancestors: Which when they had declared, the King, Lords and Commons by a
special Act, did approve and affirm this Law for ever, the only Act passed in
that Parliament. And in a Cook l. 7. The Princes case.
Parliament, 11. E. 3. this Kings eldest son was created Duke of Cornwall by
Parliament, which then also entailed the Duchy of Cornwall upon the eldest
sons of the Kings of England. See 21 R. 2. c. 9.

7. H. 4. c. 2. Hals Chronicle 1. H. 4. f. 10. 15. Fabian. part. 7. p. 376.
Speed p. 763.
King Henry the fourth, the ^et^er to assure the inheritance of the Crowns and
Realms of England and France to him and his posterity, caused them by a
special Act of Parliament, in the first year o^ his reign, to be entailed
and settled on himself and the heirs of his body begotten; and Prince Henry
hi^ eldest son to be established, pronounced, ordained, and decreed heir
apparent to him* and to succeed hi^ in the said Crowns and Realms, to have
them with their appurtenances after the Kings death, to him an^ the heirs of
his body begotten; And if he should die without heir of his body begotten,
then to remain to the Lord Thomas, the Kings second son, with successive
remainders to Lord John the third, and Lord Humfry the Kings fourth son, and
the heirs of their bodies begotten. After which Act passed (for t^^ avoiding
for all claims, titles, and ambiguities, to be made unto the Crown) he
thought never by any of his Subjects to be molested or troubled: the rather,
because in this Parliament it was first concluded that deposed King Richard
should continue in a large prison, and ^e plenteously served of all things
necess^ry both for viande and apparel, and if any persons should presume to
rear war or congregate a multitude ^o deliver him out of prison, that then
he should be the first that should die ^or that sedi^ious comm^tion: Which King
Richard (as Fabian. part. 7. p. 373.
Sir John B^got by his Bill exhibited to this Parliament averred) h^^ diverse
times, at sundry Parliaments in his time holden, said; that he would have his
intent and pleasur^ concerning his own matters, whatsoever betide of the
residue; and if any withstood his will or mind, b^ would by one means or
other bring him out of his life; And further said to him at Lichfield in the
one ^^ twentieth year of his reign, that he desired no longer for to live
then to see his Lords and Commons ha^^ him in ^s great awe and dread, as ever
they had of any his Progenitors, so that it might be chronicled of him that
none passed him of honor and dignity, with condition that he were deposed, and
put ^^rom his said dignity the next morrow after. So wilful was he, as to
prefer his will before his Crown or safety.

Hall. An. 38. and. 39. H. 6. f. 176. to 183. Fabian. An^o 1441. p. 470.
Grafton p. 643. to 648. Holins. Stow, Howes, An. 1440 144^
In the years 1440. and 1441. Edward. Duke of York came into the Parliament
House, an^ there, in a large Oration laid claim, and set forth his Title to
the Crown of England, which King Henry the sixth had long enjoyed, desiring
the Parliament to determine the right of the Title between the^ both ^ides
submitting to their resolution as the proper Judges of this weighty royal
controversy: After lon^ debate and consideration of the case among the Peers,
Prelates, and Commons of the Realm, it w^^ finally agreed and resolved by
them: That in as much as Henry the sixth, had been taken as King for. 38.
yea^^ and more, that he should enjoy the name and title of King, and ^ave
p^ssessi^n of the Realm during his n^turall life. And if he either died, or
resigned, or FOR FAITED THE SAME for breaking ^^ part of this concord, then the
said Crown and authority royal should immediately descend to the Duke ^^
York ( King Edward the 4. his Father) if he then live^, ^r else to the next
heir of his line. And that the s^ Duke from thenceforth should be Protector
and Regent of the Kingdom. Provided always, that if the Ki^^ did closely or
apertly, study or go about to break or alter this agreement, or to compass
or imagine the de^^ of the said Duke or his blood* then he TO FORFEIT THE
CROWN: and the Duke T^ TAKE IT: These Articles made by the Parliament between
them, they both subscribed, sealed, ^ swore to, and then caused them to be
enacted. Lo here we have these two Kings submiting their Titles ^ the Crown
and Kingdom it self to the Resolution of both houses of Parliament, as the
Soveraig^ Judge between them; who settled the Crown in this order, under pain
of ^orfeiting it by Ki^^ Henry, if he violated their Decree herein* and
appointing a Lord Protector over the Kingdom in ^^ full age, as Historia
Angliae p. 458. Parliamentum fuit c^nv^catum in qu^ Parliamento ex assensu
omnium Statuum, idem Dux Defensor seu Protector, Angliae fuera^ nomina^us and
ordina^us, omniaque Regni off^cia and beneficia ejus dispositioni sunt commissa.
Walsing^am informs us, a Parliament c^nstituted Duke Humsry to be protector
of hi^ and h^s Kingdom of England, and the Duke of Bedford to ^e Regent of
France, during his minority, wh^ exercised all regal power, by virtue of that
authority which the Parliament derived to them. A^^ this, in these two Kings
reigns, See Grafton p. 691. 692. Speed p. 869. 878. 859. 886. 1. E. 4. c. 1.
17. E. 4. c. 7.
the Crown and its descent were variously settled by Parliament (as I ha^^
formerly manifested) yet so, as that which one Parliament settled in this kind,
continued firm till it ^^ akered or reversed by another Parliament. King
Speeds Hist. p. 928. 931
Richard the third coming to the Crown by usurp^tion, to strengthen his Title,
procured the Lords and Commons to pass an Act of Parliament, where in the
declare him to be their lawful King, both by election and fuccession, entaile
the Crown upon him and the hei^^ ^f his body lawfully begotten, create his
Son Edward, Prince of Wales, and declare him heir to succeed him in ^he
royal Crown and dignity after his decease.

In which Act of Parliament (recited at large by Speed) there is this memorable
passage: That the Court of Parliament is of such Authority, and the people of
this land of such a nature and disposition, as experience teach^th; that
manifestation or declaration of any Truth or Right made by the three Estates of
this Realm Assembled ^n Parliament, and by the Authority of the ^ame, makes
before all other things most faith and certainty, and ^uieting of men's minds,
removes the occasion of all doubts, and seditious language: Halls Chro. 1 H.
7. f. 855.
Henry the seventh af^erwards slaying this usurping Richard at Boswell-field,
to avoid all ambiguities and questions of his Title to the Crown, in his first
Parliament procured the Lords and Commons by a special Act, to set^le the
inheritance of ^he Crowns of England and France, on him and the heirs of his
body lawfully begotten, perpetually by the grace ^f God, so to endure, and on
none other, and all attainders and Acts against him, by Edward the fourth, and
King Richard Grafton p. 856.
this Parliament annibilated. After him King Hen^y the eighth, to ratify his
divorce from Que^ne Katherine, caused it to be confirmed, and his Sp. p. 1028.
Marriage with her to be utterly dissolved by Act of Par^iament: and by 25 H.
8. c. 22. 26 He. 8. c. 13. 28 H. 8 c. 7. 35 H. 8. c. 5. See Hall.
sundry Acts, ratified his subsequent Marriages, and settled the descent of the
Crown to ^is posterity, somewhat different from the course of the Common Law;
which Statutes were afterward altered and the descent of the Crown settled by
other special Bills in Parliament, both in 1 Mar. c. 1. and Parliament 2. c. 1.
2. 1 Eli. c. 3. 13 Eliz. c. 1.
Queen Mary's, and Queen Elizabeth's Reigns, Whose Titles to the Crown were
settled, and in some sort created by the ^arliament.

By the notable Sta^. of 13. Eli. c. ^. worthy reading for this purpose, it is
made no less then high Treason, ^o affirm; That the Queen, WITH, and BY THE
AUTHORITY OF THE PAR^IAMENT of England, is not able to make Laws and Statutes
of sufficient force and validity to bind, li^it, restrain and govern all
persons, their Rights and Titles that in any wise may or might claim any
interest or ^ossibility in or to the Crown of England in possession,
re^ainder, inheritance, succession, or otherwise howsoever; and all other
persons whatsoever. King Edward the sixth, Queen Elizabeth, and other our
Princes holding their Crowns by a Parliamentary Title, rather then by the
course of the Sea Cooks. Institut. Littlei. f. 15, 16.
Common Law, which this ^tatute affirms the Parliament has power to alter,
even in case of descent of the Crown.

It is observable that the Statutes of 25 H. 8. c. 22. 28 H 8. c. 7. and 35 H.
8. c. 1. do not only Nul^^fie some of this Kings marriages, and ratify
others of them, declaring some of his issues legitimate and heredi^ble to the
Crown, others not, and appoint the Queen, if living, to be Protector of the
infant King or Queen, ^at should inherit the Crown; or such of the Lords as
the King by his last will should design; But likewise pre^cribe strict Oaths
for every Subject to take, to maintain the Succession of the Crown, as it is
limited ^y those Acts, which Oaths for any to refuse, is made high Treason, or
to write or speak any thing against the Succession of the Crown as it is
therein limited: And withal they derive a plenary authority ^^ the King (who
thereupon 35 H. 8. c. 1.
acknowledges the great trust and confidence his loving Subjects had in him, ^
putting in his hands wholly the Order and Decla^ation of the Succession of this
Realm) by his Letters Patents ^der his Seal, or his last will in writing
signed with his ^and, for la^ke of issue lawfully begotten of his bo^^ to 28 H.
8. c. 7. 35 H. 8. c, 1.
give, limit, assign, appoint or dispose the imperial Crown of the Realm,
to what person or persons, ^d for such estate in the same, and under such
conditions as it should please his Majesty. The Parliament therein ^omising by
o^e common assent to accept, take, love, dread, and obey, as their legal
Governors, and Supreme ^ads, such person or persons only, as the King by
au^hority of those* Acts should give the Crown unto, and ^olly to st^cke to
them as true faithful Subjects. Provided, that if any of his Children or
Heirs, afterward ^d usur^e one upon the other in the Crown of this Realm, or
claim, or challenge the said Imperial Crown, ^^erwise, or in any other
course, form, degree or condition, then the same should be given, disposed, or
li^ted unto them, by the King, by ver^ue of those Acts. Or if any person or
persons to whom it should please ^^ King, by autho^ity of those Acts to dispose
the said Crown and Dignity of this Realm, or the Heirs of any ^ them, should
at any time hereafter demand, challenge, or claim the Crown of this Realm,
otherwise, or in ^y other course, form, degree or condition, then the same
should be given, disposed, and limited unto them by ^^ King, by ver^ue and
authority of these Acts; That then all, and singular offenders, in any of the
premises ^ntrary to these Acts, and all their Abettou^s, Maintainers, Factours,
Counselors, and Aiders therein, shall be ^emed, and adjudged HIGH TRAITORS TO
THE REALM; and that every such ^ence, shall be accepted, reputed, and taken to
be high Treason, and the offenders therein, their ayders, etc. ^^ every such
offense shall suffer such judgment, pai^es of death, losses and forfeitures of
Lands, Goods, and Pri^ledges of sanctuary, as in any cases of high Treason. And
over, that as well the Kings said Hei^es and Children, every such person and
persons to whom the Crown should be limited as aforesaid, and every of their
Heirs, ^^ every such offense above specified by them or any of them to be
committed, shall lose and forfeit as well all such ^ight, Title, and interest,
that they may claim or challenge, in or to the Crown of this Realm, as
Heirs by ^scent, or by reason of any gift or Act done by the King, for his or
their advancement, by authority of those Acts, by any manner of means or
pretense whatsoever.

And the Statute of 35. H. 8. c. 1. which entailed the Crown upon Queen Mary,
after Edward the 6. his decease without issue, has this proviso. That if the
said Lady Mary, do not keep and perform ^^ conditions as King Henry by his
Letters Patents or last Will in writing, should hereafter declare and limit ^^^
said estate in the Imperial Crown; That then and from thenceforth, the said
Imperial Crown shall be^ come to the Lady Elizabeth, and the heirs of her
body lawfully begotten, in such like manner and form, a^ th^^ the said Lady
Mary were then dead, without any ^eires of her body begotten, any thing in this
Act contained ^ the contrary notwithstanding. And the like proviso there is for
Queen Elizabeth, That if she perform not ^^ like conditions, limited as
aforesaid, to her estate in the Crown; That then the said Imperial Crown
shall ^ and come to such person or persons as the King by his Letters patents
or last will shall limit or appoint. By ^ which Acts, (worthy reading and
consideration) the Parliaments Supreme power of settling and disposing the
descent and inheritance of the Crown, and giving Authority even to the King
himself, to ^^pose of it upon condition, on pain of forfeiture as aforesaid
(which the King alone had no right nor po^er at all to do) will easily appear
to the most malignant Spirits.

In the first ^ Jac. c. 1.
Parliament of our late King James, the first Bill then passed, was an
acknowledgem^^ and confirmation of his immediate, lawful, and undoubted
succession and right to the Crown of England, ^ the next and only heir of
the blood Royal, to whom of right it descended; which Dolman the Priest, and
so^ Jesuits opposed in Printed seditious Books. So the ^ Mariae, Parl. 2. c.
2.
Articles of Queen Mary's marriage with K^ Philip, were limited, appointed,
and ratified by Parliament: And the Imperial Ecclesiastical Ju^diction
usurped by the Pope and Prelates, has likewise by 25 H. 8. c. 19. 21. 26 H. 8
c. 1. 3. 27 H. 8. c. 10. 28 H. 8. c. p. 16. 32 H. 8. c. 22. 24. 29. 31 H. 8. c.
10. 14. 3^ H. 8. c. 29. 34 and 35 H. 8. c. 17. 19. 35 H. 8. c. 1. 3. 1 Eli. c.
1. 1 E. 6. c. 2. 1 Mariae c. 1. and Parl. 2. c. 1. 8 El. c. 1.
sund^y Statutes been restored and united to ^^ Crown, and the Title of
Supreme head, and Supreme Governor in all causes, and over all persons,
Spirit all, Ecclesiastical and Temporal, seiled upon our Kings and Queens;
Who during their minori^ies have ^^ Guardians and Protectors appointed to them
by Walsingham Hist. Angl. H. 5. p. 458. Speed p. 1 108. 28 H. 8. c. 7. 17. 1 E.
6. c. 11. Hals Chronicle 1 H. 6
Parliament, to summen Parliaments, assent to ^ils; and ex^cute all royal
Jurisdiction in their names and steads. And a^ the Title and Right to the
Crown of Englan^ and the Jurisdiction thereof has thus from time to time
been decided and settled in and by our Parli^ments, so has the Title and
Jurisdiction of the Crown of Scotland, been Hist. Angl. p, 16. to 26. 31. to
33 42. 46. to 56. See Holin. Grafton, Stow, and Speed in the life of Edward the
first. ^podigma Neust. p. 72. to 96.
frequently discussed a^ settled in our Parliaments, upon appeals made to them
by the Kings of Scotland, and their Corrivals to that Crow^^ Witness the
famous case and competition for that Crown long agitated and resolved in
Parliament between ^^ King of Norway, Bailliol, and Bruce, (to omit others) in
the Reign of King Edward the first; And ^^^ King Edwards title to the Crown
of Scotland, declared and resolved by our Parliament here; All which ^^
Recorded at large by Thomas Walsing^am, in the life of King Edward the first,
and in the Parliame^^ Rols and Pleas of his Reign, with 1 Jac. 1.
sundry other instances of this nature (frequent in our Historian ^ which for
brevity I pretermit.

It is a 35 H. 8 c 1
clear case without dispute, that if the King should dye without any Heir,
the Crown wou^ ofcheate to the whole Kingdom and Parliament, who might
dispose of it in such a case to what pers^^ they pleased, or quite change that
form of government, if they saw good cause; no particular kin^ of rule being
so simply necessary by any divine right or Law to any state or Kingdom, but
that as it was ^ first instituted, so it may in such a case be changed by the
whole Kingdoms general consent, upon suff^cient grounds. This appears by the
case of Elondus Decad. 2. l. 2. Regin l. 2. An. 800 Bi^^op Bilson of Christ an
Su^jection, etc. part 3. p. 423.
Charles the gross, who being deposed from the Empire a^^ his Kingdoms, for a
mad man, and dying without any Heir, the Kingdoms which before were subject
^^ him, Destitute of a right Heir, began to fall in sunder on every side, and
to choose Kings of themselves of another Family. France elected Charles, a
child, surnamed Simple, for their King; and after his simplic^ty displeased
them, they Crowned Otho Son of Robert Duke of Saxony, in his place: At the
same tim^ the people of Italy meaning to have a King of their own, could not
agree on the matter, but some cho^ Beringarius, others Guido, and so had two
Kings in Italy, both calling and bearing themselves as Emp^rours; And the
Germans elected Arnolph Duke of Bavaria for their Emperor. Thus Zonas Annal.
Tom. 3. f. 1 26. Grimstons Imperial History p. 303.
Zeno the Emperor dying without any Heir that might succeed him, Anastasiu^ a
man of great reputation, yet of no No^^ Family, was chosen his Successor, by
the Senate and Legions. The like we read of diverse other Emperou^ de^easing
without Heir; of some of our Saxon and British Kings, before the Conquest; and
of other in other Kingdoms, where the Crown has been translated from one
family to another, by the Kingdoms consent for want of Heirs: Yea, Bishop
Bilson The true difference between Christian Subjectio^ and unchristian
Rebellion, part 3. p. 418. to 422.
himself (though a great Royalist,) po^^tively affirms; That if a King, or
right H^ire to any Crown be borne, or becomes a natural Fool, or star^mad,
or run besides himself, so that he is not able to govern himself, much less
his Realm; in these ^^ cases, ANY REALM BY PUBLIC CONSENT and ADVICE MAN
CHOOSE ANOTHER KING: (for what should he do with a royal Office, or by what
divine or humane right can he enjoy a Crown, who is utterly unable to manage
it?) Upon this groun^ See the general History of France in his life,
Sabellicus Ennead. 8. l. 8. ^* 245 N^ucl^rus vol. 3. genesis 20. Blondus, Decad.
1. l. ^^ Aventinus, l. 3. p. 293. to 300. Gaguinus l. 3. in Carolo. M^rt.
Herman. Sche^^ Chron. Aetas. 6 f. 185.
King Childericke was deposed by his French and German Subjects general
consents; because he was ^ ^e, a Sot, a Beast, unable to govern his Kingdom,
and Pepin of another race, elected and crowned King in ^stead; which act by
Pope Zacharies resolution, was adjudged both just and lawful, even in point of
^science, before it was put in execution. So Go^fredus Viterbiensis Chro. pars
^^. col. 468 Regino l. 3. An. 887. H. Mutius, Germ. Chr. l. 12, Grimstons
Imperial History p. 404.
Charles the third, the last Emperor of Pipins race, ^^ deposed from the
Empire by the Princes, Dukes, and Governors of the Provinces of Germany and
^^ce, for that he became foolish and unfit to govern, being bereaved of his
senses; and by common consent, ^^olph was elected Emperor in his stead; Thus
Euagrius Eccl. hist. l. 5. c. 11. 13 Zonaras. Annal. Tom. 3. f. 150, 151.
Eutropius l, 16. p. 211.
Justinus the second, falling into a frenzy and madness, that he had no sense
nor understanding of any thing that was done, was removed, and Tiberius placed
^he Empire; at his Coronation Justinus used this notable speech; Let not the
glory of these Imperial ^^es, lead thee into error, neither be thou de
ceived with the glorious show of such things as are* subject unto the ^^s,
wherewith I my self now (al^s) being snared, have brought my self foolishly
into grievous torments. ^refore in governing the Empire with great moderation
and mildness of spirit, redress what is amiss, and cor^ what I have leudly
committed. And pointing at his ill Counselors with his finger, he said* Neta.
Thou ^^ in no wise be ruled by these men, for these be those which brought me
into this lamentable plight, and the mi^ thou see me in. A memorable strange
speech of a distracted Prince. And thus the Emperor Grimstons Imperial
History, p. 581, 582. Sententia Ex^^ctorationis and Depositionis Wencestai, An.
14^0. in Germani. Hist. Tom. 2. p. 180. 181. Iean. Crespin. L* estate de
Lesglise p. 465.
Wen^^us, was likewise deposed by the Princes electors of the Empire, For
besotting himself so with pleasures, ^* as that he became altogether unfit for
the government, and a man unprofitable for the Empire and Christian
^^monwealth; and Rupert Count Palatine of R^ine, and Duke of Bavaria, was
elected Emperor in his stead. ^^ like (no doubt) might be* lawfully done here
in England, by the whole Kingdom and Parliament, if ^ such cases of incurable
folly or frenzy should befall any of our Kings, who might then either create a
Lord ^tector to govern both King or Kingdom, during such disabilities of
Government in the King (as ^hildricke for a time, before his deposition, was
governed and overruled in all things by the Marshall ^he Palace) or else
Crown the next Heir King, if he be capable to Govern. Yea, in the time of
our ^on Kings, when the right Heir was an In^ant, unable to govern, the
Crown usually descended ^he next Heir of full age* Hence Speed^ hist. p. 252,
253. 262. 364, 365* See Matthew West. Poly^h^onicon, Floren. Wigorniensis,
Holinshed* Hun^^ndon, and others.
Wibba King of Mercia deceasing, Penda his Son being an Infant, Crown
descended to his Nephew Ceorl of full age, after whose death Penda being of
ripe age inheri^ the Kingdom. So King Wulfeher deceasing leaving his Son
Kenred within age, his Brother Ethelred ^^eeded him; who resigning his Crown
and turning Monk after he had Reigned 30. years, Kenred ^^ of full age
enjoyed the Crown. So Ethelfred King of Northumberland dying, Edelwald his
Brother ^^ed the Government and Reigned, Aldulfe, Ethelherds Son, being then
a minor, who enjoyed not ^ Crown till after Edelwalds death. So Gaufredus*
Monu. lib. 3. c. 20. Grafton p. 67.
Cassebelan succeeded Lud his Brother in the Kingdom of Bri^e, Luds Sons
being too young and insufficient to Reign: The like was very usual in
Scotland, of ^^h there are diverse precedents in Gra^ion Hector B^etius, and
Buchanan, which I pretermit. All which 6 Aventine l. 3. f. 293. Fri^ingens. l.
5. c. 13. Nauclerus vol. 3. Genesis 26.
^^iculars laid together, are a most clear unanswerable demonstration, that
the Soveraignest power and ^isdiction of all others, resides in the whole
Kingdom and Parliament, not in the King h^mselfe, since ^^ may thus dispose of
the very Crown it self, and determine all controversies, all titles which
con^e it; The King alone having no power to transfer it to any other without
the Lords and Com^^s free consents, as was resolved in the case of King John,
who resigned and granted his Crown to the ^e, without the Kingdoms consent;
and therefore the resignation and grant were adjudged void, not ^y by the
Gra^ton l. 1. 112.
French King and his Lords, but by our own Parliament, as you may read in 40
Ed. 3. ^ 8. and Doctor Craken^^orpe, Of the Popes temporal Monarch^, cap. 2.
p. 251. to 255. This point ^ave thus copiou^ly debated, not out of any the
least intention to derogate from his Majesty's just ^re^acy and P^erogatives
royal, which I have of^ solemnly sworn to maintain to the utmost of my pow^
and shall (God willing) perform; but out of a serious desire to rectify the
general mistakes of men, ^ching a pretended Prerogative, which their fantasies
only, (not the Law) have unduely attributed to ^ King: and to vindica^e the
just Liberties, Privileges and Prerogatives of the Parliament (so much ^yed,
declaimed against of la^e by a company of ignorant Papists, Ma^ignan^s,
Royalists, who know not ^t the jurisdiction of Parl^aments is) according to the
Protestation, the clearing of which points (in my ^ke apprehension) is the
only high and ready way to compose our present differences, and settle all ^
distractions, which the ignorance and mistakes of the Kings and Parliaments
just Preroga^ives and ^ers, (next to the treacherous ma^i^e of the Papists) have
principally raised among us, almost to the ^e of the Kingdom. For my part, I
profess sincerely, I love and honor both King and Parliament ^^, and in the
controversies now between them concerning their Jurisdictions, stand as a man
indiffe^ to do right to both without prejudice to either; and the King being
the Principal Member of the Par^ent, the elevating of its now disda^ned Power,
to its due altitude, can be no depression but advancement ^e Kings prerogative,
which shines most perspicuously in Parliaments, whiles King and Parliament
^^nited, and is most eclipsed only when they are divided, as the precedents in
all ages manifest. And ^ I dare confidently aver, that there are no such
enemies to the Kings Prerogative, as those who ad^cing it beyond due bounds,
do necessarily draw it into dispute, in which it commonly comes off with ^,
and diminution in the end, as in ^h^ late cases of Lo^nes, Ship-mony, and the
like.

If any here object against the premises, 1 El c. 2.
that the King is the only Supreme Governor of this R^a^^ Object.
That Li. 1. c. 8. f. 5, 6. l 3. c 9. f. 107.
Bracton, L. 1. c. 5. 17
Fleta, and our 3 E. 3. 19. Corone 161. 22 Answer. E. 3. 3. b. Dyer, 297* a.
Stamfo. 153. a.
Law books resolve* That the King has no Peer in his Kingdom for so he
should lose his Empire, since Peers (or equals) have no command over one
another; much more then ou^^ he not to have a Superior, or mightier, for so he
should be inferior to those who are subject to him; and infer^ours cannot be
equal to Superiors. The King ought not to be under man, but under God and the
Law. If then J^stice be demanded of him by way of Petition, (because no writ
runs against him (though 22 E. 3. 3. b
anciently some w^^ did) if he do not justice, this punishment may be
sufficient to him, that he may expect God will revenge it. Ne^^ quidem de
factis suis praesumat disputare, m^lto fortius contra factum suum venire, etc.
Therefore the K^^ is above the Parliament, and whole Kingdom, not they above
him.

I Answer, First, that the meaning of all these Books is, that the King is
above every one of his S^^jects, and has no Peer nor Superior, if they be
taken particularly and distributively, as single m^^ as the words Parem,
Superiorem, in the singular number, and the like, explain the meaning of the
Book^ to be. But if we take them collectively in Parliament, as they are one
body and represent the whole Ki^^dome, then these very Authors resolve (in
their forequoted words) That they Bracton l. 2* c. 16. f. 134. ^. Fleta l. 1.
c. 17.
are above the Ki^^ and may and ought to restrain and question his actions, if
there be cause.

Secondly, Bracton explaines himself how he is highest and without a Peer, to
wit, In Parem autem habere non debet, nec multo for^^us superiorem, maxim in
justitia exhibenda, licet in justitia recipienda, minimo de regno suo
comparetur, l. 3. c. 9. f. 167 a.
distribu^^ Justice, that is, he is the highest Justiciar in the Kingdom, but
as small as any in receiving justice.

Thirdly, Even in Parliament it self the King is the Supreme Member, and in
that regard the Parl^ment in most Acts, and in all Petitions or Addresses,
usually styles him, See Bodines Commonwealth l. 2. c 1* p. 192. the like of the
Parliaments in France.
Their Sovereign Lord: Besides, the Parliament it self is ever See Modus
tenendi* Parliamentum. C^mb. Brit. p. 177. Crompt. Juris. of Ceurts, f. 1. to
6. Sir Tho. Smith^ Commonwealth l. 2. c. 2. 3* Hol. Desc^^p of England* c. 8.
Cowel and Minsh. Tit. Parl. Mr. Hack. manner of passing Bills sect. 8.
summoned, dissolved by his w^it, in his name, by his Authority: A^ in passing
all Acts and Bills of Grace, or such as are not simply necessary for the
public safe^y and ^^li^y of his people, He has an absolute negative voice,
and his Royal assent is simply necessary for the passing of^ binding Laws; In
which respects he is, and may be truly said, to be above the Parliament it
self, and ^^ only supreme Governor; but ye^ in the forenamed respects, the
Parliament may be truly said to be P^^ mount him and the highest power.

Fourthly, The Oath of Supremacy, That the King is the only Supreme Governor,
relates only or p^^cipally to the Popes and foraine Princes authorities,
formerly usurped in this Realm, as the Title, Wo^^ and scope of the Statute of
1. Eliz. c. 1. and the very next words in the Oath of Supremacy manif^^ ( and
that NO FORAINE Power, person, Prelate, State or Potentate has or ought to
have any Jurisdi^^on, power, SUPERIORITY, PRE-EMINENCE or Authority,
Ecclesiastical or spiri^^ within this Realm; and therefore I do utterly
renounce and forsake ALL FORAINE Jurisdictions, and ^ Therefore it refers not
at all to Parliaments or their Jurisdiction, Power, Superiority, Preheminen^^
Authority; not so much as once thought of by the prescribers of this Oath,
which had its Authority ^^^ the Parliament, and made some addition to the Kings
Prerogative.

Fifthly, Common w. l. ^. c. 9. l. 2. c. 5.
Bodine and others* (as I shall hereafter manifest) assure us, that the
Sovera^^ power, and jurisdiction both in the Roman and German Emperors, and
most foraine Christian Kingdo^^ was and yet is, in the Senate, people,
Parliaments, and Dyets; yet this is no empeachment at all to their Supr^^cies,
no more then the asserting of general Councels to be above Popes themselves,
by the learned^^ Papists, is ^ derogation (as they hold it is not) to the Popes
most absolute pretended Sovereignty See p. 2, 3.
above all Em^^ours, Kings, Princes, Prelates, Subjects, and the world it
self, of which they affirm him sole Monarch: Th^^fore by the selfsame
reason, this asserting of the whole Kingdoms, and Parliaments power to be ab^^
the Kings, is no diminution at all, much less a denial of his Supremacy, and
just Prerogative R^ all.

If then the Parliaments power be thus higher and greater then the Kings
personal power and Juri^^ction out of Parliament, it will necessarily follow
from hence:

First, That in these unhappy times of division and separation of the Kings
personal presence (not ^gall which cannot be severed) from the Parliament: the
Lords and Commons Orders, Votes, and O^^nances made legally in Parliament it
self, are to be preferred, obeyed by all the Kingdom, before ^ his Majesti^s
Proclamations, Declarations, Commissions Warrants, or Mandates made illegally
out of ^^liament in affront of Both Houses proceedings and Decrees, since when
ever two dis^^ powers command different things, that a^e lawful, or of the
same nature, the higher power ought ^ to be obeyed; As if a Master commands his
Servant one thing, and the King another, or the King ^ne ^^ God another; the
King is to be obeyed before the Master, because the Superiou^ power; but God
before the K^ because the highest power, as the Sea Gratian causa 11. quaest. 3
where he quotes (...). Hier. and Isi^dor. to this purpose.
Fathers and Canonists resolve most fully.

Yea, the Parliament being the highest power, the King himself ought to submit
thereto, and ^^^ ruled and advised thereby. This conclusion (though it may
seem a paradox to most men) is an und^^ table verity both in point of Divinity
and Policy, as is most apparent, by the 1 Sa^. 14. 38. to 46. an^ 29. 1. to 11.
2 Samuel 18. 2, 3, 4. c. 19. 1. to 9. 1 King. 12. 1. to 25. 1 Chronicles. 13. 1. to 6.
2 Chronicles. ^ and 11. c. 30. 2, 3. 5. 23. Esther 1. 13. to 22. Jer. 38. 4. to 28.
Dan. 6. 4. to 20. Jonah 3. 7. Ezra 10. ^. ^ccles. 4. 13. Prove. 11. 14. c. 15
22. c. 25 5. compared together, and with Josh. 22. 11. to 34. Judges 20. ^. to
20. and in point of Law and Conscience, even in our own Kings and Kingdom, as
is clear by 20 ^. 3. the Preface, and c. 1. 25 E. 3. Parliament 6. the Statute
against Provisors, 38 E. 3. Stat. 2. c. 1, 2. 3 E. ^. c. 17. and 48. and other
Statutes which I shall hereafter cite at large in answer to the fourth
Objection; which Texts and Statutes those who will, may peruse at le^^ure for
their better satisfaction. And in Paul's ^me, the highest Powers in Rome, were
not the Roman Emperors, as ignorant Doctors make the unleared world believe,
but the Roman Senate, who had full power, not only to elect and command, but
^^nsure, and depose their Emperors, and adjudge them unto death, as Commonw.
l. 2. c. 5.
John Bodin acknowledges, and I shall hereafter abundantly manifest in the
Appendix.

Secondly, That the Parliaments resisting of the Kings personal Commands
(especially such as are il^gall and destructive to the Kingdom) or any private
Subjects resisting them by virtue of a public ^rdinance or Countermand from
the Parliament, is no resisting of the higher Powers, against Paul's in^nction,
Romans 13. 1. to 7. (as Resolution of Conscience, sect. 1, 2. etc. and
Revindication of Psalm, 105 15. Printed at Cambridg. 1643
Doctor Fearne and other ignorant Doctors vainly fancy, but a direct ^bmission
and obedience to the highest powers, (the Parliament) and those who resist the
Parliaments ^rdinances and Commands (especially such as tend to the
preservation of Religion, Laws, Liberties, ^iviledges of Parliament, and the
Kingdom, or bringing Delinquents to condign punishment) though ^ey do it by
virtue of any extrajudiciall countermand from the King or his ill Counselors,
do both ^ point of Law, Divinity, conscience, resist the highest powers,
because they resist the Parliament; and ^ shall receive damnation to themselves
for it, either here or hereafter, if they repent not: which I seriously ^sire
all those Delinquents, Papists, Malignants, ill Counselors and Cavaliers to
consider, who con^ary to several Orders, and Declarations of Parliament, yea
contrary to the Law of God, of Nature, of the ^ealme, have like unnatural
Vipers, taken up offensive Arms against the Parliament and Kingdom, to ^ine
them, with our Religion, Laws, and Liberties at once.

Thirdly, Hence it follows, that the Resolutions and Declarations of the Lords
and Commons in Parlia^ent, the supremest Court, against the Commission of
Array, Arming of Papists, raising of Forces, impo^g Taxes to maintain War
against the Parliament, plundering, and the like, ought to be obeyed, and
sub^itted to, as lawful and binding, both by the King himself, the Kingdom,
and every private Subject ^hatsoever; and that the Kings extrajudiciall and
illegal Declarations out of Parliament in direct oppo^ion and contradiction to
the resolutions and Votes of both Houses in Parliament, ought not to be obeyed,
^e King himself as our Law Books resolve, being no 8 H. 4. 13. b. 24 H. 8. c.
12. 52 H. 3. c. 1. 25 H. 8. c. 21. Cooks 1 Institutes on Mag. Charta, f. 103.
See here p. 14. 34.
competent Judge (especially out of his Courts) that is Law or what not in
those Cases, but the Parliament only. Which extrajudiciall new device of
con^olling, affronting the Resolutions and Declarations of both Houses, by
opposite Proclamations, and ^^clarations published in his Majesty's name; is
such a transcendent violation of, and contempt against ^e known privilege,
the sacred venerable Authority, and power of Parliaments, as (I am confident)
^^ age can parallel; and if not severely vindicated by exemplary punishments
of the highest nature, upon those ill Counselors, and corrupt Lawyers, who
contrive and pen them, will bring this Highest, grea^st and most honorable
Court (wherein the 31 H. 8. c. 1 1 Jac. c. 1. Dr. and Student, 44. a.
whole Kingdom and every member of it are represented) into ^eater contempt
and less estimation with all men, (whether Natives or Forainers) then the
basest Court ^^ Pipouders is. No King nor Subject ever yet attempted such
affronts against the Resolutions of any Jud^s in inferior Courts; Let no
person whatsoever then presume by pen or tongue, any longer to a^^igne or
traduce the Resolutions and Ordinances of this highest Tribunal. If Kings or
Counselors of ^ate, willinstruct or excite the Subjects, perempto^ily to
disobey and contemn the Ordinances, the ^udgements of the Parliament, let them
never expect the least obedience or submission to any of their ^wn commands,
which are of lesser credit and Authority.

Fourthly, That the Parliament and whole Kingdom, being the highest power, or
any Member of ^^e Parliament, cannot by any public Acts or Votes of theirs
consented to in Parliament, become Tray^^s, or guilty of high Treason, against
the King, either by the Common Law; o^ the S^atute of 25. Ed. 3. (b) page 4, 5.
^. 2, of Treasons, which running in the singular number; If A MAN, etc. (that
is, any private man ^ men, by their own private authority) shall levy war
against the King, etc. it ought to be judged high ^reason; extends not to the
whole Kingdom, or Court of Parliament representing it, (of which no trea^n was
ever yet presumed, and by this very act, is made the Judge of all Treasons that
are doubtful, being ^ver yet included within the words or meaning of any Law
concerning Treasons, and therefore cannot be ^ilty of it. Hence the depositions
of Graf. part 6. p. 62, 63. Galfredus, Mo^^^. Fabia^, Polychr. and others.
Archigallo and Emcrianus, two ancient British Kings, by the unani^ous assent
of the Lords and Commons for their rapines, oppressions, and Tyranny, with
other forenamed Sax^ Kings; and of Edward the second, Richard the second, Henry
the sixth, Edward the fourth, by Acts ^^ Parliament; the creating of Richard
the third, King; and the frequent translations of the Crown from ^e right
heir at Common Law, to others who had no good title, by the whole Kingdom or
Parliament, ^o less then Bracton l. 2 Glan. l. 2. f. 112 Myrror, c. 1 sect 4.
Britton c. 8. f. 16. c. 22. f. 39* 25. E. 3. ^. 2. See. Rastal, ^rote, Sta^^f.
Crompt. Dalton, in their Titles and Chapters of Treason
high Treason in private persons) was never yet reputed, much less questioned
or adjudged ^igh Treason in the whole Kingdom or Parliament, or any chief
active Members in these Parliaments; which being above the King, are incapable
of Treason, for any their judicial actions and resolutions in such cases,
being only Tortious and Erroneous, reversible by other Acts in Parliament, not
Traiterous and Rebellious, as appears by all the forequoted Statutes; and by
13, Eliz. c. ^. which makes it high Treason (d) page.
for any person to affirm, That the Queen by Authority of the Parliament of
England, is not able to make Laws (e) Walsingham Holin. Graf. Sto. Speed,
Martyn Fab. Polychro. in 21 R. 2. and 11 R. 2. c. 3, 4. 21 R. 2. c. 12.
and Statutes of sufficient force to alter, limit, and bind the Crown of this
Realm and the descent, limitation, inheritance, and government thereof.

And for direct Authorities in this very point. Robert Tresylian and Belknap
(then chief Justices) Holt, Fulthorpe, and Burgh Judges, Locton Kings
Sergeant, and Blake the Kings Counsel, in the Parliament o^ 1^ Rich. 2. were
condemned, executed, and banished the Realm, as guilty of high Treason, only
for affirming under their hands and seals See the particulars more at large in
21 R. 2 c. 12.
That the Duke of Gloucester, the Earls of Arundell aad Warwick were, and that
other Lords and Commons might be guilty of high Treason, for procuring a
Commission, and other proceedings in Parliament, and be punished for it as
Traitors. Which opinion of theirs, being afterward affirmed for Law, in a
packed Parliament, 21 Rich. 2. was the very next Parliament in 1 Hen. 4. c. 2,
3, 4. repealed, and the judgment given against those Judges for this
Traiterous opinion (tending to the utter subversion of Parliaments) resolved
and enacted to be just. This See 1 H. 4. c. 3. and here. p. 13.
Judge Spee. p. 747
Belknap foresaw; and therefore was unwilling to put his Seal to this opinion;
Saying: There wanted but a hurdle, a horse, and hal^^^ to carry him where he
might suffer the death HE HAD DESERVED: for if I had not done this, ^ should
have dyed for it, and because I have done it, I DESERVE DEATH for betraying the
Lords. Which makes me wonder at a passage in Hist. p. 675
Speed (who records it) now frequent in Malignants mouthe^ That the very shop
where the Barons original Treasons were forged, was THE PARLIAMENT* HOUSE,
wherein from time to time they forced on the King (Edward the second)
presumptuous an^ TREASONOUS ORDINATIONS, not only to reform the Kings house
and Counsel, and t^ place, and displace all great Officers at their pleasure;
but even claim a joint interest in the Regiment of the Kingdom, together with
the King, which William Inge (a Judge of the Common Law) with other like
sticklers, tray^erously persuaded them was according to Law: which gross
slander of the Parliament House, would have bee^ capital at least in former
ages, and may now endanger the heads of those who speak or write the sam^ of
the present Parliament. Never did any of our Kings charge any Parliament with
high Treason hither* to; much less indict or wage war against the
Parliaments, as Traitors, which questioned or depose^ them for offenses against
the Kingdom: Let none then dare affirm, that the Houses of Parliament are, or
can be Traitors now, for providing for their own and the Kingdoms safety.

Fifthly, That to conspire or levy war against the Parliament, or Kingdom,
to dissolve, or destroy it, or the Members of it, is no less then High
Treason; as has been solemnly adjudged in Parliament 15 E. 2. in the Act
entitled, Exilium Hugonis le de Spenser, in 11 Rich. 2. c. 2, 3, 4. and in the
Parliament Roll, Printed by Order of both Houses, August 27. 1642. And before
both these, in Lib. 14. sect. 112. Stamf. l. 1. c. 2. f. 1. b. and Cromptons
Ju^isdict. f. 73.
Glanvil; who declares it to be Treason, even at the Common Law, Si quis
machinatus fuerit vel aliquid fecerit in SEDITIONEM REGNI: agreeable to Instit.
l. ult. Tit. 8.
Vlpian, and the Tit. 3.
Saxon Laws, which inform ^^ of Treasons against the Commonwealth and
Kingdom, (the case of Cice^o Orat. in Catil.
Cateline and Live. hist. l. 23. sect. 17.
others) as well as against the King; and to the Statute of 13 Eliz. c. ^.
which makes it High Treason for any person to stirr^ up a^y Forainers or
strangers with force to invade this Realm, or Ireland. And if it be no less
then high Treason against the King to slay the Chancellor, Treasurer or any of
the Judges, or Justice^ of either Bench, Eyer, Assiz^ or Oyer and Terminer,
being in their places doing their Offices (though by the Kings command; as is
clear by 25. E. 3. c. 2. and all our Law Books;) then much more must it be
high Treason against the King and Kingdom, to war against the highest Court
of Parliament, or slay any member of it, for doing their Offices and executing
the Houses just Commands, as I shall in due place more fully manifest.

In brief, the Gun powder plot in 3 Jacobi to blow up the Parliament House,
was then adjudged, resolved by the Parliament, 3 Jac. c. 1, 2. 4, 5. and in his
Proclamations for apprehending those Traitors. The proceedings against
Traitors, Spee. hist. p. 1248. to 1257.
King and Judges, to be high Treason, not only against the King, but
Parliamen^ and Kingdom too: and to blow up, or assault the Parliament now, in
the Kings absence, is question le^^ high Treason, both against the King,
Parliament and Kingdom. Yea, the statute of 28. H. 8. c. 7. declares those,
Who shall claim the Crown even of right, in any other manner then it limited
by virtue and authority of that act, after the Kings death; with all their
Counselors, and abettors, to be deemed and adjudged HIG^ TRAITORS TO THE
REALM, (not the King) and such their offense to be rep^ted HIGH TREASON; and
they for it, to suffer such pains of death, and forfeiture of Lands an^ Goods,
as in any cases of high Treason is used; And I read in Par. 7. p. 186.
Fabian, that Eguiran chief Counselor to Philip the third of France, was
judged to death and hanged on the Gibbet at Paris, for Treason against King
Philip and the REALM OF FRANCE, as our powder Traitors were executed for high
Treason against the King and Realm of England.

And by the Statutes of 5. R. 2. c. 6. II R. 2. c. 1. 3. 17. R. 2. c. 8. 21. R.
2. c. 2. 4. 20. 3. H. 5. S^a* 2. c. 6. and 1. Mariae c. 6. certain offenses
are declared and made high treason and the committers of the^ Trayters and
enemies, not only, to, and against the King, but likewise TO AND AGAINST THE
REALM: and in particular; the illegal indicting of some Lords to destroy
them, as guilty of High Treason, for procuring a Commission in Parliament
supposed prejudicial to the King and his Crown, 10 R. 2. c. I. and the
opposing and annulling of that Commission, and of some Process, Judgments,
Executions, made, given, and affirmed in some of those Parliaments, raising
forces, and le^ying war against the Parliament, and Members of it to destroy
them, were then See Walsingh. Holinshed, Fabian, Grafton, Stow, Speed, in 10.
and 11. R. 2. 21. R. 2. c. 12.
adjudged High Treason both against the King, and THE REALM ( though done by
the Kings express Commission and command:) The reason is, because the King in
judgment of Law, See here p. 20, 21. 22.
is ever legally present in and with his Parliament when they sit, (as I have
already proved) where ever his person is; and his royal legal will (of which
alone the Law takes notice) is ever presumed to concur with his greatest
Council the Parliament, against whose Privileges, safety and protection he
neither can nor ought by Law or right to attempt any thing; and if any
personal Commands, or Commissions of the King, under his great Seal, to do
ought against Magna Charta, the Subjects liberty, safety, property, the
Parliaments Privileges, the Common or Statute Laws of the Realm (all which
expressly prohibit the levying of war, killing, wounding, murdering,
impris^ning, disin^e^i^ing, robbing, or plundering of the Subjects, without
legal trial or conviction, as d^e the Statutes of 2 R. 2. c. 7. 1 H. 5. c. 6.
1 H. 5. c. 6. which prescribe exemplary punishments against such Plunderers and
Robbers, especially the Welshmen) issue out to any person or persons
whatsoever, especially to raise forces on levy war against the Parliament or
Subjects, they are merely void in Law, and will rather aggravate then
extenuate the guilt of those who obey or execute them: as is clearly resolved,
not only by 42. Ass. p. 5. 12. Brook Commissions: 15. 16. Cook b. 5. f. 50.
51. l. 7. f. 36. 37. l. 8. f. 125. to 129. but likewise expressly adjudged and
enacted by the Statutes of 15. E. 3. Stat. 1. c. 1. 3. 42. E. 3. c. 1. 3. 11.
R. 2. c. 1. to 6. 21. Jac. c. 3. the Petition of Right, 3. Caroli. 28. E. 2.
Artic* super* Chartas c. 2. 4. E. 3. c. 4. 5. E. 3. c. 2. 25. E. 3. c. 1. 15.
34. E. 3. c. 2. and generally byall Statutes concerning See Rastals
abridgement, Tit. Purveyors.
Purveyors, by the memorable old Statute of 25. E. 3. Stat. 1. c. 3. If any
Minister of the King, or any other person of what condition soever he be, do
or come against any point of the great Charter, or other Statutes, or the Laws
of the Land, he shall answer to the Parliament, as well as the SUIT OF THE
KING, as at the suit of the party, AS FAR FORTH WHERE ^T WAS DONE BY
COMMISSION OR COMMANDMENT OF THE KING, as of his own authority: And by that
parallel good Law recorded by Part. 7 p. 376
Fabian, made in Parliament in the first year of King Henry the fourth; That
no Lord, nor other person of n^ degree, should after that day lay for his
excuse (as some then did) any constraint or coacting of his Prince in executing
of any wrong judgment, or other criminous or unlawful deeds, saying; that for
fear they durst not otherwise do; for such excuse after this day. SHALL STAND
HIM IN NO STEED. And in this Parliament, Fabian. part. 7. p. 342. 375. Hals
Chron. 1. H. 4. f. 10. Grafton, p. 408. Walsingham. Hist. p. 393. 402.
Hall was judged to be drawn from the Tower of London unto Tiburne, and there
to be hanged and quartered (which was accordingly executed) only because he was
one of those who secretly mur^^ ered the Duke of Gloucester at Calice (illegally
attainted of Treason in the Parliament of 21. R. 2. without due process of the
Law, by King Richard the second his command:) and likewise the Dukes of Aumarl,
Surrey, Exeter, with other Noble men were deprived of their Dukedomes, of most
of their Lands, Castles, Honors, for having a finger in this Dukes suff^cation
and death by King Richards instigation and command, (and had lost their heads
too if the common peopte had been their Judges, who murmured against King
Henry for sparing their lives) as you may read in Histor. p. 402. 403. Speed.
p. 763.
Walsingham and Speed: All which I would advise his Majesty's Captain^s,
Cavalliers, and ill Counselors to consider. The rather, because all levying of
war either against the King, or against the Kingdom and Parliament, (now
made a matter of high Treason on both sides) must and ought to be determined
and resol^ed, which of them is high Treason and which not, and the parties
guilty of it, must and ought to be tried arraigned, judged, and condemned for
it only in and by the Parliament, and in and by no other Court or Judges, as
is punctually resolved by the several Statutes of 11. R. 2. c. 1. 2. 3. 4. 21.
R. 2. c. 2. 3. 4. 1 2. 20. 1. H. 4. c. 10. and the very words of the Statute of
25 E. 3. c. 2. of Treasons, especially being a new case. If then the Parliament
are, and must be the only judges of this question, Which of the two parties
now ^n Arms are Traitors? and the only Court wherein all must be tried on
this point, they may easily judge who are and must be the Traitors in this
case; and those who by the Kings mere personal command and presence (whom
they have treacheron^ly withdrawn from his Parliament) fight now both against
Parliament and King in his legal and regal capacity, when the time of trial
comes, will be found real Traitors both to King and Kingdom, what ever their
own ignorance, temporising Lawyers, or hopes of prevailing may now suggest
unto them. In the Parliament of 15. Edward 2. the two Spensers were by ^
Exisium Hugonis le Despensor, f. 50. 52.
special Act of Parliament adjudged Traitors, banished, and their lands and
goods confiscated, for miscoun^elling their King, and advising him to ride with
armed Troops of horses and men into Glocestershire to assault the good people
there, and to levy war within the Realm to the destruction of the Church and
people, contrary to the form of the great Charter, and breach of the peace of
the Realm: What severe judgment then may those ill Counselors and Cavalliers
deserve, who have actually levied war, not only against the Coun^y of
Gloucester, (which they have pitifully harrowed and spoiled, contrary to all
Law, sacked See the Relation takin^ cest.
Cicester ^o its utter ruin, and led away the good people thence Captives to
Oxford in triumph, for the most part barefooted, through dirt and mire, in this
cold Winter Season, chained together in ropes, more like to
Turkish-Gally-slaves then English Christian Subjects; only for this new kind
of supposed Treason and Rebellion, the defense of their Liberties, lives, and
goods, against theeving Cavalliers, (which they may defend by Law, Fitz.
Corone, 192. 194. 246. 258. 261. 330. Stamford. f. 11, 12, 13. 22 H. 7. 39, 24
H. 8. c. 5. Cook I. 5. f. 51, 52, 53.
and justify the killing of all those who shall violently assault them to rob
them of them) denying them so much as a draught of cold water to quench their
thirst by the way, and keeping off all wh^ would give it to them, many of them
being since dead at Oxford of samine and more then barbarous usage, ^ but
likewise against most Counties of England, (miserably wasted by them) and the
whole Kingdom Parliament, and King himself in his politic Capacity; and
raised an Army of Papists against expres^^ late Acts of Parliament; who not
only now set up their long exploded Mass openly in Yorkshire, Reading, and
other places, but (which my very soul abhorres to think of) have even freshly
mo^^ impiously, Shit upon the English Bible in folio, defaced and burnt many
Testaments, and godly English Book^ in John Hamonds house (a Bookeseller) in
Marleborough, when they sacked it, in contempt of our Religion; setting the
chimney on fire with their excessive flames; and if reports be credible, have
since bu^ned diverse English Bibles and other good Books in the public Market
place at Reading, under the very Gallows, in detestation of our Protestant
faith, whose utter extirpation is their chief design. Certainly, if these ill
Counselors once come to a legal trial, a Gallows will be too mild a
punishment, to expiate such a prodigious high Treason, which former ages can
hardly parallel, especially if they persever^ therein. But of this more fully
hereafter.

Sixthly, Hence likewise it necessarily follows, that the Houses of Parliament
being the Sovereign Power, ought of right to enjoy, and may when they see just
cause for the Kingdoms safety and benefi^^ order and dispose the Militia,
Navy, Ports, Forts, and Ammunition of the Realm, into such person^ custodies
as they may safely confide in; nominate both the great Counselors, public
Officers, an^ Judges of the Kingdom; of right require, (if not enforce, if
wilfully denied) the Kings Assent to all public Bills of Right and Justice,
necessary for the Commonweal and safety of his Subjects; tak^ up defensive
Arms to protect their Privileges, Laws, Liberties, and established Religion,
not only against Malignants and Popish Recusants, but the King himself, if he
raise Forces against them; yea impose taxes upon the Subject, and distraine,
imprison, secure them for the public defense and safety when they deem it
necessary. All which particulars I shall (God willing) fully prove by such
Demonstrations; Arguments, punctual Authorities, and undeniable precedents in
former ages, as shall I tro^undeceive the blinded world, and convince, if not
satisfy the greatest Royallists, and Malignants, both in point of Law and
Conscience, in the next part of this Discourse, which shall pass the Press
with a^ convenient expedition, if God permit.

Finis partis Primae.
Errata.
Page 2. l. 31. read all the royal: p. 15. l. 26. enact, r. exact, p. 17. l.
17. of, and, p. 20. l. 16. if it, r. if being la^ down, it, p. 22. l. 18. last
doubtful rising.


