THE TRUE GROUNDS OF Ecclesiastical Regiment SET FORTH In a breife
Dissertation. Maintaining the Kings spiritual supremacy against the Pretended
Independencie of the PRELATES, etc. TOGETHER, With some passages touching the
Ecclesiastical Power of Parliaments, the use of Synods, and the Power of
Excommunication.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Bostock. 1641.

The Divine Right of Episcopacie refuted.
IN this Controversy about Episcopacie by reason of many mistakes of either
side much time has been spent to little purpose, and the right and truth is
yet as far imbosked, and buried in darkness as ever it was. Me thinks, the
case is, as if two well imbattail'd Armies had marched forth for a mutual
encounter, but both not taking the same way, there never was yet any meeting in
any one certain place, where this great strife might be decided. These
mistakes and misadventures on both sides, as I conceive, have happened for want
of an exact, and adequate definition of Episcopacie first set down, and agreed
upon by both, and then by both equally pursued. It shall be therefore my care
at this time to begin with a definition of Episcopacy, and that such a one, as
I shall take out of Bishop Hall, one of the greatest asserters, and in that the
noblest, of Episcopacy: and that which he indevours to maintain as being of
Divine right, I according to my power shall endeavor to disprove.

The first definition given by the same Bishop is this; Episcopacy is an holy
Order of Church Government, for the administration of the Church. This
definition I hold to be too large, and unadequate for the determining of this
doubt, for Calvin's discipline may according to this definition be called
Episcopacy, and it may be affirmed that Episcopacie has bin in all ages; since
God had never yet any Church, wherein was not some holy Order of Church
discipline for better ruling of the same. And by the way, I must here profess
to shake off, and neglect the mentioning, or answering of any thing which the
Patrons of Episcopacie have alleged, and stuffed their volumes withal, in
defense of Order, and disparity in the Church; for let our Adversaries be never
so clamorous in this point, yet it is manifest, that no Church was ever yet so
barbarous as to plead for anarchy, or a mere equality, neither did Calvin
ever favor any such parity as was inconsistent with Order and government,
neither do we see any such confusion introduced into Geneva it self, as our
Hierarchists seem to gainsay. To let pass all impertinent vagaries, our
dispute must be not whether Church polity be necessary, or no; but whether
that Church policy which is now exercised in England be necessary, and
unalterable, or no. And not whether such parity as is the mother of Confusion
be politic, or no; but whether such parity as now is at Geneva amongst
presbyters be politic, or no: but my present scope is not to defend the
Presbyteriall discipline in all things, it is only to maintain against the
necessity of such an immutable Episcopacy, as is now constituted in England,
and so far to defend parity, as our Hierarchists take advantage against it, for
the upholding of their own side. To this purpose I cannot choose but say, that
in nature that seems to be the best parity which admits of some disparity in
Order, and that seems to be the best disparity which prevents confusion with
the most parity. And therefore we see that our Savior recommended as unlordly
a disparity as might be, not unlike that of marriage, for there is a great and
sweet parity in the tie of Wedlock between man and wife, and that is not
maintained without some disparity, yet that disparity is as little as may be,
and that only for parities sake, Non aliter fuerint foemina virque pares. But
of this no more; I come to Bishop Halls next more exact definitions: and they
run thus; Episcopacy is an Eminent Order of sacred function appointed in the
Evangelicall Church by the Holy Ghost, for the governing and overseeing
thereof, and besides the Word and Sacraments, it is endued with power of
Ordination and perpetuity of jurisdiction. Or thus: A Pastor ordained
perpetual moderator in Church affairs with a fixed imparity exercising
spiritual jurisdiction out of his own peculiarly demandated authority is a
Bishop. Or thus: Add majority above Presbyters, and power of jurisdiction by
due Ordination for constant continuance, and this makes a Bishop: take away
these, and he remains a mere Presbyter.

It is to be observed now that four things are here asserted.

First, Episcopal power is such as none are capable of, but only men within
Sacred Orders. A Bishop must be a Presbyter endued with power of Ordination,
and spiritual jurisdiction by due Ordination, and without these he remains a
mere Pastor.

Secondly, Episcopal power is such as is wholly independent upon temporal
Rulers, Its institution was from the Holy Ghost in the Evangelicall Church, It
must rule out of its own peculiarly demandated authority.

Thirdly, Episcopal power consists in Ordination, and spiritual jurisdiction,
and in majority above Presbyters.

Fourthly, Episcopal power is unalterable by any temporal authority, it is
perpetual by divine right, As it was fixed, and where it was settled by Christ,
and his immediate successors, so and there it must continue unchanged til the
worlds end.

In brief, the sum of all these definitions is this: Episcopacy is a form
of Ecclesiastical policy instituted by Christ, whereby a Superior Order of
Presbyters is endued with a perpetual independent power of Ordination, and
spiritual jurisdiction, and with majority above Presbyters, and this power as
it appertains to all that Order, so it appertains only to that Order.

And those things which we oppose herein are chiefly two; First, we see no
ground in the word of God, why Bishops should arrogate to themselves such a
peculiar, independent, perpetual power of Ordination, spiritual jurisdiction,
and such a majority above Presbyters, as now they enjoy, excluding from all
such power and majoritie, not only all Laymen, and Princes, but also Presbyters
themselves. Secondly, if power of Ordination, and spiritual jurisdiction, and
pre-eminence above all the Clergy be due only to Bishops, yet we complain
that now in England that power and pre-eminence is abused, and too far
extended, and to such purposes perverted, as the Apostles never practiced or
intended. Of these two points in this Order: but for my part, I am no favourer
of extremes, some defend Episcopacie as it is now constituted in England, as
Apostolical, others withstand it as Antichristian: my opinion is that the
government is not so faulty as the Governors have been, and that it is better
then no government at all, nay, and may be better then some other forms which
some Sectaries have recommended to the World. And my opinion further is, that
it is not alike in all respects, and that it ought to be severally examined and
ventilated, and that so it will probably appear in some things unprofitable,
in some things inconvenient, in some things mischievous: in notihng necessary,
or unalterable. And it ought to be observed, that evil forms of policy have
been sometimes well ordered and rectified by good Commanders: and so the State
of Boetia once flourished under Epaminondas and Pelopidas, and yet it owed this
prosperity not to the government of the City, for that was ill constituted,
and composed: but to the Governors, for they were wise and virtuous. The
contrary also happened to Lacedaemon, for that fared ill sometimes and suffered
much distemper, because though its fundamental Laws were good, yet its Kings
and Ephorie were many times tyrannous, and unjust. And this should teach
Bishops not always to boast of the sanctity of their Order: because such, and
such, in ancient, and modern times were Martyrs, or were humble, and fortunate
to the Church, nor always to blame all other forms of government, for the
faults of such and such Governors. But in this my ensuing discourse I must
undertake almost all Churchmen, at least some, if not all, of all Religions,
and opinions. Papists allow something to secular Magistrates in the rule of the
Church, but Supremacy of rule they do utterly in very terms deny. The
Protestants though divided amongst themselves, some placing supreme power in
Episcopacie, others in presbytery, yet both in effect deny it to the King,
though in words they pretend otherwise. The grounds of this mistake (as I
conceive) are these; when our Savior first gave commission to his Disciples to
preach, and baptize, and to propagate the true faith in the World, Secular
authority being then adverse thereunto, He was of necessity to commit, not
only doctrine but all discipline also to the charge of his Apostles, and their
Substitutes only: Wherefore though Secular authority be now come in, and become
friendly to Religion, and willing to advance the spiritual prosperity of the
Church, as well as the temporal of the State, yet Clergiemen having obtained
possession of power in the Church, and that by Christ's own institution, they
think they ought not to resign the same again at the demand of Princes. And
because the certain form of discipline which our Savior left, and to whom it
was left is doubtfully and obscurely set forth in Scripture, and is yet
controverted of all sides, therefore some contend for one thing, some for an
other, but all agree in this, that whatsoever form was appointed for those
times, is unalterably necessary for these, and that to whomsoeever rule was
designed, to Christian Princes it was not, my drift therefore must now be, to
discover the erroneous conceits herein of all sides, and to do as the Romans
once did when they were chosen arbitrators between two contesting Cities, I
must neither decree for the Plaintiff, nor Defendant, but for the King, who is
in this case a third party. I am of opinion that some order and imparitie was
necessary in the Primitive Church, in the very House of God, and therefore was
so countenanced by our Savior: but for ought I see, that power which was then
necessary was not so large as our Prelates, nor so narrow as our Presbyterians
plead for, but whatsoever it was, or wheresoever it rested, questionless, it is
now unknown, and not manifest in Scripture: but if it were manifest, and that
such as the Prelacie, or such as the Presbytery mayntaines, it is so far from
being now unchangeable since Princes are come in to do their offices in the
house of God, that I think it cannot remain unchanged without great injury to
Princes, and damage to the Church, and by consequence great dishonor to our
Savior. And this is that now which I shall endeavor to confirm, and
demonstrate. In the first place then, I am to impugn those grounds whereby a
sole, independent, perpetual power of Church Government is appropriated to
Ecclesiastical persons only: and whereby Princes, etc. are excluded as
incompetent for the same. That there is no such thing as Ordination, and
spiritual Jurisdiction due, and necessary in the Church is not now to be
questioned, the question is what persons are most capable of the same, whether
such as are commonly called Ecclesiastical, or no. It is agreed by all, that
God has not left Humane nature destitute of such remedies as are necessary to
its conservation: and that rule and dominion being necessary to that
conservation, where that rule and dominion is granted, there all things
necessary for the support of that rule and dominion are granted too. It is
further agreed also that Supreme power ought to be entire and undivided, and
cannot else be sufficient for the protection of all, if it do not extend
overall: without any other equal power to control, or diminish it: and that
therefore the Supreme Temporal Magistrate ought in some cases to command
Ecclesiastical persons, as well as Civil: but here lies the difference, the
Papists hold, that though spiritual persons as they are men, and Citizens of
the Commonwealth in regard of their worldly habitation are subject to
temporal Commanders, yet this subjection is due ob pacem communem, or quoad
commune bonum, and that per accidens and indirecte, and that no further
neither, but only secundum partem directivam, seu imperativam. Thus, whatsoever
they pretend to the contrary, they do erect regnum in regno, they give
temporal Monarchy an imperfect, broken right in some things, but controlable
and defeasible by the spiritual Monarchy in other things. And the World has
had a long sad experience of this, whilst Kings had the Pope for their
superior in any thing, they remained Supreme in nothing, whilst their rule
was by division diminished in some things, they found it insufficient in all
things, so that they did not command jointly with the Pope, but were commanded
wholly by the Pope. And in Popish Countries now Princes do suffer themselves in
word to be excluded from all spiritual Dominion, and execute not the same in
show but by subordinate Clerks under them, and that by privilege of the Popes
grant, but we know in truth they hold it, and use it as their own, and the Pope
is more officious to them, then they are to him. And whereas the Canon Law
allows temporal Princes to punish the insolence and oppressions of Bishops
within their respective Territories, modo sint verae oppressiones, we know
this comes to nothing, if Princes claim it not by something higher then Canon
Law. For how shall this be tryde? how shall it appear, whether these
oppressions be true, and heinous, or no? if Bishops will not submit themselves
in this trial, and refuse to appeal, Kings are no competent Judges, nor can
take no just cognizance hereof: and what redress then is in the Kings power?
Even Popish Princes now know well enough how ridiculous this favor of the
Canonists is, and therefore as the Popes fed the^ heretofore with the name and
shadow only of painted Sovereignty in temporalibus, so they feed him the like
now in spiritualibus. Protestants dissent much from these Tenets, but because
many of them, especially Clergimen do not wholly dissent from all the grounds
of these Tenets, therefore they also do partake in some errors, and
absurdities of the like nature: One Scotist says, That Mountague, and our
learnedest Protestant Divines, nay, even Rainolds himself though otherwise a
Puritan, yet they all hold, that there is due to the King, no spiritual but
only a temporal rule over persons and causes Ecclesiastical, and that also by
accident for the common peace sake. He says also that in his presence at a
Cambridge Commencement, the chief Bishop was called Maximus Pater, and that it
was maintained that the care of spiritual things did appertain to the chief
Bishop, and of temporal to the King, and whereas it was at last concluded that
all was to be governed by the King, yet he says questionless the intent was
civiliter, not spiritualiter. And if we look back to the primitives we shall
find that in good times before Popery had any considerable growth Kings for
penance were enjoined to kneel to Priests, and were not admitted to have seats
in the Chancell near the Altar, no not amongst the Deacons: but were sometimes
subjected to heavy and sharp censures of Bishops, and sometimes struck with
the thunderbolt of Excommunication it self. And we shall find that the Name
Church was applied in common speech to Churchmen only, and the Name
Spiritualitie was taken in the same sense, as if all other persons had been
strangers to the Church, and had been of a mere Temporal and Secular
condition: and by the name Clergy it was intimated to the World, that the
Sacerdotall function was the only lot and patrimony of God: and these usages
were ab antiquo. And we shall find that the holiest and learnedest Fathers of
the Church did seem to prefer the Mitre before the Diadem, and to dream of
a Spiritual Empire belonging to Priests more worthy and sacred then that of
Emperors. And therefore Gregory of Nazianzen in a Sermon before the Emperor
says thus to him: The Law of Christ has committed you to my Charge, and to my
Pulpit: for we rule also and ours is a more excellent and perfect regiment. And
comparing further the rule of Priests with the rule of Princes, He calls the
one spiritual the other fleshly, and concludes that the spirit ought not to
give place to the flesh, nor heavenly things to earthly. What he meant here by
giving place, whether he meant it of external submission, or internal awe I
cannot tell: but he left it uncertain. To the same purpose that of Ambrose
tends also: Think not, O Emperor, that thou have any right over divine
things: for the Palace is for the Emperor, but Churches for Priests. And that
also of Athanasius, Its neither lawful for us to hold a Kingdom upon earth:
nor have thou O Emperor power over sacred things. We see they speak of their
Ministry and Ecclesiastical vocation as of a sovereigntie, and rule, and that
more sacred, then that of Princes, of which Princes were not worthy, or
capable. And to pass by the blind times of Popery wherein upon these grounds
the Roman Bishops inthralled a great part of Christendom with temporal
bondage, we shall find also that since the abjuration of Romish servitude,
yet Protestant Ministers themselves have assumed a sanctity more then is due.
The Kings Supremacy or Headship over the Ecclesiastical or Spiritual State,
He being accounted but merely temporal in comparison of Priests is as ill
wished by many Calvinists, as by Papists, their word is of Secular Princes,
Istis non competit iste Primatus. And as Sir Thomas More suffered death in
testimony of his dislike, so Calvin himself condemns this Realm of Blasphemy
for entitling Henry the Eighth Supreme Head of the Church here under Christ.
And not only the Name, but the power it self which we give to Civil
Magistrates he protests against, as that which had wounded him deeply,
Princes being made thereby too spiritual, he complains that this fault did
reign throughout Germany, and in some parts of France, to the taking away of
Spiritual Regiment, whilst Princes were made chief Judges as well in matters
of doctrine as discipline.

Hence it is that all which follow Calvin, which is almost the generality of
Protestants, besides Papists, hold Princes incompetent for spiritual Regencie,
accounting the intermedling of Princes therein as an abolition, or profanation
of the same.

And hence it is, that our contrary faction of Hierarchists also, deny the
Kings Supremacy in Spiritualibus, though not in Ecclesiasticis, and our
Prelates Style is providentia divina, not gratia Regis, and as they issue Writs
in their own Names, so they use their own arms in their Seals, and not the
Kings. And we know it was my Lord of Canterburies industry of late to procure
a Commission about five years since, that all Bishops Courts might proceed
without any subordination or dependency to any other of the Kings Courts. So
that though they complain of the Presbyterian Discipline, and the doctrine of
Calvin as injurious to Princes, yet they themselves seem to be of the same
confederacy.

But that I may not seem to misreport, or misinterpret any, I will cite only
two Divines of prime note, both defenders of Supremacy. Hooker speaking of
that dutiful subjection which is due from all Christians to the Pastors of
their souls in respect of their sacred Order, affirms that the same is as due
from Kings and Princes, as from their meanest vassals. Reverence due to the
Word, and Sacraments, and to Gods Ordinances is not here meant, for that is as
due from Priests themselves also, as from any other, it is meant of reverence
due to the persons of Priests, and this he calls subjection, and challenges as
due in respect of their sacred Order. And so Bilson descanting upon the words
of Nazianzen, after a comparative manner (as Hooker did) inferres thereupon,
that Priests have a greater and perfecter regiment then Princes: For (says he)
Priests govern the souls of men, and dispense the mysteries of God, whereas
Princes are set to rule the bodies of men, and to dispose the things of this
life, etc. He does not compare the offices but the Regiments of Priests and
Princes, and he averres as confidently that Priests govern the souls, and
exercise dominion over the spirits of Christians, as that Princes have no power
at all, but over the bodies and temporalities of their Subjects. And for these
causes the Crosier is generally preferred in Honor, and Sanctity, before the
Scepter: to detect therefore the error of Divines herein, I will now truly
produce, and thoroughly poize those arguments which they most rely upon. The
first argument runs thus. Spiritual things are not to be managed, and treated,
but only by spiritual persons: but Princes are not spiritual, Ergo. We must
first understand here what is meant by spiritual things, and spiritual
persons. If by spiritual things here, such things are meant as appertain to
God and to Religion, and as concern Gods service in the Church, and the
welfare of the souls and spirits of men; so all men have a spiritual charge in
general: for all men by their general callings are servants to God, and are
not only bound to provide for their own souls, but to promote also the worship
of God, and the salvation of other men. And in this respect that man which is
most pious, is most holy, and spiritual, and most acceptable to God, and
though his condition be but private here in this World, yet his reward in
Heaven may be more glorious, then theirs who have public Offices and Dignities
here, and whose particular callings are far more sacred. But besides this
internal holiness of persons visible only to God, there is an external,
political holiness also of persons which arises from our particular Functions
in this World, and the measure of this holiness, is the profit and consequence
of our professions, and employments. The Regal and Sacerdotall Offices have
ever been held comparatively of all other the most holy, and worshipful, and
the reason is because of all others they are the most advantageous, and of most
extensive benefit to the people of God. And therefore the person is always
valued according to the function, and the function according to its benefit,
and not on the contrary: The man is Honorable because he is a King, and the
King is honorable because He is the Conservator of the people: and of this
reason of Honor man is able to Judge. God accepts of such a man to serve him
in such an honorable place; the place is not here honorable* because He
serves in it, but he is Honorable because the place is profitable: and though
of Gods mere acceptance of the person no reason can be given, yet there is
great reason that all men should be Honorable with men, as they are
acceptable with God. God honored the Israelites before other Nations; they
were a royal Priesthood in comparison of Heathens, because God by his peculiar
choice of them to his service did give them that more then regal, or more then
Sacerdotall privilege. The Israelites in condition were more contemptible, and
in disposition more incorrible than other Nations, but because God separates
them they are holy, and because God separates them to serve him according to
his pure will, they are holy as Princes, and Priests. Christians also may now
be termed Princes and Priests in comparison of the Jews in as much as God of
his free pleasure is now more extensive and diffusive of his graces amongst us,
that we may adore him more ingenuously, more intelligently, and more
comfortably then the Jews did: and in the like manner amongst Christians,
Princes and Priests are yet higher elevated above common laymen, in as much as
they have nearer access to God at the Throne and at the Altar, and by their
more sublime employments are more highly dignified, and more honorably
consecrated. With the Prince and the Priest no man will enter into any
co^petition, but the co^petition now being between the Prince and the priest,
we must search into the nature of this political sanctity, that we may the
better distinguish its de-grees. Calvin we see complains, that the persons of
Princes are made too spiritual, by our appropriating to them spiritual
authority: because he holds that authority too spiritual for their persons.
The same thing is here the reason of the same thing; spiritual offices and
services belong not to Princes, because their persons are not spiritual: and
why are their persons not spiritual? because their offices, and services are
not spiritual. This is unjust and unscholasticall: against the person no
exception lies, but such as is drawn from the function; the person is coruscant
only by the rays of the function: they which will prove Kings to be not
spiritual, must first prove their offices to be merely temporal, and not on
the contrary. Such proofs as infirm the Kings power, and interest in
spiritualibus are proper, such proofs let us hear. Ambrose, and Athanasius
indeed say directly, that Emperors have no right over divine things, nor power
over sacred things: but they are very brief, and give no reason for their
allegations, nor do they leave us satisfied in their true meanings. The
persons and offices of Kings were ever held sacred, and if that which is sacred
be not spiritual, it were good that the difference were set forth between
them. Palaces are for Princes, and Temples for Priests: but palaces are not the
sole interest of Princes, so as that they are excluded thereby from all power
in Temples: nor is this a good result, because priests may not move in the
Civil Orb, therefore Princes may not in the Ecclesiastical. But Nazianzen is
more full, and expressive of his reasons, and those reasons also are further
pressed by Bishop Bilson, let us bend our forces thither. Nazianzen concludes
the regiment of Priests to be more perfect, and excellent then that of Princes,
and compares it to that of the soul over the body, because things committed to
the priests charge are heavenly and spiritual, whereas Kings (he says) have
in their power things earthly, and bodi^y. He takes three things here for
granted, First, that the office of a Priest is as properly and truly a power,
and rule, as that of Princes. Secondly, that the rule of Princes extends only
to earthly things. Thirdly, whatsoever may be spoken of the whole order of
Priesthood, that he applies to every particular Priest. And thus he seems to
attribute a greater sanctity not only intensive, but extensive also, to any
priest, then to any Prince. The gloss of Bilson also hereupon is: That Priests
govern the souls of men, and dispense the mysteries of God, whereas Princes
are set to rule the bodies of their Subjects, and to dispose the things of this
life. And therefore if the fruits and effects of their callings be compared,
the Preachers (he says) passes that of Princes by many degrees of excellence
and perfection: God giving earthly food, and peace by the Prince, but heavenly
grace and life by the Word and Sacraments; which we receive from the mouths,
and hands of his Messengers. As to external power, and corporal compulsion:
So Preachers are servants to their brethren, Princes are Lords over them.
Preachers may reprove and threaten, but Princes must seize the goods, and
chastise the bodies of offenders. Preaches may shut the gates of Heaven against
non-repentants: Princes must root them from the face of the earth, and inflict
the just vengeance of their sins in this world. And whereas the Princes and
Preachers functions concur in ghostly and heavenly things, that the Preacher
declares, and the Prince establishes the word of truth: yet the Preachers
service in these cases excels the Princes: for that the word in the
Preachers mouth ingendreth faith and wins the soul unto God to serve him
with a willing mind, whereas the Sword in the Princes hand strikes only a
terror into men to refrain the outward act, but reformeth not the secrets of
the heart. This is Bilson's sense, and I think the sense of almost all our
Divines: by this is Nazianzen fully seconded and abetted, for first, the true
and proper rule of priests is not only asserted, but also explained, for it
gives grace and life by the Word and Sacraments, it reproves and threatens, it
shuts the gate of Heaven against Non-repentants. Secondly, the rule of princes
is lesned, and that by this instance: for that the preacher wins souls to a
willing service, but the prince by external terror restrains only from the
outward act of sin. And thirdly, his comparison is indefinite, between Prince,
and preacher, that which is employed of Priest in general, he seems to apply
to every priest in particular. I must frame my answer to every particular.
Power and Dominion of it self is divine, and add but infinite, or absolute to
it, it is Divinity it self. Nothing is more desirable to man, or more
adequate to the aims of intelligent creatures then power* the Angels in Heaven
are known to us by the Names of Thrones, and Principalities, Heaven it self is
known to us by the name of a Kingdom: and our best devotion to God consists
in ascribing to him, honor, worship, subjection, etc. and the first and
greatest sin of men and Angels, was an aspiring to undue Power, and excellence.
Absolute perfection and blessedness is the Unity of the Godhead, and that
Unity must needs subsist in absolute power, absolute wisdom, and absolute
goodness. Absolute power also in order of Nature (according to man's
understanding) as a Father gives being to absolute wisdom: as both give being
to absolute Goodness. Whatsoever is in God must needs be God, and of the same
substance indivisible, and so infinite wisdom, and infinite Goodness, must
needs be coeternall, and consubstantiall with infinite power: yet this excludes
not all order of distinction; and according to order of distinction it is more
proportionable to our capacity, that infinite Wisdom should derive its divine
generation from infinite power, then infinite power from infinite Wisdom.
Unity of perfect blessedness cannot comprehend any thing more then this
Trinity, neither can it comprehend any thing less: and therefore though this
word Trinity cannot have any relation to the essence of God, or to his works ad
extra, which flow from the essence, yet to his persons it may, and to his
internal operations, wherein one person is more generative then another. And
according to these internal operations of the Deity we ought (to speak after
the manner of men) to ascribe prioritie of Order to infinite power, the first
person of the Godhead, in as much as we cannot conceive but that God is rather
wise, as he is powerful, and Good as he is both powerful, and wise: then
that he is powerful, as he is wise, or wise, and powerful, as he is good.
Having premised these things in general concerning power, and dominion, and
the excellence thereof, I am come now to see what that power and Dominion is
which Churchmen claim to themselves. Our Hierarchists use the words Power and
regiment to describe all their actions, and employments: the Power of Order,
the Power of Jurisdiction, the Power of the Word and Sacraments, and the Power
of the Keys, all their spiritual Offices, and Faculties are expressed in
commanding, and high terms, that they may seem to owe no subordination, or
dependence to any above themselves. And this art they further use, when they
would prove the excellence of their spiritual rule, they derive it from
preaching, and the subordinate Offices of the Ministry, but when they would
exercise their rule, then they allege that to rule over Preachers is more, and
greater then to preach: because the spirits of men are properly subject to no
rule; and because preaching* though it be one of Gods most effectual
Ordinances, yet is no proper rule but a service rather: therefore they lay hold
of Ecclesiastical juridiction for proof of their holy spiritual rule. And
yet because Ecclesiastical jurisdiction is of it self no such divine sublime
thing, as the ministration of the Word, and Sacraments, nor so incompetent for
Princes, as to the use of it, therefore their proofs are chiefly grounded upon
the ordinances of the Word and Sacraments: but this slight imposture cannot so
delude us: for either Ecclesiastical jurisdiction is more sacred and
spiritual then the ministration of the Word, and Sacraments, or not; if it be,
then these arguments drawn from the Word and Sacraments are impertinent: The
question is whether Princes be capable of such jurisdiction or not, and this
proves not the incapacity of Princes, this only proves the honor of such
capacity: but on the other side, if it be not, yet there is the same
impertinence, for if priests challenge to themselves power in things more
excellent, and holy, this excludes not Princes from things less excellent, and
holy: but we shall not need to stick here.

The papists themselves do acknowledge, that to preach, etc. is less then to
rule, and to prescribe Laws to preachers, etc. and Bilson makes a plain
confession, that the Sacerdotall Office is rather Ministerial, then Imperial,
and that such reverence and subjection as is due in spiritual affairs from
Princes is not due to the persons of priests, but to the Ordinances of God, and
to the graces of the Church: For (says he) the word is to be submitted to in
the mouths of Prophets, and the Ordinances are to be honored in the
administration of Priests, but the persons of Prophets, and Priests, must not
be objects to terminate this submission, and honor. God is to be honored in
the service of his Ministers, not the Ministers in Gods stead: for in these
services there is the same honor due to GOD from Ministers themselves, as from
Laymen. And therefore we see if the greater Priest hear the word, etc. from
the less, this does not sanctify the less above the greater, as it would, if
sanctity did rest in the person, and not in the Ordinance, or if it did not
pass from the actor, or instrument, to the Author and Ordainer himself. I
think we may therefore proceed now from this, that power, and Government is a
thing in it self most awful and honorable, to this: that the truest owners
thereof next under God, whom the Church ever looked upon as Gods immediate
Vicegerents, and Deputies thereof, are Princes. Saint Peter 1. 2. writing to
the Church in the time of a Heathen, and impious Emperor, commands every soul
to be subject to the higher powers. He acknowledges power in a very Nero, and
that to be the higher power, and to that higher power of that Nero he subjects
every soul Christian and Heathen, Priest and Laymen. For the same cause also
the primitives in Tertullians mouth make this humble profession: Colimus
imperatorem, ut hominem a Deo secundum, and solo Deo minorem: and this
profession was made under the Reign of wicked Emperors, to whom in
Ecclesiastical affairs more might be denied, then to ours: for though Reges,
in quantum Reges serviunt Deo, as Saint Augustine says, yet in quantum pii
Reges, they serve God the more gloriously, and have a nearer access to God,
and in that respect it may be more truly said of them, that they are a Deo
secundi, and solo Deo minores: and if so, how awful and venerable must this
render their persons, and with what submission must we prostrate our selves at
their sacred feet? and that it may not seem strange that mere power and rule
in an unbelieving or wicked Prince should be so sacred and inviolable, we must
take notice that the wickedness of Princes in ill commands though it discharge
us as to those ill commands, yet it does not discharge their power or rule
either in those, or in any other: For when Princes rule well, they are to be
obeyed, when ill, they are to be endured, and this very indurance is an effect
of obedience and subjection. Peter as a Citizen of the Commonwealth is a
servant to Nero, and though in the mere consideration of a Christian, He has
not dependence upon Nero further then is to be testified by suffering under him
in ill commands, yet in all civil things, and things indifferent, his
dependence remayns undissolved. If Nero forbid Peter to preach, contradicting
God herein, whose power is still transcendent, this prohibition binds not
Peter, but if Nero use the Sword hereupon against Peter, this sword is
irresistible, because though in this it be injurious, in other things it is
still sacred. This one violence of Nero is tyrannous, but the authority whereby
this is done is not tyranny; For the same sword which offends one defends many
still, and if one here be defended, many must be offended, and the good of many
is to be preferred before the good of one. And yet if God had made Peter
supreme Judge of such cases, and had given him a power independent, it had
been necessary that he had given him withal some remedy, and sufficient means
to support the same Supremacy and independent right: for God gives no man an
absolute right without some proper remedy appertaining to the same. The use of
power is not to entreat, or persuade only, for these may be done without
power, but to command, and commands are vain without compulsion, and they
which may not compel, may not command, and they which cannot command, may not
meddle at all except to entreat, or persuade. Power then there must be, and
that power must be somewhere supreme that it may command all good, and punish
all evil, or else it is insufficient, and if all, then in religious as well as
in civil cases, for Supremacy may be severally exercised, but the right of it
cannot be severally enjoyed: if Peter may do more then persuade Nero, the
Scepter is Peter's not Neroes; if he may do no more, he is as mere a subject
as any other Layman: but in whethersoever the power of commanding rests, it
cannot rest in both, the Scepter cannot be shared, independence cannot be
divided: the people cannot obey both as equal Judges whilst their judgments
remain contrary, nor serve both as equal Lords whilst their commands are
contrary. To persuade and entreat in Ministers, are the offices of a blessed
vocation, but they are not properly Ensigns of Royalty, and power: and if the
spirits of men are sometimes moved, and won by the persuasions of Ministers, as
they may by other means, yet captivated, and commanded they cannot be: and
therefore if this be called power, it is but imaginary, and improper, and such
as ought not to enter into any comparison, or rivalitie with that solid,
sensible, coercive, binding power wherewith God has invested his true
Lievtenants upon earth. That power which is proper, must include not only a
right of commanding, but also an effectual virtue of forcing obedience to its
commands, and of subjecting and reducing such, as shall not render themselves
obedient. The supreme civil Magistrate has this power grounded upon the
common consent of Mankind, and as strong as is the political consent of
humane nature in its supreme Law of public conservation, so vigorous, and
invincible is this power. Had Priests any such power or sword, we should soon
see it, and feel it, and voluntarily stoop under it: but since they can
pretend to none such, the mere noise of an imaginary spiritual power and
sword must not deceive us. The sword must be of sympathy and proportion
answerable to those commands for which it was ordained, if the commands be
external and political, the sword must not be invisible, and merely
spiritual. If the Pope can impose an oath upon us to stand to his laws, and to
obey his awards, our obedience being here political, his power of imposing
Oaths must be the like; for if he pretend a right, and have no remedy, that is
no power; and if he have a remedy that is not of the same nature with his
command, it will prove no remedy, it will be found vain and uneffectuall. We
cannot think that God has given the Pope any power but for good, and we
cannot think that power good, whereby the Pope may destroy Millions of souls,
and yet cannot reclayme, or convince one. The Popes commands seem to me
unreasonable, unnatural, impious, the Pope herein has no spiritual power to
rectify me, or to discover my error to me, or to procure obedience from me,
that power which he has over my soul is only to exclude it from heaven, and
to give it as a prey to Satan, for not attributing more to him then to my own
conscience, and natural light. Can we think that God gave this new Power,
never before known, to these latter days out of mercy, that all except one
handful of men should perish by it, and none at all receive benefit by it? It
cannot be said that the same keys which shut heaven to so many, open heaven to
any one: for those few which obey the Pope, obey him either voluntarily, or by
constraint: and they which are constrained, obey him as a Prince, not as a
Priest, and bow under his temporal, not spiritual yoke: howsoever it be
otherwise pretended. Voluntary obedience also is such as is rendered without any
external influence from the Pope; For the will is capable of no compulsion,
and if it were, my will would be as liable to the same as any other man's: and
if the Pope may compel my will, and so open Heaven to me (as it were) by his
spiritual keys, and will not, it is his cruelty, not my contumacie. Its no
glory to the Pope, that some few by blind voluntary obedience acknowledge the
power of his keys, in this he has no advantage of Mahomet, that sword which
was so victorious in the hand of Mahomet, was as spiritual, and as universally
prevalent as the Popes. So much of the imaginary rule and spiritual sword of
Priests, as also of the real effectual dominion of Princes, I shall now prove
further, that the sword of Kings if it be not so spiritual, as the Pope
pretends, to cut off souls; yet it is more then temporal, and extends to
things most spiritual. The Founders and Patriarchs of the World before the Law
of Moses, did not only govern the Church, but also execute all pastoral,
spiritual Offices as they were Princes, and Supreme Potentates within their
own limits: they did not govern men as they were the Priests of God, but they
did sacrifice and officiate before God, as they were the Heads, and Governors
of men. In those times it was not held usurpation, or intrusion upon priests,
for Princes to sacrifice with their own hands, or to teach the will of God with
their own mouths; it would have been held presumption if any else had
attempted the like, and a dishonor to Gods service. Nature then taught that
the most excellent person was most fit for Gods service in the Church, and that
no person could be more excellent, then he which served God in the Throne. The
word priest now may have diverse acceptions. In some sense whole Nations have
been called priests, viz. comparatively, and in some sense all Fathers of
Children, and Masters of Servants are in the nature of priests, and in more
usual sense all Princes, so far as they have charge and cure of souls, and
are entrusted with Divine Service within their several commands, are more
supereminently taken for priests: but the most usual sense is this. A Priest
is he which has cure of Souls, and a trust of Gods worship by a more peculiar
kind of public and politic consecration and dedication thereunto: of such
consecration, or ordination, before Aaron, we read nothing, and for ought I
see, we are bound to believe nothing. Melchisideck was a pious man, a devout
Father, a religious Master, nay, a zealous Prince and Commander, but in all
these respects he had no privilege nor right to the denomination of priest
more then Adam, Sem, Noah, etc. had. You will say then how is that denomination
given him so peculiarly? This denomination might be given not by reason of any
external, formal, ceremonial Unction, or imposition of hands, or any other
solemn Dedication or separation before men: but in this respect, that he did
perhaps publicly officiate in the presence of all his Subjects, and perhaps in
behalf of all his subjects, and this is a higher and blesseder Sacerdotall
Office, then any we read of in his predecessors or successors till Aarons
days. It is probable that God was served in Families before Aaron, and perhaps
there were solemn days and Feasts, which all Families by joint consent did in
several places dedicate to Gods service by strict observance of the same, but
that any public places were appointed for whole Congregations to join and
meet publicly in under the charge and function of any one public Priest, till
Aaron is not specified. This only we may guess by the special name of priest
applied to Melchisedeck, that perhaps being a priest of Salem, he was the first
that made the worship of God so public: and did not only by the general
influence of his power take order for the service and knowledge of God in
several Families, but also gather several assemblies of united Families, and
there publicly sacrifise and officiate in behalf of great, and solemn
Congregations: wherein he might far exceed Abraham. Howsoever its sufficient
for my purpose, that this he might do by virtue of his Regal power and
dignity without any further consecration or Sacerdotal instalment whatsoever.
And in this respect he was without predecessor, and perhaps successor, so that
I think he was the most lively and Honorable type of our Savior: for Aarons
Order was Substitute, and his consecration was performed by the hand of his
Prince and Superior, and being so consecrated, He did sacrifise, not as a
Prince but merely as a Priest. Whereas Melchisedeck received his Order from
none but himself, and so remained not only independent, but his service also
being both Regal and Sacerdotall, as our Saviors also was, it was yet more
Honorable in that it was Regal, then in that it was Sacerdotall. And this
certainly suits best with our Saviors Order, for no Secular authority but his
own did concur in his inauguration, he was his own Ancestor in this, in
that his own Royal dignity gave virtue to his Sacerdotall: and though he
would not assume to himself the external Function of Royalty in mere Secular
things, yet in this he would follow holy Melchisedeck. But to pass from
Melchisedeck, within some few ages after we find the Scepter and Censor
severed; We find no prints of great Empires before Moses, for in small
Countries we find diverse petty independent principalities: and it may be
imagined that neither true policy, nor wicked tyranny was then known in such
perfection, as now it is. The Israelites at their departure from Egypt were a
great and formidable Nation, as appears by the combinations of many other
Potentates against them, yet at that time the weighty charges both of prince
and priest were supported by Moses alone. This was exceeding grievous till
Jethro in civil affairs, and till God himself in matters of Religion, for
his further ease, took much of his laborious part from off his shoulders;
Subordinate Magistrates were now appointed in the State, and priests and Levits
in the Church, the Nation being grown numerous, and Ceremonies in Religion
very various: but we must not think that Moses was hereby emptied, or lesned
of any of his Civil, or Ecclesiastical authority: as he retained still
Supremacy of power to himself in all things, so that Supremacy became now the
more awful, and Majesticall. The poet says of waters, Maxima per multos
tenuantur flumina rivos.

And indeed did waters run backwards they would spend and diminish themselves
by often divisions in their courses: but we see that in their ordinary natural
Tracts many little petty streams officiously hasten to discharge themselves into
greater, so that the more continued the course is, the greater the streams ever
grow. It is so with power both in Church and State: Sovereigntie is as the
main Ocean, of its vast abundance it feeds all, and is fed by all, as it is
the fountain to enrich others, so it is the Cisterne to receive and require
back again all the riches of others. That which Moses parted with all and
derived to others was for the better expedition both of piety and justice,
that GOD might be more duly served, that the people might be more quickly
relieved, and that his own shoulders might be the freelier disburdened: for as
a man he could not intend universal business: yet a Prince he might well
superintend it in others. And it is manifest that after the separation of the
Priesthood, he did still as superior to Aaron in the most sacred things
approach God in the Mountain to receive the custody of the Law from Gods hand,
and to receive Orders from God for the Tabernacle, and all religious services,
and did perform the act of consecration to Priests, and did always consult
with God by Priests, and command all men as well Priests, and Levits, as other
men. Hooker and Bilson, and I think most of our Divines do confess not only
this, that Moses retained all Ecclesiastical Supremacy to himself, but that
he left the same also to his Successors. Hooker says that by the same
supreme power David, Asa, Jehosaphat, Josias, etc. made those Laws and
Statutes (mentioned in sacred History) touching matters of mere Religion, the
affairs of the Temple, and service of God. And by virtue of this power the
piety and impiety of the King did always change the public face of Religion,
which the Prophets by themselves never did, nor could hinder from being done.
And yet if Priests alone had bin possessed of all spiritual power, no alteration
in Religion could have been made without them, it had not been in the King,
but in Priests to change the face of Religion. And the making of
Ecclesiastical Laws also with other like actions pertaining to the power of
dominion had still been recorded for the acts of Priests, and not of Kings:
whereas we now find the contrary. Hooker says this and more, and Bilson says
not one jot less. He confesses the Jewish Kings were charged with matters of
Religion, and the custody of both Tables, nay, publishing, preserving,
executing points of Law concerning the first table he assigns as the
principal charge committed to Kings, as Kings, Religion being the foundation
of policy. He instances also in the good Kings of Judah, who as they were
bound, so they were commended for their duty by God himself, in removing
Idols, purging abominations, reforming Priests, renewing the covenant, and
compelling all Priests, Prophets, people, to serve God sincerely. Many of the
learnedest papists do not gainsay this evident truth, and therefore Stapleton
being I suppose fully convinced of it, seeks to answer and avoid it another
way.

But I proceed to the times of thraldom, wherein the Jews were governed by the
Persians. How far the Jews were left in Babylon to the free exercise of their
own Religion is uncertain, it may be conceived that their condition was not
always alike under all Kings, but generally that they found more favor there,
then Christians did afterward under the Roman Emperors: before this time
there is no probability of Excommunication, or any spiritual Judicature, we
read nothing of Maranathaes, or Anathemaes, but now perhaps some such
government might take place: for where no peculiar consecrated Ministry is,
the Magistrate is fittest to officiate before God, and where no Magistracy is
permitted Ministers are fittest to preserve order. Some Papists that will
undertake to prove any thing out of any thing allege Cain as an instance of
Excom. as if Adam were so a Priest, as that he were no Prince, and had power
to excommunicate in case of so horrid a murder, but not to execute any other
Law: or as if Moses would proceed against adultery by temporal punishment,
when Adam had proceeded against murder by spiritual: but not to insist longer
upon these conjecturall passages, I come to our Saviors days, and his
government also being Regal, as well as Sacerdotall, nay, being rather divine
then either, I shall not stay there neither. Our mayn strife is how the Apostles
and their successors governed after his Ascension during the times of
persecution: but little need to be said hereof: For in Scripture we find the
Apostles themselves very humble, and unlordly, and transacting all things
(according to our Saviors command and example) rather by persuasion, and
evidence of the spirit, then by command and constraint, and if any difference
was between a Bishop and a Priest, it was in outward eminence or majoritie very
small: and the very terms themselves were promiscuously applied. In the next
ensuing times also we find by ancient Testimony, that Omnia communi
Clericorum consilio agebantur: and after that Episcopacy had gotten some
footing, yet, as another ancient testimony informs us, except a Ordinatione,
setting Ordination only aside it challenged no privilege above Presbyters: but
as I have said before, whatsoever authority did reside in the Clergy whilst
temporal rule was wanting to the Church, and whilst miraculous power of binding
and loosing sinners, and of opening and shutting Heaven was supplied by the
Holy Ghost for the emergent necessity of those times, the reason thereof no
longer remaining, it ought now to remain no longer as it did, but to devolve
again into the Tempor^ll Rulers hands; from whence it was not taken by Christ,
but where it was then abused, and made unprofitable by the owners themselves.
If we do imagine that Timothy and Titus had Episcopal power, and by that
Episcopal power did send out processes, and keep Courts, and holds pleas of
all Testamentary, and Matrimonial Causes, and Tithes, Fasts and all other
which our Bishops now claim; and did redress all grievances for the
preventing of confusion in the Church, during the malignity of Secular power;
if we take all this for granted, though it be some thing too large to be
granted, yet still we ought to conceive that this power was conferred upon
them not in derogation of Secular authority, but for necessities sake, till
Secular authority should again come in, and undertake the same offices, which
Timothy and Titus were now to perform: when confusion cannot otherwise be
prevented, Timothy and Titus shall govern, but when it may be prevented by
that authority which is most competent, and when more perfect order shall be
more naturally and justly induced, what injury is this to Timothy or Titus? Why
rather is it not an ease and comfort to them, that they have now leisure more
seriously to attend their own proper function, and ministration? Hookers own
words are, if from the approbation of Heaven the Kings of GODS own chosen
people had in the affairs of the Jewish Religion supreme power, why should
not Christian Kings have the like in Christian Religion? And Bilson having
mayntained the supremacy of the Jewish Kings, He ascribes the like to the
whole function. He says, it is the essential charge of Princes to see the
Law of God fully executed, his Son rightly served, his Spouse safely nursed,
his house timely filled, his enemies duly punished, and this he says, as it
was by Moses prescribed, and by David required, so it was by Esaias prophesied,
by Christ commanded, by Paul witnessed, and by the Primitive Fathers consented
too. He says further, that what the Jewish Kings had, Christian Kings ought
to enjoy, and therefore Esaias (says He) prophesying of the Evangelicall times,
foretold that the Church should suck the breasts of Kings and Queens, and that
milk which those breasts should afford, He interprets to be spiritual milk.
Now what can be added to this, what more excellent and perfect Regiment then
this had Timothy and Titus committed to them by virtue of their Episcopal
Order? What more sacred, what more spiritual offices could they perform in
the Church? What could Gods children suck from their breasts other then milk,
then sincere, spiritual milk? Saint Augustine agrees to this, when he says
that Kings, as Kings, serve God, so as none but Kings can do, and when he
confesses, that Christ came not to the detriment of sovereigntie. And the
Church in Tertullians words, ascribing worship to their Heathen Emperors, as
being second immediately to God, and inferior to none but God, says as much as
words can express. In regard of internal sanctity Peter may be more
excellent then Caesar, and so may Lazarus perhaps then Peter: but in regard of
that civil sanctity which is visible to man's eye, Caesar is to be worshipped
more then Peter. Caesar is to be looked upon as next in place here to God,
betwixt whom and God no other can have any superior place. Wisdom and
goodness are blessed graces in the sight of GOD, but these are more private,
and Power is an excellence more perfect, and public, and visible to man then
either: if Ministers do sometimes in wisdom, and goodness excel Princes, yet
in Power they do not: and therefore though wisdom and goodness may make them
more amiable sometimes to God, yet Power shall make Princes more Honorable
amongst men. There is in heaven no need of Power in the glorified creatures,
and yet the glorified creatures are there differenced by Power: it is hard to
say that one Angel, or Saint differs from another in wisdom, or in holiness,
yet that they differ in power and glory we all know. The twelve Patriarchs and
the twelve Apostles sit in heaven upon higher Thrones, then many Saints which
perhaps here in this life might be endued with a greater portion of wisdom,
and holiness then they were: and by this it may seem that there is a species
of external sanctity of power dispensed according to the free power of God
even in Heaven also, and that that sanctity is superior to the other more
private sanctity of other graces, and excellences. And if power in heavenly
creatures where it is of no necessity has such a supereminent glory
appertaining to it, with what veneration ought we to entertain it on earth
where our common felicity and safety does so much depend upon it? Goodness
here we see is a narrow excellence, without wisdom, and power: and wisdom in
men that have neither power, nor goodness, scarce profits at all: but power in
infants, in women, in Idiots hands is of public use, in as much as the wisdom
and goodness of other men are ready to be commanded by it, and its more
natural that they should be obsequious and officious in serving power, then
that the transcendent, incommunicable, indivisible Royalty of power, should
condescend to be at their devotion. And for this reason when Princes are said
to be solo Deo minores, and Deo secundi, this is spoken in regard of power, and
this being spoken in regard of power, we must conceive it spoken of the most
perfect excellence, and dignity, and sanctity that can be imagined amongst men
on earth. And for the same reason, when Princes are said to serve God as
Princes, and so to serve him as none other can, we must conceive this spoken
also with respect to their power, in as much as wisdom and goodness in other
men cannot promote the glory of God, and the common good of man, so much as
power may in them.

But Stapleton takes four exceptions to those times, whereby if it be granted
that the Jewish Kings had supreme Ecclesiastical authority, yet he says, it
does not follow that our Kings now ought to have the same. He says, first,
That the Jewish Religion was of far less dignity and perfection then ours
is: ours being that truth of which theirs was but a shadowish prefigurative
resemblance. Our answer here is, that the Religion of the Jews, as to the
essence of it, was not different from ours, either in dignity or perfection.
The same God was then worshipped as a Creator, Redeemer, Sanctifier, and that
worship did consist in the same kind of love, fear, hope, and belief, and
the same charity, and justice amongst men. The Law of Ceremonies, and
external Rites in the bodily worship of God, did differ from our discipline,
that being more pompous and laborious: but the two great Commandments which
were the effects, and contents of all heavenly, spiritual, indispensible
worship, and service, whereby a love toward God above that of our selves, and
a love toward man equal with that of our selves was enjoined, these two great
Commandments were then as forcible, and honorable, as they are now. Sacrifice
was but as the garment of Religion, obedience was the life, the perfection, the
dignity of Religion, and the life, perfection, and dignity of that obedience
consisted then in those weighty matters of the Law, Piety, and mercy, as it
now does; but if the Jewish Religion was less excellent, and more clogged with
shadows, and ceremonies in its outward habit, what argument is this for the
Supremacy of Regal, rather then Sacerdotall power? The more abstruse and dark
the form of that worship was, and the more rigorous sanctity God had stamped
upon the places, and instruments, and formalities of his worship, and the more
frequent, and intricate questions might arise thereabout, me thinks, the more
use there was of Sacerdotall honor, and prerogative, and the less of Regal
in matters of the Lord: I see not why this should make Princes more spiritual
then their Order would bear, but Priests rather. His second reason is. That
all parts of the Jewish Religion, Laws, Sacrifices, Rites, Ceremonies, being
fully set down in writing, needing nothing but execution, their Kings might
well have highest authority, to see that done: Whereas with us there are
numbers of mysteries even in belief which were not so generally for them as
for us necessary to be with some express acknowledgment understood, many
things belonging to external government, and our service not being set down by
particular ordinances, or written, for which cause the State of the Church does
now require that the spiritual authority of Ecclesiastical persons be large,
absolute, and independent. This reason is every way faulty: for as to matters
of Discipline and external worship our Church is less encumbered with
multiplicity of Rites, such as Saint Paul calls carnal and beggarly rudiments,
and in this respect there is the less use of Ecclesiastical authority
amongst us: and if popish Bishops do purposely increase Ceremonies, that they
may enlarge their own power, they ought not to take advantage of their own
fraud. And as for matters of faith and doctrinall mysteries, we say according
to Gods ancient promise knowledge does now abound by an extraordinary effusion
of Gods Spirit upon these latter days; we are so far from being more
perplexed with shadows, and mystical formalities, or with weighty disputes,
that we are, and ought to be a great deal less, and we do the rather suspect
all popish traditions, and additions in Religion, because we see they make use
of them for the augmenting of the power and regiment of Prelates. And yet if
knowledge did not abound, if our Religion were more cloudie, and if the
Scriptures, Councils, Fathers, and all learning were now more imperfect to us
then they are, I cannot imagine how an unco^fined absolute dominion of Churchmen
should be more necessary the^ of Princes. For if absolutenes of power be of
necessary use in intricate perplexed mysteries and controversies, yet why must
that absolute power be more effectual in Priests then Princes? is not the
counsel of Prelates the same, and of the same vigor to solve doubts, and
determine controversies, whether their power be subordinate, or not? does mere
power ad to the knowledge of Priests? or is the power of Priests more virtuous
for the promoting of truth, then the power of Magistrates? how comes this vast
irreconcilable difference betwixt the government of the Church and State? In
matters of Law, in matters of policy, in matters of war, unlimited power in
such as are most knowing and expert does not conduce to the safety of the
Commonwealth: subordinate Counsels are held as available for the discerning
of truth, and far more available for the conserving of peace and order. And who
can then assign any particular sufficient reason, why matters of religion
should not as well be determined in the consistory by dependent Prelates, as
matters of Law are by the Judges and Justices in their tribunals, where they
sit as mere servants to the King?

His third exception is: That God having armed the Jewish Religion with a
temporal sword, and the Christian with that of spiritual punishment only, the
one with power to imprison, scourge, put to death, the other with bare
authority to censure, and excommunicate, there is no reason why our Church
which has no visible sword should in regiment be subject unto any other power
then only to that which binds and loses.

This reason takes it for granted, that amongst the Jews the Church and State
was the same, had the same body, the same head, the same sword, and that head
was temporal, and that sword was material. This we freely accept of: but in
the next place, without any reason at all given, it as freely assumes, that
Christians now have only a spiritual sword in the Church, as that Jews had
only a temporal one. A diametricall opposition is here put betwizt Jews and
Christians in Church Regiment, and yet no cause showed, or account given of
that opposition.

We have very good color to argue, that without some strong reason showed of
opposition, Christians ought not to be so contrary to that excellent
discipline of the Jews which God himself ordered, and to introduce I know not
what spiritual rule in prejudice of temporal rule: but how will Stapleton
prove, that amongst Christians the Church and State are two divided bodies, so
as they may admit of two several heads, and several swords, the one temporal
the other spiritual, the one yielding precedence as temporal, the other
predominating as spiritual? This we desire to see fortified with better
proofs.

Hooker in his eighth book not yet published has a learned clear discourse to
show the fallacy, and injustice of this blind presumption. He allows that a
Church is one way, and a Commonwealth another way defined, and that they are
both in nature distinguished, but not in substance perpetually severed. Since
there is no man (says he) of the Church of England, but the same is a member
of the Commonwealth, nor any of the Commonwealth, but the same is of the
Church, therefore as in a figure triangle, the base differs from the sides, and
yet one and the self-same line, is both a base and a side: a side simply, a
base if it chance to be the bottom, and to underlie the rest. So though
properties and actions of one do cause the name of a Commonwealth, qualities
and functions of another sort give the name of a Church to a multitude, yet one
and the same multiude may be both. Thus in England there is none of one
Corporation, but he is of the other also, and so it was amongst the Jews. Two
things cause this error.

First, because professors of the true Religion sometimes live in subjection
under the false, so the Jews did in Babylon, so the Christians in Rome under
Nero, in such cases true professors do civilly only communicate with the
State; but in matters of their Religion they have a communion amongst
themselves. This now is not our case, and therefore these instances are not
proper amongst us.

Secondly, In all States there is a distinction between spiritual and
temporal affairs and persons, but this proves no perpetual necessity of
personal separation: for the Heathens always had their spiritual Laws and
persons and causes severed from their temporal, yet this did not make two
independent States among them: much less does God by revealing true Religion
to any Nation distract it thereby into several independent communities, his
end is only to institute several functions of one and the same community. Thus
far Hooker most judiciously, and profoundly.

We must not here expect any satisfaction from our Adversaries, why there
should be less division between Church and State amongst the Jews, and less
use of two several swords, then is amongst us: it is sufficient that they have
said it. There Is no crime so scandalous amongst our Churchmen, or wherein they
claim so much spiritual interest of jurisdiction as adultery, yet amongst the
Jews that crime was carnal, not spiritual; and its punishment was death
inflicted by the Civil Judge, not damnation denounced by the Priest. Now if
adultery in these days were better purged away, and less countenanced in our
Christian Courts then it was amongst the Jews, there might something be
alleged to prefer our modern inventions before Gods own Statutes, but when
Ecclesiastiall persons shall therefore incroach upon Civil, that by, I know
not what, pecuniary corruptions and commutations, vice, and scandal may
abound, we do strangly dote to suffer it.

For his last reason he says: That albeit, whilst the Church was restrained
into one people, it seemed not incommodious to grant their Kings general
chiefty of power, yet now the Church having spread it self over all Nations
great inconvenience must thereby grow if every Christian King in his several
Territory should have the like power.

By this reason its presumed, that all the Universe ought to have but one head
on earth, and that Rome must be its Court, and that it must be endued with
Oraculous infallibility, and so to remain till the Worlds end: and this must
be admitted out of some obscure general Metaphors in Scripture, or else God
has not sufficiently provided for the wise government of his Catholic Church.
Man can scarce imagine any thing more mischievous, or impossible, then that
which these goodly Politicians have invented to be profitable, nay necessary
for the universal government of Mankind: for what one man can receive Appeals
either in temporal or spiritual affairs, or direct final, unerring
dispatches to all the remote climates of the earth at one time? or what a
cursed vexation were it for all people of all languages and customs to be
chained to One City, thither to travel for all final determinations, and
there to attend confused sentences, and in the mean time to endure at home
endless dissentions, and hopeless divisions under the insufficient rule of
subordinate limited Princes and Bishops? Surely had Mahomet preached any such
gross doctrine amongst his ragged, barbarous Arabians, he had never tamed and
broken them so easily to his wretched usurpation: It Is wonderful that our
Ancestors could drink of such a cup of intoxication in the worst of times, but
that the nauseous dregs of its bottom should now be obtruded upon us in these
golden, shining days, is almost past belief.

The Pope never yet had the rule of a third part of the World, but so far as
he has had it he has given sufficient testimony how insupportable great
Monarchies are, both to the Governor, and the governed. And where the yoke of
Rome has prevailed, what has that infallible judgment, and unlimitable
power, which the Pope pretends to for our good, what has it availed the Church
of God? when the Eastern Churches were in Unity, this gave them occasion to
depart, and revolt, but when the rent was, what virtue had the Pope to reduce
them to unite? The like may be asked concerning all Protestant Countries now
fallen from Romish obedience, nay of al Turks and Heathens not yet subdued to
the triple crown; if Christ intended the Popes infallibility for the discovery
of all errors and heresies, and his supremacy for the subjugation of al such
as would maliciously persevere in discord errors and heresies, how comes this
intention to be so defeated, and frustrated? if the Popes keys be potent
enough for both these purposes, why does he not force all men to come in within
his sheepfold? and if not, why does he pretend so much? Would Christ put into
one Bishops hand an universal Scepter, such as the World never before heard
of, such as he himself here on earth never exercised, and yet leave it
contemptible to the greatest part of the World? if ignorance prevail and
incredulity, let the key of knowledge assist us, and bring us into light; if
stubbornes and perverseness have hardened our hearts, let the key of power
dissolve and bruize us: and if he can do neither of these, what virtue is
there in the Roman Oracle, what benefit is there in that prophetic chair?
what privilege has Peter more then John? Shall the City of Rome it self be
upheld and secured from ever erring and falling away, and shall not England,
shall not Scotland, shall not all Nations be the like? The power of the Pope is
the same in all Countries, if it fail in England, it may fail at Rome; if it
fail not at Rome, it would not fail in England, but that the Pope is less
propitious. O why should his mercy be more narrow, then his virtue? O let him
once again graciously ascend his reverent chair, let him congregate general
Councils, and there pour out the treasures of his inspired breast let him
there give judgments as clear, pure, irrefragable, and as obvious to humane
apprehension as Scripture it self, nay, if something more sufficient then
Scripture be necessary for the composing of all our strifes, let him give us
Solutions in a phrase more powerful then the Apostles ever used, and prescribe
rules more convincing then God himself, or Christ in his incarnation ever
prescribed, and if Kings and Emperors still make resistance, let him put on
his robes of Majesty and terror, let him pass over them as Serpents and
Basilisks, whilst the stroke of his foot upon the earth fills all Countries with
battalions of armed men: nay if terrestrial forces come not in fast enough,
let him shake the Heavens with the thunder of his voice, and call down
Seraphims to his attendance, and let the highest orders of Heaven give
testimony to his earthly Deity. I might frame the like expostulations after a
sort against our own Prelates also, but I forbear: for if God has given them
sole knowledge to determine all controversies, and power to enact all
Ecclesiastical Canons, doubtless he has given them some binding coercive
force correspondent thereunto: and if so, why do they not expel all dissension
by it? if their virtue extend no further then to exhortation, why do they urge
commands upon us? if they have a commanding power, why do they not second it
with due compulsion?

And as this is sufficient to prove independent power due to Christian Princes
in all causes whatsoever, so History makes it as plain that Christian Princes
at their first entrance, till Popery began to intoxicate them, did claim,
and exercise the same as their due. Constantine had (...) given him for his
Title, and we know he showed himself no less, and we know his Successors
for diverse Ages did assume and verify the same Title as their due. And
therefore Bilson proves out of Socrates, and other Historians, That in the
Primitive Christian Emperors times all Ecclesiastical affairs did depend upon
Emperors: and that the greatest Synods, and Councels were called at their
appointment: and that Appeals from Councels were reserved to them, and
sometimes overruled by them: and that all Ecclesiastical Laws were by them
enacted, confirmed, and repealed; and that the greatest Prelates were by them
ordered, and commanded: and that whole Provinces and Kingdoms were by them
visited, and reformed in all cases whatsoever.

And this truth, the learned of Papists will nor deny, and those which do deny
the same rely upon some particular exception only, and have very few instances
before the Popes inthronization at Rome, and these of matters of fact, and not
rights alleged neither. Valentinian the Elder is one maine Instance, and he
when strife was between the Arians and the Orthodox Christians would not take
upon him to determine the same, his modest Answer was, non est meum judicare
inter Episcopos, And Ambrose says of him; Inhabilem se ponderi tanti putabat
esse Iudicii. Valentinian here was a pious Emperor and Orthodox, but his blame
was (as Socrates justly taxes him) that though he honored those that were of
his true faith, and sound opinion, yet he in the mean time let the Arians do
what they list. And this cannot be excused, for if he was doubtful of his
own faith, this was ignorance: and if He was not, and yet tolerated
Arianisme, this was neglect in him: and if he did shun this decision as
burdensome to him, this was impious: and if as intricate, this was
inconsiderate. For what if he could not judge as a Bishop, could not he
therefore judge by Bishops; was not the learning and knowledge of all Bishops,
at his command to be employed, as if it were his own? Bishops themselves might
err, and dissent, and in that point many of them did err, and hold against
the truth: and without his aid this division was irreconcilable; but by his
influence and superintendence; truth might obtain a fair trial, and Bishops
themselves might be convinced by Bishops. This case in Divinity might be too
intricate for his sole judgment, and too pondrous for his actual
determination: but what he could not do single, and personally, He might well
effect by the counsel and advice of his most moderate, and disinteressed
Clergy: for in Divinity the Prince is as in juridicall, or Martial affairs,
As he is not always the ablest Divine, so neither is he the ablest Lawyer, nor
the ablest Soldier, and yet by the advice of Divines, Lawyers, and Soldiers,
He may conclude that wisely which neither He without them nor they without him
could ever have concluded. Therefore against this remiss, cold slacknesse, and
haesitancy of Valentinian we may oppose the politic, and courageous resolution
of Constantine, Theodosius and diverse other pious Emperors, who all did
compose debates, and end controversies, and vindicate Truth and Religion from
many errors and abuses, which otherwise had bin endless, and remediless. After
the first 5. or 6. hundred years Episcopacy began to invade the rights of
Royalty by the Sophistications, and impostures of the Sea of Rome, and till
this last Age, Princes almost every where did blindly and superstitiously too
far abandon their own right, but by the light of Nature, the wisest Kings in
all Countries were ever the most refractory, and most impatient of the Popes
tyranny* and in the most ignorant times, some there were found, that made
resistance to the same.

Much blood was shed upon this Theme in diverse other Countries, and even in
our own stories we find, that though England was prone otherwise to be the
Popes Ass, yet in the quarrel of supremacy it was jealous, and had almost
perpetual conflicts. I will only cite one story. Henry the second was a very
puissant Prince, and in all other things except only Ecclesiastical. He was
fortunate and victorious: but his misery was, that He reigned in such an Age as
the Pope was in his Zenith, and had to do with Becket of all the Popes
dependents the most seditious. Henry the first his Grandfather out of the
greatness of his Spirit and wit, had passed these Laws; That no Appeal should
stand, That no Bishops should go out of the Realm, That no Tenant in Capite
should be excommunicated; That no official of the Kings should be interdicted
without the Kings leave, and consent, And that Clergimen should be subject to
secular judgment, and that Laymen under the King, should judge of Tithes, and
other causes Ecclesiastical.

At these just and necessary Laws, the Clergy hitherto rested quiet, if not
contented, but now a most rebellious Becket arises to spurn against them, and
in his mouth they are dangerous encroachments, and breaches upon the Church.
Rather than he will subscribe to these so long established Laws; He departs
the Kingdom in contempt of the King, and with all violence and bitterness
that may be incenses the Pope, the King of France, and all the Italian and
French Bishops against his natural Lord. The King at first gallantly relyes
upon the edge of his temporal sword, and whets it sharper in behalf of his
legal prerogative* and for some years together stands out against the danger
of the Popes confounding blow; but at last when Becket the fierce Traitor was
slain, through the execrations and anathemas of the Pope, and by the threats
and exclamations of the King of France, and diverse other Bishops and
Potentates; He is beaten from his ground, swearing fealty to the Pope and his
successors, and admitting of Appeals to Rome. Long it was before he would
submit himself in this contestation betwixt a subject, and himself to the
Romish Tribunal, or yield to any condemnation being untryed, and unheard; and
it appears by the Popes forbearance of his last thu^derbolt, that the Pope was
diffident in his power, and durst not sentence him, if He had not yielded
before the sentence. But I leave Popery, and come now to our reformed times.
The dead time of night being now over, Luther began to crow in Germany, and to
give notice of light ready to dawn upon the Earth: and no sooner did that light
appear, but that diverse Princes began to awake, and to shake off that blind
servitude of Rome which had so long layne upon them, and locked up their senses
like a deep sleep: How be it the light was not alike welcome to all, some
fully and wholly gave it entertainment, others opened some Curtains only,
and so yielded themselves to a little further slumber. Henry the eighth here in
England was well pleased with that Doctrine which discovered his own
independence, and the weakness of the Popes Prerogative: but those further
monstrous, deformed errors, and superstitions of Rome, which are founded upon
its absolute Prerogative, and are as inconsistent with light, as the
Prerogative it self; He took no delight to look upon. So far as his own
interest, and worldly advantage was represented by the beams of the Gospel,
so far his eyes thought it amiable And so far Bishop Gardener though a
Bishop was ready to assist him: but so far as his spiritual interest, and
the general advantage of his Subjects was concerned, so far, He and
Gardener both could remain as blind as Sir Thomas More: It Is wonderful that so
sharpsighted a man, as Sir Thomas More was, should lay down his life in
justification of the Popes supremacy; but it is more wonderful that Gardener
should see the weakness of that supremacy, and yet still adhere to diverse
other Popish superstitions as absurdly resulting from the same principles. The
State of Venice also out of mere policy has long been at defiance with the
Court of Rome, so far as mere rules of Government guide, and direct it: but
in all other spiritual delusions, and impostures it is as dead, as
heavie-eyed, as ever* Spain, France, and Germany also, though they speak not
the same, yet they now do the same as Venice, they all shut up and impale the
Popes Authority within Peter's Patrimony, leaving him no command but within his
own Italian territories, and yet besides his authority they cast off nothing
else: so much do we generally esteem Earth before Heaven, and our temporal
advantages before the subsistence of our souls. But let reason of State be
what it will, The Parliament here agrees to annex to the Crown of Henry the
eighth and his successors whatsoever sole, independent power was before
challenged in Ecclesiastical and Spiritual things by the Pope, or any
Churchman whatsoever: And Hooker seems both to confess and justify the
same, for says H, Our Kings of England when they are to take possession of the
Crown, have it painted out before their eyes, even by the very solemnities, and
rights of their inauguration, to what affairs by the same Law their supreme
power and authority reaches. Crowned we see they are, and Inthronized, and
Anointed, the Crown a sign of Military dominion, the Throne of sedentary or
Judicial, The Oil of Religious, and sacred power. He here Attributes as
supreme a rule, and as independent in Religious and sacred affairs, as He
does either in Military, or Judicial, and he accounts that venerable Ceremony
of Unction, as proper to the Kings of England as that of Crowning, or
Inthroning.

Nevertheless, it is now a great objection against this chiefly of Dominion,
that it may descend to Infants under age, as it did to King Edward the sixth:
Or to Women, as to Queen Mary, and Elizabeth, and whatsoever we may allow to
men, such as Henry the eighth, yet it seems unreasonable, to allow it Women,
and Children. The Papists think this objection of great moment, and therefore
Bellarmine in great disdain casts it out, that in England they had a certain
Woman for their Bishop: meaning by that woman, Q. Elizabeth: And Q. Elizabeth
her self knowing what an odium that word would draw upon her, both amongst
Papists, and many Protestants also, consults her Bishops about it, and by their
advice sets forth a declaration, certifying the world thereby, that she
claymed no other Head-ship in the Church, but such as might exclude all
dependency upon foreign Head-ships, and secure her from all danger of being
deposed.

How this paper could satisfy all, I cannot see: My thinks the Bishops in
this did as warily provide for their own claim, as the Queens: for
whatsoever power She had in the Church, it was either absolute, Coordinate, or
Subordinate. If it was subordinate, She was in danger of deposition, and was
to be ordered, and limited, and commanded by her Superior. If her power was
Coordinate; She had no more power over her equal, than her equal had over
her: and it being as lawful for her equal to countermand, as it was for her
to command: her power would be as easily disabled and made frustrate by her
equals, as her equals by hers. In the last place therefore if her power or
headship were absolute, why did not her Bishops uphold and declare the same?
Such dallying with indefinite expressions, and dazelling both our selves and
others with mere ambiguities does often very great harm, for uncertainty in
Law is the Mother of confusion, and injustice, and this is the mother of
uncertainty. According to this obscure declaration of supremacy in the Queens
paper many Papists at this day take the Oath penned in the Statute for that
purpose: they will abjure the Popes supremacy, as to deposition of Princes: but
not in any thing else: and they will hold the King supreme, as to all deposers,
but not as to all men else. Those which are not bloody, and dangerous, but by
the light of nature abhor regicides, rest themselves upon these shallow
distinctions: but such as are Iesuitically furious, and murdrous, break through
them as mere Cobwebs: and the more secure Princes are from the other, the
less safe they are from these. These men will still insist upon absolute
supremacy somewhere to rest; and that it cannot rest in Women, or Minors, they
will still insist upon this argument, If the Queen be not competent for that
lower Order to whom the Word and Sacraments are committed, then she is not
competent for that higher Order which has power over the lower: but the Queen
is not competent for the lower, therefore not for the higher. They say, that to
prescribe Laws to Preachers is more than to preach: and to have power over
Ordination is something greater, than to enter into Orders, and therefore the
Law cannot justly give that which is more, and greater, when God denies that
which is inferior, and less. Our Divines make a very short unsatisfying reply
to this. Their reply is, that though our Bishops owe some kind of subjection to
Kings, yet the authority of preaching, etc. is not from Kings, but from Christ
Himself, Christ they say, gives the Commission, Kings give but a permission
only. All the power at last of our Kings, which is acknowledged equal with
that of the Jewish, and has been so far all this while magnified, and
defended against Papists, inables them now no further, than to a naked
permission in religious affairs, their most energeticall influence is
permission.

It Is true, the Commission of the Apostle was from Christ, His Ite and docete,
was their authority: And so it remains still to all their successors; but is
it therefore a reason, that there is now, no other Commission necessary? Where
Christ's Commission was particular, it was good without any other humane
commmission, nay permission it self was not requisite: the Contents of that
Commission was not only Ito, Doceto: but Tu Petre, Tu Paul, etc. Ito, doceto:
but now there remains nothing of that Commission, but the generality, Ito,
doceto: the particularity requires now particular Commissions, and mere
permissions will not serve the turn. And as for succession, we may suppose
that our Saviors first Commission was vigorous, as to that purpose, but we
must know, That the Apostles being both Governors and Preachers, all that
commission which was given them as Governors, was not given them as Preachers.
There must still be successors to the Apostles in Governing, and Preaching: but
its not necessary that the same men now should succeed in both offices, and
that whatsoever was commanded or granted to the one office, the same should be
granted and commanded to the other The Civil Judges and Counselors of State
under the King are not without General Commissions from Heaven to do justice,
and preserve order in their several subordinate stations, and yet they depend
upon particular commissions too from Gods immediate Vicegerent. And it seems
to me a weak presumption, that Officers in Religion should have more
particular Commissions from GOD, than Officers of State: or that Princes should
be more permissive, and less influent by way of power in the Church, than in
the Commonwealth. He that observes not a difference betwixt these times under
Christian Princes, and those under unbeleeving Caesar's, is very blind, and He
is no less, that thinks particular Commissions now as necessary when Princes
join to propagate the Gospel, as they were when supreme power was abused for
its subversion: And so makes no difference betwixt a Nero, and a Constantine.
Did Constantine gain the style of Head-Bishop, or Bishop of Bishops merely by
permitting the true worship of God? And let us lay aside the strangenes of the
Name, and apply the thing, I mean the same Episcopal power to Queen
Elizabeth, as was to Constantine and what absurdity will follow? What is
intended by the word (...), which may not be as properly applied to Queen
Elizabeth, as to Constantine? If the Patriarchs, and Kings of Judah and first
Christian Emperors had jurisdiction, and a legislative power in the Church, nay
had dominion over all those which did exercise judicial power in the Church,
and were so exalted in sanctity, and dignity above mere Priests, shall Queen
Elizabeth be barred and disabled for the same power and honor merely by the
prejudice of her Sex? The very Papists themselves do grant to some Abbatisses
power of jurisdiction over some Ecclesiastical persons, and this power they
hold to be more honorable, than that of suborninate Monks, and Priests which
officiate under them; and yet to officiate they will not grant to Abbatisses,
though they grant more than to officiate. Therefore we see this rule does not
always hold; that He which may not undertake the lesser charge, shall not
undertake the greater; for the mere sanctity of the person is not always that
which gives Law in these cases. Though the person be not void of sanctity, yet
some other unfitness, and defect may stop and bar in less employments, and
yet be no stop, nor bar at all in matters of a more excellent, and sublime
nature. So it is with Infants and Women, though the possession of a Crown be
more sacred and honorable, than admission into Orders; yet they shall be held
more capable of a Crown, than of Orders; because personal imbecility, and
natural inferiority (as I may so say) is less prejudicial in civil, than in
religious affairs, and in matters of function and service, than in matters of
privilege, and command. God had confined the right and honor of the
Priesthood amongst the Jews, to one Tribe, and Family only, and therefore
Vzziab might not invade that right, and honor to the infringing of Gods
special command, and in this respect Vzziah was qualified for a Scepter, yet
not qualified for a censer; He was qualified for that authority which was more
sacred, yet not for that service which was less. So perhaps it is now under
the Gospel, women are expressly barred from the Altar, that very Sex is
precisely excluded, and excepted against by God* they may not Minister in the
Church: yet this is no exception, but that they may Reign in the Throne, and
yet this seems not to prove that that ministration is more holy, than this
reigning, but rather that it is more difficult, and such as requires more
personal ability, and natural perfection. For let Vzziahs case overruled us.
That which disabled Vzziah for the service of the Altar was not personal
incompetence, or want of sanctity: for then the same had disabled him for all
higher, and more excellent offices. But we know that Vzziah was not so
disabled: for he was capable of the Scepter, and by virtue of his Scepter, the
whole Temple, and all the sacred things therein, all the Order of the Priests
and Levites, the whole Law of God, and the state of Religion, and Policy, and
the general welfare of all Gods holy beloved people were within his guard, and
protection, And will any man conceive this to be less excellent, than to
sacrifice? By virtue of the Scepter Moses did consecrate Priests to serve at
the Altar, and govern their service at the Altar: by virtue of the Scepter
Solomon did build, and dedicate the very Temple, and Altar it self, with his
own mouth, bless both them, and those Priests which were to attend them: by
virtue of the Scepter, Vzziah himself did inherit the same power, and
holiness, and dignity which Moses, or Solomon, or any of his Predecessors had,
And shall all this seem less worthy and excellent to us, than to serve with a
censer? In this Hooker fully concurres with me. He distinguishes between an
Ordinary and a supreme Judge, and He allows it unfit for Princes to sit as
Ordinary Judges in matters of Faith and Religion: and yet he denies not their
supreme right and influence of judging. For (says H.) an Ordinary Judge must
be of qualities, which in a supreme Judge are not necessary, because the person
of One is charged with that, which the others mere authority discharges,
without employing himself personally therein* It is an error to think that
the Kings authority can have no force in doing that, which himself personally
may not do: for it is impossible, that at one and the same time, that the King
should order so maine and different affairs, as by His power every where
present are ordered in Peace and War; at home, and abroad.

And the King in regard of Nonage, etc. may be unable to perform that thing
wherein years of discretion are requisite for personal action, and yet his
authority is still of force: And therefore it is a maxim, that the Kings
authority never dies, or ceases from working.

Sundry considerations then may be effectual to hold the Kings person from
being a doer of that, which notwithstanding his power must give force unto. In
civil affairs nothing does more concern the duty, or better beseem the
Majesty of Kings, than personally to administer justice. Yet if it be in case
of Felony, and Treason; Lawyers affirm (Stanford l. 2. c. 3.) that well may
the King commit his authority to an other, to judge between him, and the
offender: but the King being himself there a party, cannot personally sit
there to pronounce judgment. Here we see sometimes the King cannot be possibly
present to act his part, sometimes defect of knowledge may hinder him,
sometimes other exceptions, as being a party, and the like, may bar him from
doing those things, which notwithstanding by his substitute power must be
done: and yet this preferres not substitutes before him. So in Vzziahs case,
the Priesthood was for very sufficient reasons in policy, severed from the
Kingly office, and that by Gods own approbation, and command, Vzziah shall not
now conjoyne, and unite them again out of a fond pragmaticall humor to the
dis-inheriting of the Tribe of Levi, to the disservice of the Crown, to the
hinderance of Religion, and to the violation of Gods command. If Vzziah will
content himself to move in his own superior Orb, and leave the Priests of
God to their own regular subordinate motions, his influence shall give vigor
to those actions in them, which are with more honor to him done by them under
his superintendence than by himself in person. For as the Ordinary Judge
deputed by the King, in cases where the King Himself either cannot be present,
or has not skill to determine, or may not legally interesse himself, does
give judgment, not by virtue of his own, but by virtue of the Kings authority,
and does therefore acquire more honor to his Majesty, than to himself: So in
the Church the Priest ministering in that employment, which in all places the
King cannot minister in, and which is too difficult for some Kings to minister
in, and prohibited to others, yet is not hereby greater or holyer than the
King, but even in his very actual administration it self, He is so dependent,
and derives such virtue from the Kings supreme, spiritual authority, that the
King is supreme, and he but the secondary agent therein. But Bishop Bilson will
yet say, that the Priest in the work of conversion winnes the soul to a
willing obedience, and that the Princes work only by external, political
terror, which begets not virtutis amorem, but only formidinem panae, and
therefore it seems that the work of the Minister and the Prince, differ not
only in order, but also in kind, the one being far more spiritual and divine
than the other. I answer hereunto, that if power does only induce a servile
fear of punishment, and so cause of forcible forbearance of sin, and if
preaching only make a voluntary conquest upon the soul, then by the same
reason, the power of Bishops as well as the power of Civil Magistrates is of
less value than preaching: but this none of our adversaries will agree to. My
next answer therefore is, that Preachers in the wonderful work of
regeneration are not in the nature of Physical causes, they are rather in the
nature of the meanest isntrumental causes under GOD: they are but as Vessels
in the hand of Husband men, from whence the seed Corn is thrown into the
ground. If the Corn fall into the furrow, and there fructify, God opens and
enlives the womb of the Earth, God sends showers and influence from Heaven,
God blesses the seeds with a generative, multiplying virtue, nay God casts it
into the furrow, from the mouth of the Preacher, and as He uses the mou^h of
the Preacher, for the effusion of his grain; so He uses the Princes power as
his Plough, to break and prepare the ground: and in this case, the use and
service of the plough is as Noble, as that of the Bushel.

Neither is the office of Kings the less Glorious, because they can use force;
nor Ministers the more Glorious, because they may use none but ethicall
Motives, and allurements: for power it self being a Glorious, Divine thing, it
cannot be ignoble to use it in Gods cause. And therefore we see Josiah, and
other good Kings are commended for using compulsion: and diverse other Kings
which used it not for the removing of Idolatry, and suppressing of the high
places, did grievously offend God, and draw curses upon themselves, and their
subjects. And whereas it is objected that force and compulsion restrains only
from the act of sin, but restrains not the will from the liking thereof. We
see common experience teaches us the contrary. For Scotland, Holland, Denmark,
Sweden, Bohemia, England, etc. Suffered great changes of Religion within a
short space, and these changes were wrought by the force of civil Magistrates,
and could never else without strange miracles from Heaven have been so soon
compassed: but these changes are not the less Cordial, and sincere, because
civil authority wrought them. Authority it self has not so rigorous a sway
over the souls of men, as to obtrude disliked Religions universally: it must
persuade as well as compel, and convince, as well as command^ or else great
alterations cannot easily, and suddenly be perfected. And in this respect the
Proclamations of Princes become of^entimes the most true, and powerful
preaching that can be: and it is beyond all doubt, that if preaching were as a
Physical cause in the act of regeneration of sinners, or reformation of
Nations, yet the edicts and commands of Princes are sometimes more efficacious
Sermons than any which we hear from out our Pulpits. For let us suppose that
a considerable number of our Ministers were sent into Mexico, or Perue, to
preach the Gospel of Christ, amongst the poor blind Savages, could we hope
for so great success thereby without the concurrence of some Princes there, as
we might, if some of them would assist, and join to advance the same word and
doctrine by their wisdom, and power, which our Ministers should publish with
their art, and eloquence? If we cast our eyes back upon former times, also we
shall see that before Constantine favored Religion, the Gospel spread but
slowly, and that not without a wonderful confluence of heavenly signs and
miracles, wrought by our Savior, and his Disciples; all which we may suppose
had never bin in such plentiful measure showed to the world, had it not bin to
countervaile the enemity and opposition of secular authority.

And it may be conceived, that had the Caesar's joined in the propagation of
CHRIST'S Doctrine, more might have been effected for the advantage of Religion
by their co operation, than all Christ's Apostles, Bishops, Prophets,
Evangelists, and other Elders did effect by their extraordinary gifts and
supernatural endowments. We see also that Constantines conversion was of more
moment, and did more conduce to the prosperity, and dilatation of Christianity,
than all the labors, and endeavors of thousands of Preachers, and Confessors,
and Martyrs which before had attempted the same. And to descend to our late
reformations, we see Edward the sixth, though very young, in a short time
dispelled the mists of Popish error and superstition: and when no men were more
adverse to the Truth than the Clergy, yet He set up the banner thereof in all
his Dominions, and redeemed millions of souls from the thraldom of Hell, and
Rome. In the like manner Queen Elizabeth also, though a woman, yet was as
admirable an instrument of God in the same design, and what she did in England
diverse other Princes about the same time did the like in many other large
dominions: whatsoever was effected by miracles in the hand of Ministers, after
our Savior, the same if not greater matters were sooner expedited by the
ordinary power and wisdom of Princes, when Ministers were generally opposite
thereunto.

And as we see the spiritual power of Princes how strangly prevalent it is for
the truth, so sometimes we see most woeful effects of the same against the
truth. Religion was not sooner reformed by Edward the sixth, than it was
deformed again by Queen Mary. And though many godly Ministers were here then
settled, as appears by their martyrdoms: yet all those Ministers could not
uphold Religion with all their hands so strongly as Queen Mary could subvert
it with one finger of her hand only. One fierce King of Spain bound himself
in a cursed oath to maintain the Romish Religion, and to extirpate all
contrary Doctrines out of his confines: if many pious Ministers could have
defeated this oath, doubtless it had not so far prevailed, as it does: but
now we may with tears bewail in behalf of that woeful Monarchy that one
Kings enmity in Religion, is more pernicious, than a thousand Ministers zeal
is advantageous. And by the way let all Princes here take notice what a
dreadful account of souls, God is likely to call them to: Fort is not the
Clergy that are so immediately and generally responsible when Religion is
oppressed, or not cherished, and when souls are misled, and suffered to go
astray, the abuses of the very Clergy it self will be only set upon the
Princes account, for according to that vast spiritual power which He has put
into their hands, yea according to that vast spiritual power, so will God
certainly require at their hands. Let Princes know that preaching is not the
only means of salvation, nor are Ministers the only Preachers, nor that the
Sacraments are therefore efficacious because the Clergy only may administer
them; Let them know that though Ministers call themselves only spiritual
Persons, and the Lot of God, and the Church of Christ, and put them into the
number of Temporal, and Laymen, and limit them to secular things: yet God
will not be so abused; they must make an answer to him for things most
spiritual, and for the improvement of those graces and prerogatives which
belong to Gods most beloved inheritance, and honored servants, and near
Officers in his Church. And let Ministers also on the other side learn to
acknowledge that Character of Divinity which is so much more fairly stamped
upon Princes, than it is upon them, and let them not rob Princes of that
influence in sacred things: which they of themselves can never enjoy. For as
Princes shall answer for them if they employ their power to the depression of
Ministers; so shall Ministers also answer for Princes if they cosen Princes out
of their supreme power, out of pretense that Gods message is so delivered to
them. Let Ministers assist Princes in their religious and spiritual offices,
as Aaron, and Hur did Moses. Let them not contend for supremacy in the highest
offices of devotion, but like humble servants let them account it their most
supreme service, to attend upon that supremacy. Let them in the most glorious
services of Religion look upon Princes, as Ioab did upon his Master in
martial exployts. Let them be jealous of themselves, that no part of honor
due to the independent power of Princes, may rest upon the secondary
instruments but return to the first and highest movers. And thus shall more
honor and sanctity pass from Ministers to Kings, and more efficacy and virtue
from Kings to Ministers, and more grace and happiness from both to the people.

Another occasion of mistake, and error in Nazianzen, and Bilson seems to be,
that in comparing the great fruits of Princes, and Priests, in their several
functions, they both speak of the whole order of Priest hood: as if every
Prince were therefore less spiritual, or excellent than every Priest, because
all Priests in some things excel some Princes. If we speak of a Prince and all
the Clergy within his dominion, perhaps we may say he is universis minor, and
yet he may be singulis major: perhaps he may not do so much good in the Church
as all his Clergy, yet he may do more than a great number of them. And yet for
my part, I am of opinion, that all the Clergy are so dependent, and borrow
such virtue from the Kings supreme spirituality (as I may so say) that
whatsoever good they do, they ought not to let the honor thereof terminate in
them, but return to him upon whom they depend. And now I think, these things
being made clear, that Princes are sacred in respect of their supreme rule,
and spiritual in respect of their spiritual rule, and that Priests have no
proper rule at al over men's spirits, or in any Ecclesiastical cases, but
derivative, and subordinate to Princes. I may conclude, that there can be no
office, nor action so sacred upon Earth, for which Princes are incompetent in
respect of personal sanctity.

And therefore, as it is most erroneous to argue, that Princes are not capable
of spiritual rule, because their persons are not holy enough: So it is most
undenyably true, and we may safely argue, on the contrary, that no men's persons
can be more holy than such as God has honored, and entrusted with such
supremacy of spiritual rule, as He has done Princes.

THe next argument which raises the Miter above the Diadem is drawn from the
power of the Church in Excommunication: and it is framed thus. That supremacy
which makes Princes to be above the Church, and free from Ecclesiastical
censures, is absurd; but such is here maintained, Ergo: by the word Church may
be meant the Catholic Church, or some National Church: The Church Triumphant,
or the Church Militant: th Church which was from the beginning, and shall be to
the end, or the Church which now is. We apply the Title of Head ship to Princes
over no Churches but such as are under their present Dominions, and that
Head-ship we account subordinate to Christ's, and we allow with Saint Ambrose in
some sense, that the King is Intra, and not supra Ecclesiam: For he is not such
an universal supreme Head as Christ is, but is a member under Christ the Head.
Yet this impugnes not, but that the King may in an other sense be both intra,
and supra, as to his own dominions: for take the Church for Ecclesiastical
persons, and so the King may govern all under Christ, but take it for
Ecclesiastical graces, and so the King may be subject; He may be superior to
Priests, yet acknowledge inferiority to Scripture, Sacraments, etc. And
therefore with that of Ambrose, that of Nazianzen may well stand; Thou raignest
King together with Christ: Thou rulest together with him; Thy sword is from
him; Thou art the Image of God: And surely this is something more glorious than
can be applied in so proper and direct a sense to any Clergie-man whatsoever.
But let us briefly see what this spiritual sword of Excommunication is, which
the Church, that is, Churchmen only claim, and wherewith they think they may
as freely strike Princes, as Princes may do them with the temporal.

The grounds in Scripture for Excommunication, are several, not all intending
the same thing, yet all are blended and confounded by Clergymen to the same
purpose: whereas we ought to put a great difference between Excommunication,
and Non-communication, and in Excommunication, between that spiritual stroke,
and punishment, which was ordinary in case of contempt, and that which was
extraordinary in cases of most heinous nature. Non-communication may be
supposed to have been from the beginning; and by common equity; for Gemmes
were never to be cast to Swines, nor the privileges and Treasures of the
Church to be imparted to such as were enemies and strangers to the Church.
Heathens and Publicans hated the Religion of the Jews, and therefore it was
hateful to the Jews to communicate with them, either in matters of Religion,
or in offices of friendship. The Jews did not forbear all civil conversing
with them, but all familiarity they did forbear, and yet the forbearance of
familiarity was no proper punishment to them: Nor was it a thing spiritually
inflicted by authority, but by general, and natural consent practiced. So men
of the same nature, as Publicans and Heathens now, viz. such as hold our
Religion contemptible, or whose profession is scandalous to Religion, they
ought to be to us as they were to the Jews; to mingle familiarly with them
cannot stand with our own safety, or the honor of Religion, or the Law of
common decency: but those whom we account as Publicans, we do not make
Publicans, whom we shun as infectious, we do not punish as rebellious: their
actions we do generally detest, but their persons we do not judicially
condemn. Princes under the Law might not eat of the Show bread, nor approach
the Sanctuary being in a polluted condition, nor in case of Leprosy might they
be admitted into the Congregation of the Lord, so nor bastards, etc. but these
are all instances of Non-communion, not of Excommunication: and the reason of
Non-communion is perpetual, so that if Princes in open contempt of the
Sacraments should desire them at the Ministers hands, Ministers ought rather to
dye than to administer them. But to deny the Sacrament is not any spiritual
obduration, or castigation; to this denial, no special authority is
necessary, neither to that authority is any coercive force internally working
upon the soul granted. Cain having committed an unnatural murder was
generally abhorred amongst his brethren and abandoned as unfit for humane
society: but this was a crime proper for the temporal sword, and if this was a
proper punishment it was temporal. And it is plainly cleared to us, that
adultery it self by Gods Law was punished by the temporal, not spiritual
sword, and that abscissio animae amongst the Jews was ever spoken of corporal
punishment by death, the inffliction whereof was only left to the temporal
Magistrate; and that there was no difference observed between Crimes
Spiritual, and Crimes Temporal. Non-Communion, then we grant to have bin of
ancient use, and perpetual, but we wish great caution and circumspection to be
had therein amongst Christians, for as visibly profane persons are to be
rejected, so no former profaneness ought to be cause of rejection, where the
party with outward professions of repentance, and gestures of reverence craves
the mysteries at the Ministers hands, as almost all Christians do. For in such
case if the Sacrament, then the word also may be denied, and so no manner of
salvation shall be left to such as have bin formerly vicious, whatsoever their
present demeanor be.

To come now to Excommunication, or the Spiritual Sword, and sentence of the
Church, as it was used in the Primitive times, yet so we find differences of
it amongst our Divines. That incestuous Corinthian which was said to be
traditus Satanae, as Chrysostom conceives, was not ejected out of the Church
by ordinary excommunication, but was miraculously left to Satan, ut
percelleretur vulnere malo, aut morbo, and such was the punishment of Ananias,
and his Wife, and of Elymas, etc. according to Ierom, Ambrose, Theodoret,
Oecumenius, Theophylact, etc. This excommunication, if it may be called so, was
a corporal punishment, and there is no appearance of any internal obduration
by the binding power of the Minister: and it was miraculous, and therefore
though it was of use then, when the Keys of Churchmen could not err, and
when a Temporal Sword was wanting, yet now it is utterly useless, and
abolisht. For any other excommunication of present and perpetual necessity in
Ecclesiastical regiment there is little proof in Scripture, it is the
spiritual Scepter of our Hierarchrists, without which their Empire would
appear merely imaginary: and therefore their zeal is strong for it, though
their grounds be weak. It seems to me a very dark deduction, that the Keys
of Heaven in the Gospel must needs import real power, and jurisdiction in
Churchmen, and only in Churchmen; and that that power and jurisdiction must
needs intend such a spiritual sword, as our present form of excommunication
is, and that that sword is as miraculous as it was, or as useful, as if it
were miraculous; and that the stroke of it is merely spiritual, and not to be
supplied by the temporal sword: and that Princes are as well liable to it as
other Laymen. Jerome says, that with God not the sentence of the Priest, but
the life of the sentenced party is looked upon, and regarded; and says he, Vt
Leprosum mundum vel immundum Sacerdos facit, Sic alligat vel solvit Presbyter.
It should seem our Priests now have the same power to try and discern
scandalous persons amongst us, as the Jewish had Leapers in their times: and no
man supposes that the Jewish Priests had any virtue, or force in their
judgments to purge such as were unclean, or to infect those which were
clean, they were held the most fit and impartial judges, but the matter to
be judged of was visible, easy, and sensible. So much as this, no man will
deny to our Ministers, for if they bind, and shut Heaven to persons sensibly
profan, not altering at all the condition of such as they bind, and shut out,
this is no such strange Spiritual Sword, and Celestial power, and
supereminent dominion, as they have hitherto pretended to, neither is it of any
such great consequence in the Church of God.

But if Ministers can yet by virtue of their Keys, either search into the
reins and hearts of hypocrites, as the Apostles did, or alter the condition of
such as are subject to them, either by absolving, or obdurating the guilty, or
can effect any remedy in the Church for the taking away of scandal, by their
spiritual power, which the temporal ruler does not effect as the Apostles may
be supposed to have done; This is more than the Jewish Priests ever professed,
this is supernatural, and we ought to admire it. I do not believe that our
Ministers will lay claim to any such miraculous virtue and infallibility, and
if they did, I hope they would give us some signs and demonstrations thereof by
opening Heaven to thousands, and by confounding all incorrigible opposers of
Religion. If Nero had resorted to Peter's ministry, desiring to be made
partaker of the Word and Sacraments, out of fraud and diffimulation, Peter
doubtless would not have refused him, and cast him off, without a certain
insight into his hypocrisy: but if Peter did discern his hypocrisy, and
reject him, yet our Ministers cannot discern the like, and therefore cannot
reject in the like manner. With us take Excommunication, as a spiritual
punishment, as it hardens, and drives from Repentance (for so the shutting of
Heaven intimates) and our Ministers should be cruel to use it where they are
ignorant of the heart: and take it as a wholesome remedy, and fit means to
draw to repentance, as corporal punishments, sometimes are (though it be
strange to conceit the like of spiritual) yet their virtue being ignorantly
applied, is no proper virtue. For in case of utter impenitence, and open
perverseness, Heaven is shut without the Ministers power: and in case of
fained penitence, the Ministers Key cannot open effectually, though he discern
not the fraud: and in case of true penitence, if the Minister be mistaken, yet
Heaven will not remain shut. Howsoever if Priests may now Excommunicate as
they pretend, yet this concludes not, that they may excommunicate Princes. We
know the Primitives did use excommunication, very moderatly, and tenderly, and
not without great policy, and respect had to the good of the Church, and
therefore Saint Aug. openly avers, that excommunication is a proud, pernicious,
and sacrilegious attempt, when it is denounced against any considerable number
of people, ubi periculum sit schismatis. We must know that it is of worse
example when it is used against Princes than diverse other great bodies and
societies: in as much, as one Prince is of more consequence and power than
thousands of other Laymen. We know also that in all judgments there is a
necessity of legal trial to precede conviction: and that great multitudes may
be convented, examined, sentenced, and punished with less disturbance of
peace, less violation of Majesty, and less obstruction to policy, than those
which sway the Ball imperial. And if the condemnation of Princes might be
upon due trials without violence, yet the execution of the sentence would
produce more grievous and rigorous events in them, than in private men: for how
shall the people honor, obey, and worship him in the State as Gods Lievtenan^,
whom they see accursed, cut off, and abhorred in the Church as the Devils
Vassal? That which was obtruded upon private men at first as a wholesome
Corrosive plaster for their spirits, declined after into corporal penances,
and after that into pecuniary mults: but what have been the sufferings of
private men in comparison of that which Princes have lost hereby to the
Clergy? Upon the Excommunication of Princes, whole Nations have bin
interdicted, whole States ruined, the innocent with the obstinate, the Prince
with the people all have bin sacrificed to blood thirsty Priests, under
pretense of Obedience to the holy Church.

It will be objected, that if Princes be not this way punishable, they are no
other way punishable, and that it is very mischievous in the Church, that there
should be any scandal given, and no means left for its purgation, and
expiation.

I answer, The Jewish Kings did sin in the most offencive manner that can be
imagined; yet God assigned no spiritual Rulers for their Castigation, and the
Heathen Emperors were also free from any coercive restraint or punishment, and
this God suffered, and we must suppose, that if it had bin so extremely and
publicly mischievous, God would not have suffered it. Besides, in civil
transgressions of the Law Priests do not usually claim jurisdiction (though
Saint Ambrose vindicated murder upon Theodosius) for so their power would be as
temporal, and as large as the Princes, and yet there is no reason why God
should not have left a judicatory to punish civil violations in all men
whatsoever, as well as Ecclesiastical.

In the last place also, if scandal shall not remain unpunishable in the
supreme temporal Magistrate, yet it shall in the spiritual, and that is a
mischief of the same nature as the other. For if the King shall abide the
judgment of this Bishop, or that Consistory, yet what judgment shall that
Bishop or Consistory abide? If this spiritual supremacy rest in any one, that
one must be unpunishable: for two supremes are things incompatible: and if this
supremacy rest in more than one, this is not consistent with Monarchy: for
either the one or the other must be predominant, and transcendent. We read
that lustinian did command the Clergy to be proceeded against by
excommunication, suspension, and deprivation, and we cannot deny this to be his
right, and all other Princes in the like manner, when misdemeanors are
scandalous in the highest Cleargy-men, or Consistores; and we know that such
command and constraint in Justinian is more than to excommunicate, suspend, or
deprive. We may justly therefore infer, that Justinian having a power above
excommunication, ought not himself to be excommunicated, by those which were
under his power: for so the excommunication of the inferior would disable the
excommunication of the superior. And since excommunication cannot be
promiscuously and oppositely used by two, one against the other, without
variance, and confusion, but either the one, or the other must be above
excommunication, it is more reasonable that the higher be exempted, and
privileged than the lower. And so it is a strong argument, that Princes are
not liable to excommunication, because even in the power of excommunication it
self their function is more excellent, and their power more sublime, than
theirs is, which excommunicate under them, and at their command, the Prince
doing herein the nobler office -- quantum qui navem temperat, anteit -- Remigis
officium -- but when it is argued against Princes, that they may be
excommunicated by Priests; because they bear offices less sacred, and serve
God in places less glorious than Priests, the grounds are here utterly false,
and repugnant to all right reason, and sound Divinity. Let us not then doubt to
submit all things under one supreme on Earth, submitting him to his supreme in
Heaven; For it is no small thing, as we imagine, in such case to be left to the
searching judgment of God, for God is not negligent of his office therein, nor
need we doubt, or hold our selves utterly remediless, whilst we can say truly,
Omne sub regno graviore regnum est. And let us not mistake our supreme on
earth, for if God had intended to have left us a spiritual sword and
miraculous judicatory under the Gospel, never before known, or useful to the
world, and that of perpetual necessity, doubtless he would have left us some
clear command in Scripture, and not have involved his meaning in metaphors so
intricate, and ambiguous.

THe next argument against the Sovereign Dignity of Kings is this. If servants
are to be measured by the degree of their Master whom they serve, they are the
greatest servants, which serve Christ: But Ministers serve Christ: Ergo, This
can decide nothing for Princes and Priests, serving both the same Master; The
argument has the same force for Princes, and for Priests, and if it be further
said, that Christ as a Priest, is greater than Christ as a Prince, and that
Princes therefore serving under him as a Prince, are not so great as Priests
serving under him as a Priest, I shall deny that to be so, for Christ as
Mediator was inferior to his Father, and all works of his regiment over the
Church are not done by him as Mediator, but do belong to his Kingly Office,
and as to his Kingly power, He is equal with the Father.

THe next Argument therefore of truer force is this: There can be no office
more sacred, or dignity more excellent, then such as is signified under these
glorious Titles of Gods, Stars, Angels, Ambassadors, Rulers, Fathers,
Stewards, Pastors, Leaders, Teachers: but these glorious Titles are applied to
Ministers, Ergo. We will acknowledge all these Honorable badges given to
Ministers, and duly given: and we will acknowledge these no empty words
without truth, and so make words and things contrary: and we will acknowledge
the Function of Ministers to be more venerable than any amongst men, besides
that which bears the sword, the Emblem of Gods imperial Majesty. But to
such as are Gods sword-bearers upon Earth, we conceive Ministers ought to give
place, and pay subjection, as humbly as any others. The preminence of Kings, we
hold to be three ways manifest: in order, in measure, and in kind. In the very
sanctity of the Priesthood it self we conceive the ministration of Priests to
be subordinate to Princes, inasmuch as to superintend in the most religious
affairs is due to Princes, and to officiate only to Priests, and to
superintend is more than to officiate.

Secondly, In measure we conceive Princes excel also, in as much as in
religious affairs such Priests have the charge of such flocks, and such
Bishops of such Priests* but all both Bishops, Priests, and flocks are under
the Kings charge. And not only in religious affairs, but in civil also the
authority of Princes is both intensive, and extensive many ways, where Priests
may not at all intermeddle. And though to govern Christians as Christians, be
the most transcendent honor of Kings; yet to govern men, as men: and not only
to govern but to govern well, is a thing of divine impression.

Thirdly, in kind the regiment of Princes is far excelling, for the regiment
of Kings is a true proper regiment assisted with real power, decored with
external honor, founded in the general consent of men, and blessed by the
gracious influence of God, but the rule of Priests is but ethicall, or
metaphorical only, its utmost vigor is but persuasive, and is not at all
coercive, either inwardly, or outwardly: and that subjection which it
challenges is not to it self, but to the Word and Sacraments, whereto it
self renders as much, as it requires from others. This general answer might
suffice, but to each particular Title we will briefly reply further. Ministers
they are GODS, viz. to such as are under their cure: but then as they are GODS
to others, so Princes are GODS to them. Thus Moses was a God to Aaron, though
Aaron was a God to his inferiors. Ministers are Stars, but not in magnitude
equal to the Sun; neither is their light and influence so independent as the
Suns. Ministers are Angels, viz. upon earth, and their internal piety is like
a shining raiment to them amongst men, but they serve under Gods on Earth,
whose robes of Majesty are every way resplendent, as well externally as
internally. Ministers are Ambassadors, but all Ambassadors persons are not of
the like honor, nor all their Embassages of the like moment, nor all their
Commissions of the like extent: and in all these respects, Preachers are
inferior to Princes, being joined to them, as Aaron was to Moses for a
spokesman, or an Interpreter only. Ministers are Rulers, viz. quoad vim
directivam, but not quoad vim coactivam. Ministers are Fathers, viz. such as
have been Gods instruments to regenerate us, and so as Saint Jerome says, they
are the Fathers of our souls, and perhaps, as Chrysostom says, in this
respect they are more to be honored than our natural parents. But Ministers
always, and only are not so our Parents, and they that are so our Parents,
are not so physical, and self efficacious causes as our natural Parents are:
but if they may challenge more honor than our fleshly Parents, yet this
advances them not above Kings, who are both political, and Spiritual Fathers
also. Fabius the Consul, though he was to pay Honor and reverence to his
natural Father, yet he was to demand a greater measure of the same from him
being his political son: and it did not mis-beseeme him to prefer the civil
right before the physical: Yet Fabius here was a mere Magistrate, and in that
far less glorious than our Christian Magistrates are; Ministers are
Stewards, but not the highest in the house of God; for Princes are Stewards
also and only accountable to God, but they are accountable to Princes
themselves. And as Stewards do provide food for those, by whom themselves are
fed, and manage only but one part of their Lords affairs: so it is with
Ministers: under Princess Ministers are Pastors, Leaders, Teachers, their
Doctrine is their food wherewith they comfort the people, their persuasion is
the light wherewith they secure them from falling, they feed by their
exhortations, and guide by their dehortations, but all these are offices of a
servant, rather than privileges of a Master, and even in these offices they
are subordinate also. So the Pilot at Sea may have the safety of his Prince
committed to his direction, charge, and rule: So the Commander in War gives
order for all affairs of the battle, assigning to the King Himself a fit
station: So the Judge in matters of Law by his just decree binds the right of
his own Master: So the Physician limits and prescribes rules of diet, and sets
down Laws of exercise to his Sovereign Lord.

In all these cases there is a kind of Obedience due from Kings, and that
obedience implies some kind of inferiority: and yet this obedience of the King,
does not drown the higher and greater obedience of the Subject, nor does this
inferiority contradict that which is of a far other quality, and degree. In
the self same manner also the Priest officiates in the Church, perhaps before
the King, perhaps before his own Metropolitan, at this time, in this place,
and in this office, there is honor, reverence, and obedience due to him from
the King, and Metropolitan: yet this does not exempt him from that stronger and
holyer tie of subjection, awe* and subordination, by which he is always bound
to those which govern him in other things; when Ambrose therefore says Honor
and sublimitas Episcopalis nullis poterit comparationibus adaequari: and
again, Nihil potest esse in hoc seculo excellentius Sacerdotibus, nihil
sublimius Episcopis reperiri: we answer, if he here include Princes, as having
Episcopal power, and a jurisdiction both over Priests and Bishops, we agree
hereunto, but if he exclude Princes, we exclude this from our belief. And
again when he says: if you compare Episcopal sublimity to the brightness of
Kings, or Diadems of Princes, that of Kings and Princes will be more inferior
than lead, compared with gold: we answer, if he here intend the mere secular
authority of Princes in things merely temporal, we suppose some mild
construction may be allowed: but if he speak of the entire Sovereignty, and
Prerogative of Princes, and put that as lead in comparison of the golden Miter,
we reject him as erroneous. That which Chrysostom says, that more awe is due
to Priests, than to Kings and Princes, we admit also in this sense, viz. to the
Embassages of God in their mouths, not to their persons: and those Embassages
also and instructions we oppose to the mere civil Ordinances of Kings, not to
religious injunctions, wherein Princes are sent with larger Commission than
they are. And whereas he says further of the power of Priests, that God
Himself would not impart it to Angels, or Archangels we may add also nor to
Princes: yet this concludes nothing to the derogation of Angels, or Archangels
or Princes. For the Angels, etc. though they have not the same Ministry in the
same kind, and order, yet they have a more glorious and heavenly, and
consequently so may Princes. That which Saint Augustine says also that Princes
bear the Image of God, Bishops of Christ, We willingly consent to, and yet by
Bishops here we do not intend only such Church Governors as our Bishops now in
England are, but all other such as do the same offices over Gods people,
whatsoever their styles, or external additions be otherwise. And these things
we conceive ought to receive such constructions, because our Savior Himself
did always decline all State and pomp, and recommend the same lowly president
to his followers; with strict command not to exercise any Lordly Dominion, nor
to assume the Name of Rabbi upon them, ever pressing this; That he came to
serve, and not to be served. And yet in the mere Name of Lord, or Rabbi there
could be no offense, if the power and grandour belonging to those names, had
not bin displeasing to him: and if it was displeasing in those his immediate
followers whom he had made governors as well as Preachers, and for their better
governing had endued with many miraculous gifts, to discern spirits, and to
open and shut Heaven: and enriched with many other weighty graces, we cannot
imagine it should now be pleasing in our Ministers, where less power is
necessary, and less virtue granted. However it is far from our meaning to
detract or derogate any thing from that internal reverence which is due to
Christ's Ambassadors, and Stewards, etc. in the Church, we know that he that
despises them, despises Christ Himself, according to Christ's own words, our
meaning is only to place them next and in the second seat of Honor after
Princes, and Rulers, and Judges which have Scepters committed to them by God,
either mediately, or immediately. Cyp. says well, that our Savior being King
and God did Honor the Priests and Bishops of the Jews, though they were
wicked, for our instruction: we grant that our Savior ought in this to be
imitated, and that all Priests whether they have such command or no, as the
Jewish had, or whether they be Religious or no: yet for Christ's sake which is
our High Priest, and their Head, we ought to pay all reverence and awe to them.

THe last Argument urged is this. That Order which is of the greatest
necessity in Religion, without which no Church can at all subsist, is most
Holy and excellent, but such is the sacerdotall order, for Religion had
subsistence under the Apostles without Princes, and that it never had nor could
have under Princes, without Priests: Ergo, This is no way true, for Religion
can have no being without men, and men can have no being without government,
and therefore as to this first, and most necessary being, we may justly say,
that the Gospel it self was as well protected by Caesar, which hated it, as
by Peter which preached it: For Peter did owe his civil being to Caesar, and
without this civil being, his Ecclesiastical being had perished. Besides
Peter, etc. was not only a Preacher, but also a Governor, and those offices
which he did as a Governor, might be as much conducing to the welfare of
Religion, as those which he did as a Preacher: and yet for want of the civil
Magistrates further assistance, both offices were some way defective, and
perhaps, had bin wholly unprofitable, had not miraculous gifts and graces
superabounded to supply that defect. Howsoever, it is more true, that after the
Creation Religion did subsist under Princes only without Priests, for until
the Priesthood was severed in Aron, Adam, Melchisedeck, etc. were not so
properly Priests, as Princes: for though they performed the offices of Priests,
yet they had no other Consecration to enable them therefore, than their Regal
Sanctity, and sublimity. If the mere officiating did make a Priest, then the
Priesthood were open to all: and if some right and warrant be necessary, it
must orginally flow from Princes, and they which may derive it to others, have
it, till they derive it, in themselves. The essence of Priesthood does no more
consist in the rites and Ceremonies of Consecration, than Royalty does in
Coronation: and the due warrant of lawful authority being that essence, before
that warrant granted, we must look upon authority as including that warrant
within its virtue: and after that warrant granted, as not exhausted of its
virtue. When the Priesthood was separated from the greater, and confered upon
the inferior, some formal Ceremonious resignation thereof was thought
necessary: but before that resignation till Moses, we may well conceive that
Princes did officiate in their own rights, without borrowing any thing therein
from Ceremonies, or from any higher power than their own.

I have now done with Arguments of the first kind, which are urged against the
sanctity, and competence of Princes, in Ecclesiastical and Spiritual things.
I come now to answer such things as are further objected against other defects
of qualification in them, especially in learning, knowledge, and theological
understanding.

THe maine argument here, is thus: Whosoever is fitest to direct to Truth, is
also fittest to command for Truth: but Ministers being most skilld in Divinity
are most fit to direct, Ergo.

In answer hereunto, I must make appear.

1. That Ministers are not always most learned.

2. That the most learned are not always the most judicious.

3. That learned and judicious men are not always Orthodox, and sound in faith.

4. That there is no necessity in policy, that the most learned, judicious,
and sincere men should be promoted to highest power in the Church.

And first, we deny not that the blessing of God does usually accompany the due
act of Ordination, to add gifts and abilities to the party ordained: we only
say, that Gods grace like the wind has its free arbitrary approaches and
recesses, and is not always limited, or necessitated by the act done of
consecration. And we say also, that as God usually sanctifies Ministers for
their function, so he does also Kings: and when he did lay his command upon
Kings to have a Copy of his Law always by them, to read and study it for
their direction, we conceive it is intimated to us what kind of knowledge is
most fit for Kings, and what kind of grace God does most usually supply them
withal. King Edward the sixth, Queen Elizabeth, and King James of late, and
happy memory were so strangly learned and judicious in Divinity, that we may
well think there was something in them above the ordinary perfection of
nature: and had they perhaps relied less upon the greatest of their Clergy in
matters concerning the interest and honor of the Clergy, the Church might
have been more free from these controversies, and disturbances at this day.

Counselors of State were by a wise King of Spain compared to Spectacles, and
so may Prelates also, but as the same King well observed, those eyes are very
wretched which can see nothing at all without them. It Is as much wisdom in
Princes to look into the particular interests of Counselors, and not to be too
light of belief, as it is to do nothing without counsel and to suspect their
own imaginations. If we did attribute to our Judges a freedom from all
fallibility and corruption, and so entrust all Law into their hands, this would
be as dangerous, as to allow Judges no credit at all. The Anabaptists which
rely only upon their own private Enthusiasmes are not mislead into greater
idolatry, and slavery than the Papists, which renounce their own light, and
reason, to cast themselves wholly upon the directions of their Ghostly Fathers.
Our Prelates at this day have not so rigorous an Empire over our belief as the
Papists groan under, yet they have given us a taste of late, what Canons should
be held most religious and fit for us, if we would admit all to be
indisputable: which they think fit to be imposed upon us. And truly when
Clergy men were confessed to be the only Oracles and infallible Chaires of
Divinity in the world, it was but a modest Law my thinks, that all Laymen being
on Horseback, and meeting Clergymen on foot, should perpetually dismount,
and resign their horses to Clergymen: sure those times which thought this
reasonable, and just were pretty modest times, and Laymen did not deserve so
good. In the second place also admit Clergymen to be only and always
learned, yet the learned men are not always the wisest, and fittest for
action. Sometimes where great reading meets with shallow capacities, it fumes
like strong Wine in their heads, and makes them reele, as it were, under the
burden of it: it causes sometimes greater disquiet both to themselves, and
other men. In our Ancestors days when all learning was engrossed by the
Clergy, and thrust into Cloisters, and Colleges from the Laity, yet there
were many grave and wise Statesmen that were as an allay to the insolent, and
vain excesses of the Clergy, or else this State had bin often ruined. But
admit in the third place, that Clergymen are always more learned and wise
than all Laymen, yet we see they are not more free from errors, heresies, and
jars amongst themselves, than other men, but rather less. When Schisms rise
amongst Divines, as they do almost perpetually, Divines being thereby banded,
and divided against Divines, what can the poor Laicke do? both sides he
cannot adhere to, and if he adhere to this, that side condemns him, and if to
that, this condemns him: if he make use of his judgment herein, than he
trusts himself more than the Priest, and if he use not his judgment at all; He
commits himself merely to fortune, and is as likely to embrace the wrong, as
the truth: if he apply himself to the Major party, that is hard sometimes to
discern* and if it be discernable, yet it is many times, the erroneous party.
The Papists are not the major part of Christians, Christians are not the major
part of men, The orthodox amongst us are not the major part of Calvinists
Calvinists are not the Major part of Protestants.

Before the Law the Minor part worshipped the true God, and amongst those which
worshipped the true God, the Minor part were heartily his servants, and made a
Conscience of their ways. After Moses also when the Jews began to mingle with
the Canaanites, and other bordering Heathens in the manner of their sacrifices
and high places, a very small part sometimes kept it self pure from those
pollutions, and innovations. And in that great rent under Jeroboam ten tribes
of twelve estranged themselves from God, set up a new spurious false worship in
Bethel. And we read long before the Captivity, that Ephraim was divided
against Manasseh, and Manasseh against Ephraim, and both against Judah. Judah
also it self was never wholly untainted, for from the Captivity, sundry sects,
and factions had distraited it, in so much that when our Savior came into the
world, there was scarce sincerity or truth to be found, and that that was, was
not most eminently amongst the greatest Scribes, Pharisees, or Priests. In all
those times if there was such an infallibility in the Chair of Moses (as the
Papists dream of) it did but little avail the world, for he that then would
have sought for the true way to walk in, disclaiming utterly his own light
and understanding He must not have sought it amongst the multitude: and if he
had sought it amongst the Priests, he would have seen divisions there: and if
amongst Prophets, He would have found the same there also. God did not deliver
Oracles, nor inspire Prophets, at all times upon all occasions for the ceasing
of differences, and contestations; He did appear in love, but not without all
Majesty; He did show grace, but not according to obligation. After our Saviors
Ascension a blessed Spirit of infallibity did rest upon the Church to direct in
intricate debates, and to prevent schisms, till a perfect Gospel was
established: but this Spirit in those very times had not residence in any one
man's breast at all times, to give judgment in all things. The greatest of the
Apostles might severally vary and dissent in points of great concernment, and
therefore they had consultations sometimes, and when consultations would not
satisfy, they did assemble in a greater body; and when those assemblies were,
the wisdom of the Spirit did not always manifest it self in those which were
of highest order, but sometimes the inferior did reprove and convince the
superior, and the superior did submit, and yield to his inferior. But after one
age or two, when the Spirit of God had consummated, the maine establishment of
Religion, though it preserved the Church from a total deviation, it secured
not all parts thereof from all gross prevayling rents, and Apostasies, neither
did it affixe it self, or choose any certain resting place in any one part of
the world more than an other. Three ages being now run out, heresies of a
foul nature beginning to spring up and increase with Religion, it pleased God
to send Constantine to aid the truth against error, and impiety: in his power
now it was to congregate Bishops of the best abilities, for the discussing and
discovering of truth, and for the upholding the same being discovered. When
Bishops contended against Bishops, and Presbyters against Presbyters, and when
Arianisme was defended by as great a number of Divines as it was opposed, so
that from the wisdom of Divines, no decision could be expected, then does the
power and policy of one Emperor, by Divines remedy, that, which a thousand
Divines by themselves could never have remedyed. From the Bishop of Rome the
Orthodox party could obtain no succor, till Constantines Scepter proved more
virtuous than his Crosiers: and when the Council was by Constantine called,
and ordered, the Bishop of Rome was not the only Oracle in that Council,
neither had that great trouble of assembling been, if one Bishop had then bin
more oraculous than all. The same offices also which Constantine did in his
days, many other godly Emperors did in their reigns: and had not they done
them, no one Bishop could; for the Catholic Bishops were many times inferior
in number, and power to the Heretics: and if the Pope had then had the power
to utter Oracles, yet not having power to enforce, and authorize the same upon
all opposites, he could not have advantaged Religion amongst Heretics, more
than he does now amongst Protestants, Jews, Turks, or Pagans. If God gave
infallibility to one Bishop, for the avail of all the world, why does not that
Bishop avail the whole world? Why is so great a light put under a Bushel? Why
are not all men illuminated by it? And if God had no regard therein but to that
remnant which worships the Pope, if his only aim therein was at the salvation
of Papists, why is this made a ground of universal authority to the Pope, or
of general privilege to all Bishops? But I am to speak now to Protestants
which hold no one Bishop infallible, but the whole order of Bishops freer from
fallibility, than any other condition of men: therefore to such, I shall
instance in Rome it self what multitudes of Divines; of learned, profound
Divines; of politic, Sagacious Divines for many ages together have been
drunk and bewitched with the superstitions, Idolatries, blasphemies, and
heresies of that enchanting City? Can it be thought safe for Princes and
Laymen wholly to abjure their own understandings, and yield themselves
Captives to the dictates of Divines only, when so many Millions of them for so
many ages, notwithstanding all their exquisite learning and rare abilities,
devote themselves to such sottish impostures, and gross impieties, nay to some
such infernal, diabolical tenets? Can men still persist to give up their
judgments wholly to other men for their callings sake, or for their learning
and wisdom supposed, when we see this is the very same rock, whereupon Rome
suffers Shipwreck, and this blind opinion the very snare wherein so great a
part of the world still lies entangled? But I will avoydeprolixity.

And now in the fourth place, I come to show, that if we will take all these
things for granted, and ascribe all learning, knowledge, and freedom from
variance to all Clergymen and to Clergymen only, yet it does not follow
that they are necessarily to rule, and command in chief. Nay I shall make it
appear, that it is not only not necessary, but that it is many ways
mischievous, that the ablest Divine should always be supreme in all causes,
and over all persons Ecclesiastical. Power and wisdom are things of a
different nature, for power cannot stand with inferiority, but wisdom may be
as efficacious in a man of mean condition as in a man of high quality; and
power if its supremacy be divided, it is diminished: but wisdom the more it is
dispersed, the more the virtue of it is increased. Wisdom often is contented
to serve, and to accept of a low dwelling, but power ceases to be power if it
dwell not in sublimity, and have honor to attend it. To be wise, and to be
contemned, dejected, suppressed are things compatible, they are things
frequent: but to be potent, is the same thing as to be great, to be sacred, to
be a commander of other men's wisdom: Nay to be potent has no term
convertible, but to be potent. Power in the State, is preserved as the Arc was
in the Jewish Church, it is privileged from common sight, and touch in all
well constituted Common wealths, it is united in some one person only, and to
him so lineally intayled, that it may never dye, never cease, never suffer any
violent motion, or alteration. Power is as the soul of Policy, of so
exquisite, and delicate sense, that nothing but the wings of Cherubims is fit
to guard and enclose it, from all rude approaches: vacuity in nature is not a
thing more abhorred, or shunned with greater disturbance, and with greater
confusion of properties, than the least temeration, and eclipse of power in the
State. How absurd then is this axiom, which makes power servile to wisdom,
not wisdom to power, which subjects power to so many translations, and
competitions, and ceslations, as often as time shall discover such and such
excellencies in such, and such men? If power shall always be at the devotion of
such men, as for the present appear most wise, if she shall be made so cheap,
and vulgar, and prostituted daily to so many uncertainties, what quiet can she
procure to the world? Nay what blood will she not procure? I need say no more:
this axiom is neither consistent with Monarchical, nor hereditary rule.

For first, if the most knowing Divine shall always be supreme Commander in
all Church affairs (for more than this the Pope never claymed) then by the
same reason the most knowing Statesman shall be supreme in the Palace, the
most knowing Soldier in the Camp, the most knowing Lawyer in the Tribunal,
etc. and so Monarchy shall be changed not into the aristocracy, or democracy,
which are forms not utterly corrupt, but into poly-coirany, than which nothing
can be more unpoliticke.

All Nations have ever rejected this broken confused rule of many several
independent Commanders, which cannot choose but injoyne impossible things
sometimes: for all these commanders may at the same time use the same man's
service in several places, and in this they never can be satisfied: wherefore
we may well account this rule as bad as anarchy it self. Nay even Religion it
self by this means may be distracted into several supremacies, for He that
is the ablest Divine in polemicall points and in deciding controversies, may
not be ablest in positive points, or matters of Discipline, and yet here the
one has as good title to absolute power in his sphere, as the other has in
his. And as Monarchy cannot, so secondly, neither can hereditary right stand
with this always uncertain, variable title of ability, and excellence in
knowledge. Nay possession of supremacy is here no good plea: For he that was
the greatest, and most knowing man last year, is not so this year, neither
perhaps will he be next year, that is so this year. A thousand incongruities
and inconveniences attend upon this paradox: for the abilities of men are very
hardly tryable, and discernable: and if they were not, yet the subjecting of
power to the perpetual, giddy changes of new elections would soon confound us
into our old Chaos again, as the Poets word is.

The three principal acts of power are,

First, to make Laws.

Secondly, to give judgment according to Laws made.

Thirdly, to execute according to the right intent of judgments.

In the making of Laws also according to Tully, there is three things
necessary: 1. Invenire. 2. Disceptare. 3. Far. The invention of all necessary
Laws is almost perfect already to our hands; Those Laws which God ordained
for the Jews, and those which our Ancestors found out for us, are daily before
our eyes, and little can now be added of moment, except only for illustration
of what was ambiguous before. In the Church also is less want of perpetual
alterations, and additions of Canons, than in the State, our misery is, that we
succeed Ancestors which were oppressed with too vast a Church discipline. Our
reformation has rid us of some part of this burden, but yet no sensible man
can choose but see, that our Ecclesiastical Courts are yet of larger
jurisdiction, and fuller of trouble, than ever the Jewish were, or those of the
Primitive Christians. The reason of this is, because we still rely too much
upon Divines herein, and they for their own profit, and power are still as
willing to uphold their own Tribunals as ever they were. Did they think it a
greater honor to serve at the Altar than in the Consistory, and did they take
more delight in Preaching, than attending suites, they would not study New
Canons, but discharge themselves of many old ones: and so ease themselves and
us too, and restore back again to the Civil Magistrate that which Popery
first usurped, and their ambition has since continued. Howsoever if Ministers
can add any Articles to the Doctrine of our Church for the better preventing
of Schisms, or frame any orders for the more decent performance of Gods
worship in the Church, I would not exclude them from proposing it; I only
desire that since they are men, and may have private interests and respects to
the prejudice of other men, they may not ingrosse all power of proposing what
they list, and to exclude all others from the like power.

And in the second place, if Clergy men only shall propose all Ecclesiastical
Laws; yet it is most unjust that Princes, and Laymen should be held utterly
incapable of ventilating, and debating the same.

Id quod omnes tangit ab omnibus tractari debet. Nature has printed this in
us, if the Priest propose any thing tending to the disservice of God, that
disservice will draw the same guilt upon me, and all others, as upon him, and
it shall not excuse me or others, that he pretended his judgment to be
unquestionable; and shall it then here be unlawful for me and others to use any
endeavor for the prevention of this guilt? If Angels from Heaven should seduce
me, I were inexcusable: and when Ministers, whom I know to be subject to the
same natural blindness, and partiality as I am, and to whom I see general
error may be a private advantage, in matters of this private advantage, shall I
be allowed no liberty to search, and try, and to use my best art of
discussion? If this were so, God had made my condition desperate, and
remediless, and I might safely attribute my error, and destruction to the hand
of God alone: but this no man can imagine of God without great impiety. God
has declared himself contrary herein, for he has exempted none from error
though never so learned, nor leaves none excusable in error though never so
unlearned* if we will blindly trust others, it is at our own peril, He will
require it at our hands; but if we will seek industriously, we shall find, if
we will knock at his door, He has promised to open to us. And if private men
stand accountable for their own souls, whatsoever the Priests doctrine or
commands be, how much more shall Princes, and Courts of Parliament answer for
their wilful blindness, if they will depart from their own right and duty in
sifting, and examining al such religious constitutions, as concern them, and
all others under their charge? Shall they sit to treat of Lether, and Wool,
and neglect doctrine and discipline? Shall they consult of the beauty and glory
of the kingdom, and transfer Religion to others, which is the foundation of all
happiness? Shall they be sollicitous for transitory things, and yet trust their
souls into other men's hands, who may make a profit of the same? Let us not so
infatuate our selves, let us honor Divines, and reverence their counsels, but
let us not superstitiously adore them, or dotingly in-slave our selves to their
edicts.

THe 3d. thing in making of laws is that which we term far Legem: and till
this act of carrying, passing or enacting give the binding force of Law to it,
how good and wholesome soever it be after all debate, yet it is but as the
counsel of a Lawyer, or the prescription of a Physician. And here we
maintain, that if Divines are the most fit, to invent, and discuss
Ecclesiastical Constitutions, yet they have not in themselves that right and
power which is to imprint the obliging virtue of Laws upon them. The form or
essence of Law is that coercive, or penal virtue by which it binds all to its
obedience: and all cannot be bound to such obedience, but by common consent, or
else some external compulsion: take away this binding virtue, and it is no
Law: it is, but a Counsel, wherein the inferior has as much power toward his
superior, as the superior has toward his inferior. If then Divines will
vindicate to themselves a Legislative power in the Church, they must deduce the
same either from the common consent of the Church, or from some other authority
to which all the Church is subject, and to which the whole Church can make no
actual opposition. If they claim from common consent, they must produce some
act of State, and formal record to abet their claim, and common consent must
also still strengthen the same, or else by the same that it was constituted, it
may still be dissolved; and if they claim from some higher external
authority, stronger than common consent, they must induce that authority to
give vigor to their Laws, and to use means of constraint against all such, as
shall not voluntarily yield obedience to the same. And it is not sufficient for
them to allege God for their authority, without some special, express words
from Gods own mouth, for God gave no man a right, but he allows him some
remedy agreeable thereunto, and God is so great a favourer also of common
consent, that though he has an uncontroleable power above it, yet (as Hooker
observes) He would not impose his own profitable Laws upon his people, by the
hands of Moses, without their free, and open consent. And if God, which cannot
do unjustice, nor will impose laws, but such as are profitable to us, and yet
has an undisputable Empire over us, will so favor common consent; shall man
which may err, and do injury* and is of less value then communities, and
wants might to enforce and put in execution his own commands, usurp that
which God relinquishes? Take it for granted that Priests cannot err out of
ignorance; or be perverted by private interest, and that they are superior to
all Christians under their charge: yea grant them a right to make what Canons
they please, and grant them no power to compel obedience to the same, and to
punish disobedience to the same, and this would take away peace, and cause much
mischief and disturbance every where, and this we cannot think God would be
the Author of.

How ridiculous are the Popes anathemaes to those which renounce his
allegiance, they seem to us but mere Epigrams sent abroad to provoke laughter?
And yet why do they not appear as ridiculous in Italy, as in England? were it
not for common consent, they were not in more force amongst Italians, then
Englishmen: and there is no more true natural vigor in the Popes Bulls, to
procure common consent in Italy, then in England: we may gather then from
hence, that there is no Ecclesiastical Supremacy, but founded upon the same
basis of common consent, as temporal supremacy is, and being so founded, it
cannot be Divine, or unalterable, or above common consent so as to have any
efficacy without, much less against it. That some Nations are gulled, and
cozened out of their consents, is no presedent for us, for as many Nations are
addicted to Mahomits commandes, as are to the Popes: and in this the dominion
of Mahomet is as spiritual as the Popes: and is as strong a case to overruled
us, as the Popes: for if consent were to be forced, the Pope might as well
force Mahometans, as Christians: and if it be free, his Empire depends as much
upon it, as Mahomets. They then that have erected a Spiritual supremacy, not
depending upon common consent, have been in a great error, and they that slight
common consent, as not capable of a spiritual supremacy, seem to have been as
much mistaken. Many of our Divines say, that Parliaments are temporal Courts;
and so not of spiritual jurisdiction, and others say, that they may as well
frame acts to order the Hierarchy in heaven, as to dispose of Ecclesiastical
things on earth: both these seem to me verry erroneous. The Argument methinks
is equally strong: as God would not give a right to bind up other men by
Statutes and Commandments, but he would give some power withal to drive men
by constraint to observe, and yield obedience to the same: so He would not
indue any Prince, or Court with such power, but He would give a right of
binding equal, and congeniall to that power. Princes of themselves are sacred,
as I have proved, and spiritually sacred; how much more then are they accounted
sitting in Parliament: and if Princes in Parliament, how much more Princes, and
Parliaments; for to Princes on their awful Tribunalls, is something more due
then at other times, but to Princes in Parliament, there is most of all due, in
regard that there they are invested with more then their own natural power,
common consent having not derived all power into the King: at any other time,
or in any other place: but reserved much thereof till a full union be in
Parliament; besides, setting aside the sanctity of power in Parliaments: yet in
regard that they are assisted with the best counsel of Divines, so they ought
not to be accounted mere Temporal Courts: for what better advise can those
Divines give out of Parliament: then in Parliaments: Some Parliaments in
England have made some Ecclesiastical acts, excluso clero; nay that which was
the the most holy act, which ever was established in England, viz. The
Reformation of Religion, was passed invito clero: and when these things are not
only legal, but honorable, shall we limit Parliaments in any thing wherein the
votes of the Clergy are concomitant, and concurrent, with the Laytie? Hooker
says, that the most natural and religious course for the making of Laws, is,
that the matter of them be taken from the judgment of the wisest in those
things whom they concern, and in matters of God (he says) it were unnatural,
not to think the Pastors of our souls a great deal more wise than men of
secular callings: but when all is done for devising of Laws, it is the
general consent of all, that gives them the form, and vigor of Laws. This we
allow of for the most part, but we conceive this to be understood of such
Divines, as in the judgment of Parliaments, are omni exceptione majores; for
it was not unnatural in the beginning of the Reigns of Edward the Sixth, and
Queen Elizabeth, to think that the Lords and Commons were better Judges of
Religion, than the Bishops and the Convocation house, as matters then stood in
England. For the whole body can have no sinister end, or interest to blind
them: but the whole Clergy, which is but a part of the whole body may, and
therefore the whole body is to judge of this, and when they see a deviation in
the Clergy, and observe the occasion of it, they must not blindly follow
blind guides, but do according to that light which God has given them. And
certainly, it were contrary to that interest which every man has in the Truth,
that any should be obliged to receive it from other men's mouths, without any
further inquiry, or judgment made upon the same. The meanest man is as much
interessed and concerned in the truth of Religion, as the greatest Priest, and
though his knowledge thereof be not in all respects equally easy: yet in some
respects it may be easier, for want of learning does not so much hinder the
light of the Laymen, as worldly advantage, and faction sometimes does the
Priests. Examples of these are infinite: corruption in the Church before our
Savior, and in our Saviors days, and ever since has oftener begun amongst
the greatest Priests, Rabbers, and Bishops, than amongst the meaner Laity. And
for this cause, God requires at every man's hands an account what doctrine he
admits, what Laws he obeys, holding no man excused for putting blind
confidence in his ghostly Father, and not taking upon him to weigh and try how
sure his grounds were. And if every private man stand so responsible for his
particular interest in the Truth, being equally great in the Truth? shall not
whole States and Nations, whose interest is far greater than their Priests or
Bishops is, give a sadder account to God, if they leave themselves to be
seduced by such men, which are as liable to error as themselves? If we
consider the mere matter of Laws, they are either profitable for the Church,
or not: if they are profitable, why should we think that Princes and
Parliaments want power to impose Laws upon themselves, for the avail of their
own souls, they standing to God accountable for the same, according to the
greatness of their own interest? and if they are not profitable, there is no
obedience due to them, whether Priests, or Princes make them, and that they be
not profitable, is equally doubtful whether Priests, or Princes make them.
Take then Laws to be questionable, as all humane are, and liable to
examination: and being made without common consent, they bind not at all, and
being made by common consent, they bind all either to obedience, or to
sufferance. It is Gods own Law, that such as shall except against the validity
or obliging virtue of common consent, shall die the death: for no peace can
ever be in that State where any inconsiderable party shall not acquiesce in
the common Statutes of the land. Those Laws which Heathen Emperors made by
common consent against Christianity, were not wise Laws, But they were Laws,
there was no piety, but there was vigor in them: and doubtless the very
Apostles, which might not lawfully obey them, yet might not lawfully contemn
them. Two things are objected against the Ecclesiastical power of Parliaments.
1. That it is more due to Princes. 2. To Counsels, or Synods. It Is true
anciently Princes were the only Legislatives: the old rule was, Quicquid
placuerit Principii Legis habet vigorem. But we must know, that Princes had
this power by common consent, and doubtless till policy was now perfect, and
exquisite it was safer for Nations to depend upon the arbitrary, unconfined power
of Princes, then to have their Princes hands too far bound up, and restrained,
but since Laws have bin invented by common consent, as well to secure Subjects
from the tyranny of their own Lords, as from private injuries amongst
themselves: and those Common wealths which have left most scope to Princes in
doing of good offices, and the least in doing acts of oppression, are the
wisest but ever this golden axiom is to be of all received: That that is the
most politic prerogative which is the best, but not the most limited. But
this objection makes for Parliaments, for whatsoever power was vested before in
Princes and their Counsels, the same now remaining in Princes and the best,
and highest of all Counsels, viz. Parliaments Counsels, also and Synods, are
as improperly urged against Parliaments, for Counsels and Synods did not at
first claim any right, or in dependent power, they were only called by the
secular Magistrate, as Ecclesiastical Courts for the composing of cissention
in the Church, and they were as mere assistants, called ad consilium, not ad
consensum.

In 480 years after the establishment of Christians, Religion, from the first
to the seventh Constantine there were but fix general Counsels called, and
those in disputes of a high nature: all other Laws were established without
Oecumeniall Counsels, by the private instruction of such Clergiemen as
Emperors best liked. The truth is, no universal Counsel ever was at all,
because there never yet was any universal Monarch, or Pope, whose power was
large enough to call the whole world: but Princes to the utmost of their
bounds, did in that space of time congregate Bishops out of all their dominions
in those six cases* and yet we do not find that those six Counsels, though
they have more reverence, yet claymed more power than any other National
Synod. Without question no less power than the Emperors could have bin
sufficient to cite, and draw together so great a body, or to order them being
met, or to continue their mee^ing, and no less power could animate their
decrees with universal binding virtue, then the same, that so convened them.
But it is sufficient, that Counsels have erred, and that appeals have been
brought against them, and that redress has been made by Emperors in other
Counsels called for that purpose: for this takes away from them that they are
either supreme, or sole, or infallible judges of Religion: and this being taken
away they cannot be pretended to have any overruling superiority, or
privilege above Parliaments. The assistance of Counsels, and Synods scarce any
opposes, so that they be not indeed with an obliging, Legislative force above
Parliaments, or preferred in power above common consent, which is the soul of
all policy and power, and that which preserves all Churches and States from
utter ruin, and confusion: and this no wise man can agree too. So much of the
first act of power in passing, and promulgating of Law; I now come to the
second: In giving judgment according to those Laws. But little need here be
said, for if we did yield Clergymen to be the most skillful and knowing
Judges in all matter of doctrine and discipline, this is no argument at all,
for their supremacy, or independency, neither can any difference be showed why
subordinate power in Ecclesiastical judgments should not be as effectual, and
justifiable, as in temporal, and it is sufficiently cleared that poly coirany
is not to be received in any Church or Kingdom: and therefore I haste to the
third act of power which consists in using compulsory means for procuring
obedience. If Priests had any such spiritual sword, as they pretend, virtuous
and efficacious enough to inflict ghostly pains upon such as disobey them,
doubtless it would reform as well as confound, and procure obedience, as well
as chastise disobedience: and then it would as much advance their Empire, as
the temporal sword does the Princes. Doubtless it would have some sensible
efficacy, and work to good ends, and men would not nor could not choose but
bow, and submit themselves under it, but now a spiritual sword is pretended,
whilst the gaining of a temporal sword is intended, and nothing is more plain
to be seen. Its not to be wondered at therefore if the people fear not any
binding power, where they see no loosing, nor regard the shutting of those
keys, which cannot open: nor tremble at that thunder, and lightning which is
accompanied with no perceiveable virtue of warmth and moisture, to open and
refresh, as well as to break, and burn. But I have touched upon this already,
and so I now leave it.

THe next Argument is taken from the Jewish policy, for they suppose that the
Jewish Priesthood was independent in Spiritualibus, and they suppose that the
spiritual knowledge and ability of the Priests and Levites was the ground of
this independency. Here we say first that there are diverse reasons why more
power and preeminence was requisite amongst the Jewish Priests than is now.
Bilson gives four differences, and I shall add two more: for first the
Priests, and Levites were then a great body, they were a twelfth part of
Israel, and had many Cities and their territories wherein they lived a part
from other Tribes, and in those Cities and precincts a civil rule was as
necessary as else where and that rule could not be administered without
inequality, and power, and in this they much differed from our Ministers.
Secondly, Priests, and Levites were then the only studied Booke-men and
Scholars of that Nation, learning was at a low ebb, the judicial as well as
the Ceremonial Laws were scarce known, or read by any but that tribe: and
in this the State of our times is far different. Thirdly, The Priests and
Levites had then a natural command and signiory in their own families, over
their own descendents whereas now no such superiority can have place amongst
our Clergymen. Fourthly, The Priests and Levites had then offices of a
different nature, some of them were more easy, as to superintend, etc. others
more toylesome, as to sacrifice, etc. some more holy, as to offer incense, etc.
others more mean, as to slaughter beasts, etc. and so different orders were
accordingly appointed, but no such difference of service is amongst our Priests
in our Churches. I shall add also fifthly, that there were then many
Ceremonies, and Types, and rites of worship, about which many differences might
arise hardly to be decided without some appointed Judges, whereas now the
abolition of those external rudiments, and clogs has discharged us of all
such questions, and scruples in the Church. And sixthly the whole form of
Religious worship was then externally more majesticall, and dreadful, and it
was convenient that some correspondence should be in pomp, and splendour
between the persons which did officiate, and the places wherein they did
officiate. As there was a Sanctum more inaccessible than the outer Court, and a
propitiatory more reverend than either, and as some Altars, and Sacrifices were
more solemn, and venerable than others: so it was fit that persons should be
qualified accordingly with extraordinary honor, and privilege but this reason
now ceases amongst us. There was no inherent holiness in that Temple more than
is in ours, nor no more internal excellence in those Priests, than in ours:
and yet we see an external splendor was than thought fit for those times,
which our Savior did not seem to countenance in his Church. The same
glittering garments are not now useful for our Priests, nor the same
sanctimonious forbearance, and distance due to our Chancels; and for ought we
know all other grandour, and luster of riches, power, and honor falls under
the same reason, but in the next place our answer is, that notwithstanding all
these differences which may much more plead for power and preeminence amongst
the Jews, than amongst us, yet we do allow to our Clergy more power, and
preeminence than was known amongst the Jews. There is no color in Scripture
that there were so many Ecclesiastical Courts in Judea, so thronged with
suitors, so pestred with Officers, so choked up with causes of all kinds, as
matrimonial, testimentary, and many the like: there is no color, that in so
many several divisions of the Land, besides, ordinary tithes, and indowments,
they had any Ecclesiastical Lords to enjoy so many several Castles, Palaces,
Parkes, Manors, etc. They had one Miter, we have many. They had one Priest
richly attired, but with Ornaments that were left for the use of successive
generations, we have many, whose bravery is perpetually fresh, and various.
Alexander might perhaps wonder at the sumptuous habit of one of Aarons
Successors, but if Solomon himself should see the Majesticall equipage of
diverse of our Archbishops, or Cardinals, as they pass from one tribunal to
an other; He would think his own Religion simple, and naked to ours. Besides
though the Jews had but one High Priest, in whom was concerned all the State
and glory of their Clergy, yet he also was so far from clayming any
independent power, that in the most awful of Religious affairs, as consulting
with God, receiving the Law, building and dedicating the Temple, ordering, and
reforming Priests, and their services, making Laws, and superintending all
holy persons, places, and things, in all these things he was inferior to the
Prince, not so much as executing the same by subordination. That Scotch
Gentleman therefore, which undertakes to prove the independent, unalterable
jurisdiction of Bishops, as its now injoyd, and accounted divine in England,
both from the Law and the Gospel, is as much to be applauded for his
confidence, as for his wit.

One Argument more is brought by some Papists, to the same purpose, but it is
scarce worth repetition. They say, Jeremy was but a mean Prophet, yet its
written of him, that he was appointed over Nations and Kingdoms, to pull up,
to beat down, to despise, etc. and they infer that what a Prophet might
do, a fortiori a Priest may do. But this is not literally spoken as true of
Ieremies own exployts; The Prophet was here Gods instrument to foretell, and
proclaim them, but God had other instruments to execute them, and those
instruments in probability were Princes, not Prophets, nor Priests. Princes,
Prophets, and Priests, may all be instruments of God in the same service, yet
not all serve alike honorably: for we must look further sometimes than into
the mere names of things, because some names of service import the nature of
command, and some names of command import the nature of service. The word,
Nurse, expresses something of service, but more of power, and this is fitly
applied sometimes to Princes, for the office of Princes is to serve those who
are subject to their power. On the other side, the word, Guide, expresses
something of power, but more of service, and this may be fitly applied to
Priests and Prophets, for their skill may make them serviceable in somethings
to those which in others are served by them. But I conclude these two first
points, that there is no privilege either of Sanctity or Knowledge which can
exalt Priests, above Princes, or entitle them to that spiritual regiment in
the Church, which they would feign pretend to. Further at this time I have not
leisure to proceed, I must now leave this already spoken, and all that which
naturally will result from it, to the Judicious.

FINIS.

