March, 31.

A Great Defeat given TO THE Rebels in Ireland,

By Master George Courtney, Governor of the Castle of Limbrick:

Wherein Colonel Geraldine, one of the chief Rebels, with diverse Captains and
other Officers and above 130 Common Soldiers were slain.

Whereunto is added, the Relation of the taking of the City of Cork by the
Rebels.

All this being credibly Related in a Letter sent from Master Francis Pursell,
to his kinsman G. Buck Esquire

London, Printed Anno Dom. 1642.

Noble Cosen,
IN my last I made known unto you some part of my misfortunes and losses; but
they were not then grown unto their full maturity, as now they are; for my
house, at that time, was exempt from the flames, which since have devoured it,
together with all my Stables, Barns, and other houses of office, and adjacent
Buildings: They have taken, killed, and driven away all my stock of Cattle,
and left me in that indigent condition, that I have nothing now to boast of,
but my poverty, which indeed is the more bitter at this time, in respect that I
have not formerly been acquainted with it: and I find, that upon all the
estate which I had (for I cannot say that I have now one foot of Land in this
Kingdom) I am not able to procure here 500l. though I should perish through the
want of such a sum: Wherefore let me entreat you to omit no time in the taking
up, and sending me those moneys which I wrote the last week unto you for, upon
the Bonds which lie in the Solicitors hands; and for other particular
businesses, I have here sent you an enclosed Schedule, for your better
direction. The Rebels have put a strong Garrison into Cork, which likewise
they endeavor to fortify. Tredagh yet holds out, but it is to be feared, will
be surrendered for want of Victuals, if we have not good success in the
arrival of our Pinnace, which is once more gone to supply them, having twice
already relieved them. Provision begins to be here extremely dear, in regard of
the multitudes that flock unto this place, and the great devastation of the
Country round about. And we have not yet a competent Army to march with far
into the Country. There was news brought unto us the last night of an assured
defeat given unto the Rebels at Limbreck, by one Master George Courtenay, who
is Constable of the Castle, and has there 1000 Foot of his own Tenants, and
two Troops of Horse, which are commanded by two of his sons, for the Guard of
the City and Castle. On the fourteenth of this present, the enemy, to the
number of 8000 men, marched under the conduct of one Colonel Geraldine, to
take in this Place; and before they came within three English miles, sent a
Herald, to summon it: The chief Officers of the City presently entered into
Counsel, to deliberate of the answer which they should return to the enemy.
And it was Courtenay's advice, that they should pretend a readiness to render
the City up unto them, upon condition that they might enjoy their goods and
Estates peaceably, and without any molestation: and to this purpose they
procured two serving-men, of whose fidelity they were well assured, to go unto
the enemy, and declare the resolution of the City. The men being well
accoutred, taking upon them to be Citizens of the best rank, who came thither
to offer themselves as pledges for the real intentions of the City, gained so
much credit from the Colonel, that without further delay, he taking these two
with him, marched with about 1500 men to the City, leaving the rest behind
him* and when he came near unto the gate, he found it open, and not any sign
of opposition: and being met about a Musket shot from the gate, with diverse of
the chiefest Citizens, to receive his promise of peaceably enjoying their
fortunes, which was condescended unto by him; he was entreated to march into
the City with those men which he brought with him, being desirous they should
be there in Garrison, for the Guard of the City. He finding them so (seemingly)
real, and suspecting no fraud or treachery, went into the City, accompanied
with these Burghers, and his Soldiers following him, until such time as about
500 of them being entered, the Percullis was immediately let fall, and Morters
and Muskets fired, as well upon those that were come in, as those who were
without. The Colonel himself was shot in at the left eye, and through the head.
There was also slain one Captain Butler, and another of the Geraldines, who was
a Cosen to the Colonel, and had a Company under him: Captain Orose, Lieutenant
Magroh, and diverse other inferior Officers, and not one man escaping of those
who entered, and very few of those who were without, for as soon as the Musket
shot which played upon them from the Walls and Port had routed them, and put
them to flight, the two Troops of Horse commanded by Master Courtenay his sons,
sallied out, and cut off most of them. This famous overthrow was achieved by
the discretion and wisdom of Master Courtenay, who lodged his soldiers so
privately about the Port, that no notice was taken of them, until the
Watchword was given; and then those Burghers which accompanied the Colonel,
retired themselves instantly into houses on either hand, giving free liberty
for the Shot (which was placed in convenient places) to play on the enemy.
There were also slain diverse Officers of quality without the Town, in their
flight, and to the number of 700 soldiers. I hope that this great and assured
Victory will much quell their bold and barbarous attempts, and give
encouragement to ours, to obtain more of them. Would your distractions in
England would give leave unto the Parliament to send us some speedy supplies of
moneys and Horses, for we want neither men nor courages. I shall expect daily
to hear from you; and as soon as there is any thing worth writing, you shall
not fail to receive.

From DUBLIN, this 15 of March, 1641. Your well-wishing friend, and loving
Kinsman, FRANCIS PURSELL.

FINIS.

