The Total and Final DEMANDS already made by, and to be expected from, the
AGITATORS AND ARMY: Upon the Concession whereof they will rest fully satisfied;
and DISBAND When they shall think seasonable, but not before in all probability.

ECCLES. 2. 14. The wise man's eyes are in his head; but the fool walks in
darkness. LONDON, Printed in the Year. 1647.

The Total and Final DEMANDS of the AGITATORS and ARMY: Upon Concession
whereof they will rest fully satisfied, and Disband when they shall think
seasonable; but not before, in all probability.
1. THat all the Sir Thoma^ Fairfax last Letters to the House, and the
Apprentices Petition to him, sent to the Agitators, (newly Printed) their own
speeches, and Papers, and 14 Article against the Impeached Members and the
Agitators massage to Trinity House, evidence this.
Forces and Militia of England, Ireland, Wales, and the Islands thereunto
belonging; the City and Tower of London, with all the Towns, Forts, and
Garrisons within England, Ireland, Wales, and the Isles; and the Navy of the
Kingdom, may be immediately put into their hands and power; not to inthral the
Parliament and people to their wills and tyranny, but to maintain the Subjects
Freedom and Liberties; the Kings Prerogative and Parliaments Privileges, in
such sort, and for so long time, as they in their just discretions shall think
meet: (A demand already concluded, and in substance already propounded and
granted;) that so the General (only in name) and Lieutenant General, in truth,
may become absolute Emperors of all King CHARLES his Realms and Dominions (now
Captive under their Sovereign Power,) til the Agitators and Army shall think fit
to dethrone him, to set up either a new John of L^yden of their own creation,
or introduce a Popular Tyranny, and Anarchy, which suits best with their Laid
down in Regal Tyranny discovered; A clear and full Vindication of the late
proceedings of the Army; A Declaration from the Army June 14. 1647 Englands
Birthright, and other Pamphlets.
principles, and the Peoples Freedom, the Supreme power and Authority, to whom
all other powers are subordinate de jure, and must be so de facto; before this
Army disband; as their Papers intimate.

2. That not only the X-I. accused Members, but all Presbyterians and other
Members in both Houses, opposite to the Armies proceedings or designs in any
particular, may be cast out of both [as well as all such Officers cashiered the
Army;] predicted in Englands Birthright, and now actually demanded in many of
their printed Papers, but most clearly expressed in that of 7o Julii, at
Reading, wherein the Commissioners of the Army render this as a reason why they
refuse to proceed in the Treaty; That notwithstanding the Votes of the House of
the tenth of June, and those since of the fifth of July, for the present
purging of the House, yet diverse persons comprised in these Votes continue still
to sit there; And what comfortable effect may we expect of a Treaty so long as
THE PARLIAMENT (the supreme Iudicatory of the Kingdom) is constituted OF SOME
THAT ARE MEN OF INTERESTS, CONTRARY TO THE COMMON GOOD THEREOF, from whom we
can expect nothing but banding and designing to obstruct and frustrate all
proceedings (contrary TO THEIR INTEREST.) And if a seasonable remedy be not
given herein, we despair of any good to the Kingdom by way of Treaty. And when
both Houses are thus fully purged, That then King Charles, their Prisoner (whom
now they flatter only for the easier accomplishment of their own ends, and to
take off the envy and opposition of his party, as some of them acknowledge in
plain terms) be forthwith articled against, This Lilburns Regal Tyranny
discovered, The Title pa. and p. 14. 62, 53, 54, 55, 57, etc. Englands
Birthright. Overtons, and other sectaries printed Pamphlets clearly demonstrate
and advise, which have a great influence on the Agitators and Army.
impeached, arraigned, deposed, executed, and his posterity dis-inherited by
the Parliament, as the Grand Delinquent, and Author of all the late Wars,
Mischiefs and bloodshed in his three Kingdoms; And after that the Members of
both Houses, who have been opposite to them, arraigned and condemned as
breakers of trust and Invaders of the peoples Liberties; and then the
domineering House of Peers perpetually abolished, and a new-model'd Parliament
consisting merely of Commoners (elected by the Army) constituted, to execute
only what the generallity of the Agitators and people shall prescribe them.

3. That the The Araignment of Persecution, the Bloody Tenet. Sir Simon
Presbyter, and many other late Pamphlets of Sectaries, clear all this, with
Hartfordshire Petition against Tithes and other Petitions of like Nature.
Assembly of Divines be immediately dissolved and impeached of high Treason;
Presbyteries suppressed, the Directory, National League and Covenant, Parishes,
Parish Churches, Chapels, Tithes, Oblations, Ministers made by Ordination,
Universities, and all Schools of learning (except only such as teach to read
English, write and cipher) all set forms of Prayer, the Lords Prayer, Creed,
and Ten Commandments, baptizing of Infants, and singing of Psalms utterly
abolished as Antichristian, and an Act of eternal oblivion passed against them;
That a full and free Liberty be granted to all persons whatsoever to preach,
baptize, dip, set up what new Congregations and Religions they please, and
broach any Heresy, Error, Blasphemy, or new opinion without the least
inhibition, as they do now within the Armies Precincts.

4. That all Regal Tyranny discovered. p. 15, 16 etc Englands Birthright,
Lilburn^ Apology to Judge Reeve, the Harfordsh. and other late Petitions to
the General and Army manifest this design.
Innes of Court and Chancery, all Courts of Justice now erected, as well Civil
as Ecclesiastical, with the Common, Civil, Canon and Statute Laws formerly in
force; and all Corporations, Tenures, Copyholds, rents and services, with all
Titles and Degrees of Honor, Nobility and Gentry, elevating one free-subject
above another may be totally abolished, as clo^gs snares, and grievances to a
freeborn people, and inconsistent with that universal parity and equality of
condition which ought to be among Freemen, and opposite to the Communion of
Saints

5. That all the This diverse of the Army and their friends have propounded in
print and discourse.
Lands and Estates of Deans, Chapters, Prebends, Universities, Colleges,
Halls, Free-schools, Cities, Corporations, Ministers Gleablands; and so much of
the Lands of the Nobility, Gentry, and rich Citizens and Yeomen, as exceeds the
sum of 300 l. per annum* and all the Revenues of the Crown belonging to the
King or his children, be equally divided between the Officers and Soldiers in
the Army to satisfy their Arrears, and recompense their good services (all the
wealth of London being too little to reward them, as their friends have
published in Print) that so the Prophecy of Daniel 7. 22. may be fulfilled,
Judgment is given to the Saints of the most high, and the time came that the
Saints possessed the Kingdom; much descanted upon in the Army both by the
Soldiers and their M. Sedwicks Sermon at S. Albans.
Chaplains, as now or never to be accomplished.

6. That all This is positively demanded in the Armies Remonstrances and
printed Papers to disingage and mutiny the Reformadoes and leave the Parliament
and City naked of all defense.
Reformado Officers, Soldiers, and Forces in or about London, or elsewhere not
actually under the Armies power may be immediately dispersed; all listings of
men, but only by the Generals and Armies order, prohibited under pain of high
Treason; the old City and Parliaments Guards removed; and a New strong Guard of
horse and foot presently sent from the Army to secure the City and Tower of
London, and the This was moved in the House, and that by an Alderman, and
desired, in the Young man's Petition to the General.
Commons House (under pretense of preventing a new War;) that so the Lives,
Liberties and Estates both of Lords, Commons, Citizens, Gentlemen, Reformadoes,
Soldiers, and people of all sorts, may be at the absolute mercy and free
disposal of the Army, without the least hopes of resistance, or opposition,
till all the precedent demands be granted and accomplished; and then we shall be
as free a people as the slaves in Turkey or Algiere.

When all this is effected, and the Kingdom utterly exhausted with taxes and
free quarter to keep up this unmercinary and most meritorious Army, who have
such glorious designs in hand for the Kingdoms ease, and peoples Liberties and
enfranchisement from their ancient Vassallage to the King, Parliament, Laws,
Magistrates, Ministers, etc. our supreme Lords and Masters (the Agitators and
Army) will be satisfied, and contentedly disband to divide the spoils in the
fifth demand, but not willingly before, if their Principles or printed Papers;
their private free ingenuous discourses; the Pamphlets and Petitions of their
Confederates, the practices of their Predecessors in Germany, and the series of
their late high proceedings and multiplied demands (growing every day higher,
and more then formerly) may pass either for demonstrations, or more then
probable presages. Let all wise, honest, and wealthy men then, both in
Parliament, City and Country be no longer gulled or blinded with specious
pretenses, but look about them in time; and provide for the public safety and
the Liberty of the King, Parliament, Kingdom, and their own preservation,
before it be over late: and take the Poets advice to heart.

Principiis obsta; sero medicina paratur
Cum mala per long as invaluere moras.
In fine; In bello non licet bis errare; hic nec semel.
Reader, consider these Passages among others in Lilburns new printed Regal
Tyranny Discovered, (whose brothers are chief sticklers in the Armies
Treasonable proceedings) p. 14. We may evidently perceive, that this Office of
a King is not, in the least, of Gods institution; neither is it to be given to
any man upon earth. And p. 56, 57. Charles Stewart, has committed treason
against the Kingdom of England, etc. To sum up all, he is guilty of all the
innocent bloodshed in England, Scotland, and Ireland, since the Wars, which is
the blood of thousands of thousands. For which if all the Sons of men should be
so base and wicked as not to do their duty, in executing Justice upon him (in
deposing and beheading him) which legally may and OUGHT TO BE DONE, by those
especially who have Power, and Authority in their hands; Yet undoubtedly the
righteous God will, and that I am confident in an exemplary manner, in despite
of all his bloody and wicked Protectors and Defenders. And then judge in what
condition the King, Kingdom, and Parliament now are in, under the power of men
of Lilburns Spirit and Principles.

FINIS.

