Twelve QVERIES OF Public Concernment Humbly submitted to the serious
consideration of the Great Council of the Kingdom.
By a Cordial Well-wisher to its Proceedings.
1. WHether it be not a Work of extraordinary Necessity and Benefit to the
whole Kingdom, to abolish and reform all unnecessary Delays by Protections,
Essoynes, frivilous Pleas, Demurrers, general Writs of Error, Motions in arrest
of Judgment after Verdicts upon full Evidence, Injunctions in Chancery, and the
like, in suits and proceedings at the Common Law; and to take away all arrests
and reversals of Judgments after verdict for any defect of form, or mere
misprisions or neglects of Clerks, Attorneys, Council, and the like, which the
Client could not prevent? Whether it be not requisite to take away the
allowance of Clergy in all cases of Felony, since Bishops are abolished? it
being a mere Relic of Popery, allowed only to Men, not Women, though guilty
of the same offense; and a badge of great injustice, to condemn and execute one
Felon, only because he cannot read, and save another guilty of the same offense
at the self-same time, only because he can read his Neck-verse, or the Ordinary
(against truth and conscience) affirm to the Judge, Legit vt Clericus: whereas
in reason, he that can read, deserves rather of the two to dye, because he is
more learned, and so more capable of instruction, then he that cannot read at
all. And whether it be not just, equitable, and beneficial to the Republic to
make intailed Lands liable to just Debts, Statutes, and Judgments, as well as
Fee-simple or Chattle Leases? And to bring Gentlemen and others that are no
Merchants or Tradesmen, who lie in prison or obscure themselves refusing to pay
or compound their just debts, within all the Statutes of Bankrupts, as well as
those who live by buying and selling?

2. Whether the speedy regulation and settlement of the jurisdiction of all
Courts of Justice Civil and Ecclesiastical, and of the exorbitant Fees of all
Clerks and Officers in them, and in both houses and all Committees of
Parliament; and the Rectifying of all Extortions and Abuses in Common Goales
and Prisons, much complained of, be not a thing of such present public
Necessity and Utility, as admits no longer delay, and deserves the Parliaments
speedy consideration? And whether it will not be an excellent ready means to
reform abuses of Common Goals and Prisons, to make them all Houses of
Correction and Common-Work-Houses, where all Felons and Criminal persons of
ordinary quality shall be enforced to work for their living during their
imprisonment, and receive due correction in case of refusal, to keep them from
idleness and other Vices; and to provide Preachers to instruct them there?

3. Whether a new Coronation Oath, with some effectual clauses to secure the
subjects Liberties against the Invasions of pretended Royal Prerogatives, be
not simply necessary for our future security; the old Oath having been altered
in some material things? And whether an Oath enjoined by the Houses to all
their members, in all public and private causes that come before them in the
House or at Committees, to proceed and Vote according to the merits and justice
of the cause, and the best advantage of the Commonwealth, to the best of their
skill and judgment, without any fear, favor, hatred, affection or partiality;
would not give much satisfaction to the people, and prevent all scandals and
jealosies of partiality and affection under which some Members and Committees
may else sometimes chance to suffer?

4. Whether it would not be an Act of noble Justice and Equity, for the
Parliament to take some speedy course to satisfy the just Debts of such
well-affected Persons, (who are now fallen into great necessity, and ready to
perish for want) freely lent long since upon the public faith, before they
satisfy arrears or pay Debts to any Members or Officers, who are in no such
present Necessity, and have gained much by the Wars; since many of the richer
sort are to be satisfied their public faith, out of the Excise and sale of
Bishops Lands?

5. Whether the speedy suppression of al standing Country Committees and their
Troops (against whom there are many grievous complaints) erected only in case
of necessity, be not absolutely needful, both for the peoples ease and
contentment, the expediting of the Accounts of the Kingdom, the reducing all
things to the Ancient course of Justice, the preservation of the remaining
Breeds of Cattle, sheep, horses, and Stocks of the Kingdom, almost destroyed
by them and their Agents, the true cause of their present dearth? And whether
it be not worth the inquiry, who and what are the real causes they are still
supported, continued, after so many complaints, motions, Votes, and Ordinances
drawn in both Houses to abolish them?

6. Whether it be not worthy the Parliaments present Examination, how many
Companies of Horse and Foot designed for Ireland, have for many months taken
free Quarter on the Country, contrary to Ordinances, without any Order as yet
for their transportation; and who have been the causes of this great abuse,
that they may be exemplarily punished? Whether many Irish Rebels and Cavaleers
under a pretext of going for Ireland, have not listed and kept themselves in
Companies, taken free Quarter, levied Taxes, and committed many unsufferable
Robberies, outrages in diverse Counties, to the great scandal of the
Parliament, the intolerable oppression and discontenting of the people,
without any Orders but their own? And whether such (if not speedily disbanded
and exemplarily censured) may not raise up new commotions in the Kingdom, by
joining with the Malignant party, and other disbanded malcontents; or else
mutiny the people against the Parliament by their Exorbitances?

7. Whether it be good husbandry or policy to employ such Commissaries or
Agents in the affairs of Ireland now, who have defrauded the Parliament in
that employment heretofore? Or to send provisions into Ireland from London,
Norfolk, Suffolk, Sussex, the East and Southern parts, through the narrow Seas*
(where Pirates often times meet with them) at three times the charge of freight,
ten times the hazard, loss, length of time and inconvenience (such provisions
being for the most part spoiled, or much impaired with long lying at Sea, and
seldom ariving in due season) as they might be transported from the Western
Ports; and in the mean time to eat out and waste all the Provisions of the
Western Counties nearest to Ireland with free quarter of Horse and Foot,
pretended for Ireland, but yet not shipped thither in eight or nine months
space; from whence Ireland and the forces there should and might receive
seasonable supplys with far more speed, safety, convenience, and at much easier
rates then now they do? And whether it be not worth the Inquiry, what is the
true cause of such miscariages?

8. Whether it be not of absolute necessity both for the Parliaments,
Kingdoms, Countries safety, to put the Orthodox conformable wellaffected party
in each County (as the Militia of it) into aspeedy posture of Defense, under
faithful Commanders of their own choosing, first approved by the Houses; both to
suppress the present and future insolences, mutinies of such disorderly
Soldiers and Cavaliers, who straggle up and down refusing to disband, the
overawing of the Malignant party, and all seditious Sectaries and others, who
alelse may soon embroyle us in new Wars? And whether the settling of such a
Militia will not be a better security, and less charge to the Kingdom then an
Army, or capitulating mercenary Soldiers?

9. Whether the deduction of Free quarter and undue Taxes levied on the Country
by Soldiers out of their pay, will not satisfy most of their pretended
Arrears, if duly examined? And since sew or no Soldiers are so just or
conscionable as to pay their quarters duly, when they have once their moneys in
their purses; Whether it be not necessary to deduct all Soldiers quarters for
the future out of their pay at every muster, to satisfy the Counties where
they billet; and to allow them to take free quarter (who else will take it
without allowance or payment for it) and to disband or punish such upon
complaint, who will not be contented with such ordinary quarters as the Country
(in this time of dearth) may reasonably afford them, at the rates deducted for
it out of their pay? Without which course and due payment of quarters by the
Treasureis, out of their pay, or each Counties Contributions to ward the Army,
upon tickets, or proof of the Free quarter taken upon Oath before the
Committees of Accounts in each County, the Country will be totally ruined, and
at last enforced (as many fear) to rise up in mutinies, both against the
Soldiers and Parliament too, as unable to bear the intolerable burden of free
quanter, and pay Excise and Taxes too, even for that the Soldiers eat and
drink at free cost, as they now do in many places?

9. Whether a speedy examination and exemplary punishment of all undue
practices in Elections already made: and an Ordinance to this effect; That all
the Electors of Knights or Burgesses for the Parliament, shall immediately
before their Elections take an Oath, without either fear, favor, or affection,
to elect such persons to serve in Parliament, as in their judgments and
consciences are most sufficient, able and discreet to discharge that trust for
the common good; and that such who either directly or indirectly canvis or make
open or private suite for any such place, shall be absolutely disabled to sit
in Parliament, though returned; would not be a ready means to prevent all
future complaints of undue Elections, and ease the House of very much trouble
and the people of long attendance and much expense, now spent about Elections;
and so necessary to be Ordained?

10. Whether it be not necessary or expedient to redeem all Impropriations in
the possession of Colleges, Hospitals, and Free-Schools, by settling demesne
Lands of Deans and Chapters of equal value on them by way of exchange? And
whether the speeding of the Ordinance for surveying and returning the true
yearly value of all Church livings, Impropriations, Deans and Chapters Lands in
every County, and for the uniting and dividing of Parishes and augmenting the
means of such as are incompetent upon the return thereof, will not be an
effectual means for the settlement of our Church; and the only methodicall
way to make all livings competent?

11. Whether the speedy settling of the great Seal of England in able and trusty
hands, the confining the Chancery to its due bounds, the reducing of penal
Bonds to a less forfaiture (as 120. l. for not payment of 100. l. at the day
to prevent suits in Chancery) and filling the Courts up with able Judges, will
not prove a great advancement of Justice and benefit to the Subject?

12. Whether the delays and difference about the Ordinance for Oxford will not
prove mischevous to the University, the whole Church and Kingdom, if long
continued? And whether all private differences, ends, interests, formalities,
should not always give way to public Accommodations and Advantages,
especially in Parliaments?

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed by I. M. for M. Spark, at the Bible in Green (...) MDCXLVII.


