A LITTLE CABINET RICHLY Stored with all sorts of Heavenly Varieties, and
Soul-reviving Influences.

Wherein there is a remedy for every Mala-dy, viz. Milk for babes, and meat for
strong men, and the ready way for both to obtain and retain assurance of
Salvation:

Being an Abridgement of the Sum and Substance of the true CHRISTIAN Religion;

Wherein The Cause of our Salvation, the Way, the Guide, the Rule, the
Evidence, the Seals, etc. and the connection of these points together, and
Dependancy of them one upon another: This I have endeavored to do orderly,
exactly, methodically, with much plainness and clearness.

By ROBERT PURNELL.

John 14. 6. I am the way the truth and the life, no man comes to the Father
but by me. John 17. 3. This is life eternal, that they might know thee the only
true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. London, Printed by R. W. for
Thomas Brewster, at the three Bibles, at the West end of Paul's, 1657.

Purnel's Cabinet.

The EPISTLE Dedicatory.
To all the Churches congregated, according to the order of the Gospel, with
all that in every place call upon the name of the Lord Jesus, viz. to the
strangers scattered throughout England, Scotland, Wales and Ireland, that are
in love sweetly united, or that yet have their Spirits too much imbittered.
OF all people in the world, those are the only happy people, whose God is the
Lord, Psalm. 144. 15.

Whether they are high or low, learned, or in the worlds account illiterate:
that are tempted or deserted, afflicted or oppressed, they are precious in the
account of God, though vile and contemptible in the eyes of men, etc. my
brethren, for your sakes this piece is come to public view, which is neither
deficient in necessaries, nor abundant in superfluities: the consideration of
the shortness of our time, and the largness of volumes, and the weakness of our
memory, engaged me in this work; Our tender father, who knows what is best for
us, has gathered up all practical Divinity into ten precepts; and our Savior
has reduced those ten into two, and all that we can pray for, or against, into
six heads or petitions; my dear friends, labor to keep close to God in this
loose age, spend not your precious time in complaining on others, but endeavor
in the use of all means to reform your selves; beware of scandals, take them
not where they are, make them not where they are not; lay the foundation of
mortification deep, reserve no lust from the stroke of Jesus Christ; take heed
of pleasing your selves in a bare formal profession, labor to be rooted in
Christ and abide in his doctrine, let your speech be always with Grace, and a
word or two of Christ in every company; beware of sleighting or neglecting of
any of the ordinances of God, or giving those to sinners that belong to Saints;
consider* the truth is the same in all ages, only it shines more and more clear
from age to age, until that which is perfect is come, and that which is
imperfect be done away; the truth held forth is the same, though with more of
God and less of man; such addition is no innovation, but an illustration, not
new light but new sight; a man may not be said to make a new world, when he
makes a new discovery of the old world; despise not the providence of God in
the world they are signs of Gods mind, if not of his love, read your own hearts
in the defects of others, put your confidence in nothing beneath God himself:
Can the stone rest without its center, the Camelion without air, the Salamander
without fire, or the Fish without water? surely they cannot; Our center is God,
all things beneath him are mutable, and fleeting and failing, viz our best
friends may fail us, our eyes fail, our tongues fail, our strength fail, our
flesh and our heart may fail, nay our spirits may fail, Ps. 143. 7. But the
Lord, if we trust in him, will neither fail nor forsake us, Heb 135. In a word,
he is a Sanctuary to the oppressed, he is life indeath, health in sickness, joy
in grief, liberty in bondage, comfort in despair, riches in poverty, honor in
disgrace, heaven in hell: I will hold you no longer in the Porch, but invite
you into the house, and such as I have, I will set before you, desiring you to
taste of every dish before you spend your judgment of the Feast, for what is
wanting in the first course, may be made up in the second; account nothing so
precious as Gods favor, nothing so fearful as his displeasure, nothing so
hateful as sin, nothing so desirable as grace; beware of partial obedience,
mercenary love, pretended zeal, legal sorrow, and feigned humility, for except
your rig hteousness exceed that of the Pharisees, your Sacrifice that of Cain,
your Confession that of Pharaoh, your Fasting that of Ahabs, your Weeping that
of Saul's, your Reformation that of Iebu's, your Restitution that of Iudas's,
your Faith that of Simon-Magus's, your Fear and Trembling that of Felix's,
(...) ye may die in your sins. Read well this book, and mark diligently what
variety of heavenly treasure there is comprised in this Cabinet, and forget it
not, for you shall buy much for little cost, and read much to thy great gain:
If I may prevail with thee to to read it once, thy Love to it will constrain
thee to read it again and again: thou shall find it for order Methodicall, for
matter Spiritual, for brevity Compendious, and for use Precious. I leave you to
him that never forsakes his, and remain

Your Servant for Christ's Sake, ROB. PURNELL.

The Epistle to the Impartial Reader.
Ingenious Reader,
IT was in my thoughts, if I did ever present any thing to public view again,
to have written only of the Kingdom, and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ in the
glory of his Father, attened with the Archangels, and all the host of heaven
so much spoken of in the Scripture, and confirmed by the testimonies of the
Prophets, Apostles, and Angels; but since there is a Doctrine sprung up and
carried on with a high hand, that in part or whole denies the Scriptures of
truth to be the word of God, and so neglect and slight the Ordinances of God
therein contained, and so endeavor to undermine the Doctrine of Christ, I
thought good to make a speedy and safe retreat back again, to guard and defend
the first principles of Religion, that so I might retain that which I had spent
many years to obtain, and not change a rocky foundation for a sandy foundation,
and the pure, perfect, safe and sure ruleof the written word, for a supposed or
pretended light within, who not contenting themselves with those plain and
precious rules, and that clear light that shines in the word, they are only led
by their own fantasies, daily creating to themselves diversity of new
opinions, and so break the bonds of love, and fall off from the communion of
Saints, as though it were no Article of their Creed, and so fall to judging,
railing, and condemning men for not doing as they do; contending for Cummin and
Annis, putting off a hat, and wearing ribans, etc. and not only so, but also
hate, malign, and most bitterly and uncharitably censure all those that differ
from them. Reader, I shall here in this Book present thee with all that I have
learned, or at least with the sum and substance of all that I have gained this
four and twenty years, by reading the Scriptures, hearing of Sermons,
conferring with Christians, and perusing their writings, together with several
things that God has immediately darted in upon my heart; but I have not
received as I know of, nor here presented any of the mediate or immediate
teachings, save that, and only that which is agreeable to the word of God, as
far as I understand his mind therein: neither have I made it my work to contend
for, or cry up any particular interest, but rather it does much grieve my heart
to see what a state most menare in here, each tugging for his interest, and so
whilst they are contending for the garment, the power of Religion is much
abated.

I would entreat thee Reader to weigh things in the balance of Righteousness,
love and impartiality, and then I am confident that there will be none that
has the work of grace upon their souls, unless they be under some violent fit
of temptation, but in the main will sweetly own, and spiritually bless God for
the revelation of the precious things contained in this little Book; here being
something of every thing needful to be known and practiced, for the obtaining
of which I have imitated the Be, that goes forth of the hive, and gathers honey
from several sorts of flowers, and herbs, and sometimes from weeds. And for
the compiling of these things together, as they have a connection and dependence
one upon another, I have borrowed a little time from my particular calling, and
from my sleep, and recreation. If I have done this work well, it is that which
I desired, but if slenderly and meanly, it is because I could do it no better.
I must confess I rather lisp then speak plain in the things of God, wherefore
cover all my imperfections with a mantle of love. for it has been compiled in
the midst of many personal trials; if thou find any imperfections, yet let not
the truth of God suffer through my weakness; to the Law and to the testimonies:
wherein I come short of writing according to that rule, it is for want of
light: I hope I shall be content to decrease, so the glory of God in the gift
of Christ, and Covenant of grace may increase: let my name perish, so his may
flourish, let me cut off like a Weaver and dye, so his name and glory may live:
I shall no longer detain thee from the thing it self, which treats of that
which is of great concernment to all, in the reading of which if thou shall
receive any light, or reap any spiritual benefit* give all the praise to the
Lord, and pray for him who is a lover of all that fear the Lord, under what
form soever they be, or by what name or title soever they are known.

ROB. PURNEL.

A Table of the principal heads in general, and the connection of these points
together and dependence of them one upon another.
OF God the Father. Of God the Son. Of God the Holy Ghost. Of Gods decrees. Of
Election. Of the Creation. Of Angels. Of Man. Of the Sou l. Of Man's fall. Of
Providence. Of Man's recovery. Of Vocation. Of the Covenant of Grace. Of
Justification by Grace alone. Of Sanctification or a holy Conversation. Several
strong reasons why the Saints should walk holily. Of Justification and
Sanctification, wherein they differ, and wherein they agree. Of Faith. Of
Repentance. Of Sin, the nature of it. Of Knowledge. First Of God. Secondly Of
our selves. Of Experience. Of Enjoyment Of the grace of love, 1. First to God.
2 To his People.
Of the Grace of hope. Of Perseverance. Of the several gifts and Graces of the
Spirit. Of the several Ordinances o^ the Gospel 1. Of the ass^mbling of our
selves together. 2. O preaching and prophesying. 3. Of Prayer and supplication.
4. Of singing and praising God together. 5. Of the Ordinance o^ Baptism. 6. Of
the Ordinance o^ the Lords Su^per. 7. Of the Collection or the poor. 8. Of
reading the Scriptures. 9. Of Admonition, private and public. 10. Of
Suspension. 11. Of Excommunication.
Of Assurance of Salvation. Of the difference between the Law and the Gospel,
and of the several sorts of Laws. Of the ten Commandments, and what each of
them does prohibit and enjoin. Of the Lords prayer, and the several petitions
therein contained. Of the World, Flesh, and the Devil, the three great enemies
of man. Of afflictions, and why the Lord does afflict his own people. When a
man may be said to suffer for well-doing, and when for ill-doing. The Lord is
many times better then promise, never worse. Mercies and deliverances are many
times nearest to us, when we think they are farthest of. The Lord does hand
forth mercies by the rule of contraries. He does not despise the day of small
things. The order of causes, how the Lord comes down-ward from the causes to
the Effects, and how we must go upward from the effects to the causes. Man's
life is or should be guided by seven virtues. Several Divine Sentences. Diverse
knotty questions answered and seeming contradictions, reconciled, and many
scruples of conscience removed. Of the shortness of man's life, and of the
misery that does attend every age thereof. Of the misery attending both body
and Soul at the hour of Death. Of a Bill of indictment at that time brought
against us. Of the sad condition and misery of all out of Christ after death.
Of our preparation for death, that we may be ready when it comes. Death to a
Christian is but a house, a bed, a sleep. The great and terrible day of the
Lord is near; proved 1. By the testimony of the Prophets. 2. By the testimony
of the Apostles. 3. By the testimony of Angels. 4. By the immutability of Gods
decree. 5. By the infallibility of his promises. 6. By the impartiality of his
justice.
There are four things that Christ has already done, and five things he is now
doing, and six things more that he will do when he comes. Of the resurrection
of the dead at Christ's second coming. Of the first and second resurrection.
Whether there be any such things as the personal reign of Christ: and if so,
what it is. Of the last judgment. 1. The signs that go before it. 2. What is
meant by it 3. O^ the place where it shall be. 4. Of the person, who it is that
shall judge the world. 5. Of the time how long the judgment shall last. 6. Out
of what all people shall be judged. 7. The day of judgment will be a great day.
The sad condition of all Christless, after the Sentence is pronounced. 1. The
unspeakable pains they shall endure. 2. Their companions, what they shall be.
3. The duration of this miserable estate.
Of the happy and blessed estate of the Godly after judgment. 1. Their bodies
shall be made glorious. 2. Their Soul shall be far more perfect then it was in
the state of innocence. 3. Of the place where we sha^^ be after the last
judgment. 4. In whose presence we shall be. 5. Whether the Saints shall know
one another. 6. Whether they shall speak one to another. 7. The varieties of
joys, that there shall be in heaven. 8. The duration of this blessed estate.
And lastly what the consideration of all this should teach us.
Reader, do me that favor as to correct these greater faults that appear at
first view: for I have not opportunity to peruse it all; And cover lesser
faults with the mantle of love: and let not the truth suffer through my
weakness, etc.

Errata.

Page 5. l. 1. r. 1 John 5. 7. p. 22. l. 12. r. Ier. 32. 40. p. 23. l. 29. r.
John 6. 27. p. 25. l. 6. r. 2 Cor 5. 19. p. 29. l. 6. r. Heb. 13. 20 p. 29. l.
16. r. Inherent. p. 36. l. 21. r. undertook. p. 48. l. 11. leave out in. p. 50.
l. 5. r. use. p. 55. l. 4 r. John 1. 16. p. 61. l. 31. r. Ephesians. 28. p. 62. add
the word (that) In l. 22. p. 72. l. 17. add the word (he) p. 73. l. 26. add the
word (the) p. 73. l. 12. r. (him) p 84. l. 6 r. 1 Kings 8. 56. p. 91. l. 7. r.
Col. 3. 10. p. 101. l. 17. add the word (the) p. 108. l. 4. r. Facility. p.
122. l. 3. r. Tltu^. 3. 8. p. 143 l. 15. r misery p. 175. l. 12 r. 2 Cor. 8. 8.
p. 188. l. 28. leave out the word (the) p. 229. l. 14 r. call p. 24. l. 9. r.
^ph. 3 14. p. 258. l. 16. r. deductions p. 260. l. 30. r. Col. 2. 12. p. 2^8. l
16. r. Romans 4. 21. p. 295. r. 1 Chror. 28. 8. p. 300. l. 24. leave out the word
(set) p. 306. l. 1. r. Isaiah 58. 13. p. 330. l. 22. r. other p. 343. l. 19.
place and after time. p. 350. l. 17. r. Psalm. 45. 13. p. 356. l. 6. r. lohn 5.
45. p. 376. l. 29. add the word (If) p. 381. l. 27. r. of God p. 385. l. 5. put
(the) before sincere p. 391. l. 8. r. (and)

A LITTLE CABINET Stored with all sorts of Heavenly Varieties.
Of God the Father.
GOD is a Spirit, having his being in himself, and giving being to all things,
Ioh. 4. 24. Exodus 3. 14.

In a word, he is,

1. Without composition. 2. Infinite, Psa. 147. 5. and 145. 3. Exodus 3. 14. 3.
He is eternal, Pro. 8. 20, 22, 23. Romans 16. 26. 4. Incomprehensible, Exodus 33.
22, 23. 1 Timothy 6. 16. Isa. 66. 1. 5. Unchangable, Jam. 1. 17. Mal. 3. 6.
He comprehends all things, and is comprehended of nothing. He is without
beginning and end, for by him, and in him all things begin and end, Act. 17.
28. For in him we live, and move, and have our being; he is present in all
places, at all times, beholding and seeing all things, Prove. 15. 3. Psalm. 139.
4. Job 9. 11. 2 Chronicles. 16. 9. Jer. 23. 23, 24.

Two things in God. 1. There is something incommunicable, as infiniteness,
immensity, eternity, 1 Kin. 8. 27. and 1 Timothy 1. 17. 2. There is something in
God communicable, as love and mercy, Exodus 34. 6. Wisdom and Power, Job 36. 9.

Perfection, glory, and blessedness, this God is to be known in the first Adam;
and in the second Adam in his ordinances, and in his Saints: Now we must know
God, otherwise we cannot.

1. Desire him, Joh. 4. 10. 2. If we know him not, how can we obey him. 3. If
we know him not, how can we have communion and fellowship with him, 1 John 1.
5, 6, 7. All nature is not able to teach us what God is in himself, neither can
man in nature comprehend him, Job 36. 26. 1 Timothy 6. 16. Yet may he be known by
his properties and actions, God is a spiritual substance, having his being of
himself, infinite, great and good, Ioh. 4. 24. and 8. 58. Exodus 3. 14. and 34.
6, 7. Psalm. 145. 3, 8, 9.
Of the Son.
THE Father, Son and Spirit, are but one essence or substance, although
distinguished, into Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, 1 Ioh. 5. 7.

In Christ two things are to be considered,

1. His Person. 2. His Offices.
1. In his Person consider the two natures, Divine and humane, 1 Timothy 2. 5. and
Mat. 1. 13.

He was to be God, because the greatness of the evil could not be taken away
but by himself; the wrath of God being infinite, it could not be taken away by
any finite thing.

Again it must be finite, for it could not stand with Gods justice to punish
Christ for our sins, if he had not our nature, neither could it have been
satisfaction for us, if it had not been in our nature and stead; so that Jesus
Christ is very God, and very man, of the very substance of the Virgin Mary,
begotten by the Holy Ghost. The unity of the two natures in Christ, is not the
confounding of them, for the Godhead remains infinite, invisible,
incomprehensible, the Body finite and visible, Acts 3. 21. 1 Cor. 15. 26, 28,
29.

As God is in Christ, so he is infinite, eternal, Almighty, wisdom, goodness,
mercy, truth, Justice, equal with the Father, in being, majesty and glory, in
whom the Father delights from all eternity; his own, and his only begotten Son,
promised before to Adam, preached to Abraham and the Patriarchs, typified in
the Legal Sacrifices, and prophesied of by Moses and all the Prophets, pointed
at by John, manifested in the flesh, Justified in the spirit, seen of Angels,
preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world, received up into glory, 1 Timothy 3. 16. Let us get a distinct knowledge of this Christ without us, and a
sensible feeling of his virtues in us.

Of the Holy Ghost.
THE Father sent forth the Son, and the Son sent forth the Holy Ghost, yet
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost was never separated one from the other. As there is
one God Father of all, and one Lord Jesus Christ redeemer of the world, so
there is one sanctifying Spirit of grace: and as it is the office of the Father
to elect, and the office of the Son to redeem, so it is the office of the
Holy Ghost to sanctify those, and only those, whom the Father has elected,
and the Son redeemed: and as the Father does love freely, and the Son manifest
that love, so the spirit does evidence that love to, and in the souls of the
Saints: the Father loves a Christian as redeemed by Christ, Christ looks upon
him, and loves him as given by the Father for him to redeem: the Holy Ghost
seeing the love of the Father, in choosing him, and the love of the Son in
redeeming him, he also sets his love upon him, and manifests it unto him.

So that as election to life is by God the Father, and redemption by God the
Son, so justification, sanctification, and restoration into the Image of God
is by the Holy Ghost.

So that in the unity of the Godhead there be three of one substance, power
and eternity; God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost; the Father
is of none other, begotten nor proceeding; the Son is eternally begotten of the
Father; the Holy Ghost eternally proceeding from the Father and the Son: See
Math. 3. 16, 17, and 28. 19. 2 Cor. 13. 1, 4. 1 John 1. 14. And that the
Holy Ghost is God, will appear by these Scriptures, Act. 5. 3, 4. Peter
reproving Annanias for lying, said, he did lie to the Holy Ghost, and so he
lied not to men but to God: so again, Isa. 6. 9. I heard the Lord speaking,
which place Paul expounds of the Holy Ghost, Act. 28. 25.

Of Gods Decrees.
WHatsoever God does in time, that did he decree to do from all eternity.

So that Gods decree is that whereby he has from all eternity set down with
himself whatsoever shall come to pass, Ephesians. 1. 11. If any ask what things are
decreed by God; I answer, (1) all things, (2) with their causes, (3) with their
effects, (4) circumstances, and (5) manner of being, Act. 2. 23. and 4. 27, 28.
Ephesians. 1. 11.

1. This decree is most wise, Romans 11. 33. 2. Just, Romans 9. 13, 14. 3.
Eternal, Ephesians. 1. 4, 5. 1 Cor. 2. 7. 4. Unchangeable, Heb. 11. 17. 5. Most
free, Romans 9. 18. 6. The cause of all good, Iam. 1. 17.
Now the parts of this decree is twofold; first, concerning Angels; Secondly,
concerning man; and of this decree concerning man, there be two parts: First
Election. Secondly Reprobation: 1 These. 5. 9. Judge. 4. 5.

As concerning Angels, they also are of two sorts.

First good. Secondly bad. First good or excellent.
1. For their nature. 2. For their gifts. 3. For their offices. 4. For their
estate.
Secondly, bad or evil Angels.

God from all eternity has determined of all things, together with their
causes, effects, circumstances of place and time, means, manner and end, to the
manifestation of his own glory, Psalm. 99. 4. Mat. 10. 29. Romans 9. 20, 21. and
11. 36. Pro. 16. 4.

Of Election.
ELection is the decree of God, of his free love and grace, and mercy, choosing
some men to Faith, holiness, and eternal life, for the praise of his glorious
mercy, 1 These. 1. 4. 2 These. 2. 13. Ephesians. 1. 4, 5, 6. Romans 8. 29, 30. The
causes of election was none other, but his mere good will and pleasure, Luke
12. 32. Romans 11. 5. and 9. 11. 16. Ephesians. 1. 5. 2 Timothy 1. 9.

The end of election is the manifestation of the riches of his grace and mercy,
Romans 9. 23. Ephesians. 1. 6.

Quest. Was not Christ, and faith, and holiness, the causes of election?

Answ. No, the sending of Christ, faith, holiness and eternal life are only
the effects of Gods love, by which he manifests the infinite riches of his
grace: Ioh. 3. 16. 1 Ioh. 4. 10. Acts 13. 4. Titus 1. 1. Col. 1. 12. Romans 6. 23.

God ^eerly out of his good pleasure, without the fore-fight of any good in the
creature, according to his unlimited sovereignty, elected a certain number by
name unto eternal salvation, and he has decreed to effect all the ways and
means for them, and in them, to bring them thereto: see 2 Timothy 1. 9. and 1 Pet.
2. 8.

So some are elected unto life out of all sorts of people: Mat. 20. 16. Rom* 9.
24. Rev. 7. 9.

That unto which God has elected them is,

1. To the Adoption of Sons. 2. Sanctification of life here. 3. And eternal
life hereafter.
The first and only moving cause of Election is the good pleasure and love of
God: Ephesians. 1. 5. Romans 9. 18. Ephesians. 1. 11. So that Faith is not the cause, but
the effect of election: Act. 13. 48.

God is no respecter of persons, and yet he elected some, and left others, when
he found no difference.

A man may come to know in time, that he was elected before time.

1. We come to apprehend this by Faith, 1 These. 1. 4. 2. By our effectual
calling. 3. By our justification, 4. By our sanctification, Romans 8. 30. 5* By
the testimony of Gods Spirit: Romans 8. 9, 16, 17. 1 Cor. 2. 10, 11, 12. 2 Pet.
1. 2, 3. 2Cor. 1. 21, 23.
Of Reprobation.
REprobation is the wise, just and absolute decree of God, passing by, and
leaving some men unto themselves, to suffer them to fall, and to enflict upon
them eternal punishment, deserved by their sins, for the praise of his
unspeakable great justice, Romans 9. 11, 13, 22. Jude 4. Ier. 6. 30.

The causes of this decree is the absolute will and good pleasure of God, Mat.
11. 26. Romans 9. 13.

The end of this decree is not the condemnation of the creature, (...)
^^^ifestation of Gods Justice: Romans 9. 22. Yet election and reprobation, in a
sense, are not the causes of salvation and damnation, but Christ is the proper
and meritorious cause of salvation, and sin the proper and meritorious cause of
damnation. Election and reprobation, they are but precedent acts or decrees,
and the causes of salvation and damnation, they come in between the causes, and
the execution thereof. It is the fore-appointment of certain Angels and men,
unto everlasting dishonor. God of his own free will determining to pass them
by, refuse, or cast off, and for sin to condemn and punish them with
everlasting death: Prove. 16. 4. Exodus 9. 16. Romans 9. 17. 2 Timothy 2. 20. Mat. 25.
41.

Of the Creation.
ALthough God made man of the dust of the earth, yet he could have made him of
nothing, as he made all things else of nothing, in six days, Heb. 11. 3. Exodus
20. 11.

1. In the first day, were created the heavens and the earth, and light, Genesis
1. 1, 2. Job 38. 7.

2. In the next day was the out-spreading firmament or heavens, the division of
the waters above, from the waters beneath, Genesis 1. 6, 7.

3. In the third day there was a twofold work, first a gathering of the waters
in one place, secondly a bringing forth of herbs, Genesis 1. 9, 10, 11, 12.

4. In the fourth day was made the Sun, Moon and Stars to give light on the
earth, and to be for signs and seasons, and for days and years, Genesis 1. 14,
15, 16, 17.

5. In the fifth day, there was a twofold work, the creation of all sorts of
fish in the sea, and fouls in the air, Genesis 1. 22, 23.

6. In the sixth day, there was also a twofold work, the creation of all sorts
of beasts upon the earth, and the creation of man, whom the Lord made in his
own Image, Genesis 1. 24, 25, 26, 27.

7. The seventh day the Lord made a Sabbath of rest, and blessed that day above
all other days, and did also sanctify it.

The causes of this great work of creation, was first his love to man, and the
showing forth his own glory, and the fulfilling of his decree, to the end that
God may be known and honored of his creatures, etc. his eternal power and
Godhead is seen in raising all things out of nothing.

By his word alone, Isa. 40. 12. Romans 1. 20. Ier. 10. 12. and 51. 15.

And his infinite wisdom is made known by them, Psalm. 104. 24.

Of Angels.
ANgels are spiritual creatures, complete and immortal, yet finite: Heb. 1.
13, 14. Col. 1. 16. Mat. 4. 11. and 26. 53. Psalm. 68. 17. Mat. 22. 30. Luke 20.
36. Heb. 1. 7. Psalm. 104. 4.

There be two sorts of Angels, first good, secondly bad.

The good Angels they praise God, worship the Son, they are heavenly messengers
from the Father to defend the faithful, they have wrestled, eaten, been
received as strangers, had their feet washed, they shall gather the elect from
the four corners of the earth, they shall come with Christ to judgment, they
be excellent creatures.

1. For their nature, Isaiah 6. 2. Daniel 9. 21. 2 These. 1. 7. 2. For their
gifts, 2 Samuel 14. 17. Mat. 6. 10. Luke 15. 10. 1 Cor. 13. 1. 3. For their
offices, Dan. 7. 10. Rev. 5. 11. 4. They be excellent for their estate, Mat.
18. 10. 5. They be wise and of great understanding: 2 Samuel 14. 20.
They were the first creatures that ever God made; there be also several
orders of Angels, viz. Archangels, Cherubims and Seraphins; yet lay all these
things together, it will appear that righteousness of Angels is but the
righteousness of creatures; but the righteousness that the Saints are clothed
with, is the very righteousness of Christ, and in this respect the meanest
Saint is more excellent, then the most glorious Angel in heaven: they are by
God sent forth for the good of his people, hence they are called ministering
spirits, and they minister to the Saints many ways.

In their life, by defending them from their enemies; the Angels of the Lord
pitch their tents about them that fear him, Psalm. 34. 7.

An Angel it was that slew the army of the Assyrians. That delivered Peter out
of prison, as also preserved Lot, Psalm. 91. 11. For he shall give his Angels
charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways, Genesis 32. 5. An Angel
encouraged Jacob, when he feared his brother Esau, an Angel it was, Luke 1. 30.
who bid Mary not to fear, and who stood by Paul and bid him be of good cheer,
Act. 27. 24. By an Angel was the incarnation of Christ foretold to the Virgin,
and by a multitude of Angels was it proclaimed; afterward an Angel leads
Philip to expound the Scripture to the Eunuch, sets Peter at liberty to preach
the Gospel, bids Cornelius send for Peter to be instructed by him, and prays
Paul to come over to Macedonia to help them; none are so nobly attended as
Saints, they have a lifeguard of Angels to encompass them about; Angels are as
careful of the faithful, as a nurse of her sucking child, they bear them up
in their arms, that they dash not their feet against a stone.

Of Man.
ALL men by nature are equally made of one earth and blood, and every poor
Christian is as dear unto God as a mighty Prince. Man was wonderfully created,
and more wonderfully redeemed: The Lord has assigned his heart to wisdom, the
belly to avoidance, the breast to health, the liver to anger, the gall to
bitterness, the spleen to laughter, the kidneys to craftyness, the loins to
strength, the ribs to comeliness: the Lord having finished the excellent frame
of heaven and earth; he calls a counsel, to build that excellent tabernacle Man,
into whom he breathed the spirit of life; this man did far exceed all other
creatures, that amongst them all, not found any one fit, or meet to be a
companion for him, or to have society with him, and so the Lord made him a help
meet for him; this man was the masterpiece of all Gods works, to whom the Lord
did give an unlimited prerogative over the beasts of the field, the fouls of
the air, and the fish of the sea, but man by his disobedience became inferior
to the most despised creatures; and we, all his posterity are more miserable,
and fuller of vanity then any of the unreasonable creatures: viz. other
creatures by the benefit of nature can stand upon their legs, and seek after
their food, when young, but man the Lord of them all must be swadled in clouts,
being no way able to help himself; the young chickens as soon as ever they are
hatched, can run after their dam, to seek for food, and have that wisdom to
hide themselves under her wings at the fluttering of the Kite; the lambs,
calves, and young costs, stand suddenly upon their legs, to seek their dams
teats. But man would perish if his mother by her natural affection did not
bring the nipple of her breasts to his mouth, and rock him upon her knees.

Of the Soul.
THE soul of man is a spiritual substance, immortal and invisible, endued
with memory, understanding and will; or the soul is a substance immortal,
invisible, united to the body, and endued with many admirable faculties, as
life, sense, and reason; to this end principally, that God might be truly
honored, and duly worshipped.

Or the soul is a spiritual, invisible and immortal substance, endued with
power to understand, and will: this soul is at one instant both created and
united to the body, and by the power and faculties of the soul, man is capable
of happiness, or of the the chief good, or greatest misery: or thus, the soul
of the Saints is a spiritual and immortal substance, created after the Image
of God, and renewed after the immortal Image of God in Christ: the soul is a
real and very being as the body is, only of an higher kind; the body is of the
earth, the soul is immediately from God.

Of Man's Fall.
THE devil himself being fallen, comes to the garden in the form of a
Serpent; Adam and Eve being in Paradise, and looking upon themselves, as indeed
they were, the most excellent piece of all the creation, bearing the Image of
God their Creator; the Lord having left them a law, he leaves them to the
fredom of their own will; the devil boards the woman thus: has God said ye
shall not eat of such a tree, it is a likely thing that the Lord cares what ye
eat; what, do you think he stands upon an apple? this is the first assault,
which the woman weakly resists, and answered doubtfully, we must not eat lest
we die: then the devil perceiving the woman to stagger, and the ground of her
faith to shake, he plants all his pieces, and purposes for a second storm, and
stands up, and says to the woman, ye shall not die at all; can there be any
hurt in an apple? Oh silly woman! God he affirms and faith, ye shall die; the
woman says I must not eat, lest I die; the devil says ye shall not die; upon
this the woman did eat, and gave to her husband, and he did eat; and thus,
through Satan's temptations, our father and mother rebelled against our God: Oh
father Adam what have thou done! For through it (wast thou that did sin) yet
thou art not fallen alone; but we all that came of thee, as being then in thee,
we are infected by thee, and so are become Satan's conquest, out of whose hands
there is no redemption, unless the Lord Jesus Christ come down from heaven, and
lead captivity captive, and open the prison doors, and let the prisoners go
free, all Adams posterity are pertakers of his sin and misery.

Of Providence.
IF we look upon Gods providence in some few particulars only, we shall wonder,
seeing Joseph disgraced and imprisoned, David persecuted, Christ arraigned and
condemned, Paul accounted one of the worst of men, Innocent Naboth stoned, true
Churches, as in Hesters time, ready to be swallowed up: Many things may fall
out by Gods providence contrary to our desires, that are not contrary to our
good.

1. Consider that God takes notice and knows all things.

2. He upholdeth and governs, and disposes of the world, so as it pleases
him.

3. This providence reaches to every thing, so that the smallest things are
governed and upheld by him.

4. That of all creatures God has most care and respect to man.

5. We are to consider that the good or evil that befalls a bad or good man or
woman, is not without, but by Gods providence.

6. That God does whatsoever pleases him in heaven and earth.

7. God in his ordinary providence makes use of means, and yet he is free to
work without, above, and against them as he pleases.

8. As the providence of God does reach to all creatures in all things: so
after a more special manner he takes care of his Church and people, and
disposes all things to the good thereof.

God can look sowrly, and chide bitterly, and strike heavily, even when and
where he loves dearly, Abraham, Job, Jacob, and David, Moses, Jeremiah, Jonah,
Joseph, Paul, and many others, met with many things that were contrary to their
desires and endeavors, that were not contrary to their good: God has a
continual care over all his creatures once made, sustaining and directing
them, with all that belongs to them, and effectually disposes of them all to
good ends: Ephesians. 1. 11. Romans 11. 36. Ier. 23. 23. Col. 3. 11. Psalm. 139. 2.
and 119. 91.

Of Man's recovery.
GOD who at first made man in his own Image, and made him Lord of the creation,
endued him with wisdom, knowledge, and understanding above all other creatures,
and made him for so noble an end, as to serve him here, and reign with him
hereafter: man soon fell from his blessed state, yet was not the love of God
obliterated, but more abundantly manifested in sending his dear Son to take our
nature, and yield obedience to his righteous law; make satisfaction for our
transgression; and to bring in an everlasting righteousness, and to make
proclamation to us that his Father so loved the world, that he gave him, his
only begotten Son, that whosoever believed in him, should have everlasting
life, John 3. 16. And whosoever did come to him should in no wise be cast off,
John 6. 37. Adams righteousness from which he fell, was but a righteousness of
the creature; but the righteousness of Christ, is the righteousness of the
Creator. Adams righteousness was a mutable righteousness that might be lost, a
righteousness that might be sinned away; but the righteousness of Christ is an
everlasting righteousness, that cannot be sinned away: Prove. 8. 18. Dan. 9. 24.
Psalm. 119. 142.

Of Vocation or effectual calling.
VOcation is Gods acquainting men with his gracious purpose of salvation by
Christ, and so inviteth them to come unto him, Heb. 2. 14. and so reveals
unto them his Covenant of grace, Mat. 11. 27. and 16. 17. John 14. 21. Psalm.
25. 14. and so brings them out of darkness to light, Acts 26. 18. So God
becomes in Christ, their Father; he does not only outwardly by his word invite,
but inwardly also, and powerfully by his spirit, allure and win their hearts to
cleave to him inseparably unto salvation, Psalm. 25. 14. and 65. 4. Acts 2. 39.
Or effectual calling is the work of Gods spirit in us, whereby he does, first,
convince us of our sins and misery, enlightening our minds in the knowledge of
Christ, and renewing our wills, he does persuade and invite us to embrace Jesus
Christ freely tendered to us. We read that many were called to the wedding, but
they made their excuses, and most of those that came were compelled to come in,
Luke 12. 23. the Lord does force none by violence, but draw them by persuasions.

The Gospel calls many outwardly, that after perish eternally. Our vocation
depends upon Gods election, not upon our preparations: how was Paul disposed
and affected, when Christ called him? God is for us, in predestinating us; God
is for us, in calling us; God is for us, in justifying us; God is for us, in
glorifying us; if God be thus for us, who can be against us? he has
predestined us before we were, he has called us, when we were averse to him,
he has justified us when we were sinners; he will glorify us and cloth us
with his own righteousness.

That we may be neither drawn, enticed, or forced from our Religion, let us
build upon a right foundation.
IT is impossible that any soul should enjoy a firm and settled peace, whose
confidence toward God is grounded upon conditional promises, or his own best
and choicest performances. For the wanting in himself, the condition of the
one, and not yiedling a perfect, exact, universal, perpetual obedience to the
other, the Law will be condemning, Conscience accusing, and the heart
misgiving, and all proclaiming that there is still in all thy duties
imperfection, something polluted, and something defective, so that thy most
spiritual duties are not wound up to command, they are all tainted with
disproportion to rule, and beleprosed with spots, so that it is in vain to
expect a bed of rest in the barren wilderness of our own performances, for that
bed is shorter then that a man can stretch himself on it, and the covering is
narrower then that a man can wrap himself in it; Oh the spots, the blots, the
blemishes that are to be seen upon the face of our fairest duties! so that we
may say with the Church, Isa. 64. 6. all our righteousness are as filthy rags,
which if rested upon will as certainly undo us, and everlastingly destroy us,
as the greatest evil that can be committed by us: the consideration of this
was the cause of those words, Hos. 14. 3. Neither will we say any more to the
works of our hands, ye are our gods. For in thee the fatherless find mercy*
Jer. 3. 23. Truly in vain is salvation hoped for from the Hills, and from the
multitude of mountains; truly in the Lord our God only is the salvation of
Israel. Now that I my self, and others that read these lines, may be grounded,
rooted and established upon the true and only foundation, is the desire, and
endeavor of my heart and soul.

In the ensuing Treatise, and for the accomplishment of this great work, which
is of highest concernment, let us first endeavor to unravell, unmask and
unbowel the Covenant of Grace, and for our more orderly proceeding therein, let
us enquire into these particulars.

1. What is the sum and substance of this new Covenant. 2. With whom this
Covenant was first made. 3. When this Covenant was made. 4. Whether there be
any conditions of this Covenant, and if so, what they are. 5. Whether it be one
and the same Covenant of grace that was in force before the Law, and under the
Law, and under the Gospel. 6. Whether this Covenant may not be broken, as was
the Covenant of works. 7. What means one should use to get into this Covenant.
8. When may a man or woman be said to be in this Covenant. 9. Wherein the
Covenant of Grace and the Covenant of works do differ.
Question 1. What is the sum and substance of this Covenant of Grace, or New
Covenant?

Answ. The Covenant of Grace is called a testament or will: indeed the will of
the Father, revealed to the Son, and by the Son revealed to the world, to
manifest the Fathers love unto the sons and daughters of men, and testified to
the world, that what he declared was the mind of God, and so sealed it with his
blood, Heb. 10. 29. So that his blood that he shed, is called the blood of the
Covenant; yea of the everlasting Covenant, Heb. 13. 20. Or,

The Covenant of grace is full of sure mercies, and sweet promises, that God
will give a new heart, a heart to know him, and that he will write his Law
within us, put his fear into us, cause us to walk in his statutes, forgive our
iniquities, cleanse us from our filthiness, be our God, and make us his people,
Ezekiel. 36. and Jer. 31.

This Covenant does fall into these six parts, viz.

1. It is a free Covenant. 2. It is a full and complete Covenant. 3. It is a
well ordered Covenant. 4. It is a sure and firm Covenant. 5. It is a peaceable
Covenant. 6. It is an everlasting Covenant.
1. First it is a free Covenant.

1. Because the foundation of it is free. 2. Because it is freely given to
those that do partake of it, Isa. 42. 6, Isa. 49. 8. 3. Because there is no
active condition required on our part, Jer. 31. 33, 34. 4. It is free in
respect of his entering into Covenant with us, Isa. 65. 1. 5. It is free in
respect of his performances of it, Mich. 7. 20.
2. It is a full and complete Covenant, richly and plentifully stored with all
suitable promises, both for this life, and that which is to come, for soul and
body, being and well being, there is some remedy in it for every malady.

3. It is a well ordered Covenant.

1. In respect of the Persons with whom it is made, and that is first with
Christ, then with his seed.

2. In respect of the promises, and parts of the Covenant.

First God becomes our God, then we become his people, Jer. 32. 38.

3. In respect of manifestations, he first reveals it, and then seals it by his
Spirit, Ezekiel. 16. 8, 9. 2 Timothy 1. 10.

4. In respect of the ends of it, which is God the Father, and the Sons glory,
in the riches and freeness of his Grace; which should caution us not to darken
the Glory of free Grace.

4. It is a sure and firm Covenant, founded upon that Rock Jesus Christ, Isa.
26. 4. Romans 4. 16. Our salvation is by Grace, to the end that the promises
might be sure to all the seed, Isa. 55. 3. I will make an everlasting Covenant
with you, even the sure mercies of David. Now it is sure and firm:

1. Because it is made by an Immutable God. 2. He has confirmed this Covenant
with an oath, Heb. 6. 17, 18. 3. He has sealed it with the blood of his Son,
Heb. 13. 20. 5. Fifthly, It is a peaceable Covenant, in this Covenant he does
freely give peace to the soul, and so keeps the soul in peace, the heart being
stayed on him, Isa. 26. 3.
In this Covenant there is a threefold peace conveyed to the soul, Ephesians. 2. 14.
he is our peace who has made both one.

1. He is our peace with the Father. 2. He gives peace of Conscience, he stills
and quiets that. 3. He is the Author and cause of our peace with men.
6. Sixthly, It is an everlasting Covenant, Jer. 3. 40. And I will make an
everlasting Covenant with them, that I will not turn away from them, to do them
good, but I will put my fear into their hearts, that they shall not depart from
me. The motives that did move God to make this Covenant, was his everlasting
love; the Righteousness upon which it is grounded, is everlasting
Righteousness. In this Covenant is presented to us everlasting pardon,
everlasting kindness, everlasting mercy, everlasting joy and consolation, and
everlasting life and salvation, all these are fully proved, by these and the
like Scriptures, Psalm. 105. 8. Isa. 40. 18. Heb. 8. 12. Isa. 54. 8. and 35. 10.
2 These. 2. 16.

What shall I say more to the nature of this Covenant; it is sometimes called a
New Covenant, sometimes it is called a better Covenant, as appears by Heb. 12.
24. compared with Heb. 8. 6. Sometimes it is called a Covenant of grace, now by
a New Covenant, a better Covenant, a Covenant of grace. All serious Christians
do understand the engagements which God has laid upon himself: to bestow on
them for whom Christ died, all good temporal, spiritual and eternal
blessings, so that by this God does make himself debtor to his people, in
Covenant with him, and is bound in justice to perform his word and promise.

Now this Covenant is sometimes called a New Covenant, because it succeeds in
the place of the other Covenant of works; and it is called a Covenant of grace,
because all the effects thereof do flow down to us, merely of free Grace and
favor of God, and the merits of Christ, Zach. 9. 11.

In the Covenant of Grace we may find the mouth of the Law stopped, and all the
accusations of Satan answered, and the justice of God ^ully satisfied.

God will have all blessings and happiness to flow to us, through and by the
Covenant of Grace.

1. That the worst of sinners may have strong ground of hope. 2. For the praise
of his own glory. 3. That vain man may not boast. 4. That our mercies and
blessings may be sure to us, our salvation is by grace, says Paul, Romans 4. 16.
that the promises might be sure to us; for if it in any sense depended upon
works, we could not be sure thereof. Reader, understand these four choice
things, viz.
1. That Christ by the will of God gave himself a Ransom and sacrifice of a
sweet smelling Savor unto God, in behalf of the Elect, Joh. 6. 7. Heb. 5. 10.
and 10. 9, 10. Ephesians. 5. 2.

2. That this ransom was alone, and by it self a perfect satisfaction to
Divine Justice for all their sin, Heb. 1. 3. When he had by himself purged our
sins, sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high, Heb. 10. 10. by the
which will we are sanctified, by the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once
for all, verse 14. For by an offering he has perfected, for ever, them that
are sanctified, 1 John 1. 7. The blood of Christ cleanses us from all sin.

3. That God accepted it, and declared himself well pleased, and fully
satisfied therewith, Mat. 3. 17. And lo a voice from heaven, saying, this is
my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, Isa. 4. 2. 1, 4, 6. I will give thee
for a Covenant of the people, for a light of the Gentiles, etc. God was so well
pleased in him, that he has Covenanted and sworn that he will never remember
their sins, nor be wroth with them any more, Isa. 43. 25.

4. That by this ransom of his we are delivered from the curse of the Law:
Gal. 3. 13. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a
curse for us.

To close up all as to the nature of this Covenant. Let me tell thee the main
substance of the Covenant is in these words, I will be their God, and they
shall be my people, but sprinkling with clean water, taking away the stony
heart, and giving a heart of flesh, all these are nothing but the fruits of the
Covenant. So Christ is given for a Covenant to the people: that is the Covenant
of Grace takes its being from Christ to us: Adam was all mankind, as all
mankind was in Adam, in the loins of Adam; so Christ is the Covenant, and all
the Covenant is as it were in the loins of Christ, and springs to us out of
him; in this sense he is the Covenant-maker, he is the Covenant-undertaker, he
is the Covenant-manager, he is the Covenant-dispenser, he does every thing in
the Covenant, he makes the articles, he draws God the Father to an agreement
unto the articles, Psalm. 110. 3. thy people shall be a willing people in the
day of thy power, and God is in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself: 2
Cor. 5. 9. Hence Christ is also called the Mediator of the Covenant, that is,
he is one that has the managing of it on both sides, and he alone is able to
bring both sides together, and make up a conclusion, and thus Christ is the
Covenant, and the Mediator of the Covenant, etc.

The second thing to be enquired into, is with whom this Covenant was first
made.
THis Covenant was not made with us, but with Christ for us; God did not
immediately make this Covenant with us, we were children of disobedience and of
wrath, who were not capable of any such Covenant and conditions, but it was
made with Christ for us, that upon the making of his soul an offering for sin,
he would give unto his seed eternal life, Zech. 9. 11. As for thee also by the
blood of thy Covenant, I have sent forth thy prisoners out of the pit wherein
is no water: Adam lost his righteousness* the foundation of the first Covenant:
But the righteousness of Christ the second Adam, can never be lost, it being
grounded upon better promises, Heb. 8. 6.

The Covenant made with Christ, has these promises, Genesis 12. 3. In thee shall
all families of the earth be blessed, 2 Cor. 1. 20. All the promises of God,
are Yea and Amen in him; so then this Covenant was made with him actively, as a
person that performed all the conditions upon which the promises were grounded;
but with us passively, as the Persons to whom the benefits of these promises do
belong: if Christ merited nothing for himself, but wholly for the Elect of God,
then all the promises made to him do belong to them; or the Covenant which was
made with him as Mediator, does belong to us, for whom he does mediate. Now the
parties concerned in this Covenant, are first God the Father, and Jesus Christ
the Mediator, and the Church or body of Christ, for whom he was to mediate. Now
this Covenant being made with Christ, he as a Surety is bound to perform and
see performed, all the duties that God requires of believers; so he was
arrested, and brought to the bar of Gods justice, where he is convicted,
adjudged, and arraigned as a sinful transgressor, so he suffered the uttermost
rigor of the Law, and not one grain of justice abated him, nor a farthing of
the debt forgiven him, no nor so much as one sin unaccounted for or blotted
out, till satisfaction was first made and given. But after the full account and
perfect payment, this Surety Christ Jesus pleaded for a dismission, and
discharge, and so got a general discharge, acquittance, and releasment, under
the King of Heavens hand and seal for us, etc.

If any man desire further satisfaction, whether this Covenant was first made
with Christ for us, yea or no. Let him consult with these precious Scriptures,
Psalm 89. 24, 27, 28. Hebr. 13. 20. Isaiah 42. 6. Isa. 55. 3. Zach. 6. 13. Isa.
50. 56. Zach. 9. 11. Isa. 53. 10.

Now if any one ask, what were the conditions between the Father and the Son,
when this Covenant was made, they are as follows. First see what God the
Father promised unto Christ on his part.

1. That he would anoint him, and fill him with the Spirit above all others,
Heb. 1. 9. Isa. 11. 2.

2. That he would prepare him a body to sacrifice for sins, Heb. 10. 5, 10.

3. That he would uphold him, and strengthen him, that he should not be ashamed
by the things he should suffer, Isa. 42. 6. and 50. 5, 7.

4. That he would justify and glorify all his seed, Isa. 50. 8. Joh. 17. 22,
24, Isa. 53. 11.

5. That he should see and enjoy the travel of his soul, and the purchases of
his blood, Isa. 53. 10. Heb. 2. 7.

6. That he should have all power in heaven and in earth given him, till all
his enemies were made his footstool, Ephesians. 5. 25, 27, Matthew 28. 18. 1 Cor.
15. 28.

Next let us examine what Christ did perform or promise to perform on his part,

1. To become a Mediator, Surety and Savior for all those that his Father
should give him, Heb. 8. 6. Heb. 7. 22. Act. 13. 23. Ioh. 17. 11, 12. Ephesians. 1.
10. Col. 1. 20. 1 John 2. 1.

2. To take upon him the nature of man, and so to become flesh, in his Fathers
appointed time, Gal. 4. 4. Mat. 11. 27. John 17. 4.

3. That he would glorify his Father, by keeping, revealing and doing his
will, John 15. 10. John 6. 39.

4. That he would suffer and satisfy personally and perfectly for the sins of
men, Luke 24. 46. Hos. 13. 14. 1 Pet. 2. 24.

5. That he would bring himself, and all those given him by his Father unto
glory, Heb. 10. 14. Joh. 14. 4, 9. John 10. 18.

The word of God does contain the Articles of this Covenant; those that desire
further satisfaction, search the Scriptures, wherein you shall find that Christ
did willingly undertake this work, Heb. 10. 7, 9. and did faithfully discharge
it, Heb. 10. 5, 6, 7, etc. so our reconciliation was wrought by the Son, Isa.
61. 1. John 1. 3. John 5. 36, 37. Col. 1. 16, 17. Hebr. 1. 3. John 5. 17. and
3. 17. and sealed by the Holy Ghost, Ephesians. 1. 13. and 4. 30.

The third thing to be enquired into, is when this Covenant was made with us.
THere be three set times wherein God may be said to make this Covenant: viz.

1. Immediately after the fall of Adam, Genesis 3. 15. the seed of the woman shall
bruise the Serpents head; these few words comprehended the sum of all Law and
Gospel, and the Covenant therein contained: Tit. 1. 2. in hope of eternal
life, which God that cannot lie promised before the world began, 2 Timothy 1. 9.
who has saved us, and called us with an holy c^lling, not according to our
works, but according to his own purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ
Jesus before the world began.

2. This Covenant in a sense may be said to be made with us at the death of
Christ, because thereby all the benefits were merited and procured for us: so
this Covenant came to be confirmed by the death of the Testator, Heb. 9. 16,
17, 18. Hence his blood is called the blood of the everlasting Covenant, Heb.
11. 20. And the blood of the New Testament, Mat. 26. 28.

3. This Covenant may be said to be made with us, when God does confirm upon us
the benefits which are therein promised, which are many; I will instance but in
three.

1. There is the matter and blessing of the Covenant on Gods part, in these
words, I will be their God, and they shall be my people, Ier. 31. 33.

2. In this Covenant Christ does first give us grace imputed, and then grace:
inherit all the benefits of the Covenant, are the fruits and effects of Christ's
death.

3. There is also the promise that God will work out the manifestation, by
which man shall see his interest in this Covenant, and his right and title to
all the blessings thereof.

Now if we would yet farther know when this Covenant was made with Christ for
us, let us weigh that text, Ephesians. 1. 4. We are chosen in him, before the
foundation of the world. Now if Election be before the foundation of the world
(sure it is) then also by the same ground the Covenant or promise was made
before the foundation of the world, for the word does prove the one as well as
the other; these promises were made first to Christ on our behalf, before they
are made to us, because the whole work of our redemption and salvation, was
transacted between the Father and the Son, before the foundation of the world,
and is afterward revealed to us in due time, as is evident, Tit. 1. 2. 2 Timothy
19.

The fourth thing to be enquired into is, whether there be any conditions of
this Covenant on our part, and if so, what those conditions are.
WHat this Covenant is, with whom it was made, and when it was made, has been
laid down before: now it follows in order to examine whether there be any
conditions on our part; and for answer unto which, let me give my judgment,
viz.

In this Covenant the Lord does bequeath grace and glory on no other condition,
but the death of the Testator, that is, Christ Jesus: as the first Covenant was
built upon the righteousness of the first Adam; So the second is built upon the
righteousness of the second Adam: and it will plainly appear in this Covenant
of grace, that there is no condition on our part to entitle us to the blessing
of it; it is true, to our head Christ this Covenant was conditional, though to
us it is free; to him it was a Covenant of works, hence Christ is called the
Mediator, Witness and Surety of this new Covenant, and that this Covenant is
without conditions on our part, will appear more fully by these ensuing reasons.

1. Because a Covenant of free grace cannot stand with conditions, for if it
had conditions it would not be of grace, for grace is not grace, if it be not
every way free, Romans 11. 6. and if by grace, then it is no more of works,
otherwise grace is no more grace, etc.

2. Because to give a thing freely and condiotinally are contradictions; and to
say there is conditions as to us, is to eclipse the grace of God, and to open
a door for vain man to boast. So that the whole glory of our justific^tion and
salvation ought to be given to the grace of God, and to the merits of Christ.
If either of them did depend, and were obtained by works and conditions
performed by us, it would not be of grace.

3. Because that justification by grace, without conditions on our part, is the
life and soul of the Gospel, Galatians 1. 6, 7. I marvel that you are moved
from him that called you into the grace of Christ, unto another Gospel, which
is not another, but there be some that would pervert the Gospel: how can there
be another Gospel, and yet not another Gospel? First it is not another, because
it is not possible there should be two Gospels; yet another Gospel, because men
did turn it aside in point of justification.

4. Because if any qualification or grace in us be a condition, Faith must
needs be the condition, or one of the conditions; but if faith should be the
condition of the Covenant of grace, then it differs nothing from the Covenant
of works, for it is as hard a thing for a man to believe, as it is to keep the
whole Law.

Again, Faith cannot be the condition of the Covenant, because we obtain it by
the same means we obtain all other good things else, to wit by the
righteousness of Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 1. 1. Ephesians. 1. 3. Romans 8. 32. Ezekiel. 36.
25. Jer. 31. 31, 34.

Again, Faith and repentance, justification and sanctification, are things
purchased by Christ for us, and freely given to us, and are the effects and
consequences of the Covenant, as does appear, Ezekiel. 36. 27. Jer. 32. 38, 39,
40. Hos. 2. 18, 19, 20.

It is true, Faith and repentance are means of our enjoying the comforts of the
Covenant, but not the conditions flowing out of the nature of the Covenant; for
every means is not a condition, though every condition be a means; so that we
are not justified by faith, as the condition of the Covenant, but organically
and isntrumental.

So that all the blessings of the new Covenant are called gifts, not
conditions, Romans 5. 17, 18. compared with Romans 6. 23. and these are gifts that
are given freely, 1 Cor. 2. 12. we choose him, because he first chooses us; and
we love him, because he first loves us: we cannot say God is our God, till he
does first say, we are his people; we cannot say we will run after him, till he
does first draw us; neither can we bring forth fruit, unless we abide in the
Vine; nor purify our selves as he is pure, unless we have this hope in us; so
that we may not expect the effects before the cause, nor the light before the
sun, or heat before the fire.

5. There be no conditions in this Covenant, because it works and effects in us
all things required of us.

Now faith, repentance and obedience does describe the Persons that are saved,
but not the terms or conditions upon which they do obtain salvation; that
interpretation of any Scripture, that does involve a contradiction, is not to
be admitted; but to say faith is the condition of the Covenant, is an express
contradiction.

Ob. But are there not conditions required on our part? pray read these two
Scriptures Psalm. 25. 14. The secrets of the Lord is with them that fear him,
and he will show them his Covenant, Isa. 55. 3. Incline your ear and come unto
me, hear and your soul shall live. And I will make an everlasting Covenant with
you, even the sure mercies of David.

Ans. It is true, in these Scriptures there are three things required of us.

1. To fear him. 2. To incline our ear and come. 3. To hear, and our soul shall
live.
But are not all these three things promised to us in the Covenant? and does
not God by his Spirit, work these things, with many more, in us? is there any
one thing required of us, that he has not promised to work in us? surely no.

Ob. But if faith be not an active, it is a passive condition.

Ans. I have heard some say so, but could never see a man able to prove it to
be so.

Object. Some say that this Covenant is conditional, no otherwise, then in
respect of Gods order and method, in bestowing the blessings of it upon us.

Ans. In this sense it may be granted (it is so) still keeping close to this,
that not in a proper, but in an improper sense, the Covenant may be said to be
conditional; for as has been said before, the Covenant of grace and life by
Christ is every way free, and unconditionally on man's part, else how does it
differ from a Covenant of works? Romans 11. 6. And if by grace, then it is by
gift, for grace and gift you must understand are all one: grace is nothing but
the favor of God, freely given, and of his own accord communicated; and if by
grace, then it is no more of works, otherwise grace is no more grace, etc. If
you bring grace unto works, or works unto grace, either the one or the other,
or both, are made void; as much as to say, these two things are inconsistent,
they cannot stand together; that we should partake of Christ through grace, and
works both, they will not stand together; grace must stand alone, or works
alone, for one does directly stand in opposition to the other; and the
Scripture is plain and clear, that the Father expects nothing of men, no
qualification, or spiritual disposition, before or upon the communicating of
his Son; the condition on our part is to receive it, and to improve it, and
walk worthy of it, and when we come short herein, we are said to break Covenant
on our part, Psalm. 44. 17. and Isa: 24. 5. and in Deuteronomy. 29. 25, etc.

The fifth thing to be enquired into is, whether it be one and the same
Covenant of grace that was in force before the Law, and under the Law, and
under the Gospel.
THere is but one Covenant of grace, and a threefold administration of that
Covenant; the one before the Law, the other under the Law, the third under the
Gospel.

1. Before the Law the promise of grace was, that notwithstanding man had thus
rebelled against God, yet the seed of the woman, which was the Lord Jesus
Christ, should bruise the head of the Serpent, Genesis 3. 15.

2. This Covenant was given or published by Moses, and made with the Jews, till
Christ's resurrection, being placed in ceremonies, types, figures and shadows,
all pointing at the substance that was for to come, all the Laws and Ordinances
remaining in full force and virtue; for he that did but neglect circumcision,
was to be cut off from the Isreal of God, Genesis 17. 14.

3. This same Covenant in the days of Christ and his Apostles is renewed, and
the substance of the Covenant more fully opened and cleared, whereby more
persons are renewed, and more graces bestowed, being always to endure one and
the same; hence it is called a new Covenant, Heb. 9. 13. Jer. 31. 31.

Now it is the same Covenant of grace both in the old and new testaments, only
the difference stands thus.

1. It is larger in the New Testament, even extending to the Gentiles, and not
confined to the Jews as then it was, 1 Thessal. 4. 5. Ephesians. 2. 11. and 2. 12.

2. It is plainer now, then it was in types and shadows, blood of beasts,
incense, washing with water and other rudiments; so that now things are seen
more plainly in their substance, then in painting or prospective glasses.

3. It is stronger, this makes perfect, the other could not, being weak and
unprofitable, and therefore in that administration it is now disanulled, Heb.
8. 7, 13.

4. It is more firm, being confirmed with an oath, and by the death of Christ.

5. It gives more knowledge, that in comparison of the Law, they shall not need
to teach one another, Heb. 8. 10.

6. It has a better Mediator, even Christ, who by his intercession reconciled
the disagreeing parties, and undertaken for both sides; on Gods part, that
these and these things shall be done, which he has promised; on our part, to
give satisfaction by his own death, and make us obedient to his Father. Oh that
God should ever enter into Covenant with us, so sinful, vile and miserable!
Covenants make unequal persons equal, as Jonathan and David; the Lord abaseth
himself, when he looks thus upon things below, as in Psalm. 113. 6.

Although the Covenant of grace be the same then and now, yet there is a
difference in regard of the manner of dispensation and revealing it: being
several ways propounded, according to the several times, ages, states and
conditions of the Church: delivered one way, before the coming of Christ, and
another way afterward. And therefore in regard of the old way and manner of
administering of it, it is called the old Covenant; and in regard of the new
manner of dispensing it, its called the new Covenant; the same Covenant is
therefore called both new and old, Heb. 8. 8, 13.

Quest. Wherein stands the difference between the old and new administration of
this Covenant of grace?

Answer 1. One more burdensome, another more easy.

2. In regard of the extent of the dispensation; the one to the Jews only, the
other to all Nations.

1. The Covenant in the former dispensation was more burdensome, as will
appear by these things.

1. The burden of their costly sacrifices, suitable to the quality of the
person, and nature of the sin.

2. They had long and tedious journeys to Jerusalem, thrice a year, Deuteronomy. 16.
16.

3. They were restrained from many liberties which we now enjoy; we are allowed
many creatures for meat, which they might not eat, as the Hare, Swine, etc.
Differences of meats is now taken away.

4. They were tied to the observation of many days, new moons, and ceremonies,
which we are freed from.

2. The second difference is in regard of the extent of it in the old
dispensation, the Covenant of grace pertained to the Jews only, Romans 9. 4. Romans
3. 2, etc. but now under the Gospel Dispensation this Covenant extends to all
Nations, or at least some of all Nations; whosoever will, says the Scripture,
let him come and take of the water of life freely, Rev. 22. 17. Isa. 55. 1, 2.

The sixth thing to be enquired into is, whether this Covenant may not be
broken, as the first Covenant of works was.
1. AS this Covenant was not made with us, but with Christ for us, so it cannot
be broken by us; and as it was not made for our good works, so it cannot be
disanulled by our sins, because the Lord has founded it upon his own immutable
word and promise, which he has confirmed by an oath; hence it is called an
everlasting Covenant, because his everlasting love caused him to make it, and
because it cease not when we are in glory, for our continuance in glory is
promised in this Covenant.

2. This Covenant cannot be broken, because the righteousness upon which it is
founded is an everlasting righteousness, and everlasting pardon, Heb. 8. 12.
And everlasting kindness, and everlasting mercy, and everlasting joy, and
everlasting consolation, 2 Timothy 2. 16, 17. Isa. 35. 10. Psalm. 100. 5. Dan. 9.
24. Jer. 31. 3.

3. This Covenant cannot be broken, because he that made it is an everlasting
God, the motives that did move him to make it was everlasting love, and the
Righteousness upon which it is grounded, is, as is said before, everlasting,
yea all the legacies and blessings thereof are everlasting: to have and to hold
salvation by Christ our head is more secure and lasting then in our own
keeping; God will no more trust us with our selves, nor with our righteousness,
by which we shall stand before him.

For if when we were truly good, and had no corruption nor sin in us, we did
then fall, much more should we do so now, were not Christ our undertaker; he
will keep it for us, and us for it, so that now the promises of righteousness,
life and salvation, are sure to all the seed of Christ, 1 Pet. 1. 3, 4, 5. 2
Cor. 12. 9. Romans 4. 16.

4. This Covenant cannot be broken, because the Lord has sworn it shall not,
Isa. 54. 9, 10. For as I have sworn that the waters of Noah should no more go
over the earth, so have I sworn that I will not be wroth with thee, nor rebuke
thee, for the mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed, but my kindness
shall not depart from thee, neither shall the Covenant of my peace be removed,
says the Lord that has mercy on thee.

Object. Do we not read in Scripture, that the Lord will break Covenant with
the people that break Covenant with him, viz. Ezekiel. 16. 59. Zach. 11. 10. Isa.
24. 5.

Answ. 1. Consider, that as this Covenant was not at first made with us, so it
cannot at last be broken by us, and as it was not made for our good works, so
it cannot be disanulled for our sins; and for answer to the three places of
Scripture, in this objection alleged, let us consider them with an unbiassed
judgment; the first Scriptures is that in Ezekiel. 16. 59. For thus says the
Lord God, I will even deal with thee as thou have done, which have despised the
oath, in breaking the Covenant.

Now compare these words, with 60. and 62. verses, and you will find, that
although man does break the Covenant on his part, yet God will not break
Covenant on his part, nevertheless says the Lord, I will remember my Covenant
with thee, and establish my Covenant with thee, says the Lord.

The next Scripture is that in Zach. 11. 10. And I took my staff, even beauty,
and cut it asunder, that I might break my Covenant which I had made with all
the people.

For answer unto this, consider, the people oftentimes broke it on their part,
as does appear, Lev. 26. 44. Deuteronomy. 31. 16, 20. Judge. 2. 20. Jer. 11. 10. and
31. 32. But for all that, God never did nor would break it on his part totally,
see Judge. 2. 1. Psalm. 89. 34. Jer. 33. 20, 21. Exek. 16. 60, 62. And this
Covenant here does relate more immediately to that peace which he has granted
to his Church, that she should be no more assaulted nor molested by any strange
Nation, etc. and so for that place, Isa. 24. 5. the Covenant was broken but on
the peoples part, as appears by the express words of the text.

What shall I say more, the old Covenant was for to last but for a time, till
the time of reformation, Heb. 9. 4. but the new Covenant is to last for ever;
this makes much against that dangerous opinion of those that slight and neglect
the ordinances of the Gospel, under a pretense of setting up Christ's Kingdom.

The seventh thing to be enquired into is, what means should one make use of to
get into this Covenant of Grace.
THE safest and speediest way to get into this Covenant, is to rest upon Christ
alone, and to fetch the comfort of our justification from his perfect
obedience, only we may not put our selves or others upon the evidencing of our
justification by our election, nor our election by our justification, but both
justification and election by a steadfast reliance upon Gods free grace and love
held forth in absolute promises.

1. The first means, Let a man get up, and keep up a holy fear of God upon his
heart, and then thou come under the promise, Psalm. 25. 14. The secrets of the
Lord is with them that fear him, and he will show them his Covenant.

2. Consider what a pickle poor man was in, even as bad as thy self, when God
did first enter into Covenant with him, or when God did manifest himself to be
in Covenant with him, see Ezekiel. 16. from verse 2. to the 11. Luke 10. 30, 33,
34.

It is an apparent truth unto all experienced Christians, that when God first
enters into Covenant with men, he finds them in their blood, and in their
infidelity.

3. Means to get into this Covenant, endeavor to believe, for although faith
be not an instrument to procure it, yet it is to receive justification and
salvation, which is freely given us by Jesus Christ, and so peace in the soul
does come by believing: God is the Author and giver of peace, Christ the Prince
and promiser of peace, the Spirit the worker and sealer of peace, and the
Gospel the word and ground of peace, and the Ministers the messengers of peace,
and this blessed Covenant is sometimes called a Covenant of peace: but if thou
endeavor to believe and can not, consider, God does not take men into
Covenant because they believe and are holy, but that they might believe and be
holy; in this Covenant he does promise faith and holiness to men, and through
it he does convey it to them, and this Covenant being without conditions, it
does give a man the greatest encouragement to believe, and cast himself into
the arms of Christ, and to put on a strong confidence of inheriting the
precious promises; seeing that in their accomplishment, they depend not upon
works and conditions on our part, let us then do as Benhadads servants did, 1
King. 20. 31, 32, 33.

Yea let us resolve with the woman of Canaan, not to be beaten off with any
discouragements; this act of faith is styled a taking the kingdom of heaven by
force, Job 13. 15. though he slay me, yet will I trust in him, see 2 King. 7.
4, 5.

4. Dwell much upon the consideration of those promises that God has made,
viz. To bring men into the bonds of the Covenant, and to work a willingness,
and an ability to receive what he gives: to believe what he says, and to
observe and do what he commands.

What shall I say more, would we indeed get into this Covenant? then the work
we have to do is twofold.

1. To get a Title to Gods love. 2. To get assurance that we have a title: the
first is done by consideration and believing: the second is done by examination
and diligence to make our calling and election sure.
Object. But you have said before, that there is no condition of this Covenant
on man's part: and now you put men upon the use of means to get into this
Covenant: now I would fain know what difference there is between means and
conditions, are they not as one?

Answ. Every means is not a condition, though every condition be a means.

Now Gods order and method in bestowing the blessings of the Covenant upon a
person, or a people, is in the use of means, in Exek. 36. there are some
sixteen promises one after another, made to the people without any condition on
the peoples part. Be it known says the Lord to them, not for your sakes, but
for my own names sake, I will do this for you, but I will hand these mercies to
you in the use of means, verse 37. I will yet for this be enquired of by the
house of Israel, to do it for them.

And surely mistaken is Mr. Samuel Richardson, that says in his book called
the Saints desire, page 46. that there is no means to be used by man to get an
interest in this Covenant, or to partake of it.

1. Break your Covenant with your old sins and your lusts, or else God will not
enter into Covenant with you, Mat. 6. 24.

2. Come with an humble submission to yield up thy self to the obedience of the
will of God. If any will be my disciple, he must deny himself.

3. Come before God in the name of a Mediator, and make a Covenant with him by
his sacrifice, Psalm. 50. 5.

4. By faith look at the gracious invitations of God, and consider his
readiness and willingness to enter into Covenant with us, 2 Chronicles. 30. 8, 9.
John 6. 39.

The eighth thing to be enquired into is this, when may a man or woman be said
to be in this Covenant.
1. A Man or woman, old or young, is then properly, actually and expressly in
Covenant with God, when God has come to it in a promise of the Gospel, so that
the soul does feel it self under the power of the promise, then it begins to
know he is in Covenant; so the Lord in and through this Covenant, brings a poor
soul to see, and seeing, to admire the superabundant riches of his free grace
and love, and so humbly and thankfully embraces the same: and the heart thus
wrought upon, exceedingly desires that such kindnesses of God might not slip
out of mind, but that the consideration of this soul-ravishing, heart-melting
grace and loving kindness might carry him forth steadfastly to believe, and
dearly to love, cheerfully to honor and obey this God of mercy in soul, body
and spirit, so long as the Sun and Moon endures: so the soul begins to be
carried forth out of self unto God, and in God alone finds rest and
satisfaction.

2. Faith and works does evidence our being in the Covenant; faith does
evidence it to our selves, and works to others, but faith and works do evidence
no otherwise then organically, as it is an organ or instrument by which we do
apprehend it.

3. Then may a man be said to be in the Covenant, when he does find his soul
carried forth to a secret resting, relying, leaning, staying and hanging upon
Christ alone for life and happiness.

4. A man may be said to be in this Covenant, when he does find within this
frame of spirit. Oh that I had more of God, that I were filled with Christ: oh
that I had his righteousness to cover me, his grace to pardon me, his power to
support me, his wisdom to counsel me, his loving kindness to refresh me, and
his happiness to crown me.

5. Again, a man may be said to be in this Covenant, when in some good measure
a soul does come to see that Christ did legally interpose and put himself
between God and man, to mediate and intercede for them, and so voluntarily
became obedient unto his Fathers will, and by undergoing, bearing and suffering
the warth and curse due to him for his sins. And so Christ took away the sins,
reconciled him to God, redeemed him from the Law, and delivered him from the
wrath to come.

6. A man may be said to be in this Covenant, when he does freely accept of
free pardon, and a surety under the Gospel: Gospel grace neglected is the great
condemnation of the world: how mindful should we be of the Apostles counsel?
Receive not the grace of God in vain, that is, receive it not only in word, but
in power, as it is a quickening spirit, or spirit and life; not begetting a form
only of a profession, but as changing and transforming into the Image of God,
and altering the inward disposition of the heart.

7. A man may be said to be in this Covenant, when he finds in himself a
conscientious improvement of the word of God, for self purifying: the word has
a purifying faculty in it, John 15. 3. Ye are clean through the word that I
have spoken to you: now the word does purify these several ways.

1. As an antidote against sins, Psalm. 119. 11. Thy word have I hid in my
heart, that I might not sin against thee.

2. As a lamp discovering the spot, Romans 7. 7. I had not known sin but by the
Law.

3. As a star conducting to Christ the fountain of purifying, 1 John 2. 1, 2.
Zach. 13. 1.

4. As a rule according to which we are heedfully to order our conversation,
Psalm. 119. 9. wherewith shall a young man cleanse his way, but by taking heed
thereto, according to thy word?

5. As a motive in the precious promises of it, 2 Cor. 7. 1. Having therefore
these promises, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of ^^esh and
spirit.

The ninth thing to be considered of, is this, wherein does the Covenant of
grace, and the Covenant of works differ.
FOR answer hereunto, consider the vast difference between the Law and the
Gospel, viz. the Law affords not a drop of grace, it bestows nothing freely:
the language of the Law is, do thou and live; if not die; no work no wages; but
in the Gospel, the yoke of personal obedience is translated from believers to
their surety; there is nothing for them to pay; all that they have to do, is to
hunger and feed; their happiness is free, in respect of themselves, though
costly to Christ, who by his merits has purchased for them whatsoever they
would obtain, and by his Spirit works in them whatsoever he requires.

The First Covenant of works is old, the Covenant of grace is new: the first is
the Law of the letter, the second is the Law of the Spirit; the first is a Law
of death, the second is a Law of life: the first was wounding, the second is
healing; the first a natural law, the second a spiritual law; the first a law
of types, the second a law of substance: the first was to be done away, the
second is to continue; the first a Covenant of earthly blessings, the second a
Covenant of spiritual blessings: the first was to stand for a time, the second
was to stand for ever.

Again, this Covenant of grace does differ from the Covenant of works in the
universality and large extent of it: the first Covenant requires a
righteousness in us, the second does give and accept of a righteousness which
is another, and imputed to us.

It is true, that Religion for the substance thereof, was ever one and the
same, and unchangeable, as appears, Heb. 13. 8. Ephesians. 4. 5. Jude 3. Acts 26.
22. Tit. 1. 1, 2. And so the word of God written by Moses and the Prophets, did
contain whatsoeever was needful for the salvation of the Israelites, Deuteronomy. 4.
2. and 12. 32. Psalm. 1. 2. Mal. 4. 4. Hos. 8. 12. Luke 10. 26. But the in New
Testament our Savior made known unto his Disciples, the last and full will or
Covenant of his heavenly father, John 14. 26. and 15. 15. and 16. 13. and 1.
18. and what they received of him, they faithfully preached unto the world,
Acts 20. 27. 1 Cor. 15. 1, 2. 3. Gal. 1. 8. 1 John 1. 3. And the sum of what
they preached is committed to writing, and left upon record for our learning,
Act. 1. 1, 2. Joh. 20. 31. 1 John 5. 13. Act. 8. 5. 1 Cor. 2. 2. Romans 10. 8, 9,
10.

The difference between the Covenant of works, and the Covenant of grace, may
be reduced to these three heads.

1. The first was a ministration of the letter, a naked Commandment, carrying
with it no aptness, disposition, or ability to keep it.

2. It breeds enmity and fear; looking on God as a hard taskmaster, and so fills
the soul full of terrors.

3. It is a ministration of death, namely by the curse, to them that keep it
not.

But the Covenant of grace is a ministration of the Spirit, requiring no more
then what it promises to give. In a word, it is a ministration of the Spirit,
of love, freedom, and righteousness, and of life; for that it shows the guilty
a righteousness to satisfy the Law, and the way to obtain a Pardon.

4. The first Covenant was made altogether upon condition on both sides; the
condition on Gods part was, they should live; the condition on man's part was,
he must do this: but in this Covenant there is not any condition, I mean in the
Covenant of grace.

True it is, could we justify the Law by keeping it; the Law would justify
us, in and by that obedience to it. But now the Law is become weak and unable
to justify any man, though powerful and strong enough to condemn every man.

5. In the Covenant of works a man is left to stand by his own strength; but in
the Covenant of Grace, God undertakes to keep us through faith to salvation.

6. In the Covenant of works, Gods highest end is the glorifying of his
Justice; and in the Covenant of grace, it is to glorify his grace. The voice
of the Covenant of works, is like the first speech of Nathan to David, Thou art
the man; the voice of the Covenant of grace is like his after-speech, The Lord
has put away thy sin: the voice of the Covenant of works, is, the soul that
sins shall die, Ezekiel. 18.

In the Covenant of grace, he says, Ezekiel. 33. 11. As I live says the Lord, I
desire not the death of a sinner.

7. There is help for such as break the Covenant of works, but no help for such
as make void the Covenant of grace.

The tenth thing to be enquired into is this, what is Gods oraer and method,
that he generally makes us of, to bring his people into the bond of the
Covenant, and to bestow the blessings of the Covenant upon them.
FIrst, in the making up of the Covenant between God and us: God is the first
with us, he is the first mover, he begins with us, before we begin with him: we
should never seek to be in Covenant with him, if he did not first allure us,
and draw us, invite us, and entreat us, Ezekiel. 20. 37. I will bring them (says
the Lord) into the bond of the Covenant: it is the Lord that brings them, they
do not first offer themselves.

1. God prepares his own way for entering into Covenant with us, and then he
finisheth the work, and in this preparation he does these three things.

1. He breaks us of our Covenant with hell and death, and makes us sensible of
our undone estates, and makes us to see that we are without God, without
Christ, without hope, that we are not under mercy, that we are not as yet of
his people, Ephesians. 2. and 1 Pet. 2.

2. He opens to us his mind and will, showing himself willing to receive us to
grace, and to enter into a new Covenant with us, yet again to take us to be his
people, and he to be our God: and so he goes into the streets, and open places,
as it is in Prove. 1. 20, 21. and there makes public proclamation: ho, every
one that will, come ye to me, and I will make an everlasting Covenant with you,
Isa. 55. 3. Isa. 65. 1. and if we come not at this first invitation, then he
comes and beseeches us to be reconciled to him* 2 Cor. 5. 20. and speaks to us
as pitying us, Jer. 3. 12. and lamenting over us, Ezekiel. 33. 11. and all this
he does to persuade us to come and strike a Covenant with him.

3. By the hearing of these promises and offers of grace, the Lord usually
scatters some little seeds of faith in the hearts of those that he will bring
unto himself; which seeds being sown, do quickly put forth, and act toward the
Covenant, before by the Father tendered, and lays hold of it, as we see in
Lydia, the Jailer, Zacheus, etc. So by an act of faith, we come to close with
the Covenant, revealed and offered freely unto us, by accepting the grace
offered, resting upon God for all the mercy which he has promised; and then
taking God to be a God over us, submitting to his government and authority, to
command us, and to rule us in all things according to his own will; these two
things faith does, and so takes hold of the Covenant more firmly, in the same
way and order as God offers it. First God makes himself known to us as a God of
mercy, gracious, long suffering, pardoning iniquity, transgression and sin, and
so offers himself to be reconciled to us, though we have rebelled against him,
promising to be a Father unto us, and to accept of us in his beloved, as his
sons and daughters: and thus is the Covenant made up between God and us; and
the soul now begins to say in it self, I that was an enemy, he has now
reconciled unto himself; I that was in times past, without God, without Christ,
without promise, without Covenant, without hope, and none of Gods people -- Yet
now I have God for my God, Christ is my peace, and I am now become one of Gods
people, the Covenant of his peace now belongs to me, and the Lord is become
my salvation, saying as Jacob, Genesis 33. 11. The Lord has had mercy on me,
therefore I have enough, I have all that my heart has desired. The Lord does
acquaint the soul with those absolute promises, which show unto us the only
cause of our salvation, even free grace and no other thing. Secondly, they are
a foundation for the faith of adherence or dependence to stay upon, they yield
a singular encouragement to a poor dejected soul, that finds nothing in it self
but sin and misery, with hope to cast it self upon the free grace of God,
seeing he looks at nothing in us, for which he should save us: there be two
acts of faith, one of adherence or dependancy, another of assurance; there be
also two kinds of promises, absolute, and conditional: mark now how these do
fit and answer one to the other, the absolute promises to the faith of
adherence: the conditional to the faith of assurance. Now faith helps us to
close with the Covenant, and enables us to walk with God according to the
Covenant which we have made; there is a keeping of Covenant required of us, as
well as a making a Covenant with God, Genesis 17. 7, 9. Psalm. 50. 5. The Saints
are said to make a Covenant with God, but in Psalm. 103. 18. they are said to
keep his Covenant; so there is a making and a keeping of Covenant, and both by
Faith.

The eleventh thing to be enquired into is, what are the blessings and benefits
of this Covenant to usward.
Answ. WE can never know the things which are given to us of God, but by
knowing of the Covenant, which conveys all the blessings from God to us. O let
us lift up our hearts, to look for great things, great blessings, such as the
great God has promised; the blessings are suitable to our wants, the things of
the Covenant are great things, Hos. 8. 12.

The Covenant is as full of blessings as of letters, or syllables, and more; it
is a rich storehouse, replenished with all manner of gifts and graces,
spiritual and temporal; it is as a tree of life to those that feed upon it,
they shall live for ever; it is a Well of salvation, it is a fountain of good
things, to satisfy every thirsty soul, Zach. 13. 1. it is a treasure full of
goods, as Deuteronomy. 28. 12. here is unsearchable riches, unspeakable mercy, which
can never be fathomed, or emptied: all these blessings of the Covenant are
wrapped up in the promises of it, every promise of grace containing a blessing;
as every threatening of the Law contains a curse. Now the promises and blessings
of the Covenant are of two sorts: First, of things spiritual and eternal.
Secondly, of things temporal; the spiritual blessings of the Covenant are
chiefly comprehended in these places of Scripture, Jer. 31. 31, 33. Ezekiel. 36.
25, 26, 27, 28. Jer. 32. 38, 39, 40. Genesis 17. 7. God in Trinity enters into
Covenant with us.

1. The Father enters into Covenant with us, and promises to be a Father to
us; hence says the Lord, Exodus 4. 22. Israel is my son, my first born, and
Jer. 31. 9, 20. is Ephraim my dear son, is he my pleasant child? so the Lord
has a care to provide both heavenly and earthly inheritance for his children:
he has also a care to nurture and instruct them in his ways, Deuteronomy. 32. 10.

2. Christ the son enters into Covenant with us, and speaks to us, as in Isa.
43. 1. Thou art mine: and Hosea 13. 14. I will redeem them, I will ransom
them. Oh death, I will be thy death; thou have destroyed my people, but I will
destroy thee; so he undertakes to take up all controversies, which may fall
between God and us, he promises to restore us to the adoption of sons, and to
the inheritance of sons, that we might be where he is, Joh. 17. 24.

3. The holy ghost makes a Covenant with us, as Heb. 10. 15, 16. whereof the
Holy Ghost also is a witness to us, testifying of this Covenant, which he makes
with us; although the Father be employed in it, yet here is the power and work
of the Holy Ghost; what the Father has purposed from all eternity, and the Son
has purchased for them in time, that the Holy Ghost effects in them, and
applies to them, viz. he enables them to apply the blood of Christ for the
remission of sins, he writes the Law in our heats, he teaches us, he washes
us from our filthiness, and comfort us in our sadness, supports us in our
faintings, and guides us in our wanderings, etc. I may say as Moses to the
people, Deuteronomy. 33. 29. happy art thou O Israel, who is like unto thee, O people
saved by the Lord? and as David, Psalm. 33. 12. Blessed is that Nation whose God
is the Lord.

By faith we look at Christ, as having all fullness of grace in himself, Joh.
16. and Col. 1. 19. all other Angels and Saints have but their measure, some
more, some less, according to the measure of the gift of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 7. but
Christ has received the Spirit, not by measure, but in the fullness of it, Joh.
3. 34.

Now whatsoever fullness of grace there is in Christ, he has received not for
himself, but for us, that he might communicate unto us, and we might receive
from him, Psalm. 68. 18. it is said he received gifts for men; not for himself,
but for men, that we might receive from him; and thence it is, that in Joh. 1.
16. of his fullness we receive grace for grace, his wisdom is to make us wise,
his meekness and patience, is to make us meek and patient, and Christ is
faithful to distribute to us all such graces that he has received for us, he
is faithful in all his house: what shall I say more in this Covenant, God
unbosoms himself unto us, and shines forth upon us, and there is now and then a
sweet intercourse of love between him and thy soul* in the blessing of this
Covenant there is remedy for every malady, promises suitable to every condition,
for being and well being, for this life, and that which is to come. I omit here
to mention such blessings of the Covenant as I might, and the nature of the
same, having spoken something to it inthe former part of this Treatise, etc.

The twelfth thing to be enquired into, is this, viz. notwithstanding this
blessed Covenant of grace contained in the Gospel, whether most men and women
in the world be not under a Covenant of works.
THE Covenant of works remains in full force and virtue, to all unbelievers,
Romans 10. 4. For Christ is the end of the Law, for righteousness, to none but to
those that believe. Oh, did we but consider the misery of all such as are under
the Law, it might awaken us. He that is under the Law, is under a Covenant of
works, and they must come and stand before God the Judge of all, and have their
sins set in order before him, and the Law pass sentence of death upon them, and
their own consciences terrifying them, and there shall be none to plead for
them, or to stand betwixt Gods warth and them; but they shall be left to
themselves, to die and perish in their sins: this Covenant has no Mediator;
for then Christ has not a word to speak for them, he telssuch, John 17. 19. he
prays not for them, he pleads only for them that fly to grace, and take hold
of that Covenant; but as for all others they have God against them, the Law
against them, they have all creatures to accuse them, and to testify against
them; but have no Christ, no Mediator to appear for them, and there shall be no
grace showed, but strict Justice without any mercy: Oh that such would bethink
themselves, what a God they must meet withal, even a just God, a God of
judgment, a God of vengeance, that will not spare their misdeeds, what ever
Justice can require of them they must satisfy to the uttmost farthing; there
will be Justice without mercy. Oh when nothing but Justice shall judge you, who
can stand, what flesh may abide it? Psalm. 78. 5. A wicked man has no true
right before God, unto the good things of this life, for if any say they have,
I ask by what Covenant? is it by the Covenant of works? then they must fulfill
it, which they do not, nor can do; is it then by the Covenant of grace? but
they are not within that Covenant, they are within the Covenant of works, but
cannot fulfill it; they are without the Covenant of grace, and therefore they
can claim nothing by it; again, faith and holiness can no more be separated,
then light can be separated from the Sun. Such as lay claim to the Covenant of
grace, and yet live loosly, carnally, unconscionably, they do but deceive
themselves, they may be in Covenant with hell and death, but have no part in
the Covenant of life and peace, John 5. 45. Do not think that I will accuse you
to the Father, ther^ is one that accuses you, even Moses in whom you trust;
the Law in which you trust will condemn you, if ye continue not in every thing
written therein, and yield a perfect, personal, perpetual obedience thereto,
it will accuse you to the Father.

Of Justification by Grace.
THE question is not so much about the time, and terms, and matter of our
Justification, but how we are made righteous in the sight of God, which the
Scriptures do affirm, to be by the perfect righteousness of Christ alone, which
God does impute to all his seed freely, without works and conditions performed
by us.

1. Consider if the righteousness by which we are justified, be a perfect
righteousness, then we are not justified by our obedience to Gospel precepts,
but the righteousness whereby we are justified, is a perfect righteousness,
which is the righteousness of Christ alone, Heb. 1. 8. Mat. 6. 33. Romans 4. 6.
and everlasting righteousness, Psalm. 119. 142. Psalm. 22. 31. and 35. 28. that
righteousness which justifies us before God, as it is not ours, so it is not
in us.

But as it is Christ's righteousness, so it is in him, In me you shall have
righteousness and strength, Psalm. 71. 15, 16, 19, 24. I will make mention of
thy righteousness, even of thine only. Justice and mercy do both meet in this
Justification; Justice, in that he will not justify a sinner, without a
perfect righteousness; and yet mercy, in that he will accept him for such a
righteousness, that is, neither in him, nor done by him, but by his surety for
him.

2. Consider the Apostles all along were very carefullto keep this Doctrine of
Justification by grace distinct from all other things, they all along do oppose
the Law and grace, works and faith, our righteousness and Christ's
righteousness, teaching us thereby how needful it is they should be kept
asunder.

Justification by grace has been and will be the bone of contention till the
next coming of Christ: why so? because learning cannot reach it, natural
wisdom is confounded at it, evil Angels do not know it, most men do persecute
it, as being bereaved of the knowledge of it, or else corrupt in the simplicity
of it.

The Papists say, if we be freely justified by grace, we need not do any good
works, and if we cannot fall from grace, we need not fear to commit sin.

And they hold that we are not justified by the righteousness of Christ
imputed, but by the righteousness of Christ inherent in us, and righteous
actions done by us.

3. Consider we should not be justified by grace, if any condition were
required of us, in order to our justification; for the condition whenever
persormed, makes the Covenant a due debt; then justification should not be of
grace, but of debt, contrary to the express words of Scripture, Romans 4. 4.

4. Consider the nature and cause of justification more particularly, viz.

Justification, is when God merely of his own grace and free will, forgiveth
our sins, and pronounces us just and innocent.

Though Gods Law was by us violated, we are absolved from sin and punishment by
the grace of God, and merits of Christ apprehended by faith: and so by him all
that believe are justified in all things, in which they could not be justified
by the Law of Moses, Act. 13. 39. Justification is an act undivided, and all at
once, and so it differs from sanctification, which is done by degrees; all
different eminent acts, as justification, sanctification, renovation, are but
one act in God. I shall close up what I have to say to this thing, by desiring
the reader seriously to consider these precious Scriptures, all speaking to the
same thing, Romans 4. 5. Now to him that workoth not, but beleiveth on him that
justifies the ungodly, his faith is accounted for righteousness. Tit. 3. 5. Not
by works of righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy he
saved us. Romans 11. 6. And if By grace, then it is no more of works, otherwise
grace is no more grace.

So having spoken to the nature of justification, give me leave also to lay
down the usefulness of it as to us, and the benefits every beleiver have by it,
the greatest thing that we can desire (next the glory of God) is our own
salvation, and the sweetest thing we can here obtain, is the assurance of our
salvation. In this life we cannot get higher then to be assured of that which
in the next life is to be enjoyed; all godly people shall enjoy a Heaven when
they leave this earth; some enjoy a Heaven whilst they are here on earth; that
Christians may enjoy two Heavens, let them enquire after, diligently seek for,
and cheerfully embrace this Doctrine of justification, freely and only by the
grace of God, as the cause, through Christ as the way, the Holy Ghost as the
worker and evidencer.

1. This Doctrine is as the foundation and basis of all Christian Religion.

2. This Doctrine is the inlet of all spiritual divine peace and consolation.

3. This is the root and spring of all Gospel obedience.

4. This Doctrine is the great stop and bar to keep out all floods of error.

5. This Doctrine is the main support of a soul under all trialls.

6. This is the great Doctrine by which Satan's kingdom is undermined and
overthrown.

7. This is the Doctrine that Satan does most war against, either to pervert or
corrupt.

8. This Doctrine is the most hardest piece to be learned, it being wholly
supernatural in every part of it, above the reach of nature, and all things in
us do oppose it.

1. This Doctrine is the foundation and basis of all Christian Religion, as
does clearly appear by these several instances.

1. To begin at the bottom, our Election is the Election of grace, and
according to the good pleasure of his will, Ephesians. 2. 4, 5.

2. Our Vocation is according to his grace, 2 Timothy 1. 9. who has saved us, and
called us with an holy calling, not according to our works, but according to
his own purpose and grace, given us in Christ, before the world began.

3. Regeneration is of Gods own will, Jam. 1. 18. Of his own will begat he us,
by the word of truth.

4. Faith it self is the gift of God, Philippians 1. 29. Ephesians. 2. 28.

5. Justification is freely by his grace, Romans 3. 24. and a free gift, Romans 5.
15.

6. Forgiveness of sins is according to the riches of his grace, Ephesians. 1. 7.
In whom we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins according
to the riches of his grace.

7. Eternal life is the gift of God, Act. 15. 11. But we believe that through
the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, we shall be saved, even as they, Romans 6.
23. The gift of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord.

If any ask what is the nature of this free grace? I answer, grace in its
proper notion signifies that free goodness, favor or good will, whereby God is
moved to open the eyes of the blind mind, and to let him know the love of God
that passes knowledge. If any ask why the Doctrine of the Gospel is called by
the name of grace? I answer, because it was only Gods free good will, to bestow
it upon those that did most want it. If any ask farther, why this free grace
was ever bestowed at all? or why one age or place of the world should receive
is rather then another? or why God should discover this great mystery, was
kept secret since the world began, to those who were sinners of the Gentiles,
who served dumb Idols? or why God should be found of them that sought him not,
or be made manifest to those that asked not after him? I can give no other
answer then that, 1 Cor. 1. 29. that no flesh should glory in his presence, or
that in Mat. 11. 35, 26. Even so Father, because it seems good in thy sight.

Whoever builds, and builds not upon this foundation, does build upon the sand,
and his house in a storm and tempest will fall, Mat. 7. 27. or if any man build
upon this foundation, gold, silver, precious stones, wood, hay, stubble, the
fire shall try every man's work of what sort it is: see 1 Cor. 3. 10, 11, 12,
13, 14, 15.

2. This Doctrine is the inlet of all spiritual divine peace to the soul.

There is a vein through which this peace that passes understanding, is
conveyed to the soul, which the men and women of the world know not, Isa. 59.
8. The way of peace they know not; they have made to themselves crooked paths,
whosoever goes therein shall not find peace, Romans 3. 17. the way of peace have
they not known: in a word, no man or woman under heaven can know the way to
this peace, until the Lord give light to them that sit in darkness, and in the
shadow of death, and to guide their feet into the way of peace, Luke 1. 79.

No man can receive, retain and enjoy this peace of God unless he wait on God
at the springs of peace.

1. The first spring of peace is faith, Romans 5. 1. being justified by Faith we
have peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ: faith sees Christ to be
our peace, Ephesians. 2. 14. and from him freely given to us, John. 14. 27. and the
vein through which it runs to the soul, is the vein of faith; laying hold on,
and applying of the free grace of God to the soul, Romans 15. 13.

2. The second way of peace, is this, a man must not only know it, where it is,
and believe it, but he must stay himself wholly upon God in the constant
expectation of the increase and supply of it, Isa. 26. 3. Thou will keep him in
perfect peace, whose heart is stayed on thee.

3. The next vein or spring of peace, arises from a souls resting satisfied in
Christ's righteousness, adding nothing to it, Psalm. 71. 15, 16, 19, 24. and
Psalm. 119. 142. I will make mention of thy righteousness, even of thine only,
for thy righteousness is an everlasting righteousness, See Jer. 33. 16. the
perfection of Christ's righteousness is held forth unto us, and always lies
before us, that we may be thankful for it, and peaceable with it, and rejoice
in the bestower of it; the Lord Jesus having spoken peace to the soul, and
acquainted the soul that he has paid all his debts for it, and that his sins
which were so many shall be remembered no more, then the soul begins to be
filled with joy and peace, in beleiving, beholding, and enjoying Christ's
righieousness, which begets in the soul, a perfect peace, a precious peace, a
full and complete peace, and an everlasting peace.

4. The next vein through which peace is conveyed to the soul, is by our
acquainting our selves with him, Job 22. 21. Acquaint now thy self with him,
and be at peace thereby, so good shall come unto thee; now by thy acquainting
thy self with him, these things will fall in. First, thou will see that thou
wast cast out to the loathing of thy soul, and no eye pitying thee, much less
to relieve thee; that then, even then, when man was ready to perish, should be
the time of love with God, whereby he cast his skirt of compassion over him,
and said unto him again, live. Oh ye Heavens stand amazed! and oh thou earth,
flesh and blood rejoice and triumph, for when there was no eye to pity thee,
the arm of the Lord has brought salvation, by raising up a mighty one out of
the house of his servant David, even Christ the Lord, the wondefull Counselor,
the mighty God, mighty to save, the everlasting Father, the Prince of peace,
who became man under the Law, and obligation to obedience; and not only so, but
also became our Surety for us; to do, suffer and fulfill that for us, which we
were no ways able to do for our selves.

The Covenant of works rested in and trusted unto, can never work settled
comfort, and peace, and quietness of heart; let a man walk as exactly as ever
flesh and blood can attain unto, let him as confidently build on this
foundation as he possibly may, yet the heart will be still in suspicion, in
doubt, in fear, uncertain what to trust unto, but the Doctrine of grace rested
in and trusted unto, does settle a soul in peace, this is a sure Anchor for the
soul to rest upon, let waves swell, and winds blow, he retains a firm peace,
stand here and we are safe for ever, Romans 5. 1, 2.

3. Thirdly, This Doctrine is the Root and Spring of all Gospel obedience,
whatsoever men call obedience, if it arises not from hence, it is but forced
and legal; we must get up Gospel principles, if we would keep up Gospel
practices.

Wheresoever this Doctrine of grace is received and retained in the love and
power of it, it works these five things in the soul, viz. Faith, Love, Fear,
Willingness and Cheerfulness, and from these five things, as from five Springs,
does all Gospel obedience arise.

1. True obedience does flow from Faith; hence it is called the obedience of
Faith, Romans 16.26. in the latter part of this Chapter we read of a mystery
revealed, and what that mystery was, it was the Doctrine of Gods grace; and
the end why it was revealed, was for the Obedience of Faith, see Romans 1. 5.

2. As Faith in Christ does put the soul upon heavenly and spiritual actings,
so also love constrains them in whom it is, to keep the Lords commandments,
John 14. 21, 23. compared with Psalm 26. 3, 4. If ye love me, keep my
commandments: For thy loving kindness is before mine eyes, says David, and I
have walked in thy truth.

3. As true obedience does spring from Faith and Love, so it is attended with
an holy fear, Psalm 119. 161. My heart, says David, does stand in awe of thy
word, Heb. 11. 7. Noah being warned of God, touching things not seen, was moved
with fear, and so prepared an Ark.

4. As Gospel obedience does spring from Faith; Love and Fear, so it arises
from a willing mind, Psalm 27. 8. when thou said, seek ye my face, my heart
answered, Lord thy face will I seek; as David had said, O Lord it is thy great
command, (seek ye my face) my heart says unto thee, it is the desire of my
soul, thy command is become my request, thy face Lord will I seek.

5. As Gospel-obedience springs from Faith, Love and fear, and a willing mind;
so it is performed cheerfully, and delightfully, Psalm. 40. 8. I delight to do
thy will O God, thy Law is in my heart, as well as in thy Book. What shall I
say more, a soul receiving, believing, retaining and standing in the true grace
of God, shall be every way furnished and supplied with strength to perform any
duty, to exercise any grace, to subdue any lust, to resist, any temptation, to
bear any affliction. etc.

Sure, if the bowels of mercy do not melt, win and draw us, Justice will be a
swift witness against us: And as the Branch cannot bear fruit except it abide
in the vine, John 15. 4. no more can ye, except ye abide in me: Gods free love
manifested to us, and by his Spirit shed abroad in us, is the cause of our love
to him, 1 John 4. 10, 19. And our love to him is the cause of our obeying him,
1 John 5. 3. and John 14. 15, 21, 23. we read in Jer. 31. 19. After that I was
turned, I repented, and after that I was instructed, I smote upon my thigh.
That is as if he had said, after that thou have wrought a gracious change upon
my soul, by thine afflicting hand, out of thy love to me, Heb. 12. 6.

Or after I came to my self again, Luke 15. 17 and considered seriously with my
self how it was with me, I was touched with repentance, with sorrow, and with
shame for my former miscariages.

4. Fourthly this Doctrine received, and the heart therein established, will be
a stop and bar to keep out all floods of error.

The floods of all error flow in at the pipe of ignorance, and especially
ignorance of this very thing, viz. The Doctrine of grace; the error of the
Papists of building and resting upon works, springs from their ignorance of
this blessed Docrtine; the error of the Quaker springs purely from hence; the
error of the Arminian springs in at the same pipe, partly by works, and partly
by grace; they not seeking salvation by grace, but as it were by the, works of
the Law, they stumbled and fell, Romans 9. 32. And all the unstability,
formality, legality that there is at this day appearing amongst the
Presbyterian, Independent and Baptist, or any other people professing
godliness, does arise from their ignorance or their little knowledge in this
great mystery; nay farther, did you ever read, or from any true Christian
hear, that any man or woman that was acquainted with, and in some good measure
established in (this Doctrine of grace) infected with, and overcome by these
floods of error, that does now swarm among us? Oh how does Satan pollute and
defile the souls and judgments of men, with Christ-dishonouring and
soulundoing opinions, viz. That Ordinances of the Gospel are poor, carnal, low
things; wholly denying some, and slighting the rest, saying, that the
Scriptures are not the Word of God, nor the ground of Faith, nor the Rule of
life, nor a true Judge in differences and controversies, also denying
interpretations and expositions of the Word, which is,

1. First, By God commanded, 1 Cor. 14. 1. 2. This was practiced by the godly,
Matthew. 1. 23. 3. This is profitable for the unfolding of obscure places, Neh.
8. 8.
Now these and the like things the Lord in his Word does call ungodliness,
because it in part or in whole denies what he has commanded, and opens a door
for men to do the contrary. Now for a remedy herein, let every Christian study,
pray and enquire for, and stand in the grace of God: See that blessed place, 1
Peter 5. 12. Exhorting and testifying that it is the true grace of God in which
ye stand, or wherein ye stand: Agreeable is this text to the former, Romans 5. 2.
By whom we have access by Faith into this grace wherein we stand: now their
standing in this grace, did fence them from all false doctrines and erroneous
opinions.

Papists and Arminians, which hold a falling away from grace, know not the
difference between the Covenant of Works, and the Covenant of Grace; their
error is this, they teach as a principle of Religion, that those that are
adopted, sanctified and planted into Christ may fall away and perish; this
Doctrine is contrary to the whole tenor of the Covenant of Grace, injurious
unto God, and uncomfortable unto the Saints: it would shake the foundation of
Gods election, if those that are once sanctified should fall away and perish,
for those only whom he knew before, those only does he sanctify; now if he
has in mercy drawn us to himself, it is a sign he has loved us from
everlasting, Jer. 31. 3. our calling and sanctification is according to his
purpose, Romans 8. 28, 30. 2 Timothy 1. 9. and those that are sanctified, justified
and called, are all first chosen, and thence faith is called the Faith of Gods
elect, Titus 1. And those that are sanctified, are said to be chosen unto it,
Ephesians. 1. 3, 4. so that the foundation of Gods election stands sure, and so our
state in Grace is sure also, as being built on that foundation which cannot be
removed, and this does Christ make good in that speech of his, Mat, 24. where
speaking of the strong delusions which many should be deceived withal, he
says, that those deceivers should show forth such signs and wonders, that if
it were possible they should deceive the very elect: (if it were possible) but
that they cannot do, the elect cannot perish, etc.

5. This Doctrine is the main support of a soul under all trials; when all
things fail, Gods grace and free love does never fail.

I will not leave thee, nor forsake thee, says the Lord, Heb. 13. 5. compared
with Joshua 1. 5.

1. Gold and Silver may fail, yea all earthly treasures do make themselves
wings and flieaway, and the labor of the Olive may fail, Hab. 3. 17.

2. Our nearest and dearest friends may fail, Job 19. 14. 2 Timothy 4. 16.

3. Our eyes may fail, Psalm 119. 123. mine eyes fail for thy salvation, and
for the word of thy righteousness.

4. Our tongues may fail, Isa. 41. 17.

5. Our strength may fail, Psalm. 31. 10. My strength fails because of mine
iniquity.

6. Our flesh and our heart may fail us, Psalm. 73. 26 My flesh and my heart
fails, but God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever.

7. Our spirits may fail us, Psalm. 143. 7. Hear me speedily, my spirit fails
me, hide not thy face from me.

But now says the Lord, although the labor of the Olive may fail, and thy
nearest and dearest friends fail, and thine eyes fail, and thy tongue fail, thy
strength fail, and flesh and heart fail, yet I will be with thee, I will never
fail thee, as thou may see, by what I have left written for thy learning in
these following Scriptures, Josh. 1. 5. Josh. 21. 45. and 23. 14. 1 King. 8.
56. Heb. 13. 15.

Yea, search the whole Scripture, and enquire of all the Saints, whether I did
ever fail any one soul, that did put his trust in me; thus thou may see,
that a Believer is blessed, only in a help without him, not within, and all his
assurance, confidence and comfort does flow to him from the fountain of
free grace, through the channel of faith, and not of works, believing himself
happy for what another (even Christ) has done for him; not for what he has
done or can do; the joy of a Believer would always be unspeakable, did he
always apprehend his happiness in and by Christ alone. In a word, the pure,
glorious, matchless and spotless righteousness of Christ is a souls
righteousness and resting place, when the soul finds that he wanders no more
from mountain to hill, as formerly he did. Whoever you are that read these
lines, search whether you are gotten into this rest, if not, with all speed get
into this resting place, for Satan is walking about as a roaring Lion, and
though he cannot rob a Christian of his Crown, yet he will do what he can to
rob him of his comfort and peace, to make his life a burden, and an hell to
him, to cause him to spend his days in sorrow and mourning, sighing and
complaining, in doubting and questioning, saying in these or the like words,
surely I have no interest in Christ, my graces are not true, my hope is but the
hope of an hypocrite, my confidence is but presumption, and my enjoyments are
but delusions.

Then when a soul is thus beweldred and troubled, the Lord many times discovers
his free grace and love, and that expells ignorance, and slays the souls
enemies, and by this love the Lord draws the soul to himself in love; again,
Gods way of support of a soul in trouble and trial, is a way of love, therefore
he says, Behold I will allure her, and speak comfortably unto her, Hos. 2. 14.
his love is free, full and eternal. I will, says he, love them freely, Hos.
14. 4. I will draw them with the cords of a man, with the bonds of love, Hos.
11. 4.

And so the soul comes to have great joy and pleasure, Psalm. 16. 11. No misery,
as hunger, cold, nakedness, pain, grief or weariness, shall much disquiet the
soul, it will rest fatisfied in God alone, in this rest there is tranquillity,
in tranquillity contentment, in contentment joy, in joy, variety, in variety
security, in security eternity, etc.

6. This Doctrine is that by which Satan is overthrown, and his Kingdom turned
up side down.

So that being a Reprobate and a fallen Angel, makes it his great work to
bring all that possibly he can into the same state with him, although through
this grace of God, he can do nothing but by permssiion, God does keep him in a
powersul chain, wicked Angels are Potent, only our good God is omnipotent; when
he does give way, one Devil does overthrow a Legion, a million of men; but till
God does lengthen out his chain, a Legion of Devils cannot hurt one man: Satan
cannot hurt us, unless he get us within the compass of his chain, if we go not
to him, he cannot come to us. All the wai^s of Satan are swarving from the way
and rule of the Word, he cannot touch one man or woman that endeavors to walk
according to rule, he can but suggest sin to us, he cannot force us to sin, he
cannot infuse wickedness into us, but only stir up sin in us. All the forces of
hell cannot scale the walls of heaven. Its true, Satan will sometimes stand up,
as the Philistian did, and say, Who is the man that will redeem this and that
soul that are in my snare, and in my power; am not I the God of this world, and
is it not written that I am the Prince of the air, who shall rescue them out of
my hand? then comes the Lion of the tribe of Judah, as David against the
Philistian, and says to Satan, thou have defied the Armies of Israel, I will
try thy power, and pull down thy pride; here Christ has a single duel with
them, and the issue was, that Satan bruised the heel of Christ, and Christ
wounded his head, and so fulfilled that Prophecy, Genesis 3. 15. And so Chtist
after he wounded his head cast him out, John 12. 31. The Prince of this world
is cast out, so that now Satan's power is already taken away, the Devil, it is
true, does challenge a right to many of Christ servants, till they are called,
converted and brought from under the power of darkness, by the appearance of
this free grace, Titus 3. 4, 5. But after the kindness and love of God our
Savior appeared, according to his mercy he saved us by the washing of
Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost; it was Satan that tempted our
first parents to rebel; it was Satan that provoked David to number People: it
was Satan that put Peter upon persuading of Christ not to suffer: it was Satan
that put Cain upon murdering Abel, therefore he is called a Murderer from the
beginning; it was Satan that put treason into the heart of Judas against
Christ; it was Satan that put Annanias upon lying. Now there is no weapon but
spiritual weapons that will steed the soul in combating with the Devil, Ephesians.
6. 13, 16.

It was not David's sling nor his stone that gave him the advantage of setting
his feet upon Goliath, but his faith in the free grace of God, 1 Samuel 17. 45.
Luther reports of a German Minister, that he acknowledged himself, that before
he came to understand aright the free and powerful grace of God, he vowed and
resolved above one hundred times against some particular sin, and never could
get power over it; at last he saw the reason to be his ignorance in the
Doctrine of grace, and his too much trusting to his own resolution; at last he
could resist Satan steadfastly in the faith, and he would fly from him, James
4. 7. we read in 1 John 5. 4. This is the victory that overcomes the world,
even our Faith.

7. This is the Doctrine that Satan does make war against, either to pervert or
corrupt.

1. He seeks to pervert it by putting out of order, or turning up-side-down, to
bring in that which should be kept out, Prove. 10. 9. He that perverteth his way
shall be known.

2. If he cannot prevail with men to pervert this Doctrine, he shall leave no
means unattempted, no stone unturned to corrupt it, by keeping people in a
foolish unsound persuasion, that all is well with them, Psalm 143. They are all
corrupt; that is, they have not understanding to perceive the things which God
offers to them.

There be two main things in which Satan does busy himself to deceive souls.

1. By laying the greatness and vileness of a man's sins before him, and then
falls to persuade him there is no mercy in God for such a sinner.

2. By presenting God to the soul as one made up all of mercy.

1. By laying the greatness and vileness of ones sins before him, and then
persuades him, there is no mercy in God for such a sinner: What says Satan,
do thou think that ever thou shall attain mercy by Christ, that have sinned
with so high an hand in slighting the tenders of grace, and grieved the Spirit
of grace, and despised the Word of grace, that have trampled under foot the
blood of Christ, by which thou might have been pardoned, purged, justified
and saved? What do thou think, says Satan, that ever Christ will own,
receive or embrace such an unworthy wretch as thou art? Thou art unworthy to
entertain Christ in thy house, much more unworthy to entertain him in thy
heart; thou fool, thou know thou art not prepared, thou art not thus and
thus humbled, thou art not heart sick of sin, thou have not been under horrors
and terrors, as such a man and such a woman, thou must stay till thou art
prepared, and qualified to receive Christ; for albeit Christ is able, yet he is
not willing to save such a rebel as thou art, that have been in open Rebellion
against him all thy days: now for answer hereunto.

That there is mercy for such miserable creatures, if they will receive it, and
not despair, will more at large appear in these choice places of Scripture,
Micah 7. 18, 19. Isa. 43. 25. Jer. 3. 12. Joel 2. 13. Isa. 55. 7. 1 Timothy 1. 13,
15. Psalm 66. 18. John 6. 37. 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10, 11. Heb. 7. 25. Isa. 1. 18.

It is hard to find any one place in the whole Book of God, requiring any
worthiness in the creature, before a souls believing in Christ, and resting
upon him for happiness and blessedness; I read of none that obtained mercy and
pardon from Christ but unworthy souls; pray what worthiness was in Zachens,
Mary Magdalen, Paul and Lydia before their coming to and believing in Christ.

2. If Satan cannot catch men in this first pit, then he turns over leaf and
comes a new way to work, viz* by presenting God to the soul as one made up all
of mercy; Oh says Satan, you need not make such a matter of sin, nor to be so
unwilling to sin, for God is a God of mercy, a God that delights in mercy,
ready to show mecry, a God that is never weary of showing mercy, he is a God
more prone to pardon his people, then to punish them, and why then should you
make such a matter of sin? by this Satan does cause many a soul to turn the
grace of God into wantonness; but for a remedy herein, consider that God is as
just as he is merciful, as the Scripture does speak him out to be, a very
merciful God, so they speak him forth to be a very just God, witness his
casting the Angels out of heaven, his turning Father Adam out of Paradise, his
drowning the old world, his raining fire out of heaven upon Sodom.

It is true, his general mercy is over all his works, but his special mercy is
confined to those that he has divinely qualified, Exodus 34. 6, 7. Psalm. 32.
10. Psalm. 103. 11.

8. This Doctrine is the most hardest thing in the world to be learned, it
being wholly in every part of it supernatural, and all things in us do fight
against it.

To do well and have well is natural, but to believe and have well is
supernatural; man remaining in his natural state, is altogether unable to
receive and comprehend those glorious and gracious mysteries of being righteous
by another righteousness, and of being saved by another suffering; all men
both Jews and Gentiles are set upon seeking life and happiness by their own
doings and performances; for although man did fearfully fall by transgression,
yet he retained certain footsteps, marks and impressions, of that moral and
eternal Law of righteousness, which was at first engraven in his heart, by the
finger of God Almighty. So that although as to everlasting felicity man is dark
and dead, being under the power of the God of this world, whose Kingdom is a
Kingdom of darkness, who rules in men by ignorance, yet there remains in every
man so much light as does lead him to the knowledge of a God; but when the Lord
does reveal this mystery of his grace by his Spirit to and in man, then he
does over and above that common work of the Spirit, by which he enlighteneth
every man; I say, Christ does give unto those given him of the Father, the mind
and understanding to know him and to receive him, and to lay hold on him, for
life and salvation. Now in this sense the natural man perceives not the things
of God, 1 Cor. 2. 14. neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned, 1 Cor. 1. 21. The world by wisdom knows not God, etc. Now this
Doctrine of grace is the hardest thing in the world to be learned, because we
are naturally apt to hunger and thirst after a righteousness of our own, but it
must be renounced; I confess this self denial is very hard: Oh how hard is it
for the soul to be taken off its own bottom of works and qualifications, and to
strip them of all that is their own! ye take away their lives, they must and
will have something; some humbleness and brokenness of heart, some tears, some
good works or abilities, or good heart, as many say; and this does argue as yet
thou art not plucked off thine own stock, and therefore art not planted into
Christ; thou art ignorant of the righteousness of God, and so go about to
establish thine own righteousness; consider, consider our works make us not the
better before God, neither the more beloved of the Lord, but declare us to be
what we are made by God, and so are profitable to men, but not to God.

But what says the Scripture? now to him that works is not the reward
reckoned of grace but of debt; but to him that works not, but believes on
him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is accounted for righteousness, Romans
4. 2, 3, 4, 5.

We are saved, not according to our works, but according to his own purpose and
grace, 2 Timothy 1. 9. Again, we read, Romans 5. 10. When we were enemies we were
reconciled to God by the death of his Son, Isa. 43. 25. I will blot out thy
transgressions for mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins; a new heart
also will I give thee, Ezekiel. 36. 26, 27, 31. Again, Isa. 57. 18. I have seen
his ways and will heal him, Isa. 44. 22. I have blotted out as a thick cloud
thy transgressions, return to me, for I have redeemed thee, Ezekiel. 16. 6, 8.
When thou wast polluted in thy own blood, I said unto thee live; when thou wast
in thy blood, thy time was the time of love: and I covered thy nakedness. Now
consider the Lord does this that he might have all the glory of our Election,
Vocation, Justification, Sanctification and Salvation. See Ephesians. 1. 6. Jer. 9.
24. Romans 3. 9. Luke 1. 74. 1 Cor. 4. 7. James 1. 17. And as this Doctrine is
the hardest thing in the whole world to be learned, so it is the hardest work
(where it is not learned) to obey God in any of his commands; to instance in
one for all, God does command men every where to repent: but is not repentance
a mighty work, a difficult work, a work that is above our power? Surely there
is no power below that power that raised Christ from the dead, and that made
the world, that can break the heart of a sinner, or turn his heart. It is as
easy to turn the stream that runs swiftly forward, and make it run as swiftly
backward, as it is to repent indeed, and to melt thine own heart; it is as
easy to turn a flint into flesh, as to turn thine own heart to the Lord; it is
as easy to raise the dead, and make a world, as to repent; it is a flower that
grows not in natures Garden, Jer. 13. 23. Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or
the Leopard his spots? then may ye also do good, that are accustomed to do
evil.

But this work that is so difficult, and so hard, above our reach, is easily
wrought in the soul, when God gives it to see his grace and love in giving
Christ, Act. 5. 31. Him has God exalted with his right hand, to be a Prince
and a Savior, for to give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins, Gal.
1. 8. If I or any other, or an Angel of heaven preach any other Gospel then
this, that we have preached unto you, then salvation and participation of
Christ by grace, and free gift, for that is the Doctrine he had established,
before and through the whole Epistle to the Galathians: What shall I say more?
there is nothing in men, though never so vile, that can debar a person or a
people from a part in this Christ; some will not have Christ except they can
pay for him, others dare not meddle with Christ, because they are so vile and
sinful, and therefore they seek to get an inherent righteousness, they run to
their qualifications, to their prayers, to their tears, to their humiliations,
and sorrows, and reformations, and will not come at Christ until they have
spent all upon these Physicians, and are sensible with the woman in the Gospel,
that they are nothing the better, but the worse; then they begin to think of
the back parts of Christ, and wait for a time to come behind him in a throng,
that they may not be seen to touch the hem of his garment.

You know when a pump is dry, men use to fetch a Bucket of water, and pour it
into the dry pump, and then they fall to pumping, and by virtue of the water
poured in, there comes more water up, and by continual pumping they fetch out
abundance: So our hearts many times are dry, there is no sap, no moisture, no
life: the virtues of Christ must first be poured in, before you can get any
thing out. Wherefore stand we laboring and tugging in vain? O stay no longer,
go to Christ, it is he that must break thy rocky heart: in a word, we must
consider Christ as freely given us by the Father, before we can believe the
life of grace.

This Doctrine speaks out with open mouth the exceeding freeness and riches of
Gods grace, as will appear, if we consider;

1. That God is first in seeking after us, to draw us into Covenant with
himself; we seek not him, but he seeks us; we choose not him, but he chooses us;
we wait not on him, he waits to be gracious to us: we beseech not him, he does
beseech us to be reconciled to God, 2 Cor. 5. 20. John 15. 16. and 1 John 4.
19. So that he is found of them that seek not after him, because he first
reveals and offers himself in mercy to us, Isa. 65. 1.

2. Consider, the time wherein the Lord does seek to us, and take us by the
hand, to bring us into Covenant with him, and then we shall find, that when we
are most averse and backward, and have least thought of seeking after him, then
it is that he seeks us: thus the Lord called Saul, when he was persecuting,
raging, and breathing out slaughter against the Lord, and against his Saints;
then the Lord takes him by the hand, and enters into Covenant with him, Acts 9.
and so it was with those mockers, Acts 2. 13, 37. Here were no dispositions and
preparations on their part, but free and unexpected grace from God.

3. Compare those that are taken into Covenant, with those that are left out,
for all are not taken in, Ephesians. 2. 12. And this also will make it manifest it
is Free grace by which any are taken in, Romans 3. 22, 23. We have all sinned,
and there is no difference; no reason therefore -- in us, why one is taken into
Covenant, and not another, but only free grace in God, God owes nothing to any
man: he may truly say to all, I do thee no wrong, Mat. 20. 13. Thou have as
much as I owe thee. So then it must needs be free grace to those that are taken
in: apply John 14. 21. Mat. 11. 5, 25. Nay sometimes God chooses the worst, and
takes in the most unworthy, and leaves those that are better then they, viz.
Paul a chief of sinners, 1 Timothy 1. 15. Publicans and Harlots, Mat. 21. Mary
Magdalen possessed with seven Devils: these were taken in, and the righteous
generation, as they were reputed, which justified themselves, and were
justified by others, were left and passed by. The reasons why the Lord would
have his Covenant to stand upon this foundation of free grace are these.

1. To be a ground of hope, to such as see themselves unworthy of acceptance
with God, if the grace of the Covenant were not free, such unworthy ones could
have no hope.

2. It is the glory of grace to be freely communicated, Isa. 55. 1. Come and
buy without money, it darkens the glory of grace, to have it bestowed upon
worthy ones. Be it known unto you says the Lord, not for your sakes I bestow
this, but for my own names sake.

3. That vain man may not boast.

4. That our mercies and blessings may be sure to us, Romans 4. 16. Our salvation
is by grace, to the end that the promise might be sure to all the seed,
implying thereby, that if it depended never so little upon works, we could not
be so sure of it.

Oh the rich mercy, the great love, exceeding riches of his grace, great
goodness, tender love, great mercy, multitude of loving kindnesses. Oh then not
unto us O Lord, not unto us, but to thy name be the praise, it is enough for us
that we have life, let grace alone have all the praise and glory, and let every
one that reads these lines, endeavor to imitate this free grace of God,
which is showed to us. First, Loving the Lord, not for his gifts and rewards,
but with a free love, as he has loved us, and serving him with a free spirit,
and a willing mind. Secondly, Let us be free in doing good unto all men, even
to such as have deserved nothing, though they be aliens and strangers, and such
as we never hope to receive any good from, yet freely to do them good, even
where we look for nothing again, as God has done to us, Luke 14. 12, 14.

10. As this Covenant and grace is free, so it is sure and certain to be
performed, it cannot, it will not fail those that rest upon it.

The Covenant and promise of grace, are built upon the unchangable purpose of
God, which is a foundation remaining sure, and cannot be shaken, 2 Timothy 2. 19.
Nevertheless the foundation of God stands sure, having this seal, the Lord
knows them that are his, Tit. 1. 2. The Lord is said to have promised eternal
life, before the world began.

So then it is free, and it is sure, and the freeness of it does prove the
sureness of it, it is free that it might be sure; so here it is sure because it
is free; nothing can hinder free grace from giving eternal life to whom it
will. So that the accomplishment will every way answer their expectation and
hope, thus said David, 2. Sam. 23. 5. God has made with me a Covenant perfect
in all points, and sure; and in Isa. 55. 3. The promises of the Covenant are
called the sure mercies of David; the promises of free grace, are not (yea and
nay) various and uncertain, but they are, Yea and Amen, sure to be fulfilled,
there shall not fail so much as one word of all that good which God has
promised to do for his people: See Joshua 21. 45. and 23, 14. and 1 King* 18.
56.

The stability of grace is compared to the firmness and unmoveableness of the
mighty mountains, Isa. 54. 19 And to the unvariable course of the day and
night, Jer. 33. 20. So that it is as ea^e, yea more easy for the mountains to
remove out of their places, and the course of day and night to cease, as for
the Covenant of grace to fail; God has given us many pledges to assure us of
the certainty of it.

1. His word is gone out of his mouth, he cannot alter it, Psalm. 89.

2. He has written it, to make it more sure* and what he has written, is
written never to be bloted out.

3. He has sealed it with his own seal, and so it is become as the Laws of the
Medes and Persians, which alter not.

4. He has sworn to make it good in every part of it, Psalm. 89. 3, 35. Heb. 6.
17, 18.

5. He has given us the virtues, or earnest of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 1. 22.

6 Christ the Mediator and Testator of it, has confirmed it by his own blood,
Heb. 9. 16, 17, 18.

This Covenant is said to be everlasting. First, in respect of the promise made
to Christ for us, which was done before the foundation of the world, Tit. 1. 2.
Secondly, as being to continue from everlasting to everlasting: though the
Covenant in respect of our own personal entering into it, is made with us now in
time, and has a beginning, yet for continuance it is everlasting and without
end, it is never to be broken if once made in truth, 2 Chronicles. 13. 5. It is
called a Covenant of salt, because it corrupts not, it fails not, as things
that are salted use to last and continue: hence it is that all the blessings of
the Covenant are said to be everlasting; forgiveness of sins is everlasting,
being once forgiven, they are never remembered any more, Jer. 31. 33. The peace
and joy which comes thereby is everlasting, your peace shall no more be taken
from you, and your joy is everlasting, Isa. 35. 10. Our salvation is an
everlasting salvation, Isa. 45. 17. Our life is an everlasting life, Joh. 3. 16.

Several strong reasons why the Saints should walk holily, notwithstanding the
Covenant is free, and justification is free* and salvation it self is of grace,
not of works.
ALthough our qualifications does not cause Gods love, yet we might question
whether God did love us, if we were not qualified.

Some men will be ready to say, if the Covenant of grace be thus every way
free, in those several particulars, and if we are so freely justified by grace
without works, qualifications, and conditions on our part, we may live as we
list, etc. To which give me leave to lay down the grounds and reasons why all
men ought to walk holily and humbly in this present world, and that for these
ten strong reasons.

1. Because the Lord has commanded us in his word, to do justly, and to love
mercy, and to walk humbly with our God, Mic. 6. 8.

2. Because the Lord the Mighty God is glorified thereby, Mat. 5. 16. Let your
light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your
Father which is in heaven, 1 Pet. 2. 12. That they may by your good works,
which they shall behold, glorify God.

3. Although the Covenant of grace is free, and we are justified freely by
grace, yet we are to walk holily and without blame, before him in love, Ephesians.
1. 4. John 15. 16. Because it is the end of our election.

4. Because it is the end of our Redemption, 1 Pet. 1. 18. Ye were not redeemed
with corruptible things, as silver and gold, from your vain conversation, but
with the precious blood of Christ, 2 Cor. 5. 15. He dyed for us, that they
which live, should not live unto themselves, but unto him which died for them.

5. Because it is the end of our Vocation, 1 Pet. 1. 15. But as he which has
called you is holy, so be you holy in all manner of conversation, 1 These. 4. 7.
God has not called us unto uncleanness, but unto holiness.

6. Because it is the end of our Creation, Ephesians. 2. 10. Created in Christ Jesus
unto good works, which God has before ordained, that we should walk in them.

7. Because if our conversation be not answerable to our profession, we walk.

1. Unworthy of God, Col. 1. 10. and 1 These. 2. 12. 2. Unworthy of the Gospel,
Phil. 1. 27. 3. Unworthy of our Vocation, Ephesians. 4. 1.
8. The Saints should endeavor to out*strip in all good things, because they
be the salt of the earth, the light of the world, a City set upon an hill, that
cannot be hid, Mat. 5. 13, 14.

9. Because of the great dishonor that we shall bring to God, if we do not
walk holily: we cause his name to be blasphemed, we crucify Christ afresh, and
cause the way of truth to be evil spoken of, and grieve the Saints, and harden
sinners, etc.

10. Because the end of our lives, and the dissolution of the world is at hand.
Seeing then that all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of persons
ought we to be in all holy conversation and godliness: See 1 Pet. 4. 3. 2 Pet.
3. 11. I know no further reasons, unless it be these that I shall but name,
viz. First, it is the way in which God has appointed men to walk in, as in
Ephesians. 2. 12. Secondly, that we may declare our selves to be the children of
our heavenly Father, as in 1 Pet. 1. 14. and Mat. 5. 45. Thirdly, that we may
be profitable to our brethren, Tit. 3. 8. compared with 1 Pet. 3. 1, 2.
Fourthly, that we may adorn the Gospel, and stop the mouths of wicked men who
will condemn sin in a professor, although they will approve of it, and delight
in it themselves. Fifthly, because God will give unto every man according to
his works, Mat. 16. 27. Sixthly, a Christian should walk holily: that so he
might give a check, convince and put to shame, and silence ungodly men, 1 Pet.
2. 15. For so is the will of God, that with well doing you may put to silence
the ignorance of foolish men. I might, had I time, add some motives to these
undeniable reasons, to put those that read these lines upon holy walkings; as,
First, he that does order his conversation aright shall see the salvation of
the Lord, Psalm. 50. 23. 2 Pet. 1. 11. For so an entrance shall be administered
to you abundantly. Secondly, it will be a great encouragement to others to walk
so too, 2 Cor. 8. 7. compared with verse 3. Thirdly, it will be very profitable
to thy self, not only afterward, but in the present tence, Psalm. 19. 11. And
in the keeping of them there is great reward.

Of sanctification, or a holy conversation according to a Gospel Rule.
But in all our actions and holy walkings, let us be sure we have an eye upon
these three things, viz.

1. We must act from a right ground or principle. 2. We must act by a right
rule, by precept rather then from example. 3. We must be sure we have right
ends: low base ends spoil the highest undertakings.
1. We must act from a right ground or principle: there be three principles
from which men do act: two of them are too low and beneath a true Christian to
act from, viz

1. A natural principle, from which the Philosophers and heathens did many
commendable things.

2. Many men act from a legal principle, as the Papists, Quaker, and Arminian;
these do many things that are commanded, but not as it is commanded, and so
with God not accepted.

3. There is a spiritual, or supernatural principle, from which Christians do
or should act: now the right ground or principle, from which all holy and
righteous actions should flow, is either from

1. A pure heart. 2. A good conscience. 3. Faith unfeigned.
1. A pure heart, not absolutely and completely purified from all sin, but
comparative, and respectively purified by the blood of Christ, by way of
justification, Psalm. 51. 7. Purified by the blood of Christ; his gracious
habits as principles purity, being infused by way of sanctification, 1 Cor. 6.
11. Purified by faith, Act. 15. 9.

2. A good conscience, I mean not naturally good: so every man's conscience is
in a sense good: but spiritually and supernaturally good, being purged by
Christ's blood from dead works, to serve the living God, Heb. 9. 14. And when we
find conscience to give a comfortable testimony of the hearts simplicity, and
godly sincerety in what it does.

3. Faith unfeigned that is without hypocrisy, according to that, 1 Timothy 1. 5.
Now the end of the Commandment is charity out of a pure heart, and of a good
conscience, and of faith unfeigned: now faith is then unfeigned, when it has
the true nature of faith in it, viz.

1. Assenting to the truth revealed, 1 John 5. 10, 11. and applying this truth
assented to, John 1. 11, 12. Gal. 2. 20.

2. When it does produce the effects of a living faith, which is good works,
Jam. 2. 20, 26. Now examine whether thou have such a pure heart, such a good
conscience, such a faith unfeigned, from whence all thy righteous actions do
spring, (otherwise) thee and I may be said with Amaziah, 2 Chronicles. 25. 7, 8, 9.
He did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, but not with a perfect
heart: And so much to the first of these, the principle from which we should
act.

2. We must act by a right rule. Some make their own wills their rule, others
make the example of men their rule, others make the light within their rule,
but we are to make the word of God our rule, and so to go forth by the
footsteps of the flock, Cant. 1. 8.

And as many as walk according to this rule, peace be upon them, Galat. 6. 16.
And again the Apostles tell us, from Christ, whose mouth they are, we ought so
to walk as we have them for an example.

And he that walks or speaks not according to this rule, it is because he has
no light in him, Isa. 8. 20.

This was Noah's rule, Hebr. 11. 7. and Abraham's rule, Heb. 11. 8, 17. and
David's, Psalm. 40. 8. and Paul's, Romans 7. 22.

The Lord does not bid us make the light within the rule, but he has placed a
light within us, to see the rule without us, which will appear, if we a little
consider, that there is a threefold illumination.

1. General and natural, which is a natural light, or a light of reason; and
with this light, the eternal word, the Son of God has enlightened every man
that comes into the world, Joh. 1. 9.

2. There is a special and supernatural light which is planted in the souls of
those whom he has before time elected, and in time called. See Col. 3. 19. and
have put on the new man which is renewed in knowledge, after the Image of him
that created him.

3. There is a kind of a middle illumination between these two, more then
merely natural, but less then truly supernatural, which is the common gift of
the spirit, even to hypocrites: Judas was thus enlightened, and those hypocrites
we read of in Mat. 7. 22, 23. and Simon Magus, Acts 8. 13. and by means of this
light they may attain to these five things, and yet perish at last.

1. They may attain to a great measure of literal knowledge of Christ, of the
truth, and of the way of righteousness, as does clearly appear by these
Scriptures, Heb. 10. 26. If we sin wilfully, after we have received the
knowledge of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sin. See Heb. 6. 4.

2. They may by means of this knowledge, attain to great degrees of reformation
in their life and ways, 2 Pet. 2. 20. For if after they have escaped the
pollution of the world, through the knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, they are again entangled therein and overcome, the latter end with them
is worse then the beginning, for they were only outwardly reformed in the sight
of men, but not inwardly renewed in the sight of God. Sin may be chained up and
restrained, yet not cast out and mortified.

3. They may go so far as to taste of the heavenly gift, Heb. 6. 4. Note, here
the Holy Ghost does not say of them as of true Saints, they have eaten or
drunken, but only tasted, that is, they have had some kind of Relish or small
sense, by a temporary Faith, of the excellencies of Christ.

4. They may be said by the improvement of this light, to be partakers of the
Holy Ghost, Heb. 6. 4. that is, they are made partakers of the common gifts of
the Holy Ghost, as common illumination, hystorical faith, and faith of
Miracles. See Mat. 7. 22, 23. compared with Act. 8. 13.

5. They may in a sense be said to have tasted the good word of God, Heb. 6. 5.
for these men hearing the Gospel powerfully preached, and the matchless love of
God in Christ to sinners displayed, the worth and excellency of Jesus Christ
and his benefits unfolded, they come to be sometimes moved, pleased, and for
present affected with some pangs and moods of joy. Herod heard John-Baptist
gladly, Mar. 6. 20. Mat. 13. 20. compared with Ezekiel 33. 31, 32. but all this is
but an imperfect taste, and so they do nothing from right principles, neither
by a right rule.

3. As we ought to act from a right principle, by a right rule, so in the last
place to a right end; low base ends spoil the highest undertakings: now he that
does a good action to a good end, does mind these two things in his action.

1. He does it to the glory of God, according to that Command of God, 1 Cor.
10. 31. and Mat. 5. 16.

2. He does it for his own and others good, Romans 2. 7. Mat. 5. 16. Now bring
these things home, and lay them upon your hearts: make a curious, narrow,
impartial, diligent search, and see whether thou do act from such a
principle, by such a rule, to such an end.

If not, thou do the thing that is commanded, but not as it is commanded;
thou do with Amaziah, 2 Chronicles. 25. 7, 8, 9. That which is right in the sight
of the Lord, but not with a perfect heart, or else thou do a good action to
an ill end, as in Phil. 1. 16.

And yet say to others and think in thy self that thou have done well, as Jehu
to Jonadab the son of Racab. Hence it appears that the strength and confidence
of a deluded man or woman may be so great, that it may seem unto himself an
unreasonable thing once to question whether his heart be right, or the action
good, even in those actions wherein he came short both of the matter, ground,
form, and end.

Quest. Cannot a natural man do an action that is good?

Answ. A man by nature may do an action that is good for the substance thereof,
as appears, Dan. 4. 27. But he cannot do that which is truly and spiritually
good, Mat. 7. 18. A corru^t tree cannot bring forth good fruit, Jer. 13. 23.
Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the Leopard his spots; then may ye do
good, that are accustomed to do evil. See also Romans 3. 10. Prove. 15. 8. and 21.
27.

Quest. Why cannot he do that which is spiritually good?

1. Because his person is not accepted, Genesis 4. 4. compared with 1 Pet. 2. 5.

2. Because his person is not sanctified, so the actions he does proceed not
from a good root, viz. Faith and the spirit of sanctification, 1 Timothy 1. 5.
Jam. 4. 3.

3. Because he does it not to a good end, 1 Cor. 10. 31. Col. 3. 17. Phil* 1.
16.

Object. You have been speaking to us of the principal from which, the rule by
which, and the end to which we should act, and of our remissness and defection
herein, but pray if you can, tell us by what power we shall do all these
things. I find my self altogether unable to do these things; and I read in
Scripture, that the way of man is not in himself: it is not in man to direct
his steps, Jer. 10. 23. And Paul tells us from the Lord, that we are not
sufficient as of our selves, to think so much as one good thought, and that it
is God that works in us both to will and to do.

Answ. Strength to perform any duty, to exercise any grace, to subdue any
lusts, to resist any temptation, to bear any affliction, etc. Is derived only
from Christ, ( viz.)

1. Consider that either he has already enabled thee to do the thing
commanded, for he has given a talent, or talents, 1 Cor. 12. 8, 9, 10. Romans
12. 6. compared with Mat. 25. from ver. 15. to 28.

2. Consider that many times the Lord conveyes a power together with the
command, to enable thee to do the thing commanded. So when he bid Lazarus to
come forth, he conveys a power together with the command, and he came forth; so
again in Luke 5. 24. he commanded the man that was sick of the palsy, to take
up his bed and walk, and conveys a power together with the command, whereby
ver. 25. he did immediately arise, took up his bed, went to his house, and
glorified God: so again in Ezekiel. 2. 1, 2. And he said unto me, Son of man stand
upon thy feet, and I will speak unto thee, and the Spirit entered into me when
he spoke, and set me upon my feet, and I heard him that spoke unto me, etc.

3. When the Command lies before thee, if thou find no power in thy self
already given to thee, neither any power conveyed to thee together with the
Command, then bring the precept to the promise, and search what there is in the
promise, answering to that which the precept requires, and so to sue out by
prayer the blessing of the promise, that we may be enabled to do the duty of
the precept.

Precept, it is man's duty to believe, Mark. 1. 15.

Promise, the Covenant holds forth believing as a free gift, Ephesians. 2. 8.

Prayer sues it out, Lord help my unbelief.

Precept. It is man's duty, to wash and be clean, Isa. 1. 16.

Promise. It is Gods promise to sanctify and cleanse us, Ezekiel. 36. 25.

Prayer. It is the business of prayer to sue out this promise; wash me and I
shall be clean, Psa. 51. 7.

It is man's duty to repent, and turn to God, Act. 17. 30.

The promise holds forth repentance as the gift of God, Act. 5. 31, 2 Timothy 2.
25.

Prayer sues it out, turn thou me, and I shall be turned, Jer. 31. 18.

It is required of man as a duty to make him a new heart, Ezekiel. 18. 31.

It is Gods promise to give a new heart, Ezekiel. 36. 26.

Prayer rises up suitable to the promise: Psalm. 51. 10: Create in me a clean
heart O God, and renew a right spirit within me.

It is man's duty to love God, Mat. 22. 37.

Promise, It is Gods Covenant to circumcise the heart to love him, Deuteronomy. 30. 6.

Prayer works out in the strength thereof, that God would direct the heart to
love him, 2 These. 3. 5.

It is man's duty to fear God, Deuteronomy. 10. 12.

It is Gods promise to put his fear into our hearts, Jer. 32. 40.

Prayer seeks for it, Psalm. 86 11. Unite my heart to fear thy name.

It is man's duty to draw near to God, Jam. 4. 8.

It is Christ's promise to draw men unto him: John 12. 32.

Prayer falls in suitable hereunto, Can. 1. 4. draw me, we will run after thee.

It is man's duty to walk in Gods Statutes, Psalm. 119. 4.

It is Gods promise to enable him so to do, Ezekiel. 36. 27.

Prayer works up accordingly, Psalm. 119. 5. O that my ways were directed to
keep thy Statutes.

It is man's duty to be strong in the Lord, Ephesians. 6. 10.

It is Gods promise to make him strong, Psa. 29. 11.

Prayer fetches strength from him, Psalm. 86. 16. Give thy strength to thy
servant.

It is man's duty not to depart from God, Heb. 3. 12.

It is Gods promise to his people, that they shall not depart from him, Jer.
32. 40.

Prayer answers hereto. O let me not wander from thy commandments, Psalm. 119.
10.

I might instance in all, or almost every thing required of us, that there is a
promise left us, and to many precepts there is two or three promises; the one
to enable us the other to reward us, and all to encourage us to do our duty.

Behold all ye whose faces are Sion-ward, here is a new and living way paved
with promises. A way of strength to the upright, wherein they may walk from
strength to strength, till they appear before God in Sion. Let no discouraging
thoughts concerning the difficulty of the work which is set before you possess
your hearts, so as to hinder your application to it, and cheerful progress in
it. A yoke we are commanded to take upon us, but such as is made most easy to
bear, because, that God which lays it upon us, has promised to strengthen,
supply and support us; he who is righteous in commanding, is gracious in
promising: let us be strong in believing, and fervent in praying, and our work
will be our meat, our duty our delight, and God will let us see that he has
either the Castle of providence, or the Ark of a promise, or the al-sufficiency
of his own grace, for a retirement of his people in the greatest storms and
tempests.

Paul and Silas said to the Jailer, Act. 16. 30, 31. Believe on the Lord Jesus
Christ and thou shall be saved. Now might not the Jailer have replied as many
do now in our days, and say, I can as well make a world, work miracles,
overturn mountains, as believe by mine own power; therefore Paul and Silas, why
bid ye me believe?

To this I answer, though it be true, that every commard of God is alike
difficult to flesh and blood, that a man can indeed as well make a world, as
make a prayer aright, a man may as well subdue an army of men, as subdue one
lust, did not the Lord convey a power into the soul, together with the command,
viz. If God command a man to believe, and gives him power to believe, the work
will soon be done, Ezekiel. 36. The Lord commands to make a new heart: now a man
is no more able to make a new heart, then to make a new world: therefore as we
said before, he promises in the same place to give a new heart: and in another
place it is said, mortify your lusts: now this a man cannot do of himself: but
the same God that commands us to kill our lusts, will kill them for us, Micah
7. 18, 19. He will subdue our iniquities, and thou will cast all their sins
into the depth of the Sea. Again, God commands us to repen^, but we are no more
able to repent, or to shed one tear for sin then a rock is to give out water,
or we are no more able to repent, then to turn the stream, or to make a slint
flesh, till the Lord give us a repenting heart: he has promised to give
repentance to his people. So that the commands in Scripture, does not show what
the creature can do, but what he should do, yet not by our own natural power,
but by his assisting grace to enable us to do, what of our selves we cannot do,
therefore we should pray with Saint Augustine, Lord give what thou command,
and then command what thou please.

To draw toward a conclusion to this point, let me acquaint the Reader of what
I have observed amongst all sorts of men with whom I have more or less
conversed, viz. First the Papist, both in their writings and discourses, cry up
and press all people to be doing good works. The Arminian his cosen Jerman,
pleads for the same, and that almost, if not altogether, from the same
principle, to the same end: the new upstart Quakers, falls in and closes with
these old errors, pressing people to do the thing that is commanded, but not as
it is commanded; so many of our brethren of the Presbyterian party being in and
under a spirit of bondage themselves, preach the Law before the Gospel, and put
their hearers to act for life, but not from life. So also our brethren of the
Independent party, and those of the Baptist party, many of them to my own
knowledge do more mind the things they do for God in way of obedience to his
commands, then they do the principle from which, the rule by which, and the end
to which they do it; and when they have done it, even these also are apt to lay
too great a stress upon it. So then the Papist, freewiller, Quaker,
Presbyterian, Independent, Baptist, all these preach, teach and cry out to all
their hearers for a holy conversation; nay to come a little nearer home, the
word of God calls upon us for it, our own consciences call for it, and check us
for our remissness therein; nay the Christians with whom we converse expect it
from us, what remains then but that we be found in the practices of it, but let
us beware we rest not upon it, for as we are not to conclude our justification
from any effects of sanctification, so we are not to conclude that apprehension
of justification to be from God, which takes us off the means, ways and rules
of sanctification: the Ranters error springs up in them for want of this
distinction.

In a word, to say no more; duty is the matter of promise, as well as Gods
mercy, as does most clearly appear by these Scriptures, 1 Cor. 2. 12. Ephesians. 2.
8. Phil. 1. 29. Acts 5. 31. Joh. 8. 32. And our holy conversation is not the
cause of our salvation, but the effect; neither do I hold that there is any
free will in man, neither do I believe that any man has, or ever since the
fall, had any will or power of himself without God to do any thing that is
good, for in him, as the Scripture says, we live, move, and have our being; so
that in, through, and by God and Christ we may do all things, for he is a Sun,
and a shield, and will give grace and glory, and no good thing will he withhold
from them that wait on him, Psalm. 84. 11.

Yet God has given all men enough, to leave them without excuse; what man is
there that knows not, that if he make use of all the opportunities, will,
power and understanding that God has given him, but he may avoid more evil,
and do more good then he has done, or does now do?

Of Justification and Sanctification, how they differ, and wherein they agree.
GOD in Justification imputes the righteousness of Christ to us; in
Sanctification his Spirit infuseth grace in us. In Justification we read sin
pardoned, in Sanctification we read sin subdued; the one does free all
Believers from the warth of God that they never fall into a state of
condemnation; the other neither equal in all, nor in this life perfect in any,
but going on and growing up to perfection.

Again, Justification and Sanctification differ thus; to wit, Justification is
the imputing of another justice to us, to wit Christ.

Sanctification is the impression of Justice, that it may be in us.

In Justification, there is satisfaction of Christ.

In Sanctification, there is the obedience of a Christian.

Justification is a perfect and absolute undivided act at once; Sanctification
is a work begun, not equal in all, but carried on in all by degrees.

Justification is first; Sanctification afterward: consisting in separation
from sin, filthiness, and common pollution.

Justification and Sanctification are two inseparable companions, where one
does dwell, the other will lodge; and as Election is the proper work of the
Father, as Ephesians. 1. 3, 4. Redemption of the Son, 1 John 2. 1, 2. So
Sanctification is the proper work of the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 6. 11.

Now there are four things considerable to show us wherein we are to keep our
Justification and Sanctification distinct the one from the other.

1. We are to keep Justification and Sanctification distinct, in respect of the
subject and matter of this, which is not any thing in us, or done by us: but
the personal and spotless righteousness of Jesus Christ made over to us, 1 Cor.
1. 30.

2. It is our duty to keep up our Justification distinct, although it be not
accompanied with Sanctification, although there be failings in us; the Prodigal
in Luke 15. came and confessed his sin as a son, and said, Father I am not
worthy to be called thy son.

3. We should keep our Justification distinct, and not go to reason out our
Justification from our Sanctification, but we should look to Jesus Christ, the
Rock upon which a Christian should build his soul.

4. We should always keep up, and keep distinct our Justification, as the
spring and way to Sanctification; for the fruit of Justification, is peace,
joy, boldness and strength to do the will of God; all this does come in from
Jesus Christ in a way of believing, and not from Sanctification; for as we are
not to conclude our Justification from any effects of Sanctification, so we are
not to conclude that apprehension of Justification to be from God, which takes
us off the means, ways and rules of Sanctification: therefore although they be
distinct in these four forementioned heads, yet they agree, and go hand in hand
in these ensuing things.

1. They go together in these; he that is justified, does as earnestly desire
Sanctification and holiness, as he does heaven and happiness.

2. He does as well desire, that is justified by Christ's righteousness, to
choose Christ as a King to rule over him, as a Savior to save him.

3. They go together in this respect also; a soul is not content with the
apprehension of his Justification, unless he finds some measure of, and growing
up in Sanctification.

4. They go together, as does appear by this; the man that is truly justified,
he does make as much care and conscience to practice holiness, as ever he did
to get Christ's righteousness.

5. They go together in this respect also: every discovery of Christ and his
righteousness to the soul for Justification, does fit and heighten the souls
resolution for Sanctification and holiness.

6. A man may be said to keep his Justification and Sanctification together,
when he does trust his soul in the hands of Christ for salvation, and makes it
his work to die to the world, and to honor Christ in the world.

7. When a soul has found out Christ, for his Justification, he does make it
his great business to be conformable to him in his conversation, Phil. 3. 10.
being made conformable to his death.

Now if any ask,

1. Why a soul should keep his Justification and Sanctification distinct in
some things. 2. Why in other things we should keep them together. 3. How a soul
should come to keep his Justification and Sanctification distinct, and yet to
keep them together.
Then I answer,

1. Why a soul should keep them distinct: to which I answer.

1. Because the Spirit of God is distinct in laying down these things in the
Scrptures, viz. in exhorting us to come without money, and without price; and
if we walk in darkness, and see no light, yet to trust and stay our selves upon
him, because he does love us freely, and pardon us graciously, and is found of
them that sought him not.

2. Because otherwise our souls can never be truly established, rooted and
built up in him, Isaiah 7. 9. Ephesians. 3. 17. Col. 2. 7. he that does mix
Justification and Sanctification together, can never be established.

3. We should keep them distinct, that so we might give God the whole glory of
our Justification and salvation.

Quest. 2. Is, why we should in other things keep them together?

Answ. 1. That we might glorify God before the world; its true, a soul does
most glorify God by believing, but he does more glorify God before the world
by his holy conversation, Matthew. 5. 16. John 15. 8.

2. Because holiness and sanctification is the way in which the Lords people
shall be saved. I do not say that this is the way by which, but the way in
which salvation is manifested, 2 Pet. 1. 10, 11.

3. The next reason why we should keep them together, is, because thereby we
shall stop the mouths of wicked men, 1 Peter 2. 15. For so is the will of God,
that with well doing you may put to silence the ignorance of foolish men.

4. We are to keep them together, because this is the will of God, that all
that do profess his name, and lay hold on his Mercy, should live holily, 1
These. 4. 3, 4. For this is the will of God, even your sanctification, that
every one of you should know how to possess his vessel in sanctification and
holiness.

5. We are to keep up Sanctification as well as Justification, because thereby
the Lord will stop the mouths of wicked men at the last day, saying, Come ye
blessed of my Father, you have done thus and thus for me and mine, Matthew. 25.
34, 35.

Quest. 3. Is, how should a soul come to keep his Justification and
Sanctification distinct, and yet keep them together?

Answ. 1. Meditate much on the free love of God, when we were in our blood, he
was in his love; freely to love us, and graciously to justify us: and then in
the second place the soul will say within it self, shall I sin against him that
has freely justified me? No, no, how can I do this great wickedness and sin
against God?

2. Dwell much upon those engagements that God has put upon us in the many
great things that he has done for us, Titus 3. 3, 4, 5. For we our selves were
sometimes foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving diverse lusts and pleasures,
living in malice and envy, hateful and hating one another; but after that the
kindness and love of God our Savior appeared, not by works of righteousness
which we have done, etc. Ver. 8. These things I will that thou affirm
constantly, that they which have believed in God might be careful to maintain
good works.

3. Think much upon the littleness of our work or services we can do to him,
and the unspeakable things that he has done and promised to do for us* what a
disproportion there is between his mercy to us, and our obedience to him; the
one is like the Ocean Sea, the other as a grain of mustard seed; the one
infinite, the other finite; the one as a great mountain that fills the whole
earth, the other as a Peppercorn.

4. Dwell much upon the great difference there will be between those that make
it their work to keep up their Faith and obedience, and those that do not; at
the coming of Christ, the one he will bless, and make them sit down to meat,
and will serve them, see that blessed place, Luke 12. 37.

The other has neither Justification nor Sanctification, the Lord will cut
them asunder, and will appoint them their portion with unbelievers, Luke 12. 46.

O what remains then, but that we labor to distinguish between our
Justification, and our personal Sanctification. The first is quite out of our
selves, consisting in the imputation of Christ's righteousness inherent in him,
who sits at the right hand of God, far above the reach and sphere of sins
activity, and is therefore perfect and complete, yea the foundation of all
blessedness; the latter is in our selves, and therefore weak and uncertain; he
that understands not the true nature and doctrine of Justification, cannot
enjoy true, stable and constant peace; but remains unstable, apt to be led away
with every wind of Doctrine; in the right understanding of this point, is
treasured up a fountain of soul-reviving consolation.

Surely, by what has been said, it does most plainly appear, that a Christians
happiness depends not upon his own doings, but on Christ, who is of God, made
unto us Righteousness, Sanctification, etc. who has saved us, and called us
with an holy calling, not according to our works, but according to his own
purpose and grace. See 1 Cor. 1. 30. 2 Timothy 1. 9. Heb. 13. 8. Sanctification
admits of degrees, Justification neither of Rules nor degrees; when we cannot
apprehend God in a way of Sanctification, yet we are then comprehended of God,
though our actual righteousness be but as menstruous rags, and often fail us,
yet then, even then, we have the righteousness of Christ presented to us, Isa.
45. 24. Surely shall one say, in the Lord have I righteousness and strength:
their righteousness is of me says the Lord, Isa. 54. 17.

And this Righteousness, as it is ours by imputation, so it is perfect and
endures for ever, and is the foundation of all blessedness, therefore let us
rest satisfied with Christ's righteousness, and add nothing to it, let our
hearts say with David, Psalm 71. 15, 16, 19, 24. I will make mention of thy
righteousness, even of thine only, and wait upon him in Faith, prayer and
patience, who has promised that he will be as a dew to Israel, and that he
shall grow as a Lilly, and cast forth his fruit as Lebanon, Hosea 14. 6, 7.

Of Faith, the quality, object, acts, seat, subject, inseparable concomitants
and degrees of Justifying Faith: the difficulty of believing, and the faculty
of mistaking about it.
FAith gives courage and confidence in greatest difficulties and dangers, but
unbelief raises fear where no fear is, Psalm 23. 4.

Believing is the ready way, the safest way, the sweetest way, the shortest
way, the only way to a well-grounded assurance; now Faith is,

An habitual frame, or a believing disposition of heart, whereby man is
inclinable to believe whatsoever God has said in his word.

Or,

It is a grace of God, whereby the heart and will of a sensible sinner, does
take and embrace Jesus Christ as tendered in the Gospel, in his person and
offices, and does wholly and only rest upon him for pardon of sin, and for
eternal life.

Gods eternal decree is the original cause of it, Acts 13. 48. The instrumental
cause of it is the Word of God, Romans 10. 17. The immediate and singular cause
of it is the Spirit of God, Gal. 5. 22. That the will or heart of a man should
be brought off from it self, and to abhor its own condition and sufficiency,
and to take Christ as God tenders him, to be the only rock upon which a man
must build his salvation, and to be the only Lord, to whose Law and will we
must resign up our whole soul, this arises not from natural causes, or man's
own free will.

Of the Object of Faith.
NOW the object of Justifying Faith is the whole Trinity; God the Father the
ultimate object: God the Son the immediate, as he is jointly one with the
Father in justifying a sinner, John 14. 1. ye believe in God, believe also in
me; now whole Christ is the object of Faith: Christ you know is God and man,
and he is to be considered as a Priest, as a Prophet, and as a King; now God
tenders him in all these to sinners, and Christ is willing to bestow himself on
them, as one who can and will assuredly save all that come to him; but says
Christ, if you would have me to be your Priest to save you, you must also be
willing to have me to be your Prophet to instruct you and direct you, and to be
your King and Lord to command you; you must resign up your selves to my Scepter
and Government, for I am a Lord as well as a Savior, and I will be taken as
both, or else you shall have part in neither. I will be taken as Lord and King,
to command all the heart, to dispose all the ways, to rule the very thoughts.

Of the subject of this Faith.
THE subject of this Faith is a sensible sinner; there are two sorts of sinners.

1. Some generally corrupted, both in their natures and in their lives, and
they are as unsensible as they are sinful, they know not their own vileness;
these are not the subjects of this precious Faith.

2. There are sensible experienced sinners, who loath themselves, and groan
under the burden of their sins; I must confess there are several degrees of
this sensibleness, neither dare I to assume the height and latitude of it, unto
the terms, or horror, and terror, and dejections, before he can believe in
Christ; no, though these sharp throws are manifest in some, yet let us not make
them a rule for all; but this be sure, that the heart looks not toward Christ,
until it feel it self to be sinful and lost, then and not till then, the soul
looks out and enquires after a Savior; and anon he finds it written, that
Christ ^ame not to call the righteous, but sinners; and that Christ was sent to
find that which was lost; and that the whole need not a Physician but the sick*
and that he is sent to preach liberty to the Captives.

Of the Seat of Faith.
THE seat or habitation of Faith is the heart, or will, or both, Romans 10. 10.
with the heart man believes unto righteousness, Acts 8 37. and Philip said, if
thou believe with all thy heart, thou may: now before Faith takes up his
seat in the heart, or in order to it. 1. There is a looking to Jesus, John 19.
37. 2. There is a coming to him, Mat. 11. 28. John 6. 37. 3. There is a leaning
upon him, Cant. 8. 5. 4. There is an embracing of him, Cant. 2. 6. 5. There is
a taking hold of him, John 1. 12. Col. 2. 6. 6. There is a believing in him,
and that with the heart, and there is the seat of Faith.

Of the ground of Faith.
THE ground of believing is the word of God, the Scriptures of truth; he that
does say he does believe in God, having no Scripture ground, he does deceive
himself; the ground of Faith is without our selves, not a light in us, or any
thing done by us: the ground of Faith is, God in his word does offer us Christ,
and Christ calls us unto him, and says, he will in no wise cast us off, but if
we believe in him we shall have eternal life; now this is a word of truth, and
this word of his is worthy of all acceptance, and whatsoever was written
aforetime, was written for our learning, that we through patience and comfort
of the Scriptures might have hope, John 20. 31. But these things are written
that we might believe, and that believing we might have life through his name.

1. The Scriptures of truth are the ground of Faith; as they do give a man
sufficient ground and warrant to believe whatsoever is contained in them; this
was the ground of Abraham's faith, and of David's faith, remember the word upon
which thou have caused me to hope, Psalm. 119. 49.

2. The Scriptures are the ground of Faith, as it is a sure word: as we are not
to believe any thing that is not contained in Scripture, so we need not doubt
of any thing that is promised in them: they are the faithful sayings of God.

3. The Scriptures are the ground of Faith, as it is a touchstone to try all
doctrines by, Isa. 8. 20. John 5. 39.

4. They may be said to be the ground of Faith, as they hold forth all things
necessary to salvation, and all things necessary to be believed.

Again, they may be said to be the ground of Faith, because in them the Lord
does command us to believe, 1 John 3. 23. Joh. 6. 29.

Again, in the Scriptures there are many solemn invitations to poor sensible
sinners, to come and take milk and wine, and the water of life freely.

And many precious promises to those that do come, with many examples left upon
record, how well those have sped that did come; all these are grounds and
encouragements to believe.

The Springs of Faith, how God does beget it in an unbeliever.
THere is no natural power in man to produce a cause within its self; this
great grace of Faith is no fruit of the wisdom of the flesh, nor is it the
birth of a corrupt will. The immediate and sole cause of Faith is the Spirit of
God: He it is who is greater then the heart, who can persuade and draw the
heart, and change and renew the Spirit: There be means appointed by God which
he does ordnarily bless, for the production of faith; as he has ordained means
for the revelation of Christ, so he has sanctified means to lead the soul unto
him, to implant Faith.

1. God lets the soul see that it is the command of God, that he should
believe, and that faith is the gift of God, without which we can do nothing
acceptably; it is through grace that men believe, yet men are to use the means;
now the great and ordinary means by which God works faith in the hearts of men,
it is the preaching of the word* See Act. 13. 48. When the Gentiles heard this
they were glad, and glorified the word of the Lord, and as many as were
ordained to life believed, Romans 10. 17. Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by
the word of God, Ephesians. 1. 13. In whom ye also trusted, after that ye heard the
word of truth, the Gospel of your salvation.

2. The preaching of the word does discover to the soul, its extreme misery,
and great need of Christ, and makes him say, men and brethren, what shall I do
to be saved.

3. It is that which casts down all the reasonings, arguments, and disputes
of the mind against the conditions of Christ, and renders all the terms of
Christ upon which he will be taken, as most equal, fair and reasonable.

4. It is that which clears the way for the soul against all its fears, and
unbelieving doubts; it lays before the sinner, the freeness of Gods mercy, the
fullness of Christ's Redemption, the willingness on Christ's part to accept of him.

5. It is that sets the soul in a patient expectation, to lie at the Pool, for
ever to attend the assemblies of the Saints, and to enquire in his Temple, till
the soul can take a close with Christ, by true believing.

6* Means to get faith; take one promise, and charge that upon the heart, and
if the heart be stubborn, and will not yield, then take another, if that will
not do, then take another; and lay that home upon the heart, and never leave
this work till you have gotten some small measure of Faith.

7. Make as much conscience of those commands that require you to believe, as
you do of those commands that do require you to hear, read, and meditate, and
pray.

Lastly, consider for thy encouragement that blessed text, Psalm 147. 11. The
Lord takes pleasure in those that hope in his Mercy. See Psalm 33. 18.

The Impediments, Lets and Hindrances of Faith.
AS the Eunuch said to Philip, here is water, what hinders me that I may not be
baptized? so may I say to my self and others here in the Gospel: is Christ set
out to the life? here are arguments fair enough to draw on our souls to Christ,
what hinders that we do not believe and receive Christ?

The first impediment to the getting of Faith, is gross ignorance; whatsoever
is contrary to knowledge, the same is contrary to Faith: the soul must have
light for all its motions, for the eye to see, and the understanding to
perceive; and for the heart to embrace those ignorances that is a hindrance to
faith, falls in these three parts.

1. They are ignorant of their own sinful condition

2. They are ignorant of Gods just disposition toward them.

3. They are ignorant of Christ and all his excellencies: what he is, God, or
man, or both: they know not him in both his natures, neither in his Offices,
Actions, Passion, Benefits, Virtues: they understand not how God has
manifested love in Christ; to what end he was made man; what is in him more
then in any other. Alas they think not of these things: Now how is it possible
for the soul to believe, or to be persuaded to believe in Christ, or to labor
for this precious faith, which is a stranger to it self, to God, to Christ?

2. A second impediment of Faith is a vain confidence of natural righteousness;
this was it which kept off many of the Pharisees; the text says, that they
trusted to their own righteousness, they being ignorant of Gods righteousness,
and going about to establish their own rigteousness, have not submitted to the
righteousness of God, Romans 10. 3, 6.

3. A third impediment of faith is the honor of the world; how can you
believe, says Christ, which receive honor one from another, John 5. 44.
again, Mat. 19. 22. He went away sorrowful without faith, for he had great
earthly possessions, John 7. 48. Have any of the Pharisees believed on him?

Motives to believe, or diverse Arguments from Jesus Christ himself to persuade
us to believe.
1. OUR Lord Christ does lay his command upon us, John 14. 1. ye believe in
God, believe also in me, John 6. 29. this is the work of God, that ye believe
on him whom he has sent. 1 John 3. 23. this is his Commandment, that we
believe on the name of the Son of God, even Jesus Christ.

2. The second motive is or may be thus; consider that Christ plainly says,
that he that will not believe shall be damned, John 3. 18, 36.

Excellency prevails much with an ingenious nature, and necessity with the
worst nature: When the Leapers saw that they must either venture their lives or
dye, they would out into the Camp: when the Prodigal saw he must famish abroad,
or repair home, he would then back to his fathers house; when the woman with
the issue of blood had spent all, and grew worse, and knew not whither to go,
or what to do, then she comes to Christ: now if thou have not so much ingenuity
as to come to, and believe in Christ, in obedience to his command, yet let thy
necessity prevail with thee, or else the Leaper and Prodigal shall rise up in
judgment against thee: were we in Adams created innocence, then we need not to
look after a Savior, but we are fallen, but we are broken, but we are sold
under sin, but we are transgressors from the womb, but we are by nature the
children of disobedience and wrath.

3. He does invite us to come, and to believe by the Prophets, Isa. 55. 1, 2,
3. He beseeches us by the Apostles to be reconciled to him, 2 Cor. 5. 20. He
calls upon us by his Church and spirit to take of the water of life, Revelat.
22. 17. and after all this, he waits upon us to be gracious to us; Isaiah 30.
18.

4. Our unbelief grieves the very heart of Christ; he grieved at their
unbelief, he complains at our backwardness to believe, (O fools and slow of
heart to believe) Nay, and he sheds tears because we believe not on him; when
he came near the City, he wept over it, etc.

5. Motive, Consider there is none who have right to thy soul but God and
Christ; our souls are Gods workmanship, and Christ's purchase; why then should
we not give to God and Christ that which is their own, 1 Cor. 6. 19, 20. ye are
not your own, ye are bought with a price: God put forth his own power to make
thy soul, and Christ shed his heart blood to redeem thy soul, and will thou
through unbelief withhold it from him?

6. Christ outbids all Merchants for thy soul, he outbids the world, sin and
Satan: is there any one of them that presents Redemption unto thee? is there
any one of them that can procure remission and pardoning mercy for thee? is
there any one of them that can satisfy the wrath of God for thee? which can
make thy peace, which can present thee righteous before the judgment seat,
which can settle eternal life upon thee? all this can Christ do: none of this
can they do.

Behold here is laid before thee life and death, life if thou do believe,
death if not; now choose you whether; what shall I say more, by believing we
honor God, John 3. 33. by believing we come to be established, Isa. 7. 9. by
believing we are kept in perfect peace, Isa. 26. 3, 4. Romans 5. 1. Our naked
cleaving to God in his free promise, will carry down all our distempers at
once, and fill our souls with peace in believing. O how can we look so many
sweet promises in the face, and harbor so many misgivings in our hearts? Romans
9. ult. whosoever believes in him shall not be ashamed.

Of the evil of unbelief, and the springs of it, and the misery that does
attend it.
Unbelief does rob the soul of all joy, comfort and content: Nay further,
unbelief does throw reproach upon God, Christ and the promises, and gives Satan
the greatest advantage against us; he that lives without Faith, lives without
comfort, joy, peace and content; by unbelief we add sin unto sin in the highest
nature, 1 John 5. 10.

Unbelief straightens the heart, stops the mouth, and hinders thankfulness;
thou shall be dumb, because thou believe not, Luke 1. 20.

Unbelief is the door that lets in condemnation. John 3. 18, 30. He that
believes not is condemned. Rev. 2. 8. The fearful and unbelieving shall be
cast into the Lake of fire and brimstone.

1. It is the greatest sin in the world, because it is a sin against the
greatest love in the world, John 3. 16. Romans 5. 8. It is a sin for which there
can be no remedy, for as much as it is a sin against the only remedy; the
Sentence of the Law may be repealed by the Gospel, but the sins against Gospel
remedy there is no appeal, it is a sin that makes void and vain all the
Covenant of grace, turning all the sweetness thereof into bitterness, and all
the truth of it to a lie, 1 John 5. 10.

Unbelief binds all our sins upon the soul, and so murders the soul, it grieves
the heart of Christ, leaves all our sins upon record, leaves us to answer for
our selves: it is a sin against the greatest love, against the only remedy,
makes void the Doctrine of grace, and breeds an indisposition toward all holy
duties: it is a dishonouring to God, a denying of Christ, a murderer of the
soul, a belying of God, a denying of Christ, and a crowning of Satan; it does
without doubt proclaim the Devil a Conqueror, and lift him up above Christ
himself. Judas did sin more by unbelief, and despairing, then by betraying of
Christ. In a word, doubts, fears and discouragements, proceed neither from God,
Christ, nor the Spirit of truth, but they do proceed, First, from the Devil, he
either tempts us to sin, and that will cause us to doubt, or else he does tempt
us to doubt, and that will cause us to sin. Secondly, they proceed from our own
hearts, Heb. 3. 12. Thirdly, from the lying vanities that we hearken unto,
Jonah 2. 8. Fourthly, from ignorance, heedlesness and forgetfulness. Fifthly,
from unskilfulness of the word of righteousness, Heb. 5. 12. 7. Sixthly, from
want of watchfulness. Seventhly, from building our hopes and comfort upon that
which is mutable and uncertain, viz. our own personal Sanctification, and not
upon Christ, and our free Justification. Eighthly, from our own false
reasonings, making Sense, Reason, and Feeling the Judge of our spiritual
condition. Ninthly, from our ignorance of the love of Christ and the Covenant
of Grace.

The Characters, Marks or Signs of true Faith, etc.
THere are many characters or discoveries of this Faith of the Gospel, called
the Faith of Gods Elect, which works by love. First, the habit of this Faith
is infused into the soul, by God in regeneration, Ephesians. 2. 8. John 1. 12, 13.
Secondly, this habit so infused, is brought to act by the Fathers drawing the
soul to Christ, John 6. 44. Thirdly, faith being thus infused and acted, does
cheerfully accept of Christ upon his own terms, viz. self-denial, bearing the
Cross and following Christ, Luke 9. 23. John 1. 12. Faith having thus accepted
and received Christ, begins to taste such sweetness and pleasantness in him,
that Christ is most pleasant to the soul, 1 Pet 2. 3, 7. So the soul by degrees
comes to be filled with joy and peace in believing. Again, Faith having thus
taken and tasted Christ, contends after a fuller perfection, even after
assurance, Col. 2. 2. Heb. 10. 22.

1. True Faith is not only a justifying grace, but a sanctifying grace, Acts
15. 9. and 26. 8. the blood of Christ i^ a pure blood as well as a precious
blood. It is a cleansing blood, as well as an expiating blood. So faith is a
grace not only to acquit, but also to purge and renew the person where it
dwells. It is not only an enlightening grace, but it is also a conforming
grace; therefore we read that it does ingraft us into the similitude of his
death, and in the fellowship of his sufferings and Resurrection, Phil. 3. 10.

Now then enquire; is there virtue gone from Christ to make thy dark mind
seeing, thy stubborn judgment yielding, thy proud heart humbling, thy filthy
heart cleansing, thy hard heart relenting and mourning, thy carnal affections
to be heavenly, thy sinful soul to be holy? Read and well consider that in 1
Cor. 6. 9, 10, 11.

2. Where there is true Faith, it will cause the party to make a curious,
narrow, impartial, diligent search into his own heart and soul, to see what
humility, what self-denial, what sin abhorrency, what love to Christ, what
delight to the Ordinances, what zeal for Gods glory, what contempt of the
world, what desires after the society of the Saints, what sympathizing with
them in their afflictions? and if upon this search thou find any impressions
of grace, any spiritual work, any savouring, savory distinguishing operations
upon thy heart, then the Spirit has been there, and begun to work the grace of
Faith in thy heart.

3. True Faith does make the heart humble and lowly; Have we pardon of sin? why
says Faith, the cause of this is Gods love: Have we righteousness? why says
Faith, the cause of this is Christ's merits: Have we any gift? why says Faith,
the cause of this is Christ's love. So that the soul sits down, and often says,
O Lord, O Lord, in my self I am nothing, nay of my self worse then nothing. But
what I am, I am by grace, all that I have is thine, my bread, my health, my
life, my body, my soul, all is thine. If any love, if any mercy, if any Christ,
if any grace, if any comfort, if any strength, if any stedfastness, if any
performances, if any good work, if any good word, if any good affection, if any
good thought, why, all is thine. I have nothing but what I have received, thou
only art the cause, I am less then the least of thy mercies, and what is thy
servant that thou should look on such an one as I am? thou made me, and
thou boughtest me, and thou calledst me, and thou justifiest me, and thou
savest me.

4. True Faith does desire and endeavor after an increase; Help my unbelief,
said the weak believing Father. O Lord increase our Faith, said the Disciples;
there are yet many degrees wanting to faith; either thou can not be
persuaded, or not fully persuaded, or not constantly persuaded; but if the
Faith be true and living, it will bend after a rising.

5. True Faith in Christ, and a mournful heart for sin always go together,
Zach. 10 12. They shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and mourn, etc.
there are two things that Faith will fetch up in the soul, the one is love to
Christ, another is sorrow for sin.

6. True Faith is fruitful, James 2. 18. See Titus 3. 18. Although works do not
cause Faith, or Justification, yet they do clearly manifest to others, whether
we have Faith yea or no.

To close up this point, let me acquaint the Reader, that there are spiritual
and inward characters of Faith, which serve as evidences to him that has it,
many of those I have hinted at under this foregoing head. Secondly there are
outward or more external signs of Faith, and they consist in walking, so in the
sight of men, that they may in charity judge of our Faith by our works: then
there are characters of a strong Faith, and also signs of a weak Faith: First
of a strong Faith, Romans 4. 20. he staggered not at the promise through
unbelief. Mat. 8. 6, 7, 8. I have not found so great Faith in Israel. Mat. 5.
22. O woman, great is thy faith, etc. So there are characters of a weak Faith;
One is, he will be hasty to be answered, and be ready to suspect Gods favor,
and Christ's love, if he be not presently answered. Another is, he will be faint
if delayed. And so much for the characte^s or signs of Faith.

The benefits of living by Faith: a Believers comfort, hope, joy and confidence
should be in God, the same at all times.
THE Lord has various dispensations of providence as well relating to the
outward, as to the inward man. Sometimes his way is in the whirlwind, and
sometimes he is in the small still voice, and sometimes his footsteps are in
the deep waters, and so his way is not known. Nah. 1. 3. and 1 Kings 19. 12.
and Psalm 77. 19. His dispensations are many times contrary the one to the
other; to day perhaps thou enjoyest peace, strength, riches and honor, with
health, prosperity and many friends, and tomorrow all these may be blasted; to
day God unbosoms himself unto thee, and shines forth upon thee, but in a moment
he withdraws himself. As blessed Job, David, and diverse others experienced. Now
the reason why we should believe, hope and rejoice in God at all times, are as
follows.

1. Because a Believers happiness depends not upon his own doing, but upon
Christ, who is of God made unto him righteousness, sanctification, etc. who
has saved us, and called us, not according to our works, but according to his
purpose and grace, etc. 1 Cor. 1. 3. 2 Timothy 1. 9

2. Because the state of a Believer in Christ, as considered in him, is a state
of perfection, he is clean from all sin by the blood of Christ, they be removed
from us; thou have cast all my sins behind thy back; as far as the East is from
the West, so far has he removed our transgressions from us: seventy weeks are
determined upon the people, to finish the transgression, and to make an end of
sins, and to make reconciliation, and to bring in everlasting righteousness.
Col. 1. 28. John 17. 23. Heb. 10. 14. 1 John 1. 7. Isaiah 35. 8. and 38. 17.
Psalm 103. 12. Dan. 9. 24. Ezekiel. 16. 14.

Hereupon the soul begins to rejoice in God, for he has clothed me with the
garment of salvation, and covered me with the robe of righteousness. Our sins
are laid upon Christ, and his righteousness is ours: hereupon says God, thou
art all fair my love, there is no spot in thee.

3. Reason: Why a Believers comfort, hope, joy and confidence should be the
same at all times, because that God who has loved an everlasting love, loves
thee in his Son: thou art not beloved for thy own sake, or for any thing in
thee, but upon the account of the Lord Jesus, in whom God is well pleased:
Believers are never the more just before God for their own integrity, nor the
less just for their iniquity. God does say of himself, I am the Lord, and
change not: his love is as himself, ever the same: and Christ in whom thou art
beloved, the same yesterday, to day, and the same for ever: and hereupon should
we live by Faith, and rejoice evermore with joy unspeakable and full of glory,
Heb. 13. 8. 1 These. 5. 16. Psalm. 32. 11.

4. Because whatsoever thoughts we have of God, he is unchangeable; if he does
withdraw himself, and lead thee into the wilderness, it is that he may speak
comfortably to thee. Hos. 2. 14, 15. and all this while thou have his promise
with thee, and his faithfulness is engaged unto thee. Isaiah 54. 7, 8. For a
small moment have I forsaken thee, but with great mercy will I gather thee: in
a little wrath I hid my face from thee for a moment, but with everlasting
kindness will have mercy upon thee. Jer. 51. 5. Neh. 9. 16, 17. Having loved
his own which were in the world, he loved them to the end, John 13. 1.

5. God does ever look upon his as they are in his Son, and not simply as they
are in themselves: they dwell in Christ, and he in them, they live in Christ,
and their life is hid with Christ in God; and when Christ who is their life
shall appear, then shall they also appear with him in glory, and be found in
him, not having their own righteousness, etc.

These Scriptures do fully prove all the foregoing reasons, why a Christians
hope, joy and comfort should be the same in God at all times, and so live by
faith, and not by sight, Hos. 2. 19, 20. Jer. 3. 14. Jer. 33. 8. Isa. 62. 5.
Heb. 8. 10, 12. Ezekiel. 16. 62, 63. Heb. 3. 6. Jer. 33. 20, 21. Hosea 14. 5. Isa.
61. 10. Isa. 54. 5. Jer. 31. 9. Heb. 3. 17, 18. Heb. 6. 17, 18. Romans 3. 3. 2 Timothy 2. 13. Romans 8. 28, 33, 35, 38, 39. Isa. 41. 10 Isa. 57. 18, 19. Isa. 54.
7, 8. Heb. 10. 19, 20, 22. Psalm 46. 1, 2, 3, 4. Romans 8. 1, 2. John 13. 1. Isa.
63. 16. Psalm. 89. 30, 31, 33.

Several ways for a believer to hold fast his confidence in God, at all times.
To live by Faith in infirmities, is to live upon Christ and his promises, viz.

If under temptations, 1. Cor. 10. 13. there is a promise of supportation and
deliverance.

In deadness of heart, Isa. 35. 5, 6. there is a promise of relief and
quickening.

If fallen by transgression, Jam. 5. 17. yet there is others of the Lords own
in the same case.

If thou see thy duty, and want strength to do it, here is help and strength
for thee, Job 17. 9. Psalm 84. 7. Isa. 45. 24. and 40. 29, 30. Jer. 17. 8.
Psalm. 1. 2, 3. Psalm. 92. 13, 14. Isa. 61. 9.

In Christ thou have perfectly obeyed the Law, perfectly suffered and satisfied
for all thy sins to the justice of God; so that in Christ, thou art perfectly
just and righteous, and thereupon it is said, Col. 3. 3. Ephesians. 2. 6. that our
life is hid with Christ in God, and we are raised up with Christ, and made to
sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus; though in thy self there is a
body of lust, and corruption, and sin, and there is a law revealing sin,
accusing and condemning, but if we live by faith in Christ, and in the
apprehension of his love, believing in the life, righteousness, obedience,
satisfaction, and glory of him whom the Spirit calls ours. Christ is ours, we
are Christ's, and Christ is Gods: he then lives out of the power of all
condemnation, Christ being the end of the Law for righteousness; and thus a
believer is blessed only in a righteousness without, not within, and all his
assurance, confidence and comforts to flow into him through a channel of faith,
and not of works, believing himself happy for what another, even Christ has
done for him, not for what he has done, nor can do for himself: for when we
are at the best, we are but vanity, Psalm. 39. 5. and unprofitable servants,
Luke 17. 10.

Now this believing in God is attended with these five blessed things.

1. It is the highest piece of obedience to God, Romans 16. 26. It is called the
obedience of Faith.

2. It does put a new engagement upon God to make good his promise, upon which
faith is grounded, Psalm. 119. 49. Remember the word unto thy servant upon which
thou have caused me to hope, 1 Chronicles. 5. 20.

3. Consider also another privilege is this, the greatest mercies that ever
came into a soul, comes in a way of believing, Romans 15. 13. Now the God of hope
fill you with all joy and peace in believing, Romans 5. 1. being justified by
Faith, we have peace with God. etc.

4. By it we give the greatest honor to God, John 3. 33. He has set to his
seal that God is true, but he that believes not has made him a liar, 1 John
5. 10.

5. This is the way to have God take pleasure in us, Psalm. 147. 11 The Lord
takes pleasure in those that fear him, in those that hope in his mercy, Psalm.
33. 18. The eyes of the Lord are upon them that fear him, upon them that hope
in his mercy. The joy of a believer would be always unspeakable, did he
always apprehend his happiness in and by Christ Jesus.

Faith in Christ supplies all wants, it honors God, as Heb. 11. the whole
Chapter: and God honors those most that live by it: by it, says the
Scripture, the Elders obtained a good report; by faith we may live a life to
God, of joy in him our righteousness, as if we had never sinned; by faith we
live above sin, infirmities, temptations, desertions, sense, reason, fears and
doubts: Faith sweetens the sweetest mercy, and the bitterest miseries, it
renders great afflictions as none, it is the bulwark of the souls strength and
comfort: by Faith we cheerfully, readily, and universally, and constantly obey
God. In a measure it makes the the yoke of Christ easy and sweet, it states
the soul in the possession of heaven, whilst the body remains on earth, as John
3. 36. By faith we view the glory of heaven, and know our selves to be happy,
even then when to a carnal eye we seem most miserable. By faith we can
cheerfully part with, and suffer deprivation of the sweetest outward comforts
and enjoyments, and welcome them, knowing that we do but exchange the worst
things, and place for a better; those that live up by faith, live upon God, and
are refreshed in his house, which is plentifully stored with all desirable
dainties, having this welcome, eat O friends and drink abundantly: It is O
believer thy portion, duty, and privilege thus to do: O then, O then let us at
once believe that God will be to us according to his gracious promise and
Covenant, notwithstanding our daily omissions and commissions, excuses and
defects, according to that portion of Scripture, Psalm. 89. from 30. to 37. If
my children forsake my Law, and walk not in my judgments; If they break my
Statutes, and keep not my Commandments, then will I visit their transgressions
with the Rod, and their iniquities with stripes: Nevertheless my loving
kindness will I not utterly take from them, nor suffer my faithfulness to fail,
my Covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips,
etc. He that lives by Faith in infirmities, may be thus characterized.

1. He will hear Christ and not the voice of a stranger, John 10. 27. 5.

2. He is not offended at whatsoever Christ requires, Mat. 11. 6.

3. The revealed will of God in the Scriptures is his Rule, and not the light
within, nor the traditions of men; he walks more by rule then example.

4. He will trust God, and rely upon his word, he eyeth the promise, and
says, surely in the Lord have I righteousness and strength, Isa. 45. 24. Jude
3. Act. 20. 31, etc.

5. He will hold fast to, and earnestly contend for the truth, and Faith once
delivered to the Saints.

6. His sin does not sink him into despair; though he may have many doubtings,
he will say in the mid ^ of all his imperfections, I have as much of the love
of God, acceptance in Christ as the best Saint ever had; though I come short
in the manifestation, my state is as happy as any of theirs, Heb. 3. 17.
Although the Figtree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the vine,
etc. Yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation,
etc. What shall I say more? my body shall be raised. 1 These. 4. 16. And I shall
have a spiritual body, 1 Cor. 15. 43, 44. I shall have a glorified body, Phil.
3. 21. The Sun in the firmament is not so glorious as my body shall be, because
the Sun is but a natural body: I shall have fullness of knowledge, Ephesians. 3. 18.
and fullness of joy and pleasure, Psalm. 16. 11. No misery, hunger, cold or
nakedness, pain, grief nor weariness shall attend me, but I shall rest without
labor, 2 These. 1. 7. And I shall have in rest tranquillity, and in tranquillity
contentment, in contentment joy, in joy variety, in variety security, in
security a glorious eternity, then shall I be like him, and see him as he is, 1
John 3. 1, 2. compared with 1 Cor. 13. 12.

To close up all that I shall speak of this grace of Faith, which is of so
great concernment, give me leave to answer two considerable questions that do
arise in the hearts of many.

1. What conditions or qualifications must or ought I to find in my felf before
I believe or lay hold on a promise?

2. If to believe in God is of so great concernment, both to being, and well
being, why do so few men and women's sons and daughters believe?

1. Quere is: What conditions and qualifications must, or ought a man to find
in himself, before he believes or lay hold of the precious promises in the
Scriptures of Truth.

Answ. I know no qualifications or conditions required of us, before we come,
unless these be conditions and qualifications; tob uy milk and wine without
money and without price, and to take of the water of life freely, Isa. 55. 1, 2,
3. Rev. 22. 17. Isa. 43. 25. Isa. 45. 22. And this I say there will be found in
all that do believe, without which they will not come to Christ: I do not say
without which they should not come.

1. A sense of his lost condition, and great need of a Savior; the whole need
not a Physician, says our Lord Christ.

2. There will be poverty of Spirit, which does spring or arise from these two
things.

First, that a soul has a sense, that it has nothing that good is in it self.
Secondly that he can do nothing to procure good to himself.
3. There will be an inquiring after a remedy, etc. Sirs, what shall I do to be
saved? Lord what will thou have me to do?

4. There will be a willingness to part with any thing for Christ, that stood
in opposition to him, that so he may enjoy him.

5. There will be a resolution and purpose of heart to lead a new life, more
holily, spiritually and heavenly, for time to come.

6. A resolution to wait upon God in his ways, and to lie at the Pool of
Bethesda. Now these and the like things are not required, as that without which
we should not come to Christ, but these things will be in him that does come,
without which he comes not.

2. Quere: What is the reason why so few do believe in God, seeing the way is
so opened, and cleared, and the stumbling blocks removed?

Answ. 1. Ground or reason, why believing on the Son of God is so hard, is
because every thing in man does fight against it: hence it does come to pass,
that believing does require the greatest piece of self-denial in them: for a
man to break the Law, and yet to be freed from the curse of the Law, this
reason cannot comprehend.

2. Ground why so few believe, is, either because they think they do believe
already, and yet do not; or else they would believe, but say they cannot: First
they think they do believe, and yet do not, and these are of three sorts;
First, ignorant persons: now ignorance and unbelief, they always go
togegether; we read of Paul that did things before he was converted, in
ignorance and unbelief. Jer. 4. 22. My people are foolish, they know not me, to
do good they have no knowledge. Secondly, those that boast and glory in their
own righteousness, these have no faith in Jesus Christ and his righteousness.
The third sort of people that do think they do believe and do not, are profane
persons, and these be of two sorts, men of profane spirits, and men of
profane lives, profane practices.

3. Ground or reason why so few believe, is, because it is the great design of
Satan either to hinder or overthrow our Faith; because believing does give the
greatest glory to God, and brings in the greatest good to us. First, it does
give the greatest glory to God of any work in the world, it does give glory to
his truth and faithfulness, and power, and mindfulness. So it does give glory
to Jesus Christ, to his name, power and Godhead, Offices and attributes; by
doubting we dishonor him, frustrate the grace of God, make the death of Christ
of none effect.

4. Reason why believing is so hard a work, is, because of the multitude of
false Doctrines that there are in the world, that a man scarce knows who to
hear, or whom to believe, etc.

Of Repentance unto life.
REpentance and faith are two inseparable companions; where the one does dwell
the other will lodge, in the Covenant of grace there is place for repentance,
and mercy for the penitent. Let us first enquire what true repentance is, viz.
Some say repentance is a grieving for sin, both original and actual, arising
from an apprehension of displeasing so loving a God, 2. Cor. 7. 11. For behold
this self-same thing that ye sorrowed after a godly sort: what carefulness it
wrought in you, yea what clearing of your selves? yea what indignation? yea
what fear? yea what vehement desire? yea what zeal? yea what revenge in all
things? etc. Repentance is not only a turning from evil to good, but a hating
the evil we turn from, and a loving the good we turn to.

True repentance is a general universal change of the whole man in every part;
though it be but in part, it does change both heart and life, word and work, it
makes darkness light, and bitter sweet* and a Leaper an Angel, Isa. 1. 16, 17,
18. Wash ye, make ye clean: there is the change of the heart: put away the evil
of your doings, there is the change of the life. See Ezekiel. 18. 30, 31, 32. Or
repentance is a universal change in the whole man, the understanding is turned
from darkness to light: the will from sinfulservitude to an holy liberty: the
affections from disorder into order, the heart from hardness into softness: so
the eye of wantoness into an eye of chastity: the uncircumcised ear into an
obedient ear: the hands of bribery into the hands of liberty: and the feet of
vanity into the ways of purity. Repentance for sin is nothing, without
repentance from sin.

He that has repented indeed, does still desire to have his sin purged, as
well as pardoned: repentance is a work that must be timely done, or we be
utterly undone: he that has truly repented, does now strike most at those sins
that he was most prone to before: the Jailer, Act. 16. Washed those wounds that
his own hands had made but a little before: he acts in ways of mercy, quite
contrary to his former cruelty: So did Zacheus, Luke 19. So did Paul, Acts 9.
So did Manasses, 2 Chronicles. 33. 6.

True repentance has these choice companions attending it. The first is Faith,
Mar. 1. 14. Repent ye therefore and believe the Gospel. Secondly, love to
Christ does always accompany repentance, as we may see in Mary Magdalen, Luke
7. Thirdly, fear of offending God, and an holy care to honor him, these and
the like companions do always accompany true repentance, they were born
together, and they will live together, till the soul does change earth for
heaven. Conviction goes always with conversion, and repentance and forgiveness
of sins goes always together, so does sanctification and justification: this
repentance is a flower that grows not in natures garden, Jer. 13. 23. Can the
Ethiopian change his skin, or the Leopard his spot? etc. Men are not born with
repentance in their hearts, as they are with tongues in their mouths.

The Nature of sin. The Springs or Rise of sin. The ready way to mortify sin.
FIrst of the Nature of sin.

Although sin has but one nature, yet it has several names; in every sin we
take from God, and add to another thing. Sin is the transgression of the Law,
and not believing and obeying the Gospel: sin defiles a man totally, it begins
at the understanding, and so to the will and affections: sin robs a man of the
Image of God, of the presence of God. Sin was the first founder of hell, and
laid the first stone thereof. And yet, most of this is but the effects of sin:
the essence must needs be much more abominable. Hence sin is called poison, and
sinners Serpents. Sin is called vanity, and sinners dogs. Sin is called mire,
and sinners swine: the least sin virtually more or less, contains in it the
nature of all sin; no sooner did one sin set upon Adams heart, but he had all
sin in him; every sin does put God upon complaining, Christ upon bleeding, and
the Spirit upon grieving, and the soul a mourning: many sin by omission and
commission, at one and the same time, and yet know of neither: the more there
is of the will in the acting of sin, the greater the sin is. Some sins of
omission may exceed some of commission; the more deliberation, and the weaker
temptations any has, and yet sins, the greater the sin is.

Many a man is full of sinful corruption, but show it not for want of occasion.
No sooner did one sin seize upon Adams heart, but he had all sin in him.

How sin creeps up, and gets head in us.
SAtan first tempts us to be strange one to another, and then to divide, and
then to be bitter and jealous, and then to bite and devour one another: again,
hasty and froward words begets anger; anger being kindled, begets wrath; wrath
seeks greedily after revenge. See Prove. 17. 14. Sin is of an incroaching
nature, it creeps on the soul by degrees, step by step: David gave way to his
wandering eye, and so fell into the sins of murder and adultery: again, Satan
will first draw a soul to be unclean in his thoughts, then in his looks, then
in his words, and then in deeds; he will first draw a soul to look on the
golden wedge, and then to love the golden wedge, and then to handle the golden
wedge, and then to gain the golden wedge. Again, he will draw a soul, first to
have low thoughts of Scripture and Ordinances, and then to slight Scripture
and Ordinances, and then with the Ranters and Quakers to cast off Scripture and
Ordinances: Again, if we give way to sinful motion it will be great, vain
thoughts, and vain thoughts will beget idle words, and idle words will beget
petty oaths. Sins of omission do also open the door, and make way for sins of
commission: and again, fearfulness and timerousness does arise from weakness
and feebleness, and weakness and feebleness does arise from unbelief or
incredulity; the beginning of sin is often by the Devils suggesting evil
thoughts: evil thoughts cause delight, delight consent, consent engendereth
action, action causes custom; so one sin draws on another: grant a little
and a great deal will follow. Sin is ill in the eye, worse in the tongue,
worser in the heart, but worst of all in the life: there are three ways how
Satan comes into the Soul to cheat it. First as a subtle Serpent in evil
thoughts. Secondly, as an Angel of light, in lying Prophets and evil spirits.
Thirdly, as a roaring Lion, in Persecutors.

Of the great danger of small sins.
OUR Father Adam for eating an Apple: one would account it a small matter to
eat an Apple: Yet what misery did that bring? It did slay our Father, and
deceive our Mother, cheated and almost undone all our Brethren, defiled our
Sisters, wounded our children, and plundered all our kindred to the skin, and
left them as poor as Job.

The sin of Angels was but a small sin, only one sin, and but a sin in thought
too, not in action; yet for this they were cast out of heaven.

One would think it but a small sin for David to number the people, yet how
many thousands did God take away by the plague for that small sin?

It is true, in one sense there is no little sin, because there is no little
God to sin against. One would think it was but a small thing for Vzza to put
his hand to uphold the falling Ark; yet for this the Lord smote him that he
dyed.

For one small sin of Moses, for neglecting to circumcise the child, for the
bare omission of that, the Lord met him, and would have killed him, Exodus 4.
24.

The same Moses for one unadvised speech must die in the wilderness, and not go
into Canaan, Number. 20. 10. Palm 106. 33.

Now there is great danger in samll sins, for these four reasons.

1. Because they be committed with more complacency and less reluctance.

2. A man is apt to commit small sins with more security and less penitency.

3. People are apt to run into small sins with more frequency.

4. One stab at the heart with a penknife will kill a man.

One little leak in a ship may sink it.

And one little sin unrepented of will damn a soul, etc.

Of the mischief brought upon many for one sin.
ONE sin cast Adam out of Paradise, and the Angels out of heaven: Annanias and
Saphira for one lie were stricken dead; so was Vzza for once touching the Ark:
One sin brought misery upon Esau for selling his birthright, and David for
Numbering the people; the sin of Saul, his sin being but one, and that of
omission too, in not killing

Agag the King of the Amalekites, he was utterly cast off by the Lord for the
same, though he was his anointed and chosen servant before. I have lately read
in a Book of Mr. Thomas Brooks, of the mischief brought upon many precious men
for one only sin, viz. One sin tript up the heels of Noah, the most righteous
man then in the world: One sin cast down Abraham, the greatest Believer in the
world: One sin threw down David, the best King in the world: One sin cast down
Paul, the greatest Apostle in the world: One sin threw down Sampson, the
strongest man in the world: Another cast down Solomon, the wisest man in the
world; And another Moses, the meekest man in the world: And another sin cast
down Job, the patientest man* in the world.

What hurt sin does a Saint.
IT is not falling into the water that drowns, but lying in it; so falling into
sin sinks not thy soul, but living in it: we can stay no more from sinning,
without the restraining grace, then the Heart from panting, and the pulse from
beating: Sin may break a Christians Communion, but not his Union with God.

God had one son without corruption, but no son without correction; he had one
son without sin, but no son without sorrow: Sin will cost a Christian more
grief, sorrow, heart-bleeding, and soul-breaking, before conscience will be
satisfied, and comfort restored, and evidences cleared, and pard on in the
Court of conscience sealed: For God is as severe in punishing, as he is
gracious in pardoning, his house of correction is his School of instruction;
Sin does make God look severely, and chide bitterly, and strike heavily, even
where and when he loves dearly. Isaiah 59. 2. Your sins have hid his face from
you, that he will not hear. Psalm 89. 32. Then will I visit their sins with a
rod. Ver. 33. Nevertheless my loving kindness will I not take from them, nor
suffer my faithfulness to fail.

Many would fain be rid of their sufferings, that would not at all be rid of
their sins; Sin and shame are inseparable companions, and sin and punishment
are linked together; if thou will be sinful, thou must be miserable. One little
miscariage does in the eye of the world over-shadow all a Christians graces, as
one little cloud does overshadow the whole body of the Sun.

The ready way to mortify sin.
1. SHun the occasions of sin, for that man shall be a slave to sin that will
not fly the occasions of sin; it is impossible for that man to get the victory
over sin, that sports and plays with the occasions of sin. I have read of five
men that were studying what was the best way to mortify sin. The First said,
to meditate of Death; the Second said, to meditate of Judgment; the Third
said, to meditate on the Joys of Heaven: the Fourth said, to meditate on the
Torments of Hell: the Fifth said, to meditate on the blood and sufferings of
Jesus Christ: and certainly the last is the strongest motive of all to mortify
sin; that soul that does this, Isa. 62. 4, 5. shall no more be called forsaken,
for the Lord will rejoice over him, and be a wellspring of life unto him, and
make his abode with him, and turn his sighing into singing, and his trembling
into rejoicing, and his prison into a Paradise; then the soul will break forth,
and say in these or the like words, O blessed be God for Jesus Christ, blessed
be his name for that precious blood that has justified our persons, and
quieted our consciences, and scattered our fears, and answered our doubts, and
given us the triumph over sin, hell and death; who is he that condemns? it is
Christ that died: this made Paul, Romans 8. 33. to the 38. cry out, victory,
victory; he looked upon all the enemies, and sings it sweetly out, saying, Over
all these we are more then Conquerors: in a word, from Christ alone we have
strength to perform any duty, to exercise any grace, to subdue any lust, to
resist any temptation, to bear any affliction. John 15. 5. Without me ye can do
nothing; nay Paul goes further, 2 Cor. 3. 5. We of our selves are not
sufficient to think a good thought, but all our sufficiency is from God. Isa.
45. 24. Christ is made unto a Believer righteousness and strength: now if we
want Faith in Christ, we want righteousness by way of acceptance, and we want
strength by way of assistance: Surely the mercy of God is the most powerful
argument to persuade a soul from sin. Psalm 26. 3, 4. For thy loving kindness
is before mine eyes, and I have walked in thy truth. So Joseph, Genesis 39. 9. How
can I do this great wickedness, and sin against God? his soul being taken with
mercy, was not moved with his mistresses impudency. 1 John 3. 3. He that has
this hope in him does purify himself as he is pure. Mich. 7. 19. He will
subdue our iniquities, and cast all our sins into the depth of the Sea. Romans 8.
13. If ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the flesh, ye shall live.
Heb. 9. 14. How much more shall the blood of Christ, through the eternal
Spirit, purge our consciences from dead works to serve the living God? Surely,
surely, if the bowels of mercy do not melt, win and draw us, Justice will be a
swift witness against us: all divine power and strength against sin, flows from
the souls union and communion with Christ; it is only Faith in Christ that
binds the strong man hand and foot; it is only Faith in Christ that makes a man
triumph over sin, Satan, hell and the world: And that stops the issue of blood,
that makes a man strong in resisting, and happy in conquering, so that sin
always dies most, where faith lives most; so that we must get up Gospel
principles, if we would keep up Gospel practices:

Quere. We read in the Bible of many over head and ears in sin, and yet at last
became great Saints. I pray how came those to mortify their sin?

Answ. We read of their misery, and also of their recovery, in many Scriptures:
I will instance in one that speaks the sum of all the rest, as to the way how
to mortify sin; Tit. 3. 4, 5. For we our selves sometimes were foolish,
disobedient, deceived, and serving diverse lusts and pleasures, living in malice
and envy, hateful, and hating one another (there is the mystery) but after
that the kindness and love of God appeared not by works, of righteousness which
we have done, but according to his mercy he saved us, (there is the remedy,) in
a word, the consideration of the love and grace of God the Father, and the love
of God the Son, the promises of God, and the presence of Christ: the example of
the Saints, and the recompense of reward held forth to us in the Gospel makes a
sound Christian to hold on, and to hold out, resolving to conquer, or to dye
conquering.

As a Christian grows up in the assurance of Gods love, so he will better heal
his strong lusts: an heart softened and reconciled to God, willingly closes
with the commandment, so that the best way to mortify sin, and to amend our
lives, is to lay hold on the love of God by faith in Christ, and so first to
get assurance of forgiveness, which softens the heart, and enlightens the eyes
to see that it is only the blood of Christ that purges from dead works. A man
by his own strength cannot prevail against a lust, that is to be done only by
the blood of Christ, into which we are baptized, Romans 6. 3. He that has the
strongest faith, has ever the holiest heart and life; sanctification arises
from justification: the Scripture says, Every man that has this hope in him,
purifieth himself as he is pure: in this evidence of selfpurifying, note these
three things. First, the act performed purifieth. Secondly, the object, about
which this act is to be exercised, themselves, that is, their whole man, soul
and body, from all filthiness of flesh and spirit. Thirdly, the rule or Pattern
of this act, he purifieth himself as God is pure: this is not a word of
equality, but of resemblance. Fourthly, the ground or motive inciting to this
purifying, viz. hope of glory: every man that has this hope in him, purifieth
himself as he is pure, 1 John 3. 2, 3. Hope in Christ excites to purity,
because it conducts us straight to Christ the perfect pattern of all purity.
Surely it is the appearance of Gods grace to us, which works a hope of glory in
us, and this hope of glory does purify these several ensuing ways.

1. It puts us upon, and helps us in a frequent washing our selves in the
fountain opened for sin and uncleaness, viz. in the purifying blood of Christ
by Faith and hope, as instruments applying Christ crucified, Zach. 13. 1. Heb
9. 14. Psalm. 51. 7. Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation through Faith
in his blood, etc. Romans 3. 25.

2. This works us up to true endeavors in the use of all means to purify both
soul and body, person and conversation, from all corruption universally, both
in kind and degree, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness both of flesh
and Spirit, 2 Cor. 7. 1. Now hypocrites wash the outside of the platter or cup,
but inwardly they are full of extortion and excess, Mat. 23. 25, 26.

3. This grace of God, and hope of glory, puts the soul upon maintaining a
constant spiritual combat by faith and hope, and other graces of the Spirit
against the flesh, Romans 8. 13. And so by the Spirit mortifies the deeds of the
flesh, daily crucifying the flesh with the affections and lusts, Galat. 5. 17,
24, 25. and this grace of hope as an inward principle works out pollution and
corruption, as being repugnant thereunto.

4. This hope of glory leads the soul to a diligent improvement of the word of
God for self-purifying, the word has in it a purifying Faculty, John 15. 3. Ye
are clean through the word that I have spoken unto you: the word purifies these
ways.

1. As a lamp, discovering the spot, Romans 7. 7. 2. As a star, conducting to
Christ, the fountain of purifying, 1 John 2. 1, 2. Zach. 13. 1. 3. As a rule,
according to which we are heedfully to order our conversation, Psalm. 119. 9. 4.
As a motive to self-purifying, 2 Cor. 7. 1. 5. As an antidote against sin.
Psalm. 119. 11. thy word have I hid in my heart, that I might not sin against
thee.
Sin in the best Saint, and most times in the best actions of Saints.
1. THE fairest day has his clouds, and the finest linneng has its spots, the
richest jewels their flaws, and the sweetest fruit their worms; so has the
most precious. Christians their failings, David's heart was more often out of
tune then his harp.

2. Consider what complaints and cryings out there were amongst the most
precious Saints, being sensible of their sins, Romans 7. 24. O wretched man that
I am, who shall deliver me, said Paul, Jer* 3. 25. We lie down in our shame,
for we have sinned against the Lord our God, both we and our fathers from our
youth, Genesis 6. 5. God saw that the wickedness of man's heart was great, and that
every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually. And
for the Saints themselves here, in all duties, there is imperfection, something
polluted, and something defective; our most spiritual duties are not wound up
to command; they are all tainted with disproportion to rule, and not only so*
but our choicest* services are be Leoparded with many spots. We, whilst in this
body can stay no more from sinning, then the heart from panting, and the pulse
from beating: The Angels are impure in his sight, how much more the best of our
actions? in many things we offend all: either offend and fail in the matter, or
in the ground, or in the form, or in the end: Now our not acting from a pure
principle, by a pure rule, to a pure end, or our coming short in any of these,
may mar the whole action: no action is said to be done according to rule, in a
Gospel administration, unless it be attended with these five things.

1. All righteous acts must, and ought to be done spiritually and heartily,
with heart and spirit, Prove. 23. 26. John 4. 24. 1 Cor. 6. 20. 2. Sincerely, as
in the sight of God, Genesis 17. 1. Psalm 18. 22. and 66. 18. John 21. 15, 16, 17.
3. Obediently, because God commands it, as in Noah, Genesis 17. 7. Abraham, Heb.
11. 8, 17. Psalm. 40. 8. 4. Universally, without reservation or exceptation,
Psalm. 119. 6. 5. Constantly, perseverance in well doing does crown the action,
Psalm. 1. 2, 3. Psalm. 119. 20. Psalm. 92. 14, etc.
And moreor less every man comes short in these five things.

So that a Saints comfort cannot lie in the duty performed: but a Saints
comfort lies in this, viz. Although we carry our selves in our choicest
performances very weakly, yet the Lord does carry toward us very sweetly, and
does accept of that which we do very kindly, although done in much infirmity:
in a word, he does accept of our performances, although accompanied with many
infirmities: but to close up this head, that there is sin in the best Saint,
consider these Scriptures, 1 King. 8. 46. For there is no man that sins not,
Eccles. 7. 20. For there is not a just man upon earth, that does good and
sins not, etc. Jam. 3. 2. For in many things we offend all, etc. 1 John 1.
8. If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us,
Prove. 20. 9. Who can say, I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin? 1
John 1. 10. If we say that we have no sin, we make him a liar, and his word is
not in us. There needs no more proof to prove sin to be in the best Saint, and
in the best actions of Saints. Let us make out after a more perfect
righteousness, or we perish for ever. The universal experience of the best of
Gods people in all ages, does evidence that none of them have been without sin
in this life, not Abraham, Genesis 12. 13, 19. not Isaac, Genesis 26. 7, 8. not
Jacob, Genesis 27. 19, 20. not Moses and Aaron, Psalm 106. 33. Deuteronomy. 32. 50, 51.
Exodus 32. 2, 21. not David, Psalm 51. 1. to the tenth verse, and 38. 3, 4. not
Peter, Mat. 26. 33, 34, 35, 70. to the end, Gal. 2. 11, 12, 13. not Paul
himself, Romans 7. 18, 20, 23, 24, 25, etc.

The difference between the sinning of the Regenerate, and the unregenerate.
COnsider, that both the children of God, and the children of the Devil sin,
yet there is a vast difference between the sinning of the one, and of the
other, whereby we may according to Scripture distinguish betwixt the regenerate
and unregenerate.

1. He that is regenerated and born again, commits not sin, nor can sin with
a whole will, but as it were with a half will, an unwilling willingness, and a
dissenting consent, Romans 7. 15. For that which I do I allow not, verse 19. But
the evil which I would not, that I do. Now the unregenerate sins with a full
will, and with a full consent.

2. Sin in a Christian differs from sin in a wicked man, thus; it is the same
for the matter, but not for the manner.

3. Although there be sin in a godly man, as well as in a wicked man, yet with
this difference; the Christian does constantly maintain war against his sin,
the other is at peace with it.

4. They that are regenerate sin not against Gospel remedy, the other does. Now
Jesus Christ is the Gospel remedy: and their not coming to him, looking upon
him, receiving him, and accepting of him for salvation, John 1. 11, 12, 13.
Act. 4. 12. John 3. 18, 36 and 16. 9, etc. This is to sin against Gospel remedy.

5. A regenerate man, though he have sin and corruption in him, yet he does in
some good measure avoid the occasions that should draw this out. Job made a
Covenant with his eyes, that he might not sin against God: but the other runs
into all actions, as the horse into the battle: To close up this head, a
regenerate man, although he sin as well as an unregenerate, he is not under the
reign of sin, neither does he sin habitually, neither with the allowance of any
bosom sin, not only as carnal men do, nothing but sin. For, first he does stand
in the way of sinners, and entice others to sin, he does study how he might
commit sin, and makes a trade of sin, sins willingly, and pleases himself in
sin, and pleads for sin: he is troubled and cannot sleep except he has done
mischief, and caused some to fall, Prove. 4. 16, etc. The very thoughts of sin
is pleasant and delightful to him, he will boast at his wickedness, and hates
the man that does reprove him for it; but this spot is not the spot of Gods
people, Deuteronomy. 32. 5.

How many ways the Lord is said to forgive sin; Or the various names and
expressions of forgiveness.
1. FIrst Aaron by a special command from God, Lev. 16. 21. Was to lay his haad
upon the head of the goat, and confess over him all the iniquities of the
children of Israel. and all their transgrestions, putting them upon the head of
the goat, and the goat did bare away all their iniquities, into the land not
inhabited, verse 22.

2. The Lord tells us he has cast all our sins behind his back, Isa. 38 17.
Thou have cast all my sins, says he, behind thy back, etc.

3. We read that our sins are cast into the bottom of the sea, Micah 7. 17.

4. The Lord tells us in his word, that our sins are blotted out, Isa. 43. 25.
I, even I am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for my own sake, Isa. 44.
22.

5. The Lord tells us our sins are covered, Psalm. 32. 1. Blessed is the man
whose sins are covered, and transgressions for given.

6. The Lord tells us he will remember our sins no more, Jer. 31. 34. For I will
forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sins no more.

7. The Lord says he will not impute sin to us, Romans 4. 8. Blessed is the man
to whom the Lord will not impute sin; he will not impute sin, that is, he will
not set sin on our score, he will not put sin to our account; though sin be in
us, yet it is not imputed to us.

8. The Lord tells us, that so far at the East is from the West, so far has he
removed our transgressions from us, Psalm. 103. 12. What shall I say more, who
is a God like unto him, that pardons iniquity, transgression and sin, which
comprehends all sin of what nature, kind and degree whatsoever, unless the
unperdonable sin (iniquity is that which is done against another man) Sin is
that which is done against a man's felf, and transgression that which is done
immediately against God, but all these are pardoned for his own sake, Isa. 43.
25.

Whether sins before conversion ought to be called to mind after conversion.
SINS before conversion ought to be called to mind, but not with complacency of
Spirit, or stupidity of heart, or despondency of mind.

1. Not with complacency of Spirit, but with bitterness of Spirit, and grief
and sorrow of heart. Isaiah 6. 5. I am a man of unclean lips, says that humble
soul; so humble Job cries out of the iniquity of his youth, Job 13. 26, etc. so
humble David sighs it out, Psalm 51. 3. My sin is ever before me: so those many
converts, Titus 3. 3. For we our selves also were sometimes foolish,
disobedient, deceived, serving diverse lusts and pleasures, living in malice and
envy, hateful and hating one another, but after that the kindness and love of
God our Savior toward man appeared.

2. Though they are to be called to mind; it must not be with stupidity of
heart, but with a broken, and bleeding, and a contrite heart; in the day of our
prosperity we are not to forget our former poverty, but to consider, that we
are not worthy of that calling, of that Gospel, and of that grace tendered to us
in the word.

3. It must not be done with despondency of mind neither, the truth lies
between two extremes; we must not call them so to mind as to discourage us, and
make us unwilling to come to Christ, etc.

1. The first Reason why that people in a converted state should often call to
mind the sin and misery they were in before conversion; because by so doing we
shall be provoked to magnify and admire the riches of Gods grace; none in the
world do more admire Gods grace and mercy, then those that are most sensible of
their own sin and misery. See 1 Timothy 1. 13.

2. Reason: because this will kindle a great deal of pity and compassion in
our souls toward those that remain yet unconverted. Titus 3. 2, 3. I Paul, and
thou Titus, were sinful as well as they, and did serve diverse lusts as well as
they, let us pity them, and help them out of this state of sin and death.

Reason 3. Because this will make us more watchful and careful. Ephesians. 5. 8. You
were sometimes darkness (says he) but now are you light in the Lord, walk
therefore as children of the light. 2 Samuel 7. 18. Who am 10 Lord God, said King
David, and what is my house, that thou have brought me hitherto? And Saint
Paul, 1 Timothy 1. 13. remembers himself, and leaves it written for others to
read, that he had been a blasphemer, a persecutor, and injurious: a low
meditation for an high Apostle, yet profitable to himself and others.

Whether the Dominion of sin may not be taken away, where yet the life of sin
remains.
SIN may live where it does not reign, and dwell where it is not welcome; it is
true, the Scripture does say, they that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh,
with the affections and lusts; but here the Scripture does not speak of a total
subduing of sin, as if every lust and corruption should be quite subdued, but
only this far, to give a deadly blow to sin, that sin shall not reign nor bear
sway in thy soul as it has done formerly; the dominion of sin is taken away,
but the life and being of it is continued for a little time. As Hagar would
dwell with Sarah till she beat her out of doors: so will sin dwell with grace,
till death beat it out of doors: there shall be some remainders of sin still in
the best of Gods servants, but sin shall not reign in their mortal bodies; sin
may live in a Saint, and yet the Saint not live in sin.

Let us now examine in what cases, and with what limitations strength of
corruption may consist with strength of grace? the resolving of this question
is of very much use.

1. Though sin be strong, yet grace may be strong too in thy soul; though thy
sin be great, if thy sorrow be great too, it evidenceth thy grace is so also, 1
Chro. 23. 12.

2. If you find a strong opposition against your corruptions, though you cannot
fully subdue sin, yet do you strongly oppose it: then there is strength of
grace in the soul, though there be strong corruptions in the body.

3. There is strength of grace, where there is strong cries to God against thy
sins, this argues grace, and the strength of grace, Deuteronomy. 22. 25, 26, 27.

4. There is strength of grace in that man or woman that is resolved in the
strength of Christ, to conquer his strong sins, or die conquering of them; our
Lord Christ when two things were set before him, either to sin or die, he chose
death, rather then sin, and by degrees he works his Spouse to the same mind.

5. That strength of grace may be consistent with strength of corruptions, I
might instance in many precious Saints, I will mention one for all the rest,
and that is in Peter; who had not only truth and reality, but eminency and
strength of grace: For though temptations and corruptions did sometimes
prevail, yet he had strong affections toward Christ, he did outstrip many of
the Disciples.

1. He was the man that of all the Disciples wept most bitterly for his sins,
Mat. 26. 75.

2. Peter was the first that ran to the Sepulcher to see what was become of
Jesus, John 20. 5.

3. He was the man who hearing that Christ was risen, leapt into the Sea for
joy, John 21. 7.

4. He was the first man that made the first Sermon, and first preached the
Gospel after the Ascension of Christ, Acts 1. 15.

5. He had that love to Christ as strong as death, for he suffered death
afterward for Christ; but now although in the cases before mentioned, strength
of grace may be consistent with strength of corruption, yet there are other
cases wherein they are altogether inconsistent; though there may be strong
grace, and strong corruption in the soul, yet the reign of any one corruption
in the soul, yet the reign of any one corruption is utterly inconsistent with
grace, and the strength of it. See Romans 6. 12. and 7. 23.

And when I say there is a consistency between grace and corruption, I would be
understood of spiritual and inward corruption, viz. of hardness of heart,
Spiritual pride, deadness in duties, etc. For into gross external open acts of
sin, strong Christians do seldom fall.

How far a true Christian may be tainted with error in Judgment, and yet at
last be restored.
Sometimes even Gods own children, are even overcome with erroneous opinions;
One whom the Lord had received into favor, might erroneously hold himself
bound in conscience to the Legal difference of days and meats under the
Gospel, Romans 14. 1. to the 7. The Apostles themselves erroneously deemed Christ
should be a worldly King, Mark 10. 37. to 41. And this error was not cured in
them, though they were eye witnesses of his passion and resurrection, Acts 1.
6. And the Church of Galatia erred grossly in the point of Justification,
mingling Moses with Christ, the works of the Law with Faith in Justification,
Gal. 3. 4, 5, etc. by which it does appear that regenerate persons may for a
time be ensnared in some errors that are gross and dangerous, and that against
fundamentals of Faith; Christ and his Offices, those are fundamentals, 1 Cor.
3. 11. Ephesians. 2. 20. yet the Apostles as we said before, till the sending of the
Holy Ghost upon them, were in an error about Christ's Kingly Office, taking it
to be temporal rather then spiritual: Justification by Faith alone is a
Fundamental, Romans 3. 28. Gal. 4. 5, 6. yet for a season, as before the
Galatians lay under that gross error of that necessity of Legal works with
Faith. But it is a dangerous thing for any of the Lords people to fall into
such gross errors, hereby their minds are darkened, Ephesians. 4. 18. and corrupted,
2 Cor. 11. 3. bewitched, Gal. 3. 1. Now consider how grievous it is to have a
man's mind corrupted; if the mind be darkness, how great is that darkness? etc.
Oh here is the love of God in restoring his people again into the truth; and
yet for all this he calls them the children of truth, 1 John 3. 19. they can do
nothing against the truth, but for the truth. 2 Cor. 13. 8. their loins are
girt about with truth. Ephesians. 6. 14. whereas carnal men remain in error; and are
men,

1. Of corrupt minds, destitute of the truth, 2 Timothy 3. 8. and turning away
their ears from the truth, 2 Timothy 4. 4.

2. Or they hold the truth in unrighteousness, Romans 1. 18.

3. Or they are not able to come to the knowledge of the truth, 2 Timothy 3. 7.

4. They have no love to the truth, 2 These. 2. 9, 10. and no wonder if such
persons be unstable, and led away with the error of the wicked, etc.

Of Knowledge, first of God, secondly of our selves: the properties of it, and
means of attaining it, and the benefits we have by it.
Of Knowledge.
TO lack knowledge is a very evil thing, to scorn to learn is worse, and to
hate knowledge is worst of all. Hos. 6. 6. I desired the Knowledge of God, more
then burnt offerings. Hos. 4. 1. The Lord has a controversy with the
inhabitants of the Land, because there is no knowledge of God in the Land. 1
Cor. 15. Some have not the knowledge of God, I speak this to your shame. Hos.
4. 6. My people perish for want of knowledge. Prove. 1. 22. How long ye simple
ones will ye love simplicity, and fools hate knowledge? Prove. 2. 16. When
wisdom enters into thy heart, and knowledge is pleasant to thy soul,
discretion shall preserve thee, understanding shall keep thee. Ephesians. 2. 17.
Therefore be ye not unwise, but understanding what the will of the Lord is.
What shall I say more, knowledge is that understanding which we have both of
God and his Word and Will, and of our own selves; it is a storehouse of all
wisdom, and the beginning of salvation; it is a spiritual virtue to speak
little and well; words are the shadow of works, and works the substance of
words; much talking and little practicing, is like to an empty vessel, that
does give a greater sound then they that be full; much knowledge and little
practice is like a great tree that makes a large show, but bears no fruit. To
close up this, first of knowledge in general, let me tell the Reader, that a
man without knowledge, is as a workman without hands, or as a painter without
eyes, or as a traveller without legs, or as a ship without sails, or as a bird
without wings, or as a body without a soul: there is a threefold knowledge or
illumination: First, general and natural, the light of Reason. Secondly,
spiritual and supernatural. Thirdly, there is a knowledge of middle
illumination betwixt these two, more then merely natural, but less then truly
supernatural.

Of the knowledge of God.
SOme have not the knowledge of God, says the Lord by his servant Paul, I
speak this to your shame, 1 Cor. 15, etc. Again another Scripture says, This
is life eternal, to know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou
have sent, John 17. 3.

Again, it is death to be ignorant of him, for he will come in flaming fire,
rendering vengeance on them that know him not, 2 These. 1. 8.

So that all regenerate persons have true knowledge, though it be an imperfect
knowledge: they do truly, though weakly know God, as does appear in these
Scriptures, Jer. 31. 34. John 6. 45. 1 Cor. 13. 9, 12. 1 John 5. 20.

In a word, to know him, is to know all things, for they have their being from
him; to be ignorant of him, is to be ignorant of all things: So that such an
one does know nothing as he ought to know. Let the reader turn to the first
page of this book, where I have laid down as much as I understand in this
mystery.

Of the knowledge of our selves.
IT is a most excellent thing for a Christian to know himself, and then at the
best, he would see himself to be but vanity, and an unpofitable servant to God,
and so begin to cease from man, whose breath is in his nostrils. Oh what are
the best of men! they have no better lodging for his noble soul, then a cottage
of clay, and that so frail and crasie, as were it not once or twice a day
dawbed over, it would fall about his ears: and wheresoever he goes he is forced
to carry this clog, this clay. Whereas Angels free from these shakels of flesh
can move from heaven to earth, even as swiftly as can our very thoughts. Nay,
take the best piece in man, his soul, search and see, his understanding is full
of darkness, blindness and vanity, Psalm. 94. 11. 1 Cor. 2. 24. Unteachableness
and incredulity. See 2 Cor. 4. 4. Secondly, the will of man is wholly depraved,
as being contrary to God, his will, word and spirit in all things: it will not
depend nor wait on God, it is unconstant in good resolutions, it is very apt to
disobey the will of God, as we may see in Father Adam. Thirdly, as for the
memory, that is also full of corruption, that it will forget the things that it
should remember, and remember the things it should forget; it will hold fast
trifles, and let go matters of moment. Fourthly, The Conscience that is wholly
corrupted, that is without feeling, whereas it should excuse or accuse: It does
abuse and pervert the light it has, by making great sins small, and small sins
great. Fifthly, Our affections, they are also corrupted, they come as a
tempest, and carry us away; either to make us over-love, or overgrieve, or
over-joy; and so we hate our brother, whom we should love, and love our lusts
whom we should hate. What shall I say? our understanding is darkened, our will
depraved, our affections disordered, our memory misimployed, and conscience
benumbed, etc. We were conceived in sin, brought forth in iniquity, we have
lived in vanity, and without the riches of Gods grace we shall dye in misery.

The Charecters or Properties of true knowledge.
1. THE knowledge that is from God, subjects the soul to God: but the knowledge
that is in the brain is notional, and neither subdues sin nor Satan.

2. Spiritual, experimental knowledge is a free gift of God, 2 Cor. 4. 6. God
who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has shined in our hearts, to
give in the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus
Christ. This Divine light does reach the heart as well as the head.

3. True knowledge is a transforming knowledge, 2 Cor. 3. 18. Like as the child
receives from the parents, member for member, limb for limb, or as the paper
from the press, receives letter for letter, or as the face in a glass,
answers to the face, so the beams of Divine knowledge, shining into the soul,
stamps the lively Image of Christ upon the soul, and makes him put on the Lord
Jesus, and resemble him. God will own no knowledge at last, but that which
leaves the stamp of Christ, the print of Christ, and the Image of Christ upon
the heart.

4. True saving knowledge does spring from a spiritual sense and taste of holy
and heavenly things; this is that experimental knowledge, that will turn to
account at last; the other litteral knowledge will only increase our guilt and
torment, as it did the Scribes and Pharisees.

5. True knowledge circumciseth the heart, and dissolveth the dominion of sin,
Ephesians. 4. 22. The root of lust is error; when Christ takes away the foundation,
the lust dies, and the Devils work is dissolved. First, the lust of the eye:
Christ informs the soul that there is no such excellency in riches; but that
they are dross and dung, and therefore why should the eye or heart be set upon
them: So this lust is dissolved, there is an end of it.

6. True knowledge does indear Christ and the things of Christ to the soul,
Cant. 2. 5. I am sick of love, I cannot live in my self: I can live only in
Christ who is my life, Galatians 6. 14. God forbid that I should glory in any
thing but Christ.

7. True knowledge is soul-humbling, soul-abasing knowledge: John said, I am
not worthy to loose his shoo. Peter said, depart from me, I am a sinful man.
Abraham said, he was but dust and ashes. Genesis 18. 27. Jacob said, he was less
then the least of all his mercies, Genesis 32. 10. David said, he was a worm and
no man, Psalm 22. 2. Job abhorred himself in dust and ashes, Job 42. 1, 2, etc.

8. True knowledge is always attended with holy endeavors, and heavenly
desires after a further knowledge of God, Prove. 18. 15.

This knowledge of God goes before trusting in God, Psalm 9. 10. They that know
thy name will put their trust in thee. There may be knowledge without grace,
but not grace without knowledge.

How one Believer differs from another in knowledge.
AS saving knowledge is a free gift of God, so he gives to some more, and to
others less, according to the measure of the gift of Christ; and though it be
freely given, yet the Lord does hand it to us, and work it in us, in the use of
means; age, and time, and communion, and study, and use of means, and
experience do raise the apprehension and knowledge to far more degrees and
strength then at the first; whereas before they saw dimly, at length they rise
by degrees to a more perfect light of the same truths, and to a more full aad
enlarged apprehension of other truths, which he was ignorant of before, even in
this does one believer differ from another.

Faith is the eye of the soul, and knowledge the ground of Faith, for believing
is not rooted in ignorance, but in light: now every believer has not so full
and distinct a knowledge as another: there are several promises, and in them
several parts and degrees Now all Christians have not been so long acquainted
with the word, as to know all the good which does concern them.

Of what a large and vast measure of knowledge a man may attain unto, and yet
be without this saving knowledge.
HE may speak with the tongue of men and Angels, and yet be as sounding brass,
or a tinckling Symbal, as in 1 Cor. 13. 1. Again, he may attain to the natural
knowledge of all natural things, and speak eloquently and distinctly, and in
many things truly; he may be well skilled in Logic, Rethorick, Philosophy, and
have the letter of the Scripture at his fingers ends, and yet be an ignorant
man in the knowledge of God, and in the account of Christ, viz.

1. A man may have a common knowledge of Christ, and yet be without a spiritual
knowledge of Christ; he may gather together a great deal of notional knowledge
of Christ, and have much natural knowledge, by the works of God, by hearing,
reading, conferring, or the like, and yet be ignorant of the Trinity in Unity,
and Unity in Trinity.

2. He may attain to vast and great measures of notional, and yet be without an
experimental knowledge of Christ: how abundantly is this proved in our days in
all places, etc.

3. An unregenerate man may attain to a contemplative, or speculative knowledge
of Christ, and yet want and be altogether without a spiritual expemental
knowledge; he may know Christ as a man knows his neighbor; but now a believer
knows Christ, as a wife knows her husband: a natural man's knowledge is like the
Moon, it has light, but no heat: but a spiritual man's knowledge is like the
Sun, that has heat as well as light.

4. A natural man may have much knowledge, but he is a stranger to an
appropriating knowledge of Christ -- he does not know Christ to be his Christ;
now in this sense, a man may be a great knowing man, and yet not know Jesus
Christ.

5. He is without a practical knowledge of Jesus Christ, he may know much, but
do but little, Tit. 1. 16. in their words they profess to know him, but in
their works they deny him: though they know God, yet they glorify not him as
God. Now put all these together, and they speak out with open mouth, that a man
may attain to a great measure of knowledge, and yet be in the account of God,
in the account of Christ, in the account of Christians, an ignorant man, he is
without spiritual and experimental knowledge, without an affective, and
apprehensive knowledge, and without an appropriating, and practical knowledge.
I shall close up this head with a few cautions and considerations.

1. Take this for a truth, that in a Scripture account, to complain of
ignorance, is a good degree of knowledge, Prove. 30. 2. And I have not the
knowledge of a man, etc.

2. Take this also for a truth, that in Gods account, he knows most that does
most, Psalm. 111. 10. A good understanding have all they that do his
commandments: God does not measure our knowledge by our questions and disputes,
but by our practices, as in Jer. 22. 16. He judges the cause of the poor and
needy; was not this to know me, says the Lord?

3. Take this also, that it is not the wanting of some measures or degrees of
knowledge, that does make a man ignorant in the sight of God, but the wanting
of true knowledge of the Father, Son, Spirit, and Scriptures.

Object. I am surely ignorant of God, says many weak Christians: I do not know
him, he will come in flaming fire, taking vengeance on me.

Answ. 1. Suppose thou art ignorant of God, yet if thou art not consentingly
ignorant, if thou art not a self-conceited man or woman, that think thou
know much, when thou know little, thou art well enough, if thou art not
like those, in Hos. 8. 2. Israel shall say unto me, my God we know thee, and
yet there is no fear nor knowledge of God in the Land.

2. If thou do not sit down contentedly in thy ignorance, but do labor and
endeavor after more knowledge, then thy condition is good enough; but if thou
say unto God in thy heart, as in Job 21. 14. Depart from me, for I desire
not the knowledge of thy ways; then thy condition is extreme bad.

3. If thou art not obstinately ignorant, like those spoken of in Psalm 82. 5.
They know not, neither will they understand, but they walk on in darkness: When
men be ignorant, and will be ignorant, this is an evidence they have no saving
work of God upon them, 2 Pet. 3. 5. says the Apostle, these things they are
willingly ignorant of.

Now if thy ignorance be accompanied with these three circumstances, that you
are conceitedly, and contentedly and obstinately ignorant, the Lord be merciful
to thee, thou art in a state of death and damnation; but on the other hand,
although thou have abundance of ignorance in thee, yet if thou do bewail it,
and labor and desire after more knowledge, if you follow on to know the Lord,
and are not obstinately ignorant, thy condition is good.

Of Obedience.
TRue obedience or keeping of Gods commandments, flows Originally from the true
knowledge of God, to which we have been speaking, so that here obedience falls
in its center and place; there is a threefold obedience, viz.

1. There is an obedience both true and perfect, this was performed by Christ
on earth, and by Saints and Angels in Heaven, Phil. 2. 8. Mat. 6. 10.

2. There is another kind of obedience, that is neither true nor perfect, done
by all natural men; they fail in the ground from which, the rule by which, and
the end to which, Romans 8. 8.

3. There is a true and sincere, but an imperfect obedience, which is performed
by Saints on earth: in all their obedience there is some imperfection,
something polluted, and something defective; yea the most spiritual obedience
is not wound up to command, they are all tainted with disproportion to rule;
and not only so, but our choicest services are be Leoparded with many spots,
yet the bent and main disposition of their hearts are upright and unfeigned,
notwithstanding there be some gradual infirmities and imperfections in all
their actions: concerning obedience, what it is, the ground and springs of it,
I have before in this book at large laid down under the head of justification,
and also more larger under the head of sanctification, and therefore I shall
speak no further to it here, but to proceed the next point that comes in order.

Of Experience.
IT is the duty, and it should be the practice of all sober Christians, to
treasure up experiences of Gods goodness, Psalm 77. 5. Thou have been my
helper, Psalm 63. 7. I was brought low, and he helped me, 2 Timothy 4. 17, 18.
Notwithstanding the Lord stood with me, and strengthened me, Psalm 89. 49. Lord
where are thy former loving kindnesses? and so in another Psalm, return to thy
rest O my soul, the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee, 2 Cor. 1. 10. Who
delivered us from so great a death, and does deliver us, in whom we trust, he
will yet deliver us, Psalm 116. 2. Because he has inclined his ear unto me,
therefore will I call upon him as long as I live. It is good to hear, better to
understand, better to enjoy, and best of all to have experience of what we
hear, understood, and enjoyed: Laban could say to Jacob, I have learned by
experience, that the Lord has blessed me for thy sake, Genesis 30. 27. So a man
that has had experience, can tell us, that sin is the greatest evil in the
world, and that Christ is the only thing necessary; the favor of God is better
then life: that the wounded spirit is such a burden that none can bare; that a
broken heart is an acceptable sacrifice to God, for he has found it; so that
the promises are precious promises, for he has found it so: That the smiles of
God will make up the want of any outward mercy, for he has found it so, Psalm
63. 3. Because thy loving kindness is better then life, my lips shall praise
thee.

Of Enjoyment.
IT is one thing to have a portion, and another thing to enjoy it; to possess a
thing, and to enjoy a thing is the portion of a true Christian, 1 Timothy 6.
17. Who gives us richly all things to enjoy, and hence it is that many a poor
man lives more comfortably then the rich; the rich man has much, and does
possess, the poor man has little, and that little he does enjoy. The rich man,
says Solomon, roasteth not that which he caught in hunting; he has hunted to
and fro, and gotten a great deal together, and now has the sight of it, but
not the taste of it: this is one of the sore evils that Solomon saw, Eccles. 5.
13. There is, says he, a sore evil which I have seen under the Sun; riches
kept for the owners thereof to their hurt. Eccles. 6. 2. there is an evil that
I have seen, a man to whom God has given riches and honor; so that he wants
nothing of all that he desires, yet God gives him not power to eat thereof;
this is vanity, and a sore evil, Prove. 12. 27. but the substance of a diligent
man is precious, he does eat and drink, and is satisfied, and does praise the
name of the Lord. If it be but a dinner of herbs, it is better to him then a
stalled Ox to the other: What shall I say more to this head, the enjoyment of
Christ without honor will satisfy the soul; the enjoyment of Christ without
riches, will satisfy the soul; the enjoyment of Christ without relations; the
enjoyment of Christ without pleasure and smiles of the creature will satisfy
the soul: Nay, though honor is not, and health is not, and friends are not; It
is enough that Christ is mine and I am his.

Of love, the nature of it, several sorts and kinds of it: How its wrought in
the heart, trials of it, and properties of it: means of attaining it, and
impediments of it, and inducements to it.
OF the nature of this love.

Although Christians do somewhat differ in their defining it, what it is, yet
in the essence or body of it they agree; but before I can orderly come to speak
of the several definitions that Christians give of it, I must acquaint the
Reader of the several sorts of love, viz. there is a love natural, etc. and a
love sinful, etc. and there is a love spiritual.

1. There is love of pity, as in a Father to a sick and vicious son, or one
friend to another in misery: or if you please there is,

2. A natural love planted in the heart of man to love himself, his children,
wealth and acquaintance: Now the spiritual love that we shall speak of by and
by, does set banks to the stream of natural love, that it run not over, either
to over-love, or overgrieve.

3. There is a love of complacency: So the Father is well pleased with an
obedient son, the husband with a virtuous wife, the Schoolmaster with a
towardly Scholar.

4. There is a love of friendship, when a man does both honor and respect such
and such good people, and is so beloved of them again.

5. There is a love of dependence, when we love one upon whom all depends,
namely God; whom also we love, with a love of complacency and friendship, being
a full object, free from all mixture of evil, and altogether supernatural; this
supernatural love is that I intend to speak to, and first of the nature of this
love; in which I shall take notice of the various judgments of many precious
Christians, in the definition of it, although in the main they all agree.

1. One says, it is an holy disposition of the heart arising from faith,
whereby we cleave to the Lord, with a purpose of heart to serve him, and to
please him in all things.

2. Another says love is a grace wrought in the heart by the Spirit of God, in
persuading the party of Gods love to it; and so the soul comes to love God,
because he did first love him, 1 John 4. 19.

3. Others say, it is a supernatural grace flowing from Faith, instilled by God
himself, whereby through the mercy of God we see the great excellency of him,
and thereby are drawn to love and yield obedience to him.

4. Others say it is an holy affection, or act of the will, or disposition of
the heart, whereby it cleaves or makes forward to some good, that is agreeable
to it self.

5. Others say, it is a spark of heavenly fire, that puts all the affections
into an holy flame. Cant. 1. 7. Tell me O thou whom my soul loves. Isa. 26. 9.
With my soul have I desired thee, yea with my spirit within me will I seek thee
early. He that planted the affections of love in our hearts, may well call for
his own, and expect to gather the grapes of his own Vineyard.

Several sorts or kinds of Love.
BEsides what has been spoken in the foregoing head, there are several sorts
and kinds of love; as, First there is a fleshly and carnal love, which is
altogether sinful. Secondly, there is a natural ove, as in a Parent to a
child, and one relation to another. Thirdly, there is a civil love, such as one
neighbor and friend has to another. Fourthly, there is a religious love, and
that is twofold, the one is subordinate to the other, viz. First there is our
love to God. Secondly to his people, as they bear his image. First to God
himself, who is the very essence of love, he is nothing else but love, God is
love, neither should there be any thing beloved by us, but as it either conveys
love to us from him, or else deaws up our affections to him; there is also a
love to our enemies required of us, which we ought to be found in the practice
of, in obedience to the command of God, and in love and pity to their poor
souls, Mat. 5. 44.

But that love that I shall treat of is, that love spoken to in Scripture,
which is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost, Romans 5. 5.

Of the springs of Love, how it is begotten and increased in us.
THE Lord tells us by Paul, Romans 5. 5. That the Love of God is shed abroad in
our hearts by the Holy Ghost: he shows us that he loves us that were of no
worth, and whilst we were in our sins, that he dyed for us, and then he does
shed the sense and feeling thereof abroad in our hearts, whereby we come to
taste and see how good and gracious the Lord is, Psalm 34. 8.

1. Spring of love is this, the Lord does unveil himself a little to the soul,
whereby it sees his excellency, viz. wisdom, power, riches, beauty, glory,
faithfulness and amiableness.

2. Spring of love is this, the soul having seen something of his excellency,
and so loves him, not only because of that, although he be most worthy of love,
but also because he has cast his love upon us: and so in the second place, the
soul comes to love Christ, because he first loved us, 1 John 4. 10, 19. as fire
begets fire, so does love beget love.

3. Spring of love is this, after the soul has seen the worth of Christ, and
the love of Christ, it comes in the next place to see that the love of all
relations does meet in the love of Christ: and this does raise up a Christian
to love Christ with a supreme love: Love is as a Lodestone, drawing the
affections to love Christ, as to one that is aimable and lovely, famous and
glorious, spotless and matchless, in his name, in his nature, in his offices,
in his graces, in his gifts, in his discoveries, in his appearances; in his
Ordinances, he is full of gravity, majesty, and mercy, and glory, he is the
chiefest among ten thousand, Cant. 5. 10. So the soul loves Christ for that
incomparable goodness and natural sweetness that there is in him. But others
that see it not, reject those gracious invitations, reject the Kings Supper,
and think it strange that thou runnest not with him to the same excess of riot.

4. Spring of love is this, the Lord presents before the soul, First his love
in giving Christ. Secondly, the love of Christ in giving himself, and this many
times takes with a soul, and makes it break forth in these or the like
expressions; O the love of God to sinners, to give his son, and not a servant,
his own son and not another, his only son and not a second, his only begotten
son, and not an adopted son, that he should send and give him, when he was not
sought by us, but freely given by him to us, not friends but enemies! etc. In
the next place consider, the love of Christ in giving himself; O how wonderful
was his love to us, it was not a love to the fallen Angels, but to fallen man!
Oh what has he undergone for us! O that he that was equal with God should come
in the form of a servant! That he that the heaven of heavens could not contain,
should be cradled in a Manger, and from his cradle to his Cross, his whole life
was a life of sorrows! Oh that the Judge of all flesh should be condemned, the
Lord of Life put to death, that he that was crowned with honor and glory,
should be crowned with thorns! That that face that was white and ruddy, should
be spit upon by the beastly Jews! and that tongue that spoke as never man
spoke, should be accused of blasphemy! That those hands that swayed the
Scepter, and feet that were as fine brass, should be nailed to the Cross! He
was tempted by the Devil, reviled by the High Priests, branded for a Babbler,
Wine-bibber, and Sabbath-breaker, and Blasphemer! all this he suffered for us
out of love to us, shall we not love him? his true love to us will be satisfied
with nothing but love again -- This is another Spring of love.

Of the Trials of Love, how it may be known.
WE read, 2 Cor. 2. 8. And to prove the sincerity of your love; if the Lord
will, this shall be my work in few words, to lay down those spiritual
experimental signs of this sincere, unfeigned, fervent love.

1. The first character of this grace of love is this; true love will be
satisfied with nothing but love again; what does all avail, as long as we may
not see the Kings face.

2. Those whom we love we often think upon, our thoughts fasten on them. Psalm
139. 17, 18. How precious are the thoughts of thee unto me O God, how great is
the sum of them? when I awake I am still with thee. So that sleeping or waking,
his mind runs upon him: try thy love of God by this; if thou think not often of
God, thou love him not; but if thou can not satisfy thy self with profits,
pleasures, friends and other worldly objects, but thou must turn other
businesses aside, that thou may daily think of God: then thou love him.

3. Those whom we love, we will not willingly offend; no bars are so strong as
love; Sooner will the servant offend his master, the son his father, the wife
her husband, the subject his Protector, then him whom he spiritually loves.
Friendship binds faster then any authority; Jonathan will offend his natural
Father, rather then his spiritual brother, David: Joseph will offend his
mistress, rather then his God, etc.

4. Those whom we love, we acquaint with our grievances, and lay open our
miseries to their bosoms; their counsel we ask, and from them we look for help.
2 Chronicles. 20. 12. Jehoshaphat being opposed by his enemies, to whom comes he to
complain? to none but to God whom he loved: to whom comes Hezekiah, 2 Kings 19.
14, 15. to complain against Rabshakeh and Sennacherib? to none but to God: to
whom went David to complain of the bitter words of Cush the Benjamite? to none
but unto God whom he loves. Psalm 7. 1. O Lord my God, in thee do I put my
trust, save me from all them that persecute me, etc.

5. Those we love, we take any small token kindly from them; a pin from a
friend is more esteemed then a pound from an enemy.

6. Those whom we love, we are willing to suffer or endure any thing for.
Jacob, Genesis 29. 20. endured a tedious service for Rachel, and it seemed but a
few days to him, because he loved her: so Paul's love to Christ made him not
care for the passionate speeches, nor affectionate tears of his friends, he
loved Christ more then either of them, Acts 21. 13. compared with John 21. 15.

7. Those whom we love, we can bear any thing that comes from them; we can
endure their reproofs and their corrections; the child can be contented to be
struck by the Father, that would not not take a blow of another. Psalm 39. 9. I
was dumb, I opened not my mouth because thou did it.

8. That love that we bear to the people of God, is a sure token of our love to
God, the image of God is graven in them, and they that love God, love those
images of him that himself has stamped; and the more like they are to God, the
more they love them: But not to love them, is delivered as a note of the
children of the Devil. 1 John 3. 10. He that loves not his brother, is not of
God. 1 John 4. 7. He that loves not his Brother abides in death. See 1 John
4. 20.

9. Those that we love, we shall be often speaking of, and praising them. Psalm
47. 6. As he abounded in love to God, so he abounded in praising him, Sing
praises to God, sing praises, sing praises to our King: and see ver. 7.

What shall I say more, does thy heart stir after Christ? art thou sick of
love, grieved if he be absent, glad if present? art thou very diligent to
obtain the thing beloved? love cannot abide delays, but would presently enjoy
the thing loved: love desires no wages but love again; true love will constrain
you to please him, and put such necessity upon you to obey him, that you cannot
choose but do it in some good measure, 2 Cor. 5. 14.

10. And lastly, with the love of God is always joined the hatred of sin.
Revelat. 2. 6. Thou hate the deeds of the Nicolaitans, which I also hate.

The love of God, and the love of sin cannot dwell intensively at the same time
in the same heart; for the love of the one will prove the hatred of the other,
Mat. 6. 24. Jam. 4. 4. So love to God casts out servile fear, 1 John 4. 18, 19.
there is no fear in love, but perfect love casts out fear, because fear has
torment: he that fears is not ^^de perfect in love: love casts out a
sinful, servile, slavish fear, whereby we slavishly fear either God or the
creature, Romans 8. 15. Mat. 10. 28. this is the fear that true love casts out.

1. Is this love of God shed abroad in thine heart by the Holy Ghost? have thou
an experimental taste of Gods love? Romans 5. 5.

2. Has this love of God effectually regenerated and renewed thee by the
Spirit? Titus 3. 4, 5, 6.

3. Has this love of God adopted thee, that thou art numbered amongst the sons
of God? 1 John 3. 1, 2.

4. Has this love of Christ satisfied thee, and made thee holy? Col. 3. 12.

5. Has this love of Christ brought thee to live the life of Faith? Gal. 2. 20.

6. Does this love of God and Christ sweetly constrain, and even compel thee
to be chea^^ully serviceable to him in thy place and calling? 2 Cor. 5. 13, 14,
15, 16.

Of the Properties of this true Love.
1. WHere there is love to God, and faith in Christ, it makes the soul long
for, and earnestly desire the appearing of Christ, 2 Timothy 4. 8. There is a
Crown of righteousness laid up for all them that love his appearing: as when we
love any, we love their presence. It is true, sometimes good men are afraid to
die, but it is because they would be better fitted for their Bridegrooms
coming: besides the best have flesh as well as Spirit, etc.

2. Another property of love is this: Love delights to speak well of the
party beloved. David abounded in love to God, and therefore could never
satisfy himself in speaking of, and praising him, Psalm 105.

3. Love is bountiful and seeks not its own, as does abundantly appear in this
blessed portion of Scripture, 1 Cor. 13. 4, 5.

4. Another property of love is this, it will put the whole man to work for the
party beloved: Memory, Will, Affections, Tongue and Hand, and all will fall to
work, when others stand frozen and benumbed: surely the heart that loves Christ
is still drawing nearer and nearer to him, aspiring toward heaven, and
thriving in the work of grace.

5. And lastly, love commands the affections, of anger and fear, it moderates
the one, and regulates the other.

What shall I say more of the properties of this love? he that has this love
of God shed abroad in his heart, does look upon Christ as the chiefest among
ten thousand, and so speaks good of his name, Psalm. 34. 8. O taste and see that
the Lord is good, etc. In a word, a soul comes to love him for himself, because
he is the object of love. And so this man grieves when he is either dishonored
or slighted.

Of the motives or inducements to persuade us to get into, and grow up in this
Love.
THE motives to persuade us to make out after this love, may be drawn from,
either the benefits that we shall get by it; or from the hurt or danger in
neglecting it. To begin then with the last first, 2 Cor. 16. 22. If any man
love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be cursed with a double curse, etc. 1
John 4. 8. He that loves not, knows not God, for God is love: and if we know
him not. 2 These. 1. 8. he will come in flaming fire taking vongeance on them
that know him not. John 5. 42. These people have not the love of God in them.
Ioh. 8. 42. Jesus said to them, if God were your father, ye would love me, etc.
1 John 3. 10. In this the children of God are manifest, and the children of the
Devil; whosoever does not righteousness is not of God, neither he that loves
not his Brorher: in a word, there is nothing that we say or do that will be
accepted of the Lord without this love, 1 Cor. 13. 1, 2, 3. Though I speak with
the tongue of men and Angels, and though I have the gift of prophecy, and
understand all mysteries, and though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor,
and give my body to be burned, and have not this love, I am nothing, etc.

In the next place let us consider the excellency of it, and the benefits we
shall get thereby. First, it is most like to God, 1 John 4. 16. God is love,
and he that dwells in love, dwells in God. Again, it is called by David, a
joyful, blessed and pleasant thing: Again, it is recorded in Scripture as one
of our evidences for heaven, 1 John 3. 14. By this we know we have passed from
death to life, because we love the brethren: and our love to our brethren is a
sign of our love to God, 1 John 4. 20. Lastly, love will stand when all other
graces will fail, 1 Cor. 13. 8. Love never fails, ver. 13. now abides Faith,
Hope, Charity, these three, but the greatest of these is Charity.

Of our love to the children of God, the nature of it, the trials of it, the
means of attaining it, and impediments that hinder it.
1. OF the nature of it: Christ is nothing else but love, and there should not
any thing be beloved by us, but as it either conveys love from him* or else
draws up our affections unto him; and our loving of his body the Church, will
effect both these. The nature then of this love, may be comprehended under
these ensuing heads. When we love them, as such in whom we see the Image of
Christ, for their spiritual brotherhood, 1 Pet. 2. 17. The godly for godliness
sake, for God in them: Christians for Christianity, for Christ in them; the
Saints for their Saint-ship, for their Sanctity of person and conversation; The
spiritual children begotten, for their Heavenly Fathers sake: when grace is the
principal lodestone of our affection; when for this we love them, more then
for beauty, sweetness of disposition, birth, breeding, learning, wi^, gifts,
wealth, honor, etc. And so love all such as we apprehend to be the children of
God; for he that truly loves one child of God, as a child of God, loves every
child of God, whether noble or ignoble, rich or poor, bond or free, male or
female; for the same God, the same Christ, the same grace, is as truly amiable
in one, as in another. See Col. 1. 4.

Hence we also come to love them most, that are most gracious, for where grace
allures the affection, the more grace there is in any person, there is the
stronger motive and allurement to love more. Jesus loved all his Disciples,
John 13. 1. But John he loved eminently above all the rest, John 21. 20. And so
as grace grows in the same person, true love toward him will grow
proportionably.

Of the Trials of our love to the brethren.
THere is a twofold trial or evidence of our love to the Lords people, the one
more internal, the other ext^rnal. ^^^st, of the first, of the inward
evidences. We ^^ad ^ J^hn 3. 14. By this we know we have passed from death to
life, because we love the Brethr^n. Now ^^r unfeigned love to them will appear
by these ensuing things.

1. If I would know whether I love the Brethren* Let me exam^^^ what my
thoughts are of them, love thinks no evil, 1 Cor. 13. 4, 5. Now I can
certainly tell what I do think of another, although I cannot tell what he does
think of me. So, though I cannot certainly, and infallibly tell whether another
loves me, yet I can certainly tell whether I love him or no; his love to me is
in his heart, which I know not; my love to him is in my heart, which I know,
and no creature else.

2. If I would indeed know if I love the brethren, let me examine how I do
stand affected to them, in sympathizing with them when they be in misery, Heb.
13. 3. Remember them that are in bonds, as bound with them, and them which
suffer adversity, as being your selves also in the body.

3. When we are at distance from them, what desires have we after them, Phil.
1. 8. God is my record, how greatly I long after y^^ all, in the bowels of
Jesus Christ. Now why does Paul call God to record? to prove the truth of his
love to these Saints, but because this love in his heart, was known to none but
to God and himself.

4. What delight do we take in their company; we are often in the company of
those that we take no delight in: Now do we indeed delight in the society of
the Saints: then we love them, Psalm 16. 3, etc.

In a word, such things as we love, we keep with care, possess with joy, and
loose with grief: so much of the inward trials of our love to the Saints.

Next of the external trials of this love, by which we may know, that others do
love us, and by which they may know that we love them.

But these evidences are not so infallible as the other, we read John 13. 35.
By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye have love one to
another: and how does our love unto another appear, but in these or the like
things, viz.

1. He that does love his brother, will be apt to reprove him when he does ill,
and praise him when he does well; a friend can bear a sharp reproof from a
friend, etc.

2. Another evidence of love is this, we acquaint those whom we love with our
miseries, lay open our griefs, and account it some ease to discharge some of
our sorrows into their bosoms; their advice we ask, and from them we look for
assistance, 2 Cor. 8. 3.

3. Where love is in the heart, it will appear in the tongue, 1 Cor. 13. Love
is kind, but there is a great deal of verbal and complementary love with men,
forbidden in the Scriptures of truth, saying, love not in word and tongue, but
in deed and in truth.

4. Another Character of love is this, when thou have some injuries offered
thee, thou will not soon be angry, 1 Cor. 13. 4. love suffers long.

5. Where there is love unto another, there will be endeavors to do good unto
another; not only to the body, but also to the soul; they will be apt to say,
as the woman of Samaria did to her neighbors, when she had found Christ her
self, she calls them to him, John 4. 29. Come see a man which told me all things
that ever I did, is not this the Christ? Or as David, Psalm. 66. 16. I will tell
you what God has done for my soul.

Of the means of attaining a true love to the brethren.
1. COnsider the Lord loves them, and ^ath received them; then say to thy self,
shall I hate and reject those that he loves and receives, how unlike shall be
to God?

2. Consider that the Lord commands thee to love them, and it is thy duty so to
do; and will thou rebel against God, in not doing thy duty, but the quite
contrary?

3. Consider they be members of the same body, children of the same Father,
heirs of the same promises as thou art. Consider I say, thy relation to them, 1
Cor. 12. 27. For relation is the ground of affection.

4. Labor daily to have a higher esteem of all the Saints, and a lower esteem
of thy self, so by degrees shall thou come to love them indeed, Phil. 2. 3. Let
nothing be done through strife and vain glory, but in lowliness of mind: let
each esteem other better then themselves.

5. Eye the work of God in them, the Image of Christ in them, and the gifts and
graces of his Spirit adorning them, and then thou will quickly love them, and
that with a pure heart fervently, 1 Pet. 1. 22.

Of the impediments, and hindrances of love.
1. THe first impediment that does hinder love, which we should do well to
beware of, is this, beware of persecuting them either with tongue, hand or pen,
Acts 9. 4. Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? Zach. 2. 8. He that touches
them, touches the Apple of mine eye, says the Lord.

2. Beware of pride, Prove. 13. 10. Only by pride comes contention.

3. Beware of offending them, Mat. 18. 6.

4. Beware of giving credit to evil reports, for many times it is a lie; also
take heed of evil surmisings, and groundless jealousies, and all other things
that makes head against love, E^hes. 4. 31. Let all bitterness, and wrath, and
anger, and clamor, and evil speaking be put away from you, with all malice.

Of the grace of hope, the nature of it, and the properties of it, and
encouragements to it, and Characters of it.
IF any ask why I write of hope after love? I answer, because I find it so set
down in the Scriptures written for our learning, 1 These. 5. 8. But let us who
are of the day be sober, putting on the breastplate of Faith and love, and for
an helmet, the hope of salvation. Now, first the nature of this hope may be
thus. That hope of the Gospel is a grace of God, whereby we expect good to
come, patiently waiting till it come, Romans 8. 25. But if we hope for that we
see not, then do we with patience wait for it. Look what the breast is to the
child, and the oil to the lamp, such is hope to the soul; it lives upon the
promises, and every degree of hope, brings a degree of joy into the soul, Heb.
6. 18.

It is built upon the truth and faithfulness of God, 2 Timothy 2. 13. Or* the hope
of a Christian is built upon the love of Christ, the blood of Christ, the
righteousness of Christ, the satisfaction of Christ, and the intercession of
Christ, and the free grace of God, 1 Peter 1. 13. And upon the infinite power
of God, Romans 4. 21.

In a word, true hope does consist in Gods love in adoption, and the truth of
his promises, and the power of performance, 2 Timothy 1. 12. I know in whom I have
believed, and I am persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have
committed unto him, etc.

Or, hope is that virtue, whereby we expect all good things from God, and so
patiently attend in the use of his appointed means, for all things that we
need, Psalm. 22. 4, 5. and 37. 7. and that not only when we have the means, but
also when we want all apparent means, as the Israelites did in the Desert, etc.

Or, true hope is a well grounded and patient expectation of the accomplishment
of all those spiritual and eternal good things, which God has promised
through Jesus Christ, to all that believe and expect them.

Of the Properties of this hope.
1. FIrst, this hope as an inward principle, works out pollution, and
corruption, as being repugnant thereunto, 1 John 3. 3. And every one that has
this hope in him, purifieth himself, as he is pure.

2. Hope is always more or less exercised about heavenly things, viz.
Sometimes it is exercised about the righteousness of Christ, sometimes it is
exercised about the love of God the Father in giving Christ: sometimes hope is
exercised about the word and promises, Psalm. 119. 49, 81, 114. and Psa. 130. 5.
In thy word do I hope.

Hope in the promises will keep the head from aching, and the heart from
sinking: in a word, the promises are the ladder by which hope gets up to
heaven, and so hope in the promises will support a distressed soul, and reduce
a wandering soul: hope in the promises will confirm staggering souls, and some
undone souls: The promises are the Anchor of hope, as hope is the Anchor of the
soul, See Romans 8. 24. Gal. 5. 5. Tit. 1. 2.

3. Hope has much in reversion, though little in possession; hope can see a
glimpse of heaven through the thickest cloud; hope can see light through
darkness, life through death, smiles through frowns, and glory through misery;
hope holds life and soul the together; it holds the soul and the promises
togeit holds the soul and heaven together.

4. Hope never takes off, but puts the soul upon doing and obeying, 1 Pet. 1.
3. it gives life and strength to all our duties, 1 Cor. 9. 10.

5. Hope will enter into that within the vail, Heb. 6. 19. Which hope we have
as an anchor of the soul, both sure and steadfast, which enters into that
within the vail.

6. Another property of hope is this, it will help a soul to wait patiently
upon God, for any thing it does stand in need of, Romans 8. 25. For if we hope
for that we see not, then do we with patience wait for it.

Of the encouragements, to encourage us to hope in God.
1. FIrst, this is the way for a Christian to enjoy himfelf, and to have God
take pleasure in him also, Psalm. 147. 11. The Lord takes pleasure in them that
fear him, in those that hope in his mercy, Psalm. 33. 18. Behold the eye of the
Lordis upon them that fear him, upon them that hope in his mercy, to deliver
their souls from death, etc.

2. A believers comfort, hope, joy, and confidence should be the same at all
times, and that for these five unanswerable reasons.

1. Because God is unchangeable, John 13. 1.

2. Because God ever looks upon his, as they are in Christ, Gal. 5. 17. Psalm
103. 14.

3. Because the hope and comfort of a believer depends not upon his own doings,
but upon Christ's holiness and righteousness, 1 Cor. 1. 30* 2 Timothy 1. 9. Heb.
13. 8.

4. Because Christ and all true believers in a sense are one, 1 Cor. 12. 12,
13. Ephesians. 5. 30. Heb. 2. 11.

5. Because we are not beloved for our own sakes, but for Christ's sake, Mat. 3.
17. compared with Isa. 43. 25. Mich. 7. 18, 19, 20.

6 I might speak of many more encouragements, viz. As God does command us to
hope in him, and commends us for so doing, and blames and threatens us for not
hoping in his mercy.

But if I should speak of every thing distinctly, I perceive my book would
swell to a greater volumn then I intended.

Of the distinguishing Characters between a well grounded, and a presumptuous
hope.
1. FIrst, the hopes of a regenerate man, it is gotten by, and grounded upon
the word of God, and therefore it is called the hope of the Gospel, Col. 1. 23.
Romans 15. 4. But now the hopes of wicked men, as they are gotten they know not
how, so neither do they know upon what they are grounded, etc.

2. True hope is bottomed upon the mercies of God, and the merits of Christ:
and hence it is that Christ is called our hope, 1 Timothy 1. 1. Because he is the
foundation, upon which believers do build all their hopes. But now the false
and presumptuous hopes of the wicked, are built upon their own duties, what
they have done for themselves, Mich. 3. 11.

3. True hope does as well act for heaven, as hope for heaven, Psalm. 37. 3.
Trust in the Lord and do good; here is trusting and doing put together; true
hope does act for heaven, as well as hope for heaven.

But a presumptuous hope, that hopes for heaven, as its end, but never acts
holiness, as its way to heaven: in a word, false hope does hope much and act
little. Wicked men will hope for salvation, but not work out their salvation,
etc.

4. He that has true hope, does make conscience to keep his heart pure and
free, both from the love of sin, and the dominion of sin, 1 John 3. 3. He that
has this hope in him, purifieth himself, as he is pure: that is, he does
endeavor so to do at least.

But now a false hope will hope for heaven, though he walk on after the
imaginations of his own heart, as in Isaiah 51. 10. Thou have walked in the
greatness of thy wicked ways, yet say thou not, there is no hope: though
they had great sins, yet they had great hopes for heaven, but this hope is only
a presumptuous hope.

5. True hope flows from a long, and well grounded experience in the ways of
God, and from an experience of the grace, and beauty, and love of God to him,
and from experience of the goodness and mercy, and promises of God, and also
from an experience from his own heart, which in some measure is enabled by
Christ to withstand temptations, subdue corruptions. Such experiences as these
are inlets to a well grounded hope. But now, the hopes of wicked men and women,
are only the results of ignorance, deluding and presumptuous hopes, without any
former experience of the ways of God, surely such hopes are vain and empty
hopes, that will end in miserv, Prove. 11. 7. The hope of the wicked shall be
cut off, and when he dies his expectation shall perish. See Job 8. 14. Whose
hope shall be cut off, and whose trust shall be a spiders Web. See Job 11. 20.
Their hope shall be as the giving up of the ghost, therefore let us take heed
that we do not fancy to our selves false hopes of heaven on the one hand, and
have as much care on the other hand; that you do not cast off grounded hopes,
and say, there is no hope, and have as much care that you do not harbor in
your hearts, common and ordinary conceits of this grace of hope: for there is
the same certainty, the same excellency, and the same efficacy in this grace of
hope, as there is in Faith and love. First, there is the same certainty in it,
Heb. 6. 11. It is called the full assurance of hope. Secondly, there is the
same excellency in it. Tit. 2. 13. It is called a blessed hope, and there is
also the same efficacy in it: for as faith is said to purify the heart, Act.
15. 9. So likewise does hope, 1 John 3. 3. Every man that has this hope in
him, does purify himself, as he is pure. Again, there is the same difficulty
in getting hope, as there is in getting Faith; for as it is gotten by the word
preached, so is hope too, Col. 1. 23. And if Faith be wrought in us by the
power of God, as Heb. 12. 2. So is hope likewise wrought in us by the power of
the Holy Ghost, Romans 15. 13. That ye may abound in hope through the power of
the Holy Ghost, let our faith and hope then ^e in God, 1 Pet. 1. 21. and let us
not be moved away from the hope of the Gospel. Col. 1. 23.

The great Pillar of Marble that must bear up our hope, is the promises of God
in Christ; he that builds his hopes for heaven only upon his own performances
and good duties, his hope is in vain; for this is not the pillar and ground of
our hope, for when we have done all that we can, we must lie down at the feet
of Christ, and conclude, that our best righteousness is but silthy rags; and
when we have done all that we can, we are but unprofitable servants, Isa 64. 6.
Luke 17. 10.

Of Perseverance, what it is.
It is the end that crowns the action: it is not enough to begin well, unless
we end well; Mannasseh and Paul began ill, ended well; Judas and Demas began
well, but ended ill; Double damnation does attend those that begin in the
Spirit, and end in the flesh; Persevering Saints must work hard in the
wilderness, before they sit down in Paradise; they must make a constant
progressin holiness, before they enter into happiness.

1. That perseverance that is true, is, a perseverance in holy and spiritual
principles, it is an abiding in love, John 15. 9, 10. Col. 1. 23. If ye
continue in the Faith grounded and settled, and be not removed away from the
hope of the Gospel: See 1 Timothy 2. 15. Heb. 13. 1. 1 Cor. 13. 13.

A persevering Christian does hold on, and hold out to the end, Mat. 10. 22.
Mat. 24. 12, 13. Rev. 2. 10. Be thou faithful unto the Death, and I will give
thee a Crown of Life.

2. It is a perseverance in believing, in repenting* in mourning, in hoping, in
loving, in fear, in humility, and in patience, and self-denial; it is
perseverance in grace that does crown every grace, and every gracious soul with
the crown of glory at the last, Rev. 2. 10.

3. In a word, that which the Holy Ghost calls perseverance, has this
ingredient in it, it is an abiding in the Word and Doctrine of Christ. John 15.
7. 1 John 2. 24. John 8. 31. If ye continue in my Word, then are you my
Disciples indeed: A true Christian does constantly maintain war, and usually
obtain victo^y; he is resolved to conquer, or die conquering.

We read Acts 8. 43. that Paul and Barnabas persuaded the Christians to
continue in the grace of God: for if we continue not, we shall be cut off, Romans
11. 22.

Of the gifts of the Spirit, and what those best gifts are that Christ gives to
his best beloved ones.
HAving written before of the graces of the Spirit, it now follows in order to
write something of the gifts of the Spirit, for there are many gifts and
virtues of the Spirit: for every man has his proper gift of God, one after
this manner, another after that, Jam. 1. 17. Romans 12. 6. having then gifts
differing, etc. 1 Cor. 12. 8. there are diversities of gifts, but the same
Spirit; To one is given a word of wisdom, to another a word of knowledge, by
the same Spirit, to another Faith, by the same Spirit, to another the gift of
healing, to another the working of miracles, to another prophesying, to another
discerning of Spirits, to another diverse kind of tongues, to another the
interpretation of tongues; hence it comes to pass that every man is eminent in
his gift above others, viz. Abraham exceeded Moses in faith; Moses exceeded
Abraham in meekness; and Job exceeded both in patience: and Joshua exceeded all
three in valor; So the Church of the Romans exceeded the Church of the
Thessalonians in wisdom and knowledge; and the Church of the Thessalonians
exceeded the Church of the Romans in Faith and Patience. So again, Paul he had
the gift of utterance, and freedom of speech, he was accoun^ed the chief
Speaker, he was a most eloquent man. Now Barnabas did exceed Paul in another
gift, viz. in comforting those who were in trouble, Acts 11. 23, 24. and Peter
did excel both Paul and Barnabas in another gift, viz. in feeding the Lambs,
John 21. 15, 16. Again it is said of James and John, that they were sons of
thunder, as having a more powerful gift from God to terrify and awaken
sinners. So then every good and perfect gift is from above, as we find James 1.
17. And as every man has received the gift, so he is to administer the same, 1
Pet. 4. 10. For to that end every man has his proper gift of God, one after
this manner, another after that, as we read 1 Cor. 7. 7. And no man is to
neglect the gift that is in him, 1 Timothy 4. 14. But it is the duty of all to
stir up the gift that is in them* 2 Timothy 1. 6. Every man has a gift given him
according to the measure of the gift of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 7. and so having gifts
differing according to the measure that is given to us: whether prophecy, let
us prophecy according to the proportion of Faith, Romans 12. 6, etc.

Again we read in 1 Cor. 12. 1, 4, 8, 9, 28. concerning spiritual gifts, I
would not have you ignorant, for there are diversities of gifts, but the same
Spirit; for to one is given by the same Spirit the Word of wisdom, to another
the Word of knowledge, to another faith, to another the gifts of healing by the
same Spirit, to another prophecy, to another discerning of spirits, to another
diverse kinds of tongues, to another the interpretation of tongues, and all this
works that one and the self-same spirit: Dividing to every man sever^^ly as
he will. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. And he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some
Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, Elders and Deacons, ver. 12. for
the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of
the body of Christ, till we all come in the unity of the Faith unto a perfect
man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ.

More particularly, let us enquire into this, what those best gifts are that
Christ gives unto his best beloved ones.
THere are common gifts that all in common have, one as well as another; but*
under this head I shall speak only of those most choice special gifts that he
bestows upon his sons and daughters.

1. He gives light to his beloved ones, yea he gives spiritual light, which
is a mercy of mercies, Ephesians. 5. 14. He gives that light whereby his people, not
only awake and rise from the dead, but he enables them to see sin to be the
greatest evil; he gives that light that melts the soul, that humbles the heart,
that warms and quickens the soul, and quiets the soul, and glads the soul. A
man is not born with heavenly light in his heart, as he is born with a tongue
in his mouth, for till Christ comes and sets up a light in the soul, the soul
lives in darkness, and lies in darkness, yea is darkness in the very abstract.
Ephesians. 5. 8. Ye were sometimes darkness, but now are ye light in the Lord.

2. He gives repentance, which is a flower that grows not in natures garden.
Jer. 13. 23. The Ethiopian cannot change his skin, nor the Leopard his spots;
and that he does give repentance as a gift to his, does appear by these
Scriptures, Acts 5. 31. 2 Timothy 2. 25.

3. He gives his Spirit, Romans 5. 5. 1. John 3. See John 14. 26. and 4. 13.

4. He gives a soul skill to lay hold upon, and sweetly to apply the precious
promises to himself.

5. He gives peace. John 14. 27. My peace I leave with you, my peace I give
unto you.

6. He does give pardon of sins, and that pardon of sins is a gift, will appear
Acts 5. 31. Acts 26. 18. compared with Psalm. 32. 1, 2.

7. He does give grace. John 1. 16. of his fullness we shall receive grace for
grace.

8. And lastly, He gives himself. Romans 8. 32. he that has given us his son,
how shall he not with him also give us all things?

In a word, the Lord does give his people spiritual and heavenly gifts, pure
gifts, wine without water, light without darkness, gold without dross. See Rev.
22. 1. James 3. 17. He gives soul-satisfying gifts, most permanent and lasting,
and most useful gifts. I had intended to have written something of the
difference between Common and Special gifts, and of the vast difference between
the gifts that Christ gives, and those the world gives; But my Book I see would
then swell too big, etc.

I shall to this add but this word, Christ does voluntarily and freely give
these gifts and graces; never did a mother more willingly give her child suck,
then Jesus Christ bestows grace upon his people. Isa. 55. 1. Rev. 22. 17.

So much of the graces, gifts and virtues of the Spirit; we shall now come to
speak of the Ordinances of the Gospel, in which these gifts and graces must and
ought to be exercised. I shall speak of ten or eleven of them which are
standing Ordinances remaining to this day in full force and virtue.

Of the several Ordinances of the Gospel.
1. OF the Assembling of our selves together.

2. Of preaching, and prophesying, and attentive hearing.

3. Of joint prayer and supplication.

4. Of singing and praising God together.

5. Of the Ordinance of Baptism.

6. Of the Lords Supper, or breaking of bread.

7. Of Collections for the poor.

8. Of Reading the Scriptures.

9. Of Admonition, private and public.

10. Of Suspention.

11. Of Excommunication.

First of the Ordinance of Assembling our selves together.
THE Church of God is in Scripture resembled to a natural body, wherein are
many members united to each other, and to one head, by one Spirit: now in order
to this union, we are to assemble our selves together in obedience to that
great command. Heb. 10. 25. Not for saking the assembling of your selves
together, as the manner of some is. Psalm. 122. 1. I was glad when they said
unto me, Let us go unto the house of the Lord. Those Saints that are assembled
together according to a Gospel institution, are a communion of Saints, arising
from a clea^ apprehension of their union with Christ and his members. 1 Cor.
12. 13, 14. For by one Spirit we a^e all Baptized into one body, whether we be
Jews or Gentiles, bond or free, and have been all made to drink into one
Spirit, for the body is not one member, but many members. Ver. 20. For now are
they many members, but one body: Now when a man comes to see that every one in
whom the Lord Jesus appears is a member together with him in the same body,
whereof Christ is the head; then his heart longs to join himself in
fellowship with such, who have fellowship with the Father and the Son. 1 John
1. 3. And so goes out by the footsteps of the flock, and propounds himself to
the Church, and puts himself upon the trial of the truth of that work of grace
in his heart: So that a Church is at first gathered by the word preached and
faith received of them that hear it, Mat. 28. 19, 20. but to come to
particulars, I shall according to my measure speak or write of the Ordinance of
assembling under these two heads.

1. As it relates* to those that are converted, but never as yet joined to any
Church of Christ.

2. As it relates to those that are converted, and joined to the Church of
Christ.

1. As it relates to those that are converted, but never as yet joined to any
Church of Christ in order: let them consider, that it is their duty to propound
themselves to, and endeavor to join with the Church. For first the Lord in his
Word does command it. And secondly the example of the primitive Saints, whose
footsteps we are to follow, does call for it; and therefore you no sooner read
of a people converted, but the next news, they were baptized and added to the
Churches: and good reason why: because God commands us not to forsake the
assembling of our selves together. And secondly, although our being depends not
upon our joining with a Church of Saints, yet our well-being does much depend
upon it: If any ask how or by what means is a Church at first gathered? I would
say to them again. What is written? how read thou? you are to observe no
other Rule, means or way, then what is either expressed, employed, or included in
the holy Scriptures of truth, where we may find out the right Ordinan^es,
Ministry and Government.

The right Constitution of a Church of Christ, or the way at first to gather a
Church.
1. LET seven, eight, nine or ten, or more of those men that are most sound in
the Faith, and most unblamable in their lives and conversation, appoint one day
to fast and pray together, and earnestly seek unto God for his direction
herein, and toward the end of the day, let them one by one give an account of
the work of grace upon their hearts, and of the hope that is in them, and then
give your selves up to the Lord, and one to another by the will of God, with no
other Covenant then this, to endeavor as God shall enlighten, and enable you
to walk together in the appointments, Ordinances, and institutions of Christ,
the head of the Church, expressed, employed, and contained in the Scriptures of
truth, which you take to be your rule, etc.

2. In the end of this meeting appoint your next meeting, both time and place,
expecting the presence of Christ with you to assist and teach you, according to
his promise, Mat. 18. 20. See the assemblies Annotations on this verse.

3. You having proceeded thus far, you may look upon your selves as a Church of
Christ in its infancy, and when other Christians by the word preached, and
Faith received, desire to join with you in this or the next meeting, let their
names be propounded, which being done, let the brethren appoint a meeting to
confer with them about the time when, the place where, the manner how the Lord
did first appear to them in a powerful conviction, conversion, and
regeneration, or something equivolent thereunto: and if they give such an
account of the work of grace upon their hearts, as does satisfy the brethren,
that the Lord has begun a work in this creature, that he has promised to
finish, as in Phil. 1. 6. Then you are to proceed to a second question, being
as before satisfied in the first; that the party is a hewed and squared stone,
and a living stone, fit for the spiritual building: in the next place enquire
of the said party that desires to join with you; what is his or her grounds and
ends in desiring fellowship with you, and if you find that their grounds be in
obedience to the command of God, 2 Cor. 6. 17, 18. Rev. 18. 4. and their ends
be, that they might enjoy God in all his ordinances, and have a fellowship with
those that have fellowship with the Father and the Son, as in 1 John 1. 3. that
is, being united by Faith to Christ and his members, he may partake of his
grace, and spiritual life from him, and by him be united to God the Father, and
have communion with him, Joh. 17. 21. compared with Heb. 2. 11.

All that are admitted, must put themselves upon the rest, and be received by
consent, for the Church is Christ's kingdom; now the matter or subjects of
Christ's kingdom, they are believers gathered out of the world, by the preaching
of the Gospel, and the powerful Ministry of the Spirit, Mark 1. 15. and Mar.
16. 15, 16. Act. 2. 44. hence it is that the Church in Scripture are frequently
called Saints, and holy brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling, the house
of God, and Temple of the holy Ghost, the household of Faith, born from above,
of the Spirit, that they might worship God in Spirit and in truth; they were
darkness, but now are light, Ephesians. 5. 8. They were lost, but now found; were
dead, but now are alive; they before had not obtained mercy, but now have
obtained mercy: were not a people, but now are a people of the living God; the
Father disdains not to count them his sons and daughters; the Son is not
ashamed to call them brethren; the Holy Ghost is pleased to make them his
temple to dwell in; all which discovers and confirms that the Church of Christ
are and ought to be a spiriritual building, made up of spiritual stones, 1 Pet.
2. 5.

Now if any professor hang back, and seek not to join with the Church of
Christ, only because he will not be examined before the Church, in the
particulars before mentioned, then let me ask that man or woman, child or
servant, how it is that you are unwilling to venture your estate in this world,
without first advising with a Lawyer; and thou will advise with Physicians
about thy bodily health, but will adventure their souls upon their own
judgment and trial, without taking the advice of the Church of Christ: is thy
soul less precious to thee then thy body or thy estate? if thou have truth of
grace, why will thou not bring it to the touchstone, and come to examination?
if no grace, why will thou refuse the way and means to get it? surely thou do
neglect this way either,

1. Our of ignorance and pride, because thou will not have thy ignorance
discovered.

2. Or else it is from a profane spirit of opposition against all the ways of
Christ, held forth in the Gospel. See thy doom, Luke 19. 14, 27.

4. The Church being thus planted, and the number thereof increased. If you
find some qualified, you ought to proceed to elect your Officers, the Church
being a most free Corporation under Christ the Lord, Ephesians. 2. 19. She is in
all reason and equity to choose her Officers and Ministers, 1 Cor. 12. 27, 28,
etc. Unto whom also she is to give assistance, obedience, and maintenance, 1 Timothy 5. 17, 18. 1 Cor. 9. 7, 9. compared with Heb. 5. 4, 5. 2 Cor. 4. 5.

Now that these Officers of the Church appointed by Christ, are to have their
outward calling from the Church, whereof they are members, for the present, and
unto whom they are to adminster, will fully appear by these few reasons.

1. Because the Apostles, who taught only Christ's commandments, so directed the
Churches, Act. 1. 23. Act. 6. 1, 2, 3, 5. Act. 14. 23.

2. Because the people amongst whom they have been conversant, can best judge
of their fitness both in respect of their gifts and graces.

3. Because it furthereth much the diligence and faithfulness of the Minister,
that they whose Minister he is, have freely chosen him, as unto whom under
Christ, they commit the most precious treasure of their soul, Heb. 13. 17.
Also, it binds the people to greater love, and obedience to him or them, whom
themselves have made choice of. But if any of the officers so elected by the
Church be found unfaithful in his place, he is by the Church to be warned to
take heed to his Ministry he has received, Col. 4. 17. to fulfill it; which if
he neglect to do, by the same power which set him up, he is to be put down and
deposed.

Now if any ask how many are the officers or offices in the Church? I answer,
there are five, besides the extraordinary offices of Apostles, Prophets, and
Evangelists, for the first planting of the Churches, which are ceased with
their extraordinary gifts, etc.

1. First, there is, or ought to be the Pastor, to whom is given the gift of
wisdom, for exhortation, Ephesians. 4. 11.

2. The teacher, to whom is given the gift of knowledge, for Doctrine, Romans 12.
8. 1 Cor. 12. 8.

3. The governing Elder, who is to Rule with diligence, Romans 12. 8. 1 Timothy 5.
17.

4. The Deacon, who is to receive and distribute the holy treasure, with
simplicity and sincerity, 1 Timothy 3. 10. Act. 6. 1, 3.

5. The widow or Deaconess, who is to attend the sick, and impotent with
compassion and cheerfulness, 1 Timothy 5. 3, 9, 10. Romans 16. 1.

All these are useful and necessary, and these alone sufficient for the Church,
as being the most perfect society, and body of Christ, which neither fails in
that which is necessary, nor exceeds in any thing superfluous; so they are
united and compacted together by that one Spirit, to the Lord, and each to
other to the edifying of its self in love, Ephesians 4. 3, 4. and 16. In the
want or in the absence of any of these servants of the Church; the Church has
power to appoint any one or more of her members for the present necessity to
supply the room or absence of her officer or officers.

2. But then in the next place for those that are united to a Church of Christ,
let them beware that they forsake not the assembling of themselves together, as
the manner of some is, Hebrews 10. 25. And again, consider the danger of
drawing back, Hebrews 10. 38. Now if any man draw back, my soul shall have no
pleasure in him: Again, Luke 9. 62. And Jesus said unto him, no man having put
his hand to the plough, and looking back, is fit for the kingdom of God. Surely
those that fall off from a true Church of Christ, and persevere therein to the
end, shall hear Christ say to them, as in Luke 19. 27. But those mine enemies
which would not that I should reign over them, bring them hither, and slay them
before me. How dreadful is this sin of falling off! First, it is sharply
threatened of God, Proverbs 14. 14. Heb. 10. 38, 39. Secondly, this sin is
severely plagued, Matthew 12. 43, 44, 45. compared with 2 Pet. 2. 20, 21, 22.

Again, See 1 John 2. 19. They went out from us, but they were not of us, for
if they had been of us, they would no doubt have continued with us; but they
went out that they might be made manifest, that they were not all of us: These
were once in the Church, but never truly of the Church; for then they would
have persevered; their apostasy therefore does evidence their hypocrisy; false
rotten professors, will, and in all ages has thus apostatized. The wind blows
not away the wheat, but the chaff, etc. And so much of the first Ordinance of
assembling our selves together.

Of the Ordinance of preaching, who they are that ought to preach: the manner
how, the time when, the place where, the persons to whom, how this gift of
preaching may be obtained: and whether the Minister may receive money for
preaching: how to remember, and a rule to try all doctrines by.
1. Of the Ordinance of preaching.
THat preaching and prophesying is a standing Ordinance of God, will at large
appear, if we consider these and the like Scriptures, 2 Timothy 4. 2. Preach the
word, be instant in season and out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort with all
long suffering and Doctrine, Mat. 28. 19, 20. compared with Mark 16. 15. And he
said unto them, go into all the world and preach the Gospel to every creature,
he that believes and is baptized shall be saved. The business of preaching is
to make new creatures, and to turn Lions into Lambs; the Preacher is but an
instrument in the hand of God, to make an unbeliever to believe he is Gods
workmanship, Ephesians. 2. 10. An ax makes no Artificial thing, but by influence
from the Artificer; neither does a pen write, but by his help that handles it.
So Preachers and preaching, is but instrumental in the hand of the Spirit, to
make you Christ's, 2 Cor. 3. 2. They may be only called Ministers, by whom the
people believe, God was mighty by Peter and Paul, Gal. 2. 8. Ministers are but
the Rams horns, but God throws down the walls of Jericho: Men's hearts are as the
everlasting doors, but God opens them, as he did Lydia's, or else all the
preaching will be in vain.

Who they are that ought to preach the Gospel.
THose to whom the Lord has given the Word, Psalm 68. 11. The Lord gave the
Word, and great was the company of those that published it.

But principally those are to preach, open and apply the Scriptures that are
set apart by the Church or Churches to that work of the Pastor and Teacher, who
by the Word of life are to feed the Flock, over which they are the overseers,
Acts 20. 28. Titus 1. 5.

But in the exercise of prophecy, such as are not in office in the Church, may
exercise their gifts to speak unto edification, exhortation and comfort, after
the public ministry by the Teachers, and under their direction and moderation,
whose duty it is, if any thing be obscure, to open it; if doubtful, to clear
it; if unfound, to refute it; if imperfect, ^o supply what is wanting. See 1
Cor. 14. 3, 29, 30, 31. If any say farther, how is that exercise proved in the
Scripture? I answer.

1. By the example in the Jewish Church, where men, though in no office either
in Temple or Synagogue, had liberty publicly to exercise their gifts, as does
clearly appear by the Scriptures, Luke 2. 42, 46, 47. Luke 4. 16, 17, 18. Acts
8. 4. and 11. 19, 20, 21. and chap. 13. 14, 15, 16. chap. 18. 24, 25, 26.

2. It will yet farther appear by this commandment of Christ and his Apo^^les,
Luke 9. 10. Luke 10. 1. 1 Pet. 4. 10, 11. 1 Cor. 14. 1, 5* 30, 31.

3. It will further appear by the prohibiting of women to teach in the Church,
hereby liberty being given unto men, their husbands, or others, 1 Cor. 14. 34,
35.

4. This will yet more fully appear by those most excellent ends, which by
these means are to be obtained, as,

1. The glory of God in the manifestation of his manifold graces. See 1 Pet 4.
10, 11.

2. That the gifts of the Spirit in men be not quenched, 1 These. 5. 19, 20.
Quench not the spirit, despise not prophesying, that is, stop not the motions
of the spirit in your selves, nor restrain the gifts thereof in others.

3. For the fitting, and trial of men for the Ministry.

4. For the preserving pure the Doctrine of the Gospel, which is more
endangered, if some one or two alone may only be heard, and speak, Act. 2. 42.

5. For the debating and satisfying of doubts if any do arise, Act. 13. 15.

6. For the edifying of the Church, and conversion of others; always provided,

1. That he speak not as one that has any authority over them, but as a fellow
member.

2. That he have the gift of prophecy, to speak as an Oracle of God, to
edification, exhortation and comfort, 1 Cor. 14. 3.

3. That he speak not in opposition to, nor in any way undervaluing of those
that are set apart by the Church, as Officers over them, for they are called to
the greatest and weightiest employment in the world: Yea such an employment,
that would certainly break the backs, not only of the best, and strongest men,
but even of the very Angels, should not God put under his everlasting arms. No
labor to that of the mind, no travel to that of the soul; those that are
faithful in the Lords vineyard no doubt find it so: and so with Paul, often
say, who is sufficient for these things? I have read of Luther, that he would
often say, that if he were again to choose his calling, he would dig, or do any
thing, rather then take upon him the office of a Minister.

Of the manner how the Preacher is to preach.
2 Cor. FOR we are not as many which corrupt 2. 17. the word of God, but as of
sincerity, but as of God, in the sight of God speak we in Christ, 1 Cor. 2. 4.
And my speech, and my preaching, was not with enticing words of man's wisdom,
but in demonstration of the Spirit, and of power: Their work is to make dark
things plain, not plain things dark and obscure. It is most observable
concerning God the Father, who is the great Masterpiece of speech; when he
spoke from heaven, he makes use of three several texts of Scripture in one
breath, Mat. 17. 5. This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, hear
him. First, this is my beloved Son, that Scripture we have in Psalm 2. 7. In
whom I am well pleased, this we have in Isa. 42. 1. hear him, this we have in
Deuteronomy. 18. 15. All which may be a pattern to Preachers to keep close to the
Scriptures. Oh how unlike to God are such Preachers, that spend much time in
wisdom of words, and vanity, and novelty, and sophistry, and so darken counsel,
by words without knowledge.

A Minister of the Gospel is duly to divide and distribute the word according
to every ones spiritual estate and condition; they must speak comfort, to whom
comfort belongs, and counsel to whom counsel belongs, and reproof to whom
reproof belongs, and terror to whom terror belongs, 2 Timothy 2. 15. Study to
show thy self approved unto God; a workman that needs not to be ashamed,
rightly dividing the word of truth: or rightly cutting into parts the word of
truth; and that they may so do, they ought to study the condition of the
people, as well as the parts of the text, and so before they preach, to
consider who they are to preach to, whether to the ignorant or knowing; whether
enemies to Religion, or professors of it. Whether they are merely formal, or
truly spiritual: Whether they are more cheerful and zealous, or more cold and
sluggish; that so he may give to every one his portion, and rightly divide the
word of truth, like a wise Physician, to apply cordials where the condition of
the party does require it, as well as corrosives and purges; this is to have
the tongue of the Learned, to know how to speak a word in due season: we may
see, Isa. 50. 4. The phrase must be plain and full, wholesome and effectual; the
greatest learning is to be seen in the greatest plainness. Saint Paul does
often glory in this, that his preaching was not in wisdom of words, or in
excellency of speech, not with enticing words of man's wisdom, not as pleasing
men but God, who tries the heart, 1 Cor. 1. 17. and the second chap. 1 These.
2. 4.

Those that are the true Prophets of Christ, must with Micaiah speak the truth
to Ahab, although with him they be beheaded for it, 1 King. 22. 8. they must
with Nathan tell David, thou art the man, 2 Samuel* 12. 7. and with Nehemiah, tell
the Princes and Rulers to their faces, that they oppress the people with sore
taxes, Nehem. 5. 6. also the Lord commands Jeremiah, that he should speak the
mind of the Lord to the faces of the people, Jer. 1. 17. the true and faithful
Prophets of the Lord must with Amos, preach the death of Jeroboam, and
captivity of Israel at Bethel in the Kings Chapel, Amos 7. 12, 13. Yea they
must with the Prophet Zachariah tell the Rulers and people of Israel to their
faces, that because they had forsaken the Lord, the Lord had forsaken them, 2 Chronicles. 24. 20, 21. In a word, to add no more, they ought with John Baptist, to
tell Herod to his face, that it is not lawful for him to have his brothers
wife, although with him they be beheaded for it, Mark 6. 18. to 28.

Of the time when, the place where, the persons to whom the Gospel is to be
preached.
1. FIrst of the first, the time when the Gospel is to be preached, 2 Timothy 4.
2. Preach the word, be instant in season and out of season, reprove, rebuke,
exhort with all long-suffering and Doctrine, Acts 20. 7. Paul continued his
speech until midnight. Surely the Lord in his word does give us to understand
that there is no time unseasonable, either to receive or do good, only some
times may be more seasonable then other.

2. The place where the Gospel is to be preached; the Lord in his word does
give us to understand* that as the Gospel is to be preached to all Nations; so
it is to be preached in all places, in the Synagogue, in the house, in the
field, by the seaside, in the ship; the most convenients place is, where the
people may most conveniently meet together in the name of Christ* See Acts 5.
42. And daily in the Temple, and in every house, they ceased not to teach and
preach Jesus Christ.

3. The persons to whom the Gospel is to be preached, and that is to every
creature; go says Christ in his commission, into all the world, and preach the
Gospel to every creature; he that believes and is baptized shall be saved,
Mark 16. 15. God does ^ender the Covenant of grace or the Gospel to all
Nations, and to every creature in all Nations, and it is the mind of God that
every messenger and Minister of his should declare and publish this Covenant to
all, without respect of persons, as by these Scriptures does fully appear, Act.
20, 24, 25. Mat. 28. 19. Tit 2. 11. Mat. 24. 14. The Lord does make this
general tender of grace and mercy, that so none might object and say, they were
not called, nor invited, and to leave them without excuse: withal, we are to
consider, that man has neither will nor power of himself, unless it be given
him from above, to receive, believe, or embrace such tenders, John 3. 27. John
6. 65. Jer. 10. 23. Jer. 17. 9. Job 21. 14. John 5. 40. Acts 13. 48. For all
men by nature are desperately wilful, absolutely weak, and altogether wicked,
having neither spiritual desire nor strength, neither spiritual feet to carry
them to this grace, nor spiritual hands to receive this grace, when it is
brought and tendered unto them; yet it must be tendered to all, for a witness
against all that embrace it not, and for the bringing in of those that are
ordained to eternal life, for there be some of the Lords flock amongst all
Nations, kindreds and tongues, upon the face of the earth; therefore no man is
to shut out himself, but to endeavor to get strength from the Father to draw
him to Christ, John 6. 44. Acts 13. 28.

What a Minister is to preach.
IT is undoubtedly the duty of all Ministers to preach Jesus Christ unto the
people, 2 Cor. 4. 5. We preach not our selves, but Christ Jesus the Lord, and
our selves your servants for his sake. We no sooner read that Paul was
converted, but the next news of him is, Acts 9. 20. And straight way he reached
Christ in the Synagogues: Christ is to be preached, because the preaching up of
Christ, is the only way to preach down Antichrist, or whatsoever makes against
Christ, 2 These. 2. 3, 4, 7, 8, 9, 10.

Again, Christ is to be preached, because this is the only way to save and win
souls to Jesus Christ, Acts 4. 10, 11, 12. compared with John 17. 3. Acts 2. 14
to 42.

If any ask further what a Minister is to preach? Then I answer, he is to
preach the Gospel, and he is to preach the Law, for so did Christ and his
Apostles: but the Gospel is to be preached chiefly, and mainly, but the Law
accidentally and occasionally, as will more fully appear in the following
discourse.

Which is first to be preached, the Law or the Gospel.
THis is the Commission and message of Christ, Mark 16. 15. Go and preach the
Gospel. And it was the practice both of Christ and his Apostles to preach the
Gospel in the first place. First, we find it to be the practice of Christ, as
for example, our Savior Mat. 5. 3. to the 12. he pronounced nine blessings of
the Gospel in his Sermon on the mount, before he spoke one word of the Law. So
Mat. 4. 23. We read that Jesus went about a^l Galilee, teaching in their
Synagogues, and preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom, etc. So likewise it was
the practice of the Apostles, viz. we read of Paul, 1 Cor. 2 2. That he
determined to know or make known nothing amongst the Corinthians save Jesus
Christ, and him crucified: Hence Ministers are called the Ministers of the New
Testament, 2 Cor. 3. 6. And in another place they are called the Ministers of
Christ, and of righteousness, because they did preach the Gospel in the first
place. So again, Paul when he came to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 15. 3. He
delivered unto them, first of all that which he also received: how that Christ
dyed for our sins, according to the Scriptures, which was plain and pure
Gospel. So again, Paul and Sylus, upon the first question propounded unto them
by the keeper of the prison, Acts 16. 31. They exhort and teach him to believe
in the Lord Jesus Christ; and good reason, because believing was to be taught
before doing, Heb. 11. 6. Tit. 3. 8. without faith it is impossible to please
God: and those that had believed in Christ, should be careful to maintain good
works. So again, Peter in Act. 2. before he spoke of the Jews crucifying of
Christ, he did preach the free and blessed Gospel to them.

Object. 1. But I have heard some of our brethren of the Presbyterian
Congregations object against this truth, and say, how can men come to see the
want and need of Christ, if the Law be not first preached?

Answ. It is supposed that all men do look upon themselves as sinners, and
acknowledge themselves to be sinners, although they have not such a particular
and sensible conviction the^eof, and so the work of the Minister is not so much
to show men the need of Christ first, but rather the love of God in giving
Christ, John 3. 16. and to show and set forth the riches of Christ's grace to
sinners in general, Romans 5. 8.

Object. 2. But is it not the first work of the Spirit to convince men of sin?
John 16. 8.

Answ. By sin in that place is meant the sin of unbelief. Of sin, says he,
because they believe not on me, ver. 9. and this sin is not convicted by the
Law; For that which does not command Faith, cannot discover the sin of
unbelief; or else consider, the Gospel was preached to these people before, and
they would not believe nor embrace that Gospel, but continue under the Law, and
so the Law is to be preached to them.

Object. 3. If the Law be not to be preached first, when and to whom is the Law
to be preached?

Answ. 1. The Law is to be preached after the Gospel, unto such as do not
embrace the Gospel, and yet justify themselves, as the Jews did, and that
think by their misunderstanding the Law, that they keep the Law; thus Christ
did preach the Law, Mat. 5. from 21. to the end.

2. The Law is to be preached to those that would make it void, and null, and
of no effect.

3. The Law is to be preached, and taught unto men after they do believe, so
far as it does teach Believers their duty toward God and Christ, and their
neighbor; but the duties and commands of the Law are not ^o be urged to
Christians upon any other ground, th^n upon that ground which Christ himself
did urge them. John 14. 15. If ye love me, keep my commandment* Titus 3. 8.
These things I will that thou affirm constantly, that they that have believed
in Christ, be careful to maintain good works. Much more might be said to prove
this point.

How the Gift of preaching may be obtained.
SUrely it is the Lords work to furnish and enable a soul to this great work, 2
Cor. 3. 5, 6. not that we are sufficient of our selves, but our sufficiency is
of God, who has made us able ministers of the New Testament; So again, Ephesians. 1.
1. Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God. Gal. 1. 11, 12. But I
certify you Brethren, that the Gospel which was preached of me is not after
man, for I neither received it of man, neither was I taught it, but by the
Revelation of Jesus Christ. Now the Lord does hand forth this gift to his
servants many times in use of means. First prayer. Secondly reading the
Scriptures. 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and
is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction, that
the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto every good work.
Thirdly meditation, 1 Timothy 4. 15. Meditate upon these things, give thy self
wholly to them, that thy profiting may appear to all. The fourth and last means
to be used to attain this gift, is studying, 2 Timothy 2. 15. Study to show thy
self approved unto God, a workman that needs not to be ashamed; but be sure
that thou do study more Scripture mysteries then humane Histories.

1. In each text consider the coherence, occasion, circumstance, and order of
the words.

2. Consider the denomination of the text, as whether it be a Precept,
Exhortation, Threatening, Promise, Petition, Deprecation, Similitude, Parable,
etc. and that to be insisted upon only, which is most agreeable to the
principal immediate scope of the holy Ghost in that text, then you are to
consider of the method, that so you may teach clearly, convict strongly, and
persuade powerfully, and that you may so do, consider the chief parts of a
Sermon are these three.

1. Explication. 2. Confirmation. 3. Application. Each of these may be further
branched and subdivided: Then come to the dividing of the Text, and there be
not too curious (for it must not be divided) needless or obscure. From the
division of the words, come to the Doctrines which must be deduced from it,
clearing their inferences, showing their latitude according to their several
branches and degrees; then come to the confirmation by positive proofs from
Scripture; the text being divided, and the doctrines raised, then you come to
the reasons, which should be such as may tend to convince the judgment; the
particular heads from whence the reasons are deduceable, are these.

1. The Necessity 2. The Equity
Which are capable of many subordinate branches.

Then come to application, which is either,

1. Doctrinal, for our information: or, 2. Practical, for examination, by marks
or signs, which are either Effects, or Properties.

Doctrinal application is for our information, being a use of information, and
here those Logical directions may be useful concerning the collecting,

1. Of a general from a special, Romans 4. 3, 4. 2. Of the less from the greater,
as John 10. 25. Romans 8. 32. 3. The greater from the less, as 1 Cor. 9. 9, 10.
4. The effect from the cause, as Heb 2. 8. 5. The cause from the effect, John
6. 45.
2. Practical application does consist in correcting of manners, commonly
styled a use of reproof, terror or dehortation, to dissuade men from any sinful
course; but herein you must endeavor to distinguish between sins of infirmity,
and sins of wilfulness, and accordingly proportion the severity of your
reproofs; in all which you must express, rather your love then your anger, and
strive rather to convince, then to exasperate, so that it be the zeal of a
displeased friend, rather then the bitterness of a provoked enemy, that it
might appear that it proceeds from your love and care of their welfare, and
that there is a necessity of insisting upon it, both from your duty and their
danger; the proper heads for amplification of this use are twofold.

1. Disswasive. 2. Directive.
1. Disswasive, may have these three heads.

1. The aggravation of the sin. 2. The threats denounced against it. 3. The
judgments executed upon it.
All which are further capable of many other subordinate branches of
Amplification.

2. The directive part does either consist in the removing the impediments that
do hinder, or in the use, or means, and helps, whereby we may be directed to
the remedy.

Then also there is a use of confutation, and that is for the refuting of
erroneous positions, and Solution of such doubts and queries as are most
obvious, and material; and here you must be careful that you manage this with,

1. Solid pressing arguments, making your answers as clear as the objection,
lest you confirm the error by darkning counsel with words without knowledge.

2. This must be done with much meekness and Lenity in differences not
fundamental, 2 Timothy 2. 25. Soft words and hard Arguments are the most effectual
way to convince.

Then there is a use of consolation, and that is to apply the comforts that do
arise from any Doctrine to the receivers, and embracers and retainners, and
practicers thereof; now consolation does arise from either promises,
experiences, or from the removing of scruples, by which the thoughts of the
hearers are raised from sense to Faith, from present things to future.

Then there is also a use of exhortation; this also may be amplified by
motives, to intcie the affections from either,

The profit or danger in obeying or not obeying.

If any desire further direction herein, let them seriously consider these
particulars.

1. The Preface. 2. The Method. 3. The Matter. 4. The Expression.
1. The Preface; in which it is the duty of all Gospel Ministers, to persuade
the hearers it is the word of God that you speak to them, which concerns their
everlasting happiness, and is able to save their souls, and that you the
speakers do but stand in Christ's stead as his Ambassadors and mouth to you; and
that the peoples despising them is no less then the despising Christ, Jam. 1.
21. 2 Cor. 5. 20. Luke 10. 16. 1 Timothy 4. 8. which being believed, it will make
the hearers,

1. Favorable. 2. Teachable. 3. Attentive.
2. The next thing to be considered, is the Method; now Method is an art or
gift, in contriving the discourse in such a regular frame, wherein every part
may have its due place and dependence, which will be a great advantage both to
the preacher and hearers, viz. A man may more easily retain them, when they are
linked together, and not scattered; Method being as a chain, in which if a man
should let slip any one part, he may easily recover it again, by that relation
and dependence which it has with the whole; the Method which many do think is
most useful, is that of Doctrine and Use, and Explication, and Application;
Allegorical interpretations may lawfully be used, observing these three
qualifications.

1. Use them sparingly and soberly. 2. They must be short and pertinent, not
forced and far fetched. 3. Use them rather for illustration then proof.
But here you must be careful that you do not let Hagar the hand maid,
out-brave her Mistress Sarah, and that you do not prefer blear-eyed Leah before
beautiful Rachel, and so stuff a Sermon with cytations of Authors, and the
witty sayings of others; but this is to make a feast of Vinegar and Pepper,
which is useful, as sawces, but must needs be improper and offensive, to be fed
upon as diet.

3. The next thing to be considered, and that is the matter, in which there is
two things to be considered.

1. The seasonableness of it, to the time and people. 2. The pertinency of it,
to the text.
1. The seasonableness of it to the time and people, and for your help herein
consider,

1. Who you are to speak to, whether to the ignorant or knowing.

2. Whether enemies to Religion, or professors of it.

3. Whether they be merely formal, or truly spiritual.

4. Whether more cheerful and zealous, or more cold and sluggish. That so you
may rightly divide the word of truth, and give to every one his portion, and
prophecy according to the analogy of Faith, Romans 12. 6.

And keep to the form of sound words, 2 Timothy 1. 13. And that you do this
according to the mind of the Holy Ghost, Peter tells you, 2 Pet. 1. 20. That you
must not make the Scripture speak in a private sense, that is, you must not
analize, and interpret them so, as if the prophesies thereof did relate only to
the particular occasion and circumstances of times, of places, and of persons
in, by, and to whom they were at first spoken, so much to the Preface, Method
and Matter: the last help unto preaching is the Expression, in which there be
two things considerable.

1. The Phrase. 2. The Elocution.
1. The Phrase should be plain, full, wholesome, and effectual, and natural to
the text; the greatest learning is to be seen in the greatest plainness. Saint
Paul does often glory in this, that his preaching was not in wisdom of words,
and excellency of speech, not with enticing words of man's wisdom, not as
pleasing men but God, who tries the heart: what shall I say more?

1. He must speak according to the mind of God in Scriptures, Isa. 8. 20.

2. He must speak to exhortation, edification and comfort, 1 Cor. 14. 3.

3. He must speak nothing but that which he has been taught of God, Romans 15.
18.

4. He must speak as an Oracle of God, 1 Pet. 4. 11.

2. In the Elocution there are two extremities to be avoided.

1. Too much boldness. 2. Too much fear.
1. Too much boldness: as a remedy against this, consider the special presence
of God and Angels; the solemn dignity of these sacred Mysteries, the weighty
business of saving souls, and who is sufficient for these things, 2 Cor. 2. 16.

2. Against too much fear; consider it does become the business you are about,
for you should speak the word with boldness, Acts 4. 29. God has promised his
assistance, that his strength shall appear in your weakness: Again, consider
tim erousness in the speaker will much hinder the efficacy and power of the
word on the hearers, so that the most proper manner of Elocution is with
Modesty and Gravity. I have dwelt longer upon this point then I intended, I
proceed to the next.

Whether the Minister may receive money or wages for preaching, yea or no.
AS the ministry of the Gospel is an ordinance of God: So has the same God
ordained that they that preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.
14.

Again we read Gal. 6. 6. that it is the duty of the people so to do, Let him
that is taught in the word, communicate unto him that teaches in all good
things, Luke 10. 7. for the labourer is worthy of his hire. 2 Cor. 11. 8. I
robbed other Churches, taking wages of them to do you service; 1 Cor. 9. 9. For
it is written in the Law of Moses, thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the ox,
that treads out the Corn: does God take care for oxen, ver. 10. Or says he
it altogether for our sakes? for our sakes no doubt this is written, ver. 11.
if we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great thing if we shall reap
your carnal things?

I shall answer some objections, and present a few cautions, and so close up
this point.

Object. But we read of the Apostles, or at least some of them, that they did
preach the Gospel of Christ freely, as appears, 1 These. 2. 9. and 2. Cor. 11. 7.

Answ. Let the reader consider these two things in answer to this objection.

1. That the Apostle does reckon it an abusing of his power: 2 Cor. 11. 7.

2. He put his laboring with his own hands among his afflictions, 1 Cor. 4. 12.

3. He did not want a power to command them to maintain him, 2 These. 3. 8, 9*

For there was a commission from the Lord, as well to live of the Gospel, as to
preach the Gospel: which no man can deny, unless he deny the Scripture to be
his Rule, or else remain ignorant in that rule.

But withal take these cautions? a Gospel maintenance by the Lord appointed,
is for none but a Gospel Ministry, plants of his own planting, the other plants
are to be plucked up: then also this maintenance must be collected in a Gospel
way, not by Tithes, and commencing suits at Law, and taking away their goods by
violence, etc.

There are some of our national ministers, that have need to be better taught,
before they be better: fed if any make hire or wages, the end of their work,
they are hirelings, not Gospel ministers.

Of Attentive Hearing.
WE have heard what is the duty of the preachers; now let us see what is the
duty of the hearers: the same God that Commands his Ministers to speak as an
oracle of God unto edifitation* exhortation and comfort: commands us that are
hearers to hearken to his voice in them, and to attend upon the same without
distraction: whiles the Minister is speaking, let us be searching the
Scriptures, to see if those things be so, yea or no.

1. We are to endeavor to understand what we hear. 2. To believe what we
understand. 3. To treasure up and keep in memory that we do believe. 4. To
practice what we keep in memory. 5. To communicate to others, what God has
taught us.
It is not enough that the word be rightly preached and dispensed, unless it be
rightly heard and received; some there be that are all ear, all for hearing, no
thing for practicing; others there be that are all tongue, all for speaking;
others are all eye, all for searching and enquiring; others are all hand, all
for receiving, nothing for communicating, and no marvil then that we hear so
many Sermons to so little purpose: let us seriously consider these three
Scriptrues, Prove. 1. 24, 28. Because I have called, and ye refused, ye shall
ball upon me and I will not answer you, Mich. 3. 4. As you have behaved your
selves to me so will I to you, you shall cry unto me but I will not hear you,
Zach. 7. 13. Therefore it is come to pass, that as he cried, and they would not
hear, so they cried and I would not hear them, says the Lord of Hosts.

What shall I say more; by attentive hearing our Judgments come to be
informed, and the corruptions of our hearts discovered, James 1. 23, 24.

Nay that precious grace of Faith comes by hearing, Romans 10. 17. Acts 13. 48.
E^h. 1. 13.

1. Then let us take heed how we do hear. Luke 8. 18. 2. Take heed what we do
hear, Mark 4. 24. 3. Let us take heed whom we do hear, Jer. 27. 9. Compared
with John 10. 27.
How to remember what is preached.
1. BE well acquainted with the principles of religion, and of the Scriptures,
by frequent Reading of them.

2. Be much in conferring with experienced Christians about the ordinances of
God, and duties of Christians.

3. Be well acquainted with the method of preaching; and for that there is
three Rules.

1. Hear several men. 2. Hear frequently. 3. Read now and then some Sermon
books.
4. Eat sparingly, and drink moderately, and so f^ame thy mind to these ensuing
things.

1. Consider the text with its parts. 2. The doctrines with its proofs. 3. The
reasons and grounds, for demonstration and confirmation. 4. The uses and
applicacion: these things being considered, there are six thing to be
practiced. 1. In hearing, Sit or stand all the time without moving as little as
you can. 2. Keep your eye from staring about, look intently either upon the
Minister, or some other thing. 3. Keep your ear all the time very attentive to
what is delivered, as if thou were to hear for thy life, for so thou art. 4.
Call home thy wandering mind, and keep it close to what you hear. 5. Repeat the
first principal heads to your self twice or thrice, and the rest successively.
6. Sermon being ended, repeat to your self at large, and beware of charging
your memory with worldly businesses, and daily exercise your memory to retain
some things, for custom is a second nature, and use makes masterdome.

A Rule to try all Doctrines by.
THE Scripture is the standard by which we are to try all Doctrines by, it is
the touchstone or test, therefore we should maintain no opinion stiffly, till we
have tried it thoroughly.

1. Whatsoever doctrine does advance the will of God as well as the grace of
God; which does teach us what we should do for him, as well as what he has
done for us, that Doctrine is true.

2. That doctrine that does advance all the Attributes of God, the justice of
God as well as the mercy of God, the holiness of God, as well as the grace of
God; which does teach us piety toward God, and Charity toward men, according
to Scripture rule, that doctrine is true.

3. That doctrine that does teach us to bottom upon Christ alone for Salvation,
and not upon our own works or qualifications, that must needs be true.

4. That doctrine that tends to the informing of the judgment, and reforming
the heart, and conform the life to the whole will of God, that doctrine is true
and good.

5. That doctrine that does lead out by the footsteps of the Flock to teach us
to have respect to all the ordinancesto seek for, and to keep all the commands
of God, that doctrine is true, 1 Chronicles. 28. 8.

Of Prayer and Supplication, another standing ordinance of the Gospel.
1. OF the nature of it, what it is. 2. Whom we must pray to. 3. For whom we
are to pray. 4. What extraordinary prayer is. 5. The necessity of Prayer. 6.
The posture to be used in Prayer. 7. The place where we are to pray. 8. The
time in which we are to pray. 9. Motives to encourage us to pray. 10. Means to
be used to obtain the Gift of Prayer. 11. Hindrances of Prayer. 12. Several
sorts of prayer, never answered. 13. How many ways does the Lord answer
Prayers.
1. Of the nature of it, what Prayer is.

Prayer is a speaking to God face to face, wherein we speak to him in Faith,
Humility, Sincerity and Fervencie of Spirit; it is Jacobs Ladder, by which a
soul climbs up to Heaven, and it is Noah's dove that goes forth and returns not
till it brings an answer of peace. Or prayer is a calling upon God alone in the
name of Christ by the help of the Holy Ghost, or it is the earnest request of
an humble and sanctified Heart, together with thanksgiving, in behalf of our
selves and others, with assurance to be heard in what we pray for, according to
the will of God, Phil. 4. 6. Romans 8. 26. Psalm. 50. 15. Ephesians. 6. 18. 1 John 5.
14. James 1. 6. Or Prayer is a Familiar speech with God in the name of Christ,
1 John 5. 14. Opening the desires of our hearts unto him, and a pouring out of
the heart before him for the things we need, Psalm. 50. 15. Jer. 33. 3. Lam. 2.
19.

Or prayer is a spiritual gift and grace of the holy Ghost, teaching us both
what to pray for, and how to pray, enabling us to pour out our souls unto the
Lord with sighs that cannot be uttered, Psalm. 62. 8. Romans 8. 26. Psalm 145. 18.
the Lord is nigh to all them that call upon him in truth: Heart and tongue must
go together, word and work, lip and life, prayer and practice must echo one to
the other: it is not the greatness of the voice, nor the multitude of words,
nor the sweetness of the tone, nor the studied notions, nor the Eloquent
expressions, but truth in the inward parts, that is prevalent with God: now the
properties of effectual prayer are these.

1. That we pray understandingly, 1 Cor. 14. 15. I will pray with the Spirit,
and I will pray with Understanding,

2. That we pray earnestly and importunately, James 5. 16. compared with Luke
11. 8.

3. That we pray constantly, Luke 18. 1. Men ought always to pray and not to
faint, See Luke 21. 36. Watch ye therefore and pray always.

4. We should pray in Faith without wavering, James 16.

5. In truth without faining, Psalm. 145. 18. and Psalm. 17. 1.

6. We should pray in humility, without swelling, Luke 18. 13.

7. We should pray in zeal without cooling, Jam. 5. 16.

8. We should pray with resolution to use all good means for the obtaining the
things we pray for, etc. The Heart may pray without the tongue, with fruit and
feeling, 1 Samuel 1. 10. But the tongue without the heart is nothing but vain
babbling.

Whom we are to pray unto.
SUrely we are to pray to God alone, and to none other, for he alone as the
great Searcher of all hearts, hears the voice, and knows the meaning of the
Spirit of Prayer, Psalm 25. 2. Romans 8. 27.

Jehosaphat oppressed by his enemies, to whom goes he to complain? to none but
unto God, 2 Chronicles. 20. 12. To whom went David to complain of the bitter words
of Cush the Benjamite? to none but unto God, Psalm 7. 1. O Lord my God in thee
do I put my trust, save me from all them that persecute me, and deliver me, He
alone is able to grant whatsoever we demand; Ephesians. 3. 20. Wherefore seeing he
alone hears all prayers, heals all Sinners, knows all Suitors, Jer. 31. 18. 2 Chronicles. 7. 14. 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. Psalm. 44. 21. He alone has love enough to pity
all, and power enough to relieve all our wants and necessities; to him alone we
are to pray, and to none other, Mat. 11. 28. Thus we must pray only to God, in
the only name, and for the only sake of his Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, the
alone Mediator between God and man, 1 Timothy 2. 5.

For whom we are to pray.
FIrst, for all men, 1 Timothy 2. 1. even our enemies, Mat. 5. 44. because they
bare the common Image of God, Jam. 3. 9.

So that we are to pray for all sorts and degrees of men, especially public
persons, as rulers and such as are in Authority, 1 Timothy 2. 2. and for Ministers
that watch over our souls, Ephesians. 6. 19. Col. 4. 3.

So also we are to pray for our selves, us and ours, for all things that we
want, either for soul or body, that does concern our being, or well being.

And if we be not answered at the present, or in the same kind that we desire,
2 Cor. 12. 9. yet sooner or latter we are sure to receive, even above that we
are able either to ask or think, if we continue with constancy, patience, and
importunity, to seek unto him according to his will, Luke 11. 5. and 18. 1. 1
John 5. 14. And that we ought to pray for others, will yet further appear by
this, viz. Abraham prayed for Abimelech, Genesis 20. 17. Jacob for his sons, Genesis
49. Paul for the people, and they for him, 1 These. 1. 2. this kind of prayer is
called intercession.

What extraordinary prayer is.
EXtraordinary prayer is that which is made upon some special occasion, or
extraordinary accident falling out, felt or feared, upon a whole Nation, City,
Family, or Person; by reason whereof our prayers are both longer, and ferventer
then at other times, Psalm 119. 62. Acts 12. 5. Joel 2. 15. Jonah 3. 6. See
Ezra 9. Dan. 9. and Nehem. 9. In these times of Fasting, or extraordinary
praying, or both, we are most earnestly and fervently to call upon God either
for the obtaining of some singular benefit, or special favor that we stand in
great need of, or for the avoiding of some special punishment, or notable
judgment hanging over our heads, or already fallen upon us, Acts 16. 30, 31,
32. and 14. 23. 2. Chron 20. Joel 1. 2, 12. 16.

There are three things to be considered about this extraordinary prayer.

1. There is something to be considered before we enter upon it.

2. There is something to be considered in this prayer.

3. There is something to be considered after this prayer.

1. Something to be considered before this extraordinary prayer.

1. What our wants are, either for soul or body, our selves or others.

2. What promises we have from God, that he will give us such things.

3. That we agree together, to pray for these things, with one tongue and one
heart, Mat. 18. 19.

4. Let us also for the keeping up our Faith, consider what wonderful things
prayer has done; it has healed the sick, and raised the dead, unloosed
chains, and unlocked prisons, and set the Saints free, Act. 12. 5, 7, 11.

2. There are some things to be considered in prayer, and they are four.

1. That we call upon God in truth of heart, Psalm. 145. 18. Psalm. 17. 1.

2. Beware of drilling out too much time in praying; long prayers oftentimes
deaden others affections: it is good to pray brief and often, as Christ did,
Matthew 26. 39, 42, 44. compared with Mat. 6. 7.

3. When we pray to one in the Trinity, let us mind all three, Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, and sever them not.

4. Let us be very importunate, and earnest, and servent; and that we may do
so, consider the excellency of the things we ask, and the necessity of them,
Romans 15. 30. Psalm. 143. 6. Consider, how did Daniel pray in the Lions den, the
three children in the fiery furnace, Jonah in the Whales belly, and Jeremiah in
the dungeon, and our Savior Christ, when he prayed, and sweat drops of blood?
let us endeavor to pray so, that he may turn our darkness into light, our
deadness into life, our bondage into liberty, and our weakness into strength.

3. And lastly, there be four things to be considered after prayer.

1. Press after what we have prayed for, in the use of all the means for the
accomplishing or obtaining of those things, Prove. 1. 2, 4, 5.

2. Hearken and listen what the Lord does say, as a man that does knock at a
great man's door, he listneth to hear if any body be coming, if not, he knocks
again and again, etc.

3. Expect and wait patiently for a full answer, Psalm. 40. 1. I waited
patiently for the Lord, and he inclined unto me, and heard my cry.

4. Learn wisely to distinguish between delays and denials, and not take a
delay for a denial, Mat. 15. 21. to 29. Christ did delay the woman praying to
him, but not deny her, and at last did give her more then she had asked.
Surely, as prayer is the cry of our hearts, to open all our necessities unto
God, Lam. 2. 19. So it is also the key of the Lords treasury, and to obtain the
mercies from him that we need; so we pray in the name of the Son, by the help
of the Spirit according to his will, with understanding, reverence, humility
and fervency, faith, love, and perseverance.

Of the necessity of praying.
SOme men are very apt to say, it is of no use to pray unto God, seeing he both
knows what we need, either for his glory, or our good, and has determined
what to bestow upon us: but let me tell them that say so, that as God has
foreappointed all necessaries to be given us, so has he also appointed the
means whereby they should be brought to pass, whereof prayer is a chief means,
as appears, Ezekiel 36. 37. compared with Mat. 7. 7.

Prayer is a means to recover our peace, and to nourish our communion with our
God, Dan. 9. Phil. 4. 6, 7. John 17. Surely, such as have least care, and make
least conscience of calling upon God, have least acquaintance and acceptance
with him, Psalm. 14. 4.

Prayer is a Key to open the storehouses of all Gods treasury unto us; as by
knocking we enter into the place we desire to go unto; so by prayer we obtain
those things we need: prayer is as a hook to reach those things that are above
our reach, and to put by those things that stand in our way; in a word, it is
so necessary, as without it, the use and the enjoyment of the things we have is
unlawful, 1 Timothy 4. 5. For as if we take any thing that is our neighbors,
without asking him leave, we are accounted thieves. So to take any thing of
Gods (whose all things are) without asking them at his hand, is felony, Ier.
10. 25. He will pour out his fury upon the families that call not on his Name:
that is, upon those that do not acknowledge the Sovereignty of God, by seeking
unto him in prayer, See Psalm. 79* 6.

The Posture or Gesture to be used in prayer.
WE should use such holy behaviors, and comely gestures of body, as are
beseeming the Majesty of God, with whom we are to deal, and in whose presence
we are, and as becomes so holy an exercise which we have in hand; namely, such
gestures as may best express and increase our reverence, humility, and
fervency, as the bowing of the knees, Ephesians. 3. 41. Lifting up of our hands and
eyes to heaven, Lam. 3. 41. John 17. 1, etc. Which yet are not always or
absolutely necessary, Luke 18. 13. The Publican stood afar off and prayed: the
main thing is to have the heart lifted up to God, Psalm 25. 1. and 143. 8. and
the knees of our hearts bowed before the Lord, Phil. 2. 10. In a word, it is
said that Christ looked up to heaven and prayed, Paul kneeled down; the gesture
should be such as does express the reverence of the heart, and that gesture to
be used in prayer which does most quicken and help the duty. Some gestures
bring dullness, and indiposition, others makes the body more fit for prayer; use
that which does most quicken.

Of the place where we are to pray.
Quest. WHere must we pray?

Answ. Generally in all places, 1 Timothy 2. 8. I will that men pray every where,
lifting up holy han^s without wrath and doubting, for Christ is every where
present before us, Mat. 18. 10 The public place sometimes is most convenient,
sometimes the private, Mat. 6. 6. And sometimes there is the sudden lifting up
of the heart unto God, as occasion is, without gesture in any place or company,
Nehem. 2. 4.

So then prayer may be either public or private, and in both places, either
ordinary or extraordinary, Acts 6. 4. 1 Timothy 2. 12. Acts 10. 4. Jonah 3. 6.

Of the time in which we are to pray.
THe time in which a Christian is to pray, is laid before us, 1 These. 5. 17.
pray continually: So Luke 21. 36. Watch therefore, and pray always, Luke 18.
1. This parable spoke he unto them, that men ought always to pray and not to
faint, either suing for mercies, or waiting for answers, or rendering praise for
mercies received, Psalm. 5. 3. Luke 2. 37.

The motives to encourage us to pray.
PRayer is a jewel of grace bequeathed by Christ unto us, Luke 11. 2. Again, it
is the hand of Faith, the Key of Gods treasury, the souls Solicitor, the hearts
armor-bearer, the minds interpreter, Mat. 7. 7. Ephesians. 6. 18. It procures all
blessings, preventeth all curses, 2 Chronicles. 7. 14. Further, it sanctifies all
creatures that they may do us good, 1 Timothy 4. 5. seasoneth all crosses, that
they can do us no hurt, 2 Cor. 12. 18. Lastly, it keeps the heart in
humility, the life in sobriety; strengthens all graces, overcomes all
corruptions, subdueth all temptations, makes our duties acceptable to God, our
lives profitable unto men, and both life and death comfortable to our selves,
Act. 9. 11. Ephesians. 6. 18. Jude 20. Acts 4. 24. What shall I say more for our
encouragement to pray unto God but only this? consider, and that seriously, the
Lord is never worse, but many times better then his word. Solomon did only ask
in prayer for wisdom. 1 King. 3. 11, 12. And the Lord gave him more wisdom then
he did ask and riches and honor to boot. Again, we read, 1 Samuel 1. Hannah
prayed but for a son, and the Lord gave her a son, and a Prophet too for her
son. Samuel was a great Prophet.

So again, for our encouragement to pray, we read, Genesis 17. That Abraham
prayed, saying, Oh that Ishmael might live before thee, ver. 19. And God said,
Sarah thy wife shall bear thee a son indeed, and thou shall call his name
Isaac, and as for Ishmael, I will answer thy prayer, and make of him a great
Nation, ver. 20.

Again, we read that Jacob prayed, Genesis 28. 19. and said, O Lord, if thou will
give me raiment to put on, and bread to eat, thou shall be my God; and the Lord
gave him all that he desired, and much more, Genesis 32. 10. For with my staff,
said he, came I over this Jordan, but now I am so exceedingly increased in
goods, that I am become two bands. See Genesis 33. 4, 5, 6.

Again, we read, Mat. 18. 24, 26. Of one that was in debt ten thousand talents;
and the money being demanded, the debtor desired but days of payment, and the
Lord forgave him the whole debt, ver. 27.

Shall I crave leave to instance only in one more, then consider that place,
Acts 3. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. A certain man lame from his mothers womb, asked an
alms of Peter and John, and they gave him a mercy above, and beyond what he
asked, yea a mercy to him worth more then the whole world; they healed him of
his lameness, insomuch that he leaped, and rejoiced, and praised God, ver. 8.

The means to be used to obtain the gift of prayer.
FIrst labor to get some true feeling of thy misery, for sense of misery
breeds desires of mercies, Mat. 15. 22. when the soul pants most, the heart
prays best; and increase in knowledge, that the head may guide the heart, 1
Cor. 14. 15. For what we know is worth the having, we will not lose for want of
asking.

Pray for the Spirit of Prayer, which helps and heals our infirmities, and
teaches us both for manner, measure, and matter to lay open all our
necessities, Romans 8. 26. Luke 11. 13.

Of the Lets and hindrances of prayer.
THe sensuality of the men and women living in pleasure, drowning all their
desires in delights, and their prayers in pleasures, 2 Timothy 3. 4. These men are
lovers of pleasure more then lovers of God, and therefore pray not to him.

Another hinderance is, that state of stupidity of worldlings, that think they
have no need of praying, but of carking and caring, toyling and moyling in the
world, Luke 12. 17, 18. Phil. 3. 19. Who mind only earthly things.

Again, roving imaginations, inordinate affections, dullness of spirit, weakness
of Faith, coldness in feeling, faintness in asking, weariness in waiting, too
much passion in our own matters, and too little compassion in other men's
miseries, Mar. 9. 24. Isa. 38. 13, 14.

Several sorts of Prayer never answered.
1. HE that prays and yet regards iniquity in his heart, the Lord will not
hear his prayer, Psalm. 66. 18. If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will
not hear my Prayer.

2. He that prays, and yet hates to be reformed, drawing near with the lips,
but having his heart far from him, Isa. 29. 13.

3. Those that pray and yet turn their ^ars from his precepts: he turns away
his ears from their prayers, Prove. 28. 9.

4 Those that pray and yet continue in unbelief, their prayers shall not be
answered, Jam. 1. 7. letnot that man so much as think he shall receive any
thing from the Lord.

5. Those that pray and yet continue in senseless impiety; so that the cry of
our sins unrepented of drowns the voice of their prayers, Zech. 7. 13.

6. Those that would neither hear nor answer God when he called and cried unto
them, see Prove. 1. 24. 28. Mich. 3. 4.

7. When we either cause or suffer the afflicted to cry without hearing; the
Lord hearing us cry in our afflictions, without helping. Genesis 42. 22.

How many ways does the Lord answer the Prayers of his people.
1. HE does answer many times in giving the very thing we ask, So Solomon did
ask wisdom, and the Lord gave it. So Hanna prayed for a Son, and the Lord gave
her a Son: So also Acts 10. 30, 31. Dan. 9. 19, 20, 21. Acts 12. 13, 14.

2. The Lord does answer the prayers of his people in giving them faith to
believe, and patience to wait the Lords leisure, till he does give the mercy
prayed for, So Heb. 5. 7. 2 Cor. 12. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.

3. The Lord does many times answer our prayers, although he does not give us
the very thing we ask, but a better in the room of it, Genesis 17. 18, 19. Psalm
35. 13.

4. He does answer our prayers many times in giving as full Satisfaction to the
soul, in the absence of the mercy prayed for, as if it had received it: Hab. 2.
3.

Another stanning Ordinance of the Gospel is thanksfiving or Singing of Psalms
and Spiritual Songs making melody to the Lord in our Hearts.
PRaise or thanksgiving is a reverent acknowledgement of his mercies, the heart
being cheared with some taste of his goodness, acknowledges all to come from
his mercies, goodness, wisdom and power, which makes the Soul as in Psalm. 32.
11. to rejoice in the Lord, and to shout for joy, Psalm. 107. 8, 15, 21, 31. O
that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his
wonderful works to the children of men! This is to be done with the Spirit and
with understanding, 1 Cor. 14. 15.

As prayer and petition arises from the feeling of our miseries, so does
praise from feeling of Gods mercy; petition beggeth what we want, and praise
acknowledges what and wheuce we have it: Rev. 15. 3. 1 Chronicles. 29. 12.

1. This puts the Soul upon speaking good of his name to others, Psalm. 40. 9,
10.

2. It puts the Soul upon resolving to bestow all for his honor and service, 1 Chronicles. 29. 2, 3.

This praising of God must be with a single, not with a double heart, Psalm.
145. 18.

This must be done in the best manner, suting his several properties, with
their due Praises, according to the nature of the present blessing, Exodus 15.
2, 3. Psalm 144. 1, 2.

This praise must be continually, as long as we live, as long as his mercy
endures, and our lifelasteth, Psalm. 146. 2. 1 These. 5. 18.

It is a good, comely, and pleasant thing to praise the Lord, Psalm. 147. 1.

It is his will thus to be honored, 1 These. 5. 18.

It is a duty of Saints and Angels both here and hereafter, Luke 2. 13, 14.

It fits the heart for other graces, and provokes the Lord to fresh mercies.

That we may set about this work in good earnest, dwell much upon these things
following.

1. Seriously consider what great things God has done for us, 1 Samuel 12. 24.

2. Rest content with thy allowance and estate wherein he has set thee, Phil.
4. 11.

3. Often compare thy estate with others of Gods Saints who want many things
that we enjoy, and feel many Sorrows which we fear not, Psalm. 147. 20.

4. Be faithful in all talents, and fruitful in all graces, and this will be a
great means to make us praise God for all his mercies: Mat. 25. 13. Phil. 1. 11.

That Singing of Psalms, Hymns, and spiritual Songs is a Gospel-command, which
ought to be performed unto the Lord, and practiced in and by the Church of
Christ, and by every particular believer as occasion requires: by singing I
understand a lifting up of the voice with joy: see 1 Chronicles. 15. 16. Isa. 51. 3.
and 52. 8, 9. and by singing of Psalms, Hymns and Spiritual Songs, a praising
of God, by lifting up of the voice, Psalm. 51. 14. Psalm. 8P. 1. Psalm. 105. 2, 3.
By Psalms I understand the Psalms of David, or such as are contained in the
book of Psalms: By Hymns I* understand Songs of praise unto God, Mat. 26. 30.
Mark 14. 26. Col. 3. 16. By spiritual Songs I understand such songs, the matter
whereof is divine, and Spiritual, and heavenly, Rev. 15. 3. these spiritual
Songs are mentioned also in Ephesians. 5. 19. Col. 3. 16. and were framed at first by
the immediate motion and inspiration of the Spirit of God, upon some special
and extraordinary occasion; that singing is a Gospel-command, or one principal
part of Evangelical Gospel worship, is proved from Paul's injunction thereof
unto the Churches, Ephesians. 5. 19. Col. 3. 16. James* likewise does urge the
practice of it, by way of command, Jam. 5. 13. and we have the example also of
our blessed Savior and his Apostles, Mat. 26. 30. Mar. 14. 26. and of the
Apostles Paul and Silas, Acts 16. 25. That it ought to be practiced in the
Church, I mean the Assembly of the Saints, is evident from that Ephesians. 5. 19.
Col. 3. 16. Where the Apostle exhorts the Church of Ephesus, to speak to
themselves in Psalms, and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs; and the Church at Coloss,
that they teach and admonish one another in Psalms, Himns and spiritual Songs,
singing with grace in their hearts unto the Lord; which were altogether
impossible to be done, if this ordinance or command of the Lord Jesus was not
to be practiced in the Church: and I find the Prophet David exciting and
stirring up the Saints to the practice of this so heavenly an exercise, Psalm.
30. 4. Sing unto the Lord O ye Saints of his, and give thanks at the
remembrance of his holiness; and Psalm 145. 5. Let the Saints be joyful in
glory, let them sing aloud upon their beds; and withal I find several Gospel
prophecies which seem to point out the mutual and joint performance of this
duty, as ^sa. 52. 8. thy watch*men shall lift up the voice, with the voice
together shall they sing; and Psalm. 132. 16. I will also cloth her priests
with Salvation, and her Saints shall shout aloud for joy: and it was prophesied
of our Savior Christ, saying, I will declare thy name unto my brethren, in the
midst of the Church will I sing praise unto thee, Heb. 2. 12. Isa 35. 10. Jer.
31. 12. therefore they shall come and sing in the height of Sion, and shall
flow together to the goodness of the Lord, etc.

That it ought to be practiced by every believer, as occasion requires, and as
the Spirit is drawn forth thereunto, is very evident from Jam. 5. 13. 1 Cor.
14. 15.

That the Psalms of David ought to be sung, will appear by these reasons.

1. Because I find no other Psalms mentioned in the Scriptures, then the Psalms
of David, and such as are contained in that book of Psalms.

2. Because where there is mention of Psalms in the new Testament, either by
Christ or his Apostles, I find that they refer or relate to the Psalms of
David, or that book of Psalms, as may be collected from these (among other)
Scriptures, Luke 20. 42. Luke 24. 44. Acts 1. 20. Acts 13. 33, 35.

3. Because I find contained in the Book of Psalms variety of excellent,
spiritual and heavenly matter, which upon all occasions may draw forth the
souls of the Saints in this way of a holy rejoicing before the Lord.

That our Singing ought to be performed with a cheerful heart, and that they
only ought to sing whose hearts the Lord has made glad, the Scriptures do
evidently declare: Its said in 2 Chronicles 29. 30. That the Levites sang praises
with gladness, Jer. 31. 7. Sing with gladness for Jacob, Isa. 65. 14. Behold my
Servants shall sing for joy of heart, And it is the express rule of the Apostle
James; Is any merry, let him sing Psalms; How shall we sing the Lords Song in a
strange Land, said the captive Jews, who were required to sing when they were
weeping by the rivers of Babylon, and their Spirits overwhelmed with grief?
Psalm. 137. 1, 2, 3, 4.

That our singing ought to be with grace in the heart, is evident from Col. 3.
16. that is I conceive either with a heart full of the sense of Gods pardoning
and justifying grace, or as it is regenerated, renewed and Sanctified by the
spirit of grace; this is the root of all true Spiritual and heavenly rejoicing,
and this has made the Saints to sing aloud for joy, Psalm. 71. 23. my lips
shall greatly rejoice, when I sing unto thee, Psalm. 145. 7. Isa. 12. 2. 35. 2.
And lastly, that our singing ought to be performed with the spirit and
understanding, is very clear from 1 Cor. 14. 15. I will sing with the Spirit,
and I will sing with understanding also; our singing (as all other religious
actions and services) will be very unpleasing and unacceptable unto God, if
they be not carried on in the strength of the Spirit, that is, if they be not
purely, believingly, and affectionately, and understandingly performed.

Some objections I have met with, as to the manner of the performance of this
duty.

Obj. 1. But if it be granted that Psalms, etc. are to be sung, what warrant
have we to sing them in meeter? and if you have no warrant in the word for such
a practice, then is it a mere tradition and invention of men: nothing ought to
be practiced in the worship of God, but what is warranted by the word of God.

Answ. I answer, First, that if the Psalms as they are penned and recorded in
the book of Psalms can be sung so as the Church may be edified, and confusion
avoided, I should judge it an exercise very suitable to the mind of God,
wherein my spirit would very freely concur, provided that such Psalms be sung,
which contain matter of praise unto God: I have been hitherto of opinion that
the Church ought to sing Psalms in such a way as they can be sung by them,
which hitherto has been found to be in the way of meeter, provided that the
putting of them into meeter, does answer, but not obscure and destroy the Sense
and mind of the Holy Ghost as they are left upon record unto us. Now lest the
pleasantness of the voice or tune should more affect the ear, then the
Spirituality and soundness of the matter the heart, the Apostle does caution
them, that they so sing, as that they make melody in their hearts unto the
Lord, that their hearts be affected and ravished as it were with that which
their tongues do utter before the Lord; this is that singing with grace in our
hearts, Col. 3. 16. If we are offended with meeter, because there will be some
variation, or change of words from what they are in the Psalms, upon record,
though they agree never so much with the sense of the Spirit of God in them,
then may we also be offended with our Bibles, and lay them aside, because one
Bible differs from another very much in the translation, as we may find if we
compare one reading with another; and yet duly weighed and considered, the
sense is the same, and the mind of the Holy Ghost may be understood in either.

Ob. But singing of Psalms and Hymns, must be by an immediate gift of the
Spirit, as may be gathered from, 1 Cor. 14. 26, etc. to sing a Psalm or hymn,
already penned, savoureth too much of formality, and customariness, which ought
to be avoided in the Church of God.

Answ. That in 1 Cor. 14. is a reprehension of some disorders amongst them in
the worship of God, and proves nothing at all, that the singing of a Psalm or
hymn must be by an immediate gift of the Spirit, extemporary and without
forethought or premeditation at all. How is it then brethren, when you come
together, every one of you has a Psalm, has a Doctrine? etc. One having made
choice of a Psalm he would sing, another he would declare a Doctrine, and that
at the same time, in much confusion and disorder, to the disturbance of the
Churches peace, therefore he reprehends them for so doing, and cautions them
also, that all things be done to edifying; but we must be sure the Psalm or
Hymn, for the matter, is suitable to the state and condition of the Church, and
that there be a sutableness in our spirits to utter it before the Lord, etc.

Of the Ordinance of Baptism, another standing Ordinance of the Gospel.
THat Baptism with water is an Ordinance still in force, is so plain and
clearly held forth in the Scriptures, that I hear none deny it, unless it be
the erroneous Quaker, and the voluptuous Ranter, together with a few new
upstart wantons, that cast Gods Ordinances behind their backs.

I shall reduce all I have to say to this Ordinance of God, to these two heads.

1. We shall speak something to the essence of this Ordinance. 2. To the
exercise of it.
1. To the essence of it; the Ordinances of the Gospel, whereof this of Baptism
is one, does not differ from the Ordinances of the Old Testament, in respect of
the Author, which is the same God, the substance Christ, the receivers the
people of God, which are in both the same, but of continuance, evidence, and
easy performance and efficacy; in all these the Ordinances of the New
Testament have the greater pre-eminence, 2 Cor. 3. 9.

This Ordinance of Baptism was brought into the Church at the command of God,
John 1. 33. by the Ministry of John, therefore called his Baptist, Mat. 3. 1.
afterward this Ordinance was sanctified and confirmed by our Savior Christ
himself, being Baptized by John, Mat. 3. 13. and after all this, he gave
commission to his Apostles and Ministers to continue the same in his Church
unto the end, Mat. 28. 18. Mark 16. 15, 16. That the washing of the body by
water is essential to this Ordinance, will appear Ephesians. 5. 26. and that the
party be Baptized in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Mat. 28. 19.

2. The exercise of Baptism is abundantly held forth to us in the Scriptures of
truth, where we have example one upon another.

As there is first our birth in Christ, and secondly our nourishment after we
are born; so the Lord has appointed two seals, or two confirming Ordinances;
the one sealing our regeneration, entrance, and ingrafting into Christ, the
other sealing our perseverance and growth in Christ; as in the bodily life we
see that we need no more but to be born, and then to have this life preserved:
the Ordinance of Baptism seals the first, and the Lords Supper the second; so
then Baptism is an Ordinance of the New Testament, by the washing of water,
Ephesians. 5. 26 representing the powerful washing of the blood of Christ, 1 Cor.
6. 11. Heb. 10. 22. and so sealing our regeneration, or new birth, and entrance
into the Covenant of grace, and our ingrafting into Christ, and into the body
of his Church, John 3. 5. Tit. 3. 5. Act. 8. 27.

Here let the Reader take notice of the similitudes between the sign, and thing
signified.

1. Water is a necessary element, the natural life of man cannot be without it,
and the blood of Christ is as necessary to the spiritual life of the soul.

2. Water is a comfortable element, the thirst of the body cannot be quenched
but by water. So the thirst of the soul cannot be quenched but by the blood of
Christ, Joh. 4. 13.

3. As water is necessary and useful, so it is a free element, a cheap element,
easy to come by without cost, so is the blood of Christ, Isa. 55. 1. O he that
thirsts, come and drink freely.

4. As it is necessary, useful, and comfortable, and free, so it is a common
element* none are barred from it, any may go to the river and drink. So the
blood of Christ is offered to all, rich and poor, high and low, none can say I
am shut out or excepted against.

5. Water is copious and plentiful, there is no less in the river for thy
drinking, there is enough for all men. So is the blood of Christ, it can never
be drawn dry of his fullness. we may all receive, yet he never the more empty,
John 1. 16.

6. Water is a cleansing and purifying element, and it resembles the blood of
Christ fitly in that, 1 John 1. 7. The blood of Christ cleanses from us all
sin.

The inward thing signified, is many times really exhibited, and coveyed and
sealed in the use of the outward: hence are those expressions in Scripture, of
being born again of water, and of the Holy Ghost, John 3. 5. of cleansing by
the washing of water, Ephesians. 5. 29. So again, arise and be baptized, and wash
away thy sins, Acts 22. 16. so Romans 6. 3. we are buried with Christ by Baptism
Surely the Ordinance of Baptism, being rightly administered, and rightly
received, does effect that which it does represent.

We should know that confirming Ordinances, Sacraments or seals, properly do
not give us any right unto God and his Christ, and promises, but only seal up
and confirm that right and interest which already we have in Gods Covenant of
Grace: God promised to Father Adam life, and then he gave him the tree of life,
to be a pledge of his promise: now it was not the tree of life, that gave Adam
life, but God according to his promise. Adam might have lived upon God in the
promise without the tree, for the tree could do him no good without the
promise. Thus God promised Christ, and his benefits to the believing
generation, and then he gave Baptism to seal these promises. So then it is not
Baptism that saves us, but the promises; it is not water that purges our sins,
but the blood of the Covenant; what shall I say more? where God is pleased to
dispense his seals they are great comforts, and pledges of his love, and where
he denies means and opportunity of enjoying the signs, the things signified are
never the further off, or less effectual: David's child died the seventh day, a
day before the time appointed for circumcision: and yet both his words and his
carriage gives us to understand that he doubted not of the salvation of it. So
the thief upon the cross, believing in Christ, was received with Christ into
Paradise, though he were never baptized; but he had the inward grace of
baptism, the washing of the blood of Christ, though not the outward sign; some
have the outward sign, and not the inward grace, some have the inward grace,
and not the outward sign: when God affords means, we must wait upon him for a
blessing in them, and by them, as his pipes of conveyance: and when he does not
afford means, we should not tie the working of his grace to them.

These things seriously considered, may make any man admire why there should be
so great contention, jarring, and wrangling about the time when, and the
persons to whom, and the manner how this Ordinance is to be administered: are
not the Scriptures as clear in laying down this, as they are in confirming the
Ordinance it self? now the Scripture being the rule, we are to look for a
precept for what we do, otherwise the Lord will say, who has required these
things at your hands? and in the want of a precept, we are to walk by example,
so says the Apostle, ye ought so to walk as ye have us for an example: in the
want of a precept and example, necessary directions, inferences and
consequences may be made use of, as I might prove at large; but beware of
drawing any of these against a plain precept and example. Now give me leave to
present a few of those precepts and examples, recorded in the Scripture, for
the baptizing of a believer, and when the reader has answered these few, I
shall give him so many more for ought I know.

1. For precept, consider these three Scriptures, Acts 2. 38. Then Peter said
unto them, repent and be baptized every one of you, etc. Acts 10. 48. And he
commanded them to be baptized in the name of the Lord. Acts 22. 16. And now why
tarriest thou, arise and be baptized, and wash away thy sins.

Now here being three precepts for the baptizing of believers, can any man
forbid water, that these should not be baptized, which have received the Holy
Ghost as well as we? Acts 10. 47.

2. For example, consider these three examples, Mat. 3. 13, 14, 15. Then comes
Jesus to John to be baptized, ver. 16. and Jesus when he was baptized, went up
straight way out of the water, and lo the heavens were opened unto him, etc.
Acts 2. 41. Then they that gladly received the word, were baptized, etc. Acts
8. 12. They were baptized both men and women, etc.

Behold, here is both precept and example for baptizing of believers, and that
in the mouth of two or three witnesses (and yet shall not every word be
established?) Show me the like for baptizing of children, and I will write a
book of recantation, and acknowledge my error both to God and man: But I am
sure thou can not do it, without thou will make a new Scripture, or grossly
pervert this.

Let the Reader beware at last, that he be not found amongst the number of
those spoken of, Luke 7. 30. But the Pharisees and Lawyers rejected the counsel
of God against themselves, being not bapeized.

That Baptism is an Ordinance of the Gospel, and that only believers has right
unto it, has been proved: now I shall lay down a few reasons why children
ought not to be baptized.

1. Because we find no command nor example in the word of God, that any Infants
were baptized, and we are forbidden to presume above what is written; and
further, if we should admit of any one thing in the worship of God, which we
find no warrant for in the word of God, we should be forced by the same reason
to admit of many, yea of any inventions of men.

2. As an ^nfant is incapable of examining himself, and of discerning the Lords
body, and therefore not admitted to that Ordinance, so also he is incapable of
believing and discerning the use and end of this Ordinance, for there are many
things about which Faith is to be exercised by him that is baptized. I will
instance in five.

1. To exercise Faith in the blood of Christ for the washing away of sins, See
Acts 2. 38. compared with Acts 22. 16. Arise and be baptized, and wash away thy
sins, calling on the name of the Lord

2. Special things held forth in this Ordinance, that a child is not capable of
discerning, is the Mystical mortification of sin, Romans 6. 3. Know you not that
so many of us that were baptized into Jesus Christ, were baptized into his
death, ver. 6. knowing this, that our old man is crucified with him, that the
body of sin might be destroyed, etc.

3. Another thing held forth to us in this Ordinance, is the rising again unto
newness of life, Romans 6 4. Therefore we are buried with him by Eaptism, verse
5. For if we have been planted together in the likeness of his death, we shall
be raised in the likeness of his resurrection.

4. Another thing held forth in this Ordinance, is the Baptism of the Spirit,
Act. 2. 38. compared with Act. 11. 16.

5. Another thing held forth in this blessed Ordinance, is the resurrection of
the body, See Col. 7. 12. Romans 6. 5, 8.

I suppose the Reader will grant that a child is not capable of apprehending,
believing and applying these and the like things held forth in this Ordinance,
and that God requires that such as are baptized, should first believe, Mat. 28.
19. Act. 8. 12, 13, 36, 37, 38. Mat. 3. 6. Act. 10. 47, 48.

But because this controversy is handled at large in other treatises, such as
desire further satisfaction may have recourse to them.

Now, what art thou doing O man that call me and others Anabaptists? for our
obedience to God in this blessed Ordinance, whilst thou art rejecting his
counsel? if thou say, was not I baptized heretofore? I answer, if I were
baptized with Godfathers and Godmothers, Common prayer book, Cross and
Surpliss, and by a Minister made by the Bishops, all which are voted down, as
Antichristian, and the manner of that Baptism was also by sprinkling water upon
my face, concerning which the Scripture is silent, how may I be assured God
will own such a Baptism for his Ordinance? Blame me not then if I endeavor to
follow Christ herein, who was baptized when he came to years, and commands me
so to walk, as I have him for an example, 1 John 2. 6. compared with Mat. 3.
15, 16. I shall close up all that I have to say at this time to this Ordinance
with two words of advice, the one to those that own Baptism according to the
Scripture Rule, when people are capable of it; the other to those that rail,
mock, and deride the people that are baptized, calling them Anabaptists.

1. You that have taken up this Ordinance, beware of laying a greater stress
upon it, then ever God appointed you, viz. it was never appointed to break
love, and Communion, and to quench the Spirit, and to justle out some other
Ordinances, nor to shut out the weak in the Faith, nor to put them upon
doubtful disputations; my brethren, let me tell you, I have rather chosen to
weep it out before the Lord in my closset, then to publish to the world* what I
have heard and seen amongst you; what? know you not that all Christians are one
in Christ, and partakers of one Spirit, promises, graces, and have right to all
Privileges? what? know you not that all Saints are fellow members,
fellow soldiers, fellow-travellers, coheirs, fellow sufferers, and
fellow-Citizens, having the same father, being clothed with the same robe,
ruled by the same word, inclined to the same work? will you shut out those that
God has received, and stop the mouth that God has opened, and refuse
communion with those that have fellowship with the Father, and the Son, and
that are faithful to what they know? are all blind that does not see by your
eyes?

2. You that so exceedingly cry up Baptism of Infants, and cry down all
baptizing of believers. Let me tell you, that through prejudice, weakness and
blindness, you cry up that which you have neither precept nor example for in
all the book of God, and cry down that which there is precept upon precept for,
and example upon example: I even tremble to think what a sad account you will
give to God for this one day: if you say you can prove the baptism of Infants
by necessary Deductions from Scripture, and Inferences, and Consequences, then
let me ask you how you durst to make use of any of these to cross plain
precepts and examples.

Of the Lords Supper, or breaking of bread: another standing Ordinance of the
Gospel.
1. OF the Lords Supper, what it is. 2. Wherein Baptism does differ from it. 3.
Preparations to the Lords table required. 4. The actions of the Administrator
of this Ordinance. 5. The actions of the receiver, and duty in receiving. 6.
Who they are that may partake of this Ordinance. 7. The ends and uses of the
Lords Supper. 8. The duties to be performed after receiving.
First, of the Lords Supper, what it is.
IT is a sealing or confirming Ordinance of the Gospel, wherein by the outward
elements of bread and wine, sanctified by the word and prayer, and exhibited by
the Minister, and rightly received by the communicant, assurance is given to
those that are ingrafted into Christ, of their continuance in him, and relation
to him, receiving nourishment by him unto eternal life: or it is a second
confirming Ordinance of the New Testament, wherein God, by the signs of bread
and wine, signifies, seals and offers to every faithful receiver, the body
and blood of Christ for his spiritual nourishment and growth in Christ; and so
confirms him in the Covenant of grace.

The matter of the Lords Supper is partly outward, as bread and wine, and
partly inward, as the body and blood of Christ: those outward elements
signifying Christ, and him crucified, with all the benefits of his death,
passion, even whole Christ, with all the fruits of his mediation, Mat. 26. 26,
27. 1 Cor. 11. 24, 25.

Wherein does Baptism differ from the Lords Supper, seeing they are both
confirming Ordinances.
IN regard of the thing signified, Baptism, as has been said, is a seal of our
entrance into the Church of God: the Supper of the Lord is a seal of our
continuance in the same; the one of our new birth, the other of our spiritual
growth; the former is ordained to this end, that being out of Christ by nature,
we being born again, might now be ingrafted into his body, Tit. 3. 5. Joh. 3.
5. the latter, that being in Christ by grace, we might continue and increase in
him, 1 Cor. 10. 16. and 11. 23. 1 Pet. 3. 21.

The Supper of the Lord is to be received as often as he shall give occasion:
Baptism but once, for there is but one entrance into Christ, but many degrees
of growth up in him.

Of the Preparation to the Lords table.
THere ought to be a careful preparation before the action, and great heed in
the whole action, and a joyful and thankful close and shutting up of it; all
which ought to be performed as well by the minister as the people.

1. Let there be a due search and trial of our own souls, whether we can find
in our selves the things which God does require in worthy communicants, viz. 1.
by examining our wisdom and knowledge, both of Gods will in general, and of the
nature and use of this holy ordinance in particular; whether we can give a
reason of the representation of Christ in the bread and wine, and see our need
of it, and what we may benefit by it: So also we should examine our Faith, 2
Cor. 13. 5. 1 Timothy 1. 15. and repentance, Heb. 10. 22. James 4. 8. and see
whether this to us be attended with the love of God, Zach. 12. 10. and of our
Brethren, 1 Cor. 16. 4. and a fervent praying for a blessing upon this
ordinance of God, Mat. 26. 26.

In thy preparation look much upon thy unworthiness, as first the wickedness of
thy nature, ready to all evil, and backward to all that is good. Secondly,
consider thy blindness of mind, sleepiness of memory, hard heart, and stubborn
will, unholy affections.

Consider if thou wast cursed in the womb, born a child of wrath, what art thou
now having lived so long in Sin, but the child of hell far more then thou wast
before, Psalm. 58. 3. Job 20. 11. If for one sin a^l the curses of the Law do
lie upon thee: as Gal. 3. 10. James 2. 10. What is due to thee for all thy
sins? if single sins deserve death, what do thy double and treble sins deserve?
consider thy rebellious backsliding sins against knowledge, conscience,
covenants, purposes, promises, protestations; do not all these deserve double
and deeper damnation? not knowing of God, he will not have mercy upon thee,
Isa. 27. 11. not repenting thou shall perish, Luke 13. 3. not fearing him, he
will make thy plagues wonderful, not believing in him thou shall be damned,
John 3. 18. not loving him thou art and shall be cursed, 1 Cor. 16. 22. not
being zealous he will spew thee out of his mouth, Rev. 3. 16. not being meek
thou art an abomination to the Lord, Prove. 3. 32. not being merciful, thou
shall have judgment without mercy, not eating the flesh and drinking the blood
of the Son of God, thou have no life in thee, John 6. 53. And eat his flesh and
drink his blood thou can not, unless thou do examine thy self, and by Faith
discern the Lords body.

Of the actions of the administrator of this blessed Ordinance.
FIrst the minister is to take the bread and wine, and to separate it from
ordinary bread and wine, which does signify Gods separating Christ from other
men to be our alone mediator; and that he was by the father set a part to that
office, and so separated from sinners, Exodus 12. 5. Heb. 7. 26.

Then he comes to bless and consecrate the bread and wine, by the word and
prayer, which does signify Gods sanctifying and furnishing him with all gifts
needful for a mediator.

Then he comes to break the bread and pour out the wine, which does signify
the passion of Christ, with all the torments which he endured for our sins,
viz. to accomplish our salvation: see what he endured, consider that he that
was equal with God, should come in the form of a Servant; that he that the
heaven of heavens could not contain, should be cradled in a manger, that the
Judge of all flesh should be condemned; that the Lord of life should be put to
death; that he that was his fathers joy should cry out, my God, my God why have
thou forsaken me? that that head that was crowned with honor should be crowned
with thorns; that those eyes that were as a flame of fire should be closed up
by the darkness of death; that that tongue that spoke as never man spoke,
should be accused of blasphemy; that those hands that swayed the Scepter, and
feet that were as fine brass, should be nailed to the cross, and himself hanged
on a tree between two thieves, and then they pierced his side with a spear, his
precious blood shed, and his righteous soul poured forth unto Death, Isa. 53.
5, 10, 12. Heb. 9. 14. Surely as the bread nourishes not if it remain whole
and unbroken, so there is no life for us in Christ, but in as much as he died
for us.

Then the Minister gives the bread and wine to the receivers, which does
signify that God gave Christ, and Christ gave himself to us, and in this is
Christ Jesus with all his merits offered to all sorts of receivers, and that
God has given him unto the faithful receivers to feed their souls unto eternal
life, John 3. 14, 15. and 6. 50, 51.

Of the actions of the receiver, or duty in recieving.
FIrst he is to take the bread and wine presented to him, which does signify
the recieving of Christ into our souls, with all his benefits, by Faith, and
that they and only they have benefit by Christ, which thus apply Christ to
themselves by a true and lively Faith: John 1. 12. To as many as did receive
him, to-them he gave power to become the Sons of God.

Secondly, the communicants are to eat the bread and drink the wine, receiving
them into their bodies, and digesting them, 1 Cor. 11. 26. Which does signify
our uniting to Christ and enjoying of him, and so with delight apply him and
his mercies to all the necessities of our Souls, Spiritually feeding upon him,
and growing up by him; and as God does bless these elements to preserve and
strengthen the body of the receiver, so Christ apprehended and received by
faith does nourish our Souls, and preserve both body and soul unto eternal
life, John 6. 50, 51. 1 Cor. 10. 3, 11, 19, 17.

As the bread passes through many alterations before it is fit to be eaten, as
cutting down, threshing, grinding, and the parching heat in baking, so the
blessed body of Christ was pitifully bruised and rent with drops of blood,
scourges, nails, thorns, and with a spear, before it could be a fit sacrifice
for sin; and as bread feeds the body, so does Christ the soul; and as bread
drives away natural hunger, so does Christ spiritual hunger; and as bread is
given to the hungry and poor, so Christ effectually to the broken in heart, and
to the contrite Spirit, and to the hungry soul: if any ask what it is to
receive Christ, then I answer, to accept of him to be thy Priest, and Jesus, to
save thee by his blood; and to be thy Prophet, and Christ, to teach thee by his
word: and to be thy Prince and Lord, to reign in and over thee by his Spirit,
making thee to learn and live by his Laws; now if thou have thus received
Christ, thou will part with any thing in the world rather then him, and so it
will make thee to take heed of that which may cause Christ to depart from thee.

1. By committing any of thy old sins, 2 Pet. 1. 9. 2. By neglecting any of his
Services, 2 Pet. 1. 10. 3. By not loving all his commandments; John 15. 14. 4.
By not waiting for his second coming in power and great glory.
Who they are that may partake of this Ordinance.
ALL who are of years and sound judgment to discern the Lords body, and to
examine themselves, and are received by consent into the body of the Church of
Christ, these are to repair to this ordinance, for none partake of it worthily,
but those who profess the true Faith, and have duly examined and prepared
themselves, Isa. 66. 23. 1 Cor. 11. 27, 28. whereby all not of age and sound
judgments are debarred of this ordinance, and may not be admitted by the
Church to the Supper of the Lord, but such only as have these things in them,
which God requires at their hands, the other is to be kept back by the
Discipline of the Church, and those also of the Church that are under
admonition or suspension, till the Church receive full satisfaction.

The ends and uses of the Lords Supper.
HAving spoken to the matter and form of the Lords Supper, it now falls in order
to speak of the ends and uses thereof.

1. To receive Christ more firmly, and to be knit faster unto him.

2. To renew our Covenant with God.

3. To show forth his death, 1 Cor. 11. 26. or to call to mind and renew the
mercy and virtue of Christ's death, 1 Cor. 11. 24.

4. To increase our Faith, begotten by the word preached: and to confirm unto
us our nourishment therein by the means of Christ's death.

5. To increase our love to Christ, and his body the Church.

6. To quicken our hearts to all holy duties.

7. To increase our joy in the Holy Ghost, our peace of conscience, our hope of
eternal life, and all other graces of God in us.

8. To stir us up with greater boldness to profess Christ and his Ordinances,
then heretofore we have done.

9. To make a difference between our selves and the enemies of Christ, who
casting the converting Ordinances behind their backs, they are debarred of the
confirming Ordinances of Baptism and the Lords Supper.

Of our duty after receiving.
WE should endeavor to obtain, and retain a greater measure of Faith in
Christ, love to God and all his servants, power to subdue sin, and practice
obedience with all other sanctifying and saving graces, 1 Cor. 10. 16, 17. and
11. 21. Col. 2. 6, 7. 2 Pet. 3. 18. For a true receiver shall feel in himself
an increase of Faith, and sanctification, and a greater measure of dying unto
sin, a further strengthening of the new man, and so a greater care to live in
newness of life, and to walk the more comfortably and steddily in the ways of
God, for strength to perform any duty, to exercise any grace, to subdue any
lust, to resist any temptation, to bare any affliction, is derived only from
Christ, and many times conveyed to the soul in this pipe of conveyance, to wit
the Lords Supper.

Of Collection for the poor, another standing Ordinance of the Gospel.
WE read 1 Cor. 16. 2. Upon the first day of the week* let every one of you lay
by in store as God has prospered him, 2 Cor. 8. 7. Therefore as you abound in
every thing, in Faith, and utterance, and knowledge, and in all diligence, and
in your love to us, see that ye abound in this duty also, 1 Timothy 6. 17, 18.
Charge them that are rich, that they do good, that they be rich in good works,
ready to distribute, willing to communicate, Romans 12. 13. Distributing to the
necessity of the Saints, given to Hospitality. 1 John 3. 17. But who so has
this worlds goods, and sees his brother has need, and shuts up his bowels
of compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in him? Heb. 13. 19.
Therefore to do good and to communicate, forget not, for with such sacrifice
God is well pleased, Prove. 19. 17. He that has pity upon the poor, lends to
the Lord, and that which he has given, will he pay him again: but more
particularly consider,

1. What it is to give alms. 2. Who they are that should give to the poor. 3.
How much must they give. 4. To whom are we to give. 5. What order is to be
observed in giving. 6. With what affection must we give. 7. How many ways are
we to give. 8. What fruits may we expect of this duty.
1. Of the first, what it is to give alms.

Answ. It is a duty of Christian love, whereby such as have this worlds goods,
do freely impart to such as are in want, in obedience to the command of God, 1 John 3. 17. 1 Timothy 6. 8. Mat. 25. 35, 42. 2 Cor. 9. 7.

Who they are that should give alms.
WHosoever has this worlds good, 1 John 3. 17. that is, such a portion out of
which something may be spared, though it be but two mites; not only rich men
are to give, 1 Timothy 6. 17. but all such as labor with their hands, Ephesians. 4.
28. out of their earnings, servants out of their wages, children out of their
parents allowance, wives out of any portion they have of their own, or by
allowance of their husbands; lastly, those that live upon liberal alms, must
spare something to those that have little or no supply, 2 Cor. 8. 2, 14.

Nay in some cases those may give that are accountable to others, as appears
in the wise and commendable example of Abigal, 1 Samuel 25. 3.

And in some other cases of necessity, for extreme necessity dispenses with
the ordinary course of duto both to God and man, See Mat. 12. 7.

But of goods evil gotten, or wrongfully detained, not alms, but restitution
must be made, Luke 19. 8.

How much must we give.
WE must sow liberally, that we may reap liberally, 2 Cor. 9. 6. Gal. 6. 7.
Prove. 11. 25. Notwithstanding in the quantity respect must be had.

1. To the ability of the giver. 2. To the condition of the receiver.
1. To the ability of the giver, Luke 3. 11. 1 Cor. 16. 2. Who is not so bound
to give, as to impoverish himself, 2 Cor. 8. 13. And at last to make himself of
a giver a receiver: yea, it is unlawful so to give unto some one good use, as
to disable our selves for the service of the Commonwealth, or for the relief
of our families or kindred in special, 1 Timothy 5. 8.

2. Respect must be had to the condition of the receiver, that his necessity
may be supplied, 2 Cor. 9. 12. Jam. 2. 15, 16: not so as to make him of a
receiver a giver, for this is to give a patrimony, not an alms.

To whom must we give.
TO such only as are in want, yea to all such, but especially to them who are
of the household of Faith, Gal. 6. 10. We are to give to Orphans, aged, sick,
blind, lame, and the trembling hand, Levit. 25. 35. But such as turn begging
into an occupation, they are to be compelled to work, if able, which if they
will not, they are not to eat, 2 These. 3. 10, 11, 12.

What orders is to be observed in giving.
WE must begin with such as are nearest to us in point of relation, 1 Timothy 5.
8. for our own families, Deuteronomy. 15. 7. Thou shall not harden thine heart, nor
shut thine hand from thy poor brother, and so according as the Laws of Nature,
Nations and Religion shall direct us, and so proceed to such as are afar off,
according as our ability can extend; it must he given seasonably, whilst the
poor have need, and thou have it to give; thou have something to day, it may be
none tomorrow.

With what affection must we give.
1. WIth tender pity and compassion, as we would have others do to us if we
were in their case, Psalm 112. 4. compared with Mat. 7. 12.

2. With humility and secrecy, not seeking praise from men, but approving our
hearts to God, Mat. 6. 1.

3. With cheerfulness, because God loves loves a cheerful giver, Romans 12. 8.
2 Cor. 9. 7.

4. With simplicity, not respecting our selves, but the glory of God, and the
good of our fellow members, 2 Cor. 8. 4, 5.

How many ways may one be said to give.
1. BY giving freely and cheerfully, as we have proved before.

2. By lending to such as are not able to lend to us again, Luke 6. 34. Psalm
37. 26. provided we take nothing for the loan, Exodus 22. 25.

3. By selling, and abating something of the price, in pity and love to them.

4. By forbearing whatsoevor is our right, in case of their great necessity,
Nehem. 5. 8.

5. By considering the poor, in begging something of others for them, Psalm 41.
1. Blessed is the man that considers the poor: the Lord will deliver him in
the time of trouble.

What fruits may we expect of this duty.
1. BY this we make God our debtor, Prove. 19. 17. He that has pity upon the
poor, lends to the Lord, and that which he has given, he will pay again, See
Mat. 10. 42. and 25. 35. 2 Timothy 1. 18.

2. By this we seal the truth of our Religion, Jam. 1. 27. This is pure
Religion and undefiled before God.

3. By this we sanctify our store, and bring a blessing on our labors, yea
and upon our posterity after us, Luke 11. 41. Deuteronomy. 15. 10. Psalm 112. 2. 37.
26.

4. God forgets not, but will surely reward the least, even accept of cold
water, given in Faith, and for his sake, Mat. 10. 42.

Of reading the Scriptures, another standing Ordinance of the Gospel.
1. COnsider that the Scriptures are the word of God.

2. That no History is comparable to the Scripture.

3. Who they are that ought to read the Scriptures.

4. Why must we read the Scriptures.

5. How we ought to read the Scriptures.

1. Let us consider that the Scriptures contained in the Old and New Testaments
are the word of God, as will appear by these ensuing particulars.

1. By the consent and testimony of* godly men in all ages, from them that
first knew the penmen, until our time. See Psalm. 119. 125.

2. The simplicity, integrity, and sincerity of these Writers, doing nothing by
partiality, 1 Timothy 5. 21.

3. The sweet concord and harmony between these writings, and all things
contained in them, notwithstanding the diversity of persons by whom, places
where, times when, and matters whereof they have written, See Luke 24. 44.

4. The prophesies thereof prove them to be the word of God, foretelling
things to come so long beforehand, with their circumstances, thus was the
Messiah promised to Adam four hundred years before he was born, Genesis 3. 15. and
to Abraham one thousand nine hundred and seventeen years before the
accomplishment, Genesis 12. 3.

5. The admirable power and force that is in them to convert and alter men's
minds, and to incline their hearts from vice to virtue, Psalm. 19. 7, 8. Psalm.
119. 111. Heb. 4. 12 Act. 13. 12.

What shall I say more, the Scriptures of truth are perfectly holy in
themselves, and by themselves, whereas all other writings are imperfect, Christ
is the eternal word, John 1. 1. Rev. 19. 13. John 1. 14. 1 John 5. 7. The
Scriptures are the written word, Mar. 7. 13. Jer. 30. 1, 2, 4. Ier 34. 1. Exodus
20. 1. and 34. 27. Job 42. 7. John 10. 35. Luke 8. 21. and 11. 28. Jer. 37. 2.
Jer. 36. 1, 4, 6, 8, 11, 16, 18.

That no History is comparable to the History of the Scriptures.
THe books of the Old and New Testament are so sufficient for the knowledge of
Christian Religion, that they do most plentifully contain all Doctrine
necessary to salvation, they being perfectly profitable to instruct to
salvation in themselves; whence it follows, that we need no traditions or
inventions of men, no Cannon of Councils, no sententes of Fathers, no orders of
Parliaments, or decrees of Popes for to supply and supposed de^^cts of the
written word, or for to give us perfect directions in the worship of God, and
the way of life, then is already expressed in the Scriptures, Mat 23. 8. John
5. 39. Mat. 15. 9. Lastly, the holy Scriptures are the rule of life and ground
of Faith, the rule, the line, the square, and light whereby to examine and try
all Doctrines by, Joh. 12. 4^. Gal. 1. 9. all traditions, revelations, decrees
of councils, opinions of Doctors, etc. are to be proved out of the Divine
Scriptures, no word like this word for antiquity, rarity, brevity, harmony.

Who they are that ought to read the Scriptures.
THe Scriptures of truth are carefully and profitably to be read and heard of
all sorts and degrees of men and women, both privately and openly, so as they
may receive profit by them, Deuteronomy. 31. 11, 12. Moses commanded the book of the
Law to be read to all the children of Israel, men women and children, that they
might thereby learn to fear the Lord their God, Josh* 8. 34. There was not a
word of all which Moses commanded, that Joshua read not before all the
congregation, John 5. 39. Christ commands all men to search the Scriptures,
for in them ye think to have eternal life, and they testify of me, Rev. 1. 3.
Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear the words of this prophecy,
Romans 15. 4. Whatsoever things were written aforetime, were written for our
learning, Act. 17. 11. The hearers are commended for searching the Scriptures.

Why must we read the Scriptures
DAvid testifies that the Law of the Lord Psalm 19. 8.
is perfect* converting the soul; the Testimonies of the Lord are true, giving
wisdom to the simple, Psalm. 119* 105. Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a
light unto my paths, Prove. 1* 4. It gives subtilty to the simple, and to the
young man knowledge and discretion. Paul says, If our Gospel be hid, it is hid
to them that are lost, 2 Cor. 4. 3.

The Scriptures are our fathers letters to us, and his last will, to show us
what inheritance he has left us; women and children have read the Scriptures,
2 Timothy 3. 15. Saint Paul affirms that Timothy was nourished up in the
Scriptures from his Infancy, etc.

Again, by reading the Scriptures, we gain knowledge, therefore we should read
them, Prove. 2. 16. When wisdom enters into thy heart, and knowledge is
pleasant to thy soul, discretion shall preserve thee, and understanding shall
keep thee, Hos. 6. 6. I desire knowledge of God, more then burnt offerings,
Hos. 4. 1. The Lord has a controversy with the inhabitants of the Land,
because there is no knowledge of God in the Land, 1 Cor. 15. Some have not the
knowledge of God, I speak this to your shame, Hos. 4. 6. My people are
destroyed for want of knowledge, Prove. 1. 22. How long ye simple ones, will ye
love simplicity; and fools hate knowledge? Ephesians. ^. 17. Therefore be ye not
unwise, but understanding what the will of the Lord is, 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16. And
that from a child thou have known the holy Scriptures, which are able to make
thee wise unto salvation, ver. 16. For all Scripture is given by inspiration of
God, and is profitable for Doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for
instruction in righteousness, ver. 17. That the man of God may be perfect,
thoroughly furnished unto all good works.

How must we read the Scriptures.
1. FIrst, endeavor to see the excellency of the Scriptures, set a high price
upon them, and then thou will take more delight in them, Jer. 6. 10. The word
of the Lord is to them a reproach, they have no de^^^ht in them: whereas David
that did delight in the Lord, he did meditate in them day and nihgt, Psalm. 1. 2.

2. Let us endeavor to get the Scriptures written in our hearts, as well as in
our minds, and to that end we should pray constantly, and wait diligently for
the Spirit of revelation, to open the seals of that book.

3. Observe these eight rules, and read the Scriptures.

1. Read them diligently and carefully. 2. Read them frequently. 3. Read them
believingly, with an expectation to gain something by reading* 4. Compare
Scripture with Scripture when you read them, compare spiritual things with
spiritual. 5. Pray, meditate and study to find out the spiritual meaning of
those Scriptures that be dark and hard. 6. Take heed of allowing thy self in
any secret sin, against, or contrary to the Scriptures; he that does so, may
read long enough, and understand nothing. 7. Be much in the practice of what
thou have already learned, he that is faithful in a little shall have much
more. 8. Pray frequently, and fervently to the Lord.
1. To help thee to understand what thou read, Mat. 24. 15. and Mat. 13. 5.
2. Believe what thou understandest. 3. To apply what thou do believe. 4. To
affect and hide in thy heart, what thou do apply. 5. To keep and retain in
memory what thou do affect. 6. To communicate as opportunity is offered what
you keep: surely he that thinks himself too good to read and to be ruled by the
word, will at last be found too bad to be owned by God, etc.
Of Admonition, private and public.
PRivate admonition is betwixt brother and brother, Levit. 19. 17. Mat. 18. 15,
16.

The other public, by the messengers of the Churches or Officers, when the
private will not prevail, Mat. 18. 17. 1 Timothy 5. 20.

The degrees of private admonition are two, the former is most private, done by
one; the other is private also, but more public then the first, and it is done
by two or three at the most, whereof he that first admonishes must be one,
Matthew 18. 15, 16. Now public admonition is that which is done by the whole
Church, or the Minister assisted by the Congregation, 1 Timothy 5. 20.* For if the
second warning serve not, our Savior would have the offender presented to the
Church as to the highest court, Mat. 18. 17. Who therefore hearing their
admonition, is to be received, notwithstanding his former obstinacy. I shall
say no more to this in this place, because I shall speak more fully to it when
I come to speak of the Ordinance of excommunication.

Of Suspention.
SUspention is a certain separation of him that will not amend by admonition
from some things that are holy in the Church, as the use of the Lords Supper,
or from officiating in any office in the Church, till he repent, and when he
does, he is not by and by to be admitted to all privileges of the Church, but
to remain suspended for a time, till the fruits of repentance may better
appear; for if some in the Law, Number. 9. 6. for a certain pollution in a lawful
duty, for burying the dead, were suspended from the Passover, much more in the
Gospel for such obstinacy; it is agreeable to the Gospel to execute the sensure
of suspention after two admonitions upon a known offense.

Of Excommunication.
THE Church of Christ is in Scripture resembled to a natural body, wherein are
many members united to each other, and all to one head by one spirit, growing
up in unity: now as in the natural body there may be many infirmities, so also
it is in this mystical body, sometimes it may be Subject to distempers by the
drinking in of untruths, sometimes windy humorus of pride, high-mindedness,
etc. and so distemper it, sometimes a Palsy humor of deadness and benummedness
seize upon it, sometimes feverish fits of violent headiness may inflame it;
but God whose temples it is, has provided for it against such distempers,
whereof this of excommunication is is one. Now if any ask what it is, then I
answer.

Answ. It is the casting of a stubborn sinner out of the Church, and a
delivering him unto Satan, who being thus disfranchized of all the liberties,
and deprived of all the benefits and common society of the Church, is separated
as it were from that protection it once had.

This ordinance is to be administered to such as are desperately wicked, that
have nothing profited by the former censures, but still continuedin their
former wickedness of obstinate and malicious resisting all means graciously
used to reclaim them.

Now the end of this casting out is twofold, either respecting the good of the
person excommunicated, or the rest of the Church, 1 Cor. 5. 5. 1 Timothy 1 20. In
the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, when ye are gathered together, to deliver
such an one unto Satan, for the destruction of the flesh, that the Spirit may
be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus.

This must be done in wisdom, tenderness, courage and faithfulness, to this
end, to gain our offending member a gain, and to obey God in this command also,
praying to God for his blessing upon his own ordinance, and that he would keep
us from those sins that we deal with others for.

Of assurance of Salvation.
1. THE nature of it.

2. Whether it be attainable in this life.

3. Of the several sorts and degrees of assurance.

4. Of the trials of assurance, how it may be known.

5. To labor and endeavor for it is our duty.

6. Of the benefits of it, and arguments to persuade us to endeavor to gain
it, which are five.

1. The want of it does hinder thankfulness. 2. Assurance will settle a soul
upon Christ. 3. Assurance does sweeten all other blessings to us. 4. Assurance
does put us upon our duty, be it what it will. 5. Assurance does ease us of the
world, and mounts the Soul above it.
7. Of the Springs of Assurance.

8. Of the impediments of assurance.

9. Of the evil of doubting or want of Assurance.

10. Many think they have Assurance and have it not.

11. Many reasons wherefore the Lord does not give Assurance speedily.

12. Very hard to recover assurance if once lost.

Of the nature of Assurance, what it is.
ASSurance is a certain sweet motion of the soul steadily resting upon the
mercy of God, through the merits of Christ, with an unshaken expectation of all
that is promised; this assurance in Scripture has several denominations, which
I shall speak to under the next head.

Or assurance is a victorious conclusion against the strength of doubting,
whereby the mind of a believer is certained and persuaded, and upon good
grounds settled concerning his personal interest in Christ and all his benefits.

Assurance conquers our doubtings, answers our arguments, clears our evidences
unto the soul, against the many suspicions which did arise, that Christ does
indeed own it, that he is the Savior thereof, etc.

This assurance is called sometimes full assurance of understanding, Col. 2. 2.

Sometimes called full assurance of hope, Heb. 6. 11, 12, 19.

Sometimes full assurance of Faith, Heb. 10. 22*

So that faith and hope do contribute their influence to the making up of full
assurance, sometimes this is called boldness, Heb. 4. 16. Importing an
undanted, yet humble and dutiful looking God in the face; sometimes full
assurance when faith acts strongly without staggering through unbelief.

Whether Assurance be attainable in this life.
1 John 5. 13. THese things have I written unto you, that ye way know that ye
have eternal life, Heb. 6. 18. God has given us his Oath, his word, his seal,
that our consolation may be strong, and that our salvation may be sure.

2 Cor. 5. 1, 2. We know that if our earthly house of this tabernacle were
dissolved, we have a building, an house not made with hands, eternal in the
heavens. Solomon's Song. 2. 16. My beloved is mine and I am his, I am his by
purchase, and I am his by conquest, I am his by donation, and I am his by
election, and I am his by Covenant, and I am his by marriage: Isa. 63. 16.
doubtless thou art our Father, though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel
acknowledge us not, thou O Lord art our Father and our redeemer, Romans 8. 38.
Paul says that nothing could separate him from the love os Christ, 2 Pet. 1.
10. Give diligence to make your calling and election sure: therefore we see it
is attainable, and our duty to make it sure, etc.

Of the several sorts of Assurance.
THere are degrees of assurance, some more weak, some more strong; there is an
assurance, and a full assurance. God in his word does exhort Christians to
strive after assurance, yea full assurance, yea the riches of full assurance;
and no doubt, that not only Paul but many a good Christian can say sometime or
other, I am verily persuaded that Christ loved me, and gave himself for me.

Assurance has many denominations in the Scriptures, according to its degrees;
sometimes it is called a persuasion, Romans 8. 38. Sometimes boldness, Ephesians. 3.
12. In whom we have boldness, which does import an undanted (yet humble and
dutiful) looking God in the face.

Sometimes it is called full assurance, Romans 4. 2. That is, when faith does act
strongly, without staggering through unbelief.

This is called sometimes full assurance of understanding, Col. 2. 2.

Sometimes full assurance of hope, Heb. 6. 11, 18, 19.

And sometimes full assurance of Faith, Heb. 10. 22.

For Knowledge, Faith and Hope do all contribute their influence to the making
up of full assurance, many Christians have some degree of assurance, who think
they have not, and many have no assurance at all, who yet pretend thereto most
of all.

Of the trials of assurance.
AS Surance may be brought to the test, and tried by, 1. The qualification of
the Subject assured. 2. Or by the grounds or cases of assurance. 3. Or by the
fruits and effects of it; we are not to let the real interest of Christ to
hang hovering and in dispute, but to determine them by particular and personal
evidence.

1. True assurance does support and comfort the heart in deepest tribulation,
as we may see in Job and Paul.

2. True assurance does make a man of a Godlike disposition, easy to be
entreated, ready to forgive, abundant in goodness; it makes a man study the
good of others, wherein he may strengthen the feeble, and comfort the dejected,
and enrich the impoverished, and recover the seduced, and enlarge the
straightened, and build up the wasted.

3. True assurance puts the soul a work upon selfpurifying, 1 John 3. 2, 3.

4. True assurance does make the soul incomparably to prize communion with God
and Jesus Christ Can* 2. 6, 7, 16, 17. Compared with Cant. 3. 1. to the 6.

5. True assurance does engage those that have it to serve and honor God,
Josh. 1. 15. God assured Joshua that he would neverleave him, nor forsake him:
Joshua upon this resolves that he and his house would serve the Lord, etc.

To make out after, and endeavor for assurance, is our duty.
WE are bound to draw near unto God in the full assurance of Faith, Heb. 10.
22. 2 Pet. 1. 10. Wherefore the rather brethren give diligence to make your
calling and election sure: but so foolish are we, that whilst with much care
and labor we go about to make those things certain which are most uncertain,
we make those things uncertain, which might be made certain, 2 Cor. 13. 5.
Examine you selves, whether ye be in the faith, prove your selves, etc.

Consider farther, that although the enjoyment of assurance makes most for our
consolation, yet the living upon Christ purely in the want of assurance, makes
most for his exaltation; he is happy with Thomas that believes upon seeing and
handling, but thrice happy are those that believe when they do nor see, John
20. 29.

Faith can make a soul submit in a cross, but it is assurance which makes the
soul to rejoice and triumph.

Of the benefits of assurance, and many arguments to persw^de us to make out
after it.
1. THE want of it does hinder thankfulness; 2. Assurance will settle a soul
upon Christ. 3. Assurance will sweeten all other blessings to us. 4. Assurance
will put us upon all kind of duty. 5. Assurance will ease a man of the world,
and mount the soul above it.
1. The want of it does hinder thankfulness.

We cannot give God hearty thanks, whilst we are doubtful of our particular
interest in Christ; this man cannot thank the Lord from his own Soul, for
giving his Son Jesus Christ, seeing he does doubt of his interest in him; he
cannot thank God for pardon of sin, seeing he does doubt whether they be
pardoned or no, see Psalm. 103. 1, 2, 3.

2. Assurance will settle a soul upon Christ, and cause him to lie down and
sleep in safety; there be two effects of this blessed assurance, one is joy,
the other is peace; it glads the heart, and it pacifies the heart.

3. Assurance will sweeten all other blessings to us: we shall see them handed
forth to us in love, here is says the soul plenty of food and ^ayment, and
friends, and God is my God too: my sins are pardoned too, but the want of this
may check all our mercies.

4. Assurance will put us upon all kind of duty, viz. What shall I render to
the Lord for all his mercies? I will either do, or suffer, or any thing for him
that has done so much for me.

5. Assurance will mount the soul above the world, and make the soul to live
out of its self, in the Spirit, upon Christ, unto God, above the world, under
Ordinances, looking to election behind, and perfection before. O the blessed
favor of God, the evidences of our Union with Christ: this is like the light
of the Sun, which puts out the light of ten thousand candles; those that have
so much as to make up assurance for heaven, will never complain of too little
on the earth: these things considered, does lay before us two things. 1. The
benefits of assurance. Secondly, it does bespeak the reader, if he have it not,
to labor for it.

Of the springs of assurance, or means by which it is attained.
THE work we have to do is twofold. First, get title to Gods love. Secondly,
get assurance that thou have a title; the first is done by action, the second
is done by examination. He that would get assurance, must not cut off any of
the pipes of conveyance, neither make use of them sluggishly. A sluggish
spirit, is always a lazy spirit: he that will find rich minerals, must dig
deep: he that will be rich, must be diligent and sweat for it: he that will
taste the kernel, must crack the shell: he that will have the marrow, must
break the bone: he that will wear the garland, must run the race: He that will
ride in triumph, must get the victory; a lazy Christian shall always want four
things: comfort and content, confidence and assurance, Heb. 6. 11. and we
desire that every one would show the same diligence to the full assurance of
Faith. O how can we look so many sweet promises in the face, and harbor so
many misgivings in our hearts? First, take one promise, and charge that upon
the heart, and if the heart be stubborn and will not yield, then take another,
if that will not do, then take another, and lay that home upon the heart, and
never leave or cease this work, till thou have made thy calling and election
sure; and make as much conscience of these commands that requires thee to get
assurance, as you do of those commands that requires thee to pray, read and
hear; assurance is heavenly wages that God gives not no loyterers: though no
man does merit assurance by obedience, yet God usually crowns obedience with
assurance, Joh. 14. 21, 22, 23.

1. Diligently improve those notable assuring Ordinances, the Word, Lords
Supper, and Pray r, to help on all the former directions.

1. The word was therefore written, 1 John 5. 13. That believers might know
they have eternal life, let it therefore dwell in you richly, Col. 3. 16.

2. The Lords Supper seals up remission of sins, therefore be at the Lords
table frequently, but be sure to partake of it worthily.

3. Prayer, that not only spreads open a man's heart, but pierces the heavens,
creeps into the bosom of God, and sometimes furnishes the doubting spirit with
assurance in the very exercise of it.

2. Spring of assurance cherishes and improveth all your graces but especially
assuring graces, knowledge, Faith, and hope; by knowledge we discern our
selves, by Faith we appropriate to our selves, and by hope we patiently wait
for full enjoyment.

3. Quench not, grieve not the Spirit of God, for that spirit is sent to assure
us, most convincingly, clearly and satisfactorily.

4. Go on from faith to faith, add one grace to another, so shall an entrance
be administered to thee abundantly into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ. See and well consider this portion of Scripture, 2 Pet.
1. from ver. 5. to ver. 12.

Of the impediments of assurance.
1. THE first impediment of assurance that I shall name, is this, our measuring
of the merey and bowels of God, by the narrow scantling of our dark
understanding.

2. Another is our making sense, reason and feeling the sole judge of our
spiritual condition.

3. Another impediment of assurance is, our retaining so many despairing
thoughts, not considering that despair is one of the worst sins, viz. It is a
dishenour to God, and a reproach to Christ, a resisting of the Spirit of Grace,
and a murderer of the soul, a belying of God, a denying of Christ, and a
crowning of Satan, and a proclaiming the Devil conqueror; J^das did sin more by
despairing then by betraying of Christ.

4. Another impediment of assurance is, our not reading and believing these and
the like precious promises, Number. 14. 19, 20. Exodus 34. 6, 7. Mich. 7. 18, 19.
Isa. 30. 18, 19. Psalm. 38. 34. to the 40. Psalm. 103. to the 13. Jer. 3. 1. to
12. Luke 15. 20. to 24. 1 Timothy 1. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17.

5. Another impediment of assurance is our living in the neglect of some of
Gods Ordinances, when we wait on God in some of his ways, but not in all, viz.
Some will wait upon God, in hearing the word of life, and yet neglecting the
breaking the bread of life: sometimes God will give assurance in one Ordinance,
and deny it in another, that we may seek his face in all, 1 Cor. 28. 8.

6. Our dallying with sin; he that does lie down in sin must live in fear,
there is no assurance for us, unless we offer up our Isaac, and part with our
Benjamin, pull out our right eye, and cut off our right hand, etc.

The evil of doubting, or want of assurance.
WE cannot in any one thing more gratify Satan, and wrong our own souls, then
to live in a state of doubting; we wrong our selves in point of comfort and
content, and in point of peace, and in point of boldness; a man that lives
without assurance, leaves his soul open to many blows and knocks, frowns and
wounds, from God, from the world, from carnal friends, and from Satan: besides,
if we live and dye in unbelief, John 3. 18. He that believes not, is condemned
already: by the Law, and the Gospel, and by your own conscience; all these have
passed the sentence of condemnation upon that state already: the sin of
unbelief is a great sin, and it is our sin to give way to it. We nourish a
snake in our bosom, that will sting us to death; to doubt and to despair of
mercy, is to make the God of truth a liar, 1 John 5. 10. Doubting makes the
countenance sad, and the hands to hang down, and the knees feeble, and the
heart full of fears and trembling; besides, the time of doubting is a barren
time, there is no praying nor praising, nor growing, nor any vigorous acting.
Surely, this state comes not from God, he bids us make our calling and election
sure; neither does it come from Christ, he speaks and gives peace to his flock,
they come not from the holy Spirit of God, for he is the great and most sweet
comforter, revealing and applying the love of God unto the soul; consider these
Scriptures, Mat. 14. 31. O thou of little faith, wherefore did thou doubt?
Luke 12. 29. Neither be ye of doubtful minds, 1 These. 2. 8. I will that men
pray every where, lifting up pure hands without wrath, and doubting. But whilst
we live in the want of assurance, we live in a state of doubting.

Many think they have assurance, and have not.
LET us consider, that there is a great deal of counterfeit knowledge, and
counterfeit faith, and counterfeit love, and counterfeit repentance: so there
is a great deal of counterfeit assurance in the world; many there be that talk
high, and look big, and bear it out bravely, whereas when their assurance comes
to be weighed in the balance, and brought to the test, it will be found too
light; when it comes to withstand temptation, it is found too weak, and when
it should put the soul upon Divine action, it is found to be but a lazy
presumption; so we are apt to think our sins to be no sins, when indeed they be
many, and that they are but small, when indeed they are great, and that we have
grace, when we have none, and that our grace is true, when it is counterfeit,
and that our condition is not so bad as others, when it is worse: so we are apt
to lay claim to God, to Christ, and the promises, and privileges, and all the
glory of another world, when we are in the sight of God, poor, and blind, and
miserable, and naked, being Christless, and graceless, and truthless, and so
think our selves to be something, when we are nothing according to this
Scripture, Gal. 6. 3.

Assurance is not all kind of persuasion, there are two kinds of assurance or
persuasion of the mind touching a man's personal interest in Christ, one is
imaginary and deluding, for as the heart of a man may deceive it self, about
the habit of Faith, or any other grace, so it may delude a man about the acts
and degrees of the same; does the true believer believe in Christ? so thinks
the hypocrite that he does too: has a true believer a persuasion of his
interest in Christ? so has the hypocrite to a most exalted confidence, an Iron
faith that will never doubt nor bow; it is just with him as with a poor man in
a dream, what the rich man has by propriety, that same thing may the poorest
man have in a dream, fancy or imagination.

Many reasons wherefore the Lord does not give assurance speedily.
1. BEcause assurance is meat for strong men, babes are not able to bear it,
and digest it.

2. He does not give it speedily, because we are apt to seek it more for our
selves, then we do for his honor; as the Sun does, as it were, put out the
light of the Moon, stars, fire and candle. So the glory of God must put out all
other ends; the servant that minds his wages more then his work, must not
wonder if his master be slack in paying him; and sure it is, that he that is
most mindful of Gods honor, God will be most mindful of his comfort.

3. Another reason why he does not speedily give in assurance is, that when
they have it they may the more highly prize it, and the more carefully keep it,
and the more wisely improve it, and the more affectionately and effectually
bless God for it; none sets such a prize upon light, as he that has lain a
long time in darkness.

4. That we might live purely upon Christ, we are apt to rest upon every thing
below Christ, viz. to rest upon creatures, to rest upon gifts or graces, duties
and Divine manifestations, or celestial consolations, and to rest upon gracious
evidences: now the Lord to cure his people of these distempers, many times
leaves his children of light to walk in darkness; but let us consider, that
although the enjoyment of assurance does make most for our comfort, as we have
said before: yet the living purely upon Christ in the want of assurance, does
make most for his glory; no Christian to him that in the want of visibles, can
live upon an invisible God.

5. The Lord most times will have his people make a constant progress in
holiness before he gives them this happiness of assurance, for assurance in a
sense is the daughter of holiness.

Very hard to recover assurance, if one lost.
LET us consider the wonderful difficulty of recovering assurance if once lost.
Oh the sighs, the groans, the complaints, the tears, the heartrentings, the
soul-bleeding* the gaining of assurance at first cost very dear, but the
regaining of it will put us to more pains and charge. Of the two it is casier
to keep assurance when we have it, then to recover it when we have lost it: as
it is easier to keep the house in reparations, then to raise it up when it is
fallen; a man may easier make a seeing eye blind, then a blind eye to see; a
man may easily put an Instrument out of tune, but not so soon put it in again:
a man is easily born down the stream, but cannot so easily swim up the stream.
It is better to be kept from the losing of assurance, then to be cured; as it
is better to be kept from a disease, then to be cured of a disease. Oh what is
the state of a poor Christian that has lost his assurance! it will cost him
more grief, sorrow, heartbreaking, and soul-bleeding, before conscience will
be* quieted, divine justice satisfied, and comfort, and joy restored, evidences
cleared, and pardon in the court of conscience sealed. David found this to be
very hard, which made him cry out, O spare me a little, that I may recover my
strength, create a clean heart, renew a right spirit, restore unto me the joy
of thy salvation, Psalm. 51. 7. to 12.

We lose our assurance by backsliding, unbelief, luke-warmness, formality, etc.
and yet cannot be recovered until we remember from whence we are fallen; and
repent we cannot, until we look upon him whom we have peirced, and see Gods
delightful affections, and tender mercies before set us, in sweet working, and
soul-ravishing, and heart-melting expressions: a relapse in diseases is more
dangerous then the first sickness was, Job 5. 14. 2* Pet. 2. 22. Mat. 12 43.

Of the difference between the Law and the Gospel; and of the several sorts of
Laws.
AS the Law requires obedience, so the Gospel directs us how to perform it,
1 Timothy 1. 9, 10, 11. The Law commands us to worship God as our Creator, the
Gospel commands us to worship him in Christ, as our Savior; the Law like
Pharaoh requires brick, but allows no straw, the Gospel both allows strength
and supplies, Romans 10. 5, 6, 8.

But yet as the Law saves us not without the Gospel, so the Gospel saves us
not without the Law, which directs us in our duty both to God and man, Deuteronomy.
5. 32.

At the giving of the Law the mountain burned, the trumpet sounded, the people
fled, and Moses trembled, and all this to teach us that we should be very
careful to perform obedience to the same.

Object. What was the Ceremonial Law?

Answ. It was that which did prescribe orders for direction in rites of outward
worship, only shadowing the grace of the Gospel. Heb. 10. 1.

But the substance of this* Law being come, those shadows are utterly
abolished, by the death of Christ, and therefore the use of them now would be a
kind of denial of his death.

Quest. What was the Judicial Law?

Answ. That wherein God appointed a form of civil government of the
Commonwealth. Now this Law is not utterly revoked and abolished by Christ, for
he came not to over-turn any good government.

Quest. What is the Moral Law?

Answ. That which commands perfection of godliness and righteousness, and
directs us in our duties both to God and man, Deuteronomy. 5. 32, 12. 32.

Quest. Are not we delivered from this Law by the means of Christ?

Answ. From the burden of the Law, exacting in our own persons perfect
obedience, and from the curse of the Law, due unto disobedience, we are
delivered by Christ, Gal. 3. 10, 11, 12, 13. but from the commandment as a rule
of life, we are not freed, Jam. 2. 8.

For the Law does lay a charge upon all the powers of the soul, viz. First, it
does charge the understanding to know every duty, even all the will of God; it
charge the judgment to discern between good and evil; it charge the memory
to retain it; it charge the will to choose the better, and to leave the worse;
it charge the affections to love those things that are lovely, and to hate
things that are uncomely.

Of the ten Commandments.
THe ten Commandments are divided into two tables, Deuteronomy. 4. 13. and 10. 1, 4.
Which Chirst called the two great Commandments, Mat. 22.

The four first do contain our duty to God, and the six latter, our duty to man.

The first commandment is,

Thou shall have no other Gods before me.

This commandment directs us to the choice of the true God, and the
entertaining him in all our thoughts, in which there are nine things enjoined,
and three things prohibited or forbidden.

1. Knowledge, Joh. 17. 3. 2. Remembrance, Eccles. 12. 1. 3. Love, Deuteronomy. 6. 5.
4. Trust, Prove. 3. 5. 5. Hope, Psalm. 146. 5. 6. Fear, Isa. 51. 12, 13. 7.
Humility, Mich. 6. 8. 8. Patience, Lam. 3. 39. 9. Obedience, 1 John 5. 3.
Things prohibited or forbidden in this first commandment.

1. Atheism, Heb. 11. 6. 2. Heresy, Tit. 3. 10, 11. 3. Apostasy, Heb. 10. 26.
The second Commandment.

Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, nor the likeness of any
thing that is in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, or in the waters under
the earth, thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them, Exodus 20. 4, 5.

This second commandment lays before us the solemn worship that is to be
performed unto God, without images and ceremonies.

This second commandment does prohibit seven things, and enjoin six things;
four ordinary, two extraordinary.

The things prohibited or forbidden are these seven.

1. Idolatry, Psalm. 97. 7. 2. Will Worship, Col. 2. 23. 3. Superstition, Act.
17. 22* 4. Traditions, Col. 2. 8. 5. Schism, 1 Cor. 11. 18. 6. Witchcraft,
Exodus 22. 18. 7. Confusion, 1 Cor. 11. 21.
Things commanded and enjoined in this second commandment, are, first ordinary,
secondly extraordinary.

First ordinary, Extraordinary 1. Prayer, 1 These. 5. 17. 2. Preaching, Mal. 2.
7. 3. Seals or Sacraments. 4. Discipline, Mat. 18. 17. 5. Fasting, Lev. 23. 19.
6. Feasting and thanksgiving. Ester. 9. 22.

The third Commandment is this.

Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain, for the Lord will
not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain, Exodus 20. 7.

This third commandment does inform us, how we should glorify God aright, in
the actions of our common life, without swearing or blaspheming.

This third commandment does prohibit four things, and enjoin five things.

The things forbidden, or prohibited are,

1. Oaths, Jer. 4. 2. 2. Vows, Numb. 30. 2* 3. Lots, Prove. 16. 33. 4. All
unreverent and unholy use of his name, and profaning of his titles,
properties, actions, and Ordinances, either by mouth or action, Lev. 21. 32.
Mal. 1. 6, 12.
Things commanded or enjoined in the third commandment, in the sanctifying of
God.

1. His names, Deuteronomy* 28. 15. 2. Attributes, 1 Pet. 3. 15. 3. Word, Psalm. 50.
16, 17. 4. Works, Psalm. 58. 10, 11. 5. Religion, Ephesians. 4. 1.
The fourth Commandment is this.

Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day, Exodus 20. 8, 9* 10, 11.

This fourth commandment does inform us of a certain day set apart for Gods
service, as the Sabbath or Lords day.

This fourth commandment does prohibit certain things, and enjoin many other
things.

Things prohibited.

1. The making of it a common day* Neh. 13. 15* 2. Vain speech about wordly
things. Isa. 581. 3. 3. Idleness, feasting, pastimes, Exodus 32. 6. 4. The doing
that on the Lords day, which is no day lawful, Mar. 3. 4. Ezekiel. 23. 37, 38. 5.
The employing others in worldly business.
Things commanded or enjoined to be done on that day.

1. Hearing and reading the word, Luke 4. 16, 22. Act. 13. 14* 15. 2. Prayer
and singing of Psalms. 3. Visiting and relieving the sick. 4. Examining our
selves, and those that belong to us. 5. Catechizing our families.
The fifth Commandment runs thus.

Honor thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be l^ng in the Land which
the Lord thy God gives thee* Exodus 20. 12.

This commandment lays before us the duties we owe one to another in regard of
our particular relation, unto such as are our superiors, inferiors and equals.

In a word, the fifth commandment presents us with the duty of,

1. Magistrates, 1 Timothy 2. 2. 2. Ministers, 1 Pet. 5. 2. 3. Parents, Eph^s. 6.
4. 4. Masters* Col. 4. 1. 5. Husbands, Ephesians. 5. 25. 6. Noble and rich, 1 Timothy
6. 17. 7. Aged, Tit. 2. 2, 4. 8. Subjects, Romans 13. 1. 9. People, Heb. 13 17.
10. Children, Ephesians. 6. 1. 11. Servants, 1 Pet. 2. 18. 12. Wife, Ephesians. 5. 24,
33. 13. Poor, 1 Samuel 25. 8. 14. Young, Lev. 19. 32.
The sixth Commandment runs thus.

Thou shall not murder, Exodus* 20. 13.

This commandment lays before us our duty in the preservation of men's persons,
and living in peace and meekness.

In this commandment there are five things forbidden, and four things enjoined.

The things forbidden are these and such like,

1. Unjust anger, Mat. 5. 22. 2. Hatred, 1 John 3. 15. 3. Inward desire of
revenge, Romans 12. 19. 4. Reviling and backbiting, Psalm. 15. 3. 5. Immoderate
worldly sorrow, 2 Cor. 7. 10.
Things enjoined or commanded.

1. Friendship, Prove* 27. 9. 2. Mercy and good works, Gal 6. 10. 3. Meekness,
Ephesians. 4. 32. 4. Overcoming evil with good, Romans 12. 21.
The seventh Commandment is this.

Thou shall not commit adultery* Exodus 20. 14.

This commandment presents us with the preservation of chastity* temperance,
and marriage.

In this commandment there are eight things forbidden, and seven things
enjoined.

The things forbidden are these and such like.

1. Wanton gestures or behavior, Prove. 6. 13. and 7. 10. 2. Wanton looks, Job
31. 1. 3. Wanton speeches, Ephesians. 4. 29. and 5. 3, 4. 1 Cor. 15. 33. 4.
Uncleaness 1 Cor. 6. 9. 5. Fornication 1 Cor. 6. 9. 6. Adultery, Heb. 13. 4. 7.
Intemperance, 1 Pet. 4. 3. 8. Bad company, 1 Cor. 5. 9.
Things enjoined in this commandment.

1. Marriage, 1 Cor. 7. 2, 9. 2. Care to keep a good conscience, Eccles. 7. 28.
3. Labor in our vocation. 4. Watchfulness over our own hearts, Mal. 2. 16. 5.
A Covenant with our eyes, Job 31. 1. 6. Prayer, Psalm. 119. 37. 7. Holy
meditation, etc.
The eighth Commandment is this.

Thou shall not steal, Exodus 20. 15.

This commandment enjoins us to have a care, and endeavor the preservation of
our own, and our neigbours good, and therein of the maintaining of justice in
our dealing one with another.

In this eighth commandment there are seven things prohibited, and five things
enjoined.

The things forbidden follow.

1. Theft, Lev. 19. 13. 2. Oppression, Prove 14. 31. 3. Deceit, 1 These. 4. 6. 4.
Sacrilege, Prove. 20. 25. 5. Usury, Deuteronomy. 23. 20. 6. Bribery, Prove. 29. 4. 7.
Prodigality, Luke 15. 13.
Things enjoined in this commandment.

1. Just dealing, Lev. 25. 14. 2. Diligence in our calling, Ephesians. 4. 28. 3.
Liberality, Prove. 11. 25. 4. Hospitality, 1 Pet. 4. 9. 5. Restitution, Exodus
22. 5. Lev. 6. 4, 5.
The ninth Commandment is as follows.

Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor, Exodus 20 16.

This commandment enjoins us with the preservation of our own and our
neighbors good name, and the maintaining of truth in our testimony.

This ninth commandment does prohibit seven things, and enjoin five things.

Things prohibited in this commandment.

1. Slandering, Prove. 15. 24. 2. Credulity, Psalm. 15. 3. 3. Hearing
tale-bearers, Prove. 25. 23. 4. Censuring, Mat. 7. 1. 5. Sinister suspicions, 1
Cor. 13. 5. 6. Flattery, Prove. 27. 14. 7. Silence in defending, 2 Timothy 4. 16.
Things enjoined in this commandment.

1. A care of our own names, Phil. 4. 8. 2. A care of the names of others, Mat.
1. 19. 3. A care of our speeches, that they be to Gods glory, Ephesians. 5. 4. 4.
That they be profitable to the good of others, Col. 4. 6. 5. And lastly, that
our speeches be both true and charitable, for these two must inseparably go
together, for charity rejoices in truth, 1 Cor. 13. 6. And the truth must be
spoken in love, Ephesians. 4. 15. For truth without love savoureth of malice, and
charity without truth is false, vain and foolish, because God is true, and the
Author of truth, and the Devil a liar, and the father of lies; and as truth
makes us like unto God, so lies make us like unt the Devil.
The tenth Commandment is as follow e^h.

Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, thou shall not covet thy neighbors
wife, Exodus 20. 17.

This tenth and last commandment, does prohibit,

1. Covetousness, Heb. 13. 5. 2. Self-love, 2 Timothy 3. 2. 1 Cor. 10. 24. 3. Evil
thoughts, Prove. 24. 9. 4. Envy, Prove. 23. 4.
This commandment does enjoin,

1. A pure heart, 1 Timothy 1. 5. 2. Watchfulness over our thoughts, Prove. 4. 23.
3. Contentedness, Phil. 4. 11. 4. Coveting after spiritual things, 1 Cor. 12.
31.
Now in the strictest sense it is impossible that any man should keep these
commandments in thought, word and deed, from such a principle and to such an
end as it ought to be kept; but this may serve, First to humble us in the sight
and sense of our sins, which have made us subject to the wrath of God, and the
curse of the Law, that so we may be driven out of our selves, and with have
fly unto the mercies of God, in the satisfaction of Jesus Christ.

Of the Lords prayer and the several petitions therein contained.
THere are in the Lords prayer six petitions, the three first do concern Gods
glory, and the three latter do concern our necessity; divided as it were into
two tables; whereof three do concern God, as does the first table of the Law;
and three do concern our selves, and our neighbors, as does the Second table;
so that by the very order of the petitions we may learn this, that we ought to
think upon Gods glory before any thing that belongs to us, John 12. 27, 28.

The six petitions are as follows.

1. Hallowed be thy name, Mat. 6. 9. Luke 11. 12. 2. Thy kingdom come, Mat. 6.
0. Luke 11. 2. 3. Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven, Mat. 6. 10.
Luke 11. 2. 4. Give us this day our daily bread, Mat. 6. 11. Luke 11. 3. 5.
Forgive us our debts, as we forgive them that are debtors to us, Mat. 6. 12.
Luke 11. 4. 6. And leads us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil, Mat.
6. 13. Luke 11. 4.
1. Of the first, Hallowed be thy name.

1. By the name of God, we are to understand God himself, 1 Kings 5. 5. Isa.
26. 8.

His titles, as Jehovah, Eloim, the Lord of Host, and such like; and then his
attributes, and properties, as wisdom, power, love, goodness, justice, mercy,
truth, Exodus 33. 18, 19. and 34. 5, 6.

We are said to hallow his name, when we acknowledge it, and honor it, Psalm.
96. 7, 8.

Thereby as it were setting the crown of holiness and honor upon the head of
God.

2. In the next petition, Thy kingdom come.

In this petition we pray that God may reign in our hearts, that the kingdom of
sin and Satan being more and more abolished, Act. 26. 18. Col. 1. 3 Christ may
now reign in our hearts by grace, Col. 3. 15, 16. and we with him for ever in
glory, 2 Timothy 2. 5. 12.

3. In the next petition, Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven.

Hereby we exclude all wills opposed to the will of God, as our own will, and
all wills of evil men, or wicked Angels may be dissappointed; and so we desire
grace, that we may obey his will, and not the lust of the flesh and the will of
man.

4. In the next petition, we pray, Give us this day our daily bread.

In this petition, we beg that God would provide for us competent maintenance,
or such a proportion of outward means, as he shall see meet for us, Prove. 30.
8. and that he would give us grace to rely upon his providence, for all the
means of this temporal life, and to rest contented with that allowance which he
shall think fit for us, Psalm. 4. 11, 12.

Yea in this petition we beg health, wealth, food, sleep, raiment, house, etc:
together with all the helps and means to attain them, and that he would give us
care and conscience, to get those needful things by lawful means, that
laboring with our hands the thing that is good, we may eat our bread, Ephesians. 4.
28. 2 These. 3. 12.

5. The fifth petition, And forgive us our debts, as even we forgive them that
are debtors to us.

In this petition there is a frank and humble confession that we have sinned,
and stand guilty of original and actual transgressions, and that there is no
power in us to make satisfaction sor our sins; for by the Law, as by an
obligation, every man stands bound to keep it holy, and continually, Deuteronomy.
27. 26. Gal. 3. 10. James 2. 10. So that the breach thereof even once, and in
the least point, makes us debtors presently (as having forfeited our
obligation) So that no man can make amends unto God for it, considering that
whatsoever he does after the breach, is both imperfectly done, and if it were
perfect, yet it is due by obligation of the Law, and therefore cannot go for
payment, no more then a man can pay one debt with another.

6. The sixth and last petition: And lead us not into temptation but delievers
from evil.

In this petition we pray, that not only our sin may be pardoned, but also that
it may be mortified, Romans 6. 1, 2. and that we may be either kept from
temptation, or preserved by his grace from being hurt thereby, 1 Cor. 10. 13. 2
Cor. 12. 9. The effect of temptation, without the special grace of God, is
extremely evil, to wit sin and damnation, 1 Timothy 6. 9.

Now seeing we cannot be tempted without the will of God, Job 1. 10. nor resist
without his power, 2 Cor. 12. 9. If it be his blessed will, that he would not
let us fall into the one, unless he preserve us in the other, and that he would
tie up Satan, and restrain his malice and power, or else make us wise to know
and avoid his stratagems.

Of the World, Flesh and Devil, the three great enemies of man.
First of the World.
TAke the world in all its beauty, bravery, and glory, and you shall find
sorrow attend worldly joy: danger attend worldly safety, and loss attend
worldly joy labors, and tears attend worldly prosperity.

Where one thousand are destroyed by the worlds frowns, ten thousand are
destroyed by the worlds smiles, it sings to us and sinks us, it kisseth us and
betrayeth us: Let heaven be a man's object, and the world will soon be a man's
subject; the fashion of this world passes away, why should we set our eyes
upon that which is not; heaven has a foundation, the earth has none; again,
worldly light is mixed with darkness, Joy with sorrows, pleasure with pain,
honor with dishonor, riches with want, wine with water, honey with gall, and
our Sugar with wormwood, and roses with prickles, in a word, worldly comforts
entertained with great delight, are seldom lost without exceeding great Sorrow
and grief.

Of the Riches of this world.
THE good things of this world are not so absolutely given us, but that God
retains still a right to it, and an interest in it, and may demand it, how and
when he please, And usually the worst of men have most of these outward things,
and the best of men have least of earth, and most of heaven.

A man may be great and graceless with Pharaoh, honorable and damnable with
Saul, rich and miserable with Dives: A man may have enough of the world to sink
him, but he can never have enough of the world to save him: A man may as soon
fill a bag with wisdom, and a chest with virtue, or a circle with a tryangle,
as the heart of man with any thing here below, therefore it is better to be
gracious then great, inwardly holy, then outwardly happy; the riches of this
world, although well gotten, are but like the manna, those that gathered less
had no lack, and those that gathered more, had little or none to spare; the
consideration of this raised up the spirits of those Saints, Heb. 11. to
triumph upon all the beauty, bravery, and glory of the world, they having
acquaintance with, and an interest in a better and more durable riches; these
are uncertain riches. For one storm at Sea, one coal of fire, one false friend,
or one unavised word may make a rich man a beggar, and a prisoner altogether:
Oh how do riches hinder the actings of Faith upon God, how do they interrupt
our sweet communion with God, how does it abate our love to the people of God,
and cool our love to the things of God? oh the deadness, dullness and the
barrenness that attend men having large possessions in this world, and when
they fall sick, a crown of Gold cannot cure the head ach, nor a velvet slipper
the gout, nor a chain of gold about the neck, cannot take away the pain of the
teeth.

Many times he that we account the richest man, is the poorest man in the world.
WE account him a poor man that does want meat for his belly, clothes for his
back, and money in his purse, and a house to put his head in; and in this
respect every man that is out of Christ, although the most richest and
honourablest man in the worlds account, is but a poor man.

1. He is a poor and beggarly man that has no money in his purse; now if your
bags be full of gold and silver, and your hearts empty of grace, you are poor
and beggarly in a Scripture account, yea you are poor, and blind, and
miserable, and naked, Rev. 3. 17.

2. He is a poor man that has no meat to put in his belly; but every man that
is out of Christ, does not, nor cannot feed upon that true manna, the bread of
life, nor drink of that water of life, John 6. 55.

3. He is a beggarly man that has not an house to put his head in; this is the
case of all those that have no interest in Christ, when death comes they know
not what to do, nor where to go, unless it be into a dungeon of darkness, full
of devils and damned Spirits, Mat. 25. 41.

4. He is a poor man that has no clothes to put on his back; thus every man
out of Christ, is not only poor, but naked too, Rev. 3. 17. surely he is the
poorest man in the world, for he wants an interest in God, Christ, the Spirit
and promises, he wants peace with God, and peace in conscience, he wants
acceptance and reconciliation, he wants righteousness, Justification and
adoption, and redemption, he wants the pardon of sin, and power against sin,
and freedom from the reign of sin, he wants those riches that perish not,
that glory that fades not, that kingdom that shakes not.

5. We do account that man a poor man that is in debt over head and ears, and
has little or nothing where withal to pay; even this is the case of most of
those men that have feathered their nests by raking and scraping together the
muck of this world: they are in debt to men, let every bird have his feather
and they will have little enough: and they are in debt to God, ten thousand
times more then they are worth, and having no surety, they must lie in prison
perpetually; and as for the honors of the world, what are they? the best man's
honor is* as glass britt and brittle, and ever more in danger of breaking; as
a bird hoppeth from tree to tree, so do the honors and riches of this world
from man to man: and so much of the world.

Of the Flesh.
NOw the works of the flesh are manifest, Galat. 5. 19.
which are these, adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, therefore
great need of this exhortation, 1 Pet. 2. 11. dearly beloved I beseech you as
strangers abstain from fleshly lusts, Romans 7. 18. in my flesh dwells no good
thing, for to will is present with me, but how to perform that which is good I
find not, for all flesh is grace, and all the goodliness thereof as the flower
of the Field, the grass withers, and the flower fades, Isa. 40. 6. 1 Pet. 1.
24. Psalm. 37. 2. Psalm. 90. 5, 6. and 92. 7. and 103. 15. Isa. 37. 27.

What shall I say more? all mankind are under the wrath and curse of God, being
full of blindness of mind, having a reprobate sense, liable to strong
delusions, hardness of heart, horror of conscience, and vile affections, having
the curse of God upon the whole creation for man's sake; and besides all this,
man is subject to all manner of evil, in body, name and estate, and relations,
and employment, together with an utter undisposed mind to all that is good, and
wholly inclined to all that is evil, and that continually.

What man is by nature.
NOT only born in sin, but left in a condition not able to help himself, Job
14. 4. Who can bring a clean thing out of an uncelan? not one, Job 25. 4. How
can he be clean that is born of a woman? Psalm. 51. 5. Behold I was shapen in
iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me, Mich. 7. 2. there is none
upright amongst men, there is none righteous, no not one, Romans 3. 12. We go
astray as soon as we are born, Psalm. 58. 3. Every imagination of the thoughts
of our hearts is only evil, and that continually, Genesis 5. 6. Nay all the Saints
themselves before conviction, conversion, and regeneration, were guilty of
original and actual transgression, and so were by nature the children of wrath
as well as others, Ephesians. 2. 3. 1 Cor. 6. 9. Tit. 3. 3. 1 Timothy 1. 13. Eccles. 7.
20. What shall I say more, the understanding is full of vanity, Psalm. 94. 11.
Nay its full of blindness, 1 Cor. 2. 24. unteachableness and incredulity, 2
Cor. 4. 4. The will of man is wholly depraved, being contrary to God, his word
and spirit in all things; as for the memory, that also is full of corruption,
it will forget the things that it should remember, and remember the things that
it should forget, it will retein trifles, and let go matters of moment; and as
for the conscience, that also is wholly corrupted, it is without feeling,
whereas it should excuse or accuse, it does abuse and pervert the light it
has, by making great sins small, and small sins no sins; and as for our
affections, they are also corrupted, they come as a tempest and carry us away,
either to make us overlove, or overgreat, and to hate our brother we should
love, and love our lusts we should hate.

Of man's own righteousness.
BUt we are all as an unclean thing, and Isaiah 64. 6.
all our righteousness is as filthy rags, and we all do fade as a leaf, Jer. 2.
22. For though thou wash thee with Niter, and take much Soap, yet thine
iniquities are marked before me, says the Lord God, Job 9. 30, 31. If I wash
my self in Snow-water, yet mine own clothes shall abhor me, Hosea 6. 4. O
Ephraim, what shall I do unto thee? O Judah what shall I do unto thee? for your
goodness is as the morning cloud, and as the early dew it goes away, Isa. 28.
20. The bed is shorter then that a man can stretch himself on it, and the
covering is narrower then that a man can wrap himself in it, Isa. 50. 11.
Behold all ye that kindle a fire, walk in the light of your fire, and in the
Sparks that ye have kindled, this shall ye have of my hand, ye shall lie down
in Sorrow, Job 35. 7. If thou be righteous, what give thou to him, or what
receives he of thine hand? verse 8. Thy wickedness may hurt a man as thou art,
and thy righteousness may profit the Sons of men, etc. See Job 22. 2, 3. Titus
3. 8. Psalm 16. 2.

Of the Devil.
THE Devil sinned from the beginning of the world, compare John 8. 44. with
Jude 6. and you shall see he was the first sinner in the world, and the sole
cause of all other sinners; he drew his apostate Angels with him, hence came
that phrase, Mat. 25. 41. The Devil and his Angels; he deceived our first
parents in the Serpent, and so brought sin upon all the world, Genesis 3. And
still he as a roaring Lion walks about seekinng whom he may devour; sometimes
in Scripture he is called Satan, because he does mortally hate mankind;
sometimes Devil, because he does slanderously accuse men to God and man, Job 1.
11. and 2. 5. Rev. 12. 8, 9. 10. Sometimes he is called the old Serpent, for
his subtle temptations; sometimes the great dragon, for his destroying of
many, Rev. 12. 8, 9.

But here lies much of a Saints comfort, the Devil must have a double leave,
before he can do any thing against him; he must first have leave from God, as
we find in the example of Job. 1. 11, 12. and 2. 3, 5. though the Devil had
malice enough to destroy him, yet he had not so much as power to touch him,
till God gave him commission: so Luke 8. 32. they could not so much as enter
into the swine without leave from Christ; so Satan could never have overthrown
Ahab and Saul, but by a commission from God, 1 Kings 22 And as Satan must have
a leave from God, so he must have leave from us; when he tempts we must
consent, when he commands we must obey, or else all his temptations will be
frustrate, Act. 5. 3. Why has Satan filled thy heart, to lie to the
Holy Ghost? why have thou given him an advantage to fill thy heart with
infidelity, hypocrisy and obstinacy to lie to the Holy Ghost? when a
temptation comes, and the soul cries out, and says, O help, help Lord for
thine honor sake, for thy Sons sake, for thy promise sake, for thy mercies
sake, then the evil that he tempts us to, shall be put down only to his
account: what shall I say more? those that be the objects of Gods dearest love,
are many times the subjects of the Devils deepest rage: Satan watches all
opportunities to break our peace, to wound our consciences, to lessen our
comfort, to impair our graces, and to slur our evidences; it is as easy to
compass the heavens with a span, and to contein the sea in a nut-shell, as to
relate fully Christ's goodness, and Satan's devices, for he aims principally to
make us walk sinfully, that so we might live uncomfortably, and die miserably,
and be tormented with him eternally.

Of afflictions, why God does afflict his own people, and how to know what Sin
God aims at in affliction; and when a man may be said to suffer for well-doing,
and when for evil doing.
WE read in Scripture that man is born to trouble as the sparks fly upward,
and although his days be few, yet they are full of trouble; nay we may find in
the Scriptures of truth, that the Lords own dearest ones have been exceedingly
exercised this way, Job 6. 4. Job the justest man alive, was fought against by
the terrors of the Lord; and David a man after Gods own heart had no rest in
his bones, because of his sin, and was so wasted with the grief of his heart,
that his moisture was turned inth the drought of summer, Ps. 32. 3, 4. and
Hezekiah who walked in the truth and with a perfect heart, had the anger of the
Almighty to break his bones like a lion, Isa. 28. 13. Was not Abel murdered by
his brother? Noah mocked by his Son? Job scoffed by his wife? Jacob threatened
by his brother? banished from his Father? abused by his uncle? in the day
consumed with heat, in the night with frost? Genesis 31. 4.

Did not the son of God himself lie bleeding upon the cross, and cry out in the
bitterness of his spirit, my God my God why have thou forsaken me? Isa 53. 5.
But he was wounded for our transgressions, and bruised for our iniquities,
persecuted in his child hood by Herod, Mat. 2. 16. tempted by the Devil,
reviled by the Highpriests, branded for a babbler, wine-bibber, blasphemer,
mocked by the Jews, stripped of his garments, crowned with thorns, the first
fruits of the curse, he was hanged between two thieves, and nailed his hands to
the cross, and pierced his side with a spear, etc.

Some reasons why the Lord does afflict his own people.
1 Cor. 11. 32. WE are chastned of the Lord, that we should not be condemned
with the world: sometimes he does afflict a few, that the rest might beware,
Luke 13. 5. And sometimes he does afflict his people for the trial of the
truth, and strength of their graces, Job 1. 21. Again, sometimes he brings his
own dear ones into misery, that he might magnify the attributes of his mercy
in healing them; so it was with him that was born blind: and sometimes he does
afflict them, to keep them humble and low in their own eyes, and to put them
upon the use of means, whereby sin may be subdued. Sometimes the Lord does
afflict, for the prevention of sin for time to come; he does punish those that
serve him, and lets the world go free, this was David's temptation, Psalm 73.
13. Affliction is a seal of adoption, no sign of reprobation* for the purest
corn is cleanest fanned, the fine^t gold oftest tried, and the sweetest grape
hardest pressed, and the truest Christian heaviest crossed; affliction does
many times make a bad man good, but it does always make a good man better; nay
God can look sowrly and chide bitterly, and strike heavily, even where, and
when he loves dearly: it is a common thing for all men to be afflicted, but it
is an extraordinary thing to be bettered by it: in all afflictions consider
three things.

1. The fountain from whence it comes, and that is from Gods love, Eccles. 7.
14. 2. The end whither it ayms, (our good) It was good for me that I was
afflicted, Psalm 119. 3. Consider, our punishment is less then our desert; the
consideration of this made Aaron to hold his peace, Lev. 10. 3. and Hezekiah to
wait for deliverance, Isa. 38. 13, 14. This made David to be dumb, Psalm. 39. 9.
This made Ely to say, it is the Lord, let him do as seems him good, 1 Samuel
13. 18. yea, this made Job to say, blessed be the name of the Lord.
The Lord does try the truth and strength of his own people to the highest, and
yet lays no more upon the weakest, then he does enable him to bear.
IF Job do exceed all others in patience, as he did, Job 5. 11. then the truth
and strength of this patience shall be tried to the uttermost.

1. The Sabeans take away his Oxen and his Asses, Job 1. 15.

2. A fire from heaven came down and burnt up his sheep, Job 1. 16.

3. The Chaldeans came and stole away all his cammels, Job 1. 17.

4. His servants that were plowing and keeping the sheep, were all slain by the
edge of the sword, fire from heaven.

5. His sons and daughters were all at once slain by the fall of an house, Job
1. 18, 19.

6. Then his body was smote, and became full of boyls from the crown of the
head, to the sole of the foot, Job 2. 7.

7. Then his wife that lay in his bosom, tempts him to curse God and dye, Job
2. 9.

8. His three near and dear friends came to him, and stayed with him seven
days and seven nights, and spoke not one word of comfort to him, Job 2. 13.

9. The presence and favor of God was hid from his soul, Job 19. 8. and all
this to try the truth and strength of Jobs patience.

If Peter will boast of a greater love to Christ, then the rest, saying, though
I should dye with thee, I will never deny thee, Mat. 26. 35. And when this love
came to the trial, instead of dying, he came to denying of Christ. So again,
although Peter's love made him to go out of the ship to meet Christ upon the
sea. I say, although his love was strong, yet his faith was weak, and he began
to sink: here his truth and strength was tried to the highest: If Moses will
exceed all the men upon the face of the earth in meekness, Number. 12. 3. the
truth and strength of that meekness must be tried, first in his absence, the
people make a calf and worshipped it, Exodus 32. 19. After this the people speak
against Moses, Numb. 21. 5. A little after this, when they wanted water the
people chide with Moses, saying, would God we had dyed in the wilderness, Numb.
20. 3, 4. So he was continually vexed with a perverse and crooked generation,
Deuteronomy. 32. 5. And at last so provoked by them, that he spoke unadvisedly with
his lips, Psalm 106. 33. and so his meekness was tried to the highest: Again,
to instance one more for all, if Paul have a greater revelation then the other
Apostles, he must have a thorn in the flesh, even the messenger of Satan to
buffet him: so the woman, Mat. 15. 22. to the 28. She had a strong faith that
Christ was able to help her daughter, and the mercy she desired was but
external, to wit crumbs; now Christ did try the truth, and strength of this
faith, in a threefold seeming denial; but in all trials the Lord does
proportion them according to the strength of those that he does afflict, See 1
Cor. 10. 13. The Lords people have diverse corruptions, and so do need diverse
corrections.

How to know what sin God aims at in affliction.
THE Lord says in his word, hear the voice of the rod, Micah 6. 9. which if we
did heedfully observe, we might find out the sin that God ayms at in the
affliction.

1. When we find in Scripture that such and such a punishment is denounced
against such and such a sin, we may find by the effect the proper cause; pride
with dejection and contempt; whoredom with barrenness; idleness with poverty;
worldly sorrow with death.

2. Consider, if thou would find out the sin God afflicts thee for, consider
God does punish thee by way of retaliation, like for like; as when we have
dishonored God, he does cast dishonor upon us, and having wronged our
inferiors, our superiors wrong us, or if we lavish our tongues against others,
we are paid home with the scourge of tongues, thus David was justly dealt with,
2 Samuel 12* 10, 11.

3. When we are taken in the very act of sinning, so Jon. 1. 12. flying, was
followed with a tempest, and the I sraelites murmuring for flesh, were punished
by God, whilst it was between their teeth, Numb. 11. 33.

4. When our sin in its own nature brings forth such a punishment, so a lazy
Christian does always want four things, comfort and content, confidence and
assurance. Idleness in natural things, brings forth beggary and want,
drunkenness begets dropsies and surreits: so the sin of uncleanness brings
forth weakness and filthy diseases, so immoderate carking, is attended with
consumptions.

5. If thou would know the sin that brought these afflictions on thee,
observe what thy conscience does most check thee for. Joseph's brethren in their
troubles calls to mind their cruelty to their troubles calls to mind their
cruelty to their brother Joseph, which was indeed the cause of their cross,
Genesis 42. 21.

When a man may be said to suffer for well-dong, and when for evil doing.
FIrst, for well-doing.

1. That man that does suffer for well-doing, in the account of God, according
to his word, his person must be holy, he or she must be in the main godly.

2. The cause that they suffer for must be good, it must be for righteousness
sake, viz. either for his believing in Christ, pleading for him, or practizing
of his commandments, and so his affliction will be better then the prosperity
of the wicked, Psalm 37. 15.

They shall have more comfort in scantness, obscurity, then wicked men have in
plenty, credit and great felicity, 2 Cor. 4. 8, 9. We are troubled on every
side, yet not distressed; we are perplexed, but not in despair; persecuted, but
not forsaken; cast down, but not destroyed.

3. He that does suffer for well-doing, he must suffer in a right manner; first
humbly: secondly patiently and meekly: thirdly cheerfully: fourthly, he that
does suffer for Christ, must have good ends, etc.

1. He must suffer humbly: we read of Christ, whose footsteps we ought to
follow, that he was led as a lamb to the slaughter, he opened not his mouth.

2. As he did suffer humbly, so he did suffer patiently.

3. He did suffer cheerfully.

4. He did not revile again, when he was reviled; when he was threatened, he did
not threaten again.

4. He that does suffer for Christ, must have good ends in his suffering, viz.

1. To bare witness to some truth of Christ, contained in the Scriptures.

2. To bare witness for the name and glory of God, 1 Pet. 4. 13.

But when a man does that which is evil, and does suffer for it, this is not
thank-worthy with God: See these Scriptures, 1 Pet. 2. 20. 1 Pet. 4. 15, 19.

Many men that suffer and glory therein, suffer only for their faults, and are
in no wise acceptable to God.

The Lord is many times better then his word, never worse.
THE Lord promised to Israel, only the Land of Canaan, but besides that, he
gave them two better Kingdoms, Numb. 32. 33. Solomon did only pray for wisdom,
and the Lord gave him more wisdom then he asked, and riches and honor to boot,
1 King. 3. 11, 12. Jacob told the Lord, that if he would give him raiment to
put on, and bread to eat, God should be his God; and the Lord gave him that,
and ten times more, Gone 28. 19. compared with, Genesis 32. 10 For with my staff I
passed ^ver this Jordan, and now I am become two bands, Genesis 33. 4, 5, 6. So
again, 1 Samuel 1. Hannah begged a son, and the Lord gave her a Son, and a
Prophet too; she desired a single mercy, and the Lord gave her a double mercy,
Genesis 17. Abraham and said, O that Ishmael might live before thee, the Lord
granted that, and gave him an Isaac to boot, ver. 19. Mat. 15. 22. to the 28.
The woman of Canaan did only beg of Christ the life of her daughter, and Christ
gave her that, and said, moreover be it unto thee even as thou will Again, we
read Ephesians. 3. 20. That he is able to do exceedingly above all that we can ask
or think: these words are so full, that they can hardly be expressed. So again,
sometimes we only ask temporal mercies, and he gives us both temporal and
spiritual mercies. Sometimes a soul does beg only support under temptations,
and the Lord does give that and more, (to wit) a deliverance out of temptation.
So again, we find Mat. 18. 23. to the 27. That the Lord gave him more then he
desired; he desired but days of payment, and the Lord forgave him the whole
debt. So again, Act. 3. 2, 3. The cripple did only ask of Peter and John an
alms, and they gave him a mercy more worth to him then the whole world; they
cured him of his lameness.

Mercies and deliverances are many times nearest to us, when we think they be
furthest off.
WE read Act. 27. 20. When all hopes of being saved was taken away, then Paul
stood up and told them from the Lord, that there should not be so much as the
loss of any man's life amongst them. So Luk 24. 15. When two of the Disciples
were walking together, and were sad about the death of Christ, Christ risen
from the dead talked with them, and they knew it not, Genesis 21. 16. to the 19.
we read that Hagar was weeping for her son, who was dying for want of water,
and there was a well of water by her, and she did not know it, till the Lord
opened her eyes, Joh. 20. 11. Mary stood at the sepulcher weeping for the
absence of Christ, and Christ stood by her, and talked to her, before she knew
it. Again, we read Genesis 44. 45. chap. that Joseph's brethren were taken
prisoners, and they rent their clothes, saying, how shall we clear our selves?
and Joseph their brother stood by them, and they knew it not, even then when
they were trembling, and terrified at his presence: in a word, the Lord does
many times bring about a swifter, a fuller, and more universal help and
deliverance, then heart could imagine. See Zach. 14. 6, 7. But at Even tide it
shall be light. So that we may all conclude with David, Psalm. 77. 19. Thy way
is in the sea, and thy paths in the deep waters, and thy footsteps are not
known.

The Lord does many times hand forth his mercies to us by the rule of
contraries.
GOD promised to Abraham a son, and that his seed should be as the stars of
heaven, and the Lord made good this by the rule of contraries; there was
fourteen years between Gods making the promise, and giving him a son, and he
was about one hundred years old before he had a son, and Sarahs womb was
barren; and after this son was born, God calls upon Abraham to offer him up,
yet notwithstanding all this, the Lord made good his promise, and Abraham
staggered not at the promise of God, Romans 4. 20, 21. Again, we find Exodus 14.
when the children of Israel were in the greatest straight, and at the furthest
distance from all humane helps, not knowing what to do, then, even then the
Lord delivered them, Luke 21. 28. When ye see these things come to pass, then
lift up your heads, for your redemption draws nigh: one would have thought
ruin was nigh, to see such things come to pass, John 9. 15. Christ put clay
upon the blind man's eyes; one would think clay should have made him more blind,
Hest. 3. 12, 13. All the Jews were designed for death, Hest. 8. 9, 10, 11, 12.
This design, contrary to all expectation, was discovered and revoked, and the
Jews preserved by the rule of contraries: so Joseph had a promise by way of
vision to be made a great man, but contrary to this, he was sold into Egypt,
and there cast into prison, yet at last he got the mercy: we might instance in
Job and many others, but this may suffice to prove this truth, that God does
often times hand forth his mercies to us by the rule of contraries, etc. This
would be of great use to Christians, if more considered.

The Lord does not despise the day of small things.
WE read Zach. 4. 10. That the Lord does not despise the day of small things:
and it was but a day of small things for Nicodemus, to come to Christ by night,
and yet he was received and embraced: one would have thought that if Christ
would have despised any, he would have despised him, who was so weak, as being
either afraid or ashamed, or both, to own Christ in the day, and so he comes
to him by night; one would have thought Christ would have said to him,
Nicodemus, is thy desire after me so weak and faint, that thou do fear to
come to me in the day? or am I so unworthy, as not to be owned but out of
sight? have thou either so low an esteem of me, or bear thou so little love
to me? go, return as thou came, I will not accept thee in the dark, who
would not acknowledge me in the light; no no, Christ has not one syllable of
this, but he entertains him, embraces him, and instructs him, etc. It was but a
day of small things with that woman, Mat. 9. 21. That had spent all, and grew
worse and worse, and knew not whither to go: then she resolves to go to Christ:
It was but a day of small things with that man that came to Christ, Mar. 9. 22.
saying, if thou can do any thing, help us: he doubted whether Christ could
help, yea or no: It was but a day of small things with the Prodigal, Luke 15.
to say, when he knew not whither to go, I will arise and go to my father; yet
he was received, embraced, welcomed, and honored; well may we say, as in Mat.
12. 20. A bruised reed shall he not break, and smoking flax shall he not
quench. So again, it was but a day of small things with David, to have thoughts
to build an house unto the Lord, yet that was accepted, as fully as if it had
been done. Again, we read Isa. 40. 11. He will gather his lambs with his arms,
and he will carry them, and that in his bosom. It is true, he does carry our
sins on his back, and has received all the lashes due to us for them: ask
blind Bartimeus, and he will tell you that Christ does not despise the day of
small things; he did but ask for mercy, and presently received the mercy, Mar.
10. 46, 47, 48. So it is but a day of small things with us in respect of our
faith, love, knowledge, and power over our corruptions, hope, patience, and
self-denial, yet who has despised the day of small things? Zach. 4. 10.

The order of causes, how God comes downward, from the causes to, the effects;
and how we must go upward, from the effects to the causes.
IT will make much for our information, and consolation, to consider what order
and method the Lord does take to unvail his love to man, and what order and
method man should take to apprehend and enjoy this love, viz. God goes downward
from the causes to the effects, and we must go upward, from the effects to the
causes: the web that God has weaved we must unweave; he goes from election
downward, we must go from regeneration upward, thus shall God and we meet in
the middle way; we must prove our selves to be called, and he will acknowledge
us to be elected: consider and weigh these ensuing things.

1. The cause of salvation is Gods love. 2. The way is Jesus Christ. 3. The
guide is the Holy Ghost. 4. The rule for our footsteps is the Scriptures. 5.
Faith is the evidence. 6. Hope is the Anchor of the soul, and Baptism and the
Lords Supper are the seals.
1. Gods love to sinners, was the cause of sending his son to dye for them,
Job. 3. 16. Romans 5. 6, 8. 1 Pet. 3. 18. Tit. 3. 4, 5.

2. Christ's dying for our sins, and rising again for our justification, is the
cause of the Gospels being preached to sinners, Mat. 28. 18, 19. Mar. 16. 15,
16. 1 Cor. 15. 13.

3. The Gospel being preached to sinners, is the cause of their believing, Romans
10. 14, 15, 17. Ephesians. 1. 13. Act. 13. 48.

4. Man's believing is the cause of his justification from sin, Act. 13. 38, 39.
Romans 3. 26, 28.

5. Our knowing our selves to be justified from our sins, by faith in the blood
of Christ, is the cause of our love to Christ, 1 John 4. 10, 19.

6. Our love to Christ, is the cause of our obeying of Christ, 1 John 5. 3. For
this is the love of God, that we keep his commandments: so again, Joh. 14. 15.
If ye love me, keep my commandments, See the 21. and 23. ver.

7. In our obedience to him, he does manifest these things to us, that we have
right to the tree of life, Rev. 22. 14. Blessed are they that do his
commandments, that they may have right to the tree of life, and may enter in
through the gates, into the City: that is, in the obedience, he shall have the
manifestation of that, 2 Pet. 1. 11. For so an entrance shall be administered
unto you abundantly, into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ. And so he is manifested to be the Author of salvation to all them that
obey him, Heb. 5. 9.

Behold obedience to God is the way of conveyance to us, so it is a lively
evidence to others that we are the Lords, Joh. 13. 35. By this shall all men
know that ye are my Disciples: because our faith, which is the evidence of
things not seen to us, is proved to others to be true by its works, Jam. 2. 18.

Behold here is the Lords going downward, from the causes to the effects; now
we must go upward, from the effects to the causes.

1. God shows us what is our duty, and puts us upon doing it, and for the doing
of it, those that behold it, and hear of us, judge us to be true Christians.

2. In the doing of it, God manifests himself more and more to our souls; in
the keeping of his appointments there is great reward, for so an entrance is
administered to us abundantly, 2 Pet. 1. 11.

3. The cause of our obedience is our love to God, If ye love me, keep my
commandments.

4. The cause of our love, was our seeing that God did love us first, 1 John 4.
10, 19.

5. The cause of our faith in Christ, is the preaching of the Gospel, Romans 10.
17.

6. The cause of the preaching the Gospel to us, was Christ's dying for us.

7. The cause of Christ's dying for us, was Gods great love of pity to
us-wards, even when we were dead in trespasses and sins, Ephesians. 2. 4.

So then Gods love was the cause of sending his son o deye for our sins,
Christ's dying and rising again is the cause of the Gospe^s being preached. The
preaching of the Gospel is the cause of our believing: Our believing is the
cause of our justification from sin; the knowing of our selves free from sin by
the blood of Christ, is the cause of our love to Christ; our love to Christ is
the cause of our obeying of him; and in onr obedience is the manifestation more
and more conveyed to us. So by our obedience, others have some evidence of our
faith in Christ.

Man's life is, or should be guided by these virtues.
1. FAith whereby we believe in, and lay hold on God for something promised.

2. Hope, and that is either for pardoning mercy, or for glory.

3. Charity, whereby we love God as the only good, and his people, and our
enemies in obedience to his command.

4. Prudence.

1. In our hearts to guide our thoughts. 2. In our mouths, to order our
speeches. 3. It should be in our words to grace or adorn our actions. 4. In the
intelligence, to understand things present. 5. Prudence, to guess at things to
come. 6. Prudence, to recall matters past.
5. Temperance, which moderates our desires, and brings the Appetite under a
rule of reason, that it may not exceed the rule of moderation.

6. Perseverance, which continues in doing and suffering valiantly.

7. Justice, which gives every man his due, without self-love, fear or
ranckor; it binds us to give due to God, to our parents, and kindred: verity
and equity in all that we do, in order to our duty herein.

1. Sense perceives. 2. Imagination represents. 3. Understanding forms. 4.
Wit devises. 5. Reason judges. 6. Memory preserves. 7. Intelligence
apprehends. 8. Contemplation in the prosecution, perfecteth.
Several Divine Sentences.
First of Christ.
HE that was the Son of of God, became the son of man, that we who were the
sons of men, might become the sons of God.

He was made sin for us, that knew no sin, that we might be made the
right^ousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5. 21.

The more vile Christ made himself for us, the more dear he ought to be unto
us; therefore let us beware of Christ-dishonouring, and soul-undoing opinions.

All good things are in Christ, eminently, perfectly, and eternally.

Faith in the blood of Christ, the witness of the Spirit of Christ, a sense of
feeling and the love of Christ, and the hope of reigning with Christ, are the
only things to be desired. Christ is as well the fountain of common gifts, as
of saving grace.

A true Christian cannot find fullness in the creature, nor sweetness in sin,
nor life in any Ordinance without Christ; he will weep over other men's
weaknesses, and rejoice at their graces.

We must lean more upon Christ, and less upon our own strength; lest with Peter
we rest upon some old strength, and fall before a new temptation.

Christ can heal a soul speedily, perfectly, freely, and eternally.

Oh that Christ should shed his blood for those sins that we never shed one
tear for!

A true Christian does labor for unity in the Church, as well as purity; he
loves to see Christ's coat without rent, as well as without spot, Phil. 3. 15.

Christ did admit his spouse into the garden sweetly, though she kept him out
of her house sluggishly.

What a poor soul does for Christ sincerely, that our precious Savior takes
sweetly; though it be done ill, he does accept it well.

Nay, though we carry our selves in our choicest performances, very weakly, yet
he does carry himself toward us very sweetly, and does accept of that which we
do kindly, although done in much infirmity: let us enter into his service, and
we shall soon experience his sweetness.

Christ does weigh the heart of the giver, more then the value of the gift, and
delights to see his people give cheerfully, though they cannot give bountifully.

Let us give over measuring his mercy by the narrow scantling of our dark
understandings though difficulties may arise, and Christians hearts may fail,
yet the work of Christ shall go on, etc.

Of affliction for sin, in Sentences.
GOD is as severe in punishing as he is gracious in pardoning; his house of
correction is his School of instruction; God had one Son without corruption,
but no Son without correction; he had one Son without Sin, but no Son without
Sorrow. A Soul may be dearly beloved, although soarly afflicted; sin and
punishment are linked together; if thou will be sinful, thou must be miserable:
Oh what is the state of a man that has sinned! it will cost him more grief,
sorrow, heartbreaking and soul-bleeding, before conscience will be satisfied,
comfort restored, evidences cleared, and pardon in the court of conscience
sealed: for God can look sowrly, and chide bitterly, and strike heavily, even
where and when he loves dearly; a soul may be full of holy affection, when it
is empty of divine consolation; there may be true grace where there is not one
drop of comfort, nor one dram of joy.

Of Sin, in Sentences.
MOst men are fallen into sin, as if there were no God to punish them, no
justice to condemn them, no hell to torment them.

That man shall be a slave to sin, that will not avoid the occasions of sin.

It is impossible for that man to get the conquest of sin, that plays and
sports with the occasions of sin.

It is better to be kept from sin, then to be cured of sin; as it is better to
be kept from a disease, then to be cured of that disease; the greatest sinners
shall be the greatest sufferers. Sin shall never be our bane, if it be our
burden; sin does entice us to that which is against Gods holiness, as well as
against our happiness, There is no sin little, because there is no little God
to sin against.

There is many a one full of sinful corruption, that shows it not for want of
occasion; but the more grace thrives in the Soul, the more sin dies in the
soul: Sin may break our Communion, but not our Union with God.

Every sin does put God upon complaining, Christ upon bleeding, and the spirit
upon grieving, and so men go on from folly to folly, till they be ripe for
eternal misery.

Of doing or practicing, in Sentences.
WE should spend our and time pains about that which will make us live happily,
die comfortably, and reign eternally.

It is not knowing man, nor the talking man, nor the reading man, but the doing
man, that at last will be found the happiest man.

Therefore no danger or difficulty should hinder a Christian from his duty; for
if our knowledge be not turned into practice, the more knowledge we have, the
more miserable shall we be.

We should be thankful under mercies, faithful in our places, humble under
divine appearances, and fruitful under precious o^dinances.

For he that thinks himself too good to be ruled by Gods word, will be found
too bad to be owned by God.

To reward good for evil, is divine; to reward good for good, is humane; to
reward evil for evil, is brutish; but to reward evil for good, is devilish; we
are apt to have two eyes to behold our dignity and privileges, and not so much
as one eye to see our duty and services.

Of the Riches, Honor and Glory of the world, in Sentences.
A Man may be great and graceless with Pharaoh, honorable and damnable with
Saul, rich and miserable with Dives.

A man may have enough of this world to sink him, but he can never have enough
to save him; though good Christians have here but little in possession, yet
they have a glorious kingdom in reversion.

It is better to be gracious then great, inwardly holy then out wardly happy,
for the best man's honor is as glass, bright and brittle, and evermore in
danger of breaking: the things of this life are not so absolutely given us, but
that God retains still a right to it, and an interest in it, and may demand it
when and how he please.

Of the Devil and his temptation, in Sentences.
THE Devil aims principally to make us walk sinfully, that so we might live
uncomfortably. If Satan be always roaring, we should be always watching, for
though Satan cannot rob a Christian of his crown, yet he will endeavor to
spoil him of his comfort: It is not Satan's tempting, but our consenting, not
his enticing, but our yielding, that makes temptation sinful.

Therefore let us not yield to Satan's temptations, who has the worst name, and
the worst nature of all created creatures: our carnal security is his
opportunity; and he that would not be taken with Satan's devises, let him make
present resistance against Satan's first motions.

Of assurance of Salvation, in Sentences.
A Ssurance is a salve for every sore, and a remedy for every malady; a
Christians anchor at sea, and his shield at land, a staff to support him, a
sword to defend him, and a pavilion to hide him.

Assurance makes heavy afflictions light, and long afflictions short, and
bitter afflictions sweet; God has made an everlasting separation between sin
and peace, sin and joy, sin and assurance; if sin and our souls be one, God and
our souls must needs be two.

He that will get assurance, must mind his work more then his wages, for
assurance is heavenlywages, that God gives not to loiterers, but to the
ingenious laborers.

Though no man merits assurance by his obedience, yet God usually crowns
obedience with assurance.

That soul will never attain to any settled assurance of Salvation, that builds
his hopes upon a sandy foundation; We cannot distrust our selves too much, nor
trust Christ too much.

It is one thing for God to love a soul, and another thing for God to assure
that soul of his love.

A man may be truly holy, and yet not have assurance that he shall be eternally
happy.

God writes many a man's name in the book of life, and yet not let him have
assurance of it till the hour of death; assurance is a mercy too good for most
men's hearts, a crown too weighty for most men's heads. It is the best and
greatest mercy, and therefore God will only give it to his nearest and dearest
friends. As faith is often attended with unbelief, and sincerity with
hypocrisy, and humility with vain glory, so is assurance with fears and doubts.

Diverse knotty questions answered, and seeming contradictions in the Scripture,
reconciled, and many Scruples of conscience removed.
WE read 1 John 3. 16. we ought to lay down our lives for the brethren.

Quest. In what cases may we hazard or lay down our lives for the brethren?

Answ. 1. A private Christian may adventure his life for public persons, Romans
16. 3, 4. Greet Priscilla and Aquila my hel^ers in Christ, who have for my life
laid down their own necks, unto whom not only I give thanks, but also all the
Chruches of the Gentiles.

2. A man may warrantably adventure his life, if need require, for a multitude,
that they may be preserved from destruction, so Moses, Exodus 32. 31, 32. so
Paul, Romans 9. 3. compared with Phil. 2. 17, 18.

3. One public officer may hazard his life for another of more concernment in
the Church, as Epaphroditus a Pastor of the Philippians, for Paul an Apostle,
Phil. 2. 30, etc.

We read in many places of Scripture, that it is the duty of every man to
believe, and we find in other Scriptures, that God is the Author of Faith, and
without him we cannot believe, John 5. 40, 44.

Q. Why does God promise eternal life to those that do believe, and threaten
eternal death to those that do not, seeing it is not in their power by nature?

Answ. 1. That he might by means of those promises and threats work us unto
that which by nature we are averse unto, 2 Cor. 5. 11, 20.

2. That we might appear more inexcusable, when neither promises nor
threatenings will move us to embrace free mercy, Acts 13. 46, 51. Acts 18. 6.

3. That the grace of God might as well appear in giving us power to believe,
as in giving Christ, and in him forgiveness of sins to be believed, Romans 9. 16.
and Romans 11. 5, 6.

4. That we might apply our selves unto God in the use of those means that he
has appointed for the working of Faith in us, John 6. 27. Isa. 55. 3.

5. That we might wholly deny our selves, and search, and by searching find in
the Covenant of grace, matter of free conveyance of power to believe whatsoever
is required to be believed, Romans 10. 17. John 5. 39. Romans 4. 16, etc.

We read John 3. 3. except a man be born again he cannot see the kingdom of
God, and we find that he that is born of God 1 John 3. 9. does not commit Sin.

Q. How or in what sense he that is born of God is said not to commit sin?

Answ. 1. He sins not, that is, he does not make it his trade as others do; he
sins not out of malice, nor allows himself in a course of sin; if sin
dwells in him, it does not reign in him, Romans 6. 12, 14.

2. If he do through some strong temptation fall into any sin, he sins with an
unwilling willingness, and with a dissenting consent, Romans 7. 15, 19. So that
they that are born of God, do not commit sin, as they do who are unregenerated.

3. They that are born of God do not commit Sin, That is, they do not sin
against Gospel remedy, as others do; Jesus Christ is the Gospel-remedy, Acts 4.
12. the going on in a state of unbelief and impenitency, not accepting of
Christ by Faith and repentance as a Savior and Mediator, is sinning against
this Gospel-remedy, Acts 16. 31. Compared with John 1. 11, 12.

4. He that is born of God does not sin presumptuously, and with wilful
obstinacy; they sin rather out of infirmity then of insolency, out of weakness
rather then willfulness, they do not so much overtake faults, as faults
overtake them, Gal. 6. 1. In this sense he that is born of God does not sin, or
that that is born of God does not sin; but for all this in another sense the
best of men do sin, and have in them sin Original, and too often fall into
actual: who can understand his errors? Psalm. 19. 12. Who can say I have made
my heart clean, I am pure from my sin? Prove. 20. 9. there is no man that
sins not, 1 Kings 8. 46. 2 Chronicles. 6. 36. But before I proceed further, I
will give you a Catalogue of those places of Scripture that speak of man as
free from sin, and then another Catalogue of those places of Scripture that
affirm we have sin in us: and lastly do what I can to reconcile them together.

Of spotless Saints.
THou art all fair my love, there is no spot in Cant. 4. 7.
thee, that is, no such spot as the wicked man has, Deuteronomy. 32. 5. Ephesians. 5. 27.
That he might present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or
wrinkle, 2 Pet. 3. 14. That you may be found in him without spot or wrinkle,
Rev. 14. 5. For they are without fault before the throne of God, Col. 1. 22.
You who were enemies in your minds, now has he reconciled in the body of his
flesh through death, to present you holy and unblamable, and unreprovable in
his sight. ver. 28. that we might present every man perfect in Christ, Col. 2.
10. You are complete in him, Ezekiel. 16. 14. Thou art comely through my
comeliness, says the Lord, that I have put upon thee, 2 Cor. 5. 21. He was
made sin for us, that knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of
God in him, Psalm 55. 13. The Kings daughter is said to be all glorious within.

Whatsoever grace there is in Christ, there is something of the same stamped
upon every true Christian, viz. Is Jesus Christ called the beloved of God? so
are the Saints too: is he called the Son of God? the Saints are also called the
Sons of God: Is Christ called heir? the Saints are said to be heirs, coheirs
with Christ: Is he said to be elect and precious? so are the Saints, 1 Pet. 1.
2. He is called the light of the world; they are also called light in the Lord,
Ephesians. 5. 8. Is he said to be full of grace and truth? so are the Saints too,
some of them, as Stephen, full of grace, Acts 7. 55. and Mary full of grace,
etc. They were once blind, but now they see; once slaves, but now sons; once
dead, but now alive; once drakness, but now light; once an heir of Hell, but
now an heir of Heaven; once Satan's bond men, but now Gods free men; once under
the Spirit of bondage, but now under the Spirit of Adoption, that seals up the
remission of sins, the Justification of their persons, and the salvation of
their souls, etc.

Of the spots in the best Saints.
THe most holy and best of Christians in this life* have in them sin original,
and thence too often fall into sin actual: who can understand his errors?
Psalm. 19. 12.

Who can say, I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin? Prove. 20. 9.
There is no man that sins not, 1 Kin. 8. 46. and 2 Chronicles. 6. 36.

In many things we sin all, Jam. 3. 2. There is not a Just man upon earth, that
does good, and sineth not, Eccles. 7. 20. If we say we have no sin, we deceive
our selves, and the truth is not in us; and if we say we have not sinned, we
make God a liar, for he has said in his word, that we all have sinned, 1 John
1. 8, 10. see also Romans 7. 5, 23, 24. Again the Testimony of the best of Saints
in all ages does testify that none of them all have been without sin in this
life: no not Abraham the Father of the faithful, Genesis 12. 13, 19. and 20, 2,
5. not Isaac, Genesis 26. 7, 8, 9. not Jacob, Genesis 27. 19, 20, 24. not Moses and
Aaron, Psalm 106. 33. Deuteronomy. 32. 50, 51. Exodus 32. 2, 12. not David, Psalm. 51.
1. to 10. and 38. 3, 4. not Peter, Mat. 26. 33, 34, 35, 70. not Paul himself,
Gal. 2. 11, 12, 13. Romans 7. 18, 20.

How to reconcile these Scriptures together, seeing the one says, they have
Spots, the other says, they have none.
1. WE are to put a difference between Spot and Spot, as the Lord does: Deuteronomy.
32. 5. Their Spot says he, is not the Spot of my people; so his people had not
Spots, and yet they had Spots, but not such Spots as wicked men.

2. Whereas it is said they had no spot or wrinkle in them, it was as they were
made comely by the comeliness that he had put upon them, Ezekiel. 16. 14. And as
they were covered with the robe of his own Righteousness, Isa. 61. 10. And so
their Holiness and Righteousness was of the Lord, Isa. 57. 17. Hence he is in
Jer. 23. 6. Called the Lord our Righteousness: the nature of Grace and
Sanctification in this life, is but imperfect, and growing unto perfection, 1
Cor. 13. 9, 10. Phil. 3. 12, 13. Some Canaanites are still in the Land;
although we are entered into Canaan, there is a Remnant of flesh, as well as a
Principle of the Spirit. Gal. 5. 17.

In this sense the Church is not actually purged, but in purging from all
defilements, and at last there shall be no spot, nor wrinkle, nor any such
thing, Ephesians. 5. 26, 27. So that complete purity from sin, and perfection, is
to be desired on earth, yet reserved for heaven, Romans 6. 7. Ephesians. 5. 27. Heb.
12. 23. Rev. 21. 27. I have dwelt longer then I intended upon this question, I
must get it up again in being brief in the next.

We read Mat. 12. 31, 32. The Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall not be
forgiven in this world, nor in the world to come.

Quest. What that sin against the Holy Ghost is?

Answ. The sin against the Holy Ghost does comprehend, and take in three
things, Knowledge in the mind, Malice in the heart, persecuting some known
Truths, and persevering therein: for the proof of this, let me instance in
three Scriptures, first, Paul was filled with malice in his heart; but although
a scholar, he had no knowledge in his mind, as the text says, he had mercy on
me because I did it ignorantly; now Peter he had much knowledge in his mind,
but no malice in his heart, and so although he sinned out of knowledge, yet he
sined not this sin, but upon the crowing of the cock, and Christ's looking on
him, he repents; now take the knowledge that was in Peter, and join it with
the malice that was in Paul, and in both these persecute the truth, and
persevere therein, this is that grand sin, for that grand sin has these three
properties, 1. Knowledge. 2. Malice. 3. Perseverance in a way of wickedness,
for finalness, maliciousness, and universalness must be taken jointly together,
not severally one from another, if by them we would describe the sin against
the Holy Ghost; for a man may fall knowingly and maliciously, yet unless he
fall finally, and so make a defection from the truth, not through fear or
infirmity, but out of hatred, blasphemy, and persecution; if he come not up to
this, he has not committed this sin, for we find all the former sins to be
pardonable.

It is reported of Julian that committed this sin, that he was from his
childhood trained up in piety, and attained to great knowledge, and when he
came to the Empire, he carried himself with much clemency, but after this, he
came to deny Christ in France, and turned a most bloody butcher, and barbarous
persecutor to poor Christians; after this being either wounded in a battle, or
a blow from heaven, he took a handful of his blood, and flung it up into the
air, and burst out into a most wicked experssion against Christ, and said, thou
man of Galilee, thou have overcome me, and so miserably dyed.

Quest. Is not Election the cause of salvation, and Reprobation the cause of
damnation?

Answ. Election and Reprobation are not in any sense the causes of salvation
and damnation, but Christ is the proper and meritorious cause of salvation; and
sin the proper and meritorious cause of damnation: Election and Reprobation
they are but precedent and precurrent acts or decrees, and the causes of
salvation and damnation, they come in between the decrees and the execution
thereof.

Quest. How could Christ, being but one, make satisfaction for the sins of so
many?

Answ. How could father Adam, being but one, infect so many with original sin?
I hope you will grant that the second Adam was as well able to sanctify, as
the first was to putrify; for though Christ was but one, yet he was such a one
as was greater and better then all, and so able, and sufficient to satisfy for
all, and to redeem all as well as he made all; and the blood of such a one as
Christ, the son of God, was of such an infinite value and price, that it did
surmount and surpass in dignity and worth, all the souls in the world; and his
sufferings and merits were a sufficient satisfaction, if intended and applied
to that end for to save so many worlds of men, as there is men in the world.

Quest. Did Christ fulfill the moral Law, or ten commandments by his death?

Answ. He did satisfy and perform for his people what the Law could require
and exact from them, and so became the end of the Law, for righteousness or
Justification, to every one that believes, Romans 10. 4. And so redeemed and
freed them from the Curse of the Law, Gal. 3. 13. By being made a Curse for
them, etc. but it still remains in full force and virtue, as a Rule of life, as
it is opened by Christ, Mat. 5. There is some difference in the administration
of it, since Christ's coming, from the administration of it before his coming.

Quest. Has not Christ dyed for all men, and tasted death for every man? 2
Cor. 5. 15. 1 Timothy 2. 6.

Answ. The word All, is not to be always taken for every one; for the word All
has many restrictions; for this word All is very often taken in Scripture for
all kinds, as Paul exhorts, that supplication be made for all men, that is,
some of all sorts and degrees, as well Rulers as others, 1 Timothy 2. 1. So it is
said, that Moses was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, that is, in
all kind of wisdom; so we read, that Christ healed all diseases, that is, all
manner of diseases; All is sometimes restrained in Scripture to Gods peculiar
people; Christ says, I will draw all men to me, John 12. 32. That is, all men
that the Father gave him, John 6. 4, 5. See Isa. 54. 13. Again we read, they
shall be all taught of God, not all the world sure, but all Gods people: Again,
I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh, Acts 2. 7. These cannot be meant of
all the wicked: Again we read, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 15. They please not God, and are
contrary to all men, that is, all good men: Again we read, Mat. 10. 22. Ye
shall be hated of all men for my names sake, that is, of all wicked men; by
which we may see how the word All is taken variously, and therefore it is to be
limited, and determined to persons and things, according as the text will bear,
and no otherwise; and when as it is said, he tasted death for every man, it is
to be taken for many, for instance, Cant. 3. 8. Every man had his sword on his
thigh. Mic. 4. 4. Every man shall sit under his Vine. 1 Cor. 4. 5. Every man
shall have praise of God: Now consider, every man in the world had not a sword
to wear, nor a Vine to sit under, neither shall every man have praise of God;
so every man is not to be taken, for every man in the world particularly: but
if it were granted that Christ tasted death for every man particularly, and
that all have some Benefit by the death of Christ, viz. Their natural lives,
and the possession of the creatures, yet it does not follow, if he tasted death
for every man, that therefore he suffered the wrath of God for every man, and
the punishment due to all for their sins, Mat. 27. 34. He tasted the vinegar
mingled with gall, but he would not drink it: and may there not be some
mystery held out thereby to the point in hand? you that are spiritual, Judge.

Quest. Does not God give to every man some Talent or Talents, which if a man
did improve, should be increased?

Answ. Yea, and there is no man that does avoid so much evil, and do so much
good as he ought and might: consider that to some the Lord does give natural
Talents, as Wisdom, Wealth, Art, etc. And to other spiritual Talents or Gifts,
as to Pray, Prophecy, Interpret; and God may very justly damn men for not
improving what he g^ves them; therefore we read, that the very Heathen, that
had but the very Light of Nature, and walked not up to that, will be
inexcusable at the day of judgment: but withal consider this, that to sin
against the Law of Nature only, is enough to damn men, yet the improvement of
the Law of Nature is not sufficient to save men, for there is a Knowledge of
Christ, Faith in him, and Obedience to him required as absolutely necessary to
salvation, John 17. 3. John 3. 36. Luke 19. 27. Compared with Rom 1. 20, 21.
Romans 2. 15. These Scriptures compared together will prove the whole answer to
this question.

Quest. How came the Sabbath day to be changed from the seventh day to the
first, and from a Sabbath day to the Lords day.

Answ. By divine authority, as may appear by the practice of our Savior Christ
and his Apostles, John 20. 19. compared with Act. 20. 7. 1 Cor. 16. 1, 2. This
is the day they preached, prayed, brake bread, and collected for the poor.

And so it came to be called the Lords day, Rev. 1. 10* Because the special
dedication thereof was to the Lords service.

So then this day was changed from the seventh to the first, and from a Sabbath
to a first or Lords day, because it might serve for a thankful memorial of
Christ's resurrection: for as God rested from his Labor on the last day of the
week, so Christ ceased from his labor and afflictions on this day, Matthew 28*
1. compared with Genesis 2. 1* 2. As the one therefore was specially sanctified,
in regard of the Creation of the world, so was the other in respect of the
restoration and redemption of the world, which of the two is a greater work
then the Creation.

So then the sourth Commandment does not require a seventh day from the
Creation, but a seventh day in general: so then it does not hence follow that
we should rest the same day the Lrod rested, but that we should rest from our
works one day in seven, as he rested from his; which day under the Law he
appointed to be the last day of the week; so nothing hinders but by his
special appointment under the Gospel, it may be the first day, and yet the
substance of the Commandment nothing altered: if any reply and say, why does
not the new Testament mention this change? I answer, because we read of no
question moved about the same in the Apostles time: so then a Sabbath day, the
Lords day, or the first day of the week, which is all one, is constantly and
perpetually to be observed, and never to cease till it be perfectly consummated
in the heavenly Sabbath, Heb. 4. 9, 10. The Jews were to work six days, and
rest the seventh day; first work, then rest: but now we are to rest the first
day, and work the following days; first enter into rest, and then work, as an
effect of that rest.

We read John 10. 27. And Christ said, my sheep hear my voice.

Quest. How are believing man and women said to be his sheep?

Answ. First, we are said to be his by donation, God gave us to Christ.

2. We are said to be his by purchase, he bought us with a dear price. 3. We
are said to be his by Covenant. 4. We are said to be his by Covenant. 5. We are
said to be his by Marriage. 6. We are his by birth, we are born from above.
Quest. Whether a godly man ought to pray, when he has not the fresh gales of
the spirit drawing him forth thereunto?

Answ. Then is the principal time to pray, but not the only time; for he is to
pray also at other times; first, we are commanded to pray at all times, Luke
18. 1. Luke 21. 36. Secondly, we have example as well as precept to prove this
truth, Psalm 119. 25, 154. David in the midst of deadness falls to prayer for
quickening, saying, quicken me according to thy word.

Quest. Whether it be the duty of a wicked man to pray, seeing we read Prove.
15. 8. That, the Sacrifices of the wicked is an Abomination to the Lord?

Answ. It is undoubtedly the duty of a wicked man to pray, and the Privilege
of a Christian that he can do it, though they that have no faith, cannot seek
Christ as they ought; yet it is their duty to pray and to seek after Christ,
Psalm. 79. 6. Pour out thy wrath upon the Heathen that have not known thee, and
upon the Kingdoms that have not called upon thy name: So again, Jer. 10. 25. If
the not calling upon the name of God be a sin, then to call upon the name of
God is a duty: Hence Peter calls upon Simon Magus, Acts 8. 22. Though an
unbeliever, to pray.

The Pharisee and the Publican both went to the Temple to pray, Luke 18. 10. So
again Ephraim, Jer. 31. 18. Yet not converted, prays unto the Lord to turn him.
Again, we may see 1 Kin. 21. 27. Ahab humbled himself, and rent his clothes,
and put sackcloth upon his flesh, and fasted, ver. 29. I will not says the
Lord bring the evil in his days, but in his sons days I will bring the evil
upon his house. So then it does plainly appear, that it is the duty of all men
to pray, only it is the privilege of the regenerate, they can pray in the
spirit, and with understanding too: a Christians seeking of God, is the effects
of Gods seeking of him; and a man's praying before faith, is the effect of the
common work of the spirit; our seeking after faith, is the effect of the saving
work of the Spirit; external Actions shall have external answers; spiritual
actions shall have spiritual answers, etc.

We read in four Scriptures, of Iniquity, Transgression and Sin, Exodus 34. 7.
Mic. 7. 18. Levit. 16. 21. Job 13. 23.

Quest. What difference is there between Iniquity, Transgression, and Sin? are
not these three one?

Answ. Iniquity is that which is done against another man; Sin, that which is
done against a man's self; and Transgression, that which is done immediately
against God, 1 Samuel 2. 25. But the Scriptures in some places make them all one;
but where we find these three words, Iniquity, Transgression, and Sin, laid
down together; we are to understand that the Lord does speak of our sin, with
all its aggravations, with all its heinous circumstances, sin with all its
malignity.

Quest. Whether God may forgive a man his sin, and yet the man himself not know
it?

Answ. A man's sins may be forgiven him, and he not know it, Lam. 3. 42. We have
transgressed, and have rebelled, and thou have not pardoned, etc. yet God had
pardoned, and God had forgiven them, and yet they lay under suspense of pardon;
and this is the case of many souls at this day.

Quest. If God pardons sin, whether or no does he afflict and punish men for it
afterward?

Answ. God in his despensation of Justice, does punish no man but where sin is:
Sin entered into the world and death by sin: it is true, sometimes the Lord
does afflict for trial, and not for sin, so was Jobs affliction.

Now that God does punish his people for sin, though their sins be pardoned,
will appear from these two Scriptures, 2 Samuel 12. 14. How be it, because by
this deed thou have given great occasion to the enemies of the Lord to
blaspheme, the child shall surely die: I will punish thee in thy child, I will
pardon thy sin, yet I will punish thy sin. So likewise in 2 Samuel 7. 14, 15. I
will be his father, and he shall be my son: if he commit Iniquity, I will
chasten him with the rod of men, but my mercy shall not depart away from him,
this was a promise to Solomon; so the Psalmist quoting this expression, Psalm
89. 31, 32. If they break my Statutes, and keep not my Commandments, then I
will visit their transgressions with a rod, Amos 3. 2. You have I known of all
the families of the earth, therefore I will punish you for all your Iniquities.

Object. Did not Christ fuffer for our sins, and must we suffer too? how can
this hang together?

Answ. When we say we are punished for sin, we are to take notice, that there
is a great deal of difference between our sufferings for sin, and Christ's; our
punishment for sin is not by way of satisfaction to divine Justice, for so
Christ was punished, Isa. 53. The chastisement of our Peace is laid upon him.

Quest. Whether pardon of sin goes before faith and repentance, or follows
after?

Answ. Doubtless in the court of heaven, according to election, Christ being a
Lamb slain from the foundation of the world, our sins are forgiven and done
away; but as to our apprehension and manifestation, God does pardon sin after a
man repents and believes, Act. 3. 19. Repent ye therefore, and be converted,
that your sins may be blotted out, see Acts 26. 18. Ephesians. 2. 3, 12. That at
that time ye were without Christ, being Aliens from the commonwealth of Israel,
and strangers from the Covenant of Promise, having no hope, and without God in
the world.

Quest. Whether it be consistent with the state of pardon, to fall into the
same sin again, and again, over and over?

Answ. Pardoned men have fallen often into the same sin, Genesis 42. 15. It was a
gross sin for Joseph to swear an heathenish oath, by the life of Pharaoh ye
shall not go forth hence, except your youngest brother come hither; send one of
you for him, and you shall be kept in prison, or else, by the life of Pharaoh,
surely you are spies; so that Joseph swore twice by the life Pharaoh: so we
read of Jehosaphat, he fell twice into the same sin, 2 Chronicles. 20. 35, 36, 37.

Besides consider, that although grace does free us from the dominion of sin,
and from the damning power of sin, and from the love of sin, yet grace does not
free any man from the seeds of any one sin, and therefore it is possible for a
soul to fall again and again: as for instance, Lot was twice overcome with
wine, John twice worshipped the Angel, Abraham out of fear often dissembled,
and laid his wife open to adultery to save his life, see Gen 20. 13. and Genesis
12. David was resolved to kill Nabal, and all his innocent family, and a little
after he fell into the foul murder of Vriah. Jacob twice told a lie for
compassing the blessing, Genesis 27. 19, 21. Lot was twice made drunken, and
committed Incest with both his daughters, Genesis 19. Peter thrice denies his
Master, and every time worse then another, Mat. 26, etc. These things are
written to caution us that stand, that we fall not; and to comfort them that
are fallen, that they despair not.

Quest. How should a Christian come to see the greatness and vileness of his
sin? or how shall I aggravate my sin, that I may see it as it is in its colors?

Answ. 1. Consider first how osten thou have sinned against the motions of Gods
Spirit, and so grieving the spirit by withstanding Divine motions.

2. So sinning against the frequent manifestations of Gods Love to thy soul,
this does grea^ly aggravate sin: this did aggravate Solomon's sin, 1 Kin. 11.

3. Consider how thou have sinned against the rebukes and checks of thine own
conscience, Jam. 4. 17. To him that knows to do good, and does it not, to him
it is sin.

4. To sin against Gods warnings or Judgments, either against others or our
selves, this does heighten our sin, see Dan. 5. 22, 23. compared with 2 Chronicles.
28. 22.

5. To sin against mercies, is an aggravation of sin, 2 Samuel 12. I delivered
thee out of Saul's hand, I gave thee thy Masters house, if all this had been too
little for thee, I would have given thee such* and such things, wherefore have
thou despised, etc.

6. There is a resisting of the Spirit, Acts 7. 51. And there is a vexing the
Spirit, Isa. 63. 10. But they rebelled, and vexed his holy Spirit, therefore he
was turned to be their enemy, and fought against them.

7. Sin is aggravated, when a man does frequently fall into the same sin.

8. Sin is aggravated, when it is done in a way of complacencie, when we love
and delight in it.

9. Sin is aggravated, when it is done by one that lives under much means of
Grace; this made a woe to be pronounced against Chorazin and Bethsaida.

10. This also does aggravate sin, when it is done against vows, purposes,
promises, prayers and resolutions. This does add perjury to our Iniquity.

Quest. Who are those that are nearest related one to another in this life,
amongst the sons of men?

Answ. The members of Christ, whether strong or weak, high or low: Religion
puts men into the nearest Union, and the most endeared Relations; they who are
united together in the blood of Christ, are knit together in the strongest
bands.

Quest. Whether sin may be dying, when in our own apprehnesion, and in the
apprehension of others it is rather increasing?

Answ. Corruption may be then most enfeebled, when in our own apprehension it
is most enraged, viz. A coal of fire glows most, a little before it goes out:
and a candle burning into the socket, gives a blaze, even as it is going out: a
long dark night, sometimes is most darkest, a little before break of day, the
devil rages most, when he is nearest chaining up: many a Fowl fluttereth most,
when his neck is broken, or his head cut off.

Quest. Seeing all men under heaven, are either in the state of Nature, or in
the state of Grace, how may we know who is in the state of Nature, and who is
in the state of Grace? or what are the distinguishing Characters of the one,
and also of the other?

1. A man in the state of Nature is one that does live, and walk in an open or
secret course of sin, contrary to the Scriptures, and the light of Nature.

2. He is one that does live quietly, and securely, and contentedly, in a
secret state of ignorance.

3. He is one that does rest upon, and glory in a form without a power.

4. He does in his judgment prefer, and in his will deliberately choose the
things of this world, before the things of Christ.

5. He is one that does contemptuously turn his back upon the Ordinances of
God, and tenders of Jesus Christ.

6. He is one that is apt to persecute with his hand, and revile with his
tongue the people of God, Phil. 1. 28.

7. He is one that will cloud and color wicked practices with specious
pretenses, devour widows houses, and for a pretense make long prayers.

8. He is apt to be a great exactor of holiness upon others, but he will do but
little himself; bind heavy* burdens, and lay them upon others, etc.

9. He is apt to be careful in small matters, and negligent in great things.

10. And lastly, a man may seem to make a great progress in Religion, and yet
be but in a state of condemnation, viz. It is said of Simon Magus, that he
believed, Act. 8. 13. It is said of Judas, that he repented: others did hear
the word with joy, and some partake of the heavenly gift and powers of the
world to come, and were sanctified, Numb. 24. 2, Balaam is said to have the
Spirit of God, and to have his eyes opened, and to have heard the word of God,
and to have seen the visions of the Almighty, so that he prophesied of the
Kingdom of Christ, ver. 19. So Jam. 1. 26. If a man amongst you seem to be
religious, and bridleth not his tongue, this man's religion is vain.

Quest. What are the Characters of a true Christian, by which I may be able to
discern between him and a man in the state of nature?

Answ. There are many external discernable Characters of a true Christian, and
there be also many internal evidences. First, there are many external
Characters.

1. He that does see his interest in the promises, he will let us know it, by
cleansing himself from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, 2 Cor. 7. 1.

2. He that is a servant unto God, will let us know it by his obedience to him,
Romans 6. 16.

3. If you say that you are Christ's sheep, let it appear by your hearing his
voice, Joh. 10. 27.

4. If you say that you do abide in him, let us know it by your endeavoring to
walk as he walked 1 John 2. 6.

5. If Christ has dyed for you, let us see it by your living unto him, 2 Cor.
5. 15.

6. If you do know him, so as to have an interest in him, let it appear by
keeping his commandments, 1 John 2. 4.

7. If you have received a Kingdom that cannot be moved, let us see it by your
serving him with reverence and godly fear, Heb. 12. 28.

8. If you be the spouse of Christ, let us know it by your enquiring after him,
Cant. 5. 6. 9.

9. If you be his Disciples, let us know it by your love one to another, Joh.
13. 35.

10. If you say you live in the spirit, let us know it by your walking in the
spirit, Gal. 5. 25.

11. If you do abide in the true Vine, let us know it by your fruitfulness,
Joh. 15. 5.

12. If you say that you are indeed Christ's, let us know it by your crucifying
the flesh, with the affections and lusts, Gal. 5. 24.

13. If you are indeed planted in his house, let us know it by your flourishing
in his Courts, Psalm. 92. 13.

14. If Christ has chosen you to salvation, let us know it by your
sanctification of the spirit, and the belief of the truth, Ephesians. 1. 4.

15. If you say that you do live in his will, let us know it by your doing his
will.

16. If you say that you have faith in Christ, let us see it so appear by its
works, Jam. 2. 18.

17. Who is a wise man amongst you all, and endued with knowledge? let him show
out of his good conversation, his works with meekness and wisdom, Jam. 3. 13.

Quest. But are there not some things in a Christian that cannot be in an
hypocrite; if so, pray let me know what they are?

Answ. There are some flowers that grow not in natures garden, and some pearls
that are not to be found in the worlds field, and some precious things in a
true Christian, that were never found in a castaway, viz.

1. A true Christian indeed will mourn in secret, confess to God, and judge
himself for those sins that no man can spot him for; his greatest and hottest
conflicts are against inward pollution, obvious only to the eye of God and our
selves.

2. A true Christian indeed does as earnestly desire to have his sin purged as
pardoned, and himself fitted to do or suffer for the name of Christ.

3. He does loath, hate, and abhor, and refrain sin, from a right principle to
a right end, and so in his heart says with Joseph, how shall I do this evil,
and sin against God?

4. He is willing to be searched be any Christian in any thing; and many times
he entreats the Lord to search him, Psalm. 139 23, 24.

5. He labors in all duties and services to approve his heart to God.

6. In respect of the general bent, and srame of his heart, subjects to Christ.

1. Freely and sweetly. 2. Universally, in one thing as well as another,
without any exception, or reservation. 3. This he does constantly and
unwearyedly, at least in desire. 4. He mourns in secret, when God is
dishonored.
These are such flowers of Paradise that were never seen to grow in natures
garden, until the new man was put on, and the party renewed in the Spirit of
his mind let us then make the word and spirit the judge of our condition, for
if we make sense and reason the judge of our condition, we must resolve to l^ve
in fear, and lie down in sorrow.

Quest. Whether man has a free will, yea or no?

Answ. Man's will is free to all that is evil; so said the Apostle, to do evil,
is present with me, but how to do that which is good, I find not.

So man has free will to do evil, but no will to do good, because the one is
natural, the other is supe natural, Romans 9. 16. So then it is not of him that
wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that shows mercy: poor man would
be like the spider, spinning out a thread of his own, and so think to climb up
to heaven by a thread spun out of his own bowels, J^b 8. 14. This thread will be
cut off, there is an emptiness and insufficiency in our nature to any thing
that is spiritually good, we are not sufficient of our selves to think any
thing, as of our selves, but all our sufficiency is of God: we have no grace
but what we receive from Christ, and grace is no grace, unless it be every wav
free; therefore we have little reason to boast of the freedom of our will, to
any thing that is spiritually good, because our will is not free, till it be by
grace made free; we have no power to become the Sons of God, till it be given
us to believe in his name.

Quest. Whether a man may fall from grace, yea or no?

Answ. A true Christian can never totally and finally fall away from grace; it
is true there is a kind of seeming holiness, which may be lost, and a form of
godliness, which may vanish and come to naught, Heb. 6. 4, 6. and 10. 29. It is
true also that Gods own people called and chosen, may n^uch damp and quench the
grace of God which is in them, and may show much infirmity in particular falls,
the sense of it may be much lessened, power of it weakened, the degree of it
abated, but the habit cannot be utterly lost, the life of it never goes out;
consult with these Scriptures, and they will prove this truth, Jer. 31. 3. I
have loved thee with an everlasting love, 2 Timothy 2. 19 Nevertheless, the
foundation of God stands sure, Heb. 7 25. He ever lives to make intercession
for them, John 10. 28. And I give unto them eternal life, and no man shall
pluck them out of my hand, 1 Pet. 1. 5. Who are kept by the power of God,
through faith, to salvation.

Now if any say a man may fall away from grace, let me ask him.

1. Is the surety of the New Testament grown so uncertain? Heb. 7 22.

2. Is the promise now come to be so mutable?

3. Is the power of God grown so weak? 1 Pet. 1. 5.

4. Is the will of God become mutable? 2 Timothy 2. 19.

5. Is the free, eternal and everlasting love of God become changable? John 13.
1. Isa. 54. 10 The mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed, but the
kindness of the Lord shall not depart: men and Devils shall as soon dethrone
God, pluck the Sun out of the firmament, and Christ out of the bosom of the
Father, as they shall pluck a believer out of the arms of Christ, or rob him of
his interest in the precious promises: what shall I say more? A Christian is
but a weak subject to fall, but he has a strong God, a strong Savior, and
strong promises: he has a foundation: first, a sure foundation: secondly, it
is a foundation of God that cannot shake, but stands firm, etc.

Quest. How should a godly man or woman follow their particular calling with
comfort, pleasure, ease and delight, that so they might live sweetly till they
go hence, and at last dye comfortably?

Answ. The Scripture shows that men must have a calling, and teaches them how
to beliave themselves in it. Tht first Adam and the second, the two only
innocent persons that ever lived upon the earth, had both of them a calling.
Adam dressed the garden, and Christ was a Minister of the circumcision, Genesis 2.
15. Romans 15. 8.

1. How a man may and ought to follow his calling providently, Proverbs 27. 23.
and 2 King. 2. 23.

2. Diligently, Eccles. 9. 10. with Genesis 31. 6. 40.

3. Faithfully, not trusting to our own toyling, without building upon Gods
blessing, Deuteronomy. 8. 18. Prove. 10. 22.

4. Moderately, not hindering our selves in the exercise of Religion, Luke 10.
39, 40. etc. not wearing away our bodies with excessive toil, Exodus 18. 18,
etc. avoiding excessive care, which disturbs and annoies the heart, Psalm. 108.
1. 1 Timothy 2. 8. not with a will to be rich, but to be employed for Gods glory,
1 Timothy 6. 9. 2 Cor. 12. 14. Ephesians. 4. 28.

Observe a few rules in buying, and a few rules in selling. First in buying.
(1.) Do not say the commodity is naught, when you know it is good, Prove. 20.
14. (2.) Do not give counterfeit money, Genesis 23. 16. (3.) Do not long defer the
paying, when you have bought, Prove. 3. 27, 28. (4.) Do not buy those
commodities that are not fit to be sold, as stolen good, Monuments, as
Crosses, Beads and Images, Amos 2. 16. then in selling,

1. Do not multiply words in selling, in a multitude of words there is sin,
says Sol^mon. 2. Do not sell thy commodities by false weights, Amos 8. 5.
Micah 6. 10. 3. Do not work upon the ignorance or simplicity of him that comes
to buy, 1 These. 4. 6. 4. Do not imbase a commodity from its primative worth,
and yet sell it at the full price, Amos 8. 6. Isa. 1. 22.
In a word, in all our endeavors and pains, let us be without care, 1 Pet. 5.
7. casting all your care upon him, for he cares for you, Psalm. 37. 3, 4, 5.
Trust in the Lord and do good, so shall thou dwell in the Land, and verily thou
shall be fed; delight thy self in the Lord, and he shall give thee the desire
of thine heart; commit thy way unto the Lord, trust also in him, and he shall
bring it to pass, Prove. 16. 3. Commit thy way to the Lord, and thy thoughts
shall be established, Psalm. 55. 22. cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he shall
sustain thee, remember the world was made of nothing, Heb. 11. 3. and Job tells
us that it does hang upon nothing, Job 26. 7. therefore to depend upon it, is
to depend upon nothing, Prove. 24. 5. Will thou set thine eyes upon that which
is not? surely the fashion of this world passes away, and here we have no
continuing City, our bodies are cottages of clay, which shortly will beblown
down by the wind of death, yea their falling began with their building.

Quest. Whether a godly man may buy and sell, eat and drink, travel and
discourse with an ungodly man or men?

Answ. We find in the Scriptures that a good man is to love his enemies, and to
do good unto all, Gal. 6. 10. The Lord does cause the Sun to shine, and the
rain to fall upon them, therefore beware of judging and condemning them: are
they proud? who can tell but God may humble them: are they unclean? who can
tell but God may cleanse them: we ought to be courteous in our behavior
toward them, Genesis 23. 7, 12. Abraham bowed himself to the people of the Land,
Christ was tender hearted toward them, he wept over them that were to shed his
blood: and we are to own and commend what there is of God in them: so it is
said, Christ did love the young man in the Gospel, for those natural parts that
there were in him. God is the fountain of common gifts, as well as of saving
grace. The Lord does make use of them, to bring out of their loins many
precious men: and sometimes he does make use of them, to help the woman, and
sometimes to awaken his people, and put them upon their guard: but in all our
conversings with wicked men, take heed to these things. (1.) Walk warily and
circumspectly before them, Phil. 2. 15. For you are in the midst of a crooked
and perverse Nation, 1 Pet. 2. 12. Having therefore your conversation honest
amongst the Gentiles, ver. 15. For so is the will of God, that with well doing,
we put to silence the ignorance of foolish men. (2) Beware of envying at their
prosperity, because God has prohibited that, Psalm 37. 1. Consider, they have
their reward here in this life, Prove. 24. 19. There is no reward to a wicked
man in another life. (3.) Beware of cracking a good conscience to procure their
favor, as Judas did: consider their favor is fickle, and it is a madness to
lose the favor of God, to gain the favor of his enemies. (4.) Beware of
omitting those duties that God requires of you for fear of them: this is to
life up man more then God. Consider, omission may damn a man, as well as
commissions, and hereby we shall gratify carnal men, by omitting of good
duties, for fear of them: and by this we shall stagger those that were coming
on in the ways of God. (5.) Beware of too deep a familiarity with them, and
that for these reasons. First, because they have no communion nor fellowship
with God, Ephesians. 2. 12. They are without Christ in the world, and have
communion with Satan, 1 John 5. 19. The whole world lies in wickedness. Again,
deep communion with them is very dangerous to your souls. Joseph by this began
to swear, by the life of Pharaoh; and Peter being a little in bad company how
soon could he swear and lie, both one after another.

Quest. Whether recreation be lawful, and if so, what recreation and when to be
used, and how long, and how often?

Answ. Recreation in some pleasant and harmless exercise is lawful, as might
appear by the testimony and practices of many good people, sometimes making use
of their liberty therein; observing these and the like rules.

1. In, and by things lawful, not vain, as filthy or slanderous songs, 1 Cor.
15. 33. Psalm. 69. 12.

2. Not foolish talking, and unsaintlike jesting, Ephesians. 5. 3, 4

3. Not dicing, carding, stage-playing, and fidling.

4. We are not to use recreation as we do meat and drink, but as wine, seldom,
and little at a time, 1 Timothy 5. 23.

Then there are times in which no recreation is either lawful or expedient.

1. On the Sabbath or Lords day it is altogether forbidden, Isa. 58. 13.

2. In the time of mourning, for it becomes no body to be jolly, when God is
angry, Isa. 22. 12, 13. Mat. 9. 55.

3. It must be done in a fit time, as our occasions will bare; that we may
redeem time, and not set spurs to a running horse, as it were a benefit to be
rid of time, that is neither for our profit here, Proverbs 21. 17. nor our
safety hereafter, Mat. 25. 30.

4. It must be made use of, in a fit manner, for no more then we are willing to
lose.

5. It must be carried on soberly, not over earnestly; it is dangerous for a
man to give up himself too much to pleasurable things, 1 Cor. 7. 31. for wisdom
must be the moderator of our mirth and content, Eccles. 2. 3.

6. This also must be done in good company, not with men of evil manners, lest
we bring our selves to be in danger to be partaker of their sins.

Quest. In as few words as may be answer me to these eight things.

1. Election, what it is? 2. The causes of it. 3. The ends of it. 4. The
effects of it. 5. The Subjects of it. 7. The properties of it. 8. The signs of
it.
Answ. I have spoken to Election before in its place, but seeing here are more
particulars, then there I have spoken unto, I shall answer each briefly.

1. As to election what it is? consider that it is a special decree of God,
touching the conferring of eternal salvation, by Christ the Redeemer, to
certain men of mere mercy and good will.

2. As to the causes of election, it is the love of the Trinity, God Almighty,
Father, Son and Holy Ghost. The manner of working peculiarly to each of them:
the Scripture expressly shows that the Father and the Son did elect us, Ephesians.
1. 4. John 15. 16. In which we may not exclude the Holy Ghost, who has one
common Godhead with them, 1 John 5. 7. So that the cause which moved God to
elect, was his mere good will, and nothing else, as appears by these ensuing
undeniable reasons.

1. By the word of God, he has predestined us, according to the good
pleasure of his will, Ephesians. 1. 5. Romans 11. 5.

So then we are not elected for foreseen faith, for every cause is before the
effect, now faith is after election, Act. 13. 48.

So in the next place we are not elected for any foreseen works, for the
Apostle does exculde all works from being either causes of election or
reprobation, Rom* 9. 11, 12.

3. The ends of election may be reduced to these three heads.

1. The glory of God, and the celebration, and declaration of his mercy, Romans
9. 23. Ephesians. 1. 6.

2. The second end is, that we should be ho. ly, Ephesians. 1. 4. He did not choose
us because we were then holy, but that we might be holy.

3. The third end is the salvation and glory of the elect, therefore they are
said to be ordained to eternal life, and prepared unto glory, and chosen unto
salvation, Acts 13. 48. Romans 9. 23. 2 These. 2. 13.

4. The effects of election, are the mediation of Christ, adoption, vocation,
saving faith, justification, glorification, in a word, Gods election is the
root of all gifts of God in us, and the foundation of all saving benefits
bestowed upon us.

5. The Subject of election is double, the first is him in who we are elected,
and that is Christ, he has chosen us in him, says Paul, Ephesians. 1. 4.

The other Subject is the persons that are elected, and these are not all the
sons of Adam without exception, for he that takes all, and refuses none,
cannot properly be said to choose; the elect considered comparatively, are a
little flock, a remnant, a garden enclosed, a spring shut up, a fountain
sealed, they be as one of a City, two of a tribe, they be but a handful to a
house full, a drop to the Ocean. Yet if we consider them simply in themselves,
they are an innumerable number, that cannot be numbered, Ephesians. 5. 23. Many
shall come from the East and West, and shall sit down in the Kingdom of God,
Romans 5. 19. By the obedience of Christ, many shall be made righteous, Rev. 7.
9. John says he saw an innumerable multitude of all Nations and tongues which
stood before the lamb, clothed with long white robes, and palms in their
hands, so that the number of Gods elect, considered by themselves alone, is
great.

6. The Prerogatives of the Elect, which no reprobate can partake of, are as
follows.

1. God knows them, loves them, and approves of them, 2 Timothy 2. 19. 2. True
faith is wrought in them, and them only, Tit. 1. 1. Act. 13. 48. 3. Effectual
vocation and conversion belongs to them only, Romans 8. 30. 4. They only are
adorned with the graces of the Spirit, Col. 3. 12. 5. Salvation belongs to none
but to them. Romans 11. 7. 6. None of the Elect shall be wholly seduced, Mat. 24.
24. John 10. 28. Jer 32. 40. 7. God does cause his Angels to protect them,
Psalm. 34. 7. 8. God shall send his Angels to gather together his elect, Mat.
24. 31. 9. The Elect shall judge the world, 1 Cor. 6. 2, 3. 10. If any wrong
them, here God will a venge them, Luke 18. 7, 8. Zech. 2. 8. 11. He will
shorten the evil days for his elects sake, Mat. 24. 22. 12. The elect need not
fear death and damnation, who shall lay any thing to their charge? Romans 8. 33.
7. The properties and signs of election are as follows.

1. It is most free, without all obligation, compulsion, external instigation,
or provision of future preparations, merits, etc. has not the potter power
over the clay, to make of the same lump, one vessel to honor, and another to
dishonor? 2. The decree of election is from all eternity, before we did
believe, and before we were born, see Romans 9. 11. 3. The election of God is
constant, perpetual, immutable and inviolable, my Counsel says God shall
stand, Isa. 46. 10. and the foundation of God remains sure, 2 Timothy 2. 19.
8. What are the signs of election, but the dying unto sin, poverty of spirit,
a hungring after the righteousness that there is in Christ, and prizing of it
above all earthly things? a resignation of our selves into Gods hands, with an
acknowledgement of our ffences, with a true purpose to leave them, forgiving
our enemies, and a delight in Gods Saints? etc. So then put all together, and
we may see it is Gods favor, not man's faith, his mercy, not man's merit, that
is the foundation and fountain of man's election and felicity.

Q. What is vocation or effectual calling?

Answ. Vocation is an action of God, translating from the kingdom of darkness
to his own kingdom; it is twofold extraordinary or ordinary, extraordinary
vocation is an immediate work of the spirit, whereby without outward means, he
inwardly speaks to the soul, and so does make the heart to answer his call:
Vocation which is ordinary, is that whereby God calls out of darkness into
his mavelous light, from the power of Satan, unto God, by the preaching of
the Gospel.

Q. What is Justification?

Answ. Justification is a gracious work of God, whereby he judges the elect to
be just by faith in Christ, through the imputation of his justice, and that
unto the praise of his glorious grace, given us in Christ before the world
began.

Q. What is Sanctification?

Answ Sanctification is a benefit bestowed upon us by God, whereby our corrupt
nature is renewed to the Image God, or a total inward change of a man
justified, whereby the Image of God is restored in him.

Q. Wherein does justification and sanctification agree, and wherein do they
disagree?

Answ. 1. First they agree in their cause, for God is the Author of them both,
through the merits of Christ.

2. They have both one instrumental cause, which is Faith; of the former by
receiving of it, and of the latter by effecting it.

3. They agree in their scope and end, for they both tend to one end; but
justification as the cause, and sanctification as the way.

Now as they do accord in some things, so they differ in other things, viz.

1. In that justification is out of man, Sanctification is within him.

2. Justification absolveth a sinner, whereby he sees he stands righteous at
the bar of Gods justice; sanctification, makes us stand righteous in the
account of men.

3. Justification brings peace of conscience, so does not sanctification but
puts us upon following that peace.

4. Justification consists in the imputation of righteousness to us;
Sanctification in the infusion of right principles, that we might walk holily
to right ends.

5. Justification is acted at once, sanctification is done by degrees: the
former is in this life perfect, the latter is imperfect.

6. They differ in respect of the manner in which they are wrought, for
justification is wrought by the right of donation, but sanctification is by the
way of practical alteration.

Q. What necessity is there of Magistracy or Civil powers in the world?

Answ. As a City without walls, a sea without banks, a vineyard without a hedge
or pale, so is a commonwealth without a Magistrate; or a kingdom without a
Magistrate, is as a ship without a pilot, or a world without a Sun.

Q. What men are fit for officers in Church and State?

Answ. When the Lord directed Moses what officers to choose for public
employment, Exodus 18. 21. He said, choose out of all the people, able men, such
as fear God, men of truth, etc. not favor, money, seniority, etc. But grace,
wisdom and courage must advance men unto rule: Officers in Church and State are
not for sight, but for service; we judge not of a pillar by its beauty, but by
its strength: It is better to be under a zealous faithful John Baptist, though
his raiment be hair and leather, then under a silken Diotrephes, who is all for
pre-eminence, nothing for performance.

The shortness of man's life, and the misery that does attend every age and
condition of all men that live and delight in sin, and lie down in Sorrow.
Man's whole life is but a progress of death, all the time we live we die
invisibly, and when we die indeed, it is but a completing of what we have been
doing all our life; the best men's lives are as glass, bright and brittle, and
evermore in danger of breaking, Jer. 22. 29. Oh earth, earth, earth, hear the
voice of the Lord! And why does he mention earth three times? 1. Because we
came from the earth. 2. Because at the best we are but earth. 3. Because we
shall speedily return to the earth, as appears by these Scriptures, Job 7. 9.
the length of our days is compared to the vanishing of a cloud, and sometimes
to the swiftness of aPost, Job 9. 25. sometimes to a flower that springs in the
morning, and withers before night, Job 14. 2 Sometimes to a Weavers shuttle,
Job 7. 6. What is swifter then a shuttle? it flies to and again, forward and
backward: so nights and days pass this shuttle of our life, forward and
backward, to and fro; the night does cast this shuttle to the day, and the day
casts it to the night, and the night to the day, and so from one to the other,
forward and backward, to and again; So that between these two, time quickly
weaves off the thread of our life, the piece comes to be woven, and so to be
cut off; and just so is our life, Isaiah 38. 12. I have cut off like a Weaver.

What shall I say more? All the Prophets and Apostles that have written, have
more or less written of the fewness of our days, and uncertainty of our lives;
Abraham said he was but dust and ashes, Genesis 18. 27. All our days on the earth
is as a shadow, and there is no abiding, 2 Chro. 29. 15. When a few years are
come, then shall I go the way whence I shall not return, Job 16. 22. We spend
our days like a tale that is told, Psalm. 70. 9. All flesh is grass, and the
goodliness thereof as the flower of the field, Isa. 4. 6, 7. We do all fade as
a leaf, and our iniquities as wind have taken us away, Isa. 64. 6. For what is
our life? it is even as a vapor that appears for a little time, and then
vanishes away: such is the swiftness of man's days, and shortness of his life,
and frailty of his nature, that the swiftest, shortest, and frailest things
that we read of in Scripture, are not swift, short, and frail enough to compare
man's life unto. Here I cannot but acquaint the Reader with some things that the
Lord made of great use to me many years since in reading some part of the
practice of Piety, and auother book called Sincere the Convert, and another
little book called Good news from heaven, etc. together with what I have
learned from the Scriptures and Christians, etc. and so I shall trace man from
his birth to his death, and begin, First with chose that live and die in a
state of nature; Secondly we shall lay down, and that in few lines, the blessed
state of those that in their life prepare for death, for death has something
to say to every man, and would fain be heard, but men are not at leisure to
hearken to him, till he throws them upon their sick beds.

Of the Condition of man in his birth and infancy.
By the pangs, groans, and struglings, and the violent travel of his mother,
the child is produced to the light, many miscarrying at their birth by diverse
accidents, the mother and the child perish together, but sometimes by Gods
providence after the child has been imprisoned nine months in an obscure
prison, it springs into the world, and so as it were cast naked upon the earth
all embrued into the blood of filthiness, so that the mother is ashamed to let
the child know the manner thereof. Oh miserable man, where shall I begin to
describe thine endless misery, who art condemned as soon as conceived, and
adjudged to eternal death, before thou wast born to a temporal life; a
beginning indeed we may find, but no end of thy misery, and so thou art subject
in this life, to all kind of slavery, and in the life to come to overlasting
fire, prepared for the devil and his angels: from which there is no escaping,
unless thou art born again of water and of the spirit, John 3. 3, 5.

Of mankind in the state of childhood.
THE two first years of it is nothing but impotency and weak imbecility to
himself, and charge, trouble and vexation to his parents; other creatures by
the benefit of nature can stand upon their Legs, and seek after their food, but
thou must be swadled in clouts, and not able to help thy self; the yound
chickens as soon as they are hatched, can run after their dam, to seek for
food, the lambs, calves, and yound colts, stand suddenly upon their legs to
seek their dams teats: but man would perish if his mother did not bring the
nipple of her breast to his mouth, and rock him upon her knees, and for the
three or four years of his infancy, he must be carefully tended for fear he
should take hurt, left horses, carts, or coaches run over him, etc.

Of mankind in the state of youth.
THE greatest part of this time is spent under the restraint of their tutors or
masters, for youth is as an untamed beast, all whose affections are rash, and
rude, not capable of good counsel when it is given, delighting in nothing but
toys and babies, and vanity, and therefore must be kept under the rod and fear
of parents and masters, as if thou had been born to live in slavery, rather
then at the disposition of thy own will; no tired horses were ever more willing
to be rid of their burdens, then thou art to get out of this state of bondage,
etc. never minding thy Creator in the days of thy youth, Eccles. 12. 1. Except
the Lord hedge up thy way thou art running with all speed headlong to Hell.

Of the state of manhood.
THE maturiry of man's age begins at thirty, and continues till forty five; in
this state the flesh provokes thee to lust, the world allures thee to pleasure,
and the Devil tempts thee to all kind of sins, fears of enemies affright thee,
suits in Law do vex thee, wrongs of ill neighbors do oppress thee, cares for
wife and children do consume thee, sin stings thee within, Satan lays snares
before thee, sins past, dogs behind thee; in this miserable estate, whither
will thou go for rest and comfort? the house is full of cares, the Field of
toil, the Sea of Pirates, the Land of Robbers, who can reckon up besides all
this, the losses, crosses, griefs, disgraces, sicknesses, and calamities that
do attend us, the death of near and dear friends and relations; one while
adversity on the lefthand frets thee, another while prosperity on the
right hand flatters thee, over thy head Gods judgments due to thy sins are
ready to fall upon thee, and under thy feet, hels mouth is ready to swallow
thee up, therefore take heed Oh man what thou do, etc.

Of the declining state of man.
THis age of man is subject to envy and covetousness, as the former age was to
ambition and carking cares, whereby it appears that men's passions and sins, do
rather change then forsake them, for carnal delights to which young men are
most addicted, do change in their delcining age, unto envy and covetousness,
and sometimes their avarice does change to ambition; a godly man at this age is
fitter for counsel then for action, because their passions are commonly more
moderate, their experiences greatter, their Judgment more solid, and their
counsels safer, Job 12. 12. With the ancient is wisdom, and in length of years
understanding, but this declining age of man is not free from vanity, it being
subject to envy at another man's prosperity, etc.

Of the Decrepit, or old age of man.
THE decrepit age of man begins a little after sixty, and ends when death
strikes them with his dart, Romans 6. 23. the wages of sin is death, the old age
of man, except it be endued with free grace, and sanctified by the Spirit of
God, it is the vanity of vanities, and the misery of all miseries, for the
innumerous infirmities incident to it, viz. bald-headed, stooping under dotage,
wrinkled face, rotten teeth, stinking breath, testy with choler, withered with
dryness, dimmed with blindness, filled with diseases, overwhelmed with
sickness, and bowed together with weakness, having little use of any sense, but
of the sense of pain: what shall I say more? trace man from his mothers womb to
the grave, and you shall find him nothing but a piece of vanity in his best
estate, Ps. 39. 5. First in his very conception, they may be extinguished by
ill scents and vapors, bruises or falls; then in their infancy, by the quinsie,
convulsions, measels or the small pox; then in their youth by the sword,
plurisie, and burning fevers; then in the next age, apoplexies, bloody fluxes
and consumptions; then in their declining age by the stone and the gout,
dropsies, palsies, etc. And in old age, aches, cough, stone, and diverse other
casualties; so that I may conclude with Solomon, that the lives of natural men
are mere vanity and vexation of Spirit.

Of the Pollution and Misery of the soul in this life.
THE understanding is full of vanity, Psalm. 94. 11. 2 Cor. 4. 4. The will of
man is wholly depraved, it is contrary to God, his word and Spirit in all
things, it will not depend nor wait on God; as for the memory that also is full
of corruption, that will forget the things that is commanded to remember, and
remember the things that we should forget; and as for the conscience, that also
is wholly corrupted, it is neither clear to see things that are amiss, nor
sensible of sins committed; and whereas it should excuse or accuse, it does
abuse and pervert the light it has by making great sins small, etc.

And as for our affections, they come as a tempest, either to make us over-joy
or over-grieve; what shall I say more? the wretched soul is so deformed with
sin, defiled with lust, polluted with filthiness, outraged with passions, pined
with envy, overcharged with gluttony, boiling with revenge, transported with
rage, so that the glorious Image of God is transformed into the ugly shape of
the Devil; our understanding is darknned our will depraved, our affections
disordered, our memory misimployed, our conscience benumbed.

Of the Miseries attending both body and soul in the hour of death, if they see
not their interest in Christ.
DEath in the Scripture is called the King of terrors, and the fear of death
makes many subject to bondage all their life, for death is a messenger that
has something to say to every man, and he often speaks to all, that would fain
be heard, but most men are not at leisure to hear what he has to say, no, not
till old age, nor then neither; well, after all the forementioned troubles, in
comes death, and looks the old man grim and black in the face, and neither
pittieth his age, nor regards his long endured Dolours, but battereth all the
principal parts of his body, and arresteth him to appear before the great judge
of Heaven and Earth, at the bar of his Justice; then the old man falls into a
cold sweat over all his body, and a trembling in all his members; the head
aketh, the face waxes pale, the nose black, the eye-strings break, the tongue
faltereth, the throat rotleth: whilst he is thus summoned to appear at the
great assize of Gods court, behold a quarter Sessions, and goal Delivery is
held within him; where reason sits as Judge, and his conscience being now
awakened, puts in a bill of Indictment; wherein is alleged, all the evil
deeds that ever thou have committed, and the good deeds that ever thou have
omitted, and all the curses, and Judgments that are due to every sin: Never
such a bill put up against the greatest Traitor in any court of men; thou must
hold up thy hand at the bar, for all the sins that ever thou did commit in
the whole course of thy life; the bill of Indictment it self runs thus.

1. Thou art accused for many sins of omission, in leaving undone many good
things, that God in his word required of thee.

2. For spoiling all the good things that ever thou didstin thy life, by mixing
the poison of thy own corruption with them.

3. For sinning in secret, as if God had not seen it, because men do not; and
hereby denying, as it were, Gods Omnipotency.

4. For presuming sometimes to sin openly to the Dishonouring of the God of
Glory, before all the world.

5. For sinning against all sorts of men, against thy Parents in thy youth,
thine equals in thy manly age, thine inferiors in thy old Age.

6. For sinning against God himself immediately, by abusing his Name and
Ordinances.

7. For sinning against men's Souls, Lives, Goods, Chastity, good Name, and all
that was near and dear to them.

8. For sinning against thy own soul, and all the good things God has given
thee, by intemperance, and otherwise.

9. For sinning against Gods holy Ordinances, in neglecting or abusing them.

10. For sinning against Gods Mercies, abusing Health, Wealth, and Liberty, and
Parts, and Gifts.

11. For sinning against Gods Judgments, as if thou caredst not for his
pleasure, nor fearedst his displeasure.

12. For sinning against the checks of thy own conscience, that often forbad
thee to sin, but could not be heard.

13. For sinning against the motions of Gods spirit, and so putting the Lord
upon complaning, and Christ upon bleeding, and the Spirit upon grieving.

14. For drawing others to sin, by thy bad examples and counsels.

15. For encouraging them in their sins, by approving of them.

16. For not reproving them for sin, as if thou wast afraid to speak for God,
against those that dishonor him.

17. For not punishing sin, where thou had power and authority, and wast
required to do it.

18. For a world of precious time, that thou have misspent in the world.

19. For a multitude of unknown sins, that thou had totally forgotten,
committed in the childhood, youth and manhood; all thy omissions and
commissions will then come into thy mind, and if thou would, thou can not
put them out; I know of two precious Christians, being a long time weak, and
like to dye, that did witness to this truth; all the sins of their youth that
they had forgotten, came in remembrance as fresh as if but now committed.

20. And lastly, there comes in a long bill, that thou never dreamedst of, much
less, could repent of; ignorance will be no plea in this court, God will
say, thou ought and might have known al these things to be sinful, out of
the holy Scripture; and therefore art utterly unexcusable. Oh consider, if ever
any bill were like to this, and bring it home to your own consciences, for it
is your own case; it is true, that in all courts of Justice, exception against
witnesses is allowed, but thou can except against none of these, except it be
the Devil, who bears malice to thee; yet malice is a good informer, though a
bad Judge; but to cashier his testimony, what can thou say against thy
partners in sin? do not they know all thy ways? what can thou say against
good men, that with grief beheld thy sinful courses? what against good Angels,
that will not belie thee? what can thou say against thy own conscience? what
can thou say against the most true and knowing God, that cannot lie?

And whilst thy soul is thus within, out of peace and order; thy wife, children
and friends trouble thee as fast, to have thee put thy goods in order, some
crying, some craving, some pitying, some chearing well; In this extremity, the
soul looks every way for help, and she finds her self every way helpless: I
shall here acquaint the Reader, of a passage that I read at least twenty years
ago; which God made of great use to me, viz. The soul being in this misery,
desires to hear the least word of Comfort; she directs this or the like speech
to the Eyes: Oh Eyes, who in times past were so quick sighted, can you spy no
comfort? not any way how I might escape this dreadful danger? Alas, the
eyestrings are broken, they cannot see the candle that burns, nor discern
whether it be day or night.

The soul finding no comfort in the eyes, speaks to the ears; Oh Ears, who were
willing and wont to recreate me with hearing new pleasant discourses, and
music, can ye hear the tidings of the least comfort for me? but the ears are
either so deaf, that they cannot hear at all; of the sense of hearing is grown
so weak, that it cannot endure to hear his dearest friends to speak; So the ear
cannot minister any comfort: Then she intimates her grief unto her Tongue; Oh
Tongue, who was wont to bring it out with the bravest, where are now thy big
and daring words, now in my greatest need? canit thou speak nothing in my
defense? can thou neither daunt these enemies with threatening words, nor
entreat them with fair speeches? But alas, the tongue cannot in his greatest
extremity, so much as call for a little drink, or desire a friend to take away
with his finger the phlegm that is ready to choke him. Finding here no hope of
help, she speaks to the feet, where are ye oh feet, which sometimes were so
nimble, in running and carrying of me from place to place; can ye carry me now
no where, out of this dangerous place? But alas, the Feet are as it were dead
already; if they be not stirred, they cannot stir. Then she directs her speech
unto her hands; Oh hands, who have been so often approved for Manhood, in Peace
and War, wherewith I have so often defended my self, and offended my Foes;
never had I more need then now; Help now, or I perish for ever: But alas, the
Hands are so weak, and do so tremble, that they cannot reach to the mouth a
spoonful of supping to relieve languishing Nature.

Whilst The poor man lies in this misery, in comes all his wealth to give her
master a visit; and in effect says this to him: Thus far have I gone with
thee, but farther I will not, I have nothing to do in another world: Now
therefore master shift for your self; I will go seek me a new Master: Nay,
says his Master, I hope thou will not serve me so, now I have most need of
thee; many a nights rest have I broken for thee.

Wealth. The more fool thou Master, who bid thee do so, not God I am sure, but
the Prince of the air, the God of this world. And therefore now to him thou
must go or whither thou do go I know not, nor care not; but farther to go
with thee, I will not; for I will seek me a new Master.

Master. Nay Wealth I pray thee say not so, that goes to my very heart, go
answer for me, or at least speak a good word for me.

Wealth. Not I; nay, I am sure you shall answer for me and your self too; and
to tell you the truth, I doubt the place is too hot for me where thou art
going; Look, Look, here comes death; quivering in your lips, quaking in your
joints, staring in your eyes; I cannot endure the sight of him: oh draw the
curtain, shift fot thy self Master, and I will shift for one.

Master. Oh base vagrant, have I thus entertained thee like a Prince for this?
Oh all ye people of the world, be warned by me, a dying man: Lay up Treasure in
Heaven, improve thy Talent, redeem thy Time, and give Diligence to make thy
Calling and Election sure: Oh how suddenly has death stolen upon me, like the
Sun, which the eye perceives not to move, though it be most swift of motion.
The God of Mercy has utterly forsaken me, and the Devil who knows no mercy
waits for me; my joys in this life were gone before I could scarce enjoy
them; my miseries are eternal, and never shall know end: Oh that I had spent
the hours that I consumed in carding, dicing and other exercises, in reading
the Scriptures, in hearing Sermons, and meditating thereon; in conferring with
the Lords people, in weeping for my sins, in fasting, watching and praying, and
beliveing; that I might have now departed in the assured hope of everlasting
salvation: Oh that I were now to begin my life again, how religious and purely
would I lead my life! But now my glass is out, the Sun is set, the golden
Scepter is taken in, once I had a reconcilable God, bowels of Mercy were not
totally restrained, but Repentance might have enlarged them: The treasury door
of Mercy and Grace was not locked up, but Faith could have opened it, and the
hour of Grace might have procured the oil of Gladness; and there was still a
blank in the leaf, for the sinners name to be put in upon coversion, but now
every door of hope is shut and locked up, and now is my case more miserable then
the beast that perishes in the ditch; for I must go to answer before the
Judgment seat of the Righteous judge of heaven and earth, where I shall have
none to speak for me, and I cannot excuse my self; my own heart already
condemns me, I must needs therefore be condemned before his Judgment seat: me
thinks I hear that doleful sentence, Mat. 25. 41. Depart from me ye cursed into
everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his Angels: If I should say Lord,
If I must depart from thy blessed presence, then bles me before I go; Then he
will answer me as in the text, Depart ye cursed; Lord if I must depart, and
depart without a blessing, and with a curse; let me go into some good place: no
says the Lord in the same text, Depart ye cursed into Hell fire; but Lord if I
must depart, and depart cursed, and be cast into Hell fire; Let me stay but a
little while there: then the Lord will answer as in the same text, Depart ye
cursed into everlasting fire: But Lord says the damned soul, if I must depart,
and depart cursed into everlasting fire: Let me have good company there; no
says the Lord, Depart into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his
Angels, These shall be thy companions: Oh horror to to think! Oh grief to
consider! Oh cursed be the day wherein I was born, cursed be the man that
showed my Father, saying, a child is born unto thee. Cursed be the man, because
he show me not Oh that my mother might have been my grave: How is it that I
came forth of the womb, to endure these hellish Sorrows, and that my days
should thus end with eternal shame!

And thus he who made earth his Paradise; his belly his God; his lust, his Law;
and so sowed vanity, now he reapeth misery: in his prosperity he neglected to
serve God, in his adversity God refuses to save him: and the Devil whom he
served now, at at last pays him his wages; thus far of the miseries of the soul
and body in Death, which is but cursedness in part.

Of the sad Condition and Misery of all out of Christ after death.
ANd here I shall not say much, but only give the Reader a taste of that state,
and then speak at large to this thing, toward the close of this book, when we
speak of the last Judgment and end of all things. Now the misery of the soul
after death, is either particular or general: particular is that which liteth
upon the soul immediately, as soon as she is separated from the body, she is
said to stand before the throne of God, and so forthwith she is carried by the
evil Angels with violence into hell, where she is kept as in a prison, in
everlasting pains and chains, under darkness unto the Judgment of the great
day: but not in that extremity of Torments which she shall receive at the last
day; there thy lascivious eyes shall be afflicted with sights of ghostly
spirits: Thy curious ears shall be affrighted with hinous noise of howling
Devils, and the gnashing teeth of damned Reprobates: thy dainty nose shall be
cloyed with noysom stench, thy delicate taste shall be pined with intolerable
hunger, and thy drunken throat shall be parched with nnquenchable thirst, thy
mind shall be tormented to think how foolishly thou have lost heaven, and
gotten hellish pains for momentary riches; thou have lost the eternal treasure,
and changed heavens felicity for hells fury; where thou shall have punishment
without pity, misery without mercy, sorrow without succor, crying without
comfort, mischief without measure, torment without ease, where the worm dies
not, and the fire is never quenched, where the wrath of God shall fall upon the
soul and body, as the flame of fire does on the Lump of pitch or brimstone, in
which flame thou shall ever be burning, and never consumed: ever dying, and
never dead; ever roaring in the pangs of death, and never rid of those pangs:
this is the second death, which every damned Reprobate must suffer, so long as
God and his Saints shall enjoy bliss and felicity in Heaven for evermore.
Hitherto of the misery of man in the state of corruption: now follows the
means that every one should use to escape this sad condition; that they may not
go out as the snuff of a candle, but lay down their lives in peace; in
assurance, or at least some hope of their salvation.

A Preparation for death, that it may not come upon us before we are ready to
dye.
DEath having something to say to every man, in every state and condition: it
is but reason that all should hearken to the message. Now he that desires to
live sweetly, and die comfortably; let him observe these and the like Rules:
First, there are six things to be considered: Secondly, there are seven things
to be practiced.

First of the first, there are six things to be considered, viz.

1. The fewness of our years, months, weeks, and days.

2. The frailty of our Nature.

3. The Many dangers we every day pass through.

4. That death is no respecter of persons.

5. That death to the godly, is but a change of place, not of company.

6. Consider, that death to a Christian, is but a house, a bed, a sleep, a
rest, etc.

1. The fewness of our years, months, weeks and days, here in this life, is
swifter then a weavers shuttle, Job 7. 6. It is a shrub, a leaf, a reed, a
rush, a grass, a smoke, a cloud, a wind, a water, a bubble, a vapor, a shadow,
a nothing, and so at our best estate altogether vanity, Psalm 39. 5. Isa. 64.
6. Psalm 102. 3. 2 Samuel 14. 14. Jam. 4. 14. 1 Chronicles. 29. 15.

2. Consider the frailty of our nature, Psalm. 39. 4. Lord make me to know my
end, and the measure of my days, what it is, that I may know how frail I am:
such is the swiftness of man's days, and shortness of man's life, and frailty of
his nature, that the swiftest, shortest, and frailest things for the most part,
that we read of, are not swift, frail and short enough to compare man's life
unto; man's body is but a magazine, and hospital of diseases, and diseases are
but the messengers or forerunners of death; when diseases are in the house,
then death is at the threshold; when sickness is in the chamber, death is at
the window: our body is but a cottage of clay, and that so frail and crasie, as
were it not once or twice every day daubed over, it would fall about our ears:
wheresoever we go we are fain to drag this clod, this clay; whereas Angels,
free from the shakles of flesh, can move from earth to heaven, and from heaven
to earth, even as swift as can our thoughts. Oh that we were as low in heart as
condition!

3. Consider the many dangers we every day pass through, 2 Cor. 11. 26. In
perils of waters, in perils of Robbers, in perils amongst our friends and foes,
in perils in the City, in perils in the wilderness, enticed by Satan, allured
by the world, deceived and cheated by our own heart. Oh how will thou do to
lanch out into the Ocean! do thou know what will become of thee in another
world? is thy peace made with God? is thy person justified? art thou in a state
of grace? art thou born again? art thou converted, and become as a little
child? have thou repented? does thy righteousness exceed that of the Scribes
and Pharisees? if so, it is well; if not, thou shall never enter into the
Kingdom of God, John 3. 3. 5. Matthew 18. 3. Luke 13. 5. Mat. 5. 20.

4. Let us consider, that death has something to say to every one of us, he is
no respecter of persons; sometimes he snatcheth away the babe newly born,
sometimes the child, sometimes the young man, sometimes the middle age, and
always the old aged; he respects no man's person, be he rich or poor, high or
low, strong or weak, beloved or hated, godly or ungodly, wherefore call thy
self to account every evening, examine what evil have thou hated this day? what
vice have thou stood against this day? in what part thou art bettered now then
thou wast in the morning? Seneca reports of a heathen man that would every
night ask himself these questions. I have heard of a heathen after his
conversion, that was tempted to some sin, he thrust his finger into the fire,
saying, sin soul if thou can burn, and so overcame the temptation.

5. Let us consider, that death to a godly man is but a change of place, not of
company; we shall have the company of the same Father, Son and Spirit, and
Saints, and all the spirits of just men made perfect: a believer in this world
is not in his own place, therefore oh Christians, weigh anchor, hoise sail, and
be gone: death to a Christian will put an end to all unprofitable things here
we change joy for sorrow, health for sickness, strength for weakness, honor
for dishonor, plenty for poverty, beauty for deformity, friends for foes,
silver for brass, gold for copper, etc. now death puts an end to all these,
Rev. 21. 4. And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, and there shall
be no more death nor sorrow, neither shall there be any more pain, Rev. 14. 13.
therefore blessed are the dead that die in the Lord: death also does put a
change to our employment, our employment in this world does lie much in
praying, groaning, sighing, mourning, wrestling, and fighting against the
world, flesh and Devil, Ephesians. 6. 10. But in the world to come, our employment
will lie in praising and magnifying the Lord: Again, our enjoyment shall be
changed, as well as our employment, we shall change our unconstant enjoyment
for a more constant, 1 These. 4. 17, 18. We shall change our dark and obscure
enjoyment, for a more bright enjoyment, 1 Cor. 13. 12. For now we see through a
glass darkly, but then face to face; here we receive grace for grace, there we
shall receive glory for glory.

6. Consider unto what familiar things death is compared and presented, to one
that is in Christ; sometimes it is termed a house, Job said, I know that thou will bring me to death, and to the house of all living, Job 30. 23.

Sometimes it is represented as going to bed, Isa. 57. 2. Sometimes death is
styled a sleep, Dan. 12. 2.

What shall I say more, death to a wicked man is the king of terrors; but
Christ came to deliver his flock from the fear of death, and the grave is
embalmed by Jesus Christ, he lay there three days, etc.

2. As in our preparation for death, there are the foregoing things to be
considered* so in the next place, there are some things to be practiced, and
the work we have is twofold.

1. Get a title to Gods love.

2. Get assurance that thou have a title, which is, or may be done by improving
these five things.

3. Improve the present opportunity, and put not off to the last minute as most
do.

4. Store up a stock of faith, store up a stock of promises, and store up a
stock of prayers against that day.

5. Endeavor so to live every day, as if it were thy last day.

6. Gather up all thy evidences and spiritual experiences, and keep them in
mind and heart.

7. Make thy will in time of health, and leave all things clear upon thy book,
both in shop and conscience.

1. In all thy gettings, be sure to get a title to Gods love, and then get
assurance that thou have a title; the first is done by action, the second is
done by examination.

The action or actions are these.
1. GIve diligence to make thy calling and election sure, 2 Pet. 1. 10. and
that a man may so do, shorten worldly business, and be moderate in the use of
worldly pleasures: so foolish are we, that whilst with much care and labor, we
go about to make those things certain, which are most uncertain: we make those
things uncertain which might be made most certain: he that has two Irons in
the fire at once, spoils one whilst he attends the other. See what care most
have to make good their titles, to settle their inheritances upon their heirs:
shall we not be as careful to settle our interest to eternal glory? if we be
quiet now, yet the Devil will find a time to try thy evidences for heaven, and
call our title into question; sickness and death are times of weakness to us,
wherein he like a subtle enemy, displayes all his art. O consider the misery of
doubting persons at their death, think upon the anguish that their souls
endure, they apprehend God angry with them, the Devil accusing them, earth
leaving them, heaven refusing them, hell claiming them, soul and body parting,
friends weeping, and themselves hopeless, going they know not whither. O then,
O then let us make our calling and election sure before hand: as worldly men
get riches in health to cherish them in sickness, and as the Bees get honey in
summer, to feed on in the winter; even so should we in time of health get good
grounds of assurance, that so we might live, enjoy, and dye in peace, and rise
in perfection, and reign in happiness.

2. Get assurance that thou have a title, viz. make a curious, narrow,
impartial, diligent search into thy own soul, and see what humility, what
selfdenial, what sin-abhorrency, what love to Christ, what delight in his
Ordinances, what zeal to Gods glory, what contempt of the world, what desires
after the society of the Saints, what sympathizing with them in their
afflictions* and if thou find any impressions of grace, any spiritual work,
any saving savoury distinguishing operations upon thy heart, etc. can thou
mourn in secret for open and secret sins? do thou desire to have sin purged,
as well as pardoned? do thou leave sin from a right principle to a right end,
and so through the Spirit mortify the deeds of the flesh? art thou willing to
be searched by any Christian in any thing? do thou approve thy heart to God
in all thy duties and services? do thou do what thou do for God, at least
in desire and endeavor to obey him freely, universally and constantly? then
thou have a title: for these are flowers of Paradise, that grow not in natures
garden: when thou come to dye, God does but take a flower out of the
wilderness, and plant it in Paradise; or takes a rose out of the field, and
puts it in his bosom: surely death to a Christian is but an unloading him of
all his burdens, and freeing him from all his troubles, Rev. 21. 4. Rev. 14. 13.

3. If we would dye comfortably, let us improve the present opportunity; for we
have a great deal of work to do, and but a little time to do it in; this work
deferred will be still greater, the time to do it in will be shorter, the
strength to do it by will be less, our understanding will be more dark, our
hearts more hard, our wills more crooked, our affections more disordered, our
conscience more benumbed: the work we have to do is as follows, viz. We have
a God to honor, a Christ to rest on, a race to run, a crown to win, a hell to
escape, a heaven to obtain: we have weak graces to strengthen, and strong
corruptions to weaken, we have many temptations to withstand, and afflictions
to bare, we have many mercies to improve, and many services to perform.

If Hester had not improved the present opportunity, she and her fathers house
had been destroyed.

If Abigal had not improved the present opportunity, many a man's life had been
cut off, 1 Samuel 25. 34.

There was an opportunity that the children of Israel had to enter in the Land
of Canaan, upon the return of the spies, but they not improving of it, were
fain to stay longer in the wilderness.

Jerusalem had an opportunity to be gathered together, as a hen gathers her
chickens under her wings, but for want of improving it, it was destroyed.

Let us now redeem the time, lest our candlestick be removed, Rev. 2. 5. Lest
as Paul and Barnabas said to the Jews, to you is the word of this salvation
sent, but seeing ye put it from you, lo we turn to the Gentiles, Act. 13. 46,
etc. Yet the days of plenty are amongst us, let us with Joseph lay up in
store, lest we dye in the famine: yet the weather is calm, and the season fair,
let us with Noah build up an Ark, lest with the rest we perish in the flood,
Gen 7. 21. Yet the Angel* tarryeth at the gates of Sodom, let us with Lot
depart thence, lest we be destroyed, Genesis 19. 24. Yet the bridegroom tarryeth
and waits, let us have to enter in with him, lest with the foolish Virgins we
be repelled, Mat. 25. 12. Yet wisdom cries in our streets, Oh then, now let us
harken to her. Yet the Lord sets open his storehouse of mercy, let us now
turn to him for a blessing, lest coming too late with Esau, we find none, Heb.
12. 17. Yet the Lord knocks at the door of our hearts, let us now open to
him, lest he say to us as he did to Jerusalem, Luke 19. 42. Now it is hid from
thee: yet the Lord waits for our return from Babylon, oh then let us now
return whilst we have time, lest hereafter he say to us as the Angel swear,
there shall be no more time, Rev. 10. 6. Yet the Lord is saying to us as in
Prove. 1. 23. Turn ye at my reproof, behold I will pour out my spirit upon you,
lest he say to us as in ver. 24. Because I called, and you refused, you shall
call, and I will not hear you; yet the Lord is saying to us as to Nineveh,
Jonah 3. 4, 5. yet forty days, and you shall be destroyed, let us repent as
they did, lest we be destroyed indeed.

4. The next thing to be practiced of all that would live sweetly, and dye
comfortably, is, first, store up a stock of faith. Secondly, store up a stock
of promises. Thirdly, store up a stock of prayers, and thou shall attain the
art of dying well.

1. Store up a stock of faith, and that will show us that Christ's death is a
death concerning death, 1 Cor. 15. 56, 57, etc. Christ in his death put death
to death. Again, faith will assure the dying party, that the Lord will be with
him in the hour of death, Psalm 23. 4. Though I walk in the valley of death, I
will fear none ill, etc. Again, faith will make a Christian willing to dye,
Luke 2. 28, 29. Now let thy servant depart in peace, for mine eyes have seen
thy salvation.

2. Store up a stock of promises against that day; I will be with thee in the
fire and in the water, says the Lord in one promise, and in another promise he
says, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee; the labor of the Olive may
fail, our nearest and dearest friends may fail, our eyes may fail, our tongue
may fail, our strength may fail, our flesh and heart may fail, our spirits may
fail; yet says the Lord, I will be with thee, I will not fail thee; see these
precious Scriptures, Josh. 1. 5. Josh. 21. 45. and 23. 14. 1 King. 8. 56.

3. Store up a stock of prayers; amongst all thy requests to God, in all thy
addresses to him, entreat him not to forsake thee at that time.

5. The fifth thing to be practiced, is to endeavor to live every day as thy
last day, Psalm 90. The Prophet speaks of death, ver. 10. see what follows,
ver. 12. So teach me to number my days, that I may apply my heart to wisdom: a
natural man considers of death notionally, their senses tell them that all must
dye, but as for preparation for it, that they put off till the last year, and
when that is come, to the last month, and when that is come, to the last week
of that month, and when that is come, to the last day of that week, and when
that is come, to the last hour of that day, and when that is come, to the last
minute of that hour, and so knock when the gate is shut, Mat. 25. 12. the gate
of grace is shut, and the gate of mercy, and the gate of indulgence, and the
gate of repentance, and the gate of hope, and the gate of comfort, etc.

But let a Christian live every day as his last day, and make sure his interest
in God, whilst God is reconcilable, and whilst his bowels of mercy are not
totally restrained, and whilst the treasury door of mercy and grace is open,
and whilst there is a blank in the leaf for the sinners name to be put in,
before the glass is out, and the Sun set, and the golden scepter taken in.

6. Gather up all thy evidences and spiritual experiences, and keep them in thy
heart and memory, and stand on thy guard, having put on all the armor of
Christ; as a valiant soldier, constantly maintain war, and thou shall usually
obtain victory; resolve in the strength of Christ, either to conquer, or dye
conquering; for let no man think to dance and dine with the Devil, and
afterward to sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom of heaven.

Let us therefore live in Christ, and not in our selves, for in our selves
there is a body of lust, corruption and sin, and a Law accusing and condemning;
but if we live by faith in Christ, and in the apprehension of his love, laying
hold on the life, righteousness, obedience, satisfaction of him whom the pirit
calls ours, saying, Christ is ours and we are Christ's, and Christ is Gods; and
thus a believer is blessed only in a righteousness without, not with in; and
all our assurance, confidence, and comforts are to flow in unto him, through a
channel of faith, and not of works: by faith we ought to live above sin,
infirmities, temptations, desertions, sense, reason, fears, doubts; it makes
the yoke of Christ easy and sweet; it states the soul in the possession of
heaven, whilst the body remains on earth: by faith we can chee^fully part with,
and suffer deprivation of the sweetest outward comforts and enjoyments, and
welcome death, knowing that we do but exchange the worst place and things for
better, the Lord Jesus having spoken peace to the soul, that he has paid all*
his debts for it, and that his sins shall be remembered no more; now the soul
knows it is happy, and enjoys the comfort of it.

7. Make thy will in time of health, and leave all things clear upon both
books, of shop and conscience, that thou may have nothing to do but to dye,
and to meditate upon, and to have faith in the precious promises, which speak
of rest, joy, peace, and perfect happiness, which is provided for us in heaven,
firmly believing that God will after this life give us all those things with
himself which he has promised, as certainly as thou have in thy will given to
thy relations such and such things for them to enjoy; and so exercise faith in
the resurrection of thy body, 1 These. 4. 16. to have a spiritual body, 1 Cor.
15. 43, 44. to have a glorified body, Phil. 3. 21. to have fullness of
knowledge, Ephesians. 3. 18, 19. to have fullness of joy and pleasure, Psalm. 16. 11.
such as shall be internal, pure, full, spiritual and eternal, where no misery,
hunger, cold, nakedness, pain, grief nor weariness, but rest without labor; in
rest tranquillity, in tranquillity content, in contentment joy, in joy variety,
in variety security, in security eternity, etc. thus shall thou that have
prepared for death aforehand, dye sweetly, whilst others that put off
preparation to the last, O what a hurry be they in! Oh the anguish that their
souls endure! they apprehending God angry with them, the Devil accusing them,
earth leaving them, heaven refusing them, hell claiming them, soul and body
parting, friends weeping, and themselves hopeless, going they know not whither.

But to a godly man, death is neither strange nor fearful unto him; not
strange, because he dyed daily; not fearful, because whilst he lived he was
dead, and his life was hid with Christ in God; to dye then is nothing else, but
to rest from our labors, and to go home to our fathers house, unto the City of
the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, to an innumerable company of Angels, to
the general assembly and Church of the first born, to God the Judge of all, and
unto the spirits of just men made perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator of the New
Testament; whilst his body is sick, his mind is sound, for God makes all his
bed in his sickness, Psalm 41. 3. and as his outward man decays, the inward
man ^renewed day by day, when the speech of his tongue saltereth, the sighs of
his heart speaks louder unto God; when the sight of the eyes fails, the Holy
Ghost illuminates him inwardly, with abundance of spiritual light: sometimes he
is saying with Paul, I desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ, Phil. 1.
23. and with David, Psalm 42. 2. As the heart pants after the water brooks,
so pants my soul after thee O God, when shall come and appear before him?
come Lord Jesus, come quickly. So when the appointed time of his dissolution is
come, knowing that he goes to his father and redeemer in the peace of a good
conscience, he says, Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace, etc.
and so surrenders up his soul, as it were with his own hands, into the hands of
his heavenly Father, saying with David, Into thy hands, O Father I commend my
soul, for thou have redeemed me O Lord, thou God of truth; and so saying with
Stephen, Act. 7. 59. Lord Jesus receive my spirit.

Thus far of the preparation for death, with a taste of the sad condition of
one dying out of Christ, and the sweet condition of a Christian dying, that is
a member of Christ, that did prepare for death before it came. I had once
intended here to have spoken to the sad condition of the ungodly after death,
resurrection and last judgment, and also of the blessed condition of all that
dye in the faith, after death, resurrection and last judgment, but that will
not fallin order here; but toward the end of this book, when we come to speak
of the resurrection of the body and last judgment, when Christ shall deliver
up his Kingdom to his Father, and God shall be all in all. I shall proceed now
to speak of the second coming of Christ in power and great glory, etc.

The great and terrible day of the Lord is near dawning, and the glory of all
flesh staining, the Kingdom of Christ appearing, and the restitution of all
things approaching; this great Mystery opened, the grounds thereof examined,
the truth cleared, and the ignorance of many in this Mystery discovered.
THat very self-same Jesus which was born in Bethlem, and suffered at Calvary,
even he shall come again, the same Jesus, not another, Act. 1. 11. shall so
come again, as he was taken up, viz. Visibly, substantially, apparently to all;
yea in the same manner: yea it is added, as you have seen him; that we might
not allegorize the matter, we are kept to the very manner: now for the
probation of this truth, we have

1. The testimony of all the Prophets. 2. We have the testimony of all the
Apostles. 3. We have the testimony of Angels, all bearing witness to this
truth.
1. We have the testimony of the Prophets, see Acts 3. 21. Whom the heavens
must receive until the time of restitution of all things, which God has
spoken by the mouth of all his holy Prophets since the the world began, but
especially the Prophets since Samuel, ver. 24. yea, and all the Prophets from
Samuel, and those that follow after, as many as have spoken, have likewise
foretold of these days. I will instance in a few for all: First David, Psalm.
62. 7. there he speaks of the continuance of Christ's kingdom, as long as the
Sun and Moon endures; then he speaks of the extent of this Kingdom, verse. 8.
and that is from sea to sea; then he speaks who shall be the subjects of this
kingdom, verse. 11. and that is some of all Nations; Isaiah likewise has not
only spoken of the incarnation, birth, life and doctrine, and death,
resurrection and ascension of Christ, but also he has prophesied of his second
coming in power, to gather his spiritual kingdom, and of the extent, enjoyment,
glory and duration of that kingdom: See one place for all Isaiah 2. 2, 3, 4.
Jeremiah also bares witness to the same truth, Jer. 30. 31, 32, 33. Ezekiel
also has spoken of this kingdom and reign of Christ, Ezekiel. 34. 11.

Daniel has spoken of this kingdom and reign of Christ, Daniel 2. 44, 45.

Hosea bares witness to the same truth, Hos. 1. 10, 11. and 3. 4, 5.

Amos also has foretold of these things, Chap. 9. 11. to the end.

Obadiah also speaks to the same truth, ver. 21.

Micah speaks to the same, Chap. 4. 6, 7.

Malachy speaks of his coming and kingdom, Chap. 3. 2.

2. We have the testimony of all the Apostles, speaking frequently of Christ's
second coming, in all the four Evangelists, and in almost all the Epistles to
the several Churches, see Mat. 24. from 29. to the end; and Mark 13. from 24.
to the end; and Luke 12. from 31. to the end; and Luke 21. from 25. to the end;
and Joh. 14. 3. compared with Joh. 17. 24.

So in the Epistles it is called the appearing of the glory of the great God,
Titus 2. 13. and it is set out with Angelical attendance, 2 These. 1. 7, 8, 9,
10. See a farther testimony of this truth, 1 These. 1. 10. and Phil. 3. 20.

3. We have the testimony of Angels, Act. 1. 10, 11. and whilst that they
looked steadfastly toward heaven, as he went up, behold two Angels stood by
them in white apparel, which said, ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up
into heaven? this same Jesus which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so
come in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven; behold, if the
testimony of the Prophets, yea all the Prophets, and the testimony of the
Apostles be not enough, then here is the testimony of Angels, which is
accounted steadfast, Heb. 2. 2. In a word, the second coming of Christ might be
farther proved by the immutability of Gods decree, and infallibility of his
promises, and impartiality of his justice, etc. but I meet with no sort of
people denying this truth, except a few of those spoken of in the Gospel,
saying, where is the promise of his coming? these people have renounced their
reason, and made nonsense the mother of their devotion, and therefore their
arguments are not worth the answering: but the great difficulty lies amongst
those men that do believe a second coming of Christ in power and great glory,
and thesemen fall into these three ranks; the first says that Christ shall
come and reign personally on the earth a thousand years before the last
judgment; a second sort stands up, and says, he shall not reign personally,
but spiritually a thousand years in his Saints; a third sort steps in, and
contradicts the two former, saying there is neither personal reign, nor
spiritual reign to be looked for at Christ's next coming, for he comes to judge
the world, and so to put an end to all things here below, etc. let the reader
consider, that it is with us now, a little before the second coming of Christ,
as it was with the Jews and others, a little before the first coming of Christ;
for it is apparent they were in three divisions, as we now are, as appears by
their darkness in these three portions of Scripture that speaks of Christ's
first coming.

One Scripture said Mich. 5. 2. thou Bethleem, out of thee shall come one to
rule Israel.

Another Scripture said Isaiah 9. 2, 6. the land of Zebulon and Nepthaly, the
people which were in darkness have seen a great light, ver. 6. for unto us a
child is born, unto us a Son is given, etc.

A third Scripture, Hos. 11. 1. we read these words, out of Egypt have I called
my Son, now in these three Scriptures the Prophets did seem to vary in their
prophecies, and the people after, about the coming of Christ in flesh,
differing as to the place where, or in which of these three Christ should be
born; this difference of theirs begat this great question in Court, Mat. 2. 4.
Herod gathered together all the chief Priests and Scribes, and demanded of them
where Christ should be born, and they said unto him, in Bethleem, etc. Now the
thing that I would have the reader to take special notice of, is this, that
these three Scriptures were fulfilled at the coming of Christ, one after
another, for he was born in Bethleem, called out of Egypt, and came to the land
of Zebulon, and there preached, and the people that sat in darkness saw a
great light, etc. and why may not all these three things fall in together, at
the second coming of Christ in power, (to wit) a persosonal coming, a spiritual
reign, and all the time of the reign, a judging of the world: let not us make
those things inconsistent, which may be consistent, in a sense, warily
understood; this I am sure, whilst we are contending what Christ shall do when
he comes, that we let slip our precious time, and not so prepare as we ought
for his coming.

Oh what a state are things in, here every one tuging for his interest! (O Lord
put in for thine too) do thou gain, and let all sit down with loss, whose gain
lies not in thine; cozen all creatures by bringing about a swifter, a fuller, a
more universal happiness, by the appearance of our Lord Christ, then ever heart
could imagine. Let the reader consider these eleven things.

1. There shall be a coming of Christ in power and great glory. 2. That day is
very near. 3. The manner of his coming. 4. The signs of his coming. 5. He shall
come visibly. 6. The posture a Christian should be in at his coming. 7. It is
the duty of all to wait for his coming. 8. The benefits that a Christian shall
have at his coming. 9. The consideration of his coming should cause us to live
here above our contents and discontents. 10. The sad condition of all out of
Christ at his coming. 11. He shall come terribly.
1. There shall be a coming of Christ in power and great glory, which we have
proved before by the testimony of all the Prophets and Apostles, and some of
the Angels; we have proved this truth further by the immutablity of Gods
decree, and by the infallibility of his promises, and by the impartiality of
his justice, etc. by all which it does appear most certain that Christ will
come, Psalm 50. 3. Luke 21. 27. Mat. 25. 31. Mat. 24. 30. Jude 14, 15. 2 Cor 5.
10. 2 Pet. 3.

2. That day is very near, although no man knows the time of Christ's coming
exactly, in respect of the day and hour: yet there are signs set down by Christ
and his Apostles, showing that that day is not far off; and further, it does
plainly appear it is near, yea very near, by these demonstrations.

1. By the fulfilling of prophesies. 2. By the appearances of providence.
1. By the fulfilling of prophesies, viz. We have seen the Father against the
son, and the son against the father, and the mother against the daughter, and
the daughter against the mother, wars, and rumors of wars, and a great falling
away, and perilous times, as earthquakes, many false prophets and Doctrine*
of Devils, and some coming in the name of Christ, saying, I am he, the unbelief
that is in most, and that state of security, and falling from the truth once
professed, and the revealing of the man of sin, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 1, 2. These and the
like are clear testimonies that the day of the Lord is at hand.

2. This day is near, as appears by the appearance of providence, as it was in
the days of Noah, and as it fell out in the days Lot, etc. 1 These. 5. 3. When
they shall say peace and safety, then sudden destruction comes upon them, 2 Timothy 3. 1, 5. This know, that in the last days, perilous times shall come,
for men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud,
blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural
affection, truthbreakers, false accusers, fierce, despisers of those that are
good, etc. Surely these things do now abound, by which we know the day is near;
the Lord has promised to avenge his people speedily, Luke 18. 5. Zeph. 1. 14.
The great day of the Lord is near, is near, Isa. 13. 6. Howl ye, for the great
day of the Lord is at hand, Joel 1. 15. For the day of the Lord is at hand,
Joel 2. 1. For the day of the Lord is come, for it is nigh at hand, Heb. 10.
37. Yet a little while, and he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry.

Object. But that day and hour knows no man.

Answ. Men may guess at the time, and not miss much for all that; for instance,
did not Moses through faith see the redemption of the first captivity? Daniel
of the second, and Abraham the day of Christ, and the spouse her beloved coming
skiping upon the mountains, and a few in Israel were found waiting for their
redemption: does not the footsteps of Christ's coming begin to appear?

The manner of his coming.
THe Lord Jesus will certainly and surely, like a Sovereign, like a King in
Majesty, triumphing in much glory, attended with the Archangel, and all the
host of heaven, the trumpet will be sounding, the world burning, the earth
shaking, men's hearts failing, Psalm. 46. 6. And then the Lord will roar out of
Sion, and utter his voice from Jerusalem, and the heavens and earth shall
shake, Joel 3. 16. A fire stream came forth from before him, thousands
ministered unto him. Dan. 7. 10. And ten thousand times ten thousand stood
before him: this day of the Lord is great and terrible, who can abide it? the
sight of Christ's presence shall be doubtless an incredible brightness and
majesty, in which he shall appear, for he shall come in the clouds of heaven,
Mat. 26. 64. with incredible glory, Mat. 25. 31. accompanied with the whole
Army of his Angels, as before, and with a great shout and voice of the
Archangel, 1 These. 4. 16. And by reason of his brightness, the Sun and the
Moon shall be darkened, as lesser lights by the greater, and stars shall fall
from heaven, that is, they shall seem as it were, to fall, and the powers of
heaven shall be shaken, Mat. 24. 29. Mat. 13. 24. Yea at his sight heaven and
earth shall fly away, Rev. 20. 11.

There shall not be a destruction of the nature of the Sun, Moon and Stars, as
some say, for the Scripture does speak of a new heaven, and new earth; old
renewed: and so at Christ's second coming he shall renew all things. See Ezekiel.
32. 6, 7. Act. 3. Romans 8. he shall come in the glory of his Father, Mat. 16.
27. with power and great glory, Mat. 24. 30. the glory of a thousand Suns made
into one, will be but as sackcloth to that wherein Christ shall appear in man's
nature; the wicked shall be punished with everlasting destruction from his
presence, and the glory of his power, 2 These. 1. 9. and when his glory shall be
revealed, the Saints shall be glad with exceeding joy, 1 Pet. 4. 13.

The signs of Christ's coming.
ALthough no man knows the time of Christ's coming exactly in respect of the day
and hour, yet there are signs set down by Christ and his Apostles, showing that
that day is not far off: what extreme security and impiety, false prophecy,
false Christ's, pestilence, famine, earthquakes, treacheries, want of faith and
charity, have not these things already abounded? Mat. 24. 32, 33. When ye see
these things, the end is near, 1 These. 5. 1, 2, Concerning the times and
seasons, brethren, it is not needful that I write unto you, for you your
selves know well that that day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night:
therefore learn a parable of the fig tree, when its branch is yet tender and
puts forth leaves, ye know that summer is nigh, so likewise ye when ye shall
see all these things come to pass, know that it is near, ev^n at the door.

Christ shall come visibly.
WE read Mat. 24. 64. hereafter shall you see the Son of man sitting on the
right hand of power, and coming in the clouds of heaven with power, and great
glory, Rev. 1. 7. Behold he comes with clouds, and every eye shall see him;
the damned shall see him to their amazement, and the godly shall him to their
joy and consolation, Rev. 22. 4. They shall see his face, and his name shall be
in their for^heads, Acts 1. 11. This same Jesus which is taken up from you into
heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven, that
is, Christ going up into heaven was visible; so Christ's coming out of heaven,
shall be visible, Matthew 26. 64.

The posture a Christian should be in at his coming.
BE ye also ready, for in such an hour as you think not the Son of man comes,
hold out faith and patience but a little, and he that shall come, will come,
and will not tarry, Mat. 24. 44. Luke 12. 35 Let your loins be girt about, and
your lamps burning, and you your selves looking for that blessed hope, and the
glorious appearing of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, Tit. 2. 13.
Be ye therefore ready, for the son of man comes in an hour when ye think not,
Luke 12. 40. Mark 13. 35, 36. therefore let us not sleep as do others, but let
us watch and be sober, then shall ye break forth and say, when ye see him
coming, as in Isa. 25. 9. This is our God, we have waited for him, we will be
glad, and rejoice in his salvation, Heb. 10. 35. Let us not forsake the
assembling of our selves together, as the manner of some is, but exhort one
another, and so much the rather, as we see the day approaching.

It is the duty of all to watch and pray for his coming.
Luke 21. 36. WAtch ye therefore and pray always, that ye may be accounted
worthy to escape all these things that shall come to pass, and to stand before
the Son of man, 1 Pet. 1. 13. Wherefore gird up the loins of your minds, be
sober and hope to the end, for the grace that shall be brought unto you at the
revelation of Jesus Christ, Luke 12 37, 38 Blessed are those servants, when the
Lord comes shall find so doing, 2 These. 3. 5. Now the Lord direct our hearts
into the love of God, and into the patient waiting for Christ, Rev. 22. 20. He
that testifies these things, says, surely I come quickly. Let us all say,
Amen, even so come Lord Jesus.

Of some of the benefits a Christian shall have at his coming.
THE day is at hand, O perplexed soul, when thou shall have smiles without
frowns, light without darkness* day without night, wine without water, sweet
without bitter, and joy without sorrow; thou now sowest in tears, thou shall
then reap in joy, yea everlasting joy shall be upon thy head, and sorrow and
sighing shall fly away; the blessings to be enjoyed at this great day, are
truly great, we should love the appearance of Christ, and look for, and haste
to the coming of the day of God. O why is his Chariot so long in coming! Oh
that the day should be so great, and our desires so small! Shall the Mariner
desire his Port? the Apprentice his freedom? the imprisoned his liberty? the
sick his health? the Spouse the day of her marriage? a malefactor his pardon? a
labourer his rest? an heir his inheritance? and shall not a Christian long for
that day which removes every sorrow, supplies every want, and makes us like
him? viz.

1. From being a weak body, we shall be made strong, 1 Cor. 15. 44.

2. From being a mortal body, it shall be made spiritual, 1 Cor. 15. 53.

3. It shall be free from all pain, and suffering, and sorrow, and sighing,
Rev. 21. 4.

4. Our lumpish body shall be like the Angels, even like Christ's body, Mat. 22.
30.

5. This blessed change will put an end to all unprofitable changes; here we
change joy for sorrow, health for sickness, credit for disgrace, but here it
will end, Rev. 21. 4.

6. Christ will put a change to our employment; our work at present is praying,
groaning, sighing, mourning, wrestling, and fighting, Ephesians 6. 10. But then
our work will be rejoicing and praising.

7. Christ will change our enjoyment as well as our employment, viz. he will
change our more inconstant enjoyment for a more constant, and he will change
our more dark and obscure enjoyment, for a more clear enjoyment, and so turn
our sighing into singing, and our trembling into rejoicing, and our prison into
a Paradise, and so quiet our conscience, and scatter our fears.

8. He will make his people the head and not the tail, as does at large appear
by these Scriptures, Isa. 62. 8, 9. Joel 2. 23, 24. Mich. 4. 4. Amos 9. 13, 14.
Zach. 8. 12. Isa. 41. 18, 19. Jer. 31. 12. Isa. 30. 23. Isa. 55. 13. and 66. 6,
7. and 65. 21, 22. and 61. 4. and 60. 10. when he shall appear, we shall
receive a crown of glory, 1 Pet. 5. 4. and if that be too little, we shall
receive a crown of righteousness, 2 Timothy 4. 8. when he shall appear, we shall
appear with him in glory, Col. 3. 4. when he shall appear, we shall be like
him, 1 John 3. 2.

The consideration of his coming should cause us to live upon him.
PAul a servant of Jesus Christ, commands us by virtue of a commission received
from God, to follow him, as he followed Christ, viz. He did often speak of his
departure, and of his preparation thereunto, and so whilst he was here, he
lived out of himself, upon Christ, in the Spirit, unto God, above the world;
yet under Ordinances, looking unto election behind, and perfection before; so
that when death comes to summon him to appear before the Lord, by laying down
his body in the grave, he was ready, and therefore brake forth and said, 2 Timothy
4. 7, 8. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the
faith, henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the
Lord the righteous judge shall give me, at that day, and not to me only, but
unto them also that love his appearing.

Of the sad condition of all out of Christ at his coming.
1. IN what a sad condition will all be that are not born again? Joh. 3. 3, 5.

2. In what a sad condition will all be that want faith? Joh. 3. 36.

3. In what a sad condition will those be that want humility? God resists the
proud, and gives grace to the humble.

4. In what a sad condition will those be in that want holiness? Heb. 12. 14.

5. In what a sad condition be all those that want meekness? with the froward
he will show himself froward, etc.

6. In what a sad condition will all those be that do not know the Lord? 2
These. 1. 8.

7. In what a sad condition will all those be that want the wedding garment?
Matthew 22. 11, 12, 13.

8. In what a sad condition will all those be that have no oil in their lamps?
Mat. 25. 3.

9. In what a sad condition will all those be that have the form and not the
power? 2 Timothy 3. 5.

10. In what a sad condition will those be that have built upon the sand? Mat.
7. 26, 27.

11. In what a sad condition will all be that are professors, and not
possessors? Joh. 5. 38.

12. In what a sad condition be all those that would not have Christ to reign
over them? Luke 19. 27.

In a word, Christ will save no ignorant person, no rebellious person, no
hypocrite, no scoffer, no persecutor, no man that has built upon the sand, no
man that has leves without fruit, no man that does seek salvation by any other
way then by Christ, 1 Cor 6. 9, 10. Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God? be not deceived, neither fornicators, nor
idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with
mankind, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor
extortioners shall inherit the Kingdom of God, etc.

All the secret sins that now lie hid, shall then be made known, Luke 18. 17.
and 12. 2. there is nothing covered that shall not then be revealed, 1 Cor. 4.
5. He will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, Matthew 24. 30. Then
shall all the tribes of the earth mourn, and men's hearts fail for fear, and for
looking after those things that are coming on the earth, Joel 3. 16. the Lord
also shall roar out of Sion, and utter his voice from Jerusalem, and the
heavens and the earth shall shake, but the Lord will be the hope of his people.

Christ shall come terribly, and yet seasonably.
THe day of the Lord is great and terrible, who can abide it? Joel 2. 11. There
has not been ever the like, neither shall there be, Joel 2. 2. there shall be
a time of trouble, such as never was since the creation, Dan. 12. 1. Then shall
be great tribulation, such as was not from the beginning to this day, Matthew
24. 21, 22. A fire stream shall come forth before him, and ten thousands shall
be ministering unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand shall stand before
him, and the judgment shall be set, and the books opened, See Dan. 7. 10. Jude
14.

Yet this coming will be seasonable to all that have an interest in him, and
did look for him, and hasten to his coming, and love his appearing, for now
they shall be like him, 1 John 3. 2. Isa. 25. 9. and Isa. 2. 3, 4. Rev. 21. 4.

There be four things that Christ has already done for his flock, and five
things he is now doing, and six things more he will finish when he comes.
THere are four things that he has already done, viz.

1. He has taken our nature upon him, Heb. 2. 16. 2. He has taken our sins
upon him, Isaiah 53. 6. 3. He has taken the curse due to us, upon himsef, Gal.
3. 13. 4. He has fully satisfied Divine justice for us, Isa. 53. 11.
Then there are five things that he is now doing for us, viz.

1. He is at the right hand of the Father, making interceslion for us, Heb. 7.
25. 2. He is teaching us as a Prophet, and preserving us as a King, and healing
us as a Physician, and feeding us as a Shepherd, etc. 3. He is preparing for
the destroying of Antichrist, 2 These. 2. 8. 4. He is making good his promise,
in pouring out his Spirit. 5. He is turning our disunion into union, Zeph. 3.
9.
Then there be six things more that he will do for us when he comes.

1. He will unvail himself, and every eye shall see him, Rev. 1. 7. 2. He will
gather his spiritual Kingdom, Psalm. 50. 5. 3. He will establish his Kingdom on
the top of all kingdoms, Isa. 2. 2. 4. He will restore our judges as at the
first, and counselors as at the beginning, Isa. 1. 26 5. He will make his
enemies his footstool, Psalm 110. 1. 6. He will make his people the head and
not the tail, Deuteronomy. 28. 13. Dan. 7. 27.
Many more things has Christ done for us, many more he is doing, and many more
will he do when he comes.

Let the reader take notice these that I have named are but a taste.

Of the resurrection of the dead, at the second coming of Christ.
THough the resurrection of the dead is above nature, and man's corrupt reason,
yet it is neither against nature, noragainst right reason; the Scripture proves
the resurrection of the dead by many testimonies, examples, types and reasons,
etc.

1. The resurrection is proved by testimonies, Job 19. 25, 26. Dan. 12. 2. Hos.
13. 14. Mat. 22. 31. and 27. 52. John 5. 28, 29. Phil. 3. 21. 1 These. 4.

2. By example of those that were raised, 1 King. 17. 22. 2 King. 4. 34. 2
King. 13. 21. Matthew 9. 25. and 27. 52, 53. Luke 7. 14. John 11. 11. Acts. 9.
40. and 20. 10.

3. By types, as Aarons rod budding, Numb. 17. Of the Jews returning from
Babylon, Ezekiel. 37. but chiefly of Enoch and Elias, Genesis 5. and 2. Kin. 2.

4. This resurrection is also proved by reasons, drawn first from the Covenant
of God, which is not broken by death, Mat. 22. 30. But the chief reason is
drawn from Christ, who is not only the type and example of our resurrection,
but the beginning also thereof: For the Life of the body (the Church) is from
the head.

There is a first and a second Resurrection.
1. THe first Resurrection, as most do affirm, is a Resurrection from the death
of sin, to the Life of Righteousness: this is a Revocation from a state of
death to a state of Life.

2. There is a resurrection of the same body that man had in this life, Job 19.
26. The form of this resurrection consists in the reunion of body and soul,
and restoring of the de^d to Life, and in the sudden change of those that
remain upon the earth at his coming, etc. This resurrection is either of the
godly or of the wicked. There is a Resurrection to Life, and another to
condemnation, John 5. 29.

1. Of the godly, they shall be first raised, and then freed; not only from
corruption, and bodily defects, but shall be crowned also with Glory, 1 Thessalonians.
4. 16. For the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the
voice of the Archangel, and with the trump of God, and the dead in Christ
shall rise first: Agreeable to this Text is that in Rev. 20. 4, 5. I saw the
souls of them that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and for the word of
God, which had not worshipped the beast nor his Image, neither had received his
mark upon their foreheads, or in their hands; and they lived and reigned with
Christ a thousand years. Ver. 5. But the rest of the dead lived not again,
until the thousand years were finished, this is the first resurrection,
blessed and holy is he that has part in the first resurrection, on such the
second Death has no power: the Apostle Paul speaks to the same thing: 1 Cor.
15. 23. But every man in his own order, Christ the first fruits, afterward
they that are Christ's at his Coming. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 14. For if we believe that
Jesus dyed and rose again, even so them also which sleep in Jesus, will God
bring with him, 1 Cor. 15. 42, 43, 44. It is sown in corruption, it is raised
in incorruption; it is sown in dishonor, it is raised in Glory; it is sown in
weakness, it is raised in power; it is sown a natural body, it is raised a
spiritual body; ver. 49. As we have born the Image of the earthly, we shall
also bear the Image of the Heavenly Adam. The bodies of the Elect being thus
first raised, they shall have most excellent and supernatural qualities. I will
instance in four.

1. As before they shall be raised in power, whereby they shall be freed from
all wants and weakness, and enabled to continue without the use of meat and
drink, sleep and other former helps.

2. They shall be raised as before in incorruption, whereby they shall never be
subject to any manner of imperfection, blemish, sickness, or death.

3. In Glory, whereby their bodies shall shine as bright as the Sun in the
firmament: Three glimpses of which Glory were seen; first, in Moses face:
secondly in the transfiguration: thirdly in Stephens countenance.

Three instances and assurances of the Glorification of our bodies at that
glorious day, see Exodus 34. 27. Mat. 17. 2, 3, 4. Acts 6. 15.

4. In agility, whereby our bodies shall be like Angels, free from these
shakles of clay, and so move from heaven to earth, and from earth to heaven,
even as swiftly as can our very thoughts: they shall, says the Prophet, renew
their strength, they shall mount up with wings as Aeagles, they shall run and
not be weary, they shall walk and not faint. Now if any ask how long it shall be
after this first resurrection, before the rest of the dead shall rise? then I
answer, we find it recorded Rev. 20. 5. But the rest of the dead lived not
until the thousand years were finished: I dare not expound this text for want
of Light.

Now as we read of a first and second resurrection, so we read of a first and
last Judgment, or of a particular and general Judgment. Viz. Every man in
particular appears before the Judgment after the hour of his death, Heb. 9*
27. But fully and generally upon all men after the second coming of Christ,
Act. 17. 31. The death of every one severally goes immediately before the
particular Judgment; so the general resurrection of all goes before the final
judgment which shall be at the last day, but there shall be a great distance
of time between the resurrection of the Elect and the reprobate. So there shall
be a great difference between the resurrection of the one and of the other,
etc. Viz.

1. The Elect shall be raised as members of the body of Christ, by virtue
derived from his resurrection; the reprobate as malefactors, shall be brought
forth of the prison of the grave, by virtue of the Justice of God.

2. The Elect shall come forth to everlasting life, which is called the
resurrection of life: The reprobate to shame and perpetual contempt, called the
resurrection of Condemnation.

3. The bodies of the Elect shall be spiritual, that is, glorious, powerful,
nimble, Phil. 3. 21. But the bodies of the Reprobates shall be full of
uncomeliness and horror, and liable to extreme torment.

Of the Reign of Christ, or kidgdom of Christ in this world, though not of this
world.
AS to this point I cannot write as to the former, but under correction, and
with submission to better Judgments; (I crave leave to present mine) and then
let me tell the Reader, I have seriously read once, and again over and over all
that I have heard of and met with both for the personal Reign, and also against
the personal Reign of Christ, and searched the Scriptures, and debated and
reasoned with Christians many times for many months, and I cannot, yea, I dare
not positively affirm any such thing; nor totally in any sense (warily
understood) deny it. For the Scriptures seem to point at such a thing, although
I do not find it so fully confirmed, as many people of note pretend it does; so
then although I dare not say the Kingdom of Christ is of this world; yet I dare
not deny but his Kingdom in a sense may be in this world: Though I cannot
affirm that he shall Reign personally on earth a thousand years, yet I have
some ground to affirm, that he shall Reign spiritually, and have a spiritual
Kingdom for a season; or else what means that Scripture? Rev. 11. 15. And the
seventh Angel sounded, and there were great voices in heaven, saying the
Kingdoms of this world are become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ,
and he shall reign. Does not this Scripture point to the same thing? Dan. 7.
27. And the Kingdom and Dominion, and the greatness of the Kingdom under the
whole Heavens shall be given to the people of the Saints of the most high, and
all Nations shall serve and obey them. Does not the Prophet Isaiah speak to the
same thing? Isal. 2. 2, 3. And it shall come to pass in the last days, that
the mountain of the Lords house shall be established in the top of the
mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills; and all Nations shall flow unto
it, for out of Sion shall go forth the Law, and the word of the Lord from
Jerusalem, Isai. 1. 26. And I will restore thy Judges as at the first, and thy
Counselors as at the beginning. Jer. 3. 15. And I will give you Pastors
according to mine heart, which shall feed you with knowledge and understanding:
Moreover the light of the moon shall be as the Light of the Sun, and the light
of the Sun shall be sevenfold, Isai. 11. 6. Then shall the Wolf dwell with the
Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie down with the Kid, etc. Verse. 7. And the Cow
and the Bear shall feed their young, and the Lion shall eat straw like the Ox.
ver. 9. They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain, for the earth
shall be full of the Knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea, Jer.
32. 39. And I will give them one heart and one way, that they may fear me for
ever, Zech. 14. 9. Then the Lord shall be one, and his name one. Zeph. 3. 9.
For then will I turn to the people a pure language, that they may all call upon
the Lord to serve him with one consent. Act. 3. 19. Is not this the times of
refreshing that shall from the presence of the Lord? Acts 3. 21. Is not this
the time of restitution of all things which God has spoken by the mouth of all
his Prophets since the world began? Compare this with Acts 19. 21. and Romans 8.
19, 20, 21, 22.

Shall not the Jews be converted and embrace the Gospel, and the fullness of the
Gentiles come in? Romans 11. 12. Now if the fall of them be the riches of the
world, and the diminishing of them the riches of the Gentiles: How much more
their fullness? ver. 15. For if the casting away of them be the reconciling of
the world: What shall the receiving of them be, but life from the dead? ver.
26. And so all Israel shall be saved, as it is written, there shall come out of
Sion the Deliverer* and he shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob, Isa. 35. 6,
7. Then shall the lame man leap as an heart, and the tongue of the dumb shall
sing, for in the wilderness shall waters break forth, and streams in the
desert, and the parched ground shall become a pool and the thirsty land springs
of water, Deuteronomy. 28. 13. Dan. 7. 27. Then the Lord shall make his people the
head and not the tail. Zeph. 3. 19, 20. Behold at that time, I will undo all
that afflict thee, and will save her that halteth, and will get them a praise
and a fame in every land, where they have been put to shame, for I will make
you a name and a praise unto all people of the earth, when I turn back your
captivity before your eyes, says the Lord.

Hold out faith and patience but a little, and he that shall come, will come,
and will not tarry, but bring his Reward with him; and so bring about a
swifter, a fuller, and a more universal happiness then any could imagine.
Before Sion traveled she brought forth: and at even-tide it shall be Light,
Zach. 14. 6.

Oh who would but Love the appearing of Christ in spirit, and look for, and
hasten to the coming of this day of Restitution! Let our note become: O why are
his chariots so long in coming? the sweeter the enjoyment, the stronger should
be the desires: Oh that the day should be so great, and our desires so small!
the spouse does desire the day of her marriage, the prisoner his liberty, the
malefactor his pardon, the Labourer his rest, and Heir his inheritance, an
Apprentice his freedom, the Mariner his port, and shall not we live in a
continual expectation of that day, which removes every sorrow, and supplies
with every comfort? In a word, this day will be a clearing from all undue
imputations. Now a Christian is sometimes called Dissembler, Anabaptist,
Separate, Hyppocrite, and what not? But he may say when Christ does appear, his
Innocence shall appear too; all slanders and defamations shall fall off from
the Saints, and their very enemies shall be fain to confess, that these people
whom they have hated, are those whom the Lord has blessed, etc. The
blessedness of this state does consist in these and the like things.

1. A clear Apprehension of God reconciled to us in Christ, 2. Cor. 5. 19. Col.
1. 20, 21.

2. A clear apprehension of our selves, clothed with the Righteousness of
Jesus Christ, Col. 1. 28.

3. A clear apprehension that all sin is forgiven, Isai. 53. 6 1 Pet. 2. 24.

4. A clear apprehension of our Consciences being purged in the blood of
Christ, Hebrews 9. 14.

5. A clear apprehension of the Law, perfectly by Christ fulfilled for us, Romans
10. 4.

6. A clear apprehension of that real, close, spiritual, glorious and
inseparable Union that there is between Christ and our souls.

7. A clear apprehension of that saving testimony of the Spirit of God,
ratifying and testifying all this in the soul.

We find that the Apostles themselves, and also Churches with whom they walked,
made use of these benefits and privileges that they should have at Christ's
next coming, to bear up their spirits under their sufferings here, viz. 1 Pet.
1. 13. Wherefore gird up the loins of your mind, be sober, and hope to the end,
for the Grace that is to be brought unto you at the revelation of Jesus Christ.

James 5. 8. Be ye also patient, stablish your hearts, for the coming of the
Lord draws nigh.

Heb. 9. 28. Unto them that look for him, he shall appear the second time
without sin unto salvation, 1 John 3. 2. Beloved, Now we are the Sons of God,
and it does not yet appear what we shall be; but we know that when he shall
appear, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is, Rev. 22. 20. He
which testifies these things, says surely I come quickly. (Let us all say
with the Church) Amen, even so come Lord Jesus.

The diverse expressions in Scripture concerning the coming of Christ, which set
him forth as coming in various Dresses, Viz. Sometimes as a Bridegroom,
sometimes in Fire, sometimes as a Warrior, sometimes as a Judge; are not to be
understood of diverse Comings, but one and the same coming in diverse Respects;
as to his people, he comes as a Bridgroom, when in respect of the wicked, he
comes in fire, and as a Judge.

I shall close up this point with two Scriptures, Isaiah 61. 5, 6. And
strangers shall stand and feed your Flocks, and the sons of the Alian shall be
your Plough men, and your Vinedressers.

But ye shall be named the Priests of the Lord, men shall call you the
Ministers of our God. Chap. 14. 2. They shall take them captive, whose captives
they were, and they shall rule over their oppressors, etc.

Of the last judgment, the signs that go before it, what is meant by it, the
place where, the person who, the time how long the judgment shall last, out of
what we shall be judged, this day shall be a great Day.
1. Of the Signs that go before the last judgment.
THE signs foretokening the last judgment are certain nottable changes in the
world, in Church and State, some farther off, some nearer unto the coming of
the great judge.

1. The publishing and the sound of the Gospel throughout the whole world.

2. The Apostasy of many professors, losing their first love, and drawing back,
etc.

3. The revealing of Antichrist, that man of sin and child of perdition, 2
These. 2. 8.

4. Common corruptions in manners, joined with security, as in the days of
Noah and Lot.

5. Wars, commotions and troubles both in the world, and in the Church of
Christ.

6. False Christ's attended with false Prophets, and armed with false miracles.

7. The calling of the Jews into the faith of the Gospel.

8. Signs in heaven, earth and all the elements, 2 Pet. 3. 7. Mat. 24. 30.

What is meant by judgment.
BY Judgment is meant the pronouncing and executing of the irrevocable
sentence of absolution or condemnation, in which the Godly shall be judged one
way, and the wicked another way; for the first shall be Judged, but not
condemned; the latter shall be judged and condemned.

Of the place where the Lord will judge the world.
THE place where the Lord Christ shall sit in Judgment, is verily thought to
be in the air, over the Valley of Jehosaphat, by mount Olive, near to Jerusalem,
Eastward from the temple, 1 These. 4. 17. this might be confirmed by these
reasons.

1. Because we find some ground in the word of God for this, Joel 3. 2. and
ver. 11. compared with Zech. 14, 4, 5.

2* Because as Christ was there abouts crucified and put to open shame, so over
that place his glorious throne shall be erected, when he shall appear in
judgment to judge the world in righteousness, where he himself was unjustly
judged and condemned.

3. Because that the Angels shall be sent to gather together the elect from the
four winds, from one end of the earth to the other; it is most probable that
the place where they shall be gathered together shall be near Jerusalem, which
is the center of the earth as may be proved.

4. Because the Angels told the disciples, that as they saw Christ ascend from
Mount Olivet, which is by the valley of Jehosaphat, so shall he in like manner
come down from heaven: but I think it not safe, rashly to define where the
place of the last judgment shall be.

Of the Person who it is that shall judge the world.
THE chief power of judicature shall be in Christ, for to him all power is
given, and from whom no appeal can be made to any superior. This judge shall
be visible to all, both in respect of brightness and majesty in which he shall
appear, but so that his sight shall be terrible to the wicked, but joyful to
the Godly, Acts 17. 31. He has appointed a day in the which he will judge the
world in righteousness by that man whom he has ordained, whereof he has given
assurance unto all men, in that he has raised him from the dead; and both
reprobate and elect shall hear the sentence of the judge, to the one it shall
be full of horror, to the other full of comfort, Mat. 25. 34. Come ye blessed,
verse. 41. Go ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his
Angels, now where as many texts of Scripture say, the Saints shall judge the
world, that is to be understood, that they shall approve of Christ's sentence,
and praise the wisdom and justice of God therein.

Of the time how long the Judgment shall last.
WE read in the Scripture that the time is a day; but there are three opinions
among Christians about this word day.

1. Some take the day here spoken of precisely and properly, as if the day of
the last judgment should not exceed that space and proportion of time.

2. Some conceive that by the day is meant a thousand years, because some are
said to sit on thrones, and have judgment given unto them, that is power of
Judging, and to live and reign with Christ a thousand years, Rev. 20. 4. but I
conceive that this judgment and reign of a thousand years cannot be understood
of the last Judgment, because death the last enemy shall in the resurrection
be destroyed; now after the end of the thousand years mentioned by Saint John,
Satan shall be loosed out of the prison, and the nations deceived by him, shall
compass the camp of the Saints about, and the beloved City; and fire shall come
down from God out of heaven and devour them all.

3. Others seem more safely to apprehend that the day here mentioned is to be
taken improperly, for time indefinitely, it being in Scripture very ordinary to
put a day for time: in an acceptable time have I heard thee, in a day of
Salvation have I helped thee, Isa. 49. 8. If thou had known in this thy day,
Luke 19. 42. Your Father Abraham rejoiced to see my day, John 8. 56, etc. there
must be a day wherein that great work of judgment must begin, but the duration
thereof is to be measured by the nature of the thing and the counsel of God; so
I can determine nothing peremptorily concerning the continuance of the last
judgment.

By what, or out of what we shall be judged.
AND the books were opened, and the Revel. 20. 12.
dead were judged out of those things which were written in the books according
to their works, etc. by those books are meant partly Gods omniscience, and
partly man's conscience; God to whom all things are naked and open, needs no
books to help his memory as man does; yet we read, that he has two books, the
one is called the book of life, the other of knowledge of the first there; are
four kinds: the first is of predestination to life eternal, and in this book
some are so written, that they cannot be blotted out; others are written, but
in appearance and hope: many hope their names are recorded in heaven, but when
they fall from this hope, then they may be said to be blotted out of this book,
this is the book of life eternal. Secondly, there is a book of life temporary,
which is; nothing else but the condition and state of this life; out of this
book did Moses, David, and Paul wish themselves to be blotted out: The third
book of life is the Scripture, as containing those precepts and means by which
we may obtain life eternal: The fourth book of life is our conscience,
informing us of all the good and bad actions of our life.

This book is opened sometimes in this life, but shall be laid open to us in
the last day: The other book we read of, is of knowledge, which is threesold,
viz.

1. The book of Gods general knowledge, whereby he takes notice of all men,
whether they be good or bad; of this every man may say with David, Psalm. 139.
16. in thy book are all my members written, etc.

2. The book of Gods particular knowledge, of this see Psalm 1. the Lord
knows the way of the righteous, and 2 Timothy 2. the Lord knows who are his;
this is the knowledge of approbation: in this book they are not written, to
whom Christ will say at the last day, depart from me, etc. of this David
speaks, Psalm 69. 28 Let them be blotted out of the book of the living, and
not be written with the righteous.

3. The third book of knowledge is that wherein the actions of wicked men are
recorded, and which shall be laid open to them, Deuteronomy. 7. 10. Judgment was set,
and the books where opened, etc.

The day of judgment shall be a great Day.
THIS day shall be a great day; first in respect of the judge, attended with a
great number of Saints and Angels, even all his Servants waiting upon him, 1
These. 1. 13. Secondly this day shall be great in respect of the judged, as they
fall under a fourfold consideration.

1. In respect of the greatness of their company and number.

2. In respect of the greatness of their ranks and dergees.

3. The greatness of their faults and offenses.

4. In respect of the greatness of their rewards and recompenses.

1. In respect of the greatness of their number, Matthew 25. 32. and 2 These. 2.
1. We must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that every one may
receive the things done in his body.

2. The day shall be great in respect of the greatness of their ranks and
degrees; the high and mighty Emperors, as well as the poorest outcasts; the
tallest Cedar, as well as the stoutest heart, must bend and break at that day,
Psalm 110. 5. there will be no other crowns worn at that day, but the crowns of
righteousness: no other robes, but those washed in the blood of Christ.

3. The day of judgment will be great in respect of their faults and offenses*
the least sin will appear exceeding great, the smallest offense unpardoned, is
against a God infinite; the least sin will then be looked upon, as that which
put God upon complaining, Christ upon bleeding, and the Spirit upon grieving.
Oh how will the scarlet, crimson transgressions, at which natural conscience is
affrighted, appear at that day? those blasphemies, murders, open oppressions,
unnatural uncleanness, etc.

4. This day shall be great in respect of the greatness of their rewards, and
recompenses; there will be the loss of Gods presence to the one, and the
freedom of all misery to the other, and the stamp of eternity put upon both; it
shall be a righteous sentence, every cause shall be judged rightly; Christ is
called a righteous Judge, 1 Timothy 4. 8. in righteousness does he judge, Rev. 19.
11. The Scepter of his Kingdom is a rig^teous Scepter, he loves righteousness,
Psalm. 45. 6, 7. The day of judgment is a day of the revelation of the
righteous judgment of God; righteousness shall be the girdle of his loins,
this Judge cannot be biased by favor, there is no respect of persons with
God: he regards not the persons of men.

To draw toward a close, let the reader consider, that in this great day of
judgment, God will bring in every secret thing, whether it be good or bad,
Eccles. 12. 14. For we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ,
that every one may receive the things done in his body, whether it be good or
bad, 2 Cor. 5. 10. For he has appointed a day in which he will judge the world
in righteousness, Act. 17. 31.

Oh did we meditate sometimes on this day, and think of the preparations to it,
and the acting of it, and the execution of the sentence, we should tremble at
his word; surely at this day our consciences shall be so enlightened, that all
shall perfectly remember what ever good or evil they did in the time of their
life, the secrets of all hearts being then revealed; and some shall be judged
according to the Law of God, which has been revealed unto men, whether it be
the Law of nature only, which is written in the hearts of all, to leave them
without excuse, or that written word of God. First, the Old Testament, and
after also of the New, as the ground of faith, and the rule of life, Romans 2.
12. and so by the evidence of every man's conscience, bringing all his works to
remembrance, bearing witness with him, or against him, together by the
testimony of such, who by Doctrine or example have approved or condemned him.

What shall I say more, this will be a great day in this respect also, viz. as
Christ does come to judge things that are not judged; so also he does come to
judge over again things that are judged amiss, Eccles. 3. 16, 17. Moreover I
saw under the Sun the place of judgment, that wickedness was there, and the
place of righteousness, that iniquity was there: Then I said in my heart, God
shall judge the world in righteousness, yea he shall judge both the righteous
and the wicked, Mark 13. 32. But of that day, and that hour knows no man, no
not the Angels which are in heaven, neither the Son, but the Father. See Mat.
24. 36, etc. God is a knowing Judge, a righteous Judge, a powerful Judge.

I shall now proceed in order to speak of the state of both the damned and
saved, after the judgment is over, and the sentence given, and so close up all
with a few words of advice; and so of the end of the world.

Of the sad condition of a man out of Christ after his death, judgment and
sentence passed, viz. Go ye cursed.
WE find it written Mat. 25. 41. Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting
fire, prepared for the Devil and his angels: consider five things in these
words.

1. Depart from me: there is a separation from all joy and happiness. 2. Ye
cursed: there is a dreadful excommunication 3. Into fire: there is
unexpressible pain. 4. Everlasting: there is the duration of punishment. 5.
Prepared for the Devil and all his angels: ^ere are the tormented and
tormenting compan^ons: the (...)isery of this d^leful state may be reduced to
these three heads 1. The unexpressible pains that they shall endure. 2. The
companions, wicked men, evil angels or devils. 3. The duration of this
miserable estate.

1. The unexpressible pains that they shall endure: the devil and his angels,
who being tormented themselves, shall have no other ease, but to wrack their
fury in tormenting thee, where shall be punishment without pity, misery
without mercy, sorrow without succor, crying without comfort, mischief without
measure, torment without ease, where the worm dies not, and the fire is never
quenched, in which flame thou shall ever be burning and never consumed, ever
dying, and never dead, etc.

2. Thy companions shall be wicked men, evil angels or devils: from the
judgment seat thou must be thrust (by Angels) together with all the damned
devils, and reprobates, into the bottomless lake of utter darkness, that
perpetually burns with fire and brimstone, where thou shall ever lament, and
none shall pity thee; thou shall always cry for the pain of fire, and yet
gnash thy teeth for the extremity of cold* thou shall weep to think that thy
miseries are past remedy.

3. The duration of this miserable estate does multiply and aggravate thy
misery: this eternal condition admits of no change or alteration, decay or
consumption: man's eternal condition admits of no future hopes, or expectation,
waste or diminution: man's eternal condition admits of no mixture or moderation:
man's eternal condition admits of no events or issues of providence: man's
eternal condition admits of no comparison, or revocation, there is no sounding
a retreat, after we are lanched into the Ocean: man's eternal condition admits
of no conclusion: man's eternal condition admits of no conception. Millions of
ages pass away, and yet not one minute wasted so that after thou have endu ed
them so many thousand years, as there are grass on the earth, or sands on the
sea shore, thou art no nearer to have an end of thy torments, then thou wast
the first day that thou wast cast into them, yea so far are they from ending,
that they are ever beginning: but if after a thousand times so many thousand
years, thy damned soul could but conceive a hope, that these her torments might
have an end, this would be some comfort, to think that at length an end will
come; but as often as the mind thinks of this word never: it is as another
hell, in the midst of hell. This is the second death, the general perfect
fullness of all cursedness: the damned shall remain for ever in unspeakable
torment of body, and anguish of mind, being cast out from the favorable
presence of God, and Christ, and his Saints, into utter darkness, blackness of
darkness, weeping and gnashing ofteeth, the worm that never dies, the fire
that never goes out, etc.

Of the happy and blessed estate of the Elect in Heaven.
THey shall be unspeakably and everlastingly blessed and glorious in bo^y and
soul, being freed from all imperfections and infirmities, and endowd with
perfect wisdom and holiness, possessed with all the pleasures that are at the
right hand of God, seated as Princes in thrones of Majesly, crowned with crowns
of Glory, possessing the third Heaven, wherein dwells Righteousness,
beholding and being filled with the fruition of the glorious presence of God,
and of the Lamb Jesus Christ, in the company of innumerabl Angels, and Saints,
1 Cor 13. 10. Psalm. 16. 11. Rev. 3. 21. 2 Pet. 3. 13. Psalm. 17. 15. 1 Timothy 4.
17. Heb. 12. 22.

O what variety of joys may be considered in the glorification of man, in the
delights of heavenly mansions, and in the blessed society of the Saints, but
chiefly in the beholding of God: the body glorified, the soul shall be far more
prefect then it was in the state of innocence, for in it shall be understanding
without error, light without darkness, wisdom without ignorance, reason without
obscurity: the Lord shall in the sight and hearing of all world pronounce unto
his servants, Matthew 25. 34. Come ye blessed of my father, inherit the kingdom
prepared for you from the foundation of the world.

1. Come ye, here is our union and communion with the Trinity.

2. Blessed, here is our absolution, from all sins, and our endowments with all
happiness.

3. Of my father, here is the Author from whom proceeds our felicity.

4. Inherit, here is faith ending in fruition, and the promises in possession.

5. The Kingdom, behold our birth right according to grace, 2 Timothy 1. 9.

6. Prepared, See Gods fatherly care for his chosen, John 14. 2.

7. From the foundation of the world, O the free and eternal love of God in
Christ! having made this introduction, let me crave leave of thee reader to
speak more particularly of the most glorious state of a Christian in heaven
after the sentence of absolution at the last day of judgment, and to this
point I shall rather lisp, then speak, being not able to conceive, much less to
describe that most excellent bliss, and eternal wait of glory; but we may take
a scantling thereof thus, the Lord in his word does set forth to our capacity
the glory of our eternal life after death, in eight things.

1. Their bodies shall shine as the brightness of the Sun. 2. The soul shall be
far more perfect then it was in the state of innocence. 3. Consider the place
where we shall be, and that is in the third heaven. 4. Consider whose presence
we shall enjoy, Father, Son, and and holy Spirit, Saints and Angels, etc. 5. In
this s^ate we shall know one another. 6. In this state we shall speak one to
another. 7. Consider the variety of joy that there shall be in heaven. 8.
Consider the duration and continuance of this blessed state.
1. Their bodies shall shine as the brightness of the Sun in the firmament,
like the glorious body of Christ. The Glory of a thousand Suns made into one,
will be but as sackcloth to that wherein Christ shall appear in man's nature,
he being in the Glory of his Father, Mat 16. 27. And we shall be like him. 1
John 3. 2. Then shall the righteous shine forth as the Sun, in the Kingdom of
their father, as appears in this Scripture, Mat. 13. 43.

2. The soul shall be far more perfect then it was in the state of innocence;
sor in it shall be understanding without error, Light without darkness, wisdom
without Ignorance, reason without obscurity, memory without oblivion, the Will
also shall be without perverseness, joy without sorrow, pleasure without pain.
In the slate of innocence, there was in man a possibility not to Sin, but in
the state of Glory there shall be no possibility to sin. In a word, both body
and soul in heaven, shall be in such a blessed state, that neither our tongue
can express it, nor our mind conceive it.

The soul shall be more happy in being present with Jesus Christ in heaven,
then if it had been present with Adam in the state of innocence. Adam was
instated only in an earthly paradise; but now thou being with Christ, art
instated in an everlasting Kingdom; Again, Adam though pleased in a state of
innocence, yet he was liable to lose that blessed slate, and did lose it,
though he were a perfect creature; but by Christ we are instated in a Kingdom
that cannot be shaken, or lost.

Again, When Adam was made by God in innocence, he enjoyed only the society of
beasts on the earth, and birds of the air; but when Christ brings a soul to
heaven, God the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, Angels and Saints shall be his
companions.

3. Consider the place where the Saints shall be after the Judgment, and that
is in the third heaven: we read of Saints departed, that they see the face of
God. They that are in the third heaven, are in the presence of God, the Saints
departed are in the third heaven, they are in paradise, Luke 23. 43. which is
the third heaven, 2 Cor. 12. 2, 4. The place of the blessed is usually known by
the name of the third heaven: the third heaven is a shining body, created
immediately of God, the throne of his special presence, and of the gracious
manifestation of his perfections, and the habitation of the blessed, both
Angels and men. The whole Region of the air, unto the Moon, is in Scripture
called the first heaven, from the Moon to the highest stars inclusively, the
second heav^n.

That which is above these (the place of happiness) is the thi^d heaven* 2 Cor.
12. 2. This third heaven is called a house not made with hands, 2 Cor. 5* A
City whose mak^r and builder is God, Heb. 11. 10. The City of the living God.
H^b. 12. 22. This is Ch^ists fathers house. John 14. 2. Paradise. Luke 23* 43.
Heaven, the Heaven of Heavens. 1 Kin. 8. 27. The wo^ld (...) this is the great
City of the great King, he measured with the reed twelve thousand ^urlo^gs; the
length, and the breadth, and the height of it are equal, Rev. 21. 16.

It is the Court of God and Christ, wherein are habitations for in numerable
company of Saints and Angels, John 14. 2. Heb. 12. 22, 23, 24.

This heaven of heavens has twelve foundations, Rev. 21. 14. The matter of the
building of the wall of it was of Jasper, and the City was pure gold, like unto
clear glass, Rev. 21. 18. the form four square, ver. 16.

Twelve thousand furlongs, that is, fifteen hundred English miles square; the
gates are in number twelve, made of twelve pearls; every several gate was of
one pearl, ver. 21. Situate, East, West, North, and South; three looking every
way, ver. 13. Having engraven upon them the names of the twelve Tribes of
Israel, and twelve Angels for the keepers of them; the streets are of pure
gold, ver. 21. Its Temple is God, and the Lamb, its Light, the glory of God,
and the Lamb; its Inhabitants are the Lords people, ver. 24. Its water a pure
river of Life, Chap. 22. 1. Its fruits are the fruits of the tree of Life. ver.
2. In a word, there is no place so glorious by creation, so beautiful with
delectation, so rich in possession, so comfortable for habitation: for there
the King is Christ, the Law is Love, the honor verity, the peace felicity, the
Life eternity; there is Light without drakness, mirth without sadness, health
without sickness, wealth without want, credit without disgrace, beauty without
blemish, ease without labor, riches without rust, blessedness without misery.

Glorious things are spoken of thee, O thou City of God, Psalm 87. 3.

4. Let us yet consider whose presence we shall enjoy; and that is, the prsence
of Father, Son, and holy Ghost, Angels and Saints, Heb. 12. 22, 23, 24.

The whole man shall enjoy fellowship with God, fellowship with the Lamb, and
fellowship with the Angels: A happy society and sweet communion, all holiness,
all happiness, all joys shall be enjoyed.

All that God bestowed upon Moses could not satisfy his mind, unless he might
see the face of God.

When Paul had once seen this blessed sight, he ever after counted all the
riches and Glory of the world to be but dung; and all his Life after was but
sighing out, I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ: Father I will,
says Christ* that they which thou have given me, be even where I am, that they
may behold my Glory.

5. The next thing to be considered is, that in this blessed state we shall all
know one another, and have Communion one with another, and sweet content
flowing from that Communion: we shall know the power of the Father, and the
wisdom of the Son* the grace of the holy Ghost, and the invisible nature of the
blessed Trinity, and in him we shall know all our friends who died in the
faith, and all the faithful that ever were or shall be, Luke 13. 28. Christ
tells the Jews, that they shall see Abraham, Isaac and Jacob* and all the
Prophets in the Kingdom of God, therefore we shall know them: Adam knew Eve*
whom he had never seen before, muchmore then shall we know those we have known
here. David implies that he shall know his child when he comforted himself,
that he should go to it, 2 Samuel 12, 23. The Apostles knew Christ after his
resurrection, Peter, James, and John knew Moses and Elias in the
transfiguration; how much more shall we know one another, when we shall be all
glorified? Mat. 17. 4 Luke 9. 33. The rich man knew Abraham and Lazarus, Luke
16. Surely then Abraham and Lazarus shall know one another. 1 Cor. 13. 12.
S^int Paul says, at that day we shall know as we are known of God. Love never
fails, therefore knowledge, the ground thereof, remains in another life. Our
knowledge in another life shall as far exceed the knowledge of this life, as
the Light of the Sun does exceed the Light of a candle. They who thirst for
knowledge, Let them long be studients of this University: for all the Light by
which we know any thing in this world, is nothing but the very shadow of God.

Dives in Hell, knew Lazarus in heaven, and why shall not the godly know one
another there?

We read Mat. 13. That Peter, James and John, knew Moses in the
transfiguration, as before, etc.

Boulton here thinks it should detract much from the happiness of every Saint
in heaven, if every Saint should not know one another there.

6. Another privilege is* we shall not only know one another, and have
communion together, but we shall speak one to another: Our communion and
conference one with another may be gathered from the like in the Angels, who
doubtless speak one to another, though not vocally as we now do, yet in their
manner, viz. Angelically, and spiritually, which is thought to be nothing else
but a spiritual insinuation, instillation or communication of their minds,
notions and meanings one to another: to think that the Angles and Spirits of
the just made perfect, do not speak in their heavenly and spiritual manner,
communicating their minds one to anotheras they see cause, is against reason,
and inconsisting with the state of blessedness; and to think they speak in this
manner, is not against Scripture or reason, though the full resolution to this
thing, viz. with what tongues the Angels and souls departed, speak, seems to be
reserved till we come to heaven; some conceive we shall then all speak in the
Hebrew tongue.

7. Let us consider the variety of joys in heaven, and those admirable good
things which God has prepared, and which Christ has purchased for his
servants; it is not for any wit of man to conceive, or any tongue to relate, or
any pen to set down: nevertheless let us set down a taste of them as we find
them revealed in Scriptures; in that life there shall be no earthly or sinful
misery, there shall be no sin at all, no sickness, no sorrows, no diseases nor
malady, no cross nor curse, no vexation nor calamity, no defect nor deformity,
no tumults not troubles, no pain nor penury, all tears shall be done away, all
evils removed, all sin abolished, all wants supplied, Rev. 22. 3. Rev. 21. 4.

There shall be a perpetual possession of all good things, even of God himself,
who is goodness it self; there shall be perfection of knowledge, no defect in
love, certain security, conistant amity, and secure tranquillity; the end why
all this shall be given to us, is, that God may manifest his exceeding love to
us, and that we might enjoy the full fruit of Christ's death and passion; and
lastly, that we might acknowledge the wonderful mercies of God unto us, and
celebrate his name for ever; then shall we be in a state of exemption from sin,
and from the causes of sin, and from the punishment of sin. The moral
Philosophers say, that hail, storm and tempest are engendered in the middle
region, but above the middle region there is no wind, no storm or tempest, but
whilst we are here below, set us expect storms, winds, and blustering
temptations: but when God takes us above this middle region, there is no storm
nor tempest to trouble us: then the Angels that rejoiced at our conversion,
will much rejoice together with us at our entrance into heaven

8. Let us consider the duration and continuance of this blessed state, this
life is an everlasting life, Mat. 25. 45. It shall continue world without end:
life eternal is the highest degree of blessedness, in which we shall be made
partakers of Christ's glory, enjoying the sight of God, and heavenly joys for
ever and ever, therefore it is termed everlasting life, John 16. 22. and Christ
faith that our joy shall no man take from us. Oh who can bear this and not
admire it! Who can meditate on it, and not be amazed at it? as soon as any
Saint in this life felt but a true taste of these everlasting joys, they
presently accounted all the riches and pleasures of this life to be but loss
and dung in respect of that, and therefore with fervent prayers, fastings,
tears, faith, and good life, they gave all diligence, and labored to ascertain
themselves of this eternal life, and for the love thereof, they willingly
parted with much of their earthly goods and possessions, to lay up treasure in
heaven.

Abraham and Sarah left their own country and possessions to look for a City,
whose maker and builder is God, Heb. 11. 10, 15, 16. David prefers one day
in this place, before a thousand elsewhere, Psalm. 84. 10.

Elias earnestly besought the Lord to receive his soul into his Kingdom, and
went willingly, though in a fiery Chariot, King. 19. 4.

Saint Paul having once seen heaven, continually desi^eth to be dissolved, that
he might be with Christ, Phil. 1. 23.

Saint Peter having espied but a glimpse of eternal glory in the mount, wished
that he might dwell there all the days of his life, Mat. 17. 4. saying, Master
it is good for us to be here, etc.

Christ a little before his death, prays his Father to receive him into that
excellent glory, Joh. 17. 5.

And the Apostle witnesses, Heb. 11. 2. that for the joy which was set before
them, they endured the cross, and despised the shame, 1 Pet. 5. 4. and when the
chief Shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive a crown of glory, that fades
not away, etc. this eternal condition admits of no change or alteration, decay
or consumption, waste or diminution; man's eternal condition admits of no
comparison, revocation or conclusion, etc.

What use we may make of all these precious things.
1. EXcellent arguments may be drawn to pres-Christians to a holy life, 2 Pet.
3. 11. see ing then that all these things must be dissolved, what manner of
persons ought we to be in all holy conversation and godliness, and ver. 14.
Wherefore seeing ye look for such things, give diligence that ye may be found
in him in peace; It is our duty to live in a continual expectation of the
coming of the Lord Jesus, with our loins girt, and our lamps burning; for
blessed is that servant, whom his master when he comes shall find so doing.

2. Consider that here is a fountain opened for Christian comfort, and ground
for patience in all troubles, that there shall be an end: a Christians hope
shall not be cut off: if in this life only we had hope, we were of all men most
miserable, 1 Cor. 15. 19. But here lies the comfort and patience of true
Christians; theywait for another world, and they know it is a just thing with
God to give them rest after their labors, 2 These. 1. 9. and a crown after
their combat, 2 Timothy 4. 8. and after their long Pilgrimage, an everlasting
habitation, 2 Cor. 5. 1. Be patient, says the Apostle, and settle your hearts,
for the coming of the Lord draws nigh, James 5. 8. 2 Pet. 2. 9. When they
that have sown in tear shall reap in joy, Psalm 126. 5.

3. Consider, that assurance of that blessed state may be attained in this
life: we know, faith Paul, 2 Cor. 5. 1. That if our earthly house of this
tabernacle be destroyed, we have a building, not made with hands, eternal in
the heavens: these things, says John, I have written unto you, that ye may
know that ye have eternal life, 1 John 5. 13. I am sure, says Job 19. 25, 26,
27. that my Redeemer lives, and he shall stand at the latter day upon the
earth, and though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet shall I see God in
my flesh, whom I my self shall see, and mine eyes shall behold: when I awake,
says David, I shall be satisfied with thy Image, Psalm. 17. 15.

4. The consideration of this should provoke us to be such as may be made meet
for this inheritance of the Saints in light, and to endeavor to attain, and
retain the earnest of the Spirit, whence we may be always able to say we are
confident and willing, rather to be absent from the body, and to be present
with the Lord, 2 Cor. 5. 8. and to fill the soul with strong consolation
against the sufferings of life, and the fear of death, and to work an
answerable conversation, that whether absent or present, we may so walk, as we
may be accepted of him.

5. The consideration of this should put us upon a patient waiting for, and a
longing expectation of our change, which draws on a pace, and not to put that
off as most do to the last year, and when that is come, to the last month of
that year, and then to the last week of that month, and then to the last day
of that week, and then to the last hour of that day, and then to the last
minute of that hour, and so time shall be no more, and we shall not find
repentance, although we seek it with tears.

6. Consider that the cause of our salvation, and so of our glorious condition,
is Gods mere love and favor, without any merit of ours, Luke 12. 32. It is our
Fathers good pleasure to give us a Kingdom, Joh. 3. 16. God so loved the world,
that he gave his only begotten son, Ephesians. 2. 8. By grace we are saved through
faith, and not of our selves, it is the gift of God, Romans 6. 23. everlasting
life is the gift of God; and though eternal life be called a reward, yet it is
not of merit, but of mercy; let this be grounded in our hearts, that the
Kingdom of heaven is not a stipend of servants, but an inheritance of Sons,
which they only obtain, that lay hold on his mercy, Romans 5. 8. compared with
1 Timothy 6. 12. and 19.

2. Now as has been said, as the love of God is the cause of our salvation, fo
Jesus Christ is the way, Joh. 10. 9. Joh 14. 6.

3, The holy Spirit is the guide in that way, as in Joh. 16. 13.

4. The Scriptures of truth is the rule, Gal. 6. 16. Isa. 8. 20.

5. The evidence of this salvation is faith, Heb. 11. 1.

It is true, the instrumental cause, offering and proclaiming salvation is the
Gospel; but the instrumental receiving and applying it is faith, and the cause
sealing it inwardly to our souls, is the Spirit of God; the external and
instrumental seals thereof are the two confirming Ordinances, Baptism, and the
Lords Supper.

6. The anchor of this salvation is hope, Heb. 6. 19.

7. The effects of this salvation is love to God, because he loved us first;
and a holy conversation; if ye love me says Christ, keep my commandments; and
they that have believed in Christ, must be careful to maintain good works,
which are found and required in the way to the Kingdom, but they are not the
cause of reigning.

Of the end of the world.
THE consequents of the last judgment is life eternal in heaven or hell, and
the end of the world: having finished the former, let me point to the latter,
and I have finished what I intended: we read Mat. 24. 3. that Peter, James,
John and Andrew, Mark. 13. 3. came to Christ and desired him to satisfy them
in these three questions.

1. Concerning the destruction of Jerusalem and the Temple. 2. Concerning
Christ's second coming, and the signs thereof. 3. Concerning the end of the
world, etc.
The answer to the first question is from ver. 4. to ver. 23.

The answer to the second is from ver. 24. to ver. 36.

The answer to the third question is from ver. 36. to the end of that Chapter.

In which Christ tells them that the very day and hour no man knows; that day
is hidden from us, that we might not be secure, but always prepared, expecting
the day of his coming, and hope for it, and have a special care, that that
certain uncertain hour come not upon us unawares, Luke 12. 40.

The end of the world is the destruction of this visible universe: as the
wicked are thrust into hell, and the godly entered into heaven: this is called
the consummation of the world, it shall be destroyed by fire, 2 Pet. 3. 6, 7,
10, 12, etc. but what kind of fire this is, he only knows, who is himself a
consuming fire.

Some understand that this world shall be destroyed only in its quality, others
in its substance; they who think it shall be destroyed only in qualities, mean
a purging, and restoration of it to its primitive institution.

But the reader may do well to take notice, that it is one thing to be restored
and changed into a better state, and another thing to wax old like a garment,
and to vanish like smoke, to be dissolved, to melt, to be burned, to pass away,
to be no more, as these Scriptures affirm, 1 Cor. 7. 31. Psalm. 102. 26, 27. and
Heb. 1. 11. Isa. 51. 6. Mat. 24. 35. 2 Pet. 3. 7, 10, 12. Rev. 21. 1.

FINIS.
An Alphabetical Table of the principal matters contained in this Book.
A
OF assembling our selves together. Page 199. Of admonition, public and
private. p. 282. Of assurance of salvation. p. 285. 1. The nature of it. p.
286. 2. Whether assurance may be attained in this life, yea or nay. p. 287. 3.
The sorts or degrees of it. p. 288. 4. Of the trials of assurance. p. 289. 5.
It is our duty to labor for it. p. 290. 6. Of the benefits of it. p. 291. 7.
Of the springs of assurance. p. 292. 8. Of the impediments of it. p. 294. 9. Of
our sad condition without it. p. 295. 10. Many have it not that think they have
it. p. 297. 11. Of the reasons wherefore the Lord does not give it speedily. p.
298. 12. It is very hard to recover it, if once lost. p. 299.
Of afflictions. p. 323. Why the Lord does afflict his own people. p. 324. He
does try their truth and strength by it. p. 325. How to know what sin God aims
at in affliction. p. 327. Of Angels. p. 9. How a man should act. p. 88.
B.
OF the Ordinance of Baptism. p. 254. 1. Of the essence of it. ibid. 2. Of the
exercise of it. p. 255.
Of the condition of man in his birth. p. 385. Of the bill of indictment of
twenty Articles brought against man upon his sick bed. p. 392.
C
OF the Creation. p. 8. Of the Covenant of Grace. p. 20. 1. What is the sum or
substance of it. ibid. 2. With whom this Covenant was first made. p. 25. 3.
When this Covenant was made. p. 28. 4. Whether there be any conditions of it;
and if so, what they are. p. 30. 5. Whether it be one and the same Covenant of
grace that was in force before the Law, and under the Law, and now under the
Gospel. p. 35. 6. Whether this Covenant may not be broken as was the Covenant
of works. p. 38. 7. What means one should use to get into this Covenant. p. 41.
8. When one may be said to be in this Covenant. p. 44. 9. Wherein the Covenant
of grace and the Covenant of works do differ. p. 47. 10. What is Gods order and
method in bringing a people into Covenant. p. 50. 11. What are the blessings
and benefits of this Covenant. p. 53. 12. Whether most men and women in the
world are not under a ovenant of works. p. 56.
Of the ten Commandments, and what each of them does prohibit and enjoin. The
first Commandment does enjoin nine things, and forbid three things, p. 303. The
second Commandment does prohibit seven things, and enjoin six things. p. 304.
The third Commandment does prohibit four things, and enioin five things. p.
305. The fourth Commandment does prohibit five things, and enjoin five things.
ibid. The fifth Commandment does enjoin fourteen things. p. 306. The sixth
Commandment does prohibit five things, and enjoin fourthings. p. 307. The
seventh Commandment does prohibit eight things, and enjoin seven things.p. 308.
The eighth Commandment does prohibit seven things, and enjoin five things. p.
308. The ninth Commandment does prohibit seven things, and enjoin five things.
p. 309. The tenth Commandment does prohibit four things, and enjoin four
things. p. 310. The order of causes, how the Lord comes down from the causes to
the effects. p. 336. 1. Of the coming of Christ. p. 414. 2. The time of his
coming is near, p. 418. 3. Of the manner of his coming. p. 421. 4. Of the signs
of his coming. p. 422. 5. Christ shall come visibly. p. 423. 6. The posture
that a Christian should be in at his coming. p. 423. 7. It is the duty of all
to wait for his coming. p. 424. 8. Of the benefits that a Christian shall have
at Christ's coming. p. 425. 9. What should the consideration of his coming put
us upon? p. 427. 10. The sad condition of all out of Christ at his coming. p.
428. 11. He shall come terribly. p. 430.
The right constitution of a Church of Christ, or the way at first to gather a
Church. p. 201. There are four things that Christ has already done, five
things he is now doing, and six things more he will do when he comes* p. 431.
D.
A Rule to try Doctrines by. p. 231. The Lord does not despise the day of small
things. p. 334. Several Divine sentences. p. 340. The miseries attending both
body and soul at the hour of death. p. 391. Of the sad condition of all out of
Christ after death. p. 399. In order to our preparation for death, consider. p.
400. 1. The fewness of our days. ibid. 2. The many dangers we every day pass
through. ibid.
Death to a Christian is but a change of place, not of company. p. 401. Death
is no respecter of persons. ibid. Death to a Christian is but a house, a bed, a
sleep. ibid. Of the duration of the miserable estate of the damned in hell. p.
452. Of the Devil. p. 321.
E.
OF Election. p. 6. Of Experience. p. 167. Of Excommunication. p. 284. How far
a true Christian may be tainted with error in judgment, and yet be restored.
p. 155. Of enjoyment. p. 168. Of the end of the world. p. 466.
F.
OF the faith of Gods Elect. p. 108. 1. Of the nature of it. ibid. 2. The
Object of this faith. p. 109. 3. The Subject of it. ibid. 4. The seat of faith.
p. 110. 5. The ground of faith. p. 111. 6. The springs of Faith. p. 112. 7. Of
the hindrances and lets of faith. p. 114. 8. Motives to believe. p. 116. 9. Of
the evil of unbelief. p. 118. 10. Characters of true faith. p. 120. 11. The
benefits of living by faith. p. 123. 12. How we should keep up faith at all
times. p. 126.
Of the flesh. p. 318.
G.
OF God the Father. p. 1. Of God the Son. p. 2. Of God the Holy Ghost. p. 4. Of
Gods decrees. p. 5. It is man's duty to get a title to Gods love, and to get
assurance that he has a title. p. 404. Of the time when, the place where, the
persons to whom the Gospel is to be preached. p. 214. Of the gifts and graces
of the Spirit. p. 194.
H.
OF the Holy Ghost. p. 4. Of the grace of hope. p. 186. 1. Of its nature, what
it is. p. 187. 2. Of the properties of this hope. p. 188. 3. Of the
encouragements to hope. p. 189. 4. Of the difference between a well grounded
and a presumptuous hope. p. 190.
Of attentive hearing. p. 228. Several strong reasons why we should walk
holily. p. 85.
I.
OF justification by grace. p. 58. 1. This Doctrine is the foundation and basis
of all Christian Religion. p. 60. 2. This Doctrine is the inlet to all true
peace and comfort. p. 61. 3. This is the root and spring of all Gospel
obedience. p. 65. 4. This Doctrine is the great stop and bar to keep out all
floods of error. p. 67. 5. This Doctrine is the main support of a soul under
all trials. p. 70. 6. This is the great Doctrine by which Satan's kingdom is
overthrown. p. 72. 7. This is the great Doctrine that Satan does most war
against, either to pervert or corrupt. p. 74. 8. This Doctrine is the hardest
piece to be learned, it being supernatural. p. 76. 9. This Doctrine does speak
forth with open mouth, the exceeding riches, and freeness of Gods grace. p. 81.
10. And as this grace is free, so it is sure and certain, it will not fail
those that rest upon it. p. 83.
Of the last judgment. p. 440. 1. The signs that go before it. ibid. 2. What
is meant by it. p. 441. 3. Of the place where the Lord will judge the world.
ibid.
The person, who it is that shall judge the world. p. 442. Of the time how long
the judgment shall last. p. 443. Out of what the people shall be judged. p.
444. The day of judgment will be a great day. p. 445. Of the blessed condition
of the godly after judgment. p. 453. Of the sad condition of the wicked after
judgment. p. 450. Of the place where the Godly shall be after judgment, p.
454. Of justification and sanctification, how they differ, and wherein they
agree. p. 101. Of the variety of joys that there shall be in heaven. p. 459.
What use to make of it. p. 463.
K.
OF Knowledge. p. 157. 1. Of the Knowledge of God. p. 158. 2. Of the knowledge
of our selves. p. 159. 3. The properties of true knowledge. p. 460. 4. How one
believer differs from another in knowledge. p. 162. 5. What great measures of
knowledge a man may attain unto, and yet be without saving knowledge. p. 163.

L.
OF the grace of love to God. p. 170. 1. Of the nature of it. ibid. 2. Of the
kinds or degrees of it. p. 172. 3. Of the springs of this love. p. 173. 4. Of
the trials of it, how it may be known. p. 175. 5. Of the properties of this
love. p. 179. 6. Of the motives to persuade us to get into, and grow up in this
love. p. 180.
Of our love to the children of God. 281. 1. The nature of it, what it is.
ibid. 2. Of the trials of our love. p. 182. 3. Of the means of attaining this
love. p. 185. 4. Of the impediments and hindrances of it. p. 186.
The difference between the Law and the Gospel. p. 301. Man's life is or should
be guided by these seven virtues. p. 339.
M.
OF man. p. 11. Of man's fall. p. 13. Of man's recovery. p. 16. What man is by
nature. p. 319. Of man's own righteousness. p. 320. Mercies and deliverances are
many times nearest to us, when we ^^ink they are farthest off. p. 332.
O.
OF the standing Ordinances of the Gospel. p. 199. Of obedience. p. 166. How to
approve the present opportunity. p. 04.
P.
OF providence. p. 14. Of the Ordinance of preaching. 1. What preaching is. p.
208. 2. Who they are that ought to preach. p. 209. 3. The manner how the
Preacher is to preach. p. 211. 4. Of the time when, the place where, the
persons to whom the Gospel is to be preached. p. 214. 5. What a Minister is to
preach. p. 216. 6. Which is first to be preached, the Law or the Gospel. p.
217. 7. How the gift of preaching may be attained. p. 219. 8. Whether the
Minister may receive money, or wages, yea or no. p. 227. 9. Of attentive hearing
of what is preached. p. 228. 10. How to remember what is preached. p. 230. 11.
How to try all, and hold fast that which is good. p. 231.
Of prayer and supplication. p. 332. 1. The nature of it, what it is. ibid. 2.
Whom we are to pray unto. p. 345. 3. For whom we are to pray. p. 235. 4. What
extraordinary prayer is. p. 236. 5. Of the necessity of prayer. p. 238. 6. The
posture to be used in prayer. p. 240. 7. Of the place where we are to pray. p.
241. 8. Of the time in which we are to pray. ibid. 9. Motives to encourage us
to pray. p. 242. 10. Means to be used to obtain the gift of prayer. p. 243. 11.
Of the hindrances of prayer. p. 344. 12. Several sorts of prayer never
answered. p. 245. 13. How many ways the Lord does answer prayer. p. 246.
Of collection for the poor, another standing Ordinance of the Gospel. p. 272.
1. What it is to give to the poor. ibid. 2. Who they are that ought to give. p.
273. 3. How much they are to give. p. 274. 4. To whom we should give. ibid. 5.
What order to be observed in giving to the poor. p. 275. 6. With what affection
we must give. ibid. 7. How many ways a man is said to give. p. 276. 8. What
fruit to expect of these duties. ibid.
Of the Lords Prayer, and the several petitions therein contained. p. 311. Of
the pollution and misery of the soul in this life. p. 390. How to improve the
present opportunity. p. 404. 1. Store up a stock of faith. p. 408. 2. Store up
a stock of promises. p. 409. 3. Store up a stock of prayers. ibid. 4. Gather up
all thy evidences and spiritual experiences, and keep them in thy mind and
heart. p. 410. 5. Live every day as thy last day. p. 409. 6. Make thy will in
time of health. p. 411.
Whether there be any such thing as the personal reign of Christ upon earth;
and if so, what it is. p. 434. Of perseverance, p. 193.
Q
Diverse hard questions answered, and seeming contradictions reconciled, and
many scruples of conscience removed. p. 347.
R
OF repentance unto life. p. 133. Of reading the Scriptures. p. 277. How to
read the Scriptures. p. 281. Who they are that ought to read the Scriptures. p.
279. Why we ought to read the Scriptures. p. 280. Of the resurrection of the
dead at Christ's second coming. p. 432. Of the first and second resurrection. p.
431. The manner how the Godly shall be raised, and how the wicked. p. 433. Of
reprobation. p. 8.
S
OF sanctification or a holy conversation p. 88 to p. 101. 1* Of the nature of
sin. p. 135. 2. How sin creeps up, and gets head in man. p. 136. 3. Of the
great danger of small sins. p. 137. 4. Of the mischief brought upon man for one
sin p. 139. What hurt sin does a Saint. p. 140. 5. The best way to mortify sin
p. 141. 6. in in the best Saints, and most times in the best actions done by
them. p. 146. 7. Of the vast difference between the sinning of the regenerate,
and unregenerate. p. 148. 8. How many ways the Lord is said to forgive sin. p.
150. 9. Whether sins before conversion, ought to be called to mind after
Conversion. p. 151. 10. Whether the dominion of sin, may be taken away when the
life of sin remains. p. 153.
Of singing and praising God in Psalms, Hymns, and spitual Songs. p. 247. Of
Suspention. p 283. Of the Lords Supper, another standing ordinance of the
Gospel. p 263. 1. What it is. ibid. 2. Wherein it does differ from ba^tism. p.
264. 3. Of the preparation to the Lords Supper. p. 265. 4. ^f the actions of
the administrator. p. 266. 5. The actions and duty of the receiver. p. 268. 6.
Who they are that may partake of this Ordinance. p. 269. 7. Of the ends ands
uses of the Lords Supper. p. 270. 8. The duty of all after receiving. p. 271.
Of the sho^tness of man's life, and misery that does attend every age thereof.
p. 383. 1. Of the Condition of man in his birth. p. 385. 2. Of the state of
childhood. p. 386. 3. Of the st^te of youth. p. 387. 4. Of the state of
manhood. ibid. 5. Of the declining state of man. p. 388. 6. Of the decrepit
state or old age. p. 389.
Of the soul of man p. (...). The soul shall be far more perfect, and excellent
was in the state of innocence. p. 454. The Saints after death shall be in the
presence of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Angels and Saints. p. 458. 1. In this
state we shall know one another. p. 459. 2. In this state we shall speak one to
another. ibid. 3. Of the duration of this blessed estate. p. 460.
When a man may be said to suffer for well doing, and when for evil doing. p.
329.
T
THE great and terrible day of ^he Lord is near, proved p. 414. 1. By the
testimony of the Prophets. ibid. 2. By the testimony of the Apostles p. 415. 3.
By the testimony of the Angels. p. 416. 4. By the immutabil^ty of Gods dec ree
ibid. 5. By the infallibility of his promises. ibid. 6. By the impartiality of
his justice. p. 416

V
OF Vocation. p. 17.
W
OF the world flesh and devil p. 314. Of the riches of the world. p. 315. He
that men account the richest man in the world, is many times the poorest man.
p. 316.
FINIS.
Some Books printed and sold by Thomas Brewster, at the three Bibles near the
West end of Paul's.
AN Epitome of all the Common and Statute Laws of England, in Fol.

The Faithful Counselor, or the Marrow of the Law in English, in 4. to.

The Privileges of the People vindicated in 4. to.

All three by William Sheppard, Esquire.

The Retired man's Meditation, or the Mystery and Power of godliness: By H.
Vane Knight.

Vindiciae Justificationis Gratuitae, Justification without Condition, or the
free Justification of a sinner Explained, Confirmed and Vindicated: By W. Air
Minister of the Gospel at New-Sarum.

Mr. Baxter's Aphorisms of Justification, Examined and Answered: By J. Crandon,
in 4. to.

An Exposition of the whole Book of Canticles, wherein the Text is Explained,
and useful observations raised thereupon; by J. Robotham, in 4. to.

Gospel Holiness, or a saving sight of God and the glorious Privilege of the
Saints: By Walt^r Craddock, Preacher of the Gospel, in 4. to.

A description of Jerusalem, with a Map, By H. Jesse, in 4. to.

A Storehouse of Provision for further Resolution in several Cases of
Conscience, viz. of living above Ordinances, of walking in Fellowship with the
unbaptized, of Laying on of hands, etc.

Also a small Catechism for babes and little ones: all three by H. J^sse.

The Right Constitution of a Commonwealth, with some Errors of Government, and
Rules of Policy, in 8. vo.

A Brief History containing most of those notable Occurrences and Revolutions
that happened in those late contests between King and Parliament* being a short
mention of things from 1637, to 1648. by T. May Esquire.

Milk for Babes in Christ, or Meditations, Observations, and Expe^iences, with
diverse cases of Conscience resolved; the glorious Privileges of them that are
Christ's, with the way to know whether we are of that are Christ's, with the way
to know whether we are of that blessed number: Also Election before the
foundation of the World asserted, and the faith of Gods elect what it is: By
Martin Finch Preacher of the Gospel in Lincolnshire in 8.

An Anti-Diatribe, or the Apology of some Ministers and godly people,
asserting the Lawfulness of their administering the Lords Supper in a select
company; proving also the necessity of Examination, in order to a more holy
Church Fellowship, being an answer to Mr. Humphreys's general Admission: By H.
Saunders Minister of Hollesworth in Devon.

The Bible in Welsh with several other W^lsh Books.

Lazarus and his Sisters discourse of Paradise, or a conference about the
excellent things of the other world.

A Discoverer of some plots of Lucifer, against the Children of men.

The Yearning of Christ's Bowels toward his languishing friends: By S. Moore
Minis^er of the Gospel

The Gate of Tongues unlocked and opened, or a Seed-time of all Tongues and
Sciences, being a Short way of teaching and thoroughly learning the Latin,
English French, etc.

Hermes Mercurius Trismegistus his Divine Pimander in 17 Books, together with
his second book, called Asclepius, containing 15 Chapters, with a Commentary,
done into English, By Dr. Everard.

Some Sermons preached on several occa^^ons, By P. Sterry.

Christian experiences from Scripture-evidences under these several heads, viz.

1* ^omfort for Believers against their fears and dismayings. 2. Comfort for
Believers from their spiritual incomes. 3. Man's fruitlesness without saving
faith. 4. Counsel unto Saints as sojourners and strangers. 5. M^ns folly in
determining by present Events or State of things: By R. Coler preacher of the
Gospel in Wiltshire.
These written by T. Collier, viz.
The Right Constitution of a Visible Church of Christ, with its order and
Ordinances. The Day Dauning, relating to the calling of the Jews and Christ's
second coming. The Confession of Faith of several Churches of Christ in the
Went, signed by several officers of the said Curches. A Catechism for the
instruction of youth. A Dialogue between a Minister of the Gospel, and an
enquiring Christian about the Authority of the Scriptures and the principles of
the Quakers.
The personal appearing and Reign of Christ's Kingdom on the Earth stated.

An Antidote against the Infections of the times, or a faithful Watchword from
Mount-Sion, to prevent the ruin of souls, whereby some special considerations
are presented to sinners, Admonition to Saints, and Invitation to backsliders:
Published for the good of all, by the Elders and Messengers of several Churches
in Wales.

A Warning Piece for the Slumbring Virgins, or an Alarm to the friends of the
Bridegroom being some awakning Meditations upon Christ's own Watchword, Mat.
26. 41. By Ge. Scortreth Preacher of the Gospel in Lincoln. Recommended to the
Reader by Joseph Caryl, William Gre^nhill, Geo. Griffiths.

Books against the Quakers.
A Faithful Discovery of a treacherous Design of Mystical Antichrist,
displaying Christ's Banners, but attempting to lay waste Scriptures, Churches,
Christ, faith, hope, etc. and establish Paganism in England, being an
Examination of the* Doctrines of the people called Quakers: By Joseph Kellet,
John Pomroy, Paul Glisson. A Confutation of the Quakers, being an Answer to
nineteen Queries propounded by them; and Answered by S. Eaton Minister of the
Gospel in Cheshire. A Testimony to the true Jesus and the faith of him, wherein
the way of the people called Quakers is examined and weighed, being an Answer
to James Nailor's Book called, Love to the Lost: by T. Higgenson. A
Looking-glass for the Quakers: By T. Collier.

