A SPEECH DELIVERED BY Mr. PYM, AT A CONFERENCE OF BOTH HOUSES;

Ocasioned from diverse Instructions, Resolved upon by the House of Commons, and
presented to the Lords, and read by Sir HENRY VAIN.

Discovering the dangers and miseries the three Kingdoms are liable unto, by
Reason of his Majesty's evil Counselors as the effects does declare.

As also, the Justice, Reasonableness, and Necessity of changing them.

LONDON, Printed for John Bull, June 15. 1642.

AT A CONFERENCE OF BOTH Houses, there was presented to the Lords diverse
Instructions, agreed upon in the House of Commons, which were read by Sir Henry
Vain, and after the reading of them Mr. Pym spoke as follows.
THat these Instructions as your Lordships may perceive consisted of six
Articles, of the first five he should have no cause to speak much, because
they could afford no matter of doubt wherefore he only recited them thus.

The first contained a friendly apprehension of the kindness of our Brethren
in the Parliament of Scotland in their ready offer to assist this Kingdom
against the Rebels of Ireland.

The second was only a Declaration of our willingness to accept that offer.

The third, a Narrative of our proceedings and preparations for that war.

The fourth, a particular desire of 1000. men from the Scots to be speedily
sent into the North parts of Ireland.

The fifth a public undertaking and engagement to make satisfaction for the
charges of those men.

The sixth was to present to his most excellent Majesty an humble Petition:
That he would be pleased to change those Counsels which has been so
mischievous to the State, and of so much danger and misery to his Majesty and
his Subjects, and to employ in his great affairs such Counselors and
Ministers as might be approved by his great Council the Parliament, this (he
said) had been resolved by the House of Commons with good deliberation, and
might perchance admit some ob^ection, wherefore he was Command^d to speak
somewhat to show the Justice the Reasonableness, the Necessity of it therein,
wherein (he said) he would proceed by these steps.

The first was this, that the dangers and miseries which come to a State by
evil Councels are of the most pernicious and destructive naure of all others:
The comparison betwixt a Natural Body and a Politic Body is usual, they
resemble in nothing more than in this.

Death, and sickness, and d^nger, have diverse ways of approach to natural
Bodies, sometimes by outward violence, sometimes by intemperance in diet,
exercise or unwholesomnesse of the Air.

The first may be prevented by wariness, by courage, by Assistance.

The second sort are more easily cured, the cause being known.

But there is a third sort of deseases proceeding from the defects of some more
noble and vital parts, the Heart, the Brain, the Liver, these are harder to
be cured, the cause being not so easily discovered, nor the remedy so readily
applied, especially because they weaken and debilitate nature in those prime
powers and offices, which should Actuate and dispose the Medium to the
procuring of health.

The dangers by wars, and the attempt of open enemies may be compared to the
first sort, and may with more facility be prevented by the provision and
opposition of Force, the disorders and distempers of a Commonwealth by
corruption in Justice by deceites or disadvantages in Tra^e, by excess in
Luxury and inordinate expenses, they are soon discovered, and by good Laws,
and care in the execution of them may be certainly prevented, and these have
some resemblance to the second sort.

But in evil and unfaithful Counselors are the vital parts of a State
poisoned and corrupted, the ways of danger are more secret and so more
difficult to be cured; the remedies are kept out by power, greatness and
authorities, the state is not only disabled to help it self, by the want of
such principal Members and Instruments, but the power, wisdom, and
authority of it is by their cunning and subtle practices turned against it
self, and therefore the dangers and mischiefs that come this way are much
more incurable then others.

The second point to which he proceeded was this, that there have been and
still are evil Councels and Councellers, of the time past there will be no
doubt: The judgments against some, the accusation of others, the flight of
diverse, the designs upon Religion, the attempts upon the State, the oppression
of the People, and the manifold divisions and distempers in the Kingdom are
too great evidences of it, but for the present they are somewhat quelled, and
appear not so boldly; they lurk and whisper in corners, yet the effects prove
there are such, and like poison in the root, they are less visible, but no
less dangerous then when they flourish in the herb or in the fruit: yet as
much as they dare they will take upon them to make defenses and appollogies for
the evil Counsels of others, and such as these are aptest and readiest to
preferment and employment, which is a sign that some near the King are Lovers
and Patrons of those that love and prefer evil Counselors to more value and
esteem.

And most clear evidence is this, that all the wicked designs against the
Parliament and against the peace of the Kingdom, may be traced home to have
their orignall in the Court, and to be first acted and moved by some p^incipall
persons near the King.

A third was this, that the Counsels of this time are of a more dangerous and
desperate nature, then those of other times and Ages, this State has often
suffered under former Princes by evil Counsels, sometimes they have been
such as would flatter his Majesty in his vices, but we may thank God that his
Majesty's virtue will give entrance to no such ill Counsels as these,
sometimes they have abused the Power, and Authority of the Prince for
enriching and advancing their own kindred and friends, and of disgracing and
discontenting those of better Merrits: Others have been officers to strain
the prerogative to the great grievance of the People, and in ill Counsels of
this kind we have suffered in too great a measure, but these are far from
the heart of the State they extend not to come and destr^^tion, but the
Council under which we groan, and against which we labor, they are such as
aim at the alteration of Religion, at the subvertion of the fundamental
Laws, and Government, and in this consists the very life and being of our
Kingdom, they are deadly, pernicious, ruining Counsels, both to this and all
other protestant States, not to be paralleled in any former time.

A fourth was, that all these evil and mischievous Counsels proceed from
Popery, and tend to Popery: That is, the Primum Mobile, that moves and
comprehends all the rest; there are inferior Motions which tend to more
particular ends, but this is the great end by which they are all acted and
directed: the Religion of the Papists is incompatible with all other Religions,
and has in it principles distructive, not only to those that are most
opposite to it, but to all that will not fully agree and concur with them,
and though for a time they may comply with others, and make use of them, yet in
the end they will consume and destroy all that will not wholly turn to them;
there is in nature a formative virtue, whereby it frames Organs in the Body fit
for the exercise of those specificall operations which are necessary for the
life and perfection of the Creature, and likewise a Nutritive virtue, whereby
it converes other things to the increase and preservation of it self.

There is a spirit in Popery which works somewhat after this manner.

It moulds factious instruments proper to its own designs, and so it has
found out ways and means to get such Officers, such Counselors both of the
Church and State as would be useful for furthering their own cause, and then
by this Nutrative faculty they can apply both Ecclesiastical and Civil
Orders, Constitutions and proceedings to the growth and strength of themselves
and their party: other Religions may have as much falsehood as this, but no
other has such a destructive quality as this has, nor is so contrary to the
civil Government of a Protestant Kingdom as this is.

Now that Popery has a prevayling and predominant power in all the ^ate
Counsels is clear by these reasons: The innovations in Church Matters have
been such as have made that Religion more plausible, and the course of
government such as has made way for the employment, and preferment of those
who have been Patrons and Protectors of it, by whose Mediation and Power, the
professors thereof have received many Immunities, much favor and countenance,
to the evident increase of their number and strength; what Maturity this
design is come to in Ireland we see, even to a public attempt to destroy all
the Protestants there, and to free themselves from his Majesty's Government,
and that the like was intended both for England and Scotland, we have no cause
to doubt, when we consider upon what grounds the late War was procured, and
that Prayers have now a long time been made by those of the Popish Religion,
for the success of some great design in hand for the advancement of that
cause.

A fifth was this: That whatsoever Aides are given by the Subject, they will be
of no effect for the good of the Kingdom, unless such Councels be removed
they will be like restoratives to a distempered body which nourish the
sickness, and hasten Death: Our Treasure may be consumed unprofitably, and the
Kingdom left naked of defense, as it has lately been, the Negociations with
foreign Princes may be managed to our own disadvantage, and all the means of
preservation frustrated or turned to our destruction.

A Sixth was this; That now was the proper time for desiring this favor and
benifit from his Majesty, the Kingdom was very much exhausted, a little more
would ^otally undo us; we have heretofore strength to bear out ill Councels,
which now we have not, Relapses in such a case as ours prove commonly more
dangerously then the first sickness, when, by strength of Nature, the
distempers prevail without resistance; if ill Councels should now resume
strength, they would grow much more violent and fierce than before: Besides,
this is a time wherein the whole world is in Motion and Agitation, and such
times are ever aptest for great Changes and Alterations. There are none of our
neighbor Princes, but have Armies and great Preparations, both by sea and
land, and if we have false Counsel at home, we may be overwhelmed upon a
sudden, which could not be done at other times, because any attempt of that
kind would require long time, and more visible preparation.

Another Reason urged for the fitness of the time, was, That his Majesty had
now great occasion to use the love and fidelity of his people in service of
danger and expense, and therefore would be more willing to express himself in
those things which might be most for their encouragement and security in their
great undertakings and adventures for his honor, and this he said was agreeable
to the proceedings of God, who may be observed at such times, a^ he intended to
employ any of his Prophets or Servants in any great work, would for the most
part encourage in some extraordinary manner by some special blessing, or
pr^mise some more eminent Revelation, or Miracle then at other times.

The Seventh and last Step was this, that his Majesty in satisfying this
humble desire of his Subjects, should gain very great advantages to himself,
and he said, that here in our request to the King, should have some resemblance
of our prayers to God, we should desire nothing from him, but what might make
for his own honor and Happiness, as we ought to pray for nothing from God,
but what conduces to his own Glory and Service: The advantages which the King
will gain by assenting to this our humble Petition will be these.

1. It will be a great discouragement to the Rebels, when they see his
Majesty's affairs and proceedings against them; are guided by such Counselors
and Ministers as are Adverse to them, as is evident by the intelligence we have
received, that a chief point of confidence in the Rebels is this, That they
have some friends near the King here.

2. It will much encourage his Majesty's good Subject to hazard their persons
and contribute their aid to the furtherance of this service, when they shall be
assured that those w^^ govern the Affairs, have public aims, and will order
and dispose all to the advantage of Religion and the Common good.

3. It will be a terror to those who shall presume to move the King for any
corrupt or unworthy person, when they must come to an examination in
Parliament, because it will be a means to bring his Majesty to discern how
they abuse his trust and favor, by what sinister end or sordid respects they
are guided.

4. It will put an answer into the Kings mouth to all Importunate
solicitations. Nothing is more troublesome to a benign and gracious Prince,
then to deny those who are near unto him; whereas if he shall please to say
that he is engaged to his people, this will be a sure way to take off all
envy, and discontent from himself, and assure him that those whom he shall
prefer, will depend upon no other.

FINIS.

