A PSALM of Thanksgiving, to be Sung by the Children of Christ-Hospital, on
Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday in Easter Holy Days, (according to ancient
custom) at St. Mary Spittle, for their Founders and Benefactors, 1679.
^ LEt us rejoice with cheerful voice, This Chorus is to be Sung by all the
Children, and repeated after every Verse.
God's Goodness magnify,
Who freely grants to all our wants most plentiful supply.^
VERSE I.
^ WE, Monday.
who were helpless; we, who in our soft and tender years
Have known that woe, that hardship felt, which the most stout man fears
^ Poor, in distress, bereft of Friends, with direful Hunger pined.
And worse than all those Miseries, none to inform the Mind,
^ Chorus.
^ (Thanks to a Providence Divine,) we know no more of grief,
Neither in Mind, nor Body starved; in both we find relief. Let us, etc. ^
VERSE II.
Who so in deeds of Charity the needy does regard,
Him firmly has our God engaged to keep (O great reward!)
Him in all dangers will defend; so bless him, that the more
With liberal hand he does disperse, the larger is his store.
Is Sickness he will Cherish him, will ease him in his Pain,
Who did so often relieve the Sick, and Indigent sustain.
VERSE III.
O There Is to Help, Tuesday.
to Cloth, and Feed, from Misery to raise,
How truly great and noble it is? how worthy is the Praise?
Base pleasure it is Mankind to hurt; it is the only joy
Of Tyrants, who abuse their power, to ruin and destroy:
In British Isles (thanks be to God) we generous Princes find;
Who think that Royal Charity becomes a Kingly mind.
VERSE IV.
In Regions most remote from hence we I spread our Founders Fame,
And places yet unknown shall hear Our Sovereign Charles's Name:
Not to a Cloister or a Cell his Bounty can be tied;
It will support and comfort us throughout the World so wide.
Where e're we come, in Gratitude, we will make it still appear,
Who 'twas that first did nourish us; and who does Feed us there.
VERSE V.
THat some might guard us, Wednesd.
and in time of need assistance lend,
Who might us from Oppression and Injury defend;
After wise Counsel, who most fit to manage so great Trust,
We were committed unto Men, both Liberal and Just.
Such Government does render soon our Happiness entire:
When Wisdom, Wealth, and Honesty, in the same Men conspire.
VERSE VI.
For Trade and for Magnificence, London's Renown is known;
Yet Faithfulness and Charity are Virtues she does own:
They do descend so low as us; nor is it a small share,
Which we, amongst the rest, partake of this great Cities care.
God's Kindness unto us is great, we must him ever Praise;
Who Princes did excite for us, and Benefactor raise,
A true REPORT of the great number of poor Children, and other poor People,
Maintained in the several HOSPITALS, under the pious Care of the LORD MAYOR,
Commonalty, and Citizens of the City of LONDON, the year last past.
CHildren put forth Apprentices, Christ's Hospital.
and discharged out of Christ's-Hospital, the year last past, 83. 10 whereof
being Instructed in the Arts of Arithmetic and Navigation, were placed forth
Apprentices to Commanders of Ships out of the Mathematical-School, in the said
Hospital, Founded for the benefit of this Kingdom, by the Kings most Excellent
Majesty -- 83 Children buried the year last past -- 9 Children now remaining
under the Care and Charge of the said Hospital, which are kept in the House,
and diverse places in London, and Suburbs thereof, and at Nurse in the Country.
Five Hundred Fourscore and Seventeen -- 597 The Names of all which are
Registered in the Books kept in the said Hospital, and are there to be seen from
what Parishes they have been from time to time admitted. They being so many in
number, and the Charges of keeping them so great, (and having sustained great
Losses by the late lamentable and dreadful Fire,) it is hoped several good
Christians will freely contribute toward the maintenance of the said Children:
The certain Revenue of the said Hospital being little more than the Moiety of
the necessary Charges thereof. THere have been Cured this year last past in the
Hospital of St. S. Bartholomew' s Hospital.
Bartholomew, of Wounded, Sick, and Maimed Soldiers and Seamen, and other
diseased Persons, from several parts of the Dominions of the Kings Most
Excellent Majesty, and from Foreign Parts; many whereof have been Relieved with
Moneys, and other Necessaries at their departure, though (as it has pleased
God) the greatest part of the Revenues of the said Hospital was consumed by the
late dreadful Fire -- 1633 Buried this year after much charges on them -- 175
Persons remaining under Cure in the said Hospital -- 235 THere have been Cured,
S. Thomas Hospital.
presented and Discharged this year last past, in the Hospital of St. Thomas in
Southwark, of Wounded, Sick, and Maime I Seamen and Soldiers, and other
diseased Persons, from the places adjcent, and from several parts of His
Majesty's Dominions, and from other Foreign Parts; many whereof have been
relieved with Moneys and other Necessaries at their departure, though (as it
has pleased God) not only a principal part of their Revenue was consumed in
the general and dreadful Conflagration in this City, 1666. but the best of
their remaining Revenue was wholly burnt down in the great and dismal Fire in
Southwark, which happened in May, 1676. wherein also the Site of this Hospital
it self was very much damnified, being on Fire in some parts, although through
Gods wonderful Mercy, it was preserved from total destruction by the said Fire
-- 1588 Buried this year last past after much Charge in the time of their
Sickness -- 264 Remaining under Cure at the Charge of the said Hospital -- 258
REceived this last year into the Hospital of Bridewel, Bridewel Hospital.
Vagrants and other indigent and miserable People, many whereof had both
clothing, and such other relief as their necessities required, being in great
distress, and sent by Passes into their native Countries -- 919 Maintained in
the said Hospital, and brought up in diverse Arts and Trades, at the only Charge
of the said Hospital. Apprentices, and others, notwithstanding it pleased God,
the Hospital, and all the Houses within the Precinct thereof, (which was the
greater part of its Revenue) were wholly consumed by the late dreadful Fire;
besides the great Loss sustained in the remains of its Revenue by the terrible
fire, which since happened in Wapping -- 113 THe Hospital of Bethlem is of
great necessity for the keeping and curing Distracted Persons, Bethlem Hospital.
whose misery of all others is the more deplorable, because they do not
apprehend the same, it disabling the Mind as well as the Body. Brought into the
same Hospital the last year distracted Men and Women -- 46 Cured of their
Lunacy, and discharged thence the said year -- 39 Now remaining there under
Cure, and provided with Physic, Diet, and other Relief, at the Charge of the
said Hospital -- 88 The Charge whereof is great, and the Revenue of the said
Hospital so small as not to amount to one half part of the yearly Expenses
thereof; And the Building of the Old Hospital of Bethlem, being Ruinous, and
not capacious to receive and contain the great number of distracted Persons;
for the admission of whom, daily applications are made to the Governors
thereof. Upon a Christian and Charitable Consideration of the Premises, the
Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council of this City of London, did lately
grant sufficient ground whereon to erect a more large and commodious House for
the keeping and Curing the said Lunaticks, and Distracted Persons: In the
Building and Finishing whereof, the Governors of the said Hospital, have laid
out and disbursed about Seventeen Thousand Pounds, whereby not only the whole
Stock of the said Hospital is Expended, but the Governors thereof have been
necessitated to take up several Thousands of Pounds for the Fini^hing the same,
for which they pay Interest: And therefore the said Hospital is a very fit
object of all good men's Charity, to do as God shall enable, them, toward the
relief of the said poor Lunaticks, and payment of their great Debts; There
having been, and daily are, by the Blessing of God, and the Charge of the said
Hospital, and the Care of those that are entrusted therewith, diverse reduced to
their former Senses.
decorative border

LONDON, Printed by ANNE GODBID and JOHN PLAYFORD, 1679.


