A DISCOVERY OF The great Plot For the utter Ruin of the City of LONDON, AND
THE PARLIAMENT. As it was at large made known By JOHN PYM, Esquire On Thursday
being the Eighth of June, 1643. At a COMMON HALL: And afterward corrected by
his own hand for the Press.

London, Printed for Peter Cole, at the Glove in Cornhill, near the Royal
EXCHANGE. 1643.

John Pym Esquire his Speech.
MY Lord Major, and you worthy Citizens of this famous and Magnificent City, We
are sent hither to you from the House of Commons, to make known to you the
discovery of a great and a mischievous Design, tending not only to the ruin
and destruction of the City and of the Kingdom; but in those Ruins, likewise
to have buried Religion and Liberty, I might call it a strange Design, though
in these late times designs of this kind have been very frequent, because it
exceeds others in diverse considerable circumstances of it; In the malice of the
intention, subtilty of contrivance, extent of mischief, and neernesse of
execution, all which arose from the wickedness of the Authors: Two others may
be added, that is, the cleernesse of the discovery and proof, and the
greatness of the deliverance, proceeding from the great mercies of God.

I shall in the opening of this design, take this course for my own memory, and
yours.

Observe first, what was in their ayms. Secondly, the variety of preparations.
Thirdly, the degrees of proceeding. Fourthly, the maturity and readiness for
execution.

The Parliament, the City, and the Army, seem to be the three Vital parts of
this Kingdom; wherein not only the well being, but the very life and being of
it does consist; this mischief would have seized upon all these at once.

The City should have bin put into such a combustion, as to have your swords
imbrued in one another blood: The Parliament should have been corrupted, and
betrayed by their own Members: The Army destroyed, if not by force, yet for
want of supply and maintenance, that so they might have had an open and a
cleerer way to the rest, which they had in proposition, especially to that main
and supreme end, the extirpation of Religion.

I shall tell you first, out of what principles this did rise, it was from the
ashes of another design that failed; that mutinous petition which was contrived
in this City, the Actors of that petition being therein disappointed, they fell
presently into consultation how they might compass their former end in another
way, that is under pretense of see^ring themselves by force against the
ordinances of Parliament, and under pretense of procuring peace, they would
have made themselves Masters of the City, yea of the whole kingdom, and they
would have ruined and destroyed all those that should have interrupted the^ in
their mischievous intentions.

The first step in their preparation was, to appoint a Committee that might
often meet together, and consult how they might compass this wicked end.

Their next was, that they might enable that Committee with intelligence both
from the Armies, as well those on the Kings side (as they call themselves,
though we be of the Kings side indeed) as those that are raised by the
Parliament, especially they were careful to understand the proceedings of
Parliament, that so by the advantage of this intelligence, they might the
better effect that which they had in project, and find the readiest and the
nearest ways to it.

After they had thus provided for intelligence, how they might procure power
and countenance to this action, by some appearing authority from His Majesty;
for which purpose; they projected to get a Commission from the King, whereby
many of themselves, and of those that were of their own consort, should be
established a Counsel of War in London and parts adjacent, with power to raise
Forces, make provisions of Ammunition, and of other kind of Arms, and to give
authority for the leading and conducting of those Forces, and to raise money
for the maintenance of them, and as it is expressed in the Commission, for the
destruction of the Army, under the command of Robert E: of Essex, raised by
authority from the two houses of Parliament.

Having laid these grounds, I shall in the next place discover to you, those
that should have bin Actors and Agents in this business, their several
qualifications and relations.

The first sort was some Members of the City, whereof there were diverse, you
shall hear the names out of the proof, and the next was (in their pretense, as
they gave out) members of the two Houses of Parliament, and the third sort, was
two Gentlemen, Master Waller, and a brother in law of his, Master Tomkins, that
were to be Agents betwixt the Parliament and the City, as they pretended. Then
a fourth sort was those that were to be Messengers to convey intelligence from
this place to the Court at Oxford, and to other places where there should be
occasion. And then the fifth and last consisted but in one man, that we yet
discover, and that was the Lord of Falkland, that kept correspondency with them
from the Court; these were to be the Actors in this mischievous design.

They began then to think upon some other courses of very great advantage to
themselves.

The first was of combination, how they might be more closely conjoined one to
another, and how they might be more secure from all others that were not of
the same party; And for this purpose, there was devised a Protestation of
secrecy, whereby as they were Christians, they did bind themselves to keep one
another counsel, not to reveal that which they had knowledge off, which they
were trusted with. And the second was, a wariness in discovering the business
to any of those who were to be brought into the plot, though they came in
amongst them to be of them, they would not trust all of their own body, but
they took this wary and subtle course* that no one man should acquaint above
two in this business; that so if it came to examination, it should never go
father than three, by the same party that discovered it, and then those two had
the like power, that any one of them might discover it to two others, that so
still it might be consigned within the number of three: then there was a
special obligation (as was pretended by Mr. Waller) which he had made to those
that he said were Members of both Houses of Parliament, and consenting to this
Plot, but that is yet but a pretense* no names or parties are known.

After they had provided thus for their combination, and for their security;
then in the next place, they thought of some means of augmentation how they
might increase their numbers, and draw in others to come to be of their party;
and for this they did resolve to use all the Art and subtilty to irritate men's
minds against the Parliament; they found out those that thought themselves most
heavily burdened with these taxes, they did cherish all that had any
discontents about the Assessement, advising them to repair to the Committee for
ease, which they knew would be difficult to obtain, and that they being
disappointed would be more enraged, and the apter to join with them in this
Plot.

From this care of augmentatio^, they went in the next place, to find out some
means of discovery, that they might know how far their party did extend, who
were of their side, and who were against them, and for this purpose they did
devise that there should be a survey of all the Wards, nay of all the Parishes
within the City of London, the Suburbs and places adjoining in every parish, to
observe those that were for them, whom they called right men, and others that
were against them, whom they called averse men; and then a third sort, whom
they called neutralls, and indifferent men; and they appointed several persons
that were trusted with this survey and enquiry, to find out these several
degrees and sorts in every parish.

Thus far this design seems to be but a work of the brain, to consist only in
invention and subtilty of design, but the other steps and degrees which I shall
now observe to you, will make it to be a work of the hand, to bring it somewhat
nearer to execution.

The first step that came into action and execution was, that they procured
this Co^missio^ which they had before designed, and endeavored to obtain: Now
they had obtained a Commission (as I told you before) to establish certain men,
17 in number, their names are there expressed, you shall hear them read to
you, they were to be a Counsel of War here within the city; these 17 men they
had power to name others to themselves, to the number of 21, and they should be
enabled both to appoint, not only Colonells and Captains, and other inferior
officers of an Army, but to appoint and nominate a General; they had power to
raise men, to raise Arms, Ammunition, and to do all those other things that I
told you before, and to lay taxes and Impositions to raise money, and to
execute Martiall-Law.

When they had gone thus far, in the next place they did obtain a Warrant from
the King, and this was to M. Challener, that he might receive money and plate
of all those, that either by voluntary contribution, or Lo^n, would furnish the
King (as they called it) in this necessity of His, and thereby the King was
obliged to the repayment of it this was obtained.

By this comes in the list, that that was before part of the design, comes
now into act, the Citizens that were trusted with framing of this list, brought
it in, except in some few parishes; under those heads of discovery that I
formerly told you of; that is, in every parish who were right, and who were
indifferent, and neutrall, and who were averse, and those were brought to Mr.
Wallers House, and after they had delivered that list, the Citizens then
declared themselves that now they had done their part, they had discovered to
them a foundation of strength, they did expect from them again a foundation of
countenance and authority, that was from both Houses of Parliament; and they
did declare that they would proceed no farther, till they knew the names of
those Members of both Houses that should join with them, and should undertake
to countenance this business. M. Waller made this answer, that he did assure
them that they should have Members of both Houses, both Lords and Commons to
join with them, that he himself he was but their mouth, that he spoke not his
own words, but their words, that he was but their agent and did their work,
that they should have of the ablest, of the best, and of the greatest Lords,
and the greatest number, nay, that they should pick and choose, that they could
not wish for a Lord, whom he doubted not, but to procure them; this was the
vanity of his boasting to them to draw them on, and to encourage them in this
plot: This being done now, and propounded by the Citizens on their part, so Mr.
Waller propounded from the Lords diverse quaeries, questions which had been
framed (as he said) by the Lords and Commons, and in their name he did present
them, that were for the removal of difficulties, of some obstructions that
might hinder this work, those quaeries were delivered upon Friday was 7 night
to some of the Citizens, and upon the Saturday morning (that was Saturday was
seven night) they were returned back again with answers.

I shall now relate to you, both the quaeries, and the answers that were
returned by those of the City.

The first quaerie was, what number of men there were Armed.

The Answer was,

That there was a third part well armed, and a third part with Halberts, and
another third part with what they could get, with that that came to hand.

The second Quaere was, In what places the Magazines were laid?

The Answer to that was, At Alderman Fowk's house, at Leaden Hall, and at
Guild Hall.

The third Quaere was, Where the Rendezvous should be?

The Answer was, At all the Gates, at the places of the Magazines, in
Cheapside, in the Exchange, and at what other places the Lords should think fit.

The fourth Quaere was, Where the place of retreat, if there should be occasion?

The Answer was, That they had Bamstead Downs, they had Black Heath in
proposition, but they did refer the conclusion of the place to the Lords.

The fifth was, What Colors there should be?

To this it was answered, That at every Rendezvous there should be Colors.

A sixth consideration was, By what marks and tokens they should be
distinguished from others, and know their friends from their enemies?

To that it was answered, That they should have white Ribands, or white Tape.

Then in the seventh place, it was asked, What strength there was within the
walls, and what strength without the walls?

To that it was answered, That within the walls, there was for one with them,
three against them; but without the walls, for one against them, there was five
for them.

The eighth was, What was to be done with the Tower?

The Answer was, That they could conclude nothing in that point?

The ninth was, Where the chief Commanders dwelt?

To that they made this Answer, That every Parish could tell what new
Commanders and Captains they had, and who of the Militia dwelt in it.

The tenth and the last was What time this should be put in execution?

To that the Answer was, That the time was wholly left to the Lords.

After these Quaeres thus propounded and answered, Master Waller told them that
he would acquaint the Lords with those Answers that he had received from them
to their Quaeres, and wished them not to be troubled, though the Lords did not
yet declare themselves, for they could do them as good service in the House.

Being proceeded thus far, they came then to some propositions which should be
put in execution, and they were these:

First, that they would take into their custody the Kings children that were
here.

The second was, That they would lay hold of all those persons that they
thought should be able to stand in their way, or to give them any impediment,
or at least of some considerable number of them, it is unlike that all were
named, but some were named; Of the Lords House there was named my Lord Say, and
my Lord Wharton: and besides my Lord Major, whom they took into their
consideration, as the head of the City; there was named of the House of
Commons, Sir Philip Stapleton, Master Hampden, Master Strode, and they did me
the honor and the favor to name me too.

When they had taken into consideration the surprizall of these Members of both
Houses, they did take into their further resolution, that with my Lord Major
should have been seized all your Committee of Militia, they would not spare one
of them.

They intended further, That they would release all Prisoners that had bin
committed by the Parliament, that they would seize upon the Magazines, that
they would make a declaration to satisfy the people.

There are no Designs, be they never so ill, but they do put on a mask of some
good, for betwixt that that is absolutely and apparently ill, there is no
congruity with the will of man, and therefore the worst of evils are undertaken
under a shadow and a show of goodness; this Declaration must be set out, to
make the people believe that they stood up for The preservation of Religion,
For the preservation of the Kings Prerogative, Of the liberties of the Subject,
Of the Privileges of Parliament; and of these 1000. were to be printed, they
were to be set upon Posts and Gates in the most considerable and open places:
and they were to be dispersed as much as they could through the City against the
time it should be put in execution: this was done upon Saturday last was
seven-night in the morning.

Then in the next place, they thought fit to give intelligence to the Court of
what proceedings they had made here, and thereupon Master Hazel he was sent to
Oxford that very Saturday in the afternoon from Master Wallers house, there
were two Messages sent by for this main Design they would not trust in
writing, the first Message was from Master Waller, it was that he should tell
my Lord of Falkland that he would give him a more full notice of the great
business very speedily; the other Message was from Master Tomkins, and that
was, That the Design was now come to good maturity; That they had so strong a
party in the City, that though it were discovered, yet they would be able to
put it in execution: They promised to give notice to the King of the very day,
and if it were possible, of the very hour wherein this should be put in
execution; and then they did desire, That when they had seized upon the Out
works, that there might some party of the Kings Army come up within fifteen
miles of the City, who upon knowledge of their proceedings must be admitted
into the City. These were the four points upon which the Message did consist,
which was sent from Master Tourkins to my Lord of Felkland, by Master Hazel. To
both these Messages my Lord of Falkland returned an Answer by word of mouth,
they kept themselves so closely that they durst not venture to write, but he
bid the Messenger to tell Master Waller, Master Tomkins, and Master Hambden (a
Gentleman, that was sent up with a Message from the King, and remained here in
Town to agitate this business) made that use of his being here in Town, that
he should tell them, That he could not well write, but did excuse himself,
but prayed them that they would use all possible haste in the main business.

Master Waller having plotted it, and brought it on thus far, now he began to
think of putting it further, and the Tuesday following this Saturday, which
was Tuesday was se'night in the evening, after he came home to his lodging;
Master Tomkins and he being together, he told Master Tomkins, That the very
next morning, that was Wednesday, the Fast day, he should go to my Lord of
Holland, and acquaint him with this plot, discover so much to him as he thought
fit, that he himself would go to some other Lords, and do the like: this was
the Tuesday night, in which conference they had put on that confidence in
expectation of success in this plot, that Master Waller broke out with a great
Oath, to affirm, That if they did carry this throughout, then we will have any
thing. This he spoke to Master Tomkins with a very great deal of earnestness
and assurance: So far they went on in hope and expectation, but here they were
cut short: That very night there were Warrants issued (upon some discoveries
that were made of this Plot) to the Lord Major, to the Sheriffs here, which
they did execute with so much diligence and care of the good of the City, that
the next morning when Master Tomkins and Master Waller should have gone about
their business, they were apprehended, and the rest of the Citizens, diverse of
them, some escaped.

Thus far I have discovered to you the materials and the lineaments of this
miscievous design; you shall now be pleased to hear the Proofs and the
Confessions out of which this narration does arise, and that will make all this
good to you that I have said; and after those are read, I shall then tell you
what has been done since in the House of Commons, somewhat in the House of
Lords, and what else is in proposition to be offered to you from the House of
Commons; but I shall desire you first that you may be fully convinced of the
great goodness of God in discovery of this Plot, and the truth of these things
that I have spoken to you, that you will hear the evidence of the proofs, and
then we shall go on to those other things which we have in charge.

FINIS.
John Pym Esquire his Speech.
GEntlemen, we have held you long, you are now almost come to the end of your
trouble; I am to deliver to you some short observations upon the whole matter,
and then to acquaint you with the resolutions thereupon, taken in the House of
Commons; and to conclude with a few desires from them to you:

The observations are these: First, I am to observe to you, the contrariety
betwixt the pretenses with which this design has been marked, and the truth:
One of the pretenses was peace, the truth was blood and violence; Another of
the pretenses was, the preserving of propriety, the truth was, the introducing
of tyranny and slavery, which leaves no man master of any thing he has.

A second observation is this: The unnatural way by which they meant to
compass this wicked design, that was to destroy the Parliament, by the
members of Parliament; and then by the carcass and shadow of a Parliament to
destroy the kingdom; what is a Parliament but a carcass when the freedom of
it is suppressed? when those shall be taken away by violence, that can or will
oppose and stand in the way of their intentions: The high Court of Parliament
is the most certain and constant Guardian of Liberty; but if it be deprived of
its own Liberty, it is left without life or power to keep the Liberty of
others; If they should bring a Parliament to be subject to the Kings pleasure,
to be correspondent (as they call it) to his will, in the midst of such evil
counsels which now are predominant, there would little or no cure be left, but
then all things that are most mischievous, would seem to be done by Law and
Authority.

The third observation is this, with what an evil conscience these men
undertook this work: They that pretended to take Arms to defend their own
propriety, obtained a Commission to violate the propriety of others, they would
take the assertion of the Laws of the Land, but assumed to them such a power,
as was most contrary to that Law, to seize upon their persons without due
process, to impose upon their estates without consent, to take away some lives
by the Law martial; and besides all this, without any Commission they intended
to alter the government of the City, which is now governed by your own Council,
by a Magistrate chosen by your selves, then to be governed by violence.

The fourth observation is this, that the mischievous effect of this design
would not have ceased in the first nights work, all the godly part in the
kingdom, all faithful Ministers especially, would have been left not only to
the scorn and reproach, but to the hatred, malice and cruelty of the Papists,
and Malignants.

The fifth and last observation I shall make to you, is this, that this matter
was prosecuted in part, and agitated and promoted by those that were sent from
the King, and seemed to be messengers of peace; and while we should be amazed
with pretenses of gracious Messages, to propose peace, this villainous project,
which should have set you all in blood was promoted by those Messengers, and
should have been put in execution very shortly after. This is all I shall
trouble you with by way of observation.

The matters resolved on in the House of Commons, are these things: First that
there be public thankesgiving to God, both in the City, and throughout the
Kingdom for this great deliverance, that a near day be appointed for the City,
the Parliament, and the parts adjacent, and a convenient day for other parts of
the Kingdom. The next thing resolved on, was, that the House of Peers, they
should be made acquainted with these proofs, and with all this discovery,
which has been done accordingly. It was likewise resolved, that there should
be a Covenant made, whereby we should both testify our detestation of this
mischievous plot, and join our selves more closely in the maintenance of the
common interest of the Church and Commonwealth, in Religion and liberty, which
are still in great danger, and would have been utterly subverted, if this
project had taken effect. It was resolved in the fourth place, which is now
partly executed, that this should be communicated to you of the City, that so
as you have a great part in the blessing, you may do your part in the duty of
thankfulness, together with us. It is further resolved, that it shall be
communicated to the Army, that they likewise take notice of this great mercy of
God, and join with us, both in the thanksgiving, and in the protestation and
Covenant, as we shall likewise desire you of the City to do.

Then we are commanded to give thanks to my Lord Major, to the Sheriffs, and
to the rest of the Officers of the City, for their great care in the
apprehending of these persons, in guarding the peace and the quiet of the City.

We are likewise to give thanks to those Gentlemen, that have had the custody
of these prisoners; we know it cannot but be a trouble to them, there was no
means to keep them safe from messages one to another, and from speeches, but
by such a way of putting them in honest men's hands; The House of Commons have
commanded us, to give them special thanks that they would undertake this
care, and to assure them that they will see them fully recompensed for all the
trouble, and charge they shall undergo by it.

And we are to give you thanks, which are the Citizens of this City, for your
good affections to the public cause, and for your continual bounty for the
support of it.

Thus far we are enjoined by the resolution of the House: Now we are further
to entreat you, to hear both the Covenants, you shall thereby know, to what
we have bound our selves, and to what we desire you should be bound; there are
two Covenants, that is, one proper for the Houses of Parliament, which has
been taken in the House of Commons by all the members, by those Gentlemen that
are named in those examinations to have been privy to this plot, which they all
have disavowed; and the other Covenant is to be taken by all the other part of
the Kingdom, by the Citizens, by the Army, and the rest of the people
generally in all places.

The draught of these two Covenants we shall communicate to you; the House of
Lords they have had them already, and have taken them into consideration; and
we hear, they do resolve that, which is appointed for them, shall be taken by
the members of that House.

We are further to desire you, that you would be serviceable to the Divine
providence, to Gods great mercy to this City, and the whole Kingdom: God does
not only do good, but thereby gives assurance that he will do good; His
mercies they are comforts for the present, they are pledges for the future; but
yet our care must not cease.

We are to desire that you would keep your guards, and look well to your
City, and that you would find out these evil members that are among you, as
near as may be, that so for the time to come this plot may be prevented, as
hitherto has been stopped, for out of doubt all the malignity is not drawn out
of them, though the present opportunity is hindered for the present of putting
it in execution.

I am to tell you further, that in desire to win those that shall be taken with
remorse for this wicked defigne and conspiracy: It is resolved, that if any man
shall come in before the 15. day of this present June, and freely confess his
fault, and what he knows of this conspiracy, that he shall have a full, and
free, and plenary pardon for the time to come, except those that are already
taken or fled; I say, those that come in voluntarily shall be pardoned.

Your care, and our care, they will be all little enough; we hope Gods
blessing will be so upon them both, that you shall be restored to a full peace,
and that in the mean time you shall enjoy such a degree of safety and
prosperity, as may make way to it.

FINIS.

