The Public Faith.
SOme t^ll of Afric Monsters, which of old
Vain superstition did for Godheads hold.
How the Egyptians, who first knowledge spread
Adored their Apis with the white Bulls head:
Apis still fed with Serpents that do hiss,
Hamon, Osyris, Monster Anubis.
But sun burnt Afric never had nor has
A Monster like our English public Faith.
Those fed on snakes and satisfied did rest,
This like the Curtian gulf will have the best
Thing in the City, to appease its still
Increasing hunger, gluiting its lewd will
With families, whose substance it devours,
Perverting Justice and the higher powers
Contemning, without sear of any law,
Preying on all to fill its ravenous maw;
Whose Estridge stomach which no steel can sat
Has swallowed down Indies of gold and plate:
This is the public Faith which being fed
Byth City's wealth, has in this Kingdom bred
Such various mischiefs with its viperous breath,
Blastings its peace and happiness to death:
And yet this Idol which out world adores
Has made men prostitute their truth like whores
To its foul lust; which surely may as well
And soon be satisfied as the grave or hell:
This preys on Horses, yet that will not do,
Unless it may devour the Riderstoo:
This takes up all the riches of the land,
Not by entreaty, but unjust command;
Borrowing extortively, without any day
But the Greek Calends, then it means to pay.
This against the law of Nations does surprise
The goods of strangers, Kings, and in its wise
Discretion, (thinks though its not worth their note)
They Are bound to take the public Faiths trim vote
For their security, when this public Faith
Has broke more Merchants then ere riot has:
And yet, good men oth' City, you are proud
To have this bankerupt public Faith alowd
More credit then your King: to this you will lend
More willingly then ever you did spend
Money to buy your wives and children bread;
By such a strange enchantment being misled
To your undoings, you (who upon bond)
Nay scarsly upon morgage of that land
Treble your money's value, would not part
With your loved coin vanquished by th'powerful art.
Of this Magitian pubiick Faith justly install
Him master of your bags, the Devil and all
That taught you get them by deceitful wares,
And sucking in (like mornings draughts) young heirs:
Well certainly if this fine humor hold
Your Aldermen will have no other gold
But what is in thumb rings for their pondrous chains,
They Will be the public Faiths just lawful gains;
And have the honor afterward to be
Hanged in them for its public treachery.
What will become of you then, grave and wirty
Inhabitants of this enchanted City?
Who is it shall those vast sums to you repay
When master public Faith is run away?
Or who shall those prodigious heaps renew
Which were so prodigally decreased by you?
Whom the whole world imagined men of thrift*
What will your Orphants do, how will they (...)
Whose whole estates in the City chamber has
Been given a spoil to ruined public Faith:
Perhaps you will pawn your Charter to supply
The worthy wants of your necess^ty:
Who is it will take it when all (but men misled
Like you) know it is already forfeited?
Who is it will then into now coin translate
Such monstrous cupbords of huge anticke plate
To public Faiths vast treasury, bringing in
From the guilt goblet, to the silver pin.
All that was coinable and what to do
Even to create you knaves and traitors too.
Faith if you chance to come off with your lives,
Your way will be to live upon you wives:
Their trading will be good when fortune wears
Your colors in the caps oth' Cavaliers;
Whose Cuckcolds you will be then, and on your bier
Wear their horns, as you public Faiths do no^
Then then you will howl when you shall clearly (...)
That public Faith was public treachery:
Then you will confess your selves to have bin undone
By public Faithsman Isaac Pennington:
Then you will repent that ever you did fling
Such monstrous sums away against your King.
When he in triumph with his warlike train
Shall to your terror view your Town again.
Unless his mercy mittigate his wrath
Justly conceived against you and public Faith.
That reverent Alderman which did defile
His breeches at the mustering, ere while
Shall then again those volvet slops bewray
Cause public Faith did make him go astray
Paul's shall be opened then, and you conspire
No more against the Organs in the quire:
Nor threat the Saints ith'windows, nor repai
In troops to kill the book of Common Prayer
Nor drunk with zeal endeavor to engrosse
To your own use the stones of Che^pside Cross:
Then then you will bow your heads your horns and all
That so exalted were to save from thrall
Your ruined liberties; and humbly pray
For mercy more then upon each Fast day.
(When your seditious Preachers to the thro^g
Make prayers extempore of five hours long.)
Lest you by early penitence prevent
Your certain danger, if not punishment;
Which you by no means may so safely do
As quitting public Faith and treason too.
Then then though late you to your grief will find
That you have walked (as moles ith'earth do) blind
Of your fair reason, and obedience light,
Involved in mists of black rebellious night.
If these instructions will not make you see
Your error, may you perish in it for me;
And to your ruin walk in death full path
That leads toth' gallows with the public Faith.
FINIS.

