TRVTH TRIVMPHING OVER FALSEHOOD, ANTIQVITY Over NOVELTY.

OR, The First Part of A just and seasonable Vindication of the undoubted
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, Right, Legislative, Coercive Power of Christian
Emperors, Kings, Magistrates, Parliaments, in all matters of Religion,
Church Government, Discipline, Ceremonies, Manners: Summoning of, Presiding,
Moderating in Counsels, Synods; and ratifying their Canons, Determinations,
Decrees: As likewise of Laymens right both to sit and vote in Counsels; (here
proved to be anciently, and in truth none other but Parliaments, especially in
England) both by Scripture Texts, Presidents of all sorts, and the constant
uninterrupted Practices, Examples, of the most eminent Emperors, Princes,
Counsels, Parliaments, Churches, and Christian States, (especially of our
own) in all ages since their embracing the Gospel.

In Refutation of Mr. John Goodwins Innocencies Triumph: My dear brother
Burtons Vindication of Churches, commonly called Independent: And of all
Anti-Monarchicall, Anti-Parliamentall, Anti-Synodicall, and Anarchicall
Paradoxes of Papists, Prelates, Anabaptists, Arminians, Socinians, Brownists,
or Independents: Whose old and new Objections to the contrary, are here fully
answered.

By William Prynne, of Lincolnes Inn, Esquire.

Jer. 6. 16. Thus says the Lord, Stand ye in the ways and see, and ask for
the OLD PATHS, where is the GOOD WAY, and walk therein, and ye shall find
rest for your souls: But they said, We will not walk therein.

Luke 5. 39. No man also having drunk OLD WINE, straightway desires NEW: for
he says, THE OLD IS BETTER.

Tertul. de Praescrip. adver. Haeres. Ex ipso ordine manifestatur, id esse
Dominicum and Verum, quod sit prius traditum; id autem Extraneum and Falsum,
quod sit posterius immissum.

December. 3. 1644. It is Ordered by the Committee of the House of Commons,
concerning Printing, that this Book, entitled, [Truth Triumphing over
Falsehood, Antiquity over Novelty.] be printed by Mich. Spark, Senior.

John White.

London, Printed by John Dawson, and are to be sold by Michael Spark, Senior,
1645.

TO THE HIGH COURT OF PARLIAMENT.
Right Honorable,
HAving had the Honor, through Gods assistance, to be a mean, though cordial
Instrument, of Vindicating The Sovereign Power of Parliaments and Kingdoms,
in all Civil or Military affairs which concern the State, in Four several
Volumes, against all Opposites whatsoeever; which they have (for the most part)
satisfied, or put to silence: I expected a Quietus est from all other
Controversies, concerning the Jurisdiction of Parliaments, especially in
Ecclesiastical matters; which most imagined had been put to eternal silence
when our Lordly Prelates lost their Votes and Session in Parliament, by a
public Law: But (alas) I know not by what evil Genius, and Pythagorean
Metempsychosis, the Anti-Parliamentary Souls, formerly dwelling in our defunct
Prelates earthly Tabernacles, are transmigrated into, and revived in a
New-Generation of men (started up of late among us) commonly known by the Name
of INDEPENDENTS; who, though for the most part really cordial in their
Affections, Actions to the Parliament and Church of England, (for which, and
for their piety they are to be highly honored*) yet some of them are of late
become extremely derogatory, and destructive unto both, in their Anarchicall
and Anti-Parliamentary Positions: For which, and for their late gathering of
Independent Churches, contrary to Your Parliamentary Injunctions, they are to
be justly blamed, as great disturbers of our public Peace and Unity.

It is the observation of learned Select. Disputat. de Quaest. in quibus sit
Potestas Ecclesiastica. These. 1. 4, and 5.
Voetius and De Episcopatu Constantini Magni. p. 3. 4, 5, 6.
Vedelius, That the Arminians in the Netherlands, for the advancing of their
own Faction, and more facill accomplishment of their private ill Designs, did
before the Synod of Dort, and in the beginning thereof, exceedingly cry up the
Power of the Civil Magistrate, and States of Holland, in Ecclesiastical
matters, both by Writing and Preaching; ascribing to them the highest
Jurisdiction and Power of giving ultimate Judgment in all Controversies of
Faith, and Ecclesiastical matters arising in the Church, as a Prerogative
belonging immediately under Christ to them alone: And thereupon they appealed
to the States, from the Ecclesiastical Classes, as the proper Judges of the
Controversies they had raised in the Belgic Churches. But at last, after the
Synod of Dort had determined against their Arminian Errors, and the Sea Acta
Synodi Dod^. p. 3^5, 326, 327
States established their Determinations, prohibiting the Preaching or Printing
of any Arminian Tenets, with the private Independent Congregations and
Conventicles of the Arminian Party, they presently altered both their opinions
and practice; crying down the Authority of the States and Civil Magistrate,
as fast as they had cried it up, both in their Apologiae. c. 25. See Episcopius
Disput. 32. These. 4. Mr. Rutherfords, Due Right of Presbyteries. p. 343, 344,
345 357, 358, 359.
Apologies and Sermons; contracting, yea denying them that very power which
before they had so liberally measured ^ut unto them; affirming, that the States
had no power at all over their private Congregations: that it was not any right
or part of their Office to obliege men, by their authorities, to the Decrees of
Synods, however agreeable to the word of God; and that they ought not to use
any coactive Power or Authority in such cases, to obliege them to conformity.

This Practice of the Arminians was, by Anti-apol^gia. p. 157, 158.
Mr Thomas Edwards, by way of prediction, applied to the Independents, in these
very terms: And it may be feared, however these Apologists NOW to ingratiate
themselves, and being let alone in their Church Way, say, they give more to the
Magistrates than the Presbyteriall, and that they profess to submit, and to be
most willing to have recourse to the Magistrates Judgment, and Cognizance, and
Examination of Ecclesiastical Causes; yet when they shall come once to be
crossed, and the Parliament, by the advice of the Assembly, to settle the
Government of the Church, and by their Authority to bind them to things
agreeable to the word, we shall see then what they will say of the Magistrates
Power. There are too many speeches already, since the Assembly, (out of their
fear how they may go) which have fallen from many Independents, THAT
PROGNOSTICATE, THEY WILL DO BY THE PARLIAMENT, AS THE REMONSTRANTS DID AFTER
THE SYNOD OF DORT BY THE STATES. Which Prognostication has fallen out
accordingly. For since that time our Independents having felt the Pulses of the
Assembly and Parliament bearing, but very gently, by way of debate, against
their Anarchicall and Anomolous New-Way, (derived from their good friends, the Sea Lac^^ Osiander his (...) Controversiarum cum Anabaptistis.
German Anabaptists and See Mr Rob^^sons Apology
Separatists, and supported only with their Arguments, as I am fully able to
demonstrate;) they have not only in Press and Pulpit cried up their Way, as
the Only Way, Kingdom, and Scepter of Christ; and denied all opposition in
word, deed, or thought against it; as a direct See Mr. John Goodwins
Theomachia, and Innocencies Triumph.
FIGHTING AGAINST GOD; and promoted it publicly and privately with all their
Industry, Policy, Power; setting up New Independent Congregations in every
corner; but even with open mouth, pen, hand, (contrary to their former Solemn
Vows, Covenants, Protestations, which I fear they have overmuch forgotten)
cried down, and fought against the very Ecclesiastical Power, and Legislative
Authority of the High Court of Parliament it self, and Supreme Temporal
Magistrates: proclaiming not only in their Mr. John Goodwins Sermon, Febr. 25.
1643.
Pulpits, but likewise in sundry late Reply to A. S. Mr. John Goodwins
Theomachia: and Inocencies Triumph. An Answer to Mr. William Prins Twelve
Questions. My Brother Burtons Vindication. p. 5. 6. etc.
Pamphlets, wherewith they have filled the World, That every particular
Congregation of visible Saints, and Independent Church, is under the Government
of Christ alone, as the ONLY Head, King, Governor, Lawgiver of it; and
subject TO NO OTHER IVRISDICTION, then that of Christ, his word and Spirit.
That NO POWER ON EARTH, NOR EARTHLY LAWGIVERS MAY, CAN, OR OUGHT TO GIVE
LAWS, FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF THIS REPVBLIKE, nor claim, nor exercise an
Headship, or undertake the Government of this Body. That neither KINGS, NOR
PARLIAMENTS, NOR SYNODS, have any Authority to prescribe Laws or Rules for the
Churches Government, to order the affairs of Christ's Kingdom, or institute
the Government of his Churches; or to make coactive Laws, in any
Ecclesiastical matters, to bind the conscience of any Church or Christian to
outward conformity, or inflict any mulcts or penalties for contempt or
disobedience; Christ only being the Lord of men's consciences, which ought to
be left at liberty. That the Members of the Parliament are chosen but by a
secular Root, by the Generality and Riffe Raffe of the world, Papists,
Atheists, Drunkards, Swearers, Men void of the knowledge, fear, and grace of
Christ: And therefore the Independent Brethren conceive as great AN
IMPOSSIBILITY, that a Legitimate Ecclesiastic Power should, according to the
mind of Christ, be by them conferred upon any men, or that they should have
any Power or Authority from Christ to nominate or appoint who shall be the
men, by virtue of such nomination or election, to enact Laws and Statutes in
matters of Religion, and to order under mulcts and penalties how men shall
worship and serve God, as it is (in Jobs expression) to bring a clean thing
out of an unclean. That the Parliaments claiming or exercising any such
Ecclesiastical Power, or others attributing of it to them, is a means to
awaken the eye of Jealousy upon them, and seven times more destructive and
under-mining of not only their Power, but Honor, Peace, nd Safety also, than
any thing that is found in the Independent Way, so ill entreated. That it is a
claiming of the sacred and incommunicable Royalties of Heaven; an accounting it
no Robbery to make themselves equal with God; and such an high provocation in
the eyes of the Most High, as IF CONTINVED IN (by the Parliament) will kindle a
fire in the breast of him whose name is Jealous, which will consume and devour.
Yea, one of them puts this Question, An Answer to Mr. Prynnes 12, Queres. p.
24. and 2.
If the whole Kingdom may deny obedience unto Popish Acts and Canons, or upon
any other like just occasion, and they themselves be Judges whether the
occasion be just or no; Whether MAY NOT INDEPENDENTS, a part of the Kingdom
only, do the like in all respects? Or, Whether ought they, because a Lesser
part of the Kingdom, yield obedience to Popish Acts and Canons, because a
Major part approve of, and agree with a Parliament and Synod in approving them?
What if they should be for Popery again, Judaisme, or Turcisme? it is no offense
to make a Quere, nor impossible to come to pass; the greatest part of those
that chose our Parliament men being thought to be Popishly or Malignantly
affected, etc. Putting diverse such like Queries, destructive to the very
fundamental Power and Being of Parliaments; and as bad or worse than the
Popish Gunpowder Plot, to blow up the Sovereign Ecclesiastic, and Civil
Authority of this High Court, in all succeeding Ages.

These, with infinite other Anti-Parliamentall, Anti-Synodicall, and
Anti-Monarchicall Paradoxes (at which I profess I stand amazed) have not only
dropped from the Lips, but Pens of sundry Independents, who have avowed them
publicly in Print, with their Names affixed to their Books, even before the
face of Your Right Honorable Parliamentary Assembly and Supreme Tribunal, in
such open affront and high contempt of Your undoubted Rights, Power,
Privileges, (which Your Honors and we all are obliged, by Late Solemn
Oaths, Covenants, Protestations, to defend, maintain, with our very Lives and
Estates; and to discover, oppose all others who shall invade them, to our
uttermost power) as I am confident no Age, nor History can ever parallel, in
the least measure; the very Malignant Prelates, and Anti-Parliamentary
Cavaliers, having not proceeded, in this kind, so far as they: which I speak
with deepest grief of heart and spirit, out of Conscience of that common Vow
and Covenant, (which binds me to discover, oppugn, reveal, abhor it) and
detestation of their most pernicious Assertions, not out of the least malice or
hatred to any of their Persons.

What the Independents end of publishing these desperate Anti-Parliamentary
Paradoxes should be, unless to prepare their party and all others, as much as
in them lies, utterly to reject whatever public form of Church Government,
Discipline, Reformation, and Directory of Worship, Your Honors by the advice
of the Reverend Assembly shall establish in our Church for the future, after
all your serious consultations, debates, pains, Prayers and Fastings about it;
and to set up their own Anomolous Platform, (which Reply to A. S. p. 111. Mr.
Burtons Vindication. p. 54. 71.
they aver is Christ's Kingdom and Government; and which may, upon probable
and higher grounds than of reason, be thought in time to overthrow, and put
down all other Governments whatsoever, and to stand up alone in their stead;
since Christ's Kingdom shall stand up, when all opposite earthly Kingdoms,
like earthen vessels, shall with an Iron Rod be dashed in pieces: Which they
close up with a Faxit Deus and festinet,) in despite of Your Authority, and
all humane Power whatsoever, I cannot conjecture. And their own late printed
Passages, with Feb. 15 1643.
Mr. John Goodwins Sermon, (that it would be more easy for him, and he should
rather yield to be torn in pieces by wild horses, than submit to such a
Government which proceeded from a Parliament, chosen by the Riffe-raffe of the
world, etc.) intimate and express as much. Which, what an high contempt it is
against Your undoubted Power, and pious Ecclesiastical proceedings, in
Reforming, settling the Doctrine, Discipline, and Government of our Church, (the
grand desire and prayer of all well-affected spirits) I most humbly submit to
Your saddest thoughts and deepest wisdoms, who have both Power and Authority
in Your hands to suppress, incomparable Prudence and Providence to prevent,
these growing, dangerous Insolences, before they become Masterlesse, or
Epidemicall, past Your cure.

Far be it from my thoughts, to exasperate Your Power or Justice against any
Delinquents of this kind; some whereof are so near and dear unto me, that it
is my heaviest affliction to mention their extravagancies in this kind; of
which I trust they (and all their followers) will be now ashamed; and a
Brotherly Admonition to their Persons (though their Writings undergo the
sharper Censure) will I hope induce them, upon second thoughts, both to
discern, lament, recant their forementioned Paradoxes, and abhor themselves
for them even in dust and ashes, (as one of them Mr. Goodwin in his Innocencies
Triumph. p. 5.
professes he will do, in case he be convinced:) And then if they will not
be reclaimed, Fiat Iustitia; better some should suffer, than all perish. My
only desire is, that Your Honors would have a special jealous care of
preserving your own undoubted Parliamentary Rights and Privileges against
these unparalleld public Violations, Impeachments of them, and of the
tranquillity, safety of our Church and State, endangered by them. Toward the
just defense whereof, I have (with as much expedition as my many other
distracting public and private Employments would permit) contributed these my
indigested Nocturnall Lucubrations, (borrowed from the hours allotted to my
necessary natural rest) in Vindication of the ancient and undoubted
Ecclesiastical Power and Jurisdiction of Parliaments, Christian Princes, and
Magistrates; (which I have made good by sundry Divine, Historical Presidents,
and Authorities, in all Ages) and answered all the chief Pretenses, Objections
of Papists, Prelates, Independents, Anabaptists, Separatists, and all others
who oppugn them; in such a manner as I hope will silence them for the present,
and reform them for the future.

It was my primitive intention and desire to have published this Treatise
complete at first; but it swelling to a greater bulk than I expected, and my
engagements in other public services for the Commonweal retarding my speedy
progress herein, I have thereupon divided it into two Parts: the First whereof
I here humbly tender to your Honorable Patronage, till God and opportunity
enable me to complete the Second; of which there is less Necessity, since
learned Mr. Samuel Rutherford, in his Due right of Presbyteries, and Mr. Thomas
Edwards, in his Anti-Apologia, (neither of them hitherto Answered by the
Independents, and in truth unanswerable) with Gulielmus Apollonius and the
Wallacrian Ministers, Consideratio Quarundam Controversiarum, etc. quae in
Angliae Regno hodie agitantur, newly published, will supply the present defect
thereof; and this First Part supply some particulars concerning the
Ecclesiastical Power of Parliaments, Christian Princes, Magistrates,
Counsels, which are wanting in them, and in laborious Sir Edward Cooks Fourth
Institutes; who has recorded little or nothing concerning the Jurisdiction or
Power of Parliaments in Ecclesiastical affairs, and matters of Religion.

Thus humbly submitting these my distracted subitane Collections, and
Lucubrations, to Your Honorable favorable Acceptance; and imploring the God
of Verity, of Unity speedily to dissipate all our Errors, and comprimise all
our unhappy Divisions (which threaten ruin to us, if continued) by Your most
Religious Care, Wisdom, and indefatigable Endeavors, that so Romans 15. 5. 6.
we may be all like minded one toward another, and may with ONE MIND, and
ONE MOUTH, (in one Way, one Congregation) glorify God, even the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ: I shall with my ferventest Orisons daily recommend Your
Honorable Assembly, with all Your pious Endeavors for the Reforming, Settling
of our Church, State, to his Divine Benediction; and ever rest,

Your Honors most humble, William Prynne.

To the Reader.
CHristian Reader, I here present thee with Truth Triumphing over Falsehood,
Antiquity over Novelty; to settle both thy Judgment and Practice, in these
unsettled times, wherein the very Foundations of Parliaments, States, Churches,
Government, are shaken and subverted, by some of our own dear Friends, from
whom we least expected it.

For my part, I take no pleasure in detecting my Brethrens nakedness, Errors,
Over-sights; nor in disparaging their Worth or Writings; yet I must needs
acquaint thee, for thine own good, to preserve thee from seducement, with some
material Observations touching their Independent Treatises; for which thou
may chance to give me thanks.

First, That they all generally take that for granted, which they should prove
and demonstrate to us: viz. That there is an exact and most absolute form of
Church Government prescribed to all Churches in the Scripture; from which no
man must vary in the least title: And that the Independent Way it is, and no
other. But when we demand of them how they prove it? or what that Way,
Government, and Discipline is they contend for? or in what plain Scripture
Texts they find it instituted and universally prescribed to all Nations,
Churches? or how they make good all their transcendent Encomiums of their New
Way? we find them altogether silent or unsatisfactory: telling us only a
large story of the Pattern of the Tabernacle showed to Moses in the Mount; of
the exact form of the Temple showed to David by the Spirit; and of Ezekiels
vision, and his and the Angels measuring of the Temple: Which are nothing to
the point; and mere impertinencies, fit to delude the ignorant injudicious
vulgar; who take their weak inferences thence for divine Oracles.

Secondly, That they are extraordinary bold, confident, peremptory, copious in
their affirmations and positions concerning their Way; but very poor, lame,
impotent, deficient in their proofs thereof: You must take their bare
Assertions for undeniable Arguments, Proofs.

Thirdly, That their whole Independent Fabric is built either upon false
Principles; As, that every Church is a complete, absolute, independent body of
it self; subject only unto Christ: That no humane Power upon earth has any
Right or Authority to prescribe any Rules or Orders to any particular
Congregation: That just humane Laws bind not the Conscience, in point of
obedience: and the like. Or else upon false, or absurd Inferences from true
Principles: As, that Christ is the King, Lord, Head, and Lawgiver of his
Church: Ergo, No man or humane Power may make Laws or Canons, to regulate and
order it, or any thing in it, but Christ alone.

Fourthly, That to maintain their New Way of Government, they are enforced to
deny the undoubted Power and Jurisdiction of Parliaments, Counsels, Synods,
Kings, and Civil Magistrates, in Ecclesiastical affairs; and to maintain
such Paradoxes, Passages against their lawful Authority, as, if duly pondered,
may justly induce all Well-affected persons to mistrust and abhor their Way,
as Anarchicall, and destructive to all Christian and humane Society.

Fifthly, That they are constrained publicly to deny, that there is any
Vindication. p. 30, 31.
National Church under the New Testament; though they acknowledge one in the
Old: Upon which ground they must of necessity likewise deny one Article of the
Creed; That there is a Catholic Church; and themselves members of it, or of
the National Church of England. They pluck up the bounds and orderly
distribution of all Parish Churches; absolutely necessary to avoid confusion;
to provide competent maintenance for Ministers; to bring all to frequent the
public Ordinances: Warranted by Scripture; wherein we read not only of
distinct Synagogues, and Tribes under the Law, but Churches under the Gospel.
Approved by the practice of all Christian Churches, ever since there were
Christian Emperors, Princes; and as necessary as distinct Families, Villages,
Cities, Societies of men in civil respects; yea observed in New England it
self, though now disliked in Old: and thereby bring in mere Ataxy and
Confusion among us.

Sixthly, They are constrained to wrest Scriptures against their meaning; to
invent many strange Apocryphal new shifts, Interpretations, Distinctions, to
evade direct Scriptures and fundamental Truths, never formerly questioned:
They nullify and slight Examples of the Old Testament, in all things that make
against them; and yet cry them up again, when they make for them; especially
in the point of their Vindication. page 28.
Church Covenant; which they confess, has no ground at all in the New
Testament, but only in the Jewish Church under the Old. Which yet they will
not admit a sufficient Proof of a National Church.

Seventhly, They intricate, gainsay things which are clear; take things for
granted, that are either false, or doubtful; confound things in generalities,
which they should distinguish; deny things that are apparently true; yea, which
is worst of any, not only affirming, but believing most things See Mr.
Rutherford p. 369, 370.
with a reserve; according to their present light; to the posture of their
present Judgment; as they are yet informed; with a liberty of altering or
varying to morrow, from what they affirm or believe to day, upon new light
discovered; Which is in truth to bring a mere Skepticisme into Religion; to
play fast and loose with God and our own Consciences; to doubt all things;
firmly believe nothing; to set up Opinion in the Throne and Place of Faith;
and in conclusion to introduce flat Atheism.

Eighthly, They refuse Church Communion with those who are not of their Way and
Churches, excluding them from the Lords Table, and their very Children from
Baptism in their Churches, if they submit not to their Covenant and Way;
judging them all professed Enemies to the Kingdom and Government of Christ;
and so visibly without the Covenant of Grace: though never so Pious or
Religious.

Ninthly, Their very Principles teach disobedience to Parliaments, Synods,
Princes, Magistrates, and all other Superiors, in all their just Laws and
Commands which concern the Church or Religion; dissolve all Relations, all
Subordinations, and humane Society it self, as I have here fully manifested.

Tenthly, They exceedingly magnify their own Way, Ministers, Writers,
Opinions, Conceits; despising and under-valuing all others, in a kind of
Pharisaicall manner, not deeming them worthy their Church Communion.

Eleventhly, They have high conceits of their own transcendent holiness; and
under pretext of being more pious, pure, living more holily, and serving God
more exactly than others, they do (without sufficient Grounds) quite sever
from all other Churches; just like Popish Monks, Hermites, Anchorites, Nuns,
Jesuits, and other Religious Orders, who separate themselves from others,
under this very pretense of being more holy, and living more devout than others.

Twelfthly, They pretend themselves the greatest Enemies of all others to
Papists, Arminians, Anabaptists, Socinians, Sectaries, and yet concur with
them in their Opinions, Practices, Policies; fighting against us with their
very weapons.

Of all which I thought good to advertise thee (kind Reader) lest thy good
opinion of the Piety, and dignity of their Persons, (worthy all due honor and
respect) should make thee swallow down their dangerous Principles and Opinions
without strict examination: Whereas, good men's Errors are most infectious,
pernicious; and so more carefully to be observed, avoided.

How far they have swerved from Verity and Antiquity in sundry Particulars;
how fallacious and weak their principle Proofs and Arguments are, I have ^
Sect. 4.
here in part discovered; and shall in due time (if God say Amen) put a Period
to the other Part which is yet behind. In the mean time, beseeching God to
prosper these my impotent Endeavors to thine and the public good, (which I
have principally published for the satisfaction of the Learned, and such who
most seduce the Ignorant) I shall dismiss thee with this wholesome Council of
God himself, Ephesians. 4. 14, 15, 16. Henceforth be no more Children, tossed to
and fro, and carried about with every wind of Doctrine, by the sleight of men,
and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive: But speaking the
truth in love, grow up into him in all things which is the Head, even Christ.
From whom the whole Body fitly joined together, and compacted by that which
every joint supplieth, according to the effectual working in the measure of
every part, makes increase of the Body, unto the edifying of it self in love.

Farewell.
Errata.
Faults escaped in some Copies: page 5. lin. 14. read Regis. p. 22. l. 24.
Constitutions, r. Consistories. p. 25. l. 21. premissis. p. 61. l. 12. actaque.
p. 65. l. 32. necesse. l. 34. receptat r. refrixerat. l. 46. dele to. p. 69. l.
5. Turlstan. p. 75. l. 31. inhibit. l. 34. resist. desist. p. 85. l. 22. the.
p. 26. l. 31. chapter 1. p. 101. l. 1. servus. l. 12. universa. p. 108. l. 9.
issue. p. 169. inform. p. 116. l. 36. Ministers. masters. p. 120. l. 9. 35. l.
24. with his. his own. p. 135. l. 45. clear. p. 131. l. 22. Fourthly. Fifthly.
l. 31. Four. Five.

Margin. p. 66. l. 21. 22. r. Incarnationis, Anno. p. 119. l. 1. Romans 13. 1. p.
124. l. 3. 11. r. 18.

Truth triumphing over Falsehood, Antiquity over Novelty, etc.
AS it is an unspeakable grief and corrosive to my very soul, to enter into
public contestations with any of my Christian brethren, who profess the
selfsame faith together with me; so it would be a far greater heartbreaking,
and much sorer affliction to my spirit, to behold upstart groundless Errors
triumphantly insulting over ancient orthodox Verities, and dragging them
captives after their domineering chariots. This makes me once more take up the
Sword and Buckler, not of Polemicall School Divinity, but Historical
Antiquity, to encounter those Adverse forces, which have taken up offensive
arms, and waged open war in many new-printed Pamphlets, against the lawful
Jurisdiction and sovereign authority of Christian Princes, Magistrates,
Parliaments, assisted with the advice of Reverend Synods and Councels, in
matters of Religion, church government, Ecclesiastical Laws, Canons,
Discipline: all which (through Gods assistance) I hope totally to rout and
dissipate, in such sort that they shall never be able to make head again, by
this short sudden onset, which I have yet neither vacancy, nor time sufficient
(through the multitude of other public avocations) to prosecute to the full.

I shall marshall my subitane collections of this nature under distinct
Positive propositions, which I shall propound and prosecute in order.

Sect. 1.
Of the power of summoning Councels and Synods.
1 FIrst, I affirm, that the right and authority of calling or summoning
Ecclesiastical Assemblies, Counsels, Synods, whether General National, or
Provincial, to settle matters of Religion, Worship, Church Government, or
constitute Ecclesiastical Laws, belongs not to Bishops, Ministers, or private
Independent Congregations; but to Princes, or supreme temporal Magistrates and
Powers.

This Proposition militating both against Papists, Brownists, Anabaptists, and
some Independents, I shall ratify by Scripture, and historical presidents in
all ages, as well foreign as domestic, with brevitie and perspicuitie.

1. For Scripture-presidents and Authorities, we have Precepts to and
Presidents of Moses, the prime civill-Magistrate among the Israelites. Number. 10.
^, 3 4. c. 8. 9. c. 20. 8, 10. Exodus 35. 1, 4. etc. Levit. 8. 3, 4, 5, etc. c.
19. 2. Deuteronomy. 29. 2, 3. c. 31. 2, 3, etc. 28. 29. 30, etc. Of Joshua, c. 8. 33,
35. c. 22. 11, to 34. c. 23. 2, to 16. c. 24. 1, to 29. Of the chief
Magistrates of the Israelites, Judge. 20. 1, to 12. Of David King of Israel, 1 Chronicles. 13. 1, to 6. c. 28. 1, 2, 3. c. 29. 1. to 26. Of King Solomon, 1 King.
8. 1, 2, 3. etc. 2 Chronicles. 5. 2. etc. Of King Asa, 2 Chronicles. 15. 8, to 16. Of
Jehoshaphat, 2 Chronicles. 20. 3 4, 5. etc. Of Jehojada, 2 Chronicles. 23. 1, to 20. Of
King Joash, 2 Chronicles. 24. 4, to 15. Of King Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 30. 1, to 27. c.
31, 1, to 5. Of King Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 34. 29, to the end. c. 35. 1, to 20. Of
Nehemiah, c. 8. 1. to 18. c. 9. 1, etc. Of Mordecai and Esther, Esth. 9. 17, to
32. And in defect of Christian Kings and Magistrates, the Apostles and whole
Church, by mutual consent assembled together in a Synod Acts 6. and 15. as the
Highpriests, Scribes, and Elders, met together and assembled in their
Sanhedrim by temporal authority, Matthew. 26. 57. c. 27. 1. Mark 14. 51. 55. c.
15. 1. Luke 22. 66. Acts 4. 5, 6, 7. c. 5. 21. to 42. c. 6. 12. c. 22. 30. c.
23. 1.

2. For foreign historical authorities in all ages and Churches of note.
Eccles hist. l. 5. prooemio.
Socrates Scholasticus records, That since the Emperors were first christian,
the State of the Church has hanged on them, and the greatest Councels have
been, and be kept by their advice, yea by their summons, writs, and edicts. The
first famous general Council of Nice was called by Surius Council. Tom. 1. p.
334.
Constantine the great, the first Christian Emperor. De vita Constantini l. 3.
c. 6.
Eusebius writes, that Constantine (not the Pope) gathered this general
Council, and by honorable Writs called together the Bishops on every side,
that they should hasten thither. Eccles. hist. l. 1. c. 16.
Theodoret, This great and holy Council was gathered to Nicaea, by the grace
of God, and by the godly Emperor Constantine. Tripartita hist. l. 2. c. 21.
Cassiodore, That the zeal of the Prince raised up that most famous Council
at Nicaea, who commanded the Bishops and their attendants to come to the Synod
on public Asses, Mules and Horses, which he provided for them. Eccles. hist.
l. 8. c. 14. col. 377. a.
Nicephorus Callisthus, That Constantine promulged that most famous Synod of
Nice in Bithynia, See Rabanus Maurus de Vniverso l. 5. c. 7.
and by his Letters summoned thither the Bishops of all places by a set day;
and among the rest Pope Julius, who by reason of his decrepite age sent Vitus
his Presbyter for his Proxy: The like writes Hist. l 1. c. 16. l. 3. c. 7. l.
4. c 6.
Sozomen in the same words. The Council of Rome under Pope Meltiades was
convented by the same Constantines Writ: and here (says Eccles. hist. l. 10.
c. 5.
Eusebius) is a copy of the Emperors Writ, whereby he commanded a Council of
Bishops to be kept at Rome. And Saint In Epitaphio Paulae.
Hieroni, To stay certain Ecclesiastical dissentions, the Emperors writs
caused as well the Bishops of the East as of the West to draw to Rome. Yea the
Council of Eusebius. hist. l. 10. c. 15. Socrates Scholast. Eccles. hist. l. 1 c.
28. 33. Eusebius de vita Constantini l. 4. c. 41, 42, 43.
Orleance in France, and that of Tyrus (removed from thence to Jerusalem by the
Emperors Letters) were both summoned by Constantines Writs. The second
general Council of Constantinople was called by Theodosius the elder; the
Emperor; write Hist. l. 5. c. 7.
Theodoret, Hist. l. 7. c. 7.
Sozomen, and Hist. l. 12 c. 10. Sarius Tom. 1. p. 482
Nicephorus, commanded a Synod of Bishops to meet together in one place, out of
the provinces of his Empire, to confirm the Decrees of the Nicene Council;
and the Bishops therein wrote thus to the Emperor, We are come to
Constantinople by your Majesty's commission. The third general Council at
Ephesus was congregated by the younger Theodosius, Ex edicto pietatis
studiosissimorum Imperatorum sanctum and universale concilium Ephesi coactum,
writes Eccles. hist. l 1. c. 3.
Evagrius: with Council. Tom. 1. p. 607. Tom. 2. p. 31. 75. 79. 88. 96. and Tom.
1. p. 600. Niceph. Eccl. hist. l. 14 c. 34.
Laurentius Surius: and the Bishops themselves in the prologue thereof, Cum ex
pio edicto coacti essemus in Ephesiorum Metropoli. And so far was Pope Leo
from conceiving the right of calling Councels to belong to him, that he
besought the Emperor Theodosius by an Epistle in these words, Leo Epist. 9. ad
Theodosium.
We beseech your godly Majesty to grant our supplication, that you would
command a Council of Bishops to be holden within Italy: which Epistle not
prevailing, he writes another to him in these words, Epist. 14. See Epist. 13.
44. 50. 58. almost to the same purpose.
All our Churches, and all our Priests, beseech your Clemency with sobs and
tears, that you will command a general Council to be held within Italy:
which yet he denied to grant, and summoned the same at Ephesus notwithstanding
these entreaties. After which this same Pope entreated the Emperor Martianus,
that it would please his Majesty to command a general Council; and Epist. 23.
writ to the Clergy and people of Constantinople, to make suit with discreet
and humble prayer, that our most gracious Emperor would vouchsafe to grant our
request, in that we have desired a general Council. Yea St Epist. 1. ad
Innocentium.
Chrysostom being requested to do the like, writes thus to Pope Innocent, We
went in and most humbly besought the most Christian Prince to call a Council.
In like manner L. 4. c. 22. l. 6. c. 7. Socrates Scholast. l. 2. c. 7.
Theodoret. l. 2. c. 1^.
Sozomen records, that the Arrians besought the Emperor Constantius to command
a Council to be holden at Antioch; and after this entreated him to summon
another Council at Millain: and that the Catholics sent Hypatianus their
Ambassador to entreat the Emperor, that to redress certain errors they
might have leave to meet together. So far were they from redressing new
errors (much more then from framing, printing, Articles, Canons,
Constitutions, Oaths and imposing new Rites and Ceremonies, as our Bishops
lately did in their Episcopal Visitations) that they durst not attempt to
decree any thing positively against them without the Emperors special license
first obtained; no not in a public Council, much less in a private
Consistory.

But to proceed with general Councels; the fourth general Council at
Chalcedon was assembled by the Emperors Valentinian and Martian, Surius
Council. Tom. 2. p. 11. 25. 31. 152 103. 106. 120. 106.
Facta est Synodus ex decreto piissimorum ac fidelium Imperatorum Martiani and
Valentiniani, says the first Action of that Council: This Council was first
summoned by these Emperors to be held at Nice, by several Writs sent by them
both to Pope Leo himself, (who was cited thereunto, and sent his Proxy
thither) and to Anatolius Bishop of Constantinople, with other Writs to the
holy Bishops in all places, recorded by Ibid. p. 8, 9. 10.
Surius: where they appearing at the day prefixed, they sent two other Writs
unto them, to remove them from thence to Chalcedon, because they could not be
present at Nicaea: whereupon Surius ibid. p. 10. 11.
the holy and universal Council came together at Chalcedon, secundum sacram
praeceptionem, according to their sacred command. The fifth general Council
at Constantinople was called by the Emperor Justinian: Imperator Justinianus
sanctam quintam synodum Oecumenicam, Episcopis ecclesiarum omnium evocatis,
coegit, writes Eccles. hist. l. 17. c. 27.
Nicephorus: and Justinian himself in his Letters to that Synod, recorded by
Council. Tom. 2. p 494, 495, 496.
Surius, recites, that the Council of Nice was congregated by Constantine; the
first Council of Constantinople by Theodosius the elder; the Council of
Ephesus by Theodosius the younger; the Synod of Chalcedon by Martianus; and
then concludes, Ideo vocavimus vos ad regiam urbem, that he had therefore
called them to the royal City to discuss the three chapters then in
controversy, Surius. Tom. 2. p. 498, 499. 500. 501, 502
and to decide them according to these former general Councels resolutions;
yea, Pope Vigilius was cited to this Council, to dispute together with the
other Bishops there, concerning the three chapters. The sixth general Council
of Constantinople was gathered together by Constantius Pogonatus, as Apud
Surium: Council. Tom. 2. p. 900 901, 902.
his own letters of summons testify, and this passage in the first action of
it: Conveniente quoque sancta et universali Synodo, qua secundum Imperialem
sanctionem congregata est, in hac a Deo conservanda regia Urbe. The seventh
general Council of Nice (so termed by the Papists, though false, spurious,
and heretical) was summoned by Irene the Empress, and her son Constantine:
Surius Council. Tom. 3. p. 8.
Conveniente sancta and oecumenica, hoc est universali Synodo, quae per gratiam
divinam, piumque illorum Imperatorum, sancte orbem terrarum gubernantium
decretum congregata est in clarissima Nicensium metropoli; are the words of the
first action testifying the same. The eight oecumenicall Synod at
Constantinople was called by Surius Ibidem. p. 531. 539.
Basilius the Emperor; in the Prologue and first Act whereof, there was
produced a letter of Pope Adrians to this Emperor, in these words: Volumus per
vestrae pietatis industriam Constantinopoli numerosum celebrare Concilium.

As these first eight general Councels were thus congregated by Christian
Emperors, not Popes or Prelates, so likewise National, provincial Councels
and Synods have been always usually called, assembled by the Writs and Summons
of Christian Emperors, Kings, Princes, not by Bishops, or private christians:
Thus the several Theodoret. hist l. 4. c. 4. 7, 8, 9. Socrates hist. l. 2. c.
37. Nicephorus hist l. 9. c. 33. Surius Tom. 1. p 432.
Councels of Sardice, Millaine, Ariminum, Nicomedia, and Seleucia were
assembled by the Emperor Constantius his Writs and Mandates; whence De Synodis
Arin^^a: and Seleuc.
Athanasius writes thus of the Synods of Ariminum, and Seleucia, the passages
whereof he records at large: A^ Imperatore Proefectisque Literae sequentes in
omnem partem missae sunt, eos qui illuc ituri essent convocantes. The Council
of Theodoret. hist. l. 4. c. 7. 8. 9.
Illyrium was called by Valentintan and Theodosius: Eccles. hist. l. 11. c. 30.
whence the Bishops in that Council in their Su^ius Tom. 1 p. 472. 474.
Epistles to those Emperors give them thanks for their care and pains in
assembling this Council in these terms. Apud quem gratias agenus vobis
Clementissimi Principes, qui ad removendas altercationes congregare studuistis
sacerdotale Concilium, and Episcopis dignatione vestra honorific^ntiam
reservastis, ut nemo deesset volens, nemo cogeretur invitus Itaque juxta
Mansuetudinis vestrae statuta convenimus. Saint Ambrose Bishop of Millaine
speaks thus in that Council: Nos in occidentis part constituti convenimus ad
Aquilei^^seum civitatem juxta Imperatoris praeceptum. Palladius says there
likewise, Imperator noster Gratianus jussit Orientales venire, negas tu
jussisse e^m? Ipse Imperator nobis dixit, se Orientales jussisse venire.
Ambrosius Episcopus dixit; utique jussit. etc. The first^ Spelman Council. p. 39.
Council of Arelat about the year 314. was assembled. Constantini magni jussu.
The first provincial Council of Agatha, was assembled Surius Tom. 2. p. 372.
by the Kings permission, for whose long life the Council prayed, ut qui nobis
congregationis permiserat potestatem. The first Council of Orleans was
summoned by Surius Council. Tom. 1. p. 711.
Clodovick King of France as is evident by this Rescript of the Bishops of that
Synod to him: Domino suo Catholica Ecclesiae filio Clodoveo gloriosissimo regi,
omnes sacerdotes quos ad Concilium venire jvssistis: etc. Sacerdotes de rebus
necessariis tractaturos in unum collegi jusseritis: The second Council of
Orleans was summoned by the precept of most glorious Kings. Surius Tom. 2. p.
633.
Cum ex praeceptione gloriosissimorum regum in Aurelianensem urbem, Deo
auxiliante convenimus; say the Bishops in the prologue to their Canons in it.
The Council of Alebret met together Surius. Tom. 2. p. 633.
by the consent of their most glorious Lord and pious King Theodebertus; The
second Synod of Toures assembled together by the Surius ibid. p. 642.
connivence of King Arithbertus: The Surius ibid. p. 650. 654.
fifth Council of Orleans was congregated by King Childebertus, together with
the Council of Paris, as their Prologues testify. The third Council of
Toledo was summoned by King Surius ibid p. 668.
Reccarredus, who, pro fidei suae sinceritate omnes regiminis suae Pontifices
in unum convenire mandasset. The Surius Tom. 2. p. 678. 681. 682.
first and second Councels of Mascon, with the Council of Valentia were
assembled by King Guntram: Ex evocatione gloriossssimi Regio Guntramni: juxta
Imperium gloriosissimi Guntramni regis, say the Poems to these Synods Canons.
The fourth Council of Toledo was called by the diligence of the most religious
Surius ibid. p. 727. 738.
King Sisenandus, ut ejus jussis et imperiis, that by his precepts and
commands, a common treatise of Ecclesiastical discipline might be compiled
therein. Whereupon in the close of the Council they pray to Christ for this
their King, cujus devotio nos ad hoc decretum salutiferum convocavit: The
Surius ibid. p. 7. 39. 741.
fifth and sixth Counsels of Toledo were called by the Precept and writ of King
Chintillanus: ex praecepto ejus et salutaribus hortamentis; The first and
second Counsels of Bracara assembled together ex praecepto, et per
ordinationem, by the precept and appointment of the most glorious Surius ibid.
p. 746. 749.
King Ariamirus. The seventh Council of Toledo met together Surius ibid. p. 759.
studio, by the care and command of King Chindasiundus. The 8. 9. and 10.
Councels of Toledo were congregated by the Surius ibid. p. 854. 867. 870.
command of King Recessuinthas: ejusque serenissimo jussn ac sanctissimo voto.
The Council of Cavailon was assembled Surius ibid. p. 875.
ex evocatione vel ordinatione, by the summons and appointment of King
Clodouicke. The eleventh Council of Toledo came together, Surius ibid. p. 880.
hortatu, by the exhortation and precept of King Vuambanus: The Surius Tom. 3.
p. 1, 2, 8, 9.
12. and 13. Councels of Toledo were summoned and celebrated ex glorioso jussu,
by the glorious command of king Eringius. The French Synod Anno 642. was
summoned by Charlemaine Surius Tom. 3. p. 39.
Ego Carlomannus dux et Princeps Francorum, cum consilio servorum Dei et
Optimatum meorum, Episcopos qui in regno meo sunt cum presbyteris ad Concilium
et Synodum, pro timore Christi congregavi: The Synod of Surius ibid. p. 40. 4.
Soissons was called by Childerick and Pipin; and so was the Council at the
Palace of Venis: gloriosissimus atque Deo religiosus illustris vir Pipinus rex
Francorum, universos pene Galliarum Episcopos aggregari fecit ad Concilium
Vernis palatium publicum. The Surius ibid. p. 293. 318. 359. 361. 409. 421.
Carolus Molineus. Comment. ad Edictum. Hen. 2. contra parvas Datas and abusus
Curiae Romanae. p. 15. Matthew. West An. 826. Vspergensis p, 180.
several Synods and Councels of Aquisgan, (or Aix) Paris, Lions, and Toulouse
were summoned by Lewis and Lothorius their Writs and Mandates, as the marginall
authorities largely evidence. The Surius Tom. 3. p. 237. 257. 271. 274. 278.
286. 291. Math. Westminster. Flores hist. An. 813.
Councels of Frankford, Friuli, Arelat the fourth, Tovers, Cabilon the second:
Mentz and Rheems were all called by Charles great; who (as Matthew Westminster
and others write) in the year 813. commanded five several Councels to be
celebrated at once, the first at Mentz, the second at Rheemes, the third at
Towers, the fourth at Cavailon, the fifth at Arelat. The third Council at
Aquesgran was summoned Surius Tom. 3. p. 431.
providentissimo et jussu salutifero of King Pipin, as were the two former by
the wholesome command and most provident direction of his Father Lewis. The
Surius ibid. 454. 468 469.
Councels of Meaux and Medardum, by the consent and command of Charles the son
of Lewis: The Surius ibid. p. 475.
Council of Valentia, by the Emperor Lotharius his command: ex jussione
praefati Principis reverendissimi trium provinciarum Episcopi in unum collecti
residissent: The Surius ibid. p. 481.
Synod of Ticinum, and the Council of Worms, An. 868. were congregated by the
Emperor Lewis the second: The Surius ibid. p. 544.
Synod of Colen Anno 887. by Charles the third his consent. The Surius ibid.
546, 547, 555
Council of Ments Anno 888. and of Triburby Arnulphus the Emperor: The Surius
Tom. 4. p. 366.
Council of Ferrara by John Paleologus. The Provincial Synod of Augusta Anno
1548. by the Emperor Charles the fifth. Surius Tom. 4. p. 797, 798.
Cui hanc Synodorum congregandarum facultatem veluti olim Constantino
Imperatori totius ^^re orbis acceptam ferunt, says Otho the Popes own Legate.
To these I might accumulate Matthew. Westminster. Flo. Hist. An. 595.
the Synod at Tholetum Anno 525. congregated by the command of Richard King of
the Wisi-Gothes. The Synod at Rome Anno 773. cited thither by Charles the
great, to whom Pope Adrian and that whole Synod (consisting of 154. religious
Bishops and Abbots) gave the right of choosing the Pope, and ordaining the
Apostolical See with sundry others: yea most of the Councels that I have met
with in Surius, Binius, Crab, Merlin, Photius, Carranza, Syrmond, Bochellus,
Spelman, Cresconius, Fulgentius, Ferrandus, and other collectors of Councels
and Synods, have bin always usually called by Emperors and Christian Princes;
That being most true which the Code of the Liberties of the French Church
affirms, Apud Bochellum Dec^^^a Eccles. G^ll. l 5. Tit. 20. c. 34. p. 905.
That most christian Kings in allages, have been accustomed according to the
state of things happening in their Realms, to call Synods, and provincial or
National Councels, for the ordering of Ecclesiastical affairs; as the
forecited presidents with infinite other testify; and the forequoted Councels,
Fathers, Popes, Historians, together with St. Hierom and Pope Apologia 2.
Adversus Ruffinum.
Gregory the great resolve.

Most false and impudently arrogant then are the assertions of Pope Marcellus,
Epist. l. 4. Epist. 34.
Julius, Distinct. 37.
Pelagius, Gregory, and Symmacus, (if Gratian misreports not their positions)
as likewise Ibidem, and the Canonists glosses on that Distinction Summa
Angelica Tit. Concilium.
of Gratian, the Canonists, Harding Contur. part. 5, c. 6. Sect. 3. Bellarmin:
De Conciliis Contr. 2, 3. with others.
Jesuits, and Popish Parasites who all stick not to publish without shame or
fear; That the power of calling general, national, and provincial Councels,
belongs properly to the Apostolical See of Rome. That regularly no Synod ought
to be called without the Popes authority: That it is no Council but a
Conventicle which is summoned without his authority; And that all Councels
without his authority, presence (in person or by his Legates) and ratification
are merely void and invalid* Parodoxes, which all the premises, and the
constant practice of all ages places sufficiently confute, yea and some learned
Papists to De Concordia Cathol. l. 2. c. 12.
Nicolaus Cufanus determines the quite contrary in these very terms. The
authority of a Council does not so depend of him by whom it was summoned, that
unles it be summoned by the Pope it can be no Council; for so we should avoid
all the first eight general Councels. For we read they were summoned by
Emperors, not by Popes. And the Pope of Rome, like other Patriarcks received
the Emperors Majesty's sacred commandments to come or send to Councels. If the
Pope be negligent, or if he say nay the Emperor may by his own authority
summon Councels by way of command, to stay the wavering State of the Church.
Hence we have one conclusion, that in general Councels and making Laws, the
Bishop of Rome has no such power as certain flatterers give him. Thus this
learned Cardinal. Aeneas Sylvius, afterward Pope Pius the second, is as
point-blanck as he: De Council. Basil: lib. 1.
From these authorities (writes he) they think themselves wonderfully armed,
who deny that Councels can be kept without the Popes consent: whose judgment
if it should stand, as they woul have it, would draw the ruin of the Church
with it. For what remedy shall there be if a criminous Pope should disturb the
Church, if he should destroy souls, if he should pervert the people with his
ill example; if finally he should teach things contrary to faith, and should
fill his subjects with haereticall Doctrines? Should we suffer all things to go
to ruin with him? But I, whiles I read over ancient Histories, while I
consider the Acts of the Apostles, do not verily find this custom, that Popes
only should call Councels. Neither afterward, in the time of Constantine the
great, and of other Emperors, when Councels should be called, there was no
great account made of the Popes consent: Durandus De Concilio celebrando
Parisiis. 1545. Tit. 1, 2. Franciscus Zabarella Cardinal of Florence, de
Schismate and Concilio p. 542, 543, 544, and Theodoricus a Niem de Schismate c.
3. 5. 7. p. 154. confess and teach, that it belongs to the Emperors to call
Councels. The Bochellus Decreta Ecclesiae Gallicanae l. 5. Tit: 20. c. 35.
Code of the Liberties of the French Church says directly, Although general
Councels ought not to be called or kept without the Pope, nor any thing to be
decreed and concluded in them but by his authority, by the Ecclesiastical rule
(made by Popes themselves) yet notwithstanding in the French Church it has
been ever resolved, that the Pope is not thought to be above a general
Council, but is bound to keep its Decrees, Statutes, and Precepts, no less
than the people of the Church, which is the Spouse of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and which is especially presented by the Council. Yea William Ranchin a famous
French Lawyer, though a Papist, in his Review of the Council of Trent, l. 1.
c. 8. l. 3. c. 1. to 14. and l. 4. c. 1, 2, etc. not only avers, but copiously
and irrefragably manifests by pregnant evidences, that General, National,
Provincial Councels, Synods, in all Christian Nations, Kingdoms, Republikes
have always been constantly summoned by Emperors, Kings, and christian
Princes; and that neither the Pope, nor any Prelates or Ecclesiastical persons
whatsoever, have any lawful power or authority to call them, unless it be by
the special license and authority of Kings and Emperors first obtained. The
like is maintained and proved at large by Marsilius patavinus, Defensoris Pacis
pars. 2. c. 21. to 27. Rabanus Maurus de Universo l, 5. c. 7. Ioannis Marius de
Schismate et Conciliis pars. 2. c. 1. to 19. p. 507, 508. by Carolus Molinaeus,
in his learned praeface to his Commentary on the Edict of King Henry the second
of France, Contra parvas Datas, et Abusus Curiae Romanae p. 14. to 27. by the
resolutions of diverse French Councels, Synods, and Edicts of Parliament, cited
by Laurentius Bochellus, Decreta Eccles. Gal. l. 5. Tit. 20. cap. 17. 19, 20,
21. 29. 33, 34, 35. 38, 39. 41. 43, 44, 45, 46. and by the Code of the Liberty
of the French Church (there quoted) resolving in these positive terms. Soliti
sunt ab omni aeuo Reges Christianissimi, pro ratione rerum quae in Regno suo
accidunt, habere Synodos, aut Concilia Provincialia aut Nationalia, in quibus
inter alia ad statum Regni pertinontia, agitur etiam de Rebus ordinem and
Disciplinam Ecclesiarum Regni sui spectantibus. Unde Regulae innumerae,
Capitula, Leges, Ordinationes and Pragmaticae Sanctiones eorum Nominibus
inscriptae prodierunt. Yea their Relect. 4. p. 161.
Franciscus Victoria holds, that at this day in certain cases a general
Council may be called against the Popes mind, by the Emperor and Christian
Princes, whether he will or no. But although some Parasites of the Popes
universal Monarchy, endeavor to entitle him to this prerogative royal of
Christian Princes, to summon Synods and Councels, (contrary to the Resolutions
of these and infinite other Popish Authors, and the practice of most popish
Realms) yet none of them entitle any other Bishops or Prelates to it but the
Pope alone, unless it be by some special derivation from the Pope as his
Legate; so that Bishops cannot claim this power by any immediate inherent
right, but by a dirivative power only, either from the Pope or Christian
Princes: and from the Pope, no English Prelates, Ministers can, or dare derive
it.

James, King Charles, and our late Convocations.

To begin first with Presidents, both before and since the Conquest: The great
Be^la Eccles. Hist. l. 1. c. 17. and 21. Matthew. Westminster. An. 449. 465. Spelmanni
Council. p. 48, 49 60.
Synod held at verolam Anno 446, to suppress the Pelagian heresy; with
another great Council after that Anno 449, to like purpose; and the Council
of Wales Anno 465, were summoned by the Kings and Peoples joint assents who
together with the Clergy were present and voted in them. The Spelmanui Council.
p. 104 Matthew. West. An. 603. Beda ^ccles. Aist. l. 2. c. 2 Antiq. Eccl. Brit.
p. 3. Speeds Chron p. 286.
Synod of Worcester, and at Augustines Oak, under Augustine the first
Archbishop of Canterbury Anno 603. was called Ethelberti Regis open and
auxilio, by the assistance or summons of King Ethelbert; adjutorio usus
Edelberti Regis, write some. So was the Spelman. p. 126, 127.
Council held at Canterbury Anno 605 in which both the Clergy and people were
present. The Beda Eccles. Hist. l. 3. c. 21. Spelman. p. 14^.
Synod of Streneshalch An. 664. under Oswy King of Northumberland, and Alchfrid
his Son, who weee present at it, was summoned by their appointment, to decide
the controversy, concerning the time of Easter, and other differences, Anno
693 King Willielmus Malms. De Gest^ Pontif. l. 3. Antiqu. Eccles. (...). p. 18.
19.
Alfrick Synodum Episcoporum convocari fecit, caused a Synod of Bishops to be
called together. Anno 694, a Spelman p. 189, 191, 194
great Council was summoned to meet at Becanceld by King Withred, who sat
President therein, and praecepit convocari concilium: who likewise assembled
and sat President in the grand Council of Berghamsted, Anno 697. About the
year 714 there was Spelman p. 219:
a great Council of the Bishops, Princes, Nobles, Earls, and of all the
wisemen, Elders, and people of the Realm, under King Ina; per praeceptum
Regis Ina, by the precept of this King. An. 724 the Malmsb. de Gestis Pontif.
l. 3. in vita Widfridi Antiq. Eccl. Brit. p. 19.
Synod of Northumberland was conveened authoritate and gratia Osredi, by the
authority and favor of King Osred. The famous Council of Matthew. West. An.
718. p. 27^ Malm^b. de Gest. Pontif. l. 1. p. 197. Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 21.
Spelman p. 230, 242, 245.
Clovesho about the year 748, was assembled, Ethelbaldi regis Merciorum
auxilio, who sat President therein, and in a former Council there held Anno
742. The Spelman p. 292.
Council of Calchuth An. 787, was congregated by Offa King of Mercians, and
Kenulfe King of West Saxons, who together with their Bishops and Elders of the
Land (senioribus terrae) were present at it. The Spelman p. 318.
Council of Clyffe An. 800, was convented by King Cenulfe his authority and
assent. Spel. p. 387 Matthew. Westminster. An. 905. Antiq. Eccl. Brit. p. 43.
A Synod was assembled by King Edward the elder: about the year 905, Rex
praedictam Synodum congregavit, write the marginall Authors. Spelman p. 428.
An. 948. a Council and Parliament was summoned at London per regium edictum,
by Aedred his royal edict; the King and his Nobles, as well as the Bishops
being present at it. The Spelman p. 510.
Council of Enham An. 1009. ab Ethelredo rege edictum, was called by King
Ethelred. The Matthew. West An. 1070. pars 2. p. 3.
Council of Winchester An. 1070. was summoned and celebrated by the
procurement of William the Conqueror, Matthew. Paris Hist. Angl. An. 1075. p. 19.
Rege procurante: so was the Synod at Westminster, An. 1075. Rex tandem
Williesmus de negotiis agere constituens Ecclesiasticis An. 1075. apud
Westmon^sterium Synodum coegit. This being the undoubted right of Kings in
those days, caused Archbishop Anselme (though a great stickler for the Popes
and Prelates supremacy) An. 1093. to move King William Rufus to command
Councels to be revived after the ancient manner: Eadmerus hist. nov. l. 1. p.
24.
Jube (ait) si placet, Concilia ex antiquo usu renovari, quae perperam acta
sunt in medium revocari: who after held a Eadm. Hist. nov. l 3. p. 65.
Council at Westminster. An. 1102. by King Henry 1. his assent, ipso annuente.
The Council at Matthew. Paris hist. Angl. p. 67, 68.
Westminster, held by the Popes ^echerous Legate John de Crema An. 1125. was
assembled Regis licencia, by the Kings own license: and the Council of London
An. 1129. summoned by this King. The Council at Oxford against the Publicans
was called by King Henry the second his Writ, Rex Episcopale praecepit
concilium congregari, writes Histor. l. 2. c. 13.
Neubrigensis: So the Giraldus Cambrens. l. 2. c. 33, 34. Will. Neubrigensis
Hist. l. 3. c. 9. Speeds Chron. p. 516.
Synod of Cassels in Ireland for settling and reforming that Church, was
congregated by King Henry the second his authority and command: The
Neubrigensis l. 2. c. 13. Hoveden An^al. pars post. p. 500. Antiq. Eccl. Brit.
p. 125.
Council held by Hugo Cardinalis, the Popes Legate, at London under the same
King An. 1176. was favore regio adjutus, called by the Kings favor and
assistance. The Council of Matthew. Paris p. 430, 431.
London under Otho the Popes Legate An. 1237. was summoned by King Henry the
third his authority and consent: And all Synods, Councels, Convocations from
that time till this present, have ever been summoned by the Kings special
Writs for the most part, as is evident by Matthew Parkers P. 282, 362, 377,
389, 399, 401.
Antiquitates Ecclesiae Britannicae, and by these ensuing ancient Presidents
following, remaining upon Record.

Breve pro Convocat' habenda apud Lincoln, Anno Dom. 1321. Ed. Reg. 16.

Convocatio inchoata vigore brevis regii die Lunae proxim post fastum S.
Sabiani and Sebastiani, An. Dom. 1369. Alia inchoat' eodem An. 21. die Januarii.

Convocat' inchoat' vigore brevis die Lunae proxim' post festum Pent' An. 1376.

Convocat' inchoat' vigore brevis die Lunae 9. die Novembris An. 1377.

Convocat' inchoat' 7. Maii An. Dom. 1382. quoad process. contra Haereticos.

Convocat' inchoat' 18. November. An. Dom. 1382. continuat' ad 6. diem Janu.
prox' sequent'.

Convocat' inchoat' 2 December. An. 1383. contin' ad 4. diem ejusdem mensis.

Convocat' inchoat' 20. Maii An. Dom. 1384. contin' ad festum Pent' sequent.

Convocat' inchoat' 1. December. 1384. contin' ad diem Lunae prox' post festum
corp' Christi.

Convocat' inchoat' 6. Novem. 1385. contin' ad 7. diem December. An. praedict.

Convocat' inchoat' 5. Novem. 1386. contin' ad 3. diem December. An. praedict.

Convocat' inchoat' 26. Febr. 1387. contin' ad 4. diem Martii sequent.

Convocat' inchoat' 17. October. 1388. contin' ad 22. diem October. praedict.

Convocat' inchoat' 17. Apr. 1391. contin' ad 21. diem Apr. praedict.

Convocat' inchoat' 5. die Febr. 1394. contin' ad 18. diem ejusdem mensis.

Convocat' inchoat' 6. Maii, An. Dom. 1460. contin' ad 15. diem Julii An.
praedict.

Convocat' inchoat' 6. Julii An. Dom. 1463. contin' ad 18. diem Julii praedict.

Convocat' inchoat' 21. Martii 1480. contin' ad 15. diem Novem. 1481.

Convocat' inchoat' 13. Febr. 1486. contin' ad 27. diem Febr. praedict.

Convocat' inchoat' 14. Ia^^ar. 1487. contin' ad 27. diem Febr. praedict.

The Presidents since these being more obvious and infinite, I pretermit.

Indeed I find some Convocations and Synods summoned without any special
Writs yet extant which perchance are lost: however, though they were summoned
without special Writs, yet it was always by the Kings license, privi^^, and
assistance first obtained, or by former adjournments; and not by virtue of any
summons from the Pope, Archbishop of Canterbury, or any other Prelates,
without or against the Kings command; as some of the ensuing Presidents
manifest in direct terms.

Convocatio inchoata absque brevi mense Julii An. Dom. 1295.

Convocatio inchoata absque brevi die alia dominica qua cantabatur officium
laetare, eodem Anno.

Convocat' inchoat' absque brevi die S. Hillarii An. Dom. 1297. Alia absque
brevi pro defensione Ecclesiae cont' Scotos, die S. Edmundi Regis eodem Anno.

Convocat' inchoat' ad Nota.
instantiam Regis regressi a Flandriae inchoat' festo Nativ' S. Johannis
Baptistae An. Dom. 1298.

Convocat' Concilii provincialis absque brevi inchoat' 16. Maii An. Dom. 1356.

Convocat' Cleri Provinciae Cant' ad supplicationem dom. Reg. inchoat' die
Mercurii proxim' post dominicam qua cantatur officium misericordia Domini, in
Ecclesia S. Brigittae Londin. An. Dom. 1356.

Convocat' inchoat' absque brevi die Jovis prox post festum S. Georgii
Martyris, 24. April. An. Dom. 1371.

Convocat' inchoat' absque brevi 1. die December. An. Dom. 1373.

Convocat' inchoat' absque brevi 8. Febr. An. 1576.

Convocat' inchoat' absque brevi 5. November. An. Dom. 1377.

Convocat' inchoat' absque brevi 9. Maii. 1379.

Convocat' inchoat' absque brevi die Sabbat. proxim' post festum Purificationis
S. Mariae Virginis An. Dom. 1379.

Convocat' inchoat' absque brevi 1. December. An. Dom. 1380.

Since this time I find no Synod, Council, or Convocation, ever summoned or
assembled but by the Kings special Writs, yet extant among our Records, the
particularizing whereof, being superfluous, I shall here omit.

Secondly, our Acts of Parliament expressly resolve, that our Convocations,
Synods, Councels, ought to be summoned only by the Kings Writ. Hence the
Statute of 8. H. 6. c. 1. recites, See Cromptons Jurisdiction of Courts f. 4. a.
That all the Clergy are to be called to the Convocation by the Kings Writ:
and thereupon enacts, That they and their servants shall for ever hereafter
fully use and enjoy such liberties and defense in coming, going, and tarrying,
as the great men and Commonalty of England called to the Kings Parliament do
enjoy. Hence the whole Clergy of England in their submission in Parliament 25.
H. 8. c. 19. and 27. H. 8. c. 15. made this acknowledgment; See Antiqu. Eccles.
Brit. p. 376, 380, 398. E^dmerus hist. Novorum l. 5. p. 109, 117.
Whereas the Kings humble and obedient subjects the Clergy of the Realm of
England. have acknowledged according to truth, THAT THE CONVOCATION OF THE SAME
CLERGY IS, ALWAYS HAS BEEN, AND OUGHT TO BE ASSEMBLED ONLY BY THE KINGS WRIT,
etc. And thereupon these Statutes among other things enact, according to this
submission and Petition of the said Clergy, that they, ne any of them from
henceforth should make, promulge, or execute any new Canons, etc. in their
Convocations in times coming, which ALWAYS SHALL BE ASSEMBLED BY AUTHORITY OF
THE KINGS WRIT, etc. A clear confession and resolution, that Councels, Synods,
and Convocations here in England, always have been, are, and for ever
hereafter ought to be called and summoned, (not by the Popes or Prelates
authority and citations) but by the Kings royal authority and Writ. Hence the
English Clergy in most Bills of their Subsidies since, as in 27. Eliz. c. 28.
29. Eliz. The Act of one Subsidy granted by the Clergy. 31. Eliz. c. 14. 35.
Eliz. c. 12. 39. Eliz. c. 26. 43. Eliz. c. 17. 3. Jacobi c. 25. 7. Jacobi c.
22. 21. Jacobi c. 32. 1. Caroli c. 1. and 3. Caroli c. 6. have inserted this
clause in the prologue of their Subsidies; Vestrae serenissimae regiae
Majestati (or, sublimitati) per praesens publicum instrumentum, sive has
literas nostras testimoniales significamus and notum facimus, quod Praelati and
Clerus nostrae Cantuariensis Provinciae IN SACRA SYNODO PROVINCIALI SIVE
CONVOCATIONE, VIGORE ET AVTORITATE BREVIS REGII VESTRI IN EA PART NOBIS
DIRECTI, in domo capitulari ECCLESIAE VESTRAE CATHEDRALIS divi Pauli London,
vicesimo quarto die mensis Novembris Anno Dom. etc. inchoata and celebrata: to
testify, that their Synods Convocations are and ought to be summoned and held,
only by virtue and authority of the Kings Royal Writ: and why not then their
Visitations being in truth 25. H. 8. c. 19 21. 28. H. 8. c. 10. 2. and 3. E. 6
c. 1. 1. Eliz. c. 2. Jo. Seldeni ad Edam. Notae p. 165. Isiodor. Hisp. Orig. l.
8. c. 15. Canons 1571. p. 10, 22.
Convocations and Synods?

Thirdly, the whole Church of England in the 39. Articles of Religion, 13 Eliz.
c. 12.
by Parliament, and all Clergy-mens subscriptions to them; as also by our
present Sovereigns Declaration prefixed before them Anno 1628. Artic. 21. and
the whole Church of Ireland in their Articles of Religion* Anno 1615. Artic.
76. unanimously resolve, as an Article of Religion not to be questioned: That
general Councels (and by the selfsame reason National and Provincial) may
not be gathered together (by Popes, Prelates, or any other, persons) without
the Commandment or will of Princes. Therefore the sole right of summoning
them, belongs not to Popes or Prelates, but to Princes and other supreme
temporal Magistrates. And as these Articles, so the learned Writers of our
Church, as incomparable Bishop Jewel in the defense of the Apology of the
Church of England, part. 1. c. 9. Divis. 1. p 52, 54. part. 6. c. 12. Divis. 2.
p. 58^. to 592. Reply to Master Hardings answer Artic. 4. Divis. 19. and 26. p.
193. 212, 213, 214. Bishop Alley in his poor man's Library Tom. 2. Miscellanea
Praelect. 1. f. 18, 19, 20. Bishop Bilson in his true difference between
Christian subjection and unchristian rebellion, passim. Doctor William
Whittakers Controversia 3, de Conci^^s. Quaest. 2. p. 577. to 585. Doctor
Willets Synopsis Papismi. Controversi. 3. Concerning general Councels.
Quaestion 2. Doctor John White his way to the true Church, sect. 29. n. 28. p.
111. Master Rogers his Analysis on the 21. Article Proposition 1. with Dr.
Field of the Church b. 5. c. 52, 53. Dr. Fulk and Master Cartwrights Answer to
the Rhemish Testament, on (...) 15. 6. Sect. 5. to 12. Dr. Craken^^rpe his
Vigilius Dormi^ans.
sundry others whom I pretermit, subscribe, and justify this truth against all
Romish opposites. And if these be not sufficient; all the Reformed Churches in
their several confessions, registered in the Harmony of confessions, and cited
by Master Rogers in his Analysis of the 21, Article; with the whole Class of
their learned Writers unanimously resolve; That the power of calling Councels,
Convocations, Synods, belongs not to Popes or Prelates, but only to Christian
Emperors, Kings, Princes, and other chief temporal Magistrates; which our late
famous King James, (in the last place) in his Letters Patents prefixed before
the Canons and Ecclesiastical Constitutions made in Convocation Anno 1603.
ratifies to the full; affirming, that the Synod and Convocation at that time
held, was, and ought to be summoned and called only by virtue of his royal
Writ. The like is affirmed by our present Sovereign King Charles in his
Declaration before the 39. Articles, and in his Patents, Commissions, licenses
for making the last new Canons 1640. and resolved in the first Canon thereof.

From this 1. Proposition thus plentifully ratified by uncontrolable
Presidents, and public Authorities of whole Synods, Parliaments States, in all
ages, which infinitely overbalance the inconsiderable rash opinions of any
private men, I shall deduce these Consectaries.

1. That the chiefest care of defending, propagating the true Religion,
suppressing errors, haeresies, schisms, vices, and enacting Laws, Canons for
this end, for the Churches peace Government and advancement of Gods true
Worship, belongs to Christian Princes or supreme temporal Magistrates, and is
an essential part of their duty; because the right and trust of calling Synods
Councels upon all such occasions, is thus originally vested in them.

2. That See Mr^ Rutherford his due right of Presbyteries c. 6. sect. 1. p.
342. 393.
Synods and Councels are very useful, necessary, profitable to the Churches of
Christ if rightly ordered, else God himself, all Christian kingdoms states,
Churches would not have invested Kings and supreme civil Magistrates with such
a power of convening them; nor all Christian Kings, Emperors, but made so
frequent use of this their power, Joan Seldeni spicileg. and Notae in Eadmerum
p. 166 167.
not only without opposition, but even with public approbation; yea such has
been the necessity and expediency of Synods and Councels in all Christian
Churches in all ages, That the general Council of Nice An. 363, the Council
of Antioch Can. 20. the first Council of Constantinople Can. 3. the Council of
Afric Can. 18. the Council of Chalcedon Can. 19. the third Council of
Toledo under King Reccaredus An. 600. cap. 18. the fourth Council of Toledo
under King Sisenandus An. 6^1. the Greek Synods collected by Martin Bishop of
Bracara cap. 18. the second Council of Arelat Can. 2. the third at the same
place Can. 1. and the fourth, Surius Tom. 1. Council p. 342. Tom. 1. p. 407.
Tom. 3. p. 488. 574. 575. 732.
Can. 37. the second Synod of Towers. Can. 1. the fifth Council of Orleans
cap. 11. the Council of Hereford under King Egfred, Tom. 2. p. 203. 675. 728
754. 603. 605 641, 642, 643 892. 595. 713 1042. 715. 685. Gratian distinct. 18.
Iuo Carnot. Decret. pars. 40. 241. 243. 244. Spel. Council. Tom. 1. p. 153.
An. 670. the sixth Council of Constantinople Can. 8. the Council of Antricum
Can. 7. the Council of Mascon Can. 20. the Synod of Soissons under King
Childeric; the Council under King Pepin at the Palace of Vernis, An. 755.
cap. 4. the Council of Paris under Lewis, and Lothaire An. 829. the Council
of Meaux An. 845. cap. 32. yea the great Council of Basil, An. 1331. with
sundry other Councels, Decree, that a Synod or Council shall be kept twice or
thrice (or at the least once) every year, at a certain time and place in
every Province. That all Bishops and others unless hindered by sickness, or
other inevitable occasions, should be present at it, and not depart from it
till all businesses were ended and the Council determined under pain of
Excommunication, Tom. 3. p. 24. 4. 42. 406.
and that none should interrupt not keep back any necessary members from them.
Tom. 4 p. 44.
Therefore certainly they are both expedient and necessary for the Church; not
useless, antichristian, diabolical, and pernicious to the Church, as some See
M. Rutherfords d^e rights of Presbytery p. 343. 344.
Papists, Arminians, Socinians hertofore, and Independents now, scandalously,
ignorantly, if not maliciously deem them.

Sect. 2.
THat Bishops and Clergymen when assembled in Councels, Synods, and
Convocations by Christian Princes and Magistrates, have always been limited
and directed by them, not only for the time and place of their meeting, but
likewise for the manner and matter of their debates and proceedings: having no
power, liberty to debate or determine any thing but what was first prescribed
them by their summoners, or by their special License first obtained. With a
touch of Princes and Laymens presiding, judging, voting in Synods and Councels.
Secondly, As Bishops and Clergymen cannot summon Councels or Convocations,
not yet assembled together in them, but by the Princes and supreme temporal
Magistrates authority, who always appointed both the time and place of their
meeting, continuance and dissolution (as all ages, Authors attest) so when they
are lawfully met in Councels they cannot debate, determine any points of faith,
nor yet frame any Ecclesiastical Canons, Laws, Constitutions in them, but by
the Princes or Magistrates license and direction that summoned them: who have
always both abroad and at home, prescribed them either in general or special
terms, what things they should debate, treat of, and conclude in their Synods,
confining them to such particulars, for the determination and ordering whereof,
they were convened, as well as to the time and place of their assembling.

This is evident by sundry Presidents. The first famous general Council of
Nice, and the Bishops therein assembled, were thus licensed and limited by
Constantine the great, who fate President in it, as De ^ita Constantini: l 3.
c. 10. 12. 13.
Eusebius with Nicephotus Callithus Eccles. hist. l. 8. c. 16. 17.
others manifest at large: The Bishops assembled by him in the Synod of Tyrus,
were limited likewise by him how to proceed, and what to treat of, as appears
by Eusebius de vita Constable. ^tini l. 4. c. 42. Socrates Scholast. Eccles. hist.
l. 1 c. 28. 33, 34. ^ Eusebius. Eccles. hist. l. 10. c. 5. ^ Bish Jewels defense
of the Apology p. (...). 741. 742.
his letters to them; wherein after he had exhorted them to peace and unity, he
charge them not to delay, but to define the present controversies with all
earnest endeavor, within those fitting bounds he there prescribed; telling
them, That he had sent Dionysius the Consul to admonish them of all things
they were to do, and who ought to be present at their Synod, Maxim vero ut
idem animadversor sit and custos conservandae aequalitatis and ordinis: but
especially that he should be an observer and keeper of that aequability and
order which he had prescribed to be observed in that Synod, Socra. Scho. Ec^les
hist. l. 2 c. 3^. p. 281. Nic^phorus Eccles. hist. l. 9. c. 40.
The Bishops assembled by Constantius his Edict in the Council of Ariminum
most humbly requested his Majesty, of his gracious favor and wonted clemency,
to grant them license and lawful favor firmly to persevere in those things
which their ancestors had decreed, and that nothing might be diminished or
added unto the old and ancient decrees. (...). eccles. hist. l. 2. c. 39. in
the Greek (...) in the English. Nicepho. l. 9. c. 43.
In the Council held at Seleucia summoned by Constantius precept it was
commanded by this Emperors Edict that they should reason of the faith and
Arrian opinions in the hearing of Leonas, a Layman of great authority and fame
in the Emperors Court who was chief President in that Synod to order it; who
in the first day of its assembly, commanded, that every one should freely
propose what pleased him best, touching the questions of faith there
controverted: he and Laurocius Captain of the Garrison in Isauria swaying that
Council, ordering what they should treat of, and how proceed. Yea Constantius
himself (as Eccles. hist. l. 9. c. 38. p. 523.
Nicephorus records) appointed both the Synods of Ariminum and Seleucia by his
letters, that they should first of all decide the controversy of the
profession of the faith; afterward deliberate of other Ecclesiastical
sanctions; and after that of those Bisho^s that had been wrongfully deposed or
banished. Nicephotus Eccles hist. (...) 12 c. 10. Surius Tom. 1. p. 481.
The second general Council at Constantinople, was enjoined by Theodosius the
elder, who called it, to confirm the Decrees of the Council of Nice, and to
deliberate upon whom the Sea of Constantinople, then void, should be conferred.
In the fourth general Council of Chalcedon, Surius Tom. 2. p. 9.
Pulcheria the Empress writes to Strategus Consul of Bithynia, to have a
(...), that the Synod should observe all discipline and order, without
commotion or contention; and in this Council diverse of the Emperors great
temporal Actio. 1. Surius Tom. 2. p. 11. 14, 15. 18, 19, 38, 24, 25. 54, 55,
138. 148. 164, 165. 167. 535. 168. 170 180. 184, 185 197. 207. 212
Officers and Senators of State, sat as chief Moderators, Governors, Judges,
ordering and directing the Bishops, who did nothing but by their advice and
permission, according to the Emperor Martianus instructions, in his Oration in
and to that Synod, and his Epistles to Count Elpidius. In this Council Act. 1.
p. 831 Evagrius l. 2. c. 4. Jewels defense of the Apology part. 6. c. 14.
di^^if. 1. p. 745. 746. 747.
Dioscorus, Juvenalis, and Thalassius were condemned and put from their
Bishoprics, by the Lay-Iudges, and many noble Senators presiding in it, who
used this speech in that Council concerning the debates of faith: We see, that
touching the right Catholic faith, the next day whereon the Council shall
meet, there must be had a more diligent examination; When all matters were
ended, the Bishops and Council remitted all their acts to the Emperors
Majesty; yea when the Senate and Emperor had concluded and published their
Judgments of the Councels determinations; The Bishops of the East brake out
into these acclamations, Just and right is the Judgment: Long life to the
Senate, many years to the Emperor: acknowledging them the supreme Judges, as
well in Ecclesiastical Causes and matters of Religion, as in temporal
affairs. Whence the Emperor Liberatus c. 11. Jewel ibid. p. 751.
Theodosius writ thus to this Council, Because we know the most magnificent
Florentius a Nobleman, to be faithful, and approved in the right faith;
Therefore we will, that he be present to hear the debates of the Synod,
because the Disputation is concerning matters of faith; he being one of the
Judges in this Council. This Emperor Socrat. Scholast. l. 5. c. 10. Sozom. l.
7. c. 10. Jewels defense of the Apology c. 13. p. 744.
Theodosius, the better to bring his Churches unto unity (then miserably
distracted about matters of faith) Commanded an assembly of the Bishops and
best learned men to appear before him, and to write several confessions of
their faith, That himself might Judge between them which faith was best.
Having received their writings, he commanded public prayers to be made, and
himself also prayed both publicly and in private, that it would please God to
assist him with his holy Spirit, and to make him able to Judge justly; then he
perused and considered each Confession assunder by it self; and in conclusion,
allowed only the Catholics, and condemned the confession written by the
Arrians and Eumonians, and tore them in pieces.

Actio prima Surius Council. Tom 2. p. 16. 18, 19, 619. Tom. 1. Act. Concilii
Ephesini c. 25. Sozomen l. 4. c. 15.
Theodosius the younger sent his letters to Dioscorus the Patriark of
Alexandria, in this, and in the second Council of Ephesus with these words,
Imperatoris Epist. ad Dioscorum ibid.
We decree, that the most holy Bishops meeting together, this vain doubt may
be discussed, and the true Catholic Faith confirmed; Therefore your Holiness
bringing ten of the most reverend Metropolitanes that be within your Province,
and ten other holy Bishops well accounted of for their learning and
conversation, shall hasten withal speed to meet (the rest) at Ephesus by the
first of August next, no Bishop besides the foresaid troubling the sacred
Synod; If any Bishop fail to come to the place prefixed at the time appointed,
he shall have no excuse neither with God, nor with us. As for Bishop Theodoret,
whom we command to attend at home on his own Church, we determine, that he
shall be none of our assembly, unless the whole Council think good to have
him one. But if any dissent, We command that the Synod fit without him, and
dispatch those things which we have appointed them. And in his second letters
to the same Bishop, Because we suspect that some of Nestorius favorers will do
their best to be present at this Council; Therefore we think needful to
advertise you and the whole Synod, that not only in respect of Theodoret, but
of all others which have ought to do in your Council, we give you the
pre-eminence and chief authority. And those that add or diminish any thing to
or from the Nicene Fathers, and the Fathers since that assembled at Ephesus, We
suffer them not to presume any thing in this sacred Synod, but will have them
subjected to your Judgment, because we have appointed this Synod for that
purpose. And in the very same Council he likewise commanded; Imperatoris
Co^monitorium ad Elpidium. Comitem Sacri Consistorii: Ibid. p. 18.
That those Bishops, who not long before sat in judgment upon Eutiches,
should be present, but silent, and give no voices (with the rest) as Judges,
but expect the common determination of all the rest of the sacred Fathers. And
also commanded that they should neither say, neither do any thing in the sacred
Council, until the right faith were considered. Yea the Emperor Oration
Martiani ad Synodum ibid ^. 37, etc.
Martian charged the 630. Bishops in this great Council, That none of them
should dare dispute of the Nativity of our Lord and Savior Christ, otherwise
that the 318. Fathers of Nice determined. And in the same Council Epist.
Euseb^i ad Imperatores.
Eusebius Bishop of Dorilaeum put up a supplication to the Emperors Martian
and Valentinian: against Dioscorus Patriarch of Alexandria, with these words:
In most humble wise we beseech your Majesty, that you will command the
Reverend Bishop Dioscorus to answer to those things that we lay to his charge,
for confirming a wicked heresy and deposing us unjustly; directing your sacred
Precept to an oecumenicall Council of Bishops, to hear the matter between us
and the said Dioscorus; and then to certify your Majesty's of the whole cause,
that you may do therein what shall please your Graces. Su^i^s Tom. 2. p. 444,
to 498, 502.
Justinian the Emperor limited the fifth general Council of Constantinople and
the Bishops in it, how they should proceed, and what they should treat of (to
wit, of the three Chapters) by his letters to them; and they there accord what
the Emperor did specially command them to do. Surius ibid. p. 901, 903, 904,
905, 906, 907, 908.
Constantius Pogonatus prescribed the sixth general Council of Constantinople
called by him, to handle and define the Chapter delivered to them by his
appointment, and to prove the same by holy general Synods and Fathers: yea,
himself sat President in that Council, and directed it as he thought meet,
as the beginning and end of every action of that Council manifests;
Praesidente eodem piissimo and Christo dilecto magno Imperatore Constantino.
Constantinus piissimus Imperator dixit, sufficit, etc. being frequent in it,
and many of his temporal Lords and Officers sat there as Judges with him. The
Surius Tom. 3. p. 49. 50. 51. 55:
seventh general Idolatrous Council of Nice, was likewise regulated, directed
by the Letters of Constantine and Irene, by Petronius the Proconsul, Theophilus
an Earl of the Emperors retinue, and by John his royal Porter and treasurer
of his Army, with other Senators, who sat as chief Moderators in that
Council. Surius ibid. p. 539. to 543.
The eighth general Council was prescribed and directed how to proceed, and
what to treat of, by the Emperor Basilius; who caused his Princes and Nobles
to sit in that Council as principal directors, whose judgment the Popes
Legates themselves in that Council demanded, himself sitting sometimes in
person therein as chief President. As all these general Councels were thus
regulated and directed by those Emperors that summoned them and debated,
concluded nothing but by their special license and direction: so all other
forecited National and Provincial Councels were likewise limited and directed
by those Emperors and Kings that called them, as the fore-alleaged quotations
evidence at large to such as will peruse them many of these Emperors, or their
temporal deputies, sitting personally in them, as chief Presidents and
Moderators. The Bishops in the first Council of Orleance Anno 500 write thus
to King Clodoveus, who summoned them; Bochell^^ Decret. eccles. Gal l. 5. Tit.
20. c. 17. p. 9 or Surius Tom. 2. p. 371.
All the Priests which ye have summoned to the Council, and commanded to meet
together to treat of necessary things, secundum vestrae voluntatis
consultationem, ET TITULOS QVOS DEDISTIS, according to the consultation of your
pleasure, and the Titles You have given us to consult of, we have deferred
those things which seem meet to us: so as if those things which we have
concluded may likewise be approved to be right by your judgment, the consent of
so great a King, and of a greater Lord may by his sentence and authority
confirm the sentence of so many Clergymen to be observed. Lo here the King
prescribes this Council particularly in writing what Articles they should
treat of. In the Surius Council. Tom 4. p. 2 5, 6, 27, 28, to 33, 41, 42, 56,
72, 103, 104, 105, 257, to 262, 325, to 364, 416, 417 418, 467, 542 543, 551,
553 562, 571, 584, 585, 595, 596 597, 598, 607 609, 610, 613 624, 626, 647 653,
662, 668 690, 691, 694 896, 901, 902 903, 905, 929, 930, 939, 996. Tom. 3. p.
776 778, 784, 787 788, 794, 798 802, 817, 821 823, 830, 833 852. ^. Seldeni ad
E^dmaium Notae p. 213, 214.
several Council of Basil, Florence, Lateran. Constans, Sennes and Trent,
summoned by the Popes usurped authority, the Emperors, Kings, Dukes, and
Princes, who sent any Bishops to those Councels, had their Ambassadors and
Agents (though Laymen) present at them, swaying and directing them as they
thought meet, though in some of them the Popes faction bare the greatest stroke
as the several Acts of these Councels testify; some of which made choice of
those Princes for their Protectors against the Popes Tyranny and usurpations,
which they limited, decreeing a Council to be above the Pope, and he to be
bound by its determinations as well as others; some Popes being accused,
convented, and deprived by them, though they summoned them, or rather were
enforced to call them by the Emperors and other Princes, against their wills
To conclude with foreign presidents, the late famous Synod of Acta Synodi
Do^dre^^^ Praefatio ad Ecclesias, and Sessio 2, 4, p. 9, 15, 16, 17, 18.
Dort Anno 1618. was summoned by the Estates of the Netherlands, who enacted
certain Laws and prescribed Articles to the Synod, according to which they
should proceed; appointing likewise diverse Laymen to sit in that Council as
their Delegates, commanding and enjoining them and every of them, in their
name, and in their authority, to open the Synod, and in all and singular
Sessions and Actions to be present in their name, so to compose and order all
things with their prudence counsel and moderation, which belonged to their
inspection and care, according to those special instructions they had given
them, and the Articles they had framed for the ordering and holding of that
Synod; which had power to treat of order, or determine nothing, but what they
had commission and license from the States. In few words, the famous Lawyer
William Ranchin (though a Papist) resolves and proves at large, in his Review
of the Council of Trent, l. 3. c. 10. That it belongs to Emperors and Kings
to prescribe not only the place, time, beginning, and ending, but the very
form of Councels proceedings, both in respect of persons, matters to be
debated, and all other circumstances.

As for Laymens presence, presidencie, and Votes in Councels, to give a little
satisfaction herein in this Section, it is evident by the forecited Texts in
the old Testament, and by Presidents in the New, (as Acts 6. 1. to 8. c. 15. 4.
9. 22. to 30. c. 16, 4. c. 21. 22.) That Laymen were not only present, but
had Votes and consents in the first Apostolical Councels. In the Acta Council.
Ephesians. Tom. 1. c. 12. 32.
Council of Ephesus, Candidianus, a Nobleman, was appointed by the Emperor
to hold the Fathers there assembled to the points proposed, and to keep every
man in order, giving the chief directions therein. In the Sea Surius, Binius,
Crab, and Syrmond, in these Councels, Ranchins Review l: 1. c. 8.
French Synod under Childerick and Charleman Anno 742. In the Synod of Soissons
Anno 744. Regino sub An. 787.
of Worms Anno 787. of Meaux Anno 845. of Pistis Anno 863. of Tribur under
King Arnulph, of Rigardus de gestis Philip. August. sub An. 1179. and 1200.
Jean le Maire en le 2. party de la devision des schisms. Martinus Polonus.
Paris under Philip Augustus, An. 1179, and 1184. of Jean Bou^het en la 4.
party des Annals d' Aqui^aine.
Vezelay under Laws the young, of Paris under Philip the fair, called against
Boniface the 8. of Bourges under Charles the seventh, which made the pragmatick
sanction: of Surius, Binius, Crab.
Toledo 6. 8. and 12. of Luitprandius rerum per Europ gest. l. 6 c. 6, 10, 11.
Rome under Otho the first: of Martinus Polonus in Hen. 3. sub An. 1058.
Worms under Henry the third: in the Matthew. West An. 905.
Council held in the South part of England An. 903. under King Edward and
Raymond: Nubrigensis l. 1. c. ult. See l. ^. c. 25.
in the Council of London under King Stephen An. 1150. these several Kings,
together with their Barons, Nobles, and other Laymen, were present in all
these Synods, Counsels, as well as Clergiemen or Prelates, and gave
consenting, confirming Votes to things debated, concluded in them: these Synods
being in truth mere Parliaments, as I shall hereafter manifest. In the Chron.
Pauli ^angii An. 1417. Petro (...) en la vita de Sigismundo.
Council of Constance there were present not only the Emperor, but diverse
Ambassadors, Nobles, and Laymen of great quality and condition; to wit 24
Dukes, 140 Earls, diverse Delegates of Cities and Corporations, diverse learned
Lawyers and Burgesses of Universities, who were not debarred from voices, and
power of deliberating therein. In the first Apologia Council 2. Pisani.
Mediolani per Co^ardum Ponticum impres. An. 1552. and Acta Council. Pisani 2.
Council of pisa, there were present to the number of 400 Laymen of note,
delegates of Cities, Universities, States, Princes, and Doctors of Law; who not
only deposed two Anti-popes, and elected a third true Pope, but likewise
treated of points of Divinity, and made many good ordinances for the Church of
God. In the second Council of Pisa there were many such Delegates, Doctors of
Law, and Laymen, well skilled in divine and humane matters. In the first
Council of Nice, there were present (writes Eccles. hist. l. 1. c. 5. vid Act^
Council Nicen. Ruffi^us l. 1. c. 3. Nicephorus C^l. Eccl. hist. l. 8. c. 14, 15.
Socrates) many very learned Laymen, and well skilled in disputation, who
puzzled great Philosophers in matters of dispute. In the general Council at
Reimes, holden by Pope Eugenius the third, there were a great company of Nobles
as well as Bishops, as Neubrigensis l. 1. c. 19. records. In the Theodoricus a
Niem tract. de Privilegiis and Ju^ibus Imperat. p. 785.
Lateran Council held by Charles the great and Pope Adrian, and called
principally by this Pope, the Council was most solemnly held by 53
Ecclesiastical persons, Bishops or Abbots, together with Judges, Magistrates,
and Doctors of Law from all parts and also persons of all sorts and states of
that City, and all the Clergy of the Church of Rome; who made enquiry of the
customs, laws, and manners of that Church and Empire; consulting also by what
means heresies and seditions might be rooted out of the Apostolic See; and
treating of the dignity of the Senate and Empire of Rome, seeing that by reason
of these things a false error was spread over the whole world. In another
Council of Idem ibidem.
Lateran under Pope Leo and the Emperor Otho, the Pope himself in his Speech
to the Emperor, confesses, that that Council consisted not only of
Clergymen, but of Judges and Doctors of Law. That such may be competent and
meet Judges in matters of Religion and Church-affaires, is evident by this
notable passage of Cardinal Lib. 2. de Council. art. 6.
Jacobatius (though a great stickler for the Popes and Prelates authorities)
that in a Synod holden before Constantine and Helena, where it was disputed,
Whether the Jewish or Christian Law should be preferrred? Craton a Philosopher
who would not possess any worldly goods, and Zenosimus, who never received
present from any in the time of his Consulship, were appointed Judges of this
controversy: With which the saying of learned Will. Ranchin Survey of the
Council of Trent l. 2. c. 8. p. 37.
John Gerson, Chancellor of Paris, accords, There was a time, when without any
rashness or prejudice to faith, the controversies of faith were referred to
the judgment of Pagan Philosophers; who presupposing the faith of Christ to be
such as it was confessed to be, however they did not believe it, yet they knew
what would follow by evident and necessary consequence from it, and what was
repugnant to it. Thus it was in the Council of Nice, as is left unto us upon
record. So likewise Eutropius, a Pagan Philosopher, was chosen JVDGE between In
Dialogo cum Marcionitis.
Origin and the Marcionites, who were condemned by him. If Pagan Philosopehrs
then See my Epistle to the Reader before my Perpetuity Edit. 2. And Epist. Ded.
to Cozens cozening Devotions.
much more Christian Laics, endowed with learning and wisdom, may be fit
Judges of controversies of Religion and Ecclesiastical affairs, and fit to
have Votes in Synods: And that they have been so deemed in ancient times, is
evident by one memorable history recorded by Possidonius, in the life of S.
Augustine cap. 12, 13, 14. who not only informs us, that Crispinus Bishop of
Calamen, a Donatist, being accused before the Proconsull for an Heretic, and
for breaking the laws against Heretics; and denying himself to be one, St
Augustine and he debated the controversy three several times before the
Proconsull, in a great multitude of Christian people expecting the event, both
at Carthage, and throughout all Africa; and that Crispin at last was pronounced
an Heretic by the Proconsull by a judicial sentence. After which there was a
Augustine. Tom. 7. pars 1. de collat. cum Donatistis lib.
general meeting at Carthage, between all the Catholic Bishops and the
Donatists, by the special command of the most glorious and religious Emperor
Honorius who sent Marcellinus the Tribune and Notary into Africa, to be Judge
in that Collation; In which Conference the Donatists being thoroughly confuted
and convinced of error by the Catholics, were condemned by the sentence of
the Judge: From which sentence they appealing to this Emperor were afterward
upon full hearing condemned by him, and declared Heretics: Upon which Appeal
of theirs Contr. Epist. Parmen. l. 1. Tom. 7. pars 1.
St. Augustine descants thus: Is it peradventure not lawful for the Emperor,
or those whom the Emperor shall send, to give judgment in a matter of
Religion? Why then came your Ambassadors to the Emperor? why made they him
the Judge of their cause? etc. The Act of Marcellinus his sentence against the
Donatists runs thus: August. ibid and Ranchin p. 3^.
To the end that apparent error may undergo the yoke of revealed truth, by
the authority of this present Edict, I advise all men of what condition soever
Landlords, Stewards, and Farmers, as well which hold of the Crown, as of
private possessions, with the Ancients in all places, that not forgetting the
Laws, their own dignity, honor, and safeguard, they do their endeavor to
hinder all Conventicles of the Donatists, in all Towns whatsoever; who shall
be bound to surrender up to the Catholics those Churches which I allowed them
of courtesy until the day of sentence, without Commission from the Emperor.
Sozomen l. 4. c. 5.
Photius Bishop of Smyrnae being accused for an Heretic by the Council there,
was afterward admitted to dispute with the Catholic Bishops; in which dispute
(says Sozomen) certain Judges were ordained for Presidents of the Council,
who from that time forwards were accounted men of prime rank in the palace,
both for knowledge and dignity: after many objections and answers pro and con,
Basil Bishop of Ancyra, who defended the doctrine of the Catholics, got the
victory, and Photinus was condemned and sent into banishment. Athanasius in his
2. Apology, requests that the Emperors most godly and religious Majesty might
have the hearing of his own and his churches cause; for we have good hopes that
his godliness understanding our reasons, will never condemn us. If this seem
strange to any Romanist, that Laymen should be competent Judges in matters of
Divinity, and have voices in Councels, their own Pope Nicholas his resolution
in this very point may cease their wonder, who says in downright terms,
Epist. ad Micha^lem Imperatorem. Gratian distinct. 96.
Faith is catholic and common to all, as well to Laymen as Priests, yea
generally to all Christians; (he speaks it expressly of Laymens assisting in
Councels;) therefore it is just and reasonable they should have voices in
matters of faith, as well as Bishops and Clergymen. I shall close up this with
the resolution of Defensor. ^acis l. 2 c. 20.
Marsilius of Padua, who expressly resolves, that Laymen (especially those who
are pious and learned) ought to be present in, and summoned to general
Councels as well as Clergymen; especially when the Clergy are either
ignorant, corrupt, or erroneous in their judgments, or scandalous in their
lives. His reasons are these, First, because they have all as great an interest
in the faith, and Churches good, as any Prelates, Popes, or Clergiemen:
Secondly, because many of them are better learned and versed in the Scriptures
and Antiquities then many Bishops and Clergymen, yea more sound, and
orthodoxe in their judgments then they: Thirdly, because they were present, and
had voices in the Synod at Jerusalem even in the Apostles days, Acts 15. and
in the purest first general Councels, in which the Emperors with their Nobles
and Officers assisted in the resolving of Scripture doubts: Fourthly, because
the very Code of Isiodore, for the manner of holding Councels, has this
direction, Page 239, 240.
Deinde ingrediantur LAICI qui ELECTIONE CONCILII INTERESSE MERUERUNT; Multo
magis igitur qui fuerint literati, and in lege divina periti, quanquam non
sacerdotes existant; sic enim fecerunt Apostoli cum Senioribus, etc. If any
desire further satisfaction in this point, let him consult William Ranchin his
Lib. 2. c. 8.
Review of the Council of Trent, (who is copious and zealous in this point,
though a Papist) Bishop Jewels Defense of the Apology, part 6. cap. 12. 13 14.
15. and the ensuing Sections.

But to return to the point proposed. As in the forecited Councels abroad, so
in our Councels, Synods, and Convocations at home, as our Kings and their
Nobles were usually present and president (as I shall show hereafter) so the
Prelates could debate propound, and conclude nothing without their privity and
license. Hence Histor. novorum. l. 1. p. 6.
Eadmerus records of King William the Conqueror, that all divine and humane
things did expect his approbation, for he would not suffer any man living
within any of his Dominions to receive the Bishop of Rome, as Apostolical,
unless he commanded him, nor yet to accept his Letters upon any terms if they
had not been first showed to him. Yea he did not suffer the Primate of his
Kingdom, to wit the Archbishop of Canterbury or Dover, if he sat President
in a general Council of Bishops gathered together to decree or prohibit any
thing; but those things which were suitable to his will, and had been first
ordained by himself.

William Rufus his son took the same jurisdiction on him, and challenged it
as part of his Prerogative Royal. For when as Eadmarus ibid. p. 24, 25, 26, 28.
Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury moved him; to command, if he pleased,
Councels to be renewed, according to the ancient use, because there had not been
a general Council of Bishops in England since his coming to the Crown, not
in many years before: he gave him this reply: When I shall think fit, I will
do something concerning these things, not at thine, but my own pleasure. But
of this I shall think some other time, and adds by way of scoff; but thou,
whence speak thou in a Council? After this, the King demanded of him, from
what Pope he would receive his Pall? he answered, from Urbane: which the King
hearing, replied, That he had not yet taken him for Apostolical, neither had
it been the Custom in his or his Fathers time, that any one should name a Pope
in the Kingdom of England, without or besides his license or election; and
whosoever would wrest from him the power of this dignity, should do all one, as
if he had endeavored to take his Crown from him. If therefore thou recivest
the same Urban or aeny other for Pope in my Kingdom, or hold him being
received, thou do against the faith and allegiance which thou owe to me,
neither do thou offend me less in this, than if thou should endeavor to
take my Crown from me. Wherefore know, that thou shall have no share or portion
in my Kingdom, if I shall not see thee by open assertions to deny all
subjection and obedience to Urban, at my desire; Which he refusing to do, the
Bishops and Noblemen sent to him from the King, told him; Tha^ the whole
Kingdom complained against him, that he endeavored to take away from their
common Lord the dignity of his Empire and his Crown: For whosoever deprives
him of the customs of his Royal dignity, takes away his Crown and Kingdom
together with it, for one cannot be decently enjoyed without the other. So
little power had the Pope or Prelates here in England in those times. Anno
1234. there was a Council held at Gloucester, to which the King sent this
Mandate, Ex Rotu^o Patent. An. 18. H. 3. m. 17. Cooks Institutes on Lit. f.
97. a.
Mandatum est omnibus Episcopis qui conventuri sunt apud Gloucestriam die
Sabbati. in chrastino Sanctae Catharinae firmiter inhibendo, quod sicut
Baronias sua quas do lege tenent diligunt, nullo modo praesumant Concilium
tenere de aliquibus quae ad coronam Regis pertinent, vel quae personam Regis
vel statum suum vel statum Concilii sui contingunt, scituri pro certo quod si
fecerint, Rex inde se capiet ad Baronias suas. Test Rege apud Hereford 23.
Novembris etc. Anno 1237. in the Council held at London under Otho the Popes
Legate; the King sent the Earl of Lincoln with others to the Legate sitting
in Council with an Inhibition in the Kings name Ne contra authoritatem
potestatemque suam regiam quicq^am decerneret aut tractaret: Antiquitates
Eccles. Brit. p 163 Matthew. Paris hist. Major. p. 432.
to determine of nothing against the Crown and Dignity: Ut dicto Legato
(writes Matthew Paris) ex part Regis and Regni inhiberent, ne ibi contra
Regiam coronam and dignitatem aliquid statuere attemptaret: and William de
Reel, one of the Messengers remained in the Convocation house, to see this
Inhibition observed, clothed in a Canonical Cap and Surplis, the others
departing thence. So in 26. Hen. 3. rot. 21. 9. E. 1. rot. 2. 11. E. 2. rot.
10, 18. E. 3. rot. 21. in the Tower, and in Cooks Institutes part. 4. p 322.
323.
many other Records; I find a general Prohibition usually directed to the
Convocation the Prelates and Clergy therein (such loyal subjects usually were
they) Ne quid attemptarent contra jus Regium: Ne quid statuant contra Regem in
Concilio suo: Ne aliquid tentetur contra Coronam Regis in congregan^ione Cleri,
etc. the King confining them of what to treat and conclude, of what not to
entermeddle without his special license. Not to mention, That Antiqu.
Ecclesiae Brit. p. 210, 211, 212. 209. Thomas Walsingham. Ypodigma Neustriae.
An. 1297. p. 83. (...) Acts and Monuments, p. 320, 321.
our Kings have frequently prescribed the Convocation what Subsidies they
should grant, and how they have handled them in case they refused to grant
them: The Statute of 25. H. 8. c. 19. Records; `That the Clergy of the Realm
of England, submitting themselves to the Kings Majesty, then promised in verbo
Sacerdotii, that they would never from thenceforth presume to attempt,
allege, claim, or put in ure, or enact, promulge, or execute any new Canons,
Constitutions, Ordinance provincial or other, by whatsoever other name they
shall be called, in the Convocation, unless the Kings most Royal assent and
License may to them he had to make, promulge, and execute the same, and that
His Majesty do give His most Royal assent and authority in that behalf. And
thereupon 25. H. 8. c. 19 27. H. 8. c. 15.
enacts according to the said submission and petition of the Clergy that they
(assembled together in Convocation) ne any of them (to wit in their several
Visitations, Synods, Constitutions, Chapters) from henceforth Shall presume to
allege, claim, or put in ure any Constitutions or Ordinances provincial or
Synodals, or any other Canons nor shall Enact, Promulge or execute any such
Canons, Constitutions or Ordinance provincial, by what name or names they may
be called in Convocation for time to come, unless the said Clergy may have the
Kings most Royal assent and license to make, promulge and execute such Canons,
Constitutions and Ordinances provincial or Synodall: upon pain of every one of
the said Clergy doing the contrary to this, being thereof Convict, to suffer
imprisonment, and make fine at the Kings will. Hence the whole Clergy of
England in their Book entitled The Institution of a Christian man dedicated
to K. Henry the eight, Anno 1543. subscribed with all their names in a
Convocation, Chapter, of Orders; acknowledge this sovereign jurisdiction of the
Prince over them, both in and out of Synods.

After this, in the very height of Popery and the revivall of it in England in
the first year of Queen Fox Acts and Monuments Vol. 3. Edit. 1641. p. 19. to
30. where the whole Disputation is related.
Mary, a Parliament and Convocation being summoned to re-establish Popery; the
Queen her self appointed and commanded a public Disputation to be held at
Paul's Church in London in the Convocation house about the matter of the
Sacrament, which was accordingly held, and continued six whole days, many
Earls, Lords, knights, Gentlemen, and diverse of the Parliament, Court, and
City being present at it: to the end that they might constitute Laws of the
matters of Religion debated, which the Queen and Parliament might ratify. The
Disputation being ended; The Queen sent a Writ to Bonner Bishop of London to
dissolve the Convocation, which was done accordingly. So that this Convocation
did nothing in matter of doctrine or discipline even in these times of Popery,
but what the Queen did first direct and limit them.

Queen Mary deceasing, and Queen Elizabeth (a Protestant Princess) succeeding
her, called a Parliament and Convocation to suppress Popery, and re-establish
the Protestant true Religion. To effect which with more facility, this pious
Fox Vol. 3. p. 979. to 988.
Queen, having heard of the diversity of opinions in matters of Religion among
sundry of her loving Subjects, and being very desirous to have the same reduced
to some godly and christian concord, by the advice of the Lords and others of
the Privy Council (as well for the satisfaction of persons doubtful, as also
for the knowledge of the very truth in certain matters of difference) commanded
a convenient chosen number of the best learned of either part, to confer
together their opinions and reasons concerning three particular points that
should be prescribed to them, thereby to come to some good and charitable
agreement, with all convenient speed. Hereupon, nine of the learned Papists
were chosen on the one side, and nine of the ablest Protestants on the other,
to debate these three Propositions prescribed to them in writing.

1. It is against the word of God, and the custom of the ancient Church, to
use a tongue unknown to the people, in common Prayer, and the administration of
the Sacraments.

2. Every Church has authority to appoint, take away, and change Ceremonies
and Ecclesiastical Rites, Nota.
so the same be to edification.

3. It cannot be proved by the word of God, that there is in the Mass offered
up a sacrifice propitiatory for the quick and the dead.

It was further resolved by the Queens Majesty, that the conference on both
parties should be in writing, for avoiding much altercation of words: that both
sides should declare their minds, opinions and reasons in writing, and at the
same day deliver them mutually one to the other, to be considered, and to
return their answers thereto in writing by a certain day. Immediately herupon,
diverse Nobles and States of the Realm, understanding that such a meeting and
conference should be in certain matters, whereupon (In the Court of Parliament
consequently following,) some Laws might be grounded; they made earnest
request to her Majesty, that the parties of this conference might be ordered to
put and read their Assertions in the English tongue, and that in the presence
of them of the Nobility and of The Parliament House, for the better
satisfaction and ordering of their own judgments, to treat and conclude of
such Laws as might depend hereupon. This also being thought very reasonable,
was signified to both parties, and so fully agreed upon; and the day appointed
for the first meeting to be the Friday in the afternoon (being the last of
March) at Westminster Church. At which day and place, both for good order, and
for honor of the Conference, By the Queens Majesty's Commandment, the Lords
and others of the privy Council were present, and a great part of the
Nobility also: The Lord Keeper and the rest of the Lords bearing chief sway in
ordering this conference, as you may read at large in Master Fox, in the second
days discourse.

In this Conference, I shall only observe two passages of the Protestant
party. Novel. Const^. 113.
The first, is the beginning of their Prologue to their written Conference, in
these words. For as much as it is thought good to the Queens most Excellent
Majesty (unto whom in the Lord all obedience is due) that we should declare our
Judgment in writing upon certain Propositians; We, as becomes us to do
herein, most gladly obey. The next is, their third observation from the law of
Justinian the Emperor, (commanding all Bishops and Priests to celebrate the
holy oblation and prayers in Baptism with an audible voice, etc.) And let them
know this, that if they neglect any of these things, the dreadful judgment of
the great God and our Savior Jesus Christ shall fall upon you, neither will
we when we know it, rest, and leave it unrevenged, viz. That this Emperor
being a christian, did not only make Constitutions of Ecclesiastical matters;
but also threatens revenge and sharp punishment to the violaters of the same.
Therefore they held he had an obliging power over his Subjects, and a
coersiveauthority vested in him to enforce obedience to his Laws: of which
more hereafter.

As this was the practice of this blessed pious Queen in the beginning of her
Reign to prescribe to her Clergy in Convocation what they should treat off,
and how. So it continued in use, and was punctually submitted to by all
Convocations during her Reign: and that not only as a matter of complement,
but of conscience, religion, and the established doctrine of the Church of
England; as you may read at large in Bishop Jewels Apology of the Church of
England; and in the Defense of his Apology against Harding, part. 6. c. 9. to
16. p. 689. to 766. (a learned full discourse to this purpose) and in Bishop
Bilsons true Difference between Christian Subjection, and unchristian
Rebellion, the second part: (to omit (...) Bridges (...) supremacy (...)
Ch^istian Princes, over all Persons throughout their Dominions. London, 1573
Haddon Cont^. Osorium l. 3. p. ^89. et alibi.
all others who have handled this subject in her Reign.) It seems therefore
strange to me, that this which was reputed the true doctrine of the emmine^test
learnedest writers and Reformers of this Church, and of the Church of England
it self from the beginning to the end of her happy Reign and ever since, should
be deemed mere Antichristian, Diabolical, theomacall, and mere Popish
doctrine now; when as the contrary opinion is really such.

Our late Sovereign King James, in his Canons and Constitutions, 1603. the
Patent before them.
Letters Patents before the Ecclesiastical Canons and Constitutions made in
Convocation A^. 1603. recites, that he called that Convocation by his Writ, and
that ^e did By several Letters Patents under his Great Seal of England, the
one dated the 11. of April, the other the 25. of June, in the first year of his
Reign, Give and grant full, free and lawful liberty, power and Authority unto
the said Clergy in their Convocation (who without such a Patent and License
could debate and conclude nothing, else it had been vain and superfluours) To
confer, Treat, Debate, Consider, Consult and agree, of and upon such Canons,
Orders, Ordinances and Constitutions, as they shall think necessary, fit, and
convenient, for the honor and service of Almighty God, and quiet of the
Church, and the better government thereof, etc. And our present Sovereign King
Charles, in his Declaration before the 39. Articles printed at London, 1^28.
Declaration printed before the 39. Articles of the Church of England, (made by
the advice of so many of the Bishops as might conveniently be called, and twice
printed by his special command, An. 1628.) resolves in these very words, this
point of his royal Prorogative derived from his Predecessors: That We are
supreme Governor of the Church of England: and that If any difference arise
about the external policy concerning Injunctions Canons, or other
Constitutions whatsoever thereto belonging the Clergy in their Convocation (not
the Bishops in their Consistories, Visitations, or high Commissions) is to
order and settle them: having first obtained leave under Our broad Seal so to
do, and We approving their said Ordinances and Constitutions; provided, that
none be made contrary to the Laws and Customs of the Land. What power our
Kings have excercised in Convocations to direct and limit them in all their
proceedings, determinations, Canons in former ages, especially since 25. Hen.
8. c. 19. will appear; First by the form of our Kings Writs for summoning a
Convocation; of which I shall give you only one late president, agreeing in
form and substance with all former Writs of this kind.

CAROLVS Dei gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Rex fidei
defensor, etc. Reverendissimo in Christo Patri ac fideli Conciliari^ Nostro
Gulielmo, eadem gratia Cantur. A chiepis. totius Angliae Primati and
Metropolitano, salutem. Quibusdam arduis and urgentibus negotiis Nos,
securitatem and defensionem Ecclesiae Anglicanae, ac pacem and tranquilitatem,
bonum publicum and Defensionem regni Nostri and subditorum Nostrorum ejusdem
concernentibus Vobis in fide and dilectione quibus Nobis tenemini rogando
mandamus quatenus remissis debito intuitu attentis and ponderatis, universos
and singulos Episcopos vestrae Provinciae, ac Decanos Ecclesiarum Cathedralium,
nec non Archidiaconos, Capitula and Collegia, totumque Cle^um cujuslibet
diocesios ejusdem Provinciae, ad comparendum coram vobis in Ecclesia Catholica
sancti Pauli London decimoquarto die Aprilis proxime futuro, vel alibi, prout
melius expedire videritis, cum omni celeritate accommoda modo debito convocari
facias, ad tractandum, consentiendum, and concludendum super premissis, and
aliis quae tibi clarius exponentur tunc ibidem ex part Nostra: Et hoc sicut
Nos, and Statum Regni Nostri, ac honorem and utilitatem Ecclesiae praedictae
diligitis nulla tenus omittatis. Test meipso apud Westmonast. vicesimo die
Februarii Anno regni Nostri quintodecimo.

Secondly, by the form of the Kings royal License commonly granted to the
Convocation, before they may or can debate of any thing particularly, the form
whereof you may discern in this subjoyned, directed to the last Convocation,
1640.

CHARLES, By the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc. To all to whom these presents shall come greeting.
Whereas in and by one Act of Parliament made at Westminster in the five and
twentieth year of the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, reciting; That whereas
the Kings humble and obedient Subjects the Clergy of this Realm of England,
had not only knowledged according to the truth, that the Convocation of the
same Clergy were always, had bin, and ought to be assembled by the Kings
Writ, but also submitting themselves to the Kings Majesty, had promised in
verbo Sacerdotii that they would never from thenceforth presume to attempt,
allege, claim, or put in u^e, or enact, promulge, or execute any new Canons,
Constitutions, Ordinances, provincial or other, or by whatsoever other name
they should be called in the Convocation, unless the said Kings most Royal
assent and license might to them be had, to make, promulge, and execute the
same, and that the said King did give his most Royal assent and authority in
that behalf. It was therefore enacted by the authority of the said Parliament
according to the said submission and Petition of the said Clergy (amongst
other things) that they nor any of them from thenceforth should enact promulge,
or execute any such Canons, Constitutions, or Ordinances provincial, by
whatsoever name or names they might be called in their Convocations in time
coming, which always shall be assembled by authority of the Kings Writ,
unless the same Clergy might have the Kings most Royal assent and license,
to make, promulge, and execute such Canons, Constitutions, and Ordinances
provincial, or Synodall, upon pain of every one of the said. Clergy doing
contrary to the said Act, and being thereof convict, to suffer imprisonment,
and make fine at the Kings will, etc.

Know ye, that We for diverse urgent and weighty causes and considerations Us
thereunto especially moving, of Our especial Grace, certain knowledge and
mere motion, have by virtue of Our Prerogative Royal, and supreme authority
in Causes Ecclesiastical, given and granted, and by these presents do give and
grant, full, free, and lawful liberty, license, power, and authority unto the
most Reverend Father in God, William Lord Archbishop of Can^terbury, Primate
of all England, and Metropolitan, President of this Convocation for the
Province of Canterbury, and to the rest of the Bishops of the same Province,
and to all Deans of Cathedral Churches, Archdeacons, Chapters and Colleges,
and the whole Clergy of every several Diocese within the said Province; that
they, or the greater number of them (whereof the said President of the said
Convocation to be always one) shall and may from time to time, during our will
and pleasure propose, confer, treat, debate, consider, consult and agree upon
the exposition or alteration of any Canon or Canons now in force, and of, and
upon such other new Canons, Orders, Ordinances and Constitutions, as they the
said Lord Archbishop of Canterbury President of the said Convocation, and the
rest of the said Bishops and other the Clergy of the same Province, or the
greater number of them, (whereof the said Lord Archbishop of Canterbury
President of the said Convocation to be one) shall think necessary, fit, and
convenient, for the honor and service of Almighty God, the good and quiet of
the Church, and the better government thereof, to be from time to time
observed, performed, fulfilled and kept, as well by the said Lord Archbishop
of Canterbury, the Bishops and their successors, and the rest of the whole
Clergy of the said Province of Canterbury in their several callings, offices,
Functions, Ministeries, degrees and administrations, as also by all and every
Deane of the Arches, and other Judges of the said Archbishops Courts,
Guardians of Spiritualties, Chancellors, Deans and Chapters, Archdeacons,
Commissaries, Officialls, Registers, and all and every other Ecclesiastical
Officers, and their inferior ministers whatsoever of the same Province of
Canterbury, in their and every of their distinct Courts, and in the order and
manner of their and every of their proceedings, and by all other persons within
this Realm, as far as lawfully, being members of the Church, it may concern
them. And further to confer, debate, treat, consider, consult and agree of
and upon such other points, Note.
matters, causes and things, as we from time to time shall deliver or cause to
be delivered unto the said Lord Archbishop of Canterbury President of the said
Convocation in writing under Our Sign Manuell or privy Signet to be debated,
concluded, consulted and concluded upon, the said Statute, or any other
Statute, Act of Parliament, Proclamation, Provision or restraint heretofore
had; made, provided, or set forth, or any other cause, matter, or thing
whatsoever to the contrary notwithstanding. And we do also by these Presents
give and grant unto the said Lord Archbishop of Canterbury President of the
said Convocation, and to the rest of the Bishops of the said Province of
Canterbury, and to all Deanes of Cathedral Churches Archdeacons, Chapter, and
Colleges and the whole Clergy of every several Diocese within the said
Province, full, free, and lawful liberty, license, power and authority, That
they the said Lord Archbishop of Canterbury President of the said Convocation,
and the rest of the said Bishops and other the Clergy of the same Province, or
the greater number of them whereof the said President of the said Convocation
to be one, all and every the said Canons, Orders, Ordinances, Constitutions,
matters, Causes and things so by them from time to time conferred, treated,
debated, considered, concluded, and agreed upon shall, and may set down in
writing in such form as heretofore has been accustomed, and the same so set
down in writing, to exhibit and deliver, or cause to be exhibited and
delivered unto Us to the end that we upon mature consideration by us to be
taken thereupon, Note.
may allow, approve, confirm and ratify, or otherwise disallow, annihilate,
and make void such, and so many of the said Canons Orders, Ordinances,
Constitutions, matters, causes and things so to be by force of these Presents,
considered, consulted and agreed upon, as we shall think fit, requisite, and
convenient. Provided always, that the said Canons, Orders, Ordinances,
Constitutions, matters, and things, or any of them so to be considered,
consulted, or agreed upon as aforesaid, be not contrary or repugnant to the
Liturgy established, or the Rubric in it, or the nine and thirty Articles, or
the Doctrine, Orders and Ceremonies of the Church of England already
established. Provided also, and our express will and commandment is, That the
said Canons, Orders, Ordinances, Constitutions, matters and things, or any of
them so to be by force of these presents, considered, consulted, or agreed
upon, shall not be of any force, Note.
effect, or validity in the Law, but only such and so many of them, and after
such time as we by our Letters Patents under our great Seal of England, shall
allow, approve and confirm the same, any thing before in these presents
contained to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding; etc. In witness
whereof We have caused these our Letters to be made Patents; Witness Our self
at Westminster the twelfth day of May in the sixteenth year of our Reign.

Per Regem Ipsum.

To which I shall add the Kings further Warrant, for making a particular Canon
and Oath in the late Convocation.

Charles R.

MOst reverend Father in God, right trusty and right entirely beloved
Counselor: Right reverend Fathers in God right trust and well-beloved: and
trusty and well-beloved, We great you well. Whereas We out of our mere grace
and favor, and for the good and peace of the Church, have granted to you our
Archbishop of Canterbury, free leave and license under our great Seal of
England, bearing date the twelfth of this instant May, to propose, treat, and
conclude upon all such necessary Articles and Canons, which you shall find fit
to be ordered for the peace and government of this Church: Provided that you
shall thereby have no power to meddle with nor alter any thing ratified and
confirmed by Act of Parliament. And whereas we have further in that License
which we have granted unto you, Note.
reserved power to our self to command you to propose, treat, and determine of
any such thing or things as we shall recommend unto you under our Sign Manual
or Signet. These are therefore to will and require you to propose, treat, and
conclude upon such a Canon, as may secure us and all our loving subjects
against all growth and increase of Popery in this our Kingdom; as also of any
heretical or schismatic opinions to the prejudice of the doctrine or
discipline of this Church of England, established by Law: And that in this case
you agree upon some Oath to be taken by your selves, and all the Clergy
respectively, and by all which shall hereafter take upon them holy Orders, that
they shall adhere constantly to the doctrine and discipline here established,
and never give way (for so much as can any way concern them) to any innovation
or alteration thereof. And when you have made this Canon, and inserted this
Oath, we require you to present it to us, that we may advise upon it; and if
upon mature consultation we approve it, we shall confirm it, and then give you
power under our great Seal both to take the said Oath your selves, and to
administer it to all such as the Canon appoints. Given under our Signet at our
Court at White Hall the seventeenth day of May in the sixteenth year of our
Reign.

To the most Reverend Father in God, our right trusty and right entirely
beloved Counselor the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate and
Metropolitan of all England: To the right Reverend Fathers in God, our right
trusty and well-beloved the Lords Bishops; and to our trusty and well-beloved
the rest of the Clergy now assembled in Convocation.

3 ly. by the Kings letters Patents for Confirmation of those Canons after they
were made and presented to be confirmed by him: In the first canon whereof they
thus truly resolve. That a supreme Power is given to this most excellent Order
(of Kings) by God himself in the Scriptures, which is That Kings should rule
and command in their several dominions all persons of what rank or estate
soever, whether Ecclesiastical or Civil and that they should restrain and
punish with the temporal sword all stubborn and wicked doers.

The care of Gods Church is so committed to Kings in the Scripture, that they
are commended when the Church keeps the right way, and taxed when it runs
amiss, and therefore her government NOTE.
belongs in chief unto Kings: For otherwise one man would be commended for
another care, and taxed but for another negligence, which is not Gods way.

The power to call and dissolve Councels both national and provincial is the
true right of all Christian Kings within their own Realms or Territories: And
when in the first times of Christ's Church, Prelates used this power, 'twas
therefore only because in those days they had no Christian Kings: And it was
then so only used as in times of persecution, that is, with supposition (is
case it were required) of submitting their very lives unto the very laws and
commands even of those pagan Princes, that they might not so muchas seem, to
disturb their civil Government, which Christ came to confirm, but by no means
to undermine.

CHARLES, by the Grace of GOD, etc. Now for as much as the said Lord Archbishop
of Canterbury, President of the said Convocation for the province of
Canterbury, and the said Archbishop of York, President of the said
Convocation for the Province of York, and others the said Bishops, Deans,
Archdeacons, Chapters and Colleges, with the rest of the Clergy, having met
together respectively, at the time and places before mentioned respectively,
and then and there, by virtue of Our said authority granted unto them, treated
of, concluded, and agreed upon certain Canons, Orders, Ordinances, and
Constitutions, to the end and purpose by Us, limited and prescribed unto them,
and have thereupon offered and presented the same unto Us most humbly desiring
Us to give our Royal assent unto the same, according to form of a certain
Statute or Act of Parliament made in that behalf in the 25th. year of the
Reign of King Henry the eighth, and by Our said Prerogative Royal and Supreme
authority in Causes Ecclesiastical, to ratify by Our Letters Patents under
Our great Seal of England, and to confirm the same, The Title and Tenor of
them being word for word as ensues.

We of Our Princely inclination and Royal care for the maintenance of the
present Estate and government of the Church of England by the Laws of this Our
Realm now settled and established, having diligently, with great contentment
and comfort read and considered of all these their said Canons, Orders,
Ordinances and Constitutions agreed upon, as is before expressed: And finding
the same such as We are persuaded will be very profitable, not only to Our
Clergy, but to the whole Church of this Our Kingdom, and to all the true
Members of it (if they be well observed;) Have therefore for Us. Our Heirs,
and lawful Successors, of Our especial grace, certain knowledge, and mere
motion, given, and by th^se presents do give Our Royal Assent, according to
the form of the said Statute or Act of Parliament aforesaid, to all and every
of the said Canons, Orders, Ordinances and constitutions, and to all and every
thing in them contained, as they are before written. And furthermore, We do not
only by our said Prerogative Royal, and supreme Authority in Causes
Ecclesiastical, ratify, confirm, and establish, by these Our Letters
Patents, the said Canons, Ordinances, and Constitutions, and all and every
thing in them contained, as is aforesaid, but do likewise propound, publish,
and straightly injoyne and command by Our said Authority, and by these Our
Letters Patents, the same to be diligently observed, executed, and equally kept
by all Our loving Subjects of this Our Kingdom, both within the Provinces of
Canterbury and York, in all points wherein they do or may concern every or
any of them, according to this Our will and pleasure hereby signified and
expressed: And that likewise for the better observation of them, every
Minister, by what name or title soever he be called, shall in the Parish Church
or Chapel where he has charge, read all the said Canons, Orders, Ordinances
and Constitutions, at all such times, and in such manner as is prescribed in
the said Canons, or any of them: The Book of the said Canons to be provided at
the charge of the Parish, betwixt this and the Feast of S. Michael the
Arch-angell next ensuing, straightly charging and commanding all Archbishops,
Bishops, and all other that exercise any Ecclesiastical jurisdiction within
this Realm, every man in his place to see and procure (so much as in them
lies) all and every of the same Canons, Orders, Ordinances and Constitutions
to be in all points duly observed, not sparing to execute the penalties in them
severally mentioned upon any that shall wittingly or wilfully break or neglect
to observe the same; as they tender the honor of God, the peace of the Church,
the tranquillity of the Kingdom, and their duties and service to Us their King
and Sovereign. In witness whereof We have caused these Our Letters to be made
Patents: Witness Our Self at Westminster, the thirtieth day of June, in the
sixteenth year of Our Reign.

By all these Patents, with See Q. Elizabeth Letters Patents to confirm the
Canons made 1597.
others of like nature, directed to all our Convocations, by our Kings in
former and latter times, by See all the Ordinances and Orders of both Houses
concerning the present Assembly.
Our present Parliaments manner of calling, limiting, directing, our present
Assembly of Divines in all particulars of their proceedings and debates,
appointing some eminent Members of both Houses to sit and consult together with
them, and to certify all their results and determinations to them, to be
considered, rectified, rejected, or approved, by both Houses, as they in their
wisdoms shall see cause: and by the forecited premises it is most apparent,
that the Archbishops, Bishops, Clergy, and Convocation of England, assembled
Synodically together (much less then any particular Independent Minister or
Congregation) notwithstanding all their late printed vaunts, of their
Ecclesiastical sovereign Jurisdiction by divine right, and power to prescribe
and enjoyne Visitation-Oaths, Articles, new Rites and Ceremonies of their own
Inventions, both unto Ministers and people, (which See the Archbishop (...)
Canterburies (...) Bishop Mountagues, Bishop Juxons, Archdeacon Fasks, and
others late Visitation Oaths, Articles, of strange nature.
they seconded with their practice to the insufferable grievance and oppression
of the people) are so far from having any lawful right* power, and
authority, to make, prescribe, any Ecclesiastical Injunctions, Canons, Laws,
Rites, Ceremonies, or form of Government to any of his Majesty's Subjects,
that though they be lawfully assembled together in a Provincial or National
Synod by the Kings own Writ, or Parliaments command, yet they cannot legally
or of right See 25. H. 8. c. 19. 27. H S. c. 15. Dr Fi^la of the Church l. 5.
c. 53.
so much as treat, debate, consult of any Ecclesiastical affairs without a
special license first obtained from the King or Parliament; and then only of
such generals or particulars as they shall prescribe them; much less compile,
enact, promulge, impose, or execute any Ecclesiastical Canons, Laws,
Injunctions, Ordinances, Oaths, without their special approbation and
ratification of them by their special Letters Patents under the great Seal,
and by Act of Parliament too, as has been lately resolved by unanimous consent
of both Houses in the case of the condemned new book of Canons. The like I
have proved of the Bishops, Clergy, Councels, in other Christian Empires and
Kingdoms.

Where then is that immense Episcopal jurisdiction, authority, pre-eminence,
superiority, power, in point of dominion, over and beyond that of ordinary
Ministers, which our Lordly Prelates lately so much boasted of and pleaded for,
as due unto them by no less then divine institution, (if we may believe them)
not by the Grace, Patents, Grants, or connivence of Christian Princes? Let
these swelling ambitious Grandees, to abate this windy tumor, consider with
themselves, that all their greatnesses piled together in a general or
National Synod, (though steepled with the Popes own Chair and three-forked
Miter) cannot so much as treat of, debate, dispute, determine any
Church-affaires, much less constitute or promulge any new Ecclesiastical
Laws, Canons, Articles, Ceremonies, Rites, etc. without the previous license
and permission of those temporal Princes and Powers that summon them; nor yet
exercise any manner of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction whatsoever, more then the
poorest Vicar and Curate breathing, that is a Minister lawfully ordained,
without the Kings Letters Patents or Commission authorizing them, (which
erected their 24. H. 8. c. 12 31. H. 8. c. 9. 1. Ed 6. c. 2. 37. H. 8. c. 17.
Bishoprics, Diocese, and Episcopal jurisdiction at the first, and must
still support them, else they will fall to utter ruin) and then all their
pretended claims and cracked title of jus divinum; with all Independents,
Anabaptists, Brownists, Anti-monarchicall, Anti-parliamentall fancies,
concerning the jurisdiction and authority of their Independent Congregations,
opposite to the premises; will vanish into air.

If any deem the premised power of Christian Princes and Civil Magistrates,
in limiting Synods and Councels thus, to be derogatorie to the lawful
authority of Bishops, Ministers, Synods, or Independent Churches: Ianswer, that
it is not so, forthese ensuing reasons.

First, because the Sea Sect 3, 4, 5, 6. The Harmony of Confessions Sect. 19.
28. H. c. 10. 37. H. 8. c. 17. 1. Eliz. c. 1, 2. The institution of a Christian
man dedicated to King Henry the 8. by all the Clergy in Convocation, cha. ^f
Orders. Justinian Cod. l. 1. Tit. 4. 8. Niceph. Calisth. Dedicat. hist. suae.
ad Andronicum Imperat. Mr John Hales Oration to Q. Elizabeth. Fox Vol. 3. p.
976, etc.
chief care of preserving the purity of Gods Worship, Ordinances, Religion,
the Churches peace, prosperity, and of suppressing all heresies, errors,
schisms, corruptions, superstitions contrary thereunto, is committed to
Christian Princes and supreme temporal Magistrates, both by the Laws of God,
the constant acknowledgment, use, practice, constitutions, laws, canons, of
all Christian Empires, Kingdoms, Councels, Synods, in all ages; and the Leges
Edovardi Confess. Lex 17. Fox Vol. 1. p. 174.
Coronation-Oaths of all Emperors, Kings, Princes, in the Christian World,
which oblige them to discharge this trust, as the subsequent Sections will
abundantly manifest. Therefore the power of directing Synods, Councels, in
debating matters of controversy, making Laws, Canons, etc. concerning all or
any of the premises, and the confirming of them ought principally to belong to
them.

Secondly, because Christian Emperors, Kings, Princes, are the Bish. Jewels
defense of the Apology part 6. c. 11. to 15. Bish. Bilsons True difference etc.
part 2.
supreme heads and Governors under Christ, in and over all Ecclesiastical
persons, Assemblies, Synods, Councels, Churches, within their own Dominions,
as well as temporal (and our Kings of England are declared to be such by 24. H
8. c. 12. 25. H. 8. c. 19, 21. 26 H 8 c. 1, 3. 27. H. 8. c. 15. 28. H. 8. 7,
10. 31. H. 8 c 10, 14. 32. H. 8 c. 22, 24, 26. 33. H. 8. c. 29, 34. and 35. H.
8. c. 17, 19. 35. H. 8. c. 1, 3. 37. H. 8. c. 17. 1. Ed. 6. c. 2. 1. Eliz. c.
1, 2. 8. Eliz. c.
several Acts of Parliament, by the 1. Eliz. c. 1. 3. Jac c. 4, 5.
Oaths of supremacy and Allegiance, which all ought to take) within their
respective Dominions: Therefore they ought of right to direct and order all
manner of proceedings, in such Ecclesiastical Assemblies, Synods; it being the
duty and just right of every Natural and Politic head to direct the members;
Judge. 11. 8, to 15. Ephesians. 5. 22, 23, 24. 1 Cor. 11. 3, to 12.
as of the head of the family, to regulate and direct the family, wife, etc. by
way of authority or jurisdiction, not they the head.

Thirdly, because the Bishops and Clergy of our own and other Realms, have no
Legislative power, or other Ecclesiastical authority vested in them by the
Word of God, but only Matthew. 18. (...) Ma^k 10. 15.
to preach the Word, administer the Sacraments, and to bind or loose men's
sins declaratively, by preaching or applying the Gospel to them, according as
they find them penitent or obstinate in their sinful courses; and no more of
other Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, then what is derived to them by our Kings,
and the Laws of this our Realm; as is resolved in these express terms by
the Statute of 37. H. 8. c. 17. The Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, and
other Ecclesiastical persons of this Realm, have no manner of Jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical, but by, under, and from the Kings royal Majesty, the only
and undoubtea supreme head of the Church of England and Ireland, to whom by
holy Scripture all authority and power is wholly given to hear and determine
all manner of causes Ecclesiastical, and to correct all vice and sin
whatsoever; and to such persons as his Majesty shall appoint thereunto. And by
the Statute of 1. Ed. 6. c. 2. in these words, That all jurisdiction spiritual
is derived and deducted from the Kings Majesty (to all Bishops and
Ecclesiastical persons within England and Ireland) as supreme head of these
Churches and Realms of England and Ireland, and so instly acknowledged by the
Clergy of the said Realms, and that all Courts Ecclesiastical within the
said two Realms be kept by no other power or authority either foreign or
within the Realm, but by the authority of his most Excellent Majesty:
whereupon it enacts, That all their Process shall issue out under the Kings
Seal, and in his Name and Style, as in Writs original and judicial at the
common Law: with which sundry other 25. E. 1 the statute of Carlisle. 24. H. 8.
c. 12. 25. H. 8. c. 19, 21. 26. H. 8 c. 1, 3. 27. H. 8 c. 15. 1. Eliz c. 1 S.
Eliz. c. 1.
Acts of Parliament concur. Now the Kings and Laws of this our Realm have
given the Clergy assembled in Councels, Synods, and Convocations, no other but
such a limited power and authority as is expressed in the forecited Statutes
of 25. H. 3. c. 19. and 27. H. 8. c. 15. and mentioned in the premises.)
Therefore they neither can challenge nor pretend to claim any other but such a
limited and confined authority; the rather, because they are assembled to such
meetings (as our Assembly is now) only as advisers and assistants, not as
Judges or Lawgivers: Therefore the keeping of them to the forementioned
limits, can neither be an infringement or eclipsing of their just privileges,
or Christian liberty.

Fourthly, because every particular Christian is to Acts 17. 11. M^tth. 7. 15.
c 24. 23, 24, 25, 26. 1 John 4 1. 2 John 7, to 12. Col. 2. 8, 18, 19. Phil. 3.
2 1 These. 5. 2^. Gal. 1. 6, 7, 8, 9. 1 Cor. 10. 15. c. 11. 13.
try the spirits doctrines, and determinations of Ministers, by the Scriptures,
whether they are of God or not; and to beware, yea judge of false Teachers,
doctrines, and no ways to receive them, as the Acts 17. 11. M^tth. 7. 15. c
24. 23, 24, 25, 26. 1 John 4 1. 2 John 7, to 12. Col. 2. 8, 18, 19. Phil. 3. 2
1 These. 5. 2^. Gal. 1. 6, 7, 8, 9. 1 Cor. 10. 15. c. 11. 13.
Marginall Texts abundantly evidence, and all Orthodox Divines assert. Much
more then are Christian Princes, (the chief Defenders of the Christian faith)
to judge and determine of them; therefore to give particular directions to, and
in all Synods, Councels how to proceed, and what to treat of, for suppressing
false Teachers, Heresies, Schisms, Errors advancing Religion, Truth, unity,
and sincerity of Gods Worship, within their territories and Churches.

Fifthly, because every soul (as well See Chrysostom Theodoret. Theophylact.
in Romans 1^. Dr Ora^^nthorp of the Popes temporal Monarchy.
Bishops, Ministers, and all other Ecclesiastical persons, as temporal
subjects) is and ought to be subject to Christian Princes, and the highest
temporal powers, who are to provide for their spiritual as well as their
temporal welfare: Paraeus in Romans 13. dub. 5. See Dr Wil^et and Peter Martyr
ibid.
Therefore they ought to be regulated and directed by them, when assembled by
their Writs in Councels or Synods for their spiritual good.

SECT. 3.
Of Confirming, Ratifying the Canons, Decrees, and Resolutions of Counsels,
Synods, by Christian Princes, Peers, Parliaments, before they become valid or
obligatory: Of the Presence and Power of Christian Princes, Nobles, and other
Laymen, in Counsels. That many, or most Counsels, Synods, in ancient and
latter times (especially in England) were in truth mere Parliaments; wherein
Christian Princes, Nobles, Senators, and Laymen met and voted, as well as
Bishops, and other Ecclesiastical persons. And that no Canons, Laws,
Articles, concerning Gods Worship, Religion, Church Government, Ceremonies,
were ever lawfully prescribed, or imposed on any Subjects of our Realm, but by
Parliament only.
THirdly, As Bishops and Clergymen have no power at all to summon Counsels,
Synods, or Convocations, nor yet to treat, or conclude of any Ecclesiastical
Canons, or Constitutions in them, etc. without the special licenses of Kings,
under their Great Seals authorizing them; so I shall next manifest, that when
Counsels, or Synods have, by virtue of their license, agreed on, and composed
any such Articles, Canons, Constitutions, Orders, Ceremonies, etc. they cannot
print, publish, promulge, impose, execute, or put them in ure, nor are they See
Mar^^lius Patavinus, Defensoris Pacis, pars 2. cap. 21. 28.
of any binding force or authority, till they are approved, ratified, confirmed
by Kings, and Christian Princes Subscriptions, Imperial Edicts, Patents, Acts
of State and Parliament; and that most ancient Counsels, Synods, were but
Parliaments: wherein Kings, Nobles, and Laymen were present, as well as
Clergymen. This I shall manifest by some Presidents, both abroad and at home,
in all ages.

To begin with Scripture Testimonies. Josh. 24. 24, 25, 26, 27.
When all the whole Congregation of Israel, assembled by the summons of Joshua,
had in their Convocation at Shechem made a Covenant, Ordinance, and Statute,
that they would serve the Lord, and obey his voice, Joshua being then their
chief Governor, confirmed the same, by writing it in the Book of the Law of
God, and erecting a great stone in the place, for a witness thereof. When the
2 Chronicles. 30. 1. to 7.
Princes, and all the Congregation in Jerusalem, assembled by King Hezechiah,
had took counsel together, and concluded to keep the Passover in the second
Month, because they could not do it on the first, the King established their
Decree, by his Proclamation and Letters. When the Jews, upon Esther 3. 20. to
32.
Mordecai his Letter to them, had in a public Convocation ordained, and took
upon them and their seed, to keep the feast of Purim throughout every
generation, family, province, and city, in remembrance of their great
deliverance from Hamans conspiracy against them, Queen Esther and Mordecai
wrote with all authority, and confirmed this Feast and Decree, by their
Letters, and the Decree of Esther. Yea, we read, that when the Dan. 6. 5. to 11.
Presidents, Governors, Princes, Counselors, and Captains of King Darius, to
entrap Daniel, moved him to establish a royal Statute, and make a firm
Decree, that whosoever should ask a petition of any god or man for thirty
days, save of the King, he should be cast into the Lions den: they brought
this Decree to Darius to establish and sign, that it should not be changed,
requesting him to sign it, who did it accordingly; else it had not been
obligatory. And we likewise find in Jonah 3. 5, 7.
Scripture, that when as the King of Nineveh and his great men, upon Jonah his
preaching, had made a Decree for a public Fast, the King confirmed, and
published it to be observed, by his Proclamation.

To come to Counsels, under Christian Princes, and Emperors. The first famous
Synod of Nice, with the Constitutions, Canons, and Decrees therein compiled,
were Nicephor. C^^^ist. Eccl^s. Hist, l. 8. c. 7. 25. Eusebius Pamph De Vita
Constartini, l. 3 c. 12, 14, 15 16, 17, 18.
confirmed by the Imperial Edicts of Constantine the Great, who sat President
in it. Edictum quod quidem pondus habebat and autoritatem, cum hac Epistola
Imperator in singulas misit Civitates; writes Ibid c. 19. See Ni^ephor. l. 8 c.
26.
Eusebius: Who records further of him, Eusebius. De Vi^d Constantini, l 4 c. 17.
That he confirmed, and consigned, by his authority, the Canons made by
Bishops in public Counsels, that so it might not be lawful for the Princes
of other Nations to abrogate the things which were decreed by them: Which had
been invalid, without his Imperial confirmation. Subscripserunt and Augustus
Constantinus and matter ejus Helena Surius Tom. 1. p 362. cap. 2^.
The Council kept at Rome, under Pope Sylvester, was confirmed by the
subscription of Constantine, and Helena his mother. The second general
Council of Constantinople, after they had finished their Decrees and Canons,
sent them with this Epistle to Theodosius the Elder, desiring him to ratify
them; Surius Council. T. 1. p ^17 6. Sozo^ Eccles. Hist. l 4. c. 13. Centur.
Magdeburg 4. col 851.
In the beginning, verily, of our writing to your Piety, we give thanks to
God, who has constituted the government of your Majesty, for the common peace
of the Churches, and the CONFIRMATION of the true Faith: But giving God due
thanks, we likewise refer to your Majesty those necessary things which are
acted in the sacred Council; to wit, that from the time we assembled at
Constantinople, by your Majesty's command, we have first of all renewed our
mutual concord between us; and after this, we have prescribed, and pronounced,
as it were, certain Conclusions or Canons, in which we have confirmed, and
approved the faith of the Fathers assembled at Nice, and have rejected, with
extreme execration and detestation, the preverse heresies, and wicked opinions
which have sprung up against it. Moreover also, for the right settling and
ordering of the state and discipline of the Churches, we have enacted, and
prescribed certain Canons, all which we have annexed to this our Writing. We
therefore beseech your Clemency, (VT PER LITERAS TVAE PIET ATIS RATVM ESSE
IVBEAS CONFIRMS QVE CONCILII DECRETVM,) that by your Majesty's Letters you
would command the Decree of the Council to be ratified, and confirm the
same; and, as you have honored the Church with those Letters, by which you
have called us together, so you would likewise CORROBORATE WITH YOUR DECREE AND
SEAL, THE SVMME AND CONCLUSION OF THOSE THINGS WHICH ARE DECREED. And hereupon
(writes Ecclesiast. Hist l. 12 c. 13. Surius Council. Tom. 1. p. 48^, 484.
Socrates Scholast. Hist. ^. 5. ^. 8, 10.
Nicephorus) CONSTITVTIONE QVO QVE IMPERATOR SANXIT, the Emperor enacted by
his Constitution, that the authority of the Nicene Creed should be firm and
perpetual; and that all Churches in all places should be committed to those
who professed one Divinity of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, in the
subsistence of three Persons, of the same honor and glory: And likewise made a
Law, that those who abhered from the profession of this faith, should not keep
any Ecclesiastical assemblies, nor should not presume thenceforth to preach
concerning the Faith, nor have power to elect or consecrate any one: that they
should be banished out of the City and Country, fined, and have no communion
with other Citizens, etc. Which Edicts of his are Registered verbatim by Codicis
l. 1. Tit. De Haereticis. Lex 2. 136 fol. 23. Tit. 4. de Summa Trinitate Lex. 2.
Justinian. The Synod Sozomen Ecc^es. Hist. l 4^ c 13. Centur. Magdeburg 4.
Col. 538.
of Ancyra sent Legates to Constantius, informing him, that Eudoxius did study
to deprave the Faith, requesting him TO CONFIRM THOSE THINGS which were
decreed at Sardice, Syrnium, and in other Synods. So the Catholic Bishops in
the Council of Ariminum, Surius Tom 1. p. 434, 435. Niceph. Eccles. Hist. l. 9
c. 40, 41. Socrates Scholasticus Eccles. Hist. l. 2. cap. 37.
write to the same Constantius, beseeching him to hear their Orators, who
should declare unto him the Sentence of that their Council in writing, and not
to permit any innovation or change, but to suffer them to rest in those things
which were lawfully defined, and decreed by their Ancestors; and that nothing
might be added to, or detracted from their Constitutions; but that they all
might remain untouched and entire, as they were preserved by the piety of his
Father, till that time. Surius Council. Tom. 1. p. 577, 578, 579, 581, 582.
The Council of Africa, Can. 25. to 32, 34, 42, 51, 59, 60. and the Bishops
therein assembled, make diverse petitions and requests to the Emperor Honorius,
and the temporal Judges and Magistrates, to reform Idolatry, suppress the
Donatists, and reform many abuses, by them complained of, by their Laws and
Edicts, and to ratify their Canons against them, sending their Legates to the
Emperor for that purpose. Surius ibid. p. 616, 617.
The Bishops in the third general Council of Ephesus, write to Gallimar King
of Persia, supplicating, and beseeching his Majesty, to aid Religion, which was
impugned, and speedily to correct their madness and tyranny that inclined to
heresy: Yea, they Willets Synopsis Papismi, 3. General Controversy, Quest 4.
p. 136.
beseeched Theodosius the Emperor, that by his godly Letters he would ratify
and confirm the Decree of the Council: and Theodosius, of blessed memory,
CONFIRMED ALL THINGS BY A GENERAL LAW, that were determined in that general
Council; says the Sur Tom. 2. p 19. 134, 135. Bishop Jewels Reply to Harding.
Artic. 4. p. 213.
first Action of the Council of Chalcedon. Martianus the Emperor, in the
fourth general Council of Chalcedon, speaks thus, Sur. Tom. 2 p. 10. 14.
We, after the example of Constantine, have thought good to be present in
this Synod, TO CONFIRM THE FAITH, not to show our power. Yea, this Emperor, in
the close of that Council, says, Act. 3. Sur. ibid p. 134.
SACRO NOSTRAE SERENITATIS EDICTO VENERANDAM Synodum CONFIRMAMVS, By the holy
Edict of our Majesty We confirm that Reverend Synod: Which he ratified with
this Edict, Sur. ibid. p 133, 134. Jull^^ian Codici^. l. 1. Tit. 4. de Summa
Trinitate, Lex 3^^. Surius Tom. 1. p. 85, 86, 87, 134, ^36, 215, 216, 219, to
274, sparsim, are the like Decrees and Letters of theirs, confirming this
Council.
Let no Clergyman, Soldier, or any of any other condition, endeavor to treat
of the Christian faith henceforth publicly, in assemblies met together, and
hearing them, seeking from hence an occasion of tumult or perfidiousnesse; For
he does injury to the judgment of the most reverend Synod, if any shall
strive to debate again things once judged, and rightly ordered; when as those
things concerning the Christian faith, which are now controverted, are known to
be defined by the Priests which met together at Chalcedon, by Our Precepts, and
decreed according to the Apostolical Expositions and Institutions of 318. holy
Fathers, and of 150. more in this Royal City: For punishment shall not be
wanting to the contemners of this holy Law; because they not only go against
the Faith, truly expounded, but also profane the holy mysteries to Jews and
Pagans, by this contention. Therefore, if he be a Clerk, who shall publicly
adventure to treat of Religion, let him be removed from the fellowship of
Clergymen: but if a Soldier, let him be spoiled of his Girdle: likewise
others who are guilty of this crime, if they be Freemen, let them be banished
out of this Royal City, and also by the Judiciary Power subjugated to
competent punishments: but if they be Servants, let them be corrected with most
severe chastisements. The Emperors Gratian, Valentinian, and Theodosius, by
this Imperial Edict, confirmed the Decrees of the first general Council of
Nice, long after they were made, as Constantine the great had done at their
enacting. Jus^iniani Codex l. 1. tit. 4. De Summa Trinitate. Lex 2. fol. 3, 4.
Vnius and Summi Dei Nomen ubique celebretur Niceneae Fidei dudum a majoribus
traditae, and divinae Religionis testimonio atque affertione firmatae
OBSERVANTIA SEMPER MANSVRA TENEAT, etc. Yea, Pope Leo himself, in Epist. 7, 9,
12, 13, 16, 17, 23, 24, 29, 31, 33, 36, 37, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 47, 48, 49,
52, 53, 55, 56, 57, 58, 62, 67, 68, 71, 72, 73, 95.
sundry Epistles, exhorts Theodosius, Leo, Martianus, the Emperors, and
Pulcheria the Emperesse, to defend the Catholic Faith, concluded and defined
in the Counsels of Nice, Ephesus, and Chalcedon, against the Heretics that
opposed them: to ratify and maintain the Decrees of these Counsels, by their
Imperial authority, to repress the Heretics, and disanull the Constitutions
of the 2. Council of Ephesus, contrary to them, and not to suffer those things
to be redebated, which their Fathers, according to the Apostles Doctrine, had
confirmed; nor yet to suffer those Heresies to spring up again, which they had
condemned. A clear Evidence that the Canons and Determinations of general
Counsels are no ways obligatory, and altogether invalid, unless ratified by
Imperial Edicts. In the Sur. Tom 2 p. 25, 38, 55, 58 66, 67, 95, 106.
Council of Chalcedon, Action 1. when some would have added an Explanation to
the Canon of the Council of Nice, the Egyptians, Orientalls, and the Bishops
that consented with them, cried out, Nemo suscepit adjectionem, nemo
diminutionem: Quae in Nicca constituta sunt, teneant, Catholicus IMPERATOR HOC
JVSSIT. After this, upon another occasion, the whole Synod says, Quod
Impertalis praecepit autoritas, omnibus modis observandum est: Justum est quae
a piissimo Principe praecepta sunt, effectus mancipari. Et necesse nobis erit,
in omnibus Imperatoris Christi amici cedere jussioni. Omnia referantur ad
cognitionem clementiae Imperialis. Postulamus ejus referri clementiae: Et si
jusserit criminali causa alterum pro altero decertare, and hoc suscipimus,
praecipue quia universalem praecepit fieri Synodum. Et necesse est majores
causas in eum reservare Concilium. The Sur. Council. Tom. 2. p. 462, 491, 494,
496, 497, 500, 502, 521, 529, 530.
first general Council of Constantinople, with the Decrees and proceedings
thereof, were ratified by the Imperial Edicts of Justinian the Emperor, who
summoned it, yea, swayed, and directed it what to do, and how to proceed;
causing Pope Vigilius to give an account of his Faith therein, and ratifying
the Faith, and Canons of the four first general Counsels. In the third
Council of Sur Council. Tom. 2. p. 668, 669, 670, to 677.
Toledo, King Reccaredus, who summoned it, sat President therein, making two
Orations to the Bishops assembled in it, exhibiting to them a Confession of the
Christian Faith, subscribed by himself and his Queen Badda, with their own
hands, in these words, Ego Reccaredus Rex, fidem hanc sanctam and veram
Confessionem, quam una per totum orbem Catholica confitetur Ecclesia, cord
retinens, ore affirmans, mea dextra, Deo protegente, subscripsi. Ego Badda
gloriosa Regina, hanc fidem quam credidi and suscepi, manu mea de toto cord
subscripsi. This Confession of the Faith, to which was annexed the Creeds of
the Counsels of Nice, Constantinople, and Chalcedon, the King commanded to be
publicly read in the Council, to the end that it might be examined, and
confirmed therein; which was done accordingly, all the Bishops in that Council
subscribing it; and not only they, but likewise the Presbyters and Deacons;
yea all the Nobles, Senators, and Elders of the whole Gothish Nation; among
whom were Gussinus, Fonsa, Afrila, Achila, Flavius, with other Noblemen, ET
OMNES SENIORES GOTHORVM, ET TOTIVS GENTIS GOTHICAE (who were present and had
voices in that Council) subscripserunt. After which Subscription of this
Profession of the Faith, the King made another Oration to the Council,
commanding them to make certain Canons for the Government of the Church, and
Reformation of Manners; De caetero autem prohibendis insolentium moribus ME A
VOBIS CONSENTIENTE CLEMENTIA, sententiis terminate districtioribus, and
firmiore disciplina, quae facienda non sunt, prohibete; and ea quae fieri
debent, immobili constitutione firmate. Whereupon they compiled 23. Canons; the
second of them, for the reciting of the Creed in all Churches every Lords day,
has this clause in it, CONSVLTV piissimi and gloriosissimi Reccardi Regis
constituit Synodus: The eighth this, Jubente autem and consentiente Domino
Reccaredo Rege, id praecepit Sacerdotale Concilium: The tenth this, Annuente
gloriosissimo Domino nostro Reccaredo, hoc sanctum affirmat Concilium: The
fourteenth this, Suggerente Concilio, id gloriosissimus Dominus noster
Canonibus inserendum praecipit: The sixteenth this, Hoc cum consensu
gloriosissimi Principis sancta Synodus ordinavit: The eighteenth this, Ex
Decreto Reccaredi Regis, simul cum Sacerdotali Concilio: All badges, that those
Canons were made by the Kings Direction, Counsel, Decree, and Command: Who
ratified them all with this public Edict, Surius Tom. 2. p. 676.
Gloriosissimus Dominus Reccaredus Rex universis sub regimine nostrae
potestatis consistentibus: Amatores nos sui faciens divina veritas, nostris
principaliter sensibus inspiravit, ut causa instaurandae fidei ac disciplinae
Ecclesiasticae Episcopos omnes Hispaniae nostro praesentari culmini juberemus.
Praecedente autem diligenti and cauta deliberatione, sive quae ad fidem
convenient, sive quae ad morum correctionem recipient, sensus maturitate and
intelligentiae gravitate constant esse digesta. Nostra proinde autoritas id
omnibus, ad regnum nostrum pertinentibus jubet, ut ea quae definita sunt in hoc
sancto Concilio, habito in urbe Toletana anno regni nostri feliciter quarto,
nulli contemnere liceat, nullus praeterire praesumat. Capitula enim quae
nostris sensibus placita, and disciplinae congrua, a praesenti conscripta sunt
Synodo, in omni autoritate, sive Clericorum, sive quorumcunque omnium,
observentur and maneant. Then follows a Recapitulation of all the 23. Canons,
and after them this clause, Has omnes Constitutiones Ecclesiasticas, quas
summatim breviterque perstrinximus, sicut before in Canone continentur, manner
perenni stabilitate sancimus. Si quis ergo Clericus aut Laicus, harum
sanctionum obediens esse noluerit, si Episcopus, Presbyter, Diaconus aut
Clericus fuerit, NOTA.
ab omni Concilio excommunicationi subjaceat: si vero Laicus fuerit, A Coercive
Law under severe penalties.
and honestioris loci persona est, medietatem facultatum suarum amittat, fisci
juribus profuturam: si vero minoris loci persona est, amissione rerum suarum
mulctatus, in exilium deputetur. Flavius Reccardus Rex hanc deliberationem,
quam cum sancta definimus Synodo, CONFIRMANS SVBSCRIPSI: Then follows the
Subscription of the Bishops and others: A pregnant testimony, that Bishops in
Counsels have no power at all to debate and determine any matters of Faith, or
make any Ecclesiastical Constitutions, but by the Princes License; that all
their Constitutions, Canons, and Determinations, without his Confirmation are
invalid, and not binding: That Laymen have definitive voices in Counsels, and
have confirmed them with their Subscriptions; and that Counsels in ancient
times were no other but Parliaments; wherein the King, the Clergy, Nobles, and
Elders of the people (not the Clergy only) assembled, to make Laws and
Constitutions, and conclude of matters of Faith: Of which more anon, in its due
place. The Sur. Tom 2. p. 686, 687.
Decrees and Canons of the first Council of Matiiscon were ratified by the
Royal Edict of King Guntramnus, who summoned it; which begins and concludes in
this manner, Guntramnus Rex Francorum omnibus Pontificibus, ac universis
Sacerdotibus, and cunctis judicibus in regione nostra constitutis, etc. Cuncta
ergo quae hujus Edicti tenore decrevimns, perpetualiter volumus custodiri; quia
in sancta Synodo Matisconensi haec omnia (sicut nostis) studuimus diffinire,
quae praesenti autoritate vulgamus. Subscriptio Domini Guntramni Regis, data
sub die 4. Idus November. 24. Regni supra scripti Regis. The Sur. Tom. 2 p. 727.
fourth Council of Toledo, after it had decreed Church affairs in 73. Canons,
by King Sisenandus his command, who summoned his Bishops to Toledo, Era. 681.
VT EJVS IMPERIIS AT QVEjVSSIS communis ab ipsis agitaretur de quibusdam
Ecclesiae disciplinis tractatus; and entered into the Synod, cum
magnificentissimis and nobilissimis viris, exhorting the Synod to pray for him,
and to be mindful of his Fathers Decrees, and to do their diligence to
confirm to him the Ecclesiastical Laws, and to correct those things, which,
whiles they have come into use through negligence, have by usurpation procured
a license to themselves against Ecclesiastical manners: Which Synod rejoicing
at these his admonitions, according to his and their own desire, having made
so many Canons concerning Religion and Church Discipline, close up their
Constitutions with a Canon of State, concerning the Oath of allegiance of
Subjects to their Prince, and their loyalty toward them in the carriage;
establishing the Title of Sisenandus, as lawful, against all others claims.
Now all those Canons, as they were made by the License and Direction of this
King, Ibid. p. 727
(cujus tanta devotio erga Deum exta^t, ut non solum in rebus humanis, sed
etiam in causis divinis solicitus maneat, say this Council, to his honor;) so
they were likewise ratified by him, as appears by this close at the end of the
Canons, Ibid p. 738
Definitis itaque his quae superius comprehensa sunt, ANNVENTE RELIGIOSISSIMO
PRINCIPE (cujus devotio nos ad hoc decretum salutiserum convocavit) placuit
deinde, nulla re impediente, a quolibet nostrum ea, quae constituta sunt,
temerari, sed cuncta salubri consilio conservari: The Ibid. p. 728.
fourth Canon of this Council shows, that Judges and Laymen may and ought to
be present in Counsels. In the Surius ibid. p. 739.
fifth Council of Toledo, King Chintillanus, who summoned it, entered into the
midst of the Synod, with the Nobles and Elders of his Palace, atque hanc
institutionem, quam EX PRAECEPTO EJVS, and decreto nostro sancimus, divina
inspiratione PRAEMISIT; scilicet, ut in c^ncto regno a Deo sibi concesso,
specialis and propria haec religiosa omni tempore teneatur observantia, etc.
says the Prologue and first Canon of the Council: So that he both prescribed
and ratified the Canons of this Council; the 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8. Canons whereof
concern the State, the King, his Crown, Title, and Succession. The Canons of
the Sur. Tom. 2 p. 741, to 746.
sixth Council of Toledo, were ratified by King Chintillanus, with the assent
of his Nobles and great men, who were present in it, as appears by the words of
the 2, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. Canons, which determine of State affairs,
touching the King and Crown, and confirm the Canons formerly made and
ratified by the Kings consent, Cui omnium gubernatio superno constat delegata
judicio; but most apparently by the third Canon, Inspiramine summi Dei
Excellentissimus and Christianissimus Princeps ardore fidei inflammatus, cum
regni sui Sacerdotibus praevaricationes and superstitiones Judaeorum eradicare
elegit funditus, nec sinit degere in regno suo eum, qui non sit Catholicus: ob
cujus fervorem fidei gratias Omnipotenti Domino coelorum agimus, etc. Quocirca
consonam CVM EO cord and ore promulgamus Deo placituram sententiam, SIMVL
ETIAM CVM SVORVM OPTIMATVM ILLVSTRIVMQVE VIRORVM CONSENSV ET DELIBERATIONE
SANCIMVS: (A clear evidence that the Nobility and Gentry were present, and had
voices in that Council, which was in nature of a Parliament, as the State
Canons of it manifest.) Vt quisquis succedentium temporum regni sortitus fuerit
apicem, non ante conscendat regiam sedem, quam inter reliqua conditionum
sacramenta pollicitus fuerit, hanc se Catholicam non permissurum eos violare
fidem, etc. In the Sur Tom. 2. p. 854, 855, 857 863, 864.
eighth Council of Toledo; King Recessuinthus, who called it, entered into the
Synod in person, and made an elegant, pious Oration to the Prelates, and Nobles
assembled in it; after which he exhibited a Roll of those things and Canons
which he desired to be publicly ratified in that Council, written in his
Royal name, comprising therein the confession of his faith, and ratifying the
Faith and Constitutions of the four first general Counsels; which he thus
subscribed, In nomine Domini, Flavius Recessuinthus Rex, hanc fidei and bonae
voluntatis meae deliberationem manu mea subscripsi. The twelfth Canon of this
Council concerns State businesses: and all those Canons were published, and
ratified in the Kings name, as these words at the end of the twelfth Canon
evidence, Hujus quoque sententiae fortitudine vel vigore decreti nostri seriem,
quam in serenissimi Domini nostri Recessuinthi Regis EDIDIMVS NOMINE, pro rebus
a divae memoriae Patre suo quolibet titulo conquisitis, decernimus omnino
constare, etc. Yea, diverse Ibid. p. 864.
Earls and Nobles subscribed their names, in ratification of the Canons of
this Council, as well as Bishops, as Odoacer, Osilo, Adulphus, Babilo,
Ataculphus, Ellae, Paulus, Euuntius, Rucchila, Afrila, Venedmus, Faudila,
Euredus, Cunsredus, Froila, with other Earls. This Council published a Decree
in the Kings name, concerning the right of the Crown, and State Government,
(which manifests it to be a kind of Parliament, compacted as well of the
Temporalty as the Clergy) and King Recessuinthus, himself, promulgated a Law
therein, in ratification of that decree of theirs; both which are at large
recorded by Ibid p. 864 865, 866.
Surius. The Sur Tom. 2. p. 867, 870, 872, 873, 874.
ninth and tenth Counsels of Toledo were called and confirmed by the same
Recessuinthus, for whom the Prelates in these Counsels oft-times give thanks
to God; doing all things by his direction, assent, and in his name, Opitulante
miseratione divina, and gloriosissimi Recessuinthi Principis inhoerente
voluntate religiosa. The eleventh Council of Toledo was ratified by King
Vvambanus, Sur. Ibid. p. 880. 887.
Cujus hortatu aggregandi nobis facultas data est, and oportuna corrigendis
praeparata est disciplina. Iste est ergo tenor fidei nostrae, qui and a capite
copiose profluxit, and a membris probatus gloriose emicuit, says the Prologue
of the Bishops assembled in that Council, and the sixteenth Canon of it.
Constantinus Pogonatus, as he called the Surius Council. Tom. 2. p 899 to 940.
sparsim.
sixth general Council of Constantinople, by his writs, so he sat President
therein, with diverse of his Nobles, Princes, Senators; ordered, swayed,
directed all things in it; ratifying the Acts and Decrees thereof both by his
Subscription and Imperial Laws. Hence we so Ibid. p 902 904, 906, 907, 908,
928, 929, 930, 931, 932, 934, 935, 936, 939, 944, 945, 947, 964, 965, 966, 967,
980. 981, 983, 984, 987, 990, 991, 992, 993, 998, 1000, to 1013 1016, to 1030.
often read in that Council, these and the like passages, Praesidente eodem
piissimo and Christo amabili Imperatore Constantino. Piissimus Imperator
Constantinus dixit: sancta Synodus dixit. Quod and nunc a vestra serenitate pie
jussum est, fiat: Constantinus piissimus Imperator, and sancta Synodus
dixerunt. Constantinus piissimus Imperator dixit; Sufficient and quae hodierna
die relicta sunt; reliqua vero in sequenti secretario religantur. Meminit
vestra pietas and haec sancta Synodus. Residentibus quoque gloriosissimis
Patriciis and Consulibus, ex latere venerandissimi, piissimi and Christi
amatoris Imperatoris nostri Constantini. Gloriosissimi Judices dixerunt.
Diversis vicibus in praesentia piissimi nostri Domini and magni Imperatoric and
cuncti nostri Concilii interrogatus fuit. Gloriosi Judices dixerunt;
Sufficient, quae hodierna die acta sunt: Releguntur ista, etc. Ibid. p. 1021
1022.
Subscriptio piissimi and Christo dilecti Constantini Imperatoris, legimus, and
subscripsimus. Constantinus piissimus Imperator dixit. Edicat sanctum and
universale Concilium, si cum consensu omnium Episcoporum promulgata est
definitio, quae ad praesens relicta est. Sanctum Concilium exclamavit. Omnes
ita credimus; Vna fides; Omnes idipsum sentimus; Omnes consentientes and
amplectentes subscripsimus: Orthodoxe omnia credimus. Multos annos Imperatori,
etc. Sancta Synodus exclamavit. Multos annos Imperatori; Christo dilecto
Imperatori multos annos. Pium and Christianum Imperatorem Domine conserva.
ORTHODOXAM FIDEM TV CONFIRMASTI. Aeterna memoria Imperatori, aeternum permaneat
vestrum Imperium. At the Ibid p. 1025 to 1031.
end of the 18th. Action of this Council follow two Imperial Edicts of
Constantine Pogonatus, ratifying the Actions and Determinations thereof, under
severe penalties: in the later of which he says thus of his own Subscription
and Ratification of that Synod, In qua and Imperium nostrum subscripsit, and
per pia dicta nostra COMPROBAVIT EAM. Pope Leo the second, in Ibid. p. 1031
1032, 1033.
his Epistle to this pious Emperor, highly approved and applauded this his
piety, zeal, and princely care for advancing Religion, suppressing heresies
and schisms, and for his Acts and proceedings in this general Council,
testifying his assent thereto, as to a general Council, worthy to be ranked
with those other famous general Counsels held before it; exhorting the whole
Church of God securely to rejoice, that God had raised her up such a Defender
and Benefactor, cujus studio orthodoxa fides recollecto splendore toto orb
irradiat, fideles omnes gratiam referentes exultant, infideles moeror atque
dejectio comprimit and confundit, Ecclesiae Christi de cunctis oppressionibus
liberatae respirant, donis Imperialibus confoventur, principali praesidio
muniuntur: So far were Popes in those days from carping at Emperors
proceedings in matters of Religion, and their Presidentship and presence in
general Counsels. Neither did this Constantine only, but likewise Justinian
the second, his son, and Successor in the Empire, confirm the Decrees and
Canons of this general Synod, viz. those Canons in Trullus, with his Imperial
Edict; causing all his Nobles, Senate, Bishops, Captains, Soldiers, and
others, to subscribe it, as himself records in his Letter to Pope John; Ibid.
p. 1034
In nomine Domini Dei and Salvatoris nostri Jesu Christi, Imperator Caesar
Flavius Justinianus, fidelis in Jesu Christo, pacificus, pius, perpetum petuus
Augustus, etc. Magnum studium, magnam sollicitudinem nos habentes pro
stabilitate immaculatae Christianorum fidei, etc. Quia Synodalia gesta,
eorumque definitionem, quam and instituere noscitur sanctum sextum Concilium,
quod congregatum est in tempore sancta memoriae nostri Patris, in hanc a Deo
conservandam regiam urbem, apud quosdam nostros Judices remiserunt. Neque
omnino praevidimus alterum aliquem apud se detinere ea, sine nostra piissima
Serenitate; eo quod Nos copiosos misericordia noster Deus custodes constituit
immaculatae Christianorum fidei: sed mox adduximus nostros Patres sanctissimos
ac beatissimos Patriarchas, and Note.
sacratissimum Senatum, verum etiam Deo amabiles Motropolitas and Episcopos,
qui hic in regia urbe commorantur; and dcinceps Militantes incolas sancti
Palatii, necnon and ex Collegiis popularibus, and ab excubitoribus: insuper
etiam quosdam de Christo dilectis exercitibus, tam ab a Deo conservando
Imperiali obsequio, quamque ab Orientali Thraciano, similiter and ab Armeniano,
etiam ab exercitu Italiae, deinde ex Cabarisnianis, and Septensian^s, seu de
Sardinia atque de Africano exercitu; qui ad nostram pietatem ingressi sunt, and
jussimus praefatas Synodaelium gestorum chartas in medium adduci, and CORAM
SVPRADICTIS OMNIBVS LECTIONEM EORVM FIERI, OMNESQVE DILIGENTER AVDIENTES
SIGNARE IPSAS FECIMVS: quorum auditorum universitas in nostris manibus eas
praebuit chartas, ut debeamus nos tenendo inviolatas conservare ipsas, ut non
licentia fuerit in quolibet tempore his, qui timorem Dei nolunt habere, aliquid
corrumpere aut submutare ab his, quae inserta sunt in praenominatis Synodalibus
gestis; quas totas chart as been definitas in temporibus sanctae memoriae
nostrae Patris, ex probabilibus sanctis Patribus, qui propriae linguae and
manuum fidem apud Dominum nostrum Jesum Christum verumque Deum existentem,
confirmasse dignoscitur, and consitentes eam docuisse, nos speramus
clementissimum nostrum Deum: quia usque dum noster spiritus statutus est ex Deo
esse, in nobis ipsas chartas illibatas and incommutabiles semper conservabimus.
These Canons, which were compiled by his command in that Synod after his
Fathers decease, the Bishops sent unto him to peruse and ratify, as appears by
the last clause of their Oration to the Emperor, prefixed before them by way of
a Preface; Sur. Tom. 2 p. 1039.
Propterea ergo tuae pietatis jussu in hac Dei observatrice and imperante urbe
congressi, sacros Canones conscripsimus. Quamobrem tuam Pietatem rogamus, eas
quae prius in hac Dei observatrice Civitate a congregatis sub bonae memoriae
Imperatore nostro Patribus editae sunt, voces tibi adducentes, ut quemadmodum
Ecclesiae scriptis Ecclesiam bonorasti, sic and eorum quae per viros pios and
synceros decreta sunt, finem obsignes. The resolution therefore of this
general Synod was, That they could make no Canons but by the Emperors license
and command, nor promulge any but such as he should first approve and
confirm. The 12. and 13. Counsels of Toledo, assembled by King Eringius, were
in verity naught else but Parliaments: for first, the temporal Governors,
Nobles, and Magistrates of all Spain were present in them, Sur. Tom. 3. p. 2,
10.
Praesto sunt religiosi provinciarum Rectores, and clarissimorum ordinum totius
Hispaniae Duces, and illustres aulae regiae viri; quos interesse huic sancto
Concilio delegit nostra Sublimitas; and clarissimi nostri Palatij Seniores,
sublimiumque virorum Nobilitas, says the Kings Instructions in both Counsels;
and these had decisive voices. Secondly, Sur. ibid. p. 1. to 12.
the King in those Counsels made two several Speeches to them both, and gave
to them several writings, concerning such things as he desired to have
enacted; commanding both the Nobles, Senators, Captains, Courtiers, and
Counsels, as well as the Prelates in those two Counsels, to draw those
Scrolls he gave them into several Heads, Laws, and Canons; expunging every
thing that was absurd, and correcting all things contrary to justice, both in
those Scrolls, and in his Laws; prescribing them in general Heads what Laws
to make, but referring the particular forming and penning of them to them.
Thirdly, In those Counsels he desires them to rectify and confirm the Laws
he delivered them in Writing, (many of which are merely of State affairs, and
temporal matters, concerning the Kings title to the Crown, and the like:) and
when those Counsels had made Laws, Canons, and Constitutions, according to
his directions in writing, he then confirmed them both by his Royal
Subscription and Edicts, in this manner, Surius ibid. page 2. 9.
In nomine Domini, Havius Eringius Rex: magna salus populi gentisque nostri ac
regni conquiritur, si haec Synodalium decreta gestorum, sicut pie devotionis
nostrae studio acta sunt, ita inconvulsibilis legis nostrae valido oraculo
confirmentur: ut quod sercuissimo Celsitudinis nostrae jussu venerandis
Patribus and clarissimis Palatij nostri Senioribus discreta titulorum
exaratione est edictum, praesentis hujus legis nostrae edicto ab aemulis
defendatur. Est enim haec ipsa definitio Canonum, sub isto notata ordine
titulorum. Then follow the Acts, Canons, and Constitutions of the Counsels,
(made by the Kings direction and assent, as most of the Canons, and the two
Scrolls delivered by him to these two Counsels manifest,) with the
Subscriptions of the Bishops and Nobles; and then the Kings Edict of
confirmation, which recites them, proceeds thus, Quibus omnibus Synodalibus
gestis decretis atque peractis, and debitam reverentiam honoris impendimus, and
patulum autoritatis nostrae vigorem his innectare properamus. Ideo praemissas
has constitutiones Synodicas a praesenti die vel tempore, id est, ab octavo
Calendas February, anno primo regni nostri, nullus audeat contemnere, nullus
etiam praeterire, nemo earundem constitutionum audeat jura convellere, nullus
temerator haec decreta subvertere. Nemo illicitator vel contemptor vigorem his
institutionibus subtrahat, sed generaliter per cunctas regni nostri provincias
haec Canonum instituta nostrae gloriae temporibus acta, and autoritatis debitae
fastigio praepollebunt, and irrevocabili judiciorum exercitio, prout constituta
sunt, celebria habebuntur. Si quis autem haec instituta contemnat, contemptorum
se noverit damnari sententia; id est, ut juxta voluntatem nestrae gloriae and
excommunicatus a coetu nostro resiliat, NOTA.
and insuper partem decimam facultatis suae sisci partibus sociandam, amittat.
Quod si nihil habuerit facultatis, unde praedictam compositionem exsolvere
possit, absque alia infamia sui, quinquaginta oportebit eum ictibus verberari,
ut semper infamis permaneat. Edita Lex in confirmatione Concilij Toletani sub
die octavo Calendas Februarij, anno feliciter primo regni gloriae nostrae. In
nomine Domini Flavius Eringius Rex, hoc legis nostrae Edictum in CONFIRMATIONE
HVJVS CONCILII PROMVLGATVM, SVBSCRIPSI. The Passages and Canons of both these
Counsels, duly considered, will manifest, That the Counsels of Spain, and
others in those days, were naught else but Parliaments; consisting as well of
temporal Lords, Great men, Counselors, Magistrates, as of Bishops: That
Princes then could not make Ecclesiastical Canons and Constitutions to bind
their Subjects, but in Parliament: and that the Bishops alone could not then
make any such Canons or Laws but in Parliament, with the concurrent consent
and direction of the temporal Lords and Governors, the Kings license for that
purpose first gained; nor yet promulge them, without the Kings Letters Patents
first obtained for their ratification. The Sur. Tom. 3 p. 39, 40.
Canons of the Synod of France under Charlemain, An. 742. were ratified by his
Edict, and set forth by him, in his own name, being compiled by him in
Parliament, (as it seems, his Nobles being present) CONSILIO Sacerdotum ET
OPTIMATVM MEORVM, with the counsel of his Priests and Nobles. The
Constitutions and Canons of the Synod of Sur. Tom. 3. p. 40, 41.
Soyssons, made by Prince Pepin, Consensu and Concilio Episcoporum sive
Sacerdotum, and Comitum seu Optimatum Francorum, with the consent and counsel
of the Bishops or Priests, and of the Nobles or Great men of France, were
published by him in his own name, with his Royal confirmation in writing,
which concludes thus: Si quis contra hoc decretum, quod 23. Episcopi cum aliis
Sacerdotibus vel servis Dei, una cum consensu Principis Pepini, vel OPTIMATVM
FRANCORUM CONSILIO CONSTITVERVNT, transgredi, vel legem irrumpere voluerit vel
despexit, judicandus sit ab ipso Principe, vel Episcopis, vel Comitibus
componat, secundum quod in lege scriptum est, unusquisque juxta ordinem suum.
This Synod being no other but a Parliament, the temporal Lords having, voices
in it as well as Bishops. The Council held at the Palace of Vernis, under the
same King Pepin, Cap. 6. decreed by his consent, That there should be two
Synods kept every year; the first of them in March, Vbicunque Dominus Rex
jusserit, IN EIVS PRAESENTIA. Sur. Tom. 3. p. 42.
Wheresoever the King should command, and in his presence: The King therefore
was then President in their Synods, both to order them, and to control,
correct, or confirm their Canons, as he thought meet. In the second Council
of Sur. Tom. 3. p. 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 56, 60, 61, 64, 65, 70, 71, 72, 78, 79,
80, 90, 91, 92, 93, 95, 127, 128 13^, 138, 140, 182, 183, 187, 188, 189.
Nice, assembled by the Edict of Constantine and Irene his Mother, Petronius
the glorious Proconsul, Theophylact an Earl employed in the Emperors service,
John the Kings Chamberlain, and Treasurer of his Army, with other magnificent
and illustrious Senators, sat as chief Auditors and Directors: The Emperor
and his Mother likewise directed the Council both what to treat of, what to
read, and how to proceed; and ratified the Decrees of that Idolatrous Council;
the Synod craving their Imperial assistance for the defense of truth, the
suppression of heresies, schisms, reformation of abuses, and settling the peace
of the Church, by their public Laws and Edicts yea, they desire their
Majesty's, to incline their ears to their most humble supplications, Ipsasque
sacratissimas Imagines in pristino gradu constituere, ut omnes Christiani in
universo mundo exultent, and magno laetantur gaudio; Pope Adrian himself
making this request unto them, in his Epistles Supplicatory, acknowledging the
right both of summoning, ordering, and confirming Counsels, to be in them,
not in himself. Sur. Tom. 3^. p. 232, 238, 247 to 252.
Charles the Great and his Nobles were present in the Synod of Frankford;
summoned by his Writ and Edict; yea, Charles late President in it; Congregatis
nobis in unum charitatis conventu, praecipiente, ET PRAESIDENTE piissimo and
gloriosissimo Domino nostro Carolo Rege, write the Fathers of that Synod to the
Prelates of Spain, to whom Charles in this Synod writ an Epistle, and a
profession of his faith, exhorting them to reform their Errors and embrace the
Truth. The Canons of the Synod of Theodon were Sur. Tom. 3. p. ^70.
ratified by the Imperial Edict of Charles the Great, Ludovicus Pius ET
IMPERATORES, ET PENE OMNES GALLIAE PRINCIPES SVBSCRIPSERVNT, singuli singulas
facientes cruces: The Emperors and almost all the Princes of France subscribing
the Decrees of that Synod, after all persons in it had three several times
consented to them, by crying out a Placet; and Te Deum being sung by the
Clergy, after this subscription, the Synod dissolved: which was no other but a
Parliament; those Emperors and their Nobles being present, and having the
chief voices in it. The fourth Synod of Arles, under the same Charles, having
drawn up 26. Canons, submits them to his Royal censure, to correct,
disapprove, or ratify them at his pleasure; Sur. Tom. 3. p. 27. Bochellus
Decreta Eccles. Gal lib. 5. Tit. 20. cap. 19. p. 901.
Haec igitur sub brevitate, quae emendatione digna perspeximus, quam brevissime
adnotavimus, and Domino Imperatori praesentanda decrevimus; poscentes ejus
Clementiam, ut si quid hic minus est, ejus prudentia suppleatur; si quid secus
quam se ratio habeat, ejus judicio emendetur; si quid rationabiliter taxatum
est, ejus adjutorio, divina opitulante clementia, perficiatur: (A memorable
Submission) All being nothing without his Royal confirmation. The Synod of
Towers, summoned by the same Emperor, was commanded by him, both what
Constitutions to make, and what things to consult of; which they thus express,
and submit to his censure, in the Prologue, and close of their Canons, Sur.
Tom. 3. p. 274, 278. Bochellus Decr. Eccles. Gal. l. 5. Tit. 20. cap. 20. p.
901.
Quantum piissimi Imperatoris nostri excellens animus, divinae sapientiae
fulgore sit irradiatus ad gubernandum rerum praesentium statum, ipsius Imperij
sibi a Deo dati, liquido testantur negocia: quae tanta sunt industria
administrata, quantaque prudentia ordinata, qui sapiens ac intelligens est
facile perspicere potest; and eo praecipue, quod hic toto animo invigilat,
investigando quae ad pietatem and veram Religionem pertinent, quorum fructus
hominem in bono beatitudinis collocat. His igitur intentus pios ac religiosos
Dei Sacerdotes, Ecclesiae gubernacula in regno sibi divina largitate collato
tenentes, saluberrimis exhortationibus admonuit, ut operam darent, and
actionibus eminerent, quibus and se been operando, and sibi commissos, verbis
and exemplis instruendo regerent. Dissinitum itaque de locis and tempore,
quando and ubi coadunari opus fuerit, and quod A TANTO PRINCIPE NOBIS INIVNCTVM
EST, ad statuta loca convenimus: siquidem urbe Turonis congregati Episcopi,
Abbates, and venerabilis Clerus, pro parvitate nostra, pauca quae ad tantum
opus pertinere animadvertimus, and quae secundum Canonicam regulam emendatione
indigent, distinct per capitula adnotavimus, SERENISSIMO IMPERATORI NOSTRO
OSTENDENDA. Primo omnium, admonuimus generaliter cunctos qui nostro conventui
interfuere, ut obedientes sunt Domino excellentissimo Imperatori nostro, and
fidem quam ei promissam habent, inviolabiliter conservare studeant, orationes
quoque assiduas intent fundere pro ejus incolumitate ac stabilitate, omnes se
velle secundum nostram admonitionem unanimiter professi sunt. etc. And then
they close up all their Canons with this Epilogue, Haec nos in conventu nostro
ita ventilavimus: sed quomodo deinceps piissimo Principi nostro DE HIS AGENDVM
PLACEBIT, NOS FIDELES IJVS FAMVLI, LIBENTI ANIMO AD NVTVM ET VOLVNT ATEM EIVS
PARATI SVMVS. The second Council of Cavaillon, under the same Charles, thus
preface their Canons, which they submit to his correction and approbation; Sur.
Tom. 3 p 278, 279. Bochel^us Decreta Eccles. Gal. l. 5. Tit ^0. cap. 21. p. 901.
Auxiliante Domino nostro Jes^^ Christo, atque imperante ferenissimo atque
inclito Augusto Carolo, convenimus Episcopi and Abbates totius Galliae
Lugdunensis in urbem Cabilonensem, and de quibusdam rebus in quibus nobis
emendatione necessaria videbatur, quaedam capitula quae subter inserta sunt
EIDEM DOMINO IMPERATORI PRAESENTANDA, ET AD EIVS SACRATISSIMVM IVDICIVM
REFERENDA adnotavimus; quate^s EIVS PRVDENTI EXAMINE EA, QVAE RATIONABILITER
DECREVIMVS, CONFIRMENTVR: sicubi minus aliquid egimus ILLIVS SAPIENTIA
SVPPLEATVR. Then follow the Canons made in that Council, by the Emperors
direction and command, as is evident by the third Canon; Ibid. p 279.
Oportet etiam, VT SICVT DOMINVS IMPERATOR CAROLUS PRAECEPIT, scholas
constituant, in quibus and literaria solertia disciplinae, and sacrae
Scripturae documenta discantur. And then they thus conclude their Canons, Cap.
67. Ibid p. 284, 285.
Haec itaque pauca de pluribus, quae necessaria perspeximus, cum magna
brevitate DOMINI IMPERATORIS PRVDENTI IVDICIO PRAESENTANDA, ADNOT AVIMVS.
Caeterum quid generaliter in omnibus and ab omnibus sequendum sit, quidve
vitandum, qualiterve intra Ecclesiam sanctam sit vivendum, qui before nosse
desiderat, sanctarum Scripturarum prata percurrere non desistat. The Council
of Mentz under Charles the great, summoned by his command, was no other but a
Parliament; Sur. Tom. 3. p. 285.
consisting of Bishops and Clergymen, who ^ate together in one company; of
Abbats and Priors, who sat together in a second Class; of Earls and Judges,
sitting together in a third Class; Convenit nobis de nostro communi Collegio
Clericorum seu LAICORVM TRIES FACERE TVRMAS, sicut and fecimus, etc. Intertia
denique turma SEDERVNT COMITES ET IVDICES IN MVNDANIS LEGIBVS DECERTANTES,
vulgi justitias terminantes, etc. says the Prologue of that Council to the
Emperor. The Ecclesiastical Canons and Laws concluded on therein, were made
and approved by all three Companies; IN HIS ITAQVE OMNIBVS PRIMO DECREVIMVS,
etc. are the words of the same Prologue. And having finished the Canons, they
thus submit them to the Emperors correction and approbation, with this Preface,
Surius ibid. page ^85.
In nomine Patris and Filij and Spiritus Sancti: Gloriosissimo and
Christianissimo Imperatori Carolo Augusto, verae Religionis Rectori, ac
Defensori sanctae Dei Ecclesiae, una cum prole sua, ejusque fidelibus vita and
salus, honor and benedictio, cum victoria sine fine mansura. Almificae
reverentiae vestrae patefacimus nos humilimi famuli ac missi vestri, etc. In
his itaque omnibus primo decrevimus, etc. De his tamen omnibus VALDE INDIGEMVS
ADIVTORIO VESTRO ATQVE SANA DOCTRINA, quae and nos jugiter admoneat, atque
clementer erudiat, quatenus ea quae paucis subter substrinximus capitulis, I
wish our Independents would be so subm^ssive, and tractable in words and deeds,
as those in these and other Counsels were.
A VESTRA AVTORITATE FIRMENTVR, SI TAMEN VESTRA PIETAS ITA DIGNVM ESSE
IVDICAVERIT. ET QVICQVID IN EIS EMENDATIONE DIGNVM REPERITVR, VESTRA MAGNIFICA
IMPERIALIS DIGNITAS IVBEAT EMENDARI: ut ita emendata, nobis omnibus, and
cunctae Christianae plebi and posteris nostris proficiunt ad vitam and salutem,
and ad gloriam sempiternam, VOBIS QVE inde merces, and honor and laus and
benedictio, ac beatitudo permaneat in omnes aeternitates seculi. Amen. This
Council therefore knew full well, that they could neither make, nor promulge
any Canons or Constitutions, but by the Emperors license and consent; and that
all they did without his confirmation was invalid, and nothing worth. The
Council of Rhemes, Anno 813. Sur. Tom. 3. ^. 291.
(A Domino Carolo piissimo Caesare MORE PRISCORVM IMPERATORVM CONGREGATO, says
Surius,) made several Canons and Constitutions, which they entreat the Emperor
to ratify; Witness the Ibid p. 193.
33, 41, 42, 43, 44. Canons, wherein we have these passages, Domini
Imperatoris misericordia imploranda, ut victum and necessaria a sibi praelatis
consequi possunt sanctimoniales, and vita illarum and castitas, secundum
fragilitatem sexus, diligenter provisa tueatur. Vt Dominus Imperator secundum
statutum bonae memoriae Domini Pepini, misericordiam faciat, ne solidi qui in
lege habentur, per quadraginta denarios discurrant: ut in sua eleemosyna
sirmiter statuat, ne quilibet in suum pergentibus servitium, ullatenus
prohibere audeat mansionem, neque aliis quibus necessitas incumbit: Vt ejus
magnificum and cuncto imperio ejus suis and futuris temporibus firmetur
capitulum, sive ab anno 30, a quo adhuc testes haberi possunt, seu etiam ab
illo, a quo felicissimum ejus sumpsit exordium, qualiter omnes lites and jurgia
in sua misericordia terminum habere potuissent. Vt de falsis testibus, ejus
simili modo piissimum firmetur capitulum, qualiter and hoc quod ille Bonomae
statuit, firmissimum habeatur: and adhuc quaerantur, quatenus in sua piissima
misericordia, SI QVA NECESSARIA SVNT AVGEANTVR. All which Canons, standing at
the Emperors courtesy to ratify, prove undeniably, that without his
approbation and confirmation they were mere nullities. Wherefore Aistulfus
Archibishop of Mentz (as Ecclesiae Gallicanae Decretorum Additamenta. ad tit.
20 l. 5 p. 1371.
Bochellus informs me) spoke thus in that Synod, SI PRINCIPI PLACVERIT
ALIISQVE FIDELIBVS SVIS, ROGEMVS, VT CONCLAVDETVR ET SVBSCRIBATVR; If it shall
please the Prince and other his Nobles and Liege people, we entreat that it
may be jointly applauded and subscribed: ET CONLAVDATVM EST, ET SVBSCRIPTVM
EST, Suri^s Tom. ^. p 372.
TAM A PRINCIPE QVAM A CAETERIS OMNIBVS; And it was applauded and subscribed,
as well by the Prince as by all others, So that the consent and subscription
both of the Prince, the Peers and Nobles, as well as of the Prelates, was
requisite to confirm the Canons of Counsels. The first Council of Orleans,
under King Clodoveus, thus prostitute their Canons to his censure and
approbation; Bochel^us Decreta Eccles. Gal. l. 5. Tit. 20. cap. 17. p. 901.
Domino suo Catholicae Ecclesiae filio Clodoveo gloriosissimo Regi, omnes
Sacerdotes quos ad Concilium venire jussistis; quia^tanta ad Religionis
Catholicae cultum gloriosae fidei cura vos excitat, ut Sacerdotalis mentis
affectu, Sacerdotes de rebus necessariis tractaturos in unum colligi
jusseritis, SECVNDVM VESTRAE VOLVNTATIS CONSVLTATIONEM ET TITVLOS QVOS
DEDISTIS, ea, quae nobis visa sunt, definitione respondimus, ita ut si ea, quae
nos statuimus, ETIAM VESTRO RECTA ESSE IVDICIO COMPROBATVR, TANTI CONSENSVS
REGIS AC DOMINI MAJORIS AVTORITATEM SERVANDAM (majori autoritate servandae,
says Surius) tantorum FIRMET SENTENTIA Sacerdotum. This Council therefore
deemed not their Canons firm and valid, unless ratified and confirmed by the
Prince. The Council of Paris, under Jews and Lotharius, and all the Prelates
in it, in their Epistle to these Princes, commend their Canons to their
correction and ratification, in this manner, Nos fidelissimi as devotissimi
salutis vestrae procuratores, juxta parvitatem sensus nostri, prout brevitas
temporis permisit, Sur. Tom. 3 p. 402, 415.
SECVNDVM SANCTAM DEVOTIONEM ET ORDINATIONEM VESTRAM, de causis ad Religionem
Christianam, nostrumque ministerium atque periculum pertinentibus; necnon and
de his quae ad nostram correctionem and emendationem pertinere perspeximus,
sive de his, quae populis generaliter annuncianda and admonenda praevidimus,
capitulatim in praecedentibus adnotavimus libellis, VESTRAEQVE SERENITATI
LEGENDA, IMMO PROBANDA, OBTVLIMVS, etc. Et quanquam de his, quae praemissa
sunt, vestro ardentissimo desiderio prius satisfacere elegerimus, nequaquam
tamen haec quae specialiter ad vestram personam, ministeriumque pertinere
cognovimus, oblivioni tradimus, sed potius vestrae saluti prospicientes,
nonnulla capitula necessaria in secundo hujus operis libello, ad nomen
ministeriumque vestrum pertinentia, periculumque cavendum, solerti studio
congessimus, and vobis familiariter admonitionis gratia, porrigenda devovimus;
ut ea diligenter inspiciendo, legendo and audiendo, aperte atque distinct
Vestra cognoscat Celsitudo, de quibus and pro quibus in memoratis conventibus
nostris, secundum virium nostrarum possibilitatem fideliter salubriterque
egerimus. Hence this Council humbly beseeches these Princes, to establish
diverse things and Canons they propound unto them, in these supplicative words;
Ibid p. 405, 406, 407, 408.
l. 3. c. 8. to 27. Petimus humiliter Excellentiam vestram. Illud etiam
specialiter necessarium Vestra suggerere Pietati duximus. Similiter etiam
obnixe ac suppliciter vestrae Celsitudini suggerimus. Similiter and hoc a
Vestra Pietate necessarium duximus expetendum. Illud quoque a vestra Pietate
suppliciter flagitamus. Illud etiam obnixe Vestram sanctam piissimamque
Devotionem suppliciter monendo deposcimus. Iterum suppliciter admonendo vestrae
suggerimus Serenitati. Postulamus etiam, ut Celsitudo vestra. Iterum monendo,
Magnitudini vestrae suppliciter suggerimus. Similiter deposcimus. Rogamus etiam
vestram Pietatem. Et hoc humiliter observando admonemus. Ibid. p. 385
And lib. 1. cap. 50. De observatione diei Dominicae. Quapropter specialiter
atque humiliter a Sacerdotibus Imperialis Celsitudo flagitanda est, ut ejus a
Deo ordinata potestas, ob honorem and reverentiam tanti dici, cunctis motum
incutiat, ne in hac sancta and venerabile die mercatus, and placita, and
ruralia quaeque opera, necnon and quaslibet corrigationes ullius conditionis
homines facere praesumant. And it concludes thus, Ibid. p. 409. 420.
lib. 3. cap. 27. Porro de Episcopali liberate, quam, Deo annuente, VESTRO QVE
ADMINICVLO SVFFRAGANTE, adipisci ad Dei servitium peragendum cupimus, suo in
tempore VOBIS DICENDA, ATQVE VOBISCVM CONFERENDA RESERVAVIMVS. By all which it
appears, that this Council could decree nothing but by the Emperors License;
and that all their Canons and Decrees were vain and abortive without his
ratification of them. The Synod of Aquisgran (or Aix) under Ludovicus Pius,
Anno 833. has almost the selfsame words and passages; being directed by this
Emperor both what to treat of, and petitioning him to ratify and put in
execution what they decreed, as these passages manifest; Surius ibid. p 409,
410, 415, 417, 419, 420, 421.
Ibi de statu sanctae Dei Ecclesiae AD MONENTE Serenissimo atque totius
religionis devatissimo praefato Imperatore, tractare coepissemus. Revolutis
igitur A VESTRA NOBIS benignissima devotione, COLLATIS TRIBVS CAPITVLIS, id
est, VT VENTILARENTVR, etc. Vestrum siquidem nihilominus supplici admonitione
and affectu charitatis excellentiam, admonente, si quae sunt Ecclesiastici
juris VESTRA PIISSIMA GVBERNATIONE ERIGENDA, VT PER VOS, VESTROSQVE Christianae
Religionis commilitiones SVBLEVENTVR, etc. Pars (...) c 15, 16. p. 415.
Haec nos fideles and devotissimi famuli and Oratores vestri, juxta parvitatem
sensus nostri, SECVNDVM SANCTAM ORDINATIONEM VESTRAM, de his quae ad nostram,
and consacerdotorum subjectorumque nostrorum correctionem and emendationem
pertinere perspeximus, etc. Sed nunc quia de his quae praemissa sunt, VESTRO
ARDENTISSIMO DESIDERIO prius satisfacere studuimus: illud tamen quod ad vestram
specialiter personam ministeriumque pertinere cognoscimus, nullatenus oblivioni
tradidimus; sed potius vestrae saluti prospicientes, nonnulla capitula
necessaria fideliter collegimus, and VOBIS familiariter admonitionis gratia
devoteque PORRIGENDA devovimus. Similiter quaedam ad filios vestros
pertinentia, quaedam vero ad commilitones vestros non minus pertinentia: Which
Canons commonly begin thus, Pars 2. c. 5, 6, 11, 12, 13, 16 25 Ibid. p. 417,
419, 420, 421.
Petimus humiliter vestram Excellentiam. Illud etiam specialiter necessarium
vestrae suggerere Pietati duximus. Rogamus etiam vestram Pietatem propter
divinam misericordiam, vestramque salutem. Et hoc humiliter admonemus.
Innotescimus vobis, quod ea, quae IN CAPITVLIS VESTRIS NOBIS TRACTANDA
COMMISISTIS, etc. Vestram interea Deo amabilis Auguste petimus clementiam.
Similiter est postulandum. Meminimus in posteriis conventibus nonnulla capitula
ab Episcopis VESTRA ADMONITIONE FVISSE TRACTATA ATQVE STATVTA, pro necessitate
and communi salute utrorumque ordinum Ecclesiasticorum scilicet and secularium,
sed nescimus quibus impedientibus obstaculis quasi oblivioni tradita. Ideoque
affectu devoto, supplici admonitione admonemus, and admonendo precamur, ne
ista, quae nunc, licet perpauca, praelibavimus ad statum sanctae Dei Ecclesiae,
simili modo oblivioni tradantur, sed pro speculo omnibus inconvulsa habeantur
atque conserventur, etc. The Synod of Mentz, under Rabanus Maurus, assembled by
the command of Lodovicus Pius, sent all their Canons, with a Preface before
them, to this Emperor; wherein they have this notable passage touching Princes
Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, Sur. Tom. 3. p. 422.
De Christianis vero Regibus and Imperatoribus non necesse est aliqua exempla
ponere; cum omnes qui rectae fidei and sani dogmatis fuerint, a Constantino
Imperatore, qui primus Imperatorum Christianum Religionem defendere, atque
honorem Ecclesiarum Dei amplificare coepit, NOTA.
usque ad nos, semper in hoc studio solerter laboraverint, ut Ecclesia Dei
pacem, and tranquillitatem haberet, quatenus cultus Dei incontaminatus foret,
and servi ejus sine impedimento Deo delectabiliter deservirent. And at the end
of their last Cap. 31. Ibid p 428.
Canon, they conclude with this Petition to the Emperor, Haec vero quae VOBIS
TRANSMISSA SVNT, PETIMVS, VT VESTRA AVTORITATE FIRMENTVR: Et si quis
adversarius illis existere voluerit, praevalere non permittatur. Dei enim
cooperatores vos esse debetis, and adjutores sanctae ejus Ecclesiae, quatenus
Religio-Christiana incontaminatae temporibus regni vestri usque ad finem
servetur. The Synod of Aix, under King Pepin, Sur Tom. 3. p. 4^1, 492, 493.
sent the Canons and Admonitions they had made unto him, to read, approve, and
execute, as the Preface and close of them, directed to him, manifest at large:
Yea, lib. 3. cap. 27. they desire him, on their bended knees, that he would
look upon them with a favorable and acceptable eye, and that they might
through his approbation be profitable to himself, his subjects and people.
The Synod of Melden, under Charles the younger, Anno 845. in the Prologue
before the Canons, recites, That the Synod of Aredon was confirmed with the
Subscription of King Charles, and of all the Clerks and Laymen present in it;
Sur. Tom. ^ p. 453, 454.
Quod idem inclytus Princeps and caeteri quique tam Ecclesiastici quam EX
LAICALI ORDINE QVI ADFVERVNT VIRI MANV PROPRIA FIRMAVERVNT. That not long
before, in the Synod of Meaux, diverse Canons, there recited, were decreed by
the King, the Clergy, and Nobles: Nuper ab eodem devotissimo Principe, una cum
sacro Ecclesiastico Ordine, ET ILLVSTRIVM VIRORVM NOBILITATE DECRETA SVNT.
These two Counsels were in nature of Parliaments, the King and his Nobles
being present, having voices in them, and subscribing them as well as the
Prelates. In the Sur. Ibid. p. 455, 457. 459, 460, 461, 467, 468.
2, 5, 12, 26, to 44. 76, to 83, 88, 89. Canons of the Synod of Melden, we
find nothing but Supplications and Petitions to the King, to decree, and
ratify the things comprised in them: Petimus, suggerendum est, ut Regia
magnificentia liberiorem libertatem Episcopis ad suum peragendum in little
parochiis ministerium, quam hactenus habuissent, tribuat. Vt Principes juxta
decreta Canonum per singulas provincias saltem bis aut semel in anno a
Metropolitanis and Dioeoesanis Episcopis SYNODICE CONVENIRI CONCEDANT:
(Therefore they cannot do it without their license.) Vt Regia Majestas
observare praecipiat, etc. Vt jus Ecclesiasticum and legem Canonicam nobis ita
conservetis sicut Antecessores vestri. Vt Praecepta quae Avus and Pater vester
Ecclesiis nobis commissis fecerunt and firmaverunt, stabilia conservaverunt,
ETIAM VOS CONFIRMASTIS ET de caetero RATA CONSERVETIS. And they thus submit
their Constitutions to the King, cap. 80. Ibid. p. 468.
Haec vestrae Christianae Devotioni verbis and scriptis protulimus: Vt autem
Capitula, quae Domino Mediatore communiter decrevistis ET MANV PROPRIA
CONFIRMASTIS, and nunc observatores VOS VERBIS PROMISISTIS, ut opere plentier
conservetis and adimpleatis, nunc etiam admonemus. Et Capitula Patris vestri
fine refragatione de caetero conserventur, ac Capitulis vestrae Religioni, ab
exiguitatis nostrae ministerio oblatis, HOC DIPLOMA, SI COMPLACET, ADNECTATVR.
All which, are so many Synodall resolutions, that Canons made in Counsels
without Princes special ratifications, by their Subscriptions and Charters,
are no ways obligatory. In the Synod of Medardum, under Charles the son of
Lodovick, who summoned and sat President in it, this King humbly and prudently
propounded many things to be defined and discussed therein, himself sitting
there in person among the Bishops; there being Laymen likewise present in it;
The Canons in this Synod were made by this Kings direction and assent, and
confirmed by his and the others voices and Subscriptions. All which, these
Passages of that Synod evidence: Sur. Tom. 3. p. 469, 470, 474.
Ipse quoque Rex adesse dignatus est, ut non solum devotione Ecclesiae se
filium esse ostenderet, verum etiam sicubi opus esset, protectorem Regia
potestate monstraret. Cum itaque Praesules diversarum Ecclesiarum PIO REGE
MVLTA humiliter and prudenter PROPONENTE, tractassent potius quaedam quam
diffinivissent, etc. Part Cleri quae praesens erat AC LAICORVM, bonum ei
testimonium perhibente, etc. Statuit Ibid. cap. 4, 8, 9. p. 470.
sancta Synodus ANNVENTE PIO PRINCIPE, ut idonei Legati dirigerentur, qui
singulorum locorum statum solertissime perscrutarentur; and quae ipsi per se
non valerent corrigere, judicio proxime futuri Concilij ET POTESTATI REGIAE
REVELARENT. Obtentum est etiam a devotissimo Principe, ut incesti and quilibet
alij perditi examen Episcoporum refugientes, per Judices publicos ad little
praesentiam deducantur, ne alterius illicebram peccandi nutriat impunitas
vitiorum. Postremo praefixum est ab omnibus generaliter custodiendum; NE VILLAE
RES ECCLESIASTICAE ABSQVE REGIS COHIBENTIA COMMVTENTVR. (A strong Canon in the
behalf of the Kings Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction.) Et sic cunctis secundum
regulam Ecclesiasticam canonice and diligenter patratis, decretum and judicatum
est a sancta and venerabili Synodo, ASSENTIENTE ET FAVENTE Christianissimo and
gloriosissimo REGE DOMINO CAROLO haec omnia GESTIS INSERI, and in conspectu
Synodali relegi, ET RATA OMNIA JVDICATA CVNCTORVM MANIBVS ET SVBSCRIPTIONI
CANONICA, PERPETVO inconvulsae and inviolabiliter permansura FIRMARI. The
Council of Sur. Tom. 3. p. 475.
Valens, Anno 855. summoned by the Mandate of Lotharius the Emperor, cap. 23.
thus prays his confirmation of the Canons therein compiled; Quod judicium
nostrum tam necessarium and publicae disciplinae Ecclesiasticae defensioni
omnino suppliciter postulamus, EJVSDEM PII PRINCIPIS AVTORITATE MVNIRI: Under
which they annex the Edict of Constantine for the confirmation of the
Judgments and Constitutions of Bishops. In the Synod of Sur. Tom. 3. p. 480,
482, 483.
Ticinum (or Pauy) under Lodovick the second; this King sent both by word of
mouth and writing, an Exhortation and Monition to the Synod, that was publicly
related, and read in it: which the Synod drawing up into Canons, humbly desired
him to ratify, and to correct sundry abuses which they complained of: Which
the King, PRAESENTIBVS OPTIMATIBVS SVIS, in the presence of his Nobles,
ratified, both by word of mouth, and Royal Sanctions, beginning with a
Statuimus, Sancimus; and concluding thus: Haec olim saepe inculcata ET
AVGVSTALI SANCTIONE NOSTRA PROMVLGATA, quia ex part in aliquibus videntur
neglecta hactenus, acriori ulcisci debuerant examine, etc. This Synod being in
truth a Parliament, as the relation of it manifests. The Sur. Tom. 3. p 486,
489.
Council of Pistis, Anno 863. under King Charles the Bald, is thus prefaced,
Carolus gratia Dei Rex, and Episcopi, Abbates quoque and COMITES, ac caeteri in
Christo renati FIDELES ex diversis Provinciis, etc. convenimus: Which proves,
that Nobles and other Laymen were present at it. Besides, it makes mention,
that the Constitutions of the Council of Valens were made with the consent of
that Council, by the Kings Precept, and by him commanded to be proclaimed and
kept by his Subjects, and to be read and ratified in this Council: the
Constitutions whereof are made in the Kings, and published in the Kings and
Counsels names; who both subscribed and ratified them, as this close of the
Acts of that Council witnesses, Ibid. p. 491.
Vt autem haec quae observanda supra scripsimus ac praenominavimus, nunc and de
caetero certius and expressius a Nobis atque a Successoribus inconvulsa
serventum; PROPRIIS MANIBVS HIS SVBSCRIBERE COMMVNI CONSENSV DECREVIMVS, ea
condition servata, ut omnis in cunctis Ordinibus Lex Juris debiti, and honor
ab omnibus obedienter and fideliter cooperante Domino conservetur, Post haec
omnia relicta and collaudata COMMVNI CONSENSV DECREVIMVS, etc. The Council of
Worms, Anno 868. assembled by the command of King Lodovick, applaudes this
Princes great devotion, and care for Religion, in these terms, Sur. Tom. 3. p.
520.
Cujus tanta erga Deum devotio extat, ut non solum in rebus humanis, VERVM
ETIAM IN CAVSIS DIVINIS MAXIMAM SEMPER SOLLICITVDINEM GERAT: The Acts of which
Council were approved by him, The eighth general Council of Constantinople
was Sur. Tom. 3. p. 538, 539, 543, 544.
confirmed by the Subscriptions of the Emperors, Basilius, Constantine, and
Leo, whose Princes and Nobles were present, and sat as chief Directors and
Judges in it: And at the close of the Council, Basilius himself, there
present, demanded of the Synod, if they all consented to the Acts and Decrees
of this Council, and whether any of them did stick or doubt of any of them?
whereto they replied, Omnibus placent quae lecta sunt: Omnes eisdem ipsis
concordamus, omnes ita praedicamus; omnes concinentes and consentientes prompte
subscribimus* After which they all subscribed; and then the Emperors in the
last place subscribed in this manner, Basilius, Constantinus, and Leo, perpetni
Augusti, in Christo Deo sideles Principes Romanorum, and magni Imperatores,
sanctam hanc and universalem Synodum SVSCIPIENTES, ET OMNIBVS QVAE AB IPSIS
DEFINITA ET SCRIPTA SVNT, CONCORD ANTES, SVBSCRIPSIMVS MANV PROPRIA. In the
Council of Friburg, Anno 895. Sur. Tom. 3. p. 555, 556, 558.
Arnulphus the Emperor sat chief President: In which were present not only
Bishops and Abbats, but likewise all the Princes and Nobles of the Empire, with
innumerable troops of Clergymen and Laymen, who all confirmed the Acts and
Decrees thereof with their Subscriptions: Haec Subscriptio sacro-sanctae
venerabili professione and condigna responsione innumerabilium circumstantium
Presbyterorum ac Diaconorum, necnon and NOBILIVM LAICORVM CONFIRMATA ET
LAVDABILITER APPROBATA; as Surius relates it. In the great Sessio 4. to 37.
Surius Tom. 3. p. 774, 775, 776, 777, 778, 787, 788, 789, 794, 798, 802, 817,
821, 823, 830, 831, 833, 852, 923, to 930.
Council of Constance, the King of Romans in his Imperial Robes sat as
President, accompanied with his Nobles, with the Ambassadors and Orators of all
Nations, who had voices in that Council, and confirmed the Acts and Sessions
thereof, both with their Suffrages and Subscriptions. Yea, Sigismund King of
Romans, upon the Petition of the Council, by his Letters Patents and
Proclamations under his Seal, took upon him the patronage and protection of
the whole Council and their Actions; and justified and ratified all their
Proceedings; as the Fourteenth Session manifests, and sundry Passages in that
Council prove at large. In the Council of Basil, not only Sessio 1. Surius
Tom. 4. p. 2, 5. Sess. 8, 9. p. 27. Sess. 13, 14. p. 39, 40, 41, 42. Sess. 19.
p. 56 Sess 24. p. 70, 71, 72, 153, to 262. 325. to 364.
diverse Ambassadors and Nobles were present, but likewise Sigismund King of
Romans, Hungary and Bohemia, took the said Council into his Protection
against Pope Eugenius the Fourth; the Council likewise protecting him, and
vacating all the Process and Proceedings of the Pope against him and William
Duke of Bavaria, another of their Protectors. Yea, the Decrees of this Council
were made, Assistente Domine Imperatore, in habitu Imperiali, by the assistance
of the Emperor, who sat in that Council in his Imperial Robes, and confirmed
the Acts and Decrees thereof with his golden Bulls and Edicts. In this
Council, many Epistles of the Emperor and other great Princes, both ordering
and ratifying their Proceedings and Decrees, which were read publicly; yea,
the Determinations and Constitutions both of the Councels of Constance and
Basil, were ratified by King Jews of France, by Act of Parliament, 25.
Januarij, Anno 1475. and after that, by another Act of Parliament at Paris, 25.
Junij, Anno 1512. and by them enjoined to be strictly observed: both which
Acts are recorded at large by Decret. Eccles. Gal lib. 5. Tit. 20. cap. 38, 39.
p. 905, 906.
Bochellus, where he who lists may peruse them. In the Council of Ferrara,
Sur. Tom. 4 p 366, 369, 370 373, 374, 376, 378, 383, 386, 392, 407, 418.
Joannes Palaeologus Emperor of Constantinople, sat as chief President, and
diverse Nobles with him; yea, he swayed and directed most things in it; and
most that spoke therein directed their Speeches to him; as every Page almost of
the Acts of that Council, and every Session, manifest: speaking and disputing;
Impetrata prius ab Imperatore facultate dicendi: Imperatoris jussu. Si
Serenissimo Imperatori placuerit, ea nunc libenter aggrediar. Imperator
Serenissime vobis dico. Mitissimi Imperatoris jussu Orationem nostram
prosequemur. Sess. 7. Sur. ibid p. 392.
Imperator. Quisnam est Author hujus voluminis? And. Hermeus. Imper. Estne
rationi congruum ^t in Synodo historiae innitantur? And. Ad cognoscendum res
gestas Serenissime Imperator, Historia uti debemus. Imp. Historiam illam in
nostra Religione debemus suscipere, quam majores nostri probaverunt, aliam vero
minime. And. De Romanorum, aut Graecorum, aut Regum bello Historia, Mitissime
Imperator, in Synodo nequaquam uti debemus, etc. Sed (ut lubet) Humanissime
Imperator, omissis his, unde digressi sumus, revertamur. Sess. 11. ibid. p. 404.
Imper. Dicat Cardinalis. Sess. 14, 16. Ibid. p. 413, 414, 415.
Imperator jussit ut dissertores electi negocium prosequerentur. Ephesius
Imperatoris jussu longam Orationem habuit. Consentiente Imperatore, etc. This
Council being adjourned to Florence, Julius the Cardinal there began it with
this Oration, Sessio 17. Ibid. p. 413. to 419.
Quoniam Imperator Mitissime, etc. after which follows a large Dialogue, in
open Council, between him and the Emperor; in the close whereof, Imperatorem
rogarunt, etc. Cui quidem sententiae Imperator acquiescens, voluit, ut statim
disputatores ipsos seligerent, etc. In the 22. Ibid p. 442, 443.
Session of this Council, the Emperor often times speaks; Haec ad propositum
nequaquam spectare videntur, etc. Vt tibi Pater Ephesius morem gereret, huic
questioni P. R. respondit. Verum in posterum ne verbum quidem de ea faciet,
quandoquidem non tot de causis huc convenimus. De proposita Questione, necesse
est, in praesentia disputare, de hac vero forsan alias. Ita quoque Nobis
videtur. De hac Questione suo loco videbimus. Session 23. John the Popes
Disputant says, Ibid. p. 448. 449, 453, 454, 455, 456, 457.
Superiori Sessione Imperatoris Serenissimi jussu convenimus. Non ego, sed
Serenissimus Imperator tibi legem imponere potest, says he to Marcus. The,
Emperor in this Session spoke often, and gave the rule of the Synod, and
commanded another Session to be held: Jussit ut iterum Sessio haberetur. And in
the Ibid. p. 457. to 470.
last Session he orders all, and rules the Roast among his Greciaus; brings
them to a unity with the Western Churches, concerning the point of the
Procession of the Holy Ghost both from the Father and the Son: he informs
them, that he being by Gods grace their Emperor, after the custom of his
Predecessors, would rest satisfied with the Determination of this Council; and
what it, or the major part of it should conclude, he would to the uttermost of
his Imperial power ratify, and defend: But (says he) I will not be
constrained by the Latins to add any thing to our Sacred Creed, or to change
any of the Ceremonies of our Church. And when the Greeks and Latins had
accorded, and drawn up Letters of union, both in Greek and Latin, to which
both parties should subscribe; this Emperor, first of all for his party,
subscribed in this manner: Ego Joannes Palaeologus, fidelis in Christo Rex, and
Imperator Romanorum, subscripsi: And five Letters of Union being thus
subscribed by him and the whole Synod, they were further ratified by the Popes
and Emperors Seals. In the first Sur. Tom. 4. p. 366.
Session of this great Council of Ferrara, the Pope would have placed the
Emperor with his Greeks on the left hand, the Latin Clergy on the right, and
himself would have sat in the midst; but the Emperor withstood it, saying,
Locum ipsum sibi potius quam summo Pontifici convenire: That that place did
rather belong to him than to the Pope: But after many contestations, they all
accorded at last, that the Pope and his Clergy should sit on the right side,
the Emperor and his Greeks on the left of the Church, one right over against
the other, and neither Pope nor Emperor in the midst. In the Council of
Lateran, under Leo the tenth, there were diverse Sur. Tom. 4. p. 542, 543, 551,
553, 562, 571, 584, 585, 595, 596, 597, 598, 623, 624, 647, 653, 668, 689, 690,
691, 694, 695.
Ambassadors, Princes, Nobles, and Laymen present in every Session: Sigismond
King of Poland had his Ambassadors and Orators there, chosen by himself, his
Princes, Lords Spiritual and Temporal, Nobles, and Commons in full
Parliament; who gave them full Power and Commission for them, and every of
them, (Pro Nobis ac Regnis, Dominiis, Principibus, Spiritualibus and
Secularibus, Proceribus and Populis ditioni Nostrae Subjectis, (says their
Commission under the Kings Seal, 10. Aprilis, Anno 1515.) to treat of, handle
conclude, agree, and determine of all things in their names and steads, that
should be propounded or handled in that Council, concerning Religion, or the
Church: Etiamsi talia forent quae mandatum exigerent magis speciale quam
praesentibus est insertum: Promising that they would ratify, grant, confirm
and establish whatever should be there done and acted by their Orators.
Maximilian Duke of Millain, Francis Marquess of Mantua, Stanislaus and John
Dukes of Mazovia and Russia, sent Orators and Ambassadors to this Council,
with like Commissions under their Seals, to ratify all things therein
concluded in their steads; recorded at large by Ibid. p. 595. to 599. 607. to
611, 624, 653, 662, 691, 692.
Surius, in the third Session of that Council. And the like Commissions had
the Ambassadors of Jews King of France, Joachim Marquess of Brandenburge,
William Marquess of Montferrat, Emanuel King of Portugal, Charles Duke of
Savoy, and Maximilian the Emperor; the Constitutions of Counsels wherein the
Pope sat President being not obligaotory, unless the Emperor, with other
Christian Kings and Princes ratified them, by their Ambassadors, Orators, and
Proctors, if absent from; or by their Subscriptions and Seals, if present in
them. In the Thomas Walsingham Ypodigma Neustriae. An. 1245 page 60.
Council of Lions, Anno 1245. four Noblemen chosen and sent by the King and
Parliament of England, were present as Ambassadors: And the Bishops sent by the
Church of England to the general Council of Pisa, Anno 1409. were elected and
chosen by the whole Clergy of England, in their Convocation. Idem An. 1409. p.
173. See Roger Hoveden. An. 1179. p. 581. Eadwer. Hist. Novorum. l. 5. p. ^24
and Jo^ Seldeni Notae Ib p. 213, (...).
In the Council of Basil, King Henry the Sixth of England had fourteen
Ambassadors, Orators, Proctors, to whom and to the major part of them, he gave
as well a general as special power and Mandate, in his name and stead, to be
present in that Council, and therein to treat, confer, and conclude, as well
of those things which might concern the Reformation of the Universal Church,
in the Head, and in the Members; as of those things which concerned the
Supportation of the Orthodox Faith, and the Pacification of Kings and Princes;
as also of, and concerning a perpetual Peace from War, between him and
Charles of France, his Adversary: and also to treat, commune, and appoint, and
moreover to assent, and, if need were, to disassent to those things which
should there happen to be decreed and ordained, according to the determination
of the said Council: Promising that he would, bona fide, ratify, approve,
and confirm, all and every thing that should be done, acted, or effected in
the premises, or any of them, by his said Ambassadors, Orators, and Proctors,
or the greatest part of them; and that when he should be certified thereof,
he would see them duly executed, as far as belonged to him, and to a
Christian Prince. The Letters Patents themselves, dated the tenth of July, are
recorded verbatim by Ad Eadmerum Notae. p. 214.
Master Seldom, out of the Tables of France, 12. H. 6. memb. 2. A sufficient
Testimony, that it belongs to Christian Princes, by themselves, their
Ambassadors, Orators, or Proctors, to ratify the Decrees of all Counsels and
Synods, and to disapprove and damn them, if they see cause. Whence King Henry
of France, and the Parliament and Synod of Paris, Anno 1593. damned and
disavowed diverse of the Canons of the Council of Trent, as prejudicial to the
Crown, Royal Justice, and liberty of the Church of France; as Decreta Eccles.
Gal. l. 5. Tit. 20. cap. 43, 44, 45. p. 907. to 918.
Bochellus relates at full. To conclude with Foreign Presidents: The
Conclusions, Constitutions, and Determinations of that late famous Synod of
Dort, were ratified by the general approbations and Edict of the Estates of
the Low Countries, under their hands and Seal: Acta Synodi. page 325, 326, 327.
Visis, cognitis, and mature examinatis atque expensis, praedicto judicio and
sententia Synodi (say they, in their Charter of Approbation,) ista plene in
omnibus approbavimus, confirmavimus, and rata habuimus; approbamus,
confirmamus, and rata habemus per praesentes. Volentes and statuentes, ut nulla
alia Doctrina de quinque praedictis Doctrinae capitibus Ecclesiis horum
regionum doceatur aut propagetur, praeter hanc, quae praedicto judicio sit
conformis and consentanea, etc. Actum sub nostro Sigillo, Signatione Praesidis
and Subscriptione nostri Graphiarij, Hagae Comitis, 2. Julij, Anno 1619. All
these, with sundry other Forragine Testimonies, abundantly demonstrate, That
the Constitutions, Canons, and Decrees of Counsels, are of no binding force
and power at all, unless confirmed by Emperors, Kings, Princes, Nobles
Subscriptions, Edicts, Patents, Proclamations, and Acts of Parliament: and that
most ancient Counsels in foreign parts were in truth but Parliaments.

To pass from these to our own domesticke Presidents: It is most apparent, by
numerous punctual Examples, that the Clergy of England alone, had never any
lawful Jurisdiction vested in them, to make binding Ecclesiastical Laws or
Canons, in our Synods and Convocations, in any age, without our Kings, Nobles,
and Parliaments assents and approbations: That all, or most of our ancient
Counsels, Synods, Convocations, were Syelmanni Con^^. p. 5. 9.
naught else but Parliaments; wherein our Kings, Nobles, Senators, and Commons
were personally present, as well as Bishops or Clergymen: And that all matters
concerning Religion, Church Government, Ceremonies, with all binding Laws,
Canons, Articles relating thereunto, have, since the first planting of Religion
in this our Island till this present time, been always settled, resolved,
confirmed, in, and by Parliaments; or such Counsels and Synods, wherein our
Kings, Nobles, Commons were present, and had decisive Votes.

It is the received opinion of all our Antiquaries and Historians, that
Spelmanni Council. p. 34. Jac Vsser. De Britannie. Eccles. Primord. cap 6 page
101. Harrison. Descript. of Brit. l. 1. c. 9. Guliel. Lombard. Arch. Godwin. Of
the Conversion of Brit. p. 33, 34. Holinshed, Fox, and others.
King was the first Christian King of this Island, and the first Prince in the
world that embraced the Christian Faith. That about the year of our Lord 185.
he writing to Pope Elutherius, to send him the Roman and Imperial Laws,
whereby to govern his people, (then newly converted to Christ,) the modest
Pope returned him this answer; You have requested the Roman and Caesarean
Laws to be transmitted to you from Us, which you would use in the Kingdom of
Britain: The Roman and Caesarean Laws We may at all times reject; but the
Law of God by no means. You have lately, by Gods mercy, received the Law and
Faith of Christ in the Kingdom of Britain; You have with you in the Realm
both Testaments; out of them, by Gods grace, PER CONSILIVM REGNI VESTRI, SVME
LEGEM; By the Council of Your Realm, (not of your Clergy or Prelates) take a
Law; and by it, through Gods power, You may govern Your Realm of Britain: For
You are Gods Vicar (as Lib. 1. c. 8. l. 2. c. 14. Rex, cum sit DEI VICARIVS.
Seldom. Analect. l. 1. c. 6. Jac. Vsser. De Brit. Eccles. Primordiis. p. 104.
Bracton likewise styles our Kings) in Your Realm, etc. Lo here the Pope
himself resolves, the King and great Council of this Realm (the Parliament,
not Clergy or Convocation) to be the only proper makers of Laws to govern the
Church and Kingdom by.

Anno 446. Beda Eccles. Hist. l. 1. cap. 17. Matthew. Westminster. Anno 446. Spelman.
Council. p. 8. cum aliis.
Germanus and Lupus, two learned Bishops, being sent hither out of France, to
suppress the spreading, dangerous Pelagian Heresy, there was upon this
occasion a Synod assembled at Verolam; whereunto, a numerous multitude of men,
together with their wives and children, repaired: ADERAT POPVLVS, EXPECTABATVR
FVTVRVS IVDEX, The People were present, and expected to be the future Judge:
Adstabant parts, dispari condition consimiles. Inde divina fides; hinc humana
praesumptio: inde Christus; hinc Pelagius, author perversae pravitatis, etc.
After a long dispute, Vanity is convinced, confounded; perfidiousnesse refuted,
being unable to answer the objections. POPVLVS ARBITER vix manus continet,
JVDICIVM CVM CLAMORE CONTESTANDO, etc. The People being Arbitrator, scarce hold
their hands, GIVING IVDGEMENT with a shout: These things thus acted, an
innumerable company of both Sexes were converted to the Lord. In this first
Synod, that we read of, held within our Island, the People were present, as
well as the Clergy, and that not only as Auditors, but Judges, giving the
final Sentence in this great controversy concerning Religion.

Anno 449. There was another Beda Eccles. Hist. l 1. c. 21. Matthew. Westminster Anno
449. Spelman. page 49.
British Council, held by the said Germanus and Severus, MAGNOQVE Clericorum
ET LAICORVM NVMERO, and a great number of Clergymen and LAYMEN, against the
reviving Errors of Pelagius, and King Vortigerne 's incestuous marriage with
his daughter; OMNIVMQVE SENTENTIA pravitatum perversitas cum suis Autoribus
condemnatur: So that the Laity, as well as the Clergy, gave Sentence in this
Synod against this Heresy and the Authors of it. Nennius cap. 37. adds of
this Council, concerning Vortigerne, Dum conventa esset magna Synodus
Clericorum ET LAICORVM in uno Concilio, etc. Ipse Rex maledictus est, and
damnatur a beato Germano, and OMNI CONCILIO BRITONVM. So that Laymen were
present, and gave sentence together with the Clergy, in this second Synod held
in this our Isle.

About the year 612. Beda Eccles. Hist. l. 2. cap. 5.
King Ethelbert, Genti suae Decreta Judiciorum (as well in Ecclesiastical as
Temporal causes,) juxta exempla Romanorum, CVM CONCILIO SAPENTVM INSTITVIT,
etc. as Beda witnesses.

About the year 627. Beda Eccles. Hist. l. 2. c. 12, 13, 14. Huntingdon. Hist.
l. 3. p. 1328
Edwin King of Northumberland being persuaded to become a Christian, returned
this answer, That he was about to confer with his friends and COVNSELLORS
concerning this thing, and that if they would agree in opinion with him, they
would all be consecrated to Christ together in the Fountain of life: He did
as he had said; Habito enim CVM SAPIENTIBVS CONCILIO, For, holding a Council
with his wisemen, he demanded severally of them all, What this Doctrine,
which they had not hitherto heard of, and the new worship of the Deity which
was preached, seemed to them? And after some debate, Coifi declaring his
opinion, that their former Religion had no virtue in it, and that the Christian
was far better, and to be embraced; the rest of the Elders and Kings
Counselors concurred in opinion with him: Whereupon they resolved forthwith to
anathematize, and burn with fire, the Altars and Temples they had consecrated,
without fruit, with the Idols in them: Which done, King Edwin, with all the
Nobles of his Nation, and very many of the common people, embraced the
Christian Faith, and were Baptized. Leo here, a Pagan King and his Parliament
determine the Christian Religion to be truest; and thereupon renounce their
former Idolatry, and resolve to embrace the Christian Faith.

Beda Eccles. Hist. l. 3. cap. 25. Matthew. Westminster. Anno 663. Fox Acts and Mon
1610. p. 111, 112, Speeds History of great Brit. p. 295, 296. Spelm. Council. p.
146. to 150. with infinite others.
Strenaeshale, to decide the controversy concerning the due time of keeping
Easter: in which Council, King Oswey and his son Alfred, with MANY NOBLES,
Bishops, Clerks, and LAYMEN were present. Colman and his Scottish Clergy
maintained, that it ought to be kept after the Jewish computation: Agilbert
and his party held the contrary; that it ought to be observed at the time the
Western Church solemnized it. The Council being sat, King Oswey, who
presided in it, before any debate of the Controversy, made a solemn Speech
unto them, to this effect; (necessary for our times.) That it behoved those who
served one God, to hold one rule of living, and serving him; and not to differ
in the celebration of heavenly Sacraments, since they all expected one Kingdom
in heaven: Therefore they should rather inquire, which was the truer tradition,
and that this should be commonly followed by all. Which said, he commanded
Bishop Colman to relate what Rite it was which he observed, and whence it
derived its original: Which Colman doing, the King then commanded Bishop
Wilfrid, who was of the contrary party, to declare his opinion, and the grounds
of it; which he did: After long debate on either side, the King gave sentence
for VVilfreds opinion, against Colman and his party, because St. Peter, who had
the custody of Heaven Gates, did (by Colmans own confession) keep Easter as
VVilfred held they ought to do. The King giving this resolution with his hands
lifted up to heaven; faverunt assidentes quique sive astantes majores, una cum
mediocribus, et abdicata minus perfecta institutione, ad ea quae meliora
cognoverant sese transfer festinabant: all the great and mean Persons
sitting and standing by concuring with the King, gave sentence against Coleman
for VVilfred, and observed Easter accordingly ever after in their practice.
Here we find the Clergy men only the debaters, but the King, Nobles, and
Commons the sole Judges and Resolvers of this Controversy, and that in a most
eminent general National Council.

Anno 673. there was a Council held at Hertford under Theodor Archbishop
Canterbury, praesentibus Episcopis Angliae ET REGIBVS ET MAGNATIBVS VNIVERSIS
writes Matthew Westminster. et Flor. Wigorn An. 673.
Matthew Westminster, at which all the Bishops, Kings and great men of England
were present. All these sitting together, Theodor propounded some Chapters (or
Canons concerning Church Them all, which were afterward assented to and
subscribed.

Anno 684. Florentius. Wigorn. Anno 884. p. 254.
There was a Council held near the River of Alne sub praesentia Regis
Egfridi: in the presence of King Egfrid, who sat president in it.

Anno 692. King Ina made and published sundry notable ecclesiastical laws
concerning Religion and Church government, Gul. Lambardi: Archaion
Spelman-Concil. p. 182. 183. Seldens Titles of honor: part 2. c. 5. Sect. 6. p.
632.
and that in a Parliament or Council, wherein the King, Nobels, Senators, and
Elders of the people were present, as well as Bishops and Clergy men, Witness
this preface to those Laws of his.

Ego Inas Dei beneficio Occiduorum Saxonum Rex suasu et instituto Conredi
Patris mei, Heddae et Erkenvaldi Episcoporum meorum, omnium Senatorum meorum et
natu majorum sapientum populi mei, in magna servorum Dei frequentia, religiese
studebam, tum animarum nostrarum saluti, tum communi Regni nostri
conservationi, ut legittima nuptiarum faedera, justaque judicia per omnem
ditionem nostram fundata, stabilitaque sint, atque ut nulli liceat imposterum
Senatori, sive alteri

Spelmanni Concilia. p. 189. 191.
Anno 694. there was a great Council held at Becanceld, wherein Withred King
of Kent sat President, and Bertuald Archbishop of Britain, with Toby Bishop of
Rochester, the Abbats, Abbesses, Presbiters, Deacons, DVKES, EARLS, all
assembled together, deliberating about the state of the Churches in England.
The King subscribed the Laws there made for the liberties of the Church, in
this manner. Ego Withredus auxilio Christi his Legibus constitutis Rex, pro Mo
et Werburga Regina, itemque pro filio nostro Arico subscripsi.

Anno 697. there was a Spelman Council. p. 194.
Council held at Berghamsted in the 5th. year of the Reign of Withred King
of Kent, under Birtuald the high Priest of Britanny, Gybmund Bishop of
Rochester, and all the Ecclesiastical Orders, qui cum viris utique militaribus
humanissime et communi omnium assensu has l^ges decrevre, Cantuariorumque
Iuribus et consuetudinibus prout sequitur addendas, edixere The Laws are 28.
in number, all concerning Ecclesiastical matters, and are styled in the Saxon
Copy, Juditia Withredi, made in a Council at Berghamsted, praesentibus omnibus
Ordinibus illius gentis, cum viris quibusdam militaribus. So that this was no
other but a Parliament, wherein the King, Nobles, Commons and Soldiers were
present, as well as the Bishops, promulging and con^enting to these Laws.

About the year 712 Spelman. p. (...).
^ae King of Westsex, assembled a great Council Exhortatione and doctrina, and
per COMMVNE CONCILIVM and ASSENSVM OMNIVM Episcoporum and OMNIVM ALDERMANNORVM,
PRINCIPVM, PRO^ERVM, COMITVM, and OMNIVM SAPIENTVM SENIORVM, and POPVLORVM
TOTIVS REGNI; (or MVLTAQVE CONGREGATIONE SERVORVM DEI) as some others render it.

About the year 714 Beda Eccles. Hist. l. 21, 22, Spelm Council. p. ^26.
Naitan King of Picts, received a letter from Abbot Celfred concerning the time
of celebrating Easter, and Priests tonsure; which he desired the King to cause
to be observed throughout the Nation, over which God had made him Kings the
King hereupon assembled a Council of learned men, and of his Nobles; and
reading the said letter before them; Rex surgens DEMEDIQ OPTIMATVM SUORUM
CONSESSV, kneled down upon his knees, giving thanks to God, that he had
deserved to receive such a gift from the Land of England; and professed, that
he would have this form of keeping Easter, and tonsure to be perpetually
observed throughout

Anno 724. There was a Antiqu. Eccles. B^it. p. (...), 20.
Synod held in Northumberland, by the Authority and favor of King Osred
wherein wilfrid by the Kings favor got the superiority of his enemy. About
four years after, there was another Council held at Worcester under
Archbishop Bertuald by Pope Constantines advise, not only of Religious persons;
Sed etiam regni Procerum, But likewise of Will. Mat^esbur de Gest. Angliae
Pontisel. 1. p. 197. Antiqu. Eccles. Bri^ p. 12


The Council of Clovesho or Cliffe, Anno 747. Cui Concilio interfuerunt
Ethelbaldus M^rciorum Rex, CVMOMNIBVS REGNI SVI PRINCIPIBVS ET DVCIBVS; as well
as the Bishops and Clergy, made sundry Ecclesiastical Constitutions, consented
to and approved by the King all the Princes, Dukes Nobles of his Kingdom, and
not made or promulged

The Ecclesiastical Canons in the Council of Calchyth, Spelman^ Council. p.
242 ^45:
Anno 787. were made and confirmed by Offa King of Mercians, and the secular
Princes and Senators of the Land therein assembled, as well as by the
Ecclesiastical Persons: Convenerunt Omnes Principes regionis ^tam
Ecclesiastici quam Seculares etc. Tam REX QVAM PRINCIPESSVI, Spelmanni Council
p. 293 300, 301
CVMSENATORIBVS TERRAE DECRETA SIGNO CRVCIS FIRM AVERVNT.

Anno 7^9. Math. Wostm: Anno 789
Pope Alrians Legates held a Council at Chalchyth; where Jambert Archbishop of
Canterbury resigned part of his Archbishopric to the Bishop of Litchfield, and
Offa King of Mercians, who sat chief in it, caused his Son Egfride to be
crowned King, it being in truth a Parliament, as well as a Synod, anciently and
yet styled a COUNCIL.

Anno 793 Spelman Council. p. 31^.
King Offa held a Council at Verolam with Archbishop Humbert and his
suffragans; ET PRINCIPIBVS SVIS VNIVERSIS, and all his Princes; where they
consulted about, and resolved to build an Abbey to Saint A^ban, and to endow it
with great privileges, and that the King should go to Rome about it, which he
did; Iuxta sententiam praedicti Concilii.

Anno 794. at the Spelman; Council. p. 313. 714.
great Council of Celichyth, there were present 9. Kings, Alban were elevated,
adorned, and a Monastery sounded to enshrine his bones: And the same year King
Offa having assembled another Council of his Bishops and Nobles at Verolam:
REX VNANIMI OMNIVM CONSENSV et benevola voluntate beat Albano amplas contulit
terras, et possessiones innumeras, Monachorum quoque conventum ad tumbam
congregavit, etc.

Bonifac. Mog. Epist. 112. Seldens Titles of Honor, part. 1. c. 5. p. 631.
Cyneulf King of Westsex about the year 796. writ a letter to Lullus Bishop of
Mentz, una cum Episcopis meis, neenon CVM CATERVA SATRAPARVM; to settle matters
of Religion.

In the Spelman Council. p. 318.
Council of Clovesho under Kenulf King of Mercians An. 800. who summoned to
that Synod Episcopos, DVCES, Abbates, and CVJVSCVNQVE ORDINISVIROS: there were
several Canons made concerning matters of faith and the lands and revenue of
the Church.

At the Spelman Council. p. 327. 328.
Synod of Celichyth held on the sixth of August An. 816. under Kenulf King of
Mercians, there were not only Bishops, Abbots, Priests, and Deacons present in
it, but the King himself cum suis Principibus, Ducibus and Optimatibus; with
his Princes, Dukes, Nobles, who made and published 11. Canons concerning
matters of says and Church affairs.

Anno 822. there was a Spelman p. 332.
Synodall Council held at Clovesho under king Beornulfe, wherein this king
sat President; Archbishop Wilfred, with the rest of the Bishops and Abbots;
OMNIVMQVE DIGNITATVM OPTIMATIBVS Ecclesiasticarum scil.: and SAECVLARIVM
PERSONARVM, being present in it, debated such things as concerned the profit
and necessity of Churches, the rule and observance of a Monastical life, and
likewise the stability of the Realm. A clear evidence it was both a
Parliament and Synod too.

Anno 824. There was another Spelman p. 334, 335
Synodall Assembly held at Clovesho under the same king Beornulfe, and Wulfred
Archbishop of Canterbury; assidentibus Episcopis, Abbatibus, and PRINCIPIBVS.
MERCIORVM VNIVERSIS and MVLTI SAPIENTISSIMI VIRI CONGREGATI: to determine
certain Controversies, and settle the lands of the Church, which they did
accordingly; the Acts of this Council were subscribed by the king,

Anno 833. there was a Ingulphi Hist p. 855. 859. Spelman Council. p. 336. to
340.
Council held at London the 26 of May which is intiuled Concilium
Pan-Anglicum, a Cauncell of all England: wherein were present Egbert King of
West Saxons, and Withlasius King of Mercians both the Archbishops of England,
with the Bishops and Nobles. In which they con^^ted not only of Church
affairs, but also about hindering the incursions of the Danes; and confirmed
diverse Privileges to the Abbey of Crowland, by a Charter granted by this King
in this Council, subscribed by the King, Dukes, and other Laymen, as well as by
Bishops and Abbots.

Anno 838. I find (...) p. 340
Concilium Pan-Anglicum held at Kingston, wherein King Egbert and Ethelwolfe
his Son sat Presidents, together with Ceolueth Archbishop, and the rest of
the Bishops, and optimatibus Angliae and the chief men and Nobles at England,,
wherein certain Charters of Lands given to the Church (formerly accorded to by
the Nobles) were confirmed under pain of excommunication, and curses to the
infringers of them. About which time ^lector Boethius l. 10. Spel. p. 340, 341,
342.
Keneth king of Scots, compiled and published certain Ecclesiastical Laws,
intermixed with

(...) p. 858. Spelmanni Council. p 344.
Anno 851. there was a Council held at Kingsbury, under Bertulph King of
Mercia, praesentibus Ceolnotho Dorobernensi Archiepiscopo, caeterisque Regni
Merciae Episcopis and Magnatibus; and another Council at Benningdon a
Praelatis and Proceribus Regni sub Bertolpho Rege; In both these ample
possessions and privileges were granted to the Abbots and Monks of England;
Vnanimi consensu totius praesentis Cancilii, pro Regni negotiis Congregati, the
Charters being subscribed by Dukes, Lords, and temporal Officers, present in
these Councels, as well as by Bishops or Abbots.

An. 855. Mala (...) l. 2. c. 2. ^ngulphi. hist. Math. Westminster. An. 854.
Flocentius Wigorni his An. 855. ^p. l. p. 348. 350. Seldens Titles of Honor p.
633. c. 5 sect. 6 p. 633.
There was a general Council of all England held at Winchester, Concilium
V^ntoniae Pan-anglicum 5. Nov: Judic. 4. celebratum, praesentibus Aethelwulfo
Rege Westsaxoniae, Beorredo Rege Merciae, and Edmundo Rege East-Anglorum, una
cum Archiepiscopis Cantuariae, and Eborum, caeterisque totius Angliae Episcopis
and Magnatibus; in which King Aethelwulph by his royal Charter granted the
tenth part of his lands and goods to the Church, cum coxsilio Episcoporum ac
Principum meorum: Praesentibus and subscribentibus Archiepiscopis and Episcopis
Angliae Vniversis, re^non Beorredo Rege Merciae and These Councels therefore
were no other but Parliaments.

The Spelman Council. p. 363 Lambardi Archaion.
Ecclesiastical Laws of king Alured Anno 887. were made in Parliament, and
not in a Synod of Bishops; Ex Consulto Sapientum; Atque in ipsis discernendis
ego Alredus Occiden alium Saxonum Rex, prudent^ssimeram e nostris confilio usus
sum, atque eis omnibus placuit edici eorum observationem; says the Praeface to
his Laws.

The Spelman p. 375. Lamb. Archaion.
Ecclesiastical Laws of Alured (or Alfred) and Guthurne were accorded in a
Council, wherein these Kings and their people made a League.

King Edward the elder Spelman p 387. Math. Westminster. Anno (...) Matinsh. de
Gestis Regu^ Angl. l 2. c 13. Antiqu Eccles. Brit. p. 19 20, 43.
upon the letter of Pope Formosus; congregavit Synodum SENATORVM, PROCERVM,
POPVLORVM ET NOBILIVM Gent's Anglae in quae prasedebat Plegmundus
Archiepiscopus. Tum sibi Rex cum suis, and Plegmundus Archiepiscopus salubre
consilium iniverunt, and constituted and elected five Bishops in the Province
of the Gevisi, where there were but two Bishoprics formerly, dividing those
two Bishoprics into five, by a Parliament, not Synod.

The Ecclesiastical Laws of King Lambard. Archaion. Spelman p. 390.
Edward the elder and Guthurne An. were made in Parliaments of the Lords and
Commons, not Synods of the Clergy, as appears by this Proeme. Haec ea sunt
SENATVS-CONSVLTA ac instituta quae primo Aluredus and Guthurnus Reges, deinde
Edovardus and Guthurnus Reges illis ipsis temporibus tulere, cum Pacis foedus
Daci and Angli ferierunt ac sese mutuo an^plexi sunt; quae postea a SAPIENTIBVS
recitata saepius, atque ad communem Regni utilitatem aucta, atque amplificata
sunt.

The Lamberd Archa 3. n. Spelman p. 396. 410.
Ecclesiastical Laws of King Aethelstan An. 928. were made in chap. 9.
Decreta cictaque sunt haec in celebri Gratanleano Concilio, cui Wulfhelmus
interfuit Archiepiscopus, and cum eo Optimates and Sapientes ab Aethelstano
evocati frequentissimi.

The Ecclesiastical laws of Spelman p. 408.
Hoel Dha the good King of all Wales, sex Laicos viros auctoritate and scientia
pollentes, six Laymen potent in authority and Learning out of every County, and
then selecting out of them twelve Laicos doctissimos, and unum Clericum
doctissimum qui vocabatur Blanguindus, ad instituendas sibi leges and usus,
etc. 12. most learned Laymen, and but one learned Clerk, to compile
Ecclesiastical Laws, for him and his people.

The Ecclesiastical Laws Lambardi Archaion. Spelman p. 419. 421. 423. 424.
of King Edmund Anno 944. were made in a Parliament at London, as appears by
the temporal laws joined with them, and by the Proocme. Edmundus Rex ipso
solenni Paschatis festo frequentem Londini tam Ecclesiasticorum quam LAICORVM
caetum celebravit, etc. A sci entissimis, Regni mei in celebri tam
Ecclesiasticorum quam LAICORVM frequentia studiose requisivisse, quo tandem
pacto Christiana proveheretur fides. Atque NOBIS OMNIBVS commodissimum visum
est. Edmundus Rex congregavit magnam Synodum Dei ordinis and SECVLI apud London
etc. Ego Edmundus Rex mando and praecipio omni populo seniorum ac juvenum qui
in regione mea sunt, ea quae investigans investigovi cum sapientibus Clericis
and LAICIS.

Anno 948. Ingulphi hist. p. 874. Spelman Council. p. 428. Mr. Selden^ Titles of
Honor part. 2. c. 5. p. 633.
There was a Council as well of Lords and great men as Bishops and Abbots held
in London. In festo Nativitatis beatae Mariae cum universi Magnates Regni per
regium edictum summoniti tam Archiepiscopi, Episcopi, ac Abbate; quam caeteri
totius Regni Proceres and Optimates Londoniis convenissent, ad tractandum de
negotiis publicis totius regni, consummatis Omnibus, the K. in this Parlia.
granted a large Charter of lands and privileges to the Abbey of Croyland: this
Council therefore was certainly no other but a Parliament.

Spelman p. 431.
An. 952. Ed^arus Rex tandem potior, emvocate ad Brandenfordiam Regni Concilio,
Patris Edwini acta and decreta rescindit; Ablatas Ecclesiis and Monasteriis
opes restituit, etc. This no doubt was a Parliament.

King E^gars Ecclesiastical Laws An. 967. have this Prologue which proves
them made in full Parliament, Lamberdi Arehaion. Spelman p. 419. 424.
Leges quas Edgarus Rex FREQVENTI SENATV, ad Dei gloriam, regiae Majestatis
ornamentum, ac Reipublicae utilitatem

Anno. 973. I find a Council held at Spelman p. 483.
London under King Edgar, for the regulating of the Abbots and Monks of
Glastonbury, and settling of their privileges, wherein King Edgar granted a
Charter to this Abbey, CONCILIO OMNIVM PRIMATVM MEORVM; subscribed by himself
and Alfgina his Mother, Edward Clito his successor, Kmedius King of Scotland,
Mascusus his Admiral, Dunstan Archbishop of Canterbury, Oswald Archbishop of
York, caeterisque Episcopis and OMNIBVS Regni PRIMATIBVS, with others of his
officers.

In the Council of Spelman p. 49^. Matthew. (...) An. 975.
Winchester An. 975. assembled to determine the great controversy, whether
married Clerks ought to be preferred before monks? King Edgar and his Queen,
Elferus Prince of Mercians, Ethelwin Duke of the East Angles, Elfwold his
kinsman, Archbishop Dunstan, cum cae. teris Episcopis, Abbatibus, etc.
Brithnotho Comite, cum NOBJLITATE TOTIUS REGNS, were present to decide this
difference.

In the Council of Calne Anno 977. called for the same purpose, there were
present Hoveden Annal. pars prior. An. 977 p. 427. Hu^indon. hist. l. 5. p. 357
Antiqu. Eccl. Brit. p 59, 60 Spelman p. 494. Horent. Wigorninesis an 977. p.
361 Fox Acts and Monuments p. 433.
praeter Episcopes and caeterum clerum, TOTIVS Angliae Majores Natu: Omnes
aderant Aaglorum Optimates, Rege tamen (propter teneram aetatem) absente: There
were at it, Praesules, PROCERES, EQVITES, NOBILES PARITER and IGNOBILES, Omnium
ordinum conspicui, clarique viri, write our Historians.

Anno 1005. Spelman p. 504, 507, 508 599.
King Aethelred granted Lands and privileges to the Monks of Christ-Church in
Canterbury by his Charter, confirmed and subscribed

Anno 1009. Spelman p. ^10 513. 525. 529. Malm. De Gestis Regum l. 2. c. 11.
There was a general Council at Eanham, Concilium Aenhamense generale seu
Pan-anglieum Optimatibus celebratum: In this Council there were thirty two
Canons made, which begin thus, Haec sunt Constitutiones quaetulerunt Angli
eruditi, eligerunt etiam and edixerunt, instanterque docuerunt observandas.
This (writes Spelman) was doubtless a Parliament, Regium fuisse certum est
Aenhamense Concilium, tum quod edicto Regis cogebatur, and de rebus statuit ad
ecclesiasticos non pertinentibus, tum quod in festo habebatur Pentecostes, in
quibus celebritatibus convocare Reges ex antiqun consuentudine, soliti orant
Proceres suos utriusque ordinis ad festum Regium adornandum, and consilia yet
its decrees are styled SYNODALIA.

The Ecclesiastical laws of king Aethelred Anno 1012. have this Inscription,
^ambardi Archaion. Spelman p. 530.
Haec instituerunt Rex Aethelredus, and SAPIENTES ejus apud Habam They were
made in full Parliament, not in a Convocation of the Clergy, and intermixed
with secular Laws.

The Council of Winton under Canutus Anno 1021. begins thus, Spelman p. 534.
Haec sunt statuta Canuti Regis Anglorum, etc. Venerando sapientum ejus
Concilio, ad laudem and gloriam Dei, and sui regalitatem, and commune commodum.
Rex Canutus anno regni sui 5. cunctos regni sui Praelatos, Proceresque ac
Magnas ces ad suum convocans Parliamentum, in suo publico Parliamento,
persistentibitpersonaliter in eodem Wolstano and Adelnodo A chiepiscopis, and
Ailwine Episcope Elmhamense, and alijs Episcopis, ipsorum Suff aganeis, septem
Ducibus, cum totidem Comitibus, nec non diversorum Monasteriorum, nounullis
Abbatibus, cum quamplurimis gregarijs Militibus, ac cum populi multitudine
copiosae, ac omnibus tunc in eodem Parliamento personaliter existentibus, votis
Regijs unanimiter consentientibus, praeceptum and decretum fuit. Quod
monasterium, sancti Edmundi, etc. sit ab omni jurisdictione Episcoporum
Comitatus illius, ex tunc in perpetuum funditus liberum and exemptum, etc. This
Council was clearly a PARLIAMENT and so expressly styled.

The Lambar; Archai: Spelman, p. 539. 552, 566.
Ecclesiastical Laws of K. Knute, An. 1032. were made in Parliament, not in
Convocation, as appears by this proaeme. Consultum quod Canutus Aaglorum,
Dacorum and Norvegiensium Rex, ex SAPIENTUM CONCILIO ad Dei immortalis Gloriam,
Regiae Majestatis ornamentum, and Reip: utilitatem, Natalatijs Domini Nostri
Jesu Christi diebus, Vintoniae sancivit: the Laws are in number 26. and
intermixed with his secular Laws made at the same time, Haec illa humana, atque
politica sunt Jura, quae Sapientum adhibito consilio, per omnem Aagliam
observari praecipio. So as this Council clearly was a Parliament, not a Synod
or Convocation.

Anno 1066. There was a most famous Spelman: Concilia p. 627, 631.
Council or Assembly held at Westminster under King Edward the Confessor, in
the last year of his Reign, on the Feast of Christ's Nativity: Praesentibus
Rege and Confessore, Edgitha Regina, Stigando Archiepiscopo Cantuariae, Eldredo
Archiepisc. Eboraci, caterisque Angliae Episcopis, Abbatibus, Capellanis Regis,
COMITIBUS, MINISTRIS [seu Thanis] Regijs, and MILITIBUS, about the endowment,
privileges, and Sanctuary of Westminster Abbey, then newly re-edified and
consecrated: In which Council the King granted several Charters of
privileges to this Abbey; which were consented unto, ratified, and subscribed,
as well by the Dukes, Nobles, Officers, Knights and other Laymen, as by the
King Queen, Bishops, Abbots, and Clergy.

By all these ancient Presidents before the Conquest, (to which others might be
added,) it is most apparent, That all our prisline Synods, and Counsels were
naught else but Parliaments; that our Kings, Nobles, Senators, Aldermen,
Wisemen, Knights, and Commons, were usually present and voting in them, as
members and Judges; and that all our Ecclesiastical Laws, Canons and
Constitutions that were obligatory or binding, as well concerning matters of
faith, Church Government, discipline, as manners, were ever made, enacted,
ratified in and by our Parliaments only, and not by the Bishops, or Clergy
alone, or by the King and Clergy in mere Ecclesiastical Synods, without the
Nobles, Senators; and Commons consents or Votes. Neither find I any example or
Author from King Lucius his Reign to the Conquest, that either denied the
legislative or coercive power of such Counsels and Parliaments, either in
matters of doctrine, Discipline, Church Government, or manners; but all readily
and unanimously subscribed to it: enough to silence all novell opposits
whatsoever, King Bish: Jewels defense of the Apology, part 6: c. 2. p. 645
Leges Si Edwardi: c. 17. Lambardi Archaton Fox Acts and Monuments, Vol 1. p.
214. Cooks: 5 Rep. De tura Regis Ecclesiast: fao
William the Conqueror as he was resolved in a Full Council and Parliament, to
be Christ's Vicar, and chief Governor of the Church within this Realm in
these words; (...) p. 168.
Rex, quia Vicarius summi regis est, ad hoc constituitur, ut regnum and Populum
Domini, and super omina SANCTAM ECCLESI MREGAT ET DEFENDAT, etc. taken out of
King Edward the Confessors Laws, (which he established and ratified;) (...)
memb: (...) Number: 5 (...) 5 Seldeni (...) merum: (...) p. 168. Hist: of tithes
c. 14. Sect. 1. ^ax Acts and Monuments l. 3. p. 135. ^. 1. p. 154.
so he reformed the Ecclesiastical Laws and Canons of the Church in and by a
Common Council, and Parliament, as well of the Nobles, and Commons, as of the
Prelates and Clergy, as is evident by this passage in the Manuscript Tables of
Robert Winchelsy Archbishop of Canterbury: WILLIELMUS Rex Angliae DE COMMUNI
CONCILIO, Archiepiscoporum Abbatum, and OMNIUM PROCERUM REGNI SUI, Leges
Episcopales, quae non bear, nec secundum Sanctorum Canonum praeceptae, fuerunt,
sicut nec sunt his diebus, OBSERVE AND AS IN CONCUSSE JUDICAVERIT, etc. And by
this his rescript to Remigius Bishop of Lincoln, WILLIELMUS, Gratia Dei,
^^bardi Arch non Jo: (...): ad Ead^^rum, Notae p. 173, 189.
etc. Sciatis vos omnes, and caeteri mei fideles, qui in Angliamanent, quod
Episcopales leges, quae non bear, nec secundum Sanctorum Canonum praecepta,
usque ad mea tempora, in regno Anglorum fuerunt, COMMUNI CONCILIO, et consilio
Archiepiscoporum meorum, and caeterorum Episcoporum and Abbatum, and OMNIUM
PRINCIPUM REGNI MEIEMEND AND AS JUDICAVI. Proptereamando, and Regia authoritate
praecipio ut nullus Episcopus vel Archidiaconus, de legibus Episcopalibus
amplius in HUNDRET placita toneant, etc.

Math: (...) An: 1073. p. 5. Sigebertus Gemb: Ch^onog: An: 1073 1^74.
Antiqu^tates Reeles: Brit: p. 96. 97.
Council of Rhoan, 1073.
Anno 1073. William the Conqueror sat chief President. And decreed many
things as well touching Ecclesiastical Affairs, as the benefit of his new
Kingdom of England, Among other things it was there decreed [Judicatum est
praesidente Rege Anglorum Gulielmo: writes Matthew Westminster] the King
himself being president, that Monks who by force assaulted their Abbotts (as
the Monks of Andoem had assaulted, and slain their Abbot at that time, whiles
he was saying Mass) in any Abbeys, should there be thrust into prison for it,
which before it seems they could not be. This Council was no other then a
Parliament, diverse temporal Laws, as well as Ecclesiastical being enacted
therein, and both ratified, approved by this King, Hist. Novotum lib: 1. p. 6.
who (as Eadmerus stories of him) would not so much as suffer the Archbishop
of Canterbury (Primate of all his Realm) when he sat President in a general
Council of Bishops assembled together, to decree, or prohibit any thing, but
such things as were suitable to his will, and had first been

In the Council of Malmesb: dr Gestis Pon^^f: Anglo^rum p: 214. 215.
London under Lanfranks, 1075.
An. 1075. Concessum est Regia MUNIFICENTIA, Synodali authoritate, Episcopis,
de villis transire ad Civitates: By the Kings Royal munificence and the
authority of the Synod, liberty was granted to Bishops, to remove from the
Villages wherein they resided Herman Bishop of Schiroburne, removed to
Salisbury. Stigand from Selescia removed to Chichester, Peter from Litehfield,
removed to Chester, 1093.
the King ratifying the constitution of the Synod, and ordering this removeall.

An. 1093. King Eadmerus Hist: Noverum: lib. 1. p. 26. to 31.
William Rufus assembled a Council of his Bishops, Abbots, and Nobility of the
whole Kingdom, that they might; By their common assent determiue and discuss,
whether Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury could Keep his faith to the King, or
not, saving that faith, reverence and obedience which he owed to the Apostolic
See of Rome, which he would by no means violate? (A weighty question surely of
a loyal Prelate;) The Bishops, Abbots, and Nobility of the whole Kingdom
almost, Ex Regia Sanctione, assembled at Rochingham Castle, on the fifth day of
March at one a Clock in the afternoon, to debate this business; but the King
commanded all things to be adjourned till the morrow, Quia Dies Dominica erat,
because it was the Lords Day: an unmeet time to discuss such a business as
this was. On the morrow, in medio Procorum and conglobatae multitudinis, eos
and assistentem Monachorum, Clericorum, LAICORUM numerosam multitudinem, sic
loquitur, etc. Lo here the Nobles, Commons, as well as the Bishops, Abbots and
Clergy assembled in a Council (to wit a Parliament) to determine a case of
conscience, and that at Anselms request. This matter being long debated, and
Anselme continuing refractory, the business was defet^ed till after Whitsuntide.

In the Council of London under Lanfranke summoned by King William Rufus, Anno
1095. Vlstan Bishop of Worcester was deprived of his Bishopric by the Kings
sentence and verdict, quasi homo idiota, etc. Ipso rege consentiente and hoc
dictante decernitur deponendus, says Historia Angl. p. 190.
Matthew Paris, the King sitting chief president in it.

In the Council Hadmerue Histor: Novorum l. 3. p. 6^. Willielmu^ Malm^^bury de
Gestis pontif. Anglorum l. 1. p 228. (...) Annal. pars prior p. 469. Math.
Westminster. An. 1102. p. 23. Antiquitares Ecclesiae Brit. p. 104 105.
of London Anno 1102. under Anselme, the King and his Nobles were present as
well as the Bishops and Ahbots, that whatsoever was therein decreed, might be
approved ratified and observed by the unanimous care and solicitud of both
orders: For soit was necessary, A plain testimony that the Counsels of England
in ancient times were no other but Parliaments, and that their Canons ound not
any, unless confirmed by King and Parliament, At this Council (write Will.
Malmesbury and Eadmerus) Anselme the Archbishop requesting it of the King,
Primates Regni, the great men of the Kingdom were present quatenus quicquid
ejusdem Concilii authoritate decerneretur VTRJVSQVE ORDINIS CONCORDI CVRA ET
SOLJCITVDINE RATVM SERVARETVR, SJC ENIM NECSSE ERAT, quum multis retre annis
Synodali cultura cessante, viciorum vepribus succrescentibus Christiana
religionis fervor in Anglia nimis reripeat, which they thus preface out of
Anselmes own Copy and relation.

Anno Jotnal: Histor Antiqui: Ecclesiae Brit. p. 105.
1102. quarto autem Praesulatus Paschalis Summi Pontificis, tertio Regni
Henrici gloriosi regis Anglorum, ipso annuente celebratum est Concilium in
ecclesia beati Petri in ^ccidentali part juxta Londoniam sita, communi
consensu Episcoporum, et Abbatum, et Principum totius regni. In this Council
held at Westminster, therewere 26. Canons compiled, some against Priests
marriage and Wives, which when Giraldns Archbishop of Yorks, enjoined his
Clergy to observe; all the Clergy of his Province refused to submit to them,
being unwilling to part with their Wives, or to vow Chastity as some of those
Canons enjoined them: to the execution whereof, the great discord between the
King and Anselme concerning the investitures of Bishops, being an obstacle,
produced to this effect. Necanones hujus Synodi legum vim ac potestatem
sortirentur That those Canons should not obtain the force and power of Laws.

Anno. 1107. another Matthew. Pa^is Histor Angl. Anno 1107. p. 25. 26. Roger
^oveden Annal. pars 1. p. 60. Eadmerus Hist: Novorum l. 4. p. 91.
Council was held under Anselme in King Henry the first his own Palace, in
which Council The King assented and enacted, that from thenceforth no man
should be invested into any Bishopric or Abbie of England by the King or any
Layman, by giving him a pastoral staff, or a Ring. Proceres Regni, the Peers
of the Realm (writes Eadmerus) were called to this Council, and the King
assented to and ratified this Act, Astante multitudine, ac per Consilium
Anselmi et Procerum Regni, the Commons standing by him, by the Council of
A^selme, and of the great men of the Realm. This Council then was a
Parliament, and this Canon assented to, both by the Commons, Peers, and King,
^o make it valid.

Eadmerus Hist. l. 4. p. 94. 95. Haec sunt statuta de Archid^aconibus^ etc. qua
Dominicae incarnat A^iouis 1108. statue^^nt Ansel. Co^tuar^ensis
Archiepiscoput, Thomas Ebor, acensi^ Archiepisco^us electus and cum eo alii
Episcopi Anglia^ In presentia gloriosi Regis, Henrici, essensu Comitum et
Baronum suo^um, ^atutum est (...) Regeni Haveden Anal^ pars prior p. 472.
Henry the first summoned another Council about Easter, ad Curiam suam apud
Londoniam cunctis Majoribus Regni, having assembled to his Court at London, not
only his Archbishops and Bishops, but all the great men of his Kingdom, to
suppress the Marriages of Priests, contrary to the Canons of the Council of
London. Anno 1102. For the extirpation of which evil, the King Regali
authoritate atque; potentia fultos roboravit, by his royal Authority and power
ratified those Canons, and thereupon Anselmo Archbishop of Canterbury, Thomas
elect Archbishop of York, and all the Bishops of England, Decreed in the
presence of the said Glorious King Henry, Assensu omnium Baronum suorum, with
the assent of all his Barons, that Priests and Deacons should live chastely and
keep no Women in their Houses; but those who were of their near kindred, as
the Council of Nice had defined; this Canon being ratified both by the King
and Peers in Parliament to make it obligatory. In these three Counsels under
Archbishop Anselme (a great stickler for the Popes and Clergies Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction) we see the King and great men of the Realm were present, and
ratified the Decrees and Canons therein concluded to make them valid and
binding.

Anno 1114 Eadmerus Hist. l. 5. p. 114, 115. 116. (...) p. 49, 50, 51.
King Henry the first commanded all the Bishops and Nobles of the Kingdom to
meet together at his Court, whereupon a rumor was spread over all the Land,
that the Archbishop of Canterbury was about to celebrate a general Council
(in presence of the Popes Legate) and that he would promulge some new things,
worthy so great a Council, for the reformation of Christian Religion in every
order: On the sixteenth of October they all met together in the Kings Palace
at Westminster, where the multitude which assembled together, at last
perceived, that the tumor of celebrating a Council, and of the Anselme in the
behalf of the Pope, brought a letter directed from him to the King and
Bishops, wherein he taxes the King for conferring Bishoprics (claiming that
right, as belonging to Peter's See,) for determining Ecclesiastical matters,
and the affairs of Bishops, without his or his Legates privity, which belong
only to the Apostolic, Sea; for stopping appeals to Rome, as also for calling
and keeping Synodall Counsels without his privity, when as it was unanimously
ratified in the great council of Nice consisting of 318 Bishops, that A mere
^orgery and untruth, See Section ^.
no Counsels ought to be summoned or kept without the privity of the Bishop of
Rome: and for translating Bishops without his consent. Which letters much
offending the Kings mind, he sent his Nuntioes by common consent, to Rome, to
give the Pope an answer, and justify his proceedings herein, as warranted by
his Royal Prerogative.

The same Eadmer^^ Ibidem p. 117.
year upon the thirteenth of April, there was an Assembly Salisbury, 1114.
of the Bishops, Abbots, and great men of all England, the Kings Writ
compelling them to appear there: where the King appointed William his son,
lawfully begotten, to be heir to the Crown, to which all the Nobles
condescended, and presently took an oath of Allegiance to him, to be his men:
But the Bishops and Abbotts swore only and gave their faith, that if he
survived his Father, they would forthwith confer both the Kingdom and Crown
of the Kingdom on him without any controversy or exception: In Ibid. p. 1^8.
August following one Anselm the Archbish. of Canterburyes kinsman came from
Rome to King Henry, being then in Normandy, bringing the Popes Letters, which
authorized him to exercise the Office of the Popes Legate, here in England:
which in a short time being known in the Kingdom of England, the Bishops,
Abbots, and Nobles admiring at it, assembled together at London about it, and
certain other things, (the Queen being present) to discuss the matter,
Communi Concilio, in a common Council: whereupon they all accorded, to send
the Archbishop of Canterbury, whom it most concerned, to the King, to acquaint
him with the ancient custom of the Kingdom, and the liberty thereof; and if
he thought fit, that he should go likewise to Rome to annihilate This Novelty.
Who coming accordingly to the King, found Anselme there expecting his passage
into England, to exercise his Legatine office there. But King Henry (the first)
not suffering any prejudice to happen to the ancient Customs of England, kept
him from entering into England, and that not without presidents: For in the
first year of this Kings Reign Eadmerus Hist. Novorum l. 3. p. 58.
Guido Archbishop of Vienna came into England, having (as he said) the power
Legatine of all England, by the precept and authority of the Apostolical See:
which being heard of throughout England, was admired by all men, all knowing,
that it was a thing unheard of in Britain, that any man except the Archbishop
of Canterbury should take upon him to supply the Popes Apostolical turns.
Wherefore as he came, so he returned, Note.
being received as a Legate by no man, nor exercising the Office of a Legate,
in any thing. Eadmerus Hist. l. 6. p. 137. 138.
After this, one Peter having obtained from the Pope a power Legatine over
England, Ireland, France, and the Island of the Orcades, at the same hereof all
England was astonished; the King sent the Bishop of Saint David's, and another
Clergy man beyond Sea to conduct him to him, enjoining them, that after his
entrance into England, they should not suffer him to enter into any Churches or
Monasteries to lodge or eat: Being brought to the King, and honorably
received by him, having declared the cause of his coming, the King answered
him, that he had now no leisure to mind so great a business, and that his
Legatine power could not be established, and ratified but by the connivance and
assent of the Bishops Abbots, Nobles and the Assembly of the whole Kingdom in
Parliament: moreover he affirmed, that he could not by any means willingly
loose any of the Customs of his Country granted him by the Apostolical See so
long (...) lived; whereof this was one of the chiefest and greatest, that he
made the kingdom of England free from all Legatine power. Whereunto Peter
affented, and promised to do his endeavor to have this privilege preserved,
and augmented: And so being gratified with rich presents, Ille qui Legati
officio fungi in toto Britania venerat, nimirum, ab omni officio tali, cum
ingenti Pompa, v^a qua venerat extra Angliam, a Rege missus est; writes
Eadmerus of him by way of derision. So little jurisdiction had the Popes
Legates here in England 1125.
who became an intolerable vexation, oppression to it in succeeding Ages, in
the Reigns of King John, Henry the third, and others.

In the Council of Westminster under John de Crema (the Popes lecherous
Legate, Ann. 1125.) there were 17. Canons made, and ab omnibus confirmata, and
confirmed by all there present: to wit by 20. Bishops, 40. Abbots, Cuminumera
Cleri and Populi multitudine, with an innumerable multitude of the Clergy and
people, who were present at it: as the Continuer An. 1125 p. 499, 500. See
R^ger Hoveden Annal: parspr^orp. 478 Math: Westminster: Anno: 1125. p. 31. Matthew
Paris, An: 1125 p. 67. Henry Huntindon Hist. l. 7. p. 382. Cum eadem di^ ^^^pus
Christi con^ecisset Meretrice post Vesperam interceptuo est. Res apertissima
negari non potuit, celari non decuit, Summ^ honor ubique habitus in summum
dedecus versus est, etc. write our Popish, Monke^. See John Bale, his Acts of
English Votaries Holingshe^d, Speed and others.
of Florentius Wigorniensis records, Among other things it was there decreed,
that Priests should not from thence forth marry: That no married man should be
made a Priest, and that those Priests who were married, should be either
devorced from their wives or deprived of their livings; John de Crema there
alleging. That it was an unseemely thing for a Priest to rise up from the side
of an Harlot (so he called Priests wives) and to go and to make the body of
Christ. The Priests being much incensed at these Constitutions, and very angry
with this Legate the chief Author of them, knowing him to be a leacherous
companion, watched him so narrowly, that the very same night these Canons were
ratified, though himself had that very day consecrated the Sacrament, and so
made the body of his Savior (as he thought) they took him in bed with a
notable Where. In excuse of which falt of his (which was very public and
notorious) he said, that he himself was no Priest, but a corrector of
Priests, (he might better have alleged, if his own reason were good, that
he did it after he had consecrated and made Christ's body, not before it:) and
so he departed privily (...) of England with shame, the Priests by this means
keeping their Wives for a time, alleging that it was better for them to lie
with their own Wives, then with Where Is, or other men's, as this lecherous Legate
did.

In the year of our Lord 1127. Continuatio ad Florentium Wigorni^sem p. 503.
504. 505.
William Archbishop of Canterbury, by King Henry the first his assent, called a
Council at Saint Peter's in Westminster of all the Bishops, Abbots and
religious Persons of England: there flocked thither also, * Magnae multitudines
Cloricorum, Laicorum, tam divitum quam mediocrium and factus est Conventus
grandis et inestimabilis, says the Historian; Somethings were there debated,
somethings determined, some things adjourned, some things by reason of the
tumult of the raiging people cast out from the Audience of the Judges, but
those things which were there decreed and established in the At they were there
publicly Recited and received: I thought good (says he) to note in this
manner: Then he reites the Canons and constitutions of this Council, and
conclude thus: Auditis Concilii gestis consensum prebuit, authoritate Regia et
potestatate conceffit et confirmavit Sta^ta Concili, etc. Having heard the Acts
of the Council read the K. assented to them, and by his regal authority and
power passed and confirmed the statuts. (or Canons) of the Council; celebrated
by William Archbishop of Canterbury, and Legate of the holy Church of Rome, at
Westminster.

Anno 1138. King Stephen on the fourth of April held a Council at
Northampton, Continuatio^^^ Flore^tium Wigorniensem p. 519
in which ^urstlain Archbishop of York was Prefident, the Prelates, Abbotts,
Earls, Barons, and all the Nobility of England, being present at it, The
Bishopric of Exeter then void by the death of William Warwast, one Robert an
Archdeacon was elected Bishop of that See, by the consent and suffrage of the
Council, which likewise nominated and chose two Monks to be Abbotts of
VVincelcombe, and of Saint Mary's in York, being then vacant.

The same year there was a Council held at Roger Hoveden An^al. pars prior
An. 1138. p. 485.
London, wherein, Theobald was Annuente Rege, by the Kings consent.

Anno 1139. There was a Council kept at Hoveden Ibid. Anno 1139 484.
Winchester under Henry Bishop of Winchester, the Kings Brother and Legate to
the Pope, where Theobald Archbishop of Canterbury and all the Bishops there
present, ad pedes Regis devoluti sunt, etc. cast themselves down at the Kings
feet, most devoutly to restore Roger Bishop of Salisbury and Alexander Bishop
of Lincoln to their possessions; and they would willingly pardon all the
injuries the King had done them. But the King despising the venerable
supplication of so many great Prelates, suffered them to obtain no part of
their request.

In Matthew Westminster. Anno 1142. p. 28. Matthew. Paris An. 1142. p. 76 Roger
Hoveden, Anno 1142. p. 488. Gulielmus Neubrigensis l. 1. c. 18. p. 27
the year of our Lord 1142. William Bishop of Lincoln, as some record or,
William, or Henry Bishop of Winchester as others calhim, held a Council at
London, at which King Stephen was present; where in it was decreed, et
Generaliter constitutum, and generally ordained. That he who violated a Church
or Churchyard, or laid violent hands on any Priest or Religious person; should
be excommunicated, and not absolved, but by the Pope. The King, (writes
Nubrigensis) Concilio Benign interfuit, et favoris Regij Suffragium non
negavit, was graciously present at the Council, and denied not the suffrage
o^his royal savor to its constitutions; which without his confirmation had
been of no validitle. By virtue of which constitution ratified in this manner
Artic. Cler. c. 3, 22 As^. 70. 11. H. 4, 88, 20: E, 4, 10, b. 22, E. 4, 20, 12
H 7. 22, 23 C. ^4. report f^o Fitz. Na: Br^s: 51, k, 52, m. 53. ^
If any laid violent hands on a Priest or Religious Person, he might sue in the
Spiritual Court to have him excommunicated, and do penance for it, but not
for damages, and no Prohibition could legally be granted to stay the
proceedings there.

Anno Antiqu: Eccles Bri^ p, 117:
1152. There was a Synod held at London under Theobald Archbishop of
Canterbury. In which King Stephen with Eustace his Son were present: The King
required the Synod, to consent to create Eustace King, to which they could not
be brought, being inhibited by the Popes Letters, and mandate to do it.
Therefore the King and Eustace incensed with anger, shutting them in and
befieging them, did evermuch vex, and disquiet them, that they might effect
that by fear and terror which they could not do by authority and favor, And
so most of them were reduced to the Kings beck. But Theobald the Archibishop
departing privity and most craftily out of the Synod, carried through the
Thames in a Boat to the Sea side entered into a ship and passed into the parts
beyond the Sea, with whose departure the King being much more disturbed,
banished him again with others, and confiscated all his goods.

Anno 1159. There was a great Nubrigensis Hist. l. 2, c, 9, p. 112. 113. 113.
See Ioannis Marius, Zaberel: and Theodoricus a Niem de Schismate.
Scisme at Rome between Pope Alexander and Victor, concerning the Papacy,
hereupon Frederick the Emperor assembled by his Writ the Bishops of Italy and
Germany together to Papia, to Council, where the Emperor, his Dukes and
Captains were present: who swaying the Council, Victor, to whom the Emperor
inclined, was elected and declared to be the true Pope, and successor of Peter,
and sentence given against Alexander by a General decree, as against a
Scismaticke and rebel to God. Amplexus est Imperator cum omni frequentia Ducum
et Procerum acta Concilij, panam non recipientibus comminatus, writes
Neubrigensis. After which the Emperor solicited the illustrious Kings of France
and England, by all means he could, that to perpetuate mutual amity, they
would consent to him in this; they being inclined hereto, cautelously suspended
their sentence until they should more fully know the truth of so doubtful a
business, and thereupon they also called a famous Council of Bishops and
Nobles, out of both their Kingdoms in a fitting time and place, where the
business was fully debated by Guido Cremensis on Victors part, and by
Gulielmus Papiensis on Alexanders side; In conspectu Regum, and Praesulum,
coram universa quae convenerat multitudine cleri et opuli: In the presence of
the Kings and Prelates, and before all the multitude of the Clergy and People
there assembled; where Papiensis pleaded Alexanders cause so well, and
answered, retorted what ever the opposite party had alleged so
substantially, Vt neuter ulterius Princeps cunctaretur, repudiata part
Octaviani Dominum Alexandrum recipere, et cum Regnis sibi subditis ei de
caetero in ijs quae Dei sunt, tanquam Patri parere. The forenamed
Schismatickes, therefore departing with confusion and shame, Our Princes and
Prelates (Principes et Pontifices) having solemnly pronounced a sentence of
excommunication against the Schismatickes dissolved the Synod. Lo here both
the Emperor, the Kings of England and France, with their Nobles as well as
Prelates, present in a several Counsels, directing and determining this great
controversy in them who was Peter's rightful successor? ratefying and
receiving him for Pope whom they conceived in their indifferent Judgments, to
have the best title; yea, the Laity had here their voices as well as the
Clergy; and consented to the decrees of both Counsels, So when there was a
former Schism between Clement and Urban, concerning the Title of the Papacy,
Eadmerus Hist. Novorum l. 2. p. 23 33.
William Rufus enquiring who had the best right, commanded Urban to be reputed
Apostolical and true Pope throughout his Dominions, eique vice beati Petri, IN
CHRISTIANA RELIGIONE (not in any temporal affairs) obedire: claiming this as
a Eadmerus Hist. l. 2. p. 25, 26, 27, 28, 29 30, 31, 32.
part of his prerogative royal that none should acknowledge or receive any
man, for Pope or Peter's successor within his Kingdom, but by his election and
authority, and him whom he should declare to be the man, accounting him no
less then a Traitor that should deprive him of this right, which his Ancestors
claimed and enjoyed.

An. 1170. at the Gulielmns Nubrigensis Rer. Angl. l. 1. c. 25.
request of King Hen: the 2d. two Cardinals, Albert, and Theodine were sent
into France from Rome, who having called a great Assembly of Ecclesiastical
persons and Noblemen within the Teritorries of the King, of England, they
solemnly admitted the King to purge himself before them of the murder of
Thomas Becket Archbishop of Canterbury, which purgation the King there made,
and submitted himself naked to Ecclesiastical discipline.

Anno 1175. Hoveden Annal. pars. posterior An. 1175. p. 542. Speeds Hist. of
great Britain p. 521.
Richard Archbishop of Canterbury kept a great Council 1175
to which almost all the Bishops and Abbots of the Province of Canterbury came,
Et coram pranominatis Regibus, and before King Henry the second, and King Henry
his Son, and the Bishops and Abbots; Richard Archbishop of Canterbury
standing in an high place, promulged certain Decrees and Canons, concerning
Clergymen, the Eucharist, Tithes (recorded by Hoveden) to be firmly and
inviolably observed by all his Provincials; so that both the Kings assented to
them, though they were but Collections of some Decrees out of former Councels.

In the same year Hoveden ib. p. 546., 547. Antiquitates Ecclesiae Brit. p.
94, 95.
King Henry the Father called another Council at Windesore eight days after
Michaelmas; 1175
Praesentibus Rege and Filio, the King and his Son being present. Richard
Archbishop of Canterbury, with the Bishops of England, and Laurence Archbishop
of Dublin, Praesentibus etiam Comitibus and Baronibus Angliae, the Carles and
Barons of England being also present. In which Council (being a mere
Parliament) there was a general Concord made between King Henry the second,
and Rodericke King of Conact in Ireland, and the King in that Council gave the
Bishopric of Waterford to one Augustine an Irishman, whom he sent to Donatus
Archbishop of Cassels to be Consecrated.

Anno 1176. Hoveden ibid. An. 1176 p. 548, 549, 550.
King Henry the second assembled and held a great Council Nottingham, 1176
concerning the Statutes of his Kingdom, and before the King his Son, and
the Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, and Barons of his Kingdom, communi omnium
Concilio, by the common Council of them all, he divided his Kingdom into six
parts, through each of which he appointed three Justices Itinerant, whom he
caused to swear upon the holy Evangelists, that they should bona fide, and
without any sinister intention keep, and cause the people of his Kingdom
inviolably to observe the Articles of Assize, there renewed and confirmed,
recorded at large by Hoveden. To this Council (by the Kings command) came
William King of Scots, with all his Bishops, whom the King commanded by the
fealty and Oath of Allegiance they had taken to him, to do the same subjection
to the Church of England, which they ought to do, and were went to do in the
times of his Predecessors. To whom they answered; that they never had made any
subjection (or homage) to the Church of England, nor ought so to do, To which
See Eadmerus hist. Novor^. l. 4. p. 97 l. 5. p. 139, to 135. Malmesbury de
Gestis Pontif. Anglor: l. 3. p. 272 273.
Roger Archbishop of York replied; That the Bishop of Glascow and of Candida
Casa, or Whitterne, had in the time of his Predecessors been subject to the Sea
of York; and for proof hereof, he showed diverse privileges of the Bishops of
Rome, which made it appear. To which Jocelin Bishop of Glascow answered; That
the Church of Glascow was a special Daughter of the Church of Rome, and exempt
from all Archiepiscopall and Episcopal jurisdiction; and if the Church of
York had any jurisdiction over the Church of Glascow at any time, it appeared
that he deserved not to have any dominion over it for time to come. And because
Richard Archbishop of Canterbury, endeavored that the Church of Scotland
should be subject to the Church of Canterbury, (such was his ambition then) he
so crossed the King of England, That he permitted the Bishops of Scotland to
return home, without making any subjection of themselves to the Church of
England, as they had formerly done.

Anno 1176. Hugo Cardinalis Annal. part posterior An. 1176. p, 550
(Hoveden styles him Hugozun) the Popes Legate by the Kings permission and
asistance called a general Council at London, 1176
in the midst of Lent, where the Archbishops of Canterbury and York and all the
Bishops and Abbots of England, with a great number of Clergiemen assembling
together; the Cardinal sat on an high throne in the Chapel of the infirm
Monks of Westminster, and the Bishops and Abbots with him, every one in his
place according to his order and dignity. But there arose a contention between
the Archbishops of Canterbury and York, which of them should sit at the right
hand of the Cardinal; And when as the Archbishop of York would sit there, the
Bishop of Canterburies servants rushed violently upon him, threw him down upon
the ground, trampled on him with their feet, and brake his Miter: whereupon the
Council was dispersed, and the Cardinal flying to hide himself out of their
sight, was so hindered, that he held no Council. Both sides made appeals to
the Pope and complained to the King of the injuries done unto them. So Hoveden.
Hist. l. 3. c. 1. p 210, 211.
Gulielmus Nubrigensis relates the story in these words, When the Cardinal
assisted by the Kings favor had called together the Ecclesiastical persons of
both Provinces of Canterbury and York to London, to celebrate a Council of
all England there; on the day appointed for the beginning of his Council, when
all having taken their Robes and ensigns, were about to go in Procession to
it, there fell out a vehement contention between the Archbishops themselves
about the priority of place in the Council: For that rule of the Apostle (in
honor preferring one another) was so abrogated by the Bishops of our time,
that neglecting their Pastoral diligence and care, Bishops, by how much the
more stubbornly, by so much also the more vainly contend about Praecedencie,
and almost all Episcopal Controversy is wholly conversant about the
praerogative of their honors. In conclusion, York coming soonest,
praeoccupied the first seat; alleging, that the same belonged to him by the
ancient decree of Saint Gregory, by which it is known to be enacted, that of
the Metropolitans of England, he should be accounted the chief, who was first
ordained. But Canterbury having made a solemn complaint of the preoccupying of
his place, as if he suffered prejudice, refused the second seat. Whereupon his
subjects (or Clerks of his Province) contending more fiercely for him,
presently the simple contention of words, grew into a brauling. York (the
adverse party being stronger) was thrust with ignominy from the place he had so
early taken, who exhibited his torn Myter to the Legate, as a sign of the
injury offered to him, and cited Canterbury to the Apostolical See. The
Metropolitans therefore thus contending, and things thus disturbed, the
Council was not celebrated, but dissipated, and they who had assembled as
called forth to a Council, returned to their own homes. In vita Richardi. p,
125, 126
Matthew Parker in his Antiquitates Ecclesiae Britannicae, out of Gervasins and
Radulphus de Duceto, relates the story in these words: A Legate called
Flugonius came into England from the Pope, at King Henry the seconds request,
that he might both separate Queen Eleaner from him by a Divorce, and
comprimise the Controversy between the Archbishops of Canterbury and York,
touching the precedence which had continued for many successions of Bishops,
and been often times determined, but never finally ended till the Statute of 31
Hen. 8. cap. 10. such was the pride and ambition of these Arch-Prelates, whose
more than civil contentions, for superiority our Historians have at large
recorded to their infamy.) This Legate assembled a Council at Westminster in
the Church of the infirm Monks; whither the Clergy of both Provinces
plentifully assembled, and when the day of beginning the Council was come, the
Legate sitting on an high Throne, gave the right hand to the Archbishop of
Canterbury. But York hoping that the King would be more propitious to him
than to Canterbury, refused the left hand, and striving most impudently with
his breech, to sit between the Legate and Canterbury, at last sat down in the
lap of his Primate. He had scarcee, touched Canterbury with his breech with
which he strove to get the second place but he was shamefully reprehended both
by many Bishops, and also by many Clerks and Laymen. The Archbishop of
Canterburies servants provoked with the indignity of this wicked fact, and the
vehemency of the just reproof, pulling York out of their Lords bosom, and
throwing him down on the ground, trampled him under their feet, and his
Archiepiscopall Robes being most shamefully pulled off and torn, they buffeted
him with their fists. But Canterbury, when as he could not call away nor hold
off his servants, enraged with so great anger, departed out of the Council,
that at least he might draw them away with him by his departure.

The servants following their Master left York lying prostrate on the ground
environed with his torn Garments, At last York fetching many deep and
frequent sighs arises half dead, and goes all bloody to the King, who with
his son was present in the Council (the thing for which I principally relate
the story) and makes his complaint against Canterbury. The King having
received Yorks relation only, was at first in censed against Canterbury, but
afterward, the truth of his own rashness and impudency being manifested, he
dismissed York, who departed from the King with disgrace, the most reviling
him with clamors; go go (said they) thou betrayer of Saint Thomas; thy hands
do yet stink with blood. But he, poor wretch, did now welter in his own,
not Thomas his blood. Hugocius among these tumults perplexed with fear, having
pronounced a blessing, suddenly dissolved so unluckie a Council, and appealled
Canterbury to the Pope, as guilty of this battery: York also did the like. At
last Canterbury least he should be overwhelmed with appeals on both sides,
submitted himself and his servants to the Popes protection, by appealing both
the Legate and York to Rome: so all equally appealed. But the next day
Canterbury (who knew the manner of the Pontificians) pacified the Legate with
gifts, and they thus reconciled, remitted their Appeals on both sides.
Afterward the Archbishop of Cant. and Geoffry of Ely; were again accused by
the Bishop of York before the King, that in the Council of Westminster they
had laid violent hands on him; which when they had denied and purged themselves
upon Oath, they were reconciled by the Kings command; and by him a truce for
five years was made between Canterbury and York, who promised between
themselves upon Oath, that they would firmly stand to the Arbiterment of the
Bishops of Normandy and France, as well concerning this battery, as all other
controversies depending between them; And so this fray and Council ended;
wherein you see the King, Prince, and Laymen were present, it being in truth a
Parliament accompanied with a Convocation.

Anno 1226. there was Math. Westminster. Anno 1226 p. 118. 119. 126. Math Paris An
1226. p. 316. Antiquitates Ecclesiae Brit. pi 153. 154.
a Synod held at London under Otho the Popes Legate where the King, with the
Clergy. and Magnatibus Regni, and the great men of the Kingdom assembled, with
many Bishops, Priests, and La^corum Turbis and Troops of Laymen: when they were
all assembled. Otho read the Popes letters to them before them all, in which
the Pope alleged, that it was a most ancient scandal and reproach to the
Church of Rome, that she was branded for coveteousnesse the root of all evil,
and in this especially, that no men could expedite any business in the Court
of Rome, unless by disbursing great sums of money, and giving store of
gifts; but because the poverty of the Church of Rome was the cause of this
scandal and infamy, her natural sons ought to relieve the want of their
Mother; for unless we should receive gifts from you, and other good and honest
men; we should want necessaries to supply our lives, which would be altogether
incongruous to the Roman dignity; Therefore utterly to root out this scandal,
by the Council of our Brethren, the Cardinals of the holy Church of Rome, we
have provided a certain form, to which if you will consent, you may free your
Mother from scandal, and obtain Justice in the Court of Rome without giving
any bribes. Now the form provided is this; First of all, we desire two
Prebends to be given us by all Cathedral Churches, and out of Abbeys, where
the Monks and Abbots have diverse portions, of each one Monks entire
allowance, one from the Covent, another from the Abbott: which demand Otho
urged the Bishops and Prelates to grant on the foresaid grounds: Who consulting
together hereupon returned this their common Answer by John Archdeacon of
Bedford; That those things he had propounded to them did specially concern the
King of England, and generally all the Patrons of Churches, Archbishops
Suffragans, and Prelates of England, since therefore the King was then absent
by reason of his infirmity, and some Archbishops, Bishops and other Prelates
were absent likewise, that in their absence they neither could nor ought to
give any Answer. And upon these words uttered, came John Lord Marshall of
England and other Messengers from the King, strictly commanding all what held
Baronies of the King in Capite, that that they should not obliege their lay Fee
to the Church of Rome, whereby he might be deprived of the services

The same year, there was another Council assembled at Westminster under
Stephen Langhton Archbishop of Canterbury about the same matter; Math. Paris p.
319. Antiquitates Ecclesiae. Brit. p. 119. 120.
To which the King conferring a part with some of the Nobles and Bishops, gave
this Answer, that these things concern all Christendom, and because we are
placed in the remotest parts of the world, when we shall see what other
Kingdoms will say to these exactions, and shall have an example from them, the
Pope shall find us more ready to obey him. And so this Council brake up. By
both which presidents, it is evident, that Counsels in those days were no
other but Parliaments, the King, Nobles, and Commons being present in them, and
that the Clergy alone could treat or conclude of nothing but by their
concurring assents.

Anno 1231. There was a great Synod of Math. Paris. Hist. Angl. An. 1231. p.
359.
Abbotts, Priors, Archdeacons with whole Nobility, 1231.
Masters and Clerks of the Realm, assembled at Saint Albans by the Popes
Command, to celebrate a divorse between the Countess of Essex and her
Husband, if there were cause: This divorse was but an Ecclesiastical matte^ as
the Canonists deemed it, yet both King, Nobles, and Commons, as well as Abbots
and Clergymen were present at it, and called to it by the Popes command.

In the year of our Lord 1236. Matthew. Paris An. 1136. p. 431, 432, 433. Math.
Westminster. An. n. 237. p. 146. Antiquitates Ecclesiae Brit. p. 163, 164.
there was a Council of all the great men, London by King Henry the third,
1236.
under Oath the Popes Legate, which being assembled together at Paul's, the
second day thereof the King sent John Earl of Lincoln, John the son of
Jeffery, and William de Reele a Canon of Paul's, to inhibit the Legate in the
behalf of the King and Kingdom, that he should not there Attempt or decree
any thing against his Royal Crown, and dignity. William Reele remained there
to see this inhibition observed, the others departed. The next day following,
the Legate supported with divine assistance and astantis concilij Suffragits et
consensu and by the suffrages and consent of the Council there present, to
conserve and reform the State Ecclesiastical in the parts of England, besides
other Canonical institutions promulged certain Canons digested into Chapters
and Articles, which Edmond Archbishop of Canterbury, with diverse others who
departed from the Council with little joy, resolved to nullify and revoke,
(as not confirmed by the King the Lords and Commons for ought appears) which
Otho understanding, writ to the Pope to ratify them, who accordingly did it by
his decretall Epistle.

Anno 1288. 1288
Antiquit. Ecclesiae Brit. p. 205. Se loannis de Aton Constit. Provinciales f.
139, 131.
John Peckam Archbishop of Canterbury held a Provincial Council at Redding:
in which he made five Constitutions, purposing to draw the conusance of
Patronages of Churches anciently belonging to the Kings Court, to the
Ecclesiastical, to rescinde all Royal Prohibitions in suites depending in the
Ecclesiastical Court for goods and Chattels, and to inhibitu that
Ecclesiastical Judges should be thenceforth prohibited to proceed in them. But
the King hearing of this design, sent certain selected messengers both to the
Archbishop and the whole Council, commanding them with threats to resist,
whence it came to pass, 1296
and the Council being dissolved, all the Prelates returned frustrate of their
hope.

31. An. 1296. Antiquit. Eccl^siae Brit. p. 209, 210, 211. Matthew Westminster
An. 1295, 1296, 1297. p. 408. 409. 410. Thomas Washingham Ypodigma Neustriae.
An. 1296, 1297.
Robert Winchelsee Archbishop of Canterbury held a Provincial Council at
London, where the Clergy to disapoint the King of his Subsidies and Tenths;
decreed among other things, Ne quid inconsulto Papa Regibus a Clero solveretur;
That nothing should be paid to Kings without the Popes privity and consent. A
right loyal Constitution worthy Prelates. The King having then called a
Parliament to re-inburse his monyes spent in the Scottish Wars; had a large
Subsidy granted him by the Commons and Burgesses: But the Clergy neither
offered, nor granted him any thing by reason of this their Constitution; for
confirmation whereof, the Archbishop had gotten the Popes Bull; The King being
moved therewith, proroged the Parliament to London, commanding the Clergy to be
there on the first day of Saint Hilary, to give him a better answer; The King
in the mean time commanded all the Clergy men's Barnes, which were full of
corn, to be sealed up with public Seals; which whiles his Officers were
executing, the Archbishop commanded the Popes decree to be published in
Cathedral Churches; inhibiting under pain of Excommunication, that no Tribute
or aid should be paid to the King, or to any secular Prince out of
Ecclesiastical livings or revenues (an high strain of Papal usurpation and
presumption:) and when he and his Suffragans met in Paul's, they resolved to
stand to their former Constitution, and to grant the King nothing. (Such
dutiful good Subjects were these lordly Prelates.) Whereupon the King sending
messengers to them, to demand a supply from them, they all return him this
answer; It is sufficiently known that under God the Lord of all we have two
Lords; a spiritual, the Pope our Lord, and a temporal the King our
Sovereign: and though we are bound to obey both, yet we ought to obey our
spiritual Lord more than our temporal. And therefore we intend to send a
Legate to the Pope, that his leave first obtained, we may give the King what
he desires of us. The King receiving this answer, took it very disdainfully,
that he should be thus mocked in his own Kingdom by the Pope and his Clergy;
and thereupon See Fox Acts and Monuments p. 388. Bishop Jewels defense of the
Apology of the Church of England, part. 6. c. 2. divis. 1. p. 522 habito Rex
cum suis Baronibus Parliamento and Clero. excluso, Statutum est, etc.
thrust the Clergy out of the Parliament, and held a Council with his Barons
and Commons alone, and presently put all the Clergy out of his protection,
that none of them should have power to sue any man in any of his Courts, but
might be sued there by any of his subjects; upon which all the Clergy but the
Archbishop, were content to offer the King the fith part of their
Ecclesiastical goods, and the Archbishop persisting in his obstinacy, had all
his temporalities, goods, Chattels seized into the Kings hands: Who yet would
not yield, but pronounced them all excommunicate, who disobeyed the former
constitution, which being made only by the Clergy, and not ratified by King
and Parliament, was held but a mere idle nullity, and audacious disobedient
attempt, obliging neither King nor subject.

Anno 1418. Antiquitates Ecclesiae Brit. p. 314, 315.
A Provincial Synod was held at London under Henry Chichely Archbishop of
Canterbury: 1418
Where upon the motion of Robert Guilbert President of Merton College in
Oxford, and of Thomas Kington, it was decreed; That the Patrons of
Ecclesiastical benefices when they fell void, should confer them upon such
who were Graduates in the Universities, having a respect of their degree and
profession, according to the value of the living. This Constitution being
propounded in the Congregation in the University to be there ratified, the
Masters of Arts, Monks and Professors, who exceeded the Regents of the
University in multitude, rejected and refused it, but K. Henry the fifth being
addicted to learning. An. 1420. writ to the Synod then assembled at London,
(wherein the Chancellors both of Oxford and Cambridge petitioned that it might
be received, though the Masters of Art had refused to receive it) to pass the
Decree (which some Friars there opposed,) Judge in Parliamento postea
confirmavit, and he afterward confirmed the same in Parliament. Lo here a
Constitution first made in a Synod or Convocation rejected in both
Universities, because not then confirmed by the King in Parliament, to make it
binding and efficatious for future times: a most pregnant evidence for proof
of that I now contend for. To cite more presidents of this nature in former
ages, would be more tedious than necessary in so plain a case; I shall
therefore pass from Councels and Synods to direct Acts of Parliament touching
Religion and Church affairs.

As high as we have any Acts of Parliament since the Conquest remaining on
Record, We find all Ecclesiastical matters, and Church affairs settled, and
ratified by special Acts of Parliament only, not by the Clergies Canons.

The great Charter of England, first See Sir Edw: Cooks Institutes on Magna
Charta c. 1. Matthew Paris, p. 53. 249, 296.
granted by King Henry the first, King Henry the 1. and 2.
ratified afterward at Runing-Mead by King John, revived by King Henry the
third in the ninth year of his Reign, (confirmed frequently by him
afterward; by King Edward the first, in the 28th year of his Reign, yea, by
all or most of his successors, in special Acts of Parliament, by the Petition
of Right: 3. Caroli;) begins thus, Know ye, that we to the honor of Almighty
God, and for the salvation of the Souls of our Progenitors, and Successors
Kings of England, to the advancement of holy Church, etc. First, We have
granted to God, and by this our present Charter have confirmed for Us, and our
Heirs for ever more; that the Church of England shall be free, and have all
her rights and liberties inviolable: And that all her elections shall be free,
etc.

An. 1164. In February there was a Matthew Paris, p. 96. 97, 98, 99. See
Eadmerus, Houeden, Hollingshed, Speed Daniel, in the life of King Henry the 2d.
and Antiqu. Ecclesiae Brit: and Godwin, in the life of Becket.
Parliament held at Clarindon, by King Henry the 2d. his command, who was there
present; where all the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbotts, Priors, Earls, Barons,
Nobles, and great men of the Realm, made a Recognition or Recerd of part of the
Customs and Liberties of the Kings Ancestors; to wit, of King Henry the first,
and others, which ought to be observed and kept by all men in the Realm, by
reason of the dissension, and discords frequently emerging between the Clergy,
and the Kings Justices, and great men of the Realm: the substance whereof was
contained in these 16. Chapters recorded by Matthew Paris.

1. That if any controversy concerning the advowson and presentation of
Churches should arise between Laymen, or between Laymen and Clergy men, it
should be heard and determined in the Court of our Lord the King.

2. That the Churches of the Fee of our Lord the King, could not be given in
perpetuity (or appropiated) without his grant or concession.

3. That Clergiemen accused of any thing, being summoned by the Kings Justice,
should come into the Kings Court to answer the same there; that so the Kings
Court might determine what was to be answered there and what fit to be
answered in the Ecclesiastical Court; that so the Justice might send into the
Court of holy Church, to see how the matter shall there be handled; And if the
Clarke shall be convict, or confess the crime, that the Church from
thenceforth ought not to protect him.

4. That it shall not be lawful to the Archbishops, Bishops, and persons of
the Realm to go out of the Realm, without the License of our Lord the King;
and if they shall go thence, if it shall please the King, they shall give him
security, that neither in going nor in returning, nor in staying, they shall
procure hurt or damage to our Lord the King or the Realm.

5. That excommunicate persons ought not to give a pledge to remain, (vadium
ad remanentiam) nor to take an Oath, but only to give a surety or pledge of
standing to the judgment of the Church, where they are absolved.

6. That Laymen ought not to be accused, but by lawful accusers and witnesses,
in the presence of the Bishop, that the Archdeacon may not lose his right, nor
any thing that he ought to have from thence. And if those who are accused shall
be such that no man will or dares to accuse, the Sheriff being required by the
Bishop, shall swear twelve lawful men of the Vicenage or Town, before the
Bishop, that they shall manifest the truth (concerning such) according to their
Consciences.

7. No man who holds of the King in Capite, nor any of his Dominicall Ministers
(or household servants) shall be excommunicated, nor the Lands of any one of
them put under interdict, unless our Lord the King (if he be within the
Realm) be first acquainted therewith, or his Justice, if he shall be forth of
the Realm: (the reason then rendered was, lest the King should at unawares
Kiss or admit to his Council such an excommunicate person resorting to him,)
that so he may do right concerning him; and see that what appertains to the
Kings Court, shall be there determined, and that what belongs to the
Ecclesiastical Court may be sent unto it, that it may bethere descided.

8. Concerning appeals, if they shall happen, they ought to proceed from the
Archdeacon to the Bishop, from the Bishop to the Archbishop; and if the
Archbishop shall fail in exhibiting Justice, they may appeal to our Lord the
K. in the last place, and that by his precept the controversy may be ended in
the Archbishops Court, so that there ought to be no further proceeding
without the assent of our Lord the King.

10. If any be cited by the Archdeacon or Bishop for any offense, for which he
ought to answer to them, and will not appear upon their citations, it shall
be lawful for them to put him under interdict, but they ought not to
excommunicate him, till he be convented before the chief Officer of the King
in that parish, that he may admonish him to appear to give satisfaction, And
if the Officer of the King shall fail therein he shall be in the Kings mercy,
and from thenceforth the Bishop may with Ecclesiastical Justice curb the
party accused.

11. Archbishops, Bishops and all persons of the Realm, who hold of the King
in Capite, may have their possessions of the King as a Barony, and shall answer
for them to the Justices and Ministers of the King, and shall follow, and do
all Royal Customs, and like other Barons, ought to be present in judgments
of the Kings Court, with the Barrons, until it proceed to diminution of
Members, or unto death.

12. When an Archbishopricke, Bishopric, or Abbey, or Priory shall become
void in the Kings Dominion, it ought to be in his hands, and he shall receive
all the rents and issues thereof as the Dominicall rents, And what shall come
to the Church is to be disposed of, Our Lord the King ought to commend the
best persons to the Church, and the election ought to be made in the Kings own
Chapel by assent of the King himself, and advise of such persons of the
Realm, which he shall call unto him to do these things; and there the person
elected shall do his homage and fealty to the King, as to his Liege Lord, of
life and members, and of terrene honor, saving his Order, before he shall be
Consecrated.

13. If any of the Nobles of the Realm shall deny to do Justice to any
Archbishop, or Bishop, or Archdeacon concerning him or his, our Lord the King
ought to do them Justice. And if peradventure any shall deny to our Lord the
King his right; the Archbishops, Bishops, and Archdeacons ought to admonish
him, that he may satisfy the King.

14. The Church or Churchyard ought not to detain the Chattels of those who are
in forfeiture of the King, against the Justice of the King, because they are
the Kings own, whether they be found within or without the Church.

15. Pleas of Debts which shall be due either by interposition of an oath, or
without oath, are in the Justice of the King (that is, triable in the Kings
temporal Courts.

16. The Sons of Peasants (or Villainies) ought not to be ordained (Priests)
without assent of the Lord, in whose land they are known to be borne.

To this Recognition or Record of the Customs and Liberties of the Realm, the
Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Clergy, with all the Earls, Barons, and
Nobles swore, and firmly promised viva voce, in the word of truth, that they
would keep and observe it to our Lord the King and to his Heirs, bona fide and
without male engine for ever. His itaque gestis, potestas Laica in res and
personas Ecclesiasticas, omnia pro libitu, Ecclesiastico jure contempto,
tacentibus aut vix murmur antibus Episcopis, potius quam resistentibus,
usurpabat; writes Matthew Paris. Whereupon Thomas Becket then Archbishop of
Canterbury, repenting of his oath to observe them, humbled and afflicted
himself exceedingly with fasting and corporal pennace, yea he suspended
himself from the office of the Altar, until the Pope absolved him from his
pretended offense and oath, which he readily obtained: After which Becket
resusing to conform himself to the King and these Laws he had sworn to,
departs secretly without the Kings license into Flanders, and from thence
repaired to Pope Alexander at Sennes, who courteously entertained him; and
refused the demands of the Kings Ambassadors, to do him justice against
Becket, or to confirm these Laws and ancient Customs of the Realm. Whereupon
the King sent this ensuing Writ to every Sheriff of England, Matthew Paris
ibid.
Praecipio tibi, quod si aliquis Clericus vel Laicus in Baliva tua, Romanam
curiam appellaverit, eum capias, and firmiter teneas, donec voluntatem meam
praecipiam, and omnes reditus Clericorum Archiepiscopi and possessiones saiseas
in manum meam. Et omnium Clericorum qui cum Archiepiscopo sunt, Patres, Matres,
Fratres, and Sorores; Nepotes and Neptes, pones per salvos plegios, and catalla
eorum, donec voluntatem meam inde praecipiam. Et hoc Breve tecum afferas, cum
summonitus fueris Gilberto quoque que Londonensi Episcopo scripsit in haec
verba. Nosti quam male Thomas Cantuariensis Archiepiscopus operatus est
adversum mo and regnum meum, and quam male recesserit; Et ideo mando tibi quod
Clerici sui, qui detraxerunt honori meo and regni, qui circa^psum fuerunt, post
fugam suam, non percipiant aliquid de reditibus suis quos habuerunt in
Episcopatu tuo, nisi per me, nec habeant aliquod auxilium vel consilium a^te,
Item Justitiariis suis significavit per literas sub hac forma. Si quis inventus
fuerit ferens literas Domini Papae vel mandatum, aut Thomae Archiepiscopt,
continens interdictum Christianitatis in Anglia, capiatur and retinetur, donec
inde voluntatem meam praecipiam; Item, nullus Clericus, Monachus, Canonicus vel
conversus, vel alicujus religionis transfretare permittatur, nisi habeat
Literas de reditu suo, Justitiarii vel nostras: Si quis aliter inventus fuerit,
capiatur and retineatur, Nullus appellet ad Papam, neque ad Thomam
Archiepiscopum, neque aliquod placitum ex eorum mandato teneatur, neque aliquod
mandatum eorum in Anglia recipiatur, and si quis tenuexit, vel receperit, vel
tractaverit, capiatur and retineatur; Si Episcopi, Abbates, Clerici, vel Laici
sententiam interdicti tenuerunt, sine dilatione a terra eijciantur and tota
eorum Cognatio, Ita quod nihil de catallis suis secum ferant, sed catalla eorum
and possessiones in manu nostra saisiantur; Omnes Clerici, qui reditus habent,
in Anglia, sint summoniti per omnes comitatus, ut infra tres Menses praecise ad
reditus suos, sicut diligunt eos and amant, in Angliam redeant. Et si ad
terminum praefixum non venerint, reditus eorum in manu nostra saisiantur.
Episcopt Londoniensis and Norioensis summoneantur, quod sint eoram Justiciariis
Nostris ad rectum faciendum, quod contra Statuta Regni, interdixerunt terram
Hugonis Comitis, and in ipsum sententiam Anathematis intulerunt Denarii beati
Petri colligantur, and serventur, quousque inde vobis Dominus Rex voluntatem
suam praeceperit, Ecclesiam praeterea Cantuariensem, and omnia bona
Archiepiscopi Rex, et suorum, consiscari praecepit. Et quod in nullius
historiae legitur serie, totam ejus congnationem exilio ascriptam addixit, sine
delectu conditionis, sexus aut aetatis. Et cum Ecclesia Catholica, oret pro
haereticis, schismatieis and perfidis Judaeis, prohibitum est a Rege, ne quis
Archiepiscopum, orationum suffragiis adjuvaret. Such Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction did the King then exercise.

To what an unfortunate end this opposition brought this Archbishop Becket, our
Historians at large record, and I have The Antipathy of the English Lordly
Prelacy etc. part. 1. p. 17. to 29.
elsewhere manifested.

In King Henry the 3. his Reign, K. Henry 3.
I find these several printed Acts of Parliament made concerning the Church,
Bishops, Abbots, Clergymen, and Ecclesiastical affairs, which you may peruse
at pleasure. 9. H. 3. c. 1. 5. 18. 31. 33. 36, 37. The Charter of the Forest,
9. H. 3. c. 4. 11. 16. 20. H. 3. c. 9. 51. H. 3. c. 10. 12. 28. besides those
Recorded by Matthew Paris.

In King Edward the first his Reign there were these Acts to like purpose. K.
Edw. 1.
3 E. 1. (which begins with this Prologue, Because our Soveragine Lord the King
had given power to redress the State of the Realm, etc. for the common profit
of holy Church, and of the Realm. And because the State of holy Church has
ever been kept, etc.) c. 1, 2. 46. 4 E. 1. c. 6. 7 E. 1. the Statute of
Mor^main: 13. E. 1. c. 5. 19. 29. 31, 32, 33. 41, 42, 43. 48. Circumspecte
agatis 13 E. 1. (commonly called a Statute, though 19 E. 3. Fitz. Jurisdiction
28. it be adjudged none.) The Statute upon the Writ of Consultation: 24 Ed. 1.
The confirmation of the Charters of the Liberties of England. 25 E. 3. c. 4. 6.
The Statute concerning certain Liberties granted to the Commons. The Statute of
Carlisle 25. E. 1. (See Cooks 5. Report of the Kings Ecclesiastical Law, f.
13.) 34. E. 1. c. 6.

In King Edward the seconds days, K. Edw. 2.
I meet with the Statute of A^ticuli Cleri. 19 E. 2. which wholly concerns the
Clergy, their Courts, Tithes, Rights. The Statute de Prerogativa Regis c. 1. 8.
10. 14, 15. and Articles against the Kings Prohibition.

In King Edward the third his Regency, K. Edw. 3.
I find very many Statutes concerning the Clergy, and all kind of Church
affairs; as namely, 1 E. 3. Stat, 2. c. 10, 11. 4 E. 3. c. 6. 5 E. 3. c. 2. 9
E. 3. Stat. 2. c. 1. 14 E. 3. stat. 1. c. 1. 17. and stat. 3 made for the
Clergy, the Prologue, and c. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. 15 E. 3. stat. 1. c. 1. 6. Parl. 3.
c. 6. 18 E. 3. stat. 3. for the Clergy, c. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. 23 E. 3. c. 8.
25 E. 3. stat. 3! for the Clergy, c. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. 25 E. 3. stat. 6.
of Provisions, 27 E. 3. stat. 1. c. 1. of Provisions. 28 E. 3. c. 14. 31 E. 3.
stat. 1. c. 4. 11. 13, 14. 36 E. 3. c. 8, concerning Priests Salaries etc. 38
E. 3. stat. 2. against provisors and Appeals to Rome, c. 1, 2, 3, 4 5. 45 E.
3. c. 3. 50 E. 3. c. 1. 4, 5. To which I shall add only this observation, That
the prologues to the statutes of 1 E. 3. stat. 2. 2 E. 3 stat. 3. 28 E. 3. 38
E. 3. stat. 1. and 50 E. 3. with others, begin thus. To the honor of God, and
of HOLY CHVRCH, and redress of the oppressions of the people, etc. these
ensuing Acts were made and granted: to testify, that even in those days our
Parliaments first began with matters of God and the Church, and settled them by
Laws as there was occasion, and then proceeded to temporal matters and
grievances: the very Statute of Magna Charta, having the same prologue wherein
you may discern this method pursued, and in most subsequent Parliaments. I
shall add to these printed Acts 6 E. 3. number. 5. prohibiting Bishops to meddle
in matters of the peace. 45 E. 3. number. 15. removing Bishops from all temporal
Offices, 50 E. 3. number. 99. 103. complaining against popish Cardinals. 40 E. 3.
number. 7, 8. a notable Record against the Popes claim to the Kingdom of
England, by virtue of K. John's grant. 17 E. 3. number. 59, 60. 18 E. 3. number. 59,
60. 38 E. 3. number. 7. 50 E. 3. number. 85. 87, 88. complaining against, yea
restraining the Popes exactions and usurpations as the cause of all plagues. 50
E. 3. number. 46, 47. complaining against the Canons of the Clergy, and 47 E. 3.
number. 24. against Ordinaries incroaching upon the civil Jurisdiction.

To proceed to King Richard the second, K. Rich. 2.
the Statutes in the first year of his Reign have this Preface. Richard by
the Grace of God, etc. Know that to the honor of God, and reverence of holy
Church, for to nourish peace unity and concord in all the parts of the Realm,
etc. We have ordained and established certain Statutes, etc. First it is agreed
and established, that holy Church shall have and enjoy all her rights,
liberties, and franchises wholly and without blemish. etc. The confirmation of
Magna Charta with other temporal Laws next follow; and then c. 13, 14, 15.
three Laws for paying of Tithes, and freeing Clergymen from arrests during
their exercising of divine Service. The second Parliament in ^. Rich. 2. has
the like prologue; To the honor of God and holy Church, cap. 1 confirms the
franchises and liberties of the Church: 3. R. 2. C. 1 does the like and c. 3.
is a Statute against Provisions from Rome, to avoid Nonresidency, to provide
for instruction of the people by preaching, and reform many abuses in the
Church occasioned by provisions, made at the complaints, clamors and diverse
Petitions of the Kings Liege people delivered in diverse Parliaments, to reform
these abuses, 5. R. 2. cap. 1. has the like preface, c. 1. confirms the
Churches liberties, 5. R. 32. Parl. 2. c. 5. Is a Statute made at the Clergies
motion to suppress haresies, and Errors, contrary to the Christian faith, and
to imprison haeretickes and erroneous Preachers, till they justify themselves
according to the Law and reason of holy Church. 6 Rich. 2. Stat. 1. has the
like prologue, and c. 1. Ordaines and accords, that our holy Mother the Church
of England have all her Liberties whole and unhurt, and the same fully enjoy
and use. 7 Rich. 2. has the same prologue, c. 8. the like confirmation of the
Churches privileges, and c. 12. prohibits Provisions from Rome. 8 Rich. 2.
has the like preface, and enacts in the first chapter. That holy Church have
all her liberties, 9. R. 2. c, 4. 5. concerns Ordinaries, Priors dative, and
perpetual, and Priests, 10. R. 2. c. 1. saves pontifical dignity, and
privilege of holy Church, and cleares all in all things aforesaid, 11. R. 2.
c. 3. declares, that Bishops ought not to be present or voting in Parliament in
matters of blood, 1. 2. R. 2. c. 1. confirms the Churches liberties Chap. 7.
exempts pilgrims from the punishments of Vagrants and c. 15. prohibits
Provisions from any foreign power, 13. R. 2. recites, That the acts therein
passed were to the honor of God and holy Church: etc. and c. 13. prohibits
hunting on holy days, and Priests to keep Dogs, who have not livings to a
certain value c. 18 concerns the Bishop and Deane of Lincoln, and c. 29.
Pilgrims, 13. R. 2. Parl. 2. c. 23. provides for the election of Bishops, and
all other ecclesiastical dignities elective, and prohibits provisions,
usurpations, citations, and Bulls of the Pope and Court of Rome under pain of
a Praemunire, banishment, abjuration; Imprisonment, Fine and ransom, 14. R. c.
2. Limits the exchanges of monyes to the Court of Rome, 15. R. 2. c. 2. 6.
concerns forcible entries into Benefices, and Offices of holy Church,
mortuaties to Religious persons, Popes Bulls, consecrations of Church-yeards
and Appropriations of Churches, and Alms, 16. R. 2. c. 5 provides for
presentations to Churches, against the Popes usurpations, Translations
excommunications, Bulls, and Jurisdiction, under pain of a Praemunire, 21. R.
2 it prefaced: To the honor of God and holy Church: and c. 1. confirms the
Churches Liberties. K. Henry 4.


In King Henry the 4th. his Parliaments, I find, that the Prologues of the
Statutes in 1. ^. 4. 7. 9. and 13. H. 4. begin thus; To the honor of God and
reverence of holy Church, etc. and the first Chapter in each of them is. That
holy Church have and enjoy all her rights, liberties, and Franchises, entirely,
and without imbleamishing. Then follow temporal Laws. 2. H. 4. c. 3. 4.
prohibits provisions of exemption from regular or ordinary obedience, granted
to any religious persons from Reme, and Bulls of exemption from payment of
Tithes granted to the Religious of the Order of Cysteaux, under pain of a
P^amunire: and Cap. 15. provides for the suppression of Sectaries, heretical
Preachers, Conventicles, heriticall Books, Schools, and preservation of the
Catholic faith: enacting, that Heritickes shall be imprisoned, abjured and in
case of relapse, or obstinacy, burned, 4. H. 4. c. 2. 3. confirm all the
Statutes formerly made in favor of the Church and Clergy, and for preservation
of their liberties Cap. 12. concerns appropriations of Churches, Vicaridges,
Ordinaries, the Bishop and Archdeacon of Ely, and other Religious persons, cap.
14. prohibits working or wages on holy days, Cap. 17. enacts; that none shall
enter into Religion unless he be fourteen years of age without the Parents
consent Cap. 22. concerns presentations to Benefices 5. H. 4. c. 11. 12.
concern Tithes, Chalices, and ornaments of holy Church, 6. H. 4. c. 1.
prohibits provisions and the payment of first fruits, or exacted fees to Rome,
under forfeiture of all their estates who offend herein, 7. H. 4. c. 6.
inhibits Religious persons under pain of a Praemunire, to procure any
exemption from payment of Tithes or any provisions from the Pope, 9. H. 4. c.
8. forbids provisions and translations from the Pope under pain of a
Praemunire, and makes all elections of Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Prebends
and Deans to be free, without any interruption from the Pope or King. 11. H. 4.
c. 4 Prohibits unlawful games on Sundays, and other holy days.

1. H. 5. c. 7. 8. prohibits the conferring of Ecclesiastical living upon
Aliens, K. Henry 5.
and orders their benefices and the lands of Priors aliens to be seized in
times of War, 2. H. 5. c. 1. provides for Ordinaries visitations of
Hospitalls, and reformation of them after the laws of the holy Church: Cap. 3.
grants a prohibition to spiritual Courts, where they deny a Copy of the Lible,
Chap. 7. for the preservation of the Christian faith, the Law of God and holy
Church with in this Realm, and the punishment of Heresies and Heretics
enacts, that Heretics shall be apprehended and imprisoned by Sheriffs, and
upon conviction of Heresy, forseit their Lands and goods, and be burned. 2. H.
5. Parl. 2. c. 2. limits the wages of Curates and Parish Priests, 3. H. 5. c.
1. enacts, that holy Church have all her liberties and franchsies C. 3.
concerns Abbots and Priors, C. 4. inhibits provisions from Rome under a
Premiarie, C. 8. concerns Probate of Wills and r^gulates exorbitant fees for
procuring them, C. 6. forbids the promotions of Irishmen to Beneficies or
Ecclesiastical dignities, 9. H. 5. c. 9. limits the manner of collecting
Dismes by Archbishops, Bishops and their Agents.

2. H. 6. c. 1 confirms the Churches liberties 6. H 6. c. 3. prohibits work
on, K. Henry 6.
and wages for holy days, 8. H. 6. begins thus. To the Laud and honor of
Almighty God, and of the holy Mother the Church, Chapter 1. provides for the
privileges of the Convocation, 10. H. 6. c. 11. limits how Bastardy shall be
tried between the Common and Canon Law, which differ therein: 15. H. 6. c. 7.
concerns Abbots and Priots, 27. H. 6. c. 5. prohibits Faires and Merkets upon
Sundays and principle holy days, as a great profanation of them, 28. H. 6.
begins, To the honor of God and of holy Church, 33. H. 6. c. 6. concerns the
exemption of the Abbot of Founteynes, and other Abbots and Priors, from
Vexations suits.

1. Ed. 4. is prefaced. K. Ed. 4.
To the honor of God and of holy Church, C. 1. contains in it many
particulars concerning Bishops, Abbots, and Clergymen, 3. E. 4. has the same
prefaced, and 12. E. 4. c. 7, prescribes excommunication 4. times a year to be
denounced against the infringers of Magna Charta, as other Acts formerly did

King Richard the 3d. prefaceth the Acts of his first Parliament in his 1.
year thus. K. Rich. 3.
To the honor of God and of holy Church, c. 14. limits the manner of collecting
the Clergies Dismes.

King Henry the 7th. begins his Statutes in the 1. year of his Reign; To the
honor of God and his holy Church: K. Henry 7.
and Cap. 4. enables Archbishops, Bishops, and other Ordinaries to imprison
Priests, Clerks, and Religious persons for incontinency, which they could not
do before; The Statutes of 2. 4. 11. 12. and 17. H. 7. (as their Prologues
attest) were made, to the worship of God and holy Church, and for the common
good of this Realm.

The Statutes of An. 1. 3. 4. and all or most Parliaments in the Regine of King
Henry the 8th. are prefaced. K. Henry 8.
To the honor of God and holy Church, and for the Common Weal and profit of
this Realm: In the Parliament of 21. H. 8. C-3. 4. 13. there were Statutes
made concerning Probat of VVi^s, taking of mortuaries by Priests or others,
against Pluralities of Benefices, and taking of farms by spiritual men, All
of Ecclesiastical Cognizance, 22. H. 8. c. 15. contains the Kings general
pardon to his spiritual Subjects, who were fallen into a Praemunire, by
submitting to Cardinal Wolsies power Legatine, 23. H. 8. c. 1. abridgeth the
power of Ordinaries and takes away the benefit of Clergy in some cases: chapter 9.
enacts: That no man shall be cited into any ecclesiastical Court, out of the
Diocese wherein he dwells, unless in certain causes, chapter 10. settles the Law
concerning feofements and assurances to the use of any Parish Church or Chapel
24 H. 8. chapter 12. takes away all Appeals to Rome, and excellently sets forth
the Kings supremacy as well in and over Ecclesiastical causes and persons, as
temporal (as you may read at large in the Act it self) denying, exploding the
authority of the Pope and Sea of Rome, 25. H. 8. c. 14. conteines a Law for the
punishment of HERESY and HERETIQVES. limiting the manner of proceeding against
them, defining what shall be heresy, how it shall be punished, and abridging
the Authority of the Bishops and Canon Law, chapter 16. concerns Pluralities, chapter
19. contains the submission of the Clergy and Convocation to the King;
declares the Kings supremacy in causes Ecclesiastical, the impotency of the
Clergy, or Convocation to make or promulge any Canons, or Ecclesiastical
constituti^ns, or to debate any thing in Convocation without his Royal License
and approbation: The Nullity and invalidity of the Canon Law: abolisheth all
appeals to Rome; and Authorizeth 32. persons, whereof half to be of the
Clergy, the other half of THE LAITY, to survay the Canon Law, and to compile a
body of the Canon Law to be authorized by the King under his Great Seal by
virtue of this Act, for to be the only Canon Law, to be used within this
Realm, Chap. 20. takes away the payment of any Annates o^ first fruits to the
Bishop of Rome, nullifies his usurped power, and Bulls settles the form of
electing and consecrating Archbishops and Bishops within this Realm, and
plentifully manifests the Kings and Parliaments Jurisdictions in
Ecclesiastical affairs, chap. 21. does the like: exonerating the Kings
Subjects from all exactions and Impositions heretofore paid to the Sea of
Rome, and enabling the Archbishop of Canterbury and his Officers to grant all
Licenses and dispensations within the Realm, which were formerly granted at
Rome only. The Statute is worthy perusal, consideration, fully demonstrating
the power of the Parliament in Church affairs. 26. H. 8. c. 1. declares the
Kings Highness to be supreme head of the Church of England under Christ,
making it a part of his Royal Title, and to have Ecclesiastical authority to
redress and reform all Errors, Heresies and abuses in the Church, punishable
by any spiritual or ecclesiastical Law. Chap. 3. enacts; The payment of the
first fruits of all Dignities, Benefices, promotions spiritual, and tenthes to
the King and his Heirs, abolishing the Popes usurpations and authority herein,
chapter 13. abolisheth sanctuary in cases of High Treason. chapter 14. Authorizeth the
nomination and consecration of suffragan Bishops in sundry places of this
Realm, and both creates and limits their authority. chap. 15. takes away some
exactions of spiritual men, within the Archdeaconry of Richmond, 27. H. 8. c.
8. limits, that the Kings spiritual Subjects shall pay no Tithes whiles they
are in their first fruits chapter 15. authorizeth the King to nominate 32. persons
half of the Clergy, the other of the Laity for the perusal and making of
Ecclesiastical Laws, and manifests the Convocations invalidity to make such
laws or Canons, chapter 19. Limiteth and abolisheth Sanctuaries, and sanctuary
persons, chapter 20. contains an Order touching the paying of Tithes throughout
the Realm: chapter 21. Limits the manner of payment of Tithes within the City of
London chapter 27. suppresseth diverse Monasteries, Priories and Religious Houses,
vesteth their revenues in the King, and erects the Court of Augmentations. 28.
H. 8. chapter 10. extinguisheth these authority of the Bishop of Rome, prescribes an
Oath of abjuration of it and Popery together with the Popes usurpations and
excellently sets forth the Kings supreamacy the Parliaments authority, in
matters ecclesiastical as you may read in the Act, worthy perusal chapter 11.
enacts, Restitution of the first fruits in time of vacation to the next
incumbent, chapter 13. compells spiritual persons to residence upon their livings,
chapter 16. Releaseth such as have obtained pretended Licenses and dispensations
from the Sea of Rome, 31. H 8. c. 6. enables such as were Religious persons to
purchase lands, and to sue and be sued in all manner of Actions, which they were
disabled formerly to do by the Common and Canon Law, chapter 9. Enables the King to
make Bishops by his Letters Patents only, and to erect new Bishoprics, which
he did, chapter 13. disolves all Monasteries and religious Houses and vests them in
the King, wherein you may behold much of the Kings and Parliaments power in
Church businesses, chapter 14. For abolishing of diversity of opinions in matters
of Religion; most fully and exactly demonstrates; the Kings and Parliaments
jurisdictions in matters of Religion, as the whole Act sufficiently manifests,
though the Articles therein defined were erroneous, and the Act too cruel and
bloody 32. H. 8. cap. 8. provides for the true payment of Tithes and offerings
chap. 10. contains the punishment of incontinent Priests, and of women
offending with them, chapter 12. concerns Sanctuaries and the privileges of
Churches and Churchyards, chapter 15. prescribes the manner of proceeding against
Heretics, and impugners of the Act, for abolishing of enormious opinions in
Christian Religion, chap. 23, 24. concerns Accounts of Bishops, and subsidies
granted by the Clergy, chap. 25. Dispences the Kings marriage with the Lady
Jane, chap. 24. Dissolves the Hospitalls of Saint John's of Jerusalem, in
England, and Ireland, for supporting and maintaining the supremacy and
jurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome, contrary to their duty and Allegiance,
chap. 26. Entitled, An act concerning true opinions, and Declaration of Christ's
Religion, is most pregnant to our present purpose, which you may peruse, chap.
38. Concerning precontracts of marriages and degrees of consanguinity, is
likewise a most punctual Act for the Kings and Parliaments Ecclesiastical
power, and chap, 44. 45, 47. good evidences of it, 33. H. 8. chap. 15. 27, 28,
29, 30, 31, 32. Enabling Religious persons to sue and be sued; severing the
Bishoprics of CHESTER, and Isle of MAN from the jurisdiction of CANTERBURY to
the Sea of York: making the Church of Whitgate a Popish Church by it self,
and severing it from the Parish of Over; (which I wish our Independents to
observe, and to learn from this and other Acts, that no new Churches or
Parishes can be erected legally but by act of Parliament, which none of their
Churches are) 34. and 35. H. 8. c. 1. entitled; An act for The advancement of
true Religion and For the abolishing of the contrary, is most pertinent to our
purpose, and c. 15. 17, 19, 35. H. 8. c. 9. for ratification of the Kings
style, and Title of Defender of the Faith, and supreme head of the Church of
England, and Ireland, chapter 6. Concerning the qualification of the Statute of the
6. Articles, c. 16. concerning the examination of the Canon Laws, by 32.
persons, half of the Clergy, and half of the temporalty, to be named by the
Kings Majesty, during his life, to compile a body of the Canon Law to be used
in the Realm, 37. H. 8. c. 4. 12. but especially, chapter 17. That Doctors of
civil Law may execute Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, though Laymen, and married
(a Law worthy reading) and chap. 21. For the union of Churches not exceeding
the value of 5l. (which could not be done but by Act of Parliament) are all
most pregnant evidences of the Kings and Parliaments indubitable
Ecclesiastical jurisdictions in matters of Discipline, Religion,
Church Government, and all Church affairs whatsoever.

The Statutes made in King Edward the 6. his Reign are most punctual and
pegnant evidences hereof; K. Edward the 6th.
as namely, 1. Edw. 6. chapter 11. For administering the Sacrament in both kinds
(therein proved necessary by sundry Texts of Scripture) and punishing such
persons as shall unreverently speak against the Sacrament, with Temporal and
Ecclesiastical censures. chapter 2. concerning the election and creation of
Bishops by the Kings Letters Patents, and what Process and Seals they shall
use; declaring, that they have no Ecclesiastical jurisdiction but merely from
the King, chapter 9. For uniting certain Churches within the City of York: chapter
12. which abolisheth Sanctuaries and Clergy in some cases, 2. and 3. E. 6. chapter
1. For the Uniformity of service, and the administration of the Sacraments
throughout the Realm, chapter 13. For the true payment of Tithes, chapter 19. For
abstinence from flesh, chapter 20. Concerning Recusants, chapter 23. For positive Laws
made against the Marriage of Priests, chapter 23. The repeal of a Statute touching
Precontracts of Marriage: 3. and 4. E. 6. chapter 10. For the abolishing and putting
away of diverse (superstitious Popish) Books and Images, chap. 11. That the
Kings Majesty may nominate and appoint 32. persons (half Clergymen, and half
Laymen) to peruse and make Ecclesiastical Laws, chapter 12. For the manner of
Ordaining Ecclesiastical Ministers, and Consecrating Bishops, chapter 15. Against
fond and fantastical Prophecies, 5. and 6. E. 6. chapter 1. For the uniformity of
Common Prayer, and administration of the Sacraments, chapter 3. For the keeping of
Holy Days, and Fasting days, chapter 4. Against fighting and quarelling in
Churches and Churchyards, chapter 12. For the lawfulness of Priests Marriage and
legitimation of their children, chap. 13. Touching Religious persons, and c.
23. Against Usury. All these are clearly Ecclesiastical Acts, yet made by
Parliament.

The Statutes in Queen Mary's Reign, Q. Mary.
(though of a different Religion from her brother, and a zealous Pontifician)
sufficiently evidence the jurisdiction of our Princes and Parliaments in
matters of the Church and Religion: witness, 1. Mar. Parl. 1. Ses. 2. Chap. 2.
Repealing diverse acts-made touching Religion in King Edward the 6. his Reign,
and setting up Mass, and the old Lyturgies again, chap. 2. Against Offenders
of Preachers, and other Ministers in the Church, or Churchyard, or
interrupting them in their Sermons, or saying Mass, under pain of
imprisonment, fines and Ecclesiastical censures, chap. 15. For re-edifying the
parish Church of Saint Ellins in Stangate. 1. Mariae, Par. 2. c. 1. Declaring,
That the Regal power of this Realm, is in the Queens Majesty as fully and
absolutely as ever it was in any of her most Noble Progenitors Kings of this
Realm, chap. 3. Being an Act of Repeal of two several acts in the 7. year
of King Edward the 6. touching the dissolution of the Bishopric of Durham,
Chap. 9. Touching Ordinances, Rules, etc. in Cathedral Churches and Schools,
c. 10. Repealing a statute for the uniting of the parish Churches of Onger and
Greensted in the County of Essex, 1. and 2. Phil. and Mary, chap. 6. For the
reviving of three Statutes made for the punishment Of Heresies; and that with
forseiture of Lands, imprisonment, and death in some cases, chap. 8. Entitled;
an Act repealing all Statutes, Articles, and provisions made against the Sea
Apostolic of Rome since the 20. year of King H. 8. and restoring the Bishops
with their Courts, offices, and the Pope himself to their former usurped
jurisdictions in England; ratifying this Popes very Bulls, and dispensations
to make them valid; and settling the whole affairs of the Church of England,
chap. 9. 20. For the punishing of traitorous Sermons, and Prayers against the
Queen, chap. 17. Concerning leases of some spiritual persons, and 2. and 3.
Phil. and Mary, chap. 4. For the extinguishment of first fruits etc. All
Ecclesiastical Statutes.

In Queen Elizabeth's happy Reign, Q. Elizabeth.
there are sundry Statutes abundantly manifesting her own, and the Parliaments
supreme Jurisdictions and Legislative power in matters of Religion,
Church Government, Discipline, etc. as namely, 1 Eliz. c. 1. An Act restoring
to the Crown the ancient Jurisdiction OVER THE STATE ECCLESIASTICAL and
SPIRITVALL, and abolishing all fortaigne power repugnant to the same: which
gives the Queen, her heirs and successors, all manner of Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, in, and over all Ecclesiastical persons and causes, and power to
correct, redress, and reform all manner of HERESY, SCHISM, ERRORS, ABUSES
and OFFENSES ECCLESIASTICAL: prescribes the oath of Supremacy (which all are
to take and most Independents have formerly taken) wherein, they do utterly,
testify and declare in their consciences, that the Queen and her Successors
are the only supreme Governors of this Realm, and other their Dommions, as
well IN ALL SPIRITVALL OR ECCLESIASTICAL THINGS OR CAUSES as temporal, etc.
which jurisdiction of theirs, they swear to their power to assist and defend:
Which oath if any refuse to take, he shall forseit all his Ecclesiastical
promotions and temporal offices. This Act likewise abolisheth the Popes
jurisdiction, under pain of a praemunire and other mulcts against the
maintainers of it: It determines what shall be adjudged HERESY and what not;
namely, Only such matter and cause as heretofore has been determined ordered,
and adjudged to be heresy, by the authority of the Canonical Scriptures o^ by
the first four generall-Councels, or any of them; or by any other general
Council wherein the same was declared heresy, by the express and plain words
of the Canonical Scripture, or such as hereafter shall be ordered, IVDGED, OR
DETERMINED TO BE HERESY, BY THE HIGH COURT OF PARLIAMENT OF THIS REALM; with
the assent of the Clergy in their Convocation: (to wit, by way of assistance
and advice cumulatively, not negatively, as if their assent were simply
necessary.) So as by this Act, the Parliament is made the sole proper Judge,
what is or shall be reputed and punished as heresy, what not, and how it shall
be punished; the highest point of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction. Chapter 2. For the
uniformity of Common prayer and service in the Church, and administration of
the Sacraments, enjoining conformity under temporal and Ecclesiastical
punishments, is an irrefragable proof of the Parliaments Ecclesiastical power
in all Church matters and 1 Eliz. c. 3. 4. 6. 5 Eliz. c. 1. For the assurance
of the Queens royal power over all States and Subjects within her Highness
Dominions. chapter 23. For the due executing of Writs, de Excommunicato capiendo,
chapter 28. For translating of the Bible and divine Service into the Welsh tongue.
8 Eliz. c. 1. Declaring the manner of making and Corsecrating the Archbishops,
Bishops, and Ministers of this Realm, to be good, lawful, and perfect:
ratifying the Book of common Prayer, and of Ordination, together with the
Queens Sovereign Ecclesiastical Authority. 13 Eliz. c. 2. Against the
bringing in and putting in execution of Bulls and other instruments of the Sea
of Rome, chap. 8. Against Usury chapter 19. concerning Dilapidations, c. 12. To
reform certain disorders touching Ministers of the Church, ratifying the 39.
Articles of Religion, and enjoining subscription thereunto, under penalties,
loss of Benefices and other Ecclesiastical penalties, Limiting likewise the
age of such who are to be made Ministers. chapter 17. Concerning the Leases of
Benefices, and Ecclesiastical livings with Cure. 18. Eliz. c. 6. Concerning
the taking away of Clergy, etc. 23 Eliz. c. 1. To retain the Queens Majesty's
subjects in their due obedience, made against Jesuits, Semenary Priests, and
others receiving Orders from Rome, and the harbourers of them, under capital
penalties. 27. Eliz. c. 2. Against Jesuits, Seminary Priests, and such other
disobedient persons. 29. Eliz. c. 6. Concerning Recusants. 31. Eliz. c. 1.
Against Symony. 35 Eliz. c. 1. Against Seperatists and Schismatics refusing
conformity to our Church Service and Liturgy; who are liable to imprisonment,
fines, and other penalties for it by the Law. chapter 2. For restraining Popish
Recusants to some certain plate of abode. 29 Eliz. c. 8. For confirmation of
the Deprivation of diverse Bishops and Deanes in the beginning of the Queens
Reign. chapter 22. Concerning the Bishop of Norwich, are plentiful evidences of
what I plead for.

In King James his Reign I find many Acts of Parliament asserting the Kings
and Parliaments Ecclesiastical jurisdictions, K. James.
as 1 Jacobi c. 1^ Concerning the Kings Title to the Crown. chapter 2. Concerning
Archbishopricks and Bishoprics. chapter 5. For the due execution of the Statutes
against Jesuits, Seminary Priests, Recusants. chapter 12. Against second marriages
till former wives or husbands be dead. chapter 31. For building a new Church in
Melcombe Regis, to be the Parish Church of Radepoll, and for making the Church
of Radepoll a Chapel to it. 3 Jacobi c. 3. for a public thanksgiving to
Almighty God every year on the fifth day of November, for the deliverance from
the hellish Gunpowder treason. chapter 4. For the better discovering and
suppressing of Popish Recusants; which prescribes a new oath of Allegiance: chapter
5. To prevent and avoid danger which may grow by Popish Recusants, which
likewise prohibits the Importations of any Popish Books. Agnus Dei, Crucifixes,
etc. chapter 20. To restrain abuses of Players. 21. Jacobi chapter 17. Against Usury.
chapter 20. To prevent and reform profane swearing and cursing.

The Statutes in King Charles his Reign, K. Charles.
are punctual evidences of the Sovereign Ecclesiastical jurisdiction of our
Kings and Parliaments, in all which we find, not only several Committees
appointed concerning Religion (frequent in all Queen Elizabeth's and King James
their Parliaments) but also sundry Statutes concerning Religion and
Church Matters; as namely, 1 Carols c. 1. For punishing diverse abuses committed
on the Lords day. 3 Caroli c. 1. For further reformation of diverse abuses on
the Lords day, chapter 2. To restrain the passing or sending of any to be Popishly
bred beyond the Seas. But the several Acts, Ordinances and Proceedings of this
present Parliament, concerning all matters of Religion, Church government, and
Ecclesiastical affairs, are presidents beyond all exception: The Acts already
passed, For suppressing the High Commission; disabling any Clergyman to meddle
with any temporal offices, or to be Justices of Peace; The taking away of
Bishops Votes, and their sitting in the House of Peers. The several Acts,
Votes, Ordinances which have passed both House for abolishing all new Canons
Plaralities Nonresidence; punishing of scandalous Ministers; Sanctifying the
Lords day; Keeping of Monthly and other Fasts; Celebrating special days of
thanksgiving for sundry Discoveries and Victories: Prohibiting the printing of
erroneous books: Suppressing Antinomians, Socinians, Anabaptists, and other
Sectaries; Abolishing all Innovations, Superstitions, Idolatreus pictures,
Images, Altars, Copes, Tapers, Royals, etc. Payment of Tithes, Probate of
Wills, Ordination of Ministers; and above all, their nominating and convening
an Assembly of conscientious, pious, reverend, learned, orthodox Divines, to
assist them in reforming all errors and corruptions in Doctrine, Worship,
Government, Discipline, and establishing such a pure Worship and
Church Government in our Realm, as shall be most agreeable to Gods Word (wherein
they have made a large progress already, the Directory for Worship being now
finished; and we expect a full accomplishment of this much desired Work, ere
long.) All these, with infinite other particulars, are a most satisfactory and
unanswerable evidence of the Parliaments jurisdiction, and Legislative power in
all matters of Religion, Worship, Government, Discipline, and other
Ecclesiastical things or proceedings whatsoever: none of which have ever been
settled among us in any age in a legal and obligatory way, but only in and by
Parliaments. I shall close up these (...) Domestic authorities with the
Ordinance of both Houses of Parliament concerning the present Assembly of
Divines; (wherein all may clearly discern the jurisdiction of our Parliaments
in all Church affairs, matters of Religion, and over the Assembly it self,)
together with the Instructions or Ruled prescribed to the Assembly (which they
have punctually observed, and submitted to) not yet in print.

An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons in Parliament, for the calling of an
Assembly of learned and godly Divines, and others, to be consulted with, by the
Parliament, for the settling of the Government and Liturgy of the Church of
England. and for vindicating and clearing of the Doctrine of the said Church.
from false uspertions, and interpretations.
WHereas amongst the infinite blessings of Almighty God upon this Nation, none
is, or can be more deate unto us, then the purity of our Religion, and for that
as yet many things remain in the Lyturgy, Discipline and Government of the
Church, which do necessarily require a further and more perfect reformation,
then as yet has been attained: And whereas it has been declared and resolved
by the Lords and Commons assmbled in Parliament, that the present
Church Government by Archbishops, Bishops, their Chancellors Commissaries,
Deanes Deanes and Chapters. Archdeacons, and other Ecclesiastical Officers
depending upon the Hierarchy, is evil and justly offensive and bu^thensome to
the Kingdom, a great impediment to reformation and growth of Religion, and
very prejudicial to the state and government of this Kingdom and that
therefore they are resolved that the same, shall be taken away, and that such a
Government shall be settled in the Church as may be most agreeable to Gods holy
Word, and most apt to procure and preserve the peace of the Church at home, and
nearer agreement with the Church of Scotland, and other reformed Churches
abroad, and for the better effecting hereof and for the vindicating, and
clearing of the doctrine of the Church of England. from all false calumnies and
aspersions, It is thought fit and necessary to call an Assembly of learned
godly, and judicious Divines, who together with some members of both the Houses
of Parliament are to consult and advise of such matters and things, touching
the premises, as shall be proposed unto them by both or either of the Houses of
Parliament and to give their advice and counsel therein to both or either of
the said Houses, when and as often as they shall be thereunto requited. Be it
therefore ordained by the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament
assembled, That all and every the person^ hereafter in this present Ordinance
named, that is to say, Algernon Earl of Northumberland. William Earl of
Bedford, Phillip Earl of Pembroke and Montgemery, William Earl of Salisbury,
Henry Earl of Holland Edward Earl of Manchester, William Lord Viscount Say
and Seal Edward Lord Viscount Conway, Phillip Lord Wharton, Edward Lord Howard
of Estr. John Seldom Esquite. Francis Rows Esquire, Edmund Prideaux Esqui^e,
Sir Henry Vane Knight Senior, John Glyn Esquire, Recorder of London, John White
Esquire, Bouldstrode Whi^locke Esquire, Humphrey Salloway Esquire, Master
Sergeant Wild Oliver, Saint John Esquire his Majesty's Solicitor, Sir
Benjamin Rudyard Knight John Pym Esquier, Sir John Clotworthy Knight, John
Maynard Esquire, Sir Henry Vane Knight, junior, William Pierpoint Esquiet,
William Wheeler Esquier, Sir Thomas Barrington Knight, Walter-Young Esquier,
Sir John Euelin Knight Herbert Palmer of Ashwell Batchellor in Divinity, Oliver
Boles of Sutton Batchellor in Divinity Henry Wilkinson of Waddesdon Batchellor
in Divinity, Thomas Valentine of Chalsont Giles Batchellor in Divinity, D.
William Twisse of Newbury (with sundry other Divines mentioned in this
Ordinance) and such other person and persons, as shall be nominated and
appointed by both Houses of Parliament, or so many of them as shall not be
lefted by sickness or other necessary impediment, shall meet and assemble, and
are hereby required and enjoined upon summons signed by the Clerks of both
Houses of Parliament, left at their several respective dwellings, to meet and
assemble themselves at Westminster in the Chapel called King Henry the
sevenths Chapel on the first day of July in the year of our Lord, one
thousand six hundred fort^y three: and after the first meeting, being at least
of the number of forty, shall from time to time sit and be removed from place to
place and also that the said Assembly shall be dissolved in such manner as by
both Houses of Parliament shall be directed; And the said persons, or so many
of them as shall be so Assembled, or sit, shall have power and Authority, and
are hereby likewise enjoined, from time to time during this present Parliament,
or until further Order be taken, by both the said Houses to con^erre and treat
amongst themselves of such matters and things, touching and concerning the
Liturgy, discipline and Government of the Church of England, or the vindicating
and clearing of the doctrine of the same from all false aspertions and
misconstructions. AS SHALL BE PROPOSED UNTO THEM BY BOTH OR EITHER OF THE SAID
HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT, AND NO OTHER, and to deliver their opinions and advices
of or touching the matters aforesaid, as shall be most agreeable to the Word of
God. TO BOTH OR EITHER OF THE SAID HOUSES, FROM TIME TO TIME, IN SVCH MANNER
AND SORT, AS BY BOTH OR EITHER OF THE SAID HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT, SHALL BE
REQVIRED, and the same not to divulge by printing, writing, or otherwise,
without the consent of both or either House of Parliament. And be it further
ordained by the authority aforesaid, that William Twisse Doctor in Divinity,
shall sit in the Chair as Prolocutor of the said Assembly; and if he happen to
die or be let by sickness or other necessary impediment, then such other
person to be appointed in his place, as shall be agreed on, by both the said
Houses of Parliament; And in case, any difference of Opinion shall happen
amongst the said persons so assembled, touching any the matters, that shall be
proposed to them as aforesaid, that then they shall represent the same,
together with the reasons thereof to both or either the said Houses
respectively, to the end such further direction may be given therein, as shall
be requisite in that behalf. And be it further Ordained by the authority
aforesaid, That for the Charges and expenses of the said Divines, and every of
them, in attending the said service, there shall be allowed unto every of them
that shall so attend, during the time of their said attendance, and for ten
days before and ten days after, the sum of four shillings for every day,
at the charges of the Commonwealth, at such time and in such manner as by both
Houses of Parliament shall be appointed. And be it further Ordained, that all
and every the said Divines so, as aforesaid, required and enjoined to meet and
assemble, shall be freed and acquitted of and from every offense, forfeiture,
penalty, loss or damage which shall or may arise or grow by reason of any
Non-residence or absence of them or any of them, from his or their, or any of
their Church, Churches, or Cures, for, or in respect of their said attendance
upon the said Service any Law or Stature enjoining their attendance upon their
respective Ministeries or Charges to the contrary thereof notwithstanding; and
if any of the persons before named shall happen to die before the said Assembly
shall be dissolved by Order of both Houses of Parliament, then such other
person or persons shall be nominated and placed in the room and stead of such
person and persons so dying, as by both the said Houses shall be thought fit
and agreed upon: And every such person or persons so to be named shall have
the like Power and Authority, Freedom, and acquittall to all intents and
purposes, and also all such wages and allowances for the said service, during
the time of his or their attendance as to any other of the said persons in this
Ordinance is by this Ordinance limited and appointed. Provided always; that
this Ordinance or any thing therein contained, shall not give unto the persons
aforesaid or any of them, nor shall they in this Assembly assume to exercise
any Jurisdiction, Power, or Authority Ecclesiastical whatsoever, or any other
Power, then is herein particularly expressed.

Some general Rules for the Assembly, directed by the Lords and Commons in
Parliament Assembled.
1. THat two Assessors be joined to the Prolocutor to supply his place in case
of absence or infirmity.

2. Two Scribes to be appointed to set down all proceedings, and these to be
Divenes who are not Members of the Assembly, viz. Master Henry Rowberry, and
Master Adoniran Byfeild.

3. Every Member at his first entrance into the Assembly, shall make a serious
and solemn Protestation, not to maintain any thing but what he believes to be
the truth, and to embrace Truth in sincerity when discovered to him.

4. No resolution to be given upon any question on the same day wherein it is
first p^rpounded.

5. What any man undertakes to prove as necessary, he shall make good out of
the Scriptures.

6. No man to proceed in any dispute after the Prolocuter has enjoined him
silence (unless the Assembly desire he may go on.)

7. No man to be denied to enter his dissent from the Assembl^, and his (...)
for it, in any point, after it has been first Debated in the Assembly, And
thence (if the dissenting party desire it) to be sent to the Houses of
Parliament by the Assembly (not by any particular man or men in a private way)
when either House shall require it.

All things agreed (...) and prepared for the Parliament, to be openly read and
allowed in the Assembly (if the major part assent.) Provided that the opinion
of any persons dissenting and the reasons urged for it, be annexed thereunto
(if the Dissenters require it) Together with Solutions (if any were) given in
the Assembly to these Reasons.

Jo: Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

Having thus sufficiently evidenced the authority and jurisdiction of
Parliaments in matters of Religion, and Church affairs, by these numerous
punctual and irrefragable Presidents in all Ages; give me leave to add these
two considerations to them to demonstrate this their undoubted right and
privilege beyond all contradiction, and silence every adverse tongue, Pen, of
all Papists, Anabaptists, Brownists, Separatists, or Independents whatsoever.

First, that all our ancient and modern Crompton Jurisdiction f. 1. 2. Con^ 4.
Institut^ p. 9.
Writs for summoning a Parliament, have ever had this special clause in them.
Pro quibusdam ardnis and ungentibus negotiis, Nos, statum, and defensionem
Regni Angliae and ECCLESIAE ANGLICANAE, concernentibus, qu^ddam Parliamentum,
etc. teneri ordinavaimus. From whence it is most apparent; That the state and
defense of the Church of England, and well ordering of the same, is one
Principal end of summoning Parliaments and one maine part of the subject
matters of our Parliaments, as Sir Edward Cook resolves.

2ly That all and every of the pre^ended opposites to Parliaments
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, hand formely* and none especially in the present
Parliament, addressed several Petitions to this High and Honorable Court, for
Reformation of the Church, suppression of haeresies, Errors, Idolatry, Popery,
Superstition, Schisms, Prela^y, and establishing Gods true worship, Religion,
Ordinances, Discipline, as to the most proper Judicature Tribunal, Lawgiver in
our Church, which they could resort unto, and not to the Convocation, or any
other Assembly of Clergymen alone, or Independent Congregation.

To give you some few remarkable instances (besides those formerly remembered)
instead of infinite others, which I pretermit for brevity. Our famous English
Apostle, Walsingham Hist Angliae p. 188. 204. to 210. 302. to 307. Fox Acts and
Monuments vol. 1. p. 556. to 570.
John Wickelesse, as he professedly maintained in K. Richard the second his
Reign; That any Clergyman, yea the Pope himself, might lawfully be
reprehended accused and corrected by Laymen, That the temporal Lords and
Princes might lawfully and meritoriously take the possessions and Revenues from
the Church, and from Ecclesiastical persons offending habitually, etc. to the
end they might reform them; And that they were obliged to reform the Church
and Prelates, under pain of being traitors to Jesus Christ: So likewise in
the fifth year of this King he Walsingham Hist. Angl. p. 302, 303.
Writ and sent to the Lords and great men assembled at London IN PARLIAMENT
seven Propositions; tending to the abolishing of the Popes usurped power and
exactions; to self the temporalities of Deli^^^ent Bishops; to remove Bishops
and Clergymen from all secular employments; (...) reform the abuses of
Excommunications, and imprisonments upon (them;) to (...) Transubstantiation,
and reform the Churches both to (...) the particulars whereof you may read at
large in (...). And (...) long after, his learned Disciple William (...) (a
Marty^ being unjustly condemned by the Bishop of Hereford for maintaining
Wickliffes opinions, appealed to the King and Parliament against it; and
withal writ a pious Acts and Monuments vol. 1. p. 618, 619, 620.
Letter to the Parliament (recorded by Master Fox) which concludes thus. Dear
worshipful Sirs in this world, Theseech you for Christ's love as ye yet (...)
loven Gods Law and Truth (that in these days is greatly borne abacke) that
they woollen vouchsafe these things that I send you written to Gods worship, to
let them be showed IN THE PARLIAMENT, as your wits can best conceive to most
worship to our God, and to showing of the truth, AND AMENDING OF HOLY CHVRCH.
My conc^usions, and mine^ appeal, and other true matters of Gods Law (if any
can find in them error falsenesse or default, privet by the Law of Christ
clearly to christian men's knowledge) I shall revoke my wrong conceit, and by
Gods law be amended; more ready to hold with Gods law openly and privily with
Gods grace, and nothing to hold, teach or maintain that is contrary to his Law.
By which he made that very Parliament Judges of his Doctrine had reformers of
the Church, though for the most part Papists in those days.

On the contrary side, the very Papists Prelates Clergy and Convocation in
those times did likewise Petition the King and Parliament for suppression of
haereticall opinions Preachers Books, Schools, Conventi^les and the
punishment and restraint of heretics, sectaries, haereticall preachers and
Schoolmasters (as they deemed them) and upon their prayer and importunity, the
Statutes of 5. R. 2 (...) 5. ^2 H. 4. c. 15. ^ H. 5. c. 7. (to which the
Commons never consented* were made and (...) to that purpose, as is evident by
the very words of the Acts themselves? Master Fox his Acts and Monuments vol.
1. Edi^ (...) p. 773. And it is as evident, that the Popish Commons Petition
was the cause of the Statute of 25 H. 8. c. 14. For the punishment of heresy:
and the Popish Clergyes importunity to King Henry the eight his motion to the
Parliament, the occasion of the bloody Statue of 31 H. 8. c. 14. 34. H. c. 8.
1. as the words of the Acts, and Master Fox demonstrate: both King and Clergy,
Nobles and Commons even in these times of Popery deeming our parliaments the
meetest Judges, and only lawgivers for ordering Church affairs and matters of
Religion.

About the 37. year of King Henry the (...), Roderick Morse once a Gray (...),
published a book in print, (...) A complaint to the Parliament house of
England, directed to the Parliament; wherein he demonstrates many abuses and
corruptions of the Church and Clergy of England in those days both in matter
of Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, manners; which he earnestly presses,
petitioneth the Parliament effectually to reform by wholesome Laws and Edicts
as a thing most properly belonging to their place and Jurisdiction, as the
whole book manifests: which had been very absurd, had the Parliament been no,
mere Judge of Religion and Church affairs, and no (...) Reformers of these
abuses by Laws and punishments, as some now repute them.

In King Edward the sixth Queen Mary's, and Queen Elizabeth's several Reigns,
the Clergy and (...) made their Petitions and addresses to the Parliament for
settling, reforming, establishing all matters of Religion, Church Government and
discipline as the forementioned Statutes, with multitudes of Petitions and
books printed and dedicated to the Parliaments in their several Raigns
demonstrate; especially 1. and 2. Phili. and Mary c. 6. 8. 1 Eliz. c. 1. 2. 4.
8. Eliz. c. 1. Two admonitions to the Parliament. Anno. 1572. John Penry his
supplication to the Parliament, and others.

The Petitions to all the several Parliaments in See Boanerges o^ the
Supplication of the Ministers of Scotland to the high Court of Parliament of
England. Master Henry Burton his Isreal's Fast: the Epistle Dedicatory. The
Petition of the Lincolnshi^e Ministers, etc.
King James his Reign and our present Sovereigns, (but more especially to
this present Parliament) from all sorts of people in every County of the
Realm; from Laity and Clergy, Protestants of all sorts, as well Presbyterians
a^ Independents, yea from Antinomians, Anabaptists, Brownists, and
Schismatickes of all sorts, to reform Religion, especially Church Government,
set up the Ordinances and worship of God in their purity, and settle all
matters of Doctrine, Discipline, Government by Act of Parliament as near as
might be to the word, by the assistance of a godly learned Assembly of Divines;
the daily calling of Ministers of all sorts upon, the Parliam. to pursue this
work, the prayers of all piously affected to Almighty God both publicly and
privately, to assist them extraordinarily from Heaven in this great weighty
spiritual building; together with the Assemblies submission of all their
determinations to the Parliaments alteration, approbation or rejection, and the
Independents own addresses, Petitions, and late tender of the reasons of their
dissent from the Assembly to them; is (to my weak approbation) a most
irrefragable* Argument and public acknowledgement of their undoubted right,
and Legislative power in all Ecsiasticall affairs of what nature and quality
soever; and that all parties ought readily to submit to their just
determinations in point of practice, and obedience in all these particulars,
whereof they have thus unanimously and importunately from time to time
petitioned them to be Judges.

There is no party or Sectary whatsoever, which has formerly petitioned them
in this kind but would preach and write for universal obedience to that form
of Church Government the Parliament should settle and establish, provided it
suited fully with their particular way which they judge the truest and most
consonant to Scripture: and if they should once authorize or settle the
Independents (hitherto concealed) way, I am confident they would all preach
universal obedience and submission to it, under pain of contumacy haeresie,
schism, and the severest penalties Ecclesiastical or civil since they write
as much in effect already in their Pamphlets; Redly to A. ^. p. 111. See my
Brother Burtons Vindication, p. 44, 45. 60, 51, 62.
and that this their way, may reasonably (yea and upon higher terms then of
reason) be thought in time, that it cannot but overthrow all other sorts of
Ecclesiastical Government, and stand up it self in their stead. If then every
side be of this mind in case the Parliament determine for their party, then
why should not all be willingly concluded and satisfied with what they shall
rightly determine, be it for or against their way, since they have all
appealled to their judgments alike; which must either be altogether fruitless
and un-obliging to any, or else indifferently bind all to voluntary or enforced
conformity. Add to this, that all or most of our opposites in this point of
Parliaments juri^diction and Legislative power in Ecclesiastical matters, have
freely submitted themselves to the Protestation. Vow, and solemn National
Covenant imposed and prescribed by the Parliament, which enjoyne them under
pain of highest Perjury, with their lives and estates to maintain and defend
the ancient rights and privileges of Parliament, and this we now debate as
well as any other. That they have generally acknowledged and obeyed the
Parliaments Jurisdiction in prescribing public monthly Fasts, and others upon
special occasions, with public days of thanksgiving; together with their
power and Ordinances to suppress all prophanations of the Lords day, with many
other abuses, Sects, Errors in Church affairs; which has for ever estopped
them to quarrel or deny the Parliaments Legislative Jurisdiction in any other
particulars of Church Government, Discipline, or Religion, which suite not with
their humors or opinions. I shall conclude this point concerning Our own
Parliaments Ecclesiastical jurisdiction with the determination of our
incomparable Jewel, which has more real worth and value in it, then the
contrary opinion of thousands of opposites (being always hitherto reputed the
received Doctrine of the Church of England) and with Bishop Bilson, a very
solid Writer.

This reverend learned Part. 6. c. 2. Divis. 1. p. 641, 643, 654 ^^5.
Jewel in his Apology has this passage, concerning the establishment of the
Protestant Religion among us, That the matter has been treated in open
PARLIAMENT, with long consultation, and before a notable SYNOD and CONVOCATION.
Master ^^^ding his Antagonist An^^gonist, answering thereunto just as some
Independen^^; and others (who protest they have abjured all Popery, though they
follow it herein to an hairs breadth) do now: The Parliaments of these later
days did make most of you, and yet how open was it for you? had ye any pla^e
at all in it? were ye admitted within the doors? or had ye any thing to do in
that assembly? Did they tarry many months about it? had they Bishops? had they
Divines and the most learned to reason too and fro with all Liberty, etc.? How
many of the spiritual Lords (a great part of the Parliament, and without all
doubt the part which must be chiefly and only regarded when the questiones of
Religion) gave their voice to your Gospel? yea, which of them did not resist
it, save (...) alone etc? If they will needs have their matters to depend of
THEIR PARLIAMENT, let us not be blamed, if we call it PARLIAMENT RELIGION
PARLIAMENT GOSPEL, PARLIAMENT FAITH: This learned Bishop returns the ensuing
reply to him: That the Parliament war summoned by royal Authority, confirmed
and concluded in Order, as heretofore has been used: That a Parliament might
be held and Acts passed without the consent and agreement of Lords Spiritual
(for which he produces sundry examples.) Farther, whereas ye call the Doctrine
of Christ that now by Gods great mercy, and to your great grief, is
universally and freely preached a PARLIAMENT RELIGION, and a PARLIAMENT GOSPEL
(for such sobriety becomes you well, and may stand you instead, when learning
fails) ye might have remembered, that Christ himself at the beginning was
universally received, and honored through this Realm BY ASSENT OF PARLIAMENT*
and further, that WITHOUT PARLIAMENT, your POPE himself was never received, no
not in the late time of Queen Mary: yea, and even then his Holiness was
clogged with PARLIAMENT CONDITIONS, that whatsoever had been determined in
Parliament, and was not repealed, were it never so contrary to (...) and
Canons, should remain still inviolable, and stand in force. (...) Holiness had
gone home again. Such Master Harding is the Authority of a Parliament. Verily
it Parliaments of Realms be no Parliaments, then will your Pope be no Pope.
Therefore as you now call the truth of God we profess, a Parliament Religion,
and a Parliament Gospel, even so with (...) and gravity of speech, you might
have said, our Fathers in old times had a Parliament Christ: And your late
Father^ and Brethren, had of late in the time of Queen Mary, a Parliament
Faith, a Parliament (...), a Parliament Pope.

Neither is it so strange a matter to see Ecclesiastical causes debated in
Parliament; read the Laws of King Inas King El^^ede, King Edward, King
Ethelstan, King Edmond, King (...), King Canute, and ye shall find, that our
Godly Forefathers, the Princes and Peers of this Realm, never vouchsafed to
entreat of matters of Peace, of War, or otherwise touching the Common State,
before all controversies of Religion and causes Ecclesiastical had been
concluded, King Canute in his Parliament holden at Winchester upon Christmas
day after sundry Laws and Orders made, touching the faith, the keeping of holy
Days, public prayers, learning of the Lords Prayer, receiving of the
Communion thrice in the year, the manner and form of Baptism, fasting and
other like matters of Religion, in the end thereof says thus. Iam sequitur
institutum Legum secularium: Now follows an Order for temporal Laws.

Thirdly we see, that the Godly Catholic Princes in old times, thought is
their duty, before all other offices of the Common weal, first to determine
matters of Religion, and that even BY THE PARLIAMENTS OF THIS REALM. In a
Parliament holden by King William the Conqueror it is written thus: The King,
for as much as he is the Vicar of the highest King, is therefore appointed for
this purpose, that he should Rule and defend the Kingdom and People of the
Lord; and above all things the holy Church: etc. Hereby it appears, that
Kings and Princes are specially, and of purpose appointed by God, not only to
defend, but also to Govern and Rule the holy Churh, How be it, if any
imperfection shall appear in the former Parliaments, we give God thanks for
the same, that is: and trust, that for his own names sake he will confirm
what he has begun. The hearts of Princes, and determinations of Parliaments,
are in his hands: If any thing want, the arm of the Lord is not Shorted: he is
able to supply the same. So our incomperable Jewel: enough to satisfy and
silence all our Opposites, The true difference between Christian subjection
and unchristian Rebellion. part. 3 p. 540. 541. 4^2. 543.
Thomas Bilson Warden and afterward Bish. of Winchester, bringing in the
Prelates and Iesui^s objecting against our reformed Protestant Religion, that
it was brought in and ratified, not by a Council and Synod of the Clergy; but
by the Prince, (Queen Elizabeth) and the Parliament; who (say they) had no
power to determine or deliberate of those matters, returns this answer: May
not the Prince command for truth within he Realm except your consents be
first required and had^ May not her Highness serve Christ in making laws for
Christ, without your likeing? Claim you this interest and prerogative, NOTA.
that without you nothing shall be done in matters of Religion, by the Laws of
God, or by the liberties of this Realm? By the Laws of the land you have no
such privileges: Parliaments have been kept by the King and his Barons, the.
Clergy wholly excluded, and their Acts and statutes good. And when the Bishops
were present, their votes from the Conquest to this day were never negative; By
Gods Law you have nothing to do with making Laws of Kingdoms or Common
wealths: You may teach, you may not command: persuasion is your part
compulsion is the Princes. If Princes embrace the truth, you must obey them. If
they pursue truth, you must abide them. By what authority then claim you this
Dominion over Princes, that their laws for Religion shall be void unles you
consent, seeing they are the maintainers, establishers, and upholders of the
faith, with public power and positive Laws? which they and their Parliaments
may make without a precedent council of Clergy men to guide them; as he there
proves at large, by sundry presidents. If any Concur not with me in this
undoubted Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction of Christian Princes and Parliaments
after all these pregnant testimonies, I must tell them in plain english, they
directly violate their late vow and Covenant, and symbol^e herein with Jesuits
and Popish Prelates, whose doctrines they have abjured by their National
Covenant, and therefore cannot, may not ever hereafter emb^ace without the
highest Perjury and plain Apostasy unto Popery.

I shall finish this Section of the Authority and power of Parliaments in
matters of Religion, Church Government, Discipline and enacting Laws in all
and every of these particulars, with some foreign presidents in the
Parliaments, Diers, and Assemblyes of Estats in other Realm and republikes.
Should I now relate unto you the many ecclesiastical Laws of all sorts made in
them, I might swell this Treatise into many folio volumes, I shall therefore
only give you a brief touch and catalogue of some few, which the Studious may
peruse and make use of at their leisure. FRANCE.


For FRANCE; Fredericus Lindebrogus Codex Legum Antiquarum
you may survey the Decrees of King Childebert, debated and agreed by him and
his people in a Parliament, de quibuscunque conditionibus, una cum Optimatibus
nostris, c. 2. 4. and c. 15. For sanctifying the Lords Day, prohibiting the
dressing of any but necessary food on it, and all Bodily labor under pecuniary
mulcts. The ecclesiastical laws of Charles the great, Ludovicus pius, and
Charles the Bald, collected into one volum by Abbot Ansegisus, Benedictus
Levita, Lindebrogus, and others, printed with some pettinent additions
Parisijs, 1640. styled See the Title p. 1. Ad^ dit 4. f. 304. and Hinemari
Epist. ad Epis. copos quosdam Franciae et Ludovico Regi, And Fridericus
Lindebrogus, Codex Legum Antiquarum p. 322. etc.
Capitula Regum, and Episcoporum, Maximeque OMNIVM NOBILIVM FRANCORVM; were
made, GENERALI CONSENSV PIDPLIVM SKORVM, ET GENERALI CONSVLTV, ET COMMVNI,
CONCILIO by general consent of the King Bishops and especially of the Nobles
and states of France, in Common Counsels, Parliaments and Assemblies of the
estates. Who had so great a power in making rejecting Canons and
ecclesiastical Laws, that when in the Caroli Magni etc. Capitula p. 328. 329
Fridericus Lindebrogus Codex legum Antiquarum p. 1193. 1196. 1197.
year 846. the Bishops of France and their suffragans had in their Synods
compiled certain Canons by the command of Charles the Bald and tendered them
to him as he had commanded in Sparna^ a Village of the Church of Rhaemes, to
peruse and approve; the King, Dissidentibus regni sui PRIMORIBVS ab eorundem
episcoporum admonition^ by reason that the Nobles and other men of his Realm
differed from the Bishops in opinion in most of those Canons, the King and
Nobles, out of all their Canons or Chapters, haec tantum observanda and
complacenda sibi colligerunt and Episcopis scripto tradiderunt, dicentes, NON
AMPLIVS DE FORVM CAPJTVLIS ACCEPTASSE QVAM ISTA, ET ISTASE VELLECVM PRINCIPE
OBSERVARE: which were Styled Captule Regis CAROLI, and not the Bishops Canons.
By which it is evident, that no ecclesiastical laws or Canons could be made
in France to bind either Clergy or Laity, but such at the King, Nobles,
Parliament, and three estates approved and confirmed, I shall add to this, that.

Anno 1307. King Philip the 4. of France assembled a Parliament at Paris,
wherein the Laity of France exhibited 65. Articles against the Clergy to
regulate their jurisdiction and abuses, Acts and Monuments vol. 1. p. 461. to
478. Edit. 164.
which were there largely handled and debated, as you may read at leisure in
Masters Fox (who records the passages very fully) and in the French Histories.
What the Parliament and Estates in France have done and enacted in matters of
Religion, Church Government and discipline of ancient and latter times, you may
read at large in Liurentius, Bochellus his Decreta Ecclesiae Gallicaiae, in
Carolus Molinaeus Contra parvas Datas, etc. in William Ranchin, his Survay of
the Council of Trent: but above all, in Antonie Fontanon his Les Edicts et
Ordonnances dos Royes de France, A Paris 1585. Tom. 4. throughout, wherein you
may see an whole Folio volume of Ecclesiastical Laws and Edicts made by the
Kings and Parliaments of France, to which (for brevity) I shall remit the
Reader.

For Spain, Spain.
the forecited Councels of Toledo (which were but Parliament and assemblies of
the Estates) The laws of the Wisigothis, especially lib. 1^ De removendis
OMNIVM HAERETICORVM SECTIS exterms, and DE OMNIVM HAERETICORVM ATQVE IVDAEORVM
ERRORIBVS AMPVTANDIS: which you may read at large in the third some of Hisp^^
Illustrata: p. 992. to 1014. and in Fredericus Lindebrogus, his Codex Legum
Antiquarum. France-furtii, 1613. p. 210 to 238. together with the General
history of Spain, Joannes de Laet. Hispaniae Descriptio, Hieronimus Blanca
Rerum Arragenensium Commentarius, will furnish us with sufficient Presidents of
their Parliaments Jurisdiction in matters of Religion, and making
Ecclesiastical Laws in all Church matters.

For Bohemia: Bohamia.
Georgius Bartholdus Pontanus, his Bohaemia pia, l. 7. De Rebus Gestis sub
Ludovico Rege lib. 1. c. 8, 9, 10, 12, 24, 25, 21, 29, 30, 31. lib. 2. c. 3, to
24. l. 3. c. 2, 6. l. 4. c, 1, 711,, 18, 33, 34. Pauli Geschinii Majestas
Carolina, sine Constitutiones Caroli 4 Romani Imperatoris, quibus illo Regni^^
Bohemiae firmandum ornandumque censuit Handviae 1607, Rubr. 1. De fide
Catholica; Rub. 2, 4 5. De hareticis, etc. Aeneas Sylvius, his Historia. (...)
Pauli Stranhii. Respub. Bohemiae: Master Fox his Acts and Monuments (...) and
Grimstons Imperial History, will furnish us with sundry Presidents, where
their Kings and Parliaments have determined and settled matters of Religion and
Church Government in that Kingdom, not Synods of their Clergy.

For Denmark, Hungary, Poland, and Sueden, the Laws and Historians of these
Kingdoms, Denmark.
abundantly testify that their Parliaments and general Assemblies of State,
have alwayee settled matters of religion and Churchgovernment. See Guagninus,
Chromerus, Saxogrammaticus Pontanus, Chy^^^ Rer um Ungarirarum Scriptores.

For Italy, Italy.
I find that Theodoricus King of Italy; among his temporal Laws intiteled,
Frederic^^ Lindebrogus: Cod: Legum Antiquarum.
Edictum Theodorici Regis, has many Ecclesiastical constitutions, intermixed,
as cap. 26. 70. 71 168, 125, 143. and 174. De die Dominico, prohibiting arrests
or citations thereon. The like I find among the Laws of the (b) Burgundians,
made by Gundebald their K. by the advice and consent of his Nobles (Coram
positis Optimatibus nostris, universa pensavimus and iam nostra quam eorum
sententia, mansuris in aeuum legibus sumpsimus statuta praescribi) cap. 28. 44,
45. 51. ^ Additamenti primi, cap. 18. Additamentum, 2. cap. 12. Among the Laws
of the Ib. f. 363.
Almains made in the time of King Chlotair, (una cum Principibus suis, id sunt
33. Episcopis and 33. Ducibus and 72. Concitibus, vel cetero populo consti^^ta
est, writes my Author) I find sundry Ecclesiastical Laws intermixed with
temporal, as cap. 1. 24. and cap. 38. De eo qui die DOMINICO opera servilia
fecerit: Which first enacts: Die dominico nemo opera servilia prasumat facere,
quia hoc Lex prohibet; and sacra Scriptura in omnibus contradicit: And then
prescribes bast inadoing to a servant that shall work on the Lords day; and to
a freeman after three admonitions, the forfeiture of the third part of his
inheritance; and for the 4th offense, perpetual villainage: Quia noluit Deo
vacare, in sempiernum servus perman^^^.

In the Laws of the Ib. f. 400.
Bavarians, first compiled by King Theodoricus, by the advice of Wisemen
skillful in the Laws: Fridericus Lindeb ogus Ibid. f. 265. 166.
afterward proceeded in by King Childebert, and Clothaire, and renewed by King
Dagobert, by advise of his Parliament, (as this Preface to them attests: Hoc
DECRETUM est apud Regem and Principes ejus ^ apud CUNCTUM POPULUM CHRITIANUM
qui intra Regnu^^ (...) consistunt) I find the first Title to be, DE
ECCLESIASTIC IS REBVS; De libris legum justitutionum qua ad CLERVM pertinent:
Concerning whom there were many very good Laws enacted. I meet with sundry
Laws made by Tassilo Duke of Bavaria, Anno Do. 772. Ib. f 439.
Et per PRIMATES Imperij, unmerso CONSENTENTE MVLTITVDINE, etc. Est ab
universis uno ore confirmatum, etc. Many of which Laws are merely
Ecclesiastical: As the first, for the honor and sanctifying of the LORDS DAY,
Sicut in Lege Scriptum est, and in decretis Canonum, and cap. 2, 3, 4, 6. De
Popularibus legibus, cap. 10. 11, 12, 20. So also in the Aditions of Charles
the Emperor to the Bavarian Laws Addit. 1. c. 1. 8. and Addit. 2. cap. 7. 8,
10. Among the Ib. f. 442.
Laws of the Saxons, cap, 2. sect. 8, 9. There are some Laws relating to the
Church. In the Ibid. f. 498 591.
Prisons Laws, chap. 18. There is this Law concerning the LORDS DAY, Qui opus
servile die Dominico fecerit, ultra Laubachi, sol: 12. in caeteris locis
Prisiae 4. Sol. culpabilis indictum, Siseruus hoc fecerit, vapuletur, aut
Dominus ejus 4. Solidos pro illo componet. Additio Sapientum (to these Laws)
Tit. 1. and 12. Concern the Church. Among the Ibid. f.
Laws of the Lombards, l. 1. tit. 2. chap. 2. lib. 2. tit. 8, 38, 39. lib. 3.
tit. 1. De Episcopis and Clericis, tit. 3. De decimis. tit. 10. De Rect^^ibus
Ecclesiarum, tit. 11. De Pontificibus, tit. 26. De excommunicatione and tit.
30. 32, 40, are wholly Ecclestasticall. Ib. 694.
In the Laws and Constitutions of those of Naple^ and Sicily made in the year
1221. lib. r. tit. 1. 2. D^ Haereticis and (...) and eorum Receptoribus,
Fauctoribus, etc. tit. 3. De Apostatis, tit. 5. De Crimine sacrilegij. tit. 7.
De Decimis, and Tit. 29. 65, 68. lib. 3. tit. 1. 2, 3. 20, 25, 26, 28, 43, 51,
58, 59. are merely Ecclesiastical concerning Religion, the Church, and
Clergy.

Not to mention the many Ecclesiastical Lawers and edicts made by some of the
Roman and Greek Emperors, with the consent of their Senators, recorded in
Codicis, l 1. Tit. 1. to 12. Novel: Constable: 3. 5, 6. 16, 37. 42, 67. 77, 83 79,
123, 131, 132, 133, 141 144, 146, 1^^ 117.
Justinian, in Codice Theodosij, lib. 16. throughout, and many of them inserted
by Gratian himself into his Decrees and body of the Canon Law, and reduced
under several heads by Paulus Windeck in his Theologia Iuriscon^^^torum: and
Canonum and Legum Consensus: Not to rehearse the many Laws and edicts of the
German Emperors Princes, Diets, touching Religion and Church affairs of all
sorts, mentioned scatteringly in Abbas Us^eigensis, Sabellicus, Rerum
Germanicarum Scriptures, Ioannes Aventinus Au^alium, Boyorum, Master Fox,
Fasciculus Rerum expetendarum, Hermaennus (...). Grimstons Imperial History,
Constitutiones Imperat, Parisijs 1606. (...) Comment; Chytraus Chron: Saxoniae;
and Augustana Confessto fidei and Dictrina, Electorum, Principum, and Ordinum
Imperij, atque corundem Theologorum qui Augustanam Confessionem amplectuntu^,
subscribed by all the Protestant Princes, Dukes Earls, Barons, Councels,
Senates and Senators of Germany: presented to the Emperor, and printed, yea
reprinted, by all their special Commands, Lipsiae 1584. together with the
several Confession of all the Protestant Churches in Germany and elsewhere,
recorded in the Harmony of Confessions; which were made, published,
established, by the several Protestant States to Diets or Parliaments by
common consent of the Nobles, Magistrates Senates, and Ministers of those
Churches, not by the Clergy alone) are a sufficient demonstration of their
Ecclesiastical legislative power and jurisdiction in all matters of Faith,
Discipline, and Government. In few words, I dare aver, that there is never a
foreign Christian Empire, Kingdom or Republike in the world whether
Protestant or Popish, but has in their Parliaments, Diers Senates, made sundry
Laws concerning matters of Faith, Government, Discipline, Clergiemen, and all
Ecclesiastical affairs, yea for the establishment of that Religion, Church
Government and Discipline in present use among them, as their several Laws and
Constitutions will abundantly manifest, to any who have vacancy to peruse them.

I shall close up this Section, with some presidents of the Parliaments of
Ireland, and Scotland, which have most affinity to the Parliaments of England.

Among the printed Statutes of Ireland, Ireland.
collected by Master Belton: I meet with these ensuing Ecclesiastical Laws
made in the Parliaments of Ireland, 36. H. 6. c. 1. That Beneficed persons
shall keep Residence, 7. E. 4. c. 2. 3. That none shall purchase Benefices from
Rome, and that pardons made to such as purchase them thence shall be void, 10.
H. 7. c. 5. Against provisors from Rome, 25. H. 8. c. 2. For uniting the
Personage of Cantrim, to the Priory of Saint Peter's, 28. H. 8. c. 5. That the
King shall be supreme head of the Church of Ireland, chapter 8. and 26. For
payment of first fruits, chapter 13. Against the Authority of the Bishops of Rome
and chap. 14. 17, 18, 23. For other Ecclesiastical matters, 33. H. 8. c. 6.
Conconcerning Marriages, cha. 12. For Tithes, chap. 14. For erecting of
Vicaridges, 33. H. 8. Parl. 2. chap. 5. For suppressing religious houses, 2.
Eliz: chap. 1. For restoring to the Crown the ancient Jurisdiction, Scotland.
and the State Ecclesiastical, and abolishing all foreign power repugnant to
the same, cha. 2. For the uniformity of Common prayer and service in the
Church, chap. 3. Concerning, first fruits and Personages impropriate, c. 4. For
the conferring and consecrating of Archbishops and Bishops: 11. Eliz. c. 6. and
13. Eliz. c. 6. with diverse others since.

For Scotland, I find many Ecclesiastical Laws concerning the Church,
Churchmen and all matters of Religion made in Parliament, and intermixed with
their temporal Acts. To omit the Hector B^ethius lib. 10. Spelman Council: p.
340. 342.
Ecclesiastical Laws of King Keneth, mixed with his Temporal, enacted about
the Year of our Lord 844. In the Statutes of See Regiam Majestatem: Or Auld
laws and constitutions of Scotland collected by Sir John Skene, printed at
Edinburgh, 16^9.
K. William of Scotland made about the Year of our Lord 1170: chap: 32. Is,
For maintaining the true Religion, and the Rights and liberties of haly Kirk,
chapter 34. Of the honesty of Clerks, King Robert the first in his Parliament
holden at Scone with his Bishops, Abbots, Priors Ea^i^s, Barons, and other
Noblemen of his Realm, to the honor of God and haly Kirk, with common advise
and consent of all the Prelates and Freeholders foresaid, and hail community
in the 13. Year of his Reign (to wit Anno 1319) made a law, chapter (...).
For the freedom of the Kirk and Kirkmen, and maintenance of true Religion:
And the second Parliament of this King, chapter 1. Is, of Donation of Lands
made to Religious persons: and chapter 14. Concerns Nuns: Among the Statutes
of King David the 2. the 12th chapter, is of Pilgranners; and chapter 42. For
freedom of holy Kirk. Not to mention all the statutes made in the Parliaments
of Scotland in times of Popery, for advancing the Popes Authority, Mass,
Prelacy, with sundry Doctrines and Ceremonies, abolished by subsequent Acts in
times of Reformation; I shall only give you a brief account of some of their
Acts of Parliament, since beginning of reformation in that Kingdom.

I find in Master John Knox his History of the reformation of the Church of
Scotland, lib. 3, page: 56, 57. in the London edition, ^644. That in a
Parliament held in Scotland: Anno 1543. there began question of the abolishing
of certain tyrannical Acts made before, at the devotion of the Prelates, for
the maintaining of their Kingdom of darkness; to wit: That under pain of
Haeresy none should read any part of the Scripture in the vulgar Tongue,
neither yet any Tractate or exposition of any place of Scripture: which Act,
after great debate in Parliament between the Nobility, Commons, and Clergy,
was wholly repealed; and this Act of Parliament enacted: That it should be
lawful to every man to use the benefit of the Translations which then they had
of the Old and New Testament, together with the benefis of other Treatises,
containing wholesome doctrine, until such time at the Prelates and other
Churchmen, should give and set forth unto them, a translation more correct.
And so by Act of Parliament it was made free to all men, and women to read the
Scriptures in their vulgar tongue, and all Acts to the contrary abolished. This
was no small victory of Christ Jesus, against the conjured enemies of his
Verity.

In the year Knox History of the Reformation of Religion in the Realm of
Scotland l. 3. p. 127. to 135.
155^ of the Protestants in Scotland petitioned both the Queen Regent, and
likewise the Lords Barons, Burgesses, assembled there in Parliament, for
repeal of several Laws formerly made against Heritickes, for prayers in,
their vulgar Tongue, frequent preaching or interpretation of the Scriptures,
due administration of the Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper
Reformation of the Church, Prelates and ecclesiastical estate, their lives,
Courts, and proceedings. And likewise entered a formal Protestation in the
Parliament House. After this in the Ibidem p. 250. 251. to 278. See the
Doctrine and Discipline of the Kirk of Scotland, Le^^e lib. 10. Buchanon.
Hist. l. 16. 17. 18.
year, 1560. The Protestant Barrons, Gentlemen Burgesses, and others of the
Realm presented a large supplication to the Nobility (...) States of
Parliament then assembled; wherein they desired; the abolition of Idolatry, and
such false Doctrine as w^e condemned by Gods word, by Act of that Parliament,
and punishment to be appointed for the transgression: that the abuses and
prosanations of the Sacraments of Jesus Christ, and of the true Discipline of
the Church might be reformed. That the Popes usurped ecclesiastical Authority
might be abolished, and the Popish Clergy removed etc. Which application being
read in the Audience of the whole Assembly; the Batons Ministers and other
Petitioners were thereupon commanded to draw into plain and several heads the
sum of that Doctrine which they would maintain, and desire the present
Parliament to establish as wholesome true and only necessary to be believed, and
to be received within the Realm, which they willingly accepted, and within
four days presented a large Confession of the faith professed and believed by
the Protestants within the Realm of Scotland, consisting of 25. Articles:
which were read in face of Parliament, and after ratified by the three States
of this Realm, at Edinburgh the 17. of July, 1560. and by the whole body of
the Parliament (which confession was again ratified, Anno 1567. in the first
Parliament of James the 6.) After which there was an Act made against the
Mass, and the sayers and hears thereof, and another Act: for the abolishing
of the Pope and his usurped Authority in Scotland After this a form of Church
Government and discipline was presented to the Nobility to peruse; but not then
fully agreed on and settled. The like Petitions and, proceedings in
ecclesiastical affairs, I find in the years, 1561. 1562. 1563. to 1580.
1581 1582. and that the General Assemblies of Scotland (in nature of a
Council or Synod) wherein they debated matters of Religion and
Church Government, consisted not only of Ministers, but of Nobles, Gentlemen
with other Laikes; and that their resolutions and Acts were not thought
obligatory unless ratified by special Acts of Parliament, by which they still
petitioned they might be confirmed.

Not to trouble the Reader over. long. I find these ensuing ecclesiastical
Acts of Parliament in Scotland against provisions from Rome, Iam. 3. parl. 6.
c. 43. Iam. 4. parl. 1. c. 4. parl. 5. c. 53. Iam. 5. paul (...). c. 119.
Against Working, Gaming playing, haunting of Taverines, A^ch^uses, and using
any sorvile work on the SABOTH-DAY Iam. 4. parl. 6. c. 83. Iam, 6. parl. 6: c.
70^ parl. ^4, c. 148 against Apostasy, Idolatry, Mass the Pope, Semeniary
Priests; Jesuits, uncommunicants, Popery: as Iam. 8. parl. 1. c. ^, 3, 5.
parl. 3. c. 1. 45, 46. 55. parl. 4. c. 7, 8. 35 parl^ 7. c. 106. parl. 10. c.
24, 27. parl. 12. c. 1 20. parl. 13. c. 60. parl. 14. c. 193. parl. 16. c. 17,
18. parl. 19. c. 1. Against Adultery: Mat: parl. 5* c. 10. parl. 9. c. 74. Iam.
6. parl. 2. c. 14. parl. 7. c. 105, with sundry others, which you may find
mentioned and recired in the 5 and 6 Acts of the second Parliament of King
Charles at the Sessions holden at Edinburgh the eleventh day of June, 1640 and
Regiam Majestat^^ to which for brevity, (...) refer the Reader.

I shall conclude with, the Ecclesiastical Acts made in the several Sessions
of the second Parliament of King Charles held at Edinburgh in the year 1640,
and 1642, where in the presens government of the Church of Scotland, together
with their profession of Faith, national Covenant, and all Ecclesiastical
matters whatsoever were fully settled and ratified. In the first Session of
this Parliament, I find these ensuing Ecclesiastical (...) enacted. Act. 4.
(...) the Ratification of the ACTS OF THE ASSEMBLY, which are recited in, and
ratified approved, and perpetually confirmed by this law. Act. 5. Anent the
Ratification of the Covenant, and of the Assemblies Supplication, Act of
Councels and Act of Assymbly concerning the Covinant and confession of Faith
(formerly made and subscribed sundry times) here in recited, and confirmed. In
which Act sundry laws formerly made against Popish Idolatry, superstitious
Doctrine, Papists, Seminary priests, Jesuits, Papisticall Ceremonies, Mass,
the Popes jurisdiction, the reformation of the Church, and maintenace of Gods
true religion, are recapitulated, confirmed. Acts 6. Rescissory; repealing
diverse former Acts concerning Archbishops, Bishops with other Prelates, their
unjust jurisdiction and authority. Acts 7. For planting of Kirks unprovided
with Ministers through the Patrons default. Acts 8. Anent admission of
Ministers to Kirkes which belong to Bishoprics. Acts 9. discharging the going
of Salt-pans and Milnes upon the Sabbath day. Acts 10. discharging, Salmon
fishing upon the Sabbath day. Acts 11. Against Papists. Acts 12. discharging
the Zule vacancy (or Christmas) Act 13. discharging Monday market in Edinburgh
and elsewhere, as occasioning great profanation of the Sunday, and distracting
men from Gods public worship and Service. Acts 14. For taking order with the
abuse committed on the Sabbath day etc. Acts 15. Directing Letters of horning
against excommunicated persons: to which I might add Acts 16. 29, 30. 32. 37,
38, having relation to the Church, and defense of Religion: And Session second
of this Parliament, 1641. Acts 8. 9 10, 11, (for abolishing the Monuments of
Idolatry) and 12. Anent Non-communicants and excommunicate persons, all
printed; besides sundry other Acts unprinted: are an abundant Evidence both of
the Scottish and English Parliaments undoubted right jurisdiction, and
authority in all matter of Religion, Discipline, and Church Government, maugre
all inconsiderable late privateopinions to the contrary, by whomsoever broached.

Section 4.
Containing certain Corollaries from the premised Sections, against the
Inpugners of Parliaments and Princes Legislative Power and Authority in matters
of Church Government, Discipline, Religion: Together with a complete Answer to
Master John Goodwins pretended Authorities, my dear Brother Burtons, and
others Arguments to the contrary, in Iustificaetion of their Independent way,
in some late Publications; the substance whereof is here clearly refuted; and
this point among others, cleared; That just humane Civil or Ecclesiastical
Laws bind the conscience in point of obedience, And that there is no exact
set form of Church government universally prescribed in Scripture to all
Churches.
IN the precedent Sections, I have (according to my solemn Covenant and
Protestation) abundantly cleared the ancient unquestionable Jurisdiction and
Legislative Authority of our Kings and Parliaments in all matters of Religion,
Church Government, Discipline, by multitudes of express Presidents in all
Ages, and Authorities of all kinds: I shall in the next place Dissipate all
those empty clouds of objections, which endeavor to obscure this clear-shining
Verity; by deducing some Corollaries from the premises, and then refuting the
principle late objections against the same.

The first Corollary is this: That Bishop Lauds desperate Positions, in his
Anti-Parliamentary paper of Hopes and Fears, about calling a Parliament An.
1627. That Church-businesse is not fit for Parliaments: That the Parliament
House, one or both, can be no competent Judge in any point of Doctrine. That
the Papists insult over us by this means, and call it Parliamentary Religion.
That the King suffers by this as much or more than the Church: For in the
Statute of submission of the Clergy, the King and the Convocation are Judges
of all Ecclesiastical Causes. An. 25 H. 8. c. 19. And why should the
Parliament take this from either? That he should have little hope of good
success in Parliament, till they leave meddling with the Church. Are all
dangerous false Positions, exceeding derogatory and destructive to the
indubitable ancient Rights, privileges, and power of our Parliaments,
constantly exercised and enjoyed without dispute, even in the darkest times of
Popery, and highest Ruff of Pope, of Prelates; and ever since the Reformation
admitted without any opposition but by Popish Priests and Jesuits, Page 96. 97.
98.
as the forequoted passages of Bishop Jewel, and Bishop Bilson, withal the
premises manifest.

Secondly, That Master John Goodwins late printed passages against the
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction of Parliaments (seconded in substance by some See
my Brother Burtons Vindication, p. 69.
other Independents) viz. ^ Theomachia ^ 48. 49. 50, Reply to A. S. p. 81. 22.
and his Sermon in Feb. 25. 1643.
That the generality and promiscuous multitude of the world, who have a right
of nominating persons to Parliamentary trust and power, are but a SECVLAR ROOT,
out of which the Independent Brethren CONCEIVE AN IMPOSSIBILITY that a
spiritual extraction should be made: That a man may as well bring a clean
thing out of an unclean (in Jobs expression) as make A SPIRITVALL EXTRACTION
out of this SECVLAR ROOT, who have NO Authority nor power from Christ to
nominate or appoint who shall be the men that shall order the affairs of
Christ's Kingdom or institute the government of his Church. That therefore there
is AN IMPOSSIBILITY, that a legitimate Ecclesiastical power, should according
to the mind of Christ, or any precept or prefident of Scripture, be by them
conferred UPON ANY MAN, OR THAT THE PERSONS SO ELECTED SHOULD HAVE A POWER by
virtue of such nomination or election TO ENACT LAWS OR STATVTES IN MATTERS OF
RELIGION, and TO ORDER UNDER MVLCTS and PAENATIES, HOW MEN SHALL WORSHIP and
SERVE GOD etc. Are diametrally opposite to the ancient privileges and
undoubted Ecclesiagicall Authority of Parliaments, which they pluck up by the
very roots; and altogether as bad as, if not far worse than Bishop Lauds, with
whom he symbolizeth in this particular, (which I have A full Reply, etc. p. 21.
to 24
elsewhere answered and fully resuted.)

These Passages of his were first unseasonably vented by him in a Sermon in
Colemanstreet, 25 February 1643. to what other end, unless to prepare his
Auditors to slight or reject what ever form of Church Government the
Parliament should prescribe or settle, I cannot discern; for which (with other
particulars) being questioned before the Committee for plundered Ministers,
even pending the complaint there, he presumed to justify them again very
unseasonably in the Pulpit on a solemn Fast day, and likewise in two printed
Books to one whereof he prefixed his name, in high affront of that Committee
which suspended him and contempt of the Parliaments Authority not to be
paralleld in any age, by any person, for ought I find. Which audaciousnesse of
his, who pretended so much respect and honor to the Parliament heretofore,
engaged me (according to my Covenant and Protestation,) to give a public
answer in print to these scandalous passages, in vindication of the Parliaments
indubitable Right and Privilege, to intermeddle in and make Laws for all
Church matters (as I have manifested by a cloud of witnesses in all ages in the
foregoing Section) and so far incensed the Committee against him; that they
sequestered him from his living in Colemanstreet, for the very things I
mentioned in my Full Reply, etc. and ordered the passages in his Sermon and
Theomachia, to be specially reported to the House with all expedition, as an
unsufferable affront, and presumptnons under mining of their Privileges, which
they could neither in honor, nor justice connive at, without exemplary
punishment, and censure. And yet this Gentleman since this censure has had the
boldness in another Pamphlet of his (to which he has prefixed his name)
Entitled INNOCENCIES TRIVMPH, (an unfitting Title for a sequestered Nocent) to
deny those very matters of fact, which he voluntarily confessed in my hearing
before the Committee for which he was sequestered; and to justify his
forementioned scandalous passages, in such a daring way, as cannot be
paralleld.

For first he professes, p. 2. That he has not denied the least dram or
scruple of (belike he has weighed it exactly in the scales) which is truly
Parliamentary, and consistent with the Word of the great and glorious God: of
which misdemeanour he is not in the least measure conscious to himself as yet.

This manifestes him incorrigible, impenitent after censure, proclaims him that
which this whole Pamphlet vainly endeavors to acquit him from; One who has
presumptuously undermined the undoubted Privileges of Parliaments and here
trebles in his former offenses.

Secondly, he averreth, that what he formerly preached and writ, was out of
Page 4, 5.
and tender affectionate jealousy over the Parliament, lest possibly they
might dash their foot against that stone, by which all Rule, all Authority and
power will one day be broken in pieces. So that if his tongue or pen, have in
the least miscarried in this point, it was Error Amoris, not Amor erroris: he
being extremely jealous over the Parliament, lest they should touch with any
Title or claim the most sacred and incommunicable Royalties and privilledges
of Heaven, and so count it no robbery to make themselves equal to God: knowing
most assuredly, that this is a most high provocation to the eyes of the most
High, and IF CONTINUED IN, will kindle a fire in the breast of him, whose name
is Jehovah, which will consume and devour, etc.

But good Sir, first, can any rational man think (though you should protest
it ten thousand times over) that such Anti-Parliamentary passages as yours are,
should proceed from your love to Parliaments? The blindest charity (I fear)
will hardly credit it; that a friend to Parliaments should thus successively
Preach and Print against their jurisdiction, more desperately than the worst
Malignant, Royalist, Cavalier, or the Arch-Prelate himself, as you have
apparently done.

Secondly, If this proceeded from such affectionate jealousy over the
Parliament: I pray what made you so strangely, if not ma^gnantly jealous over
them, as to fear and presume, they might dash their feet against that stone by
which all power shall be broken in pieces; claim the most sacred and
incommunicable privileges and royalties of Heaven to themselves, and count it
no robbery to make themselves equal with God? Did the Parliament ever give you
the least color or occasion of any such uncharitable, unchristian, that I say
not detestable jealousy? could you have harder or more jealous thoughts than
these of the very Pope or Turk himself, or of that great Antichrist, ^. These.
2.
who exalts himself above all that is called God? Can such jealousies as these
issued from any but a rancorous or disaffected heart against Parliaments? or
did ever such execrable jealousies as these proceed from the heart, tongue,
much less the pen of any Oxford Aulicus, or most venomous Malignant to our
Parliament? Do their calling of an Assembly of most pious and conscientious
Divines of all sorts, to reform our Church, and conform its Government,
Discipline in all things as near as possible to the Word of God, with all
their religious proceedings in this kind, infuse any such jealousy into you?
If not, then for shame retract these your groundless fanaticke jealousies of,
and uncharitable hard thoughts against the Parliament; else the world will
censure you an Arch-Malignant, and the greatest Enemy to our Parliament that
ever yet appeared openly in Press or Pulpit, within the lines of
Communication, if not without them to.

Thirdly, had you had any just cause of such a jealousy, yet it had bin your
duty to have privately informed your friends in Parliament with, it in a
brotherly Christian way: but to publish these your brainsick jealousies, and
suspicions of them behind their backs in open Pulpit, and then to the whole
world in print, of purpose, to make your Auditors, Readers jealous of them, as
men who invaded the very incommunicable royalties and privileges of heaven,
and counted it no robbery to make themselves equal to God; or to defame, or
draw an odium or contempt upon them, and prepare the people before hand to
oppose or reject whatsoever Church Government they shall establish contrary to
your Independent way (for there can be no other real end of these your
Antiparliamentary Sermons, writings) is such a transcendent crime, and high
affront against the Parliament, as you are never able to expiate; and is so
far from extenuating that it aggravates your former offenses beyond
expression.

Fourthly, Your last clause: And if continued, etc. intimates and speaks ^ound
without any straining, that the Parliament for the present are guilty of
dashing their foot against Christ the Rock; of claiming the most sacred and
incommunicable royalties and privileges of heaven, and making themselves
equal to God: And that if they persevere in the course they have begun (in
reforming our Church, and setting up a Church Government according to the Word,
different from your new way) it is such an high provocation against the most
high, as will kindle a fire in the breast of him whose name is Jehovah; which
will consume and devour; etc. Could all the Malignant and Prelaticall party in
England lay a greater, wickeder or more unjust scandal in our Parliament then
this, or more defame them then by such a false report? enough to fire the whole
Kingdom against them, as well as Gods wrath? Certainly Master Goodwin, I must
tell you freely without malice or uncharitablenes, (and I beseech you pardon my
zeal in this particular) that your Jealousy and pen in this, Iam. 3. 6.
was See Master Walkers and Mr. Roburrowes answer to them.
set on fire of hell, rather then heaven, when you printed this passage, and
what ever censure you deserve, I fear your Book demerits the fire, to purge
out this dross: yea all the late tears of Repentance you may shed, will not
be sufficient to quench those unhappy flames of contention your late Sermons
and Pamphlets have kindled in our Church and State, to omit your former
Socinian Errors.

Thirdly. He professes, that in case he has said or written any thing
detractory the undoubted privileges of Parliament; Page 3.
yet my Indictment against him, that he did it, Answer.
PRESVMTVOVSLY, is such a charge, which men, whose ungrounded zeal has not
eaten out the heart of their Charity, cannot lightly but recharge with
unreasonablenesse, and utter unlikely-hood.

Sir, I dare affirm upon good grounds that you did this presumptuously, as I
charge it; Calepine, Holioke, Calvim, Lexicon Juridicum, Summa Angelica, Tit:
Praesumptio: Media v^lla, Aquinas, and others.
Grammarians, Lawyers and Divines informs us, that the Word Presumptuous, comes
from the verb, Praesumo; which signifies, to forestall, to conceive before
hand, to usurp or take that upon him which belongs not to him; to do a thing
before a man be lawfully called to it, which belongs not properly to him, or
to do a thing boldly, confidently, or rashly without good grounds, or against
Authority, or Laws, or upon hopes of impunity. He that does ought in any of
these senses, may properly be said to do it PRESUMPTUOUSLY; and that in Exodus
21. 14. Number. 15. 30. Deuteronomy. 1. 43. c. 17. 28. c. 18. 20. 22.
Scripture phrase, as well as in common parlance. To apply this to your crime.
First, you preached and printed these passages, of purpose to forestall the
Parliaments and Assemblies pious resolutions, to settle one uniforme
Church Government, and suppress all private Coventicles of Sectaries or
Anabaptists contrary to it. 2. Psalm 19. 13. 2 Pet. 2. 10.
To establish support that Independent way, which you had before hand without
any lawful warrant, conceived, ere the Parliament had made choice of, or settled
any Church Government for you; as the whole Tenor of your Books and Sermons
evidence. Thirdly, It was no less then high presumption in you, being a mere
Divine, and a man altogether ignorant of, or unskilful in the ancient Rights
and Privileges of our Parliament (as your writings demonstrate, and your self
intimate, p. 5.) to undertake to determine and judge of them so peremptorily,
and in such manner as you have done: When as if you had known any thing
concerning the Rights of Parliaments, you might have learned this among other
things; That Divines are no competent Judges of Parliaments Privileges: That
the Privileges, Rights, and customs of our Parliaments, are only to be judged
and determined by the Parliament it self, not in or by any other inferior
Court, much less in a Pulpit That the power and jurisdiction of the Parliament
for making of Laws, is so transcendent and absolute, as it cannot be confined
to causes or persons within any bounds; and that the state and defense of the
Church of England is the very first matter and care of the Parliament of
England; as all the premised Presidents manifest, and Sir In his 4. Institutes
c. 1. Of the High-Court of Parliament, and Camden, Holinshed, Vowell Sir Thomas
Smith, concerning Parliaments.
Edward Cook with others might have informed you. And for a man to undertake
to judge of that which is above his power; is expressly defined to be
presumption, by Richardus de Media villa in 3. Sententiar: Distinct, 26. and
other Schoolmen on that place; and by Summa Angelica, Tit. Praesumptus.
Fourthly, You had no lawful calling nor warrant from Gods Word, or our Laws
to handle the Jurisdictions and rights of Parliament in your pulpit, nor yet to
dispute them in your writings in such a daring manner by way of opposition, or
to encourage people to disobedience to its Ecclesiastical Laws and
descitions: Therefore in this you were presumptuous, by the Scriptures own
definition, 2 Pet. 2. 10. Fourthly, after you were questioned before a
Committee of Parliament for these very passages in your first Sermon, as
exceeding scandalous and Derogatory to the Members and privileges of
Parliament, yet you in a daring manner, whiles you were under examination,
audaciously preached over the same again in substance in your Pulpit on a
solemn Fast day, and published them with additions in no less then two
printed Books: Yea since your very censure by the Committee for them, you have
in a higher strain then ever, gone on to justify them in print once more, in
your Innocencies Triumph; (like an incorrigible delinquent) wherein you slander
the Parliament more then before, and show your self a man 2 Pet. 2. 10 12. 1 Timothy 3. 2, 4, 5.
dispising Government (at least any Church Government, the Parliament shall
establish not suitable to your fancy) selfe-willed, and even speaking evil of
Dignities in your forementioned clauses and others: Therefore in this regard
you are superlatively presumptuous, by St. Peter's resolution: Yea most men,
whose ungrounded zeal to your new way has not eaten out his brains, and
reason too, must readily acknowledge it, notwithstanding your two reasons to
the contrary: To wit, First, your former uninterrupted zeal to this Parliament
and its cause: (you mean perchance before you were an Independent, and since,
whiles you thought it would embrace your new way) which does but aggravate your
subsequent opposition in press and Pulpit, against its undoubted jurisdiction.
Secondly, The grounds and reasons you have given of your opinion; (which I
shall examine in due place) as if men might not do presumptuously against the
lawful power of Parliaments and civil Magistrates, as you have plentifully
done, even with some color of reason, as well as insanire cum ratione: which
is all I shall answer to your reasons.

Fourthly, He writes, Let Master Prynne, Or any other evict me, of any
wilful or unwilfull violation of the privileges of Parliament (and I shall
be as willing as willingness it self can make me to further such a
conviction) and no man shall be more ready then I to crave their pardon, Page 5.
or undergo their Justice; nay, I shall repent my self and abhor my error in
dust and ashes.

Certainly this your promised late Repentance (which is yet contingent, and
improbable, after so many public offronts and oppositions against the power
and proceedings of Parliament) will be a very poor recompense and
satisfaction for all your former misdemeanors and scandalls to the Parliament;
yet late repentance being better then none at all; I shall now challenge you to
make good this your promise, since your own Conscience and judgment cannot but
inform you, I have written enough in the former Sections to evict and convince
you and all the world besides, that you have not only violated, but denied,
oppugned those privileges of Parliament in Ecclesiastical affairs, which our
own Parliaments in all ages, and Parliamentary Assemblies in all other
Kingdoms have unquestionably exercised, enjoyed without any such public
opposition as you have made against them. And if you now make not good your
promise, few or none will ever credit you hereafter.

5ly. For the Authors you cite to justify yourselfe; they are miserably
wrested and mistaken for the most part. The first you quote is Master Edwards:
who maintains point blancke against you throughout his Treatise, a Page 156.
to 183. 237. 237. 238. 280. to 307.
Legislative and coerceive power in Parliaments and civil Majestrates, even in
Church-affaires and matters of Religion, in the very pages you quote, and else
where Therefore you palpably abuse the Author and Reader in quoting him to the
contrary, who is so point-blancke against you.

For the passage you quote out of his Page, 256. The Parliament interposeth no
Authority to determine what government shall be: whence you infer (p. 7.)
Therefore his opinion appears to be, either that the Parliament has No
authority, or at least intends not to make use of it, in determining a
government. It was written only with reference to that present time, the
Parliament having at that time when he writ (during the Assemblies debate and
consultation) interposed no Authority to determine what government shall be:
yet before that it had declared the old prelaticall Lordly government to be
abolished, and called an Assembly to advise with about a New. But to infer
from thence as you do: Therefore his opinion is, either that the Parliament
has no Authority, or at least intends not to make use of it in determining a
Government, Is an inference quite contrary to the next ensuing words, and
pages; to the whole scope of the Authors Book; See his Title Page 15. 15
Humbly submitted to the Honorable houses of Parliament: contrary to his
express words: p. 138. 281. to all his reasons against Toleration of your Way,
and to the Parliaments intent in calling the Assembly to assist them in
determining and settling a Church Government agreeable to Gods word. Be ashamed
therefore of this gross perversion of your first Authors passages, diametrally
contrary to this meaning. Page 9 to 14.


Your Passages out of Master Hayward, Bishop Jewel, Master Fox, Mr. Calvin,
Iacobus Acontius, Junius, Peter Martyr, and Gulielmus Appolonius, make nothing
at all against the Legislative Authority of Parliaments, in matters of Religion
and Church government, and have no a^^inity with your Passages, words, most of
them (and Bishop Jewel especially as I have Here p, 96. 97. 98.
already proved, vindicating) propugning the very ecclesiastical power of
Parliaments which you oppugn Indeed some of their words seem to diminish the
Coercive power of Majestrat^s, and enforcing of men's consciences in matters of
Religion, which I shall answer in due place, and manifest how you abuse the
Authors herein as well as Mr. Edwards (not hitherto answered by any of your
party,) Page 9. 11.
but how they militat against the jurisdiction of Parliaments in making Laws
touching Religion, discipline and Church Government, I am yet to seek.

For the Passages he aleageth out of the Divines of Scotland, That the Prince
or Majestrate, may not make or publish any Ecclesiastical Law without the free
assent of the Clergy, etc. That he may not by HIMSELF define or direct such
matters, nor make any Laws therein: That the King has not a Nomotheticke
Legislative Power in matters ecclesiastical in a constitute Church. That the
ordinary power of the King is not to make Ecclesiastical Laws. etc.

I Answer, ANSWER.
1. That their only meaning (if I mistake not) in these passages is, that the
Prince or chief civil Majestrate of HIMSELF, without a Parliament, or
without the assistance and consent of his Nobles, Commons, Clergy, cannot
legally make any ecclesiastical Laws to obliege his people: upon which reason
our Brethren of Scotl. rejected the late See the Articles of the Scottish
Commissioners against Canterbury.
New service book and Canons, and our selves the late Canons and etc Oath
(which Canterbury would have obtruded on us) because they were made and
prescribed only by the Kings Authority and the Prelates or Convocations, not
the Parliaments; upon which very reason the Parliaments of both Kingdoms have
respectively adjudged both one and other illegal. But that the King, or
supreme temporal Majestrates assisted by a Parliament and Orthdox Divines,
may not make binding ecclesiastical Laws; or that their or our Parliaments
have not a real Legislative power in any matters ecclesiastike (the only point
controversed) is directly contrary both to the constant Doctrine and Practice
of our Brethren and their Church used ever since the Reformation, and to the
proceedings of their last Parliaments and general Assemblies as I have Page
102, 103. 104.
formerly manifested. You may therefore blush, at this your perverting of their
meaning as if they held, that the Parliaments, of England or Scotland had no
power to make Ecclesiastical Laws for Religion or Church government; when as
their Books, Actions, addresses to our present Parliament, their presence,
assistance in our Assembly, proclaims the contrary: And the very public
Confession of faith professed and subscribed in their Church Anno 1560 Chap. 14
(since confirmed by several Acts of Parliament) does the like. But admit all
those Authors really (as not one of them is in verity) opposite to the
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and Legislative power of Parliaments, yet the
unanimous practice and resolution of all Christian Realms, Synods Parliaments,
in all ages, contrary to their private novell opinions, is sufficient infinitely
to overbalance them in the Judgments of all prudent men. And thus much for Mr.
Goodwins Innocencies triumph, as to the present point.

I shall next apply my self to Answer such Objections as my dear Brother,
Master Henry Burton, has lately made against the premises; in his Vindication
to my 12. Queeres touching Church Government, and my Independency examined.

His first and principal Objection is this, Object. 1.
That every particular Church now, In this Vindi^ation p. 1. 2 ^8, 42. 48. 51.
52. 53. 60. 6^. 71.
consisting of visible Saints, is under Christ as the SOLE Head, King,
Governor, Lawgiver of it: and so is subject to no other jurisdiction then
that of Christ, his Spirit, his Word: We hold, that every particular Church is
under Christ's Government, as the SOLE Head King, Lord, and Governor thereof
That it is a spiritual House, whose only builder and Governor is Christ, and
not man. A spiritual Kingdom, whose only King is Christ, and not man. A
spiritual Republique, whose only Lawgiver is Christ, and not man. A
spiritual Corporation, whose only head is Christ and not man. That no man, nor
power on earth, has a Kingly power over this Kingdom. That no earthly
Lawgivers may give Laws to this Kingdom or Republique. That no man may
claim or exercise a head-ship over this body. That no man can or ought to take
the Government of this Communion of Saints. That Yet Independents though men,
may and now do it.
men may not appoint, limit, constitute what Congregations of all sorts they
please, to be Churches of Christ, as Nations and Parishes. That Christ is King
over every man's conscience, so that no power on earth, may sit with him in this
his Thror, etc. yea so as no human power not Law may intermeddle to prescribe
rules for the Government or forms of this Church of Christ. That the Children
of those Parents who will not thus acknowledge Christ to be their only King and
Lawgiver, and are ashamed or afraid to be thus in Covenant with Christ, (in
the Independents way) as their King, are not to be baptized; such Parents not
being within the Covenant. (A very hard and uncharitable censure of all
Churches, Persons, who are not Independent) That Christ is the ONLY Potentate
Lawgiver, Lord, King, Governor over Churches, and not men. Not Counsels or
Senates: That this is Christ's Royal Prerogative which is incommunicable to ANY
or All the powers on earth. That Christ has not delegated his Kingly Office,
to any Princes, Magistrates PARLIAMENTS to set up any form of Worship, of
Church Government, who have no authority to make Laws to rule or bind any
particular Churches: and if they make any such they shall be apt to transgress
them: but yet men must take heed how they punish them for that transgression
with any enseresciderdum, Answer.
or Club-law. This is the sum and (often repeted) Argument of my dear Brothers
Book.

To give a satisfactory Answer to this Objection; I shall first demand of my
dear Brother: what he means by this frequently incultated assertion; That
every particular Church is under Christ as the only Head, King, Lawgiver, Lord
and Governor thereof, etc. and that none ought to have any power, rule or
Jurisdiction in the Church but Christ alone? If he intends, that he is the only
immediate HEAD, KING, Lawgiver, and Governor, as he clearly does, I desire
some solid scripture proofs for it, since he produces none to evince it; the
rather, because it is quite contrary to sundry expres Texts, which style Kings,
Majestrates, Ministers Romans 13. 1, 2, 3. Tit. 3, 1. 1 Timothy 2, 2, 1. 2, 13, 14,
Act. 20. 28, Heb. 13, 7, 17, 1 Cor 4, 15. 1* John 2, 13, Isay 49, 23, Psa 8,
16, Ps. 78, 70, 71, 72,
Heigher powers, Rulers, Overseers, Fathers, Nursing- Fathers, Pastors,, of and
over their Churches, people flocks, who are ever enjoined to obey and submit
unto them; yea Acts 18. 7, 17, ^, 13, 15, Mark 5. 22. Lu. 8, 41. 49.
Rulers of the Templ, Congregation Church Rulers, Chife Rulers of the Synagogu:
^ay sometimes Exodus, 22. 28. c. 16, 22. c. 34, Exodus 7, 1, Ps. 28, 1, 6, John 10,
34, 35, Cor 8, 1 5 2. Chron. 9, 8.
Gods sitting upon Gods, throne, to whom men must yield obedience for the Lords
sake, as to Gods and Christ's Vicegerents and Ambassadors. Yea Brother, your
self inform us out of Scripture, page 51. That the members of Christ's body
are Superior, and inferior; as Pastors, Teachers, Teaching and RVLING Elders,
Helps, GOVERNMENTS Bishops (or OVERSEERS) etc. If Christ then be the only
Head, King, Ruler, Shephard, Governor of his Church, and none else, in that
sense you object; what will become of these Pastors, Ruling-Elders, Governors
Overseers, which you aver, Christ has fixed in his Churches? What will
become of those Independent Ministers, who take upon them (like absolute kings
Popes, Lawgivers) to erect gather new Chruches of their own forming, and
prescribe both Laws, Rules, Covenants, to them which Christ never made?
Brother, you must expunge the 1 Timothy 5. 17, 1 Timothy 5, 17 Phil. 1, 2, 1 Cor. 12,
28
Let the Elders that RULE well, be counted worthy of double honor: Romans 13. 1.
Let every soul BE SVBIECT to the HIGHER POWERS, etc. even for CONSCIENCE
SAKE: Tit. 3. 1. Put them in mind to be subject to Principalities and Powers,
to obey Magistrates, etc. Heb. 12. 17. Obey them that have THE RULE OVER YOU,
and SVBMIT your selves, for they watch for your souls, as they that must give
an account, etc. Remember, Salute all them that have the RVLE OVER YOU: Acts
20. 28. Take heed to the floke over which the Holy Ghost has made you
OVERSEERS (or Bishops) to feed the Church of, God which he has purchased with
his blood. Romans 12. 8. HE that RVLETH let him do it with diligence. 2 Chronicles. 9.
8. Blessed be the Lord thy God, who delighted in thee to set thee UPON HIS
THRONE, to BE KING FOR THE LORD THY GOD, etc. with infinite other Texts; yea
the very names of Kings, Princes, Governors, Elders, Rulers, Magistrates,
Overseers, Bishops, Teachers, Fathers, Pastors, Masters, etc. out of the Bible;
and all Christian States, Churches, if you will make Christ alone, the only
immediate King, Ruler, Governor, Lawgiver of his Church, in the sense you here
object it: and that no person nor humane power whatsoever, has or ought to
have any rule, power, or jurisdiction in or over the Churches and people of
God. But if you mean no more, but that Christ is the Dan. 1. 7. 27. Luke 1.
23. 1 Timothy 6. 15. Is^ 9. 6. 7. Psalm. 22. 28. Psalm. 103 19. (...). 21. Ephesians. 4.
5. 1 Cor. 8. 5, 6.
only supreme Head, King, Lord, Governor, Lawgiver, Pastor, and Ruler of his
Church; and that all other Kings, Princes, Magistrates, Rulers, Pastors,
Ministers, Governors are subordinate unto him, as to the King of Kings, Lord
of Lords, and chief Shepherd of his flock^: your proposition is true, but
your conclusion miserably false; that therefore there are no subordinate Kings,
Magistrates, Rulers, Pastors, Governors, Lawgivers under him, to rule,
govern, order, instruct, direct his Churches and people; which the forequoted
Texts, your own experience, reason, and the whole world will contradict.

Secondly, I shall demand of my Brother, how he proves all his forementioned
Paradoxes concerning Christ and the Church, in the sense he propounds them? Or,
that his own, or other Independent Churches lately gathered, erected by no
other but by men, and consederated by a new Covenant, framed by men, not
Christ: Page 49. 50.
to be built governed, ordered only by Christ, and not men? to be the
spiritual Kingdom of Christ, etc. whole only King, Governor, Head, is
Christ and not man? Or in what Text he can show me any particular Independent
Church styled, Christ's spiritual Kingdom and Republike? I find it prophesied.
Revl. 11. 15. That when the seventh Angel foundeth, The KINGDOMS of this World
(which must be meant of National Churches which you deny, not of Particular
Congregations, which are no such Kingdoms) shall become the Kingdoms of the
Lord and of his Christ. Psa. 22. 27, 28 Psa. 2. 8.
That all the ends of the World shall turn unto the Lord, and all the kindreds
of the Nations shall worship before him: for THE KINGDOM is the Lords, and he
is the Governor among the NATIONS: Psa. 72. 11. Psa. 86. 9* Romans 15. 4.
That ALL NATIONS shall serve and worship before him: That he shall have
DOMINION from sea to sea, and from the Rivers to the ends of the earth Dan. 7.
27.
That all DOMINIONS shall serve and obey him: That the KINGDOMS of the earth
shall sing unto the Lord, etc. (All pregnant proofs of National Churches,
which should serve and obey Christ:) But that Independent particular
Congregations of visible Saints, and they only should be Christ's Kingdom,
Republic, and Governed immediately by him, rests yet on my Brothers part to
make proof of, when he is able.

Thirdly, I shall request my Brothers to satisfy me and others, by that Texts
Paradoxes of his; That Page 44, 45* 46. 62. 63.
those who will not submit to his Independent Church Government, Covenant, and
become members of such Churches, have no interest in the Covenant. Sacraments,
or Seal of the Covenant, or right to any Church Communion. That they are not
within the Covenant visibly; and therefore their Children not visibly to be
baptized; That they profess not Christ to be their King, and are afraid, or
ashamed to be in Covenant with Christ as their King? etc. Do not these
uncharitable Paradoxes (good Brother) un-Church, un-Saint all Christians and
reformed Churches whatsoever, which submit not to your new way? excluding both
them and their Children from the Covenant and Seals of Grace, and all
Church Communion, at least in and among your Congregations, as professed
enemies to the Kingdom and Sovereignty of Christ? Is not this the very
language, Doctrine of the Antichristian Church of Rome: who vaunts herself the
only true Church of Christ, out of which there is no salvation, un-Churching
all Churches, and un-Saincting all Christians but their own professed members,
as haeretickes, Schismatics and enemies to Christ? yea, is it not an higher
strain of spiritual pride and uncharitable Behavior against your brethren
then ever the Donatists or Nouatians broached? I beseech you dear Brother, in
the bowels of Christ, to consider and recant these harsh passages, which you
can never justify before God or men and have given great offense to many who
cordially affect you.

These general questions being demanded, I shall next address my self to a
more particular answer of the premised Objection, Argu. 1.
by reducing it into these Logical arguments, Answer.
which will best detect the fallacies imbecillities of it. The first is this.
Christ is the only immediate supreme King, Head Ruler and Governor of every
particular Church: Ergo, no Kings Parliaments, Councels, Synod, Ps. 10. 16.
Ps. 29, 10, Ps. 44, 4, Ps. 47. 2. 6, 7 Ps 84. 3. Ps. 89. 18, Ps. 95, 3, Ps. 98,
6, Ps. Ps. 149, 2, 1 Timothy 1, 17, c. 6. 15, 16, Rev. 15, 3, c. 17, 14, c. 19.
16. Psalm. 22, 18, Ps. 103. 19. Isay 9. 7. Dan. 4, 32. Math 10, 13, c. 1. 1. 25.
or any human Power can make any Laws, Rules, Canons for the settling of
Religion or reforming, Governing, well ordering of any particular Churches of
Christ. This is the sum of all my Brothers Passages.

I answer that this is a mere Independent Argument; which will introduce a
world of absurdities if admitted; as I shall clear by these following
Instances.

1. The Scripture is express Ps. 10. 16. Ps. 29, 10, Ps. 44, 4, Ps. 47. 2. 6,
7 Ps 84. 3. Ps. 89. 18, Ps. 95, 3, Ps. 98, 6, Ps. Ps. 149, 2, 1 Timothy 1, 17, c.
6. 15, 16, Rev. 15, 3, c. 17, 14, c. 19. 16. Psalm. 22, 18, Ps. 103. 19. Isay 9.
7. Dan. 4, 32. Math 10, 13, c. 1. 1. 25.
That God himself is King yea a great King, over all the earth; That Christ is
the ONLY Potentate; the King of Kings and Lord of Lords yea a great King over
all Gods: That all the Kingdoms and Nations of the earth are the Lords and
that he gives them to whomsoever he will^ That his kingdom rules over all.
That 1 Chronicles. 29. 11, 12 13. Dan. 5, 11, c. 4, 17, 25.
his is the greatness, the Kingdom the power and the glory and the Majesty: that
all that is in the Heaven and in the Earth are his: that he is exalted as head
over all and reigns over all, That he is Lord and King of all as well of
their bodies, estates, as souls and consciences. Ergo, (By my Brothers form
of Arguing.) No Kings, Parliaments Potentates Rulers Kingdoms Republikes, ought
to make any Laws for the government of their Realms publikes, Nations,
Corporations, or the ordering of men's persons or temporal estates but God and
Christ alone; and all particular Kingdoms, Societies, States, Corporations,
Families, are and ought to be immediately subject to no King, Majestrat,
Parliament, or human power whatsoever, even in temporal things, but only to
God and Christ.

2ly. God is more frequently styled in Scripture 1. Sam. 1. 11. p. 20. 10. p.
46. ^. Exodus 15. 3. and infinite other texts, 1. Sam. 17. 47. Psalm. 24. 8.
The Lord of HOSTS and God of BATTLE, then he is called the only King of his
Church; (a Title you can hardly show me in direct terms in sacred writ:) Yea,
his power and providence principally appears in mannnaging and disposing all
occurrences and particulars concerning Hosts, Armies Battles, as your Brother
Buroughs in his Glorious name of the Lord of Hosts, has largely manifested,
Ergo (by this Logic) No King, Parliament, General, Captain or Council of
War may or ought to make or prescribe any Martial Laws for the regulating
governing, mustering Marshaling, or disciplyning of their Hosts, but God alone.

3ly. Christ is our only Isa. 9. 67. John 13. 9. Acts 2. 36. c. 10. 36. Romans
14. 6. 7. 8 9. Mat. 6 9. 14. 15. c. 23. 3. 10. Mat. 1. 6.
Sovereign Lord, Master, Father, Ergo no Landlord Master, Father, ought to
prescribe any Laws, Rules, orders for the better Government of their Tenants,
servants, families, Children, but Christ alone, by your argumentation.

4ly. Christ is the 1. Pet. 1. 25. c 5. 4. John 10. 16. 12. 16. Acts. 3. 22.
23. c. 7. 37 John 6. 45. Isay. 54. 13.
chief Shepherd, Bishop, Prophet. Teacher and Instructor of his Church, Ergo
none ought (by your reasoning) to seed, teach or instruct the Church and people
of God, but Christ alone: We must have no Ministers, teaching Elders Pastors,
Teachers to instruct Us henceforth; who are but men and not Christ himself.

5ly. Christ is the only 1. Tim. 2* 5. 1. John 2. 1. 2. Romans 8-34. Pet. 7. 25.
Mediator, Advocate, Intercessor for his Church and people, Ergo none ought by
their Prayers and 1 Timothy 2, 1, 2, 3. Isah. 59. 11, 12. Ier. 27. 18 c. 36. 25,
Romans 2. Psalm. 122. 6
intercessions to soltcite the throne of Grace for the peace, prosperity,
reformation and deliverance of Christ's Churches, and people, but Christ alone.
Ministers must not pray for their people, nor Saints one for another, noreither
of them for the whole Church of God; if your Argumentation be solid.

6ly. If this argument stand firm, then mark the inevitable consequences of
it. Independent Subjects will argue with their Princes, Majestrates Superiors,
thus. Christ is our only King, Head, Lord. Therefore we must not be subject to
any Laws and commands what soever, but only to the laws and precepts of
Christ, Wives, Children servants will reason thus; Christ is our only Head,
Husband, King, Lord, Father, Master. Therefore we will not, we ought not to be
subject to any of the Laws, Orders, precepts of our Husbands, Parents,
Ministers, but only to the immediate Rules, Laws, edicts of Christ himself.
Mutinous or Independent Soldiers will thus argue with their Generals and
Commanders. Christ is our only Captain, General and our Lord of Hosts, Ergo
we will be commanded; conducted ordered by none but Christ, not by any other
Captain or General whatsoever. Nay people and every member of your Independent
Congregations upon any discontent will thus dispute with their Ministers Ruling
Elders Congregations. Christ is our only head King, lawgiver. Judge. Therefore
neither Councels Synods, nor any Independent Ministers or Congregations may
prescribe any Laws, covenants, Orders, or directions to us, or exercise any
jurisdiction eclesiasticall over us, or pass any censures upon us, but only
Christ himself: Brother, if such Antimonarchicall, Antiparliamentall, and
Anarchicall Logic and Divinity be ever taught and believed in the world
(which cutts asunder the nerves, and dissolves the very foundation of all
Governments and Relations whatsoever whether natural, civil, or
Ecclesiastical) what an horrible confusion, will be immediately produced, to
the utter destruction of all Kingdoms, Republiques, Churches, Families,
Societies, Corporations in the World let all prudent men Judge. Yet this is the
dangerous, Logic, this the Foundation stone whereon your whole Independent
fabric is built, the absurdities and ill consequences whereof, I trust all
will now at last discern.

Secondly, I answer, That though Christ be the only King and supreme Lawgiver
of his Church; yet it follows not thence, that therefore no Parliament or
humane power may or can make Laws to order or govern the Churches and people
of God by, but only Christ. For (Brother) See Vindication, p. 3940 70. where
this is in a manner confessed.
your self will grant. 1. That See Pareus in Romans 13 Dub. 7. 8 and D. Willet
on Romans 13. Cant. 6. 7. Doctor Davenant his Praelectiones. De Judice and Norma
fides cap. 14. Bishop Jewels Defense of the Apology part 6. cap. 1. 2. 11, 12,
13, 14, 15. Bish. Bi^sons true difference, etc. part. 2. Fridericus Lindebrogus
Codex Legum Antiquarum; Lambardi Archaion: Master Rutherfords: Due Right of
Presbyteries cap. Sect. 5. and p. 355. to 480, etc.
Parliaments, Kings, and Synods may and ought to make Laws to supposse and
punish all manner of Idolatry, superstition, Impiety, prophanenesses,
corruptions, Heresies, Doctrines, Opinions, and exorbitances whatsoever in
their Churches, Ministers, people, that are contrary to the Word of God, the
Laws Doctrine, Government of Christ, or tending to the depravation,
disturbance, or prejudice of the Church and Gospel. Secondly, they may publish
Laws and Canons to settle and establish the true Confession of the Christian
says, the sincere Ordinances of God, and such a true worship,
Church Government, and Discipline which is most consonant to his Word,
throughout all Churches in their respective jurisdictions; yea compel
Ministers to do their duties, and people diligently to repair to all the
Ordinances of God, to sanctify the Lords day, and to observe extraordinary
days of humiliation, and thanksgiving upon extraordinary occasions. Thirdly,
They may enact Laws and Ordinances to settle the places and times of public
Worship, and all necessary circumstances which concern the same, not peremptorily
determined in the Scriptures, and concerning Church assemblies. Fourthly, They
may enact Laws for the maintenance of Ministers of all necessary Church
Officers, and for prayer, preaching reading the Word, administering receaving
the Lords Supper, concerning ordination, Marriage, siging fasting,
excommunication, agreeable to the Word of God. This I presume all will grant
and my Brother will not deny: which is all I contend for. Therefore Christ's
being the only King, Head, Ruler, and Lawgiver of his Church, is no impediment
to Kings, Parliaments, by advise of Synods, to enact such Laws as these; and
so the Argument a mere Independent Nonsequitur.

Thirdly, Christ is the Psalm. 5. 2. Psalm. 145. 1. John 20. 13, 28. 1. Cor. 11.
3.
King, Lord, Head, and Lawgiver of every private Christian or Member of a
Congregation, as well as of every particular, or of the whole Catholic Church;
and so Page 18.
by your determination) he is subject to no other jurisdiction then that of
Christ, his Spirit and Word: Yet I hope See this confessed, page 45. 46, 62.
and elsewhere.
you will grant; that every Independent Congregation, has a true jurisdiction
and power over every particular member of it, yea a legislative power to
prescribe a special covenant and such Ecclesiastical Rules, Orders, as the
whole Congregation shall think meet, to which they must submit, under pain of
excommunication, suspension, Non-communion, and denying baptism to their
Infants, as you plainly intimate, (page 44. 45* 46, 62, 63.) Therefore these
titles and Prerogatives of Christ, do not deprive particular Churches of the
power of prescribing covenants, Orders, Rules, and Canons to their Members;
much less then whole Synods, Counsels, Parliaments, of far greater wisdom
power Authority then particular Churches: And if private Churches may thus
oblige their Members, then much more may Parliaments, Counsels, all particular
Churches within their jurisdictions: And so much in answer of this grand
argument.

The second is this. A^gn. 2. Vindication page 50. 51.
Christ is the full and sole King, reigning in the heart and conscience of
every true Believer, He only is King over every man's Conscience, so as no man
nor power on earth may sit with him in this his Throne. Therefore no
Parliament, Council, nor human power may prescribe Laws for the Government or
ordering of the Church, for then of necessity man should be Lord over the
Conscience, which is the highest presumption against the most high.

I answer, Answ. 1.
That this argument is grounded upon a very sandy foundation; and upon this
controversed question, both among Divines, and Casuists; Whether
Ecclesiastical or Civil human Laws made and ratified by the supreme civil
Magistrates and Parliament, bind and necessarily oblige us to obedience in
point of conscience, in case they be not contrary to Gods Word, for if they be,
all grant they Acts 4. 18 19, 20. c. 5. 28, 29. Dan. 1. 8. to 17. c. 2. 5. to
17. c. 6. 5, to 28. See Gratian causa 11. qu. 3.
do not bind to obedience in point of Conscience. My Brother here holds the
Negative, as an indisputable Maxim, That these Laws bind not the conscience,
in point of Obedience to them: A very dangerous, false, unsound Position,
tending to mere Anarchy, and contempt of all humane Laws and lawful
Authority in Church or State: And for my own part, I clearly hold the
Affirmative to be an undoubted truth. This question is largly debated and held
affirmatively by learned Paraeus, Explicatio Dubiorum in c. 13. ad Romanos,
Dubium 7. page 1413. to 1446. by Musculus, Peter Martyr, Marlorat, and Doctor
C^^tr. 7. p. 617.
Willet in their Commentaries on Romans 13, with other Protestants on this Text,
by Ursinus: in Exposit: secundi Praecepti, p. 299. by Theodoret; Ambrose, Beda,
Anselme, and generally most ancient and modern Commentators on that Text by
Alexander Alensis: Summa Theologiae: Pars. 2. qu: 120. Artic 2. 3, 4. (with
whom all other Shoolemen generally concur:) Paulus Windek: Canonum and Legum
Consensus and Dissensus cap. 4. p. 12. Stapleton The Papists and we differ some
what de modo, or manner of binding*
: in Antid: p. 783. Bellarmine, l. 3. c. 9. De Laicis, Pererius: Disp: 2. Number.
8. by Saint Augustine in Epist: 54. ad Macedonium, and in Tit. Psalm. 70. by
Saint Bernard, Tract: de Praecepto and Dispensat: With infinite others. Indeed
Master Calvin, Instit: lib. 3. c. 9. Sect. 15. 18. and lib. 4. c. 10. Sect. 3.
4, 5. Beza, in Notis: ad Romans 13. Sibrandus, De Pontif: Romano, l. 8. c. 7. and
some others seemingly hold the contrary, yet not generally of all, but of some
particular humane Laws, I shall briefly lay down the truth of the affirmative
part, out of Pareus and Doctor Willet. in these ensuing Propositions, and then
propound the Affirmative, and answer the Negative arguments in their Order, to
vindicate this truth, now most opposed, when it is most necessary both to be
discovered and obeyed. The Propositions are these.

That all just Civil, Ecclesiastical, or Oeconomicall Laws and Ordinances
made by the King and Parliament, or by lawful Magistrates, Parents, Masters,
Tutors, Superiors, which concern the duties of the first or second Table, do
bind the Conscience, of themselves, and that simply, both in general, and
particular: That all good Laws made for the determining of any necessary
circumstances of Gods Worship, or necessary and profitable for keeping the
Commandments of the first and second Table, the advancement of Gods Honor and
Service, the propagation of the Gospel, the peace and well ordering of the
Church, State, Family; the performance of the external public or private
exercises of Religion; Or to avoid scandalls, Schisms, Errors, Innovations,
Corruptions in the Church, or to bring men to the Ordinances and knowledge of
the truth, do of themselves bind the Conscience, at least in general,
because they tend to the observation of the moral Law, which we are bound in
Conscience to obey. That particular civil and Ecclesiastical Laws, whereby the
temporal Law givers not only signify what is to be done, but likewise
seriously intend to command it, and to obliege the infringers to an offense,
do in particular, and by themselves bind the Conscience under pain of sin and
offense of God. That other particular Laws may bind the Conscience, though not
of themselves in regard of the thing commanded; yet by accident, when by their
violation the Order, Peace, or government of the Church or State is disturbed,
the authority of the Lawgivers and Magistrates despised, or just scandal
given to the Church, State, or any weak brethren. The Arguments to prove these
positions follow.

1. Those Laws to which men must be obedient and subject even for Conscience
and subject, not only for wrath, but even for Conscience sake, Romans 13. 1, 2,
5. Therefore they must necessarily bind the Conscience.

2. Those Laws whose violation draws both a temporal and spiritual Romans 1.
2. 3. 4, 5, 6. See Paraeus and Willet on the place.
both a temporal and Civil Offense, Guilt and judgment upon men, as the
Apostle, yea every man's Conscience, and experience determines. Ergo, they bind
the Conscience.

Those Laws and Ordinances which God Himself enjoynes us to obey even for the
Lords sake; must of necessity bind the Conscience, to ready obedience, because
God Himself. (the Sovereign and supreme Lord of the Conscience) the Lords
sake, Romans 13. 1, 3, 5. 1 Pet. 2. 14, 15, 16. Ergo, they bind the Conscience.

4. Every Supreme Power, Lawgiver, Magistrate in commanding such things and
making such Laws as aforesaid, is but Romans 13. 1. 2, 3, 4. 2 Chronicles. 9. 8. Deuteronomy.
1. 17.
Gods own Deputy, Ordinance, Minister, Vicegerent; in obeying whom we obey,
and in contemning whose Edicts, we contemn even God Himself, from whom they
derive their Authority, Romans 13. 1, 2. 1 Pet. 2. 14* 15, 16. Ephesians. 6. 5, 6, 7.
Col. 3. 22, 23, 24.

Therefore their just Laws must needs oblige the Conscience, as being in some
sense the very Ordinances and Laws of God Himself, according to that
resolution of Saint De Praecepto and Dispensat.
Bernard. Sive Deus sive homo, Vicarius Dei, mandatum quodcunque tradiderit,
pari profecto obsequendum est cura, pari reverentia deferendum, ubi tamen Deo
contraria non praecipit homo: Which In Tit: Psalm. 70.
Augustine thus seconds. In ear sola filius non debet obedire Patri suo, si
aliquod Pater ipsius jusserit contra Dominum Deum ipsius. Ubi enim hoc jubet
Pater quod contra Dominum non sit, sic audiendus est quomodo Deus, quia obedire
Patri jussit Deus: which he proves by Gods blessing of the RECABITES for
obeying their Fathers command in not drinking Wine Jer. 25. Upon this very
ground, Wives are commanded to submit themselves to their own Husbands, as
UNTO THE LORD; To be subject to them, in every thing as the Church is to
Christ, Ephesians. 5. 22, 24. Col. 3. 8. Ephesians. 6. 5. 6, 7, 8. Col. 3. 22, 23, 24. 1 Timothy 6. 1, 2. 1 Pet. 2. 18. Ephesians. 5. 2. to 9. Col. 3. 10. to 26.
Servants are commanded to be obedient to their Masters according to the
flesh, ^ 1 Pet. 2. 18. 19.
with fear and trembling and singleness of heart, ^ Romans 13. 1, 2 Heb. 13. 7,
17 Tit. 3. 1, 1.
as unto Christ. Not with eye service as men pleasers, but as the servants of
Christ doing the will of God from the heart; Heb. 13. 7, 17
with good will doing service as Unto the Lord not to men: Tit. 3. 1, 1.
knowing that whatsoever good thing any man does, he shall receive from the
Lord, Pet. 2. 15, 16 17
for YE SERVE (herein) THE LORD CHRIST. If servants in obeying their Masters,
Children their Parents, Wives their Husbands lawful commands serve and obey,
the Lord Christ Himself: as the Scripture positively resolves, then Christian
subjects and Churches in obeying the lawful Ecclesiastical or Civil Laws of
their Princes and Parliaments, obey and serve Christ Himself therein, and so
do they who enact them; and not commit the highest presumption that can be
against the most Highest, as my Brother objects, without any authority but with
his Ipse dixi.

Fifthly, Paul did endeavor and exercise himself to keep a good Conscience
always both toward God and Man; (by obeying the just Laws and commands of
man, as well as of God; as some Interprets expound it) Acts 24. 16. Yea 1 Pet.
2. 18. 19. 20.
Peter commands servants to be subject to their Masters with all fear, not
only to the good and gentle, but also to the froward; and even for CONSCIENCE
TOWARD GOOD, to endure grief, and suffer wrongfully from them: and by the 1
Peter 3. 16. We are enjoined to have a GOOD CONSCIENCE Toward men who speak
evil of us: Whence thus I argue. If a good Conscience must be carefully
exercised and kept as well toward the lawful precepts and laws of Man as of
God, then certainly they bind the Conscience as well as the Law of God: else
what had conscience to do with them? But the supposition is most evident by the
former texts; Therefore the deduction thence.

Sixthly, If such Laws should not bind the conscience and inward man to the
cheerful practical obedience of them; but only the purse and outward man, the
obedience to them would be lame or slavish; the Laws Nugatory, and
contemptible, the end of the Laws (which is cheerful obedence to them for the
advancement of Gods glory, and the public good of Church and State)
frustrated; and the contempt of them no sin at all, against the fifth
Commandment, and the precepts of obedience to the higher Powers, Magistrates,
and Rulers over us as all Expositors on the 5th. Commandment resolve it is.

7. The violating of such just Civil and Ecclesiastical Laws as these will
cause, violating whereof a tender true in lightened conscience will John 8. 9.
Romans 2. 15. c. 9, 1. 1 Cor. 1. 12. Heb. 10* 2.
check a man for, and accuse him, as guilty of an offense: Therefore, They
must certainly oblige the Conscience, else it would not check at such a
violation, and acquit and cheer a man in case of ready Obedience; as every
man's experience can attest, if he narrowly watch his conscience, in case it be
not feared.

Eighthly, Disobedience to the just edicts, Laws of Magistrates, Governors
Parents, Natural, Civil, or Ecclesiastical, are particularly Josh 1. 16. 17.
18. Ex^ra 7. 26. Romans 1. 30. 2 Timothy 3. 2. 4. 2 Pet. 2. 10. Jude 8.
branded both in the Old and New Testament, at heinous sin^, and capital
offenses punishable in some cases, with imprisonment, banishment, confiscation
of goods and death it self: And on the contrary, cheerful obedience to them is
not only Exodus 20. 14 Ephesians. 6. 1^2. Col. 3. 2. to 25. Ier. 35. thronghout.
commanded but commended by God Himself, in, by, and for whom they rule and
command, as the marginall Scriptures fully manifest: Therefore undoubtedly they
bind the Conscience. And so all Parliaments, Lawgivers ever held and
believed, else they would never take care or pains to enact or publish Laws.

Finally, Princes, Magistrates, and Parliaments, may and oft-times do prescribe
solemn Oaths and Covenants to their people, to observe both Gods just Laws,
and their own to, as is clear by the Genesis 24. 2. to 10. Josh 2. 17. 20 1 Samuel
14, 26, 27. 2 Chronicles. 15, 12, 13, 14, c. 23, 3 c. 34, 30 to 33 Ezra 10, 3. Neh.
9, 38, etc. 10. Neh. 9, 29, 30.
Marginall Texts: by 28 H. 8. c. 10. 1 Eliz. c. 1. 3 Jac. c. 4. which
prescribe, an oath of abjuration of the Popes Authority; the oaths of
Supremacy and Allegiance, with infinite other Acts, enjoining sundry other
oaths: and by the late Protestation, Vow, and National Covenant, made and
imposed upon all by the present Parliament. Now these oaths and Covenants do
without all controversy Genesis 24, 2, to 67. Numb. 30, 2, to 15 Josh. 2. 18, 19,
20. Judge. 21, 5* 6. 1 Kings 2, 43, 44. Eccles. 8, 2. Ezekiel 17, 16, to 20. Eccl.
5, 4, 5, 6 Object.
bind the Conscience to observance and obedience in the highest degree;
Therefore questionless these their oaths, Laws, Covenants bind the
Conscience; else we might with safe Conscience refuse and violate them at
pleasure, which none dares affirm they may, who has any sparkle of Conscience
remaining in him.

I shall now propound and answer the principal contrary Objections, which are
these.

1. It is, contrary to Christian liberty, and a plain tyranny, that humane
Laws should obliege the Conscience, Christ having freed us from all humane
Ceremonies Laws, obligations; and the Scripture enjoining us, Gal. 5. 1. c. 1
10. Col. 2. 16. to 22.
to stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, See Paraeus
in Romans 13. Dub. 7.
and not to be again entangled with the yoke of Bondage: Not to be the
servants of men: Not to be subject to Ordinances, as touch not, taste not,
handle not (which all are to perish with the using) after the commandments and
Doctrines of men: If therefore humane Laws should bind the Conscience,
Christian liberty would be destroyed, and tyranny over consciences introduced.

1. Answer; Answer.
1. That it is no ways repugnant to, but very consistent with Christian
liberty, to be obliged to obey al honest, just necessary, Laws, all decent,
and convenient, things which may advance Gods glory, worship, the peace, we will
or prosperity of Church, State, our own felicity, and are consonant not
repugnant to Gods Law: Neither do the objected scriptures extend to such Laws
or Edicts at these.

2. That Christian liberty which Christ has purchased for us is not an
exemption or freedom from the obedience of humane Laws, but from the Romans 6,
1, to 23. John 8, 34
dominion and power of sin, the yoke and bondage of the Ceremonial Law Col.
2. 14, 15, 16. Acts 10 and 15. 1 Timothy 4. 3, 4, 5. Romans 14. 1. 1 Cor. 8.
abolished by Christ's death, from the exact performance and condemning power of
the moral Law, not from obedience to it, and from placeing inherent holiness o^
any matter of Religion, worship, conscientiousnes in things merely indifferent
in themselves, as Mr. Insti. lib. 3. c. 19. Aretius de Adiapheris Locus.
Calvin with others, who write Deliberitate christiana, with most Commentators
on the Galathians resolve: yet Magistrates may command such things to be done
or not done, for (...), order, peace, and other public ends, (so as they
place no inherent holiness, religion or worship in them) and Christians are
bound to obey them therein, without infringement of their Christian Liberty.
Thirdly, As to the Texts objected. The first of them is meant See I^ther,
Calvin, Marlorat, and others on these Texts*
of the Ceremonial Law, and morrall to, so far forth as to seek
justification by it, or to be under the rigor and condemning power of it; Not
of just humane Laws. The next is intended only of^ men-pleasers, who flatter
men in their lusts, pleasures, errors, or obey their unjust commands repugnant
to the will of God; not of obeying the just Laws or precepts of Kings,
Parliaments, Magistrates, Parents, Masters and other superiors, for then there
shall be no servants, no subjection or obedience at all to superiors in this
world, and this Text should repeal the 5. Commandment, with all other
precepts of obedience, given to subjects, wives, children, servants, if thus
expounded, For that of the Colossians 2. 20, 21, 22. it appears by verse 14,
15, 16, 17, etc. that it is spoken only of the Ceremonial Law, and of that
Ceremonial holiness or intrinsicall uncleannes which some did put between meats
and drink^s, which were indifferent in themselves, as is most clear by
comparing it with Acts 10. 10. to 16. Romans 14. 2, 3 to 23. 2 Cor. 8. 1 Timothy 4.
3, 4, 5. Therefore it makes nothing against the Ecclesiastical or Civil Laws
of Princes and Parliaments, who may command abstinence from flesh and such
particular things, creatures, at certain times, for lawful civil ends, which
we are obliged to obey; though not out of any religious or superstitious
respect, as if the creature it self were unlawful at such times by any divine
precept, or in its own nature, (...). 19. 4, Elix c. 5. Objest. 2.
our Statutes and Homylies concerning Fishdayes define.

The second Objection is this, That the civil power is temporal, and the end
of civil Laws external or temporal peace and order. Therefore they bind
not the Conscience.

I Answer, Answ.
That the end of Ecclesiastical Laws is not merely temporal, but spiritual
and Ecclesiastical: Therefore the objection is not solid. 2ly. Admit the power
he but temporal, inregard of the object or end, yet internal and outward
obedience to those Laws is the principal thing intended in them, which none
can with safe conscience deny, Object. 3.
where the Laws are just and necessary.

The third is, That Magistrates, Parliaments and their Laws, have nothing to
do with men's consciences, which they cannot judge or discern, but only with
th^^ outward actions: Therefore they cannot bind the conscience.

I answer, Answer.
that though Majestrats have nothing to do with nor can judge of men's
consciences or opinions simply considered in themselves and concealed, yet they
have to do withal their external actions flowing from, and regulated by their
consciences and opinions; Therefore they may bind the conscience as it is
Practical, and punish Atheists, Heritickes See 23, Eliz. c. 1, 35, Eliz. c. 1,
2
Papists, Idolaters, when they openly appear to be such. 2ly, The very Law Of
God Romans 13. 1. 2 1 Pet 2, 15, 16 Tit 3, 1 Object. 4.
hindes the conscience to obey all just commands of higher powers; therefore
such commands even by virtue of Gods own precept, oblige the conscience to
internal obedience, as well as the body to external.

The 4th. is, That Princes and temporal Majestrates cannot inflict inward and
spiritual, but only temporal and external punishments. Therefore they cannot
bind the conscience.

I Answer, Answer.
that men may bind and deliver others over to such punishments as they cannot
immediately inflict: The Sea Fox Acts and Monuments passim The writs de Haretico
Com^urendo and Excommunicato Capiend^.
Church may deliver men over even for ecclesiastical offenses to the secular
power, which they cannot exercise, and to temporal punishment which they
cannot inflict: yea they may deliver (a^ they hold) men ever unto 1 Cor. 5. 5 1 Timothy 1. 20, 1 Cor. 16. 22.
Satan, and to the judgment of God at the last day, which they cannot
actually execute: Majestrates do frequently punish the breach of Gods Laws
with temporal punishments, yet by this Gods Laws become not temporal and
unobligatory to the conscience: So God on the other side may and does (...) the
violation of just humane Laws with spiritual and eternal punishments
(Majestrates being but his Vicegerents, Deputies, and the contempt of their
just Laws, a Acts 3. 4. Rom 13. 1 2. Lu. 10 16. 1 These. 4. 6. 7. 8.
contempt of God himself,) Therefore the Argument holds not.

The 5th. Objection is this; that the conscience only respects God: therefore
nothing can bind it but Gods own Law, which is spiritual. Objection 5.


I Answer, Answer.
That the conscience respects as well men as God, Act. 24. 16, therefore the
just Laws of men (as I have proved) as well as of God, 2ly. The conscience
looks upon the just Laws and precepts of men, not merely as human Laws, but as
proceeding from the Ministers and Vicegerents of God himself whom they
represent, and whom God himself frequently enjoynes us to obey. Objection 6.


The 6th. Is this Vindication p. 40.
No one man, and by consequence not all men's consciences in the world may or
can Judge another man's conscience; who stands or falls (...) his own
Master: Romans 14. 4. 16. Ergo they cannot make Laws to bind the conscience.

I Answer, Answer.
first, that this text speaks only of private Christians Judging one another in
things indifferent (as meats, holy days etc.) when and where there is neither
law of God nor man, inhibiting the free use or refusal of them, at the whole
Chapter manifests. Therefore it makes nothing against necessary ecclesiastical^
Laws, Canons obliging men to obedience, even in point of conscience. 2ly, The
Apostle expressly concludes in this very Chap. v. 14. to 23. That in case of
giving scandal and offense to weak Brethren, we ought to abstain from the very
use of lawful and indifferent things, even out of conscience of the scandal
and hurt don thereby, not simply of the things themselves, though there be no
law of God or man restraining or altering the indifferency or lawfulnes thereof
and that without any impeachment of Christian liberty. Therefore when necessary
or convenient things merely indifferent in their nature, are enjoined by
Superiors just Laws, or inconvenient indifferent things prohibited for the
public good or peace, they ought much more to be submitted to without
impeachment of christian liberty, out of Conscience of the Law, and scandal
which would follow the volation thereof; and in obedience to the general Law
of God, which commands obedience to such Laws.

The 7. Objection is this: Objection 7.
There is one Lawgiver which is able to save and to destroy, (to wit God^ who
art thou that judge another, Iam. 4. 12. Ergo none can make laws to bind the
conscience, but God. I answer 1. that there is but one supreme absolut Lawgiver
which is God. Answer.
Is. 33. 2. which excluds not subordinat ones. 2ly. The Apostle says not, that
there is ONLY one lawgiver, that can save and destroy: neither will the words
infallibly conclude, there is but one such: since humane lawgivers can make
Laws to save or destroy, the lives, bodies and Estates of men (as appears by
(...) 1, 11. 1 Samuel: 11, 7. Ezra 7, 26, Dan: 2, 5, c: 3, 19, c: 6, 24, Math: 10,
28. Luke 12, 4, 5
Scripture, and the Laws of all Nations) though not their Souls, as they are
meare humane Laws; but only collaterally, as the wilful contempts and
violations of them are sins and breaches of the very 1 These. 4. 6. 8 Rom: 1,
30, 31 (...).
law of God prescribing obedience to those Laws, in which sense they may
secondarily destroy the very souls of men.

Thirdly, This Text takes not away the power of making necessary temp^rall or
Ecclesiastical Laws (for then no such Laws could possibly be made by any) But
the meaning of the Apostle is this; That only God the Supreme Lawgiver, is
able by his Law to make any indifferent lawful thing, necessary or unlawful,
in it self, in point of Religion or conscience; and to change the mere
indifferency of it, into a thing simply good or evil: and not humane
Lawgivers. Therefore we should not judge or condemn one another in the use or
neglect of those things which God himself has left indifferent, where there
is no circumstance of scandal, or contempt of humane Laws to engage us to
use, or not to use them. But it reaches not to such humane Laws, Civil, or
Ecclesiastical, which command or prohibit things agreeable to the rules of
Gods Word; or things necessary and expedient for Order, Decency, Peace,
avoiding of scandal and other mischiefs; which Laws (as Doctor Willet
himself, who makes this objection affirms) do bind the conscience,
notwithstanding this objected Text. And thus much for my Brothers first
general Objection.

His second is this, Objection 2.
Vindication. ^, 4, 5, 6, 9, 34 35, ^^.
That the Scripture holds forth, and Christ in the New Testament presoribes and
lays down unto us, but ONLY ONE (and that a most complete and exact) form of
Church government and Discipline, which ought not to be altered or varied from
in the least title, being a part of the Gospel, and must be BUT ONE and THE
SAME in all Nations, Churches in all ages throughout the World, and precisely
observed by all Churches without the least variation. That the Independent way
alone is this divine unalterable Evangelicall platform. Therefore nor King nor
Parliament (though assisted with a Synod of most pious, and learned orthodox
Divines) justly may or can of right, make any Ecclesiastical binding Laws for
the government or Discipline of the Churches of Christ within their
Jurisdictions; it being indeed a mere adding to the Word of God, prohibited
under a curse. Deuteronomy. 4. 2. c. 12. 22. Prove. 30. 6. Rev. 22. 18, 19. Thus my
dear Brother, and other Independents Argue, with more confidence than evidence
of Scripture.

To which I answer first: Answer.
That though Christ and his Apostles have instituted in the Gospel all
necessary Church Officers, as Phil: 1, 1. Ephesians 4, 11, 12. 1 Cor. 12, 28, 29
Evangelical Bishops, Elders, Ministers; Deacons, Pastors, Teachers, etc. and
likewise given some general rules for the Government, and Discipline of his
Church, yet he has neither instituted nor prescribed any such unalterable
complete exact form of Church Government and Discipline in all ages and
Churches, in the New Testament, as is pretended by many, not evidenced by any.
My reasons are these:

First, Because no such exact and punctual platform is or can be clearly
demonstrated Quod non lego, non credo: has always been reputed a solid
Argument in matters of Divinity and divine institutions. The Apostle Heb. 7.
13. 14. argues thus negatively even in the point of Christ's Priesthood: because
Moses spoke nothing of the Tribe of Judah concerning Priesthood: And God
himself argues thus, Deuteronomy. 9. 12. 15. Ye saw no manner of similitude,
therefore ye shall make no likeness or image of me. I may safely argue
negatively in like sort. The Scripture speaks nothing of such an exact
universal Platform: and we see no image or similitude of it in the Gospel:
Therefore there is no such.

Secondly, Independents have been frequently pressed to show us any such Gal:
1, 8.
Angels from Heaven, we dare not credit you, without a word to build on.

3ly, Because some Independents themselves (and one (...) An Answer to Master
William Prynnes 12 Questions p, 2.
Anonymous who has published a malicious Answer to me full of virulency
against Presbytery and the Scots) positively deny any such universal
platform, concurring fully with me in opinion.

Fourthly, Christ has not perempto^ily prescribed one and the selfsame (...)
of Ecclesiastical Government to all Nations: The (...) to blame are such who
go about to prescribe one throughout whole kingdoms, etc.
Because the Churches of God, ever since the Apostles days have in several
Nations, Republikes, States and Conditions had different forms of Government,
Discipline, Ceremonies, administrations in some particulars (as the Independent
Congregations of Brownists, Anabaptists, Familists, etc. differ in sundry
things of moment among themselves) and yet have ever been reputed true
Churches of Christ. The Churches of England, Scotland, France, Geneva, Germany,
Aethiopia, Russia, Greece, Bohemia, and the Netherlands vary one from another
in their Government, Discipline Rites, Ceremonies, and in some points of
Doctrine, and are not Independent: yet none of our Brethren (I suppose) will be
so uncharitable, as to deem them all Antichristian, opposers of the Kingdom
and Government of Christ, and no true Churches; as they must of necessity be,
if Church Government be a part of the Gospel, and one uniform unalterable
Government universally prescribed to them all.

Fifthly, Because the Gospel never intended to subvert, diminish, cross, Gods
Romans 13. 1, 2. Prove. 8, 15.
own Ordinance, as well as Churchgovernment) since one Ordinance of God does
not cross or thwart another. Now the lawful Governments, Customs, Manners of
most Nations, Kingdoms, Republiks, being various and different one from
another, and the Gospel to be equally preached to them all and some,
Church Government erected among them all: and the condition of the Church
(whiles militant in this world) being as full of changes as the Moon;
sometimes tossed with the boisterous waves, and almost drowned in the floods of
affliction; Sometimes totally ecelipsed and driven into the wilderness in one
place, yet slourishing or less troubled in another: Othertimes in a prosperous
peaceable condition. Sometimes under Pagan or impious Princes and Magistrates,
other whiles under more or less pious Christian Kings and Governors:
sometimes in a more pure light some, otherwhiles in a more corrupt and ignorant
condition; Sometimes over-growne with haeresies, schisms, Innovations;
other-times holding forth the truth more clearly, and purging out of all
errors: sometimes requiring a 1 Cor 4, 21, (...), 12, 13, Gal 16, 1, 2, Tim 2,
25, 26
more sharp and rigorous Discipline, other-times a more mild and gentle: Yea
some Nations being more barbarous, fierce, obstinat, vicious, proner to some
kind of vices, sins, corruptions then others, and so needing a Discipline,
Government, somewhat discrepant from those who are more civell and ingenious;
Some using one gesture of prayer, adoration administering the Sacrament some
another: as some bowing, others kneeling, others prostration, some knocking of
the breasts, some bare-headed, others covered some vayled, others unvayled;
some sitting at the Lords Supper in one manner, others in another, Some
kneeling, others standing; some using dipping, others sprinkling, others
washing in baptism; some one kind of tongue, tone, tune, gesture in singing,
Preaching, Praying, others another: (which is all I meant in my first and
second Queries, by the manners and customs of the people; which my dear
Brother mis-interprets as meant of their superstitious and corrupt customs,
not their civil, which I only intended.) Some one form of Temples, Churches,
Tables, Pulpits, Chalices, Vestments, others another; and all Nations not
having the selfsame opinion, judgment of the lawfulnes or convenience of one
sort of Church Government, as of another; I conceive there was a kind of
necessity under the Gospel, of leaving divets things in Church Government and
Discipline, more indeffinite and arbittary then under the Leviticall Law, given
only to the Jewish Nation and that not for perperuity, but till the Gospel
came Col. 51, 2 Acts 15, 1, to 30. Col 2. 14, to 23
which see them free from that yoke of bondage, and left them and all other
believers at greater liberty than before. This I conceive to be the true
reason, why there is no such precise universal set form of Church Government
and Discipline, punctually prese^bed without the least variation to all Nations
Churches in the New Testament, as you say was to the Israelites in the old.

We are able to produce See Catalogus Testium V^ritatis, Dr. White, Doctor
Web Dr. Abbot, Doctor Featly, and others.
Professors of the Doctrines maintained in the Protestant Churches in all ages
the Doctrine of the Gospel being universally the same and unalterable. But no
creature is able to demonstrate a succession of any one kind of
Church Government and discipline in all ages or Churches, be it Presbyteriall,
Episcopal, or mixed of both, much less any series of Independent Churches.
Therefore certainly there is no such universal divine set form of
Church Government and Discipline, essential to the being of a true Church,
prescribed in the Scriptures, as some have fancied; for then it would have had
a being in some part or other of the world in all ages, as well as the Doctrine
of the Gospel and the Sacraments.

7ly. All Independents reach, that there is no set form of public Prayer,

8ly. All grant there is no immutable universal set form of Civil Government
prescribed to all Nations, Republickes, Cities, Families, Christian or
Ethenicall, (...) they have a liberty left them to elect what civil government
they by public consent shall deem most convenient: provided it be generally
agreeable to Gods Word, which has prescribed general rules applicable to all
civil Governments, actions, as well as Ecclesiastical, and spiritual, though
no one Government in particular: And why the Government of the CHVRCH MILITANT
should be more particularly uniformly, unalterably, said down in scripture,
then the Government of Christian Kingdoms, Nations, states under the Gospel;
(which leaves both of them equally undetermined Deutr, 17. 14. ^0 20. 2 Samuel 23.
3.
since both of them were alike limited among the Israelites under the Law, no
rational man cangive any solid reason; Christ being 1 Timothy 6 15. Rev. 17. 14. c.
19. 16. Psalm. 22. 28 Ps 4. 7 2, 7. 1 Chronicles. 29. 11 to 17. Dan. 2. 21 27 1 Cor.
19 26. Ps. 24. ^
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, yea a great King over all the Earth; the
only Potentate and Lord of Kingdoms, Nations, Republiques and of men's bodies,
estates, as well as Rev. 15. 3.
KING and Lord of his Church Saints or of men's souls and consciences.

9ly. There was not only one uniforme Church Government at first under the
Gospel, in all Churches no not in the Apostles times: for in the original
gathering and planting of the Christian Churches, they had at first only Acts
1. 13. 14. 15. 26. c. 2. 41. 4^. 46.
Apostles and Brethren no Elders, or Deacons: After that, their Churches
increasing, they proceeded to elect, ordain Acts 6 (...). 1, 1, 1 Timothy 3 8, to 14
Deacons in the Churches of Jerusalem, and afterward some other Churches
(though not in all for ought we read) Not long after the Apostls ordained 1 Timothy 3. 1. to 8 c 5. 17. Tit. 1 5. 6. 7. Iam. 5 18. 1. Pet. 5. 1 2. ^^il l. 1.
Acts 11. 30. c. 14 23. c. 15. 2. 22. 23. 46 c. 16. 4. c 20. 19. 28. c. 21. 18.
Elders in Churches, which had none at first: after that 1 Timothy 5. 3. to 15.
Acts. 6. ^.
Widows in some Churches, not in all. In the primitive Churches, some
Congregations, had Acts 4 11. 12 1 Cor. 12. 4. to 33. Act. 21 2 Timothy 4, 5, Romans
12 6, 7, 8, Acts 21. 10 ^ Cor. ^4. 29. (...).
Apostle s, Evangelists, Prophets, workers of miracles, Healers by miraculous
extraordinary gifts of healing, men endued with diversities of Tongues,
Interpretation of Tongues, GOVERNMENTS. (that is, men gifted with an
extraordinary faculty of Governing Churches;) all which the Scriptures and many
Divines distinguish. Other Churches at that time had none of these Officers or
members; and all Churches have been deprived of them since those days, these
Officers not being perpetual, but temporary, as all acknowledge though Christ
might have continued a succession of them still, had he pleased Therefore the
Government and Officers of all Churches not being de facto one and the
selfsame in all particulars in the very Primitive times, as well as since, it
can never be proved to be of divine right but one and the sell same in all
succeeding ages, without the least variation, since it was not so in the
Apostles days.

10ly. The Apostles speech, 1. Cor. 12. 4, 5. 6. etc. There are diversities of
gifts, but the same spirit; and there are differences of administrations but
the same Lord; and there are diversities of operations but the same God, which
works all in all: compared with v. 8. to 13. and chapter 9. v. 19. to 24. I made
my self servant unto all, that I might gain all. And unto the Jew I became as
a Jew, that I might gain the Jew; to them that are under the Law, as under the
Law, that Law, that I might gain them that are without Law. To the weak I
became as weak, that I might gain the weak. I am made all things to all men,
that I might by all means save some: paralleld with Acts: 15. 1. 2. 5. 6. to
32. and Chapter 21. 18. to 30. by which it is evident, that many Churches of the
Jews, and those in Jerusalem did still rotain the use of Circum^ition,
purification and other Jewish Rites, Ceremonies, which the Churches of the
Gentiles (by the Apostles own resolutions) WERE NOT TO OBSERVE. And with Acts
c. 2. to cap. 22. where it expressly appears, that the Apostles and other
Christians equally frequented the Jewish Temple and Synagogues (conforming
themselves to the Orders and discipline thereof) and their own private
Assembly: and Cougregations, consisting all of professed Christians: Will
expressly clear it, that all particular Churches Congregations in the Apostles
times had not one and the self same Church Government, Orders, Ceremonies:
Therefore it is most clear, there is no such uniforme general government or
discipline necessarily prescribed in the Gospel, unto al, without the least
variation, as is objected.

Adams Creation till Moses, there was no one universal set form of Church
Government and discipline enjoined to be observed by all the world, from which
none might vary in any particular. That under the Law it self there was one
form of Government, Worship, Discipline, Ceremonies, and Solemnities to be
observed in the Wilderness, Exodus 12. 25. to 30. c. 23. 14. to 20. Levit. 14.
35, 35. c. 19. 23. to 56. c. 23, 10 ^o 20. c. 25, 5 to 42.
another in the Lind of Canaan; One form in and under the Tabernacle revealed
by God, described by Moses; another in and under the Temple, showed by God and
appointed by 1 Chronicles. 28 29. 2 Chronicles. cap. 31. 2, 3, chap. 1. to 9. Ezra 3.
Hog. 2. 3, etc.
David and Solomon: Yea the 1 Chronicles. 28* 29. 2 Chronicles. cap. 31. 2, 3. chap. 1.
to 9. Ezra^. Hog. 2. 3, etc.
second Temple and its Ornaments services differed somewhat from the first, and
all of them expired when the Gospel came; If then there were no one universal
constant form of Church Government, Discipline, before and under the Law it
self: then by parity of reason (till direct Scripture proofs be produced to
the contraty) there neither is nor can be any such under the Gospel.

Twelfthly, The Scripture (as all must acknowledge) gives not many particular,
but mostly See Ephesians. c. 5 and 6 Col. c. 3 and 4. 1 These. 5. P^^l. 4. 8. Iam. c.
1. and 4 1 Pet. c. 2* and 3. 1 Cor. 10, 31 32. Romans 12. and 13.
general Rules for the Government, and regulating of our thoughts, words,
actions, lives Children, Servants, Families, callings, the fashion of our
apparel, gestures, eating, drinking, sleep etc. Yea the promises and
threatenings in it are for the most part general, and indefinite, yet applyable
to every particular person, and occasion: If then there be for the most part
only general Rules, precepts, (which admit some Latitude and variety in
particulars) prescribed to us for the very ordering and regulating of our
thoughts, words, actions, lives, apparel, meat, drink, etc. Then certainly
there are but general Rules and Precepts given us for the Government, and
Discipline of the Churches, which admit varieties of Government, discipline in
sundry particulars (so as they agree in the general with the Word, and be not
repugnant to it) as well as the general Rules for regulating our words,
thoughts, actions conversations, callings, apparel, meat, drink and family
Governments, admit of variety, which more immediately concern every man, then
the more remote, and general Government of the Church.

But against this my Brother Burton Objects. Object. 1. Vindication, p. 5, 6,
etc.
1. That God in the Old Testament did give this charge to Moses: See that thou
do all things according to the pattern showed thee in the Mount, He must not
vary ONE PIN; And when the Temple was built, God was so exact in this, that he
would not leave it to David himself, though both a King and a Prophet, and a
man after Gods own heart, to set up what worship he pleased in the Temple, but
God gave him an exact pattern of all, and that not only by his Spirit, but in
writing; that he might neither add to nor omit IN THE LEAST TITLE, 1 Chronicles.
28. And it was never left to the Kings of Judah, to do the least thing in
point of Reformation, but only to see, that the Priests do all strictly
according to the prescript rule of the Law, 2 Chronicles. 31. Now was the great
Lawgiver so strict under the Old Testament, and is he grown over remiss
under the New? In Ezechiels vision of the Temple or Church under the Gospel,
Ezechiell. 43. 10, 11. We read of a pattern, of every particular thing
belonging to the House of God, exactly set down and measured by Gods special
rule and direction, Ergo There is a most exact rule set down for the Government
of all Churches under the Gospel in all particulars, even to a Pin from which
they must not vary in the least point or title: Else a sluice would be opened to
drown the whole world in supestition and error.

I have elsewhere given a full answer to this common objection, Answer.
and manifested the absurdity of it, to which my Brother has not given the
least reply; and (because much insisted on) I shall once again answer it here
with some additions.

My Brothers first Argument from the premises, if turned into a logical form,
is this.

God in the Old Testament showed and prescribed to Moses in the Mount, an exact
pattern of the Tabernacle and its implements, from which he must not vary in
one Pin, or Title.

Ergo, He has prescribed an exact uniforme, universal model of
Church Government, and Discipline under the Gospel for all Churches, Nations,
Ages whatsoever, from which they must not vary in the least Pin, or Title.

What an Independent argument this is, will appear; First by considering, that
the Tabernacle (as all well know) was no part of the Congregation or living
Church of the Israelites, (made up only of Circumcised persons, of which our
present controversy, concerning Church Government is meant,) but only the
place wherein the Israelites met to Worship God during their Pilgrimage in the
Wilderness, which Tabernacle ceased when the Temple was built, and the Arc
placed therein, it being in truth naught else, but a material moveable Temple,
answerable to our Churches, Chappells, and places of public meeting for Gods
Worship now, but only in its moveablenesse: The like may be said of Salomons
material Temple: what Argument can then be deduced thence to prove such an
exact form of Church Government settled under the Gospel as is objected, I can
not conjecture.

Brother, I beseech you tell me in good earnest what you think of these
following Arguments which may be retorted on you from this pattern, with far
more probability and reason then this objected.

First, God in the old Testament prescribed the I wonder my Brother and
Independents allege not the form and dimensions of the Arc, prescribed by
God to Noah, Genesis ^. 14, 15. and ^hap. 7, 5. It being a Type of the Church as
well as the Pa^terne of the Taberna^le and Tem^le.
height, length, breadth, compass, form and materials of which the Tabernacle,
Arc, Altar, Curtains, Candlesticks, Sockets, Rings Staves, and every pin,
vessel, utensill belonging to the Tabernacle should be made, and expressed the
same most punctually in writing, commanding Moses to make all of them according
to the pattern showed him, and not to vary in one Pin: as you may read,
Exodus cap. 25. to c. 40.

Ergo, Christ in the New Testament has a punctually prescribed to all
Christians, nations, in as direct words, the express form, matter dimensions,
portraiture of all Christian Churches, Temples, Chappells, and all Tables,
Chalices, Pulpits, Pues with other Appurtenances to them belonging, from which
they must not vary in one pin or title.

Secondly, God in the Old Testament appointed particularly and by name, who
should build the Tabernacle, and make all the Implements, sur^ure there
belonging; and appointed by name, B^zaliel, and Aholiah, to be the chief
workmen; And every wisehearted man and cunning Artificer, employed in this
building, this Architecture, whom God himself endued with special skill,
wisdom and ability for this work, (not any Priest or Levite) Exodus 31. 1. to
10. chap. 35, 30. to 31. c. 36. 1. 2, 3. etc. c. 37. to 40. Ergo, none but
those Artificers, whom God does immediately name and endow with extraordinary
gifts from Heaven; None but Embroyderers, Goldsmiths, Carpenters, Ioyners,
Carvers, Masons, (not Ministers, Presbyters, Deacons or Evangelicall Pastors)
must under the Gospel, build up the spiritual Churches of Christ, and settle
the true Government and Discipline thereof.

Thirdly, The very frame, fashion, Color and materials of the holy Garments
which Levit. 16. 4. 23, 24, 32.
Aron and his Sons should wear when they came to minister before the Lord,
were expressly set down, and the use of them enjoined under pain of death, in
the Old Testament, and were a part of the pattern showed to MOSES in the
Mount, from which he might not vary in one Pin, or Title, Exodus c. 28. and
29. and 39. and 40.

Ergo, The very form, fashion, matter, and color of all Ministers, Elders,
Deacons Garments in which they should minister, is as punctually prescribed and
limited under like penalties in the Gospel, from which they must not vary.

Fourthly, The Tabernacle and Temple too, under the Law were made and built by
the hands of men, and were only corporal, not spiritual buildings in the
spirits of men. Ergo, the Church under the Gospel is such to: And then what
will become of your strange determinations. p. 49. 50. That the Church is a
spiritual house, whose ONLY BUILDER is Christ, and NOT MAN etc.

Fourthly, This pattern in the Mount, was showed and delivered by god, only to
Moses the Temporal Magistrate, not to Aaron, or the Priests; and he was to
make and see all things made according to this pattern without the least
variation; by the help of Bezaliel and other lay-Artificers. Ergo, the
framing, settling of Church Government and Discipline under the Gospel, belongs
wholly or principally to the supreme temporal Majestrates, and to such Lay
Artificers, as they shall please to take to their assistance; Not to Bishops,
Presbyters, Ministers, or any Ecclesiastical, persons.

Brother, If you grant all these four Arguments absurd, false, or incoherent,
as I presume you will, then by the self same reason, your own Argument must
much more be so. And therefore I beseech you now at last to consider, on what
false sandy ground and absurd Inconsequencies your Independent Churches are
built.

Secondly, I pray inform me, Brother, if you are able: If there be such an
exact apparent unalterable form of Church Government prescribed under the
Gospel, as there was of the Tabernacle, Altar, Temple in the Old, in all
particulars; why the one is not as clearly and punctually set down without
any obscurity in the New Testament, as the other is in the Old? If you can show
us any such unalterable form entirely delineated all together in precise,
direct terms in the one, as we can show you to in the other, the controversy
would be ended without more dispute. But since this cannot be done; and your
self confess in your Margin p. 6. (which contradicts and subverts your Text)
We do not say the same things are prescribed under the Gospel, NOR DOES IT
COME TO SUCH CIRCUMSTANTIALS; but we say, (and I say so to) what it
prescribes, ^s to be kept (and so say all, but what that i^ is the question:)
and page 5. in the Margin, Not but we grant AVARIETIE in the method and manner
of preaching the Gospel in point of circumstance, so as the substance be kept,
etc. SO IN CHURCH GOVERNMENT whereas you aver, Moses and David might not in
the building of the Tabernacle and Temple VARY IN ONE PIN OR TITLE, in your
Text: I shall thence retort the Argument here upon you thus.

The form of the Government of the Church under the Gospel, is not so fully
or particularly held forth, in direct terms in the New Testament, as the
pattern of the Tabernacle and Temple was in the Old: Neither is there any such
precept in the New, not to vary in the ^east Title from any frame or pattern
of Church Government therein prescribed, as therewas for not varying from their
patterns in the Old.

Therefore there is no such exact punctual form of Church Government therein
instituted or prescribed, as is pretended.

Thirdly, Admit the Argument true; yet then the great question remains
unresolved, Whether your Independent form only, be this pattern in the
Mount prescribed in the New Testament? This I am certain neither the pattern
of the Tabernacle, Altar, Temple, nor Ezechiels measuring of the Temple will
ever be able to evidence, neither by way of argument, nor illustration; And
therefore you may do well to insist no more upon them, unless you will make
the world swallow down this Independent Logic and Divinity.

Moses had a pattern of the Tabernacle showed to him in the Mount and David
the pattern of the Temple showed him by the Spirit, both of them put into
writing; and Ezechiell did set down the pattern and frame of the Temple, and
measured it exactly, Ergo the Independent New-invented Government is as exactly
de^ineated and set down in the New Testament as these in the Old; yea the
only way, and Government of Christ, from which none must vary in the least
Title.

The second Argument from David and the Temple, Argument ^. Vindication page 6.
That he gave Solomon an exact pattern of the Porch, Chambers, Vessels,
Mercy-seats, Treasuries, and whole Fabric of the Temple, not only by the
Spirit, but in writing, from which he might not vary in one title, Answer.
Ergo there is a set form of Church Government and Discipline prescribed in the
Gospel and the Independent it: Receives the same Answer, and is as incoherent
as the first, wherefore I shall pass it by with these brief observations. 1.
That this Pattern was showed by the Spirit to David, and by him delivered in
writing, to his Son King Solomon, (the supreme temporal Magistrate, who built
the Temple and followed this Pattern) not to the High Priest, or any other
Priests or Levites; who were to be 1 Chro. 15. chap. 16, 37. to 43, cha 28 13 2
2 Chro. ^. chap. 8. 14* chap. ^1, 2, 3. Ezra. 6. 18.
ordered directed, by David and Solomon (not they by them) in the services of
the Temple. Therefore if any good conclusion can be deduced hence, it will be
this; That under the Gospel the ordering, settling of the Government;
Discipline and Ministers of the Church, belongs to the supreme temporal
Magistrate, as it did under the Law, not to the Priests, or every particular
Independent Congregation who now usurp this royal uthority without warrant or
president*

Secondly, This pattern was exactly set down in writing (as you object)
distinctly by it self 1 Chro. (...) 11, 12, 13
and delivered unto Solomon to follow, But you can show no written pattern, for
your Independent, or any other precise universal setteforme of
Church Government or Discipline delivered unto any particular person, Church or
Nation, under the Gospel, nor distinctly set down by it self in the New
Testament, Therefore there is no such prescript form.

Thirdly, This Pattern 1 Chronicles. 16* ^. 37, to 45, (...) 11 21, 2 Chr^ 5, c 31,
2, 3*
was principally of the materials fabric, Altar, Porch, Chambers Vessels
and furniture of the Temple not of the Government of the Church and
Congregation, neither was there one fillable in it concerning Ecclesiastical
Discipline, or Church Censures: Therefore you can only apply it to material
Churches under the Gospel, and infer thence, Ergo there is a prescript
pattern of the materials, form, fashion, Porches, Chambers, Vessels, yea
Altars, for all our Churches, Chappells given and prescribed to us in writing
in the New Testament (if you can show us where) as there was to Solomon of the
material Temple, in the old, not of the Discipline and Government of the
living Temples, or Congregations of Christian men, the only Church whose
fabric, Government and Discipline is now in question.

Fourthly, When the Temple was built and consecrated the Priests, and peoples
services, Ceremonies, Isay. 2, 3, Es^a, 3.
attendance in and about the Tabernacle wholly ceased; though appointed by God:
and so the very Form, Ceremonies and services of the Church under the Law,
were both various and changable: yea, when the first Temple was destroyed, the
Temple-services ceased, till the second Temple was built, 1 Chronicles. 28. 11, 12,
13
much different and inferior improportion, beauty, Ornaments, materials, and
some services from the former, all the services whereof expired Ezra 3, 10. 12,
Aag 2, 3 to 10.
by Christ's death and were abolished soon after upon the destruction of
Jerusalem, If this president, then, of the Temple, has any weight, it is to
sway the balance on my side; that there is no one unversall unalterable set
form of Church government in all particulars prescribed to all Churches under
the Gospel, Col. 2, 13, to 23, Acts 15.
but such as admits of some variations and changes, as the Tabernacle, Temples
and their services did, provided they be suitable to the general rules of Gods
word, and not repugnant thereunto.

The third Rev. 11. 1. 2
argument, Argument 3
That Ezech ^3, 10, 11, etc.
Ezechiell saw the pattern of the Temple in a vison and measured it with the
parts, Chambers, Court, Altars, and Implements thereof, in all their
dimensions, and was to show them to the people; which house was a Type of the
Church under the Gospel, (as is said not proved.) Ergo, there is a set form
of Church Government held out and showed to us under the Gospel, Vindication.
p. 3.
and the Independent Platform it; Wants bones to support, and sinews to knit
it together: For* first, his measuring and vision was only of the Jewish Temple
and no other, which was but one, not of their Synogogues (much less, of our
material Christian Churches now) which were many, Acts 15. 21. Ps. 74. 8.

2ly This vision and measuring was not of the Government, but only of the
fabric Chambers Court, Altar, of the material Temple, long since abolished:
and our Churches under the Gospel neither have nor ought to have any such
Chambers, Porch, dimentions, courts altars, Implements as that Temple had, or
as Ezechiel saw or measured. If then this vision prove nothing for set forms
or patterns of material Churches, Porches, Churchyeards, Altars, (not yet for
the use of Altars) under the Gospel, as you will grant, I am confident they
can prove less then nothing for any such set form of Church Government and
discipline as is pretended, which Ezechiell saw not in his vision, nor ever
showed to the people, and yet appears not fully in the New Testament. Perhaps
Bishop Mountague from this vision and the two former Patterns, deduced, his Of
what (...) is your ^^^plesse? (...) 1636.
Assize of surplesses and pattern of the new Altars Rules, etc. prescribed to
be enquired of in his Visitation Articles; But I hope my dear Brother can not
spy out any such vision, nor deduce any such conclusion from this Text, nor
from that of measuring the Rev. 11. 1. 2
Temple, and Altar in the Revelation, which I have A full Re^^. 6
elsewhere answered, and shall here omit.

The 4th. Argument 4 Vindication p. 34. Answer.
Argument from Dutr. 4. 2. c. 12. 31. Proverb. 30. 6. Reu. 22. 19. That God
has prohibited any addition to the Book of sacred Scripture under a plague,
and heavy punishment Ergo there is a set form of Church Government and
discipline prescribed in the Gospel, which none may vary from by addition or
diminuition.

Is a mere Non-sequitur. For first, these Texts speak only of Additions to
the Books, Doctrine, Histories and Prophesies of the Canonical Scriptures
then written (as my Brother acknowledges, and the Texts infallibly prove) not
of any Church Government Discipline, Ceremonies under the Gospel, not so much
as mentioned or imagined in them, Therefore (Brother) you do very ill for to
wrest these Scriptures thus against their sense and meaning, 2ly. Brother, you
know, that God himself after the writing of the Book of Deuteronomie and the
Proveths, caused diverse other Books of Canonical Scriptures in the old, and
the whole New Testament to be written, for the further benefit and Instruction
of his Church; Yea many Additions were made to the service of God in the Temple
not mentioned by Moses, without infringing these Texts, therefore your citing
of them, without any limitation, is very impertinent. 3ly. I fear Brother,
that those who hold, there is an absolute set form of Church-goverment
prescribed in the word to all Churches, though they cannot show it, and yet cry
up their Independent way, See the Reply to A. S.
as the very Government, discipline, Kingdom, and Ordinance of Christ
himself, though they neither prove nor demonstrate it; are far more guilty of
this sin, of transegressing these texts, by Adding to Gods word; then those
who deny it are, of adding to, or detracting from it. Take heed therefore (I
pray) of this sin your self, which you would fasten upon others. You know who
are most guilty of this va^ting cry, The M Goodwins Theomachia, and his 2
B^okes since: My Brother (...) Vindication. (...) 4. 7 Object. 3.
Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord are these,
when yet they were but lying words: and which party boastes most of the
Divinity of their way: your whole Book sursets of this in every Page, without
one solid text, to warrant what you so frequently and over-confidently affirm.
Wherefore this Argument returns wholly on your self. My Vindication p, 7, to 22,
24 49, 50, 58, 60
Brothers 3. Objection is from the 1 Cor. 7. 17. So ordain I in all Churches
1. Cor. 16. 1. Now concerning the collection the Saints, as I have given order
to the Churches of Galatia, SO ALSO DO YE: Every first day of the week. (or
some one day of the week, or weekly, as some translate, and the (...)
phrase will bear it) let every one of you lay BY HIMSELF in store, as God
has prospered him; that there be no gatherings when I come Act 14. 25. And
when they had ordained them Elders in EVERY CHVRCH. From which Authorities only
and no other in the New Testament, he inferrs, That there is but ONE, and the
self same form of Churchgovernment and Discipline prescribed to all Churches
in the world in all ages, without the least liberty of varying one from
another, or from the form pretended to be thus prescribed. Answer.


But (dear Brother) what will you say if none of these Scriptures prove any
such conclusion, but the contrary? have you not then injured the Readers, and
truth hereby? Hear then, how you are mistaken in them. The question (you know)
is not concerning Precepts, Doctrines or Rules of faith, which are the self
same to all Persons, Churches Ages, and bind all alike; but only of
Church Government and discipline: But has your first and principal text, any
relation thereunto? No verily, but to a mere private case of conscience then
undescided; Whether a believing Wife might depart from an unbeleeving Husband,
or a believing Husband from an unbeleeving wife without mutual consent, if the
unbeleever were willing to cohabit with the other? This was the case of
conscience then in question at Corinth, and propounded specially to the
Apostle, to whom they Wrote for resolution v. 1. To this the Apostle gives a
final desciton in the negative, showing sundry reasons for it, v. 10. to 16.
and then v. 17. he concludes, As the Lord has called every one so let him
walk, AND SO ORDAINI IN ALL CHVRCHES. Now what, Brother, is this private case
of conscience to one set form of Church Discipline or Government? does the
Apostle say; that this he ordained to be the very same in all Churches? no
verily, there is no such mention or intention, in the Text: or Chapter so that
the true deduction from hence will be but this absurd Nonsequitur.

The Apostle by the determination of Gods spirit ordained in every Church, that
Believing Wives or Husbands, should not forsake their unbeleeving Consorts if
they desired to cohabit with them: Ergo he ordained one and the selfsame
unalterable set form of Church Government and Discipline in all Churches
whatsoever.

Your 2d. text, makes clean against you: For first, the Apostle 1. Cor. 16. 1.
2. does not say, that he gave order for a collection in all Churches alike: but
only in the Churches of Galatia: and there were many Churches else besides
them; Therefore this extends only to particular Churches, not to all. And so no
proof of any one universal Government of Discipline prescribed alike to all
Secondly, It was an order only upon a particular emergent transient occasion,
which might seldom or never happen again, to wit, The Acts 11. 28. 29. 30.
present necessity of the Saints at Jerusalem, in respect of a dearth and
famine there. To argue therefore an universal standing Church Government and
Discipline from a particular transient occasion, not permanent and lasting but
contingent and temporany, for this particular time and occasion only, is very
incongruous.

Thirdly, The Apostle here prescribed no public duty relating to
Churchgovernment, or Discipline, nor yet to be performed in the open
Congregation (for then there might have been some vigor in the Text) but but
only a voluntary preparatory benevolence to be weekly laid apart in private
according to Gods blessing on every man's estates, as is clean by the words
Upon the first day of the Week, [or wekely] Let (...)
every one of you lay a part BY HIMSELF [not contribute publicly in the
Church] in store as God has prospered him; that so there may be no collections
when I come: Therefore this Action has no relation at all to
Church Government, Discipline, or ought to be done publikly in the Church.
Fourthly, This collection and the manner of it, for every man to lay aside by
himself some thing weekly, according as God has prospered him, was only a
preparatory extraordinary collection; as the last clause (that there may be no
collections when I come) and the very words import. Therefore it can be no
president for an ordinary, constant, unalterable universal Church Government
and discipline established in all Churches. 5ly. (Which takes of all, and
turns its edg against my Brother) It is and must be confessed, that this is no
binding precept nor president, in point of collections themselves, much less
then in other things. For (...) demand of my Brother, 1. Whether this text did
simply bind all the Corinthians to a weekly preparatory contribution toward
the poor Brethrens necessities that were in Jerusalem, so as they might not
deny or vary from it? it being rather a bare advise then a peremptory precept
and a mere voluntary charitable action, as is clear by comparing it with Act.
13, 28. 29. 30. Romans 15. 25. 26. 2 Cor. 8. and 9. 1. to 15. especially v. 7.
Every man according as he has purposed in his heart so let him give, not
grudgingly as of necessity: for God loves a cheareful giver. 2. Whether they
were necessarily tied to make private contributions, only on the first day of
the week and no other? or had they not a liberty notwithstanding this order to
do it on any other week day, as well as on the first? or every day, or every
fortnight or 10. days, if they pleased, as their particular occasions and
conditions administered abillity or opportunity for such a charitable work?
3ly. Whether this prescript form of collection (admitting it obligatory during
this occasion) did bind any Church but this of Corinth, and those of Galatia
only? or whether it obliged all other Churches then, or simply binds all
Churches now to this form of preparatory or private contributions, or not? If
you say, no, then you yield the cause: since this president binds no Churches
now to any punctual, imitation. Therefore it is no proof at all for any one
divine universal unvariable form of Church Government and discipline in all
ages prescribed by Scripture: If you say, yea, then all Christians,
Congregations in the world (and your Independent to) offend against this the
Apostles divine institution in not retaining this form of private collections,
by segregating something for the use of the poor Sai^ts on every Lords day, or
weekly, and in suffering public gatherings for the poor in Churches on
Lecture days, or weekday fasts, whereas these were no such collections, but
only laying something up in private, by way of preparatory Charity against the
Apostles coming, who would then receive every man's particular Charity by
itself, and not trouble them with any public collections. In one word: No
Churches, nor Independent Congregations hold themselves strictly obliged to
this form of collection, (which was not public but private, every man by
himself) but all hold they may with safe conscience vary from it. Therefore
(if this collection be a part of Church Government or Discipline under the
Gospel as you make it) this Government, Discipline is both mutable and
arbitrable in this particular; and so by consequence in others to, as occasions
and conditions of the Church do vary.

Your third Text of Acts 14. 23. When they had ordained them Elders in every
Church: proves nothing for what you allege it. For first, it extends not to
all Churches then planted in the World, but only to every Church in Derbie,
Lystra, Iconium, Antioch, to which every Church relates, as is clear by
comparing it with the three preceding and following verses; whence the Argument
from this Text can be but this: The Apostles, ordained Elders in every Church
at Derbe, Lystra, Iconium, and Antioch (and so in every City in Creete Tit. 1.
5.) Ergo in all Churches throughout the world. Which is no infallible
inference. They might do it in all or most Cities where the Congregations were
great, yet not in Villages or lesser places, where the number of Believers was
but small.

Secondly, This proves there were Elders ordained by the Apostles in many, if
not most Churches: But yet it concludes not infallibly, that there must of
necessity be Elders ordained by those who are no Apostles in all Churches.
There were such Elders then, Ergo there must of necessity be such now in every
Church, unless there be a direct precept enjoining them for perpetuity, is no
infallible Argument.

Thirdly, Admit it general and binding unto all; yet this proves only that
there ought by Apostolical president and institution to be Elders (not one but
more) in all Churches: what then becomes of some of your Independent Churches
which have none (as Master Simsons had none in Holland) and as no new
Independent Churches in or about London had, when they were first gathered.
These certainly were no true Churches of Christ by this rule, because they
wanted Elders.

Fourthly, This Text speaks only in the general, that they ordained Elders
in every Church, But what sort of Elders they were, Ruling, or Preaching Elders
only, or such who did both Rule and Preach: or in what manner they were
ordained, whether by lifting up of hands only to choose them, and no more; or
by laying hands upon them, or by the Apostles own imposition of hands only as
Apostles, or joining with others as ordinary Ministers, or in any other form,
is not expressed; So that this Text only informs us, that there were Elders
ordained in every Church; but determines nothing of their office, or in what
manner or form they were ordained: Therefore it concludes nothing for any exact
complete, unalterable, universal form of Church Government in all
particulars, prescribed to all Churches; ordaining of Elders, being only one
part of Church Government, not the whole; and no part of Discipline and that
left very indefinitely in respect of the manner and form, which the Scripture
has not by any direct precept or president reduced to an unalterable
certainty, but rather left Arbitrary and indefinite, as will appear by
comparing Number. 8. 10. Acts 1 23. 24. 25. 26. c. 6. 5. 6. c. 14. 23. 1 Cor. 4.
14. c. 5. 17. 22. 2 Timothy 1. 6. 1 Timothy 4. 14. Tit. 1. 5. It being a great
Controversy at this day: whether imposition of hands be now simply necessary
in the ordination of Presbyters, Deacons, or Lay Elders? or whether it be but
an arbitrary ceremony which may be omitted without prejudice, if there be
cause? whether it belonged to the Apostles only as Apostles, or as Presbyters?
whether it be appropriated to Preaching Elders only, as such? or to ruling
Elders as well as they, or to the Sea Numb. 8. 80.
whole Church or Congregation, and such as they shall appoint? Or to
Archbishops, and Bishops only as such? as many held of late, though now that
question is out of date. So as neither of these Texts in several, nor any, nor
all three of them conjoined, prove any such conclusion, or universal set form
of Church Government and Discipline, for all Churches, as is pretended.

My Brothers 4. Objection is, Object.
Vindication page 18. 19, 20* 42, 50, 58, 59.
The every particular Congregation, is a complete entire absolute spiritual
Republike, Corporation, Body, and City of God of it self, and of absolute
authority within it self, subject to no other Jurisdiction then that of Christ,
his Word and Spirit, and not to any other particular Congregation, Synod, or
National Church, or humane power whatsoever. Therefore the Parliament and
Assembly can make no Canons nor Rules to bind it, nor presc^ibe any
Church Government or Discipline to it.

Brother, Answer.
this is the sum of your whole Book, and it grieves me to see so many strange
Parodoxes piled up together to support an Independent Fabric, by one of your
years and Judgment. Give me leave therefore to discover your manifold
over-sights in this particular by such demonstrations, as you shall not be able
to gain say.

First then, I say that the whole Church of Christ is See Guliel^^s Apollonius,
cap. 3. 6.
but one entire Mystical Body, whereof Christ is the supreme Spiritual Head
and Governor, and all particular Churches only members of this entire Body; as
the head, hand, feet, are members of the Natural Body, not absolute bodies of
themselves; as every house or Parish in a City is a member of the whole City;
Every Company or Regiment in an Army a member of that Realm, not absolute
bodies, Cities, Armies, Kingdoms of themselves. That this is truth, we have
sundry express Resolutions of Scripture in positive terms, as the 1 Cor. 12.
12, 13, 14. 26. 27. (and in truth the whole Chapter) Ephesians. ^. 22, 23. c. 2.
14. 15. to the end c. 4. 11. to 17. c. 5. 23. to 33. Col. 1. 18. 24. c. 2. 17.
19. which you may peruse at leisure, Ephesians. 4. 3. to 7. Endeavoring to keep
the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace: For there is ONE BODY, one
Spirit, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism. One God and Father of all, who is
above all and through all, and in all. And John 17. 20. 21. 23. Neither pray I
for these alone, but for them also which shall believe on me through their
word: THAT THEY ALL MAY BE ONE, as thou father art one, and I am in thee; that
they also MAY BE ONE IN US, and may be made perfect IN ONE. Hence the Scripture
usually expresses the whole Catholic Church of Christ (which allages hitherto
have believed to be but one, so far as to make it an Ephesians. 1. 22. 23. c. 5.
23. 10. 33.
Article of their Creed) under singular titles; as the Church Rev. 12. 1. to 7.
A WOMAN, Can. 2. 6. 9. c. 2. 14. ^. 4. 10, 11, 12, 15, 16. c. 5. 1.
MY LOVE, MY DOVE, my Sister, my Spouse, a Garden, a Cant. 8. 12. Isa. 5. 1. to
10. Matthew: 10. 1. ^. 10.
Vineyard, Psalm. ^ ^2. Heb. 12. ^2. Rev. 21. 2 to 24. 1 Pet. 2 6.
a City, a Congregation an Assembly, Sion, Jerusalem an 1 Pet. 2. 5, c. 4. 17.
1 Timothy 4. 15.
House, a Acts 20. 28. Ioh. 10 3, to 17.
Flock, a 1 Cor. 12. 12. 27 Ephesians. 1. 22, 23.
Body, and the like; to note it; unity, that it is but ONE entire spiritual
Corporation, though distributed into several particular Congregations
scattered ^ver the face of the whole World. This being an indubitable verity,
strikes off the head of your Galiah, and subverts the very foundation of
Independent Congregations, which would be absolute and complete spiritual
Bodies within themselves, and no members of a Catholic or National Church.

Secondly, If all the particular Churches in the World, be in reality but one
entire Body and Church of Christ, then by the self-same reason likewise all the
particular Congregations within one Nation, Kingdom, Republike (united in one
civil Corporation under one Head, and temporal government) are but one and
the selfsame Church, and members one of another; not absolute Independent
Congregations of themselves, subordinate to no other: even as all the
particular persons in a House make up but one Family; all the particular
Houses, Parishes in a City, but one City; all the several Cities, and Counties
in a Kingdom, one Realm; and all the Nations on the earth, but one world of
men. These clear principles of Divinity, Policy, Nature, experience, none can
or may deny, unless he has lost his senses, or means to subvert all humane
Relations and Societies. And my Vindication page 30, 31. Gulielmus Apollonius
chap 3. 6.
Brother acknowledging the whole Nation of the Jews to be but one entire
National Church, though divided into sundry Synagogues and particular
Congregations, as is evident by Acts 15. 24. FOR MOSES OF OLD TIME has IN
EVERY CITY them that Preach him, being read in THE SYNAGOGVES EVERY SABBATH
DAY, compared with Psa. 74. 8. Matthew. 6. 2. 5. c. 7. 1. 8. c. 9. 35. c. 23. 34.
Mark. 1. 21. 23. 29. 39* c. 3. 1. n. 5. 22. Luke. 4. 15. to 44. c. 13. 10. c.
21. 12. John 6. 59. c. 9. 22. c. 18. 20. c. 10. 2* Acts 9. 2. 20. c. 13. 5. 14.
42. c. 14. 1. c. 17. 1. 10. c. 18. 4. 7. 13. 26. c. 19. 8. c. 22. 12.) must of
necessity subscribe to this conclusion issuing naturally from it; that all
particular Congregations in any one Christian Realm, Nation, Republike, are but
one entire Church, though divided into several squadrons for necessity and
convenience; as one house is into many Rooms, one City into many Streets,
Parishes, companies, wards; one Kingdom into diverse Counties, Provinces. One
Parliament into several Houses, and Sub-Committees as there is occasion; one
Army into several Regiments, Brigades, Companies, Troops.

Thirdly, It is at clear as Noonday: That in all Civil, or Ecclesiastical
Corporations, Congregations or Societies of men united into one common
Politic Body, the whole body or greater part, has by the Law of God, Nature
Nations a lawful inherent jurisdiction over every particular member, or lesser
part to make Laws and common Rules to obliege them for the safety, peace and
benefit of the whole Body: In all Parliaments, Councels of State or War, Cities,
Corporations, Societies, Courts of Justice, Chapters Committees, yea in all
elections of Magistrates, Ministers, Knights or Burgesses of Parliament, Majors
of Cities, Masters Wardens of Companies; heads or fellows of Colleges,
Churchwardens, and the like, the whole Body or major voice binds the lesser
number, and all the whole body ever overrules the parts: And it must needs be
so, else there could be no Rule, Order, Government in any of them, if one member
only or the lesser part should overruled and prescribe Laws unto the whole or
greater part, not they to them. The like rule holds firm, and has ever taken
place (...) ^^mall general Nation Provincial, Parochial or Congregation
(...) Synods Convocations. Assemblies or meetings, in all matters of (...)
Discipline, Government Laws, Rules, Edicts, Censure Descition, (...). Yea in
Independent Churches themselves, the Votes, Orders, (...) determinations of the
whole or major part of the Congregation, bind all the other dissenting* as
well as consenting members; neither will any Independent Congregation admit of
any into their new society, but such who shall first submit to the Covenant,
Orders, Government, Rules and Discipline that Congregation, or the major part
thereof has elected established.

Fourthly, It is a principle of the Law of Nature, and common Reason, which all
Republikes, Churches, Societies of men in every age till this present, have
admitted, that the Laws, Ordinances, Decrees, of the greatest Civil or
Ecclesiastical Assemblies, where the whole Realm, Republike, Church, or
Nation, are personally, or representatively present by their deputies or
Proxies, obliege all inferior Corporations, Societies, Churches,
Congregations, Persons, within their several Jurisdictions, to submission and
real obedience, especially when just and agreeable to Gods Word, or at least
to passive (whiles in force) where unjust or contrary to the Word. Hence the
public Laws Ordinances Edicts, of Parliaments and general Assemblies of the
Estates, have in all Kingdoms, Ages, without the least dispute, obliged,
regulated all Corporations. Societies, Persons, within their several
jurisdictions, because they are the Representative Body and supreme power of
those Realms, where all are virtually present and consenting, when all, or the
major part at least assent. Hence the whole World have ever held the
determioations, Creeds, Canons, Decrees, of Oeumenicall, National, or
Provincial Councels, ratified by Emperors, Kings, and Parliaments, obligatory
in point of jurisdiction to all Churches, persons within their jurisdictions.
And in truth, the chief end, use of Parliaments, Councels, Synods See here
Sect. 1. 3.
(approved by God, and the higher powers ordained by him:) is not to advise,
admonish, persuade, debate, Romans 13. 1, 2*
or deliver their opinions of doubts, errors, mischiefs; for this every
private man has power to do, and contains no stamp of See Master Rutherford,
his due Rights of Presbyteries, Sect. 15. p. Gulielmus Apollonius, c. 3. and 6.
See Section 3 ^ Acts 15. Romans 13. 1. 2
jurisdistion, Power, or Authority in it; But authoritatively to prescribe
Laws, Canons, Rules, and determinations, oblieging otherrs to obedience under
pain of exemplary censures and penalties.

Sixthly. It cannot be gainsayd; but every man and woman in the world,
considered merely as such, or as single persons stripped of all their natural,
civil, or Ecclesiastical relations, are of equal Authority, and have no
jurisdiction, power, or superiority at all one over another, no more than
fellow servants, fellow Citizens, or neighbors out of office have over one
another: yet look upon the selfsame persons as they stand clothed with their
several Relations, as members of a family, Corporation, City, Kingdom,
Church, and their very relations, make them subordinate and liable to sundry
superior jurisdictions* not only by way of counsel but command. Thus
children, servants, wives, Pulpits are by a natural relation (established by a
Moral Exodus 20. Ephesians. 5. 20. to 30. c. 6, 1. to 9
Law and sundry divine Precepts) subject to all the just Laws, Orders,
commands of their Parents, Masters Husbands, not only by way of Counsel or
advise, which they may obey or reject at pleasure; but of Jurisdiction and
Authority; so far as to be enforced to obedience, and justly punished for
disobedience or neglect, according to the quality of the offense and contempt.
Thus inferiors of all sorts, in a politic relation only (as subjects to
their Princes, to all subordinate Magistrates Officers, in their respective
places of power* Kingdoms to their Parliaments, Cities to their Majors,
Aldermen, and Common Council; Companies to their Masters, Wardens and
Assistants; Soldiers to their Generals, Commanders of all Ranks; Scholars to
their Tutors, Colleges to their Rectors, mariners to their Masters) both by
the Law of God Nature, Nations and Dictat of common reason, are subject to all
just orders Mandates of these their superiors, to which they must yield
obedience^ under pain of such punishments as are answerable to their contempt
and disobedience. The same rule and reason holds as firmly in all
Ecclesiastical Relations: Take several private Christians as Christians, or
several Parishes or Congregations, as they are such; and it is certain one of
them has no Jurisdiction nor power at all over another in any Ecclesiastical
matters, either to prescribe Laws to, or inflict censures upon one another;
but only a power to exhort, admonish, reprove, advise, or assist one another in
a brotherly way. But yet look upon the selfsame particular persons,
Churches, as Members of a Parochial or National Church, and then in this
Relation they are and ought to be subject to the just rules, precepts, Canons,
Orders of the Ministers, and whole Congregation of which they are Actual
Members, even in point of conscience; and every particular Church, must and
ought readily to submit to the just Canons, Constitutions, Orders,
determinations Ecclesiastical Censures of the whole. Representative National,
or Provincial Church, Council, ^ynod, ratified by Authority of Parliament, in
a Regular way, under pain of Ob^inacy, Contempt, Disobedience and exemplary
punishment; there being the selfsame reason and equity for several combined
Churches in a Council Synod Presbytery to have a coe^cive power over every
particular Church within their limits as for any particular Congregation, to
claim or exerise a jurisdiction in point of direction or correction, over any
or every particular member of it. Our Independents no doubt will grant, that if
two or three several Congregations unite themselves into one Church, they do
by virtue of this union, become all liable to the Jurisdiction, Canons, Orders
Determinations, Censures of that one Church; and those, who whiles divided, had
no authority nor power, but only of their own members, have by this union a
Jurisdiction over the Members of all these Churches, thus eonjoyned into one:
As it is with several persons united into one Corporation Society, Church, or
when several powers Or jurisdictions meet and join together in one, as the
Parliaments, Commissioners, Armies of two Provinces, Kingdom in one Parliament
Council Army; the Lords, Commons, Knights and Burgesses of every County, City,
Town, and Borough in both Realms in one Parliament, they have by this their
union the whole power and authority of both united Kingdoms, Armies,
Parliaments. and a joint Jurisdiction over both, which they had not before
whiles separated; even as a Major or King has when as several Cities, Towns,
Villages, Kingdoms (as our ancient Saxon Heptarchy) are all conjoined into one
City, Realm, and thereby subordinated to one new Jurisdiction. If this then must
be yielded to me; it will inevitably follow by the selfsame reason, that
several particular Churches being united together in one Synod, Council,
Assembly, Parliament or Presbytery, (even for this very end and purpose to
prescribe such general Canons, erect such a uniforme Church Government and
Discipline for the public peace and benefit of the Church, as shall equally
bind all Churches victually present and combined in it) must have a lawful
Iuridicall, Legislative power in them to make such Laws, Canons as shall bind
all particular Congregations, not only as advises, or brotherly counsels, but
as See Guliel^us Apolloni^^, cap. 6.
vigorous Laws, which subject the particular persons, or Churches, who
transgress or contemn them to condign punishment: as the reasons, Scriptures
formerly alleged, to prove that humane Laws obliege the conscience in point
of obedience, abundantly demonstrate.

These uncontrolable verities, never yet so much as doubted in any Age till
this, clearly discover the falsity, and vanity of my Brothers objection, to
which I will give this further direct answer.

1. I deny, that every particular Church or Congregation in a Christian State,
where there are many adjacent Churches under the self same Civil Government,
is an absolute complete, independent Body, City, or Republike of it self, (as
is objected) to all intents and purposes, without dependency on, or relation,
or subordination to any other. True it is, that in some respects, so far as
concerns its own private interest, it is a complete body, having a Minister
Elders, Members, Ordinances, Prayers, preaching, Sacraments, reading of the
Word maintenance, and the like, of its own, within it self; (yetso; as not
simply to exclude all others from preaching or communicating with them, when
there is occasion:) and in this regard the definition of a Church; given in out
For (...) part 2.
Homilies and by others: (That it is a company of men outwardly professing the
faith of Christ, wherein the Word of God is syncerely preached, and the
Sacraments duly administered) belongs unto it. But yet it follows not hereupon,
that it is either an absolute, or Independent Church, or a complete body in
all respects, exempt from all superior jurisdiction, but a dependent,
subordinate Congregation, and a mere Member in respect of the National,
Provincial or Catholic Church. For as every private person, family,
Corpotion, Society, City considered in themselves, are complete, perfect men,
bodies, Societies etc. but in relation to the Families, Kingdoms, Cities,
Republikes wherein they are, meet dependent, subordinate parts, and Members of
the whole common body, to whose just Laws, and commands they are all equally
subject: or as every particular persons, families, or corporations interests in
their own persons, liberties, lands, estates, Children, servants, is good and
absolute against all other private persons or corporations, who have no power
to deprive them of them but yet subordinate to the public interest and power
of the whole kingdom, Pa^^ia. who may command or dispose of them upon all just
occasions for the safety and service of that common bodywhere of they are all
Members, which may give Laws (of common right) to all, and deprive them of all
private interests, privileges for the public good; Salus popul^, being
Suprema lex, to which all Privadoes must submit. So it is with every particular
Christian, Congregation; As a private Christian, or Church, they have a private
compleatnesse, absoluteness, and Ordinances within themselves, of which no
other particular Christian or Church can deprive them, not judicially question
them for: But yet this private Christian as a Member of a Congregation, and
this particular Congregation, as a Member of the National and Catholic Church
of Christ, are neither absolute, not independent, but subordinate to the other
Churches, Synodically assembled, to the supreme Council of Parliament, (the
representative Church and State of England,) who may prescribe Laws unto them,
and to the Civil Magistrate, who may both censure and correct them to. For
example, if any particular Congregation, or any Pastor, or Member of it, shall
abuse or exceed their private power, to the oppression of any of the^^ own
Members, or injury of their neighbor Churches; as by separating from their
communion, without just cause; erecting a new private form of
Church Government or Discipline in opposition to other Churches of the same, or
other Realms without public authority, to the engendring of schi^mes; or
broach any heretical seditious, Erroneous Doctrines, as some now do: set up
Idolatry, supersition, innovations, or falfe worship; abuse or profane the
Sacraments; become licencious, vicious or scandalous in their lives; injure
their own Members without giving them satisfaction or relief: entertain all
sorts of Sectaries; deny communion in Sacraments or other Ordinances with the
Members of their neighbor Churches, who desire it upon just occasions; debar
any of their Members from the Lords Supper, or their Children from Baptism
without just cause; be unable to resolve doubts and controversies in Religion
between Minister and people, or Members; or to judge of doubtful cases;
Vsu^pe more power then is meet to the impeaching of the Magistrates Authority;
wants means to raise monyes to provide an able Minister, or defray their
necessary Church expenses; or invades the Rights of other Neighbor Churches,
or refuses obedience to such public Ecclesiassticall Laws which tend to the
peace and unity of the whole National Church: In all these cases, and others
which concern the National or whole Catholic Church in general or other
neighboring Churches in particular no particular Church is an absolute or
Independent body of it self, but only a subordinate Member, Subject to the
Laws, Ordinances, Determinations, censures of the whole Church of that Nation,
combined in Parliament, and to National, Provincial Synods and Presbyteries,
established by common consent in Parliament, as well as every Member of a
Family, City, Society Kingdom, Army, or Realm, is subordinate to the whole
Family City, Army, Realm, which no reasonable creature or Conscientious person
can or dares deny.

Secondly, I answer: That this very argument, is a most dangerous seditious
Par^dox, destructive to all Republikes, and Societies of men; A Cockatrice fit
to be crushed in the shell, ere it prove a devouring Serpent to Church and
State, as you may discern by these instances in my Brothers way of arguing;
For may not any Independent Company, (...) Regiment or Brigade, in our Armies
argue just in this very strain? Every Company, Troop, Regiment, Brigade, is a
complete body of it self, having an its own necessary Officers, and
Commanders; Therefore we will not join with or submit to the commands Orders
Military Laws or directions of my Lord General, the council of War, or any
superior Officer; but be ruled commanded only by our selves and* and the
Parliaments own immediate commands, to which we are only subject. Any
Independent Family Street, parish, Company, or Ward only in the City, argue
thus; we are an absolute complete body, family, street, parish, company, Ward
within our selves; Therefore we will not, we may not be governed, directed,
commanded or censured by my Lord Major, the Court of Aldermen, or Common
Council; but only by and within our selves, Any Independent child servant,
Wife, or Member of any such Congregation allege, I am an absolute Man, Woman,
Christian of my self: Therefore I may not. I will not be commanded governed,
overruled, obliged corrected by my Parents, Master, Husband, or that
Congregation of which I am a Member, but only by my self: Any independent
County, City, Committee, or Court of Justice argue: We are a complete County,
City, Committee, Court in and of our selves? Ergo, We neither will, nor must
submit to any Laws or Ordinances of the high Court of Parliament: Yea every
College in our Universities dispute thus; We are a complete College and
corporation within our selves, Ergo, the Chancellor, Vicechancellor,
Convocation, Congregation, and whole University have no Authority, to control,
judge, or order us. Brother, if such Arguments as these should be once admitted
(as they now begin to grow very rise in all places) I refer to your saddest
thoughts, what will become of all our Armies, Parishes, Cities, Churches,
Families, Parliaments, Kingdom in a short space? Will they not all be
dissipated, dissolved in a moment, and naught but a Chaos of confusion,
disobedience, Schism, Anarchy, and disorder, cover their faces? I beseech you
therefore consider and retract this new monstrous Logic and Divinity which
cuts in sunder all relations, and subverts the very pillars, foundations of all
Government, Order, Peace, Unity, both in Church and State,

But my Brother Objects 3. things to make good his Argument. ^bject. 1.
1. That if there were no other particular Church in the world then one, as
that of Abraham's family should it not be a complete Church, Vindication page 18.
until there were other Churches; on whose jurisdiction it should depend?

I answer yes: Answer.
But this is not the case, nor question: We in our Realm (blessed be God) have
in all parts, not only one particular christian family, church; but many
thousand Parochial Churches, Congregations as our very Almanacks as well as
Cosmographers will inform you. What then, Brother, will you infer from this
sole Church in Abraham's family, to our Churches now? Will you argue, Abraham in
his days had a complete absolute Independent Church in his own family only.
Ergo now there ought to be such an Independent absolute Church in every family?
(at least, where there is a sufficient number requisite to make up a
ministerial body) as you interpret it* what then will become of your
congregationall Churches, and our Parochial, consisting of many great families?
they must by this new Doctrine, divide themselves presently into so many
families, or Independent Churches, as there are great families in them; and
then I hope, the Sea Dr. Fi^^ o^ the Church, l. 1. c. 1, 2. Genesis 4. 3, 4, 5.
Heb. 11. 4. (...) 5. 8. ^^. 18 19. c. 22. 2. to 15.
Master of the family only, not an Independent Minister must be their Paster
and Ruler, as Abraham was in his, and then farewell the office of Minister,
(which some of your Lay Elders exercise without scruple, denying the very
calling of Ministers) and all our Churches too, Brother, will you argue thus?
Adam was a complete and absolute man alone; therefore he needed not a helper or
wife, or family to be joined to him. Suppose you should take a single person,
who formerly lived alone by and of himself, without relation to, or communion
with any other men, like a Popish Hermit or Anchorite, into your family,
Church; or incorporate him into this City, or any company in it: will you say
that because this man was absolute, and under no command at first, Ergo he must
continue so still in your family, Church, this City, and his company; and
neither you, nor any of them may, or can of right enact any thing to control
him? I trow not: When there were only single Families, living remote from
others in the world, they were absolute and complete Churches, Republikes of
themselves; but when these single families multiplied, and combined themselves
into Villages, Cities, Provinces, Republikes; Kingdoms, they thereby lost
their pristine liberty, absoluteness, independencie, compleatnesse, and of
entire small bodies, Churches, Republikes, became only parts and members of
those larger ones to which they were thus combined. So it is with particular
Mother Churches, when there was but one particular Church in the world, or in
one State or Kingdom (the case of all the first Churches planted by the
Apostles) without any Neighbor Churches to combine with, this Church being
under no superior Christian Magistrates, was absolute and independent in it
self, there being no other Church to join with. But if this one Church
through the increase of Christians shall swell so great, as to spread it self
over all the City, or Republike wherein it is, and so upon necessity must
divide it self into sundry particular Congregations, then all these Churches
being under one and the selfsame Republike, and united together under one
supreme, Civil Magistrate, as members of the same Nation, Kingdom, City,
Republike, and of the self-same national, or Provincial Church, do thereupon
lose their absolutenes and Independency, and become subject to the Power,
Laws, Canons, Determinations, Government, and Discipline of the whole
National Church and Kingdom, of which they are but members; which to preserve
public peace, unity, order, amity, ought constantly to be governed by the
self-same general Ecclesiastical Laws, settled by the common consent of all
their several National Synods, and Parliaments, as Civil Laws are, which
oblige all.

But this says my Object. 2.
Brother in the second place, takes away the lawful Jurisdiction and rights of
particular Churches: Vindication, p. 18, etc.
Ergo it is not to be admitted.

I answer first: Answ.
By the like reason you may argue; the joining of many particular persons into
one family, of diverse families into one Parish, of sundry Parishes into one
City, of diverse City into one State; of sundry States and Kingdoms into one
Monarchy or Empire: of diverse Companies and Regiments into one Army; of sundry
Knights, Citizens. Burgess^^, and Peers, into one Parliament, and many
Ministers into one Synod, deprives them of their Independency, their particular
Rights, Interests, and subjects them to a new superior power, Jurisdiction,
command, and to their public Laws and Ordinances; Ergo it is unlawful,
intolerable, and such Corporations, Republics, Kingdoms, Empires,
Parliaments, Synods, ought not to be: If this be a good consequence, you will
subvert all humane Societies, Corporations, Republics, Synods, Parliaments,
Independent Churches, and Families to by like reason.

^. This takes not away the lawful rights of particular Congregations, but
rather improves them for their own particular, and the public good: for
(Brother) I pray inform me, which is best of the two, for a particular Church,
or Corporation to be subject only to such Laws, Rules, Government and
Discipline, as shall be made, decreed, declared most agreeable to the Word of
God, and fit to be generally received in all Churches, by an Pro. 11. 14.
Eccles. 4. 9, 10, 11, 12.
whole Parliament and Assembly of the most wise, ablest, and best experienced
Christians, Nobles, Divines, after long debate and consideration; or by the
private rash Opinions, and perchance passions, humors, of two or three private
persons, perhaps directed, swayed by particular interests, relations, ends?
Which is justest, safest, or most remote from Tyrannical, Arbitrary and Papal
Government, for Churches, States, Persons, to be all confined to certain
public Laws and Canons, enacted by common consent in Parliament, limiting
who shall be admitted to, who secluded from the Congregation, Sacrament,
communion of Saints, etc. and for what causes, offenses, in certain, etc. then
to be left Arbitrary to the mere mercy, wills, determinations of the Ministers
and Elders of every particular Congregation, or to the pleasures of Princes, or
some few temporal Magistrates, without any Laws or limits to restrain them?
We all hold it the greatest happiness, freedom of our Kingdom, and the
chiefest part of our Privilege, which we enjoy as freemen of England
Fortesoue de Laudibas logum Angliae. c. 36. Magna Charta, c. 29. The Petition
of Right. 3 Carol. See judge Crookes and Huttons Arguments concerning
Ship Money.
That we neither may, nor can be legally bound by any Laws, Canons, Taxes, or
Commands, but only such as are made and imposed on us by full consent in
Parliament: and not subject to the mere Arbitrary Laws, Ordinances, wills,
commands of our Princes, Magistrates, Judges, Prelates, or any other private
men. And shall it be then held the slavery, injury, and not rather the liberty
or privilege of particular Churches, and their members, to be subject only to
such Ecclesiastical Rules, Canons, Orders, Covenants, Government and
Discipline as shall be publicly agreed on, consented to, and settled in
Parliament (to which all Churches, Christians shall be equally obliged without
exemption (then to be left at six and seven, to what Rules, Covenants, Orders,
Censures, Government, Discipline, every private Minister, Eldership, or every
major part of a congregation shall arbitrarily prescribe unto their members as
suitable to the Word? No doubt he that has a doubtful case in Law, would
rather have the advice of many solid Lawyers then one; he that is sick in
body, will give more credit to the opinion of the whole College of Physicians
upon debate, then to one or two Doctors, or Apothecaries. Whence the policies
of all States, Churches in all Ages, have reserved the power of making Laws,
and settling matters of greatest moment to their most general Counsels,
Parliaments, and Assemblies, not to Cabinet Counsels or Vesteries. Brother, it
is, a true rule of Polit. l. 3. c. 7. 11, 12.
Aristotle; that men are better governed by Laws, which continue constant,
inpartiall, inflexible, then by Men whose lusts, passions, interests and
private ends, do for the most part byasse them awry; holds as well in
Ecclesiastical, as civil Constitutions. Therefore this legislative power and
Jurisdiction of Parliaments, and Synods, over particular Churches is so far
from being a prejudice or slavery to them, that it is as great a privilege and
freedom, as our Parliaments are to our Kingdoms, which only make binding
Laws for all, and the only means to free us from an arbitrary Government.

The third thing my Vindication, p. 1^.
Brother objects is: Object. 3.
That all these Churches where the Apostles Preached were of absolute Authority
among themselves, respectively, and equal one to another; not one of them
having jurisdiction over another. (The seven Churches of Asia, the Churches of
Ephesus, Corinth, Antioch, etc. exercising all jurisdiction within themselves
alone, not being subordinate to themselves or any other, as others object.) And
in the Primitive Churches next after Christ for two hundred years or more, the
Government was almost popular, and every Church had equal power of ordaining
and casting out their Minister, and were independent one of another, as
appears by the Centurists. Cent. 1. c. 7. Tit de Conso^iatione Ecclesiarum,
and De Synodis privatis.

To this I answer. Answ.
1. That there is no such thing in the first Century, my Brother quotes, nor
any thing in the second, but that one particular Church, and Bishop, was not
then Lord and sovereign over another; but it says not, they were not subject
to the determinations of public Synods. 2. That none of the Churches planted
by the Apostles were absolute, and Independent as you pretend. For first they
were all subject to the Apostles rules and directions, both Churches,
Ministers, Elders, as is evident by the whole History of the Acts, and all the
Epistles written to those Churches after they were planted, prescribing Rules,
and Directions to them for to follow; by Paul's sending for the Elders of the
Church of Ephesus to him, to Miletus, and giving them there a charge concerning
themselves and their flocks, Acts 20. 15. to 36. by ^. Cor. 11. 18. That which
comes upon me daily, the care of all the Churches, etc. 1 Cor. 11. 34. The
rest will I set in order when I come; by his commanding them to deliver the
incestuous Corinthian to Satan, 1 Cor. 5. 4, 5. and Tit. 1. 5, 6. Therefore
they were not Independent or absolute in themselves, but subordinate to the
Apostles.

2. Though they were not subordinate immediately one to another, as one single
Parish Church now, is not subordinate to another particular Church; nor the
Churches of one City, Republike, Kingdom, subordinate to another; yet they were
all subject to a Parliament, Synod, or combination of many Churches in cases of
differences, new opinions, etc. which concern the purity of Religion, the
suppressing of Schisms, the common Peace or weal of all Churches, in which
all have equal interest, as is clear by the Ser Cent. 2 c. 7. Guliclmus,
Appolonius, c. 3 6.
Synodicall determination and decrees of the Apostles Elders, and Brethren at
Jerusalem, who sent Decrees to all the Churches of the Gentiles to observe,
Acts 15. throughout, etc. 21. 24, 25. which is thus expressed, Chapter 16. v. 4, 5.
And as they went through the Cities they delivered them, THE DECREES FOR TO
KEEP THAT WERE ORDAINED OF THE APOSTLES AND ELDERS WHICH WERE AT HIERVSALEM.
(And mark the happy fruits and effects of those Decrees) And so was the
Church established in the Faith, and increased in number daily. It was well
there were no Independents then; they would have quarrelled both this Synod and
its Decrees, as Reply to A. ^ p. 70. to 73. Vi^dication ^ 65. to 70.
they do most strangly now, or sought for to avoid this unavoydable president,
and argued as some do now. What, we are Independent Congregations, absolute
and complete within our selves, what has the Church or Synod at Jerusalem to
do to make Decrees for us to keep, who are under Christ alone as our only
King, Head, Governor, Lawgiver; not under Apostles, Elders, Synods, or any
other Church, who may not Lord it over us? Hence then I argue, that the
Churches then were not Independent, because they thus readily embraced,
submitted to the observation of these Synodall Decrees, which our Independent
Churches will not stoop to; saying, Their Churches are absolute entirely their
own Page 12. 4.
who is Lord over them? Add to this, that the Apostle in the 1 Cor. 11. 15.
argues the unlawfulness of women's praying without vailes, and of men's wearing
long hair (ad never longer in England then now) in the Church of Corinth, from
the very custom of other Churches. Nevertheless (says he) if any man seens
to be contentious (in opposing the premises) we have no such custom, NEITHER
THE CHVRCHES OF CHRIST: where Paul from the custom of all other Churches of
Christ, condemns the irregularity of some in the Church of Corinth: whence I
argue. If the lawful, laudable customs only of all other or most of the
Churches of Christ ought to oblige a sister Church, that is singular, and
different from them, to uniformity with them, in things convenient and just, as
this Text manifests, then by like reason the just Decrees, and Canons of many
Churches combined, ought to oblige particular Churches which are under their
precincts.

3. Though the Church of Corinth did not exercise Jurisdiction, or claim a
power over the Church of Philippi, nor one of the seven Churches exercise a
Jurisdiction over the other, as they were single Churches, and under several
civil Government, whose Magistrates then were not Christians; yet Paul, John,
and the other Apostles held a jurisdiction over them, as their Epistles to them
manifest, and they all combined in a Synod, had power by their Deputies one
over another not as particular Churches, See Gulicimus Appollonius.
but as a Synod wherein they were all combined; as the second Century, cap. 7.
Master Rutherford his due Right of Presbitires, Art. 15. p. 355. to 480. to
whom I sha;; refer the Reader: My Brothers Argument therefore is but this in
substance.

The Church of Sepulchers has no jurisdiction over Saint Androwes, nor the
Church of Paul's over Westminster, not the Church of England over the Church of
France, or Scotland: Ergo a general Council, or National Synod, wherein
these Churches are all combined has no juridiction or legislative Authority
over them, nor any other particular congregation under their precincts. A
doughty Argument, much like this in effect.

The Borough of Westminster has no jurisdiction nor power to make binding
Laws for the Borough of Southwarke; not the county of Kent for the county of
Middlesex, nor any one City, County or Borough in England power to prescribe
Laws to one another Ergo all these counties, cities, buroughs assembled in
Parliament, in their Knights, and Burgesses, have no power to make Laws to
bind any of them, nor the Kingdom. And what then becomes of our Parliaments
Authority, and legislative power, if this kind of logic be admitted?

4. My Page 42. to. v. 6. 57.
Brother and other Independents generally grant, that every Congregation may
and ought to give an account of their actions, The Apologeticall Narration, see
Master Edwards Antapologia, p. 126, 127. to 151.
censures, proceedings, and opinions to another private Church; therefore they
are not absolute nor simply Independent in regard of other particular Churches,
much less then in respect of an whole National Synod, Parliament or
Presbitery; which reason Mr- Edwards, Mr. Rutherford, Dr. Sicward.
others having largely prosecuted, I shall but touch.

5. I demand, whether every particular Church or Congregation whatsoever, be
such an absolute, complete, independent body in it self, subject only unto
Christ, etc. or only independent Churches and congregations? If Independent
only, I pray show your Magna Charta for such a peculier privilege, which no
Churches else enjoy or challenge but only yours. If all particular Churches
enjoy this privilege, then mark the consequence: Papists, Arminians,
Anabaptists, Sociniaas, Antinomians, Arrians, Familists, (and as one Master
Williams an Independent affirms, in Print, Mahumetans, Jews, and all the
several Sects of Religions in the world, mustered up by Master Samuel Purchase
in his Pilgrimage and Voyages,) must be absolute and Independent to; nor may
any Magistrates, Parliament, Synod, make Laws to regulate, reclaim,
suppress, or punish them, because they are subject to none but to Christ, and
accountable only to him, and their consciences free; then An Answer to Mr.
Prynnes 12. Queres. p. 2 3. avers, this in direct terms.
every Sectary, Schismaticke, Heretic what soever may gather and set up an
Independent Church, of three or four families, persons in a corner; and
neither King, Parliament, nor Presbiteries may question, or suppress them,
because they are immediately subject to none but Christ. Then persons
questioned, excommunicated by their congregations, or such members of your
Churches, who either fear your censure or fall into any pett, or humor
against your Ministers, Elders, Government, may set up a new Church of their
own, and so avoid both your jurisdiction and censures. In one word, this
absurd Paradox would open a large guppe to all Errors, Heresies, all
Sectaries, Schismatics impious practices and opinions, without the least
impunity, restraint, or means of reformation.

6. This conceit (derived only from the Aluarus Pelagius de planctu. Eccles.
1. Artic. 6. 13, 31, 34, 35, 37. Augustinus Triumphans. Cassaneus Catalogus
gloriae Mundi p. 7. 4. cons^d.
Pope himself, who claims this privilege, that he is subject and accountable
to none but Christ himself in spiritual things, and is an Independent Church
within himself, as the Jesuits with others affirm) makes every Independent
Church or Minister a mere Pope, subject and accomptable to Christ alone. I
beseech you therefore (Dear Brother) tell me, how you can be said to renounce
the Pope, Popery, Antichrist, and abolish them out of our Realm, to your
utmost power, according to your Vow and Covenant; when as you banish only one
Pope, and set up many, in making every Independent Minister and Congregation, a
mere Antichristian Pope 2 These. 2. Object 5.
exalting it above all that is called God, as immediately subject to none but
Christ.

My Vindication. p. 33. to 37
Brothers fifth Objection is: That Christ should be very unfaithful,
careless, and leave his Church to six and seven, if he had not prescribed as
exact a Church Government and Discipline for it under the Law, as under the
Gospel. And we should have a mad world (he should say Church) if it were left
to Christian Princes, Civil States or Parliaments, to set up such a
Church Government and Discipline, as they should conceive were most suiteable
to Gods Word, and the Laws and customs of the Realm, and manners of their
people.

I Answer 1. In general, Answ.
In general, that this is only words, not proofs; matters of fact (as this
now controverted is) must be ever proved by real visible demonstrations, not
farre-fetched inferences, fancies, probabilities, suggestions, or pretended
inconveniences of our own devising. Therefore (Brother) trouble not the world
any more with inferences, or illustrations of what is not, but produce some
downright Scripture proofs of what really is: what Philip spoke in one sense
to our Savior Ioh. 14. 8.
Show us the Father and it suffices us; I shall say to you, show us your
Church Government deliniated, prescribed to all Churches in Scripture, in all
particulars wherein we differ, and it shall suffice us; but your Inferences
from the Tabernacle, Temple, Ezechiels vision and these objected
inconveniences, neither will nor can satisfy any man who has any science,
conscience or reason to guide his choice.

2. I answer; That Christ has not been so extremely negligent or careless as
to leave his Church under the Gospel at six and seven, though he has not been
so exact in prescribing, or establishing a set form of Church Government and
Discipline under the Gospel, as he was in the Old Testament, in setting down
the pattern of the Tabernacle, Arc, Temple, under the Law, as you object. For
Brother, your self acknowledge in your Margent, page 5. 6. (upon second
thoughts) that he has not done it, though you affirm the contrary in your
Text; Will you I pray argue, that Christ is more careless of his Church under
the Gospel then under the Law, because the manner and time of Circumcision;
eating the Passover, consecrating of Priests, with all their accoutrements;
the form of the Tabernacle, Temple, with all the Services, Sacrifices thereto
belonging, are more exactly and particularly set down and prescribed in the
Old Testament, then the manner, time, or form of Baptism, administering and
receiving the Lords Supper, ordination of Ministers, the model or fashion of
our Churches, and their necessary furniture are in the New: or because the use
of solemn Vows and Covenants (your great Diana) the manner of solemnizing
Fasts, sanctifying the Sabbath, Feastivalls, National Assemblies, etc. are
more exactly delineated and prescribed in the Old Testament, then the New? Or,
which soars higher; was Christ more careless of his Church before then under
the Law, because he gave them not the Law in writing as he did in after times?
or careless of the Church under the Law, because he gave them not the Gospel
then, but Law alone? Brother, your self acknowledge, that Christ has left his
Churches, childrens consciences more free under the Gospel, then they were
under the Law, See Christ on his Thron. The Protestation protested and
Vindication passim.
exempting them from the Ceremonial Law, and all humane Ordinances, to which
they were formerly obliged. Is he therefore careless, or unfaithful? I
beseech you Brother, take heed how you cast dirt in Christ's own face by such
strained inferences; or charge your Brother with no less then Vindication, p.
8.
Heresy, or heretical Doctrine, by such extravagant inferences, and incoherent
Arguments: for fear you dishonor both your Master and your self.

3. Though Christ has left no absolute exact form of Church Government in
Scripture for all Churches and Ages, yet he has left his Psalm. 1^9. 105. 2 Timothy 3. 15. ^6, 17.
Word, to be a light to the feet, and a Lantern to the paths of all his
Saints and Churches; and said down such general Presidents, rules, and
directions therein, as may serve for ordering, directing, and regulating of all
Churches herein; yea he has given us some more particular rules for some
things which concern the Government of his Churches, The Scripture has Gal.
6. 16 Ephesians. c. p. 5, and 6. 1 Timothy ^. 3. 1 Cor. 10. 31, 32, 33. Phil. 4. 8, 9.
1 Pet. 2, 3. Romans 12. 13.
general Rules for our faith, life, manners, thoughts, words, actions,
apparel, eating, drinking, praying, preaching, receiving the Sacrament, etc.
applicable to all particular cases and occurrences concerning them, though not
particular punctual rules for deciding all those cases of conscience, and
controversies that frequently arise concerning them: yet Christ is not
unfaithful, because he has left his Church sufficient rules, and means of
salvation in general or particular, to bring it safe to heaven.

4 The providing of godly and faithful Mat. 9. 3^ Ephesians. 4. 11. 12. 13. 2 Chronicles. 9. 8. Ier. 3. 15. c. 23. 4. Ezech. 34. 5. and Zach. 10.
Ministers, Magistrates, and Governors of the Church, to put good Laws,
Discipline, and Government in execution, is a great part of Christ's charge and
care, as well as providing his Word, and a Government for his Church. Will you
charge Christ then with negligence, and leaving his Church to six and seven,
because every Minister of Christ has not the selfsame measure of gifts, and
endowments to discharge his Ministry? or, because some Ministers are more
negligent in their places then others; and some sheep are Mat. 9. 36 John 10.
Acts 20. 29. 2 Pet. 2. 1. to 20. 1 Timothy 4. 1. to 2 Timothy 3. to 10.
left oft-times without a Shepherd, or committed to a Judas, a Thief; or to
Wolve^, false Teachers, Seducers, which tear, and devour instead of feeding
them? or because he set not up, and maintained this form of Church Government
you now contend for as his, and none else beside, in all Churches for so many
hundred years together, but reserved this honor in this latter age to some of
you, (or rather to the Anabaptists and Brownists, your Predecessors herein) to
advance it. Brother, you may easily discern by this, where your own pretended
inconveniences, and inferences will drive you at the last, if you rely upon
them; I beseech you therefore (as a loving Brother) to forbear them for the
future.

4. Whereas you object, Object. 4.
Vindication. p. 7.
We should have a mad world of it if Civil States, Magistrates, Kings and
Parliaments should set up such a Government (...) they conceived to be
agreeable to Gods Word, and the good Laws and Customs of their Realms. I
answer.

1. That it is your own position, Answ.
Vindication, p. 51. 70.
that every particular man and Church ought to walk according to the rule of
their own consciences, and judgment, not another, Christ only being Lord of
their consciences. If then a whole Kingdom, Parliament, Church, or Realm
shall conceive, and be persuaded in their consciences, that such and such a
Church Government is most consonant to Gods Word, most suiteable to their
condition, and therefore shall upon solemn debate, after much seeking of God
by Prayer and Fasting, make choice of this government before another, as by
electing a Presbyteriall, rejecting an Independent way; What madness, or
inconvenience, mere slavery, tyranny, humane inv^ntions, superstitions, or
corruption will this introduce? Shall they be Heretics presently for such a
choice, as Page 8.
you define them? Shall private men have more liberty of choice, or conscience
then whole Nations, Synods, Parliaments; or more wisdom, temper, knowledge,
discretion, conscience then they? Indeed I have read of one Parliament styled
the Parliamentorum insanum. Matthew Paris Hist. Angl. in
Mad, and another the Parliamentum Indoctorum. Thomas Walsingham, Hist. Angliae
An. 400. p. 414 Speed p. 775. Sir Edward Cooks 4. Institutes, chapter 1.
unlearned, because there were no Lawyers in it: and no doubt both Parliaments,
Counsels, Synods, general Assemblies may, and do sometimes err, and that
grossly, as well as private persons or congregations. But doubtless all
reasonable men will and must acknowledge, Eccles. 4. 9.
that two are better then one; a whole Court of Justice less liable to error
and corruption then a particul^r Judge; a whole Parliament then a Committee; an
whole Synod then a private Conventicle or congregation: Then tell me in sober
sadness (good Brother) whether your Independent Assertion. Vindication, p. 56.
to 60. An Answer to Mr. Prynnes 12 questions. p. 2, 3.
That every particular Minister has power to gather, and set up a Church of
his own, Independent from any other, and to choose such a Discipline,
Government to themselves as they CONCEIVE to be most suiteable to Gods Word
(though in truth it be not so, but a mere CONCEIT, as I fear your New way
is.) That particular Christians have power to unite themselves into a Church,
and elect a Minister and Government of their own choice, most agreeable, as
they think, to the Word. And that every Sect and Person ought to have free
liberty of conscience in the exercise of what they believe: Or my Position, be
likely est to produce more madness in the world, or mischiefs in the Church?
Certainly it will be a madder world (and Church too indeed) when every private
Minister and Christian may follow their own opinions, fancies, crochets,
ways, every Sectary set up his own congregation, sect, and vent his own
erroneous schismatic Opinions without control: when every man shall have
privilege to do Judges 17. 6. c. 18. 1. c. 31. 25.
What seems right in his own eyes, as if there were no King in Israel, no
Parliament in England: when every Anabaptist, Enthusiast, or brainsick
Melancholico, shall not only build Churches in the air, different from all
others, but set them up openly in our Cities, Counties, Kingdoms, without
impediment, in contempt of Laws, Parliaments, all Civil or Ecclesiastical
Authority (as too many I fear do now, and I hope the High Court of Parliament
will remedy it in due time) because they deem their own fancies, Gospel; their
own Juventions, Christ's Oracles. Certainly the world, and Church will both be
mad in good earnest, when such a licentiousness shall be proclaimed under the
Notion of Christian Liberty, and every man's own private way, christened with the
Name of Christ's Kingdom, etc. though it has small affinity with it. The God of
peace, order, of his infinite mercy preserve us safe from this Maniaca
Insania, this deadly madness into which we are running, and has already
desperately seized upon the Brains and hearts of many.

My Vindication, p. 16. 32 66, 68, 69.
Brothers sixth Objection is this, Object. 6.
That Parliaments, Counsels, Synods are not now infallible, but subject unto
error, many of them having erred, and that grossly in former and late times:
That neither Parliament, nor Assembly can now say, as that Synod, Act. 15. 28.
It seems good to us, and to the Holy Ghost, they being not endued with an
infallible spirit. Therefore they can make no binding Determinations, Laws,
Canons, Decrees in any Ecclesiastical matters, to oblige any particular
Churches or christians. Good Brother (writes he) for all your punctual
quotations of that Scripture, Acts 15. you do not all this while tell us that
which is the maine of all, which we find in the 28. verse. IT SEEMED GOOD TO
THE HOLY GHOST and Us, to lay upon you no other burden then these necessary
things. Now, Brother, we challenge you to show us ANY PARLIAMENT, COUNCIL,
SYNOD, EVER SINCE THE APOSTLES, that could or can say thus, It seemed good to
the Holy Ghost and Us, to determine controversies of Religion, to make and
impose Laws to bind all men, etc. Show this to us at this time, and we will
obey But if you cannot, AS YOU NEVER CAN, never let any man press upon us that
Scripture, that Synod WHICH HAS NO PARALLEL in the whole world, and so is NO
PRESIDENT, PATTERN, FOR ANY COUNCIL, SYNOD, PARLIAMENT. Thus my Brother
Burton concludes hence with abundance of confidence.

But sweet Brother, Answ.
let not him who puts on his harness, boast as he that puts it off: receive
your Answer first, and then be as vainly confident as you will (...) your
obtuse Argument afterward, which I shall thus retort upon you. First (I
suppose) you will grant, That the Apostles 2 Pet. 1. (...) Mat 26. 19. 20. 1
Cor. 14. 37. 1 Pet. 4. 11.
Preached, (as well a writ and determined) by an infallible spirit, and by the
Holy Ghosts Divine inspiration, when as neither your self, nor any other
Independent, nor Presbiterial^ Minister can infallibly thus Preach, write, or
determine at this day: Ergo Brother (by your Argument) neither you, nor any
other Minister must henceforth Preach unto, nor determine any Controversies of
Religion, or Church Government at this day, being not guided by any infallible
Spirit, and because you may possibly err, and cannot say as the Apostles did,
it seems good to the Holy Ghost, and to us; and then Brother, of what value
are all your Sermons, Books, and confident asseverations of the Divinity of
your Independent way? your Disciples and congregation may make wast paper of
them, instead of reading them, as the Oracles of God a some ignorants perchance
esteem them. 2. Christ and his Apostle, when they ordained Elders, and laid
their hands upon them, did usually John 20. 22, 23. Acts 2, ^ and 15. to 20.
Acts 11. 15. (...). c. 13. 1. to 5. c. 19. 1. to 7.
give them the holy Ghost, and gift of tongues (who fell upon the parties
ordained, and those to whom they Preached) and to those whom they Mat. 3. 11.
Acts 10. 34. to 4^. (...) 1. 15, 16, 17. c. 15. 8. c. ^9. 1. to 7.
Baptized (as the marginall texts assure us) which no Ministers nor Elders can
do now: Ergo no Ministers may or can now ordain any Ministers by imposition of
hands, nor baptize any children or men, nor preach the Gospel to any, because
they cannot give them the gifts of Tongues, nor cause the Holy Ghost to fall
upon them, as Christ and the Apostles did. 3. See Exodus 20. and Deuteronomy. 2. to 20.
etc, Levit. and Numbers throughout.
Moses gave no civil nor judicial Laws to the Israelites under the Law, but
such as he received immediately from God by an infallible Spirit. Ergo Kings
and Parliaments at this day can make no civil temporal Laws to govern their
people by, because they receive them not immediately from God, by an infallible
spirit. 4. Christ sent none to Preach the Gospel, or administer the Sacraments,
but such whom himself, immediately called, ordained, furnished miraculously with
gifts of tongues, and with the Holy Ghost, (A privilege peculier to the
Apostles, and some few others in their days, not communicable to any ordinary
Ministers) and made Elders, and Bishops by the Holy Ghost. See Mat. 10 5, ^.
28. 19, 20. Mat. 1^. 15, 16 Acts 20. 28. c. 13. 2 Romans 1. 1. 1 Cor. 1. 1 Gal.
1. 1. See. (^) before.
Ergo No Ministers but such who are thus immediately enabled, endued and
ordained by the Holy Ghost, may or ought to preach the Gospel: And then where
are all your Independent Ministers, and Lay-preachers? I hope Brother by this
time, you most renounce your Argument as absurd, or else your Preaching,
Church, Ministry, at least your writings, will be little valued, which now you
see are not infallible.

2. A possibility of erring, or some actual errors in Counsels, Synods,
Parliaments, are no good grounds of rejecting all their determinations, Laws.
Edicts, but only such as are apparently erroneous and repugnant to the
Scripture. Such Acts 4. 19 20. c. 5. 28, 29, etc.
indeed you may disobey, but to all others you Romans 13. 1 to 7. 1 Pet. 2. 15,
16.
must submit, even in point of conscience, as I have formerly proved. If you
deny this, then mark the consequence of your denial. Ministers may, and
sometimes actually do err, both in their preaching and writing; and I doubt
Brother it is, or may be your own case: Ergo people must neither obey nor
believe any thing they preach or write, but contemn all: Parliaments, Princes,
Magistrates, Elders, Parents, Masters, Tutors of all sorts may, and oft-times
actually do swerve from truth, and Justice in some of their Laws, Orders,
Precepts, commands, and Judgments: Ergo their subjects, wives, children,
husbands, scholars, pupills must receive no Laws, Orders, Commands, or
instructions from them, nor yet obey them in any thing which they shall
prescribe. Brother you may as rationally argue Iam. 3. 2.
in many things we offend all: Ergo we must not endeavor to do any thing that
is good; Or conclude, in many things, and in making Laws we err all;
Therefore we must obey no humane Ecclesiastical or civil Laws in which we can
discern no apparent error. Brother, will you 1 Timothy 5. ^3.
drink no wine at all, as the Apostle gives Timothy advise to do, because some
have drank poison in it, and you perchance may do so to? Or shall none
adventure to marry a good wife or husband, because so many have met with bad?
Answer me these questions, and then you need no other answer to what you
object, but your own reply to them.

3. Admit Synods, Counsels, Parliaments have sometimes erred out of humane
frailty; yet this is a most certain truth, that they are not so apt or prone
to err, (having more helps, means, assistances to keep them from erring,
when they Mat. 18. 20 John 16. 15.
are met together in the Name and fear of God) as private men, or Conventi^les
of persons less learned, less experienced, they being more able to discover
and bolt out truths by debate then they. This is the ground why Solomon
concludes, Eccles: 4 3 to 13.
That two are better then on^ Prove. 11. 14
that in the multitude of Counselors there is safety; why the greatest points
of Religion and State, have in all ages been debated, resolved not in
Conclaves, Conventicles, Chambers, Closets; but in general or national
Councell^, Assemblies, Parliaments, as the most effectual means to discover,
suppress errors, heresies, and resolve doubts; for which we have an
unanswerable pregnant president in the Old Testament, 2 Chronicles. 30. 1. to the
end: where King Hezechiah, with all the Princes and Congregation of Israel and
Judah (assembled in full Parliament at Jerusalem) upon solemn debate resolved,
AND ESTABLISHED A DECREE, to keep the Passover in the second month, because
they could not keep it in the first, the Priests and people being not
sufficiently sanctified: And another in the New: in the Chapter objected (Acts
15.) where the Apostles themselves assemble a full Synod to debate and resolve
the great contr^versie raised in the Church, concerning the necessity of
Circumcision. This then being an indubitable Verity, it is most certain, that
Parliaments, General, or National Synods, and Counsels, are the fittest of
all others to make Laws and Canons for all civil and Ecclesiastical matters
in State or Church, because they are least subject to error. And therefore
there is great reason all their Laws, Canons, Edicts should be obeyed as just
and good, but such wherein there is apparent error, and pregnant contrariety
to the Scrip^^re.

4. All determinations of men not immediately directed by an infallible spirit
^ven in Church-affaires, ought not to be condemned but submitted to: since Paul
resolved some things of his kind by his own private spirit without the spirit
of God, especially inspiring him; to which yet we all submit, as is clear by 1.
Cor. 7. ^. 11, to 40. For that clause concerning the holy Ghost I shall give
you a very full answer to it, First it is clear by Acts 15. 6. 7. 12, 13. 22,
23. that those who used this expression: It seemed good to the holy Ghost, and
to us; were Vindication. p, 6^,
not only Apostles endued with in infallible spirit: but likewise the ELDERS,
BRETHREN, AND WHOLE CHURCH (OR Synod) then assembled at Jerusalem. Now Brother
you cannot say nor prove, that all the Elders, Brethren, and whole Church of
Jerusalem were infallibly inspired: yet they all used this Language then, as
well as the Apostles; therefore by the self same Reason, Parliaments, Synods,
Counsels, may do it now, especially where they ^arnestly seck to God for the
Holy Ghosts direction, assistance, aid, by fasting and prayer* Secondly, God
has commanded all Christians earnestly to Luk 11. 13
pray for, and has Romans 15. 16 Tit. 3. 5. 2 These. 2. c. 13. versa 1, 2. and
John, 14. 16. Heb. 6. 4. Ephesians. 2. 22. Iam. 4. 5. 2 John. 4. 13. Romans 8. 12. 2 Timothy 1. 14.
promised to give the holy Ghost and his Spirit to those that ask him: yea, the
Scripture is express, that the Holy Ghost and Spirit does not only sanctify,
comfort, live, dwell, and abide in the hearts, souls of Christ's Ministers and
people for ever; but 1 Cor. 6. 19.
avers that their very bodies are the Temples of the holy Ghost which dwells
in them, that Ioh. 16. 15
he shall lead his Church and people into all truth: why therefore they may not
now say when Assembled in Parliament, or a Synod with sincere hearts, desirous
to reform and settle Church Government, as near as may be to the Scripture; It
seems good to the Holy Ghost and us (especially when they have found an
extraordinary providence and assistance from Heaven, which they have importuned
in the work) as well as the Apostles, Elders, and Brethren then; since we and
they have 1 Cor. 12. 6 to 14. 1 Cor. 1. 12
all one and the self same spirit (though in a different measure) by which
spirit we are all Baptized into one body; and have all been made to drink into
ONE SPIRIT. I cannot discern.

Thirdly, all Christians are expressly commanded, to Jude 20, Romans 9. 23. 26,
27: Ephesians: 6: 18:
pray in the Holy Ghost; to pray in the Spirit, and sing in the Spirit, in
which duties the Spirit helps our infirmities: yea the Scriptures are direct;
that Christians are not only Ioh: 3. 5: 6. 8: Ephesians: 1: 13: 2 Cor: 5: 5: 1 Cor:
14* 14: 11: 16:
Regenerated, quickened, sanctified by the Holy Ghost, and Spirit of Christ, and
receive the earnest and first fruits thereof; Gal: 5: 16: 18: 25:
but that they are lead by the Spirit, Walk in the Spirit, live in the Spirit,
worship God in the Spirit, speak and bless God in the Spirit; yea it is the
great Acts 2: 17: Joel 2: 28:
promise under the Gospel, that God will power out his spirit upon all flesh:
that they shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, and be Luke ^: 15* 35: 41:
c. 2: 25: Acts 2: 33: 38 c: 4: 31: c: 6: 3: 5* c: 7: 55: c. 9* 11: c: 10. 47:
c. 11: 15 16. c: 13: 9: 52: Rom: 6: 5: and 6: 4: John 7* 39: c: 15: 26:
filled with him, whence we read that Steven, and sundry others who were not
Apostle^, were filled with the Holy Ghost, full of the Holy Ghost, partakers of
the holy Ghost; and I hope Brother, you and all other godly Ministers do both
pray, and preach in, through, and by the Holy Ghost, and spirit of Christ: yea
I doubt not but you inform your new Proselites, Members, how by the spirits
direction you gathered your Independent Church; prescribed them your new
Covenant, Discipline, Government, that you exhort, teach, instruct, comfort
wounded souls, and resolve their scrupulous consciences doubts, by the
assistance and guidance of the Holy Ghost; else all you do, say, prescribe,
resolve, is to little purpose; and the work of your Ministry will be very
unprofitable; disclaim but this, and all your new Congregation will soon
disclaim you for their Minister, they and we accounting all those who either do
or cannot pray and preach in and by the spirit of God, with some good evidence,
and demonstration thereof Mat: 5: 13: Mar. 9: 49, 50.
unsavery ^alt, fit for nothing but to be cast out and trampled under (...) of
all men, as many hundreds of such have been so served of late.

If then all this be undeniable Scripture and experimental Truth: why a
Parliament of Godly Religious Lords and Commons, with an Assembly of Reverend
Divines, now assisted with the prayers of all godly people, to settle a
Church Government, Discipline, Worship, according to the will and word of
Christ in all things, may not engrave this Motto: (It seems good to the Holy
Ghost, and to us, to order and settle things thus, etc.) on all their
determinations, resolutions, (as Councels have usually done in former time,
from this very Te^t) you cannot render the least dram of reason. Object. 3.
If you allege (which is all that can be See Mr: Goodwint Thromichia: p. 48:
49: 50: and his Sermon: Feb. 25: 1643:
Objected) that perchance all or the greatest part of the Parliament, and
Assembly are not i^dued with the sanctifying spirit of God, therefore they
cannot use this Language.

I answer, First, this is 2. Chron. 6. 30. 2, Tim, 2, 19*
only known to God, not you, who only kn^weth who are his, and has made you
no Judges of their hear^s; whose persons for the most part (I dare say) you do
not ^^miliarly know. Secondly, admit there may be some few among them, who have
not Gods sanctifying spirit; Answ.
yet I doubt not but very many, if not the major part of them have, as their
zealous actions and proceedings evidence to all the World, in despite of all
jealou^ies, or (...); and the (...) or a great part being such; they may now as
well use this expression, (...) the Apostles, Brethr^n, and whole Synod of
Jerusalem, whom you dare not ^ver to be all real Saints, endued with the
infallible and sanctifying spirit of God: So as, Brother, you might well have
forb^rn, that sco^^e you put upon our Assembly and Parliament: A Cardinal in
the C^^clave at Viterbium, after almost 3. years agitation [As Vindication: p.
16.
many years It is well Brother you have so be st^^red your self, as not only
to have founded but built a Church in far less space:
AS WE HAVE BEEN ABOUT TO SET UP A REFORMATION, AND THE FOUNDATION NOT YET
LAID] each Cardinal ambitiously aspiring to be the Pope, one of them r^se up,
and said, Domine, etc, Let us uncover the roos of this chamber, seeing that the
Holy Ghost cannot get in unto us through so many Tiles: which I will not
aggravate. Thirdly, it is Vindication p: 68:
your own Dogmaticall Resolution, That in the Synod at Jerusalem, only the
Apostles were guided by the Holy Ghost and an infallible spirit, not all the
Elders, Synod, and Brethren, who did but give their consent to those Decrees,
as Softines, Tychicus, Timothy, and other Brethren joined with Paul in his
(...) Therefore because the Apostles who had the leading Votes, were thus
guided, and they consented, they all joined in this Language, It seemed good to
the Holy Ghost and us. If then the Major or leading part of the Parliament and
Assembly be now endued with Gods Holy Spirit; they may all by like reason join
in the same Dialect, because they consent to what those determine and ^nact,
who are assisted and guided by the Spirit. 4. God many times for the benefit of
his Church does indue unregenerate men with extraordinary gifts, though not
with saving gr^^^s of his spirit, and make them Prophets, propagators of his
Truth; as is clear by the examples of Numb. 22: and 23 and 24:
Ba^^^^ 1 Samuel: 10, 11, 121
Saul, amongst the Prophets, John 11: 49: to 53:
Caiphas, Acts 5, and Ioh: 6: 70: 71:
Gama^^^, Judas, and infinite others, by daily experience as well Ministers and
People; as he made use of 2 Cron: 36: 22, 23: Ezr: 1 ^ to 9: c: 3. 76. 5: 13:
to 17: c: 6: 3. to 14: c: 7: 7: to 121 c: 8: 1: Esaias 44, 28:
Cyrus, Darius, Artaxerxes with other heathen Princes to build his Temple, and
restore his worship in it; and therefore admit the most you can imagine of the
members of the Parliament and Assembly (which deserve the highest, honorable,
christian respect our hearts or tongues can yield them) there being at least
some true Nathaniels and Stephens among them, filled with the Holy Ghost, and
so many armies of prayers in the spirit daily sent up unto Heaven, to bring
down the spirit of truth and holiness upon all their Persons and Resolutions;
we cannot but in christian charity expect and believe, that all they resolve on
may have, It seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and us, inscribed on its front,
until the contrary shall evidently appear. Therefore there is not the least
shadow of reason rendered by you, but that you and yours should make good what
you have promised in the objected passage: Vindication, p. 69:
Show this to us and WE WILL OBEY.

And thus Dear Brother (seeing truth is ^^earest to you and me, and that which
I hope we both unfainedly aim at) I have fully and freely answered all your
pretended Objections against the Ecclesiastical legislative power and
Jurisdiction of Parliaments, Councels; yea the substance of your whole
Vindication, in defense of the Independent way, in such sort as I trust will
fully satisfy both your self and others whom you have misled. If I shall be so
happy as to hear from you, That I have won my Brother, and reclaimed him from
an (...) dangerous By-path* I shall exceedingly rejoice in it, and bless God
for it; and you and I shall most joyfully depart from off the public Theater
like M^nucij Felicis, Octavius, at the end:
Cecilius, Octavius, and Menucius Felix, (...) hac sati hilaresque dicessimus;
Caecilius quod crediderat, Octavius gaudens quod vicerit; Et ego, quod hic
crediderit, and hic vicerit.

What else remains of this Treatice, shall by Gods assistance be supplied in
due season. In the mean time, I shall implore the blessing of Heaven upon this
for our States and Churches (...).

FINIS.

