A Psalm of Thanksgiving to be sung by the Children of Christ's Hospital, on
Monday in the Easter Holy Days, at S. Mary's Spittle, for their Founders and
Benefactors. Anno Domini, 1641.
CHORUS.
This is to be sung by all the Children, and repeated after every Verse.

^ GReat God direct our tongues, erect our hearts to sing thy praise,
^ Whose sacred love, flows from above, from sorrows us to raise.
VERSUS.
^ WHen exiled Hagars waters failed, thou botled'st up her tears,
^ And them into a Well did turn, thus to prevent her fears.
^ When as thy Justice, Isreal's Land, with barrenness had cursed:
^ When others were with Famine pined, Ravens E-li-as nursed.
^ Chaste Joseph was from Pri-son freed, with Pharaoes favor crowned:
^ Afflicted Job rose healthi^-er, and wealthier from the ground.
Chorus. Great God direct, etc.
Distressed Hagar was our tipe, her tears our woes do show,
Her wealth the Bounty which to us, does from this City flow.
Lord, thou did feed us by the hands, of these our Patrons dear:
For Ravens, (we) relievers have, our famished limbs to rear.
From dens of death we are redeemed, and raised from the earth:
And Charities sure saving-rock, has freed us from a dearth.
Chorus. Great God direct, etc.
Look down upon this Sion Lord, and heal her many sores,
From subtle Foxes keep thy Vine, and from the Romish Bores:
Show favor to our Solomon, his Queen and Royal race:
As thou have graced him with a Crown, so crown him with thy grace.
Double Elias spirit on Peers, and Prophets of our Land;
On City, Mayor, and Aldermen, shower gifts of thy right hand.
Chorus. Great God direct, etc.
CHildren kept and maintained at this present, at the Charge of Christ's
Hospital, in the said House, in diverse places of this City and Suburbs, and
with sundry Nurses in the Country. 926 The names of all which, are Registered in
the Books kept in Christ's Hospital, there to be seen, from what Parishes, and
by what means they have been from time to time admitted. Children put forth
Apprentices, discharged, and dead this year last past -- 103 THere has been
cured this year last past, at the charge of Saint Bartholomews Hospital, of
Soldiers and other diseased people, to the number of -- 1002 All which were
relieved with money, and other necessaries at their departure. Buried this
year after much charge in their sickness, -- 192 Remaining under cure at this
present, at the charge of the said Hospital, -- 330 THere has been cured this
year last past, at the charge of Saint Thomas Hospital, of Soldiers and
other diseased people -- 1003 All which were relieved with money and other
necessaries at their departure. Buried out of the said Hospital this year --
212 Remaining under cure at this present -- 309 THere has been brought to the
Hospital of Bridewell within the space of one year, of wandering Soldiers and
other Vagrants, to the number of -- 711 Whereof some have been clothed and sent
beyond the Seas. And of which number many have bin chargable for the time of
their being there, which cannot be avoided by reason of their necessities, nor
passed away without charge. There is maintained and kept in the said Hospital,
in Arts, Occupatitions, and other works and labors, Apprentices, taken up out
of diverse Parishes and streets of this City, to the number of -- 170
Printed at London by R. Oulton, dwelling near Christ-Church. 1641.


