A SERIOUS and SEASONABLE WARNING UNTO All People: Occasioned by two most
Dangerous Epistles to a late BOOK of JOHN FALLDOE'S, Subscribed by RICHARD
BAXTER,

Tho. Manton, Tho. Jacomb, John Yates, John Sheffield, Ben. Needler, Rob.
Bragg, A. Palmer, Tho. Cole, Tho. Dolittel, Will. Cooper. Will. Carslake, Th.
Wadsworth, Geor. Griffith, Matthew. Barker, John Singleton, Andr. Parsons,
Steeph. Ford, Fran. Warham, Rich. Mayo, Tho. Gouge, Will. Jenkins, Tho. Watson,
Sam. Smith: Will. Tutty.
Brethren all -- in Iniquity.

Whose Bow is always ready bent
With Quivers of Malice against the Innocent.
For lo the wicked bend their Bow, they make ready their Arrows upon the
String, that they may privily Shoot at the Upright in heart,

Psalm. 11. 2. Whose Slanders and Lies against the Holy People called Quakers
are hereby Reproved.

By C. P.

These things have I written to you concerning those that seduce you,

1 John 2. 26. They are impudent Children and stiff hearted; but surely they
will not hear, neither indeed will they cease; for they are a rebellious house;
yet shall they know that there has been a Prophet amongst them.

Ezekiel. 2. 4, 5. London, Printed in the Year 1675.

To the People called, Anthony Palmers CHURCH.
Mr Friends, my knowledge of you has been long, about this time 20 years, my
Love to you can never expire, being unfeigned: I heard of you first, at a place
called London-house, and am constrained to remind you of that day: You then
were a Reproached Suffering People; and it was then a Reproach to go to your
Meetings, several of you, in that day, being Imprisoned, for bearing a
Testimony against the Sins of those times, and in that day, you being humble
and meek, the presence of God was amongst you, in so much as a Rumer of it went
through the Nation, and you were visited by many choice Spirited men, and your
heart, were melted by the powerful strivings of Gods Spirit; Oh ye degenerated
People, remember that Day: But you resisting the Holy Spirit, Pride and Lust,
and Self-seeking gat up amongst you; and then you defiled your selves, by
touching with the Iniquities you had testified against; and then a Spirit of
Strife and Division entered you, and brake you to pieces, and ye went into
Sects and Parties, one Party publicly declared against another, as Old Leaven
purged out, and thus ended your Glory: and by this means were many honest
hearted, that uprightly sought the Lord amongst you, scattered. Now it is not
possible to utter the grief that was in my heart in that day, for I dearly
loved you: And when the Lord brought that great Desolation upon all professing
Interests, 1659. whereat even the whole world was amazed; then great was my
expectation that by affliction, you would be turned to the Lord: and that
accordingly, again his Presence would be found amongst you: and you know what a
noise you then made in your many days of Fasting and Prayer, then in sincerity
seeking to be established in Religious matters, expecting to be strengthened by a
nearer fellowship with you, so as to abide in the trials of that day, I sought
to be nearly related to you, and was admitted as one of your Members, and the
Lord knows I closed with you, in uprightness toward him; and true love to
you; which pure unfeigned Love still rests upon my heart unto you* And here I
cannot forget, and it may be good for you to be minded of it, that at that time
one of your Chiefest; to my great disappointment, told me, in the hearing of
several of you, that you were sensible, that the Presence of God was suspended
from you, endeavoring to satisfy me, that God does often suspend his presence
from his Church: I then answered, that if I found a want of the Lords Presence,
I always charged it upon my self as the cause of it. Now after some considerable
time of trial, I found you spoke truth, to my very great distress finding that
the presence of the Lord was not amongst you; and dismal and dark was that day,
when I came to see, that I sought the Living amongst the Dead. Now, Oh People,
God Almighty, that scarcheth the heart, and tries the reins, knows that I am
deeply sensible of your state, who have only a name to live, but are dead, and
in true love to you have mourned for you, and fervently desired your Salvation,
and indeed hoped well concerning you, until lately finding the name of your
Teacher, A. Palmer, amongst many more, to a Book published by John Faldoe, as
Approvers, deep sorrow even seized upon me, that the Teacher of you, a People
that for many years have loudly proclaimed to the world, That Love to all
Saints is a Foundation Principle of your Fellowship: should set his hand in a
way of Recommendation to the world, of the said book; to an Epistle, stufft
with most detestable lies and slanders, of, and against a People, that by many
years experience, I have found to be a holy People, walking in the fear of God
blameless, and sound in the faith of the Gospel, whom by your aforesaid
Principle you ought to Love, and knowing them to be clear of those foul things
laid to their Charge by your said Teacher, both as to Doctrine and
Conversation, I forthwith sent your Teacher one of William Pens Answers to him
and his Brethren Moniters, And thus wrote to him.

Anthony Palmer,
IT is so plain hereby proved, that thou art guilty of Lies and Slanders
against Gods People, called Quakers, that he that Runs may Read it; and that
thou art so guilty, I hereby charge upon thee, if thou art the A. Palmer there
meant, as I believe thou art; and I send this, that thou may see thy Error,
which if thou will acknowledge, and send it me under thy hand, that thou do
see and acknowledge thy Sin herein, I shall be right glad: otherwise, if in
some short time, I do not receive such an account from thee, thou may expect
that I shall (in that Congregation, whom I knew, I judge, many years before
thou did; and whose Souls Salvation I desire) bear my Testimony against thee
as a Slanderer, and Liar, not fit for the Communion of such, much less to be a
Teacher of any People pretending to Christianity.

The 19th Day of the 10th Month. 74.
After waiting many days, having a great desire to have heard of his eyes being
open, to see his great Sin herein, as says the Prophet, Amos 5. 12. I know
your manifold Transgressions, and your mighty Sins, they afflict the Just: It
was in my heart to clear my Conscience publicly amongst you; but my expected
Opportunity being disappointed by one of your Meeting, denying to inform me
where you intended to be Assembled; it entered into my heart, to commit my
Message unto you, into writing: Oh People, In bowels of tender Love to you, I
beseech you to consider the evil and danger of that Spirit, that slandereth and
belieth the Innocent, as your Teacher has herein done, and have a care I warn
you, least he begets the same Spirit in you. And in a Conscientious
discharge of my Duty to God and you, I hereby bear my Testimony against what
your Teacher has written, to be most detestable Slander, proceeding from the
old cursed Enmity of the Serpents Seed against the Seed of the Woman: and I do
in seriousness of Spirit, hereby call upon you, to consider of the state of
your Souls, and the sad danger you are in, to be seduced by this sort of men
into that detestable Spirit, that hereby they have manifested to be in them:
having long known you, and been of your number, I am the more concerned for
you, and do beseech you to examine your Condition, after so many years talk of
Christ, and Salvation by him: I must tell you, your Building is but on the
Sand, and the Rock you know not; for you know that when the Winds blew, and
Waves beat upon you of Persecution, you fled in that Winter, there was no
courage for God amongst you, but you fled from your Testimony, manifesting by
your fainting in the day of Adversity, that your strength was but small: And I
must clear my Conscience toward you, that for many years in many places of
this City, made such a noise concerning Religion, and when the hour of trial
came, fled, and turned your backs on your Testimony: the cause is this, your
Building is on the Sand, and so like the wicked, you often fled, when none
persued, so captivated were you by the fear of man: I know, and your
Consciences know, how you consulted your fleshly Ease, and Interests, and fled
the Cross! Consider I earnestly entreat you, how it came to be thus with you.
Men have seduced you into a false Faith, and false Hope: and the God and Christ
you talk of, I testify unto you, you know not: and so in the hour of trial,
how should you stand, that know not the Rock? Oh ye backslidden People! thus it
is with you, whether you will hear or forbear, this is the word of the Lord
unto you, even a Lie is in your Right hand, while you are talking of Christ,
his Death and Sufferings, and Resurrection, and Justification by him; yet being
rebellious against his Light in you, you are ignorant of, and strangers to him:
and so truly I see and am sensible of your sad danger, even to be seduced by
your Teacher, to stumble at the Foundation and fall and perish for ever! Oh
that ever the Teacher of All hollows witness-bearing People, should enter into
a Confederacy with the worst of men, against the Innocent Holy People of God:
for such are they, who by him and his Colleagues are so Reviled: I say, a
People sanctified by Faith in Christ Jesus. Oh People, the Lord has a sore and
terrible dreadful Controversy with you; for you are as the Cauldron the
Prophet speaks of, with its great scum in it: so it is with you: the fire has
not purified you, but you retain your scum of Pride, Fleshly-ease and
Sensuality, Formality in Religion, and Conformity to the world. Oh that it
should be thus with you after such a day as God has brought amongst you! Now I
am to tell you of one great depth of Satan, whereby you have been seduced, for
which the wrath of God Almighty is against you; and that is, your offering
Sacrifice, when God calls you to Service: In that your Practice of keeping
those Days in a way of Fasting and Prayer, when God calls you to testify
against their Superstitious Observation: your Teacher aforehand tells you, that
such a day, you will have a diversion from your Callings, and therefore apoints
it to be spent in Fasting and Prayer: thus if any Testimony exposes you to
Sufferings, you to shun the Cross, to offer Sacrifice you agree. O depth of
Deceit: Oh ye Ancients of that Congregation: there was a day when your beloved
John Symson exhorted you to open your shops on such days, as a Testimony God
required y^u to bear against Superstition: and I have heard him reprove the
neglect of it, in these words, I passed along the Streets such a day, and
scarce fee one shop open! being the 25th day of the 10th Month, and lamented
it, and reproved you for it: Oh you Back-sliders! compare this with the Spirit
of your present Teacher! Oh what a filthy pickle you are in, that have thus
long wallowed in your mire! the Lord abhors you, and all your Fastings and
Prayers: even as the Prophet said to degenerated Israel of old: this is the
word of the Lord unto you, Oh People, Zech. 7. 5. Speak unto all the People of
the Land, and to the Priests, and say, when ye fasted and mourned in the fifth
and seventh Month, even the seventy Years, did ye fast unto me? did appoint it?
I this day testify unto you, these 14, or 15 years, ye have not fasted unto
the Lord, but to your selves, to your own Bellyes, to preserve your fleshly
ease and interests: and it is no better than the cutting off the dogs neck, or
offering Swines blood: Consider this, Oh ye Houlers, and hear as in the sight
of God that justifies me in it, and requires it of me, I charge it upon you
that call your selves Churches, to be guilty of thickning the Veil of Darkness
upon the minds of the People of this age, by your deserting your Testimony
against Superstition, and running away in the day of suffering. Oh ye
Hypocrites, when God calls you to a public Testimony against Popish
Observations, you run into corners, and keep a houling of your fears of the
dark night of Popery coming upon the Nation I know your doings in the dark --
the Righteous God hereby charge it upon you, to be guilty of making gross and
thick the Veil of Darkness upon the minds of People in this day; and in his
Fear I charge it upon you. Woe, woe unto you from the jealous God of Israel,
that out of Sion this day roareth and utters his voice from Jerusalem against
you, Oh ye evil doers, that have run into Corners, Cole holes, Closets, or on
tops of houses, through Valleys, from one house to another; enquired after, and
consulted to have back doors, and all to escape the Cros^: Oh blush, that ever
men should be so impudent, as to appear in this day to admonish the People,
that have so acted their part! Now no wonder your Teacher joins his hand with
that notorious Enemy to God and Reformation, R. Baxter, who has strained his
wits on that Teynters, to reduce this age into Egyptian Darkness, witness his
Cure for Church Divisions: wherein he has condemned the Saints and Martyrs of
all ages: and no doubt but Ed. Bagshaw, that so honestly opposed him, was
counted with these 25 Moniters a Reverend Divine; but to pass them, Oh how can
I but lament that the people of Allhollows should be entered into this most
detestable confederacy against the work of God in this day! Oh you whom God
has emptied from Vessel to Vessel, and hewed some of you to piece, and all to
humble you and purify you: but alas you are turned into the degenerate plant
of a strange Vine to him, Jer. 2. 21. yea you are the people that having been
smitten have not received correction, v. 3. Oh people, this is your state! and
as he says v. 9. he will yet plead with you. Now clearly seeing the sad danger
you are in, even suddenly to rush your selves unto an irrecoverable state, by
being begotten by your Teacher into a Spirit of enmity against the Lords
heritag^, which is the work of the Devil in this day, in and by various
Instruments; and the Devil set awork these 25 Moniters, to slander and reproach
the holy people of God, to prejudice you and others against them, and their
holy Testimony: I hereby warn you of the danger you are in, and in obedience to
the requirement of the God, in whose hand is my breath, and to whom I must give
account of all done in the body, in opposition to them, and all such as they
are. I hereby test^fie that the people they slander, are the Israel of God, a
holy unblameable people, whose design in the world is the glory of God, and the
salvation of men's souls, for which they have hazarded their all, when none of
these Moniters durst show themselves: and amongst them, I am a witness, is
preached sound Doctrine, and not to be reproved, the same salvation and way of
obtaining it, that as the Apostle said, began first to be spoken by the Lord,
and after by them that heard him: and I here testify unto you, that you are
their enemies because you know them not: but did you see them in themselves,
stripped of the false dresses of Faldoe and these Moniters, and all such as they;
there is so much honesty in many of you, that a love would arise in you to
them; yea you would lay hold on their skirt, and their God should be your God:
A zeal is in my heart toward God, and in pity to poor deluded people by these
wicked men, and therefore beseech you and all people to consider your state,
and take heed to your Spirit, as was the ancient exhortation of Esaias the
Prophet: so to you all, I say, Oh harden not your heart by continuing in your
provocation: And to you in particular, once more I say consider your state, and
be honest and true to your selves: you know not how short your time may be: oh
be not bewitched by corrupt men, but consider what was the cause you could not
stand in the hour of trial, but for fear of a Constable or Soldiers ran away
from your Prayers and Preachments; yea from your Bread and Wine too, that you
call a Sealing Ordinance of your eternal Inheritance; but you have manifested
what a sense you have, of the vallew of an eternal Inheritance in your taking
your evidences unsealed, rather than expose your bodies to a Prison, or shame
amongst men; there is that in you that shows you that if you would do your
selves justice, you would confess you love your bellyes more than God: seek the
welfare of your bodies, not your souls: Oh repent and be converted, that you
may know a blotting out of your sins: Oh ye Summer-fruit, if you reform not
your lives, the next winter of snow and frost of Persecution, ye will all drop
again as rotten fruit, fit for nothing but the dunghill, as Christ says of the
unsavory salt: therefore even as was said to them of old, Rev. 3, 18. I council
thee to buy of me gold tried in the fire: or I assure you if you know not a
purging of the dross from the silver, you will never be vessels for the Finer.
Prove. 25. 41. But depart from me ye cursed I know you not, will be the dreadful
portion of all of you; so now I proceed to examine somewhat of the Moniters
Epistle, which I testify against to be a Compound of Lies and Slanders,
sufficient to send all those to hell that shall swallow the least dose of it.
Not that I intend a general answer to it, that would swell to a large Volume so
to rip it up and respond to it: but as to that part of it, that once my self
being infected with, and thereby prejudiced against the holy people of God and
their Testimony, the Lies I once believed, I am now to testify against: and
truly I believed them not simply of my self, but as they were influenced into
me by such persons as these, as no doubt is into you; and in Conscience toward
God, and his dear People, that I say these Moniters have falsely represented,
and detestably slandered. I thus proceed:

21. MONITERS. Excepting some juggling Socinianized Persons, or Papists that
assume their Name.
HEre they plainly endeavor to incinuate into peoples minds, that we are in
Affinity with the Papists; and have Papists amongst us.

This horrid Slander and Lie I once believed, through the like Incinuations of
such, and some of these men: Now indeed the deadly Venom of their Monition
Lies here, being the old Weapon whereby they have for many years endeavored to
destroy our Reputation, and thereby our Being, in the Land of our Nativity: and
truly these men consider not in their heart, that God remembers all their
Iniquity, Hos. 2. 7. and so they go on to drink up iniquity as the Ox drinks
water: and in this matter they have been so manifestly proved Liars, that were
they not the impudent Sons of Jezebel the Seducer, Rev. 2. 20. they would never
have raged thus more, exccepting that God will have them discovered, to be of
the same Spirit, with their Brethren in New England: for these 25 Moniters are
a Complication of Presbyterians and Independants; and it is to be perpetuated
as most requisite for the Information of succeeding Ages, That it was Preaching
Praying, Fasting Presbyterians and Independants that Murdered the Saints in
New England: Now in this horrid Impious Incinuation of us to be Popish, they
yet manifest the depth of Villainy, Hos. 6. 10. that lodges in their Hearts, to
incinuate this afresh into Peoples minds: but Lies are their Refuge, as Needham
used to say of their Enemies, This Lie was their Weapon, 1659* when they put
forth their Monition in this City. Now that through so much Trial and
Tribulation since, even to the general satisfaction of Magistrate and Subject,
the contrary has been manifested: These Men herein I Charge, 1. With most
horrid impudency and malice. 2. To be manifestly hereby convicted, to have a
design, to debauch the Peoples minds, in persuading them to believe the
contrary to their experience, and what is repugnant to the conviction of their
Conscience: contrary to experience: that sometimes these Moniters will say is
the best Teacher; herein they are chargeable with Debauchery: and better for
their work sake, merit the term^ Debauchers, than Divines. This looks Pope
like, that people must not see with their own eyes: It is sufficiently known,
how often Baxter has flown up and down the Nation in white and black sheets, to
render us Jesuitical and Romish: so cannot be much wondered at in that proved
enemy to all saints, who rather than will want enemies to shoot his arrows of
malice and envy at, can make Sectaries, and then thunder out his Bulls against,
calling upon the Powers to persecute them: as they know that are acquainted
with the wards of his Catholic Key, dedicated to R. C. where I cannot but
note, he scribles against a sort of Sectaries, I could never meet with in any
other Author, and yet am no stranger to the History of the Times, nor a
heedless Spectator, of public Actions, that is the vainest Sect: but no doubt
but this man would have all he envies such a Sect as he pleaesth to term them,
and then away with them all at one stroke, that the Presbyter may have all, and
that scarce enough to satisfy their greedy desires: But adored be the hand of
God, wherein is the heart of Princes, who has secretly disappointed all such
Hamans: and here I cannot but remember people of this man's being in 1659.
publicly cried up and down in London, for a Liar and a Slanderer: so R. B thou
art no changling; wherein thou have no doubt been lately strengthened, by a Son
of the same Mother: though differing a little in Feather, Tho. Hicks the
Baptist: who might well have Subscribed, as of your Fraternity, being so
dexterous in forgery, whose Dialogues, and thy Catholic Key differ in date,
but not in Nature. Now to conclude, This I hereby declare to all of you, and to
all men, that this Incinuation is most false, and the Lie and Liars are for the
lake of Gods Vengeance for ever: and that we have either Papist or juggling
Socinian amongst us, is a soul lie, and make your Charge good if you can. And I
hereby warn all, as they tender their Souls welface, and would escape the Pit
of Perdition, these Malicious men are leading them into, to have a care they
let not into their minds this most detestable Incinuation. A lie I once
believed, and was prejudiced against the Saints of God by it, on the contrary I
declare, that in Conscience I belive there never was a Jesuit or Papist
amongst the Quakers, as owning them, or their Principles: and for Socinianism,
I refer you to a Book written by those Servants of Christ, his Church, and
their Generation, George Whitehead and William Penn, entitled The Divinity of
Christ: wherein is enough said to satisfy any, but such as are drunk with the
Wine of the Whores Cup, i. e. the Priests, i. e. the Presb. and Independants
Cup of Malice against the Innocent: thus the Lord having opened my eyes, and
deliverd me out of these snares of the Enemy, i. e. to believe the false
incinuations of men against the holy People of God, I give my Testimony against
this their incinuation, as tending to debauch People, being assured, that as
the standers by said, when the Temple was rent, and darkness covered the earth,
when Christ suffered: Of a truth this was the Son of God: so that by the
Doctrine and Conversation of the people whom these men thus traduce, even most
people have been reached so as to believe, they are not, nor never were,
Jesuitical or Popish: Now at this time a day, thus to incinuate, I say is to
endeavor to debauch the minds of the People, to persuade them to believe a
people to be that, which they have born, and do bear such a Testimony against,
in root and branch, as never was born by any People, since Popery had a name in
the world. And oh that the present Magistrates of England could bow their ear
and receive a word of Counsel in this matter, even to be aware of these men,
and of being influenced by them into an evil opinion of the innocent people of
God: their old practice was by Petitions and Addresses to endeavor to stir up
their own Creatures to acts of Cruelty against us, under the same pretense of
Jesuitism and Popery; but of late years, what they incinuated into peoples
minds to affright and amuze them on that acoount is sufficiently known: and now
again, because malice has no place for rest, they are buzzing again into
peoples minds, incinuations against us, as the introdncers of Popery. Well, God
Almighty will render their Iniquity into their own bosom; and as to you, this
I declare, the Quakers merit no evil from you, being a people of as sound
Principles, as to Government, as ever were upon the Earth, whoever they were
and have been that have hurt people with whimsical Opinions concerning
Government, under specious pretenses, I shall here be silent as to such: but as
for the Holy Israel of God, called Quakers, Righteousness is in their hearts
toward all men, to the King, and all that are in Authority: desiring their
Eternal and Temporal Tranquillity: And therefore I do even beseech all such,
whom God in his wise Providence has set as Rulers over the People of this
Nation, to have a care they be not seduced by these men, into false
apprehensions of this holy People: and must to that end here mind you, and all
m^n, That it was Preaching, Praying, Fasting Presbyterians and Independants
that murdered the Saints in New England. Oh have a care of them, for they
drive at no less here: but God that has, will yet more and more unveil them to
all men.

MONITERS. From whom they hide the poison of their Anti-Fundamental Doctrines.
COme Rabbis, though never at your Universities, nor can well tell what trash
by Tradition you profess, for Fundamentals, forged in, and somented by General
Councels, and Synods of carnal men, like your selves, that in several Ages,
have drawn Pictures of Religion, which you fall down to and worship, out of
whose Treasuries you have stockt your selves: and strip you of which, alas how
much wiser are you than those whom you mock at, as ignorant? this I affirm on
behalf of the Quakers, that whatsoever, according to the holy Scriptures can be
called Fundamental Principles of the Christian Religion, they fully affert,
own, and contend for, even for the Faith once delivered to the Saints, which
you carnal men are out of, Now, you Rabbis, and all men know, that we believe
in one Almighty Omnipotent God, and that he is to be loved, worshipped, feared
and obeyed: that he created and upholdeth all things by the word of his power:
that he is holy, merciful, just and true: that man by sin became deprived of
the knowledge, and enjoyment of God, his Creator: that the restoration of this
lost man to happiness again, in the enjoyment of the favor of his Creator, is
only through the Lord Jesus Christ, who 1600 years ago, was of the Line of
David, born of the Virgin at Bethlem in Judea, who preached a Heavenly
Doctrine, was Crucified by the Jews, and laid in a Sepulcher, and was raised by
the power of God, and was seen of Mary, and other Brethren, who ascended far
above all Heavens, and shall come the second time without sin to Salvation,
even to all that look for him: that he came to do the Fathers will, and in the
prepared body did it, in which ho abolisht death, offering up himself through
the eternal Spirit, without fault to God, to purge the Conscience from dead
works to serve the living God, Heb. 9. 14. That Man must believe in this Lord
Jesus Christ for remission of sins, and acceptance with the Father: and that by
Faith Christ is applied to the Soul, for Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification
and Redemption: and that by the imputed and imparted Righteousness of Christ,
man comes to be justified, and accepted with God, acceptance being only in him
the beloved: We believe the Resurrection of the dead, Christ the first fruits,
and afterward they that are his at his coming: We believe the Life everlasting,
Amen. And for Christ's sake are willing to be killed all the day long, in hope
of a better Resurrection, seeking a Country whose Builder and Maker is God: We
own the Holy Scriptures to be of inestimable value, and excellent use to all
men: but we say it self gives the pre-eminence to the Holy Spirit, as that
alone which leads into all truth, John 16. 8.

Now in opposition to the four Moniters that incinuate that we do not own, and
preach Christ, the Eternal Son of God, and after the flesh of the Virgin: And
the 21 that incinuate, we hold antifundamental Doctrines, I give forth this
Testimony: wherein I affirm that of the 4 to be a most detestable Lie: that we
preach a mere Created Light of the natural Conscience and Reason, affirming
that the same Jesus that the Apostles Preached, to be Preached amongst us; faith
in him is preached as the only name given by whom poor Souls can be saved: and
in opposition to the 21, do say, if to believe in the only true God, and Jesus
Christ whom he has sent be essential to Salvation; if to fear God, and love
our Neighbors, and do to all men as we would be done by: even to believe in
Christ as the Author of eternal Salvation, to all that obey him, and as is more
largly aforementioned. be with you Fundamental, then your incinuation of our
holding Anti-fundamentals is slanderous.

It is very true, Baby-baptism, prated*prayers, Sinners to sing Saints Psalms,
Man made-Ministers, entitling every unclean harlot to Church Membership, that
the Merciful God decreed some men from all eternity to damnation, that God
offers mercy and Salvation to those he never intends it: these Lies and
Blasphemies, wherewith you have poisoned this age; all this we deny, but all
wholesome found Doctrine we own, and are ready to make it appear to the Faces of
the Stoutest of you, and prove you are Slanderers of us.

These Lies once believing, that the Quakers denied Christ and the Scriptures;
and knowing the danger people are in, through the subtle wiles of these men, to
be seduced into a Spirit of envy against the Innocent, even to their
everlasting Damnation, I am the larger in this matter: the great objection in
this matter is, that we preach the Light, and exhort people to turn to the
Light of Christ in them, this is true, but that this is to preach, a created
Light of Reason, and natural Conscience: oh that ever men that would be
accounted the only Learned men, should be thus blind, and base, and thus to
incinuate, when the Scripture so amply gives us an account of Christ's preaching
himself, in the same Dialect, that he was come a Light into the world; and
exhorted people to believe in the Light, that they might be Children of the
Light, John 8. 12. and here I shall refer these Rabbis, and all people, to the
Testimony of Paul, Acts 26. giving account of his Doctrine, I continue
witnessing, to small and great, the same things spoken by Moses and the
Prophets; how that Christ should suffer; and be the first that should rise from
the dead, and should show light to the people, and the gentiles: Well ye
Rabbis, is it to preach a created Light of the Reason and natural Conscience,
to testify that Christ does show light to all men, and exhort them to turn to
it; you might as well have said the same of Paul, had you lived in his days: Oh
the midnight darkness that you are in, thus basely to persuade people to
believe Lies concerning us, of your own forging. Whatever have been, and may
be, your false accusations, I am assured, all these people called Quakers, can
unanimously and cheerfully, concerning Jesus Christ of Nazareth, subscribe to
that savory saying of Doctor Crisp, as I remember.

If Christ thou know, it will suffice,
Though else thou know not:
If Christ be hid, thou art not wise,
Though all else thou art taught.
21. MONITERS. And yet some of them being grown Rich, can, and do live in in as
much flesh-pleasing, fullness, splendour, and indulging to a sensual life, as
others whom they have condemned.
I Will readily allow these men to be competent judges of such a life,
according to their own Tenent, that Experience is the best Teacher: yet in this
also their tongue is set on fire in hell, according to their wonted trade, to
call good evil, and evil good, Jer. 48. 27. Was not Israel a dirision to you?
even so is it with these men: they deride the Israel of God, and endeavor thus
to draw in others to deride us: and I doubt not but the cursed fire, that burns
in their unclean hearts against us, they design to blow up in the whole Nation
against us: but it is like them, who doctrinally apply peace where God speaks
war, and war where God speaks peace; but they are lame in this also, by their
own Tenent: who in their Pulpits will tell you, Generals prove nothing: This is
a general Accusation; but except they can of their own knowledge, produce some
particular instance, it proves nothing: and though I never was of their
University Pupils, yet do believe, that by their University Rules, they merit a
lash, for suppository Calumniation: It Is true, Ill Will never speaks well: so
to expect better from these men, were to seek grapes on thorns: but we know all
are not dead drunk with the wine of Malice, so as to believe all these men say,
though termed Reverend Divines. Old style, though nothing more repugnant to
propriety of Speech: But as to that matter let all men know, that if any
pretending to be of us, be such as indulge the flesh, they are none of us, but
are returned to you: for it is not possible they should be of our fellowship,
but may be fit members for your Church, who doctrinally declare, that Dominion
over sin is not to be expected here: as a great one of you in a Book called
Helps to Piety, thus faith, The body of sin and death were born, and must die
together. Oh rare Divines! is this Doctrine a help to Piety? Now to conclude
this, Oh ye Moniters, would ye recover your long lost Reputation, by slandering
us? your old cause taught you better* all this will not serve your turn, for
God is stripping the veil off peoples minds, and they will ere long see with
their own eyes, not yours; and the unprejudiced know you are false accusers
herein; and that all sensualists are judged of us and not of us: for we follow
peace and holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord.

21. MONITERS. Few among them are men of so much understanding, and competent
Principles, as to be able and willing to give a methodical account,
intelligibly, of what they or their party hold.
HEre is a Lie Couchant: he that rides conquering and to conquer,
notwithstanding all your weapons of opposition has in our day riden
prosperously, that in our Nation at this day is many thousands of true
Israelites; of which great number it may be supposed, you 25 are not acquainted
with 100. And yet you are so confident, as to affirm us all fools but a few. Oh
ye Artists, and men of Methods, that are wise to deceive! We are not ashamed to
grant, that we are come to that Wisdom that the world calls folly, being
willing to become fools, that we may be truly wife, as the Apostle testified in
his day; and it is not novelty, for such as preach in the wisdom of God, to be
called babblers, by such as you: We are come to that which gives subtilty to
the simple, and in that mystery how should we be intelligible to you, carnal
men, whose wisdom is from beneath, sensual, divelish: But before you upbraid
us for our ignorance, oh Rabbis, you should answer Rusticuss by S. F. What,
will you boast, and put off your harness, as victorious, and sing and ring a
victory, and never have engaged your enemy? If Rusticuss has put you all to
silence, why do you so mock at the Rustic? You prate against the Rustic, and
yet run away from him. Well ye Rabbis, we grant you cannot understand; but I
tell you the reason is, because you were never with us at the School of Christ's
Cross. We know you come from Cambridge and Oxford, but you are not yet entered
in the School of Christ's Cross, and that is the reason, we who speak the wisdom
of God in a Mystery, are to you unintelligible. We know you have read worldly
Authors, and have hundreds or thousands a year, to pick here and there, and
then enclose it in your Bible, and tell the people, thus say the Fathers of the
Church: thus the Ancient and Modern Divines: the Text is thus divided into
parts: these the points of Doctrine: thus illustrated: these the Inserences:
these the grounds and reasons of the point: these the Uses, and thus applied:
Lo your Trade! and by this craft you fill your bellies, and maintain your
Families in worldly pomp, and thus the spirit that is in you lusts to envy
against the poor and meek of the earth, and call them fools and mad men,
babblers, unintelligible of inconsistent Principles: Well, if ignorance be the
Mother of our Devotion, we know we have heard and learnt of the Fathers, who
calls not many wise nor mighty, and confounds things that are, by that
which is not. But oh that you Doctors could see, that God is in this day
turning the wisdom of wise men backward, and perfecting his praise out of the
mouths of babes and sucklings: which glorious work, though you join hand in
hand against, you shall not go unpunisht: for Sions brightness is arising, and
her God is her glory, and in vain do you form weapon after weapon, for none of
them shall prosper, the Lord has spoken, and who is he that says and it
comes to pass, when the Lord commands it not? the Virgin Daughter of Sion
laughs at all your plots and conspiracies, trusting in the arm of the Lord,
that has brought your councels to nothing, and yet, yet again will make you
Diviners mad. Oh ye Doctors, Remember that hand that subverted all your
councels, and brought down your lofty nest in 1659. you that deceived the
simple ones of that day, by your long Prayers, and days of Fasts in several
places in this City, charming them with Lies, until the hand of the Lords
Vengance brake forth, without remedy: could ever this age expect again to hear
of you, whose light of your eyes, and breath of your nostrils, is so long agone
dead, and twice buried. Now oh people, can you choose but stand amazed to see
these men so impudent, as ever again to appear, as your Moniters? how many of
your dear Fathers, Husbands, Brothers and Kindred have in this age, by these
very men, been seduced into destructive ways to soul and body, to the ruin of
many ancient and honest Families? I say to all people, reflect but your own
Experience, of these men, the best Teacher, as themselves say, and more need
not to be said, than to remind you of your own experience of these men. These
men are better known to me, than to every one and my feet were well nigh
slidden into the everlasting pit of destruction, by their seducing Doctrine;
and it is my concernment to warn others: and I do say, could people hear the cry
of thousands out of the pit of damnation, they would intelligibly hear their
Idol of Jealousy, and others thus lament, Presbyterian and Independants, under
the notion of Gospel Ministers, and Reverend Divines, were the men that seduced
us hither, by their preaching peace to us, and crying, the Lord is with you:
had it not been for them, we had obeyed the Light in our Consciences, and
returned from our evil ways, and had never come here: thus cries John Indicot
and others of New England, and this is the dolorous complaint of thousands of
our, but yesterday, dear Country men. Oh people, consider what I say unto you,
that you would but reflect your own expeperience of these men. Oh G. G. how
dare thou ever appear again? shure thou have forgotten thy Westminster
Flatteries, thou most notorious lying Prophet, whom I heard thus to pray, at
Paul's, Lord, Bless the Army of the Lamb, against the Beast, give them success.
The Army that by thy Master was sent to Hyspaniola, to rob the Spaniard, so
then there: the Army of the Lamb was hewed to pieces in the woods in Hyspaniola
by a few Moors. Oh sad Moniter, possessed with a legion of lying Spirits! Solomon
says, He that says to the wicked, thou art righteous, him shall the people
curse, Prove. 11. 26. That is thy portion, O G. G. by way of eminence. Oh if
people were not in a Lethargy of se^urity, they would be aware of you all, and
shun you as the Plague of the present time.

Oh People!
These Priests you see no Changlings are,
Such as they were, such like to be ever:
They change their Coats and vary their Notes,
But always you may observe their lure
Is strained to grasp after filthy lucre:
Though often routed, yet they rallie,
And face any way to fill their belly.
Their net is always spread to fill their table,
Rendering Religion a mere fable.
That of them you may not have clear sight,
They prejudice your minds against the light.
Those that them observe, cannot but mark
Their industry to keep people in the dark.
No wonder then, they thus continue to fight
Against those that exhort to turn to the light,
Did you but see these men, as they be,
From them, as greatest danger, you would flee.
All Zeal for Religion they endeavor to cool,
For alas they dread, that threatened houle, (Rev. 18. 11.)
Oh dreadful day, John the Divine there foretold,
When their Merchandice will procure no Silver nor Gold.
These sinews cut, they faint and ever dye,
Therefore dread the light, lest people should see eye to eye.
Thus see how they conspire, the people to fright
From coming to heed the Quakers Light.
Which to accomplish, a legion of Lies
They join together, for to devise.
Well, let them alone, God shall show
This applies to them, but their due.
No other evidence but their Epistles,
They yield no grapes nor figs, being thorns and thistles.
Now such as will not for their own eternal good,
Of them be warned, I am clear of their* blood.
Thus having somewhat exceeded what I intended, I shall conclude, adding some
few worthy Sayings of some Ancients: and in short, answering to what may be
objected, that here is nothing in way of answer, to what John Faldoe has
written: I shall not dissemble, in pleading inability, knowing a measure of
that promise fulfilled, that the least of the flock shall draw them out: only
this I say, at present as to that, that so much of that nature is already
written by William Penn, that more need not be yet said, seeing it is untoucht
by these Adversaries: to which I refer all that would herein be satisfied:
expecting to dispatch a discourse, wherein I shall prove these very men, I have
hereby warned people of, to be in Doctrine and practice, the very floodgate,
whereby Atheism and Profaneness, is breaking in as a mighty torrent, upon this
miserable age: but God has lift up his Standard, blessed be his holy Name, and
that by the Testimony of the holy people called Quakers, as I shall hereafter
more largly evidence. Farewell.

A few pertinent Notations out of Fox's Acts and Monuments.
288. GVlielmus de Amore, called a Master of Paris, and chief Ruler of that
University, it is probable as Learned as R. B. that wrote the Catholic Key,
says thus, True Prophets preach only for Gods Cause, health of Souls, and not
temporal gain, and study not Eloquence and curious placing of words: nor do
they force any to receive or hear them: nor do they endeavor to procure the
indignation of Princes against such as will not receive or hear them. Measure
your selves by this, oh you Presbyterians and Independants.

369. The Saints in that day complain thus; Lord, Men now make great Ston
houses full of glass windows, and call them thy Church. Is not Baalim in your
mouths, Oh Professors.

358. A Learned man thus says, The corrupt manners of the Christans do spring
and grow out of the wickedness of the Spirituality: the enmity of this age
against the Innocent, is greatly attributable to such as these Moniters.

518. Lord Cohham, If the Curate be an Idiot, Idolater, or of vicious life, I
ought to flee from him. Compare this with Bax* Cure. Alias, Balm for the
Wounded Harlot.

501. Wickliffe, So long as a man is in deadly sins, he is neither Bishop nor
Prelate in the house of God. Lies and Slanders are deadly sins, what then are
these Moniters?

239. The Saints in that day understood Christ and his Apostles to be against
men's being called Masters: I believe would not have called men Reverend
Devines; I am sure not sach men as these, that endeavor to expugn Divinity out
of the world.

485. Every good man, though unlearned, is a Priest: that the Bishop, the
Simple man, the Priest, the Layman, are of Authority, according as they live;
and that no man is bound to give bodily Reverence to a Prelate.

872. The Saints of that day against Superstitious Burials.

863. One burned for not owning ungodly Priests Pastors of the Church.

Cyprian, that lived in the 3d Century after Christ, who is applauded by the
Learned; his Writings, they say, are next to the Scriptures: thus says he,
Women that advance themselves by putting on Silks, and Purple, cannot put on
Christ; they who color their Locks with red and yellow, begin betime to
prognosticate what color their hair shall be of in hell: they that love to
paint themselves otherwise than God Created them, may fear that at the
Resurrestion, their Creator will not know them.

John Knox, the famous Scotch Presbyter, Fol. 361. History of the Reformation
of the Church of England, thus says to the Gallants of those days, How
pleasant were this Life of yours, if it were to abide ever, and in the end you
might pass to Heaven in this gear: but fie upon that Knave, Death, that will
come, whether we will or not; and when he has laid on his Arrest, then foul
worms will be so busy about this flesh, be it never so fair and tender; and
the silly Soul I fear will be so feeble, that it can neither carry with it
Gold, Garnish, Pearls nor Precious Stones.

These are short Collections very seasonable to mind these Moniters and their
Flocks of, who stink so noysomly of Envy and Pride.

THE END.

