To the Right Honorable, the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of
LONDON in Common Council assembled;
The Humble Petition and Address of the Seamen, and Watermen in and about the
said City of LONDON,
SHOWS,
THat they cannot without much grief of heart, and consternation of spirit,
consider and bewail the Extraordinary decay of Merchandise, Trade, Religion,
Justice, Piety, and inundation of all sorts of Oppressions, Miseries, Rapines,
Wars, Tumults, Sects, Heresies, Blasphemies, Alterations of Government, and
destructive confusions, which have ogerwhelm'd our formerly flourishing and
renowned Nations, and this famous City, ever since the notorious violations and
subversions of our fundamental Laws, Liberties, Properties, Government, and
Parliaments, by the treachery, and armed violence of ambitious, treacherous
Mercenaries of inconsiderable Fortunes and corrupt Principles, usurping a more
arbitrary dominion over our Lives, Persons, Estates, and Privileges, than the
worst of out former Kingly Governors, whose desperate Counsels, practices and
innovations, have made us the scorn, derision of all the world, and plunged our
Church, State, Nations, and this famous City into the very gulf of inevitable
ruin; unless speedily and timely prevented by your prudent, unanimous Counsels,
and standing up in the gap in this day of our public Calamity, by improving
your power and interest to accomplish these just desires of your Petitioners
and many thousand others of these Nations, which we humbly conceive to be the
only visible means (through Gods blessing on them) to obviate our dangers,
compose our divisions, and restore our pristine Peace, Unity, Trade,
Prosperity, and make us once more a praise amongst the Kingdoms, Churches and
Nations, whom the Lord has signally blessed with glorious deliverances and
transcendent mercies.

We shall therefore humbly importune this Honorable Assembly (the only
visible, legal Authority in the Nation, to whom we can now make our Addresses)
to endeavor,

1. That a free and legal Parliament, may with all convenient speed be convened
to sit within the City of London without any forcible interruption or
molestation, to Settle the Government, Redress the Grievances, Restore the
Peace, Merchandise, Trade, and Navigation of this Nation.

2. That the Militia of the City may be presently raised, and put into the
hands of such Persons, whose Principles and Actions have evidenced them to be
well-affected to Government, Magistracy, Ministry, Laws, Liberties, the Rights
and Privileges of Parliament, and Reformed Religion here established. That the
guards of the City may be put into their hands, and all obtruded Guards,
disturbing the Peace, obstructing the Trade of, and Threatening danger to the
City, removed.

3. That all such Officers and Soldiers of the Army in and about the City and
elsewhere, (...) shall obey your Commands, and contribute their assistance for
the calling, and safe-siting of a Free Parliament, may be assured and speedily
paid their Arrears, and those, who shall oppose the same, and settlement of the
Nation, and City, left to public Justice for the Murders lately Committed,
and other Misdemeanors.

4. That the Nobility, and Gentry of Quality, in and about the City, may be
invited to contribute their Counsels and assistance for effecting the Premises.

In the prosecution whereof, and our former Oaths, Protestation, Vow and
Covenant, we shall with our Estates, Lives, and last drop of our Bloods,
constantly and unanimously assist your Honors, and all others adhering to you
to promote and accomplish the premises, and what else your Wisdom shall think
fit to conduce to the restitution of the Public Peace, Trade, and Welfare of
this City, and our three distracted Nations.

In Witness whereof we have hereunto subscribed our Hands and Hearts.

