Good and true NEWS FROM IRELAND BEING The Copy of a Letter sent from Mr.
Rodger Buttock, one of the chief Ministers in the City of Dublin, to a Brother
of his a Merchant, living in Alderman-Berrie in London.

SHOWING In a true and real Relation, how 400. foot, and 100 horse sent from
Dublin, under the Command of Sir Charles Coot marched toward Ardes 8* miles
from thence, and beat them out of their Quarters, defeating the whole Army.
Also, how they slew 1100 men at Dundalk, 15, Officers, took 4 pieces of
Ordnance, and great store of good pillage, with the loss of 20. men.

Dated from Dublin the 4 of April, and received here the 12. 1642.

LONDON. Printed for Andrew Coe. 1642.

C R
emblem of King Charles I flanked by the English lion and Scottish unicorn
GOOD NEWS FROM IRELAND.
Loving Brother,
YOurs of the 12. of March I received, with another from my Brother Thomas,
both Testimonies of your loving affections, to your Sister and her Children;
unto you both under God, I do commend the care of them; as for my self, I am no
better then my companions, as a Snail crept out of the shell, subject to death
daily, among the Instruments of death the Lord prepares us for his heavenly
Kingdom; for our sufferings, I doubt not but they have wrought much good in
many of us. We were doting before on Rome and her Idolatries; now her cruelties
cause a general loathing of her and her Doctrines.

Before we were wedded to the world, now weaned from it: and I hope they shall
work a greater measure of Grace here, and glory hereafter.

The Lord who is the Author of peace in all the Churches of the Saints keep the
Church of England from Factions and Dissensions, to keep the unity of the
spirit in the bond of peace.

You desired to know how things slood with us; as long as I am in Dublin, I
shall endeavor to satisfy you by the Post weekly.

Droghedah is releived, her gates opened, and a great market comes in daily and
to relate the manner how it is the the Lords doing and it is marvilous in our
eyes*

From Drogheda the Army their with some five hundred foot and a hundred horse,
sent from Duhlin* to them, marched the last week to Ardee eight miles thence,
and there defeated the enemy.

From thence they marched to Dundark, sixteeue miles from Droghdah, and their
defeated the enemy, slew above eleven hundred of them: fifreen officers, took
four Pecce of Ordinance from them: and great store of good pillage in both
these two waled Towns, and which is Gods doing, We lost not twenty men.

Our Army from Dublin, have burnt and forraged all along to Drogheda: twenty
miles. To the hill of Tarah sixteen miles. To the Naas ten miles, But to the
Southward (on the mountains) of us the enemy lies strong near us. On Friday
last an Army of them came down from the mountains, within four miles of Dublin.
Our horse went to meet them, on Saturday very early, put them all to flight,
and pursued three hundred of them, into the Castle of Carrigmayne, six. miles
from Dublin, by nine of the clock in the morning, Messengers came to Dublin,
for two pieces of Ordnance, to batter the Castle; but with Consultation, and
advising with long delays of a Cunctator maximus in our state, Saturday was
passed over, and that might have bin esily done, that day was passed over to
the Lords day; So that the taking of that Castle that day cost dearly, the
loss of but a few, not past ten men, but five of them were Officers of great
note on whose name my pen is loath to write the slower of the English Army, Our
dearly beloved for his Valor, Discretion and Religion, Sir Simon Harcott,
chief Commander that day, slain by a bullet shot of the Castle, as he was
overseeing the planting of the Ordinance, a man much lamented. But I doubt not
but God will provide others for his place. I wrote formerly to venture for lands
in these parts, I hope you have done it: Ishould be sorrow you should let slip
such an ofler. Your Sister remembers herself unto you: to her sister, and to
all yours. So does he who commends you to God and rests.

Your loving brother Roger Puttok.

^INIS.
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms


