A POLITICAL CATECHISM, OR, Certain Questions concerning the Government of this
Land, Answered in His Majesty's own words, taken out of His Answer to the 19
Propositions, Page 17, 18, 19, 20. of the first Edition; with some brief
Observations thereupon.

Published for the more complete settling of Consciences, particularly of those
that have made the late Protestation, to maintain the Power and Privileges of
Parliament, when they shall herein see the Kings own Interpretation what that
Power and Privileges are.

We can do nothing against the Truth, but for the Truth, 2 Cor, 13. 8. It is
this twentieth day of May, Anno Dom. 1643. Ordered by the Committee of the
House of Commons in Parliament concerning Printing, that this Book Entitled, A
Political Catechism, be Printed.

John White.



LONDON, Printed for Samuel Gellibrand at the Brazen-Serpent in P^^'s Church
Yard, 1643.

A Political Catechism; Serving to instruct those that have made the
Protestation concerning the power and privileges of Parliament; taken out of
His Majesty's Answer to the 19 Propositions.
Question.

HOW many simple kinds are there of Civil Government of States, and
Commonwealths?

Answer, There are three kinds of Government Three kinds of Government amongst
men.
among men; Absolute Monarchy, Aristocracy, and Democracy, page, 17.

Qu. 2. Are there any of these simple Forms perfect?

Ans. All these have their particular Convenicuces and Inconvenieuces, page 17.

Observe. 1. Experience has taught men every where Never any of these kinds of
Government continued long, exactly simple.
to acknowledge this, and accordingly there never was long (if at all)
continued any of these Forms exactly Simple; though some have more seemed such
then others. Also in all mixtures there is commonly some one of these Forms
more The Government of England molded out of a mixture of Monarchy,
Aristocracy and Democracy.
conspieuous then the rest, from whence such a particular Governtment has its
denomination.

Quest. 3. Is the State of England governed by any one of these kinds simply?

A. The Experience and Wisdom of your Ancestors has molded this [Government]
out of a mixture of these. p. 18.

Quest. 4. What a kind of Government then is that of the State If England be
governed by a regulated Monarchy, then it is vain and mere flattery to talk of
an absolute Monarchy*
of England.

Ans. Regulated Monarchy. page 18.

Observe. 1. If this Government be a mixture of all these, and a Regulated
Monarchy; then it is a ^ond thing with us to talk of an Absolute Monarchy, and
what an Absolute Monarch is, or may do. And it is only the language of Flattery
that holds such Discourses.

2. It needed not to be counted Solecism (as some would persuade us to speak of
Free Subjects in a Monarchy, such Free Subjects.
a Monarchy as ours is.

3. If this Government be a mixture of all three, then the The House of Commons
has a share in this Government.
House of Commons, the Representative Body of the people, must needs be allowed
a share in Government (some at least) which yet is denied page 19.

4. If this Government be a mixture, then is not the Government The Government
not to be trusted in the King.
according to th^se Laws, solely trusted to the King, as seems to be affirmed,
page 18.

5. If the Government be regulated, why do men tell us The King not above Law.
that the King is above all Law? for it is by Laws that he is Regulated.

6. If the King be Regulated by the Law, then is the The King accountable to
Law.
King accountable to the Law, and not to God only, as men would make us believe.

7. If the Monarchy or Regal Authority it self be regulated, Whatsoever is done
by the King beyond the limits of Law is not regal Authority.
then whatsoever is done by the King, undeniably without and beyond the limits
of that Regulation, is not Regal Authority. And therefore,

8. To resist the Notorious Transgressions of that Regulation, is no Resisting
of Regal Authority. And, No resistance of the Ordinance of God.


9. It is so far from being a Resisting of the Ordinance of God, that it is not
so much as Resisting the Ordinance of man.

Quest. 5. By whom was this government framed in this sort? or who is to be
accounted the Immediate Efficient of the Constitution This Government was
molded by the wisdom of your Ancestors.
thereof?

A. The Experience and Wisdom of your Ancestors has so molded this, page 18.

Observe. 1. If our Ancestors were the moulders of this Government, then the
King has not his power, solely, or The King has not his power solely and
immediately by Divine Right, much less by right of Conquest.
immediately, by Divine Right.

2. Much less has he his Power or Authority by Right of Conquest.

3. But the Immediate Original of it was from the people. And if so, Then --

4. In questioned cases, the King is to Produce his Grant (for he has no more
then what was granted) and not the The King to produce his grant if his power
be questioned.
People to show a Reservation; For all is presumed to be Reserved, which cannot
be proved to be granted away.

Quest. 6. Is this Regulated and mixed Monarchy, as good as an Absolute
Monarchy, or better, or worse?

A. This Excellent Constitution of this Kingdom, (the This excellent
constitution of Government has made this Nation famous and happy.
Ancient, Equal, Happy, Well-poysed, and never enough Commended Constitution of
the Government of this Kingdom. page 17.) has mad^ (...) Nation so many years
both Famous and Happy, and to ^ (...) Degree of Envy, page 20.

Quest. 7. How comes it to pays that this Constitution is so Excellent. This
kingdom has the conveniences of all three kinds of Government.


A. The Experience and Wisdom of your Ancestors has so molded this, out of a
mixture of these, as to give to this Kingdom (as far as Humane Prudence can
provide) the Conveniences of all three, without the Inconvenience of any one,
page 18.

Observe. 1. Then those that would place in the King, an Absolute Arbitrary
Power destructive to the Kingdom.
Absolute and Arbitrary Power to do what he List, are Destructive to the
Nations Happiness, and Enemies to the Kingdom. It is not the greatness of the
Kings power over his people, but the restraint of that power, that has made
this Kingdom happy.


2. If this mixture cause this happiness, then it is not the greatness of the
Kings Power over his People but the Restraint of that Power that has made this
Kingdom famous and Happy; for other Kings have Power as large, but not so much
restrained; which largeness of their Power has raised those Kings indeed, (but
not their Kingdoms) to a great degree of Envy.

3. Hence we discern, that it is possible for Kings to envy their Peoples
Happiness, because the largeness of the Peoples Whereon the largeness of
peoples hapness depends.
Happiness depends much upon the Restraint of the Kings Exorbitant Power.

4. If this mixture and well-poised Constitution have No marvel if Jesuitical
Councels be active to overthrow the happiness of this Constitution.
raised this Kingdom to so great a Degree of Envy, no marvel if Jesuitical
Counsels be Active to overthrow this Happy Constitution.

Q. 8. What is the Convenience or Good of Monarchy?

A. The Uniting of a Nation under one Head, to Resist Invasion from abroad, and
Insurrection at home, page 18. The good of Monarchy.


Observe. 1. What Pernicious Counselors are they then to Pernicious Counselors
to a Monarch who Council to bring in strangers, etc.
a Monarch that advise him to bring in from abroad German Horse, or an Irish
Army, or a Fleet of Danes to invade this Kingdom; or to employ Dunkirk Ships to
seize upon his Merchants, which is so formally contrary to the proper Good and
End of Monarchy it self?

2. Or are they better or worse that Advise him to Authorize, That advise him
to authorize and permit to plunder, rob, spoil and imprison, etc. in his name.
or even permit any in his Name to Plunder, Rob, Spoil, Imprison any of his
Subjects, whom they have found peaceably in their houses, or at work in the
Fields, and have not disobeyed any Legal Command of his?

Quest. 9. What is the Ill of Absolute Monarchy? or the Inconvenience to which
it is Liable?

A. The Ill of Absolute Monarchy, is Tyranny, page 18. The ill of absolute
Monarchy proness to Tyranny.


Observe. 1. Therefore the more Absolute a Monarch is, the more prone to be a
Tyrant.

2. Therefore also it is safer to Restrain the King of some Safer for the
Subject to restrain the King of some power then to grant him too much.
Power to do us good, then to grant him too much opportunity to do us hurt; and
the Danger is greater to the People in Enlarging the Kings Power, then in
restraining it some what.

Q. 10. What is the good or Convenience of Aristocracy?

A. The good of Aristocracy is the Conjunction of Counsels The good of
Aristocracy.
in the Ablest persons of a State for public Benefit, Good for the public
benefit of the State that conjuction of Counsels in Parliament should be made
use of more then once in 13 or 14 years.
page 18.

Observe. Then surely it is for the Public Benefit of the State, that this
Conjunction of Counsels in Parliament should be made use of more then once in
thirteen or fourteen years; and the Law for a Triennial Parliament (if there
were not others before for the holding of a Parliament yearly) was a most
necessary Law, as also that it should not be dissolved for fifty days.

2. It was not then Intended in the Constitution of this Government, The
intention in the constitution of this Government.
that the King in the greatest matters of Importance for public benefit,
should only hear what they say, and then follow it, or reject it, merely at his
own Pleasure; for this may be as well done in an Absolute Monarchy.

3. Neither is it agreeable to the Constitution of this Kingdom, to withdraw
the King from affording his presence to his Great Council of State, that so the
private Counsels of Not agreeable to the Constitution of this Government, to
withdraw the King from his great Council and to prefer private Councels.
Private men may be preferred before those whom the Law and the Constitution of
the Kingdom counts the Ablest to judge of public benefit.

Q. 11. What is the Ill of Aristocracy, or the Inconvenience to which it is
liable?

A. The Ill of Aristocracy is Faction and Division. p* 18

Obs. What shall we say then to those Private Counselors The ill of
Aristocracy.
that have abused the King, by persuading him first to withdraw himself from
his Parliament, and then to call away the The mischief of evil Council in
withdrawing the King from his Parliament and to call away the Members of both
houses, to the end to dissolve the Parliament
Members of both Houses, when yet without the Consent of both Houses this
Parliament cannot be Adjourned to another place, much less Dissolved? Yet if
all would have come away at call, had it not been Dissolved for want of Legal
Numbers Remaining? And what greater Faction or Division can there be, then such
as Divide between King and Parliament, and between the House and their Members?
Are not they most Pernicious Instruments, that make Monarchy it self, (whose
end is to unite as was said before) thus far guilty of Faction and Division?

Q. 12: What is the Good, or Convenience of Democracy?

A. The good of Democracy is Liberty, and the courage The good of Democracy.
and Industry which Liberty begets, page 18.

Observe. 1. Then the more Liberties are Encroached upon, The more Liberties are
incroached upon the more cowardly and poor it renders the Nation.
the more the people will be rendered Cowardly and Poor, as may be plain enough
seen by comparing the Valor and Riches of this Nation in Q. Elizabeth's days,
with what has been of Late Days.

2. The King himself, when once his Subjects by having lost their Liberties,
shall lose withal their Courages, will In the loss of liberty the King himself
shall be the greatest looser
prove the greatest Looser; for then his Kingdom will be an easy Prey to any
Foreign Invader, or even to a homebred Usurper, that could gather any sudden
Strength, and would promise more Liberty.

Q. What is the Ill of Democracy, or the Inconvenience to which it is liable?

A. The Ills of Democracy are Tumults, Violence, and The ills of Democracy.
Licentiousness, page 18.

Observe. If these be the Evils for which the Peoples Liberty ought to be
Restrained by the Mixture in this Government, Restraint of liberties should be
measured according to the exigency evils.
then the Restraint of the Liberty should be measured according to the Exigency
of these Evils, and so much Liberty should be measured according to the
Exigency of these Evils, and so much Liberty need only be Restrained as is
sufficient for the prevention of these Evils.

Q. 14. What is the mixture of this Kingdom, which gives it the Conveniences of
all the three forementioned kinds of Government without the Inconveniences of
any one.

A. In this Kingdom the Laws are Jointly made by a The Laws of this Kingdom
made by King, Peers and Commons, gives it the co^veniency of all three kinds of
Government.
King, by a house of Peers, and by a house of Commons chosen by the people:
All having free Votes, and particular privileges, page 18.

Observe. Whereas there has been great Question made by many what is meant by
the Power and Privileges of Parliament, mentioned in the Protestation, which
has been so generally made throughout the Kingdom? There is no reason The
Privileges of Parliament, are their certain Privileges according to Law and
the Constitution of the Kingdom.
to doubt but those things which the King grants afterward, to be the
particular Privileges of each House, and of both, are their certain
Privileges according to Law, and the Constitution of the Kingdom; and to the
maintaining of them every one that has made the Protestation is most strictly
bound, without peradventure or shift.

2. That the Privileges which the King challenges to Himself, The Privileges
that the King challenges are so far to be yielded unto, as they are consistent
with the acknowledged privileges of both Houses.
are to be yielded to, only so far forth as they are consistent with the
acknowledged Privileges of the two Houses; because the Monarchy being
acknowledged to be a regulated Monarchy, and the Government mixed of Aristocracy
and Democracy, as well as Monarchy; it is the Privileges of the two Houses of
Parliament that makes the mixture, and so they must Regulate and Interpret the
Privileges of the King, and not the Privileges of the King Regulate or
Interpret theirs, save only to the maintaining still the Regal Dignity, and the
Succession according to Laws.

Q. 15. What Privileges does the King challenge to himself? The Government
trusted to the King by the Law of the Kingdom, and challenged by the King.


A. The Government according to these Laws is trusted to the King: Power of
Treaties of War and Peace, of making Peers, of choosing Officers, and
Counselors for State, Judges for Law, Commanders for Forts and Castles; giving
Commissions for raising men to make War abroad, or to prevent or provide
against Invasions and Insurrections at home, Benefit of Confiscations, power
The Privileges above mentioned are only so far trusted, as that they be not
prejudicial to the privileges of Parliament in cases of necessity.
of pardoning, and some other of like kind are placed in the King, page 18.

Observe. 1. That all these are ordinarily in the King, Experience and Custom
Teaches, even those that know not the Law by reading; but by what has been
noted before, and follows after, it is to be understood only so, as not to
prejudice the Privileges of the Houses of Parliament, especially in cases of
Necessity, (of which hereafter.) Also --

2. It is acknowledged here, that the Government, Trusted, is to be according
to the Laws, and so all these Things The Government trusted to be according to
the Laws.
are not absolutely in the King; as for instance, Pardons, the Law denies power
of Pardoning wilful Murder; And Benefit of some Confiscations belongs to some
private Lords of Mannours.

3. If Government only according to Law be trusted to To resist notorious
illegal violences is not to resist Kings Authority.
the King then to resist Notorious Illegal Violences is not to resist the Kings
Authority.

Q 16. For what end is this Authority trusted to the King, and placed in him?
For the Subjects sake their Rights are vested in the King.


A. For our Subjects sake these rights are vested in us, page 17. The Prince
may not make use of this high and perpetual power to the hurt of those for
whose good he has it, page 19. The good of the Subject is to be preferred.


Observe. 1. Then the Good of the Subjects is ever to be preferred before the
Monarchial Greatness of the King (the End is ever more considerable then the
Means) Salus Populi Whosoever counsels the King against the good of Subject,
is an enemy to King and Commonwealth.
is suprema Lex.

2. Whosoever counsels the King to any Thing against the good of his Subjects,
is the Kings Enemy as well as the Common wealths, by attempting to turn him
from that which is the end of his Authority.

Q. 17. To what purpose especially are the privileges of the The purpose and
intention of the privileges of both Houses.
house of Commons and the house of Peers?

A. That the Prince may not make use of this High and perpetual power to the
hurt of those for whose good he has it: and make use of the name of public
necessity for the gain of his private Favorites and Followers, etc. page. 19.
The Law presupposes, such cases to fallout and on whom the blame is imposed.


Observe. 1. The Law then supposes, that such Cases fall out, though it then
Charge the Blame upon those Favorites and Followers, and not upon the King (as
we shall see by and by.)

2. We need not wonder then why Private Frivorites and No wonder if Favorites
be such Enemies to Parliaments and privileges.
Followers are such Enemies to Parliaments and their Privileges which are on
purpose to hinder their gains: Of which also more anon.

3. The two Houses are by the Law it seems, to be Trusted; The trust to be
reposed in the two houses by Law.
when they declare, that Power is made use of for the hurt of the People; and
the Name of public necessity made use of for the Gain of Private Favorites and
Followers. and the like.

Quest. 18. What are the special privileges of the House of The special
privileges of the house of Commons
Commons toward this?

A. The House of Commons, an Excellent conserver of The House of Commons more
caareful for the Subjects then the King, etc.
Liberty -- is solely entrusted with the first propositions concerning the
Leavies of Moneys which is the Sinnews as welt of Peace as of War, etc. page 19.

Observe. 1. It seems then the House of Commons is presumed to be more careful
for the Subjects Liberties, then either the King, or the House of Peers.
Strange that the house of Commons should fight against liberty and propriety of
the Subject.


2. Then it must needs be strange for any to conceive (as the Kings
Declarations would persuade) that the House of Commons would Fight against and
Subvert the Liberty and Propriety of the Subject, and the Kings Favorites and
Followers Fight for them, and protect them.

3. Then no Moneys may be Levied neither for Peace nor No moneys may be levied
either for Peace or War or under pretense of public necessity, without the
Commons first propound it.
War, no not under Pretense of Public Necessity, (as Shipmoney and Monopolies
were) without the House of Commons first propound and grant it.

4. If the House of Commons be an Excellent Conserver of Liberty, it must needs
have some Power in some Cases to Levy Money even without the Kings consent; or
else it will be utterly unpossible to conserve Liberty at all, Of If the house
of Commons be a Conserver of Liberty, it must have power in some cases to leavy
Money, etc.
which likewise more anon.

Q. 19. But if the Kings Private Favorites and Followers have actually
persuaded him to any Thing against the Laws and Liberties of the Subject with
what further Power and Privilege is the House of Commons Entrusted toward the
Conserving of Liberty?

A. With the Impeaching of those, who for their own The House of Commons is
entrusted with power to impeach such as have actually persuaded the King to any
thing against the Laws and Liberty of the Subject, etc.
Ends though countenanced by any surreptitiously-gotten command of the King,
have violated that Law, which he is bound (when he knows it) to protect; and to
the protection of which they were bound to advise him, at least not to serve
him in the contrary, page 19.

Observe. 1. Then it is no excuse to any that Violate the No excuse to any that
violate the Laws, to say they serve the King in so doing.
Laws, that they serve the King in it.

2. The Law counts all Commands from the King, which What account the Law makes
of all commands surreptitiously gotten from the King.
are any way contrary to the Law, Surreptitiously Gotten.

3. Then the Parliament speaks according to the Law, The Parliament do legally
lay the blame of all violation of Law upon the Kings Favorites that obtain
unlawful commands.
when they constantly lay the blame of all violations upon the Kings Favorites
and Followers, and their getting Surreptitiously Commands from him, and not
upon the King himself.

4. No Command of the King is to hinder the Commons No command of the Kings is
to hinder the Impeachment of such.
from Impeaching such as have violated the Law.

5. The King is bound not to Protect any of his Followers The King is bound not
to protect any of his Followers or Favorites against Impeachments.
and Favorites against the Commons Impeachment of them; because he knows and
affirms, that he is bound to Protect the Laws, and that this is the Law, that
the Commons are to Impeach such.

Quest. 20. What is the special Privilege of the House of Peers in the former
Case of such Favorites and Followers of the Kings as are Impeached by the
Commons? and so to decide all Matters in Questions between the King and the
People.

A. The Lords being trusted with a Judicatory power are Judicature power is the
special privilege of the Lords house, which is an excellent Screen and Bank
between the King and People.
an Excellent Screen and Bank between the Prince and the people, to assist each
against any Encroachments of the other, and by just Judgments to preserve that
Law which uoght to be the Rule of every one of the three, page 19.

Quest. 21. But have the two Houses Power to put their judgments into
Execution, as well as to Impeach and Judge? The houses have power to put their
Judgments in execution.


A. The power of punishment is already in your hands according to Law, page 20.

Observe. 1. Then again it is no wonder that the Kings Favorites and Followers
hate Parliaments, (who not only No wonder that the Kings Favorites hate
Parliaments.
hinder their Gain, but have Power to punish them) when they have violated the
Laws.

2. Then the Lords (and much more the two Houses togeaher) The two Houses are
supreme Judges of all matters in difference between King and people.
are supreme Judges of all matters in difference between the King and the
People, and have power to prevent all the Kings Encroachments upon the people,
as well as the Peoples upon him.

3. Then the King is bound not to Protect any whom the The King is bo^nd not to
protect Delinquents.
Lords upon the Impeachment of the Commons, have Judged Delinquents; For he
has granted that he is bound to Protect the Law, and that according to Law the
Power of punishing (even of his Favorites and Followers, before spoken of) is
in their hands, and they cannot punish them, so long as he Protects them.

4. Then the Law allows them as the Supreme Judicatory The Law allows the upper
house to be the supreme Judicatory, and to be a Skreen between the King and
People, etc.
(even that which must be a Skreen between the King and the People, and Assist
the People against the Kings Encroachments and punish the Kings Favorites and
Followers, though countenanced by Surreptitiously-Gotten Commands from the
King) a Power to bring such as they have Judged, (or are to Judge) to Condign
Punishment, which is granted to all Inferior Judges in their Circuits and
Jurisdictions.

5. Then if those Delinquents get the King to Protect The Power of both Houses
is by Law to raise Arms if need be, for the apprehending of Delinquents.
them, or surreptitiously get Commands of him, to raise Arms to Shelter
themselves against the Judgment of the two Houses; the two Houses have Power by
the Law to raise not only the Posse Comitatus of those Counties where such
Delinquents are, to apprehend them, but also the Posse Regni, the Power of the
whole Kingdom if need be: or else the Power of Punishment is not in their hands
according to Law, and it would be safer contemning and scorning and opposing
the highest Judicatory, the Parliament, then any Inferior Court, a Judge of
Assize, or the like: and they that could get Commands to Violate the Law
before, would easily get Protection against the Parliament when they are
Questioned, if the Parliament had no Power to raise Arms to suppress them.

Quest. 22. But if there be an Attempt or Danger, that the Kings Favorites and
Followers go about to change this Regulated Monarchy into an Arbitrary
Government, and so into a Tyranny; is there Authority in the Houses sufficient,
according to what was forementioned to remedy this?

A. Power Legally Placed in both Houses is more then A power legally placed in
both houses is more then sufficient to prevent Tyranny.
sufficient to prevent and restrain the power of Tyranny. page 20.

Observe. 1. Then at least what ever Power is necessary to prevent or restrain
the Power of Tyranny is confessed to be Legally placed in both Houses; fot else
there is not Power sufficient, much less, more then sufficient.

2. Then it is lawful for the two Houses to Raise Arms Lawful for both houses
to raise an Army to defend themselves against any power raised against them.
to defend themselves in case an Army be raised against them* for else they
have not power sufficient to restrain the power of Tyranny: There is no greater
attempt of Tyranny then to raise Arms against the Houses of Parliament, and
there is no way to restrain this Tyranny, but by raising Arms in their own
Defense: Less then this cannot be sufficient. The Parliament are legal Judges
in danger of Tyranny, and have power to command their judgment to be obeyed,
etc* Lawful for the Parliament to provide for their own and the Kingdoms
safety, and to command the people to this purpose, both when arms are actually
raised and when they discern a Preparation there unto.


3. If a Legal Power be placed in them, not only to restrain but prevent the
Power of Tyranny, then they are the Legal Judges, when there is danger of
Tyranny; and they have Legal Power to Command their judgment to be obeyed, for
Preventions as well as Res^^rint of Tyranny.

4. Then it is lawful for them to provide for their own and the Kingdoms
safety, and they have Legal Power to command the People to this purpose; not
only when Arms are actually raised against them, but when they Discern, and
accordingly declare a Preparation made toward it. for if they let alone
altogether the Exercise of their power. til Arms are Actually raised against
them; they may in all likelihood find it too late, not only to Prevent, but
even to Restrain the Power of Tyranny.

5. Then they have Legal Power in such Times of danger, to put into safe hands,
such Forts, Ports, Magazines, Ships, and Power of the Militia, as are intended,
or likely to be ^ntended, to Introduce a Tyranny; for else they cannot have
Legal power in times of danger to put into safe hands, Forts, Ports, Magazines,
ships, etc.
Power sufficient to Prevent or Restrain the Power of Tyranny.

6. Then they have, Legal Power to Levy Moneys, Arms, Legal power to leavy
moneys, Arms, Horse Ammunition of the subjection such cases of danger, without
or against the consent of the King, etc.
Horse, Ammunitions upon the Subjects, in such cases of Danger, even without or
against the Kings Consent; for it cannot be imagined that in such cases when
the Kings Favorites and Followers have gotten Commands from him, to protect
them in their Delinquencies and Attempts to Introduce Tyranny, that ever he
will consent to Levies of Moneys against those Favorites and Followers of his,
or to the raising Arms against them, especially he being still in their hands,
and among them, and not with his Parliament; and without such Levies of Moneys,
etc. it is not possible for the two Houses of Parliament to prevent or restrain
sufficiently the Power of Tyranny.

7. They that have made the Protestation, to maintain and In all these things
acknowledged by the King, and clearly following from his acknowledgments, all
men may see the power and privileges of Parliment.
defend the Power and Privileges of Parliament, may see in all these Things
(acknowledged by the King, and clearly Following from his acknowledgeenents)
what is that Power, and what are Privileges of Parliament, which they have so
solemly in the presence of Almighty God Vowed, Promised and Protested to
maintain, etc.

8. And finally, since the two Houses of Parliament have so often and fully
declared their Intentions in settling the Militia, securing Hull and the
Magazine there, and the Navy That since the two houses have so often declared
their intentions in settling the Militia, s^^uing of Hull, etc.
at Sea, with Ports and Forts, and afterward in Raising Arms under the Commanp
of the Earl of Essex, and last of all, Levying Moneys by voluntary
Contributions and Assessments; they have only used that Legal Power which is in
them for the Punishment of Delinquents, and for the Prevention and Restraint of
the power of Tyranny, of all which they are the All men may see that they have
only used that legal power which is in them* for punishing delinquents,
prevention and restraining of Tyranny, etc.
Legal Judges; and all the Subjects of this Kingdom are bound by the Laws to
obey them herein, and those doubly bound that have made the late Protestation.

That the Reader may the better discern how the Answers here applied do agree
with the words of his Majesty's answer the to 19 Propositions, I have here
transcribed so much of it as concerns this particular.
Page 17. We call God to witness, that as for our subjects Conceening the
Government of the Kingdom.
sake these Rights are vested in Us, [so for their sakes as well as for our
own) we are resolved not to quit them nor to subvert (though in a parliamentary
way) the ancient, equal, happy well-poysed, and uever-enough-commended
Constitution of the Government of this Kingdom. Three kinds of Government
amongst men.


There being three kinds of Government amoust men, Absolute Monarchy,
Aristoceacy, and Democracy, and all these having their particular conveniences
and inconveniences. The providence of our Ancestors has so molded the
Government of this Kingdom, as by a mixture of all three kinds to give the
conv^^iences of them all, etc.


page 18. The experience and wisdom of your Aucestors has so molded this out
of a mixture of these, as to give to this Kingdom (as far as humane prudence
can provide) the conveniences of all three, without the inconveniences of any
one, as long as the Balance bangs even between the three Estates, and they run
jointly on in their proper channel (begetting Uerdure a Fertility in the
meadows on both sides) and the overflowing of either on either side, raise no
Deluge or Inunda^ion. The ill of Absolute Monarchy is Tyranny, The ill of
Aristocracy is Faction and Divi^ion, The Ills of Democracy are Tumuls,
Violence, and Licentiousness: The good of Monarhy is the Uniting a Nation under
one Head, to Resist Invasion from abroad, and Insurrection at home: The good of
Aristocracy is the conjunction of Council in the Ablest persons of a State for
the public benefit: The good of Democracy is Liberty, and the courage and
industry which Liberty begets.

In this Kingdom the Laws are Jointly made by a King, How the Laws of this
Kingdom are made.
by a house of Peers, and by a house of Commons chosen by the people, all
having free Votes, and particular privileges. The Government according to
these Laws is trusted to the Trust. ^eposed in the King.
King: Power of Treaties of War and Peace, of making Peers, of choosing
Officers, and Counselors for State Judges for Law, Commanders for Forts and
Castles; giving Co^missions for raising men to make War abroad, or to provent
and provide against Invasions or Insurrections at hom^; benefit of
Confiscations, power of pardoning, and some more of Concerning the extent of
the Princes liberty.
the like kind are placed in the King. -- Again. page 19. that the Prince may
not make use of this ^igh and perpetual power to the hurt of those for whose
good he has it, and make use of the name of public necessity for the gain of
his privats Favorites and Followers to the dotriment of his people; the house
of Commons an excellent conserver of Liberty, (but never intended for any share
in Government, or the choosing of them that should govern) is solely entrusted
with the first Propositions concerning the Levies of Moneys (which is the
sinews as well of peace as war,) and the impeaching of those The Trust reposed
in the house of Commons.
who for their own ends, though countenanced by any surreptitiously-gotten
command of the King, have violated that Law, which he is bound (when he knows
it) to protect, and to the protection of which they were bound to advise him,
at least not to serve him to the contrary: and the Lords being trusted The
Trust of the Lords
with a Judicatory power, are an excellent screen and bank between the Prince
and people, to assist each against any encroachments of the other, and by just
judgments to preserve that Law which ought to be the Rule of every one of the
three. --

Page 20. Since therefore the Power Legally placed in both The sufficiency of
the power placed in both houses
Houses is more then sufficient to prevent and restrain the power of Tyrauny:
-- since this would be a total Subversion of the Fundamental Laws, and that
excellent constitution of this Kingdom, which has made this Nation so many
years both Famous and Happy to a great degree of envy, since to the power of
punishing (which is already your hands according Incroachment of Power.
to Law) if -- since the encroaching of one of these Estates upon the power of
the other is unhappy in the effects both to them and all the rest. -- Page 22.
Our answer is, Nolumus Leges Angliae mu^ari. But this we promi^e, that Careful
to preseeve Laws
we will be as careful of preserving the Laws in what is supposed to concern
wholly our Subjects, as in what most concerns our self: For indeed we profels
to believe that the preservation of every Law concerns Us, those of obedience
being not secure; when those of protection are violated,

FINIS.

