A VINDICATION of four Serious QVESTIONS Of Grand Importance, Concerning
Excommunication, and Suspention From the SACRAMENT of the LORDS SUPPER, from
some Misprisions and unjust Exceptions lately taken against them; both in the
Pulpit, by a Reverend Brother of Scotland, in a Sermon at Margarets Church in
Westminster, before the Honorable House of Commons, at a public Fast there
held for Scotland, on the 5th of September last: and in the Press, by three
New-printed Pamphlets, by way of Answer to, and Censure of Them. Wherein some
Scripture Texts, (commonly produced for Excommunication, and bare Suspention
from the Lords Supper only,) are cleared from false Glosses, Inferences,
Conclusions wrested from them; The grounds of sole Suspention from the
Sacrament, of unmixt Communions, Independency, Separation from our Churches,
Sacraments, examined, refuted, subverted; Judas his reception of the Lords
Supper, cleared; It manifested, to be a converting, as well as a confirming
Ordinance; a means to beget, as well as increase Grace: With other particulars
tending to the Advancement of Verity, Unity, and the better, speedier
Settlement of a Church Discipline, according to Gods Word, so much desired. By
WILLIAM PRYNNE of Lincolns Inn, Esquire.

1 Thessalonians. 5. 21, 22. Prove all things: hold fast that which is good: Abstain
from all appearance of evil. Augustine. Epist. Concilii ad Donatistas: and
Gratian Cause. 1. Qu. 1. Communio malorum non maculat quemquam participatione
Sacramentorum, sed consentione factorum. LONDON, Printed by John Macock, for
Michael Spark senior. 1645.

TO The truly Honorable and Victorious Sir THOMAS FA^RFAX Knight, General of
all the Forces raised, by the PARLIAMENT, against the Popish and Malignant
Party.
Most meritoriously Honorable,
THE many late Glorious Trophies and Vnparalel'd Successes, wherewith the Lord
of Hosts has been graciously pleased to Crown Your cordial Military
Undertakings, to the Admiration of all Your Friends, the Astonishment,
Confusion of all the public Malignant Enemies of Our Churches, Kingdoms
Tranquillity; as they have engaged the Parliament, (with all parts of the Realm
under their Command) to return public Solemn Praises unto God, for sundry
Successive Victories, over puissant Armies in the Field, and Conquests of
diverse Strongholds, atcheived by Your indefatigable Industry, Incomparable
valor, through Gods blessing on them: so it has specially obliged Me, as to
render particular Thankesgiving unto God, so to tender some small apparent
Monument of my Obligations and Gratitude to Your self, whom God has highly
honored to all posterity, in making You an happy Instrument of redeeming my
Native Country (Sommersetshire) with the adjacent Counties, out of the
devouring Jaws of the oppressing Enemy, and of reviving, recovering our lost
dying Kingdom even at its lowest Ebb, in a time of greatest need, with so
great Celerity, so little effusion of English Blood on either side; Which I
knew not, for the present, how more visibly to express, then by presenting
Your Honor with this brief P^lemicall Vindication, in defect of a Richer
Present.

It was my great undemerited Happiness, and your Generous Humility (at Your
first arivall in London from the North, to undertake the Chief Command of the
Parliaments Forces) to stoop so far below Your self, as to honor Me with Your
voluntary sweet Acquaintance and Discourse; which emboldens me to crave this
further Favor, to dignifie this rude Vindication, with your Noble Acceptance,
of so Small unpolished a Piece; whose Subject matter (Church Discipline) is of
so Great concernment, that the Settlement thereof according to Gods Word, and
the Purest times* is one principle end of Your and Our taking up Defensive
Arms.

I shall not be so injurious to the State or You, to interrupt Your weighty
Military Affairs, or retard Your Admirable Expeditions with my unseasonable
Lines. I shall rather become a daily Orator to the Lord of Hosts, so far to
multiply the weekly Catalogues of Your sucessefull Conquests, that You may ere
long return to the Great Counsel and Metropolis of our Realm in a Triumphant
Chariot, with this Honorable victorious Motto, engraven in golden Characters
on Your Helmet; This is the General whom the Lord has honored to be, next
under him, The speedy Finisher of our long protracted Civil Wars; And happy
Restorer of our Long-desired Peace: Which is and shall be the Prayer of

Your Honors most Devoted Friend and Servant WILLIAM PRYNNE.

To the unprejudiced Reader.
Christian Reader:
HAving privately communicated Four short Questions concerning Excommunication
and Suspension from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, to some of my Parliament
friends, out of a mere cordial desire to expedite the settling of an
Ecclesiastical discipline in our Church, according to Gods word; so much
desired, and now in agitation in the Commons house: I have for this good
service (these Questions since growing public) been openly censured, traduced
both in Press and Pulpit, and these my Queries have been seemingly refuted, by
some well*meaning persons, whose Affections are stronger then their Arg^me^ts,
and misguided Zeal more predominant then their Knowledge, in the points
debated by them, wherein they betray their own Ignorance and Error, whiles they
would censure mine.

The first Answer to these Questions, entitled, An Antidote against four
dangerous Queries; is such a combination of Ignorance, Errors, Misprisions,
and impertinent Invectives, as merits rather derision then refutation, and has
been already sufficiently triumphed over in the Antidote animadverted; so as it
needs another Antidote to preserve it from sudden expiration. The second Answer
to them, styled A Brotherly and friendly Censure; as it Courts my person in the
Title and Epistle with friendly complements, so it wounds and traduces my
honest intentions, but in no sort answers my Questions; the Censure it self,
being the same in substance with the Antidote, and as full of gross Errors,
Mistakes, and injudicious weak replies, as it. The third Answer, as it is more
large, so more judicious then the other two, and thwarts them both in some
particulars, as in that of Judas his receiving the Lords supper; and, that
Ministers, as such, have no authority to keep back any from the Sacrament, but
have discharged their duties by their premonitions of the danger of unworthy
receiving.

I have not here answered each of them distinctly* but only taken the
quintessence and substance of them all into examination, debating only the most
material differences between us, and bringing their false metals to the test
of Scripture and sound Reason; omitting all their impertinencies, and things of
lesser moment, as not deserving any reply. My subitane Lucubrations in
Vindication of these Questions from all their misprisions and erroneous
censures, I here humbly submit to the Parliaments public, and thy private
impartial scr^tinie; in perusing whereof, I shall only request thee to pursue
the Apostles Canon, 1 These. 5. 21.
To examine all things by the Word, and to hold fast that which is good and
true.

For my part 2 Cor. 13. 8.
I can do nothing against, but for the Truth: and though some report Gal. 4. 16.
I am their enemy (yea an enemy to public Reformation) because I tell them the
truth, in these controversal points of Church Discipline, in which they have
little insight; yet neither their calumnies on the one hand, nor flatteries on
the other, shall ever sway me one hairs-breadth from the Truth, either to the
right hand, or the left. And although I certainly know, the speaking out of the
whole truth in this present Controversy will render me odious and distastefull
to many of my dear Christian friends and Brethren in the Lord, and draw sharp
censures on me: yet because John 1^. 37
I was for this cause born and brought into the world, that I might bear
witness to the truth; I neither weigh their favors, nor regard their frowns,
being resolved whiles I breath on earth, neither for fear, favor, partiality,
nor any private interest or relation whatsoever, to do any thing against the
Truth, but only for it, whatsoever the issue or event thereof shall prove; be
it, Veritas odium parit; or Uncharitable constructions, or wresting of my
Writings pointblank to their sincere intentions, whereof I have had experience
in this Controversy, especially in two particulars, which I cannot pretermit
in silence without some reply thereto.

First my Antagonists publicly charge me, That I speak untowardly, to the
great offense of godly people, against all Christ's Ministers and Ecclesiastical
Rulers, in this conditional clause, [If it fall into indiscreet, over-severe,
ambitious, passionate, or revengefull hands] In which I suppose, that
ordinarily the hands of Ministers and Elders of Christ's Church are such, and
therefore they ought not to be trusted with such power of Suspension and
Excommunication; or else that I suppose, some of them may act with such hands,
and therefore that all of that calling are to be abridged of that power.

To which I answer, that no such uncharitable incoherent inference can any way
follow from this Clause; the whole scope of my Questions diametrally
contradicting it, which tend only to an orderly regular settlement of
Presbyteriall power in the original institution of our new Presbyteries, not
to take from them all Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction due by divine right to them,
but to confine it within certain definite limits, to prevent all exorbitant
abuses of it, into whose hands soever it should sall. There is no man so
unskilful in Politics, but will acknowledge, it is the duty and ought to be
the special care of Lawgivers, in the creation of new Jurisdictions, and
promulgation of new Laws, to look, not only to present, but future
Inconveniences which may possibly spring up in after-ages; and to consider, not
what some, or most men are which shall execute such Laws or Jurisdictions at
present, but what any of them may possibly prove to be in aftertimes, and
thereupon to prescribe set bounds to all alike, and leave nothing merely
arbitrary to any, how good or just soever, to prevent all possible, all
probable abuses by any entrusted with such Laws and Jurisdictions. And there
are none so ignorant of the present condition of our English Church and
Ministry, but must acknowledge, 1. That many of our godly Ministers and people
are very passionate, indiscreet, and over-rigorous; having more zeal, then
knowledge, or discretion how to manage such a power. 2. That the best and
justest men we can select to constitute Presbyteries of, if left at large, to
an arbitrary kind of proceeding, and not bounded by strict or punctual Laws
and Penalties, will be very apt now and then (through natural infirmities, and
the remainder of corruptions in them) to abuse or exceed their power, and run
into extravagancies to the oppression of the people, of which we have diverse
experiments in many Counties, if the complaints against their Committees may be
credited, as many of them are too true. 3. That though there be sufficient
choice of prudent, discreet, learned, conscientions, upright Ministers and
Christians in and about London, fit to be united into Presbyteries, Classes,
and trusted with Ecclesiastical censures; yet in most places else throughout
our three Kingdoms (except here and there a City or country Town) there are
very few, if any such Ministers or Lay Elders to be found for the present, and
none can certainly determine when or where to provide or cull out such for the
future. 4. That, let the Parliament make the best present choice they can of
Ministers and Lay Elders to execute Ecclesiastical discipline, yet there may
and will be a Judas among the twelve Apostles, at least one or more indiscreet,
passionate, ambitious, or spleenatick persons, who upon occasion offered will be
apt to abuse or exceed their power, to the prejudice of others. 5. That into
whose hands soever this power shall Eccles. 2. 18, 19 c. 6. 12. c. 10. 14.
be put for the present, yet there is not only a mere possibility, but
probability too, (especially if the Episcopal or Malignant party should at any
time prevail) that it may hereafter fall into unjust, tyrannical, oppressing
hands, out of which it will hardly be wrested again. 6. That since we intend to
settle the self-same Ecclesiastical Government and Discipline in all three
Kingdoms, at leastwise throughout our English territories; there ought to be
the self-same rules, bounds, and limits prescribed unto all Presbyteries and
Classes, to regulate their proceedings by, and prevent exorbitances in every of
them; and none of them left more arbitrary then others, lest their proceedings
should vary from others. These undeniable principles were the grounds of my
Supposition so much excepted against, If it fall into indiscreet, over-severe,
passionate, or revengefull hands: Yea, the true reason why the Parliament takes
so much deliberation and advice in settling of the intended Presbyteriall
Church Government and Discipline, in which more difficulties arise then
ordinary capacities are able to apprehend. Wherefore for any to infer from
thence, as my Antagonists do, That the hands of all the Elders and Ministers of
Christ's Church, are such, and therefore ought not to be trusted with the power
of Church Censures; or that all of them are to be abridged of this power,
because some of them are such; is such a malicious and uncharitable perverting
both of my words and meaning, as naught but prejudice or malice it self could
invent.

The second Charge is of the same strain; That th^se Queries charg^ the
Reverend Assembly very unjustly, with falling into extremes; with affecting a
greater Lording power over the consciences and privileges of their Christian
brethren, then of right belongs unto them. That they, and our new Presbyters
will proceed as in the Papacy and Prelacy; with indiscreet, over-severe,
passionate, revengefull hands, etc. Whereas they desire nothing but a strict
discipline according to the rules of Christ, etc. And that they cast many such
unjust aspersions upon the Assembly.

Certainly there is not one syllable in these 4 Questions from whence any such
malignant accusation can be strained: and my former Writings to vindicate the
Reverend Assembly (whom I love and honor with my soul) from the libellous,
venomous, intolerable aspersions cast upon them, in many late seditious
schismatic printed Libels, (published by Anabaptists and other Sectaries, to
defame them, and vilify all their proceedings;) with the grounds in the
preceding Answer (which occasioned all the Passages unjustly wrested by these
uncharitable Answerers, to warrant this false charge) will (I hope)
sufficiently purge me from these scandalous accusations, and all
misinterpretations of my Queries, or this Vindication of them; the scope of
both being only this, to reduce the Power of Ministers and Presbyteries, in the
original erection of their Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, (now in agitation in
the Parliament,) to as great a conformity to the Word of God, and as punctual
certainty in all particulars as possible may be; and to settle it with such
necessary Cautions and Limitations as may prevent all abuses of it, into whose
hands soever it shall be committed either for the present, or in future ages:
since a small error, or admission of a mere arbitrary power in some things in the
beginning of this New Government, may soon degenerate into a grand
inconvenience and grievance in conclusion, which is easier prevented then
redressed.

Thus having fully cleared the sincerity of my own intentions, against these
scandalous inferences, I have only this to add in the Parliaments behalf;
That the settlement of Church Discipline being a matter of great difficulty and
concernment, wherein many new doubts and scruples daily arise, requiring much
debate, they cannot be justly blamed (in the midst of their other pressing
public occasions to preserve our Kingdoms, themselves and us from eminent
ruin) for proceeding deliberately in this weighty work, which has taken upthe
Assembly themselves so many months debate, and wherein there are such
differences of Opinions. Many there are, who deny any Excommunication at all to
be of divine institution, producing sundry strong arguments to justify their
opinions, and answering all objections to the contrary: In maintenance of which
opinion, Tho. Erastus (a learned Physician) long since wrote a large Volume in
Latin, entitled, Explicatio gravissimae quaestionis de Excommunicatione
printed An. 1589. who is seconded by many learned men. Others, who admit
Excommunication to be introduced, and exercised in the Apostles times, and
somewhat after; yet hold it to be but a temporary Ordinance, taken up by
Christians out of mere necessity, for want of Christian Magistrates to restrain
and punish scandalous sinners; and altogether useless, or seldom or never to
be put in execution in such places, Churches, where Christian Magistrates are
settled, whose office and duty it is, to punish all obstinate, impenitent,
scandalous sinners, with the temporal sword of justice, and to cut off all
evil doers from the City of God, Psalm. 101. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Romans 13. 3, 4, 5.
without whose assistance Church censures will become altogether useless,
invalid, and contemptible: whence the Church has always been enforced to pray
in aid from the Secular arm, and Civil Magistrate, by Writs De Excommunicato
capiendo, and the like, to force obedience and submission to her censures,
which else would prove mere Bruta fulmina. Others, who admit of
Excommunication, deny suspension from the Sacrament of the Lords supper, as no
divine step or degree to it, nor to be inflicted upon any but persons actually
excommunicated from all other Ordinances. Others who plead most for
Excommunication and suspention from the Lords Supper, are yet divided into
these circumstances which concern them. 1. Who shall inflict those censures?
Whether the Ministers only? Or the Presbytery and Classis only? Or the whole
Congregation? 2. For what sins and Offenses? which is now the grand doubt and
debate: Whether for Incest, and Heresy only, for which they pretend examples
of Excommunication in Scripture; or for any other sins, for which we find no
pattern of any Excommunication or Suspension in the Word? 3. In what manner,
and by what steps and degrees the Presbytery or Classis ought to proceed in
inflicting these censures? What remedy shall be given by way of Appeal, to the
parties grieved? And, to whom they shall appeal? 4. How, and by whom such who
contemn those censures shall be proceeded against? How long those censures
shall continue, and how and when reversed? 5. Whether excommunicated persons
ought to be admitted to hear the Word, or to any other Ordinance? and in what
sort; with what public badges of infamy and distinction, the more to shame
themselves, and deter others? All these, with sundry other difficult
controversies arising in the settlement of Church Discipline (in which the very
Assembly-men are divided in opinion, as well as the Members of Parliament) it
must needs require much debate and deliberation to settle Church Discipline in
a due and solid manner.

It is a received Maxim, approved by prudent men, and God himself; Diu
deliberandum quod semel statuendum; We must deliberate long of that which is to
be settled but once. We know that the material Temple of Solomon was near 1
Kings 9. 10. 2 Chronicles. 8. 1. 1 Chronicles. 29. 2 Chronicles. 2. and 3.
twenty years in building* though David, Solomon, with all the Princes and
people most cheerfully contributed their best assistance toward it; and yet it
was after As appears by Ezra 4. 24.
far ^onger in re-edifying: And can we then imagine the Spiritual Temple and
Church-Goverment should be completely finished and built up by the Parliament
in a month or two? How many years, I pray you, have our Independent Brethren
been in hammering and completing their New Church-Model, long since promised,
and yet are not agreed on it, or else afraid, to publish it, lest all should
discern its manifold flawes? Ignorant men, altogether unacquainted with the
numerous difficultes, intricate disputes which accompany this Subject, may deem
it an easy business, soon dispatched: but persons of better judgments,
acquainted with the several controversies in point of Divinity and civil
Policy, which arise about Church Discipline, will find it an Herculean labor,
and a work of time to establish it so, as to answer expectation, satisfy all
objections, and stop the mouths of all opposers, which must first be done, or
else it will not be embraced with such alacrity as is fit. Wherefore be
persuaded to wait a while longer on the Parliament for the accomplishment of
our longing desires in the settling of Church Discipline, and pray earnestly to
God to steer their hearts and judgments aright in this work of highest
concernment to us; for fear they should now settle any thing in haste, which
they and we may hereafter repent of by leisure. With which friendly advice I
shall dismiss thee to the perusal of this Vindication, which I humbly tender
to thy Christian acceptance.

Farewell.
A short Vindication of four serious Questions of grand importance concerning
EXCOMMUNICATION and Suspension from the Sacrament, from some Misprisions and
Exceptions taken against them, both in the Press and Pulpit.
THERE is nothing so sincerely intended, so well performed, but is liable to
some mis-interpretations or exceptions in this critical age, by men of
contrary opinions. This has been the hard fate of these four Questions.

First, the Author of them has been publicly taxed in print, as an enemy to
Reformation, and often styled In An Antidote against four dangerous Questions.

A brotherly, friendly Censure, etc.


THE ADVERSARY (of it,) when as God who Acts 1. 24.
knows his heart, and those men who are acquainted with his person and
intentions, will acquit him from this calumny, and know him to be as great, as
cordial an Advancer of Reformation, as any of his Accusers.

Secondly, these four Questions have been conceived and reported to be, a
grand obstruction to the work of Reformation and settlement of
Church Discipline, yea purposely published to obstruct it: When as
intentionally and really they do (by moderating irreconcilable extremes) tend
only to facilitate and expedite this much desired work; which he cordially
desired might be speedily accomplished, to prevent the dangerous increase of
Errors and Scismes, which multiply daily in our Church.

Thirdly, they are apprehended to strike at the very root of Excommunication,
and absolutely to deny it, in case of gross and scandalous sins; when as it
only tends to remove those sandy foundations whereon some would build it, to
prevent and regulate all probable abuses of it in its original establishment,
and confine it to its due bounds, to prevent, as far as possible might be, al
just scandal and profanation of holy things in the people, and Arbitrary
Government, Tyranny, Oppression, and Lording it over Gods Ordinances, Heritage
and men's consciences, in the Ministers and Presbitery, as the express words
thereof demonstrate.

Fourthly, it is conceived, that their principal end was, to deprive
Presbyteri^s of their due jurisdiction, conferred on them by divine right, when
as there is not one syllable in them to that purpose, but only to regulate
their power by Gods Word, and to control the Arbitrary, Tyrannical
usurpations of some Ind^pendent Ministers, who take upon them an exorbitant
jurisdiction, not only to exclude whom themselves please from the Sacrament,
without any legal admonition or conviction of ignorance or scandal, but
likewise refuse publicly to administer the Lords Supper to their Congregations
or Parishoners for sundry months, nay years together, (yea, to those, against
whom they have no just exceptions, and who tender themselves to their
Examination, desiring to be excluded, if found ignorant or unworthy) for fear
of delivering it to some, whom they (before conviction) deem scandalous or
unworthy, as they pretend; or rather, in good truth, only because they will not
join with them in their new Independent ways and Covenants.

Fifthly, it has been suggested, that it lays a tax upon our Ministers and
intended Presbyteries, as if they desired* Papal and Tyrannical authoriy over
men's consciences; when as it tends only to prevent such Papal, Episcopal
abuses of Excommunications and Su^pensions, which may possibly creep into them
by degrees, if not carefully provided against in the original settlement of
their authority, by strict and punctual Laws; there being no authority so
good, so necessary in Church or State, but by reason of their corruptions ^ See
the Histories of the Anabaptists Lucas Osiander. Bnchirid. Cont. cum.
Anabaptist is de Ecclesia, cap. 6. The profane Scisme of the Brownists,
discovered by Christopher Lawne and others. printed 1612.
who manage it, may be abused to tyranny and oppression: (especially, if not
bounded) And we find by Histo^y and experience, that these Church censures have
bin as grossly abused, as tyrannically managed by rigid Anabaptists and
Seperatists, as Popes and Prelates, and po^sibly may be so by Presbyteries.

These prejudices and mis-apprehensions being removed, I shall next proceed to
the exceptions against the substance or subject matter of them, wherein to
avoid mistakes, be pleased to observe:

First, that it is confessed, yea agreed by the Opposites, that Excommunication
or suspension from the Sacrament, is a matter of grand concernment, fit now to
be established with as much deliberarion, caution, circumspection and care as
possible may be, to prevent profanation, scandal on the one hand, and
Arbitrary, Papal, Tyrannical domineering over men's consciences, christian
liberties, and all abuses of this power, on the other hand; and that it is a
matter of very great difficulty thus to settle it; and it is as readily yielded
on the other side, that gross notorious, scandalous, obstinate sinners, who
presumptuously persevere in their iniquities after private and public
admonitions, without remorse of conscience or amendment, may be justly
excommunicated from the Church, the society of the faithful, and all public
Ordinances, after due proof, and legal conviction of their scandalous lives;
and that 1 Cor. 5. 13. warrants thus much, notwithstanding the various readings
and interpretations of that Text: So that thus far there is no dissent on
either part.

Secondly, it is accorded on both sides, (in words at least, though not in
practice) that no Minister may (...) can in point of power or conscience,
refuse to admini^^er the Sacrament to any member of his Church, not actually
excommunicated after sundry admonitions and public reprehensions for some
gross scandalous crime, who earnestly desires to receive it, in case he
publicly professes his sincere repentance for his sins past, and promise
amendment of life for time to come, though the ^inister or Presbytery in their
own private opinions, may have a hard prejudicate opinion of his unfitness,
or unworthiness to receive it.

These Agreements on both sides premised, which will in a manner determine the
greatest controversy, and rectify the mistakes between us; I proceed to the
matters in difference; which are these:

First, whether there he any precept or president in Scripture, for the
suspending of any Member of a particular Church or Congregation, from the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper only, who is not at the same time excommunicated
and utterly sequestered from the Church, the society of the faithful, and all
other public Ordinances there used, as Prayer, Preaching, Fasting,
Catechizing, singing of Psalms, and the like? And whether the Number. 21. 14 15.
Deuteronomy. 23. 1 2, 3. 1 Cor. 5. 7 to 13. Joh. 9. 22 32, 3. 3. ch: 12. 42. c. 16. 2.
2 These. 3. 14. 2 John 10. 11. 3 John 10. Romans 16. 17. Tit. 3. ^0, 11: 2 Timothy 3
5.
Texts of the old or new Testament, quoted in the first Question, and in the
Margin here, warrant any such partial excommunication or suspension from the
Lords Table, but not from preaching the Word, and other public Ordinances?
This I positively deny, from the pregnancy and words of these Texts of
Scripture, backed by the judgment and practice of Antiquity in the purest
times, as I shall prove at large anon: Neither has the Author of the Antidote
against four dangerous Questions* nor the Reverend Preacher in his Sermon at
St. Margarets before the Commons House (who undertook to refute them) produced
one dram of Scripture or solid reason to refute it, the latter not so much as
taking notice of this Question (the only thing there controverted) but utterly
mistaking it, whiles he charged the Questionist with mistakes.

Secondly, whether Matthew. 18. 16, 17. If thy brother trespass against thee,
etc. tell it to the Church, etc. be properly meant of excommunication of
suspension from the Sacrament? The Opposites affirm; I deny it.

The only reason they have rendered in Press or Pulpit, why this text should
and must be intended of a sentence of excommunication given by the Church, is,
because the text says, let him be to thee as an heathen man and a publican*
that is, as one quite cast out of the Church, which must be only by
excomunication, whereby men are cast out of it; no private christian (as they
affirm) having any authority to esteem his brother, as a heathen and publican,
if the Church has not first cast him out; for then he may esteem one man of
the Congregation thus, and after that another, and so all the Membets of it,
and at last, the whole Church by degrees, by his own authority; which to do,
say they, is a great absurdity, sin and inconvenience: But this reason (under
correction) is very infirm, inconcludent, if not false and absurd: For first,
Heathens were no excommunicate persons, being never Members of the Jewish or
Christian Church, and therefore incapable of any excomunication out of it:
Excomunication being peculiar only to Church Members, as St. Paul expressly
determines, 1 Cor. 5* 10, 11, 12. and Aretius in his definition of
Excomunication, cited in the first Question: And as for Publicans, if they were
not heathens but Jews (as (...) Ep^st at (...) Godw^ns fewish Antiquities l. 1.
c. 3.
some of them were) we never find them excommunicated from any of Gods
Ordinan^es, as they were Publicans, but partakers of them; To make then an
excommunicate person, and an Heathen, a Publican, Synonimaes, is at best an
incongruity, if not a contradictio^. Secondly, the genuine sense of this
expression (not elsewhere used in Scripture, and See Go^w^ns ^ewish Antiquities*
^* ^. ^. ^.
no form at all of any excomuni^ation practiced by the Jews) Let him be to
thee a Heathen and a Publican, in the judgment of the best Interpreters, is no
more but this; keep not any familiar company, or have no civil fellowship
with him, but avoid his company and fellowship, as Paul expressly interprets it
elsewhere, 1 Cor. 5. 10, 11, 12. 2 These. 3. 14. Ephesians. 5. 11. Romans 16. 17. or
receive him not into thy house, neither bid him God speed, as St. John renders
it, 2 John 10. Which phrase was derived from the practice of the Jews and
Pharisees in that age, who shunned the very company of heathens and publicans;
not in public Ordinances or Sacraments (in which heathens certainly had no
communion or society with them, being no Members of their Church) but only in
civil conversation; whereupon they taxed Christ, for keeping compauy with
publicans and sinners, Mat. 9. 10, 11. chapter 11. 19. chapter 21. 31. 32. Mark 2. 15,
16. Luke 18. 11, 12, 13. chapter 15. 1, 2. though some of them beleevee on, and
received him, when the Scribes and Pharisees (who disdained their company) did
reject him, Luke 7. 29. chapter 15. 2, 2, 3. chapter 19. 2. to 12. Mat. 21. 31, 32. And
as the Jews then avoided all civil familiar society with Publicans Godwins
Jew^sh Antiquities, l. 1. c. 2
whom they generally hated for their covetousness and extortion) so also with
Heathens, with whom they might not inter marry nor familiarly converse, Deuteronomy.
7. 2, 4. Josh. 24. 12, 13, Neh. 13. 27. to 31. Ezr. chapter 9. and 10. Ps. 116. 34,
35. Act. 21. 28, 29. Whence we read, The Jews had no dealing or conversation
with the Samaritans, John 4* 9 nor they with the Jews, Luke 9. 52, 53. If
then, let him be to thee as a heathen and a publican, be no more then, keep not
civil company, fellowship, or familiar conversation with him, who obstinately
trespasseth against thee, after private admonition and public complaint; or
avoid intimate familiarity with him; then every christian has free power by
Gods word to do this, without any danger of sin or scandal, before any private
or public censure of excommuncation passed against him by the Church, as is
clear by 1 Cor. 5. 9. 11. 2 These. 3. 14. Romans 16. 17. Pro. 22. 24, 25. Ps. 101.
4, 5, 7. 2 Timothy 3. 2, 3, 4, 5. 2 John 10. 11. Therefore by the self-same reason
may he avoid the company of any other brother, or the Members of an whole
particular Congregation severally, without sin or guilt, if he or they continue
impenitent, in the case of private injuries or trespasses against him after
admonition; Wherefore this Answer of theirs is both erroneous and impertinent.

Now that this Text of Matthew (so mvch insisted on) is not meant of
excommunication or Church Censures; and that the (...) Signifies any Civil
Assembly, Council or Court of Justice, as well as on Ecclesiastical
Presbytery, see Scapulae Lexicon, page 730.

h Scapula ibidem, Godwins Jewish Antiquities, l. 5. c. 4 Joseph. Antiq.
Jud^eo^um, l. 14, c* 17.


Church in this text was not any ecclesiastical Consistory, but only the P.
Galatinus, l. 4 c. 5. Doctor Potters want of Charity justly charged, London,
1634. p. 26. It may be underst^^ of any Assemb^y, AS WELL CIVIL as
Eccelsiastical, so it was in the first Edition, but it is expunged in (...) by
the Arch bishops special direction.
Sa^hedrim, or Court of civil justice among the Jews (commonly called the
Council in other Texts) is apparent to me for these ensuing reasons, never yet
answered by the Opposites. First, because it speaks not at all of any public
scandalous sin against the Church or Congregation, the proper Object of
Church-censurs, but only of pr^vate civil trespasses between man and man, as
is evident by the words, If thy brother trespass against THEE, go and tell
him his fault between him and thee, etc. which Saint Luke relating without any
Die Ecclesi^, Luke 17. 3, 4. puts out of question, if compared with Genesis 52.
31. 1 Samuel 25. 28. Now the puni^hment of such trespasses belonged properly to
their temporal Magistrates, not to their Ecclesiastical Consistory, as the 1 Samuel 2. 29. Deuteronomy. 10. 16, 18, 19, 20. chapter 25. 1, 2. 2 Chronicles. 19. 9. 6. Exodus
21. 6. 22. chap. 22. 8, 9. prove: Secondly, because the following words, ver.
16. If he refuse to hear thee, take with the^ one or two more, that in the
mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be established; relate only to
the manner of trying civil capital crimes, (as murders and the like) before
the civil Magistrates of the Jews, which was by two or three witnesses, Number.
25. 30. Deuteronomy. 17. 6, 7. chap. 19. 5, 6. not to any proceedings in
Ecclesiastical causes, in their Ecclesiastical Co^sistories, of which we find
no president. Thirdly, because tell it to the Church, the Assembly, or
Congregation, in the 17. verse, is not meant of any Presbyteritall or
Ecclesiastical Classis, which had Cognizance of private trespasses, there
being no such among the Jews, but only of the Sea Pecrus Cunaeus de Repub.
Judeorum l. 1. c. 12. Juni. Brutus Vindiciae contr. Tyoannos, Q. 3. p 94. to 97.
civil Court of Justice, which the Scripture commonly calls the Council, which
had power (which no mere Ecclesiastical Consistory can do) to scourge,
imprison* torture and outlaw offenders, if not to condemn^, put to death, but
not properly to excommunicate them, Matthew. 5. 22. chap. 10. 17. c. 5. 26, 27,
59. 60. chap. 27. 1, 2. Mark 13. 9. Acts 4. 3. to 22. chap. 5. 17. to 40.
chap. 6. 12, 13, 14, 15. chap. 25. 15. to 29. chap. 24. 20. Fourthly, because
he adds, If he will not hear the Church, What then? not, let the Church
excommunicate or suspend him from the Sacrament, or put him out of the
Sinagogue, or cast him out from them, or deliver him to Satan, or denounce an
Anathema Maranatha against him, or cut him off from his people (the only
phrases in other Texts alleged for proof of Excommunication) but, let him be
as an Heathen man and a P^blican (a phrase never used elsewhere in Scripture;)
which cannot properly signify excommunication, because Heathen men being never
Members of the Church, could never be excommunicated or cast out of it, being
un- capable of such a censure: As for Publicans those of them who were members
of the Jews Church, though they were execrable to the Jews, by reason of
the^r Tax-gathering and Oppressions, yet we never read in Scripture that they
were excommunicated or cast out of their Sinagogues, but contrarily, that they
went up into the Temple to pray as well as the Pharisees, and were more
acceptable to Christ himself (who never excommunicated, but received and
conversed with them) then the proud Pharisees were, Luke 18. 11. to 15. chapter 3.
12. chap. 7. 29. chap. 5. 27. 28, 29. chap. 15. 1, 2. chap. 19. 2, etc. Mark 9.
11, 12. Matthew. 10. 3. Mark 2. 15, 16. Therefore these expressions can no ways
warrant or imply any excommnnication or suspension from the Sacrament. Fifthly,
the words run only, let him be TO THEE as a heathen man and a Publican (not
to the whole Church, and all others professing Religion, which might have
intimated something in behalf of the Opposites;) and therefore ^o ground
excommunication from the Church, or suspension from the Sacrament on this Text
(which the Papists and others have very much abused) is to extract water out of
a flint, and palpably to wrest the Scripture from its genuine sense.

Object. And whereas some object, that the n^xt ensuing words, verse 18.
(Verily I say unto you, what soever ye shall bind on earth, shall be bound in
heaven, etc.) do necessarily infer the preceding words to relate to
Ecclesiastical censures, and the power of the Keys (as they phrase it.)

Answ. I answer, first, that these words have no coherence with, or dependence
on the former, but are a distinct sentence of themselves, because spoken only
to, and of Christ's Disciples, as is evident by the Parall^l Text of John 20.
23. not of the Jewish Church, much less of their Council or Sanhedrim, meant
only by the Church in the former verse, as is already cleared. Secondly, the
this binding and loosing is not meant of excommunication or suspension from the
Sacrament (as some would fancy it) but only of binding and loosing men's
finnes, by preaching the Gospel, and denouncing pardon or remission of sins
and salvation to penitent and believing sinners; but judgment and damnation to
obstinate, impenitent sinners, as is evident by comparing it with Matthew. 16.
19. Mark 16. 16. John 3. 16, 17, 18, 36. chap. 12. 48. Luke 13. 3. 5. Romans 2.
16. Acts 2. 38. chap. 3. 19. Therefore some clearer Text then this must be
produced, to found excommunication or suspension from the Sacrament, and
Ecclesiastical Discipline upon, by those who contend for it Jure divine.

Thirdly, whether 1 Cor. 5. 5. To deliver such a one to Satan for the
destruction of the flesh, that his spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord
Jesus* and 1 Timothy 1. 20. whom I have delivered unto Satan* that they may learn
not to blaspheame, be properly meant of excommunication or suspension from the
Sacrament?

Some of our Opposites peremptorily affirm it, but produce no shadow of proof
for it; others speak dubiously of these Texts, as needing a large debate, and
therefore prudently wave them with a rhetorical preterition, as the late
Reverend Preacher did: I for my part humbly conceive, that to deliver to Satan,
is a thing somewhat different from excommunication and suspension from the
Lords Table: My reasons are these:

First, if to deliver a man to Satan, be the self-same thing with
excommunication, or suspension from the Sacrament, as some affirm, then every
excommunicated or suspended person, should* during his excommunication or
suspension, either in a literal, or sprituall sense at least, be in their
judgment, in the actual power of Satan, though a true child of God, whom Acts
26. 18 Ephesians. 2. 1. to 6. 1 John 3. 8. 2 Timothy 2. 26.
Christ himself has rescued out of the jaws and paws of Satan; since such a
one may be actually excommunicated, suspended from the Lords Table for a
season, not only injuriously, but upon just grounds, and yet not inthe Devils
actual power or possession, but in Christ's, John 10. 28, 29.

Secondly, if to deliver unto satan, were the same with excommunication, then
it would have some proportion and coincidency with other Scripture phrases
produced for proof of excommunication* (as put away from among you that wicked
person, and the like forecited) with which it has no (...).

Thirdly, our Opposites generally grant See Cartwrights Notes on the Rhem.
Testam. on 1 Cor. 5.
that Excommunication belongs only to the Presbytery or whole Congregation, not
to any one particular person, be he Bishop, Minister, or other; whereas Paul
himself deliv^^ed Hymeneus and Phyletus unto Satan, as the words (whom I have
delivered, etc.) import, without the concurrence of any other.

Fourthly, many members of the visible Church are spiritually under the John 8.
44: 1 Johu 3. 8. 2 Timothy 2. 26. Acts 5. 3. John 13. 2. 27:
^ower of satan, and taken captives of him at his will, though still within the
Church, and not actually excommunicated; therefore to deliver men over thus to
satan, and no more, cannot be properly termed excommunication.

Fifthly, nor can it be meant merely of suspending people from the Sacrament;
for then children and others debarred from the Sacrament, by reason of their
nonage, or any other natural dis-abilities, should be as much delivered over
to Satan as any scandalous persons.

What this delivering of men over to satan is, has beeen much controverted
among Divines: Many who take it to be meant of excommunication, and an act of
discipline established then in the Church for all future ages, interpret it to
be, not only a casting of a man out of the Church See Cartwrights Answ. to the
Rhem: Testam. on 1 Cor. 5.
wherein Christ reigns, into the world of ungodly men, among whom satan rules;
but likewise to give a man over to be guided in his spirit by the word and
spirit of satan, as the Church and those within it are led, guided by the word
and spirit of God* explaining it by Ephesians. 2. 2, 3. 2 Timothy 2. 26. John 14. 30.
John. 8. 44* 1 John 3. 8. But this exposition seems to me both false and
improper: First, because these scandalous sinners, even whiles they were in the
Church, were A^ts 5. 3. Joh 8. 44. 1 John 3 ^. Ephesians. 2. 2, 3, 4. 2 Timothy 2, 26.
led and acted by the spiret of satan, in committing those scandalous sins,
for which they were excommunicated; and therefore their excommunication cannot
thus deliver them over unto satan, who took them captive at his will, but
leaves them in his hands in the same condition as before. Secondly, such a
delivery unto satan, as this, to be guided, acted in their spirits by him and
no more, tends nothing at all to the destruction of the flesh, but rather to
the pampering of it, much less to the reforming of the life, or the saving of
the spirit in the day of the Lord Jesus, but rather to aggravate and increase
men's sins. Thirdly, it is confessed, that a godly man may for some notorious
sins or scandals, be actually excommunicated, as well as other wicked
persons; now such a one God never Rom ^. 4, (...) 11. 13. 14. Gal 5. 18. 25.
gives over to be led and ruled by the unclean spirit of satan, but he always
leads them by his own holy spirit, which ever dwells and rules within their
souls, and is never dis-possessed by the Devil. Fourthly, all accord, that
the end and use of excommunication, is only to reform or amend men's lives,
and turn them from the power of satan unto God: And is not this diametrally
contrary to that end, to deliver them over to the very conduct and guidance of
satan, who Ephesians. 2. 2, 3, 4. 1 John 3. 8. 2 Timothy 2. 26.
rules only in the children of disobedience, precipitates them into all sinful
courses with a full c^^^re, and is so far from learning men not to blaspheme,
that he fills their hearts and mouths with naught but lies and blasphemies?
This interpretation therefore I cannot approve; Neither do I read or believe
that any Presbytery or Church has or does claim any authority in these days
to deliver any man to Satan; Wherefore, to deliver a man unto satan, I rather
co^ceive to be meant in two other senses more agreeable both to the letter and
scope of these Texts, and the interpretation of the Fathers on them.

The first is, either to deliver up a man corporally, by way of punishment,
into the actual possession of the Devil, only in respect of his body, not
soul, so as the Devil thereby might actually possess, macerate, torment and
afflict his flesh (as he Mat. 15 22. Luke 6. ^8. Mar 9. 17. to 30. c. 5. 2. to
10.
used to vex those whom he did corporally possess, which the Scripture
plentifully manifests) till he were sufficiently punished, and then be
dispossessed of the Devil again by those who delivered him into his power,
and restored to the bosom of the Church; the Apostles and others Mat. 16. 1^*
Acts 16. 16, 17 18 Mat. 10. 8.
in their age, having a power, not only to cast out and dispossess men of
Devils, but likewise to deliver men up by way of punishment to See Mark 5. 9.
to 15. John 13. 27. Ephesians. 2. 2, 3. 2 Timothy 2. 26.

See Beda in 1 Timothy 1.


be corporally possessed by the Devil: which (as I conceive) was the ground of
that common imprecation, (too frequent in lewd men's mouths, when they are
injured or provoked by any man;) the devil take you, or, Tradatur Satan^.

This kind of delivering men over to satan was peculiar only to the Apostles,
and some others in that age, but ceased since, and so cannot be drawn into
practice among us; A godly Christian by way of punishment may be for a season
thus delivered unto satan, for the mortifying or destruction of his flesh and
carnal corruptions, and yet still continue a true child of God in respect of
his soul and spirit, John 14. 16. 1 Cor. 6. 19. Se Aecumenius Chrysostom.
Primasius, Haymo, Beda, Theodor. Theophilact. in ^ Cor. 5. Mat. 4. 1. to 12.
which the holy Ghost does always possess, though the Devil possess his body
(as he had possession of Christ's body, though not of his soul and spirit, when
* he led him into the Wilderness to be tempted, and carried him from place to
place.) And this I take to be one genuine sense and scope of these two Texts.

Secondly, there is another sort of delivering men up to satan, somewhat
different from the former, which suits very well with the words and sense of
these Scriptures; and that is, when a man by Gods immediate permission is
delivered unto satan to be tortured, afflicted and vexed by him; either in his
body, by sicknesses, botches, diseases; or in his mind, by cares, fears,
perplexplexities and discontents; or in his estate and family, by losses and
crosses of all sorts, as Job c. and 2. See Aecumenii Enar. on 1 Cor 5. Primas.
Theophilact. Chrysostom. Hierom in locum.
Job was, of purpose to mortify his flesh and carnal members, to humble his
soul and body before God, that his spirit may be saved in the day of the
Lord, his sinful life reformed, and he hereby lessoned, no more to blaspheme
or dishonor God: In this sense God many times delivers over his children (as
he did Job) into their Adversary, satan's hands, to scowre away all their
dross, and crucify their old man, the flesh, with the affections and lusts
thereof, without giving their hearts and spirits into his power, which he still
reserves entirely to himself, as he did lob's; and theirs whom the Devil cast
into prison, and into tribulation for ten days, that they might be purifid,
and have their robes of corruption washed quite away, and made white in the
blood of the Lamb, Revel. 2. 10. chap. 7. 14. And in this sense (no doubt) the
Apostles by Gods permission, had power to deliver men over to satan, (one of
whose 2 Cor. 12. 7
Messengers Paul had sent to buffet and humble him, least he should be exalted
above his due measure*) for the destruction of the flesh. But how far the
Church or Ministers of God have any authority at this day actually to deliver
any scandalous persons thus to satan (unless it be by way of prayer or option)
I submit to others, who now claim this power, to determine: However, in these
two last senses (which I conceive most genuine) these Texts are no solid
proofs at all, either of excommunication from the Church, or suspension from
the Sacrament; since a Christian may be delivered over to satan in both these
senses, and yet not actually excommnicated or suspended from the Sacrament.

The fourth difference is this, Whether 1 Cor. 5. 11. If any man that is called
a brother be a fornicator, or cov^tous, or an Idolater, or a railer, or a
drunkard, or an extortioner, with such a one no not to eat; be properly meant
of excommunication or suspension from the Sacrament, or not to eat with such at
the Lords Table upon any terms? Some Opposites confidently aver; others,
with my self deny it; and that upon these grounds:

First, because there is not one syllable of receiving the Lords Supper, or
eating at the Lords Table spoken of in this chapter; and in the 10. and 11.
chapters, where the Apostle professedly treats of the Lords Supper, and
receiving that Sacrament, he speaks not one word of secluding any members of
the Church, or Christians from it, but only exhorts men carefully to examine
themselves before they come to receive it, least they eat and drink their own
damnation, become guilty of the body and blood of the Lord, and draw down
sicknesses and diseases upon themselves; affirming expressly, chapter 10. ver. 16,
17. The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ?
for we being many, are one bread and one body; for* WE ARE ALL PARTAKERS OF
THAT ONE BREAD: If ALL* were then partakers of this bread, certainly none were
excluded from it in the Church of Corinth; but as the Israelites under the Law,
did ALL eat the same spiritual meat, and ALL drink the same spirti^all drink,
though*God were displeased with many of them, who were idolaters, tempters of
God, fornicators, murmurers, and were destroyed in the Wilderness, 1 Cor. 10.
1. to 12. so all under the Gospel who were visible Members of the Church of
Corinth, did eat and drink the Lords Supper, to which some drunkards whiles
drunken did then resort, as is clear by the 1 Cor. 11. 20, 21. which Paul
indeed reprehends, verse 22. Therefore this, with such a one no not to eat,
cannot be meant of excommunication or suspension from the Sacrameut.

Secondly, if we look upon the catalogue of those with whom the Corinthians
were forbidden so much as to eat, we shall find railers, covetous persons, and
extortioners therein mentioned, as well as idolaters, fornicators, drunkards;
and if all such must be excommunicated or suspended the Sacrament, what will
become of most of our Anabaptisticall and Independent Congregations, who are
generally known to abound more with covetous persons, extortioners, railers,
then our Parochial or Presbyteriall Congregations do with idolaters,
fornicators, drunkards? I* fear their Independent Conventicles and chamber
Congregations will be dissolved for want of members, of Ministers, and their
Lords* Tables be left empty without Guests, if all railers, covetous persons
and extortioners were excommunicated out of them, and this their pretended
discipline put into exact execution; yea, I fear, too many Presbyterian
Ministers, Elders, who would be very active in excommunicating, suspending
others from the Sacrament for fornication, idolatry, drunkenness, must
themselves be first excommunicated from the Lords Table for their own
covetousness; Wherefore Mat. 7. 3, 4, 5
let such pull that beam out of their own eye, before they pass the sentence
of excommunication and suspension for the m^tes they spy in their brother's
eye; and this would much moderate their severity toward others, if not make
them disclaim this Text to be meant of those Ecclesiastical censures, which
would light first and heaviest on themselves.

Thirdly, it is as clear as the noonday Sun, that, no not* to eat, in this
Text, is no more, then not to keep company, or hold civil familiarity with
such: First, by verse 10, 11. I wrote to you in an Epistle, NOT TO KEEP
COMPANY with fornicators, etc. yet not altogether with the fornicators of this
world, etc. for then ye must go out of the world; (as those must do who would
have unmixt churches and communions without any putred members:) But now have I
written unto you, NOT TO KEEP COMPANY: If any man that is called a brother be a
fornicator, etc. with such a one NO NOT TO EAT: By which it is most clear,
that, no not to eat with such, is nothing else, but See Primasi^s, Theodoret,
Theophylact, Chrysostom, Haynor. O Ecumen^u* Ans^lm and M^sculus in locum.
not to keep company, or converse familiarly with them, it being here twice
together thus interpreted in the preceding words: And that it cannot be meant
of eating with them at the Lords Table, is most clear; because this inhibition
extends it self, (though not in the same strictness,) to fornicators,
idolaters, covetous persons, etc. that are Infidels and without the Church, as
well as to him that is called a brother, and within the Church, as is evident
by verse 10, 11, 12, 13* compared together: Therefore it must of necessity be
meant of civil conversation with them, of which eating together with others,
and sitting with them at our, or their Tables, is one principal branch* being
one of the highest expressions of outward friendship and familiarity, as is
evident by Genesis 43. 16, 17. 32, 33, 34. 2 Samuel 12. 28. 33. 2 Kings 2. 7. Psalm.
41. 9. John 13. 18. and disdaining to eat with one, the greatest token of
estrangednesse, or want of familiarity one with another, Genesis 43. 32. compared
with John 4. 7, 8, 9. Secondly, this is further confirmed by these parallel
Texts of Romans 16. 17. Ephesians. 5. 7. 12. 2* These. 3. 14. Tit. 3. 10. 2 John 10. 2 Timothy 3. 10. which interpret, no not to eat here, by these phrases, of avoiding
them, turning away from and rejecting them, not to keep company or have
fellowship with them, nor to welcome the^ into our houses; neither of which
amounts to an excommunication or suspension, which are judicial acts of the
whole Church or Presbytery, after legal proof and conviction: whereas these
acts of not eating, avoiding, or not keeping company, etc. are all only moral
or prudentiall acts of particular Christians, or Voluntary negative actions,
not positive, judicial, public Church censures.

Object. But our Opposites object, that though this Text be not directly meant
of excommunication or suspension from the Sacrament, yet it warrants such men's
suspension from tht Lords Supper by necessary consequence: For if we may not so
much as eat and drink with raylers, drunkards, covetous persons, etc. at our
own, their, or other men's Tables, much less may we do it at the Lords Table.

Answ. I answer, that the Argument is merely sophistical, fallacious, and not
properly any formal Argument from the less to the greater, because itvaries in
the kind of eating; the one being civil, the other spiritual; the one private
in ones own house, or another, where he has absolute freedom or liberty to
eat, or not to eat with another; the other pulik in the Church, where he has a
divine command, necessitating him to communicate with others of that
Congregation, in the Sacrament, as well as in other Ordinances. Every Argument
from the less to the greater that is conclusive, must have sundry
qualifications to make it solid: I will instance but in three. First, it must
be in the same kind of action; Secondly, it must fall under the same precept;
Thirdly, it must be within the compass of the same power: If either of these
fail, the Argument is a mere Inconsequent. For instance, This is a solid
Argument; Men ought to abstain from the smallest sins; Ergo, much more from
the greatest sins; because this holds still to the same kind [sinne] and
abstaining from the greatest sins, falls under the same precept which forbids
the least; So this is a firm Argument; He that can make a little Watch or ball
can likewise make one somewhat greater, because it in the same kind of
manufacture, and both of them within the virge of the Artificers skill: But on
the contrary, these To. 12. 18, 19.
inferences are unsound and inconcludent: A man must not keep company with an
angry man, Prove. 22. 24. Ergo, he must not join with him in any public
Ordinances or acts of Gods worship; or, A man must not swear vainly by the
Mat. 5. 34.
Name of God, which is the less; Ergo, he must not swear solemnly before a
Magistrate, which is the the greater; because there is in these, a variation in
the kind, occasion and manner of swearing; So, it is unlawful for any
Christian to recompense evil for evil in the least kind, nor to avenge
himself for the least wrong, Romans 12. 17. 19. Therefore it is unlawful for
any Christian Magistrate to recompense evil for evil, or inflict the highest
degree of Vengeance on Malefactors, even death and capital punishments; is a
meet Nonsequitur; because this public revenge by way of justice, falls not
under the same precept with private reveng: So, such a workman is able to make a
boat or ditch, which is the less; ergo, he is able to build a Ship or Fort,
which is the greater, is an Inconsequent, because they fall not under the
self-same degree of art and ability: To apply this to the objected text; Not
eating with scandalous persons at meals in private, differs in manner, kind
from eating with them at the Lords Table in public; they fall not both under
the self-same precept; and we have free power not to eat bread with those at
our own Tables, with whom we have no power or liberty left us by Christ, to
refuse to eat with them at the Lords Table: Therefore this Argument, in point
of Logic and Divinity, is as infirm and absurd, as any of the former: Yet
how many thousands, as well Scholars as Ignorants, have been overreached with
it, so far as to make them separate, not only from our Sacraments but
Congregations too?

Now because thi^ gross, fallacious Inconsequence in my apprehension, is one
principle cause and prop of Independency, yea of Separation from our Churches,
Sacraments, and has misled so many, especally of later years, I shall a little
further examine it, with relation to the Text on which it is grounded, and
further lay open both the falsenesse and absurdity thereof, to all men's
jndgements and consciences.

First, it is clear, that this Text is meant only of civil conversation,
eating and drinking, not of spiritual, as I have already proved: I would then
demand these two Questions of the Objectors: First, whether this Text prohibits
all kind of civil communion, and eating at Table with any Christians who are
raylers, fornicators, idolaters, covetous persons, extortioners or drunkards,
under pain of mortal sin? If yea; then it is a damnable sin in the
Objectors to eat, drink, or converse in any kind with any such as these, which
they daily do without any scruple, and cannot avoid; yea, then it would be a
sin against this Text, for a wife, child, kinsman, Master, Magistrate, Prince,
constantly to convers or eat with such a scandalous husband, parent, kinsman,
servant, neighbor, Pastor, fellowservant, Subject, or they reciprocally with
them, if scandalous; then if any Member of the Parliament, or of any
Corporation, College, Innes of Court, or the like, should but eat together at
meals with his fellow members who are thus scandalous, in any Common Hall, or
at any Ordinary or Corporation-feast, they should sin against this Text, which
I never yet heard any Anabaptist, Separatist, Independent, Presbyter, or Divine
affirm; neither of which make any conscience of not repairing to the Lord
Majors, or any other public City-feast, where they are sure of good fare,
because they were certain there to meet and eat with some covetous, or other
seandalous persons; with whom Saint Paul prohibits them, no not to eat: Which
precept Christ himself and his Apostles should have transgressed, in Mat* 9.
10, 11. c: 11. 19* Mar. 2. 15, 16.
eating and drinking with Publicans and sinners, for which they were [s] taxed
by the over-precise Pharisees. If then this Text extends not to oureating at
meals with such scandalous christians in cases of necessity and expediency,
where either our natural, civil relations, or common civility engage us to it,
so as we delight not intheir company, or do it notvoluntarily out of free
choice, when we may avoid it without offense, as the very Objectors, I suppose,
will grant, and S. Paul resolves, ver. 11. then by the self-same reason, it can
be no offense at all against this Scripture, to eat or drink with such at the
Lords Table, at this his public Feast and great Supper, to which all
Christians are invted (if we believe Christ's own Parable, Mat. 22. 1. to 15.
and Isa. 55. 1. Rev. 22. 17.) in such cases wherein we may lawfully eat and
drink with them at our own, theirs, or other men's Tables. Secondly, our
Objectors themselves affirm, that it is lawful to hear, pray, read the
Scriptures, ^ing Psalms, repeat Sermons, fast and perform all other christian
duties in the company of such scandalous Christians as are here particularized,
without any violation of this Text: If then we may keep company or hold
communion with them, and they with us in all other Ordinances, till they be
actually and judicially excommunicated from the Church and them; then why not
likewise in the Lords Supper too? since this Text and all others cited for
proof of excommunication or suspension by our Opposites, prohibit communion in
them al alike, or else in none. Thirdly, admit Ministers themselves be polluted
with any of those Vices, suppose with covetousness, (as too many are,) yet
none of the Objectors dare aver, that it is a sin against this precept, for
any of their Congregations to receive the Sacrament from, or eat the Lords
Supper with them, no more then to join with them in prayer, fasting, or to
hear them read, preach, catechize, expound, or sing Psalms together with
them; since the goodness or viciousness of the Minister (as See Gratian*
Cause. 1. Quest, 1. Ivo Decret. seci^da pars.
all accord) does neither add ought to, nor detract any thing from the efficacy
of the Sacraments, or any public Ordinances, which proceeds from God alone: If
then we may receive the Sacrament from, and eat it with a covetous Minister
without any sin or contradiction to this Text, then why not likewise with a
covetous Neighbor or fellow-parishioner? Fourthly, the Objectors grant, that a
Christian may lawfully receive the Sacrament with persons secretly guilty of
these and other gross sins, with close Hypocrites, who guild over their
vices; and unregenerate Christians not really sanctified, who are neither
ignorant nor notoriously scandalous in their lives, without scruple or offense
against this Text. Therefore they may lawfully do it in point of conscience
with such who are notoriously scandalous, before their actual conviction and
excommunication, especially if they profess sincere repentance for their sins
past, and reformation of their lives for time to come; as all do, at least in
their general confessions before the Sacrament, if not in their own private
meditations, prayers and preparatory devotions twixt God and their own souls.
Fifthly, it is not the mere guilt, but only the scandal, ill example, and
contagion of notorious sins that subjects men to the censure of
excommunication, in regard of others, least they should infect and draw them on
to imitation of them, as Paul resolves, 1 Cor. 5. 6. else those very sins which
are not notorious, and those infirmities, of which the best Saints themselves
are frequently guilty, should subject them unto excommunication, or suspend
them from the Sacrament; and then what mortal man almost should be admitted to
it? It is not then such sinners bare receiving with us, or ours with them, that
can any way hurt, much less deter or keep us from the Sacram^nt, 1 Cor. 11^ 29.
(for they eat and drink damnation only to themselves, not others) in case we
imitate them not in their sins, or receive no contagion from their company.
Sixthly, the Objectors will grant, that there is a necessity lies upon Ministers
to administer, and on people to receive the Sacrament at all convenient
seasons: That God only infallibly knows the hearts and real preparations of
all Communicants, in the very best of whom there are many failing and
corruptions, which make them in themselves unworthy to communicate: That all
who come to receive, do always make a general and joint confession of their
sins before God and the Congregation, acknowledging and bewayling their
manifold sins and iniquities, which they from time to time have committed in
thought, word and deed, against the Divine Majesty; prosessing, that they do
earnestly repent, and are heartily sorry for all their misdoings, that the
remembrance of them is grievous unto them, the burden of them intolerable;
desiring God to have mercy upon them for his Son Christ Jesus sake, and to
for^er all that is past, and grant, that they may ever after serve and please
him in newness of life: offering up themselves, souls and bodies to be a holy
and li^ing Sacrifice acceptable unto God through Jesus Christ: Yea, I dare
presume, there is no Receiver so desperate, that dares profess when he comes
to receive, he is not heartily sorrow for his sins past, but resolvs to
persevere impenitently in them for the future, though afterward he relapse into
them (as the be^ Saints do to their old infirmities) because his heart nature
are not truly regenerated by Gods Spirit: All this being granted, no Minister
ought to refuse the Sacrament to such an external penitent sinner (the
sincerity of whose heart and repentance, God only knows) nor may or ought any
Christian to abstain from communicating with him at it, in case he be not
actually excommunicated, or not readmitted to the Church for his profane,
scandalous life, since they have no warrant from this or any other Scripture
else to do it. All which, if seriously pondered, by Separatists and
Independents, misled by the objected inference, would speedily reduce them to
the bosom of our Church, and quite allay the heat of the present controversies
about suspension from the Sacrament, in which many now place The very Kingdom
of Christ, who never claimed nor exercised such a sovereignty as they, under
his name and title, would usurp unto themselves.

Where the Israelites being commanded to eat the Pasover on the fourteenth day
of the first month at evening, there were certain men defiled by the dead
body of man, that they could not keep the Passover on that day; and they came
before Moses and Aaron on that day, and said unto Moses, we are de^iled by the
dead body of man; wherefore are we kept back, that we may not offer an
Offering to the Lord in his appointed season among the children of Israel? And
Moses said unto them, stand still, and I will hear what the Lord will command
concerning you: And the Lord spoke unto Moses saying, speak unto the children
of Israel, saying; If any man of you or your posterity shall be unclean by
reason of a dead body, or in a journey a far off, he shall keep the Passover
unto the Lord, the fourteeenth day of the second Month they shall keep it, and
eat it. By which it is clear, that legal uncleanness did dis-able them to
eat the Passover at the appointed time; therefore much more scandalous sins
and spiritual uncleanness did dis-able ard keep them from it, and by
consequence they do likewise debar men from the Lords Supper now, of which the
Passover was a type; yea, our reverend Scottish brother in his controversall
Fast-Sermon, added, that no man might bring a Trespass offering to the Lord,
to expiate any particular sin he was guilty of, unless he did first confess
he had sined in that thing, Levit. 5. 5, 6. Therefore said he, a fortiori, he
could not be admitted unto the Pasover (nor any now unto the Lords Table)
unless he first particularly and publicly confessed the sins he stood
guilty of.

To this I answer, first, that all circumcised persons whatsoever, had a right
to eat the Passover, and participate of all the Ordinances under the law, from
which the Priests had no power to exclude them for ignorance, or any scandalous
offense, for ought appears by any Scripture-precept or president: ALL of them
under pain of being cut off from their people, being bound to eat the Passover
in its season, except in cases of necessity, disability, by reason of a
journey, or of legal uncleanness only, (not spiritual) as is clear by
Exodus 12. 3. 43. to 50. Number. 9. 1. to 15. Deuteronomy. 16. 16, 17. Ezra 6. 19, 20, 21.
2 Kings 23. 21, 22. 2 Chronicles. 35. 6, 7, 13, 17, 18. where we read, that ALL THE
PEOPLE and ALL the Males THAT WERE PRESENT received the Pasover, not one of
them being excluded from eating it. This is most evident by that noted place of
2 Chro. 30. 3. to 21. where King Hezekiah proclaiming a solemn^ Pasover,
summoned ALL Israel, and ALL THE PEOPLE, from Dan to Beersheba, to repair to
it; whereupon there assembled MUCH PEOPLE to Jerusalem to keep it: Now there
were many in the Congregation that were not clean nor sanctified* for a
multitude of the people had not cleansed themselves (from their legal
pollutions) YET DID THEY EAT THE PASSOVER, (neither Hezekiah nor the Priests
prohibiting them to eat it) otherwise then it was written; But Hezekiah prayed
for them saying, The good God pardon every one that prepares his heart to
seek God, the Lord God of his Fathers, though he be not cleansed according to
the purification of the Sanctuary: And the Lord hearkened t^ Hezekiah and healed
the people. Here legal uncleanness did not actually suspend them from the
Passover, when their hearts were upright, and they desirous to eat it, the Lord
at Hezekiah's prayer passing by their unpreparations and accepting their
devotions in this act; Nor yet did spiritual pollution, by reason of gross
and scandalous sins, debar them that were circumcized, from the Passover, as
Paul expressly determines, 1 Cor. 10. 1. to 10. (an unanswerable Text to this
purpose) Moreover brethren, I would not that ye should be ignorant, that ALL
our Fathers were under the cloud, and ALL passed through the sea, and were ALL
baptiz^d unto Moses in the cloud and in the sea; and DID ALL EAT THE SAME
SPIRITUAL MEAT (to wit, the Passover and Manna) and did ALL DRINK OF THE SAME
SPIRITUAL DRINK for they drank of the Rock that followed them, and that Rock
was Christ: But perchance ALL these Communicants were visible Saints, free from
any legal pollution, at least not tainted with any scandalous sin: The
Apostle to take off this evasion, subjoynes in the very next words, But with
MANY OF THEM God was not well pleased, for they were overthrown in the
Wilderness: No^ these things were our examples, to the intent we should not
lust after evil things, (...) they also lusted; neither be ye Idolaters as
were some of them, etc. neither let us commit fornication as some of them
committed, etc. neither let us tempt Christ (...) some of them also tempted,
neither murmr ye as also some of them murmurd, and were destroyed of the
destroyer: So that the Israelites being once circumcized, were all admitted to
eat the Passover, though some of them were Idolaters; others, lusters after
evil things; others Fornicators, others tempters of Christ, others murmurers
against God and Moses; therefore there was no suspension of any circumcized
Israelite from the Passover, for spiritual uncleanness, and scandalous sins,
but only for legal uncleanness. Secondly, it is clear by the objected Text,
that those who were legally unclean at the day appointed for the Passover, so
as they could not then receive it, were yet peremptorily enjoined to eat it the
14. day of the second Month; and not suspended, til they made public
confession of their sins, reformed the evil of their doings, and gave public
satisfaction to the Congregation, or Priests, as God himself resolves in
terminis, Number. 9. 11, 12. If any man of you, or of your posterity shall be
unclean by reason of a dead body, YET HE SHALL EAT THE PASSOVER the fourteenth
day of the second month at even, he must not be suspended from it above one
month: By what Law then, do many Ministers now presume, to suspend* their
whole Congregations, not only above whole months but years from the Lords
Table (contrary to this text) whereof the Pasoever was a Type? let them amend
this practice, or renounce this Scripture, and their unwarrantable inferences
from it. Thirdly, he that was legally unclean, was kept back from the Passover
for the present, not by the Priest, or Ecclesiastical Classis, or temporal
Magistrate, but by those of the same Exodus 12. 3. (...) 7, 47. ^ Chron. 30. ^^
to 2^.
Family wherein he was to eat the Passover, as ver. 6, 7. imports. And the true
reason in this Text, why his uncleanness did seclude him from eating the
Passover, was, because it quite excluded him out of the Camp for a time, (not
Tabernacle or Temple) and so by necessary consequence, from the House wherein
he was to eat the Passover, as is evident by Levit. 14. 3. 8. chap. 16. 26,
27, 28. Number. 5. 2* 3, 4. chap. 12. 14, 15. chap. 19. 7. 11. chap. 31. 19. 20.
24. Deuteronomy. 23. 10, 11. And by like reason it debarred him from all other
Ordinances, as well as it; So that all you can probably infer from this Text,
is but this, which none will contradict: that profane, scandalous persons
justly excommunicated, and shut out of the Church, ought not to receive the
Sacrament, nor participate in any other Ordinance, during their
excommunication, till their re-admittance into the Church; as the unclean
Israelite could not eat the Passover, nor be present at any other public
Ordinance or sacrifice, till his re-admittance into the Camp. Fourthly, here is
a direct resolution of God himself in positive terms, prescribing a
suspension from the Passover in case of present legal pollution only, not
spiritual; yet expressly enjoining the selfsame person under the severest
penalty, to eat it the very next month after; but there is no such punctual
resolution in the old or new Testament, to warrant a like suspension of any
from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, in case of scandal or spiritual
uncleanness, unless he be first legally excommunicated, nor can any Minister
or Classis debar him justly from it by any color or inference from this text,
if he be desirous to receive it; any longer then for one month. Fifthly, this
argument for suspending men from the Lords Table for spiritual uncleanness,
because some were suspended from the Pasover for legal* uncleanness, but not
for spiritual, is no way conclusive; First, because the Passover and Lords
Supper, ceremonial and spiritual pollution differ in kind: Secondly, because
suspension from the Sacrament for spiritual uncleanness, falls not at all
under this temporary precept, of suspension from the Passover, only for
legal uncleanness; the rather, because no man was kept from the Passover by
color thereof, for any spiritual pollution, but only for ceremonial
uncleannes; therefore much less can any be suspended by color of it from the
Sacrament, to which it has no relation; Thirdly, there is a direct divine
warrant for the one, but not for the other; wherefore we may justly reject the
objected argument as erroneous and fallacious.

Secondly, to the latter part of the Objection; that none might offer so much
a^ a Trespasse-offering for sin, without a particular private confession of
hi^ sin (to God, not to the Priest;) Ergo, he might not eat the Passover (nor
any now the Sacrament) if he were a scandalous sinner, without a particular
public confession and repentance of his scandalous sins.

I answer, that it is a mere Non-sequitur, because, First, directly
contradicted by 1 Cor. 10. 1. to 12. as the premises manifest: Secondly,
because a particular examination of the conscience and repentance for sin, is
no where required in Scripure of such who did eat the Pasover, though all
circumstances and necessaries for the worthy eating of it be most punctually
enumerated, Exodus 12. Number. 9. Deuteronomy. 16. Neither was there any such reason why
God should require such a confession of sin in those who were to eat the
Passover, as he expressly exacts from those who came to offer a Sin-offering to
him, only of set purpose to pr^cure an atonement for those very particular
sins which they did then confess, at which oblation it was both necessary and
requisite they should particularly confess those very sins (yet not to the
Priest, Classis or Congregation, Prove. 28. 13. 1 John 1. 9* Psalm. 32. 5.
but to God alone) since the Scripture is positive, that without confession of
sin, there is no remission of it; and therefore when they came purposely to
sue for pardon, and make atonement for any particular sins, it was
absolutely needful and expedient they should then confess them: But in the
Passover there was no atttonement nor confession made to God for any
particular Exodus 12. 22. to 28.
sin, but only a commemoration of his infinite mercy in passing over the
Israelites first borne, when he slew the Egyptians: Therefore the paralelling
of these two together, and the inference from the one, applied to the other, is
very incoherent: Finally, I answer; that every particular Communicant befoce he
comes to receive the Sacrament, makes a public confession of his sins to God
with the rest of the Congregation, and in words at least, voweth newness of
life for the future; there being no Communicant that ever I heard of so
desparately wicked and Atheistical, as not to profess hearty sorrow for all
his forepast sins, or to avow impenitent continuance in them when he came to
the Lords Table; therefore he cannot be justly debarred from the Sacrament by
virtue of this Text, after such a confession, since none were kept off from
making their atonement by a trespass offering if they did first confess
their sins to God, though perchance his confession was not cordial, or such
as the Priests approved, but external, only in show.

The sixth thing in controversy between us, is, Whether Judas received the
Sacra^ent of the Lords Supper, as well as the other Apostles? Our Antagonists
most confidently deny he received it, against direct Scripture, and all
antiquity, the current confessions, resolutions of most Churches, and their
eminentest Writers of all sorts: I shall prove the affirmative that he did
receive it, by Scripture, Antiquity, Fathers, modern Authors of all sorts, and
then answer all pretenses to the contrary, with all possible brevity.

Mat. 26. 17. to ^1. 47. Mark 14. 15. to 27. Luke 22. 24.
First, the three Evangelists Matthew, Mark and Luke, who only relate the
institution of this Sacrament, are all express in terminis, That Christ sat^
down to eat the Passover, and the TWELVE APOSTLES with him* that Jud^s was
one of these twelve, and present at the Table; that as they sat at meat
together, Jesus took bread and brake it, and gave it to them, (the TWELVE)
saying, Take, eat, this is my body: That he likewise took the cup, and gave
thanks, and gave it TO THEM, saying, drink YE ALL of it, etc. And Mark expressly
records, he gave it to them, and THEY ALL drank of it. If all twelve then sat
down with Christ, and Christ gave the bread and cup to them, and bad them ALL
eat and drink thereof, and they ALL did eat and drink thereof accordingly: With
what shadow of truth dare any confidently aver, that Judas did not receive this
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and that he was not present at its institution?

Add to this, that Matthew and Mark record, that immediately before the
institution of this Sacrament, as they sat at meat, Jesus said unto the
TWELVE, Verily one of you shall betray me; whereupon they began to be
sorrowful, and to say unto him, EVERY ONE of them ONE BY ONE, Lord is it I?
and he answered and said unto them, it is ONE OF THE TWELVE that dippeth with
me in the dish: Then JUDAS who betrayed him, said, Master is it I? and he said
unto him, thou have said it: which was no sooner uttered, but Jesus took bread
and blessed it, etc. and both instituted and distributed the Sacrament to them
ALL, as yo^ heard before; Therefore certainly to Judas, the l^st man that said,
Is it I? immediately before the institution, as Saint Matthew records; And to
manifest yet further, that Judas was present at the Sacrament, Saint Luke
places these words of Christ concerning Judas his betraying him* after the
institution and distribution of the Sacrament, not before it, which he thus
expresses; But behold the hand of him that betrayeth me IS WITH ME AT THE
TABLE, etc, and they began to enquire among themselves which OF THEM should
betray him. Saint John writes thus; And SUPPER BEING ENDED, the Devil having
NOW put it into the heart of Judas Iscariot to betray him; Christ rises from
supper, and laid aside his Garment, and took a towell and began to wash his
Disciples feet; and it seems he washed Judas his feet, who was then present,
as these words import, John 13. 10, 11. And ye are clean, but not all; for he
knew who should betray him: Therefore he said, Ye are clean, but not all:
After which he sat down again* and among sundry other discourses with his
Disciples, he said; Verily I say unto you, that ONE OF YOU shall betray me;
then the Disciples looked one upon another, doubting of who^ he spoke: Now
there was leaning on Jesus bosom, one of the Disciples whom Jesus loved; Simon
Peter therefore beckned to him, that he should ask who it should be of whom he
spoke: he then leaning on Jesus breast, says unto him, Lord who is it? Jesus
answered him it is to whom I shall give a sop when I have dipped it: And when
he had dipped the sop, he gave it to Judas Iscariot; and after the sop, satan
entered into him: Then said Jesus unto him, that thou do, do quickly; he
then having received the sop, went immediately out, and it was night.

Now Saint John expressly averring, verse 2. That all this discourse, and the
giving of the sop to Judas, was AFTER SUPPER ENDED: And the other three
Evangelists unanimously according, that Christ instituted and distributed the
Sacrament (at least the bread) as he sat at Meat, as they were eating, before
Supper quite ended (whence it was styled the Lords Supper;) it must of
necessity follow from all the Evangelists several relations, joined together,
and especially from Saint John's (who was present at the institution) from
whence our Antagonists would infer the contrary, that Judas did receive the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, together with the other Disciples* and they may
as probably question, whether Peter or John did receive it, as Judas, there
being not one syllable in any of the Evangelists, intimating he did not receive
it with the rest, which doubtless they would have particularly and positively
recorded, had he not been present at it, being a thing of so great moment.

This truth is so transparent, that all Ages have positively averred, received
it as an indubitable verity; forwhich I could produce whole Centuries of
Writers: but for brevity, I shall recite the testimonies only of some few of
principal Note.

Origin Tract. 35. in Matthew. Si autem potes spiritualem mensam and cibum
spiritualem and dominicam intelligere Caenam, quibus omnibus dignificatus
fuerat (Judas) a Christo abundantius videbis multitudinem maliciarum ejus,
quibus magistrum, cum cibo divinae mensae and calicis, and hoc in die Paschae
tradidit.

Saint Cyprian in his Sermon de Ablutione Pedum writes thus, Ad Mensae tuae
participationem, Judas proditor est admissus: And de Caena Domini, he thus
seconds it: Quamdiu, cibi illi, qui ad diem festum erant parati convescentibus
Apostolis sumebantur, veteris paschae agebatur memoria nec dum Judas ad veterem
vitam pertinens, diabolo invadente and occupante anim^m ejus egredi cogebatur;
sed ubi sac^um cibum men's perfida tetigit, and sceleratum os panis
sanctificatus intravit, paricidialis animus vim tant^ sacramenti non sustinens,
quasi palea de area exsufflatus est, and praeceps cucurrit ad desperatio^em et
laqu^um.

Saint Ambrose Enar. de Tobia. lib. c. 14. resolves thus: Judas ibi miser
periit in illo convivio quo alij saluantur: Idem Apologi a Davidis posterior,
cap. 11. Judas panem accepit a Christo, and tunc magis est repletus Diabolo,
quia non accepit ex fide, qui tam hospitali Domino pro litionem parabat And
Com. lib. 12. in Luc. 13. Judas proditionem sanguinis Dominici inter sacrificia
positus cogitabat.

Saint Chrysostom Sermon. 1. de Mysteriis Caenae Dominicae. Qui sacratae huius
Caenae indigne participatur accubitu, non cum Petro perveniat ad s^l^tis
Portium, sed sustinebit cum Judah sine reparatione naufragium. Judas non
syncerus sed simulator accubuit, et post bu^^^llam Christi, in eum Diabolus
introivit. And de Resurrectione. Homil. 3. Quid Caenam illam liberalem
commemorem, ubi tingebat Discipulus mendax digitum? Edebat cum pane Caed^m* ^t
sorbebat cum sanguine potionem. O crudele Proditoris convivium! rogo, quibus
oculis ^spectebat, quem sub dente premeb^^?

To pass by Nazianzen, who in his Christus Patiens, agrees, that Judas did
receive the Lords Supper* together with the other Apostles.

Cyrill. Bishop of Jerusalem asserts the same, Catechesis 13. Prodiderat Judas
improbus Patrem-familias, nuperque exiens a mensa, and poculum benedictionis
bibens, and pro potu salutari sanguinem Justi effudere volens.

Saint Augustine thus seconds him, in Psalm. 3. Enar. Cum Traditor Domini Judas
fuerit, ipsa Domini nostri, tanta et tam miranda patientia, quod cum tamdiu
pertulit tanquam bonum, cum ejus cogitationes non ignoraret, cum adhibuit ad
convivium in qu^ corporis et sanguinis sui figuram discipulis commendavit et
tradidit. In his 162. Epist. Judas accepit pretium nostrum: And Tract. 6. 26.
and 62. in Joan. he often reiterates it: Non mala erat buccella quae ^radita est
Iudae a Domino. Absit, Medicus non d^ret venenum; salutem medicus dedit, sed
ind^gne accipiendo ad perniciem accepit, qui non paratus accepit: Talis erat
Judas, ^et tamen cum sanctis Discipulis vndecim intrabat et exibat. Ad ipsam
C^nam Domini^am pariter accessit; conversari cum iis potuit, ^os inquinare non
potuit: De uno pane et Petrus accipit et Judas; et tamen quae pars fideli et
infidel^? Petrus enim accepit ad vitam, manducat Judas ad mortem: Qui enim
comederunt indigne judicium sibi manducat et bibit SIBI, NON TIBI: S^ judicium
Sibi non Tibi, toleramalum bonus, ut venias ad praemia bonorum, ne mitteris in
poenam malorum: which our Venerable Beda, in his Comentary on 1 Cor. 11. both
recites and approves. Sundry more passages to this purpose are there in this
Father, which I pretermit for brevity.

Victor Antiochenus in chap. 14. Evang. Marci. comments thus: Dominus autem
licet omnium consiliorum Judae gnarus esset, attamen a Sacramenti sui accessu
illum non prohibuit: Cur ita? nempe ut hin^ discas, nihil little praeterijsse,
quae eum ad sanam mentem reducere quoquo modo poterant: sunt tamen qui Judam
ante porrectum Eucharistiae Sacramentum exiuisse existiment, etc. The first
mention I find of any opinion to the contrary.

Theodoret in his Interpretation on the 1 Epistle to the Corinthians, cap. 14.
writes thus of Christ, Salutaris Sacramenti portas aperuit, et non solum
undecim Apostolis, sed etiam Judae pr^ditori pretiosum corpus et sanguinem
impertit.

Remigius Bishop of Rhemes, in his Explanation on the 1 Cor. 11. asserts it in
these terms. Probet se, etc. utrum* dignus sit neque; Ne fort^ unde alij
sumunt r^medium, accipiet ille damnationem et judicium, indigne-illud
percipiens, sicut Iud^^ proditor: nam cum alij Apostoli sumpsissent illud
terribile Sacramentum ad remedium et ad salutem suam ille qui non dignus erat
tanto mysterio, accepit illud ad dam^ationem suam; quia quem Diabolus antea
tenebat per suggestion^m et tentationem, postea ad damnationem, tenuit before,
ut nihil aliud posset cogitare aut facere nisi quod voluntas ejus erat: with
whom Haym^ Bishop of Halberstat, concurres in the self-same terms, in his
Interpretation on the 1 Cor. 11.

Pascatius Ratbertus, de Corpore and sanguine Domini, cap. 28. has this
memorable passage to this purpose: Aliud vero Christus nouerat, quod et boni
digne, et mali indigne, hoc mysterium, licet praesumptione accepturi essent,
voluit formam dare cunctis Communicantibus, quid boni, quid^e mal^ percipiant:
et ideo Judas in figura omnium malorum ad percipiendum admittitur.

Aecumenius Enar. in 1 Cor. 11. has this speech, Dominus ^oster communi mensa
non sanctos modo discipulo^, sed et ipsum Proditorem ea dignatus est, inimicum
s^eleratissimum: et vos dedignamini vna cum pauperibus caenare.

Algerus de Sacramentis, lib. 1. cap. 21. resolves thus. Cum ergo malos corpus
Christi vere sumere, ipsumque Iudam a summ^ sacerdote Christ^, cum caeteris
Apostolis acc^pisse sancti testentur, astructum etiam videtur, non esse nobis
noxium, si a nobis, vel nobiscum mali male suma^^ Sacramenta, cum Judas ab ipso
Christo cum caeteris Apostolis acceperit, nec etiam a pravis minus vere confici
ipsa Sacram^nta, cum ipse Proditor tan^^ offici^ Ministerium a summo Pontifice
accipiens, cum caeteris, hoc faci^e in meam comm^morationem, a^dierit: si enim
sicut e^ a Domino injunctum fuerat, corpus Domin^ confecisset, numquid vera
minus ab ipso pravo, quam a qu^vis bo^o factum fuisset? Q^ia enim Judas
accus^tus et damnatus non fuerat, ideo Christus conscientiam ejus perversam
quan^vis sibi notam dam^ar^ noluit, ut nos instru^ret, quod aliquorum pravitas
nec conversation^, nec Sacramentorum consecratione vel comparticipatione bonis
aliquatenus nocere possit. Augustinus contra Donatistas: Communio malorum non
maculat aliquem participatione Sacramentorum, sed consensione factorum. Item,
^dem in Homilijs suis* Ut sufferas etiam cum quem nosti malum, attend
Apostolum dicentem, unusquisque onus suum portabit. Non enim cum illo
communicas avaritiam, sed Christi mensam: Et quid obest si Communices cum illo
mensam Christi? qui manducat and bibit indigne, judicium sibi manducat and
bibit. SIBI inquit, non TIBI. Quia igitur, ut a^t Leo, Judae Dominus nec
negavit Apostolic^ ordims honorem, in conficiendis Sacramentis, nec Communionem
in ipsis percipiendis, multum providit Ecclesiae suae, ostendens per hunc solum
innoxiam e^ fore malorum praelationem vel conversationem, in quo nisi esset
praescisa tanti causa scismatis, multi magis superbe quam Religiose calcibus
etiam a se repellerent eos qui apud se minoris esse viderentur aestimationis:
Unde Aug. in Sermon. 49. super Joannem: Quid voluit Dominus admonere Ecclesiam
suam quando unum perditum inter duodecim habere voluit, nisi ut malos
toleremus, ne corpus Christi dividamus; Ecce inter sanctos est Judas, ecce fur
est and sacrilegus; talis cum Discipulis ad Coenam Dominicam accessit;
conversari cum eis petuit, inquinare eos non potuit.

Theophilact who flourished about 1070. veers after Christ, in his Enar. in
Marcum. cap. 14. page 109. writes thus; Quidam dicunt (but who they were,
appears not in any extant works of theirs) Iudam non fuisse participem
Sacramentorum sed egressum esse pri^squam dominus Sacramenta traderet: Alij
autem dicunt* quod etiam ingrato illi sacro-sancta dederit: But himself
subscribes to the latter opinion without scruple, not only in his Enar. in
Joan cap. 13. where he affirms it over and over several times; but also in
his Enar. in Matthew. 26. page 67. Apposuit autem vescentibus ut ostenderet
crudelitatem Judae, quia in mensa and Communione ciborum illius, quando si and
fera fuisset, mansuetiorem se exhibuisset; tunc neque cum argueretur
intellexit, sed et corpus illius gustans non poe^^tuit: Quidam autem dicunt;
quod egresso Juda tradidit Sacramentum alijs discipulis proi^de et nos sic
f^cere debemus, et malos a Sacramentis abarcere, etc. Bibite ex ^o omnes; Sunt
qui dicunt propter Judam hoc dictum: Judas enim panem accepit, et non comedi^,
sed oc* ul^avit, ut monstraret Judaeis, quod panem corpus suu^ voc^rit Jesus;
pocul^m autem invitus bibit, cum non posset occultare, propterea ho^ loco
dic^b^t, bi^ite omnes.

Saint B^rnard suffragates to all the former, that Judas did receive the
Sacrament as well as the other Apostles.

I shall trouble you with no more Ancients, since they all unanimously acco^d
herein without one dissenting voice, excepti^g Hilary, in Matthew. Can^n. ^0.

The old and modern Canonists of all sorts, with one consent suffragate to
this verity; I shall instance but in two, to wit, Gratian. Cause. 1. Quest. 1.
and Ivo C^^not ensis* D^cretalium* secunda pars: in both which we have many
senten^^s of Fathers collected to this purpose, and among others, this of
Augustine, in Exposi^. Psalmi. 10* Christus quid fecit vobis qui Traditorem
suum tant a pati^^ti^ pertulit, ut ei primum Eucharistiam confectam manibus, et
ore suo commend^t^m, sicut caeteris Apostolis traderet? Quid vobis fecit
Christus, qui eundem Traditorem suum que^ diabolum nominavit, qui ante
traditionem Domini nec lo^^lis d^minicis ^idem potuit exhibere, cum caeteris
discipulis ad praedicandum Regnum Caelorum misit, nisi ut monstraret, dona dei
perve^ire ad eos, qui cum fide accipi^nt, etiamsi talis sit per quem accipiunt
qualis Judas fuit: See Gratian to the same effect, Cause. 7. Que. 1. and de
Conserat. did. 1. and 2. All succeding Canonists and Glossers upon Grat^^n
concur with these two ancients without dissent, and so do the Casuists too;
I spare their names for brevity sake.

The Schoolmen generally s^bscribe to this conclusion; I shall mention only
three or four of them. The first is, Alexander Alensis, our own Countryman,
styled the irrefragable Doctor, in whose Summa Theol^giae, pars 4. Quest. 11.
Art. 1. Sect. 3. I first of all meet with this Question propounded and
disc^ssed: An Christus etiam Iudae corpus suum in coena dedor^t? This Doctor
holds affirmatively that he did, which he proves by Ma^th. 26. 24. etc. John
13. Dionysius Areopagita, Chrysostom, Hom. 81. super Matthew. the Ordinary
Gloss on Mat. 18. John 13. and 1 Cor. 11. and other Texts: Adding that if
Christ had actually excluded Judas* from this Sacrament, certainly s^^^ of the
Evangelists or others would have expressly noted such a memorabls and notable
all, which not one of them has done: And he resolves thus, Tha^ Christ in this
Supper gave his body to Judas, and that for diverse reas^ns: The first taken
from Gods wisdom, and that for a twofold reason; First, to teac^ us to love
our e^emies, finee Christ fed this Traitor with his own slesh; Secondly, to
instruct the Ministers of this Sacrament* for in that he denied ^ot his body to
Judas* who was entangled in a grievous ^inne, he has taught the dispensers of
this Sacrament, that they ought to give it to sinners in the like case, when
they shall desire it. Secondly, in regard of Gods mercy, and that in two
respects; F^rst, revocati^n from evil; secondly, promotion in good: For ^his
well ought, out of the consideration of Gods mercy (which most appears in this
that he delivered his body to him) to recla^me him from his evil p^rpose, and
conse^uently to meliorate him by the virtue of so great a Sacrament; but he
increased in his sin, from whence he ought to have augmented his Merit.
Thirdly, in resp^ct of divine justice, and that in two respects: the
augmentation of his fault, the retribution or damnation of his punishment; for
since he would not cease from his conceived malice by so great a benefit, by
the just judgment of God, he is punished by a fall into a more grievous crime,
to wit, desperation. Fifthly, in respect of divine conversation, the Lord for
this cause giving him his body with others, that he might show him, that he
ought to be of like good conversation with others. Sixthly, for his perfect
reformation as much as might be, on the Lords part, since he left no means
unattempted to reclaim him. This and much more Alensis, who is seconded by
Thomas Aquinas, 3. Qu. 81. 1. 0. l. 4. Did. ii. Qu. 3. ar. 2. Qu. 1. 2. 0. By
John Gerson Sermon. in Coena Dom. ad Eccle. Ca^telam; Hugo de Sacram. l. 2. c. 8.
and by our Countrymen* Rich. de Media Villa, l. 4. did. 11. ar. 4. qu. 2. 3.
Tho* Waldensis, Oper. tom. 3. c. 43. sect. 6. and all the Popish Schoolmen;
many of them holding See Willets Synopsis Pap^smi, p. 650.
that Judas did receive the very body of Christ himself, as well as the
Sacrament of his body: This Doctrine of Judas his eating the Sacrament with
Christ at his last Supper, is so current in the Church of Rome, that they have
inserted it into most of their Ladies Psalters, Hours, Missals, and expressed
it in this Rhyme.

Rex sedet in Coena, Turba Cinctus DUODENA,
Se tenet in manibus, etc.
For Protestant Writers, the most and best of them in foreign parts agree See
Lucas O sia^d. Encha rid. contr. cum Anabaptist. de Eccl^sia, cap. 6. Qu. 3.
that Judas did receive the Sacrament, or outward elements of Christ's body and
blood; but not the body and blood of Christ himself; Panem Domini, non panem
Dominum, Sacramentum corporis and sanguinis Christi, non rem Sacramenti: The
outward signs, not the inward and spiritual grace, for which read Caluini
Instit. l. 4. ^. 17. sect. 34. Aretii Problemata, Locus 77. De usu
Sacramentorum, instead of hundreds of others; And as the prime Writers, so the
public Confessions of the Reformed Churches resolve, That Judas did receive
the Sacrament as well as the other Apostles: Witness the The harmony of
Confessions printed at London, 1643. p. 280. 321.
Confession of Bohemia. In the holy Scripture manifest examples of this nature
are found in many places; especially in Judas, who received the sacrament of
the Lord Christ himself: And the confession of Belgia, An evil man verily
receives the Sacrament unto his own condemnation, but the thing or truth of
the Sacrament he receives not: as for example; Judas and Simon Magus* both of
them did receive the sacramental signs, but as for Christ signified thereby,
they received him not.

For our own Protestant Writers, I shall nominate but two of note, our English
Apostle John Wickliffe, as Thomas Waldensis records his opinion, Operum Tom. 3.
c 43. sect. 6. and our incomparable Bishop Jewel, in his Defense of the Apology
of the Church of England (publikly reserved in all our Churches) part 5. sect.
16. Divis. 1. page 635. who determine, that Judas received the sacrament of the
body and blood of Christ, though not Christ himself; and the whole Church of
England in the Exhortation before the sacrament, in the antiquated
Common Prayer book, has resolved, that Judas did receive the sacrament, as
this clause manifests; Therefore if any of you be a blasphemer of God, etc.
bewail your sins, and come not to this holy Table, least after the taking of
that holy sacrament, the Devil enter into you, as he entered into Judas, etc.
And the 29. Article of the church of England, with the 96. Article of the
church of Ireland* resolve as much, in citing, approving S^int Austins words as
orthodox doctrine, which he spoke directly of Judas his receiving the
Sacrament, and external elements of Christ's body and blood; for which you may
consult with Ma^ter Rogers his exposition on this Article.

The verity of Judas his receiving the Sacrament being thus abundantly ratified
by direct Scriptures, and so many concurr^nt authorities of all sorts in all
ages, (to which hundreds of like testimonies might be added.) I shall only
add^ this further consideration to the premises, that al our Antagoni^^s and
the Evangelists clearly agree, that Judas did eat the Pass^over with Christ
himself, as well as the other Apostles: (now the Passover was a type of the
Lords Supper (which su^ceeded in its place, and a Sacrament under the Law) the
same in substance with the E^charist under the Gospel; wherein Christ was
spiritually represented and received, as well as in the Lords Supper, 1 Cor.
10. 3, 4. chapter 5. 7. Therefore since Christ admitted him to the one, I cannot
beleev he quite excluded him from the other* which the last answer to the four
Quaeres does ingenio^^ly acknowledge.

And here I cannot but wonder to see, with what groundle^^e confidence many
godly learned Divines now aver the contrary both in Press and Pulpit, of
purpose to introduce a suspension of pretended ^nworthy persons from the
Sacrament, before any actual excommunication from the Church, or other
Ordinances deno^^ced against them: Certainly, their gross mistake against
Scripture, and the resolution of all ages* Churches, in this particular, will
make wise conscientious men in all parts of this particular controversy
(wherein prejudice and self ends, I fear, have much over*blinded their
judgments) distrust and examine all other their Paradoxes* Inferences, and
mis-interpretations of Scripture, which will prove but darkness in the
conclusion, though cried up and embraced by many, under the specious seducing
notion of NEW-LIGHT.

Having thus made good* the affirmative, I shall answer the reasons produced by
the opposites, to prove, that I^das received not the sacrament; which in truth
are mere mistakes: First, they say, that Judas went out before supper ended,
immediately after he received the sop, John 13. 30. but our Savior did not
ordain this sacrament till after supper, Luke 22. ^0. when he had supped, 1
Cor. 11. 25. therefore Judas certainly received not the Sacrament.

I answer, first, That Judas went not out till after Supper, as Saint John
expre^^y resolve^, Jo^^ 13. 2. And SUPPER BEING ENDED, the Devil having n^w
put it into the heart of Judas etc. After which, he adds* that Christ rose
from the Table and washed his Disciples feet, and Judas feet among the rest, if
not first of all (a^ Theophilact with others hold;) After this, Judas continued
there with Christ for some space, as the series of the chapter from the 20, to
the 30 verse attests. Secondly, all the three other Evangelists prove directly,
that Judas was present at the sacrament, as I have formerly evidenced;
therefore to infer the contrary fr^^ John 13. 30. is to make John contradict
all the other Evangelists, and himself 100, v. 2 etc. Therefore it must needs
be a cursed interpretation which corrupts the Text, and se^s the Evangelists
together by the ears. Thirdly, This Sacrament was 1 Cor* (...) 2^,
not i^sti^^ted after Supper, but as they sat^ at supper, whence i^ was called
the Lords supper; Matthewes and Paul's expression is, As they were eating, Jesus
took bread, etc. Marks, As they sat and did eat, and Lukes words taken
altogether, imply as much: Therefore he instituted the Sacrament, not after
supper, but at and during supper, whiles they sat and did eat at table: True
it is. Luke writes, not of the bread, but cup only (to which Paul's objected
words likewise relate) he took the cup after supper, Luke 22. 20. yet it
appears he took it likewise during supper, verse 17. yea, some learned me^ are
o^ opinion* that Christ had two suppers that night: First, his Pas^ha^ sup^er,
at the clo^e whereof he instituted the Sacrament of his own supper: Secondly,
an ordinary supper, which succeeded the insti^^tion of his own, in imitation
whereof* the 1 ^or. 11. 21* 22.
^or^^h^ans and S^e T^rtul. Ap^l.
Primitive Christians had their Agape or Love*feasts, which they did eat
immediately after the Lord* supper: and this is more then intimated by Saint
John, ^hap, 13. ver. 2. 4* 12. to ^1. where we read, that af^^r supper, Jesus
did rise from supper, and washed his Disciple*feet; which done, after some
discourse he SAT DOWN AGAIN with them and then dipped a sop, (which could
not well be at the Paschall Supper* where we read of no so^s, nor ought to dip
them in) and gave it to Judas* etc. who having received the sop went imediately
out: therefore Lukes, after supper he took the cup must be meant only after the
Paschall supper, not the other common supper: for if Judas went out before the
Paschal supper q^ite ^nded, the^ you mu^t grant that he did not drink of the
cup contrary to Christ's expr^^^e precept, Drink ye ALL of this; and Saint Marks
relation, that they did ALL drink thereof; to wit, all the twelve Disciples.
Fourthly, the word imediately does not always imply, a thing done at the
self-same instant, without the lest intervenient stay or delay; but many times
(as all know) in our common speech* it signifies, soon after, or not long
after; as we usually say, we will do this or that imediately, instantly,
presently, when as we mean only ^peedily, within a short time, not at that
instant or very time we speak it; So that admit the mo^^ that can be, this word
will not necessarily in^erre, that Jud^s went out so imediatly after the sop
received, that he did not stay to receive the Lords supper ere he went out,
which all the other Evangelists words deny, who would certainly have expressed
it in direct terms* had there been any such thing.

Their second reason, that Judas received not the Sacrament, because Christ
could not say unto him particularly, Take, eat, this is my body which is given
for thee; this is my blood which is shed for thee; is very absurd.

First, because it appears not, that Christ did deliver the Bread and Wine
severally, one after another to every of his Disciples* as our Ministers ^se
now to do; but only* gave it promis^^o^sly to them all at once; who took and
divided it severally among themselves, and handed it one to another, as Luke
22. 17. and Mat. 26. 27. Divide it among your selves* He took the cup and gave
it TO THEM (jointly, not to each of them by himself) saying, Drink ye ALL
(not tho^ Peter or John) of this, do more then imply.

Secondly, because admit Christ used those words particularly to Judas, a^
Ministers now do to each particular Communicant, yet he meant them only co^^i
^onally, that his body was broken, and his blood shed for him, if he would
really receive the^ by faith, otherwise not! Christ being made o^rs only by
faith.

Thirdly, Matthew and Mark relate Christ's words of instit^tion to be without
any such particular application, as w^ subjoyne* viz. Take eat* this is my
body: Drink y^ all of this, for this is my blood of the new Testament which is
shed FOR MANY: not for thee Judas; which he might very well use to Judas, as
conjoined with the other Apostles.

But these Antagonists have a second shift; when they cannot deny that Judas
received the Sacrament, they answer, he was a close Hypocrite, guilty of no
scandalous crime, so that the other Apostles were more ready to suspect
themselves then Judas, when Christ told them, that one of them should betray
him* Therefore this is no president or warrant for Ministers, to admit open
scandalous sinners (though not actually excommunicated) to the Lords Table.

^^^n ^^ 17 c. ^. ^9 2^.
I answer, first, that Christ himself (the Act. 1. 24. (...) 2. ^^
searcher and knower of all men's hearts) did some one or two years space before
this, infallibly know, and tell his Disciples, that one of them, to wit, Judas
Iscariot, was a devil, for he it was should betray him, being one of the
twelve, John 6. 70, 71. Secondly, at the time when he instituted the Sacrament,
he infallibly knew and foretold the Disciples, yea Judas himself, that Judas
should betray him, and that it was fore-prophesied he should do so, John 13.
18. to 28. Matthew. 26. 20. to 26. Mark 14. 18. to 22. Luke 22. 21, 22, 23. Acts
1. 17. 18. Thirdly, that when Christ washed his Disciples feet (and Iudasses
among others) after supper, he told them, that they were clean, but not all;
meaning it of Judas* John 13. 10, 11. Fourthly, he infallibly knew him to be
lost, and thereupon called him, the son of perdition, that the Scripture
might be fulfilled, John 17. 12. and knew that the Devil after the sop given,
would enter into, and take actual possession of him, John 13. 27. compared
with chapter 6. 70, 71. and that he should be certainly damned and fall from his
Apostleship, for his transgression, that he might go to his own place (that
is, to hell) Acts 1. 25. and that therefore in eating the Sacrament, he would
certainly but eat and drink judgment to himself, and be guilty of the body
and blood of the Lord, 1 Cor. 11. 27, 29.

If then Christ himself did infallibly know all this of Judas, though
perchance his other Disciples did not (as likewise his theevish, covetous, as
well as traitorous disposition, John 12. 6. both which did make him scandalous,
and an unworthy ^eceiver) and yet for all this, in the very original
institution of the Sacrament, because Judas was still one of the twelve, nor
actually convicted of, nor excom^^nicated for these crimes, and voluntarily
desiring to receive the Sacrament as well as others* and because Christ himself
would leave him unexcusable in leaving no external means unattempted to
reclaim him from his desperate intentio^^, by what divine authority, rule of
conscience, or Christian prudence, can any Minister of Christ (who is not, at
lest ought not to deem himself, either greater* wiser, holier, preciser or more
conscientious then Christ his Master) keep any unexco^^^nicated christian from
the Sacrament, though covetous, scandalous, and outwardly fl^gitious for the
present, in case he be desirous to receive it, and will not be kept from it by
any serious dehortations or admonitions of the danger of unworthy receiving, if
he in his own conscience judge himself worthy, profess his hearty sorrow for
his sins past, and reformation of them for the future (especially since no
Minister 2 Chr 6. ^^ Jer. 17. 4, 5.
can so certainly know the secret disposition of such a man's heart for the
present, nor what 2 Timothy* 2. 25 26
he may from thenceforth prove for the future* or whether he be not ^^ Rom 8.
29 30 1 Cor. 6. 10, 11. Tit. 3. 2 to 8.
elect child of God, and so certain to be effectually called, converted,
peradventure at that instant time, in or by this very Ordinance of the
sacrament;) as Christ himself did know the heart, state, and final
impenitence of this traitor Judas, whom notwithstanding he admitted to his
Table: I shall therefore beseech all our Ministers and Opposites, to lay this
seriously to heart; and if they will needs make, or pretend conscience in any
thing, let it be in this, not to make themselves wiser, holier, rigidder, or
more conscientious in this point then Christ himself Joh. ^5. 20. c 13. 16.
Mat. 10. 24, 25
Remember the words that Christ said to his Disciples, and in them to all
Minister^, The servant is not greater then his Lord, nor he that is sent*
greater then he that sent him: it is enough for the Disciple that he be as his
Mast^r, and the servant a^ his Lord. Remember what St. John determines, 1 John
2. 6. H^ that, says he, abides in Christ, ought himself to walk eve^ as he
walked; who, as in his suffering, so in the Administration of this Sacrament,
has left Us an example, that We should follow his steps, 1 Pet. 2. 21. Ephesians. 5,
1, 2. compared with the 1 Cor. 11. 23* etc. We all grant, it is Christ's
prerogative only to institute Sacraments, and is it ^ot his prerogative
likewise to prescribe how and to whom they shall be administered? and has he
not done this by hi^ own example? take heed therefore of making conscience of
excluding such unexcommunicated person^ from Christ^ Table now he is in heaven*
as himself without scruple admitted to it whiles he was on earth; If any
unexcommunicated Iudasses will wilfully come to this sacred feast without a
Wedding Garment, or with a traitorous and impenitent heart, contrary to their
external profession of repentance, after your serious dehortation to them, and
advisements to abstain, the danger, guilt and sin is only their own* not
yours (as I shall prove more fully a^on) else Christ himself should have been
guilty (by your kind of reasoning) of Judas his sin and ^nworthy receiving,
which you dare not affi^me.

Secondly, if Christ himself knowing Judas to be such a desper^te wick^d
wretch, traitor, reprobate, did yet admit him to eat the Passover and
Sacrament with his other Disciples, and they made not any scruple of conscience
^o communicate with him in both, no not after Christ had particularly informed
them* and Judas himself, that he should betray him, Matthew. 26. 21. to ^6. then
certainly there can be no color for any Christian, in point of con^cience* to
withdraw himself from the Lords Table, or sever from our Churches because of
mixed Comm^nions (as some now phrase them) or because some op^^ s^a^dalous
unexcommunicate persons, are admitted to communicate with them: This i^ ^he use
and inference which most of the Ancien^s* made of Judas his ^ating the Lords
Supper and Passover with his fellow-Disciples and they with him, against the
scismaticall Donatists (now revived in our Ind^penden^s A^^baptists,
Separatists) whose resolution^ in this case they may do well to read at large
in Gratian, Cause. 1. Quest. 1. and in Ivo Carnot^nsis, Decre^^lium* ^ec^nda
part, to whom I shall refer them: Certainly they may with as much conscience
and reason refuse to join with such in hearing, reading* fasting* singing,
prayer, or any other Ordinances as in this, upon the self* same grou^d^ they
(...) to communicate with the^ at the Lords Table: Therefore let not such
ground* less whimsie^, and false principles, upon which they have hitherto
soun^^d their practice of separation in this kind delude the^ any longer; they
being ^s much partakers of other men's sin^, in participating* joining or being
present with them in any other Ordin^nce, as in this; since if they de^est
their sinful courses, they are no more guilty of them by rec^iving the
S^crament with the^* then Christ or his Apo^^le^ were of Iud^s his ^^ea^on or
unworthy receiving, by communicating with him; the ^ather, because the
Scripture resolves expressly (and all Come^tators new and old upon the Text
sub^cribe to it) that every unworthy Communicant eats and dr^^^es judgment
only TO HIMSELF, 1 Cor. 11. 27. 29.) not to the Ministe^ or any other, with
whom he shall Communicate in this Ordinance.

Let those therefore who out of spiritu^ll pride and selfe*opinion of their
own transc^^dent holiness above others, disd^ine to communicate with those
whom ^hey deem more sin^^l, l^sse p^nitent then themselves, beware lest this
groundless Phari^^ical ride of theirs make them not more scandalous and unfit
to receive thi^ Sacrament (^t which they should especially manifest their
humilty, charity, love, ^ompassion and (...) toward their br^thren) then those
scandalous persons they refuse to communicate with, as the Pharis^s pride in
prayer, made him less justifi^^ and un^^ceptable to God then the Publican,
Luke 18. 9. to 15. a place well worthy their saddest consideration.

And thu^ much for I^das his receiving the Sacr^ment, which go^^ very far in
deciding our present controversies.

The seventh difference is* Whether the Minister has not fully discharged his
duty and conscience if he give warning to unworthy Communicants of the danger
they incur by their unworthy approches to the Lords Table, and seriously
deh^rt them from coming to it, ^^lesse they repent, reform, and come
prepared? And ^hether the 1 Cor. 11. Ezekiel. 33. 1. to 10. Acts. 20. 26. 27. ^ith
the Li^urgies of our own and the French Churches do not intimate and prove a^
much? I affirm, my A Bro^^^^ly and friendly censure* p ^ 7. ^ A^ A^^i^ote
against (...) da^ger^us quaeries, p 6. An Answer, etc
Antagonists deny it in their three printed Pamphlets; affirming, that it is not
enough for Ministers to warn them of the sin and danger of unworthy
receiving* unless they l^kewise keep them back from the Sacrament: The reason
they render is, because, ^f the Minister gives the Sacrament to such, he is a
partaker of their sin and as much guilty by the giving, as the other by his
unwor^hy receiving* and shall partake with him both in the guilt and
punishment: To exemplify which they use this simi^itude: Sir, if you have a
cup in your hand which will poison and kill a sick distempered man, if he
drink of it, will you give it unto him if he desire it? and do^ you think it
enough to admonish him that it is deadly poison, and first deh^rt him from
drinking of it* and then imediately reach it to him, with intent tha he shall
drink of it? I persuade my self, that as he shall perish, so hi^ blood shall
be required at your hands and that you shall as guilty hold up your hand at the
bar for it. Yea, th y av^rre, that this is more then arbitrary, tyrannical*
papal domineering over the consciences of Pastors, Elders and godly people, to
^^ s^andalous sinners intrude and come boldly to the Lords table* and the
Pastors and Elders have no power to keep them back.

To which I answer* I very much wonder at this strange divinity, never heard of
in the world till of late, and that first among the Anabaptists, from whence it
was derived into o^^ English soil: But for a direct reply, I readily
acknowledge that all desperate, sc^nd^lous, wicked* obstin^te sinners, may be
justly excommunicated from the Church and S^craments* after sever^ll previous
admonitions for their sinful courses, and that being th^s excommunic^ted* they
ought ^ot to be admitted to the s^cr^ment nor any other public Ordin^nce til
their open profession of sin^ere repentance ^^d readmission to the Church: But
if any such not thus proceeded against ^or excommunic^ted after due
^dmonitions, profer themselves ^t the Lords Table together with others,
professing unf^ined rep^ntance for their sinne^ past, and reformation of their
lives for time to come (a^ every person vol^ntarily does who resorts to the
Lords table) in such a case the Minister when he has s^rio^sly ^dmonished them
of the d^nger of unworthy r^ceiving, and dehorted them to come to the
Sacrament, unless they find th^mselves sufficiently prepared in their own
consciences, has fully discharged his duty, and cannot repel them from this
heavenly banquet* And if i^ this case they receive unworthily, he is no way
guilty of their ^inne in the least degree, since he consented ^ot to it and did
for^w^rne the^ of it: To make this apparent to every man's capacity, I shall lay
down these six conclusions which I desire all Christians, especially
Separatists and I^dependents, seriously to ponder.

First, that every visible Member of ^ visible Church or Congregation, not
actu^lly secl^ded from it by excomm^nication for some notorious sca^dall, has
a true interest in, and right unto every Ordin^nce of Christ ^d^inistred in
that Church, of which he is not made unc^p^ble by any natural disability, as
children, fools, and distracted men are of receiving the Lords Supper, because
unable to ex^mine themselves; to which notwithstanding they have been admitted
in some Ch^rche^. For pro^fe of this conclusion, I must lay down another,
which ^tterly s^bverts the very fo^nd^tion of Separation and Independency; That
the Sacr^ments both of Baptism and the Lords s^ppe^ were beq^eathed by Christ
himself (as all his other Ordinance^) ^ot only to his elect and regenerated
children* but to his visible Ch^r^h on e^rth, and ^ll visible member^ of it; in
which there always has bee^* ^o^ is, and ever will be* a ^ixture both of good
and bad, ch^^fe and Wheat, exter^all and re^ll professors, Hypocrites and
sincere Believers. Hence it is all our Opposite^ unanimously grant* that they
ca^^ot refuse the Sacrament to H^pocrites, or c^rnall moral Christians, of
civil ^nblam^ble life and conversatio^, though there be no power of godli^esse
in them, if they be not grossly ignor^^t, nor yet deny the Sacrament of Baptism
to their 1 Cor. 7. ^4.
children (which the Apo^tle cal^ Saints or H^ly) bec^^se they are members of
the visible Church* to whom the Sacaments of right belong, as such; else they
^ight s^spend all such from the Lords S^pper upon this very ground* that they
are hypocrites, unregenerated* unsanctified persons* who have no right unto the
Sacraments as well as scandalous impenitent sinners; From whence I argue thus,

Those who have a true right to the Sacrament, as visible members of the
visible Church, ought not in justice or conscience to be deprived of it, in
case they demand it, by any Minister or Presbytetery, Mat. 24. 45, 46* etc.
Luke 12. 42, etc. compared with Mat. 22* ^, to 15. 1 Cor. 10* 1. to 7. 17. ^
Tim. 2. 24. 25* 26. But all unexcommnnicated Christians* who are able to
examine themselves, as visible Members of the visible Church, have a trus right
to the sacrament, in case they do demand it, when publicly administered. Ergo,
they ought not in justice or conscience to be deprived of it by any Minister or
Presbytery, when publicly administered, if they shall require it.
The rather, because nothing but an actual excommunication can suspend them
from this their right, as an actual o^tlary suspends men from the benefit of
the Law.

Secondly* that every visible Christian not actually excommunicated, who has a
right to the Sacrament of Baptism and has bin admitted thereunto (which answers
circumcision this Seal of the covenant) such only excepted, who by reason of
infancy or other infirmitie^ of nature, are unable to examine themselves, has
likewise as good a right to, and interest in the Lords supper, the other seal
of the Covenant (as some phrase it without a text) which answers to the
Passover; even as every circumcised person under the Law had a right to eat of
the Passover, and might not be debarred from it, as is formerly proved; since
no rational Christian is able to give a satisfactory reason, why such should
enjoy the benefit of one Sacrament and yet not be admitted to the other, seeing
that which entitles them to the one entitles them to the other, and that which
debarres them from the one secludes them from the other: We read in the very
Apostles times, that a mere external slight confession of sin and profession
of the Christian faith, was sufficient to enable sinners to be baptized; hence
Simon Magus, a mere dissembler, and Symonaicall unregenerate wretch, was
b^ptized by Phillip as well as others who really repented and believed in
Christ, though he were in the gall of bitterness and bond of iniquity, Acts 8.
12. to 25. yea, many others who turned Wolves, Apostates, Heretics were
baptized by the very Apostles, only upon their external profession of Christ,
without any inward truth of grace, Acts 20. 29. 30. 2 Timothy 3. 1. to 6. Romans 16
17 18. 2 Pet. 2. throughout Jude 8. to 20. 1 Ioh. 2. 18 19 And upon a very
sudden, seeming remorse for sin and Confession of Christ at the very first
Sermon without any delay or long examination of the sincery or truth of their
faith or conversation, thousands with their whole households were baptized and
admitted into the Church by the Apostles, Act. 2 37 38. 4^. c. 8. 12. 13. ^.
10. 34. to the end chapter 16. 33. Yea* among the very Anabaptists themselves both
beyond the seas and at home, there are far more hypocrites and carnal
persons of ripe years rebap^i^ed* then real Saints* only upon a bare
external profession of faith and repentance* and so generally i^ all other
Churches in the world, from Christ's time till this present: I^ then the
Sacrament of Baptism has in all ages, Churches since its inst^^^tion* and b^
the very Apostles themselves without any danger of si^ or s^ruple of conscience
be^n administered to all external ^rofessors of Christ and never denied to any
suc^, (or to their children, but by Anabaptists;) then by the self*same reason
the ^a^^ament of the Lords Supper may and must be adminis^red to th^^, w^^n
they ^^nder themselves among others to receive it, and can neither in point of
conscience or Christianity be justly with*held from them by any Ministry or
Presbytery whatsoever, if not actually excommunicated for some ^otorious
s^^ndall, the one being as much a tr^^ Sacrament as the other, if not of more
absol^^e necessity then the other: Upon which ground, I shall challe^ge all my
Opposites* to show me any divine charter or president in Scriptu^e authorizing
them to suspend any unexcomm^^icated Christians, able to exmine themselves, and
willing to comm^nica^e, from receiving the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, whom
they ^ave formerly deemed fit to receive and could not deny him the Sacrament
of Baptism: Till this be done, they must pardon me for not subscribing to any
such pretended authority by divine right.

Thirdly, that it is the Ministers bounden duty to administer the Sacraments to
their people, as well as to preach and pray, Mark 16. 15, 16. Matthew. 28. 19,
20. Acts 2. 41, 42. chap. 8. 12, 13. chap. 10. 47, 48. 1 Cor. 10. 16. chap. 11.
23. to 28. Therefore they can no more deny to administer this Sacrament to
those of their Congregation who are not excommunicated, then ref^se to preach
the Gospel to them, or pray with them: What Paul writes of preaching the
Gospel, Necessity i^ laid upon me, andw^^ is me if I preach not the Gospel* 1
Cor. 9. 16, the same may Ministers apply to their administrng the Sacrament,
woe to us if we administer it not when de^ired; the r^ther because it is now a
received principle among Presbyterians, and professedly agreed by our reverend
Brother of Scotland i^ his Fast Sermon; that no private Minister has any
jurisdiction in himself to keep back^ any from the sacrament, but only the
whole Classis or Presbytery.

Fourthly, that though God has originally in his primary intention ordained
his Gospel and Sacraments (which are rich mercies in themselves,) only for the
comfort and salvation of those who worthily receive them; yet he has
secondarily instituted them to be the savor of death unto death, and a means
of aggravating the sins and condemnation of such who shall wilfully conte^ne,
abuse, or unworthily receive them, 1 Cor. 11. 25. to 30. 2 Cor. 2* 15, 16.
Matthew. 10. 14, 15. Mark 16. 15, 16. L^ke 8. 18. Heb. 6. 6, 7* 8. John 15. 22. 2
Pet. 2. 21. Ezekiel. 2. 3. to 9. Yea* Christ himself, though he be a most sweet
Savior in his own ^at^re and Gods pri^itive intention, yet accidentally he is
set for the fall, as well as for the rising of many in Israel, Luke 2. 34. ^ay,
for a stone of st^^bling and rock of off^nce, for a gin, and for a snare; at
^^d against which ^any shall stumble and fall, and be broken, and s^ared, and
taken, Isa. 8. 14, 15, chap. 2^. 16. Romans 9. 33. 1 Pe^. 28. Matthew. 21. 44. Luke
20. 18. So ^re his Word ^^d Sacraments too, accidentally set (by reason of me^^
corruptions and ^^worthy, ^^profitable particip^tio^ of them;) for the fall and
ruin, as well as the salvation of (...).

Fifthly, that God only i^fallibly knows the he^^ts and present state of all
men, not any Minister or Presbytery, 2 Chronicles. 6. 30. Acts 1. 24. 2 Timothy 2. 19.
1 Samuel 16. 5. to 14. Matthew. 26. 21* 22. John. 2, 24* 25. That he can convert
and change ^^^s hearts and lives in a m^ment* and make them meet Co^^nicants
though^^ cannot discern them to be such* Acts 3. 9. to 28. chap. 2. 37* 38.
etc. Romans 11. 3* 4* 5* He can suddenly give them a white ston^, with a new name
written in it, which NO MAN KNOWS SAVING HE THAT RECEIVES IT, Revel^ 2. 17.
And therefore if we see any desirous to receive the Sacrament, to be penitent
in outward show and profession, we ought in the judgment of ch^^ity to esteem
them such, since we cannot infallibly discern^ and search their hearts* 1 ^or.
13. 5. 7. Phil. 2. 3. Heb* 6. 9. Mat. 7. 1. Romans 14* 4. to 15.

Sixthly, that no Ministers private judgment, or conscience ought to be the
rule of his admitting any to* or suspending them from the Sacrament: For first,
there is no Text nor cla^se of S^ri^tu^e that makes his private judgment or
conscience such a rule: Secondly, if a Minister should have power to deny the
sacrament (under pain of sin* ye^ punishmentt, as some men ^each) ^o every
Communicant he deems unmeet or unworthy, before actual convictio^ of his
unworthiness in the Presbytery, then it would rest in the power of every
particular Minister, how justly or unjustly soever, to admit or se^l^de from
the sacrament whom ever his conscience or judgment should think fit; which
would introduce the most exorbitant arbitrary Papal jurisdiction, usurpation
over the consciences* privileges of christians and Ordinances of Christ, that
was ever yet heard of or exer^ised in the christian world; make every Minister
more the^ a Pope every member of a congregation worse then a slave, and give
greater authority to every ordinary Pastor, then ever Christ or ^is Apostles
exercised, or the Pope or Prelates hitherto claimed. Thirdly, then it would
inevitably follow, that in case the whole Presbytery, Classis or Synod should
deem a man, upon any appe^l unto them against his Ministers unjust suspension,
worthy and fit to receive the sacrament; yet if his Ministers judgment and
conscience be not satisfied* but he deems him still ^nworthy, he may, will and
must still refuse to administer the Sacrament to him, notwithstanding their
resolution, else he should offend against his own judgment and conscience. So
on the other side, if the Presbytery, Classis* Synod, should vote any man
unworthy and unfit to communicate* yet if the Minister think him fit he may,
will and must admit him to the sacrament if he r^quire it lest he should sin
against his conscience; And then to what end serve Presbyteries Classes,
Synods, or Appeals unto them in such ^ases; since upon my Opposites objected
*princi^les (if they will adhere unto them) not their resolutions* but every
particular Ministers private j^dgment, conscience, is and ought to be the sole
canon and Directory which he will, must and ought to follow, And then to what a
miserable slavery shall we be re^^^ed, if every Minister may have snch
authority to Lord it over the Lords ^ P^^ 5. 3.
inheritances and Ordinances too, let all prudent men determine.

These six conclusions premised, which have utterly overt^rned the very
foundations o^ this strange Objection, and laid the Opposites on their backs; I
answer directly, That a Minister in delivering the sacrament to a scandalous,
unexcomm^nicated person, who after admonition of the danger, does earnestly
desire to receive it, as conceiving himself in his own heart and conscience
meet to participate of it, becomes no way guilty of his si^ne or punishment, in
case he eat and drink judgment by his ^nworthy receiving of it: My reasons are
th^se; First, because this receiver being not excommunicated, has a true ^ight
to this sacrament, as a vi^^ble member of the visible Church, as well as to
Baptism and other Ordinan^^s; therefore the Ministers cannot in point of
conscience debarr^ hi^ from it. Secondly, be^^use he has no commission from
Christ to keep bac^* such a person, nor yet any such power from the Church or
state. Thirdly, because every Communicant is to examine himself and his own
conscience between God and him, whether he be fit to receive the sacrament or
not, and to be the judge of his own heart, which no other can so truly
discern as himself, 1 Cor. 11. 28. 31. 2 Cor. 13. 6. Gal. 6. 4. 5. Jer. 17.
9. 1 Cor. 2. 11. And if he judge himself fitly prepared, joins with others in
the public confession of his sins, and promises newness of life, the
Minister ought in point of charity to deem him so, and has no commission from
Christ to exclude him; When Christ himself instituted and administered this
sacrament, we read not of any examination made by him of his Disciples fitness
or preparedness to receive it; nor yet of Paul or any other Apostle or
Minister in the new Testament, that made any such particular scrutiny into
other Communicants consciences to try their fitness or unfitness, as some now
magisterially take upon them to make by way of jurisdiction* not advice,
derived originally from Popish tyranny, and their exploded practice of
Auricular confession to a Priest, before the receiving of the sacrament*: All
the power they claimed or exercised in this kind* was only by way of Council;
Let a man therefore examine himself, not others, or others him (say all old
and new Expositors on the Text.) And if they may not examine, then much less
judge or seclude him as unworthy* without examination or knowledge of his
heart, which God only knows and searches, and himself. Fourthly, because he
administers the sacrament to him as to a person outwardly fitted and prepared,
the inward preparation of whose heart, for ought he knows may be sincere
toward God, and really changed from what it was before. Fifthly, because the
administration of the sacrament is an holy lawful action, and Gods Ordinan^ce
in the Minister, who delivers it only as Gods Ordinance, in obedi^nce to his
command, with a good intention to benefit all, and hurt none by it. Sixthly,
because such a persons unworthy receiving is only contingent and casual;
Prove. 16. 1* 1 Co^ 7. 16. 1 Timothy 2. 25, 26. Rom 9. 15, 16 18.
no Minister, or creature being able infallibly to judge, whether God at this
instant* out of his abundant mercy, may not by the omnipotent working of his
spirit, in the preparatory examinations, prayers, exhortations before the act
of receiving, and in the very receiving it self (the sacrament being as well a
means to beget as confirm grace) change both his heart and life, and make him
eat and drink salvation, instead of damnation to himself. Seventhly, because
all our Opposites accord, that Ministers may and ought to admister the
sacrament to masked Hypocrites, and unregenerate civil moral Christians, who
live not in open scandalous sinners, though these for want of faith and sincere
repentance do all eat and drink judgment to themselves as well as scandalous
open sinners: Yea, most of them acknowledge, that if the Classis or Pre^bytery,
shall judge any man whom the Minister deems ignorant, scandalous and unworthy
to communicate; to be a meet Communicant, contrary to the Ministers judgment
and conscience, yet he may nay must admit and administer the sacrament to him.
I would then demand of my Antagonists, whether in this case the Minister be
guilty of these receivers sins and unworthy receiving? or whether their
similitude of a Cup of poison holds in such a case? If yea then why will they
thus enforce them to commit a sin against their conscience^* and to par^ake of
other men's sins in these cases by administering the sacrament to them? If not,
then they yield their objection false, in the case of scandalous persons too,
there being the same ^^worthy p^rticipation in both. Seventhly, because the
Minist^r only gives the sacrament, and the unworthy rec^iving, is the
receivers own personal act and sin alone, not the Minist^rs, as is his
unworthy hearing, praying, asting. Eighthly, because else Christ, who was
guilty of no sin, should have been partaker of I^das his sin and u^worthy
receiving, in administering the sacrament to him, knowing him infallibly to be a
Traitor, Thief, Devil, and son of perdition, which were blasphemy to
affirm: And if it were no sin in Christ, then not in others, to give the
Sacrament to known unworthy receivers, since they do but follow his example.
Ninthly, because the Minister in administering the Sacrament, is a sweet savor
of Christ, as well in those that perish by it, as in those that are saved and
benefitted by it, as he is in preaching the Gospel; God having appointed it
secondarily and contingently (as well as his Word) to be a means of aggravating
men's sins and condemnation, to magnify his justice, as well as an instrument
of grace and salvation to magnify his mercy, 1 Cor. 11. 25. to 30. Finally,
the holy Ghost himself expressly resolves in positive terms, that he that
eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks damnation or judgment TO
HIMSELF (not to the Minister or other Communicants,) and draws guilt,
judgments only upon himself, verse 27, 30, 31. Thus all the ancient and
modern Comentators on this Text, together with Gratian, Causa 1. Quest. 1. Iv^
Carnot^nsis Decretal. secunda pars, resolve unanimously against the Donatists;
and this the objectors own practice heretofore, in delivering the sacrament to
such, without thinking themselves guilty of their sin, having exhorted,
admonished them of the danger, and so done what in them lay to keep them off,
refutes. This new Doctrine therefore of theirs, is point blank against the
Scripture, Saint Paul's express resolution, the practice and judgment of all
antiquity, their own opinions, practice heretofore, and others now; whether of
these are to be credited herein, let themselves determine.

Finally, the word (...), in this text, which yon render damnation, signifies
naught else but judgment, as the margin of our Bibles render it; that is, some
temporal judgment, as sickness, weakness, death, and such like punishments,
as v. 30, 31, 32. directly expounds it, and most Expositors on this text
resolve; not eternal condemnation, as you misinterpret it, as Mat. 5. 21* 22.
c. 7. 1, 2. 1 Pet. 4. 7. will fully clear. Therefore the very founda^ion of
this objection, is a mere mistake.

As for the much pressed similitude of a cup of poison, which has deluded
many, it is but a mere fallacy, and differs in many particulars from the Cup
in the Lords Supper: For first, the Cup in the Lords Supper is no poison in it
self, neither can any Minister certainly determine, that it will prove poison
to the soul of any one par^icular Communicant, no more then the Word or other
Ordinances; for it may for ought he knows, prove a sovereign medicine to
those very persons through Gods blessing, to whom he thoug (...) it might prove
poison; And therefore if a Physician give a whole some potion to one, to whom
it may in probability prove a medicine, not a poison; and it proves poison to
him only by accident, through his distemper who receives it (as many physical
potions do) this certainly is neither manslaughter nor murder in the
Physician, as the Objectors ignorantly mistake, (for then I doubt all the
Physicians obout London would soon take a ^urne at Tibur^^.) Set then the
similitude right, as it stands parallel with the Sacrament in this respect, and
it vanishes into nothing, or else turns against you: Secondly, it is a mere
arbitrary, voluntary act in men to give a poisonous potion to him that shall
demand it, and they have free power to keep it from him if they please: But on
the contrary, the Minister has no power to deny the Sacramental Cup and Bread
to any seeming penitents that desire it, and does but his duty in administering
it, as I have manifested; therefore it can be no crime in him: Thirdly, you may
make the same argument against the Ministers preaching the Gospel to obstinate
scandalous sinners, since his very preaching does increase their sins and
damnation, as well as his administering the Sacraments to them, Mat. 10. 14, 15.
Heb. 6. 6, 7, 8.

Now whereas they object, that the admission of unexcommunicated wicked
scandalous persons to the Sacrament, is more then an arbitrary, tyrannical,
Papal domineering over the consciences of Ministers, Elders, and godly people:
it is a mere untruth and scandalous assertion, as all the premises demonstrate;
never affirmed by any Classicke Author till this age; and though a real error
in many conscientious persons who believe it as a truth, yet I fear andp artly
know, that many who now object and urge it, do not cordially beleev it as a
truth, but rather make use of it as a received error the more easily to usurp
unto themselves a mere arbitrary, if not tyrannical authority over their
Congregations consciences, and Gods Ordinances, in admitting to, excluding from
them whom they please: the very extremity of that arbitrary, Episcopal, Papal
power, which we solemnly vow against in our National Covenant, and have taken
up arms against in the field: And so much concerning this grand difference, the
importance whereof has made me more prolix and copious.

The eighth thing in controversy is, Whether Ministers may not as well refuse
to preach the Word to such unexcommunicated gross impenitent, scandalous
Christians, whom they would suspend from the Sacrament, for fear of partaking
with them in, and being guilty of their sins, as to administer the Sacrament
to them? since their unprofitable hearing of the Word, is every ways as
dangerous, as damning a sin to their souls, as their ^nworthy receiving the
Sacrament, and those who eat and drink damnation to themselves, in the one, do
but hear and multiply damnation to themselves in the other? 2 Cor. 2. 14, 15,
16. Mat. 10. 14, 15. Mark 16. 15, 16. Luke 8. 18. Heb. 2. 1, 2. chap. 2. 7, 8.
chap. 6. 6, 7, 8. The rather, because that often alleged Text of Matthew. 7. 6.
Give not that which is holy unto dogs, neither cast you your pearls before
swine, least they trample the^ under their feet, and turn again and tear
you: is properly meant of preaching the Word, t^o administing the Sacrament
unto such; as is evident by Mat. 10. 14. Mark 16. 15, 16. Acts 13. 46. 51. And
whether any reason can be given by our Opposites, why such as these should be
admitted by themselves, to hear the Word, without any scruple, guilt, or
participation of their sins, and yet be totally secluded from this Sacrament,
under pain of being guilty of their unworthy receiving?

To this pressing demand, our Antagonists answer v^riously, putting sundry
groundless differences, between the preaching of the Word, and administration
of the Sacraments, which I shall severally examine.

A brotherly and ^^eindly Censure, (...) ^, 8.
First, they say, that a Minister preaches the Word to many unprofitable
hearers, not knowing them to he such, in hope to convert and profit them, if
there be any such in the Auditory: so also he gives the sacraments to some
unworthy receivers, not knowing them to be such, with an intention to do them
good: and in such cases he is blamlesse: (Thus far then there is no such
difference, as is surmised.) But ^f he give the holy seals of Christ's body and
blood to scandalous and impenitent persons, he knows he gives them damnation to
eat and drink; and is half sharer with them in the sinful act; so that though
unworthy hearing and receiving be equally damnable, to the hearers and
receivers, yet not equally dangerous to the Ministers.

I answer to this latter clause, wherein the difference is pretended: First,
that the Minister does as certainly know, that if he preach the Word to
obstinate, scandalous, impenitent sinners, he does but preach damnation to them
in his Sermons, as that he does give damnation to them in the Sacrament Mark*
16. 16. Heb. 6. 6, 7, 8. Matthew. 10. 14. 15. and those whom he certainly knows
to be such scandalous and impenitent receivers, he cannot but know ^o be first
impenitent, scandalous hearers, since the Sermon preceeds the Sacrament:
Therefore if he be guilty of their sin or damnation, in giving the Sacrament to
them, he must be likewise in preaching to them. Secondly, this evasion is built
upon two false principles: First, that a Minister may and does ^ertainly know,
that if he give the Sacrament to one who has been formerly an impenitent
scandalous sinner, but now comes openly and confesses his sins, promises
reformation for time to come, and is desirous to receive the sacramental
signs of the pardon of his sins, with the rest of the Congregation, with
express promise and desire to become a new man (as all receivers ever
externally do) that he gives him damnation to eat and drink: This I am
certain no Minister can infallibly know or affirm, because he knows not the
present change or inclination of his heart, or whether God by ^his very duty
may not really convert him: Secondly, that the Minister who sorewarnes men of
the danger of unworthy receiving, and admonishes the Communicants seriously to
examine themselves, and come prepared to the Sacrament, or else to forbear, is
guilty of the unworthy rec^ivers sins; which I have already disproved.
Therefore this diversity vanishes into smoke.

A brotherly and friendly Censure* ^. ^.
Secondly, they allege; That the Lords holy table in the holy Communi^n,
(...) a place of Gods more holy presence then the common Auditory, where we
come nearer unto God* and receive with the Word and Promis^s particularly
appli^d to (...) the seals of o^r co^^union with Christ, and of our right and
int^res^ in him, and all his benefits: But preaching to a co^^on Auditory, is a
general pr^pounding of the Word and Promises to all, not a particular
application of it to any: therefore there it ^ore danger and greater sin in
admitting ^^worthy receivers to the Lords table, then in preaching to them; at
app^ares in Aarons two sons, Levit. 19. 1, 2, 3. and Uzzah, 2 Samuel 6. 7.

To which I answer; first, that the beginning of this distinction, is just the
late Archbishop of Canterburies Doctrine, in his Speech in Star Chamber (so
much distasted in former times) who produces this for a reason, why we should
bow to the Table and Altar, not to the Pulpit, page 47. We must bow toward the
Altar as THE GREATEST place of Gods presence on earth; I say THE GREATEST, yea
GREATER THEN THE PULPIT; for there it is, Hoc est corpus meum, this is my body;
but in the Pulpit, *it is at ^ost but* Hoc est Verbum meum, this is my Word; and
A GREATER REVERENCE NO DOUBT is du^ to the body, then to the Word of the Lord;
and so in relation answerably to the Thr^n^ where hii body is usually present,
then to the Seat whence his word uses to be proclai^ed; which I have elsewhere
at large refuted, proving In my Pleasant Purge for a Roman Catholic, and
Quench-Cole.
Gods presence and Spirit, to be as much, a^ really present in other Ordinances
as in this, from Matthew. 28. 20. and other Texts. Secondly, this passage proves
this Sacrament to be as converting, yea, a more converting Ordinance, then
preaching of the Word, which my Antagonists positively deny. Thirdly, in the
preaching of the Word, there is or ought to be a particular Application of it
to all the Auditors several consciences, sins, conditions, as well as in the
Administration of the Sacraments: witness experience, and Acts 2. 23. 37. 38,
39, 40, 41. chap. 3. 14, 15, 17, 19. Matthew: 24. 45, 46. Luke 12. 42. therefore
this is a difference without a diversity. Fourthly, the examples of Arons
sons, and Uzzah, are impertinently alleged, since they relate not to the
Sacrament, and rather respect unworthy Ministers, then Communicanst.

Thirdly, they Object, that the Minister in giving the Sacrament to known
impenitent sinners, pr^acheth ^ost palpable lies against his own conscience,
when he A brotherly and friendly Censure. p. ^.
s^^h, The body of Christ was broken for you, and his blood shed for you; when
as in preaching the Word, the Ministers of Christ propound the truth to wicked
men generally, but not partic^larly apply any word of comfort, or pro^ise of
blessing to any ^^profitable hearers, b^t upon condition of repentance.

To this I answer; first, that the Minister does not administer the Sacrament
to any known impenitent sinners under that notion, but only as penitent
sinners, truly repenting of their sins past, and promising, purposing to lead
a new life for the future, as the exhortations before the Sacrament and their
public confessions before the whole Congregation manifest. Secondly, he uses
these words, The body of Christ which was broken, and the blood of Christ shed
for yo^ etc. not absolutely, but conditionally only* in case they receive the
Sacrament worthily, and become penitent and believing receivers, as they all
pro^esse themselves to be, just so as they preach repentance and remi^sion to
their Auditors; Therefore the case is just the same in hoth without any
difference. Thirdly, the particular delivery and recital of the words by the
Minister to every Communicant, is not simply necessary, nor of divine, but
humane institution only, though usually and warrantably practiced amongst us.
Therefore this new distinction is of no moment.

Fourthly, they surmise, that they have an express command to preach the The
last Answer to the four Qu^stions*
Gospel to every creature without exception, to Pagans as well as Christians,
Matthew. 28. 19, 20. Mark 16. 15. Romans 10. 18. But they have no such command to
administer the Sacrament to all, but only to worthy receivers.

I answer; first, that this precept principally respects none but the
Apostles, who were sent to preach the Gospel to all Nations and creatures, and
endued with the gif^ of tongues to that purpose; not ordinary Preachers, who
confine themselves usually to particular Congregations, Countries, and have no
extraordinary gift of tongues enabling them to preach to all Naions in their
own language, as the Apostles had, Acts 2. Secondly, though the Sacrament must
not be administered to Heathens, to whom the Gospel may and must be preached,
before they believe and profess Christ; yet it must be administered to them as
well as baptism, after their belief and profession of Christ; since it
appears by the very objected Texts, that as they were to preach the Gospel to
all Nations, creatures, and sorts of men, so they were to baptize them
likewise, and by consequence to administer the other Sacrament of the Lords
Supper to them, as well as baptism: as the 1 Cor. 10. 1. to 6. 16, 17. 21.
chap. 11. 20. to 34. compared with Matthew. 26. 20. 27, 28. Mark 14. 18, etc.
Luke 22. 14, etc. manifest. Thirdly, the Sacrament of the Lords Supper belongs
of right to all visible knowing Members of the visible Harmouy of Consessions.
p. 287.
Church, as well as the Sacrament of Baptism, as I have formerly evidenced; and
as the Confession of Saxony resolves in these terms; The Sacraments of
Baptism and the Lords Supper are so instituted, that every man may use them,
because they be pledges and testimonies, which declare, that the benefits
promised in the Gospel do ap^rtaine to every one; for the voice of the
Gospel is general, etc. This distinction therefore is invalid.

Fifthly, they consent, that they ought not to preach the Word, to scandalous
impenitent sinners, who turn Apostates, wilful scorners and persec^tors of
the Gospel, who do but the more rage and are ^ardned thereby; it being a
profanation of holy things, a giving of holy things to dogs, and a casting
of Pearls before swine, Mat. 7. 6. chap. 10. 14. Acts 14. 51. Ergo, they must
not give this sacrament to such.

I answer, that by this they fully grant what I contend for, to wit, that such
dogs and swine who ought to be suspended from the Sacraments, ought likewise
to be suspended from hearing the Word; so that they do herein justify and
subscribe to my opinion instead of refutingit. For my part, I never contested*
that such dogs and swine as these, ought to be admitted to the Sacrament, but
they ought to be totally excommunicated, as well from the Word, and all other
Ordinances, as from the Lords Supper; not secluded from it alone, and admitted
to all the rest: Only here the Question between us will be, who are those
dogs and swine that our Savior intends, Matthew. 7. 6? Certainly not every
Christian that relapseth again and again into several scandalous See Richard
Capel his Nature of temptation, etc. para 1. page 214, 215, etc. Lucas Osiander
^nshirid. cont. cum Anabapt* c. 6. Qu. ^.
sins, against his pomises, Vows, Covenants, as the best men many times may
do, by reason of the strength of their sins and corruptions, before they can
totally subdue them Pro. 24, 16. Psalm. 34. 19. Psalm. 38. 3, 4. Psalm. 40. 12.
James 3. 2. Matthew. 18. 22 Gal. 6. 1. Nor yet every scandalous sinner, who
repaires to the Word and Sacraments, with a desire to hear and receive the
same, and joins with the Congregation in the external confession and
bewailing his of sins, promising, vowing repentance and a new life; surely
such a^ these are no dogs nor swine within our Saviors precept, as you
surmise; for then by your own confessions, you ought not to preach unto them,
but seclude them from the Word, (of which this Text is principally intended,)
as well as Sacraments; but only such Infidels and Heathens who refused to
embrace and believe the Gospel, andharbour or entertain the Preachers of it
(which many scandalous sinners are very willing to do) Or such open
contemners, persecutors of the Gospel and Ministers of it, who run upon and
tear the Preachers thereof, trampling the Pearls of the Gospel, and the
tenderers of them under their feet, as the Text resolves in terminis, Matthew. 7.
6. chap. 10. 14, 15. Luke 9. 5. Acts 13. 46, etc. Or, open Apostates from the
Christian faith, which they once embraced, but after, return with the dogg^ to
his vomit, and the sow that is washed, to her wallowing in the mire, trampling
under feet the Son of God, and counting the blood of the Covenant wherewith
they were sanctified, an unholy thing, offering despite to the spirit of
grace, denying the very Lord that bought them, and contemning Christ himself
(as Julian the Apostate, with others did) a^ Saint Peter and Paul expressly
determine, 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2. 21. 22. Heb. 10. 28, 29. chap. 6. 4. to 9. To apply
this Text then to such scandalous sinners, who duly repair to the public
Ordinances, desire to participate in them, and externally profess reformation
and repentance (of which the controversy only is) is a mere perverting of
this Text, and an application of it unto such, whom Christ did never intend
thereby, as these parallel Texts demonstrate: However, certain I am, this Text
extends not to any pious, penitent, believing Christians, truly fearing God,
who out of judgment, conscience, dare not join with Sectaries in their new
Independent ways of separation, to whom our Independent Ministers,
Anabaptists, and other Separatists, are so uncharitable, unchristian, that they
will not admit them nor their children to the Sacraments, in their separate
Congregations, nor communicate with them upon any terms, for fear of giving
that which is holy to dogs, and casting Pearls before swine; such, and no
better are the holiest, best of our Presbyterian Ministers, and Churchmembers
estimated in their uncharitable Pharisaicall, unbrotherly opinions. God grant
unto them more charity, and lessespirituall pride, which of all sins ^he,
d^serves most to be excommunicated out of all Christian hearts and
Congregations.

But their sixth and last difference, wherein they all accord, yea place their
strength, (being indeed the very foundation of their mistake,) this great
controversy of suspension from the Sacrament, and so requiring a fuller
answer, is that which ou^ Reverend Brother of Scotland insisted on i^ his
conorov^ sall Fas^ Sermon, That the preaching of the Word is a converting
Ordinance, and therefore ought to be preached to scandalous sinners, to convert
them from their sins; but the sacrament of the Lords supper is no converting,
but only a sealing and confirming Ordinance, instituted, not to beget, but
^ncrease faith and rep^^tance where they are formerly b^gun; and therefore not
to be administered to such, to whom they can seal no pardon of sin, nor
covenant of grace. The same distinction has likewise been used in a Sermon at
Wool-chu^ch, and is subscribed to by all the three printed Answers to my four
Queries.

To which I answer; first, that the Sacrament of the Lords Supper is a
converting as well as a sealing Ordinance. For the better clearing whereof, we
must distinguish of two sorts of conversion and sealing, which our Antagonists,
to delude the vulgar, have ignorantly, wilfully or injudiciously confounded:
First, there is an external conversion of men from Pag^^is^e or Gentilisme, to
the external profession of the P^ith of Christ; which is ordinarily wrought by
the preaching of the Word; or extraordinarily, by miracles without the Word
preached, in reference to those without the Church; but ordinarily effected by
the Sacrament of Baptism, in reference to infants of Christian Parents borne
within the Church, which Sacrament both admits and makes them members of the
visible Church (without the preaching of the Word of which infants are not
capable,) Acts 2. 37. to 43. 1 Pet. 3. 20 21. Joh. 3. 5. 1 Cor. 7. 14.
Secondly, there is a conversion from a mere external formal profession of
the Doctrine and faith of Christ, to an inward spiritual embracing and
application of Christ, with his merits and promises to our souls, by the
saving grace of faith, and to an holy Christian real change of heart and life:
In this last conversion, the Sacrament of the Lords Supper is not only a
sealing or confirming, but likewise a regenerating and converting Ordinance, as
well as the Word.

There is likewise a double sealing (if we admit this Sacrament or Baptism ^
No nor Sacraments; which I only mention, because they are s^ much cried up
above the word, and made more holy then it, only because they are term^d
Sacraments, and Seal^s of the Covenan^ without any ^ext to warrant it.
to be Seals, though never once * styled Seals in any Scripture text:) 1. A
visible external sealing of the pardon of sin, and Gods promises in the blood
of Christ to our outward senses. 2. An internal invisible sealing of them by
the Spirit, working in, by the Word and Sacraments, to our souls: In the first
sense, this Sacrament is a seal to all receivers, even to those who are
scandalous and unworthy, who receive only the outward elements; In the second
sense, only to worthy, penitent, believing receivers, who receivethe inward
invisible grace as well as the outward signs: The first, seals all Gods
promises and a free pardon of all our sins only conditionally, if we truly
repent, lay hold on Christ's passion, merits, promises, and apply them to our
souls by a lively saving faith, and sincere repentance; the second seals them
to us absolutely, because we have thus embraced and applied them.

These distinctions premised, we may easily discover the falsity of the
Antagonists surmise, That this sacrament is no converting, but only a sealing
Ordinance; and that only to true believers, and worthy receivers, to whom
alone it seals the pardon of sin, and promises of the Gospel; for proof
whereof, they produce neither reason nor Scripture, but their own bare
confident groundless assertions, which I shall thus refute because it is a
very common dangerous error.

First, our Antagonists unanimously grant, that the Sacrament belongs to all
unscandalous members of the visible Church, capable of self-examination, Lucas
Osiander Enchirid. Contr. cum Anabapt. cap. 6. Q^. 3. p. 126, 127.
and not actually excommunicated, to close Hypocrites, and moral carnal
Christians, not really regenerated, converted, yea to scandalous persons
unconvicted, whom they profess no Minister has any power to suspend from the
Sacrament, upon his own particular private knowledge of their guilt. If then
the Sacrament be only a sealing or confirming ordinance of true grace, when
and where it is already begun, then it were altogether impertinent and
ineffectuall unto civil carnal Christians; Therefore do ubtlesse it is and
was intended by Christ for a conv^rting Ordinance to all such as these, to
turn them from their evil ways, and work saving grace within their hearts,
since it can have no other proper primary effect in such: Certainly God and
Christ bestow no Ordinances upon men in vain; therefore their intentions in
instituting this Supper even for such visible moral unregenerate Christians,
as well as real Saints, must necessarily be for their conversion, not their
confirmation and sealingonely, in that sense as they interpret it.

Secondly, all Ordinances of Christ that tend to edification, confirmation, or
increase of grace, are more or less conducent to begin or beget grace,
converting, as well as strengthening Ordinances; the preaching, reading,
hearing of the Word, which comfort, strengthen and build up men in grace, do
likewise (by our Antagonists free confessions) convert and beget grace; why
then should not the Sacrament do the like? ^ince Gods spirit equally breathes
and works in all his Ordinances, and may and does regenerate and beget grace in
men's souls, by what Ordinance he thinks best, working in and by every
Ordinance, as well as by any: The rather, because Christ instituted this
Sacrament to be frequently received, when a^ Baptism only is but once
administered, for this very end, that those who often fall into sin through
infirmity, may likewise by this supper often rise again, be refreshed,
comforted, and get strength against their sins and corruptious: And is it not
then a converting as well as a co^firming Ordinance, fit for sinners to resort
to? The Sacraments are by all Divines whatsoever, and the very Directory, page
52. ever enumerated among the MEANS OF GRACE and SALVATION; why then should
they not be means of converting and begetting grace, as well as strengthening
and consirming it? as your selves affirm. See the Pract^ce of P^ety, p. 400.
^o 480. and all others concerning the Sacrament and ^ur pret^tio^s to receive
it.


Thirdly, the very receiving of the Sacrament, even in unregenerate persons, is
for the most part accompanied with such particulars, as are most effectual to
convert and beget grace in men's hearts: As first, with a previous external*
serious examination of their own hearts and estates, between God and their own
consciences, for which there are diverse pious rules and directions published in
printed books of devotion, which most Communicants ordinarily read and make use
of before their resort to the Lords Table. Secondly, a solemn searching out of
all their open or secret sins and corruptions, past or present, accompanied
with a serious, particular, private confession of them, a hearty contrition and
humiliation for them, private prayers to God for pardon of, yea power and
strength against them; secret purposes, Vows and resolutions for ever to
relinquish, war, strive, fight against them, and avoid all occasions which may
ensnare them in them. Thirdly, sundry pious, soulravishing meditations, both in
regard of their sins, Gods mercy and justice, Christ's merits, death, passion,
the end and use of the Sacraments, etc. which make deep temporary impressions
on their hearts, spirits, and work an extraordinary change both in their
resolutions, minds, spirits, conversations for the present, and many times for
the future. Fourthly, flexanimous exhortations; admonitions, comminations,
directions, prayers by the Ministers in the Congregation, before, in, and after
this duty, which operate, penetrate more upon Sacrament-dayes, upon
Communicants of all sorts (as experience manifests) then at other seasons. Now
whether the receiving of this Sacrament, usually accompanied, and set on upon
men's spirits, with such most effectual powerful, likely means of conversion,
be not a most apt and proper Ordinance to regenerate, reclaim, convert
ungodly, scandalous sinners, and more likely to regenerate and change their
hearts, lives, then the bare Word preached, or any other Ordinance, at least
wise more effectual to convert and amend them, then any rigorous suspensions
of them from the Sacrament, let every man's conscience and experience judge.

Fourthly, all our Antagonists accord, that we have a more immediate
intercourse and communion with God and Christ in this Sacrament, then in any
other Ordinance whatsoever, where in the outward elements we behold Christ's
death and passion visibly represented to our eyes, and by them unto our hearts,
and more lively, more particularly applied, and the remission of our sins more
sensibly sealed to us then in any other Ordinance; from whence I thus
infallibly conclude against these Opposites:

That Ordinance wherein we most immediately converse with God and Christ, and
have more intimate visible, sensible communion with them then in any other, is
certainly the most powerful and effectual Ordinance of all othecs, to humble,
regenerate, conve t, and beget true grace within us, and most probable
converting Ordinance of all others; because the manifestation, revelation and
proximity of God and Christ to the soul, is that which does most of all humble
and convert it, as is evident by Job, chap. 38. to 41. compared with chap. 42.
1. to 7. Isa. 6. 1. to 9. Luke 5. 7, 8, 9. Psalm. 148. 14. Isa. 55. 6. Zeph. 3.
2. Hab. 10. 21. Ephesians. 2. 13. 17. James 4. 8.

But the Sacrament of the Lords Supper by our Antagonists own confession is
such: Ergo, it is a converting, as well as a confirming Ordinance.

Fifthly, what is it that makes the Word it self a converting Ordinance? ^s it
not the particular revelation and application of the promises of the Gospel,
of Christ's merits, death and passion to the soul, by Gods holy Spirit, not the
mere outward voice or sound? 1 Cor. 1. 23, 24. chap. 2. 2. to 6. If so, as all
must grant, then certainly this Sacrament, which by our Antagonists confession,
doh most particularly, fully, lively, effectually, and sensibly apply the
promises, yea, the death, passion and merits of Christ unto every Communicants
eyes, ears, heart and soul, far livelier then the Word preached does, 1 Cor.
11. 14. to 30. Gal. 3. 2. must be a converting Ordinance, and not a mere
consirming ordinance, as they pretend.

Sixthly, all grant, that God does as effectually teach, convert and work grace
by the eye, as ear; For first, the very book of nature and contemplation of
the creatures instruct us, that there is an invisible God, and is enough to
leav men without excuse, and through Gods blessing sufficient to raise up
excellent meditations tending both to sanctification and conversion, Psalm. 8.
3. to 9. Psalm. 19. 1, 2, 3. Ps. 100. and 104. throughout, Job 31. to 42. Romans
1. 28. to 25. Acts 17. 23. to 30. c. 14. 17. Secondly, all the external
Sacrifices of the old Law, together with the Sacraments of Circumcision and the
Passover, did instruct and teach Gods people who participated of them, or were
present at them, by the eye, and were both edifying and converting Ordinances,
as well as confirming, as all do and must acknowledge. Thirdly, the several
Miracles of the Prophets under the Law, of Christ and his Apostles under the
Gospel (which converted thousands without preaching) did convert and
regenerate men by the eye without the ear; the very sight of the Miracles
being the ground and cause of their conversion and believing, John 2. 11. 23.
chap. 3. 2. chap. 4. 52, 53, 54. chap. 6. 2. 26. chapter 7. 31. chap. 16. 41. 4.
chap. 12. 18. 19. chap. 11. 45, 47, 48. Acts 1. 12. to 17. chap. 6. 7, 8. chap.
8. 6. 13. chap. 15. 12. Acts 19. 11, 12. Matthew. 15. 30, 31. Luke 5. 25, 26. 1
Kings 18. 38, 39. Exodus 18. 31. Fourthly, experience See Gen 9. 16. Job 42. 5,
6 Isa. 6. 5. 1 John 1. 1, 3.
and Scripture inform us, that the things we see with our eyes, do more affect
and beget deeper impressions in our hearts, then the things we hear, Lam. 3.
51. Hence is that speech of our Savior himself, to those who had the
happiness to see his person; Blessed are your eyes, for they see, etc. Matthew.
6. 16. Luke 10. 23. Hence old Simeon, when he beheld our Savior, was so
ravished at the sight, that he brake out into these patheticall expressions;
Lord now let th^n thy servant depart in peace, according to thy Word, for
MINE EYES HAVE SEEN THY SALVATION, etc. Luke 2. 29, 30. Yea, Luke expressly
records, chap. 23. v. 46, 47, 48. that when the Centurian saw our Savior on
his Cross, giving up the Ghost, he glorified God saying, certainly this man
was a righte^us man: And ALL THE PEOPLE that cane together TO THAT SIGHT,
BEHOLDING THE THINGS that were done, s^ote their breasts and returned. If then
all these visible objects, Sacraments, Sacrifices, Types, Miracles, and the
very beholding of Christ's person, passion, without the Word, were the most
effectual means of working contrition, conversion, belief and faith in
Christ in the spectators, by the eye; why should not the visible expressions of
Christ's crucified body, bloodshed, passion on the Cross, most lively
presented to our eyes and senses in this Sacrament, even as if Christ himself
were again actually crucified before our eyes, Gal. 3. 1. 1 Cor. 11. 25, 26.
have the like effectual converting, regenerating operation on our hearts and
spirits, as well as these other visible objects?

See Act. 2. 23. 37, 38. chapter 3. 13, 14, 19. Rev* 1. 5 ^. Isa. 5^.
Seventhly, all Divines accord, that the most humbling, melting, sin-purging,
mollifying, soul-changing meditation of all others that men can fix on, is the
serious contemplation of Christ's bitter death and passion on the Cross; that
our particular sins did wound, pierce, not only his hands, feet, side, but
his very soul; that he was bruised for our iniquities, etc. And yet that such
is his suparlative goodness, mercy, pity, that forgetting all these
indignities* provocations, he heales us by those his very wounds which we have
made, and washes away our sins in that very blood of his, which we have
shed. No meditation comparable to this, to reclaim ah obstinate sinner,
mollify an adamantine heart, humble a proud spirit, reform a sinful life,
regenerate and convert a carnal heart. And is not this most passionately,
lively, really and effectually represented to our eyes, hearts, in this very
Sacrament, in a more powerful prevailing manner then in the Word alone? And
can any then deny it, to be as converting, yea a more humbling, regenerating,
converting Ordinance then the Word, which is likewise commonly joined with it?
Doubtless if this Sacrament be not a converting Ordinance in this regard, I
know not any which can be so reputed.

Psalm. 1. 19 67. 71. 2 Chronicles. 33. 11, 12, 13. Isa. 48 10. Hos. 5. 15.
Eighthly, all accord, that our own corporal external (a) afflictions are
many times without the Word, the means of our repentance and conversion unto
God: and the Scripture is express they are so. If then our own afflictions
are, or may be a converting ordinance, then much more the Sacrament, wherein
the afflictions of Christ himself are so visibly set forth before our eyes.

Ninthly, that Ordinance whose unworthy participation is a means of our
spiritual obduration, must, by the rule of contraries, when worthily received,
be the instrument of our mortification, conversion, salvation; But the unworthy
receiving the Sacrament, is a means of our spiritual obduration and
damnation, 1 Cor. 11. 27, 29. Therefore its worthy receiving must needs be an
instrument of our humiliation, mollification, conversion and salvation.

Tenthly, the several ends and purposes for which this Sacrament was ordained,
and of which it minds men when ever they receive it, prove it to be a See the
Practice of Piety, p ^15 to 435.
sweet regenerating and converting, as well as a confirming Ordinance. As first,
the keeping of Christians in perpetual memory of Christ's death and
propiciatory sacrifice on the cross, of purpose to convert and reconcile them
unto God, 1 Cor. 11. 26, 27. Gal. 3. 1, Mat. 26. 28. Secondly, the ratification
and sealing of all the Promises and Covenants of Grace unto the receivers
souls, 2 Cor. 1. 20. Thirdly, to be a pledge and symbol of that most near and
effectual communion which Christians have with Christ, and that spiritual
union which they enjoy with him, 1 Cor. 10. 16. Ephesians. 5. 25. to 35. Fourthly,
to feed the Communicants souls in assured hope of eternal life. Fifthly, to
be an assured pledge unto them of their spiritual and corporal resurrection.
Sixthly, to seal unto them the assurance of everlasting life upon their sincere
repentance, and embracing of Jesus Christ for their only Savior. Seventhly, to
bind all Chistians, as it were by an oath of fidelity, and obliege them
forever to the service of Christ, who died for us to this very end, that
whether we live we should live unto the Lord, or whether we dye we should dye
unto the Lord; and that living and dying w^ should be ever his, Romans 14. 7, 8,
9. 2 Cor. 5. 14. to 19. from whence it is called A Sacrament, or Oath by
Divines. Now I beseech my Antagonists to inform me, how it is possible that a
Sacrament ordained for such and so many spiritual ends, (every one of which is
most powerful to operate upon the flintyest heart and obduratest spirit)
should not in all these regards, both in Gods intention and Christ's ordination,
be a converting, as well as a sealing ordinance; since that which does seal all
these particulars to men's souls, and represent them to their saddest thoughts,
must needs more powerfully persuade, pierce, melt, relent, convert an obdurate
heart and unregenerate sinner, then the Word it self, when but nakedly
Preached, which comes not with such advantages upon impenitent hearts, as this
Sacrament does in all these respects.

Eleventhly, I would but demand of the opposites, what true conversion is? Is
it not a sincere universal turning of the whole frame of a Christians inward
and outward man, from the love and service of the world, flesh, devil, sin,
unto the cordial love, service, obedience of God in Christ? And is there any
Ordinance, engine, instrument, so probable, so prevalent to effect it as this
Sacrament, in all the forecited respects? certainly none at all.

Twelfthly, (to spend no more arguments in so clear a case) I appeal to every
Christians conscience; whether their own experience will not ascertaine them,
that the Sacrament is a converting ordinance, turning their hearts from the
power and love of sin, to the service, love of God and Christ; and strengthening
them against their corruptions; temptations, as well, as much as the Word, if
not far more. And cannot many thousands of converted Christians experimentally
affirm, that their preparations and approaches to this holy Sacrament, were
the first effectual means of their conversion, yea that they had not been
converted, had they been debarred from it for their former scandalous lives?
For shame therefore disclaim this absurd irreligious paradox, for which there
is not the least shadow of Scripture, or solid reason.

If then the Sacrament be a converting as well as a sealing ordinance; then
questionless no unexcommunicated scandalous person, who is fit to hear the
Word, and join in any other converting ordinances, as Fasting, Prayer, etc.
ought to be debarred from this, it being one of the most effectual principal
means which Christ himself Mat. 11. 28 Isa. 55. 1, 2. John 7. 37. Mat. 22. 2,
to 11.
who invites all heavy-laden sinners to come unto him) has instituted for
their real conversion. Is it not (I pray you) a Soul-murthering tyranny for
any Ministers or Officers of Christ without an express divine Commission from
him, to keep back any who externally profess his name, and are not utterly
cut off from the society of the faithful and all other ordinances, from this
most effectual lively means of their conversion, comfort or salvation? to
hinder them from taking spiritual physic, because they are spiritually sick
of sin? May not the Sacrament Mat. 9. 6.
(think you) convert them as speedily, as probably as the bare Word? If men be
corporally sick, we will use all means, and debar them from no one cordial
or receipt that may probably restore them to health; and shall we not do the
like with sin-sicke souls? If you say the Sacrament may prove poison to them:
therefore we dare not give it them. May not, nay will no^ the Word and other
Ordinances prove poison to them likewise as probably as i^, and yet you admit
them without any scruple or dispute to them? Nay, let me a little retort the
objection; Is not this Sacrament of Christ's own institution, the wholsomest
medicine, the comfortablest cordial to, and purposly ordained by him ^^r
sin-sick-dying souls? And is any potion more likly to recover, revive and
strengthen them then this? Will you then adventure to detain it, nay plead you
must of necessity, under pain of mortal sin and damnation to your selves,
deny it unto those who need it most and earnestly cry out for it, because it
may possibly, through their present indisposition of spirit (which is only
infallibly known to God, not you) prove dangerous or mortal totheir souls,
when you deny it not to other civil carnal Christians, to whom it is as deadly,
as poisonous every whit? Is any Parent or Master so unnatural or sottish, to
deny his children, servant wholesome meat, drink, to feed their bodies, because
perhaps they may turn to crudities, diseases (as they do in many;) or because
they may possibly abuse them to excess and riot, and so quite starve them for
want of nourishment? And shall any Ministers be so irrational or
inconsiderate, as to deny the Sacramental food and nourishment of men's souls
unto them, only because possibly or probably they may receive them unworthily
(as the best too often do) to the aggravation of their sin or present
condemnation, and so starve their souls? Is any Physician so absurd, as to
deny his Patient the most prevailing Potion to recover him, because
peradvetture it may prove dangerous, as all other physic may and will do, if
the very best prove deadly? Suppose any souls you thus keep back, without good
warrant from Christ himself, should despair, dye, perish for want of this
spiritual physic, cordial, wilfully detained by you from them when desired,
would not their blood be required at your hands? It was an old general error
among many in point of physic, which murdered thousands, to deny drink to those
who were enflamed with burning-feavers, and earnestly cried out for it to
quench their thirst, for fear of increasing their fevers violence, which in
truth it would have allayed, extinguished, if taken; and therefore Physicians
of late have corrected this deadly mistake, by suffering such to drink freely
when they please, to extinguish the unnatural heat, that else would kill them,
which has saved many such sick persons lives: I beseech you suffer not this
old error in physic and Physicians to creep in among Divinity and Divines, in
permitting them to deny the Lords Cup to such feverish Christians, burning in
the flames of sins and lusts, who need it most to quench their flames, and
cry unto you for it; out of a fond conceit that it will prove poison to them;
whereas you cannot deny but that it will probably, and for ought you certainly
know, may through Gods blessing, eventually prove the most effectual means
for their health and recovery, and not of their destruction. We all justly
condemn the Papists, for withholding the Sacramental Cup from the Laity, to
which they have a divine right, as well as the Priests, upon pretended
inconveniences; and shall any then usurp a popish ^ower, not only to deny the
Lords cup, but Body too, to any who desire the^, and have a right, an interest
in them, as visible members of the visible Church? We sharply censure all such
Ministers, who [a] deny or defer the Sacrament of Constitutions and Canons
Ecclesiastical Anno. 604. Can. 68, 69.
Baptism to Infants, especially in cases of sickness or danger; and are not
th^se as blameworthy, who deny or delay to give the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper to such of riper years, who are ready and desirous to receive it; when
their souls for ought they know, may be as much endangered for want of it, as
others are through want of preaching and other Ordinances? Certainly if there
be any danger in the unworthy receiving the Sacrament, it is only to those who
desire it, not to those who administer it to them at their desire, with the
forementioned cautions; But if any hurt, despair, danger happen by their not
receiving it, when desired (as for ought any Minister certainly knows there
may be) the sin and danger is certainly theirs who refused to give it when
requested, Since therefore, a peradventure we may receive or do good Zeph. ^.
3* Amos 5. 15. Jonas 3. 9. c. Genesis 31. 31. 32. 30* Numb. 22 6, 11. Josh. 2. 24.
Judge 6, 5. 2 Timothy 2. 25. Jer. 36* 3, 6, 7, 8, 21. Est. 4. 14, 16. 1 Samuel 4. 6.
chapter 14. 6. 1 Kings 28. 5, 6. 2 Samuel 12. 21, 22. 2 King 7. 3, 4, 5, 6.
by such a particular Ordinance or action, is a sufficient encouragement for us
to adventure on it in other cases, let it be also a warrantable ground and
encouragement for Ministers to administer the Sacrament in such cases, where
they have at least a probabilty, a possibility, a peradventure, it maybe, and
an who knows but it may co^vert and do them good, as well as a peradventure
it may prove dangerous to their souls: Remember, you are only the Ministers
not Lords of Christ's Sacraments, Ordinances, Flock; their Stewards to give them
the food of their souls in due season, not to withold it from them: And for
a conclusion, think of these determinations of Lucas Osiander, against the
Anabaptists, De Ecclesia, c. 6. Qu. 3.

Etsi tenemur errantes and peccatores admomere, and si sieri pessit, in viam
reducere, tamen nostrum non est in acceptione Dominica Caenae, ILLORUM, SED
NOSTRA probare corda, sic dicente Paulo, probet SEIPSUM (non ALTERUM) h^mo, and
sic de pane illo edat, 1 Cor. 11. Justus SUA side vivet, non aliena, Abac. 2.
ideoque, sive alius ^idem suam contammet, sive prorsus amittat, non tamen tu
illius vel diffidentia ant infidelitate, vives vel morieris. Et alibi dicit
Paulus; Unusquisque nostrum PROSE (non pro alio) rationem r^ddet Dec: Non ergo
amplius invicem judicem^^, Romans 14. Cum Christus institueri^, Caenam suan
sacram, aderat inter A^stol^s and Jud^^, Tradit^r Christ, illius tamen
indign^tas nihil detraxit reliquis Apost^tis, neque jussi^ illos Christus,
^ropter Jude praesentiam (quem tamen Christus jam proditor^^ suum esse sciebat)
de mensa surgere, and excluso ill^ (n^ contaminarentur forte and ipsi) deni^^
celebra^e Coenam Domini. Ita etiam Paulus de indignis scribit, quod ILLI (non
vero caeteri digne communicantes.) SIBI, non alijs recte accedentibus,
manducent judicium. Neque caeteros probatos abstinere jubet a sacrae Coen^
sumptio^^, sed indign^s, ad indigne se pr^parandum, coh^rtatur: Dogma hoc
Anabaptisticum pr^ se fert Pharis^ic^m S^perbiam qua hujus^^d* ho^ines se alijs
^eli^res esse putant* and occup^ti circa alie^^s conscientias proprias suas
neglig^nt* fals^ ^mirum persuasi, sib* diligentiore and can^a probatione ^pus
non esse: Deo a^tem hac Pharisatca (...), vehementer exosa est: Tantum igitur
ocij est hisc^ hominibus ^ propria imbecilliate ut aliena potius, quam sua
scrutentur. Fieri praterea potest, ut de quo Anabaptistie^ ^i Pharisai pessi^^
judicant, is, propter panitentiam cordis, qua nobis occulta esse potest, Deo
sit long acceptior, quam superciliosus hom^, qui ^^ndem j^dic^, ^icuti
Publicanum (quem tamen Pharisaeus despiciebat, meli^rque ipso videbatur)
justificatum in domum suam descendisse, prae Pharisaeo legimus, Luke 18. Ad ho^
illud Christi spectat, Ejice prius hypocrita trabem ex oculo tuo, quam ex
fratris oculo sestucam eximas, Matthew. 7.

And thus much for their several evasions of my third Quere, in which I have
been more prolix, because it is the very foundation of all our Antagonists
mistakes and errors in this controversy.

Only this I shall add for a conclusion; That if all excommunicated persons
ought by the law of God to be admitted to the preaching of the Word, but not to
Christ's Supper; as the Antagonists determiue: Then by their own confessions
and practice it will inevitably follow, there is no absolute excommunication at
all by any divine institution left by Christ unto his Church; since persons
admitted freely to communicate every day with the Saints and faithful in the
ordinary hearing of the Word and prayer, are really unexcommunicated; it being
a flat contradiction, to say they are excommunicated, when thus admitted to
hear the Word, and to all other ordinances, but this Sacrament only. And thus
by this very evasion they yield up their cause so much contended for at this
present.

The ninth thing in debate is, Whether John 9. 21. 34, 35. The Jews had agreed
already, that if any man did confess that he was Christ, he should be cast out
of the Synagogue: and they cast him out (or excommunicated him, says the
Margin:) And c. 12. 42. Nevethelesse, a mong the chief Piests also many
believed on him; but because of the Pharisees, they did not confess him, lest
they should be put out of the Synagogue: And c. 16. 2. They shall put you out
of their Synagogues, etc. be any good proof at all, that excommunication or
suspention from the Sacrament are of divine institution; or an ordinance of
Christ which he has left and perpetuated in his Chuch?

The doting Antidote-man affirms it, page 1. And in the days of our Savior
(writes he) excommunication out of the Sinagogue continued among the Jews, and
our Savior did not abrogate it, for the abuse of it by the Priests, Scribes
and Pharisees; but his Apostles under the Gospel did exercise it against Simon
Magus, when by professed sacrilege he declared himself in the gall of
bitterness, and bond of iniquity (which I take to be no excommunication nor
suspension.)

To this I answer: first, That this putting men out of the Synagogue practiced
by the Jews, was no divine institution prescribed or warranted by Gods Word;
but only a humane invention or punishment, introduced by the Jews, or Jewish
Sanhedrim, as the texts themselves demonstrate; and so no president to bind us
Christians. Secondly, this practice used by the Jews in the objected tex^s,
was so far from being an ordinance of Christ, or approved by him, that it is
a me^e diabolical institution against Christ, and all who should profess him,
who we adjudged by the Jews to be put out of the Sinagogue for this very
cause (and no other that we read of) that they professed Jesus to be the
Christ: And is this a fitting pattern of divine institution for Christians to
imitate, or a sufficient warrant to suspend men from the Sacrament? Certainly
if it be so, it is but in this respect; that as the Jews would cast men out of
the Sinagogue, only for professing Jesus to be the Christ; so you, in imitation
of them, would keep off unexcommunicated scandalous Christians from the Lords
Table, that they might not there receive Christ tendered to them in this
Sacrament, if they do but desire it. Thitdly, if we believe the Jewish
Rabbis, Godwins Jewish Antiquities, l. 5. c. 2. De Excommun cati^ue.
Erastus, De Jure naturae and Great. lib. 4. cap. 8. De anno Civiil etc.
Praefatio, p. 6, 7. and cap. 18. p. 83, 84.
Master Seldon, and Buxto^f. ^pi. Hebraei. p. 55.
other learned men; this casting out of the Sinagogue, was no proper
Ecclesiastical, but only a civil censure, whereby the party cast out, was
separated from all company or society with any man, or woman for the distance
of four cubits only at the pleasure of the Judge, (therefore it was certainly
arbitrary, not divine) also from eating or drinking with any, from the use of
the Marriage Bed, shaving, washing, and the like, according to the quality of
the offense: It was of force forty days yet so, as that it might be shortened
upon repentance; he that was thus excommunicated, had power to be present at
divine service, to teach others, and learn of others; he hired servants, and
was hired himself, but always on condition of keeping off four cubits
distance from them. Therefore doubtless it was merely a civil excommunication
like to an oxtlary, not Ecclesiastical or Divine; since it suspended none from
any divine Ordinance, but civil co^versation only. Fourthly, It was prescribed,
inflicted, not by the Priests or Ecclesiastical Classis, but by the temporal
Magistrate, Ruler of the Sinagogue, Sanhedrim, or people, as the Texts
demonstrate, the Jews, (not Priests) were d Number. 9, 1. to 16. Deuteronomy. 16. 1 2
King. 23. 22 23. 2 Chronicles. 30. 18. 35. throughout.

Ezra. 6. 19. Mat. 26. 17. 18 Godwins Jewish Antiquities li 8. 2. cap. 1. and l
b. 3 cap. 4.


the actors in it. Fifthly, In the Jewish Sinagogues, there was neither
Passover nor Sacrament, nor sacrifice celebrated* for all sacrifices,
Passeovers, festivals were celebrated in the Temple at Jerusalem, in the place
which God did choose, not in their Sinagogues where they had only reading,
expounding, preaching, disputing, prayer, but no sacrifice, or sacrament, as
you may read in Godwin's Jewish Antiquities, l. 2. c. 1, 2. and l. 3. c. 4.
Therefore from this practice you can no ways prove any suspension from the
Sacrament, because no Sacrament nor Sacrifice was then administered or offered
in them by the Jews: and if it prove ought for the use or divinity of
excommunication, it is only thus much, that excommunicated persons cast out of
the Church must be suspended from preaching, reading, prayer, and such
Ordinances then used in the Jewish Sinagogues, not from any Sacrifice or
Sacrament which were appropriated to the Temple, to which those who were cast
out of the Sinagogue might resort: In brief, you may as well justify
excommunication from Deotrophe as from hence. 3 John 9, 10, 11.


The tenth difference is, concerning the Scriptures quoted in the fourth
Question; whether I have rightly applied them? My Opposites say no, upon four
mistakes of theirs. First, that they can infallibly know the hearts and present
conditions of Communicants who have formerly lived scandalously and
impenitently in their sinful courses, to be impenitent, obstinate and wicked
even at that very instant when they come to receive, though they publicly
profess their unfeigned sorrow and repentance for all their sins past, and
solemnly promise, yea, vow amendment and newness of life for ever after: which
I affirm to be mere arogancy, and a usurpation of Gods own Tribunal, for
any Minister or Classis peremptorily to determine, since God only knows men's
hearts, and can change them in a moment. Se^^ndly, that the Sacrament is no
converting Ordinance, but mere poison to all that have been scandalous persons
resorting to it, though with profession of repentance and reformati^n. Thirdly,
that none but persons truly regenerated an^ sancti^ied have a right to the
Sacrament, and that Ministers and Presbyters have di^in^ a^^hority to keep back
such scandalous persons from the Lords Supper, whom they have no lawful
authority to suspend from other C^l 6. 1, 2. 1 Timothy 5. 1. 20 Ti^. 3. 11.
O^^inances. Fourthly, that suspension from the Sacrament is, by divine
institution, a necessa^y preparatory step and degree to excommunica^ion, as
well (...) admonition, exhortation, reprehension, and public rebuke; which is
a mere groundle^se fancy, warranted b^ no Texts nor president of Sc^ipt^re, as
the premises d^mon^trate: And therefore the answers t^ them b^ing grounded on
these erroneous positions and mistakes, they yet remain^ in their full vigor.

Finally, to close up all other differences in few words, take notice, that my
Antagonists contend for that which I grant them with advantage, and yet quarrel
with me as denying it: for first, I freely grant them in my Questions, that all
scandalous, obstinate, peremptory, incorrigible, notorious sinners, who
desperately and professedly persevere in their gross scandalous sins, to the
dishonor of Christian Religion the scandal of the Congregation, the ill
ezample and infection of others* after several sole^n^ previous public
admonitions, reprehensions, rebukes, contemned or neglected, and full
conviction of their scandal and impenitency, may and ought to be
excommunicated, suspended, not only from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper*
but from all other public divine Ordinances whatsoever* and the society of the
faithful, till public satisfaction given for the scandal, and open
profession of amendment of life, accompanied with external symptoms of
repentance: And they contest with me for a suspension of such sc^ndalous
persons only from the Lords Supper, without any total excommunication from
the Church, and all other public Ordinances, for which I must profess^ I can
see no ground at all in Scripture* or reason; but Scripture and rational
grounds enough against it; and quite subverts excommunication.

Secondly, I affi^m that no visible member of a visible Church, professing
sorrow for his sins, able to examine himself and desirous to receive the
Sacrament, may or ought of right to be suspended from it, but such only who
are actually excommunicated from all other Ordinances, or at least notoriously
guilty and convicted of some public horrid crime, of which all the
Congregation or Presbytery have legally taken notice, and are ripe for a
sentence of excommunication then ready to be pronounced against them, so far
as to suspend them from all public Ordinances: In such a case as this, where
the fact is notorious, the proofs pregnant, the sentence of excommunication
ready to be pronounced against them as persons impenitently scandalous and
incorrigible, perchance the Presbytery or Classis may order a suspension from
the Sacrament or any other Ordinances, before the sentence of excommunication
solemnly denounced, if they see just cause; but not where there is a bare
accusa^ion without any notoriousnnesse of the fact, or witnesses examined to
prove the scandal; for thus to suspend a man upon a mere accusation, or
surmise, before witnesses produced, were to pre-judge him as guilty, before
hearing of his cause, or probat of the offense or accusation, which may be
false a^ well as true, for ought appears to the Presbytery: This was all I
meant by this new addition to the second Impression of the fonr Quares (or
judicially accused, pendente lite) wherein the third Answerer to these Quaeres
so much triumphs, as if he had wo^ne the field by this short addition, saying,
that our Ministers and the Assembly desire no more power then this; which I
shall readily grant them, with the precedent limitations, which will take off
all his flourishes on it; and so we are both accorded* provided, that this
power be claimed by no divine Right, but only by Parliamentary authority and
humane institution.

To close up this discourse, I shall only propound these four New Quares to
all my Antagonists, and leave the further consideration of them to the saddest
debates both of the honorable Houses of Parliament and Veverable Assembly; who
perchance may seriously advise upon them

First, Whether a bare excommunication or suspension from the Sacrament or
other Ordinances, if not backed with the authority of the civil Magistrate,
when these censures are slighted, or contemned, be not likely to prove an
impotent invalid, ineffectuall means to reclaim impenitent obstinate sinners,
especially if they once grow common, trivial, and inflicted upon many
together, which made it so contemptible under the Pope and Prelates? Whether it
be not far better, safer profi^abler for Christians in point of conscience
and Christian prudence, to admit such scandalous persons to the Sacrament, not
actually excommunicated* who earnestly desire to receive it, and externally
profesle repentance and amendment of their lives, though they thereby eat and
drink judgment to themselves, and become guilty of Christ's body and blood;
then under color of keeping back such, to deprive them, or any sincere true
hearted Christians of the benefit and comfort of it, to whom really it belongs,
t^ the very breaking of their hearts and wounding of their spirits? which has
been the ca^e of some and may be of more, if Christian moderation, compassion*
charity, prudence be not most predominant in every Presbytery; Doubtless
better it were a thousand reprobates and obdurate sinners who will not be
restrained by threats and admonitions, should eat unworthily, to the damnation
of their souls, then one worthy Communicant, or sincere hearted Christian be
deprived of that right and comfort of the Sacrament, which belongs unto him.

Secondly, whether the suspending of such persons from the Sacrament (being no
Ordinance of Christ for ought appears to me, nor expressly warranted by any
Scripture, president, or precept) without a total suspension of them from all
christian society and other Ordinances, will not be ^ means to harden profane
obdurate, scandalous sinners, if it be once made ordinary and general rather
then to reform, convert, amend them? And whether their admission to the
sacrament accompanied with serious previous ad^onitions* exhortations to them
against unworthy receiving* and persevering in their impenitent courses after
the Sacrament received, and public serious reprehensions for their former
evil courses, b^ not a far more probable way and means of reclaiming*
converting them from their evil ways, then any bare suspension from the
Sacrament, without any concurrent suspension from all other Ordinances and
Christian communion can be? My reasons for propounding this Question are very
considerable: First, because such obstinate scandalous sinners, as experience
teach^s, make no great conscience at all of receiving the Sacrament (from which
for the most part they voluntarily suspend themselves for sundry months, nay
years together out of mere profaneness) in case they may be freely admitted to
other public Ordinances: It being only the total exclusion from the Church
and all Christian society (not any bare su^pension from the Sacrament) which
works both shame and remorse in excomunicate persons, as Paul resolves, 1
These. 3. 14. 1 Cor 5. 13. compared with the 1 Cor. 5. 1. to 11. Secondly,
because we find this an experimental verity, that the most profane and
scandalous sinners that are, when they intend to receive the Sacrament, will
many of them (like loose S^^ Ed^. Sa^^^ R^lat^^^.
Italians in the Lent* season) for a day or two before, at leastwise on the
very day they receive it, and some days after* demean themselves very
penitently and devoutly in o^tward appear^nce, yea openly and privately promise
and vow to become new creatures, to give over all their sinful courses, and
never to return to them again, and for the ^eason seem to be real converts;
yea no doubt many d^boist persous have been really reclaimed converted* even by
their access and admission to the Sacrament; who if actually suspended from
and not admitted to it, would have grown more obstinately impenitent and
dissolute in their lives* and never have entered into any serious examination of
their evil ways, courses* nor promised such newness of life, as they do at
time^ of receiving, by their admission to the Sacrament. Thirdly, all our
Antagonists grant, that the Sacrament is a solemn Vow or Covenant, which
obliges all receivers, esp^cially the most scandalous and sinful, generally
to re^orm all their evil ways, and carry themselves more obediently,
zealously toward God and Christ, then ever they did before: And we
experimentally find that many sc^ndalous sinners, even out of a mere natural
or hypocritical conscience, when they resort to the Lords Ta^le, do often enter
into solemn secret Vows and Covenants between God and their ownesoules, to
amend their former evil ways peruse and read some good pious books of
devotion, meditation, and listen very diligently to the Word when preached,
which they will no whit regard, look on* ot hearken to at other seasons, yea,
become good, real, at leastwise formal converts. Fourthly, every Ordinance of
Chtist, and the Sacrament* especially above others, is a special means not
only of confirming, but begetting and increasing grace, as I have proved; and
I make no doubt, but many scandalous, obstinate sinners, have been, and may be
still reclaimed by their own ptivate conscionable preparations, examinations,
meditations, prayers, vows, and pious resolutions, taken to themselves* and by
the public confessions, exhortations, admonitions, prayers, i^structions* used
in the Congr^gation hoth before, at, and imediatly after their approaches to
the Lord Table: yea I Mat. ^. 11. ^3. c^ap. 13. 28, 24. L^k^ 7. 34 ch* 1^. ^,
2. 1 Timothy 1. 15.
dare say ten to one, would be reclaimed, converted, by such admission, then
will be converted or amended by their bare suspension from it: Hence it was,
that Christ, who came into the world to save sinners, when he would reclaim
and bring home sinners conversed familiarly with, and permitted them ever to
come to him and hi^ Ordi^ances, not debarred them from them: And the forecited
Fathers allege this for one reason why Christ admitted the very traitor Judas
to the sacrament, though he knew him to be a devil and castaway, because he
would ^vercome him by this great mercy, goodness, lenity, and leave no means
of his convertion unattempted: If therefore scandalous sinners seriously desire
to receive the Sacrament, as a principal means to subdue their iniquities,
reform their lives, and tie them faster unto God for the future, making
public profession of the reality of their intentions in this kind (as they all
do, at lest in words and outward show) why such should be debarred from the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, fince really admitted to the Sacrament of
Baptism, and all other Ordinances; I cannot yet discern any proof or reason.

Thirdly, whether Christ did ever intend, that none but true real believers
and penitents should receive his supper? Or, whether he did not infallibly both
know and really intend, that many unregenerate, impenitent persons, would and
should receive it, some of them to their co^vertion, who belong to him, others
of them to their h^rt and condemnation, as well as true penitents for their
comfort and salvation? Our Antagonists do, and m^st of necessity grant* that
close hypocrites, persons, who are not scandalous, b^t blameless in their
outward conversations and endued withcompetent knowledge, have an external
right to the Lords supper, though not truly regenerate and endued with saving
faith; and that no Mini^ler, Presbytery or Classis can or ought of right to
suspend such from the Sacrament; for if real Saints should only approa^h the
Lords Table, how few would the number of Communicants be in all Congregations?
or what Minister, Church, or Classis might or could take such a jurisdiction
upon them* as certainly to define who are real Saints, and who not; since the
Lord only knows infallibly who are his? They do and must likewise yield*
that such persons as these having no justifying faith nor sincere repentance in
them* when they do receive this Sacrament, do eat and drink their own
damnation, as well as the prophanest obstinatest sinners. If then these may be
admitted to the Sacrament, though they thus eat and drink damnation to
themselves, not discerning the Lords body, then why not others? and if Christ
has ordiained the Sacrament of his Supper (as well as the preaching of the
Word and Gospel) to be a savor of death to such unworthy, as well as a savor
of life unto life to worthy receivers; then what reason* in point of
conscience, can any Minister allege, why he should not administer the
Sacrament to all who desire to receive it, as well as preach the Gospel to
those who desire to hear it, since God has his end in both? the glory of his
justice in the one, as well as of his grace and mercy in the other.

Fourthly, Whether all obstinate, scandalous, impenitent sinners, before they
come to participate at the Lords Tahle, b^ not in a present state of damnation?
and whether they do not aggravate and e^crease their damnation by resorting to
Sermons, hearing* reading, praying, fasting, and every other public duty they
perform to God, as well as eat and augment it by resorting ^o the Sacrament?
If yea, which cannot be gain*said, and is yielded by all; then what matter of
conscience or solid reason can be rendered by any rational Christian, why such
persons should not at well be admitted to the Sacrament, as to any other
Ordinance; or not suspended equally from all Ordi^ances as well as from it;
since all by accident, through men's abuse and unprofitablenesse, prove means of
aggravating their sins and condemnation? Either therefore our Opposites must
suspend such person^ from all Ordinances alike, till they be reclaimed (which
themselves perchance will deem a preposterous course) or else admit them to the
Sacrament as well as to other Ordinances, since all prove alike good or bad,
saving or damning to them.

Object. If they allege (as some of them do) that suspension from the
Sacrament, though not from other Ordinances, is but a step to excommunication,
and therefore warranted by those Texts and reasons, which make for a total
excomunication from the Church and other Ordinances.

Answ. I demand, first, whether Christ himself (whose Kingdom and Discipline
you pretend excomunication to be, and him to be the only Lawgiver of his
Church) has made suspension only from the Sacrament, but not from other
Ordinances, a step to total excomunication, or a necessary or expedient
forerunner ^ Tim. 5. 1 20 ^^t* (...) c. 2* 1^* 2 These. 3. 14, 14^ Gal 6. ^^ 2*
of it, as you grant he has made public admonitions, exhortations, reproves,
and the like? If yea, then show me where, when, or how by Scripture, which I am
certain you cannot do; If not, then this suspension from the Sacrament alone
(which is now contested for with so much eage^nesse as if Christ's Kingdom and
Church Discipline did wholly consist therein) is but a mere humane invention
and so no Ordinance of Christ, nor any part of his Kingly government. Secondly,
I shall demand, whether those Texts which prescribe a total exclusion from the
Church, Ordinances, can be any way satisfied, obeyed, by a partial execution ^
Sam 15*
of them? When God commands any thing to be fully executed, a half or partial
performance only is no better in his esteem, then plain disobedience or
rebellion; as appears in the case of (a) Readiness incomplete fulfilling ^f Gods
commission against the A^al^kites, in sparing Agag and the best spoils; and
destroying only the vulgar Amalekites, with the worst of the cattle and
spoil. Your selves do daily inculcate upon the Parliament, and your Auditors,
a through and complete Reformation in Church and State; informing them, that
less will not be accepted of God or good men; and will you content God will a
half excomunication of scandalous, notorious sinners, by suspending them only
from the Sacrament, when he requires a complete sequestration and casting out
of such, from all public Ordinances and Christian communion? Answer me but
this, and you will soon satisfy your objection. Thirdly, what are the
principal ends for which excomunication was instituted in the Church? are they
not; First, the punishment of the impenitent delinquent for his crimes? whence
it is styled by you and others, a censure, yea the terriblest censure and
punishment of all. Levit 13. Number. ^. (...)
Secondly, the preserving of others from infection* pollution, by their*ill
example and conversation, as Leapers in the Leviticall law, and plague sick
persons and Leapers by our laws now, a^e to be shut up and sequestered from the
company of others during their contagions? If so (as you must needs acknowledge
from ths 1 Cor. 5. 6, 7, 8. Gal 5. 9. 2 Timothy 2. 17, 18.) then if this censure
be of Gods institution not man's* how can you prove Chancellors to m^tigate or
half it at your pleasures without Gods warrant? how can you inflict it but in
part* when and where he requires the whole? Are you f^ithfull or impartial
judges herein? I presume you dare not say so; Either therefore execute this
censure throug^ly and impartially, as God (you say) prescribes it, or not at
all* least you (...) selves wiser or mercifullier then God him self. Again,
how can you (...) others from infection by their society and examples* if you
do not totally seclude them* for the time you suspend them, till they reform
themselves, from all Christian society and public ordinances as well as from
the Lords Table only? Shall such converse and communicate daily with you in
public prayers, Sermons* Fasts, reading the Scripture, singing Psalms, etc.
and yet not so much as once communicate with you monthly quarterly or yearly,
for fear of contagion or pollution by their ill example and society in that
duty only, in which (for the most part) they are ever most seemingly penitent,
holy and devout? Was ever any m^n so absurd or se^slesse as to avoid the
company of a Leaper, or plague-sick person once a month or quarter, at his
Table only, for fear of infection, and yet meet with him daily or weekly in
the self-same house and room upon other civil occasions of business or
discourse? And can any Christians then be so irration^ll, as to conceive, that
their daily or weekly communion with such scandalous impeni^ent sinners in all
other public ordinances, will not endanger or pollute them, nor make
them*guilty of their sins by participation, communion or approbation; and yet
think their monthly, quarterly, or yearly meeting and communicating with them
at the Lords Table only, will so poison* so infect them with their sins and
guilt, that they neither can nor dare with safe conscience, admit them to, or
join with them in this ordinance only, though they ordinarily join with them
without scruple in all others? I beseech you dear Christian Brethren, consider
seriously of all these particulars, apply them home to to your own
conscien^es, weigh them by the sacred balance of Gods holy Word, the rules of
right reason, piety, prudence, and then I doubt not by Gods blessing, if you be
not obstinately wedded to your own opinions more then to the truth* you will
speedily disclaim and confess the weakness, falsnesse, deceitfulness of
those ^rro^ious grounds and whimseys whereon you have hitherto over*rashly
(without any serious deliberation or discussion) built this your partial
suspension from the Sacrament alone, without exclusion from other ordinances,
which has neither color of Scripture, nor solid reason to support it, but
both express against it.

Remember, I beseech you, that the Psalm. 31. 15*
times of men's conversion and reformation are in Gods hands alone* not theirs
or yours; that Ephesians. 2. 1, 2. 2 Timothy 2. 25, ^ 26. Romans 9. 16 Phil. 2. 13. Mark
10. 23.
the change of the heart and life is not him of that wills, nor in him that
runs, but in God that shows mercy* and works this blessed alteration*
both at what time, and by what means he pleases: he can make the Word and
Sacrament effectual to some scandalous sinners, it may be Mat. 20. 1. to ^.
at the third, perchance at the sixth, possibly not till the eleventh or last
hour of the day: shall you therefore debar them from them in the interim?
Consider how many of your selves (perchance) have lived impenitently,
unprofitably under the ordinances* Sacraments, for sundry years together, and
how long God did ^er. 30. 18.
wait to show mercy upon* you, er^ you did repent and amend; and will you* not
exercise the Sea Mat. 18* 27. to 33.
self same patience and indulgence toward others, as God and others did
toward you, during your own scandalous and impenitent lives? Does God Mat.
13. 28, 29, 20. Heb. 6. 7, 8.
suffer the tares to grow together in his Church with the wheat, and to enjoy
the rain and dew of his Ordinances till the very harvest, without separation,
because possibly some who are for the present tares, may afterward prove wheat:
and will you extirpate or deprive them from the Sacrament before Gods time
without separation, not following that golden rule the Apostle prescribes to
every Minister who is the Lords servant, 2 Timothy 2. 25 26, 27.
to be gentle toward all men, patient; in meekness instructing those that
oppose themselves, if God peradventure will give them repentance, to the
acknowledg^ng of the truth, and that they may recover themselves out of the
snare of the Devil, who are taken captive of him at his will: Let us no^ be
more impatient and harsher toward any then God himself and Christ are, and
Gal. 6. 1, 2. Luke 6. 36. Col. 3. 12, 13.
would have us to be; but let us R (...) 9. 22.
put on bowels of tender mercies toward them, with long-suffering, as they do;
God himself endures with much long-suffering (in his Church) the very vessels
of wrath fitted for destruction, endeavoring to overcome or leave them
unexcusable by his Ordinances and long-suffering: And shall not we endure them
or others, though scandalous for the present, who by these ordinances may
become vessels of mercy, as well as we? Consider the Man. 23* 1. to 11.
Parable of the marriage of the Kings Son, where the King sent forth his
servants to invite guests to the Wedding*supper, who gathered together ALL they
found, both BAD and good, that the Wedding might be furnished with Guests; and
beware that ye fall not in point of the Sacrament, into the very error we
condemn in Papists, in regard of the Word, who take away and deny the use of
the Scriptures from the common people in the vulgar Tongue (...) Pet. 3. 16.
because the unstable and unlearned wrest them (as they did in Peter's time, and
never more then now) to their own destruction? upon which very ground you take
away the Sacrament from scandalous sinners, because you pretend they eat and
drink it to their own damnation; and so lapse into the self-same error in one
kind as the Papists do in another, upon one and the same pretense. I plead not
this as a mere Lawyer, for any private ends or l^cre (as some scandalously
report) since I value not my calling (to which true Church Discipline will be
no prejudice) nor any thing in the world in comparison of Gods glory and the
truth; Nor yet as an Advocate for licentio^^, scandalous sinners, to extenuate
their offenses, punishment, or any way to encourage them in their impentiency
and prophanations; nor out of any disaffectio^ to the Presbyterian Government,
for which I have earnestly pleaded, and suffered much reproach from Sectari^s
and Independents, and in which I may expect as great a share of Presbyteriall
power and honor as any other; but merely out of consci^nce, of love unto the
truth, and tender compassions to*the souls of other^, from whom without any
punctual Scripture warrant, I would have no means of grace, or ordinances of
Christ withheld, wherein they have ^ right, a property, (...) 1 Cor. 11. 27.
which may conduce to their reformation or conversion. And I doubt not but many
thousands now contrary minded, when they have perused my grounds and reasons,
will readily sub^cribe to my opinion as the truth of Christ most agreeable to
his practice, w^rd, mind* from which mee^ crochets and new whimseys of
conceited brains* ought never to seduce us, Let us Gal. 5. 1.
stand fast therefore in the liberty wherew^th Christ has made us free, and be
no more entangled with any yoke of bondage* but what himself has put upon
us, or authorized others to impose on (...) by his word, especialy in Christ's
Ordinances, which concern our souls, from which no creatures have power justly
to seclude us, but in such cases where he gives them express commission, and
in such sort as he prescribes. And let me suggest but one thing more unto your
saddest thoughts, That in the Churches of the Anabaptists and Brownists, both
abroad and at home, where excommunication See the Histories of the Anabaptists,
and Books against the Brownist^*
and suspension from the Sacrament are most rigidly and severely exercised,
pressed; the sins and execrable scandalous crimes of heresy, false doctrine,
spiritual pride, sedition, scisme, disobedience to Magistrates, and the higher
powers, envy, hatred, malice, covetousness, oppression, extortion, hypocrisy,
yea, lying, railing* uncharitableness, slandering, un^aturalnesse, sometimes
of sor^ication, adultery, fleshlinesse, do far more abound then in many of
our English Congreg^^ions, where these censures are very rarely exercised, or
put in ^e; and that the practical power of godliness is generally more
evidently visible, and the lives of the generality of the people more strict,
pious, less scandalous and licentious in our English Congregations where there
has been powerful preaching, without the practice of excom^^ication or
suspension from the Sacrament, then in the reformed Churches of France,
Germany, Denmark or Scotland, for which I appeal to all ^ravellors, and our
Independent Ministers who have lived i^ the Netherlands, who will and must
acknowledge* that in the sanctification of the Lords ^^y, strictness of life,
and exemplarinesse of conversation, our English Ministers and Protestants
generally excel all others, notwithstanding their strict discipline, which
really reforms very few or none, and works no such miracles of reformation,
holiness, preciseness in men's lives or hearts, as is pr^^^nded: And in popish
Churches, where excom^^ications, suspensions, Interdictions, Churchcensures*
most abound of any* and are most frequently and formidably fulminated bypopish
Prelates and their officers; how many exorbitances and grievances they
introduce, how little reformation they work in men's hearts or lives, is so
well known to all m^n, and to our Opposites in opinion, that we can have
little hope^ they will produce much real sp^^dy reform^^ion in our Churches,
since they have hitherto wrought so little in all these, especially if ^hey
once grow common, g^nerall, and so contemp^ible. Certainly the speediest, best
and only way to suppress all kind of sins, scisme^, to reform and purge
our Churches from all scandalo^s offenses, will be, for Ministers no^ to draw
out the sword of excommunication and suspension against them, which will do
little good; but the sword of the Spirit, the powerful preaching of Gods Word,
and the sword of the ^ivill Magistrate, which are only able to effect this
work, And if our Assembly and Ministers will but diligently preach against that
c^talogue of scandalous sinne^ and sinners they have prese^^ed to the
Parliament, and the Parliament prescribe severe ^emporall laws and p^nishments
against them, and appoint good civil Magistrates to see them duly executed*
inflicted, I am confident, that this would work a greater reformation in our
Church and State in one half year, then all the Church*discipline and
censures now so eagerly contested for, will do in an Age* and will be the only
true way and speediest course to reform both Church and St^^e at once, which I
hope the Parliament will consider of, and take care, that our Ministers (like
the Bishops formerly) may not now be taken up with ruling and governing* but
preaching and instructing, which is work enough, wholly to engrosse their ^ime
and thoughts.

And whereas many godly, true-hearted, zealous Christians are now persuaded,
that the Parliaments deliberate (for I cannot say slow proceedings) in settling
Church discipline and cen^ures, is the maine cause of the increase of so many
heresies, seismes and sects among us, and that the speedy settling of that
model of P^t on and fomented by our Ministers underhand.
Church Discipline the Assembly has presented to the Houses, will both prevent
and redress this deplorable mischief, as is insinuated in a late printed
Petition; I must needs inform these well-affected pious men (whom I truly love
and honor) that they are much mistaken both in the cause and c^re of this
malady, and spreading dangerous Gangreen.

For first, the Parliaments deliberation in debating and settling
Church Discipline is no true cause of this Epidemicall disease* which springs
originally from other roots, of which I shall inform them.

First, from our own Ministers late daily sowing, spreading of erroneous,
dangerous seeds of separation in their Sermons, Discourses, Books, and
maintaining ^ome Anabaptisticall and Brownisticall positions, specially
concerning the Sacrament of the Lords supper, and suspending scandalous persons
from it (which I have here already recited, refuted;) even whiles they think
and believe they write and preach against scisme, separation, Anabaptisme and
errors tending t^ them: This I am confident, is one maine cause, if not the
chiefest of this spreading grievance, which some of those who most complain
against it, do out of this their ignorance and un^dvisednesse, most foment.

Secondly, our Magistrates, Ministers and peoples free permission of diverse
Ministers, Heretics, Scismatikes, to vent their scismaticall erroneous
fancies, tenants, freely in our Churches, Pulpits, Presses* under pretense of
advancing the Parliaments service, and being firm unto their cause; some of
them, like so many wandering stars, running up and down from County to
County, City to City, Pulpit to Pulpit, where they freely and boldly vent their
errors, seismes, to seduce poor ignoran^ people, and preach against our
Church-worship, Doctrine, Ministers calling, the Parliaments, Synods authority
in settling Church government etc. declaiming outright against our Church,
Ministers as Antichristian* and the like; without apprehension, censure or
control: driving on their own s^ism^ticall designs, under pretext of doing
God and the Parliament service.

Thirdly, the permission of Ministers and Sectaries of all sorts, contrary to
the laws of God and the Realm, openly to gather and set up private
Independent Churches and Conventicles of their own, separate from the public:
and to meet freely, boldly at them without the least interruption: With the
toleration of such to hold constant private meetings and consultations
together, every day, week, or month at least, how to advance and strengthen
their party in all places, and get the greatest power and places of trust into
their hands.

Now will excommuncation or suspension from the Sacrament, or the settling of
Church discipline prevent or redress all these true causes of our seismes?
Certainly no: Not the first, nor last of them, and the second but in part: For
those who thus voluntarily separate themselves from our Churches* Ministers,
and will not join in any Church communion with us, will not care a straw, but
deride and je^re u; to our faces, if we should excommunicate them from our
S^c^aments, Churches, Assemblies, of which they profess themselves no Members,
and from which they have already excommunicated* suspended themselves, but only
when they creep up into our Pulpits, of purpose to preach against ^s* and
seduce the people to sever from us, and separate to them, whenas they will not
permit any orthodox Ministers of ours to preach, much less to preach against
their ways, errors, in their separate Congregations.

The only ways therefore to remedy this dangerous mischief for the present,
and prevent it for the future, are these e^suing, which answer to these causes
of them.

First for our own Ministers to labor to discern and then publicly to
retract and unteach the people by word and writing, their erroneous, grounds,
scismaticall doctrines touching the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, unmixt
communions and suspension from the Sacrament: and then none will separate when
they are better taught, and the false grounds of separation and scism (formerly
pressed on them through ignorance, or in^ogitancy) be as constantly preached
and written against, as they have been formerly asserted in the Pulpit and
Press.

Secondly, for our Magistrates conscionably to convent question* and people to
inform against all Ministers or others, who run about, and vent
scismaticall, erroneous new Doctrines or whimseys in their own or others
Pulpits* and seriously to admonish, cheek them for what is past and enjoine
them for time to come, to prea^h nothing but Christ crucified, o^ doctrines of
edification, and to avoid all ^nnecessa^y controversies concerning
Church*government (in which some now place all Religion) snd all erroneous
doctrines contrary to those established among us; and in case they shall
afterward offend in the like kind, to debar them from stepping up into other
men's P^lpits, and suspend them from their own till they shall reform their
erros, scisms and promise never to offend in like kind again. And withal*
carefully to suppress the printing and dispersing of all heretical erroneous
or scismaticall books, by inflicting severe punishments on the Authors,
Printers, dispersers of them: for which the good laws and ordinanc^s already
made and in full force, are sufficient, were they but duly executed.

Thirdly, to prohibit, suppress* by strict public laws and ordinances, the
gathering of any particular Churches or Congregations without public
authority, together with all private conventicles, of Ana^aptisticall sectaries
wholly separating from, and standing in direct opposition against our public
Church-meetings; together with all their private cabinet-councels,
consultations, to foment and augment their party: And in case they will not be
reclaimed by lenity and friendly christian proceedings, but continue still
obstinate and incorrigible, then to proceed severely against the ringleaders
of separating sects* ^cismer, and to keep or remove them from all Offices or
places of public trust in Church o^ State, wherein their continuance may prove
prejudicial to b^t^ or either of them: And if all o^r Magistrates, Judges, and
Justices in City and Country would but modestly execute the good statutes and
ordinances already provided against those; I am certain these spreading errors
sectaries, scismes would be soon suppressed, and we all united in one, now the
great stumbling block, of Superstitious popish Ceremoies, Altars, Images, with
the Common prayer Book (the only eye-sores heart-sores and grounds of
separation, formerly complained of ^ conscientious people) are totally removed
by the Parliament, together (...) scandalous and unpreaching Ministers and Gods
word more powerfully, more ^ncere^y preached, then in any Conventicles or
segregated Congergations whatsoever, where illiterate Mechanics (who may as
well st^p into the Kings Throne, and civil Magistrates Tribunal, as into the
Ministers Pulpit) or ignorant, ^^gif^ed Ministers, do usually exercise their
leaden Talents, and vent their dros^e straw, stubble, instead of the pure gold
and orient Pearls of Gods sacred oracles.

As therefore you desire, tender the redress of this great grievanc^, the
speedy settlement, peace, unity of our distracted Church and State, the long
expected establishment of such an exact Church*discipline as is warranted by
Gods Word, not built on humane fancies; the advancement of Gods truth, honor;
the avoiding of all groundless, unwarrantable occasions of scismes or
separations, occasioned by some new erroneous paradoxes and false notions,
touching this weighty subject of Excommunication and suspension from the
Sacrament; I shall humbly beseech and seriously adjure you in the name of Jesus
Christ, the ^eb. 13. 21 d. 1. Pet. 4. 5
great Shepherd of his sheep, and impartial Judge both of quick and dead,
(...) (p) you will answer the contrary before his dreadful Tribunal at the last
day, and avoid his 1. Cor. 16.
Anathema Maranatha, with all good men's censures here, to lay aside all
self*ends, self interests, prejudices whatsoever in this weighty controversy,
and with a single, upright heart, seriously to weigh the several particulars
her^ presented to your consideration; and where you find I have Scripture,
truth, or right reason siding with me, there cordially to embrace it without
more co^te^^^* where you shall discern I have been mistaken in any thing (as
for ought I know I am in nothing) there in a brotherly manner to refute it; and
the Lord give (...) all sincere hearts to 1. These. 5 21*
Prove all things, and hold fast what is good, both in our judgments and
practices; and to rest truly thankful for the great work of Reformation already
made, not to murmr or repine against God and the Parliament, ^s if little o^
nothing were already done, because that* Church Discipline of excommunication
and suspension from the Sacrament (which some pretend, but prove not to be
Christ's Ordinance and Kingdom) is not fully established in sounlimited and
dangerous an arbitrary way as they desire, and cannot have their wills or
humors satisfied in every s^all punctilio.

2 Cor. 13. 7, 8. Now I pray God tha^ ye do no evil* not that we should appear
approved, but that ye should do that which is honest th^ugh we appear to be
Reprobates: for wr can d^^ nothing against the truth, but for the truth.


Errata.
Page 33. line 6. read s^nnes: ^. 35 l. 45 not: p. 39 l. 3 pr^m^ses l. 9 of his
l. 44 in this p. 47 l. 32. Ap^st^lo^. p 48 ^. 23. Priests, l. 28 Church, l. 42
were.

FINIS.

