A most learned and Religious Speec^ spoken by Mr. Pym, at a conference of both
Ho^ses of Parliament the 23. of this instant Month of Septem^^^

Declaring unto them the necessity and benefit of the union of his Majesty's
three Kingdoms, England, Scotland, and Ireland in matters of Religion and
Church Government.

Also certain Passages at a Committee in the Exchequor Chamber concerning
Coining of Farthings now in the hands of the Lord Mowbray, and Montravers:
Together with some remarkable Passages from Chester, and words betwixt Prince
Robert and his Excellence Robert Earl of Essex.

Sept: 30 1642 Henry Elsing Cler. Parl. D. Com.

depiction of Mr. Pym

London Printed for John Otwell. 1642.

A Learned And Religious Speech spoken by Master Pym at a conference of both
Houses of Parliament the 23. of this instant Month of Septem. Declaring unto
them the necessity and benefit of the Union of his Majesty's three Kingdoms,
England, Scotland and Ireland, in matters of Religion and Church Government,
etc.
MY Lords,
your Lordships may observe that the Distractions of this Kingdom have been
fomented by the Jesuitical and Prelaticall Faction, discontented Courtiers,
and self lovers, and how that this Jesuitical and Prelaticall Faction have
not only threatened ruin to the Kingdom of Ireland, but to all other the
reformed Churches, as is evidenced by their late practices, how necessary it is
therefore for your Lordships, and the reformed Churches to unite your selves
together I refer to your Lordships consideration; howsoever according to the
trust reposed in me by the House of Commons, I am commanded humbly to present
to your Lordships, not only the sense of these great distractions, but the
means how to compose them; which as they have taken into their consideration
are these.

First, that one directory or form of Prayer should be observed throughout the
three Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland.

Secondly, that there should be one Catechism taught of instruction of youth.

3. That the Assembly of Divines for Reformation of Religion and Church Lyturgy
should convene (as was formerly intended) with all speed, and to that end his
Majesty should be petitioned to pass a Bil that so the distractions of this
Kingdom concerning Church government and Liturgy might be semented and
united, and the 3. Kingdoms being under one government, might agree in
discipline and unity of spirit: And for the better effecting of this act of
Reformation, it is desired by the House of Commons, that some of the most able
and judicious Divines of the Kingdom of Scotland, and of other the reformed
Churches should join in this Assembly, and that a Remonstrance of these their
desires should be made to their Brethren of Scotland, all which was granted.
Then the Lord Mandevill reported the absence of the great Seal being entrusted
in the hands of a common person, and from the Lord Keeper, was a great delay in
the execution of Justice, and that diverse things had passed under the great
Seal prejudicial to the Commonwealth since his Majesty had taken it from the
Lord Keeper, which was referred to the consideration of the House of Commons.

The L. Moubray and Maltrevers his agent appeared in the Exchequer chamber
before a Committee, with his patent concerning the coining of farthings, and
confessed that the charge of the coining of 30. pounds worth of farthings in
materials and servants wages mounted to 6-8 and Sir H. Mildmay and one of the
committee alleged that coining Was a flower of the crown, howsoever if the
Subject could make appear that there was an abuse either in the creation or
execution of the patent, it was to be vacated, and thereupon the informers were
left to their further defense.

There was lately notice given to the Parliament, that his Majesty is near
Chester intending to join himself with the Forces of the Lord Strange and the
Lord Rivers, which they have raised in Chester, Lancashire, and Wales, and so
to march toward Worcester to raise the siege, the Parliaments forces have made
against Sir John Byron and the Cavalliers.

That his Excellency the Earl of Essex having instructions and directions from
both Houses to attend his Majesty with a Petition from them, received a Message
from P. Robert to this effect, that for his Petition he might present his
Majesty himself with it when he pleased, but as for his sword he himself would
answer it when and where he should be appointed.

More news from Worcester.
WHen Prince Robert came to Worcester about 11, of the clock, Sept. 23. as was
thought to fetch away those Forces that lay at Worcester, much endangered by
the L. Generals forces which were come near the City, about 10. troops, and
also 200. dragoneers drawn into an advantageous plot of ground to prevent the
Cavalliers flight, were strongly assaulted by Pr. Roberts forces, supposed to
be in number some 6000. horse, they valiently discharged against the
Cavalliers, and had a very bloody fight, until it came to the swords point,
Colonel Fines pistole I their chief Commanders, Prince Maurice hand cut off
and desperately wounded, and Prince Robert is shot through the thigh as it is
reported, the Parliaments forces being separated were forced to retreat, the L.
Generals forces being not come to assist them

Also about 10. of the clock at night, Prince Roberts forces fled over the
bridge toward Ludlow with many o^ the City with them, and forced Captain
Wingat whom they took prisoner to ride before them naked.

The next day his Excellence possessed himself of the City which was almost
ruinated by the Cavalliers, but God be praised they are departed thence, the
Cavalliers have done much mischief by plundering and disarming persons well
affected to the Parliament, and making them to fly for their lives, if a
speedy course be not taken, the Kingdom will be in great danger.

FINIS.

