A SPEECH DELIVERED AT A CONFERENCE with the LORDS. January, XXV. MDCXLI.

By occasion of the PETITIONS from the City of LONDON, and the Counties of
Middlesex, Essex, and Hertford.

By JOHN PYM, Esquire.

Published by Order of the HOUSE of COMMONS.

WHERETO Are annexed two ORDERS of the said HOUSE.

THE ONE, Containing the Thanks of the HOUSE, given to those of HERTFORDSHIRE.

THE OTHER, For punishing of those who printed a false Copy of that PETITION,
and other libellous Pamphlets.

Printed at LONDON by R. Oulton. and G. Dexter, for John Rothwell, and are to
be sold at the Sign of the Sun in Paul's Churchyard. 1641.

JANVARY 25. 1641.
At a Conference betwixt both Houses, concerning diverse Petitions presented to
the House of Commons; Mr. PYM appointed to manage that CONFERENCE.
My LORDS,
I Am commanded by the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses assembled for the
Commons in Parliament, to present to your Lordships diverse Petitions, which
they have received from several parts concerning the State of the Kingdom:
whereunto they are chiefly moved by that constant Affection, which they have
always expressed, of maintaining a firm union and good correspondence with your
Lordships; wherein they have ever found much advantage, and contentment; but
never held it more important and necessary, then at this time, wherein the
Wisdom and Resolution of Parliament, have as many great Dangers and
Difficulties to pass through, as ever heretofore.

We are united in the public trust, which is derived from the Commonwealth
in the common Duty and Obligation whereby God does bind us to the discharge of
that trust: and the Commons desire to impart to your Lordships whatsoever
Information or Intelligence, whatsoever Encouragement or Assistance they have
received from those several Countries, which they represent, that so likewise
we may be united in the same Intentions and Endeavors of improving all to the
service of his Majesty, and the common good of the Kingdom.

The Petitions which I am directed to communicate to your Lordships, are four:
from London, Midlesex, Essex and Hertfordshire. We have received many more, but
it would take up too much time, and be too great a trouble to peruse all; and,
in these four, you may perceive the Effect and Sense of all: First, I am to
desire your Lordships to hear them read, and then I shall pursue my
Instructions in propounding some Observations out of them.

TO THE HONORABLE THE KNIGHTS, CITIZENS and BVRGESSES, of the House of COMMONS
assembled in PARLIAMENT.
The humble Petition and Answer of the Major, Aldermen, and the rest of the
Common Council of the City of LONDON.
Shows,
THat the Committee of this Honorable House upon Saturday the 22. of this
instant January, sent a message to the Petitioners for the loan of one hundred
thousand pounds, or of so much thereof as could conveniently be forth with
raised, for levying of forces to suppress the Rebels in Ireland, To which
Message something was then answered, and a further answer in writing promised.

In performance whereof they humbly present the answer following, together with
the Reasons thereof, desiring that the same (being the best that for the
present they are able to give) may favorably be accepted.

And they shall ever pray, etc.

The Answer.
THe Petitioners are duly and deeply sensible of the great miseries of their
Brethren in Ireland, and of the eminent danger, not only of the total loss
of that Kingdom, but of the ruin of this also, if that of Ireland should
(which God forbid) be lost. And as they have hitherto showed themselves ready,
even beyond their abilities to serve the King and Parliament; so shall they
ever continue to the utmost of their power, with all cheerefulnes and duty. But
at the present they are compelled to repeat their former Answer; That they have
no power to raise any Sums by way of Tax for any foreign use; and do
further answer that they have no means to do it, otherwise then by the
immediate personal Consent of every particular Lender, which they cannot hope
to obtain in regard of these obstructions following: Which the Petitioners
humbly present, together with this their further Answer, as the Reasons
thereof.

1. That immediately before the Parliament and sithence diverse great Sums for
the service of the King and Kingdom have been already lent by the Citizens of
London, besides 50000. l. for the supply of Ireland, in particular; a great
part whereof some of the Lenders were compelled to borrow, and cannot to this
day repay.

2. That such part of those moneys as are already due to the Citizens from the
Parliament, and should have bin repaid out of the Pole-moneyes and Subsidies,
is not yet done, because there is not any considerable sum come in from the
Country as was expected to satisfy the same.

3. That the said 50000 l. lent for Ireland was hastened and speedily paid
within near about 2000 l upon this ground then urged by the Parliament; that
if it were forth with lent, it might be of more use to preserve that Kingdom
then the lone of 200000 l. could be, if deferred but six Weeks; yet no
considerable Forces are sent thither to this day. And we find that men will not
be willing to lend any thing till they be assured that a good strength be sent
thither with full Commission to relieve London Derry and other parts of that
Kingdom.

4. The general withholding of very great Sums of money from the
Petitioners, and many others, which moneys have been long due, not only from
Chapmen and other debtors in England; but from very many in Ireland (who owe
many hundred Thousands of Pounds to the Citizens of London) does render diverse
persons of good, Estates and credit hardly able to go on with Trade; or to pay
their debts and maintain their Charge.

5. The Brotherly offer of Scotland to send 10000 men into Jreland, not yet so
accepted as to produce any relief to that bleeding Kingdom, while yet our
Brethren are daily massacred there, discourageth most men from lending any
Money, were they never so able.

6. The not passing the Bil for pressing of soldiers here, whereby such forces
as are requisite might be timely sent from hence into Ireland, puts many men
into fears, that there may be some design rather to lose that Kingdom, and to
consume this in the losing of Ireland, than to preserve either the one or the
other; for that it cannot be conceived, that the Rebels (being grown so
powerful) will be suppressed by volunteires.

7. The slow issuing of Commissions to those who being in Ireland, or going
thither, are willing to enter the field against the Rebels, disables them from
doing any effectual execution upon the enemy, unless in their own defense;
and so all the moneys that have been, or may be sent thither, are exhausted to
maintain our forces to do little or nothing worthy of them, rather then
employed to chastise the Rebels, and to reduce them to obedience, by means
whereof the number and power of the Rebels are greatly increased, diverse
castles and towns are by them taken, much Protestant blood is daily spilt,
many thousand families destroyed, the malignant part of Papists and their
adherents here are encouraged, and those Rebels so much inboldened, that they
boast, they will extirpate the British Nation there, and then make England the
seat of war.

8. The not disarming of Papists here in England, after many discoveries of
their treacheries, and bloody designs upon the Parliament and Kingdom, the
great decays of Fortifications, Blockhouses and other Sea-forts, the not
managing of them, nor furnishing them with Ordinance and Ammunition, the not
placing all of them in such hands in whom the Parliament may confide, and the
not settling this Kingdom in a posture of defense, in times of so many fears
and jealousies of foreign invasions and intestine conspiracies, the not
removing the present Lieutenant of the Tower, and putting such a person into
that place, as may be well approved by the Parliament, notwithstanding the
earnest petitions exhibited to this honorable House for that purpose, which
has produced a forbearance to bring Bullion into the Tower in this time of
scarcity of moneys; all which cannot but overthrow trading more and more, and
make moneys yet more scarce in the City and Kingdom.

9. The Kings Ships which ought to be a wall of defense to this Kingdom, and a
convay to the Merchants (for which Tonnage and Poundage was granted) are not
fitted and employed, as the present condition of this Kingdom and Ireland
requires, but some of them for the conveying away of Delinquents, who durst not
abide the test of the Parliament, to the great encouragement of the rest of the
malignant party here, who when their designs and themselves be detected, know
how to escape the hand of Justice through the abuse of a Royal conduct.

10. The not questioning those many thousands of unknown persons, who are
sheltered in Cove^garden, and thereabouts, which do not employ themselves in
any lawful calling, and it is very probable, lie in a readiness to adventure
upon some desperate attempt, to the endangering of the welfare, peace and
safety of the Kings Majesty, Parliament and City.

11. The misunderstanding between the King and Parliament, the not vindicating
the privileges of Parliament, the not suppressing of Protections, the not
punishing of Delinquents, and the not executing of all Priests and Jesuits,
legally condemned, while others contrary to privilege of Parliament have been
illegally (as the Petitioners conceive) charged with Treason, to the deterring
of worthy Members from discharging their duties, and to the destroying of the
very being of Parliaments, do exceedingly fill the minds of men well affected
to the public, with many fears and discouragements throughout the Kingdom,
and so disable them from that cheerful assistance which they would be glad to
afford.

12. By means of the Premises there is such decay of trading, and such
scarcity of money (neither of which can be cured, till the former Evils be
removed) as it is likely in very short time, to cast innumerable multitudes of
poor Artificers into such a depth of poverty and extremity, as may enforce
them upon some dangerous and desperate attempts, not fit to be expressed, much
less to be justified: which they leave to the wisdom of this House speedily
to consider and prevent.

These are the Evils under which the Petitioners do exceedingly labor and
languish which they humbly conceive to have sprung from the employing of ill
affected persons in places of Trust and Honor in the State, and near to the
sacred person of his Majesty; and that these Evils are still continued by
means of the Votes of Bishops and Popish Lords in the House of Peers.

And now, that the Petitioners have faithfully represented the true Reasons
which dooreally enforce them to return this answer, most of which have been
formerly offered to this Honorable House in sundry Petitions; and that they
have done all that in them lies (even beyond all president) to serve the King,
Parliament and Kingdom; They humbly crave leave to protest before God and the
high Court of Parliament that if any further misery, ^^e Copy (...) Midlesex
^^tition ^^s never ^nted, and ^rfore not ^erted.
befall their dear brethren in Ireland, or if any mischief shall break in
upon this Kingdom, to the endangering or disturbing thereof, it ought not to
be i^p^t^a to the Petitioners, but only to such as shall endeavor to hinder
the effectual and speedy cure of the evils before recited, that so much
disable and discourage the Petitioners from doing that which by this honorable
House is desired of them.


