Of a Free Trade A DISCOURSE Seriously Recommending to our Nation the
wonderful benefits of TRADE, especially of a rightly Governed, and Ordered
Trade.

Setting forth also most clearly, The Relative Nature, Degrees, and
Qualifications of LIBERTY, Which is ever to be enlarged, or restrained
according to that Good, which it Relates to, as that is more, or less ample.

Written by HENRY PARKER Esquire.

(...).
Doing all things thou do none:
Business too vast makes thee a Drone.
LONDON: Printed by Fr: Neile for Robert Bostock, dwelling in Paul's
Churchyard, at the Sign of the King's Head. 1648.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL JOHN KENRICK Alderman of LONDON, Governor of the
Merchant Adventurers of ENGLAND. TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL ISAAC LEE, Deputy of
the said Company of Merchant Adventurers residing at Hamburgh. To all other
Deputies, Assistants and Members of the said Famous Company.
Worthy Gentlemen:
IF in this brief Argument (which here treats of your Charters, and maintains
your privileges) there be any thing beseeming an Advocate of yours: I desire
the entire advantage thereof may redound solely to your selves. For indeed the
Merit of your Cause is such, as would require an able Orator: and when I first
applied my self to serve you herein, I perceived your interest was the same as
the Common interest of all Merchants, and that could have no termination, but
in the common interest of our Nation: But if there appear any Error, or Fayler
in these papers: if the workmanship be found too unworthy of the stuff: I
shall then desire of all my Readers, that the blame may be only mine: and that
none but my self may suffer the least disadvantage by my defects, and
disabilities. I am certain all wise, impartial Judges will distinguish betwixt
that which is mine in this weak piece, and that which is yours: and if they
cast some disdain upon me for not pleading your cause, as I might: they will
not proceed to a condemnation of your cause, for being no better pleaded here
then it is.

In Queen Elizabeth's days a Tract to this very purpose was Printed by Mr.
Wheeler (a learned Gent: that preceded me in this place) were that Tract now
reprinted, perhaps our Times would be better satisfied in this Case. It came
not to my fight, till after I had formed the lump of this, and given it all
those rude lineaments almost, which it now bears: and I was induced then to
persist in my resolution of finishing this, and not of retroceding; the rather;
because I saw my style and method varied much from his: because, the face of
the times (which has great influence upon the State and fate of Merchandise)
was not the same when He wrote, as it is now:, because, his Tract was in bulk
more then twice, as great as mine; because, He might give some light to me in
some things, and I add some to Him in other things; and so both might be more
effectual for the ends proposed by both, then either: because, if He was more
satisfactory in matters of this particular Company, I had some thoughts in my
self, that I was more proper for the affairs of Merchants in general. These
reasons kept from abortion this Essay of mine at that time: but for how long a
space it was repreived, I cannot prognosticate: nor do I much regard how soon
its fatal hour approaches, so the business which it aimed at may survive,
and prosper. Gentlemen, my reputation in this case must run some hazard, and
stand or fall, as the vogue of this age pleases: yet my intention is to be
judged of only by you; wherefore let that only find your fair acceptance,
and favorable construction, and that shall be a sufficient encouragement to

Hamb: December. 30. 1647. Your Worships obliged, faithful Servant, HEN: PARKER.

A DISCOURSE CONCERNING FREEDOM OF TRADE.
MAN is taught by the rules of Wisdom to begin at the End of his Actions, and
to give the first place in his intention, to that which is to have the last in
Execution. Now the end of this discourse is improvement of Trade; and it being
a thing of late much controverted by diverse; whether Freedom in Trading be a
proper means, or no, to improve Trade: These two Terms (Freedom and Trade)
must be the subject matter of this Discourse. As for Trade the word is plain,
and needs no explanation: and the thing is as obvious to every man's
understanding, and so needs no definition. I will therefore premise something
very briefly concerning the value, and importance of Trade, that my end here
aimed at, to which my intention must needs give the precedence, may not seem
inconsiderable to any: and then cursorily from my first Term, I shall address
my self to my second.

My Lord Cook in his Commentary upon our Great Charter (where the Merchants
contentment is so prudently provided for) tells us, that Traffic is the
Merchants livelihood, and that the livelihood of the Merchant is the life of
the Commonweal, such as the King himself, and every Subject of the Land has an
interest in. He observes also that the Merchant is the good Bayliffe of the
Realm, as well to export Native, as to import foreign Commodities for the
benefit and necessary defense of the same. This Politic Argonante in Law
amongst matters of Law, thinks it no extravagance to deliver his judgment of
matters in Trade; and if we rightly analyze his judgment herein, we shall
find, that not a word of it falls to the earth without its due weight. The
Merchant indeed has a great dependence upon him both of Land and Water men, and
is often commander of great sums of ready money (greater then other men
commonly though better landed, and estated can raise upon sudden, public
exigences) and so even in his gown at home he is a proffitable member of the
Commonwealth: but look upon him in his employment serving the State by his
traffic, and so he is more then profitable, He is necessary to the well
being, nay to the being of the State. Those things which he exports conduce
perhaps more to profi^, and things imported to securance: yet it is well
intimated here that both exportation, and importation do conduce to both.
Native Commodities more immediately afford us Treasure: yet Treasure is as well
firmamentum belli, as ornamentum pacis: and foreign commodities more usually
are materials for Shipping, Arms, supplies in times of dearth, and distress,
etc. yet sometimes we retayle the same to strangers for gain, and thereby
convert them into ornaments of peace, as well as instruments of defense. How
prodigiously did Antwerpe formerly in a very few years aggrandize it self?
and what an excess of splendour has Amsterdam attaynd to since? yet (for ought
I know) Nature has bestowde no more previledge upon those two Towns whereby to
advance themselves with such facility: then it has upon Bristoll, and Newcastle
amongst us. Sure then, the Hollander and Fleming may infuse this secret into us
from that wondrous degree of opulence, and pomp, which both by Trade have
ascended unto* that importation of exotic commodities, if subtly managed,
may become as great an improvement, as exportation is to other^ It is visible
in the Hollander that the mines of Perne are as serviceable to Him, as to the
poor Iudian, that diggs in them that the F^^rs of Russiia are equally parted
betwixt Him and the Muscovite: that the plains of Cots-would, and Lemster do
as well graze his sheep, as they do the Englishman* And there was a time when
the Antwerpian might have boasted as truly, that Arabia was his g^rdine, that
Spain was his Orchard, that Norway was his Forest. That City (it is true) which
abounds with commodities of its own, has an easier, and shorter way to
prosperity then that City which is de^^itate of the like helps, and
opportunities, and yet experience discovers daily to us, that some Cities which
have little of their own, being industrious, slow with more abundance, and
swim in greater supefluity; then some other sloathfull Cities, that naturally
want nothing. Hence is the difference betwixt the Merchant and the Husbandman,
the Husbandmans thrift is in vendendo, not emendo as old Cato tells him: But
the Merchant has found out a way, how he may be emax, and vendax in the same
thing, and often times the retaylor finds the second sale more beneficial to
Him, then the first was to the Proprietor. Nay even the more unusefull
Crawmarys of N^rinburgh though they argue no thrift in them, that buy them at
last hand, yet they also are no contemptible mines of Gold and silver to those
which make, or buy them for a second utterance. Furthermore, if from
Merchandise it self, and these good Bayliffes of the Realm, which so actively
purvey in all parts of the world habitable, and uninhabitable for Treasure,
arms, and all other things, that partain to pleasure, health, and necessity:
if from them, we turn to the instruments, of their negotiations our Ships, the
wooden walls, and fortification of our State, of what respect ought these to
be? Even these (under God) in times of Peace prevent War: in times of War
procure Peace: in times of plenty they relieve our Friends abroad, in times of
dearth they relieve us at home. For examples, it is loss of time to offer any in
this argument, every man can tell how stupendiously Tire, Sydon, etc. of old,
and Venice, Belgia and other latter Signioryes have flourisht since by the
gains of Merchandise, whilst their puissance, and magnificence has been more
raised, and propagated by the Merchant, then either by the Husbandman,
soldier, or Scholar. It Is admirable to see what vast revenues are purchased by
some Nations (especially where Democracy takes place) out of mere commerce;
and how far other Nations in the mean time (especially such as are swayde by
Monarchs) though more commodiously situated, and advantagiously qualified
otherwise do neglect the same. The reason hereof may be, because in popular
States the Merchant usually has more share in administration of public
affairs: whereas in Monarchies, those that have the charge of the rudder, have
commonly little insight into Trade, and as little regard of Traders. Howsoever
either some singular happiness has hitherto attended Spain, and Portugal, or
else doubtless the feats of Merchandice have been in more then ordinary
esteem with their Kings: for both these have not only enriched their own
homes by Sea adventures, but also acquired thereby greater Dominions then their
own. For indeed besides those purchases which have been made in the East
Indies, we see in Mexico, and Peru, there is a new Hemisphere adjoined now to
that old half world, which the Assyrians, Persians, Grecians, Romans with so
much sweat, and blood labored to subjugate heretofore. And if the Sun find no
degree in all his circuit, where He can obscure himself from the Crown of
Spaines Subjects; the thanks thereof is due to the Art of an old Navigator: and
probably had Hen: 7. given as much credit to Columbus as Ferdinand did, either
the Austrian Family had not spread its wings so wide, or the Kings of England
had not been so closely entrenched within the four British Seas, as now they
are. But I purposely wave the ostentation of many, and great instances, and
therefore the whole weight of this Argument shall only be hung upon the single
epitome (as it were) of this pety jurisdiction here, wherein we now reside.

All the Land-intradoes, which tillage or pasturage yields to this Town of
Hamburgh are not much more considerable then some Gentlemen and Esquires
inherit in England; yet the wild Ocean, as these restless Copemen plow it
with their Fleetes, and harrow it with their nets; (though they creep into that
too through a River, not wholly at their command) is forced to pay them as
great a Tribute, and ample a rent as three the richest and goodliest Counties
of England are annually worth. Nevertheless England more abounding with all
habiliments, and necessary accommodations of Trade, and seeming to be as much
courted by the circumambient Sea, as any part of the Universe, for want of
encouragement to her Merchants at home, and Plantators abroad owes little of
her grandour, and power to that Element. Foreign Nations easily become greater
gainers by trading into England, then the English can by trading abroad: it is
too probable, that foreign Merchants reserve an entire gain to themselves out
of all their own* Commodities brought in hither: yet share a half profit with
us, in all our Commodities exported hence by them. And thus whilst we leave
many benefits to our emulous hostile neighbors, which by the same industry (as
they commendably use) might by us be anticipated to our own behoof; our own
supine sluggishnesse is the cause that we remain so much the weaker, and our
Enemies become so much the stronger. Thus much of the advantages of traffic;
thus much of the necessity of that noble profession, which teaches us to be the
curious, and laborious mariners of all the worlds Oceans, Straits, and Creeks;
if we have any desire to be more formidable to our Enemies, or more aidfull to
our Friends, or more gainful to our selves, this may be held sufficient.

From the benefit, I come now to the Freedom of Trade: I mean, that particular
degree of freedom, which is at this day pleaded for, and patronized by some,
that profess themselves no unfriends to Trade. Herein this method shall
conduct me: In the first place, I shall inquire, whether that Freedom, which is
affected by these times can stand with due order, and discipline, or not:
secondly, whether Trade probably can flourish, or not, without due order and
discipline: and in the last place, I shall answer such Arguments, as are framed
for liberty, and do militate against our Order and Discipline.

Liberty in a right acception, and understanding, is that which delivers, and
exempts us from some evil noxious, and offensive to us; such as is oppression,
too much restraint, etc. but it includes not any wild condition, such as
leaves us loosly in all things to our own discretion. That famous Roman, that
had the happiness to set Greece (in that age the Eye of the world) at liberty,
and did break in sunder the yoke of Macedon, when He saw in the people too much
wantonness, and immoderation, He advised them to more continency, and to
retire into narrower bounds; Vt saltem meram libertatem non haurirent. Herein
he seemed wisely to distinguish betwixt that sheere, unmixt freedom, which uses
to intoxicate us, and to bring detriment, and danger with it; and that allayed,
or mixed freedom, which God, and Nature have made so sweet to all Generous
minds: whose property it is ever, to set restraints to it self in some things,
as well as to take restraints off from us in other. In politics, there are
Free Monarchs, and there are Free Subjects: and the freedom of Monarchs is not
incompatible with the freedom of Subjects: for neither is it necessary to the
freedom of a Prince, that He should be unlimitable in all things, and beyond
control as well when He destroys, as when He saves: nor to the freedom of a
Subject to live absolved from all Laws, and obedience. Without all question, He
is the freest Prince that has the most power to do good, and the least to do
harm: and He is the freest Subject, who is to pay his obedience to the mildest
Laws, and indulgentest Magistrates. So in Ethics: He injoyes the purest and
most refined freedom in his own breast, which has the least furious passion to
serve, and the least impetuous appetite to master; not He that is becalmed, as
it were, and finds no mobility at all in his spirit. The variovs Luminaries in
Heaven have their distinct magnitudes, motions, and stations: and the blessed
Intelligences in the Heaven of heavens (nay even those spirits that are fallen
from blessedness) retain several distances of power, place, and office. All
these things prove to us, that restraint, and liberty, are relative things, and
not to be accounted simply good, or simply bad in themselves. When restraint
deprives us of that good which is in temperate liberty it degenerates into
oppression: when it only saves to us that good, which is in harmonious order,
it is fully answerable to Liberty. So liberty when it only discharges us from
that evil, which is in oppression, it approaches to the perfection of Order:
but when it dissolves all Order, it precipitates us headlong into confusion.

Liberty is either intensive, or extensive, and both ways it must be reduced
to a just standart: for if it be in degree too void of temperature, and
qualification the ruder sediment of the people cannot bear it, it strangely
inebriates them: and if the degree of it be moderate, yet the dilatation of it
to too many makes it incommodious. There are two vicious extremes in
government; the one is rigorous, and makes nothing lawful, or safe to any: the
other is remiss, and leaves all things free and safe to all: now by the
consent of all; that extreme, which straitens too much, is not so desperately
ill, as that which inlarges too much. The reason is, because those which govern
are fewer in number then the governed: and therefore clashing, and confusion
(which must needs inevitably follow, where all limits, and restraints are taken
away) is less dammageable amongst a few, then it would be amongst many.

Liberty therefore may well be compared to fresh waters, it is potable, and
sweet whilst it endures a just confinement in the veins and channells of the
earth. But when it once refundes it self into the bosom of the briny Ocean,
it retaynes no longer its former relli^h. And even so we must censure of
Liberty by the last, whilst it produces good effects it remains Liberty, the
name and thing agree well: but when it supplies to us no good at all, or
bereaves us of some good greater then it supplies, it remains no more then the
shadow, or mere misnomer of Liberty. Exempli gratia: If all Land-inclosures
were every where laid open, and all evidences cancelled, upon which men's
private interests, and proprieties depend, many poor men would expect to have
their conditions meliorated; yet undoubtedly their expectations at last would
fail them; and together with community in all things a general confusion of
all persons, and things would break in to the fatal destruction both of poor
and rich.

Our common Proverb puts us rightly in mind, that he which dwells every where,
dwells no where: that every man's interest is no man's intrest, and that every
man's business is no man's business: now this being true in matters of Husbandry,
and in all other interests, and negotiations, why should it not be as true in
matters of commerce, for if agriculture generally be more necessary then trade:
and if confusion in agriculture be more mischeivous then confusion in Trade,
yet by the same consequence confusion in trade? is as mischievous to Traders,
as confusion in tillage would be amongst those that till the earth.

Thus much of the word Freedom generally taken, I must now speak more
particularly of that Freedom, whose expedience, or inexpedience is so much
questioned in the business of Trade.

Freedom and restraint are things opposite (we see) yet both admitting of
several degrees, and limitations, they are not so opposite but that some kind
of restraint may be reconciled to some kind of freedom, for in as much as it
is sometimes convenient to be restrained, though not always, and from all
things; and sometimes it is inconvenient to be loosed, or enlarged though not
always, and from all things: in regard that restraint at sometimes only
upholds Order, and liberty at other times introduces confusion: Our main
Quaere, is only this; Whether that restraint in Trade which hitherto has been
established amongst such and such Companies of Merchants, be conducing to
Order, or no: And whether that Freedom of Trade which irregular Interlopers
dispute for be the usher of confusion, or no.

For the just discussion of this, the benefit of Order, regulation, and
approved discipline amongst Merchants, is to be considered and brought into the
scole of this hand, whilst the advantage of opennes, looseness, and
unconfinednesse in trading is to be brought into the other.

For out of all question, liberty is not to be poized by the mere sound of its
name, but by the solid privileges which it brings with it, and in like manner
restraint is not to be rejected except one ly for the certain, substantial
disadvantages which are found to accompany it. Let us then draw up an exact
balance.

The 1. Benefit which we now enjoy by our government, and incorporation is in
things appertaining to Gods worship, and the true Religion: though we live
amongst Lutherans, Papists, Jews, Mahometans, Pagans: Yet we have a free
exercise of our Religion, and in some places the Ordinances are as duly,
profitably, and comfortably administerd amongst us, as if we were in the besome
of our own Church.

How much this privilege tends to the honor of God, the propagation of the
true faith, how much to the prosperity of trade (Godliness having not only
the promises of the world to come, but also of this life) and how much to be
bewailed the want of the Word, and Sacraments is amongst our Merchants in
Spain, Italy, Portugal; let all men judge. Yet how this divine blessing can be
continued amongst us, after that we are bound together by no links of
Association, but that we may trade at large arbitrarily where we list, how we
list, and when we list, is worthy to be considered; and I believe all men who
have a true sense, and tincture of Religion in their hearts will consider it
seriously. The next benefit is in matters of Justice: Though we are far distant
from our own Judges and Courts, and cannot have timely recourse to the remedy
of our own Laws, nay though we should otherwise be exposed to the snares, and
rigors of foreign Laws, and Magistrates, we are now (in matters where appeal
is not requisite) tried by men of our own Religion, of our own Nation, and
education, and such also as are present upon the place.

All Partners that enter into a joint Trade for the most part Covenant here
mutually, and voluntarily in all cases of dispute, and doubt to stand to the
judgment of this Court, I never saw any Indentures hitherto without that
express clause in them. Nay even strangers here have often declined their own
Tribunals, and submitted their cases to our decisions, and I never yet heard of
any of them that departed not from our Court fully satisfied both with our
Justice, and expedition: it cannot therefore be expected, that our own
Merchants which know so well what a privilege it is to be judged by Merchants,
especially being present upon the place, and such as guide their judgments by
the same Merchants Law, as is in force in England, should not set a great price
upon this especial privilege. Hen: the 4th. and Hen: the 7th. were as wise
Kings as ever reigned in England, and when the one of them granted our Charter,
and the other enlarged the same, the main consideration, which both of them had
in their eyes, was the prevention of many mischeifs empeachments, and
obstructions which at that time sensibly oppressed Merchants, and confounded
Trade, ob defectum boni, and sani Regiminis.

A Third Benefit which we are now capable of by being incorporated into
Companies is, that hereby we are enabled to do many egregious works of charity,
which by our disfranchisement would all be utterly lost, and extinguished.

The Merchant Adventurers are but one branch of the Merchants of England, and
the Merchants here residing are but one branch of the Merchants Adventurers,
yet how many hundreds has this branch sustained, and releived in cases of
necessity? and how many widows, and poor families does it constantly feed and
refresh? About 16 years since, when the expedition of Marquise Halmilton had
miscarried here in Germany many, sick, distressed soldiers that were the
woeful splinters of his broken ararmy came hither, and were not only saved
from perishing, but also shipped for England at this Companies charge. M: Ant:
Beding-field was then our Deacon, and had the charge of the poores box, he is
now a Parliament man, and can aver upon his knowledge that this society
issued no less at that time within 6 months space then 400 pound, for such
devout purposes.

A Fourth Benefit afforded by our present Governments, is, that hereby we are
rendered far more considerable instruments to serve and honor our own Country,
then else we should be, and that not only in Trade, but also in diverse other
eminent, public Offices.

As we are now imbodied, and compacted, we can by our common seals raise great
sums of money: We are in a qualification to entertain Princes, to oblige
Cities, to procure right, and timely intelligence, and sometimes to prevent
public misunderstandings: and so to merit much oftentimes of the Nation, from
whence we are.

That formidable Armado which in 1588 was designed to swallow us up, had
inprobability been far more fatal then it was if it had been appointed sooner,
and arrived when Queen Elizabeth was not so well appointed as it found her
afterward. And yet this is well known, that Gr^sham and other Merchants by
taking up the monys at Genoa, and our Company by doing the like at Keeler Mart
in Holsteine: did so prevent Philip that his Invasion was retarded thereby for
a whole year, and that retardment being so much to the disadvantage of Spain,
and to the advantage of England, was under God a powerful means of preserving
us. Charles the 5th. by calculation found that in Antwerpe 20000 Souls, and in
all the Low Countries at least 60000 had a livelihood, and subsistence from
the English Trade: wherefore when he was very resolute to bring the inquisition
into Antwerpe, and remained unmoovable against all other arguments, and
supplications of that Town: yet this motive, that the English Company would be
dislodged by introducing of that rigor, diverted him from his purpose.

Also when the same Charles had transferred all his signiories, and Dominions
to his son Philip, that branch of the Merchant Adventures appeared in gallant
state to grace those Solemnities, consuming above 2000 Crowns in sumptuous
furniture, shows and triumphall arches. In the year 1581. likewise the Duke of
Alanson in the same City was entertained by 80 English Merchants of the same
Company, all bravely mounted on horse back, apparelled in black velvet, and
most of them with brooches and chains of gold about their necks: for which they
received thanks from Queen Elizabeth and the Lords of her Council. The King of
Bohemia, and some of our Kings Nephews (besides diverse Ambassadors) have found
some seemly receptions also from us here at Hamburgh, and from our brethren at
Roterdam, upon several occasions, but I forbear prolixity in this point. An
other excellent singular Benefit of our government is, that thereby we are put
into a capacity of enjoying all that is good and profitable in union, and all
that is good, and profitable in division withal. Take away that Order, and
Harmony that is now settled amongst us, and has been settled by all our Kings,
and countenanced by all our Parliaments from Hen: the 4th. till this very day,
and as fully confirmed by this Parliament as by any: and our Trade will become
instantly both straggling, and confused: and as a straggling Trade will deprive
us of whatsoever is good in union, so a confused Trade will abridge us of all
that is good in a due method, and distribution.

This may be demonstrated most plainly in a military body: 20000 men well
armed, and imbattaild, are of greater force, then 40000 drawn together in an
unformed, undigested heap; and when that shall be accounted an Army of so many
Soldiers effective, this shall be despised as a rout of so many men rudely
conglomerated, and thronged together. For it is not sufficient that there be
together in one Field a due proportion of Commanders and Soldiers, of Horse
and Foot, of Arms offensive, and defensive: all these must be severally ranged,
and distantly employed: the Commander must move here, the Soldier there, the
Horse must charge here, the Foot there; such a Regiment must be assigned its
post here, such a Brigade must advance there: wise men know experimentally,
that there is an art in division sometimes, such as in many cases gives life to
Union: and it is as true on the contrary: that the queintest division makes
miserable Music, when it is not subservient to Union. For let a Battle be
marshalled in all its members, and parts according to the most exact rules of
souldery either ancient, or modern: yet if the Trumpets sound contrary points
of war, if the superior Commanders give contrary Orders, if all these
curiously fashioned digestions, and divisions be not inspirited with one, joint
design, which like the soul is to overruled all the Organs, what can be
expected from this great, moliminous frame? Now if we make any doubt whether or
no the use of Tacticks be as great in mercatorian, as in military affairs let
us come to nearer application, and bend our selves to consider, as well what
the want of union, as what the want of distribution usually occasions amongst
Traders.

Union amongst Merchants cannot be denied to be of exceeding great importance,
for in all places where we six our residence, we see, it makes as more
valuable, and acceptable: Whilst we are looked upon as an orderly, united
Society, we are known to be able to make, or divert a Trade in or from any one
Town, or Province. How soon was Bruges in Flanders despoyl'd of its fame, and
opulence after our Company withdrew from it? and how soon did Antwerpe
transcend Bruges in fame, and opulence after our Commodities were stapled in
Brabant? When 'twas too late, Bruges, besides enlargement of former
privileges, could offer us moneys, and descend to strange entreaties for the
wooing and winning of our return: but Antwerpe had first prevailed with us, and
having prevailed, it sent forth its Magistrates to meet, and welcome us with
processions. And well it was for Antwerpe, that the English were so taken with
their civilities, for in the space of 60 or 70 years, whereas it had, before it
was our Mart, not above four able Merchants, and six Ships, it became the
glorious Magazine of all Europe. The like instance might be given in Stodt, and
Hamburgh, the same cause that now makes Hamburgh rich, did once do the like at
Stodt: and the same cause that made Stodt poor, may hereafter perhaps work the
same effect in Hamburgh. Who sees not therefore that from the benefit which
strangers receive from us, whilst we are thus associated, and made capable of
marrying our Company to them, arise those reciprocal obligations, and special
dowries, as it were, which they by their concordates confirm unto us? Where we
are unprofitable, we must expect to be held despicable: and what extraordinary
profit can other Nations expect from our Merchants, when they appear only as
so many individual persons, or straggling Traders.

The English had at the Narre in Leisland a good Trade, and good sales for our
Native Commodities for a while, but about 1565. diverse straggling Merchants
resorted thither out of England and so brought themselves, and their wares into
great contempt. Diverse of them went about the Town with Cloth in their arms,
and Measures in their hands, and so when they had shamefully imbased our
English Draperies, to the disreputation of our Country, and decay of
themselves, the Lords of the Council at the next Parliament were enforced, for
prevention of the like sordid, Pedlar-like traffic thereafter, to comprise the
Narre within the Muscovie Companies Charter.

Thus is Union, or a politic Association amongst Merchants, beneficial to the
places where we trade, and by resultance beneficial to our selves, and in the
last resort beneficial to our whole Nation: for all these interests are so
interweaved, that the benefit of the Stranger is requited with the benefit of
the English Merchant; and the benefit of the English Merchant is to be regarded
as the benefit of the English Nation. For in some things that which immediately
advantages the English Merchant, advantages mediately the English Nation: even
as in other things that which immediately brings prosperity to the English
Nation, mediately brings prosperity to the English Merchant. This is to
illustrate the Commodities which flow from our Union, now the Commodities
which flow from a due distribution, and division in Trade are no less
visible. The whole world almost is now aptly cantoniz'd amongst several
Societies of our Merchants, whilst some trade East, some West, some nearer,
some further off; and were it not for this apt partition, it would unavoidably
fall out, that some Mart Towns would prove over-pester'd, or like a Common of
Pasture over-layd, whilst others in the mean time would be left utterly
unfrequented. And sure if the world were not spacious enough for a ^our
Traders, some pretense might be framed, why all men ought to be licenced in all
places: but since the contrary is most true, and no man is so straited for want
of room, but that He may trade in some places to his own advantage, though he
be bounded that he may not trade in all places to other men's disadvantage:
nothing but an emulous desire to interfere with others, and to incumber trade
could provoke men to be opposite to our regular distributions. I need not
amplify hereupon, it is enough that I further refer to the example of our
thriving Neighbors in Holland; whosoever will behold Order in its beauty, and
perfection amongst Merchants there, He may observe them so politickly
associated, and their Associations so equally distributed, that no one impedes
the other abroad, nor no one Town ingrosses all Trading to it self at home.

Hitherto I have instanced in the manifold expediences of Order, and
Government, especially in matters of piety, equity, charity, and policy as well
in relation to the Common weal of Merchants, as to the Commonweal of England:
now whether there be any thing in freedom of Trading that can preponderate, and
excel all these, I leave to all sober men to discern; if there be, I wish it
may prevail, and obtain a just preference before all these: if there be not,
more need not be inferred out of these premises: sober men cannot be affected
with the name, or empty sound of a relative, that is rather to be judged by its
circumstances, effects, and additions then by it self: sober men cannot but
distinguish betwixt that true freedom which always dis-inthrals us of some
evil, and that shadowy ghost of freedom, which often denudes us of our
greatest privileges. I hope I have now discharged, what was to be expected
from me in my first point, and made it apparent that the freedom in Trade which
is to be admeasured, and balanced with all these expediences here enumerated
had not need to be of large extension.

It remains now that I come to my next head, and therein inquire whether trade
be likely to flourish or no, being stripped, and robbed of all those powers and
preeminences which our Charters convey to us.

I have hitherto looked upon Merchants as Travaylers sojourning abroad, I must
now come nearer, and look upon them as very Merchants, buying, selling,
bartering, bargaining, etc. with other Nations; and from general Order, and
harmony amongst Merchants, I must come to instance in such, and such species of
that Order, and harmony, which has hitherto been so fortunate to them. And
first let us look into that provision of our Government, which limits the
education, and admission of Apprentices, and though I have not leisure to cite
all our rules concerning the same which are very many, and each of them very
useful, yet consider the sumum genus it self, see if the breeding of
Apprentices be not absolutely necessary. Grant to all without exception an open
license to trade at large, and who will endure the strict duty and bondage of
Apprenticehood? and yet without that strict duty, and bondage, who can be
sufficiently instructed, and prepared to gain all those Arts, and subtilties,
which we know are absolutely necessary to all Traders. In all sciences, and
occupations breeding is necessary, but amongst Merchants it is more then
ordinarily necessary: For if Divines may pretend something to divine, secret
illapses from above; and soldiers by their general tacticks learned in one
Country, may be qualified for command in all Countries; and if agriculture be
a skill that depends much upon natural sagacity: yet with Merchants it is far
otherwise. For unto a Merchant not only a breeding, but a particular breeding
in such or such a place, in such or such a Trade is requisite. He that is
experienced to trade in Russia is not thereby enabled to trade in Spain, and
he that can deal warily enough with Indians, Turks and Barbarians, is not
always prepared enough to cope with the Jews, Hans Towns, and Hollanders.
Questionless to license all men to trade without breeding, nay without the
particular advertisements, and preparations of such a breeding is to send men
naked into battle, and to render them up as a prey to vulpine, circumventing
neighbors. I might here take occasion to commend the training up of our Youths
on this side the seas, as it is publicly advantageous, there being infused
into them thereby something of the Soldier, and something of the Scholar, and
indeed (if I am not deceived) there is commonly instilled something into them,
that better qualifies them to serve the State, then what we see in mere
Scholars or Soldiers. I wish our young gallants which learn in France to
wear ribbons, and in Spain and Italy to be perfidious, and do worse things,
did always return home as much improved, and as well accomplished as our
Merchants use to do. But this is not within my lists, and that thought shall
supersede me.

For our next evidence, we may appeal unto our many Orders made to prevent, and
reform, the ill and faulty making or Cloth, and other English woollen
Commodities, without which Orders all our Manufactures would be falsified, and
corrupted, and consequently our Nation disparaged, all buyers of Cloth at home,
and abroad abused, and Trade it self much desolated. At the solicitation of
our Merchants, wholesome Statutes have been Enacted, and to second them strict
Proclamations have been published: and to back them the Merchants have appointed
Officers, furnished stipends, and applied diverse other preventions, that our
Draperies might be kept to their just measures, weights, and numbers; yet we
find all is too little. The Clothiers begin to sophisticate of late more then
ever, and all our power will be insufficient to withstand them; except the
State reach forth their helping hands yet further; and do more exactly poize
both our ends and pretensions. The clamors of the Clothiers against the
Merchants privileges arise chiefly from this offense, though they are commonly
palliated with other pretexts, and it is a wondrous thing, that when they are
sensibly gainers by transgressing Laws, and we are as sensibly at a charge to
maintain them, they should be so well, and we so ill interpreted.

In my Lord Cooks opinion nine parts of ten of all our English Staple
Commodities, are such as we sheere from the Sheeps back, we had need therefore
be careful how abuses break in upon us in these Commodities, and how we
countenance those that are the abusers, and yet thereby discountenance the
zealous reformers of the same. M: Anth: Wither is now a Justice of Peace about
London, He was once employed by the Merchant Adventurers besides others about
reforming of these abuses, let it be inquired what a liberal yearly stipend He
obtained for the same.

In the third place we may produce our many prudent Orders against
mis-shipping, whereby, first, the Shipping of the Kingdom is the better
maintained, in as much as by our government it is not permitted to any
particular men for cheapnesse sake either to ship in foreign bottoms, or in
vessels of our own that are undefensible. Secondly, by our regularity in
shipping many fraudulent attempts of such as use to steal customs, bribe
searchers, color strangers goods, etc. are disappointed. Thirdly, by the due
observation of our rules, whilst we ship our goods hand in hand together we go
stronger through the Seas, are in less fear of Rovers, and other dangers. We
also are less injurious to our common Trade, yea and to particular persons
amongst ourselves: in as much as now we forestall not one another, nor bring
down our common prices by the precipitate haste of some few; by this means also
foreign buyers are accommodated by their certainty, knowing in due season when
to repair to our Marts; and we are not disaccommodated by our uncertainty,
because we know when to sell, and when to forbear selling, and thereby we keep
our Commodities from being blown upon, either by having our. Warehouses too
full at sometimes, or too empty at others.

In the fourth place, the many Cautions, Orders made by us for the reglement of
our sales may justly be here cited: by some of these, we are limited to such
certain shew-dayes partly for our own ease, and partly for the buyers
advantage. The Cities of Lubeck and Bremen have lately been urgent with us to
set more shew-dayes here at Hamburgh then two in a week: but we seeing our
Trade no ampler, then it is at present, found the inconvenience of altring our
Show days, and so denied them satisfaction in that point. By others of our
Orders we are restrained from giving gratifications to Merchants or Brokers,
from all pety sales, and retails, which (if allowed) would reduce us soon to
ignoble, vulgar Pedlars: by others we are bound from giving credit without
liquid Bills, and specialties, also from pawning Bills, or rebating under such a
certain rate, and hereby we prevent ma^y Suits with strangers, and many strifes
amongst our selves. By others we are inhibited from allowing Tare out of the
Mart Town, or out of due time, or without due inspection: and we are all
convinced, that were it not for regulation in this matter of Tare, there were
no abiding in Germany. How our Trade languishes in Holland at this time by
reason of Oppression in matter of Tare is known too well, our Council Table in
King James his days took notice of it, and sought the redress of it: and sure
our Merchants hitherto have only continued trading there, out of some hope of
better times, and conditions hereafter, as Husbandmen use to manure the earth
in times of dearth, as well as in times of plenty. Commissioners from Lubeck
and Bremen seconded by the Senate of this Town have assailed us lately, and
eagerly pressed us to allow the same Tare, as is in Holland, but our answer was
resolute, that rather then to submit to such a thraldom we should be forced to
abandon all Trade in Germany.

Many more instances then these (if it were not for prolixity) might be made:
but as those which have any knowledge in Merchandice will acknowledge these are
matters of grand moment, and importance: so to other men that are ignorant, or
careless of our affairs, more would be to little purpose. I will only add
this, that as we enjoy many conveniences by being an united, imbodied
Fraternity, so by virtue of the same we are guarded and protected from many
inconveniences. As we have a jurisdiction amongst us, we are enabled upon all
new emergencies to contravene new devised arts of fraud, and circumvention in
bargaining, selling, etc. by making new Orders against them.

Also as we are a Corporation, we are armed thereby with a competence of power
to enforce, and execute our Orders so made, and if any violence of foreign
States, and Potentates contrary to our Intercourses, and Treaties of amity
enterposes to our prejudice, or if any new Tolls, imposts, or exactions
oppress us, we are in this posture better qualified to relieve, or vindicate
our selves, then else we should be. A thousand private men intending their own
particular interests as so many particular men, having no common purse, nor
public Officers to solicit the business of them all, cannot expect that
authority with foreign States, nor hope to make so vigorous a resistance
against oppressions and innovasions, as one hundred Merchants may, that are
closely linked, and cemented together under one, and the same policy. For want
of such policy, all other Nations were long since eaten out of their Trade by
the Antwerpians, and Esterlings, and had the Merchant Adventurers been
destitute of those powers, and immunities which Hen: the 4th. Hen: the 7th. and
other famous Kings of England established amongst them, they also had been long
since driven out of Trade in like manner.

One man is woolvish to another, as the old Proverb advertises, nay when Bears
will not prey upon Bears, nor woolfes upon woolfes, man will scarce prey upon
any other then man. And yet this notwithstanding private man to private man is
not so unnatural; as Nation is to Nation: for amongst particular (...) the
primary Laws of our Creation, which injoyne us to do as we would be done unto,
and to be kindest to them that are nee^est in kind, are not so totally
abrogated to us, and eraced on of our consciences, as they are amongst Nations.

If there be any fiercer feude, and violenter antipathy then other, it is
commonly seem amongst those States that are most consanguineous, and nearest
conjoined in other relations, and as for doing to other Nations, as we would
have done unto us; that sems a ridiculous principle amongst Stats-men, inasmuch
as to do justice to a stranger when he is plaintiff against a Native, is no
less reputed then to do injustice to a Native: and to let slip any advantage
whatsoever that is offered us of spoiling forreiners, is the same accounted as
to spoil domestics.

Republics have no breasts, or seats where any such thing as conscience or
true honor can reside; were it not for fear of requital, and return of
injuries from those that are injured, all people would be at the same pass, as
Argiers is now at.

That bold Roman that expostulated with Alexander, why it might not be as
lawful for him to seize boats, as it was for Princes to invade whole Empires,
seemed to conceive that the Laws of Nature extended to communities of men, as
well as to individualls: but alas that would neither justify his private
roving at sea; nor condemn Alexanders royal roving by land.

In matters of war Monarchies especially, and in matters of Trade Republics,
lay hold of all advantages, as if their patrimoniall rights were never bounded
by any thing but invincible difficulties, and necessities, nor honor had any
rules to measure things by but those of profit, and disprofit.

This is the reason why the Jewish Lumbards are odious for their excessive
gains exacted, and extorted out of all such as they contract with, and
therefore are pursued as petty Pirates: but the Hollanders and Hans Towns for
the same exploits done more publicly are extolled as great Merchants, nay are
crowned as glorious Conquerors. We that live here in Hamburgh, and our Brethren
in Holland are too sensible of this: our often removals from one Mart Town to
another, to ease our selves of insupportable pressures most fedifragously
brought in upon us, have preserved that life in our English Trade that is yet
remaining in it: yet the vast expenses of our removings have left us in a sad
condition.

This concludes my two first points: I am now in order to answer such arguments
as are brought for a free Trade, and such objections as are urged against our
privileged way of Trading.

The first Argument is founded upon this maxim: Bonum quo communius, eo
melius: If Merchandise (say our Adversaries) be good for the Commonweal, then
the more common it is made, the more open it is laid, the more good it will
convey to us. But all grant Merchandise to be good ^rgo. Ans. To detect the
fallacies of this Argument: we must confess that this maxim is true of all
such good things as are absolutely, or infinitely good: yet we may deny that
Merchandise is either absolutely, or infinitely good. For first, Merchandise
secundum quid, that is, if it be rightly managed, and regulated may be
profitable to such a man, or such a State: but (we all see) that Merchandise at
sometimes, for want of good government, and order, undoes many private men, and
in their undoing proves injurious to the State. Secondly, Merchandise may be
reckoned amongst good things, but not amongst things infinitely good, therefore
though the diffusion, or enlargement of it may bring profit to the State unto
such bounds, and degrees; yet this is no proof, but that there are bounds, and
degrees beyond which it may not be diffused, nor can be enlarged without
disprofit. Those good things which are ample enough to satisfy all, may be
extended to all, and the further they are extended, the more good they do: but
Trade is not of that amplitude as to satisfy all men in all places, and at all
times, and therefore not within the same Maxim. If there were in the fruits,
and increase of the earth an overflowing abundance to sustain all, and answer
all men's desires without our labor and sweat, then hedges and ditches would be
to no purpose: but since the earth is not so profuse of its favors, nor so
immense in its revenues, we must maintain mounds, and terriers; priority of
possession, expense of toil, purchase, etc. must be regarded, or else we shall
all be soon at a loss.

Before the Land of Canaan was fully stockt, Abraham and Lot might intercommon
freely, and graze their Herds sociably in all places where they traveled; but
in process of time, when their flocks became more numerous, and when
consequently the surface of that milk-and honey flowing Country began to
shrink before them, they were both necessitated to journey several ways, and
to provide for themselves more ^x^, and distinct habitations. The water is a
more unmeasured element then the earth, and therefore formerly it was ever held
a common patrimony to all: yet since Navigation is improved to this degree,
even this also is now disterminated, and made subject to imaginary lives for
avoiding of encroachments, and strife about fishings, etc. And not only
navigable Rivers, but Seas, and Oceans begin to submit to particular
Proprieties, and to own the special prerogatives of such, and such signiors.
Lawyers say, Cujus est Solum, ejus est etiamusque ad Coelum: wherefore if
neither Air, Water, nor Land resist the Laws of propriety, we cannot think the
Trade of Merchants is a thing more empty, and incapable of limits and rules,
then any of the Elements: if our grounds may be pestered with cattle; if Ponds
may be over-stockt with Fish; if the several Climates of the lower Region be
severally peopled, and frequented with fowl that seem to understand their
several seasons: we can hardly imagine that such a Country, or such a Mart
Town in such a Country should not be overcharged with too great a confluence
of Merchants.

Second Argument. That which seizes too great matters into the hands of too
few, and so is in the nature of a Monopoly, has been always condemned as a
preventing Trade, and held injurious to the major part of mankind: but such is
the Trade which privileged, and incorporated Merchants drive, etc.

Ans. The force of this Objection is, that if Trade may not be set at liberty
to all, yet it may be set at liberty to more then it is, except we will incur
the name and blame of Monopolists. In behalf of the Merchant Adventurers who
have, I think, the fullest Charters, and have ever met with the greatest
oppositions, though I am not so well acquainted with other Companies, I may
with much confidence give these Answers hereunto. First, though Wools endraped
be the main matter of our Trade, yet we deal not only in those Draperies, but
also in all kinds of Wares, and, other Merchandises. Secondly, neither does our
Company alone transport these Draperies: all other English Merchants, nay the
Hans Towns, and all other Strangers in amity with the Crown of England, at
their pleasure may buy, and vend again all sorts of English Wares that are
fully manufactured, as uncontrollably as they bring in their own Commodities.
Wherefore it cannot be said that this chief Trade of the Kingdom is engrossed,
or monopoliz'd by us in either of these two respects, for as much as our
privileges neither confine that Trade to us alone, nor us to that Trade alone.

Thirdly, The name of Monopolists cannot be fixed on them in respect of the
bounds allotted them for their Trade: for by calculation we find there are
above 6000 persons free of our Company, and from the Some in France to the Scaw
in Germany, (the nihil ultraes of our commerce) is no extraordinary proportion,
for such a proportion of men, let the number of the Merchant Adventurers be
compared with the number of all other Merchants, and then compare this space of
earth in France and Germany with all the globe besides; and it will soon
appear, that the confines of our Trade are rather too narrow, then otherwise.
Some hundreds, nay thousands of our Company that are capable of our freedom by
service, or by Patrimony are feign to leave their callings, and to betake
themselves to other employments: and necessity has now taught us to confine
our selves to a certain stint of Apprentices, in regard that our Trade is too
narrow for our Traders, and therefore whilst we are enforced to break out,
what can invite other men thus to break in, and to invade our precincts?

Fourthly, The price that is set upon our privileges cannot condemn us of
monopoly: for if a sufficient number could not be admitted by service, or
patrimony: yet the State has left a door open for any that are qualified for
trading to be admitted upon a mean, inconsiderable rate.

Any Out Port Merchant might have had his freedom for 25. l. ster^ing, and any
of London for 50. l. and those which neglected that opportunity, are yet
capable for the double sum.

Fifthly, The stint which we set upon our selves in buying cloth cannot be
objected to us, as savouring of monopoly: For first the whole Company by
common advice, and consent sets this stint for its own good; and as the whole
Company best understands its own interest, so neither has it, or can it have
any interest, but such as is consistent with the interest of the State. 2ly,
the Company had never resolved upon any such stint, but in contemplation of the
narrowness of Trade: and so far is this stint from making trade more scarce,
that it self was ordained merely as some ease and remedy against the scarcity
of Trade.

We know well that it is possible for some one Merchant to exceed forty others
in purse, or credit; yet sure it cannot be expedient for the Commonwealth,
that one Merchant should graspe too much, and swell up to an excessive bulk,
whilst forty other Merchants being over shadowed by him, can attain to no
growth at all. Thirdly, As the stint of Clothes is now set, it remains larger
then is made use of by diverse, the fourth part of our Merchants scarce ever
buys to the fourth part of Clothes that is allowable by the stint, wherefore
it is a most indirect and preposterous thing to call that a monopoly, or
straitning of Trade; which is the only remedy against monopoly, and the mere
effect of straitn^sse in Trade.

They which know the difference betwixt Common certain, and Common sans number;
and see how the Husbandman in dressing his vine, makes it more fruitful by
paring away the luxuriant products of its fertility, will easily judge by these
stints, that the Merchants were grown too numerous for their Trade, and not
that their Trade was grown too copious for their mannaging. Sixthly, As our
Trade cannot be called an engrossing Trade, or a monopoly in respect of any
other of its privileges or powers, so neither can it be accused thereof in
regard of our covinous, false dealing in Merchandise. It Is true, our Company in
Qu: Elizabeth's days found much opposition from the Hans Towns, and in that
bando which was procured against us, to remoove us from Stadt, the main
pretense was monopoly used by the English Merchants, but for a further Account
of that matter, we are to be informed: that the Hans Towns had anciently by
their great skill in Merchandise, made themselves very famous, and procured to
themselves privileges in many Countries. Amongst other Nations also that did
privilege them, the English was not the last, or least.

In London therefore they had the Steelyard assigned them with power to
exercise Merchant Law there, for their own better regulation: and amongst many
other old immunities, they were to pay for wares brought in, and carried out
one and a quarter per centum custom, and no more.

This Custom whilst the chief Trade of the land was in Wool undraped, was
no great loss to us: but after that the full Art of clothing was made ours in
Ed: the 3ds. days, and the Wool Trade was almost quite decayed, our State
found that it lost exceedingly by passing out cloth at the old Custom, and
that the Hans Towns privileges were diverse otherways abused to our public
detriment. Hereupon after some contests, (Ed: the 6th. reigning Anno 1550.) the
said privileges were looked into, and found both defective in themselves, and
also forfeited by diverse breaches of conditions: the formalities of their
incorporation were so void, that none could safely contract with them, and
therefore being detected of diverse injuries in coloring of foreign goods, not
within the verge of their privileges, and other falsehoods: it appeared, that
they were such an uncertain, misconstituted body, that they were not liable to
any account, nor answerable for any trespass.

This procured a judgment to annull, and abrogate the Hans Towns privileges,
and in Anno 1557. under Phil: and Mary, our Customs were improoved from 14. d.
to 6. s. 8. d. per Cloth payable by the English and 13. s. 4. d. by strangers,
and this improovement did but equal the old Custom of wool undraped. Till
the death of Q: Mary, whilst Spain and England were united, the Hans Towns
seeing their profit so far impared, and Trade in England in so good a measure
advanced, gr^w sullenly envious, but durst attempt nothing.

Nevertheless Anno 1564 when Queen Elizabeth was at enmity with the Spanyard,
with more resumed courage the Hans Towns labored to suppress the growth of
our Merchandise: and therefore to make the King of Spain their abettor against
us in Germany, and the Netherlanders, they made themselves parties against us
in Spain, by furnishing arms, ammunition, etc. Thus some acts of hostility
were done on both sides, Queen Elizabeth in a defensive way seized some of
their Ships sent to supply the Spanyard, and the Spanyard at their solicitation
banished us out of the Low Countries, and caused us to be interdicted Germany
also.

Anno 1567. the English Merchants being expelled out of the Netherlands,
contracted for entertainment at Hamburgh for 10 years: these 10 years being
expired, no longer residence could be had there, inasmuch as all the Hans Towns
could not enjoy us wholly to themselves, and for any one to enjoy us, they
thought it unequal, and prejudicial to the rest.

From Hamburgh we remooved to Embden, and there the same parties prosecuting
and renewing their clamors of a monopolizing Trade in the English, a new Edict
from the Emperor Anno 1582. was thundered out against us. The Grave of Embden
nothing troubled at this Edict, sent his Chancellor Doctor Moller, since
Syndicus of Hamburgh to the Spiers, who there defended the English Trade
against the slanderous imputation of monopoly, and for a while gave such
satisfaction, that the Emperors Edict was not put in execution against us.

Queen Elizabeth also in 1595. wrote thus to the Emperor, Monopolium de quo
Hanseatici subditos nostros criminantur calumniae potius quam verae
accusationis rationem per se far videtur. To wipe off this calumny, we can
also instance in several letters of attestation under the Common Seals of
Antwerpe, Midlebourgh, Embden, Stadt justifying our fair, and just manner of
trading: and if such legible proofs be not so available, we could appeal to
all the places where ever we resided, as so many visible arguments, prooving
fully for us, that our way of traffic has not been only blameless, and
just, but also strangely fortunate and propitious.

From Embden (for the Spanyard prevailing in Freisland had now made those parts
dangerous to us) we betook our selves to Stadt, and there we continued till
1597. so desirous was each of the Hans Towns singly to have harbored us, if
all jointly had not envied that single advantage: and being there then
disaccommodated, 10. or 11. of the chief Towns under the States sent to invite
us, and made offers of large accommodations amongst them.

We may further take notice, that Ed: the 6th. reserved for the Hans Towns
after forfeiture of their privileges, as ample a freedom of commerce, as for
any strangers whatsoever: That Queen Mary restored the said Towns upon
engagement that their inordinate Trade should be forborne, and this engagement
being violated, She yielded to a new Treaty about a sit moderation of their
Intercourses. Yet the Hans Towns did not only neglect to send Commissioners
within the time perfixed, but at the same time published an Edict at Lu^eck,
prohibiting all Trade with the English, Queen Mary for her husbands sake was
much a friend to the Austrian family, and for the Austrians sake to these
Easterlings, and therefore she offered again another Treaty in 1557. but this
offer was rejected likewise with an opprobrious pretense, that in England they
could expect no competent Judges of their cause. If they durst not trust their
cause to England in Q: Mary's days, because it was a Monarchy, then they
judged dishonorably of all Monarchies: if they made no difference of
Monarchies, but diffided in it, because it was a foreign State, where they
should not be their own Judges, this reflects also upon all foreign States: but
the truth is, they had an ill cause, and so were diffident of all Judges, but
themselves. Howsoever Queen Elizabeth in 1560. offered yet a new Moderation,
and this not accepted of from the beginning of her Reign, she commanded they
should be used here as her own Subjects, and better then any other Forreiners.
This is also most certain, till She saw her Subjects driven from Hamburgh in
1578. and an exaction of 7. per centum set upon all English Goods at Lunenburgh
in 1579. and all the English generally ill Treated at Dantzig, Deventer, etc.
and not only her Enemies of Spain assisted by them, but other Princes also
exasperated against Her, She made little difference betwixt them and her own
Subjects. I hope this will be a sufficient justification of our English Trade:
and now since it appears, that this opposition was procured to us by strangers
and enemies, that sought not to reduce us to a fair Trade, but to eject us out
of all Trade: me thinks it should be very unworthy of any Englishman to make
use of the same Objections.

3. Arg: That Trade which is not only complained of by Strangers, but Natives
also, and in all ages has encountered with so many Complainants, is likely to be
a Monopoly, or some private, anticipating, indirect way of commerce: but such
is that of all Merchants incorporated by particular Charters, etc. All
privileged Merchants, especially the Adventurers of England (whose privileges
are looked upon as so ample) have had Adversaries always to wrestle, and
contest with both abroad, and at home: yet this may be truly said of them (as
of Cato) they have been as often absolved, as accused: and their Patrons have
ever been far more honorable, then their Adversaries. Clothiers, Interlopers,
some Officers of the Outports, and Court projectors have molested them on the
one side: but on the other side Parliaments, Kings, Privy-Councellors, and the
wisest of Statesmen have protected them, and their Cause; and upon a full, and
due hearing it continually appeared, that their friends had honorable, but
their opposers dishonorable ends. As for the Clothier, He stomachs much that
He must be so strictly held to the Statute, and may not digress from the just
weight, and measure, that is there set for his Clothes. The Interloper takes
offense, that without contributing for Himself, He may not enjoy the benefits
of that policy, which is maintained at other men's charge: that the same hedges
which keep other men from trespassing him, should keep him from trespassing
other men. The Outport Officer is prevented of some bribes, for stolen
customs, false-colour'd goods, etc. by the regular shipping of our Merchants,
and by our Ministers, which keeps too severe a check upon him, and therefore
his indignation is raised. In the mean time the begging Courtier, He finds it
profitable for the Commonwealth, that accusations should be favored, and that
all Complainants should be heard: for whether the Complaints be true or false,
just, or unjust, profit comes in to Him both ways, and the Innocent must
gratify him for his quietus est, as well as the nocent for his impunity. King
James anno 1613. found that his Progenitors had been deceived in their Grants
to us, and therefore suspended and sequestered our Privileges: but in anno
1616* and 1617. after that the Merchants had been drained of 20, or 30000 l.
and Cockayns new project (so obstructive to Trade) was fallen to the ground of
it self, the same ancient Charters, and Liberties were revived with more
honorable testimonials then ever; the Courtiers were again sensible that King
James and his Progenitors had been well advised in their Grants.

The Merchants Adventurers long before the Art of Endraping Cloth was
introduced into England, had Privileges abroad from the Dukes of Brabant, and
other Potentates. Edw: the 3d. having transplanted the Manufacture out of the
Netherlands, for the better watering, and cherishing of it, confirmed to the
said Adventurers whatsoever had been granted in the year 1248. by John D: of
Brabant. Hen: the 4th. seeing the good effects of his grandfathers indulgence,
added a more beneficial and large Charter of privileges in Feb: 1406. H. 5.
H. 6. Edw: 4. and R. 3. were followers of that good example by several
ratifications, But H. 7. seeming to transcend all his Predecessors in policy,
and desiring to testify the same by his care of Merchants, proceeded further
to dilate their privileges, and preeminences. Polydor Virgil gives him this
Encomium: Mercatores ille saepenumero pecunia multa data gratuito juvibat, u^
Mercatura (A^s una ^n^ctis aeque mortalibus tum commoda, tum necessaria) in
surregno copiofier esset. In his Reign (enmities and hostilities interrupting
our commerce with the Burgundians) we had a Staple provided for us at Calais;
and then under our own Sovereign, within our own Dominions we saw our own
fellow Subjects as tenderly entertained with diverse Franchises, and
Indulgences, as if they had capitulated with a strange Prince.

Since H. 7. all his Successors have confirmed, or enlarged what was granted
before; within few years also this King; and since that, this Parliament in
1643. have added strong ratifications, and that not without honorable
acknowledgements of this famous Companies services to the public. Moreover in
the times of Hen: 4. and Hen: 7. some Complaints were preferred by Clothiers,
etc. against the Merchant Adventurers: but after due examination, and hearing,
the Company had a favorable issue, and not only obtained a fuller
establishment of former Charters, but also new express clauses against
straggling Merchants, and all other intermedlers, that might empeach, or
disturb their Trade. Other Informations were under Edw: 6. exhibited against
the same Company by some of their own Brethren: but after the Council Table
had taken a full cognizance thereof, the two chief of the Informers were
committed to the Fleet, and the rest were Fined, and more strictly enjoined to
submit to the Companies Orders for the future. The same Informers also not so
acquiescing, made new addresses to the Parliament held after by Queen Mary: but
the business was soon quashed there also, and the accusers without further
remedy dismissed.

The like or more grievous Complaints were revived by the Clothiers, etc. in
Queen Elizabeth's days, but what event did attend them? after that the Cloth
Trade was set at liberty for a while, after that the George at Westminster was
made as free a Market for Cloth as Blackwell-Hall in London, and upon trial
the poor people of Wiltshire, Glocestershire, etc. saw their miseries not
relieved, but increased by dissolving the Company of Merchant Adventurers: The
Lords of the Council anno 29. Eliz: to prevent mutiny in those parts, were
fain to send for the Merchant Adventurers, and desire them cheerfully to
proceed in their Trade, to which no countenance, nor assistance from them
should be wanting for the future.

Alderman Cockayns Project in King James his days was gilded over with a more
specious pretext then that in Queen Elizabeth's, and when our Company was at
that time dissolved, Trade was not absolutely laid common (as before) without
all manner of regulation: but to prevent general confusion (which had proved it
self continually so fatal) a new Company was erected, and incorporated: yet
neither so could this project prosper, or subsist. King James in his
Proclamation Anno 1617. published for the restitution of our Company and its and
(...) Privileges, (after that the consumption, and miserable languishment of
Trade for above two years space had better instructed him) attestated to the
world the excellent method, and discipline of our ancient Corporation, and now
ineffectuall his (...) looser jurisdiction had proved for the vending of our
(...) manufacture. And it should seem this was susti^^^ (...) the world, yet
the Courtiers would not be so satisfied for they thought they had gratified the
Commonwealth in restoring the ancient Company of the Adventurers, and that
they had grati^^^ the Merchant Adventurers in restoring them to their due
rights, and therefore to enclose by bargain for themselves a gratification of
20, or 30000 li. was no ill office.

There is another clog remaining upon our Trade to this day, and it is
continued still upon the same reason: the Merchant Adventurers at first were
stinted to a certain number of Clothes, which number in their exportations they
might not exceed: now it appears since to the State, that that number was too
strait, and that it is very inexpedient for Trade to circumscribe our Merchants
rigorously with that stint; and yet notwithstanding Courtiers must be ^ill feed
for releasing Trade of this inexpedience. The Earl of Cumberland in Queen
Elizabeth's days was sweetened with a Present for obtaining an enlargement of
our stint; but that Present now is become a Rent, and is successively granted
by Patent; and though the Patentee be a single person, and cannot be said
properly to gratify the Commonwealth, yet He receives such a yearly revenue
in consideration that the Commonwealth shall not be disserved: and this
revenue it self being an Encumbrance upon our Draperies, and raised out of
Woollgrowers, Clothiers, Merchants Retailors, and so charging Trade in
general, is no less then a disservice it self to the Commonwealth. Thus we
see our Charters have been often times, and several ways attempted against:
and yet if they had not been so much shaken, their power of resistance had not
been so experimentally known; for the more the Anchor is straightened, the faster
hold it ever gains.

4th. Arg: Since every man is presumed to be most knowing in that Craft wherein
He has been bred up; we may presume the Clothiers in matters of cloth to be
more knowing then the Merchant.

Ans. First, in the making of Cloth we deny not but there may be more skill in
the Clothier then in the Merchant: but the question here is about the uttering
and vending, not about working or preparing of cloth: and therefore, it follows
not that the breeding of the Clothier does so much enable him to sell cloth,
especially in great quantities, and that to foreign Nations, as the Merchants:
but rather the contrary, even by the truth of the same granted rule. Forasmuch
as there is not only an Art and Mystery in the sale of cloth as aforesaid,
but also an Art more abstrase, eminent, and exquisite then that is which
consists in the Mechanical way of making and dressing the same.

Secondly, the State is not to consider what is most beneficial to the
Merchant, what to the Clothier separatim, or whether the benefit of the one
alone, or of the other be more to be favored, but how they may be both
favored conjunctim, and how the State may be most benefited by twisting their
interests both together. Now then general interest of the State requires that
all our L^nificia, or English commodities be raised in price unto other Nations
as high as may be without injustice, or inconvenience, and that as many persons
and professions in England as may be, may come to be sharers in the general
interest. If the question then be, whether the Merchants interest, or the
Clothiers do more conduce to this public reason of State; sense it self will
presently distinguish, that the Merchants advantage is more compliant with the
public then the Clothiers. For the Clothiers aim is to drown that gain, which
the Merchants industry and employment now serves for, and which by his service
is kept within the bounds of our own Island, to the maintaining of so many
families at home, and busying so many men, and Ships abroad, and thereby to
abridge the same the more to Natives, the more it is publicated unto strangers.
The Hollanders are so subtle as to clog our English Woollen manufactures with
great Impositions, and to free their own of the same, that the prices of their
meaner Draperies may be raised up to our better ones, or the prices of our
better Draperies may be beaten down to their meaner ones: but our subtlety
must be for the pleasure of our Clothiers to intercept from the Merchants all
that livelihood which they now earn, and by vilifying of our own Wares to
prostitute the same unto Strangers: nay and by the same means to expose
themselves to the danger of having worse treatance from forreiners, then now
they have from their own Countrymen.

Thirdly, if more regard be had of the Clothier, then of the Merchant, or
State, yet constant experience teaches us, that this favor and preference
which the Clothier challenges herein above the Merchant, is no real favor,
nor preference at all. For it has been always seen, that the setting at
liberty of the Merchants Trade has proved more obstructive to the Clothier then
to the Merchant, in as much as the Merchant has a more large employment, and
can better subsist without the Clothier, then the Clothier can without the
Merchant. Moreover as it does not always fall out, that the breaking up of the
Merchants Trade brings any present quickness to Trade: so if it does, that
quickness never ^a^^s; it is but bonum presens; it is but like cold water to a
feverish man, it procures some short refreshment, but repays that short
refreshment within a short space after with a prolongation of sharper
extremities. So it proved it in Qu: Elizabeth's times; so it proved in King
James his times; and so it is likely to prove hereafter: wherefore if men of
Mechanical education will only contemplate present things, and neither look
forward nor backward, Statesmen may, and must disaccommodate them for the
present, that they may be accommodated the better for the future.

5th. Arg: That power in private men which onerates the chief Commodities of
the Realm with arbitrary impositions to maintain it self, is dangerous: but
such is the Merchants power, etc. Ans. Our Companies ordinary charge is scarce
considerable in respect of the great sums we deal for; and the extraordinary
charge is always drawn on by some extraordinary, unavoidable inconvenience:
for example, the removals of our Residence from one Mart Town to another is
commonly a great burden to us, but that burden is undertaken to avoid some
greater detriment, and without it either we should loose old privileges, or be
made to submit to some new exactions: or be some other way aggrieved in a worse
degree. Now this is for the common good, and we may rather expect favor from
the Kingdom, then disfavour for such services.

Secondly, we have a Bill now in the Houses, prepared for His Majesty's Assent,
and in that Bill the future Impositions of our Company are reduced to a
certainty.

Thirdly, there is an absolute necessity of these Impositions, for neither can
our Trade prosper without government, nor government be maintained without some
charge: neither is our government necessary only for our selves, but also for
the Clothier, for as much as we are a good skreen, or bank betwixt the Merchant
stranger, and the English Clothier, and were not the prices of our clothes kept
up by us, and that partly by the charge of our government, the Clothier would
be more inslaved to the Stranger, then now He is.

Lastly, our Accounts are kept most exactly, and audited punctually, and the
hands through which all things pass are so many that there can be no error,
nor fraud. The Hans Towns in Germany, anciently 72. in number, found it
expedient to incorporate, and maintain a common correspondence: for which end
Lubeck of the Wendish, Brunswick of the Saxon, Dantzig of the Prusse, and
Cullen of the Westphalish Towns was appointed to be chief; and the chief of all
was Lubeck. These Towns so united for adjusting all common, and particular
interests obtained several places of Residence in England at London, in Norway
at Bergen, in Russia at Novograde: in the Netherlands at Antwerpe: and in each
of these residencies they had their Alderman, Assistants, Secretaries,
Treasurers, Stewards, and other Officers, by whom their public affairs were
administered, and Merchant Law was exercised. Wherefore if the expense of their
government was more then countervailed by the benefit of their unity; and if
they were gainers by that expense, why should that be imprudent in us which was
prudent in them? or why should that be damage to us, which was profit to them?

The ordinary pleas for Freedom are thus answered, and the Objections against
Reglement in Trade removed; we will now only reinforce all that has been said
in a word, or two.

The most solid glory, and magnificence that ever dazel'd humane eyes upon
earth: was that of Solomon's royal Court, at that time, when his unparralleld
wisdom had made Silver as stones in Jerusalem, and Cedars as vulgar as
Sycamores used to be in other places.

It Is written of his reign (by an inspired Author) that it made Silver of no
account, that in one year there flowed into his Exchequer 666 Talents of pure
Gold; that besides all his Masses of Ophir gold, he abounded with other various
Treasures, precious stones, etc. such as the Merchants of Spices, the
Governors of the Country, and the Kings of Arabia did import. Solomon was no
warrior, nor born Lord of many Nations, nor did his Jewish Signiory extend it
self over any large Tract in the universe: it is only written of him, that he
had at Sea a Navy of Tarshish with Hirams, and the same Navy once in 3 years
returned home fraighted with gold, silver, ivory etc. Hiram being hitherto
straightened in the mediterranean Seas, could not gain the Stronds of Arabia,
Persia, India, China, etc. without incompassing the Capes or Africa, and
crossing the Suns torrid line: but upon terms of partnership Solomon is now
able to let him in to that Southern Ocean by a way far more compendious.

Pharaoh on the further side of the red sea is Solomon's near Allye: and the
Edomites on this side are his tributary servants: hereupon things* are so
composed betwixt the Jews, and Tyrians, that it is as beneficial for the
Tyr^ans to serve the Jews with their skill in Astronomy, and Hidrography, as
for the Jews to serve the Tyrians with their harbors, and ships. Therefore the
Queen of Sheba (till her eyes were ascertained with substances) might well
withhold her belief from entertaining, that stupendous report which was
blown about the world concerning Solomon; and well might her spirit after
sink within her, when her eyes had once encountered with the radiant Majesty
of Solomon, whereby the blasts of Fames Trumpet were so far drowned, and
transcended. Of all Solomon's successors we read of none but Jeh^saphat, that
ever thought of rigging new navies in Ezion-geber; and He nevertheless though
he had the Edomites his homagers, and was also much renowned for his wisdom,
and grandour, found this design unfeasible, and the way to Ophir altogether
unpassable. This is a clear chrisis to indicate how profound the judgment, and
how broad the comprehension of Solomon was, before whom (till apostacy had
alien'd his God from him) no difficulties were able to stand: yet 'twas not so
admirable in Solomon, that he amassed such incredible treasures, as that he
amassed them by Peaceful arts, and not by the dint of his sword.

The tragical exploits of Alexander, and Caesar, may be accounted magna, and
splendida Latrocinia, if they be compared to the feats of Merchandise exercised
by Solomon and the other Kings of Tire and Arabia; and yet we may doubt too,
whether the spoil of the East to Alexander, or of the West to Caesar were
equal in value to all Solomon's Cargazoons.

Whilst the cruell^d predations of war impoverish, dispeople and by horrid
devastations root up, and so shrink (as it were) great Empires into small
Provinces: Merchandise on the other side beautifies, inriches, impowers little
States, and so alters their natural dimensions, that they seem to swell, as it
were, into spacious Empires. This martial Hero has inscribed upon his Statue:
that he has fought so many picht battles, that he has ^^th his rapid
lightnings spread a sudden conflagration over so many Kingdoms; that with the
loss of 100000 fellow Soldiers he has purchased the slaughter of 1000000
Enemies, at least such as he would needs make, and style his Enemies. But in
the mean time that gentle unbloody Prince which by his several dispersed
Carricks visits each climate of the world only to plunder the Earths caverns
of her Mettalls, or the Rocks of their Diamonds, or the Deep it self of its
pearls; merits to be celebrated for the common benefactor of mankind, as well
for the necessaries which he convaies unto other Nations, as for the more
precious wares* which he recovers out of the dark abisse of nature, and
relades for the use of his own Subjects.

Howsoever this one instance of Solomon (to lay aside all other instances of
Princes, that have engaged themselves in such like mercatorian negotiations)
makes it plain, that the most Majesticall of all Kings that ever reigned, was
the most ample adventurer that ever traffickt, and that he had not been so
great a Prince, if he had not been so ample a Merchant: for it is more then
probable that all the Tributes of Judea were inconsiderable in comparison of the
returns which Tarshish did afford.

It must needs follow therefore from the same very instance, that the
devouring, piraticall Trade of war is not so honorable, or so fit to magnify
Princes, and make happy Nations, as that ingenious just Art of commerce, which
may be exercised without rigor, or effusion of blood.

I shall then close up all with this application to our own Nation: if
Merchandise be truly noble: if the rays which streamed so plentiful from
Solomon's diadem were more supplyde by traffic, then by tribute; let not
England totally neglect Merchants. Let us look into the causes that make Trade
so dead amongst us at present, and the fittest remedies that possibly may
recover it. In the East Indies we know who they are, that by cruelty have
oppressed us; In Russia we may take notice who they are, that by subtilty have
supplanted us. Here in Germany our Privileges are ill kept; in Holland they
are worse.

In many Countries the manufactures in Silks, and Cottonwools increase. In
High, and Low Germany the store of sheep is increased, and of late the kind of
them especially in Silesia is much improoved, hereby, and by the help of
Spanish woolls, nay of English woolls too, and Fullers Earth daily exported
against Law, our English Draperies are extremely brought low.

The late obstructions and calamities of civil war in our Kingdom, concurring
with other annoyances done us by the Kings Agents abroad, and millitary
Commissions upon the Sea, have added more to our ruin. Moreover, in other
things the Times seem to look toward a Reformation, but in matters of Trade
Order and regulation it self is opposed, and confusion under the Name of
Liberty is now more then ever publicly pleaded for. The King by his
Proclamation had formerly a ^etted his Progenitors grant to us, and the
Parliament lately has corroborated the Kings Proclamations, yet nothing can
secure as against intruding Interlopers. By this means Merchandise is brought
to a low ebb, 20 Ships yearly in former times did attend us here in Hamburgh,
now 6. are sufficient to supply us, and though our Company be in this
Consumption; some other Companies waste away worse then ours. All these
mischeifs perhaps are not remediable, yet let us use the best remedies we can,
and such as are most seasonable.

In Platoes Opinion those Commonwealths were most likely to prosper where
learned men ruled, or Rulers were learned. Within the circle of Platoes
learning let us comprehend the mysteries of commerce. In Solomon's days that
kind of learning did wonderful things toward the advancing of States; and of
late as Venice a City of Merchants has been the Bulwark of Europe against the
Turk: so the Seats in the United Provinces by Trade more then Arms, have
gotten the sword of Arbitration into their hands. Spain, and France, and other
Nations no ware fain to court those Merchants, which not long since were below
their scorn. Let it then be lawful to propose: either that a certain number of
able Merchants may be made Privy Counselors: or so many Privy Counselors
specially designed to intend matters of Trade; or let some other H^^^^^
Council be empowered solely* to promote the Common weal of Merchants.

By the King. A Proclamation for the better Ordering the Transportation of
Clothes, and other Woollen Manufactures into Germany, and the Low Countries.
Whereas We have taken into our Princely Consideration the manifold benefits
that redound to this Kingdom by the Manufacture of Woollen Clothes, and the
Transportation and venting thereof in foreign parts: and finding how much good
government, and managing the said Trade in an Orderly way will conduce to the
increase, and advancement of the same: We for the better settling of Order
therein for the time to come, have thought fit with advice of Our Privy
Council, to declare Our Royal pleasure herein: And do therefore hereby
strictly will and Command, that no Person, or Persons, Subject, or Subjects of
this our Realm of England, shall at any time from and after the Feast of
Purification, etc. now next coming, Ship, transport, carry, or convay, or
cause to be shipped, etc. either from Our City and Port of London, or from any
other City, Town, Port, Haven, or Creek of this Our Realm of England by way of
Merchandice any White-clothes, colored Clothes, Clothes dressed, and Died out
of the Whites, Clothes called Spanish Clothes, Bays, Kersys, Perpetuanoes,
Stockings, or any other English Woollen commodities unto any the Cities, Towns,
places in Germany, or the 17. Provinces of the Netherlands, save only, and
except to the Mart, and Staple-towns of the Fellowship of Merchant Adventurers
in those parts for the time being, or to one of them.

And further, to the end that the said Trade may be hereafter reduced, and
continued in an orderly and well governed course: We do hereby declare Our
Royal pleasure to be, that the Fellowship of Merchant Adventurers shall admit
into their Freedom of their said Trade all such our Subjects dwelling in our
City of London, and exercised in the Profession of Merchants: and not
Shopkeepers, except they give over their Shops, as shall desire the same, for
the Fines of 50 li. apiece; if they shall take their Freedom before Midsommer
next; And that the said Fellowship shall likewise receive and admit into their
Freedom such our Subjects of the Outports of this Our Kingdom, as being
exercised in the Trade of Merchants shall desire the same, paying them 25 li.
apiece for their Fine or Income: if they shall take their said Fredom before
Michaelmas next* And that the Sons, and Servants of such as shall be so
admitted, as aforesaid, shall pay to the said Fellowship at their several
admissions thereunto the sum of 6 -- 13 -- 4. apiece. And that all such
persons, as shall not accept, and come into the said Freedom before the days
herein prefixed, shall pay the double of the Fines before limited respectively,
in case they shall afterward desire to be admitted into the said Fellowship.

And Our further will, and pleasure is, and We do hereby command and inhibit
all, and every of our Subjects, not being Free of the said Fellowship of
Merchant Adventurers, that they, or any of them shall not presume to Trade in
any the forenamed Commodities into any the parts or places of Germany, or
Low Countries from or after the said Feast of Purification next ensuing, upon
pain of Our high displeasure, and of such punishments as Our Court of
Star Chamber, whom We especially charge with the execution of Our Royal
pleasure herein, shall think fit to inflict for such contempts.

White Hall: December. 7. 10. of Our Reign. 1634*
Die. Merc. 11. October. 1643. An Ordinance of the LORDS and COMMONS in
Parliament Assembled.
For the upholding of the Government of the Fellowship of Merchant Adventurers
of England, to the better maintenance of the Trade of Clothing, and Woollen
Manufacture of the Kingdom.
FOr the better encouragement and supportation of the Fellowship of Merchant
Adventurers of England, which has been found very serviceable and profitable
to this State: and for the better government, and regulation of Trade,
especially that ancient and great Trade of Clothing, whereby the same will be
much advanced to the Common good, and benefit of the people: The Lords and
Commons in Parliament do Ordain: that the said Fellowship shall continue, and
be a Corporation, and shall have power to levy moneys on the Members of their
Corporation, and their goods, for their necessary charge, and maintenance of
their Government: and that no person shall Trade into those parts, limited by
their Incorporation, but such as are Free of that Corporation, upon forfeiture
of their goods. Provided, that the said Fellowship shall not exclude any person
from his Freedom, and Admission into the said Fellowship which shall desire it
by way of Redemption, if such person by their custom be capable thereof, and
has been bred a Merchant, and shall pay 100 li. for the same, if He be Free,
and an Inhabitant of the City of London, and trade from that Port, or 50 li. if
He be not Free, and no Inhabitant of the said City, and trade not from thence:
and that the said Fellowship shall have power to imprison Members of their
Company in matters of their government, and to give such an Oath, or Oaths, to
them as shall be approved of by both Houses of Parliament. Provided, that all
rights confirmed by an Act of Parliament, or ancient Charters, shall be hereby
saved. And the said Lords and Commons do further Ordain, That withal
convenient expedition, a (...) shall be prepared in Order to an Act of
Parliament to be passed in this present Parliament, for the further settling,
and full confirming of the Privileges to the said Fellowship, with such other
clauses, and provisions as shall be found expedient by both Houses of
Parliament. This Ordinance to remain in full force, until a Bill or Act shall
be prepared and passed, according to the intent and true meaning of this
Ordinance. And it is Ordered, that this Ordinance be forthwith Printed and
published, that all persons concerned therein may take notice thereof, as
appertains.

Jo: Brown Cler: Par.
(...): Elsyng Cler: Par. Dom. Com.
FINIS.

