THE OUTCRIES OF THE Poor, Oppressed, and Imprisoned; OR A safe WAY to free
the Poor of this City and the whole Nation of England, from Begging and
Starving. Presented to the Council of Officers, Nov. 24. By William Pryor, and
Thomas Turner. To which is Annexed, A PLEA For the Poor and Helpless, against
the Enemies of their Peace.

By William Pryor.

LONDON, Printed by G. D. for Francis Smith, and are to be sold at his Shop, at
the Elephant and Castle near Temple Bar, 1659.

THE OUTCRIES OF THE Poor, Oppressed, and Imprisoned; OR A safe WAY to free
the Poor of this City and the whole Nation of England, from Begging and
Starving.
It Is strange to consider the immediate witness of Jehovah, against the
injustice, and unrighteousness of men, when declining from that which is his
glory, and their often avowed principles, (viz.) to relieve the poor and
fatherless, the helpless, such as have no might to plead their Cause; surely
the sudden changes of late multiplied, does demonstrate, that the Lord is risen
at the deep sighs of the needy, against the Assyrian, formerly, the Rod of his
anger, the veiled oppressor that keeps pollitickly the spoil of the poor, in
the house of his servants, which makes all his prayers and sollemne services,
an abomination to the Lord; that which the Lord requires, Amos 5. When he had
declared, his abhorring the smell in their assemblies, the noise of their
songs, and the mellody of their vyals: Let Judgment, says he, run down like
water, and righteousness as a mighty stream, yea execute, says he, true
Judgment, and show mercy, and oppress not the widow nor the fatherless, the
stranger nor the poor; the fast that God requires is to loose the bands of
wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go free; to
break every yoke, to feed the hungry and cloth the naked: Has not the great
Jehovah often said it in the Scripture of truth, that all Sacrifices and
services, without these are an abomination to him? has not oppression been the
cause of all changes? was it any thing but oppression, that turned out the
Bishops, and all that Hierarchy? yea, has it been any thing but the complaint
of oppression, the want of impartial justice, that has been sounded forth, in
the oppresseds ears, as the argument for all changes that has been since. Oh
how have they been often filled with hopes of releife, that have been many
years bound in chains of tyranny, by such alarums, why should deferred hope
make the poor and helpless sick unto death? they have often cried this many
years, to those that have called themselves Ministers of justice, of all
degrees below Parliaments, and to Parliaments, themselves, but all void of
bowels of compassion to the hungry oppressed, forgetting the afflictions of
Joseph, while they are in there delicate enjoyment with wine in bowls, surely
their cries have gone up to heaven, in this last change, in breaking the reins
of all Government; Is not the Lord now eminently a trying the Officers of the
Army, whether they will perform their vows, in breaking every yonk which
Magistrates of all degrees contrary to their oaths have neglected, yea does not
the poors straights, and their own straights both cry aloud to this work, as
one deep to another? is not the work of Jehovah, now before them, has not
providence prepared it for them, is there any thing to be done on their parts
but confirmation? And has not the Lord miraculously, put power into their
hands to do it? has he given them power to Rout Parliaments, to change
Customs, to null Laws, to create and null Protectors, to create Councils, to
communicate power, to make Laws paramount? and have they not power, to relieve
the poor and oppressed? will not the pleading the want of power, be concluded
by all unbyassed men, a mocking of God and his People, a slighting his
Providence, a contemning of Gods prize, neglecting his Temple work, in
considering and relieving his Poor? Oh that they would now consider in this
their day, the things that belong to their peace, before God arise against
them, as a man of War, as against those before them, for turning Judgment into
Wormwood: Oh that they would consider what admirable Effects the confirmation
of that one Bill now before them would produce.

1. By it all Prisons would be turned into Workhouses, for the Poor that are
now ready to perish.

2. By it Felons would not be unrighteously punished before judgment and
conviction, besides prevent many Fellonies.

3. Unjust Imbessellors of the Poors Stock, would receive exemplary justice.

4. The Revenues and Gifts, already imbesselled and detained, will raise a
sufficient common Stock, to employ those, Poor that are able to work, that are
now ready to perish.

5. The standing Revenues of the several Prisons, will maintain many hundred of
Poor aged and decripped Persons that are not able to work.

6. The corrupt Impowering of Masters of Hospitals, to Let ancient Donations
upon their original Rent; and their large Fines into their own pockets, to the
defrauding of the Poor, will be avoided thereby.

7. The Rents properly belonging to the Poor, will be Restored, and Reinstated.

8. The Moneys due upon ancient Donations, unjustly detained, will raise such a
common Stock, as will set all the Poor in the several Counties a work that are
able.

9. The Increase of the Revenues belonging to the several Hospitals of England,
being raised to their true value, will maintain all those Poor that are not
able to work, besides what are maintained at present.

10. By it starving of Debtors in prison, and the ruin of their Families, to
the defrauding of their Creditors, would be avoided, and the Channel of Justice
opened, that they that do wrong, may receive for that wrong without respect of
persons. Oh that it was in the Officers hearts to resolve and fix in this good
Work, that the God of Justice may delight to dwell amongst them, and write upon
them his Sentance of Righteousness, when their breasts are manifested to be the
habitation of goodness and compassion to the hungry and oppressed; the springs
of the Lord will appear amongst them, and they will be called the Repairers of
the Breaches, the Restorers of paths to dwell in, and the Servants of Jehovah
will be their Sanctuary, when the Lords Righteousness goes before them, his
glory will be their Rereward; then will the People of the Lord be encouraged to
fight for them, and he by his eternal Covenant, will be engaged to be their
Leader, then all their undertakings will be prosperous, when the bowels of the
Poor are refresht; and we the poor Servants (for the Lords sake) shall be
engaged to bless the Lord for them, and engage with them, to the hazard of all
that is near and dear unto us.

William Pryor. Thomas Turner.


A PLEA For the Poor and Helpless, against the Enemies of their Peace.
It Is mavelous to consider the working of men against the design of God in
this last age of the World, now Christ is smiting the Image of the beast on the
feet, what stumbling blocks the Emissaries of the man of Sin, the Adversary to
Truth and Peace casts in the way of the People of God? into whose hearts God
has put it to fulfill his will, that if possible they may be either induced to
a confederacy with those that God has appointed to utter ruin, or else laying
before them the want of Power.

I shall for brevity-sake take it for granted, that it is Gods great design to
smite the Image of the Beast in pieces.

Now the Particulars considerable are.

First, What the Image of the Beast is in general.

Secondly, To define by the Scriptures of Truth, it is Particular branches.

Thirdly, To demonstrate how they are to be broken, and by whom.

In Answer to the first of these, what the Image of the Beast is in general.
These particulars are considerable:

First, what the Beast is.

Secondly to define the word Image.

Thirdly to answer the Question.

First, The Beast is the several Rulers of the World, that keeps man in
subjection contrary to the rules of Christ Jesus: this might be demonstrated by
a Cloud of witnesses, denying Christ to be only Lord, Jude 4. For which the
Jews was destroyed in the Wilderness after delivered out of Egypt, verse. 5. And
the Angels reserved in chains of darkness, verse. 6. The Priests for changing
the Ordinances of the Lord, Mal. 1.6 are made contemptible and base, Chap. 2.
verse. 9. Such are compared to Brute Beasts, by Jude, verse. 10.

From all which I thus reason, that those that deny Christ Jesus to be the King
of Kings, and Lord of Lords, are Beasts: But those that leave the Laws of
Jesus, and establish their own fancies for Laws, and compel subjection thereto,
denies Christ Jesus to be King of Kings, and Lord of Lords: Therefore they that
leave the Laws, of Jesus and establish their own, and compel subjection
thereto, are Beasts. And those Beasts in conjunction in their own Laws, against
the Laws of Jesus, complete the power of that Beast that ascended out of the
bottomeless Pit, spoken of, Revel. 13.

Secondly, For the word Image, it has only one general signification in
Scripture, it signifies Ruling, or commanding; see a proof of this, Genesis 1.26.
Let us make man in our Image, says the Lord: and in the next words
demonstrates how, (viz.) Let him Rule, or have Dominion over all Creatures,
etc. Daniel interprets the word Image so, Chap. 2.38. Christ is said to be the
express Image of the Father, Ruling all things, etc. So that the Answer to the
Question is plain before us to all unbyassed understandings, that the Image of
the Beast in general, is all those Laws that are established by the Beastly
Powers of the world, that are opposite to the Laws of God and of his Christ, by
the establishment of which Laws the Kingdoms of this World, are said to he the
Kingdoms of men, Ruled by men's Laws, administered by Ministers of men's
appointing, such as are ready to serve their wills, and lusts, by which the
poor are trampled on, and perish as at this day, and Justice is turned away
backward, and truth fails, and he that seeks after Justice, makes himself a
prey, and the Assyrian, the politic veiled oppressor by heathenish
institutions is upheld in his oppression, etc. by means of which the poor of
the Lord are exposed to woeful miseries, some starved to death in their houses
for want of bread, others in the streets for want of harbor, and others perish
in prison, and some rather than expose themselves to politic fury of
heathenish instruments and institutions, choose rather to leave their native
country and sell themselves slaves into remote parts; methinks the
consideration of these should make hearts of flint relent. But to proceed to
the second general, (viz.) What the particular branches of this Image is?
Answer, the Scripture concludes it in these four heads, (viz.) Kingdom, Power,
Strength, and Glory. I shall in the strength of the most high,

First, demonstrate in part what we may understand by these branches distinct.

Secondly, how they run parallel with the Kingdom, power, strength, and glory
of the World.

Thirdly, demonstrate how they are against Christ.

Fourthly, demonstrate them to be the cause of all Tyranny, Theft, Murder, and
Animosity: Of these in order; and,

First, what we may understand by Kingdom in a Scripture account. Answer,
Kingdom, is a people in subjection to a Superior, be they few or many; and
hence it is that such a Superior is said in a Scripture sense to be a King;
the Kings of the earth stood up, the Rulers took Counsel together: there Kings
and Rulers are terms convertible, he that's a King is a Ruler, and he that's a
Ruler is a King, and the parties under their Rule are their Kingdom; this
being plain to every common capacity, I shall wave it and proceed to Power:
what that is? Answer, it is command, ordinance, law, or commission; by which
the Kings, or Beastly Magistrates, or Ministers of the World, Rule their
Kingdoms contrary to the Statutes, Laws or Ordinances of God, which are the
higher Powers, Romans 13.1. To which all ought to be subject, and for not
subjecting, receives to themselves condemnation, or Judgment, as at this day:
from whence come wars, says the Apostle, is it not from men's own lusts, being
led away from the pure Laws of God, to the Laws of men, that are to perish in
the using, Col. 2.22. Whence observe by the way, That observing the Laws of man
instead of the Laws of God, is the cause of Wars, Contention, Condemnation and
Judgment.

Thirdly, What we may understand by the strength of this Image.

Answer. It is a suitable ability to force subjection to their Wills, Laws, or
Edicts, within their Jurisdictions, or Territories; this is visible in the
Beast, Revel. 13.12. In causing the Earth and them that dwell therein, to
worship the first Beast, by forcing subjection to his Laws, Exercising all the
first Beasts Power, or Laws, Blaspheming the Authority of God, his Tabernacle,
and Worshipers, making War with his Saints, Revel. 13.6, 7.

Lastly, The glory of this Image, is; their people, or Vassals, ready
subjecting to their Laws or Commands. Solomon says, the glory of young men is
their strength; and this strength united, in ready and cheareful submission to
the Laws or Commands of their Kings, is their Glory. How wonderful is this
manifested in the Kingdoms of men, at this day? what glorying is there in
Superiors, when their Vassals are in subjection, and what cruelty on the
contrary is exercised, when their wills are crossed?

Now I shall only take a view of the particular Branches, And then proceed to a
demonstrating, how they run parallel with the Kingdom, Power, Strength, and
Glory of the World at this day.

First then, we may learn, that the Beasts Kingdom, is people Subjecting to the
Kings of the Earth, in Counsel against Christ Jesus, the King of Kings.

Secondly, That the Beasts Power is the Laws of the Kings of the Earth,
contrary to the Statutes, Laws, and Ordinances of God and of his Christ.

Thirdly, The Beasts strength is his ability, to force Subjection to his Laws,
to the Blaspheming the Authority of God and his Tabernacle, and his Worshipers,
and to make War with the Saints.

Fourthly, The Beasts glory, is peoples ready and volluntary Subjection to his
Laws and Statutes.

Now a few words, how the Kingdom, Power, Strength, and Glory of the world run
parallel with the particular Branches of the Beasts Image. Consider I pray, is
not the Kings of the Earth, now in consultation against the Lord and his
Christ, how they may hold up their Scepters by staving off his Scepter of
Righteousness? Oh what striving is there by men of all degrees (though the
Reins of all Government be broken) still, to keep up the power or Laws of the
former Beasts? who is there that appears for the Laws that administer Right to
the poor, equal with the Mighty? are not Rulers of all degrees taking Counsel
together to make up a Model of Government answerable to there fancies, some for
Holland, other for Venus, but a few for the Laws of King Jesus, though often
solemly engaged thereto with hands lifted up to the Most High? how active are
Priests, and Lawyers of all degrees against, taking away their Dianah, by which
they have their Wealth? how do those Locusts, and Catterpillars that live upon
Simmony, and the sins of the people, strive to cast stumbling blocks in the way
of those, whose hearts the Lord has touched with his work in hand, in razing
the Foundations of Babylon, and filling to her, double the Cup of his
Indignation? Yea, how is the beastly strength of the world exercised even at
this day against God, against Christ, against his Poor? why is it that the
releiving the poor, and oppressed, sticks so much in the Birth, is it not
because the Heathenish Institutions, and Ministers are in the way? why should
the Rulers of the World be so backward in submitting to the higher Powers, the
Commands of God; is it not because they love the praise of men more then God?
Oh that the gods of the World would in time consider, how little stead those
broken Reeds, on whom they now lean, will stand them in, when they shall come
to die like men? will they not then repent there Blaspheming of the Authority
of God, by keeping up an Authority of man, shaking hands with the deceivers of
his people, profaning his Tabernacle thereby, and his Worshipers, to the
involving of his Saints in War; yea, is not the self same beastly glory
visible even to any unprejudiced Eye? how willing are men of all degrees, still
to be Subject to the fore mentioned beastly Powers of the World; pretend to be
Christians, and yet Traitors to Christ's Laws, is sad Christianity.

Thirdly, The antipathy beween the Laws of God, and of Christ; and the Powers
of the man of sin, is thus manifested.

First, The Laws of God and of Christ says, pervert not the judgment of any of
the Afflicted, Prove. 31.5.

The Laws of the Beasts of the World justifies the wicked for a reward, and
takes away the righteousness of the righteous from them.

Secondly, the Laws of God says, Open thy mouth wide, for the dumb, in the
cause of all such as are appointed to destruction, and plead the cause of the
poor and needy, Prove. 31.8, 9.

The beastly Laws of the World, opens the mouth wide, for those that have a
large purse to plead their Cause, whilst the poor are sent empty away.

Thirdly, The Royal Laws of God says, Loose the band of wickedness, undo the
heavy Burdens, and let the oppressed go free, and break every yoke.

The beastly Laws of the world, continues the wickeds bands, the heavy
burdens, and makes the oppresseds yoke heavier by the extorting fees of Lords,
Counselors, Attorneys, Clarks, Criers, Summoners, Sheriffs, Jailers, etc. The
Laws of God says, Deal thy Bread to the hungry, and bring the poor that are
cast out into thy house, and cloth the naked, and hide not thy self from thy
own flesh.

The beastly Powers of the World, feeds the Rich with delicates, whilst the
poor perish for lack of Bread, take in the Rich for jollity sake, whilst the
poor perish in the streets; cloth their Associates with Silk, Purple, and
Scarlet, with Gold and Precious things, whilst the poor for lack of clothing
perish; yea, is not the poor their own flesh, what devices is now amongst the
great ones of the World to avoid the hearing the cries of the poor?

The Laws of God says; Thou shall not despise the Persons of the poor, nor
honor the Persons of the Mighty, Levit. 19.

I need not demonstrate, how contrary to this royal Law of Jehovah, the beastly
Ministers of the Powers of the world Act, how is the poor and the poors Cause
despised? how are they destroyed by delatory promises, and delays of Justice,
and there poor Innocents exposed to the merciless cruelty of the ungodly, and
their poor Parents starved in Prison, whilst the Persons of the Mighty are
honored, (I had almost said worshipped) with bowing and cringing Idolatry; the
time would fail me to demonstrate in how many particulars the beastly Powers
of the world are in direct opposition, to the royal Laws of Jehovah; and the
poor, whilst promised liberty from chains of Tyranny, are made sick unto death,
with differred hopes, etc.

I shall speak a few words in demonstrating the fourth Particular, arising from
the Branches of the Image of the Beast, (viz.) That they are the cause of all
Tyranny, Theft, Murder, and Animossity.

First, That they are the cause of Tyranny, is manifested in these Particulars.

First, In creating themselves Lords over the Lives, Liberties, Estates, and
Consciences of their Vassals, the only design of the Kings of the earth.

Secondly, Making Laws answerable to their wills, or desires.

Thirdly, Forcing Subjection.

This is the natural product of the Kings of the earth, in Council against the
Lord, and against his Anointed, especially when accompanied with Kingdom,
Power, Strength, and Glory, by making themselves Lords over the lives of
people, they stir up to War, to satisfy their Lust, in enlarging their
Territories.

Secondly, by making themselves Lords over the Liberties of their Vassals, they
come to fill their Prisons, by which men are exposed to misery and want, which
is the cause of Theft, especially by those that have been two highly educated,
and maintained, to dig, and to beg they are ashamed, who rather then starve,
fall to stealing, which many times begets murder, especially in hot spirits
that will rather kill then be taken.

But further, the beastly Rulers of the World, when they have brought men into
misery, and want, by Tyranny; because they will be in direct opposition to the
royal Law of Jehovah, of restoring fourfold; they make a Law, that if men
steal they shall be hanged, so they necessitate them to steal by Tyranny, and
then hang them for it, and this begets anymosity; secret hatred, seeking for
reveng; the product of which is murder; thus are the beastly Magistrates or
Ministers of the World, exercising their own beastly powers, or Laws, contrary
to the Laws of God, and of his Christ, manifested to be the chief original
cause of Tyranny, Theft, Murder, and Anymosity.

And so I come to the third general, how these beastly Powers of the world, are
to be broken, and by whom, and for what? First, now they are to be broken?
Answer, by the advancement of the Laws, and Statutes of King Jesus, which shall
be for a Standard for his people, by which Judgment will be laid to the line,
and righteousness to the plummet, when the Kings of the aerth shall be ashamed,
Isa. 52.15. And the refuge of lies discovered, by the brightness of the
appearing of Jesus, when all creatures shall be tried by the Spirit of
Judgment, and burning; the Lord has said it; for as much as the people refuse
the waters of Shiloh, or the pure undefiled Laws of Jehovah, and rejoice in
Rezin and Remelia's Son, the original authors of Laws opposite to the Laws of
God; therefore the Lord has said it, he will bring the Assiryan scourg even
upon them that profess themselves to be his own people, and it shall overflow
and go over, and fill the breadth of the Land of Immanuel; and he gives this
reason, because his people say a confederacy with those that God would not have
them say a confederacy; God has determined to destroy Babylon head and tail;
branch and root, but they would preserve the gleaning of the vintage, some of
the fairest daughters of Antichrist, the finest spun Lawyers and Priests, and
their choysest Laws: Oh that those into whose hearts and hands, God has put it
to fulfill his will, would be cautioned to take heed of saving that alive, which
God has appointed to utter destruction: remember Saul saving Agag, etc.
Consider the word of the Lord by the Prophet Isa. Chap. 8. and see whether the
Lord does not come home to you that are a making an agreement with the brats of
Babylon, the sworn enemies of Christ: he tells you three times over, verse. 9. Ye
shall be broken in pieces, and your Counsel with them shall come to naught, for
the Lord has yet a people, that have not defiled their garments, with whom God
is, verse 10. That will not say a confederacy with Babylon, but sanctify the
Lord of hosts himself, according to his commandment, verse. 12, 13. For the Lord
of hosts will now assuredly be a sanctuary to his servants, and a stone of
stumbling to those that stumble at his Laws, and many will stumble and fall,
and be taken and snared, by seeking the living amongst the dead; not going to
the Law and Testimony of Jehovah for direction.

So that the answer to the first part of the Question is plain, that God will
destroy the Beastly Powers of the world, by the advancing the Laws and Statutes
of his Son, and confounding all Councils, and actions to the contrary.

The next particular considerable is, by whom the beastly powers are to be
destroyed? This is answered, Revel. 17.14. By the Lamb and his faithful ones
with him, who are to accomplish their work upon Babylon, according to the voice
from heaven, Rev. 18.6. To give her double according to her works; as she has
lived delicately, and faired deliciously, so much torment and sorrow give her.

The faithful of Jehovah are to accomplish this work upon Babylon, with the
high praises of God in their mouths, and a two edged sword in their hands, to
execute upon Kings and their people, the judgment written: This is the
prophesied of honor, of the Saints of Jesus, not such as are Saints according
to the fashions of the world, but in substance.

I shall only take notice of one thing more, that is, for what the great
Jehovah will break the Beastly Fabric of Babylon to pieces, and destroy it root
and branch. The answer is general, Revel 18.5. For her sins reached unto
heaven, and God has remembered her iniquities; Therefore woe unto them for
their unrighteous decrees and grievous prescriptions, by which the needy are
turned away from judgment, and the poor from their right, and the widows made
a prey, and the fatherless robbed, Isa. 10.1, 2. Ye tread upon the poor by
taking from them burdens of Wheat; Therefore says the Lord, ye shall not
dwell in your built houses of hewn stone, nor eat the fruit of your pleasant
Vineyards; for I know, says the Lord, Amos 5.12. your manifold Transgressions,
in afflicting the just, in taking of bribes, and turning aside the poor from
their right, the Lord has said it, Amos 8. The end is come, when the needy are
swallowed up, to make the poor of the Land to fail; when the rich by consent
shall make the Ephah small, and the Shekel great, and false Balances, that
they may buy the poor for silver, and the needy for a pair of shoes; The Lord
has sworn by the excellency of Jacob, he will never forget their works. Alas,
alas, is not this end come upon us here in England? Oh England is not thy poor
become a prey to all the Beasts of the field? Is hot the doleful cry in prison
and out of prison, in all Cities, and all corners of the streets, Bread, Bread,
Bread for the Lords sake? And is not the Lord generally out of credit amongst
men? the poor sigh and lament their wants, die for want of Bread, are starved
for want of Clothing, and who is it that lays it to heart? Though the Lord
has sworn it, he will surely avenge him of their adversary, and plead the
cause of the poor: Shall not the Land tremble when God arises? Surely, if his
wrath be kindled to action, as most certainly it is, happy are all they that
put their trust in him. Now that the God of Justice in this his day of
visitation, would direct all those that set their faces Zion-ward, whether
Shrubs, or Cedars, that they may neither transgress on the right hand, in going
beyond their bounds, nor on the left hand, by a sinful compliance, is the
earnest prayer, and fervent desire, of

The unworthiest of the Lords Servants, and the Poors Servant, for the Lords
sake. William Pryor.

THE END.

