THE REASONS OF THE House of Commons To Stay the QUEENS going into Holland.
Delivered to the Lords, at a Conference the 14 of July.

By John Pym Esquire;

Delivered the 15 to his Majesty; in presence or both Houses, by my Lord Banks.

fleur-de-lis

Printed Anno. 1641.

The Reasons of the HOUSE OF COMMONS, To stay the Queens going into HOLLAND.
THere is great cause to doubt, least the Papists have some design upon her
Majesty's Journey, because the House has been informed that diverse of them
have sold off their Lands to a good value, and used other means to get ready
money. 2. It is observed some of them have been very deligent, gathering great
quantities of gold. 3. It is informed that more then an ordinary number of
Papists are gone beyond Sea already, and those of the bettor sort.

II.
The great number of English fugitives now beyond the Seas, who by their late
designs and practices, are known to be full of malice to the State, and will
no doubt seek all opportunities of access to her Majesty; and as much as they
can labor to infuse into her such evil Councels, as may trouble the peace or
the Kingdom, whereof at this time there is more danger, because the affairs of
the Kingdom are not yet fully settled, and upon disbanding of the Army, all
parts are like to abound with Soldiers, and such others as will be apt to be
provoked to tumults, and seditions; especially in the time of the Kings absence
in Scotland.

III.
That the House of Commons have received information of great quantity of
Treasure in Jewels, Plate, and ready Money, packt up to be conveyed away with
the Queen, not only in such a proportion, as the present occasions with due
respect to her Majesty's honor, may seem to require but a far greater
quantity, and that diverse Papists and others, under pretense of her Majesty's
goods, are like to convey great sums of money, and other Treasure beyond the
Seas, which will not only impoverish the State, but may be employed to the
fomenting some mischievous attempts, to the trouble of the public Peace.

IV.
That as it will be a great dishonor to the State, if her Majesty should not
be attended and furnished suitably to her quality, so it will be a very heavy
burden in this time of great necessity, and occasions of other public charges,
if she shall be provided in so Royal a manner, as shall be fit for her
Majesty, and the honor of the King and Kingdom.

V.
That because we understand by Sir Theodore Mayerne, that the chief cause of
her Majesty's Sickness, and distempers, proceed from some discontent of her
mind; the House of Commons have thought good to declare, that if any thing
within the power of Parliament may give her majesty contentment, they are so
tender of her health, both in due respect to his most Excellent Majesty, and
her self, that they will be ready to further he satisfaction in all things,
so far as may stand with that public, to which they are obliged.

VI.
That the Commons conceive it will be some dishonor to this Nation if her
Majesty should at this unseasonable time go out of the Kingdom, upon any
grief or discontent received here, and therefore we shall labor by all good
means to take away, and prevent all just occasions of her Majesty's trouble, in
such manner, as may further her content, and therein her health, which will be
a very great comfort, and joy ^o ourselves, and the rest of His Majesty's
loving Subjects.

FINIS.

