THE WAY STEP by STEP To sound and saving CONVERSION, With a clear discovery of
the two states, VIZ: Nature, and Grace: AND How to know in which state one is,
and the way to come out of the one into the other.

OR, The ready and right pathway for the first Adams posterity to get out of
their fallen estate accompanied with sin and misery, into the relation and
Family of the last Adam, which estate is attended with Grace and Glory, etc.
With many weighty questions answered, and cases of Conscience resolved, for the
clearing and confirming the truths asserted.

By ROBERT PURNELL.

John 3. 3. Except a man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God. Matt.
18. 3. Except ye be converted, and become as little children, ye shall not
enter into the kingdom of heaven. Luke 13. 5. Except ye repent, ye shall all
likewise perish. LONDON, Printed by T. Child, and L. Parry, for Edw. Thomas at
the Adam and Eve in Little Britain, 1659.

An Epistle to the Impartial Reader.
THough it be not expedient to be always laying the Foundation, yet it is of
absolute necessity, that the Foundation be at first firmly laid: that so the
building, notwithanding the Floods, Wind, and Storms, may stand, etc. There
are many ways to Damnation, and there is but one way to Salvation, and that is
straight, and the Gate narrow; so that although the Runners are many, yet the
Obtainers are but few: for except a man be born again, converted, regenerated,
renewed and quickened, he cannot be saved; for we are by Nature Children of
Wrath, and such a one as this, even just such a one, and no other, is a man,
yea every man by Nature, such a one was I, and you, and each of all the Sons of
Adam, that have been, or shall be, and that universally without any exception
or reservation, we are all gone out of the ways, we are all become
unprofitable, there is none that does good, no not one: yet there is a way if
we could light on it, how to possess what we want, and to live long in a little
time, and to have one foot as it were in Heaven whilst the other is upon the
earth: to point out that way was my endeavor in this Treatise. Reader, this
small piece is the birth of many Prayers, and a Description of many choice
Experiences, and the sum and substance of many solid and sweet converses, and
the judgment of many precious Christians; wherefore I would entreat the
Reader, to weigh things in the Balance of Righteousness, and then I am almost
confident, that there will be few or none that have the work of Grace upon
their hearts, unless they be under some violent fit of Temptation, or
re-insnared and entangled in a state of Backsliding, but in the main will
cordially own the ensuing Treatise; wherefore let the Reader rather amend what
I have done amiss, than to carp, catch and bark at what he may suppose to be
unsound, let him rather put pen to paper and correct the faults, and supply the
defects, if he find any, that so this Book may be of great worth, though but of
small price. I am sure this subject is the most seasonablest, and the most
needfullest, that can be offered or presented, Conversion being a most blessed
work, and the day of Conversion the most blessed day that dawns, on this side
Heaven it self. It is true nothing is more common than for men to write of this
subject, on the by, and by parts and pieces, but purposely on this subject, and
alone, I know none, nor as yet could ever hear of any, besides Mr. Whatleis New
Birth, and Mr. Baxters Treatise of Conversion, so that a man may almost say,
there is nothing more rare than to find Books, that are wrote purposely and
alone on this subject, and those few that are, are either so voluminous on the
one hand, or scolastick on the other, that the Reader for want of Learning, and
a better Memory, gains not altogether that benefit thereby, as otherwise he
might. To draw toward a close, Let me acquaint the Reader, that the best and
chiefest Authors that I have consulted withal, in the asserting and compiling
the ensuing Discourse, are the Prophets and Apostles mentioned in the holy
Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, next unto them, not as infallible but
as fallible men, knowing but in part. I have perused the writings of Mr. John
Wollebius, Mr. Sam: Boulton, Mr. Christopher Love, Mr. William Jenkin, Mr.
Jeremiah Buroughs, Mr. John Norton, Mr. Francis Roberts, Mr. Thomas Brooks,
and many others; but chiefly and principally. I have perused and made use of
Mr. Whatleis New Birth, and Mr. Baxters Treatise of Conversion, finding my
Spirit witnessing the same, before I ever saw their Books, for a great part; I
have sometimes named them, and sometimes omitted it, and so do here recite it
in general; I have not step by step followed the method of neither, but here
and there where I found things fully proved by Scripture, and my own Conscience
bearing me Witness thereto, those and such like things I have taken, as helps
in the compiling the ensuing piece, and no otherwise, etc.

Reader, I doubt not through the Grace of God, and his blessing upon thee in
the reading this Book, but Faith may be wrought in thee if thou have it not, or
strengthened if thou have it: and if so, I have my end, and thou will have the
benefit. Let a man's sin be never so great, if he believe, he shall be pardoned,
if his Sin be never so small, if he believe not, he shall be damned: the very
sin against the Holy Ghost est is not unpardonable for want of Grace in our
Savior, but for want of Faith and Repentance in the sinner, the cause of
condemnation according to the Law is all sin, but the cause of condemnation
under the Gospel is Unbelief, and as Unbelief contains in it all manner of
Disobedience, so Believing contains all Obedience; therefore this one Act of
Faith is more acceptable unto God than all our Sins are unacceptable. Here thou
art presented with the means for the obtaining this grace of Faith, and all
other graces of the Spirit, and for the growing in Grace, and in the knowledge
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, to whose protection I leave thee, and
subscribe my self thy Servant for his sake,

ROBERT PURNELL.

A Table of the principal Heads in General, and the conexion of these things
together, and dependency of the one upon the other.
OF the Creation of Man. page 1 Of the pleasurable and delightful condition he
was placed in. 1, 2 The manner of his fall, and the subtilty of Satan therein.
4 The sad and miserable estate he fell into. 5 Man can never be saved, unless
born again. 8 There be four Gates shut against him. 8, 9 There be 18 sorts of
persons that shall not enter into Heaven. 11, 12 There be four reasons why the
Lord will not save them. 14 Man is both unable and unwilling to help himself
out of this miserable estate. 20, 21 There is a fourfold Change, and but one
saving Change. 1. a Moral, 2. a Partial, 3. a Formal, 4. a Spiritual,
Change. 16, to 26 The preparations and qualifications that we are to find in
our selves before we lay hold on Christ and the promises. 26, 27 How
Conversion, Regeneration, Vocation, and Repentance agree or differ. 28, 29 Of
the way step by step wherein the Lord does lead a Soul out of a state of Nature
into a state of Grace. 29 1. The first step to Conversion is Illumination. 29,
30 2. The second step is Vocation, which is accompanied with 1. The Faith of
Assent. 2. Repentance. 3. Conversion. 4. Regeneration.
35, 36, 37 3. The third step to Conversion is to trust or believe, which is
accompanied with 1. A looking unto him. 2. A coming unto him. 3. A receiving
of him. 4. Laying hold on him.
37, to 43 4. The next step for the carrying on, and completing this blessed
work, there is dropped into the Soul, the Spirit of prayer, which causes the
Soul chiefly to pray for these three things. 1. For more Illumination. 2. For
pardoning Mercy. 3. For purging Mercy.
45, 46 5. The fifth and last step that I shall name is this, the Lord does
cause the Soul secretly to give it self up, and surrender all the supposed
interest that it had in its self, to God that made him, and Christ that bought
him. 49, 50
Of Grace-begetting and Soul-converting Ordinances, which are, 1. Hearing the
word preached. 2. Reading the Scriptures. 3. Frequent and e^^nest prayer.
51, to 54 2 Dwell much upon Grace-breeding, and Soul-converting promises. 54
to 57 3. Frequent the company of Grace-begetting, and Soul-converting
companions. 57, 58, 59 4. Call to mind and meditate upon Gracebegetting
considerations. viz. 1. Consider what Christ has done for us. 2. Consider how
God has dealt with other sinners. 3. Consider what relation thou have to him.
4. Consider what engagements you have from God.
59, to 62 5. Consider in whose name you come before him. ibid.
5. Means to gather and treasure up a stock of Grace-begetting, and
Soul-converting experiences. 62, 63, 64, 65
Of the means to be used, that is more especially appointed for the confirming,
sealing and assuring the Soul of Salvation. In the use of means take these four
cautions* 1. Be sure they be means of Gods own appointment. 2. It is not the
means alone, but Gods blessing upon the means, that does help us. 3. His
Blessing is not dispensed so much according to the means, as according to the
uprightness of the heart, in the use of them. 4. Yet we are to wait upon God in
the use of means, as it is Gods way of Conveyance, etc.
65, to 73 The want of Conversion is not in God, but in our selves 73, 74, 75*
76. Some of the principal hindrances of Conversion. 1. Ignorance of our own
misery, and Gods mercy. 2. Men think it to be either a needless, or an easy
work. 3. A total neglect, or careless use of means. 4. Men's not considering the
joys of Heaven, and the torments of Hell. 5. False conceits of themselves. 6.
Too deep a familiarity with bad company. 7. Ignorance of the grounds and
princ^ples of the Christian Religion. 8. And last hinderance is delay.
76, to 81 Of the sad condition of all that are not converted. 81 Of the
privileges and benefits of all that are converted. 82, 83 1. They are Chists
Servants. 2. They are his Friends. 3. His Brethren. 4. His Jewels. 5. His Sons
and Daughters. 6. His Bride and Spouse. 7. They are Coheirs with Christ.
ibid. The trials of Conversion, by which a man may know whether he be
converted, yea, or no. 83, 84 1. He that is converted does desire the word, and
means of Grace. 2. He is willing to be made willing to do, whatsoever the Lord
does command him. 3. He is brought unto an unfeigned hatred of the whole body
of Sin. 4. His greatest conflict is against in ward pollution. 5. He mourns for
the sins of of others, and the want of more grace in himself. 6. He does
delight to be speaking of those things which his heart has taken in in the work
of Conversion. 7. He does begin to keep a watch over his own heart. 8. He makes
Conscience of keeping every known Command. 9. He is willing to put himself upon
the trial. 10. He has his Soul renewed in its faculties and virtues.
85, 86 Cerrain Objections answered, which some out of weakness, and others
out of prejudice, may be apt to make against the foregoing Discourse. 100
The Objections or Queries that are clearly answered are as followeeh.
Q. IF a people or a person refuse to embrace the Doctrine, and practice the
Discipline of the true Religion, whether they are not to be forced to receive
the one, and practice the other, yea or no? 100 Q. Whether liberty of
Conscience be, as some say, a cursed tolleration, or of Divine institution, yea
or no? 101 Q. What is or ought to be the ground of Communion and Fellowship in
the Church of Christ? 102 Q. Whether there be any preparatory work required of
men and women before Conversion? and is so, what it is? ibid. Q. Whether there
be not a free will remaining in all the posterity of Adam, yea or no? 103 Q.
Whether Adam by his fall did totally lose every good thing that there was in
him, yea or no? ibid. Q. How came the sin of Adam being but one, to become the
sin of so many, yea of all mankind? 104 Q. How could Christ being but one make
satisfaction for the sins of so many? ibid. Q. What are we to understand by
election and reprobation, which so many contend about? 105 Q. Whether Election
be the cause of Salvation, and Reprobation the cause of Damnation, yea or no?
106 Q. Whether Christ has dyed and tasted death for every man, yea or no?
ibid. Q. How can they have hope to believe* whom God has decreed shall not
believe? 107 Q. Why does the most just and righteous God command all men to
believe, and promise salvation to them that do believe, and threaten damnation
to all that do not, seeing it is not in man^ power to believe. 108 Q. Whether
there be not a Light in every man, which if improved and walked up to, would
lead us to the Gate of Heaven, if not into Heaven, yea or no? 109 Q. How does
it plainly appear, that our Acceptance, and Salvation is only of Grace and
nothing else? 111 Q. If Salvation be only of Grace without works, in what
respect are good works necessary? 111, to 116 Q. How shall a man be able to do
what is required, seeing he is not sufficient of himself so much as to think a
good thought? 116, 119 Q. What is, or who is the Object of Faith? 120, 121 Q.
What encouragements or grounds are there to provoke or persuade a people to
believe in God? 122, 124 Q. In what way are we to concelve of God when we pray
unto him? 124, 125 Q. How, or in what order are we to direct our prayers to the
Trinity? 125, 126 Q. How can there be three, viz. Father, Son, and holy Ghost,
and yet but one God, seeing they are all called God? 126, 127, 128,
To each of these Questions there are clear and full Answers, which will
satisfy all sober, enquiring teachable people.

READER,
BY reason of the Authors absence from the Press, through the distance of his
Habitation from the City, some faults have escaped the Press; wherefore I pray
thee do me the favor as to correct the greater faults that appear at first
view, and pass by in love the lesser, and weigh these things in the Balance of
Righteousness, Love, and Impartiality, etc.

Of the Creation of Man, and the love of God to Mankind therein.
THe Great and Glorious God who is infinite in knowledge, wisdom and love,
having finished the glorious Frame of Heaven and Earth, according to his divine
will, he calls a Council, even the operations in the Deity, to build that
excellent Tabernacle, Man: whom he made of the lowest, and impurest Element,
Earth, and calls his Name Earth or Earthly, that the excellency of the work
might appear so much the more glorious and wonderful; the Lord having breathed
into him the breath of life, he became a living soul, the man was now wholly
good, just and righteous, and his Lord having such a tender, entire and
indeared affection toward him, would not put him into a vast world, but
planted a garden of pleasure and delight for him, the flower of earths
treasure, it being enriched with variety of fruits pleasing to the eye, sweet
to the pallat, and decked with flowers and walks sweet to smell to, pleasant
and delightful to walk in, and beautiful to behold, the pleasant fountains and
filver streams, gliding before him to water the garden, the sweet drops of dew
hanging upon the leaves and grass, like Jewels glittering, the tender branches
and fruitful trees, continually clad in Summers livery, the Birds ringing out
chiriping peals of melody, straining forth their several notes, the nimble
footed Beasts leaping and sporting in their fruitful pastures, the Sun, Moon
and Stars, as it were smiled upon him; here was no scorching heat, or freezing
cold to distemper him, no sickness or pain to afflict him, no filthy or
venomous thing to annoy him, no such labor as to weary him, no contradiction
or combustion to molest him, but a sweet harmony and Concord amongst all
creatures etc.

Yet though all creatures were good, delightful and loving, man did so far
exceed them all, that there could not be found amongst them any one fit or meet
^^n. 2. 21, 22.
to be a companion for the man, that he might have society with, So the Lord
God caused ^ deep sleep to fall upon Adam, and he slept, and took one of his
Ribs, and closed up the flesh instead thereof, and the Rib which the Lord God
had taken from Man, made he a Woman: ^o that no sooner did the Man awake from
his sleep, but God presented him with a lovely Companion, a Wife meet for him:
the Man being now enriched with such a singular Ornament of Beauty, as to
creatures composed of love, purity, and innocence. Now had the man one Jewel
more precious than all the rest, one Flower more in his Garden, exceeding all
others in beauty and delight, etc. they might now discourse of the goodness of
God, and the excellenci^ of the Creation, etc.

But lest they should in this Paradise of pleasure and plenty grow too high in
their own conceits, and so forget the Lord their God, he gave the^ a righteous
Law, that they might know they were but Creatures, and though they reigned as
Lords and Kings on earth, yet they ought to be in subjection to their Creator:
so the Lord leaves him in the hand of his own counsel, under a strict command
not to eat of the Tree of Knowledge of good and evil, with a Promise of Life
upon obedience to it, and threatening Death upon disobedience of that righteou^
Command.

So Adam and Eve being in Paradise, and looking upon themselves, as indeed they
were, the most excellent Pieces of all the Creation, bearing the Image of their
Creator, This excellent estate did not long continue, for they both soon cast
off their Lords Precepts, by giving more credit to the words of the Serpent,
than to the Word of their Creator, and so fell by transgression, in the manner
following, viz.

The Devil being a fallen Angel, envying The manner of Adams fall.
Gods glory, and Man's happiness, comes to the Garden, in the form of a
Serpent, and first he boards the Woman thus, viz. Has God said, Ye shall not
^at thereof? as if he should have said, it is a likely matter, that the Lord
cares what you eat, what do you think, that he stands upon an Apple? has he
created all things for you? then do ye use them? this is the first Assault,
which the Woman weakly resists, beginning at the first to yield: whereas God
had said, Thou shall die, she answers doubtfully and says, Lest ye die; then
the Devil perceiying the Woman to stagger, and the ground of her says to
shake, the word was no sooner out of her mouth, Lest ye die: but he replies, Ye
shall not surely die; what, die, with eating so fair an Apple? can there be any
hurt in it? O silly Woman, Ye shall not die at all.

God he affirms, Ye shall die certainly, Genesis 2. 17.

The Woman says, Lest ye die, Genesis 3. 3.

The Devil that old Serpent says, Ye shall not die, Genesis 3. 4.

Well, who shall we believe? we see our Mother believed the Devil, for he had
said, Ye shall not die, but be as gods knowing good and evil, etc. wherefore
behold, O silly Woman, says he, What a goodly Tree is this, how pleasant to
the eye, delicate to the taste, divine for use? Can it do you any hurt, would
any but Fools abstain, eat and fear not? then the Woman, seeing it was good for
meat, pleasant to the eyes, and a Tree to be desired after to get knowledge, she
took of it and did eat. And by these or the like Reasons she persuaded her
Husband, and gave him and he did eat, and hereby he brought himself and all his
The misery that Adam and all his posterity fell into.
posterity into an estate of death, sin and misery. So those who were created
in the Image of God, and were told by the Devil, that by eating the Apple, they
should be as gods, by this one act of transgression, he and all his posterity,
(he being the Head and Root of all Mankind,) were transformed into the Image
of Satan, being filled with pride, envy, anger and discontent, mischief and
cruelty; so that,

1. The Devil is said to be his Master, Romans 6. 16. 2. The Devil is said to be
his Father, John 8. 44. 3. The Devil is said to be his Prince, John 12. 31. 4.
The Devil is said to be his God, 2 Cor. 4 4.
And so man thus fallen bears the Image of Satan, which does not consist in any
bodily shape, as some do foolishly imagine; but in a likeliness of all manner
of wickedness, The understanding by this fall was darkened, and filled with
vanity, Psalm. 94. 11. and 2 Cor. 4. 4 The will depraved, the affections
disordered, the memory misimploied, the conscience benumbed. In a word, the
wretched soul is so desormed with filthiness, outraged with passions, pined
with envy, overcharged with gluttony, boiling with revenge, transported with
rage, that the Image of God in Man is transformed into the uglie shape of the
Devil, Genesis 6. 5. And God saw that the wickedness of man was great, and that
every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil, and that
continually. And this fallen heart, not only evil, but desperately wicked,
Jer. 17. 9. The heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked,
who can know it? O Sirs, there are but few that does know the plague of their
own hearts, etc.

So that Man in this fallen estate, is become a lump of sin, from the crown
of the head to the soale of the foot there is no soundness. And so all the
posterity of Adam have sinned, and come short of the glory of God, and are
now become Satan's conquest, captives and slaves, being under the curse, and
subject to bondage and misery, Isai 63. 6. So we are all as an unclean thing,
and all our righteousness as filtby rags, and we all do fade as a leaf, and our
iniquities like the wind have taken us away. Mr. Baxter in his Treatise of
Conversion, p. 71. affirms, that even our children, by nature, considered as
finfull and unsanctified, are as hateful in the eyes of God, as any Toads or
Serpents are in ours, etc. See 1 John 3. 10. Nay further consider a little by
what names and titles all men and women, thus fallen, and so remaining, are The
names and Titles given in Scripture to fallen man.
known by in the Scriptures of truth, Sometimes they are called filtby
dreamers, defiling the flesh, Jud. 8.

Raging waves of the Sea foaming out their own shame, Jud. 13. Natural bruit
beasts, made to be taken and destroyed, that shall utterly perish in their own
corruptions, 2 Pet. 2. 12. Wells without water, clouds that are carried with a
tempest, to whom the mist of darkness is reserved for ever, 2 Pet. 2. 17.

A generation of vipers Mat. 3. 7.

Ye serpents how can ye escape the damnation of hell, Mat. 23. 33. The
Scripture calls them Lions for their fierceness, and Bears for their cruelty,
Dragons for their hiddiousnesse, dogs for their filthiness, and wolves and
foxes for their subtilty, in a word, the Scripture styles them Scorpions,
vipers, thorns, briars, thistles, brambles, stubble, dirt, chafe, dust,
dross, smoke, scum, and a cage of every unclean Bird, Rev. 18. 2. And if all
this be not enough we are said to be Satan's slaves or captives, 2 Timothy 2. 26.

Man can never be saved, unless he be regenerated, No salvation without
regeneration.
born again, and converted, and have the image of God renewed, which was
defaced in our fall in the first Adam, Hence it is that Christ tells us, Mat.
7. 13. 4. Straight is the gate and narrow is the way that leads to life, and
few there be that find it, There being four gates shut, and five exceptions
made by Christ against their entering in; First there are four gates shut.

Mat. 25. 12.
1. The gate of hope, 2. The gate of grace, 3. The gate of mercy, 4. The gate
of comfort,
Secondly, there are five exceptions, made by the Lord Jesus Christ against
their entering into heaven.

The first exception is that in John 3. 3. Jesus answered and said unto him,
verily, verily, I say unto thee, except a man be born again, be cannot see the
Kingdom of God.

2. Exception is that Mat. 18. 3. Verily I say unto you, except ye be
converted, and become as little children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom
of heaven.

3. Except ye repent ye shall all likewise perish, Luke 13. 3. 5.

4. Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no
life in you, John 6. 53.

5. Except your righteousness, shall exceed the righteousness of the Scribes
and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of heaven, Mat. 5. 20.

But most of the world will be apt to say, Object.
we grant all this. But what is this to us? we have confessed our sins, we
have prayed, we have repented of our sins, and in some good measure reformed
our lives:

Beware of temporary faith, partial obedience, Answ.
messionary love, pretended zeal, legal sorrow, and feined humility, these may
have the form, and yet want the power of godliness, except thy righteousness
exceed that of the Pharisees, thy sacrifice* that of Cain's, thy confessing of
sins, that of Pharaoh's, thy weeping that of Saul's, thy fasting that of Abab's,
thy reformation that of Jehu's, thy restitution that of Judas, thy believing
that of Simon Magu^, thy fear and trembling that of Felix, these were
cast-awaies notwithstanding these were seeming good things; Have thou never
read of Pharaoh desiring the prayer of Moses? Balaam desiring to die the death
of the righteous, Saul condemning of himself, Ahab humbling himself, Ninive
repenting* Felix trembling, Herod hearing John Baptist joyfully, and did many
things, Mark 6. 20. All this may thou do and more, thou may live
rejoycingly, and die peaceably, and yet perish eternally. Consider if thou were
cursed in the womb, born a child of wrath, what art thou now having lived so
long in sin, but the child of hell? far more than thou wast before, Psalm. 58.
3. Job 20. 11. Again, if for one fin all the curses of the Law do lie upon
thee, as Gal. 3. 10. James 2. 10. what is due to thee for all thy sins? If
single sins deserve death, what do thy double and treble sins deserve?
Consider thy often backsliding, sins against knowledge, conscience,
covenants, purposes, promises, protestations, etc.

Do^ not all these deserve double and d^eper damation? viz. Not knowing of God
he will not have mercy upon thee, Isa. 27. 11. compared with 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8.
Not repenting thou shall perish, Luke 13. 3. Not believing in him thou shall be
damned, John 3. 18. Not loving him thou art cursed, 1 Cor. 16. 22. Not being
zealous according to knowledge, he will spew thee out of his mouth, Rev. 3. 16.
Not being meek, thou art abomination to the Lord, Prove. 3. 32. Not being
merciful, thou shall have judgment without mercy, Jam. 2. 13. Not being holy,
thou shall never see the face of the Lord, Not washing thy heart from
wickedness, thou can not be saved, Jer. 4. 14.

Therefore ground this in the bottom of thy heart, That without true
conversion, there is no hope of Salvation, Mat. 18. 3. John 3. 5 Sin was that
which fetched the dearest blood from the heart of Christ, and will have thine
too, if thou gettest not an interest in him: if thy sin does not die, before
thou do die, thou art in danger of 18 Sorts of men and women that shall never
enter into heaven.
perishing eternally. Read seriously but these four Scriptures, and thou shall
find at least 18 sorts of men and women that shall never enter into heaven,
unless before they die, Christ be formed in them, and they restored and
renewed, born again and covert^d, etc.

1 Cor. 6. 9, 10.] Know you not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the
kingdom of God, be not deceived:

1. No Fornicators 2. No Idolators 3. Nor Adulterers 4. Nor Effeminate 5. Nor
abusers of themselves with mankind 6. Nor Thieves 7. Nor Covetous 8. Nor
Drunkards 9. Nor Revilers, or envious persons 10. Nor Extortioners:
These shall not inherit the kingdom of God. Rev. 21. 8.] 11. Nor the fearful
and unbelieving.

12. Nor murderers: See Rev. 22. 15. 13. Nor sorcerers, or those that use
witchcraft 14. Nor Liars, all these shall have their part in the lake which
burns with fire, which is the second death, Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21.] 15. Nor he
that is given to hatred, variance, and strife, 16. Nor he that is given to
seditions and heresies, they which do such things shall not inherit the
kingdom of God, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8.] 17. Nor ignorant persons. 18. Nor those that
refuse to practice what they know, being disobedient.
These persons being shut out of heaven, makes good the words of Christ, Mat.
7. 13, 14. Enter ye in at the strait gate, for wide is the gate, and broad is
the way that leads to destruction, and many there be which enter in thereat,
because straight is the gate, and narrow is the way which leads unto life,
and few there be which find it, Romans 9. 27. Though the number of the children
of Israel he as the sands of the Sea, a remnant shall be saved.

Well, the holy nature of God will not permit the unclean and unholy soul to
come into his presence, Rev. 21. 27. There shall in no wise enter into it, any
thing that de^ileth, or whatsoever works abomination, Ps. 5. 4. Neither shall
evil dwell with him, the foolish shall not stand in his sight, it is true you
may call him Lord, Lord, till the last, Mat. 7. 21, 22. But he will tell you,
he does not know you, if thou have not something of the image of that Spirit,
that holy nature; whatsoever thou may think of thy self, he will never take
thee for his child, thou art wicked, and the wicked as Psalm. 9 17. shall be
turned into hell, and all they that forget God: and surely God in the execution
of the curse, does the sinner no wrong; nay he should do wrong unto himself,
and (with reverence so to speak) be unjust, if he should not execute Justice
upon the sinner, either in himself or in his Surety: There are four strong
reasons for it, viz.

1. To manifest the majesty of him who is offended, 2. And the goodness of the
command that is transgressed. 3. The evil of sin that is committed. 4. The
vildness of the sinner for sinning etc.
I had once thought to have spoken something to each of these four heads, but
shall not at present, but desire the Reader to consider, that every sin puts
God upon complaining, and Christ upon bleeding, and the Spirit upon grieving;
Every sin does cast a treble dishonor upon God,

1. In its malignitie, as being most contrary to the pure, unspotted, and
perfect nature of God,

2. In its obstinacy, it opposes the command of God, slights the will of God,
and contradicts the design of God.

3. Sin does cast a dishonor upon God in its choice: a sinner in sinning,
chooses a base lust, a venomous sin, a crooked way, before the glorious,
precious, and most desirable good, the Lord himself: So that man in the state
of nature, lives upon the earth as a condemned creature, under guilt, curse and
death, being conceived in sin, and brought forth into the world in iniquity,
having lost that Image of righteousness, holiness, and saving knowledge of God,
in which Adam our father was at first created, and so remains, till born again,
converted and regenerated, the children of wrath by Nature, dead in sins and
trespasses, Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, Satan's captives, servants,
and slaves, and these men in this estate of Nature differ much one from
another, one seems nearer unto, the other farther from the Kingdom of God, Mark
12. 34. compared with Psalm. 119. 155. They

1. Have such hardened hearts and seared consciences that they commit all
manner of wickedness with greediness, glorying in their shame, and so making
themselves (as the Scripture says) sevenfold more the children of wrath than
they were before, guilty of original sin, but now they are become guilty of
original and actual transgression, having been filling up the measure of their
iniquity, and fitting themselves for the day of slaughter, Matthew. 23. 32, 33.
compared with James 5. 5.

2. Others walk more evenly and usefully, being in a measure civilized by
education, custom, fear of punishment, good Examples, wholesome counsels: So
was the young man, Matthew. 19. 20. All these things have I kept from my youth
up: What lack I yet? etc. So was the Scribe we read of, Mark 12. 32, 33, 34 he
answered discreetly, and Christ told him, he was not far from the Kingdom of
God.

Let the Reader consider, that although Man is so fearfully and shamefully
fallen, yet there r^mains some footsteps, marks and impressions of that
righteous and eternal Law at first engraven in his heart by the finger of the
Almighty, by which many Naturalists have acted wisely and prudently as to
worldly affairs and humane concernments, as may at large be safely gathered
from many Scriptures: there may be a change and yet not The Change. Some of the
Lord's people upon good ground does observe that there is a sou^ fold change.

Change.
1. A moral 2. A partial 3. A formal 4. A spiritual
A man by improvement of the light and gifc in Nature, may obtain to the three
former, as to instance:

1. There is a moral change, when a person or a people changes from sinful
notorious ways, to temperance, justice, equity, patience, when ignorance is
taken away by illumination, and boldness in sinning is abated by fear of
punishment, and sticks there, and goes no farther, and here thousands stay and
live quietly, and perish eternally.

2. There is a partial Change, when men forsake some sins, and yet live in the
love and liking of other sins; Christ sets this down in the Parable of the
unclean Spirit, (as to some sinful courses) is cast out for a time, but
afterward returns with seven spirits, worse than himself, and so his last end
proves worse than his beginning, Matthew. 12. 43, 44, 45.

3. There is a formal Change, when men will do that which is commanded, but not
as it is commanded, of these St. Paul speaks, 2 Timothy 3. 5. Having a form of
godliness, but denying the power thereof, they will be doing of good, and
forsaking evil, because the eye of the creature, and the ear of the creature,
the applause of the creature, the rewards of the creature, or the fear of the
creature, prevails with them; notwithstanding this threefold change, these
people with the former are in an estate of estrangement to God, and liable to
condemnation: for though the lives of some are less sinful than others, yet
the hearts are alike, these men do but walk in new practices, with an old
heart, Acts 7. 51. Heb. 6. 4.

Consider, O thou that read, if thou and I had committed in all our lives
but one sin, and that only in thought, this makes us subject unto, and leaves
us in danger of eternal damnation thereby, James 2. 10. Gal. 3. 10.

The Law must have a perfect, personal, universal, perpetual obedience, or else
we remain under the curse; according to the rule of moral righteousuess between
God and Man, it follows that the demerit of sin receives its nature, measure
and limits from the will of God, according as he has revealed himself in the
Moral Law. So that the damned in Hell suffer not more, nor less than they
deserved; yea, had God pleased to have inflicted a greater punishment for sin,
yet had he been still just: the object offended being God, the person suffering
being but a Man, the evil of punishment cannot exceed the evil of the offense;
neither can any thing relieve us, but that which is answerable to the evil of
sin: now there is no righteousness in the world that is proportionable to the
evil of sin, but the righteousness of Christ only.

1. Our own righteousness is too short, and is called a monstrous rag; a rag,
and therefore cannot cover us, monstrous if it should cover us, it were but to
cover filth with filth, as the Prophet speaks, Isa. 30. 1. They cover but not
with the covering of my Spirit, that they might add sin to sin, dung to dung.

2. Nor will the righteousness of the Law be large enough, if a man could keep
it, it will not acquit us for former disobedience, Gal. 3. 21. If the Law could
have given life, verily righteousness should have been by the Law. See Romans 8.
3, 4.

3. It is not the righteousness of all the Angels that can do it, because this
also is a created righteousness, a finite righteousness, and no way
proportionable to the evil of sin.

4. If we should weep as many tears as the Sea holds drops, and humble our
selves as many days as the world has stood minutes, all this were too short
to purchase the pardon of one sin; if the stung Israelites had made a Medicine
of the best Herbs in the Wilderness, and a Plaster of all the sovereign
Ingredients in the whole World, and applied it with Mountains of Prayers, Seas
of Tears, this would not have helped them, if withal they did not look upon
the Brazen Serpent; for all these cannot purchase the pardon of one sin,
nothing but infinicen^ss can deal with sin, it must be infinite Wisdom to find
out a Way, it must be infinite Mercy to pardon, infinite Power to subdue,
infinite Merit to purge and cleanse, and infinite Grace to destroy sin. Look
about thee, whosoever thou art, that read these Lines, this is or was thine
estate and condition, which is attended with these two Miscries, viz.

1. Thou art unable to help thy self out. 2. Thou art unwilling.
First of the first:

1. Thou art unable to help thy self out, Jer. 13. 23. Can the Ethiopian change
his skin, and the Leopard his spot, then may they do good that are accustomed
to do evil? There is no power below the power that raised Christ from the dead,
that can turn the heart of a sinner to the Lord, he is as well able to turn a
Flint into Flesh, as to turn his own heart to the Lord, he is as well able to
raise the dead, and to make a World, as to repent, for Repentance is a Flower
that grows not in Natures Garden; as the Birth of Isaac was not by the strength
of Nature, like Ishmael's of Hagar, but by virtue of the Promise, after a
supernatural manner, upon sensibleness of barrenness, so seems it to be with
every one that is born of the Spirit. Johnsaith, that Believers were born not
of the will of the Flesh, nor of the will of Man, but of God.

2. Thou art as unwilling as unable, thou have wilfully pulled upon thy self
just misery, and art apt wilfully to reject free mercy: there is a special
enmity in the heart against Conversion and Believing, John 5. 43. I am come in
my Fathers Name, and ye receive me not, if another should come in his own name,
him ye would receive. Acts 22. 4. I (says Paul before conversion) persecuted
this way unto the death. Romans 10. 3. They would not submit to the righteousness
of faith: Here are proud hearts indeed! that it should be matter of submission,
for a condemned man to take a Pardon, a wounded man a Plaster, a sick man a
Cordial, a naked man Clothing, a lost sinner a Savior; ls not this the case
of the Men and Women of the World? Consider, would thou not account him a
Fool, that will refuse Physic because he is sick, a Cordial because he is
faint, Meat because he is hungry, Money because he is poor, Clothing because
he is naked, and Freedom because he is Satan's Prisoner? I could almost say to
the Reader, as once Nathan said to David, Thou art the Man, 2 Samuel 12. 7. There
are amongst many others these four things that keep most Men and Women from
being converted,

1. Most think it to be a needless work, or an easy work, when as it is a
needful work, and a hard work, Jer. 13. 23. compared with Matthew. 18. 3. 2. Or
because he is not able to pay that which God requires. 3. Or because he
thinks he shall be able to discharge all himself in time. 4. Or else because
he doubts of the truth of him that promises to help him.
So much shall serve to speak of the

Change.
1. Moral 2. Partial 3. Formal
It remains now that we come to the fourth, to wit, the Spiritual change: and
here I shall fix, all that is written before is but an Introduction to this, I
have been showing the Malady, let us now come to the Remedy, the sum whereof
is; that God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost has sent forth Jesus Christ,
God-Man into the World, to seek and save sinners, and commands every one that
hears these glad tidings to believe in him whom he has sent; and promises
that whosoever believes in him shall be saved, for God when the fullness of
time (by him appointed was come) sent his Son, him that is God over all,
blessed for ^ver, equal with the Father in being, majesty and glory, him in
whom his Father See Mr. R. F. in his mystery of godliness. page 7.
delighted from all eternity, his own and his only begotten Son, promised
before to Adam, Genesis 3. 15. preached to Abraham, Genesis 12. 3. typified in the
legal Sacrifices, Gal. 3. 18. and prophesied of by Moses and all the Prophets,
Genesis 18. 18. and Genesis 26. 4. and pointed at by John, the Lord sends his Son in
the liknesse of sinful slesh, to condemn sin in the flesh, him we are to hear,
and to wait upon in a brokenhearted and diligent use of means, until we be
made partakers of his free saving grace, etc.

And although in this great work, I shall, I fear, rather lisp, than speak
plain, yet I trust I shall not darken counsel by words without knowledge. It is
true, sometimes a child of light does walk in darkness, as to the footsteps of
the Lord: Psalm. 77. 19. Thy way is in the Sea, and thy path in the great
waters, and thy footsteps are not known; compare this with John 3. 8. The wind
blows where it lists, and thou hear the sound thereof, but can not
tell whence it comes, and whether it goes; so is every one that is born of
the Spirit, says our Lord Christ, etc. From these and other Scriptures it does
appear, that God does not work in the same measure and method upon all in the
work of conversion; some are sanctified* from the womb, Jer. 1. 5. as Jeremiah
was sanctified before he came out of his mothers womb, and John the Baptist was
filled with the Holy Ghost even from his mothers womb, Luke 1. 15. Some are
converted by a small still voice: See 1 King. 19. 11. 12. some must have a
great and strong wind, renting the mountains of sin in their hearts, others
must have an Earthquake to awaken them, some must be brought through the fire
to burn up their dross, some men^ flesh is harder to heal then others, so some
men's hearts; a needle may do that to one, which a lance will not do to
another; a frown to one, which a blow will not do to another; some men are of
greater parts, of greater places, who are not so easily humbled; some men are
of crabbed and untowards spirits, and knotty blocks had need of hard wedges:
some men have longer scores, and greater rekonings, have been greater sinners
than others, and though not always, yet ordinarily God does proportion the
sorrow to the sin. Again, upon some the Lord does intend to bestow a greater
measure of grace, than upon others, and so he lays a proportionable
foundation; some he intends to use as one of a thousand. To comfort others
therefore he does exercise them with difficulties of higher nature, that they
may experimentally comfort others, 2 Cor. 1. 4. and some he intends for great
service, great employment, either in Church or State, and therefore he does
humble them the more at the bringing in, as we may se^ and read, in the
conversion of Paul, Luther, Augustine; It is true, all Gods people are
soldiers; but all his people are not Champions: all are brought home, or shall
be; but all are not brought home equally alike in every thing; and though the
conversion of a sinner be a great work, yet when the Lord sets about it, it is
soon done; Though conversion be a great work, yet it is soon done.
Vocation, regeneration and conversion, is many times wrought in an instant;
God in saying, Awake thou that sleep, arise from the dead and Christ shall
give thee life, makes the soul to awake, arise and live, in a moment, in the
twinkling of an eye, Isa. 45. 22. Look unto me and be ye saved, all the ends of
the earth, for I am God, and there is none else. Christ tells us in few words,
and the Apostle in as few, John 3. 14. As Moses lifted up the Serpent in the
wilderness, so must the Son of man be lifted up, that whosoever believes in
him should be saved, Romans 10. 9. If thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord
Jesus, and shall believe in thine heart, that God has raised him from the
dead, thou shall be saved, etc. But to proceed, consider these three things.

1. What preparations, conditions, or qualifications should a man or woman find
in themselves, before they lay hold on Christ and the promises? 2. How
Conversion, regeneration, repentance and vocation, agree or differ? 3. The way
step by step, which the Lord in his ordinary dispensation, in these Gospel
days, does lead a soul, as it were by the hand, out of a state of nature, into
a state of grace, etc?
1. What preparations, conditions or qualifications, should a manor woman find
in themselves, before they lay hold on Christ, and apply the promises? For
answer hereunto, take these considerations, Viz. I know no qualifications and
preparations that are so required, as that without it we should not come, but
there be some, without which we will not come, we must buy milk and wine,
although it be without money and without price, Isa. 55. 1, 2. By preparatory
work, we understand certain inherent qualifications, according to the ordinary
dispensation of God: and so the soul is made sensible of sin, death, and
curse due to it; before it pass through the new birth, he must be convinced,
that the Law is holy, just and good, the precept holy, the promise good, the
curse just; a man must acknowledge himself a lawful captive, before the Lord
will set him free; all the preparations required in Gods ordinary way of
dispensation before conversion, may be reduced to these four heads.

1. Revelation of Jesus Christ dying for the sins of the people, according to
the Gospel of free grace, and so tenders pardon of sin to all sinners that
are sensible of sin, sinners that are broken hearted, Isa. 61. 1. broken and
bruised, Luke 4. 18. that are weary and heavy laden, Mat. 11. 28. poor sick
sinners, Mar. 2. 17. sensible of their misery, and necessity of a remedy,
without which they perish eternally.

2. After this sense of misery and want of mercy, there will be an inquiring
after a remedy, Sirs, what shall I do to be saved? Romans 16. 30. So Paul, Lord,
what will thou have me to do? Romans 9. 6.

3. There will be a waiting upon God in the use of means, for the obtaining of
mercy.

But let the Reader consider, that whatsoever preparations and qualifications
there is required in any before conversion, they are wrought in us by the
singer of God, who works in us both to will and to do of his own good
pleasure, Phil. 2. 13. So then it is not of him that wills, nor of him that
runs, but of God that shows mercy, Romans 9. 16. how was Paul disposed, and
affected when Christ calls him? Acts 9. had not Paul's calling depended upon
Gods choice at that time, he had never been called; here may we behold the
downfall of all natural preparations, and meritorious dispositions.

Quere 2. How Vocation, conversion, repentance, regeneration, agree or differ?

For answer to this, let me give the Reader Master Baxsters judgment, to which
I fully assent and consent; All these particular expressions, says he, are
used in Scripture to express one and the same work upon the soul, only they
have some small difference, Viz. The word Vocation, is taken for Gods act of
Calling, and is twofold. First, Common; when men are brought to an outward
profession. Secondly, Specially; when people are savingly converted to Christ;
this last calling is the same with conversion, only this difference; Calling
has usually in Scripture a principal respect to the first act on the soul,
even the act of faith it self, or at least the habit of faith, is effected in
the heart, and therewith the seed of all graces in the soul; this is that
Vocation, or special effectual Calling: next, Consider that Repentance is the
same thing as special effectual Calling, only this difference, the word
Vocation, does principally express the state to which we are called; but the
word Repentance, does principally respect our our turning to God, from whom we
fell, and the word Vocation does as much or more respect our coming to Christ,
the true and only way to the Father; the word Regeneration is more
comprehensive, than Conversion, Repentance and Vocation: because there is so
great a change, that a man is as it were another man, 2 Cor. 5. 11. He that is
in Christ is a new creature. And yet the word Regeneration fignifieth the same
thing as Conversion, Repentance and Vocation, only observing a small
difference, as before mentioned.

Quere 3. The way step by step, which the Lord in his ordinary dispensation, in
these Gospel-dayes, does lead a soul, as it were by the band, out of a state of
nature, into a state of grace.

1. The first step to Conversion, is Illumination.

2. The second step to accomplish, or at least to carry on this work, is
effectual Vocation, which has many branches.

3. The third step to get out of a state of nature, into a state of grace, out
of a state of death, into a state of life, is to trust or believe in the Lord,
which has many branches.

4. The fourth step; for the completing, and carrying on this work, there is
usually dropped into the soul and heart the spirit of grace and supplication,
by which the party goes unto God, with confessions and petitions.

5. The fifth step; to effect and complete this great work, the Lord does cause
the soul secretly to give it self up, and surrender all the interest that it
had in it self, to God that made it, and Christ that bought it.

1. The first step to Conversion, is illumination, as does fully appear by
these Scriptures, Acts. 26. 18. I send thee, says Christ to Paul, to open
their eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of
Satan unto God. So Psalm. 119. 130. The entrance of thy word gives light, it
gives understanding unto the simple, lob. 33. 30. to bring back his soul from
the pit, to be enlightened with the light of the living, Men are not born with
this saving light in their hearts, as they are born with tongues in their
mouths; for the best knowing men under heaven, until born again and
converted, are in darkness, Ephesians. 5. 8. For ye were sometimes darkness, but
now are ye light in the Lord, being born again, 1 Cor. 2. 14. The natural man
receives not the things of the Spirit of God, neither can he know them,
because they are spiritually discerned, 2 Cor. 4. 6. For God who commanded the
light to shine out of darkness, has shined in our hearts, to give the light of
the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. This
illumination is acompanied with (1) A renewing of the mind, Romans 12. 2. Ephesians. 4.
23. (2) A conviction of sin and guilt, he does acknowledge himself a lawful
captive. (3) There are the seeds, or roots of all saving grace, infused into
the soul at once, if the soul be enlightened with a special saving light, but
the soul does not presently, and sensibly exercise the^ all; the first part of
saving grace is illumination, the opening of the eyes, causes the opening of
the heart.

2. The second step to accomplish or at least to carry on this work of
conversion, is Vocation; this effectual vocation, is the first or second act of
Election, says Master Norton; Calling is the first act of Divine mercy, in
recovering miserable man: Doctor Twiss says, effectual calling is the first
mercy, etc. But let the Reader consider, that if these four words, Vocation,
Conversion, Repentance, Regeneration, agree in one, and are used in Scripture
to express the same work upon the soul, having but a small difference, as has
been proved before; then now in speaking to this word Vocation, let the Reader
take notice, that though Conversion, Repentance, Regeneration, be not expressed,
yet they all are included and contained; and if so, then Vocation seems to be a
second work upon the soul, rather than the first, Jer. 31. 19. Surely after
that I was turned, I repented, and after that I was instructed I was ashamed,
yea, even confounded, because I did bear the reproach of my youth; the way that
the Lord does take for the recovering of a backslider, and the conversion of a
sinner, does in many thing; if not in all, go hand in hand together, he calls
upon the one, and so he does upon the other, he enlightens the one to see from
whence he is fallen, and so he does the other; he gives repentance to the one,
and so he does to the other, etc.

There are principally these three things, to be considered in this Vocation,

1. The principal cause of Vocation is Gods free mercy, 2 Timothy 1. 9. Titus 3.
3, 4, 5. 2. The instrumental cause is the preaching of the Gospel, 2 These. 2.
14. 3. The end of Vocation is Gods glory, and the salvation of his elected
ones, Ephesians. 2. 1. And you has he quickened, when you were dead in sins and
trespasses, Col. 2. 13. And you that were dead in your sins, has he
quickened, Ephesians. 1. 12. that we should be to the praise of his glory.
There be certain steps at first in a souls coming to Christ, or preparatory
accesses, like that we read Psalm 6. 2, 4. Have mercy upon me, O Lord, for I am
weak; O Lord heal me, for my bones are vexed; Return, O Lord, deliver my soul:
O save me for thy mercies sake. Matt. 9. 20. Bebold a woman diseased, though
she came not presently to look God fully in the face, though she dare not come
to touch Christ and lay hold on him, yet she was sensible of her own misery,
and want of mercy, she knew there was virtue to come from him, and she came as
near that as she durst, she had a desire to speak, but she went no farther than
to speak to her self; she says to her self, if I may but touch his garment, I
shall b^^whole; then Christ spoke to her, though she would not speak to him, to
overcome her bashfullness, he called her daughter, and to overcome her
unbelief, he bid her be of good comfort, he had healed her. From how little a
spark, how greata fire! from how little a beginning, how great a proceeding!
she desired but the hemm of his garment, and had himself. See John. 3. 2.
Nicodemus he came to Jesus by night, who was so weak, as being either afraid or
ashamed to own Christ in the day, he comes to him by night; One would have
thought, that Christ would have said to him, Nicodemus, is thy desire after me
so saint, as that thou fear to come to me in the day time? Or am l so
unworthy as not to be owned, but out of fight? Have thou either so low an
esteem of me, or bear thou so little love to me? Go return as thou came,
I will not accept of thee in the dark, who would not acknowledge me in the
light. No, no, Christ has not one syllable of this, he knew that Nicodemus was
but a beginner, and therefore entertaines him, and ins^ructs him in the new
birth, John. 3. 5. Except a man be born of water and of the spirit, he cannot
enter into the kingdom of God etc. Consider there is none effect of election,
before illumination and effectual vocation; the el^^t themselves are said
before, to be children of wrath as well as others. Ephesians. 2. 3.

Some affirm, that in this act of Vocation, the seeds or root of faith, is
wrought in the heart, which may be true, only, (under correction) I do verily
think it is not exercised, but in part; the Soul does exercise but little more,
than to give credit to what is written, which some call the faith of credence,
giving credit, to what is written, which others call the Faith of assent; this
undoubtedly is wrought in the heart, either in the work of Illumination, or in
estectual Vocation: now effectual Vocation, or special effectual Calling, is
attended or accompanied with, Viz.

1. The Faith of assent. 2. Repentance. 3. Conversion. 4. Regeneration.
Now most of these words are used in Scripture, to express the same work upon
the soul, as Mr Baxster affirms, or rather as the Scripture teaches us, etc.

1. That special effectual Calling is attended or accompanied with the Faith of
assent, or credence, See Mat. 8. 2. The Leper did assent to the power of
Christ, that he was able to cleanse him, saying, Lord if thou will, thou can
make me clean; surely Vocation is accompanied with a bare naked assent to every
truth revealed by God.

2. It is accompanied with Repentance, which contains two things. The first
is, a hearty sorrow that ever he sinned. The second is, a turning from that
sin to God, or there is a turning from a state of sin and misery, unto God
our only remedy; this Repentance is wrought, by the Ministry both of Law and
Gospel; the thunders of the Law terrify, and the dews of the Gospel mollify:
there is nothing breaks the heart more than mercy, nothing melts a man more
than the mercies of God, which he has abused; the consideration of this, opens
all the springs in thee, the soul is not able to stand stubborn under it, 2
Cor. 7. 9, 10, 11.

3. This special effectual Calling, is accompanied with Conversion, which is a
work of the Spirit of Christ in a sensible lost undone sinner, by the Doctrine
of Christ, by which he effectually changes the mind, heart and life, from the
creature, to God in Christ; the parts of this Conversion are these three:-
First, it is a change of the mind: Secondly, of the heart: Thirdly, of the
life, etc. In the moment of Conversion, God works that blessed work, which
shall never be undone; In a word, that is wrought in an instant, which shall
remain for ever.

4. This effectual Calling is accompanied with Regeneration, which does make so
great a change, that a man is as it were an other man, so that this word
Regeneration, is more comprehensive, than Conversion, Repentance, or Vocation,
2 Cor. 5. 17. He that is in Christ, is a new creature, old things are past
away, behold all things are become new; Mark, every man that is in Christ, that
is, thus converted, every true Christian then is a new creature, not in
substance but in quality, all things are become new; a true converted man, he
has new love, new desires, new sorrow, new delight, new resolution, and a new
conversion, Vocation, Conversion, and Regeneration, is wrought in an instant,
God in saying live, makes the soul to live; as it is in the first, so it shall
be in the second Resurrection, in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, whiles
God speaks the word, the dead shall rise, 1 Cor. 15. 52, etc.

3. The next step to get out of a state of death, into a state of life, is to
trust or believe in the Lord. I know there be many that does make this the
first step to salvation, which I hear them say, but not prove; sure I am, no
man can have grace without knowledge; for who can hate sin till he knows
it, and the evil of it? and who can love God or believe in him, till he know
him to be merciful, able and faithful? who can do the duty that he
understands not, or go the way to heaven that he is ignorant of? so that
illumination must needs be the first step, but withal it is granted, that the
Spirit of God, either in Illumination or Vocation, does cause the first act of
faith in the heart, and by that act a habit is effected, and therewith the seed
of all graces; For the habit of faith, says Master Norton, seems not to be
infused alone, before the other habits of saving grace. The universal frame of
saving grace is infused into the soul at once, as one general habit; so that
the infusion of life, into the heart or soul, has its being all at once, and
is incapable of division into parts; and so the habit of faith seems not to
be infused alone, before or after the other saving graces, so that I am not
speaking of what comes into the soul first, but what the soul does put forth
and act first, in order to its coming out of a state of nature into a state of
grace.

Two things are here of an absolute necessity to our salvation; the one is to
believe unfainedly that Christ is the Redeemer of the world, and that there is
no other way of salvation, but by him, Acts 4. 12. John 14. 6. John 10. 1, 7,
8, 9. The second is, to accept of him as he is offered to us in the Gospel, and
so faith instates a soul in the possession of heaven, whilst the body remains
on the earth; Now in this third step, of trusting in God or believing in him,
the soul and heart does in some measure, exercise these four things.

1. It does look unto him. 2. It does come unto him. 3. It does receive him. 4.
It does believe in him, and lay hold on him.
1. It does look unto him, Isa. 45. 22. Look unto me, and be ye saved all the
ends of the earth, for I am God, and there is none else, Zach. 12. 10. And they
shall look upon me whom they have peirced, and mourn for him, as one mourns
for his only son; The soul looks upon an humbled Christ, with an humble
heart, upon a broken Christ, with a broken heart, upon a bleeding Christ, with
a bleeding heart, upon a wounded Christ, with a wounded heart; in a word, this
is such a look, as sends a man away with another heart, Psalm. 34. 5. They
looked unto him and were lightened; there is no change of the substance of the
soul and body, nor of the faculties of the soul and body, but the qualities of
the faculties are clearly changed, so that men and women become as children in
humility, teachableness, and beginning the world a new; he has a new heart,
and a new tongue, new inclinations, new intentions, new desires, new content,
and discontent, new delight, new anger, new courage, new fear, new hope, new
thoughts in his heart, and new work to do, and yet, as before, there is no
change of the substance of soul and body, nor of the faculties of the soul, but
the qualities of the faculties are clearly changed, etc.

2. The soul does not only look unto him, but it does come unto him, Mat. 11.
28. Come unto me all ye that are weary, and heavy laden, and I will give you
rest,, John 6. 37. Him that comes to me. I will in no wise cast out. Some
affirm, that in the Greek, this word has three negatives, thus, I will in no
wise, no wise, no wise cast out, and if so, Let the Reader consider these three
things.

1. The Lord does call thee three times in one verse, Isa. 55. 1. come, come,
come; So in Rev. 22. 17. And the Spirit and the Bride say, come, and let him
that hears come, and let him that is athirst come.

2. As there are three calls, Come, come, come; so there are three sorts of
persons invited to come, and all couched in the latter words of the 17th verse
of Rev. 22. And whosoever will, let him take of the water of life freely.

1. What person soever he be, Jew or Gentil, Barbarian or Scythian, Acts 10.
34. 35. Then Peter opened his mouth, and said, of a truth, I perceive, that God
is no respecter of persons, but in every nation he that fears him, and
works righteousness, is accepted of him.

2. What finner soever he be; he despises not the weeping Mary, the begging
Canaanite, the entreating Publican, the confessing Thief, the adultero^s Woman,
the denying Disciple, the persecuting Paul, Isa. 1. 18. though your sins be
as scarlet they shall be cleansed etc.

3. What time soever a sinner does come; so it be before the sun is set, the
glass out, and the golden scepter taken in, if it be at the eleventh hour, or
as the Thief upon the Cross, at the last gasp, it may be thou may obtain
mercy.

4. Lastly, he does assure those that come, he will in no wise, in no wise, in
no wise, cast of: Now lay all these together, the Lord calls, Come, come, come;
the persons that he calls are of three sorts, (1) what person soever, (2) what
sinner soever, (3) what time soever he come; if he indeed come to me, I will in
no wise, in no wise, in no wise, cast off.

3. So there is not only a looking upon him, and a coming to him; but there is
a receiving of him, John. 1. 12. but as many as received him, to them gave he
power, to become the sons of God; by the habit of faith the soul does passively
receive Christ, but by the act of faith, the soul does actively receive Christ.
In the first, the soul is passive; but in the second, he is active; there is a
twofold receiving of Christ, a passive and an active; passive, wherein the
spiritual principle of grace is ingenerated, or infused into the heart or
soul, and so we are received of Christ, before we do receive Christ; so that
Christ in working the grace of faith receives us, and by the act of faith we
receive him; so that Christ takes the soul, before the soul takes him.

Now he that has thus received the Son has life. 1 John. 5. 12. he that has
the Son has life, and he that has not the Son has not life. Collo. 2. 6. As
ye have therefore received Christ the Lord, so walk ye in him. He that truly
receives Christ, receives him in all his offices, as a King, Priest and
Prophet, this receiving of him, is not an act of the understanding, but an act
of the will, embracing him, and trusting on him.

4. The heart does believe in him, and the soul lays hold on him, so that
forementioned place, John 1. 12. they and they only becomes the Sons of God,
that does believe in his name; when the Jailer Acts. 16, 30. would know what he
must do to be saved? the apostles answered him and said, Verse. 31. believe on
the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved; so when the people asked
Christ, what they should do that they might work the works of God, John. 6. 28.
Jesus answered and said unto them, Verse. 29. this is the work of God, that ye
believe on him whom he has sent. So 1 John. 3. 23. This is his commandment,
that we should believe in the name of his son Jesus Christ. 2 Timothy 1. 12. I
know, says the apostle, whom I have believed; there is the first act of faith
of reliance, and I am persuaded, that he is able to keep, that which I have
committed to his trust; there is the second act of trust.

When the soul is brought over to assent unto that great truth, that Christ is
a Savior, and a Mediator, it does roll and rest it self upon him, and so
trusts on Christ for justification, and consequently for salvation, Psalm. 37.
5. Commit thy way to the Lord, trust also in him, Prove. 16. 3. Roll thy works
upon the Lord, and thy thoughts shall be established. Cast thy burden upon the
Lord, Psalm. 28. 7. The Lord is my strength, and my shield, my heart trusts in
him. The Lord is the Author and Finisher of our faith, he does command us to
believe, he does enable us to believe, and then commends us for believing: so
the Lord commends Nathaniel, for his faith, which was only the faith of his own
powerful working, so he commends David for his uprightness, Hezekiah for his
perfectness, Moses for his meekness, Cornelius for his devotion, the Publican
for his compunction, the poor Widow for her liberality, and the woman of
Canaan for her faith and importunity; all which was only the work of his own
grace in them* O how may this encourage us to stir up our selves, and take h^ld
of God! See Isa. 64. 7. Isa. 27. 5. Let him take hold of my strength, and he
shall make peace within me. As there is no promise to us, till we believe; so
if once we believe, all the promises are ours; he has promised to be a tower,
a rock, a refuge, a covert from a storm*, and hidden place in time of danger;
he has promised to hear us when we pray, to answer us when we call, to open to
us when we knock, Psalm. 50. 15. Mat. 7. 7. Ground this in the bottom of your
hearts, that without faith in Christ, and obedience to Christ, there is no
promise of life and salvation, by Christ, no coming to the Father but by him,
no coming to Christ but by faith, no getting of faith but by waiting upon him
in the use of means, etc. And so to close up the fourth head, let the Reader
consider, that this looking unto him, coming unto him, receiving of him, and
believeing in him, is spiritually to be understood, and spiritu^lly to be
performed.

4. Step; for the carring on, and completing this work, there is dropped into
him, or her, the Spirit of grace, by which he is at length imboldened to go
unto God, with confessions, and petitions, he puts on the resolution of the
King of Ninive, Jonah 3. and says within himself, I will cry mightily unto the
Lord, who can tell, but that he may have mercy upon me? He principally praye^
for these and the like things.

1. He prays for more light, that he may see his sins, and the vildness of
them more fully, that he may arraign, accuse, and judge himself for them.

2. He prays for pardoning mercy; Pardon my sin, says David, for it is
wondrous great.

3. He prays for purging mercy.

1. He prays for an increase of light, that he may see his sins more fully
and clearly, that he may abhor, arraign, accuse and judge himself for them,
That which I see not, teach thou me, says the Prophet. Again, Job. 13. 23, How
many are mine iniquities and my sins? make me to know my transgression and my
sin. Job 40. 4. Behold I am vile, what shall I answer thee? once have I spoken,
yea twice, but I will proceed no farther.

2. He prays for pardoning mercy: Romans 8. 15. We have received the spirit of
adoption, whereby we cry Abba Father; As a little child at first says Dad and
Mam: so does a Christian; the evidence that the Lord gave Ananias of Readiness
conversion, was this, Acts 9. 11. Behold he prays! He that has not this
breath of Prayer, is either a dead man, or in a dangerous swoun, Psalm. 25. 7.
Remember not the sins of my youth, nor my transgressions, but according to thy
mercy remember me for thy goodness sake.

3. He prays for purging mercy, Psalm. 19. 12. Who can understand his errors?
cleanse thou me from secret faults. Psalm. 79. 9. Purge away our sins for thy
name sake: the soul is not satisfied with pardoning mercy, unless he may have
purging mercy also; so that pardoning mercy is so great a belly-mercy, that it
has many mercies in the bowels of it; 2 Cor. 5. 19. it brings reconciliation
with God, and admission into his favor, and adoption of children, whereby the
soul has access to God as a Father, with childlike boldness, and acceptance
of our services, and sanctification of every condition to us, and supportations
under trials and crosses; and last of all, peace, joy, comfort, which are not
so much fruits of pardon, as fruits of purging, and keeping down of sin, that
it reign not in our mortal bodies. He freed me from the guilt of fin, and shall
I love the filth of fin? He made me a member of Christ, and shall I be a filthy
member of so holy a body? He has made me a branch, and shall I be a polluted
branch of so holy a stock? the Lord forbid.

Let the Reader consider, that although we have brought Prayer under the fourth
Step, or head, yet this is to be understood, that the habit or root of this
grace or gift, was infused or conveyed into the heart and soul in the first
step, to wit, illumination: but it lay there, as fire under ashes, or sap in
the root of the tree, it was still and dumb, it did not open the mouth, nor
enlarge the heart, until Vocation and Believing had made way; If we did
consider what order and method the Lord does take to unveil his love to man,
and what order and method man should take to apprehend and apply this love, it
will make much for our satisfaction: Viz. Gods order is, he goes downward, from
the Cause to the Effect, and we must go upward, from the Effect to the Cause;
he goes from Election downward, we must go from Illumination, Vocation,
Regeneration and Believing upward: and thus God and we at last shall meet in
the middle way: we must prove our selves to be called, and he will acknowledge
us to be elected. Let us consider that golden chain, Romans 8. 29, 30. For whom
he did foreknow, he also did predestinate; moreover, whom he did predestinate,
them he also called, and whom he called them he also justified, and whom he
justified, them he also glorified, etc. Here is a golden chain indeed, no link
thereof can be unlinked, because the fastening thereof, is from and by the Lord,
First whom he fore-knew for his own, as the word is taken, John. 10. 14. 27.
those whom he marked out, as it were, out of all other men in the world, and
set his affection upon, (2ly.) he also did predestinate, that is, ordained, to
be conformable to Christ their head in part, both in grace and glory, (3ly.)
Moreover whom he did predestinate, them he also called to the obedience of
faith, by the outward preaching of the word, and the inward and effectual
operation of the spirit, and whom he called, them he also justified; that is,
God merely of his own grace and free will forgiveth our sins, and pronounces
us just: justice and mercy does both meet in this justification; justice, in
that he will not justify a sinner without a perfect righteousness; and mercy,
in that he will accept of such a righteousness, that is neither in us, nor done
by us, but by our surety for us; all eminent acts, as justification,
regeneration, sanctification, are but one act in God, as we have proved before;
but because of our darkness and unteachableness, the Lord does speak to us
after the manner of men, and so does make out things gradually to us, leading
us from step to step, from things more plain, to things more and more hard, as
we are able to hear, and understand and practice them.

5. The fifth and last step that I shall name, for the carrying on, and
completing this work, is, the Lord does cause the soul secretly to give it
self up in an everlasting Covenant, and so to surrender all the interest that
it had in it self, to God that made it, and Christ that bought it; and so his
soul is carried forth to a secret resting, relying, leaning, staying, and
hanging upon the mercy of God, in Christ alone, for life and happiness: Now he
looks after, and endeavors to be found in walking in the way of
sanctification, he reads and finds, 1 Pet. 1. 2. that if he be elected to life,
it is through Sanctification of the Spirit unto obedience, and 2 These. 2. 13.
God has chosen a people from the beginning to salvation, through
Sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the truth: He labors for holiness
as well as happiness, he reads and finds that the word of God has a
purifying faculty in it, John 15. 3. Ye are clean through the word that I have
spoken to you, Ps. 119. 9. Wherewith shall a young man cleanse his way, but by
taking heed thereto, according to thy word, Ps. 119. 11. Thy word-have I bid in
mine heart, that I might not sin against thee.

Of Grace-begetting and Soul-converting means for all heedfully to attend upon,
that hope to enter into Heaven.
THere are springs of Grace, or pipes of conveyance, which if cut off, or
neglected, we may live in sin, and die in sin, and at last go to hell; but
if we heedfully and frequently make use of them, we may live in the fear of the
Lord, and die in his favor, and enter into heaven; these means are for the
increasing holiness, as well as for the attaining it, and therefore we are not
to satisfy our selves with making use of them now and then, but frequently and
willingly; for the same means that does work the work of Illumination, does
also work the work of Conversion, Vocation, Regeneration, Faith and Repentance,
etc. And not only work and beget these in us, but increase it, and cause it to
flourish, and grow up from one degree of grace to another, until we come to
the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a
perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ; the
means follow.

1. Keep close to Grace-begetting and Soul-converting Ordinances. 2. Dwell much
upon the meditation of Grace-begetting Promises. 3. Frequent the company of
Grace-begetting and Soul-converting companions. 4. Be frequent in the
cherishing of Grace-begetting Considerations. 5. Gather and treasure up
Grace-begetting, and Soul-converting Experiences.
1. Keep close to Grace-begetting and Soul-converting Ordinances, and they are
these three,

1. The hearing of the word preached. 2. Reading of the Scriptures. 3. Frequent
and earnest Prayer; First, of the First,
1. Hearing of the Word preached, Acts 2. 37, 41. it was by hearing Peter
preach, that the Jews were pricked at the heart, and converted, and three
thousand added to the Church at once, So Acts 26. 17, 18. God sent Paul to
preach, for the opening of men's eyes, and turning them from darkness to light,
by teaching sinners the way of God; David assured himself they shall be
converted to him, Psalm. 51. 13. the word of god is the seed of life, which is
sown and takes root in the hearts of them that God will save, 1 Pet. 1. 23, 25.
It is the word of God which is the incorruptible seed, by which we are born
again; it was those that had ears and heard* not, that were not converted and
born again. Mark. 4. 12. etc. as we should hear the word preached in order to
conversion, so for the begetting of faith in our hearts, Luke. 10. 17. Faith
comes by hearing, Ephesians. 1. 13. in whom also ye trusted after ye heard the
word of truth the Gospel of our salvation, Isai. 55. 3. hear and your souls
shall live. Now in the use of this blessed means, observe these four rules,
and thou shall never miscarry, but get something by every Sermon thou hear.

1. Try the doctrines preached, by the Scritures, Act. 17. 11. they received
the word with all readiness of mind, and searched the Scriptures daily whether
those things were so.

2. Receive what thou find agreeable to the word, as from the Lord, 1 Thessalonians.
2. 13. for this cause also thank we God, without ceasing, because when ye
received the word of God, which ye heard of us, ye received it, not as the word
of man, but as it is in truth the word of God.

3. Keep in memory as much of it as may be, James 1. 25. Being not a forgetful
hearer, but a doer, Heb. 2. 1, 2. Therefore we ought to give the more earnest
beed to the things which we have heard, le^t at any time we should let them
slip: verse. 3. How shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation?

4. Endeavor to practice it thy self, and communicate it to others, Mat. 7.
26. Every one that hears these sayings of mine, and does them not, is like
unto a foolish man that built his house upon the sand. James 1. 25. But whosoever
looks into the perfect law of liberty, and continues therein, being not a
forgetful hearer, but a doer of the work, this man shall be blessed in his
deed; therefore be ye doers of the Word, and not hearers only, deceiving your
own souls.

2. The next Faith-begetting, and Soulconverting Ordinance, is, reading the
Scriptures, many a soul has had happy experience of the benefit of reading the
Word, Psalm. 19. 7. for the Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul,
Acts 8. 28. The Eunuch was reading in Isaiah; and in the 37th verse, we read he
was converted and baptized. 1 Timothy 4. 13. Till I come give attendance to
reading, Rev. 1. 3. Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear the words of
this Prophecy, Acts 17. 11, 12. They searched the Seriptures daily, whether
those things were so, and many of them believed.

3. The next Grace-begetting and Soulconverting Ordinance, is frequent and
^arnest prayer* prayer is a fruit of faith, and yet prayer is a means for the
begetting of faith; as the Spirit is the fruit of prayer, so prayer is the
fruit of the Spirit, Luke 11. 13. Compared with Romans 8. 15. In the former
place, the Spirit is said to be the fruit of prayer; in the latter place*
prayer is said to be the fruit of the Spirit, whereby we cry Abba Father, etc.
Isa. 55. 6, 7. Seek the Lord whilst he may be found, call upon him while he is
near, let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts,
etc. James 1. 5. If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that gives to
all men liberally, and ^pbraideth not, and it shall be given him, Joh. 4. 10.
Jesus said unto her, if thou knew the gift of God, and who it is, that says
to thee, give me to drink, thou would have asked of him, and he would have
given thee living water.

2. Dwell much upon Grace-breeding, and soul converting promises, there are
promises of direction, and supportation, and promises of protection, and
promises of justification, and sanctification, and promises of acceptance;
there are promises to settle us when we are wavering, and to support us when we
are falling, and to recall us when we are wandering, and to comfort us when we
are fainting; surely, as the lamp lives upon the oil, and a child upon the
breast; so does faith upon the promises. All these and suchlike promises, are
reduceable to these two heads, either absolute, or conditional promises; The
conditional promises runs thus, Believe, and thou shall be saved, John 3. 16.
Repent, and thy sins shall be forgiven thee. The absolute promises are such,
as are without condition, or such wherein the Lord has promised to give the
condition, I will be merciful to your unrighteousness, and your sins and
iniquities I will remember no more, Heb. 8. 12. So Isa. 43. 25. I, even I am
he, that blotteth out thy sins for mine own sake, etc. These, and such
absolute promises, are Grace-breeding, or Faith-begetting promises. To these
promises we must go for faith, to the conditional promises we must bring faith,
without which we cannot apply them, but to the absolute promises; we are not to
bring our penny to the promises, but go to them, as to the means of working
faith in us, such promises as these, Jer. 32. 40. I will put my fear into their
hearts, that they shall not depart from me, Ezekiel. 36. 25. I will sprinkle water
upon you, and you shall be clean from all your filthiness, verse. 26. A new
heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you. Verse. 27.
And cause you to walk in my ways, Heb. 8. 12, For I will be merciful to their
unrighteousness, and their sins and their iniquities, I will remember no more.
Now let the Reader take one promise, and charge that upon the heart, and if the
heart be stubborn, and will not yield, then take another, and if that will not
do, take another, and lay that home upon the heart, and never leave this work,
till you have gotten at least some small measure of faith. viz If thou do
doubt, and can not believe the pardon of thy sins, then take this promise,
and charge it upon the heart, Isa. 43. 25. I, even I am he, that blotteth out
thy transgressions, for mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins: If the
heart remain stubborn, and will not yield, then take another promise and charge
that upon the heart, Mich. 7. 18, 19. Who is a God like unto thee, that
pardons iniquity, and passes by the transgression of his people? he
reteineth not his anger for ever, because be delights in mercy, he will
subdue our iniquities, and cast all our sins into the depth of the Seas. Now
if the heart will not yield to believe this, then take that portion of
Scripture, 1 Pet. 2. 24. and bring it to the 53. of Isaiah, that whole Chapter,
and charge that upon the heart, and there thou shall find, that our sins
were laid upon Christ, and the stripes due unto us for them, by which the
Father is satisfied, the Law fulfilled, and by his stripes we are healed. Let
us then believe and apply this, and we are saved; wherefore live much in the
haven of the promises, feed upon the freeness, sweetness and fatness thereof,
etc.

God has so far condescended to our weakness, for our establishment, that he
has not only given us his promise, but promise upon promise, and assured us by
the mouth of all his Prophets and Apostles, yea and Christ himself, that he is
faithful, mindful, able and willing, and to this he gives us his covenant, his
oath and his seal, and all to assure us he will never fail nor forsake us,
but make good every tittle of his promise to us, How then can we look so many
sweet promises in the face, and harbor so many misgivings in our hearts?

3. The next means follows, frequent the Company of Grace-begetting and
Soulconverting companions, where we shall hear how God has wrought grace in
them, and how the Lord does usually work upon the hearts of unbeleivers, as a
man that comes into a shop of perfumes, will carry away some of the sent with
him, so we with conversing with the godly shall be the better, Pro. 13. 20. he
that walks with wise men, shall be wiser, but a companion of fools shall be
destroyed; vain talk and vain practices, inticeth the minds of men to vanity,
the noise of their foolish laughter, and ungodly discourse, will drown the
voice of conscience, remember grace is hardly got, and hardly kept, and more
hardly increased in such company, Prove. 10. 20. 21. The tongue of the just, is
as choice Silver, but the heart of the wicked is little worth, the lips of the
righteous feed many, but the foolish die for want of knowledge, Prove. 14. 7.
Go from the presence of foolish men, when thou perceivest not in him the lips
of knowledge* Oh why should we not strive to live among those companions on
earth, that we must live with in heaven, if ever we come there? Nicodemus came
to Jesus for counsel, and Christ thereupon did give him advise in the great
work of the new birth, So Math* 19. 16. Another came and inquired what he
should do to be saved? so the Eunuch desires instruction of Philip, Acts. 8.
and Paul of Ananias, Acts. 9. 12. 13 17. and Cornelius inquired of Peter; so
the Jews that were pricked at heart, asked Peter and the rest of the Apostles,
what they should do to be saved? Acts 2, 37. and the saylor asked Paul and
Silas, what he should do to be saved? To close up this point, consider this,
that a man never goes in the company of wicked men, but he comes away, less a
Christian then he was before, Joseph by this began to swear, by the, life of
Pharaoh, and Peter being in bad company but a little, began to swear and lie in
one breath; therefore let us resolve with David, Psalm. 119. 63. to be a
companion of all them that fear the Lord and keep his statutes, etc.

Let us then, if it be possible, frequent the company of the most sober,
serious, spiritual, heavenly professors, that will be drawing us heavenward,
and opening to us the riches, freeness, fullness, and everlastingness of God
the Fathers, and of the Sons love, and of the Holy Ghosts love, one Lord
blessed for ever.

4. The next means for the begetting of grace, and converting the soul, may be
this, let us meditate upon, and call to mind grace-begetting considerations,
which may be reduceable to these few heads,

1. Consider what Christ has done for us, 2. Consider how God has dealt with
other sinners, as bad as we are. 3. Consider what relation we have to him. 4.
Consider what engagements we have from him. 5. Consider in whose name we come
before him.
1. Let us consider what Christ has done for us. Viz.

1. Christ by the will of God, gave himself a ransom for our sins, a
sacrifice of a sweet smelling favor, acceptable unto God.

2. Consider that the Father accepted of this sacrifice, in full satisfation
for all our iniquities, transgressions and sins.

3. The Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, in the preaching of the Gospel, does
make Proclamation with open mouth to all the world, that he, the Lord of Glory,
is fully satisfied, forasmuch as the debt, by Christ our surety, is fully paid;
and the bond or hand writing that was against us, cancelled; and so much for
the first Consideration, of what Christ has done for us.

2. Consider, and that seriously, how God has dealt with other sinners as bad
as we are, who have come to him, viz. The Lord did not despise the weeping
Mary, the begging Canaanite, the entreating Publican, the confessing Thief, the
adulterous, Woman, the denying Disciple, the persecuting Paul, etc. And if he
refused not these, but showed mercy to them, converting and healing them, he
will not reject me, if 1 arise and go to him, Psalm. 119. 59. I thought on my
ways, and turned my feet to thy testimonies, I made have, and delayed not to
keep thy commandments.

3. Consider what relation we have to him, he is our Creator, we are his
creatures; in a word, we are his by right of Creation, Redemption, and now we
begin to be his by right of Regeneration, Vocation, Marriage, and Covenant etc.

4. Consider what engagements we have from him, viz. he has promised to pardon
our sins, to purge our natures, Ezekiel. 36. 25. Then will I sprinkle clean
water upon you, and ye shall be clean from all your filthiness, and from all
your Idols will I cleanse you.

5. Consider in whose name we come before him, not in our own, neither in the
name of any, but only his own dear Son, in whom he is well pleased, and for his
sake he has promised, that whatsoever we ask in his Name he will give it unto
us. 1. We have his prayer to the Father, to subdue and conquer our lusts, John
17. 17. 2. We have his promise, I will subdue your iniquities, Micah. 17. 19.
Sin shall have no more domin ion over you, Romans 6. 14. 3. He is not only a
Redeemer, but also a Refiner, a Purifier, he gave himself for us, to redeem us
from all iniquity, and to cleanse and purify us to be his peculiar people,
zealous of good works. 4. We have his merits, as a Sanctuary to fly unto, as to
a fountain set open to wash us, from all finne, filthiness and uncleanness,
Zach. 13. 1. Sure these are grace breeding considerations, consider them over
and over again and again.

5. The fifth means is, gather and treasure up a stock of Grace-begetting and
Soul-converting experiences; viz. We have had some experience of the riches,
freeness, fullness, and everlastingness of Gods love, and we have a little taste
of the sufficiency and efficacy of the death and sufferings of the Lord Jesus
Christ, Genesis 30. 27. O friends, shall Laban, a natural man, make use of
experience which he had treasured up, and shall not a true Christian, in
carrying on the work of grace, began in his soul, make use of it much more? It
is the duty, and it should be the practice of all in converting, and also of
those converted, to treasure up experiences of Gods goodness to them, even from
their cradles, that God made them men, and women, and not toads and serpents,
that he has hitherto preserved them, when he might have destroyed them, that
they have as yet the means of grace, whilst others in the world want, that they
have liberty, sight, limbs, food and raiment; these and such like are the
blessings of his left hand, and he tenders to thee also the blessings of his
right hand, Psalm. 63. 7. Because thou have been my help, therefore in the
shadow of thy wings will I rejoice, 2 Cor. 1. 10. Who delivered us from so
great a death, and does deliver us, in whom we trust be will yet deliver us,
See Psalm. 116. 2. Because be has inclined his ear unto me, therefore will I
call upon him as long as I live. It is good to hear, better to hear and
understand, better to enjoy, and best of all to have blessed experience of what
we hear, understand and enjoy; the Saints of old could say, that they had such
experience of the faithfulness of the Lord, that he made good every thing that
he had promised to them, no one good thing failed, Josh. 21. 45. There failed
not any good thing, that the Lord had promised to the house of Israel, all came
to pass, Josh. 23. 14. Not so much as one thing has failed, etc.

In the use of these and the like means, the Lord usually scatters some
little seeds of grace in the hearts of those that he will bring unto himself,
which seeds being sown, do afterward by degrees put forth, and act toward
God, as we may see in Lydia, the Jailer, and Zacheus etc. God makes himself
known to us as a God of mercy, gracious, long-suffering, pardoning iniquity,
transgression and sin, and so offers himself to be reconciled to us, though we
have rebelled against him, promising to be a Father unto us, and to accept of
us in his beloved, as his sons and daughters, and thus is the difference made
up between God and man; the soul begins now to say, at least in its self, I
that was an enemy, he has now reconciled unto himself; I that was in times
past without God, without Christ, without promise, without covenant, without
hope, yet now I have God for my God, he is become my salvation, Christ is
become my Redeermer, the Holy Ghost my Sanctifier. O blessed, thrice blessed be
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost! O how often did he call, how carnestly did he
knock, how powerfully did he strive, how long did he wait upon me, before my
stubborn hard heart would yield? if he had never loved me, I had never loved
him; if he had never drawn me, I had never come; if he had never sought me, I
had been yet straying in the wilderness of iniquity, and feeding in the fields
of vanity; now I see that God keeps open house, invites, entreat, beseeches
us to believe, and come in, O every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters,
come buy ye that have no Silver or Gold, come buy milk and wine without money,
Isai* 55, 1. and he that comes to me. John 6. 37. I will in no wise cast out.
Let him that will, come, whosoever has a mind let him come, let his sins be
what they will be, for nature, number, and for continuance, yet come, I will in
no wise cast thee off, Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons iniquity,
and passes by the transgression, of the remnant of his heritage, thou
retainest not anger for ever, for thou delightest to show mercy, Micah 7. 18,
19.

Means to be used for the confirming, sealing, ratifying, and increasing of
Grace, where it is began.
We are to take notice, that the same means for the most part, that does
beget or breed grace in us, does build up, nourish and increase the same; these
forementioned means, are both the begetters and the nourishers, both the
breeders and feeders of grace, viz. Hearing the Word preached, reading the
Word, prayer, promises, good company, considerations, and choice experiences;
all these are full to nourish and strengthen grace; also the Sacraments were
instituted and set up for this end, to increase our grace, and assure us of the
pardon of our sins, and the salvation of our souls; Baptism is a seal of
our entrance into the Church of God, the Supper of the Lord is a seal of our
continuance in the same; the former is a seal of our new birth, the latter is a
seal of our spiritual growth^; in Baptism, some of our senses are exercised,
in the Lords Supper, all our senses are or ought to be exercised; this
Ordinance is to be used often, baptism but once; for these is but one entrance
into Christ, but there are many degrees of growth in him. Again, Consider that
we are to wait on God in the use of means frequently; as we must not forsake
our meals for our bodies, so we are not to neglect our meals for our souls, cut
not off religious exercises too short, turn not these holy duties into matter
of fashion or form, but come with an hungry appetite; and that thou may so
do, dip thy morsels often in the sharp sauce, and sour herb of humiliation;
look back and consider what once thou wast. Now, though we grant that the
Ministry of the Word, whether Law or Gospel, is but as it were a dead letter,
and profits little without the Spirit, 1 Cor. 3. 7. Neither is he that
planteth any thing, nor he that waters, but God that gives the increase, We
cannot prevail with the blind to see, nor with the deaf to hear, or with the
dead to live; yet are we with diligence to attend upon God in the use of means,
for though the means cannot work without the Spirit, the Spirit ordinarily will
not work without the means; Man is a reasonable creature, therefore God
proceeds with him by way of arguments or means; but because man in some
sense, is a dead creature, therefore he must work in him, that which he
persuades him to; he commands us who are unwilling, to be willing, and then
by the powerful efficacy of the Spirit, changing the will of unwillingness, he
makes us willing; By the first he stands at the door and knocks, Rev. 3. 20. By
the second, he opens the door, and comes in, and sups with us; He in his Word
calls upon us, to will and to do; the Spirit of Christ works in us, both to
will and to do; God in the Creation spoke the word, that such a creature should
be, and therewithal sent forth a ^ower causing that creature to be according to
his word. So whilst the Angel reveals unto Mary the conception of Christ, the
power of the Holy Ghost overshadowed her, whence it was with her according to
his word, Luke 1. 35, 38. So also whilst Jesus cried with a loud voice, John
11. 43, 44. Lazarus come forth; there proceeded from him a power whereby he
came forth. So Luke 5 24. He commanded the man that was sick of the palsy, to
take up his bed and walk, and conveyes a power together with the command,
whereby verse. 25 He did immediately arise, took up his bed, and went to his
house and glorified God, So again, Ezekiel. 2. 1, 2. And he said unto me, Son of
man, stand upon thy feet* and I will speak unto thee, and the Spirit entered
into me when he spoke, and set me upon my feet, and I heard him that spoke unto
me, etc. But in the use of these and the like precious means, observe these
cautions.

1. Be sure that the means you make use of, be means of Gods own appointment,
of his own providing, to which he has annexed his promise.

2. Consider, it is not the means singly that helps, but Gods blessing upon the
means, without which, the most likely means, brings nothing to pass.

3. Consider his blessing is dispensed, not so much according to the means, as
according to the uprightness of the heart, in the use of them.

4. Consider, notwithstanding all this, we are to wait upon God in the use of
them frequently, as it is Gods way of conveyance; for where ordinary means may
do, he will not use extraordinary.

The walls of Jericho must fall, Josh. 6. from verse. 4. to ver. 15. but they
must use the means, although but weak means, that we might not slight the
means. So John 9. from the 1. verse to the 7th, when our Savior opened the
eyes of the man that was born blind, He made clay of spittle and anointed the
eyes of the blind man, and bid him go wash in the pool of Siloam, and be went
and washed, and came seeing. So the stone must be rolled from Lazarus grave,
and Moses must sinite the rock to get water for the Israelites; all which are
written for our learning, to engage us to be diligent in the use of means, and
presents us with our duty, viz. that we should leave no means unattempted, for
the accomplishment of what God has promised; for the means are Gods pipes of
conveyance; which if we cut off, how can we expect the things we want, which
God has promised to give? Christ did not discharge us from the debt of sin,
to free us from the debt of service; but therefore he did pay the one, that we
might wait upon him in the use of the other; he that withdraws himself from the
promise, cannot long keep close to the precept, and he that keeps at a distance
from the use of means, shall never attain the mercies conveyed to others
therein.

The Sacraments were instituted and set up for this very end, to increase and
strengthen, seal and establish us; the Lord knew he had to deal with doubting,
staggering, misgiving persons, and therefore he does not only give the promise,
his covenant and oath, for the confirmation of us, but to all these he annexeth
his seal, the Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper. Here I shall give
the Reader a brief account of the sum and substance of what hitherto in this
Treatise has been presented, and so proceed, etc.

We have began with man's creation, and of his estate before he fell, and of the
manner of his fall, and the subtilty of Satan therein, and of the miserable
estate he fell into, and how he can never be saved, unless born again, renewed
and restored; there are four Gates shut, and five exceptions made against him;
there be amongst the Sons and Daughters of men, eighteen sorts, that shall not
either see, nor enter into the kingdom of God; there be four strong reasons,
why he will execute justice upon them; there are four sorts of changes, and but
one of them spiritual and saving; Man is in misery, and unable and unwilling to
help himself out, etc. Of the preparations or qualifications that we are to
find in our selves, before we lay hold on Christ and the promise; Conversion
and Regeneration, Vocation and Repentance, are but four words to hold forth, as
it were, one and the self same thing: Of the way step by step how the Lord in
his ordinary dispensation in these Gospel-dayes, does lead a soul, as it were,
by the hand, out of a state of nature into a state of grace; First, by
enlightening the soul; Secondly, by calling him effectually; Thirdly, by
enabling him to believe; Fourthly, by giving him the spirit of prayer, by which
he prays for more light to see his sins, and then for pardoning mercy, and for
purging mercy; Fifthly, the Lord does cause the soul secretly to give it self
up to God, and so he comes to surrender all its own supposed interest that he
had in himself, unto God that made it, and unto Christ that has dearly
purchased it; then there follweth the mean^ to be used, to breed and beget
grace, and to convert the soul; First to keep close to grace-begetting
Ordinances, viz. hearing the Word preached, reading the Scriptures, and
frequent and earnest prayer; Secondly, to dwell much upon grace-begetting
promises; Thirdly, to frequent the company of grace-begetting and
soul-converting companions; Fourthly, to call to mind, and meditate upon
gracebegetting considerations; Fisthly, to gather and to treasure up
grace-begetting and soul-converting experiences, and so to be diligent in the
use of many other means, for the confirming, sealing, and assuring the soul of
salvation; these and many other subordinate branches, thou have here presented,
in a little room, and a few words, etc. Now to proceed a little farther, in
this great work, and so to draw toward a close, let the Reader consider these
things following, viz.

1. If we remain in an unconverted estate, let us blame our selves only; for
the want of conversion is not in God, for he makes use of all means, and ways
to convert us.

2. We shall present the Reader with some of the principal hindrances of
Conversion.

3. Consider the sad and miserable condition of the unconverted.

4. The trials of conversion, by which a man may know, whether he be converted,
yea, or no

5. The privileges, and benefits of all that are converted.

6. Certain Objections answered, which some out of weakness, and others out of
prejudice, may be apt to make against the foregoing discourse, and so I shall
close up this Book.

The want of Conversion i^ not in God, but in our selves, he makes use of all
means and ways to convert us.
1. Our conversion and salvation is not a thing impossible, for a new and
living way is consecrated for us by Christ, through the vail, his flesh, and by
his blood we may have boldness to enter into the Holiest, he has borne our
burden, he has removed the impossibilities, and nailed to his Cross the
handwriting that was against us, Coll. 2. 14, 15. So that if any of us perish,
it is for want of grace in us, not for want of satisfaction by the Redeemer:
salvation is brought even to our doors, and thrust in as it were into our
hands; we have Christ himself offered us, and pardon, life and salvation with
him, we have God himself waiting to be gracious, and beseeching us to be
reconciled to him, 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20. We have the Lords Ambassadors entreating
us in his Name and stead; the Lord has provided excellent and plentiful means,
with promise upon promise of his presence with, and blessing upon us in the use
of them, and if the Spirit make not these means effectual, it will not be long
of him, but of our selves, God himself presents and offers us mercy, Prove. 1.
23. and continues his Ordinance^; the Angels waits for the joy that is due to
them upon our conversion; Ministers are preaching and praying for our
conversion, godly friends and neighbors are praying and longing to see this
work wrought in us, See Mr. Bax^ers Call to the unconverted, in the Preface; We
study plainness of speech to make them understand, we come with serious
piercing words, to make them feel, but they will neither understand nor feel;
if the greatest matters would work with them, we should awake them, if the
sweetest things would work, we should entice them, if the most dreadful things
would work, we should affright them, if truth and certainty would take with
them, we should soon convince them, if the God that made them, and the Christ
that bought them, might be heard, the case would soon be altered with them, if
Scripture might be heard, we should soon prevail, if the best and strongest
reason might be heard, we should speedily convince them, if experience might be
heard, even their own experience, the matter would soon be mended; yea if the
conscience within them might be heard, the case would soon be better with them
than it is, but if the dreadful God of Heaven be slighted, who then shall be
regarded? If the blood of a Redeemer be made slight of, what then shall be
valued? If the joys of Heaven is not worth the desiring, and the torments of
Hell the avoiding, what shall we do for such souls as these etc? Now if after
all these and the like means Man will not turn, it is not long of God that they
are not converted, but of themselves; so that Man's destruction is of himself,
James 1. 15. So earnest is God for the conversion of sinners, that he doubleth
his commands and exhortations Turn ye, turn ye, why will ye die, Ezekiel. 33. 11.
Again, it is the promise of God, that the wicked shall live, if they will but
turn, nay, the Lord has confirmed it to us by an oath, That he has no
pleasure in the death of the wicked, See the forementioned place, Ezekiel. 33. 11.
Nay farther, the Lord condescendeth to reason the cause with all unconverted
sinners, as to ask them why they will die in their sins, See the forementioned
place, Ezekiel. 33. 11. Compared with 2 Pet. 3. 9. The Lord is long-suffering, not
willing that any should perish, etc.

Some of the principal hindrances of Conversion.
1. The first Hindrance, is ignorance both of their own misery, and Gods mercy;
the kingdom of Satan is a kingdom of darkness, and himself the ruler of
darkness, and the mist and blackness of darkness is reserved to him and his
servants for ever, Jude 6, 13. compared with John. 3. 19. this is condemnation,
that light is come into the world, and men love darkness rather than light: So
that if the Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost, in whom the God of
this world, has blinded the minds of them that believe not, lest the glorious
Gospel of Christ should shine unto them; but those that are converted, can
truly say, we were once darkness, but now we are light in the Lord, Ephesians 5. 8.

2. Hindrance of conversion is, men think it to be either an easy work, or a
needless work.

1. It cannot be an easy work: Jer. 13. 23. Can the Ethiopian change his
skin, and the Leopard his spots, then may they that are accustomed to do evil,
learn to do well.

2. It is not a needless work, but one of the most needfullest works, without
which we perish everlastingly in Hell, John. 3. 3. 5. Mat. 18. 3. except a man
be born again, be cannot see the kingdom of God, and except ye be converted and
become as little children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of Heaven:

3. Hindrance, is either a total neglect, or a careless formal use of those
ordinary means which God has appointed, for the breeding and perfecting the
work of conversion; if we will not eat, how can we live and grow? if we will
not drink, how can we quench our thirst? if we will not wear clothes, how can
we be warm? if we will not sovve and plant, how can we reap? shall we be
industrious and neglect no means for the obteining of natural things, and
altogether remiss in the use of means for the obtaining of spiritual, that are
far better? surely we ought to leave no means unattempted for the accomplishing
of what God has promised, seeing we have more commands and promises for the
latter, than we have for the former.

4. Hindrance is, men's not confidering the joys of Heaven, and the torments of
Hell, that so the love of the one might win them, or the fear of the other
compel them to make use of the means, and improve their talent and time, for
the obtaining of life and salvation, and the escaping of Hell and damnation;
surely we ought to lay aside every weight, and the sin that does so easily
beset us, and to run with patience, the race that is set before us, looking
unto Jesus the author and finisher of our faith, who for the joy that was set
before him, endured the cross, and despised the shame, Heb. 12. 1, 2, 3.

5. Hindrance is, false conceits, that they are converted already; which
arises from some seeming change in an external conformity to the Gospel, which
arises from the souls sight of fin, and sense of punishment, which leads him
so far as to confess his fins, Mat. 27. 4. and vomi^ it up, 2 Pet. 2. 20. and
in some good measure, abstain from the external commission of it, and so
reformeth its conversation; ignorance is taken away by illumination; pleasure
in fin is abated, by sorrow for fin, boldness in finning is abated, by the fear
of punishment: he may know the very time, ^he sermon, the book, the chapter,
the verse, that were the means of doing this work, and therefore thinks it is
truly done, and that he has a saving change, and yet it may be but common
preparation, or some common works, which many partake of that perish, etc.

6. Hindrance, is, too deep a familiarity with bad company, Oh what a dangerous
thing it is to live amongst such company, as will be still hindering, but never
helping in the way to heaven, who can converse with defiled ones, and not be
defiled? Psalm. 106. 35. the people were mingled amongst the heathen, and
learned their works. Psalm. 119. 115. evil doers we must depart from, if ever we
keep the commands of God, these are not gracebegetting, and soul-converting,
but gracehindring, and soul-condemning companions.

7. Hindrance, is their ignorance of the principles of Religion, their not
being Catechized themselves, neither catechizing their Families: so that the
foundational truths, are for the most part Paradoxes and Riddles to them.

8. Hindrance, is Delay; when men intend to become new men, and to live another
life, and to leave sin, and to take another course, yet they delay and put off
the time till the next year, and when that is come, to the last month of that
year, and when that is come, to the last week of that month, and when that
is come, to the last day of that week, and when that is come, to the last hour
of that day, and when that is come, to the last minute of that hour, and so in
the mean while they are hardened through the deceitfulness of sin, as Heb. 3.
13. and so go on from folly to folly, until they are ripe for eternal misery:
Oh! say they, we are yet young, and have daylight and time enough; we are yet
in health and there is no such haste: and thus many are cut off, whilst they
are purposing to return; and many thousand souls are lost, as it is to be
feared, that once were purposed to have turned to God before they die, and all
by delaying and continuing in sinning, til they have sinned themselves into a
reprobate sense, and so they must perish everlastingly, by delaying to make use
of their remedy, by not calling upon God whilst he was near, and seeking him
whilst he might be found: See Isa. 55. 6. compared with Prove. 1. 24. 28. I
might instance in many other hindrances, as hardness of heart, unbelief, love
of this present evil world, the Differences amongst Professors; but I cannot
speak particularly to them all, lest this Book should swell too bigg.

Of the sad condition of all that are not Converted.
THe longer men or women stay, or go on, in an unconverted estate, the greater
is their sin, the harder is their cure, and the greater will be their
punishment, etc. They make void as much as in them lies, the great Counsel of
God, and all the thoughts of his wisdom, in contriving such a way to advance
his own glory, in the salvation of man; Yea, they make void all the purposes of
Gods mercy to them, in restoring and renewing them, and sending Christ to die
for them; yea they do as much as in them lies, make void the death of Christ,
they make all his sufferings, and bloodshed, to be to no purpose. You deny him
that which is his own, you deny him your hearts and souls, that which he has
made and redeemed; you deny him that which none can lay claim to, but himself;
again they are cursed in their going out and coming in, in their basket and in
their store, and in all they put their hands unto, they can do nothing truly
pleasing to God, but are servants, and slaves to Satan, and led about as his
captives at his will, and so remain in a continual danger of damnation, there
being but a breath between them and Hell.

Of the privileges, and benefits of all that are Converted
THe Lord is their portion, and they are the Lords portion, Deuteronomy. 32. 9. what
ever losses, crosses, troubles and trials, they may pass through here, all
shall work for their good at the present, and they shall be freed from all
troubles in time to come, there was joy in Heaven at their conversion, Luke 15.
10.

1. Christ calls them his servants, John 12. 26. 2. Again, he calls them his
friends, John 15. 15. 3. He calls them his brethren, Mar. 3. 34. 4. He calls
them his Jewels or treasure, Mal. 3. 17. 5. He calls them his sons and
daughters, 2 Cor. 6. 18. 6. He calls them the Bride, the Lambs wife, Rev. 21.
9. 7. He calls them coheirs with himself, Romans 8. 17.
And if all this be too little to express his heart to them, then he tells
them, that the Father loves them with the same love, (for the quality of it)
wherewith he loves Christ; what shall I say more? they have the glory of God
to be their aim, the word to be their rule, the spirit to be their guide, the
angels to be their guard, and the blessed promises to be their support, and as
by virtue of their oneness with the first Adam, his sin was made theirs; so by
virtue of their oneness with the second Adam, his righteousness is made theirs;
nay farther, they have by virtue of converting grace, union with Christ, and so
communion with the life and Spirit of Christ, with the death and sufferings of
Christ, with the merits and victories of Christ, with the privileges and
immunities, as Adoption, Sonship, etc.

The trials of Conversion by which a man may know whether he be converted yea
or no.
LEt the Reader make a curious, narrow, impartial, diligent search into his own
soul, and see what humility, what self-denial, what sin-abhorrancy, what love
to Christ, what delight in his ordinances, what zeal for Gods glory, what
contempt of the world, what desiring after the society of the Saints, what
sympathising in their afflictions; and if thou find any impressions of
grace, any spiritual work, any saving, savoury distinguishing operation upon
thy soul, and heart, then the Spirit has been there with his cure, and thou
art as certainly born again, as thou wast born first; but these graces thus
planted in the heart, at first are full of imperfections, there is some
darkness with your light, some enmity with your love, much hardness of heart
with your mourning for sin, and much worldly sorrow in your purest tears, much
pride with your humility, much murmuring with your patience, and therefore
great care is to be taken, in the laying down these trials, or marks of
conversion, for as we are to put a difference, between gifts and grace, and
internal and external marks and signs, so also we are to distinguish between
those that are strong in grace, and those that are weak in grace, that have but
little grace, and this will be of great use to Christians that are but of a
lower form; new converts, having but little grace, yet they may know that
little they have, though as yet they have not attained strength of grace, yet
they may know the truth of grace in themselves, although they come short of
strong believers, yet they shall know they go beyond the most shining
hypocrite; for the least measure of grace, is better than the greatest measure
of gifts* But we come to the trials of the new birth, by which a man may know
whether he is born again, yea or no.

1. He that is truly converted, does desire the word and means of grace, 1 Pet.
2. 2. 2. He is either willing, or willing to be made willing to do whatsoever
the Lord does command him, though it be never so contrary to flesh and blood,
Gal. 1. 16. 3. He is brought unto an unseined hatred of the whole body of sin,
Romans 7. 24. compared with, Philip. 3. 21. 4. His greatest and hottest mournings
and strivings is against his inward pollution, his close, spiritual and secret
sins, Psalm. 19. 12. compared with, Psalm. 90. 8. 5. He often mourns for the sins
of others, and for the want of growth in himself, Lam* 16. and 3. 48. 6. He
does love to be speaking of those great and saving truths, which his heart has
taken in, in the work of conversion. 7. He does begin to keep a watch over his
own heart. 8. He makes conscience of keeping every known command. 9. He is
willing to put himself upon the trial, and to have any Christian search him,
and sometimes he entreats the Lord to search him. Psalm. 139. 23. Lam. 3. 40.
10. He that is born again, or truly converted, ha^h his soul renewed in its
faculties and virtues, etc.
These are such flowers of Paradise, that grows not in Natures garden, until
the new man was put on, and the party renewed in the spirit of his mind, until
Christ was formed in him; for these are pearls that are not to be found in the
worlds field: wherefore we shall speak something to each of them briefly; but
before I proceed further, let me give the Reader this caution: Let not every
one think he is not converted, unless he find these and the like characters of
a true conversion in him, if he find but something of every thing, if it be
but in the budding, in the breeding, in the beginning, his state may be good;
for when he is a well grown Christian, these things will more and more clearly
appear, at the first conversion a man has as it were but the root of them, etc.

1. He that is indeed born again, and so converted, does desire the word and
means of grace, 1 Pet. 2. 2. as new born babes desire the sincere milk of the
word, that they may grow thereby. There the apostle makes it a resemblance of a
spiritual man; a man spiritually new born will desire after the means of
grace, that he may grow in grace; by milk, is here meant the word of God, which
is compared to milk, First because of the sweetness of it. Psalm. 19. 10. and
Psalm. 119. 103. Secondly because of the purity of it, it is without falsehood,
Psalm. 19. 18. and 119. 140, and Thirdly because of the nourishing property
thereof, 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17. When the Lord begets one by the immortal seed of his
word, he teaches him to rest upon the word of promise which indureth for ever,
tendered in the Gospel; indeed tho whole word of God is sincere milk whereby we
grow, and the old and new Testament may be called the Breasts of consolation;
but if we grow not, it is because we feed not, we play with the breast, etc.

2. He that is indeed born again, he is either willing, or at least willing
that the Lord should make him willing, to observe and do whatsoever the Lord
does command him, though it be never so contrary to flesh and blood, Acts. 9.
9. Lord what will thou have me to do? How willing Paul was to lay down his
first commission, and to take up another: So Psalm. ^10. 3, thy people shall be
willing in the day of thy power. They are willing to hear, speak Lord, for thy
servant hears; they are willing to do, Lord what will thou have me to do,
Psalm. 119. 5. Oh that my ways were directed to keep thy statutes. Again David
sets down another character of a godly man, Psalm. 1. 2. His delight is in the
Law of the Lord, and Paul after conversion speaks of himself, that his delight
was in the Law of God, as concerning the inward man, So again in another Psalm.
40. 8. I delight to do thy will, thy Law is in my hear^; there was a principal
within him agreeable to the precept without him, this is a clear demonstration
of a new creature, though he may drive heavily, sometimes under vexing and
lasting temptations.

3. He that is effectually converted, he i^ brought unto an unfeined hatred of
the whole body of sin, especially his beloved sins, that did most powerfully
captivate him before, Col. 3. 7, 8. But now you put off all these, anger,
wrath, malice, blasphemy, filthy communication, see 1 Corinthians. 6. 11. compared
with Titus 3. 3, 4, 5. etc. Nay further, he has an unfeined hatred of the
whole body of sin, as it is the greatest evil in the world; sin is worse than
hell, there may be good in punishment, but there can be no good in sin, it
makes God hide his face from us, and shut out our prayers, Isa. 59. 2. it is
the cause of all wars, James 4. 1. it is the cause of all sickness, Deuteronomy. 28.
In a word, sin is the cause of all misery, both temporal, spiritual, and
eternal, therefore Daniel was content to be thrown into the den of Lions,
rather than to sin, the three Children in the fire, Paul and Silas into the
prison, and many Christians have chosen to embrace prisons, stakes, fire, and
the hottest persecutions rather than sin, a converted person comes to see the
weakness and wickedness of his own heart, he knows he cannot trust any member
alone without a guard.

4. He that is indeed converted may know it by this, viz. his greatest and
hottest conflicts are against inward pollution, his close, spiritual, and
secret sins, that are known only to God and himself; he does accuse himself for
that which no man can accuse him, he blames himself for that which no man can
blame him, he judges and arraigneth himself for that which no man can judge
him for, he makes a through and sound search, he knows Hypocrisy is spun of a
fine thread, and is not discerned without diligent search: Again, he knows that
one stab at the heart, though it be with a penknife, will kill a man, one
little leak in a Ship will sink it, and one secret sin unrepented of, will damn
a Soul, the least sin contains in it the nature of all sin; no sooner did one
sin enter into Adams heart but he had all sin in him.

5. He often mourns for the sins of others, and for the want of more grace in
himself, we read Jer. 13. 17. that the Prophet did weep in secret places for
the sins of others; so in another place, mine eyes run down with tears, because
men keep not thy laws* etc. and as for the sins of others, so for the want of
more grace in themselves, viz. Isaiah 6. 5. I am a man of unclean lips said
Isaiah. I abhor my self in dust and ashes said Job, Job. 42 6 Surely I am more
brutish than any man, and have not the knowledge of a man, said Augur, Pro. 30.
2. I am less than the least of all Saints said Paul, Ephesians. 3. 8. nay I have so
little grace, that I am the greatest of Sinners, 1 Timothy 1. 15 Christ Jesus came
into the world to save sinners, of whom I am chief.

6. He does dearly love to be ever now and then speaking of those great and
saving truths, which his heart took in the work of conversion, he feels most
savor of life in those necessary points which were instruments of this blessed
change that there is made upon him, and upon these he feed^th and delights,
even on the inward life of spiritual things, and so he feeds his hungry Soul,
in hearing and reading, praying and conversing with Christians; he endeavors
to learn something from ^very thing.

7. He does begin to keep a watch over his own heart, eyes, and tongue and
feet, etc.

1. He keeps his heart with Solomon's diligence, Prove. 4. 24.

2. He keeps his eyes with Jobs Covenant, Job. 31. 1.

3. He keeps his tongue with David's bridle, Psalm 39. 7.

4. He keeps his foot with Solomon's guard, Eccles. 5. 1. In a word, we should
not trust any Member, without its Keeper, for there does and will remain, even
in the converted themselves, the remnants of corruption, a body of death, a
rebelling flesh, and thi^ will be still tempting and draw them from God, so
that the whole way to Heaven is a continual warfare; there be enemies that will
dispute every foot of the way, there is no going a step forward, but as the
ship does in the Sea, by cutting its way through the waves: there is Self our
greatest enemy, and there is Satan and the world, and almost all that we meet
with in it, will prove hindrances in the way to Heaven, therefore keep up your
watch with your loins girt, and your lamps burning.

8. He that is truly converted makes conscience of keeping every known duty or
command, in respect of the general bent and frame of his heart he does subject
himself to Christ freely, universally, and constantly, and unweariedly, at
least in desire* if it be not so, he could wish it were so, he endeavors and
prays to have it so, he considers, that Christ did not discharge us from the
debt of sin, to free us from the debt of service, but therefore did he pay the
one, that we might be able to return the other. Romans 8. 12. Therefore we are
Debtors not to the slesh, 1 John 2. 5. Who so keeps his word, in him is the
love of God perfected: hereby know we that we are in him; there is no known sin
but he labors to avoid, and no known grace but he longs to have, and no known
duty but he labors to perform.

9. He is willing to put himself upon the trial, whether he be converted or no,
he is willing to have any Christian to search him, and sometimes he entreats
the Lord to search him, he loves those company best that deals most plainly
with him, he carefully and continually searches himself, and goes down with
light into his heart, he is jealous of his own heart, he doubts of none more
than himself, suspects most his own graces, and the witness of his own spirit,
least Satan shine like an Angel of light, and say it is the testimony of Gods
spirit, he is content to have his spiritual estate tried by any, not only by a
searching Ministry in public, but by any private Friends; he opens his heart
freely for others to ask, and gives answers of his hope with weakness and
fear, his ears are open to the whole word* he believes the threatenings and
trembles, he fears also the promises, lest he comes short, he has found out
the hell in his heart, and feels the flames of it in secret, he has found an
emptiness in himself, and an enmity to all good, he is poor in spirit, which
appears by his continual complaints, and importunat prayers, he desires not to
be found in his own righteousness, but in Christ's righteousness, all the rest
he accounts as dung.

10. He that is born again, or truly converted, has his soul renewed in its
faculti^s and virtues, when the Lord made man in his own image Genesis 1. 26, 27.
Genesis 9. 6. which image of God in man consists not in any bodily shape, but in
the nature of the soul, as it is a spiritual and immortal substance, endued
with three faculties* Understanding, Will and Memory, as the Deity has three,
Father, Son and Holy Ghost, this image of God in man, by his fall was
defaced, which by regeneration is again restored and renewed.

1. In its faculties. 2. In its senses. 3 In its virtues.

1. In its faculties,
1. Understanding. 2. Will. 3. Memory*
1. The Understanding, that by the fall was darkened, is now again by
regeneration ^nlightened, Ephesians. 5. 8. Compared with Ephesians. 1. 18.

2. The Will that was inthralled, is now renewed, by which it does choose the
good, and reject the evil.

3. The Memory, that since the fall of Man would forget the good that it should
have retained* and retein the evil that it should forget, is now restored, so
as to treasure up spiritual things, and let slip carnal things.

The Conscience, which is Gods Deputy in man, that did cease to do his Office
being seared with an hot Iron, 1 Timothy 4. 2. is now awakened, and sits as Judge
overall your Actions, accusing in one thing, excusing in another; now if
Conscience he not a Bridle, it will be a Whip, if it be not a Curb, i^ will be
a Scourge, if you will not hear the Warnings you shall feel the Lashes* if it
does not restrain from Sin by admonition, it will put u^ to pain in sin by
Contrition.

The Senses also they come to be exercised, Heb. 5. 14. to discern both good
and evil* the Sense of Hearing is frequently exercised in hearing the joyful
sound; and the Sense of Seeing is exercised in beholding the wonderful works
of God; and the Sense of Smelling is exercised, smelling a sweet savor in
Christ, and all his ways; and so for the rest of the Senses, they are ever now
and then exercised about spiritual things.

The Virtues of the Soul, or graces of the Spirit, they begin also to be
employ^d about matters of great concernment, viz. Faith endeavors to believe,
and lay hold on God for what he has promised; Hope anchors upon the promise,
and waits with patience for a supply of all its wants; Love is exerci^^d in
loving of God* his Ordinances and People, and sometimes in doing good to his
enemies; Prudence i^ a ver^^^ whereby we foresee how things ar^ to be done* in
respect of time, place, and m^nner, and what will be the event of each b^siness
which is undertaken* prudence in our hearts to guide our thoughts, and in our
mouths, to order our speeches; it is prudence in the evils of sin to choose
none, and in the evils of punishment to choose the lesser, 2 Samuel 24. 12.

Another Virtue which begins to be exercised, is Temperance, which moderates
our desires, and brings the Appetite under a rule of reason; then Constancy or
Perseverance is another Virtue, whereby a man is resolved to persevere to the
end in the knowledge, profession, and worship of God; Justice is another
Virtue, which gives every man his due, it binds us to give due to God, to our
Parents, and Kindred, and to exercise Verity and Equity in all that we do; lo
what a wonderful change is here! yet notwithstanding all this, the Soul is the
same after conversion as it was before, and so it shall be after the
resurrection the same: there being the same faculties, only thus changed, the
Soul, is renewed and restored to its primitive institution, and so its purity
and blessedness is or shall be greater than ever it was before, etc.

Thus the Regenerate does partake of another begetting, of another birth, of
another nature, that a man should be the same, and not the same, the same man
for Body, yet as different in quality, as if another soul did dwell in the same
body; he of a lion, i^ become a lamb, of a wolf, a sheep, of a Saul, a Paul,
of a persecuter, a friend of the persecuted; here is a blessed change indeed,
Would thou know whether thou art regenerated, art thou one whom God has
enlightened? art thou one whom he* has called? art thou one who art washed,
purged, renewed, sanctyfied? examine thy heart thoroughly, deceits lie low, and
false evidence is the fruit of a slight search; Art thou one whose heart is
taken with Christ* when God delights in us, thereupon we come to delight in
him, God knows us, and thereupon we come to know him, John. 10. 14. God
apprehends us, and thereupon we come to apprehend him, he chooses us, and
thereupon we choose him, he loves us, and therefore we love him* 1 John. 4. 19.
his heart is taken with us, and thereupon we come to be taken with him: take
thy evidences from the carriage of thy spirit, neither at the best, nor at the
worst, but the middle way, which is most thy frame; for if thou look upon thy
self at the worst, thou may be discouraged, if at the best, thou may be
deceived, neither judge of thy self by particular actions, but look upon the
universal frame and ben^ of thy spirit, art thou heavy laden with the weight of
thy offenses? do thou groan under the yoke and tyranny of manifold
temptations, Come unto me, says Christ, I will refresh the, Mat. 11. 28. Do
thou thirst after the ways of grace, lo I am the living spring, says Christ,
Come drinks, h^r^ is my blood that was shed for many for the remission of
sins? are the wounds of thy transgressions so deep, that they cannot be
searched, or so old, that they corrupt and pur^fie? lo here is the good
Samaritan, that will either eind them up, or power in oil and wine: are there
any seeds of true life began? is there any motion of repentance in thy soul?
will thy pulse of remorse heat a little? have thou but a touch of sorrow, a
spark of contrition, a grain of faith, a drop of self denial? surely he that
has began this good work, will finish it? Philip. 1. 6. Surely he will more
and more inform thy mind, conform thy will, reform thy life, and tran^form the
whole man into the likeness of the heavenly pattern, a man that is born again
may be weak in respect of life, in whom the spirit breath^ though feintly,
whose pulse beats but feebly, whose heart pants after Christ but weakly, in
whom Christ, who is the wisdom of the father, shines, though through many
clouds very dimly, who indeed re^^ives Christ and his free g^^^^, though with a
shaking hand, who hopes that Christ will not cast him off, though not sure he
will take him up, he has a desire to fear the name of the Lord: h^ has a
willing mind, 2 Cor. 8. 12, and this is acceptable with the Lord, a will to
obey the Lord, is all that a blessed Paul can sometimes find, Romans 7. 18. One
may be a babe in Christ though carnal. 1 Cor. 3. ^. and I brethren could not
speak unto you as unto spiritual, bu^ as unto carnal, even as unto babes in
Christ; or as some renders the word, as unto sucklings in Christ. To closeup
this, consider, one drop of water is for the quality, the same as the whole
Ocean Sea, one grain of gold, is as pure gold as a whole mountain of gold, the
least bud by the side of a great tree, draws sap from the same root that the
greatest limb or branch does; So the least measure of grace, is as true grace,
as the greatest measure; it is as pure for the quality, though not so much for
the quantity. Our salvation depends upon the truth of grace, our consolation
depends upon the degree^ of grace.

Certain Objections answered, which some out of weakness, and others out of
prejudice, may be apt to make against the foregoing Discourse.
Qu. If a people refuse to embrace the doctrine, and practice the discipline of
the true Religion, whether they are not to be forced to receive the one, and
practice the other, yea or no?

Ans: Religion is to be taught, not to be forced, and that for these reasons;

1. Because Christ and his Apostles never used any force in propagating of
religion; not the sword, but the Word and Prayer, were the instruments used to
propagate christianity*

2. If it be not in our own power to believe, till it be given us from above,
how can it be in the power of any other to make us believe? how can they
forceus to take that which is not given, and to profess that which we have not
received?

3. Religion is the free gift of God, which as it is freely given, so it must
be freely received, without constraint; for the will cannot be forced.

4. As he is not to be esteemed an heretic, or an Idolater, that is forced
thereto, neither is he to be esteemed religious that is compelled to embrace it.

5ly. The forcing of Religion has been the cause of much mischief, viz.
murders* disorders and changes in States; Therefore the wise Romans, says Mr.
Woll^bius, p. 332 permitted the Jews, after they were subdued, to use freely
their own Religion: But men are to be warned, and exhorted to make use of the
means. If the acts of hearing, reading, praying, meditation, conference, are
means by which Religion is both begot and nourished, to neglect the use of
these and the like means, is to neglect our own salvation, etc.

Q. Whether liberty of conscience be, as some say, a cursed toleration, or of
divine institution, yea, or no?

An. If under a pretense of liberty of conscience, men shall own any other God,
or preach any other Christ, or Gospel, than what is written for our learning,
or press people to walk by any other rule, this undoubtedly is a cursed
tole^ation, and to be lamented. But for a people that does hold the head, and
agree in the doctrinal part of Religion holding all to the essence of
substantial truths, if they differ somewhat in the discipline, how, and when,
and in what plac^s this God is to be worshipped; here in the strong must bear
with the weak, and give the newborn babes leave to feed upon milk, and the
child to speak and think as a child, whilst the young man is grabling with
gainsayers, and the old man going on to perfection; and thus, seeing the one
cannot see by the others eyes, Col. 2. 6. As ye have therefore received Christ
Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in him; Nevertheless, whereunto ye have already
attained, let us walk by the same rule, let us mind the same things, Phil. 3.
15. 16. If in any thing ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto
you. Uniformity in discipline, as well as in doctrine, is much to be desired,
and the want of it to be lamented, and the accomplishment of it to be
endeavored, by all that are truly convicted.

Qu. What is, or ought to be the ground of commanion and fellowship in the
church of Christ?

An. Union: For without union there is no communion or fellowship; a Christian
having Christ formed in him, comes by degrees to see his union with him, and
from that union with Christ, as the ground and foundation, desires to join
himself in fellowship with the people of Christ, that he may inquire in his
temple, and behold his glory, and enjoy the communion of Saints, which is a
great part of ou^ comfort on earth: See Psalm. 27. 4. compared with 1 John 1. 3.

Qu. Whether there be any preparatory work required of men and women before
conversion: and if so, what it is?

An: According to the ordinary dispensation of God, the soul is made sensible
of sin, and the wages thereof death, curse and hell, but all the preparatory
works before conversion, may be reduced to these few heads.

1. Revelation of its finful and lost estate, so far as to acknowledge himself
a lawful captive.

2. Revelation of Christ in some small measure, in and by whom there is a
possibility of obteining mercy.

3. The soul is resolved to wait on God in the use of means, for the obtaining
of mercy.

But let the Reader take notice, that whatsoever preparations and
qualifications there is required, they are first wrought in us by the finger of
God, who works in us both to will and to do of his own good pleasure: man is
merely passive in the first work of conversion or regeneration, he could not so
much as really wish it; but in all the rest man is a fellow-worker with God, he
is the instrument, though not the cause of his own salvation: viz. the Lord
speaks, and he hears, the Lord calls, and he answers the Lord draws, and he
comes, the Lord commands, and he in some measure obeys; man is not like a
stock when he is called, for he is the fit subject of vocation, seeing he is a
reasonable creature, yet his reason helps him nothing to his vocation, till it
be enlightened, and so the mind is changed, and the stony heart softened, Eze.
36.

Q. Whether there be not a free will remaining in all the posterity of Adam?

An. A man's will remains free, but it is to evil only, the imagination of the
heart is only evil, Genesis 6. 5 Man's will is not free, until it be by grace made
free: yet poor man would be like the Spider, spinning out a thread of his own,
and so think to climb up to heaven by a thread spun out of his own bowels;
whereas we are not sufficient of our selves to think that is good as of our
selves, but all our sufficiency is of God 2 Cor. 3 5.

Q. Whether Adam by his fall did totally lose every good thing that there was
in him, yea, or no?

An: By original sin our natural gifts are corrupted, but supernatural gifts
are utterly lost; but he and all his posterity retain some footsteps and
impressions, though not of grace, yet of gifts, he did not utterly lose the
knowledge of God, nor did his posterity, for that is learned by the things that
are made, Romans 1. 20. Nor did he utterly lose the fear of God, for Adam
confessed, Gen: 3. that when he heard the voice of God, he was afraid: there
remains some scraps of wisdom, by which he acts prudently, as to worldly
affairs, Luke 16. 8. Again, he walks toward his fellow creatures in the
performance of certain acts of duty and charity, as they stand related to him,
and his light or conscience, excusing or accusing, according to his acting.

Q. How came the sin of Adam, being but one man, to be made the sin of so many
men, yea of all, seeing they eat not the apple?

An: The sin of Adam in eating the forbidden fruit, is made ours by
participation and imputation.

1. By participation: Adam being a public person, all his posterity was
contained in his loins, and so sinned in his sinning, Romans 5 12.

2. By imputation: the Lord does impute the legal guilt thereof unto his whole
posterity descending from him by way of ordinary generation, Romans 5. 18 19.
compared with-1 Cor. 15. 22.

Q. How could Christ, being but one, make satisfaction for the sins of so many?

An: How could Adam being but one inf^ct so many with original sin? the second
Adam was as public a person as the first, and as well able to sanctify, as
the first to putrify: and farther, though Christ was but one, yet he was such
a one as was greater and better than all, and so able and sufficient to
satisfy for all, and to redeem all, for the blood of such an one as Christ the
son of God, was of such an infinite value and price, that it did ^urmount and
surpass in dignity and worth all the souls of the world, and his sufferings and
merits were a sufficient satisfaction, if intended and to that end, for to save
so many worlds of men as there is men in the world; for all things besides God
came from nothing, and are in themselves nothing: It is true, God calls
himself I am, Exodus 3. 14. We are but created results of God, bits of
dependancies upon him, we are of yesterday, little branches budding from our
mother nothing, by the alone will and pleasure of God, Isa. 40. 15. 17. Behold
all nations are before him as a drop of a bucket, as the small dust of the
balance, as a very little thing, as nothing, as less than nothing, even as
vanity, etc.

Q. What are we to understand by Election and Reprobation which are mentioned
in the Scriptures, and so many people contending about?

An. Gods eternal purpose according to the counsel of his will, for his own
glory he has fore-ordeined whatsoever comes to pass, voluntarily to save some
through Christ: but others being left to themselves in their own fin and misery
to perish eternally; and albeit God works most freely, and according to his
good pleasure, yet neither have the Elect any just cause to boast, nor the
Reprobate to complain: for to the one undeserved grace was bestowed, and on the
other deserved punishment is inflicted. Again, consider, that as predestination
is a part of Gods providence: so is Reprobation; for as God by his providence
has ordained some to life eternal, so by that same providence, he was pleased
to suffer some to fall away from that happiness: they are altogether foolish,
who acknowledge election, and deny reprobation, because the Scripture ^eacheth,
that there is a reprobation as well as election, Isa. 41. 9. I have chosen
thee, and not cast thee away, Mal. 1. 3. Jacob have I loved, and I have hated
Esau, Romans 9. 18. He will have mercy on whom he will, and whom he will be
hardneth, Romans 11. 7. The election has obtained it, and the rest have been
hardened, 1 These. 5. 9. God has not appointed us to wrath, but to salvation, 2 Timothy 2. 20. Vessels to honor, and to dishonor, Jude verse. 4. For there are
certain men crept in which were before of old ordained to condemnation. So that
we may learn from these Scriptures, that if Christ shows a people mercy, it
is fr^e and mere mercy, if he does not show them mercy he does them no wrong,
Romans 9. 15, 16.

Q. Then Election seems to be the cause of salvation, and Reprobation the
cause of damnation?

An. Election and Reprobation are not in any sense the causes of salvation and
damnation, but Christ is the proper and meritorious cause of salvation, and Sin
the proper and meritorious cause of damnation; election and reprobation, they
are but precedent acts or decrees, and the causes of salvation and damnation;
they come in between the decrees and the execution thereof. If it be demanded,
Why the Potter out of the same lump makes vessels of such different condition?
It is answered, because there be different uses of those vessels in the house.
If again it be demanded, Why out of one piece of the same lump a vessel of
honor is made, and a vessel to dishonor? It is answered because itso pleased
the Potter. O the unlimited Sovereignty of the being of beings. how
unsearchable are his judgments and his ways past finding out, Romans 11. 33.

Q. Whether Christ has dyed for all men, and tasted death for every man, 2
Cor. 5. 15. 1 Timothy 2. 6. as these Scriptures seem to affirm?

An: The word all has many restrictions in Scripture, and so has the word
every man; as to instance, the word all is sometimes restrained in Scripture to
the Lords peculiar people, John 12. 32. Christ (says he) will drsw all men to
him, that is, all men that the father gave him: Jo. 6. 45. Again, we read They
shall be all taught of God, not all the world sure, but all Gods people. Again,
Acts 2. 7. I will power out my Spirit upon all flesh, this place cannot be meant
of all the wicked. Again we read, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 15. They please not God, and are
contrary to all men, that is, all good men. Again we read, Ye shall be hated of
all men for my names sake, that is, of all wicked men: So we see the word all
is taken variously: and when as it is said he tasted death for every man, it is
to be taken for some of all kinreds, tongues and people. As to instance, Cant.
3. 8. Every man had his sw^rd on his thigh: So Micah 4. 4. Every man shall sit
under his vine: So ^ Cor. 4. 5. Every man shall have praise of God. Now let us
consider, every mon in the world had not a sword to wear, nor a vine to sit
under, neither shall every man have praise of God: much more might be said to
this, but this point is fully deba^ed, and answered by many precious
Christians, whose books are extant.

Q. How can they have hope to believe, whom God has decreed shall not believe?

An. We are according to ordinary dispensation to look at all living under the
gospel, to be capable of believing, and in the judgment of charity, for ought
we know, elected; and it is the duty of every one, to whom the object of faith
is propounded, to believe: and it is the duty of every believer, to believe,
that he is elected. Again, God together with the object of faith, tenders us
means, so far sufficient to the begetting of faith, as leaves us without
excuse; we love our unbelief, and resist this means of believing, John 1. 11.
He came to his own and they received him not. John 5. 40. And you will not come
to me that ye might have life. If we look on God with a legal eye, so the least
sinner is incapable; but if we look at him with an evangelical eye, so the
greatest sinner is capable of mercy. Abraham becomes a father, and Sarah a
mother, by overcoming such temptations as arose from his dead body, and the
deadness of her womb. Again, let us consider, though the decree be absolute,
yet the dispensation of the decree in the gospel is conditional, Whosoever
believes shall be saved, John 3. 16. compared with Rev. 3. 20. Again, who dare
say that God has decreed that he should not believe? This decree is a secret
thing, and secret things belong to God, and revealed things to us: a man may
know he is elected, when he has made his calling and election sure; but no man
can say he is reprobated, till he is given up to a reprobate sense. We read in
many places of Scripture, that it is the duty of every one to believe, and we
find in many other places of Scripture, that God is the author of faith, which
is wrought in our hearts by his mighty power, so that without him we cannot
believe.

Q. Now, why does the most just and righteous God command all to believe, and
promise salvation to them that do believe, and threaten damnation to all that
do not believe* seeing it is not in man's power to believe?

Ans For these Five Reasons:
1. That he might by means of those promises and threats, work us unto that
which by nature we are averse unto, 2 Cor. 5. 11. 20. Knowing therefore the
terror of the Lord, we persuade men, we are ambassadors for Christ as though
God did beseech you by us, etc. 2. That the sons and daughters of men might
appear m^re inexcusab^e, when neither promises nor threatmings will move them
to embrace free mercy, Acts 13 46. 51. and Acts 18. 6. 3. That the grace of God
might as well appear in giving us power to believe, as in giving Christ, and in
him forgiveness of sins to be believed, Romans 9. 16. Romans 11. 5. 6. 4. That we
might apply ourselves unto God, in the use of means appointed by him for the
working of faith in us, Isa. 55. 3. John 6. 27. 5. That we might search, and by
searching find in the covenant of grace, matter of free conveyance of power to
believe whatsoever is required to be believed, Romans 10. 17. John. 5. 39* Romans
4. 16.
Qu. Whether there: be not a light in every man, which if improved and walked up
to, would lead us to the gate of heaven, if not into heaven, yea or no?

An* God does give to every man some talent or talents, which if people did
improve, should be increased, and the party much advantaged, etc. the same Lord
does give to some natural talents, as wisdom, wealth, a^t, etc. and to others
spiritual talents or gifts, as to pray, prophecy, in erpret, etc. and God may
justly condemn men for not improving what he gives them, we read that the
heathen that had but the very light of nature, Rom 1. and 2. chapters, their
walking not up to that, left them without excuse: but withal consider, that
not to mind the light within him, so as to improve that and all other talents
given him, is enough to damn him, yet the improvement thereof is not sufficient
to save him: the Law that every man has broken, must have a perfect, personal,
perpetual, universal obedience, or else it leaves us under the curse, and all
our improvements cannot purchase the pardon of one sin; If the stung Israelites
had made a medicin of the best herbs in the wilderness, and a plaster of all
the soverein ingredients in the whole world, and applied it with mountains of
prayers, and seas of tears, yet this would not have helped them, if withal
they did not look upon the brazen serpent, and all because that was Gods way of
healing, etc. So now Gods way of saving, is not by or for the improvement of
light, but by the obedience of Christ for us, and his righteousness imputed to
us: and therefore in Scripture we read, that our salvation is attributed all to
grace, Titus 3. 7 Romans 3. 24. Romans 4. 5. Isa. 43. 23, 24, 25. All our best and
choicest performances are but gilded sins, we can do nothing which is truly,
really and substantially good, no not so much as think a good thought, 2 Cor.
3. 5. Neither are we able to understand as we ought, 1. Cor. 2. 14. Neither
able to will any thing that is good, Philip. 2. 13. Neither able to begin a
good work, Philip. 1. 6. Neither able to perfect it when it is begun, Isa. 26.
12. Romans 7. 18. So that in all our improvements there is still imperfection,
something polluted, so that our most Spiritual duties are not wound up to
command they are all tainted with disproportion to rule, and be-leopard with
spots, so that it is in vain to expect a bed, or rest in the bar^en wilderness
of our own performances, Isa. 28. 20. This bed is shorter than that a man can
stretch himself on it, and the covering is narrower than that a man can wrap
himself in it. Isa. 50. 11. Behold all ye that kindle a fire, walk in the light
of your fire, and in the spark^ that ye have kindled, this shall ye have of my
hand, ye shall lie down in sorrow; Our own righteousness is called a monstrous
rag; a rag, and therefore cannot cover us* monstrous, and therefore if it should
cover us, it would but cover filth with filth: Isa. 30. 1. They cover, but not
with the covering of my spirit, that they might add sin to sin: that is, the
sin of their own righteousness, to the sin of their unrighteousness, they cover
a blot with a blot, add sin to sin, dung to dung.

Q But how does it more particularly appear that our acceptance, salvation,
and glorification, etc. is purely, clearly and only of grace, and nothing but
grace?

Ans. Election is the election of grace, and according to the good pleasure of
his will, Ephesians. 1. 5.

Vocation is also of grace, 2 Timothy 1. 9. Who has saved us and called us with
an holy calling, not according to our works, but according to his own purpose
and grace given us in Christ* etc.

Regeneration is of Gods own will, James 1. 18. Of his own will begat he us by
the word of truth.

Faith is also the free gift of God, Philip. 1. 29.

Justification is freely by grace, Romans 3. 24.

Forgiveness of sins is according to the riches of his grace, Ephesians: 1. 7. In
whom we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of our sins,
according to the riches of his grace.

Eternal life also is the gift of God, Romans 6. 23.

Qu If these and the like precious things be only of grace, without works, then
in what respect are good works necessary?

An. Good works are necessary,

1. in respect of God. 2. in respect of our selves. 3. in respect of others.
1. Works are good in respect of God.

1. to show our obedience. 2. to glorify his name. 3. to testify our
thankfulness. 4. to beautify his gospel.
1. To show our obedience: Romans 6. 16. To whom ye yield your selves servants to
obey, his servants ye are to whom ye obey, whether of sin unto death, or of
obedience unto righteousness. See John 8. 34. compared with 2 Pet. 2. 19.

2. To glorify his name, Mat. 5. 16. Let your light so shine before men, that
they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven, 1
Pet. 2. 12. Having your conversation honest among the gentiles, that when as
they speak against you as evil doers, they may by your good works, which they
shall behold, glorify God in the day of visitation. See These. 1. 12.

3. To testify our thankfulness, when we consider, that we our selves,
together with the residue of mankind, lay equally in the guilt and pollution of
Adams sin: he freely gave unto us so excellent a being after his own Image,
leaving our fellow sinners unto misery, from all eternity he appointed his son
to descend as low as hell to fetch us from thence, and to ascend up as high as
heaven to carry us up thither: this is the great and glorious cause of
thanksgiving, saying in these or the like words, Psalm. 116. 12. What shall I
render unto the Lord for all his benefits toward me? Whatsoever we are, we are
by him, whatsoever we have, we have received from him, whatsoever we are or
have, we owe to him, Romans 11. 36. Of him and through him are all things, to
whom be glory for ever, Amen.

4. Good works are necessary to beautify the Gospel, Philip. 1. 27. Let your
conversation be as it becomes the Gospel of Christ. And in the 2 Col. 9. 13.
there were a people commended fortheir professed sibjection to the gospel:
surely unless we maintain and keep up good works in our conversation, we walk
unworthy of God, Col. 1 10. That ye might walk worthy of the Lord, unto all
pleasing, being fruit failin every good work, etc. Nay farther, if we are
negligent in obeying, we walk unworthy of our calling, Ephesians. 4. 1. I beseech
you, that ye walk worthy of the vocation wherewith ye are called, Tit. 2. 10.
that we might adorn the doctrine of God out Savior in all things; for indeed an
holy conversation is the end of our election, Ephesians. 1, 4. compared with John 15.
16. Again, it is the end of our redemption, 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. compared with 2
Cor. 5. 15. Nay farther, it is the end of our vocation, 1 Pet. 1. 15. compared
with 1 Thessalonians 4. 7. Lastly, a holy conversation is the end of our new creation,
Ephesians. 2. 10. We are created in christ Jesus unto good works, which God has
ordained before that we should walk in them. So much for the first of these.
Good works are necessary in respect of God, to show our obedience, to glorify
his name, to testify our thankfulness, and to beautify his gospel, etc.

2. Good works are necessary in respect of our selves,

1. As it is the way of conveyance of mercy to us. 2. To declare and manifest
our sincerity. 3. This is the way to have a being, and a wellbeing. 4. This is
the way to make our calling and election sure.
1. They are necessary in respect of our selves, as they are the pipes of
conveyance of both the apprehension and application of mercy to us: See these
Scriptures, Psalm. 50. 23. To him that orders his conversation aright, will I
show the salvation of God. Psalm. 107. 43. Who so is wise and will observe these
things, even they shall understand the loving kindness of the Lord. John 14,
21. He that has my commandments, and keeps them, he it is that loves me,
and he that loves me shall be loved of my father, and I will love him, and
will manifest my self to him. 2 Cor. 1. 12. For this is our rejoicing, that in
simplicity and godly sincerity, we have had our conversation among you.

2. They are necessary to clear and manifest our sincerity, both to ourselves
and others; to our selves, as they spring from a right principle, and are
regulated by a pure rule, and done to a good end, 1 Timothy 1. 5. compared with 1
Cor. 10. 31, etc; to others, they know a t^ee by its fruits, they know where
faith is by its works, and where love is by its effects, 1 John. 1. 6. If we
say that we have fellowship with him and walk in darkness, we lie and do not
the truth, so 2 Cor. 8. 7. 8.

3. They are necessary as to our being and well being, Psalm. 37. 3. Trust in
the Lord and do good, so shall thou dwell in the land, and verily thou shall be
fed. Mat. 16. 27. He will reward every man according to his works.

4. This is the way to make our calling and election sure, 2 Pet. 1. 5. 6, 7,
8, 9, 10, 11. For if ye do these things, ye shall never fall, for so an
entrance shall be administered unto you abundantly into the everlasting kingdom
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

3. Good works are necessary in respect of others, Titus 3. 8. they that have
believed in Christ, must be careful to do good works, for these things are
good and profitable to men, in these four-sold respects,

1. To stop the mouths of wicked men. 2. To increase the joy of the Lords
people. 3. To win others to the embracing of the Gospel. 4. For an example of
virtue.
1. To stop the mouths of wicked men, who will condemn sin in a Professor,
although they will approve of it in themselves, 1 Pet. 217. For so is the will
of God, that with well-doing we may put to silence the ignorance of foolish
men: this made wicked Saul say to David, 1 Samuel 24. 17. Thou art more righteous
than I, for thou have rewarded me good for evil.

2. To increase the joy of the Lords people, Col. 2. 5. for though I am absent
in the flesh, yet am I with you in the spirit, joying and beholding your order,
and the stedfastness of your faith in Christ. So again the second Epistle of
John, verse. 4. I rejoiced greatly, says John, that I found of thy children
walking in truth. Surely it is a great encouragement to one Christian to see
the forwardness of another in the ways of well doing.

3. To win others to the embracing of the gospol, 1 Pet. 3. 1, 2. that they may
be won by the conversation, whilst they behold your chaste conversation coupled
with fear, etc. A man does teach by his conversation, as well as by his
doctrine.

4. Good works and an holy conversation are good in respect of others, for an
example of Virtue, Joh. 13. 15. I have done this good work to give you an
example, said our Lord Christ; Again we read, These. 1. 7. So that ye were
examples to all that believe: And indeed each Officer in the Church should walk
so, as to be a good example to the Flock; there is ateaching by Example as well
as by Doctrine. See Phil. 3. 17. By all which we may see that good works are
necessary, in respect of the Lord which does command them, and of our selves
that does them, and of others that behold them: although there is no man saved
for his good works, yet there is none saved without them. Many other Arguments
might begiven to engage us to be rich in good works: to instance in few, and so
to close this Answer to this Question, consider then, (1.) That all the
commands of God to walk holy, are but as so many persuasions to persuade us to
be happy, Deuteronomy. 5. 29. That it might go well with us and our Children. (2.)
Because Christians are the salt of the Earth, the light of the world, a City
set upon a Hill that cannot be hid, Mat. 5. 13, 14. (3.) Seeing that death and
judgment, and the end of this life and world is at hand, 2 Pet. 3. 11, etc.
(4.) There is no condemnation to those that walk not after the flesh but after
the spirit, Romans 8. 1. (5.) This is the way to have Gods blessing upon all we
set our hand unto, Psalm. 1. 3.

Qu. You have here presented us with our Duty and the benefits and privileges
that will redound to us if we obey, but how shall we be enabled to do these
things? Jer. 10. 23. the way of man is not in himself, it is not in man that
walks to direct his steps; and Saint Paul tells us from the Lord, that we are
not sufficient as of our selves to think so much as one good thought, and that
it is God that works both to will and to do, etc.

Answ. Strength to perform any duty to exercise any Grace, to subdue any Lust,
or resist any Temptation, to bear any Affliction, etc. is derived only from the
Lord, one of these three ways to the Soul.

1. Consider, That either he has already before hand, as it were, enabled us
to do the thing commanded, by giving us a Talent, or Talents, 1 Cor. 12. 8, 9,
10. Romans 12. 6, Mat. 25. 15. to 28.

2. Let us consider, That many times the Lord conveys a power together with the
command, to enable us to do the thing commanded: So when he bid Lazarus come
forth of the Grave: so when he commanded the man that was sick of the palsi^ to
take up his Bed and walk, Lu. 5. 24, 25. So again, Ezekiel. 2. 1, 2. And he said
unto me, Son of Man stand upon thy feet, and I will speak unto thee, and the
spirit entered into me when he spoke, and set me upon my feet, and I heard him
speak unto me.

3. If we find no power already given us before the command, neither any power
conveyed to us, together with the command; then in the next place, we are to
bring the command to the Promise, and so to seek (for) by Prayer, the blessing
of the Promise, that we may be enabled to do the Duty of the Precept. To
instance in a few cases for all the rest,

It is man's duty to believe, Mar. 1. 15. Precept. Promise. Prayer.


Believing is Gods free gift, Ephesians. 2. 8.

This puts the Soul upon praying for it, I believe, help my unbelief, Mar. 9.
24.

It is man's duty to wash and be clean, Is. 1. Precept.


It is Gods promise to sanctify and cleanse Promise.
us, Ezekiel. 36. 25.

The Soul seeing its duty, and Gods promise, Prayer.
prays, Wash me, and I shall be clean, Psalm. 51. 2.

It is man's duty to repent, Acts 17. 30. Precept. Promise.


The promise holds forth repentance, as the gift of God, Acts 5. 31. 2 Timothy 2.
25.

Prayer sues it out, Turn thou me and I shall Prayer.
be turned, Jer. 31. 18.

It is required of man as his duty to make him Precept.
anew heart, Ezekiel. 18. 31.

It is Gods promise to give a new heart. Ezec. Promise.
36 26.

Create in me a new heart O God, and renew Prayer.
a right Spirit within me, Ps. 51. 10.

It is man's duty to love God, Mat. 22. 37. Precept. Promise.


It is Gods promise to circumcise the heart to love him, Deuteronomy. 30. 6.

The Lord direct your hearts into the love Prayer.
of God, 2 These. 3. 5.

It is man's duty to fear God, Deuteronomy. 10. 12. Precept. Promise.


It is Gods promise to put his fear into our Precept. Promise.
hearts, Ier. 32. 40.

Prayer seeks for it, Psalm. 86. 11. Unite my Prayer.
heart to fear thy name.

It is man's duty to draw near to God, Jaws Precept.
4. 8.

It is Christ's promise to draw men unto him, Promise.
John 12. 32.

Prayer falls in suitable herunto, Can. 1. 4. Draw Prayer.
me, we will run after thee.

It is man's duty to walk in Gods Statutes, Precept.
Psalm. 119. 4,

It is Gods promise to enable men so to do, Promise.
Ezekiel. 36. 27.

O that my ways were directed to keep thy Prayer.
statutes, Psa^. 119. 5.

It is man's duty to be strong in the Lord, Precept.
Ephesians. 6. 10.

It is Gods promise to make him strong, Psalm. Promise.
29. 11.

Prayer falls in, O give thy strength to thy Prayer.
Servant, Psalm. 86. 16.

It is man's duty to draw near to, but not to Precept.
depart from God, Heb. 3* 12.

It is Gods promise to his people that they Promise.
shall not depart from him, Jer. 32 40.

O let me not wander from thy commandments, Prayer.
Ps. 119. 10.

Let the Reader consider, that to each precept there is a promise, and to some
precepts there are two or three promises: the one to enable us the other to
reward us, and all to encourage us to do our duty: the commands in Scripture
does not so much show what the Creature can do, but what he should do, yet not
by his own natural power, but by his assisting and enabling grace. In a word,
Duty is the matter of Gods Promise, as well as Gods Mercy, as does most clearly
appear by these Scriptures, Ephesians. 2. 8. Phil. 1. 29. Acts 5. 31. John 8. 32.

Quest. What is the best way to mortify sin that is so prevailing in us?

Answ. The best way to mortify our flesh, with the Affections and Lusts, is,
to meditate on the mercies of God, which is one of the most powerful Arguments
to persuade and prevail with a Soul to leave sin, Psalm. 26. 3, 4. For thy
loving kindness is before mine eyes, and I have walked in thy truth, 1 John 3.
3. he that has this hope in him purifieth himself, as he is pure* I have read
of five men that were studying, what was the best way to mortify sin; The
first said, to meditate of death: the second said, to meditate of judgment to
come: the third said, to meditate on the joys of Heaven: the fourth said, to
meditate on the torments of Hell, which is the wages of sin: the fifth said, to
meditate on the blood and sufferings of Jesus Christ. And certainly the last is
the strongest motive of all to mortify sin: surely it is the appearance of
Gods grace to us, which works a hope of glory in us, and this hope of glory
does purify, 1 Ioh. 3. 3. both in kind and degree, 2 Cor. 7. 1. Let us cleanse
our selves from all filthiness, both of flesh and spirit, Romans 8. 13. And so
by the Spirit we come to mortify the deeds of the flesh; he that has the
strongest Faith has the holiest life, Sanctification arises from
Justification; let us then make war against our Lusts in the strength of
Christ, still seeking unto him for assisting grace; for as we have said before
in this Treatise, strength to perform any duty, to exercise any grace, to
subdue any Lust, to resist any temptation, to bear any affliction, is derived
only from Christ.

Quest What is, or who is the object of Faith?

A. God the Father Son, and holy Ghost, is the object of saving Faith, no man
was ever saved without this, for no man ever called upon God, but by the help
of the holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 12. 3. As no man can say, that Jesus is the Christ,
so neither can any man say that God is God, but by the holy Ghost: neither did
God ever hear any man that prayed unto him for salvation, but for his Sons
sake: we are in order, not in time, to believe, first in Christ, and by Christ
in God, 1 pet. 1. 21. Who by him do believe in God. We are commanded to believe
in Christ, 1 John, 3. 23. and this is his commandment, that we should believe
in the name of his Son Jesus Christ; for Christ as Redeemer is the mediate, not
the ultimate object of Faith, for we believe by Christ in God, as before;

As Christ is the object of divine worship, Asts 7. 59.

And of saving hope, Collo. 1. 27.

And of our greatest love, 1 Cor. 16. 22.

And of our absolute service, Romans 14. 9. 18.

So he is the object of our divine Faith, together with the Father and the Holy
Ghost; so John 14. 1. compared with Acts 20* 21. as God in Trinity is the
object of Faith, so the Scripture seems to be the ground of Faith; First, the
Lord presents us with a command to believe, 1 Ioh. 3. 23. and a promise of
Salvation to them that believe, Mar. 16. 16. and it is the duty of all that do
hear the Gospel to believe, Mar. 1. 15. John 3. 18. John 15. 22. and 16. 7.

In the begetting or breeding of Faith in the heart, is manifested both the
inability of Man and the ability of God: here appears the evil of the Spirit of
corrupt nature, and the good of the Spirit of Grace; Sarah her conceiving of
Isaac, whose birth was a figure of Regeneration, was a great work, a miracle;
so Mary her conception of Christ, by the power, command, and blessing of the
holy Ghost, was also a great work, a miracle, but for, Christ to be formed in
the Soul by believing, is as great, if not a greater work, see Ephesians. 1. 19, 20.

Quest. What encouragement and grounds are there to provoke or persuade us to
believe?

Answ. There are many, I will instance only in a few* which may be reduced to
these two heads, viz.

1. The benefits in doing it. 2. The hurt or danger in neglecting it.
1. The benefits that do attend those that do believe, and they are these;

1. By believing, we honor God our Creator, Christ our Redeemer, and the holy
Ghost our Sanctifier, John 3. 33* compared with Romans 3. 34.

2. By believing we come to be established, Isay 7. 9.

3. By* believing we shall be kept in perfect peace, Isay 26. 34. compared with
Romans 5. 1.

4. Whosoever believes in him shall not be ashamed, Rom: 9. 33.

5. Our naked believing in God, and cleaving to him in his free promises, will
carry down all our distempers at once, and fill our Souls with joy and peace in
believing.

6. This is the way to have God take pleasure in us, Psalm 147. 11. the Lord
takes pleasure in those that hope in his mercy, Psalm 33. 18. the eyes of the
Lord is upon them that fear him, upon them that hope in his mercy.

7. Our believing does instate the Soul in the possession of Heaven, whiles the
body remains on ^arth. John 3. 36.

8. For our encouragement to believe, consider, Christ outbids all Merchants
for thy Soul, he outbids the World, Sin and Satan; they do not present pardon,
remission, redemption, salvation, but Christ does present these, and many more
such like choice things.

2. Let us consider the evil of Unbelief, and the misery that does attend it,
it is a dishonouring of God, a denying of Christ, it (as much as in it lies)
makes void the great Counsel of God, and purposes of his mercy, viz.

1. We do what lies in us make void Gods end in sending Christ: his end was,
that we might believe, and live for ever in blessedness.

2. We, as much as in us lies, make void the death of Christ, all his
sufferings and bloodshed to be to no purpose.

3. We make void, what lies in us, the great counsel of God, and all the
thoughts of his wisdom, in contriving such a way to advance his glory in the
salvation of man.

4. By continuing in a state of Unbelief, we rob Christ of the reward and fruit
of all his sufferings and death.

5. We wrong God by our Unbelief, we obscure his glory, we limit his power, we
contemn his wisdom, we give a lie to his truth, we abuse his love, we slight
and reject all the Precious thoughts of his mercy and grace, we proclaim the
Devil a Conqueror, and lift him up above Christ himself; Iu^as did sin more by
Unbelief and despairing, than by his betraying of Christ, as might be gathered
from Scripture.

6. We hasten damnation to our selves, John 3. 18, 36* Were we in Adams created
innocence, then we need not to look after a Savior, but we are all fallen, but
we are broken, but we are sold under sin, but we are transgressors from the
womb, but we are by nature the children of disobedience and wrath. What shall
I say more? Unbelief is the greatest sin in the world, because it is a sin
against the greatest love, John 3. 16. compared with Romans 5. 8. it is a sin
against the only remedy; the sentence of the Law may be repealed by the Gospel,
but the sin against Gospel remedy, there is no repeal of; it is a sin that
makes void and vain all the covenant of grace, turning all the sweetness
thereof into bitterness, and all the truth of it into a lie, 1 John 5. 10.
Therefore God is more severe against Unbelief than any sin, because Unbelief
is most severeto God, God has no greater Enemi^s in the world than Unbelievers.

7. Let us consider, that a man without Faith is like a naked man in a storm,
or like an una^med man in a Battle, like a ship unanchored, and unballanced in
a storm, he is like a Sea without Banks, a world without a Sun, or a ship
without a Pilot, he is under the command of all his passions and enemies, etc.

Qu. In what way are we to conceive of God when we pray to him?

Answ. We are not to conceive of him under any shape or resemblance, Deuteronomy. 4.
12, 15. we are not to think that the Godhead can be resembled to any thing,
Acts 17. 27, 29. compared together; for unless we should equal God to any
thing, how can he be likened to it? Isay 40. 18. 25.

Who can by searching find out the Almighty to perfection, Job 11. 7, 8, 12. We
are to conceive of him, as one not to be fully conceived by us, and so pray to
him* with such apprehensions of him; yet we are to believe that he is, and that
he is a rewa^der of those that seek him, Heb. 11. 6. namely, that he to whom we
pray, is such a God, which sees and knows all the secrets of our hearts, and
all our thoughts, that he is present with us wherever we are, and
comprehends us, though we cannot comprehend him, he is most holy, most wise,
most mighty, who is ready to do for us above what we are able to ask or think,
Ephe. 3 18, 19, 20. This is to conceive of him in the glorious and precious
dimensions of his love, so shall we comprehend with all Saints the height and
breadth, length and depth, and know the love of Christ, which passes
knowledge: in this sense may we see him that is invisible, Heb. 11. 27. For the
true God is invisible, as appears by these Scriptures, Coll. 1. 15. 1 Timothy 1.
17. and Tim. 6 16. The divine essence is not visible to bodily eyes in this
life, the essence simply considered cannot be seen by the Soul in this Life,
Exodus 33. 20. In the life to come though it be seen apprehensively so far as
the spirits of just men made perfect are capable, yet not comprehensively and
fully, Job 1. 1. 7* 8, 9, 10.

Q. How or in what order are we to direct our prayers to the Trinity in Unity,
and Unity in Trinity, namely, to Father, Son, and Holy Ghost?

A. In our Prayers we ought not to fix our ey^ or minds so upon one in the
Trinity, as not thereby to be led to the other, the Father being in the Son,
and the Son in the Father, and the holy Ghost in them both, John 14. 10. we
cannot look at one* but we must eye the other; they that look on Christ as
their Mediator, must see and eye the Father, as giving of him so to be; yea and
at the holy Ghost, as one with the Father, sent and consented to his designment
to that office, as the Lord Christ himself says, Isay 48. 16. and now the
Lord God and his spirit has sent me, etc. we cannot look aright to the Father,
but we must look to him through the Son, neither can we look upon the Son but
by the Spirit. It is true, that in order we are first to direct our Prayers to
God the Father, yet not as first or chief in honor above the other two; for
even the Son, who albeit as man and as Mediator he be inferior to the Father,
John 14. 28. yet as God, as the Son of God, he is equal with him, John 5. 18.
Phill. 2. 6. and the Son is to be honored as equal with the same honor as the
father, John 5 23. Albeit, as was said, the holy Ghost be not excluded but
included; so are we to pray unto God, through Christ, by the help of the holy
Ghost, John 16. 23. we are to ask the Father in the name of the Son, by the
help and assistance of the holy Ghost, Romans 8. 26. Again, we are baptized in
the name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, and therefore we are to pray unto
and worship Father, Son, and holy Ghost: we are to believe in the Father, Son,
and holy Ghost; and therefore we are to pray to the Father, Son and holy Ghost;
so that in all external worship of God, one in the Trinity being named, the
other are understood, and are not to be excluded.

Q. How can there be three, and yet but one God?

Answ. God is one in essence, one Jehovah, one God, and no more, and therefore
God calls himself, I am, Exodus 3. 14. all besides himself are but created
results of God, bits of dependances upon him; all Nations are before him as a
drop of a Bucket, as the small dust of the Balance, as a very little thing, as
nothing, as less than nothing, as vanity, Isay 40. 15 17. This one God in
essence, says Mr. Thomas Cobbert in his Treatise of Prayer, page 542 (to which
I assent, viz.) is in personal properties three, subsistences really distinct,
yet we are not so to let our thoughts feed themselves in musing upon the
blessed persons, as distinct in personal properties, but with an apprehension
of the^ as one in essence, one Jehovah, one God and no more; the property of
begetting is applied to God the Father, and not to the Son, or the holy Ghost:
he to whom the Scripture gives the property of the only begotten Son of God,
he is Jehovah, God the Son, and no other: and so he to whom the Scripture
applies the property of proceeding, he and only he is God the holy Ghost, the
Scripture applying to none other that property of proceeding, or being as it
were breathed forth from the Father, and therefore is called his Spirit, Nu^. 8.
11. and from the Son; and therefore is called the Sons Spirit, Gal. 49. yet the
holy Scriptures never mention but one Jehovah, even when it mentions him in
personal distinction three, yet essentially but one, 1 John 5. 7. There be
three that bear record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the holy Ghost, and
these three are one; the Dvine essence subsisting in three relative properties,
Father, Son, and holy Ghost.

The personal property of the Father is to beget, Ps. 2. 7. The personal
property of the Son is to be begotten, John 1. 14, 18. The personal property of
the holy Ghost is to proceed from the Father and the Son, John 14. 26. and 15.
26.

What shall Isay more? As God for the helping of us to understand his essence,
is pleased to take unto himself certain names and attributes, by the help of
which we may the better understand his essence, so also is he pleased to take
unto himself certain names and appellations to help us to the better
understanding of his subsistence, etc. yet there is but only ( one) living and
true God, who is infinite in being and perfection* a most pure Spirit,
invisibly without body, parts or passions, immutable, eternal,
incomprehensible, working all things according to the counsel of his own will,
he is the alone Fountain of all beings, of whom, through whom, and to whom are
all things, in his sight all things are made manifest, his knowledge is
infinite, infallible, and independent, he is most holy in all his Counsels, in
all his Works, in all his Commands, etc. But if any demand farther, How can
there be three, and yet but one God? I answer, great is the mystery, the Son in
the Father, and the Father in the Son, and the Spirit of truth, which is by the
Father and the Son, John 14. 11. John 15. 26. and 14. 26.

So that in this mystery a Christian is to believe, what reason cannot
comprehend; the Father sent forth his Son, the Son sent forth the holy Ghost,
yet Father, Son, and holy Ghost, was never separated one from another; Take a
candle burning and there is substance, light and heat, and yet not three
candles, but one candle; Look upon the good man of a House, and you shall find
that he is a Husband to his Wife, a Father to his Children, a Master to his
Servants, and yet not three men, but one man; so in the unity of the God* head,
there be three of one substance, power, and eternity, God the Father, God the
Son, and God the holy Ghost; the Father is of none, neither begotten nor
proceeding, the Son is eternally begotten of the Father, the holy Ghost
eternally proceeding from the Father and the Son, etc.

FINIS.

