AN ABSTRACT OF Certain Depositions, By virtue of His Majesty's Commission,
taken upon Oath, Concerning the Traitorous intention of the Rebels in Ireland,
in rejecting the Government of His Majesty, in having a King of their own: And
who that King should be.

With an Extract of a Letter from Rome, 4. Jan. 1641.

Published by His Majesty's Command.

Tudor rose Scottish thistle French fleur-de-lis depiction of Irish harp

LONDON: Printed by ROBERT BARKER, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty: And by the Assigns of JOHN BILL. 1642.

C R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
An Abstract of the Depositions by virtue of His Majesty's Commission, taken
upon Oath, concerning the traitorous intention of the Rebels, in rejecting the
Government of His Majesty, in having a King of their own: And who this King
should be.
GEorge Cook of Lissignie, Cavan 71. Jan. 22. 1641.
inter coetera, deposes, that one Tirlagh O Gown, alias Smith, a Popish
Priest, said, That the Papists would have their Churches, Lands, and Kingdom to
themselves from the English, and be no more slaves to the English, as they had
been, or else they would lose their lives.

Richard Colley, of the Parish of Kinnallie, Fermanagh 90. Febr. 2. 1641.
inter coet. deposes, that Bryan O Cormacke of Dristernan, and other Rebels
said, They would never submit to any English man.

Thomas Magill, Clerk, inter coet. deposes, Lowth 4. Febr. 21. 1641.
that Collogh, Mac Brian, Mac Mahowne, and several other Rebels, said, That
they would not be subject to any Parliaments in England, and that they would
have none to Govern over them, but a born Irish man.

Matthew Brown of Clonisse, Monaghan 36. March 24 1641.
Gent. inter coet. deposes, that he heard Peter Bath say, That they looked to
have the King to put out the words Defender of the faith; for none was supreme
of the Church, and Defender of the Faith, but the Pope.

Richard Whitton of Kilvane, Wickloe 8 Jan. 11. 1641.
inter coet. deposes, that Luke Birne of Kilvane said, He would have their
Religion flourish, no thanks to the King.

Edward Deaselye, Wickloe 39. Feb. 5. 1641.
inter coet. deposes, That Luke Tool and Luke Birne offered a Pass to this
Examinant, which they said, would be better then the Kings Pass.

Thomas Tailor of Kilmore, Cavan. 47. Jan. 12. 1641.
inter coet. deposes, that he heard Mulmore O Kely say, That if the said
Deponent would deny the King, he should speed as they did.

William Wright of Culmonyn, Queens 31. April 12. 1642.
inter coet. deposes, that John Good of Clonaysawne, and Dermot Mac Phelmi
said, That they hoped to have all Protestants hanged within one fortnight, and
he that did protect them too.

Richard Knowles of Newtowne, Fermanagh 60. 10 Ian. 1641.
inter coet. deposes, that Rory Magwite, Richard Nugent, Donogh Magwire, by
whose means he was robbed, some of the said Robbers said, That they had a King
of their own in Ireland.

Nicholas Michaell of Farnam, Cavan, 57. Ian 15.
inter coet. deposes, that he heard the parties that robbed him say, They had
an Irish King amongst them, and they regarded not King Charles, the King of
England.

Robert Barton of Newtowne, inter coet. Fermanagh 41. Jan. 5.
deposes, that some of the Rebels said, They had a new King, and had
Commission from him for what they did.

Thomas Middlebrooke, inter coet. Fermanagh 18. 4. Jan.
deposes, that about the 26. of October last past, he heard one Cahell Boy Mac
Demot of Killrout say, That within one fortnight they should have a new King of
Ireland crowned, one of the O Neales, or words to that effect.

Avis Brashaw, inter coet. deposes, Fermanagh 19.4. Jan.
That she heard the abovesaid Cahall Boy say the same, or words to that effect.

Alice Tibbs, inter coet. deposes, Fermanagh 20. 4. Jan.
That she heard the abovesaid Cahall Boy say the same, or words to that effect.

Alice Champin, the relict of Arthur Champin, Fermanagh 27. 14. April
inter coet. deposes, that she heard the Rebellious Irish say, That Sir
Phellomy Roe of Neale should be King of Ireland, and that they would give a
great sum of Money, on condition they had our gracious King Charles his head.

Elizabeth Gough, inter coet. deposes, Cavan. 85. 8. Febr.
That Cahir O Kelay, and Thomas Mac-Encorr said, They purposed to have a King
of their own, and that Sir Phelmi O Neale should be he.

John Gregg of Clovenedan, inter coet. Ardmagh 3. 7. Jan. 1641.
deposes, that Captain Shane O Neale, styled, Sir Phelmi O Neale His Majesty.

Martha Culme, inter coet. deposes, Monaghan 21. 14. Febr.
that one Art. Mac Patrick, Mac Tool Boy, Mac Mahowne, speaking to her in
Irish, she desired him to deliver himself in English, for she understood not
Irish: Who answered her in English, That such as spoke in English, should pay
ten shillings to the King: And the Deponent demanding of him, What King. He
answered, What King but the Earl of Tyrone.

Hugh Culme, inter coet. Monaghan. 16.25. Jan.
deposes, that he was credibly told that Art. Mac Mahowne said, That they that
spoke English should pay ten shillings to the King: The party to whom it was
spoken, desiring to know what King. His answer was, What King but the Earl of
Tyrone.

Anne Gill, Fermanagh. 69.29. Jan.
inter coet. deposes, that Rory Magwire in the presence of this Deponent, and
a great many of her Neighbors, gave forth, That it was to no purpose for them
to flee to Dublin for succor, for Dublin was taken by the Lord Magwire, who
was to be King of Ireland.

Roger Puttock, John Stern, Jo. Watson, Will. Aldrich, Henry Brereton, William
Hitchcock, Randall Adams.


An Extract of a Letter written 4. January. 1641. From Isidores College in
Rome, by Bonaventure O Connye, to Feylmi Roe O Neill in Ireland.
THe holy Father and his two Nephews, Cardinal Anthony Barbarinus Protector
of Ireland, and Cardinal Francis Barbarinus, who has all the power here in
such matters as concern the Pope, have heard of the War and Confederation which
you make for your Religion and Liberty: And truly I cannot express the
greatness of the Joy (no wonder) which they conceive thence, in such manner,
that if they had received Letters, or if you had sent an Agent unto them to
express your Will or Designs, you should want no help for your better
proceedings. Wherefore I would have you to send some able man, with a
Declaration of your Grievances in form of Law.

Be sure to have a great heart, and make some chief head among you, but reserve
the Crown for Con his side the Neills. Remember the old slaverie wherein you
have lived of long time, and the destruction which will generally come upon
you, except you get the upper hand: You will prevail, if you join together as
you ought, God send it. I would advize every chief Officer among you to have a
Secretary along with him to write a Diurnall of your passages, and overthrows,
which your Enemies receive; which will redound much to your Glory. Spoil not
the country for fear of Famine. I will not fail to write according as I shall
hear from you. We would send unto you a Bull, after the form of the Bull which
Hugh Mac-Baron got, if we had received your Letters. If the Church do well they
will turn over the Election of Prelates there to the Nobility, and will give
them Authority in that point.

FINIS.

