THE FIRST SPEECH OF Master Pym, The last Parliament.

Concerning Liberty of Parliament. Generals concerning Religion. Generals
concerning Civil government.


IN DOMINO CONFIDO printer's deivce

June ye 5th 1643 London Printed, 1643.

A SPEECH DELIVERED IN Parliament by M. Pym, in the House of COMMONS, April,
1640.
HE that takes away weights from the motions, does as good service as he that
adds wings unto it. These weights are old grievances, whereof there are three
heads.

1. First, liberty of Parliament. 2. Generals concerning Religion. 3. Generals
concerning civil government.
I shall prove that these grievances are more grievous to the King, then they
are to the Subject.

I shall propose some ways of remedy, just and easy.

That Kings can do no wrong, is their just prerogative; The distemper of the
world is not caused by the celestial bodies, but by the inferior: In like
manner of a Kingdom.

General grievances concerning Religion, which we possess by the Laws of
God, and of the Land.

Encouragements given to the Popish Religion, I desire no new Laws to be made
against them, not a rigid execution of those that are already enacted.

But this we are sure of, that if they once get the superiority, their Religion
is destructive of all others.

We must look upon a Papist as he is in himself, but not as he is in the
Church.

The Planets have a quiet motion of their own, but they are interrupted by
another.

The particular encouragements.
First, Cessation of all Law, that were not made to raise a Revenue to the
King, but to suppress Idolatry, and to restrain Errors.

A free communication of Councels through the Kingdom.

Papists, being admitted to places of trust, and power in the Commonwealth.

There is a Congregation at Rome, who plot how England may be reduced, and here
in England we have a Nuncio, to put in execution what they resolve of there.

Innovations to prepare us to Popery.
1. FIrst, diverse Books printed, Questions published and maintained in the
Universitie. 2. Secondly, Popish Ceremonies introduced: when the dry bones
were to be made a man, they were joined first in the sinews, and then they
were to be animated. 3. Thirdly, Discouragements upon the professors of
Protestant Religion, things of indifferency urged, to make the difference wider
amongst as many questions, where there is no ground in Law, upon the Bishops
authority, not upon the Kings authority, under the great Seal or Proclamation.
4. Fourthly, Encouragements of authority to Ecclesiastical Courts. 1. First,
To fine and imprison in some cases illegally. 2. Secondly, To affirm their
jurisdiction to be derived from the Crown, and say it is Iure divino, and
therefore we are bound to maintain the prerogative of the Crown. 3. Thirdly,
Many ordinances set out, new Articles to examine Churchwardens.

In the Common Law there is a title of extravagants, and so are these.

4. Fourthly, Generals against civil Government. 1. First, taking of tunnage
and poundage, and all other impositions. 2. Secondly, Knighthood. 3. Thirdly,
inundation of Monopolies, and commodities not only exported, but consumed at
home, as Soap, Drink, Salt, and that which is very comprehensive, the
Shipmoney. 4. Fourthly, There is a countenance of judgment for it against all
other judgments, and book Cases. 5. Fifthly, That which somewhat sticks by
me, that is, the Forest, and I might easily look my self in it. 6. Sixthly,
The sale and farming of Nusances, being compounded for the assesse to be
Nusances, and are licensed, as buildings, depopulations, etc. 7. Seventhly,
military charges, and compositions raised upon the Subject without ground of
Law, conduct-monies, pressing Cart-horses, etc. 8. Eighthly, Extrajudiciall
proceedings, a teeming grievance, the Judges will presume to anticipate their
judgments. 9. Ninthly, the authorities of Courts of Justice have countenanced
these Monopolies, as the Star Chamber has done against the Sheriffs, for not
collecting Ship Money. 10. Tenthly, The Lords of the privy Council have
assisted them. 11. Eleventhly, the prerogative has been vouched for the
maintenance of them. 12. Twelvethly, The Conscience has been pressed in this
point, betwixt the prerogative, and liberty broken.




Manwarring for his offense in this kind, was as near the ground as ever I
saw any, and I did not think he should have leapt into a Bishops Chair.

Intermissions of Parliament, the King summons them, but we humbly desire the
benefit of the Law in that point.
AS these grievances are to the Subject prejudicial, so are they to the King
much more.

1. First, this not liberty of the Parliament cuts off the sweet communion
that ought to be betwixt the head and the members.

2. Secondly, it deprives the King of the present supply, and benefit the King
has by Subsidy.

3. Thirdly, it lesseneth his reputation abroad.

4. Fourthly, by the breaches in, and upon Religion he has lost a great part
of his Alliance with Protestant States abroad, lost a great many Subsidies at
home, because of the pressing of indifferent things.

5. Fifthly, who will be industrious where he has no propriety?

6. Sixthly, It breeds many jealousies, we can remember when it has bred
distemper^ and one Summers distemper will consume more wealth then ever this
Monopoly brought in.

7. Seaventhly, The Princes that have maintained their Subjects liberty, have
been most glorious therein.

What he omitted in each due place, is here inserted.
THat not only composition was laid on goods imported and exported out of this
Kingdom, but also on goods that were carried from one foreign Country to
another, as from Spain to France, and vice versa.

Another way is that for want of a legal way of accounting a great deal of
the profit sticks by the way, and comes not to the Kings purse.

The King has farmed the Wines for thirty thousand pounds, the Farmors make
forty thousand pounds, at the sale by retaile, it amounts to two hundred thirty
and two thousand pounds.

Remedies.
First, present it to the higher house, they joining to go to the King, as in
the land of Egypt whilst the darkness was amongst them the Sun did give
light, and the people had their visionable faculty, which was only hindered by
the interposition of the darkness.

FINIS.

