A True and Full RELATION OF The Prosecution, Arraignment, Trial, and
Condemnation of NATHANIEL FIENNES, late Colonel and Governor of the City and
Castle of BRISTOLL, Before a Council of War held at Saint Albans during Nine
days space, in December, 1643.

Touching his Cowardly and Traytorly Surrendering of this City and Castle, with
all the Canon, Ammunition, Arms, Magazines, Prisoners and Colors therein to
the Enemy, in less then Three whole days Siege, before any Outwork taken, or
the least Battery or Assault against the City or Castle walls; To the ineffable
loss, danger and prejudice of the whole Kingdom.

Set forth at the earnest desire of many persons of Quality, to vindicate the
verity of this much disguised Action, Prosecution, Trial, Sentence, and some
subsequent Proceedings; together with the Honor, the Justice of the Council
of War, and Prosecutors Reputations, against all those false Glosses,
Calumnies, Aspertions, injuriously cast upon them by Col: Fiennes, or his
Partisans in sundry printed Pamphlets, seconded with public false Reports.

And to perpetuate a signal Judgment against Cowardice and Treachery to
Posterity, not fit to be buried in oblivion; For the benefit of the present and
future Ages.

By WILLIAM PRYNNE and CLEMENT WALKER, Esqs;

PROVE. 18. 13, 14. He that answers a matter before he hears it, it is folly
and shame unto him. He that is first in his own cause, seems just, but his
neighbor comes and searches him.

London, Printed for Michael Sparks senior, at the sign of the Blew Bible in
Green-arbour. 1644.

To the Right Honorable, John Lord Roberts, Baron of Truro, President; Francis
Lord Willoughby of Parham, Sir William Balfore, and Sir Philip Stapleton,
Knights; Colonel Sheffield, Col. Martin, Col. Ayscough, Col. Coningham, Col.
Thompson, Col. Hoburn, Col. Carlton, and Mr. English Adjutant General:
Colleagues and Judges in the late Council of War at St. Albans, at the Trial
and Condemnation of Col. Nath. Fiennes.
Right Honorable, Right Worshipful, and Worshipful:
WE here humbly present you with a True, though late Relation, and Vindication
of your impartial Justice, in the Trial of Nathaniel Fiennes, the Unfortunate
Governor of Bristoll, which has been overlong traduced, misreported, by the
licentious Pens, the slanderous Tongues of him and his, which will not yet
learn silence.

It was his own vainglorious humor that first inevitably engaged us, by
public Proclamations to be his Prosecutors, and now inforceth us to become the
Registers of his deserved Doom. Had his Tongue or quill been discreetly silent,
and not misreported his ignoble surrender of Bristoll to the world, the
memorial of it had been dead ere this, at least our Lips, our Pens would have
continued mute. And had he not returned to his former folly, in justifying
himself again in Print, after your Honorable just sentence denounced against
him (to the insufferable derogation of your most upright Justice) this History
of his Trial and Condemnation, (truly collected out of our broken Notes and
Memories, without any Sophistication of Additions) had never seen the light:
But his pertinacious insolency, first in appealing privately from, and since in
Writing openly against the Justice of your sentence, against the Ordinances of
War themselves, as summum jus, yea summa Injuria, in his late Check to the
Checker, to palliate or extenuate his own Cowardice and Treason, for which he
was condemned to lose his head, has now obliged us (in point of honor, of
duty, both to your Honors, the Parliament, Kingdom, Justice, and our selves)
to publish the real verity of all the proceedings in this public case, under
your Noble Patronage: to whom as we both resorted for Justice in the Trial of
the Cause; so we now appeal for the Truth of the ensuing Debates, Relation,
Testimonies, as to the most equal Judges, who took Notes of all the Passages,
Arguments, Depositions on either side, the true publication whereof will
scatter all the mists of Prejudices, Mistakes, Misreports, wherewith they have
been hitherto clouded.

Our desire is, that your eminent Justice may shine as bright in this Relation
of it, throughout the Realm, as it did in the Councell-Chamber at Saint Albans,
in the pronounced Sentence: from whence the desperate Malefactor (who has lost
his brain, or modesty at least in stead of his head) I know not by what
prodigious Chemistry endeavors to (*) abstract Arguments of his Innocence, In
his Check to the Checker.
Integrity Valor, against all sense and reason. If he will not henceforth
learn better manners, and submit himself to your public Justice, with humble
acknowledgement, and Recantation of his former Calumnies, we presume you will
be so sensible of your wounded Honors and Integrities, as to make this stout
affronter of Justice, and Cowardly Opposer of the common Enemy, a President to
posterity in point of exemplary Execution, as well as of bare Conviction; since
others of better extraction and desert then he, See here p. 118
(as Van * Hemert, with two of his Captains by name) have lost their heads, for
surrendering places of less consequence and strength then Bristoll, after a
longer, sharper siege by far then it sustained.

Thus submitting both our Canse and this unpolished Relation to your Honorable,
impartial Censures, We humbly rest

Your Honors, Worships, and the Republikes W: Prynne.

To the Courteous Reader.
IT is the just hand of God many times so far to dementate the very wisest
Politicians, as to make themselves the principal Contrivers of their own
Infamy and Ruin: Quos vult perdere, hos dementat Jupiter.

A visible Demonstration of this verity, thou may here behold in Nathaniel
Fiennes, the late unhappy Governor of Bristoll: who not content to have
surrendered this Noble City and Castle to the Enemy, to the ineffable danger,
damage, prejudice of the whole Realm (almost wholly lost and ruined thereby)
which grand capital crime, might probably have been passed over in silence,
had he not audaciously justified it in a high degree, both by an over-confident
speech in the House of Commons, and a more bold Relation, Letter, and Answer to
Master Walkers Reply to his Relation, in Print: the unadvised publication
whereof, drew on his Prosecutors (as sparingly as might be) to clear the truth
of that ignoble action. At which this man of Arms (who might have slept in a
whole skin) trusting more to the might of his friends, then to the right of his
Cause, was so highly displeased, that nothing would satisfy him, but either an
open Recantation of the truth by his Antagonists; or, a public judicial
proceeding and censure against them before a Council of War, to repair him
in his decayed honor.

But his Antagonists having too good a cause to recant, and too magnanimous
spirits to cry peccavi, where they had done no injury to the offended party,
and naught but right to verity and their abused country; this man at Arms
(notwithstanding many advises to the contrary) would needs engage them (against
their wills) to become his prosecutors before a Council of War; whereby
instead of repairing his reputation, and gaining an expected triumph over his
Opposites, he lost both his Honor and Head to boot, by a judicial sentence,
which he had formerly forfeited, only by a popular Vote. * O the depth of the
riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God, how unsearchable are his
Judgments, and his ways past finding out. Yet this succeslesse, shameless,
obdurate Delinquent persevering in his former obstinacy, has in his late
Check to the Checker, ever since his censure and pretended pardon, judged his
Judges, sentenced his very sentence, yea, * the Laws of War, established by
his Excellency, by which he was condemned, stiling them summum jus, and so by
consequence, extreme injustice; Pharisaically proclaimed himself, A just,
innocent person, a valarous Gentleman enabled with excellent gifts and
endowments, etc. Branded his Prosecutors for blood-hunters, men void of
charity, though they have suffered Pillowrings; Lawyers bribed by Aulicus to
write against Britannicus; the sad fatal instruments of Malignants, willingly
or ignorantly put on by some Malignant or Jesuitical spirit to foment
divisions, etc. Justified his Innocence, Integrity, Valor, even out of his
very sentence of condemnation, Proclaiming most scandalously to the world, *
That he was condemned only for not burning the second city in the Kingdom to
the ground; and for not doing evil that good might come of it, a diviner Law
having a greater influence on his soul at that time, then the Law of war. (An
unparalleld affront against Laws and public justice, which patience it self
cannot endure) and withal draws Argumentative princiciples both of his
Innocence and Valor out of his Pardon, which himself (in all likelihood)
thrust first into it, the Pardon savouring of his own expressions.

These extravagant proceedings of this impudent, incorrigible, desperate
Delinquent, have necessitated the compiling and publishing of the ensuing
Relation, to vindicate Truth, and public Justice, with the Prosecutors and
Judges of this capital Malefactor, from those false calumnies and aspersions
he has hitherto cast upon them; which if it actually bring his condemned head
to the block; after so long a reprieve, and perpetuate his Infamy, Treason,
judgment, slanders to posterity, he must only blame himself, not us. The loss
of Bristoll being such a fatal blow to England; and the Protestant party in
Ireland, that the present and all after ages shall for ever execrate his
memory, and his obstinate justifying this ignoble actio^ after a capital
judgment for it, such a Monster, as will make a nullity of all pretended or
real Pardons which might ward off his execution. The God of mercy will not be
merciful to any impenitent Transgressors, but will * wound the hairy scalpe of
such who persevere in their trespasses. It can therefore be no cruelty but
justice for men to deny mercy, where God himself will show none, and to take
the head of an obstinate condemned Traitor, who will neither acknowledge, nor
lament, but still defend his Treason.

Have therefore a charitable opinion of his Prosecutors (kind Reader) till
thou have perused this Relation, with the Testimonies brought against him at
the Trial; and if the Parliament, Kingdom, and thine own conscience, after
due consideration thereof, shall pronounce him worthy the indulgence hitherto
granted him, we shall not repine at his good fortune, in scaping better then
any other Delinquent, for doing more mischief to the State, then all others
put together; But if they all pronounce him guilty, and his judgment just,
though for the present we may say of him as Tully once did of that grand
Traitor Cateline; Abiit, excessit, evasit, erupit; Damnatus inani judicio;
having lost nothing but his honor, in which part he is all dead flesh; yet it
can be no uncharitablenes in us, When so many jointly Petition both Houses for
undelayed Justice against grand Delinquents.
now (*) to call for speedy execution after so long delays, which have not
bettered, but depraved this capital Offender. Who having been a spectator of
the late siege of York, which held out many months against two puissant armies,
and near a fortnight after P. Ruperts, with most of their Garrisons total
rout; till they had but five barrells of powder left, and yet then departed by
composition, with all their Arms, their Colors flying, Matches lighted,
Powder in their Bandileers, Bullets in their mouths, bag and baggage in their
Carriages, like Soldiers, and upon a thousand times more honorable terms
then he quitted Bristoll, in less then 3. days siege, before any Out-fort
taken, (wherein he left all his Canon, Arms, Ammunition, Colors, Magazines to
the enemy;) will now, we presume, pronounce his surrender of it most
dishonorable, Cowardly, Traitorous, and his Judgment just; at least all others
will repute, and Glocesters former, Limes late most heroic defenses against
their long furious sieges, will proclaim, resolve them such, and him unworthy
any favor. Vale.

A True and full RELATION OF THE Prosecution, Araignment, Trial, and
Condemnation, OF NATHANIEL FIENNES, Late Colonel and Governor of the City and
Castle of BRISTOLL: Before a Counsel of War held at Saint Albanes, during
nine days space in December last, touching his Cowardly, Unworthy, and
Traitorly surrendering of the said City and Castle to the Enemy, before he was
necessitated thereto; not one of the out-Forts thereof being so much as taken,
nor the City or Castle walls once battered or assaulted by the Enemies, who
besieged it not full three whole days.
NATHANIEL FIENNES having unexpectedly, if not ambitiously procured the
Government, and most cowardly, unworthily quitted the possession of the famous
City and Castle of Bristoll, (the chiese Magazine and Bulwark in the western
parts) by surrendering them beyond all expectation to the enemy, when no ways
necessitated thereunto, was yet of that transcendent boldness as to justify
this his Ignoble Act; First by a solemn premeditated Speech in the House of
Commons, after that by a printed Relation, and a Letter to his Excellency; and
the better to evade a Parliamentary Trial for that fatal Blow he had given to
the whole Kingdom, in the yielding up of Bristoll (which sadded the hearts of
all, exasperated the spirits of some well-affected to the Parliament and
Republique;) he cunningly desired in the close of his Speech and Relation, Page
13.
that the truth of his Narration might be examined in a Counsel of War, and
he either cleared or condemned thereby: To which purpose he obtained an Order
of the said House, when as yet he had no other Accuser but his own conscience,
which (if we believe the Proverb) is a thousand witness: This his unexpected
audaciousnesse to justify an action so universally condemned by the suffrages
of all sorts of men, provoked Mr. Prynne (after some diligent inquiry into the
truth of this disguised business) in his book entitled, Romes Masterpiece,
(printed by Authority of a Committee of Parliament) page 35. to style that
action (formerly censured in sundry printed Mercuries both at London and
Oxford) The most cowardly and unworthy surrender of Bristoll, a fit inlet for
the Malignant Welsh Papists, and Irish Rebels (lately landed there in great
multitudes) to cut all our throats: and withal obliged Mr. Walker in point of
duty, as a Deputy Lieutenant and Committee of Parliament in those parts, to
publish in print, An Answer in confutation of the said Relation, thereby to
vindicate the Truth, and let the Parliament see, they had not employed such a
man as would palliardise Lies, and become a pander unto Falsehood.

Now had Fiennes beyond his expectation gotten two adversaries whom he must
needs seemingly call into the List, lest (before the Counsel of War) he
might be thought to fight only with his own shadow: presuming therefore more
upon the strength of his friends then goodness of his Cause, he resolved to
make these two Gentlemen the subject of his Triumph; he had lost one victory
for his Country, but would gain another for himself, and lead Truth captive;
she should have been the Trophy to his Victory as well as Bristoll was to the
Cavalliers, and he should still be reputed a Man of Honor: The better to
compass this Conquest, the business was projected by him in manner following.

Mr. Prynne must be privately dealt withal by Mr. Sprigge, the Lord Says
Solicitor, to retract his former Passage, as scandalous and dishonorable to
Colonel Fiennes, and his Noble Family, though neither of them are named or
personated in in it; which he refused to do, By Mr. Sprig Mr. Beck, and others.
advising Col. Fiennes, as his friend, to rest quiet, for fear he lost his
head, and subjected himself to a legal as well as a popular censure; assuring
him, that if the business came to a public examination, if he understood any
Law or Martial Discipline, it could not but prove capital to him.

Mr. Prynne continuing thus inflexible, protesting he would never betray the
truth, his Country, or the Honor of the Parliament, which had licensed his
Masterpiece, to palliate an unworthy action in any his dearest friends; and
Mr. Walker being too stout to recant those Truths he had published in his
Reply; there was now no other remedy left this man of Arms to preserve his
Head and Honor (now at stake) but these ensuing policies.

First, he endeavors all he could to take off, and disingage the Parliament
from any avowed public prosecution and examination of this unworthy
surrender; to keep his Person exempted from all restraints, to continue
himself a Member of the House, and have free recourse thereto without the
least suspention, the better to buoy up his sunck Reputation, and deter his
Prosecutors from articling, all Witnesses from appearing against him, remaining
still a Member; which appears by his subsequent exceptions to our Impeachment
presented to the House, as an high breach of Privilege, equal to that of the
five Members.

Nex, since Mr. Prynne and Mr. Walker had lost the best part of their Estates
in the loss of Bristol, it was contrived that the business should be made as
troublesome, as chargeable in the prosecution to them and their witnesses as
could be, notwithstanding they were engaged not out of any private interest,
but only for the public; that so the trouble and expense of the very Trial
might forestall it: And therefore, upon the humble Petition of Nathaniell
Fiennes, and his Officers, to his Excellency, Mr. Prynne and Mr. Walker by the
ensuing public Proclamation (posted up both at Westminster and the Exchange)
were commanded to appear before a Council of War to be held in the The head
quarter was then at Windsor, but his Excellency with most of his officers,
forces in London.
Army (a place indefinite) upon the 19. of October 1643. there to justify what
they had published or could allege against the said Colonel Fiemes, or any
of his Officers, concerning the surrender of Bristoll.

WHereas upon the humble Petition of Colonel Nathaniell Fiennes, late
Governor of Bristoll, and diverse of his Officers, I have appointed the
nineteenth of this instant month of October being Thursday, to receive an
account concerning the surrender of the City of Bristoll at a Counsel of War
to be held in the Army: and whereas Mr. Clement Walker, and Mr. William Prynne
have published several things in print tending to the dishonor of the said
Colonel Nathaniell Fienne; late Governor of Bristoll, touching the surrender
of that place; they the said Clement Walker, and William Prynne, and all others
who can show any thing wherein the said Col. Nathaniell Fiennes then Governor
of Bristoll, or any of his Officers, have done any thing in that action
contrary to the rules of war, and honor of soldiers, are required to
appear at the said Counsel of war to give in their informations.

ESSEX.

Before this Proclamation was first pasted up at Westminster, Master Walker by
practice and procurement of the Colonel (as he had cause to suspect; and the
sequel evidenced) for some misconstruction made of a clause in his Answer to
Col. Fiennes Relation, was questioned in the House of Peers, where this
original complaint was so soon waved by falling upon some collateral words
(supposed to be spoken to Master Baker the Messenger, but denied by Mr. Walker)
for which Master Walker was suddenly fined and sent prisoner to the Tower; as
many conceived the first quarrel was not so much Causa data, as quaesita, of
purpose to disable his prosecution of the cause. Whereupon Colonel Fiennes
having gained this advantage, to show his valor in trampling upon an
imprisoned Antagonist stripped both off his liberty and estate (as his brother
John did his, in cutting off Major Woods finger when two men held him fast)
sets forth a Reply to Mr. Walkers Answer of his Relation, so fraught with lies,
a base lie, and such like uneivill ignoble language in the Margin, (where all
the lies were concentred) as better became an Oyster-woman at Billinsgate, then
a Soldier or man of Honor, and lost him exceedingly in all wise men's
opinions: Not contented herewith, he likewise caused a scandalous Paper to be
printed and dispersed about the streets, entitled: The true causes of the
commitment of Master Clement Walker to the Tower; and then posting up the
forementioned Proclamation at Westminster Hall gate and the Exchange, some two
or three days after, to wit, on the 13. of October about night he sent his
footboy to the Tower to M. Walker, with a Copy of it (without any seal, or
subscription of his Excellencies name, or other Summons) enclosed in this Note.

SIR,
I Have sent you a Copy of my Lord Generals Proclamation concerning the
Counsel of War that is to be held on Thursday next concerning Bristoll, I
understand you are in restraint by Order of the Lords House, not for your book
which you writ in answer to my Relation, for that is referred by the House of
Commons to a Counsel of War, (where I expect you should be to justify what
you have therein published to my dishonor;) but for words spoken by you
against a Peer, against the whole House of Peers; yet so soon as the Lords
House sits, I will procure the House to be moved, that you may have your
liberty in such a manner as that you may be at the Counsel of War, and make
good there what you have published against me, if you can.

Nathaniel Fiennes.


By this Writing it evidently appeared, that Master Walkers commitment, was a
mere plot of Col. Fiennes to suppress or surprise a trial, and make this
prosecutor cry peccavi, else he durst not so confidently undertake the
procurement of his liberty in this manner.

Master Walker upon this Summons Petitioned the Lords for his enlargement day
after day, to prosecute this business at the Counsel of War, and had
several express Orders for his release upon security, so as he should render
himself prisoner again so soon as the trial was ended: Yet notwithstanding
the business was so carried, that diverse weeks elapsed before he could obtain
his liberty upon bail (the Lords Orders being not only quarrelled, but
contemned by those who were to bail him) although he had by this first Summons
but five days time allowed him to procure his freedom, draw his Articles of
Impeachment, seek out, manage his witnesses, and be ready for a Trial, a
thing impossible to be done in so short a space. Nor had M. Prynne any fairer
warning, or more legal Summons, this ensuing Paper without seal, name, or
date (with a Copy of the Proclamation enclosed) about nine of the clock the
same night being delivered him in the dark by Col. Fiennes his footboy under
Lincolns Inn Chapel, instead of a citation.

SIR,
I Have sent you a Copy of the Lord Generals Proclamation concerning a Counsel
of War to be held concerning the surrender of Bristol, where I expect you
should be, according as by the Proclamation you are required to be, to justify
what you have published concerning it, that it was cowardly and unworthily
delivered up, and withal I desire you to read the 1, 2. and 7. verses of the
23. chapter of Exodus.


Which Paper when Mr. Prynne had read, he imagining Colonel Fiennes to be as
unskilful in legal proceedings as he had showed himself in Millitary
affairs, penned and sent him this ensuing Letter, to put him into a formal
speedy way of trial, and beat him out of his mere vapouring Paper bravadoes.

SIR,
ON Friday night late I received a Note from your Footboy, without name or
date, with a datelesse, namelesse Paper enclosed, pretended to be a
Proclamation of my Lord Generals, to appear at a Council of War on Thursday
next (not expressing what time of the day) to be held in the Army, (without
mentioning in what certain place, the Army being dispersed into diverse
quarters remote from Town) to justify what I have written concerning the
cowardly and unworthy surrendering up of Bristoll; which general, the
consciousnesse of your own guilt makes you (it seems) to appropriate wholly to
your self, though not named by me: This I shall be ready to do (since thus
unexpectedly challenged into the Lists) when I shall be legally summoned
thereunto, at a certain competent time and place. To which end (since your
Foot-boyes namelesse, datelesse Summons, without any Warrant under my Lord
Generals Hand and Seal; with the datelesse, namelesse, placelesse, seallesse
Proclamation enclosed, are but gross aritificiall flourishes to blind the
world, and mere Nullities in Martial, Common, Civil, Canon Law, as all
professors of them will instruct you; yea such an individuum vagum, which makes
intelligent men conceive, that you intend only to abuse the world with
flourishes, but never to put your self upon a real public trial; I and Mr.
Walker, to set you into a Legal real way of trial, have joined in two
Petitions to my Lord General and the House of Commons, to appoint a general
Council of War, for the hearing of this public case in a convenient time
(the next Wednesday if you please) and fitting place within Westminster or
London, in presence of the House of Commons, of which you are a Member, to the
end you may vindicate your Honor, and make good your printed Relation to the
House, your Letter to his Excellency, and delusory rude answer to Master
Walkers Reply, before them, if able, to your just Purgation, and our
disreputation or else give him and me leave to disprove them, and justify what
we have severally written (my self by no less authority then a Committee of
the House of Commons) to your just dishonor, capital censure, and maintenance
of our reputations, which you would wound, if possible, to repair your own.
Truth seeks no corners, fears no colors, Trials; neither shall I in this
common cause, wherein the Kingdom has suffered more damage by Bristols
surrender, then your life or estate are ever able to satisfy, though you
should lose both for it, as you may peradventure chance to do, if you make no
better a defense of your cause (in which you have now most unwillingly engaged
me past al retreats) then of this City and Castle, and that by your own Martial
Law (to omit ancient Presidents) who dispossessed Colonel Essex of his
Governorship of that place, hanged up two Citizens there, and ransomed others,
only for attempting to deliver up Bristoll to the Enemy before it was
fortified and furnished; when you did them a far greater kindness, to
fortify and furnish it with all sorts of Ammunition and Provisions, at the
Parliaments and Kingdoms cost, and then most valiently surrendered it, with all
the Canon, Ammunition, Treasure, Provisions, Ships, Prisoners, Arms, Colors in
it; and if we believe Mercurius Aulicus, bestowed them on the King, to the
irrepairable loss and danger of the whole Kingdom, before any one Sconce
taken, any one shot made against the Cities or Castles walls, or the least
assault of either of them. And yet such has been the strange carriage of this
action hitherto, on your part, that Dat veniam Corvis, vexat Censura Columbas.
You censure, quarrel all other men, who dare be so valiently honest as to
dispraise this your Heroic State-Service, which has quite undone them. Sir,
if you be as really confident of your own innocence and valor, as you are
quaerulous of our pretended calumnies of them, (who believe we have written
far more truth of you, then your self have done) I conceive you will
cordially second our Petitions, for such a fair public hearing here as we
desire, and the world expects, after so many printed Bravadoes; otherwise the
whole Kingdom will pronounce you guilty, and all men of Arms, of Honor,
proclaim you a coward, if you flee a fair public Trial; wherein I shall
punctually follow those Texts you point me to, Exodus 23. 1, 2, 7. (which I wish
you had made use of in this cause) and aim not so much at victory, or private
ends, as verity and public good in this legal combat: in which I hope to
manifest my self a true friend to my Country, and no enemy to your self, but
a pious one, of your own seeking.

Yours, William Prynne.
Lincolns-Inne, 17. November. 1643.

Master Prynne and Master Walker finding themselves thus altogether surprised
with these undermining Policies of the unrestrained, unquestioned Delinquent,
and the great straits of time in a business of such common concernment, the
one of them being likewise at that instant engaged in other public services
for the State of great moment, the other a prisoner, they thereupon drew up two
several Petitions to the Parliament and his Excellency for a public trial of
this cause within London or Westminster. The Petition to his Excellency,
(presented by Master Prynne) was this:

To his Excellency ROBERT Earl of Essex, etc. Lord General of the Parliaments
Forces.
The humble Petition of Clement Walker (Prisoner in the Tower) and William
Prynne Esquires.
Showing,

THat your Petitioners on Friday last in the evening received two several
Notes in writing, with Papers enclosed (both of them without any name, date,
direction) pretended to be Copies of a Proclamation issued by your Excellency,
brought to us by a Footboy, not from your Excellency, or any of your Officers,
or a Council of War, or by direction from either, but from Colonel
Nathaniel Fiennes himself, and in his name; whereby we are by name
particularly required, to appear before a Council of War on Thursday next,
to be held in the Army, to justify such things as we have severally published
in print (some of them by authority of the Committee of the House of Commons
for printing) touching his surrenrender of Bristoll, whereof he was late
Governor, and to give in our informations of any thing done by him or his
Officers in that action contrary to the Rules of War and honor of Soldiers;
without any expression of the time of the day where, or certain quarter of the
Army (now dispersed into sundry remote places) where the said Counsel shall be
held or appearance made. In regard of which illegal Summons, and uncertainties,
as likewise of the short warning to prepare our witnesses, and your Petitioner
Walkers present imprisonment in the Tower (by the said late Governors practice
and procurement) your Petitioners, though most willing to prove, and desirous
to justify before all the world what ever they have published touching the
said Colonels surrender of Bristoll, (for the Kingdoms future security, and
terror of all pusilanimous Commanders, who shall dishonourably betray their
trust) are yet altogether disabled to perform this service, unless they may
have free liberty, a certain place of appearance, and competent time assigned
them to prepare their impeachments and witnesses in this leading case, of
general consequence and concernment to the whole Realm.

In tender consideration whereof, and for that diverse Members of the Honorable
House of Commons are, or must be interessed in this common cause as Parties or
Witnesses, whose presence will be necessary at the hearing; your Petitioners
for the more easy, speedy, public solemn trial hereof, humbly supplicate
your Excellency to assign them a competent time and place within the City of
London or Westminster, where they and their witnesses may be personally and
fully heard touching the premises before a general Counsel of War, in the
presence of such Members of both Houses as shall voluntarily or by Order
repair to the said trial; where your Petitioners at their peril, shall (by
Gods assistance) be ready to make good their several Allegations against the
said Governor, who cannot but readily join with them in this their just
request, if so innocent, or injured as he pretends.

And your Petitioners, etc.
His Excellencies Answer to it was, that he would talk with Colonel Fiennes
about it; The Petition to the Parliament was to like effect; and the House upon
reading thereof, referred the business wholly to my Lord Generals direction.

These Petitions though they received no other Answers, yet gave occasion to
Colonel Fiennes to procure an Adjournment of the Counsel of War, to a
farther day, which was posted up at Westminster and the Exchange in this form.

Whereas a Council of War was to be held this day at Windsor about the
delivering up of the City of Bristoll, and whereas the Plaintiffes have
Petitioned for longer time, to bring in their proofs, and the Army being upon
its remove, whereby diverse Officers whose presence is needful, are likely to
be hindered from giving their attendance; The said Counsel is adjourned till
this day fortnight. Dat. 19. October 1643.

Essex.

By this time the Colonel finding his Prosecutors (thus publicly engaged by
himself) resolute to proceed for their Countries common service and security,
and that they were neither daunted nor discouraged by all his flourishes and
devises; having thus contrary to his expectation, brought his foot into the
snare, out of which he could not draw it again; thereupon his heart (as false
to him in other things as in the defense of Bristoll) did so much mis-give him,
that taking advantage of the employments and absence of some Officers in the
Army from the head quarter, he procured six or seven successive adjournments
of the day of trial (some of them after a perremtory) to be set up at
Westminster, thereby to tire out the Prosecutors: which they perceiving,
thereupon drew up their Articles of Impeachment against him, which annexing to
a Petition, they exhibited to the House of Commons to prevent all just
exceptions of breach of privilege, and quicken and expidite the trial. The
Articles are the same hereafter mentioned. The Petition as follows.

To the Honorable, the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses in the COMMONS House
of PARLIAMENT assembled.
The humble Petition of Clement Walker and William Prynne Esquires.
Showing,

THat the business of the surrender of Bristoll to the Enemy by Colonel
Nathaniel Fiennes, late Governor thereof (to the irrecoverable loss and
danger of the whole Kingdom) was upon his own motion (made of purpose as we
conceive to evade, or delay the examination thereof) referred by Your Order to
a Counsel of War, since which the Colonel has caused several papers in
his Excellencies name to be posted up at Westminster hall gate, and Exchange
(to put a flourish on that action) requiring your Petitioners by name (though
never yet served with any Warrant, and one of them ever since detained a
Prisoner to hinder the prosecution) to eppeare before a Counsel of War to
inform against the said Colonel touching that business, without expressing
any certain place where it should be held, which Counsel has been since
thrice adjourned to no place at all, or to a remote one, if any, and is like
still to be adjourned, by reason of the Armies motion, whereby your Petitioners
(now publicly engaged by the said Colonel himself effectually to prosecute
him for the common good, and future security of the Realm) shall be either
disabled, or retarded to bring that cause to a full, and speedy public
trial, as they desire.

In regard therefore that the said Colonel is a Member of this Honorable
House, the business on his part misrepresented by him in the House, we not
yet heard, the witnesses in or near London, (some of them Members of the
House) not conveniently drawn to the Army without great expense, others of
them suddenly to disperse themselves into the West and Northern parts; the
business of great concernment to the whole Kingdom, to many Inhabitants of
this City who have lost their estates thereby, and this a leading case to
others of like nature, not fit to be hudled up in a corner, since anciently
tried only in Parliament, and now thence transmitted only by the said Colonels
own motion.

Your Petitioners humbly desire your Honors out of your zeal to public
justice to order, that this cause may have a fair and speedy trial upon the
Articles of Impeachment hereto annexed against the said Colonel (which we are
ready to prove at our perils) either in full Parliament according to ancient
use, or at a general Counsel of War, to be held publicly within London or
Westminster at a set time and place, in the presence of your Honors, concerned
in it in the Kingdoms behalf; which they humbly conceive, the said Colonel,
if faultlesse, will readily condescend to; and that he, upon these our Articles
of Impeachment may (according to ancient presidents, and the present examples
of Master Waller, Sir John Hotham, and his son, with others of like nature)
be forthwith committed to safe custody till the trial.

And your Petitioners (desirous of nothing Clement Walker.

This Petition by reason of other occasions, though daily and earnestly
solicited, could not gain Audience in ten days space; and then a day being
appointed for its reading, Col. Fiennes and his friends, who had notice of it,
endeavored to suppress it as soon as read, and the Articles too: some of
them excepting against the word hudled up, in the Petition, as scandalous to
his Excellency, and the Council of war (though not so intended, and Col.
Fiennes his own expression in a paper to Mr. Pryn;) others of them, pretending
the Articles of Impeachment annexed to the Petition, were as great a breach of
the privilege of Parliament, as that Impeachment against the five Members
(though done only in pursuance of the Colonels own motions, and the Houses own
Orders, who had formerly referred him to the trial of a Council of war, and
so the cases no ways parallel:) moved, that they might be sealed up and
suppressed before they were heard or read, and the Petitioners brought to the
Bar, and proceeded against criminally for the same: so much Art and Policy
was there used to retard and take off this Prosecution. But at last after long
debate in the House, upon the reading of Mr Prynnes forecited Letter to the
Colonel (who there produced it by way of complaint, desiring it might be read,
thinking thereby to lay up Mr Prynne in Prison as he had done Mr Walker; and so
to be suddenly quit of his Prosecutors with Honor and Triumph,) the House,
quite contrary to his expectation, made these ensuing Votes for the reading of
the Articles, and recommending them to his Excellency.

Die Mercurii 15. Novembris 1643.
THe humble Petition of Clement Walker and William Prynne Esquires, concerning
Mr Nathaniel Fiennes, and the surrender of Bristoll, was this day read in the
House of Commons; and Articles of accusation of the said Mr Fiennes touching
the surrender of the said City of Bristoll, and Castle, were this day likewise
presented to the said House. A To wit, that in p. 5. at the Colonels own
entreaty.
Letter from Mr Prynne to Mr Nathaniel Fiennes was likewise read.

Ordered by the House of Commons, that as they shall be careful that there
shall be a fair and equal Trial of Mr Nathaniel Fiennes, so they will take
the Petition of the Petitioners, and the Articles after the Trial into
consideration, in as much as it shall concern my Lord General and the
Council of War, and as it shall concern the Privilege of Parliament.
Resolved, etc.

That the Articles, entitled, Articles of accusation and impeachment against
Colonel Nathaniel Fiennes late Governor of the City and Castle of Bristoll
touching the dishonorable surrender thereof to the Enemy, contrary to his
Trust and duty, by Clement Walker, and William Prynne Esquires, shall be now
read. The said Articles and Impeachment were accordingly read.

The Petition and Articles were signed Clement Walker, and William Prynne; and
they were both called in, and at the Bar being demanded, whether the names
subscribed were of their own hand writing, did avow the names to be of their
own hand writing, and did avow the said Petition and Articles.

Ordered that a Copy of these Articles, attested under the Clerks hand, be
forthwith sent to my Lord General.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

These Votes soon after drew on the long-delayed Trial, put off by several
adjournments from the 19. of October till the 14 of December; so long were
these Gentlemen ere they could bring the Bear to stake, notwithstanding his
many vapouring flourishes of purpose to abuse the world, which before this were
discovered by most, to be no better then fig leaves to cover his shame withal.

After all these undermining endeavors of Colonel Fiennes, to suppress,
retard, discourage, and tire out his Prosecutors, came the long expected day of
Trial at Saint Albanes, upon Thursday the 14 of December 1643. where Mr Walker
and Mr Prynne appearing before a select Honorable Council of War, designed
and assembled to hear this cause in a Room adjoining to the Town Hall; Dr
Doresla Judge Advocate of the Army, there demanded of them, whether they had
any Articles of Impeachment drawn against Colonel Fiennes? To which Mr Prynne
replied, that he being a Member of the House of Commons, they had exhibited
their Articles to that House, who by Order had sent a Copy of them to his
Excellency, upon which they were to proceed. Which the Advocate thereupon
acknowledging, my Lord Roberts President of the Council of war, commanded
him to read the said Order and Articles sent together with it; as soon as the
Order was read, Mr Prynne tendered a copy of the Articles of impeachment under
Mr Walkers and his own hands, agreeing with those delivered to the House,
which he averred they were there ready to make good in each particular,
desiring the Council to proceed upon them, because the other was but a copy
which they had not subscribed, but this they now tendered an original; which
was assented to.

Upon this Dr Dorisla the Judge Advocate was commanded to read the Articles;
but Mr Prynne then perceiving the doors kept close, contrary to expectation,
and all Persons, Auditors, but themselves alone, excluded; and fearing that by
this means a door would be opened to Colonel Fiennes and his party to
misreport the proceedings of this Trial, as they had done the Relation of the
siege and surrender of Bristoll, before the reading of the Articles made this
request to the Council, that this hearing might be as public as the cause it
self, and as that place could afford; the door set open, and none excluded;
the rather, because himself and Mr Walker (being no chalengers, but challenged)
were engaged in this Prosecution, not in their own particular interests, but
the Republikes, and that by special Order of Parliament (the representative
body of the Kingdom,) which had ordered a fair and equal Trial, which they
humbly conceived to be a free and open one, agreeable to the proceedings of
Parliament and all other Courts of Justice in the Realm; which stand open to
all, and from whence no Auditors are, or ought to be excluded.

Colonel Fiennes opposing this motion, in a sycophanticall way alleged, that
we suspected the integrity of that Court, as appeared by this request for an
open trial, and our endeavors to appeal therefrom by several Petitions to
the Parliament, for a trial before the House in London or Westminster; whereas
he had cast himself freely and clearly upon their Justice (which he no
ways suspected) to whom the cognizance of such Causes properly belonged; and
therefore desired the hearing might be private, according to the proceedings
used in such Courts. Upon which Dr Dorisla, Judge Advocate, intervening, told
the Prosecutors and Council, that it was against the style and course of a
Court Martial to be public and open: therefore it might not be admitted upon
any terms.

To which Mr Prynne replied, that he no ways distrusted the Justice or
Integrity of this Honorable Council, for then he would not have appeared
before them at this place and time to crave Justice from them: That he was a
Common Lawyer, and by his Profession, his late Protestation, and solemn
Covenant, bound to maintain the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom and Liberty of
the Subject; That the Members of this Honorable Council as well as himself,
had not only taken the like solemn Protestation and Covenant, but also put
themselves in Arms to maintain and defend the said Laws and Liberties of the
Subject to the uttermost: That by the Laws and Statutes of the Realm, all
Courts of Justice ever have been, are, and ought to be held openly and
publicly, not close, like a Cabinet Council; witness all Courts of Justice
at Westminster and elsewhere, yea all our Assizes, Sessions, wherein men,
though indicted but for a private Felony, Murder, or Trespass (which nothing
near concerns the Republike so highly as this dishonorable surrender of
Bristoll) have always open trialls: and if such petty Causes, then much more
this of most General Concernment to the whole Realm, recommended to a fair
Trial by the Parliament it self, ought to be as open and public as possible,
to satisfy both the Parliament and People; That not only in Courts of Common
Law, but in the Admiralty it self, We read in Scripture that among the Jews,
the Judges sat openly in the City gates, the most public place of all.
and all other Courts proceeding by the rules either of the Civil or Canon
Law, the proceedings have ever been public, the Courts open. And even in late
proceedings by martial Law before a Council of war, the trials of Delinquents
in England have been public, as appears by the trials of Yeomans and Butcher
at Bristoll before Colonel Fiennes himself, which were public; and by the
trial of Mr Tomkins, Challoner, and others since, before a Council of war
at the Guild hall of London in presence of both Houses of Parliament and the
whole City, no Comers being thence excluded. Wherefore this case being of the
same public nature, and as much or more concerning the Kingdom as theirs,
ought to receive as public a trial as theirs did.

To which Dorisla answered, that himself protested against the open trial of
Tomkins and Challoner, as a breach upon the Council of wars privileges; but
was overruled therein, to give the Parliament and City content; adding, that
all Councels of war in foreign parts were ever private, and ours now used
not to be guided by Common or statute Laws, or the course of other Courts, but
by their own Orders; and this being a Council, it was against the nature and
constitution of it to be public.

To which Mr Prynne rejoyned. First, that there was as great cause to give the
Parliament, City, and Kingdom satisfaction in this, as in the other forenamed
case, it being of as public concernment. Next, that we of England are not to
be guided by foreign Laws or Presidents, but by our own domestic: That the
Common Law, the Statutes of the Realm, and constant practice of all our other
Courts of Justice, ought to regulate the proceedings of the Council of war,
not the Council of wars to repeal and control them: especially in an Army
which has taken up arms, and are waged by the Parliament of purpose to defend
the Fundamental Laws and Subjects Liberties, not to thwart them: That it was
both against the Laws and Subjects Liberty (as he humbly conceived) to deny any
Prosecutor or Subject an open Trial, and thus to chamber up or restrain
Justice intra Privatos Parietes, in any, much more in this public cause. That
the Judge Advocate could produce no one President for such a close trial
within our Realm in any former age; and therefore he should make no such new
President now. That all cases of this nature, touching the cowardly surrendering
of Towns and Castles, were in former times tried only in full Parliament, as
appears by the cases of Gomines, Weston, the Bishop of Norwich, and others;
and that upon very good reason, since cases which concern all, are fittest to
be determined in that Highest Court which represents all the Realm. That this
Council of War had a double capacity and consideration; First, as a Council
of War only, to deliberate of things necessary for the regulating and
managing of Military affairs; and in this regard it ought to be secret in all
such debates, and not communicate their councels: but in this capacity we were
not now before it. Secondly, as a Court of Justice, to proceed criminally
against Malefactors; and in this respect it ought, (as he believed) to be
public and open to all comers. To put this out of doubt, he would instance
only in one example: The high Court of Parliament is both the supreamest great
general Council for peace and war, and the highest Court of Justice in the
Realm: as it is a Council to consult, debate, or deliberate of the Military
or Civil Affairs of the Kingdom, so it is always private, none but the
Members and Officers of either House being admitted to their consultations or
debates. But as it is a Court of Justice to punish Malefactors, so the
Proceedings of both or either House are always open and public, as appears
by the Late Trial of the Earl of Strafford in Westminister Hall, and infinite
other Presidents of Ancient and present times. If then this supreamest Council
of all others as it is a Court of Justice, stands ever open unto all, and the
proceedings of it be always public, without any infringment of its
Privileges as a supreme Council of War and Peace; then certainly this
Honorable Council of War (inferior to it both in Power and Jurisdiction)
as it is now a Court of Justice, may and ought to hold their Proceedings and
Sessions Publikly in this common cause, without any violation of its
Privileges as a Council. What therefore the Peers in Parliament once
answered the Prelates in a case of Bastardy, he hoped this Honorable Council
would now answer the Advocate in this case of our Impeachment; Stat. Merton 20.
H. 3. c. 9.
Nolumus leges Angliae mutare, quae hucusque usitatae sunt and approbatae; and
so allow us a public trial, to satisfy both the Parliament and People, whose
eyes are fixed on it; else if it should be private, they would be apt to
report, it was hudled up in a corner: for which innocent expression, as we
intended it (St Albanes and this Council in respect of London and the
Parliament, being but a corner) so much exceptions was taken in the House
against our Petition. In fine, he alleged, that Col. Fiennes himself, who
had made such public professions of his innocence, both before the House of
Commons, His Excellency, and the World, in printed Speeches, Relations,
Letters, had most cause to desire, and least reason to decline an open trial,
since Truth and Innocence seek no corners: and his Honor, his Honesty now
openly charged, could not otherwise then openly be discharged; no trial being
public enough for him who presumes his Innocence able to endure, and
professes a desire to bring it to the touch, that it may be cleared. And if he
should now decline an open trial, after so many public Bravadoes in London
and elsewhere, it would draw upon him a just suspicion of guilt in most men's
opinions, since no man John 3. 19, 20.
flees the light, but he whose works are evil.

Upon this, the Lord Roberts demanded of Mr Prynne, what he meant by a public
trial? whether only the reading of the Articles, Answers, producing of
witnesses, and managing the evidence to make good the Articles? or else, the
Councels private debates of the cause among themselves after the hearing? To
which Mr Prynne replied, that he meant only the former of these, the Judges
debates many times in cases of difficulty being private after hearings, till
they come to deliver their resolutions in public. Hereupon all were commanded
to withdraw; and then one of the Council, after a short debate, was sent to
his Excellency to know his pleasure, whether the Trial should be public, as
the Prosecutors desired, or private? who returned answer, that is should be
private; with which resolution the Prosecutors (being called in) were
acquainted.

Mr Prynne upon this answer desired, that he might put in writing the Reasons
he had suddenly offered to the Council for an Open Trial, that so they might
be presented to his Excellency, for that (as he conceived) he had not been made
acquainted with them, who upon consideration of them, might happily alter his
Resolution. Upon which motion, the Council ordered the Judge Advocate and
Prosecutors to repair to his Excellency to acquaint him with the former
Reasons by word of mouth, which they did very briefly: But the Advocate
informing his Excellency, that it was against the privileges of the Council
that the trial should be open, he answered, that he would not infringe the
privileges of the Council, whom he thought we seemed to distrust by demanding
a public trial; which distrust we utterly denied, being confident of their
impartial Justice. Upon return of this Answer to the Council by the
Advocate, we (only as overruled herein) chose rather to submit to a private
trial of so public a cause, then to have it reported by Fiennes and his
masters of calumny, that we declined a trial, because we were unable to make
good our Impeachment. And we do freely acknowledge (and so must Col. Fiennes
himself) that both we and he had a very full, Patient, Iuditious, Honorable
fair hearing (scarce parallel in any Age or time) which continued nine days
space, when as Bristoll was lost in less then three, most of the Council
diligently taking notes of what ever was pertinently alleged on either side.

The manner of the Trial being thus settled, our Articles of Impeachment were
first read, and then his Answer delivered in writing unto them, which he had
time to prepare from their first reading in the Commons House (where he took a
copy of them) till this day of Trial. The Articles and Answer to them here
follow in order.

Articles of Accusation and Impeachment against Colonel Nathaniel Fiennes,
late Governor of the City and Castle of Bristoll, touching his dishonorable
surrender thereof to the enemy, contrary to his Trust and Duty, exhibited by
Clement Walker, and William Prynne Esquires, in the behalf of the
Commonwealth of England.
1. IN primis, That he the said Colonel Nathaniel Fiennes, did suddenly
apprehend, imprison, and remove Colonel Thomas Essex, late Governor of the
said City and Castle, from his government there, upon pretense that he
intended to deliver up the same (not then fully fortified, or sufficiently
provided to withstand any long siege) into the hands of the common enemies of
the Kingdom and Parliament, contrary to the trust reposed in him; and that
hereupon, he the said Col. Fiennes obtained the government of the said City
and Castle for himself, and undertook to defend and keep the same, to the
uttermost extremity against the said enemy, for the use of the King and
Parliament, and not to surrender the said City and Castle, or either of them to
the said enemies, or to any other person whatsoever, without the previous
consent and order of the Parliament.

2. Item, That the said Colonel, soon after he became Governor of the said
City and Castle, did by Martial law, apprehend, condemn and execuse some
chief Citizens thereof; Namely, Master Yeomans, Master Butcher, and others,
only for intending to deliver up the same to Prince Rupert, when he came first
before Bristoll, (not then fully fortified and stored) though they did not
actually surrender the same.

3. Item, That he the said Colonel did put the Parliament, Kingdom, Country,
and City, to a vast expense in fortifying and furnishing it, and the Castle
thereof with Forts, Sconces, Canons, Ammunition, Arms, Victuals, Provisions
of all sorts, and with Garrisons sufficiently able to defend and mantain the
same for Three months space or more, against all the power of the Enemies,
that might or did come against the same; and did likewise promise and undertake
to diverse Gentlemen and Inhabitants thereof, to defend the same for so long
space or more, in case they should be besieged.

4. Item, That he the said Colonel, notwithstanding the premises, when the
enemy came before the said City and Castle, with no extraordinary Forces or
Ammunition able to force the same, and besieged them not above three days at
the most, did before ever the enemy had taken any of the out. Forts, or Sconces
about the same; or had made so much as the least battery or assault upon the
walls of the said City or Castle, or any mine or breach into any of the Forts
thereof, contrary to his former trust, promises, duty, and the honor of a
Soldier, most dishonourably, cowardly, and traitorously delivered up the said
City and Castle, with all the Prisoners, Canons, Ammunition, Artillery, Arms,
Military Provisions, Magazines, Victuals therein, and the very Colors too,
without, and against the consent of the Parliament, or his Excellency their
General, into the hands and power of Prince Rupert, and other common enemies
of the Kingdom and Parliament, to the extraordinary great danger, dishonor,
loss and prejudice of the whole Kingdom and Parliament, the evil example of
other Governors and Towns, the loss of most of the Western parts of
England, and great encouraging, enriching, and strengthening of the said
enemies, both by Land and Sea: and that upon very dishonorable Articles, to
which he was no ways necessitated, and had no care to see them punctually
performed by the enemy, when complaint thereof was made to him for relief; to
the great prejudice and impoverishing of the Inhabitants and Garrison soldiers
there.

5. Item, That the said Colonel, without the privity or consent of any
general Council of War, did of his own head, send out for a parley with the
enemy, when diverse Officers and soldiers advised and persuaded the contrary,
and would have repulsed the enemies, and defended the said City and Castle to
the utmost; That the surrendering up of the same was principally occasioned by
the earnest persuasion, advice, and cowardice of the said Governor, contray to
his trust and duty to keep the same: And that the said Governor, when as the
Council of war unanimously voted upon the parley, that it was neither safe,
nor honorable for them to depart the Town, unless they might march thence
with half their Arms at least, and with their Colors; thereupon, after some
private conference with Col. Gerrard, one of the enemies Commissioners, in the
Garden; without the privity, and contrary to the Vote of the said Council, did
make and insert the last Article, that they should leave all their Canon and
Ammunition, with their Arms and colors behind them, and returning to them
out of the Garden, told them plainly, that they must now deliver up all to the
enemy, but what was expressed in the Articles he then produced, and leave their
Arms and Colors behind them, to the said Counsels and soldiers great
discontent; And whereas by those very Articles, the said Town and Castle were
not to be delivered up till nine of the clock the next morning, nor the
enemies to enter them, till the soldiers, and other Gentlemen were marched
out, the said Governor was so overhasty to surrender up the same, that he
delivered them up to the enemy above one hour or more before the hour agreed
on; and suffered the enemies to enter and possess them before the soldiers
were marched out; whereby many of the soldiers were pillaged in the castle and
town, and diverse of the Inhabitants best affected to the Parliament, plundered
before the hour of surrender came, to their great loss and undoing.

6. Item, That he the said Colonel, during the three days siege of the said
City and castle, did not give any such encouragement to the soldiers and
Officers (who bravely defended the same, and slew near one thousand of the
enemies best men, by his own See p. 7. and his Letter to his Excellency
printed Relation, with the loss only of eight persons) which much
discouraged them, as his duty and place required, and they expected; And that
when a small number of the enemies, not two hundred (who gave themselves for
lost,) had entered the Line of Communication at the weakest place, which was
worst guarded, on Wednesday morning the 26. of July last (being bravely
repulsed by the Soldiers with great loss in all places else;) he the said
Colonel for two hours space or more (during which time no more Enemies entered
or approached the said Breach) both neglected and refused to command or
encourage the Officers, and Soldiers, who offered to beat them out in due
time, as he was advised and pressed to do by Captain Bagnall, Livetenant
Colonel Dauison, and diverse others, who would have undertaken that service;
and instead of incountering the said Enemies (against whom the very women
offered to go on with their children to dead the Canon, if the Soldiers were
afraid, rather then the City and Castle should be yielded) called off the
Soldiers and Officers from the Line and Outworks (that the Enemies might the
better enter them without resistance) upon pain of death, much against their
wills; who should and would have hindered and repulsed the Enemies; and
discouraged and hindered such as were forwards to have cut them off, sounding a
parley when the Enemies were so beaten, that they See his own Relation, p. 8.
threw down their Arms and cried for quarter: insomuch that diverse of the
Soldiers and Inhabitants, cried out they were betrayed, and some of the
Soldiers brake their Arms in discontent, swearing they would serve the
Parliament no more.

7. Item, That the said Governor, notwithstanding his promises to defend the
said City and Castle, and dispute it to the last, had yet a real intention to
deliver up the same to the Enemies before ever they were besieged by them, and
no thought at all to defend them to the uttermost, or till they might be
relieved by his Excellency, as appears by the premised Articles, by the said
Governors refusal to send the Prisoners formerly taken out of the said
Castle, before the Enemy approached, when moved to it, by Sir William Waller;
saying to him and others, that he would detain those prisoners still there, to
make his own Conditions and Composition the better with the Enemies, if they
came before it; by his commanding Master Hassard the Master Gunner there, to
lay aside a Reserve of Thirty Barrells of Powder, with Match and Bullet
answerable, to which when he was reduced he would then Treat with the Enemy,
(which he did long before he was reduced to this large Reserve;) by other
speeches to the like effect, And by his moving Sir William Waller to depart
from Bristoll, before it was besieged, who otherwise would have adventured his
life in its defense.

8. Item, That he the said Governor, when he surrendered the said Castle to the
Enemy, had at least sixty Barrells of Power therein (besides what was in the
City and Forts) being above twenty more then were in Gloucester when it was
first besieged, Five hundred Canon shot, fifty great Grenades, fourteen
hundred weight of Match or more, great store of Musket Bullets, and Tin to make
more, A Match-make, a Bullet-maker, with materials to make Match and Bullets,
and all manner of provisions and Victuals, sufficient to maintain one Thousand
men for three or four months space at least, Eleven Canons therein Mounted,
(besides 44. Canons mounted in the City and Forts;) All which were surrendered
to the Eenmy before any battery or assault made against the said Castle (though
he had men more then enough by his own Page 9. and his Letter to his Excellency
Relation to defend it) contray to his promise made to diverse Inhabitants of
the said City, best affected to the Parliament, to defend the same to the
uttermost, and to dispute every foot thereof with the Enemy, and to keep it, or
to lay his bones therein; who thereupon sent their Estates, with provisions for
them and their families, for three months space or more, into the said Castle,
where the said Colonel promised to secure and defend the same, most of which
their Estates, were there seized on by the Enemy to their undoing; by reason
the said Colonel admitted the Enemies into the said castle, and delivered up
the keys thereof unto them, before the hour agreed on in the Articles, such
was his extraordinary haste to quit the same.

9 Item, That the said Colonel, to aggravate this his dishonorable action,
has presumed to justify the same, not only before the Honorable House of
Commons, by word of mouth; but likewise before the whole Kingdom and world in
Printed Relation p 9. his Letter to his Excellency, and Reply to Mr Walker.
Relations and Letters, wherein he has laid an extraordinary great Blemish
both upon the Honorable Houses of Parliament, and his Excellence the Earl of
Essex, their L. General, by publishing in Print, that had he manfully held out
the said city and castle to the last, yet he could not have expected any
relief from them in six or eight weeks space at the least; when as Gloucester
since Besieged with far greater force then Bristoll, was yet relieved by them
in less then half the time (as Bristoli doubtless might and would have
been) and held out a full months siege or more, as Bristoll might have done:
though he the said Colonel to add to his former offense, and hinder or
anticipate the relief of Gloucester, that it might be lost as Bristoll was, gave
out in speeches to some Members of the house of Commons and others, and namely
to Master Samuel Brown, and Master John Sedgwick, that he would lose his head,
or be hanged, if Gloucester could or would hold out three days siege, if the
Enemy once came before it, or words to the like effect.

10 Item, That the said city and castle were so cowardly and unworthily
delivered up to the Enemies, that they have since published in Mercurius
Anlicus, Aug. 7. p. 421. 422.
Print, and given out in speeches, that the said Colonel Fiennes did bestow
the same upon his Majesty, that they were delivered up to them beyond their
expectation, and that they could not have taken the same had it been defended
by the Governor, who eventually at least if not intentionally, did but
strongly fortify, and plentifully store the same, with all manner of
provisions to make it Tenable, at the Kingdoms and the Countries extraordinary
expense, to render up the same to the Enemies with greater advantage to them,
and far more prejudice and damage to the Commonwealth, as soon as it was made
defensible.

Clement Walker.

The Answer of Col. Nathaniel Fiennes, to the Articles exhibited by Clement
Walker, and William Prynne.
1. TO the first Article, Colonel Fiennes denies, that he did suddenly
apprehend, imprison, and remove from the Government of the city and castle of
Bristoll, Col. Thomas Essex the Governor thereof, upon pretense that he
intended to deliver up the same into the hands of the common enemies of the
Kingdom and Parliament; or upon any pretended cause whatsoever, or that Col.
Thomas Essex was ever Governor of the said city or castle; but does
acknowledge that soon after his coming to Bristoll by an express Procured by
himself; The Order was, to send Col. Essex up if C. Fiennes saw cause: who
being desirous of his place resolved to see cause.
Order from his Excellency, written all with his own hand, he did send unto
him Col. Thomas Essex, who at that time commanded a Regiment in that city, and
as he is well assured that his Excellency had very good cause to send that
Order to him, although he knew nothing before it came unto him; so he did not
put it in execution, but upon mature deliberation and advice with He names
none in particular, and many of the Gentlemen, disclaim this consultation and
advice.
most of the wisest and best affected Gentlemen to the Parliament, and of the
best quality in the Town and Country, and upon good cause appearing unto him;
and that for the security and preservation of that city, which in all
probabilities could not otherwise at that time have been secured. And he does
further deny, that thereupon or at any time after, he did seek or desire the
Government of that city for himself: But on the contrary, that he did seek and
endeavor to be freed from that employment, and that not in complement, but
really, earnestly, frequently, as he is ready to make good by proof. And
lastly he does deny, That ever he Essex undertook to make good the City and
Castle to the Parliament, when he was removed by Fiennes; if he never
undertook the like, then its clear be removed him to the end the King might
the easier gain it.
undertook to the Parliament, or my Lord General to Its strange a man should
undertake the charge of that he never undertook to make good.
make good that City or Castle; or that ever he had anycharge of the Castle as
a Fort, or otherwise then he had of any Church or house in the City: but on
the contrary, That he did from time to time declare, that he could not keep
that City in the condition it was, and that it would Why then did he remove
Essex who was of a contrary opinion? why did he fortify and ammunition the
City to the Kingdoms and Countries vaste expense? Why did he undertake the
custody of it, if it must certainly fall into the Enemies hand?
certainly fall into the hands of the Enemy, unless better provision were made
for it, and that he would not be answerable for it, unless certain
propositions which he sent to the Parliament, or something equivalent thereunto
might be granted unto him, which he could never obtain. And further the
affirms, That he Ergo, He usurped the Government of Bristoll with this
intent, to surrender it up to the King, without either the Parliaments or his
Excellencies previous consents; and in plain terms, not to keep but betray it
to the Enemy.
never did undertake not to surrender the said City or Castle, both or either
of them without the previous consent and Order of the Parliament, or that the
Parliament ever did, or in Certainly, either the Parliament have lost their
reason and justice, or this respondent his wit and honesty, if such a strange
Paradox as this may pass for current.
reason and justice could require any such undertaking of him, or that he did
or ever would have undertaken it, all which he is ready to make good by proof.

2. To the second Article, Col. Fiennes does acknowledge, that not many days
after his sending away Col. Essex, by the blessing of God upon his care and
vigillance, This Conspiracy was not discovered by him, but by one D^bbins, to
M. Walker the Prosecutor, who discovered it to Fiennes; and was a chief Agent
in bringing the conspirators to punishment; yet Fiennes in his Letter and
Papers arrogates all the honor of this Discovery to himself, and receives all
the thanks from the Parliament.
he discovered and defeated a wicked conspiracy plotted between diverse
Inhabitants of the city of Bristoll and some of the Officers of Col. Essex his
Regiment, for the delivering up of that city into the hands of Prince Rupert,
and other common Enemies of the Kingdom and Parliament; and thereupon
apprehending and imprisoning diverse of the Conspirators, and thereby
disappointing the design of the Enemy, he was a means under God at that time
of preserving that city, for which he received public thanks by a Letter from
both Houses of Parliament, which he has to show; and after by virtue of a
Commission from his Excellency by Order of both Houses of Parliament, he
called a Council of War, whereof himself was appointed President by the
said Commission, and by that Council of War diverse of the Conspirators after
due try all were condemned, and the sentence of death passed upon them, which
sentence Col. Fiennss did forbear to put in execution till such time as he had
acquainted the House of Parliament, and his Excellency therewith, and the
grounds thereof; and then by his Excellencies command, according to a Vote of
the House of Commons, he did execute two of the principal Conspiratours, (
viz. M. Yeomans and M. Butcher,) notwithstanding the importunity and most
earnest intercession of the Mayor and Aldermen, and diverse of the city to the
contrary, and the The contemptible opinion the Town had of the Colonels spirit,
was the cause of these speeches.
threats and desperate speeches given out by the Malignants, although it so
happened at that time, that a The strength sent to Sir William Waller was not
considerable, the Town disarmed, the Garrison strong, the Parliament masters of
the West, so that a child might have adventred on this execution without
difficulty or opposition.
considerable strength was drawn forth of the Town to the assistance of Sir
William Waller, insomuch that some ill affected persons in the Town conceived
us so weak that the Malignants were able to master us, had procured his
Majesty to send a Trumpeter with a letter from himself to the city to stir
them up, and command them to rise and rescue the said Conspirators, and to kill
and stay all those that should oppose them therein; yet for all this Col.
Fiennes in obedience to the Parliament, and his Excellency did put the
sentence in execution, and that at midday and in the middle of the Town; in all
which he conceaveth that he discharged his duty faithfully, temperately and
resolutely.

3. To the third Article, he answers, that notwithstanding, that without any
or very little help at all by his own proper industry and uncessant travel and
pains, he endeavored to fortify and furnish that place in such sorth that
it might be in posture of defense, and that without He writ many Letters to
them every week for moneys, and received ne^re 9000 l. from the Parliament
besides the Cities and Countries contributions and plunders, to effect this
work for the Enemy.
troubling the Parliament at all; he had well nigh brought a line or rampire
of earth round about the Town; whereupon there were some small works or
redouts, which in this charge are called Forts and Sconces: And that he had
procured some proportion of powder, Artillery, Gunnes, Granado's and other
provisions, whereof he found the Town very much destitute, yet he denies that
there ever was, or that he ever did, or could raise a sufficient Garrison to
defend and maintain that city against all the power of the Enemy, that might
or did come against it, for the space of three months or more, or for His
costs and care in fortifying were ill bestowed, if the Town and Castle after
all this expense, having a Garrison of 2300 men in them were not tenable three
days space.
three days, or that he did The contrary was proved by diverse witnesses.
undertake or promise to any Gentlemen or Inhabitants of the same, to keep it
for so long space, in case that they should be besieged.

4. To the fourth, He denies, that he did deliver up the City or Castle of
Bristol, with all the Arms therein; or that he did deliver the same up
withal the Prisoners, Cannons Ammunition, etc. It is certain be never had
their consents thereto, and it was against their good will and liking, so far,
that had Justice been done he had lost his head for it.
against the consent of the Parliament, or his Excellency their General; or
that he did deliver them up All this appeared contrary by the proofs, and his
Judgment.
Traitorously, cowardly, or dishonourably, or contrary to any former promise of
his, or contrary to his trust or duty, to the extraordinary great danger,
dishonor, less, or prejudice of the whole Kingdom and Parliament; and the
evil example of other Governors, and Towns, upon All that ever read them
deemed them such.
dishonorable Articles, to which he was no ways necessitated; Or, that he
had no care to see the Articles agreed upon, punctually performed by the Enemy,
when complaint was made to him for relief, to the great prejudice and
impoverishing of the Inhabitants and Garrison Soldiers there: But on the
contrary, is ready to justify, that over and above his former good services,
in Ergo, he removed him, and deemed it good service.
sending away Col. Essex without disorder or bloodshed, in discovering and
preventing that wicked Conspiracy, and preserving the city thereby,
notwithstanding a Proclamation set forth of purpose by the King, wherein he
offered pardon to all, both Sculdiers, Citizens, and others (except himself)
within the City of Bristoll, at that time in case they would peaceably yield up
the said City: And over and above, his great pains and care to put the City in
as good a posture of defense as possibly he could; And notwithstanding, he
Others would gladly have undertaken it had be refused the place; and had he
certified his Excellency or the Parliament thus much before hand, they would
never have committed a place of such consequence to him, who neither would nor
could undertake to keep it.
never undertook to make good the City or Castle, or either of them, declaring
that he could not, nor would not undertake it; and that also he could never
obtain a sufficient Garrison for the defense of that place for any considerable
time, or moneys to maintain it, or means to raise it; Yet he did defend that
Town and Castle to the A strange Paradox contradicted by that which follows.
utmost point, not only of duty, but also of honor, that any Soldier could,
or ought to have maintained the same: And that he surrendered them upon good and
honorable conditions in respect to the state he was in: and that he did take
all the care that any Governor could or ought to do, that they might be
punctually performed, and that the breaking of them was not any fault of his
but principally by the failing and unfaithfulness of the Enemy, and partly by
the disobedience and disorder of some of his Soldiers, all which he is ready
to justify in every particular, Notwithstanding that after the line or
principal rampire of the Town was entered, and the Enemy lodged within it, he
did surrender the Town and Castle, withal the Prisoners, Cannons, Ammunition,
Artillery, Millitary provisions, Magazins, Victuals, and part of the Arms
therein Ergo, he held them not to the utmost point, not only of duty but also
of honor, that any Soldier could or ought to have maintained the same.
before the enemy had taken any of the Out-Forts about the same, or had made
the least assault or battery upon the Walls of the City, (which had none at all
on that part against which the Enemy then lay, nor at all defensible in any
part on that side the Town) or upon the Walls of the Castle, or any mine or
breach into any the Forts thereof: All which (nor the Castle) could not
prevent, the Enemy being lodged in the Suburbs by Froome-Gate, from immediately
entering the Town by force. And neither could, nor This clause to the end is a
strange Paradox, and shows he never had any intention to keep Town or Castle,
but thought it his duty to surrender both.
ought to have been kept in the condion that things then stood, to the
prejudice of the City and Garrison, and the surrender thereof upon terms of
composition, but ought to have been surrendered together with it, as they were
by the constant practice and policy of War in all places, the principles of
justice and honesty, and the rules of wisdom and discretion for the honor,
profit and best advantage of the Kingdom and Parliament.

5. To the fifth Article, he answers, that he did not of his own head
without the privity of any Counsel of War, send out for a Parley with the
Enemy when the Officers and Soldiers advised and dissuaded the contrary and
would have repulsed the Enemy, and defended the City to the uttermost: And that
the surrendering of the Town was not principally, or not at all could possibly
be by his earnest perswation or advice, nor that it was by his advice nor
cowardice, contrary to his trust and duty to keep the same: But on the
contrary, he was advised to the Treaty by the far major part, if not by the
unanimous consent of his whole Council of War, and of the There were but two
Gentlemen present, one voted against it partly, the other gave no vote at all.
Gentlemen there present, unless it were Mr. Strood (who also to the
remembrance of many present, was not heard to give any dissent when the
question was put; and all that he said, tended only to a deferring rather then
a denial of the Treaty, without any good reason, that he either then did, or
yet can give for his opinion; and that by many expressions and other clear
evidences, it did at the time of the first proposition of the Treaty appear,
that Col. Fiennes had for his principal cyme therein, the If he can make any
wise man but himself believe these palpable absurdities, and experimental
untruths, he may deserve his pardon, for so good a piece of service, to the
honor and best advantage (as he says) of the Kingdom and Parliament.
honor and advantage of those by whom he was entrusted; And he does deny that
when the Council of War unanimously voted upon the Parley, that it was
neither safe nor honorable for them to depart the Town, unless they might
March thence with half their Arms at least, and their Colors, did thereupon
offer some private conference with Col. Gerrad one of the Enemies Commissioners
in the Garden without the privity, and contrary to the Vote of the said
Council, make and insert the said Article, that they should leave all their
Cannons, and Ammunition, with their Arms and Colors behind them, and
returning to them out of the Garden, told them plainly, that they should now
deliver up all to the Enemy, or that it was expressed in the Articles he then
produced, that they should leave their Arms and Colors behind them, to the
said Councels and Soldiers great discontent: But on the contrary, he does
affirm, and will justify, that he bid the Soldiers make conditions for
themselves, the Gentlemen of the Country for themselves, and the Citizens for
themselves, which was done accordingly: And after, whenupon the Treaty, the
Gentlemen of the Country, and Citizens were satisfied with their demands;
Colonel Fiennes was the first and the chief, if not the only man that took
exception at the condition for the Soldiers; the Commissioners of the Enemy
standing upon it, that they would allow only the Officers their horses and
Arms; and he on the other side standing as peremptorily for all their horses,
Arms, and Colors: whereupon he was about to break off the parley, and the
Commissioners of the Enemy ready to return to the Army, but by the earnest
persuasion of the No such thing proved, and if it were, it seems he had more
care to satifie the Citizens requests (who were for the most part Malignants,
as he averred) then to obey the Parliaments commands, or preserve the Kingdom.
Mayor and Citizens, the Commissioners of the Enemy were persuaded to walk into
the Garden, and to leave us at the Council of War to debate amongst our
selves concerning that point of the Arms and Colors: Whereupon Col. Fiennes
stood very stiffly, till at length he was persuaded by the Council of War to
rest satisfied with half Arms, and our Colors, if we could obtain them;
whereunto Col. Fiennes expressed a great deal of resolution to adhere, and he
had done it to the end, had the Soldiers upon their Guards done their parts as
well as he did, but returning into the Garden with this resolution, many of
his Officers following him, and it being free for any to enter, openly and
before the Mayor and diverse of his Officers, he began to insist upon his
former propositions for all his Arms and Colors; whereupon they yielded that
our Troopers should have their horses and swords, and then Col. Fiennes
descended to the propositions of half Arms and our Colors, but being not able
to obtain it, he yielded so far to the entreaty of the Mayor and Citizens,
that he would not break upon that point of his own head without the advice of
his Officers; and thereupon withdrawing into a room, with all his Officers that
were there present, he debated the matter a good while with them, and could not
be brought to yield thereunto, till six or seven of his Officers came out of
the Town and told him, that they could not get six men a piece of their
Companies together, and that they ran was fast over the Key to the Enemy:
whereupon although with much reluctance he content to yield to that condition,
for fear of putting our selves into a far worse condition; and after calling
in the Commissioners of the Enemy, we fell to set down all the Articles in
writing, there being liberty left to any man to take his exception upon the
penning of them: At which time Captain Birch coming in, and desiring a more
clear expression for the Citizens and Inhabitants to have liberty to carry
away their Estates, which Col. Gerrard bogling at, Col. Fynnes rose up, and
with great earnestness protested, That he would But he would not die or
venture his life to keep the City for the Parliament, and provide for the
Kingdoms safety.
rather die then not provide for his friends and their Estates as well Citizens
as Soldiers: Whereupon Col. Gerrard consented to it, and it was further
expressed, that they should have three days liberty to resolve, whether they
would stay or depart with their goods; and the last Article was no new Article
inserted at the latter end, but only a clear expression of what was before
agreed upon and fully contained in the first Article, as by the Article it
self does appear. And lastly, Col. Fiennes does deny, that he was so
overhasty to surrender up the Town and Castle, that he delivered them up to
the Enemy one hour or more before the time agreed, or that he suffered the
Enemy to enter and possess them before the Soldiers were marched out. But on
the contrary, that he gave order to all his Officers that came to him for
Orders, to keep their Soldiers upon their Guards, until one hour before we
were to March out of the Town; at which time having given order to his Captain
Lieutenant Stokes with his Company to stay in the Castle, and to keep it till
Prince Rupert sent to demand it, and then to deliver it up unto him according
to the Articles, he gave order to the rest of his Officers to draw their men
into the Marsh, whether he did repair unto them, and about nine of the clock
marched out with the greatest part of them to the Gate which leads to
Warminster, where he stayed within the Town for an hour or two after: But the
Enemy did enter the Town Through his own default, fear and permission.
contrary to their faith, and the Articles agreed upon an hour or more before
nine of the clock, about the time that we were drawing off to a Randevous, and
fell upon our men, disarming, dismounting and pillaging them, by means whereof
and by no fault of Col. Fiennes, many both Soldiers and Citizens were pillaged
and plundered.

6. To the sixth, he acknowledges and owneth the clause mentioned to be in his
printed Relation, and that the Enemy having entered in one place on wednesday
morning the 26. of July, were valliantly repulsed in all places else with great
loss; but does deny, that to his knowledge any women made any such offer as in
the Articles is expressed, or that he should have thought it a fit means to
dead the Cannon bullets, or that any such speeches were given out, or any such
Actions done by any Inhabitants or Soldiers to his knowledge, as that they
brake their Arms, and said they were betrayed; or that he would have suffered
them unpunished, if he had heard or known any such thing: And for the rest of
the Article he denies it in the whole, and in every part thereof; and on the
contray affirms, and is ready to prove, that during the whole siege, he did
bot by his words and actions encourage the Soldiers and Officers to do their
duty, thanking some, praising others, stirring up others, sending them bread,
wine, victuals, and giving them monyes, and promising them further rewards,
but especially by his own Example, going constantly the round at all hours of
the night, sometimes in the beginning of the night, and sometimes in the latter
end thereof, and repairing upon all occasions to the places of most danger, and
standing most usually with his Troop in the place of greatest danger, and by
all other ways and means that could be expected from any Governor. And he
further affirms, that the place where the Enemy entered, was not a likely
place for the Enemy to enter by was weakliest assaulted; could not have bin
better guarded without drawing forces from other places, which were in more
apparent danger and more strongly assaulted, was more strongly guarded then
some other places that were more strongly assaulted, and yet the Enemy
repulsed, and that the Enemy might have been in all probability repulsed there
also, had the guards of foot or horse that were to second them done their
duty, as well as they did elsewhere, or had The only neglect was in himse^fe,
not in Col. Stephens or his Major who would have beaten them out.
Colonel Stephens or his Major sent down some foot together with the
Governors Troop when they went to charge the Enemy, out of the men that were
under their Command upon the next adjoining guards, which they might and ought
to have done, and could only well do it. And he further affirms, that when
the Enemy first entered they were at the least two hundred; that soon after
they dug down the Rampiert of earth all flat for their horse and foot to
enter, and that then imediately they possessed themselves of walls, houses,
Essex Fort, and other places of advantage, It was above three or four hours
before any more entered by his own witnesses confession, they entered a little
after three, and the sally was not till 11, or 12, seven or eight hours after
the first entry.
that within one hours space at the furthest, after the entry of the first,
there entered at least 300 foot more, and a Regiment of horse with Ordinance,
and after both horse and foot entered as fast as they could, that Col. Fiennes
so soon we as had notice of the entry of the Enemy at that place, made all the
have he could to repair thither, but that before he got thither, his men were
come By his special command upon pain of death.
off the lines for half a mile together, and his own Troop (unto which he was
going up) beaten off also: that afterward both by his commands and his own
person, he used the best, the safest, the speediest, and the most effectual
means that any then could, or yet can show for the securing of the City, the
safeguard of his Soldiers, and for the repulsing of the Enemy, but diverse of
his Soldiers did disobey, and other of his Soldiers and Commanders did refuse
to yield ready obedience to his commands, especially He went forth in the sally
and was wounded; and had his advice been followed the Town had been saved, and
the Enemy cut off.
Major Jews to whom he was constrained to send an Order upon pain of death to
yield obedience before he would do it, and by his and others disobedience,
the service was hindered and retarded, that a sally could not be made so
seasonably as otherwise it might have been, and with better success then it
was, although when it was made, it was performed with such resolution that it
gave a stop to the Enemy, who otherwise had in all probability entered the rest
of the Town by force, being already possessed of two of the greatest Works
thereof; and Col. Fiennes did not cause any parley to be sounded till such time
as his men were beaten back again with fresh Regiments of foot and horse
brought down upon them, but was still ready to have seconded them with his own
Company, had there been He was without faith, hope, or trial.
any hopes to have beaten them off, and till such time as goind round the Town
with his Lieutenant Colonel, he spoke with great earnestness to all his
Officers that he could meet to get their men to their Colors again;
commanding them to repair to the Marsh, and that there should be victuals, and
twelve pence a man given them, which accordingly was given to as many as came
together, but could His disorderly calling them off the Line, and not employing
them for four hours space, when called off was the cause of their d^serting
their Colors.
never get together, or to their guards, two hundred, of ten or twelve
hundred of the men that were on that side the Town: whereupon by the advice of
his Council of War, he sent forth a parley; all which he is ready to prove.

To the seventh, he answers, that notwithstanding he declared that he could
not keep the Town with the force he had in it, yet he denies that he had a
real intention to deliver up the same to the Enemy before ever it was besieged
by them, or that he had no thought at all to defend it to the uttermost, or
till it might be relieved by his Excellency, or that he refused to send the
Prisoners formerly taken out of the Castle before the Enemy approached, or that
he commanded Mr Hasard the Mr Gunner, to lay aside a reserve of thirty barrels
of powder with a purpose to retreat when he was reduced thereunto, or that he
moved Sir William Waller to depart from Bristoll, or that Sir William Waller
would otherwise a dventured his life in its defense; or that it does appear by
any of the premised Articles, or any speeches of his concerning the prisoners,
or a reserve of powder, or Sir William Wallers departure from Bristoll, or any
other speeches of his, that he had not a real intention to keep the town and
castle to the uttermost, that in honor, wisdom, and faithfulness, unto those
by whom he was entrusted he ought to have done: but that the contrary does
appear by very many deeds and speeches of his, and by those very particulars
instanced in, so far, and in such a manner as they were spoken and done by him.
And he further affirms that he did often move Sir William Waller to free him
from the care and danger of so many prisoners, but could never obtain it; but
when he thought neither town nor castle safe enough to keep them, he spoke to
him to send them away to a place of more safety, but neither showed him the
means how to do it, nor offered to take any of the most considerable with
him, although he had an absolute command over them at all times, whenever he
pleased to signify his pleasure concerning the discharge or disposal of them,
as he did discharge Major-Generall Bret, and diverse others (whereof some led on
those that assaulted us at Bristoll.) That Colonel Fiennes spoke to Sir Arthur
Hasterigge, when he took leave of him, to take some of the prisoners away with
him in the ship, but he refused it: that he spoke to Captain Birch (who seemed
forward to undertake such a matter) to see if he could find means to send them
away speedily and safely by sea, and that he would contribute his best
assistance thereunto, but he also gave it over: That he commanded Hazard the
Master Gunner, when the enemy was approaching the town, to lay apart a reserve
of thirty barrels of powder, and to keep it private, that every man might be
careful to husband that which appeared, and to make no waste thereof; and that
in case he was forced to retreat into the castle before he came to treaty, he
might have wherewith to defend himself: but Mr Hazard did so over-doe his
command, that though afterward at several times he commanded him to give a
perfect account of all his Ammunition to his brother Colonel John Fiennes, who
was to have the chief care thereof over him, yet he did This is a very probable
flory which manifests both himself, and his brother to be negligent,
indiscreet, unskilful Governors, not fit for such a charge: Orrather shows
that they concealed their flores from the Council of war, to induce them to
surrender the Town upon this misinformation.
conceal from him this reserve; insomuch that when Colonel John Fiennes was
required to declare at the Council of War, what store of Ammunition was left,
he informed us that he had taken a particular account thereof, and that there
was not above three or four hundred weight of Match, and between 20 and 30
barrels of Powder (as indeed he knew of no more;) and that they were spending
of that too: whereby (as by like speeches of the Master-Gunner to the like
purpose But why did he not send for the Gunner to the Council, to know the
truth, but adjourned this inquiry t^ll after the Towns surrender, and his
coming to London, if there were no treachery in the business?
Colonel Fiennes did believe he had broken up his reserve, and that he was
spending of that also, and that there was not above twenty barrells of Powder
left, and did not He deserved to die for his negligence here confessed.
certainly know the contrary, till such time as he was come to London, and had
particularly informed himself by Mr Hazard of the truth; and that the enemy
knew not of more powder in the castle then Capt. Bushel, the same night the
Articles were agreed on, being a prisoner in the castle, brake up the Magazine
door, and sound no less then 70 French barrels of powder, which make 140. of
ours: and therefore this is a loud untruth.
twenty barrells for diverse weeks after the surrender of the town, he is But
did it not.
able to prove. And lastly, he does affirm, that Sir William Waller was so far
from needing to be stirred up to depart the town, that on Friday, the day
after he came to Bristoll, commanding some of his Officers to draw forth some
of their men into the Marsh, and they conceiving that it would not be possible
to do it till the next morning, he replied, that then it might be too late:
and the next day drawing them out upon Durdam Down, where Colonel Fiennes
there asked, in case the enemy should advance toward Bristoll, how he would
dispose of himself and his horse; he answered, that he must retreat: And it is
evident in many respects, that it was necessary for him to draw out of the
town; for it is most likely, that had he not done it, the town would have been
left Note what aspersions be here cast upon Sir William.
sooner then it was, and the dishonor and loss of the State been greater; and
that if he had when he first came to Bristoll followed the advice given him by
Colonel Fiennes and his Officers, or done according as he promised Colonel
Fiennes when he took his leave of him, he would have done better service, both
for the preservation of that city, and the rest of England, then by the course
he took: all which he is ready to prove and justify.

To the eighth Article, he does deny that there were 60 barrells of Powder in
the castle when it was surrendered, Reader, observe the Answer to this Article,
and then judge of him that made it as thou feast cause.
or that he did promise to any inhabitant of the city to defend the same, but
in case he was forced to retreat into it; nor any longer then he thought fit,
for the honor and best advantage of them by whom he was entrusted; or that
there was in it all manner of provision and victuals sufficient to maintain
one thousand men for three months space; or that he delivered up the keys of
the castle before the hour agreed on in the Article; or that by reason thereof
many inhabitants of the city, or any other person whatsoever, had their estates
which they brought into the castle seized upon: But on the contrary he
affirms, that there were but This was 20 more then Massy had when Gloucester
was first be sieged.
fifty barrels in the castle when it was surrendered, and that was thirty more
then either And do not such a Governor and Council deserve to suffer for such
a wilful ignorance of their sto^^s, that would first surrender the City and
Castle to the enemy and then come to London to enquire what stores they had at
Bristoll when they yielded it? Certainly if there were not treachery, there
must be much Folly in such an affected ignorance.
he or his Council of War knew of before they came to London; and that
therewith he was less able to defend the Town four days, or the castle 14
days, then Gloucester might with the like proportion be defended 24 days: That
there were about eleven cannons mounted in and about the castle, and that there
was need of more, to supply the many defects and universal weakness thereof;
but that there was never an one amongst them all, or in the town, fit for
battery, or to hinder the approach of the enemy in any effectual way; but he
had sent to London for three to that purpose, and that they were at hand, but
not yet come to him: that although he had Was not this a sweet Governor, that
prosesseth he had no more cbarge of his chiefest Fort, then of any house in the
Town?
no charge of the castle, more then of any house in the town, nor was obliged
to hold it further then he judged it for the good of the public, yet he did
resolve to make use of it for the advantage of the State, and of their friends
and soldiers; as also he did, by making the terms of composition the better
by the countenance thereof, which was the best use he could make of it in that
condition he was in, and would have been as ready to have done it by the
defense thereof, if he had been forced thereunto, or that it had been fit in
wisdom and justice to have taken this course, as if succors had been at hand,
and in some other cases, it might have been: And for this, and diverse Quaere
what those were, if not to keep it against the enemy
other reasons, he did take some pains, and was at some cost, for the
strengthening of it, and furnishing of it with great and small shot, and
Granado's, and provision of victuals, and other necessaries, whereof what was
the quantity of each sort he is He was then very careless, if ignorant of his
siores.
uncertain, but is certain that none was employed but where there was occasion,
nor should have been spared if there had been occasion to use them: but does
affirm that he never gave order to the Commissary of victuals, to make
provision of victuals for more then one thousand men for a month, wherein he
aimed at a double proportion to what he thought he should have need of; or that
he ever hoped to keep the castle for more then a Ergo he yielded it up before
extremity, when he held it not three whole days, and yielded it before one
shot was made against it, or approach toward it, or retreat into it.
fortnight, on three weeks at the sarthest: That he was content, for diverse
good reasons, to suffer the best affected persons to carry into the castle some
of their principal goods, but was very angry when he saw them offer to carry
in their lumber, and straightly forbad it: That special Article was made for
them that carried in their goods, that they might have free liberty to carry
them out at leisure: That the Citizens themselves being diverse of them upon the
guard in the castle, that had their goods there, made such haste to get them
out on Thursday morning, that leaving their guards, and Major Wood and others
that had charge of the soldiers in the castle, suffering their soldiers to
go from their guards without and against order, the passage into the castle
was so thronged, that none could pass in nor out, and by that means some of
the prisoners got loose in the castle, and grew disorderly, and some of the
enemies This is formerly denied.
got in before the time; but Colonel Fiennes coming thither, and seeing this
disorder, with his sword in his hand beat back the people that thronged the
drawbridge, drew up the bridge, and got some of his soldiers to their guards
again, put their Arms into their hands, and had drawn all his soldiers into
it, had he not received News while he was doing this, that the enemy was
broken into the Town, contrary to the Articles, and were dismounting,
d^sarming, and pillaging our men: Whereupon he gave order unto his Captain
Lieutenant Stokes, to keep the Castle with his Company, and to deliver it up to
Prince Rupert when he sent to demand it, and was forced himself to go into
the Marsh with Captain Teringham, one of the enemies hostages, with him, for
the safeguard of his soldiers, both Horse and Foot, and of his friends in the
Town, as is expressed in answer to the fifth Article. And lastly, he does
affirm, and will justify, that the castle was in no sort tenable, neither in
respect of the strength thereof, or of the It had above three months
provision, in half which time it would have been releeved.
provision wherewith it was furnished, for one quarter of the space, wherein
possibly he could have had succors, nor for half the quarter of the time
where in possibility he could have expected them: And that Note this, which
proves that were it tenable, yet he was resolved to surrender it together with
the City: And is not this a confession both of his treachery and cowardice?
if it had been tenable, yet neither by the constant practice or Maxims of War
in all places, nor by the Rules of honesty or Christianity, that he ought to
have held the same; or that it had been for the honor and advantage of those
by whom he was entrusted so to have done; and therefore ought to surrender it
together with the Town, without disputing it at all, as he did.

To the ninth, he denies that he has done any dishonorable action, or that
he has said or done any thing amiss, or unduly, or untruly, in the
justification which he made of the surrender of the city and castle of Bristoll
in the honorable House of Commons, or any other ways. And the rest of the
Article he denies in the whole, and in every part thereof; and does affirmt,
and doubts not but to make appear to any that are verst in Military
affairs, that without detracting any thing from the worthy Governor, who did
as much as the enemy put him to, and as honorably as any man could do, that
he had a harder task to hold Bristoll in the condition it was in, A pretty
riddle: Why then did he say he would l^se his head, if Massy could hold it two
days if the Kings Forces came before it?
and in the manner that it was assaulted, four days, then Colonel Massy had
to defend Gloucester four weeks: and that he was so far from declaring that
Gloucester could not hold out three days, that he often declared, that if they
had Ammunition enough, they might do well enough, and hold out till relief
came to them; but often he feared they might be strained therein, as having good
cause to know it, for had he not supplied them with 10 barrels of powder, and
had they not had two or three more out of Barckly castle, which he sent thither
but a week or two before, the town had been lost for want of powder; and in
this respect he desired those whom it concerned, to relieve them, not to be too
confident of their holding out, and to hasten relief unto them, so far was he
from desiring to hinder relief to be sent unto them, that it might be lost as
Bristoll was.

To the tenth he answers, that it is an Article without a charge, an argument
without a proof; 10.
for that the testimony of the enemy can make nothing against him, it being
their parts to Never with their own disparagement; but ever enemies make their
conquests as difficult as may be, to add to their own valor and honor.
dishonor and disgrace their enemies as much as they can; but the testimony of
an enemy, though it be of no validity against him, yet it is strong for him:
and as he does deny, that those that are soldiers on the enemies side have any
such sense of the action, so he does affirm that they had and have expressed
the contrary.

This is a true compared copy of Colonel Fiennes Answer to the Articles, which
the Prosecutors copied out of the Original at Saint Albans by degrees, as they
had leisure. Which Answer is so full of untruths, absurdities, contradictions,
evasions, paradoxes, and apparent discoveries both of negligence, treachery,
cowardice, in the surrender of Bristoll, as it alone (without further evidence)
had been sufficient to condemn him.

Article I.
THe Articles and this Answer to them being read, the Prosecutors (to expedite
the Trial) proceeded presently to the proof of their Articles, before any
copy of the Answer taken by them: And whereas they conceived the Defendant
would have been so ingenuous as to have granted the three first Articles, being
but introductive to the impeachment, and so apparent, that impudency it self
would blush at their denial, yet this brave self-Fencer, to spin out time, and
display his want of ingenuity, assumed so much boldness as to deny the first
Article; and thereupon unexpectedly put the Prosecutors to an extemporary
proof of that which all the world knew, and himself only most shamefully
(even against his knowledge and conscience) denied, to the admiration of all
the Council, and others present.

First, Col. Fiennes his three first evasions.
he denied that Col. Essex was ever Governor of Bristoll.

Secondly, that he ever removed or sent Colonel Essex thence.

Thirdly, that himself was ever Governor of Bristoll.

And then bid Master Prynne prove these particulars ere he proceeded further.

Master Prynne thereupon replied, Mr Prynnes answer to them.
that he much admired how a man of his birth and breeding should so much forget
himself, as to deny that in private before the Council, which himself had
not only confessed, but professed before the House of Commons (the
representative body of the Realm,) the City of Bristoll, and published in
print to all the World in public: But since he denied these particulars, he
would easily make them good against him.

For the first, it is clear that Colonel Essex was both acknowledged and
styled Governor of Bristoll, by the Parliament, his Excellency, the Committees
of Somersetshire, Gloucestershire, Wilt-shire, the Citizens and Garrison of
Bristoll, and all the Gentlemen of those parts, and by Colonel Fiennes
himself at his first coming to Bristoll, who gave him the title of Governor.

Secondly, that the made out his Warrants, commands, and ordered all things

Thirdly, that in the book, entitled, A full Declaration of Colonel Fiennes
his march to, and proceedings at Bristoll, compiled and published by himself,
or his Major Langrish with his approbation, page 3. 4. 10 12, to 16. Colonel
Essex is both acknowledged and styled Governor of Bristoll, and that by
himself in his own printed Letter to his Father to justify his removal, and
the depositions which he took and published against him, attest him to be
Governor: therefore he must even blush to deny all these pregnant evidences,
and to put us thus to prove that only now, which he ever confessed before.

Whereupon Colonel Fiennes much appalled, said in a shuffling manner, I
confess he was a Governor de facto, but not de jure.

To which Mr Prynne replied, First, that he was sent thither, and placed there,
by his Excellencies special command, and the Parliaments approbation;
therefore he was as much Governor de jure as himself or any other. Secondly,
that he was obeyed as a rightful Governor till he sent him thence, and so
esteemed by the Parliament, his Excellency, the Garrison, City, and Committee.
Thirdly, if he was not Governor de jure, then all his commands and acts there
done, during his government, were injurious, unwarrantable, which he presumed
the Defendant durst not affirm.

Then he replied, that Colonel Essex had no commission, and therefore was no
rightful Governor.

To which Mr Prynne rejoined, First, that for ought he knew he had a
commission. Secondly, that his Excellencies sending of him thither, to take in,
command the city, and his confirming him there as Governor, with the
Parliaments consent, was a commission sufficient to make him Governor de jure.
Thirdly, that if his Excellency commanded an Officer by word of mouth alone,
without a commission under seal, to lead any Brigade out upon service, or to
take in any town or castle, (as he had lately commanded Major Skippon to take
in and fortify Newport-pannell) this was Warrant enough to make him Governor
both of the Brigade, Town, Fort; and if he should betray, or basely deliver up
that Brigade, Town, or Fort, when taken in, he should be condemned for it by
Martial Law as a Traitor, and the want of a commission would be no excuse to
acquit him from being a Governor, and betraying his trust.

Secondly, that he removed and sent away Colonel Essex from Bristoll.

Mr Prynne proved it, first, by his own printed Letter, and the depositions
published by his direction, in A full Relation, etc. page. 4 6, 11, 12. where
he uses these expressions: Colonel Fiennes ( writes his Major Langrish) who
communicated unto me an order that he had received from his Excellency, whereby
he was enjoined to send Colonel Essex to Windsor, or the Parliament, in case
Nota.
he saw cause for it; and having given me reasons, to see and know that there
was cause so to do, he asked me, whether I would assist him in the executions
of it or no? the which seeing cause for, I promised to do. But it will be
necessary here to annexe the reasons that caused Colonel Fiennes to put in
execution the Order given him by my Lord General, to send up Colonel Essex
from Bristoll, not as an accusation against Colonel Essex in this place, (let
that be followed by those to whom it appertains,) but by way of vindication of
Colonel Fiennes, that he had done nothing herein, but what the trust reposed
in him, and the safety of that important place did require him; and that the
rather, because it begins so far to reflect upon Colonel Fiennes, as if he had
done him injury, and there had been no plot at all, but a plot to put himself
in the Governors place. The Malignants in the Town taking up this, and
spreading it, and adding strength to it by Colonel Essex his own speeches and
carriages, it will be a great injustice to him, who has done his duty, and
therein no inconsiderable services, to be requited with calumny, etc. Besides,
Colonel Fiennes writes thus in a printed Letter to his Father: My Lord, etc. I
sent a Letter long enough, and full enough of particulars, concerning Colonel
Essex, and which I think were sufficient to satisfy any man, that it was
necessary be should be removed from hence, before the Town could be put in any
possibility of security, although he had not been touched in the point of his
fidelity; his being here, Nota.
I found inconsistent with the good and safety of this city; and though there
were no apparent proofe-of his falsehood, which I never affirmed, yet there were
shrewd grounds of jealousy, as may appear by the depositions, whereof I have
sent your Lordship a copy together with this Letter. For my part, so my Lord
General and the World be satisfied, that Nota.
I had good reason to send him away from hence, according to his direction, I
would not have things prosecuted too hard against him, although I am very much
deceived if many a Governor of a Town has not been called to an account, in
point of his Fidelity, upon weaker grounds then those that I have sent.

Secondly, by his own express consession, in the letter end of his Answer to
the second Article, though he denies it in the beginning, that he did it not
upon any pretended cause.

That himself was never Governor of Bristoll, Mr Prynne answered, That it
seemed he had carried himself so dishonourably in that Government, that he was
now ashamed or afraid to confess himself Governor, for search should suffer
for it, else he could not have the impudence to deny it. But since he thus
denied himself Governor, he would quickly prove him so.

First, by his own Warrants during his Government, wherein he styled himself
Governor of Bristoll. Secondly, by his acceptance of that title from his
Officers, Soldiers, the Committee, and all others. Thirdly, by the
Parliaments, his Excellencies, and own Fathers entituling of him, Governor of
Bristoll, in their Letters and directions to him. Fourthly, by his exercising
all the authority, and receiving the pay of a Governor. Fifthly, by the full
Declaration concerning his March to Bristoll, set forth by his Major Langrish,
who in his Letter from Bristoll, March 6. 1643. page 3, 4, 6. styles Colonel
Fiennes, Our Governor, and, Now Governor of Bristoll, three several times,
long before he had a commission to be Governor there. Sixthly, by his own
draught of an Ordinance presented to the House of Commons by the Lord Say, for
the settling of a sufficient Garrison at Bristoll, printed by himself in his
Relation made to the House of Commons concerning the surrender of the City of
Bristoll, page 17 to 22. in which we find this Gentleman no less then eight
several times expressly styled, Colonel Fiennes Governor of Bristoll: And are
you not ashamed so confidently to deny that here in the presence of this
honorable Council, which your self have so lately published to all the
world? Oportet mendancem esse memorem. Seventhly, in the very Articles of the
surrender of the city and castle of Bristol to the enemy he entitled himself
Governor, witness the title of them: Articles agreed on at the City of
Bristoll, between Colonel Nathaniell Fiennes GOVERNOR of the said city on the
one party, and Colonel Charles Gerard and Captain William Teringham, for, and
on the behalf of Prince Rupert, on the other party, July 26. 1643. And Article
1. That the Governor Colonel Nathaniel Fiennes, etc. Certainly if he were not
Governor before to keep, yet these very Articles prove he was then Governor
to surrender it. And now (Sir) take your choice; If you were not Governor,
then you had no power to treat or surrender the City or castle, and so must be
condemned (by your own confession) as a betrayer of them: If you were
Governor of them then, you show your self most unworthy your birth and
breeding in denying it now; especially since you have given an account in a
printed Relation, of your proceedings and surrender of Bristoll, which is in
Law a confession of this trust. To conclude, his Excellencies own
Proclamation, posted up at Westminster by the Defendants procurement, and
summoning us to give information against him, does no less then three several
times together style him, Colonel Nathaniel Fiennes late Governor of
Bristoll: and therefore eternally concludes him to deny it.

The Colonel confounded with these unanswerable ARguments, (which Mr Prynne
informed the Council he pressed the more earnestly, because his Governourship
of Bristoll, was the foundation of the impeachment, which would fall to the
ground if not fully proved,) confessed at last, that he was Governor of
Bristoll, all the Council exceedingly wondering, and seeming ashamed of him,
that he denied it so stiffely, till thus necessitated to acknowledge it: yet
forgetting himself, through fear or guiltiness, he soon after denied again
twice or thrice over, that he was Governor, till he was forced to a new
confessor.

Being thus driven from these shameful shifes, he next denied in the fourth
place,

That he was ever Governor of the Castle of Bristoll, Col. Fiennes his 4. and
5. evasions
though he was of the Town.

And 5ly That he had ever any Commission to be Governor of Bristoll; thinking
to slip his neck from under the Axe, then hanging over it, by these silly
evasions.

To the first whereof Mr Prynne replied, Mr Prynnes Answers to them.
First, that he had the chief command of the Castle, and none else. Secondly,
that he placed his own brother, Colonel John Fienne, as commander in chief,
and all other Officers under him, in Bristoll Glocestershire, and being no part
of the City, yet since Queen Annes entertainment at Bristoll, King James at
her request gave and united the Castle to the City, making it part thereof,
and so it continues to this day: Wherefore since he confesses he was
Governor of the City, he must necessarily be Governor of the Castle too, it
being now parcel of the City, and having no other Governor that had charge of
it in chief but himself alone, and his brother under him.

To this the Defendant in the sixth place replied, Col. Fiennes sixth evasion.
that he had no charge of it as a Fort, no more then of any one house in the
City.

To which Mr Prynne rejoined, My Prynnes Reply.
First, That the Castle was never reputed a house, but always a Fort, a
Castle, and a very strong one too; therefore he must

Upon this Col. Evasion 7.
Fiennes replied, That the Castle was not mentioned in his Commission, and so
he was not chargable with it as a Fort.

Which Mr Prynne presently laying hold of, The Reply thereto.
rejoined: First, my Lords, we have Fiennes had a commission to be Governor
Bristoll, the fifth thing he even now denied. Secondly, though the Castle be
not particularly named as a Fort in his Commission, yet this will not help him,
for it is therein included as part of Bristoll. This I shall undeniably
evidence by a case or two: Colonel Fiennes by virtue of his Commission has
built several Forts and Sconces about Bristoll, without, not within the Cities
limits, though adjoining to it, as we have done the like about London; these
Forts are properly no part of the City, as the castle is, nor are they
mentioned or inc'uded within his commission, being built for the most part
since the commission granted; yet no man will doubt but if Colonel Fiennes, or
any other Officer, had treacherously or cowardly delivered up any of these Out
forts to the enemy, though no part of the City, it had been Treason in him, and
he should have suffered for it: So had he in like manner yielded up or betrayed
any one house in the city or castle, were it fortified or not fortified, to the
loss or hazard of the city, it had been treason by the Laws of War, many
cities and castles having been lost, betrayed by the loss or yielding of one
house or posterne; much more then must he suffer for surrendering such a
considerable Fort as Bristoll castle to the Enemy, without any battery,
assault, or necessity, though he found it not specified in his Commission,
which extends to the whole City, and so to every house, Fort, and parcel of
it, though not particularly mentioned in it.

The Colonel, Evasion 8. The Reply thereto.
thus forced from all these feeble shifts, with much disadvantage, retired to
this false postern to make an escape, That he had no Commission to be
Governor of Bristol, and by consequence was not Governor of it.

To which Mr Prynne replied: First, That since he undertook the Charge of
Essex, till the surrender of the Town and Castle, which he surrendered as
Governor.

Secondly, That himself had formerly unawares confessed, that he had a
Langrish and others even in A full Relation, p. 4. 5. 6.
Print, before he had his Commission to be Governor.

Thirdly, he should prove hereafter, that himself sent one Captain Bagnall
London to procure not only a Commission; but An Independent Commission, from
his Excellency that so he and his Garrison might not be subject to Sir
William Wallers commands, (which Captain Bagnall afterward attested upon
Oath, and that he spent sixteen pounds in these two Journies, to obtain this
Commission, which the Colonel out of his liberallity never yet paid him) and
the Colonel himself confessed afterward to the Council upon Bagnals
testimony, he sent for and received an Independent Commission; that so he and
his Garrison Soldiers might not be liable to Sir William Wallers commands, as
they formerly were.

The Colonel thus entangled and caught in his own snare, Evasion 9.
thought to help himself at a dead lift with an absurd distinction; and
hereupon told the Council, That he sent for this Commission, not to Guard the
City against the Enemy as Governor of it, but only to keep his Soldiers in
order, who when they were commanded on any service grew mutinous, and would
still be calling on him to see his Commission: for which he gave an instance in
Col. Pophams Regiment; who disobeyed him when they returned from the taking of
Sherborne: And this made him to send for a Commission, only to order his
Soldiers, and keep them in obedience; but he never had not sent for any
Commission to keep the Town or Castle.

To which M. Prynne Replied, The Reply thereto.
That this was the most absurd, irrational, if not unsoldierly distinction,
that ever was heard of in the world, and that he might be ashamed to propound
it before Soldiers in such an honorable Council of War as this: for what
need was there either of a Garrison or Governor at Bristoll, or of such a
Commission to keep his Soldiers there in obedience and order, but only to
preserve the City? This was the only end why he and his Garrison were there
placed, maintained by the Parliament and his Excellency to keep the City, which
else would have as well or better kept it self without them.

Secondly, That he was confident his Excellency never granted any such
Commission to any Governor (nor any other Prince or General in the world)
only to keep his Garrison in order, but not to defend the Garrisoned place,
whereof he was Governor; such an absurd Commission was never yet heard of,
nor such a nonsense distinction made by any Soldier, and thereupon he desired
the Commission might be produced, to the end it might appear, whether it
warranted this distiction, That it was only to discipline his Soldiers, but
not to hold the Town against the Enemy.

Thirdly, That their Lordships now saw, the true reason why Col. Fiennes, so
soon delivered up Bristol to the Enemy: he pleads, he had, (or would have) no
Commission to keep it, therefore it was he thus surrendered it up to the Enemies
almost as soon as they came before it: who doubtless would keep it better,
defend it longer then he, though they wanted a Commission for it.

Fourthly, That this pretended disobedience of Col. Pophams Regiment was long
after his Commission received, and that upon this occasion: Col. Fiennes, and
his cowardly plundring Major Langrish, would have taken from Col. Pophams
Regiment that little plunder they had gained at Sherburn, with the hazard of
their lives, at the Countries charge without any direction from Fiennes, who
sent them not on that service: which injurious avaritious act of his, they
justly opposed by standing on their guard, and so kept that booty he would have
carried from them into Bristol Castle. This occasion then being subsequent to
his Commission could not be the ground of its procuring, but rather that which
himself unawares confessed; his desire of independency and exemption from Sir
William Wallers commands.

The Colonel thus drive to the wall and worsted on every hand, Evasion 11.
used two pleas more for his last reserve; First, That he received his
Commission only upon this condition and with this intention, to keep his
Soldiers in order, but not to make good the Town and Castle: therefore he
could be no further chargeable by it then as he received it.

To which Mr Prynne replied: The Reply thereto.
First, That every Governor must receive his Commission at his peril, as it
is granted and intended by him that granted it, (as Tenants do their Leases,
and Donces in tail their Lands) and has no power to annex any conditions
thereunto: his Commission then being absolute, to keep the Town for the
Parliament, that being the sole use, and end thereof, his conditional
accepting of it being repugnant to it, was void and idle.

Secondly, that the Littleton, sect. 378. 379. See Cooks Institutes on it,
fol, 232, 233. 234.
Common and Martial Law of the Realm annex this condition to every Governor
and Officer of trust, that he ought to discharge his trust and Government, and
keep that safe which is committed to his custody to his utmost power, though it
be not expressed in his Commission; And therefore it pretended conditional
acceptance, directly against his trust and Government, was most ridiculous.

Secondly, Evasion 12.
he alleged, That he never sought after the Governouship of Bristoll, but
really desired not to accept it, and to be acquitted from it: to which end he
produced and read diverse Letters of his own to the Lord Say his Father, and one
or two to his Excellency, which took up near two hours time in reading, and
tired all the Council, who with much patience heard them, all read, though Mr
Prynne to husband time, excepted against them, as no evidence at all, nor
sitting to be read: And in the reading of these Letters, the Colonel casually
desired the Council to observe, that many of them were written before he had
his Commission for Bristol, which was not till the first of May, 1643.

This Mr Prynne taking present hold of, desired their Lordships in the first
place to observe, his voluntary confession with a special Nota, of that
Commission which at first he so obstinately denied.

To these Letters read (many of them being printed with his Relation) Mr Prynne
gave these short Answers:

First, That all these Letters were either his own or his Fathers, and not
above Sprig the Lord Says Secretary; Therefore no evidence at all to justify
or excuse him, himself and his own Letters being no compotent witnesses in his
own cause; and his Father but tests Domesticus at the best, if present.

Secondly, That the substance of the chief Letter to his Excellency, was only
Nole, nolo, to vis Episcopari? now used as a formality, for fashions sake only,
even when they come to be consecrated; when in truth they make all the friends
and means they can to compass that Bishopprick, which for fashion sake (out
of a dissembling modesty) they pretend, and twice together answer solemnly
(when demanded openly before the Congregation) that they desire by no means to
accept of: Therefore this Letter of his can be no proof, that he was
unwilling to undertake this Government, since his subsequent acceptance and
actions disprove this pretended refusal.

Thirdly, he observed, that in one of his Letters dated the 4 of April, he writ
To procure and send him his Commission: Therefore he was so far from
refusing, that he sought the Government, and sent Captain Bagnall twice to his
Excellency to procure his Commission, as was after attested upon Oath.

Fourthly, That by diverse of his Letters then read it clearly appeard, himself
Essex, and the chief Actor in his removal, to intrude himself into his
place; so that we had now his own hand against his words and Answer.

Fifthly, that the scope of all his Letters was only to complain and cry out to
the London, or to get more Authority to raise moneys in the Country, to pay
the Garrison, without which moneys he writ, he could not long hold the Town;
But there is not one clause in all the Letters, that he wanted Arms,
Ammunition, powder, men, provision, or that the Town or Castle was not tenable:
If then he complained only of default of moneys, with which if he were
furnished, he made no doubt of keeping the Town; and it is clear he lost not
the Town for want of money (for he has not hitherto either in his printed
Relation, Letters, or answer, affirmed, that he surrendered the City or Castle
for want of money,) then by his own confession, he must surrender them either
out of treachery or cowardice, they being tenable, and furnished will all other
necessaries for a siege but money.

Sixthly, He observed that Col Fiennes did never refuse the place of Governor,
as he should have done had he been unwilling or unable to discharge it; That
his importunity to quit, it, in case he could get no money, was with no intent
to leave the place, but only to hasten the supply of moneys, it being the
argument and retorick of most other Commanders in their Letters to the
Parliament, to cry out for moneys, else all would soon be lost, and they must
disband.

Bristoll, and to settle himself in an absolute Government there. That he both
earnestly writ and sent up twice to his Excellency for a Commission by a
special Agent, that so he might be Independent; that he accepted of the
Commission when it came, Yet never acquanted the City or Committee of
Parliament with it, doing all things in a high imperious manner for the most
part, of his own head, without their privity or advise, That he held his
Commission without surrendering it till he surrendered the Town and Castle to
the Enemy, so unwilling was he to depart with his Governorship. From all which
he concluded, it was apparent he was so far from refusing, that he did
ambitiously affect, if not injuriously usurp this Government for his own
private luchre, to the prejudice of the former Governor, and irreparable
damage of the whole Realm.

In fine, Evasion 13.
Col. Fiennes desired Mr Prynne to prove: First, That he ever undertook to his
Excellency or the Parliament to make good the City or Castle, and not to
surrender the same to the Enemy without their consents: Which he thrice denied
in his answer.

To which Mr Prynne answered: The Reply.
That the very Law it self and common reason informs us, that every Governor
of a Town, or Fort is to make them good, and not to surrender them, to the
Enemy without the consent of those who committed their custody to them, else
very Governor might betray his trust at pleasure; This therefore being a
condition in Law annexed to all Governors and Officers, and he confessing
himself to be Governor, (and that by a Commission which no doubt enjoined him
to make good and keep the place in manner aforesaid) needs no other proof at
all; the Law resolves it, and therefore none must doubt or contradict it.

With this debate the proof of the first Article was concluded.

Article 2.
The second Article was proved by his own printed proceedings mentioned in a
full Declaration, etc. p. 5. 6. 7 8. 15. By his Answer to the Article, and
Relation to the House of Commons, p. 15. And Mr Prynne informing the Council,
that he did not charge it criminally, being a lawful Action done by direction
of Parliament, but only by way of introduction and aggravation of the
subsequent Articles and crime in surrendering the Town so treacherously and
cowardly, after this his sentence against, and execution of those Conspirators,
it was passed over without further pressing.

Article 3.
The third Article being likewise introductive, to aggravate his offense in the
4, 5, 6 and 8, Articles, was briefly proved by his own printed Relation, p. 4,
5, 6, 23. By his printed letter to his Excellency, confessed in part in his
Answer, and to be further proved in proof of the ensuing Articles, was
thereupon briefly run over: And so the first days hearing ended, with great
dishonor and disadvantage to the Defendant, by reason of his denial of those
apparent known truths, he was enforced (even with shame enough) to confess,
which lost him much in the opinion of the Council, and many of his own friends.

The second days hearing, together with the 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. spent wholly in the
proof and defense of the fourth Article, to which most of the others in the
reply and rejoinder were reduced.
THe three first introductive Articles being run over, the first day, the
Prosecutors, the next session, proceeded to the fourth, where the criminal and
capital charge of the Impeachment began: which the Defendant considering, used
all the Artifices that might be to shift off the proofs, if possible: To which
end, he first demurred to the depositions taken upon Oath against him, both
before the Judge Advocate himself, and by Sir William Waller and Col. Carre by
Commission from his Excellency; alleging:

First, Object. 1.
That no paper deposition ought to allowed by the Law, in cases of life and
death, but the Witnesses ought to be all present to testify Viva voce, else
the Testimony ought not to be received.

Secondly, Object. 2.
That Sir William Waller was his Enemy, and by confederary with the Prosecutors
had been the chiefest instrument of Prosecuting this Impeachment against him;
to which end he produced one Major Dowet a French man (whom Sir William Waller
had displaced, and so disgusted) to attest, That Master Walkers Reply to Col.
Fiennes his Relation, was showed to Sir William and his Lady before it was
printed, and that Sir William had spoken to his Officers to acquaint Mr Walker,
with all such passages as they knew concerning Col. Fiennes, touching the siege
and surrender of Bristoll; Therefore he was neither a fit Commissioner nor
witness in this cause, nor yet any of his Officers under him.

Thirdly, Object. 3.
that he had not joined with the Prosecutors in Commission, neither had he
notice thereof, that so he might crosse-examine the Witnesses; therefore for
these reasons, he desired, that all our Paper Depositions might be suppressed
and not given in evidence against him.

To the first of these objections, Answ. 4.
Mr Prynne returned this answer: First, that himself had formerly used this
kind of proceeding in the case of Col. Essex, against whom he had not only
taken, but printed diverse paper testimonies in things which might have proved
capital if the proof had been full. That himself in this very case had sued
forth a Commission to examine Witnesses on his behalf, without our privity,
before we took forth any Commission, who did but imitate him therein, and that
by the Judge, Advocates own advise, who directed us to this course, which he
affirmed to be both Legal and usual: That in the Civill-Law (especially in
Courts Martial) trials were as usual Testimoniis, as Testibus viva voce:
That in the Admirality, (a Civil Law Court) as likewise in the Chancery,
Star Chamber and English Courts, formed after the Civil Law, they proceed
usually by way of Deposition: That even at the Common Law in some cases,
Depositions taken before the Coroner, and Examinations upon Oath before the
chief Justice, or other Justices, are usually given in evidence even in
capital crime: That the high Court of Parliament has upon just occasion
allowed of Paper-depositions in such cases: That in all Courts Martial, both
in England and elsewhere, they have been constantly allowed, and particularly
in the late famous case of Tomkins, Chaloner, and other London. Conspirators,
whose Examinations were read, and given in as evidence one against the other;
upon which they were condemned and executed. Besides, there was both very great
reason and necessity that such Depositions should be admitted in this case, and
in all Martial proceedings of this nature, because diverse of our material
Witnesses, being Officers or Soldiers now in actual service, and dispersed
upon several occasions into diverse Brigades, and parts of the Kingdom remote
from Saint Albans, could not without great danger, dis-service to the State,
inconvenience to themselves, and excessive costs to us, (who had lost our
estates, and prosecuted only for the public on our own expenses) be drawn
together personally to attend this Trial, which had been so frequently
adjourned, not only from week to week, but place to place: That we several
times petitioned both the Commons House and his Excellency, that the Council
appointed for this Trial might be held at a certain day and place, within
London or Westminster, before our Witnesses were dispersed, and where we could
with less trouble and expense to our selves and them, have produced all or
most of them viva voce; but yet we could not (through the Defendants
procurement, as we conceive) obtain this reasonable request: Therefore
himself being both the cause and president of these our Depositions, and of
removing the Trial to this place, for our greater incommodation and expense,
ought not to take advantage of his own wrong, against a Maxim of Law, the
constant practice of the Court Martial, and his own leading example, which we
did but imitate. Which point the Council (causing us to withdraw) did upon
solemn debate among themselves clearly overruled against the Defendant, upon
the premised Reasons.

To the second Exception, Answer 2.
concerning Sir William Waller, Mr Prynne most solemnly protested for himself
to the Council, that it was a most false and malicious slander; That neither
Sir William Waller, nor his Lady, nor any other in their behalf, did ever
directly or indirectly excite, advise, or encourage him in this prosecution;
that the Delinquent himself was the only man who unadvisedly put himself upon
this Trial, as appears most evidently to all the World by the close of his
printed Relation in the Parliament House, where Page 13. he desires the House
of Commons, that they would be pleased to let the truth of what he had then
affirmed to them (concerning the surrender of Bristol) be examined at a
Council of War, that so he might be cleared or condemned as they should
find the truth of falsehood of what he had delivered; By his and his Officers
Petition to his Excellency, and his Excellencies Proclamation upon their
Petition, posted up at Westminster and the Exchange, wherein he summoned Mr
Walker and Mr Prynne by name, in the most public manner that might be, and
after that by private Notes, and sundry other public Adjournments, to be his
Prosecutors: Which thanklesse office he was not altogether unwilling to
undertake, when thus openly engaged by the Defendant, not out of any private
malice to the Delinquent, whom he formerly honored, and to whom he never bore
any particular spleen, having never received the least injury from him; much
less out of any degenerous respects, instrumentally to wrecke the private
malice or revenge of any others upon him, (it being below his spirit, and most
averse to this genius, his conscience, to be subservient or isntrumental to
any man's malice or revenge whatsoever,) but merely out of a real desire to do
his Country faithful service, and vindicate the truth of this unworthy
state-ruining Action, under which the whole Kingdom now lay languishing, from
those false disguises which the Defendant in sundry printed Papers had obtruded
on the World, to salve his own irreparable dishonor. The prosecution
therefore proceeding thus merely from himself, as all the premises infallibly
demonstrate, he had laid a most scandalous imputation upon Sir William Waller
(a noble well deserving Gentleman then absent,) and on himself, in the
forementioned exception, for which he demanded justice against him from that
honorable Council, unless he could make good this calumny, for which he was
most certain the Defendant had not the least shadow of proof, the testimony
of Dowet (the ground of this aspersion) referring not to him, but only to Mr
Walkers Relation, published long before any Impeachment of, or prosecution
against the Defendant: which charge Mr Walker himself there present, was ready
to answer as to that particular.

Hereupon Mr Walker informed the Council, that he acknowledged in the Epistle
to his Answer to the Defendants Relation, that it was but a collection out of
the several reports of diverse Gentlemen and Commanders in that service, before
and whom Bristoll was besieged: which when he had drawn up, having occasion to
go to Southampton, he left it in the hand of a friend, desiring him to show it
to whomsoever he should think fit, (and especially to those Gentlemen out of
whose mouths he compiled it) to see if he had hit their sense aright; and that
this party (as he was since informed) showed it to Sir William Waller. He said
further, that the written copy was showed to the Defendant himself, and
therefore he does not wonder if it were showed to Sir William Waller: and that
Sir Williams objected speaking to his Officers, only to declare what they knew
touching that business, with reference simply to his Answer, could not be
intended either malice, or combination, or prosecution of this impeachment, not
then so much as though of; nor any prejudice to the truth, since no man can
know a falsehood, because it is a nonentity, and can be no object of man's
knowledge: That therefore this could be no just exception to Sir William as a
Commissioner, the rather, because Colonel Carre (a man indifferent) was joined
with him; much less any legal exception to any Officers or Soldiers
testimony then under his command, who did but testify what they knew for
truth. Besides, Mr Prynne added, that Colonel Fiennes himself had examined
diverse of Sir William Wallers Officers by commission, before we examined any of
them, and some of those whom we examined; and why we should be deprived of the
benefit of their Examinations for the Kingdoms advantage, when himself had
examined them only for his private defense, there could be neither reason nor
equity alleged, it being a mere artifice, to deprive us of our most material
Witnesses, and to suffocate the truth.

To the third, Answer 3.
of his wanting notice to join in commission, and cross examine our
Witnesses, Mr Prynne answered,

William Wallers, and the Earl of Manchesters Army, to examine witnesses
there, without our privity or consent, who neither had any the least notice of
the commissions to join in them, nor of any the Witnesses names, till the
hearing, nor had not, nor could not cross examine them, nor ever yet saw their
depositions: And why our depositions, being Prosecutors, should not be admitted
as well as his, being not taken so publicly before the Judge Advocate, as most
of ours were, he saw no reason.

Col. Fiennes to crosse-examine any Witnesses, or to join with us in their
examination; therefore if he neglected to do it, or went before us in his
commissions, as he did, by virtue of which he might have examined all our
Witnesses if he would, before we had taken their testimonies against him, the
default was his, not ours.



These obstacles, by which the Defendant though to have shifted off his Trial,
being removed, Mr Prynne then proceeded to prove the fourth Article, which he
did,



That he never undertook to make good the City or Castle, or either of them,
against the enemy, declaring that he would not, nor could not undertake it:
Which is in plain English as much as to confess, that he had never any
thought or resolution to hold them out to the utmost extremity, as he ought to
have done in honor, and duty; but a professed purpose to surrender them to the
enemies, traitorously or cowardly, as soon almost as they came before it.

That soon after the enemy entered the Line (with a very inconsiderable number,
not above 150 at first, and three or four hundred in all at last, as the
Witnesses attest) he had surrender the Town and Castle, with all the
Prisoners, Cannons, Ammunition, Artillery, Military Provisions, Magazines,
Victuals, and part of the Arms, (all but the Horse-mens Swords, most of which
were likewise taken from them ere they departed the Town) before the enemy had
taken any of the out-forts about the same, or had made the least assault or
battery upon the walls of the City, or of the Castle, or any Mine or breach
into the chief Fort thereof, (and that before the Town had been three whole
days besieged, which he denies not, and therefore grants by his Answer:)
which whether it were not a most clear contession and demonstration of a
treacherous and cowardly surrender in the superlative degree, he humbly
submitted to the honorable Councels judgment, and the determination of all
men endued with common reason and yet the Defendant has the confidence, in the
same branch of his Answer, to deny that he did deliver them up traitorously,
cowardly, or dishonourably or contrary to his former promises, (to dispute
every inch of the Town, from the Line to the City-gates, and from thence to the
Castle-walls, which he would defend to the utmost, and there lay his bones if
he could not keep it, and make his Flag of Truce his Winding Sheet, proved by
Mr Powell, Col. Stroode, Col. Stephens, Mr Hassard, Capt. Bagnall.
diverse Winesses,) or contrary to his trust and duty: And the impudence to
affirm, that he did defend the Town and Castle to the utmost point, not only
of duty, but also of honor, that any Soldier could or might have maintained
the same: Which whether it were not the greatest Pardox and contradiction, that
any Military man in his right senses durst ever affirm before a Council of
experienced, valiant Commanders, he referred to the resolution of all there
present.

Thirdly, he confesses, that though neither any of the Outworks were taken,
nor (in reference to the Governors known valor and fidelity) neither the
Forts, nor castle, ought to have been kept, to the prejudice of the city and
garrison, (the prejudice of the whole Kingdom, which has felt the smart of
it, is cautiously here omitted:) but ought to have been surrendered together
with the city, as they were, by the constant practice and policy of War in all
places, the prniciples of justice and honesty, and the rules of wisdom and
discretion (all of this grand soldiers own making, Nota.
but none others:) And he further adds in the clause of his Answer to the
eighth Article, That he does affirm and will justify, that if the castle had
been tenable (mark it) yet neither by the constant practice and Maxims of War
in all places, nor by the Rules of honesty and Christianity, he ought to have
held the same. A riddle, which Mr Prynne professed transcended the limits of
his understanding to enucleate, if no^ of all men's else, but the Defendants;
and a passage which carried Treachery and Cowardice engraven with Capitals in
its very Front, proclaiming openly to all men, that had the Out-sorts and
castle been never so strong and tenable against the enemy, yet he was so far
from resolving to keep them for the Kingdoms and Parliaments security, that he
professes, he ought not to have held the same, neither by the constant
practice and policy of War, nor Rules of Piety or Christianity (prescribed him
by Dr Fern, no doubt, in his Resolving of Conscience) But ought to have
surrendered the same with the Town. Certainly this Gentleman was either
resolved to lose his head when he penned this Answer, or else intoxicated with
the panick fear that surprised him at Bristoll, (which has made his pen and
brains to stagger ever since) else he durst not put in such an Answer in
writing to this Impeachment.

Fourthly, he says, that this surrender of the city, castle, forts, with all
the Ammunition, (but Troopers Swords,) Prisoners, Ships, and his very Colors,
before any Out-fort taken, or battery made against city or castle, was upon
good and honorable conditions (he certainly means ito^^ely in reference to
Prince Rupert and the Enemies) in respect to the estate HE (not the Kingdom)
was in: I think he means himself was in an ill condition, should the Kings
forces have forcibly taken him Prisoner, for that the King had excepted him out
of the Pardon mentioned in his Answer to the third Artcle: And therefore out of
base fear and self-respects he would rather redeem his head, and buy his
peace with the voluntary surrender of a place of such consequence to his
Majesty, then hazard his life in defending it to the utmost. And withal he
adds, that this surrender was for the honor, profit, and best advantage of
the kingdom, and Parliament, by whom he was entrusted: which when he shall be
able to demonstrate, or make the Parliament and Kingdom believe, I shall
profess this honorable Council may in justice acquit him; till then (I hope)
you cannot but condemn him, even out of these several passages of his own
Answer, and diverse others of this nature, over-tedious to recite.

Secondly, 2.
from his Answer I shall descend to our proofs, which extend to all the ensuing
Articles as well as this: where we proved by the depositions of our Witnesses
hereafter printed,

Stevens, Anthony Gale, Arthur Williams, Able Kelly, James Powell, and others.

Edward Bainton, (attested afterward by Captain Bushel himself to diverse of
the Council of War at Saint Albans) Arthur Williams, Joan Batten, Major Wood,
and others: Besides, himself confesses in his Relation 50 barrels in the
Castle only, when surrendered, Mr Hassard deposes 50 at least.

Nicholas Cowling, Able Kelley, James Powell, Dorothie Hassard, Marie Smith,
and others: That See the depositions of col. Strode, Col. Stephens, Captain
Bagnall, Mr Powell, Mr Cowling, Major Wood, Richard Linpon, Ed Watlin, Mr
Hassard.
himself and others deemed the City and Castle strong and tenable; that he
promised to hold the same to the utmost; to dispute every inch of ground with
the enemy, to retire into the Castle when he could hold the City no longer; to
lay his bones there rather then yield it, and make his Flag of Truce his
Winding Sheet. If then the place were so strong and tenable, and he wanted
neither men, nor Ammunition, nor Victuals, to defend the City and Castle, his
surrender of them must of necessity be adjudged Traiterly, or Cowardly at
least, if not both: for what else but treachery, or cowardice, or both
conjoined, could move him to this surrender, in less then three days siege,
before utmost extremity, contrary to the Laws and Ordinances of War, when as
he wanted nothing necessary for a brave defense.

Secondly, 2.
we proved that the Town and Castle were not besieged three whole days; for
the siege it self began but the Monday morning, and the Articles of surrender
were agreed on before Wednesday night, and the surrender executed before 9 of
clock the Thursday morning: as Col. Stephens, Col. Strode, Abbe Kelley, and
others testify.

Thirdly, 3.
that the Enemies were generally repulsed on all quarters of the city, with
extraordinary great loss of men, near 700 of them being slain, and as many
wounded, with the loss only of six or eight of our men: and that but 150 of
them, or 200 at most, entered the Line the Wednesday morning before sun rising
(near three of the clock) and were so afraid of being cut off, that they gave
themselves all for dead men, and might have easily been cut off, none of their
own party knowing of their entry till two hours after they entered, nor
sending them any relief: attested by Arthur William, Joseph Proud, James
Coals, Marie Smith, Sergeant William Hill, Stephen Radford, Michael Sparks, and
others:

Fourthly, that Major Langrish and his horse Troops, which had the guard of
Langrish (very intimate with the Defendant) had been formerly complained of to
him, by Lieutenant Clifton, Col. Stephens, and others, for his extraordinary
cowardice and negligence, who desired he might be casheered to walk the street,
as unfit for any charge, yet the Defendant continued him in his place, and set
him to guard that very weak place where the enemy was likeliest to enter.
Proved by Joan Battin, Col. Popham, Col. Stephens, and Captain Nevill.
Lieutenant Clifton, Captain Husbands, and Captain Vaughan, (Fiennes own
Witnesses) upon cross Examinations before the Council.

Fifthly, that the day before the enemy entered, one Thomas Monday, a Soldier
Henry Lloyd (as both their Depositions witness) pointing with his finger to
the very place where the enemy entered the next morning, told Major Langrish in
the hearing of Colonel Fiennes; Captain, Yonder is a very suspicious place,
not fully fortisied, and it is very doubtful, unless you set an hundred
Musketeers more there, it being but weaklie manned, the enemies will there make
their first breach: Whereupon Colonel Fiennes for this his good advice in an
angry manner asked him, What? does he prate? and called him Saucy Knave: and
Langrish having the guard thereof, suffered the Enemy the very next morning to
enter the Line at that same place, from which he retired with his horse without
any charge or resistance, when as he might easily have repulsed and beat them
off, yet the Defendant never questioned nor complained against Langrish for
this his cowardice and treachery, which was the only real occasion of
surrendering the City, but countenanced and justified him all he could,
affirming in Reply to Mr Wallers Relation.
print, that he was acquitted by a Council of war of cowardice, which was
false; and endeavored to lay the blame of not charging upon one Lieutenant
Rouswell, who was so far from being guilty of this fact, that seeing Langrish
with his Troop quit the breach without charging, he called him Coward, and with
three or four Musketies only marched up to the enemy, and made good the
breach for a time, till he received so many wounds (whereof he after died) as
forced him to retreat for want of seconding; he affirming that if he had been
seconded by the horse, or with 20 Musketeers more, he could easily have
repulsed the enemy, and made good the breach; yet this dead man must thus be
traduced before the Council to save Langrish his credit, though Captain
Husbands (one of the Defendants own witnesses) confessed, that Langrish his
cowardice, in not charging, was the loss of Bristoll, and that he told him so
openly to his face, at a meeting in London, since the surrender; yet the
Defendant had the boldness to justify, and produce him as a competent
Witness, viva voce, at the hearing before the Council, where the Prosecutors
articled against him for this and other acts of cowardice, and would have
prosecuted him with effect, had they seen any fruits of the sentence against
Col. Fiennes, but such as justly dismayed them from all future prosecutions of
this kind.

White-church, four miles from Bristoll, with a resolution never to come on
again, had not the message of the unexpected Parley, and hopes of the Cities
surrender thereupon, drawn them back to their Quarters: And that diviers of
the Enemies confessed, if they had then been repulsed or beaten out of this
breach, they had raised their siege, and never come on again. Sergeant Hill,
Major Wood, James Coals, depose all this, and the Defendants witnesses
confessed it.

Rouswell, and after by Capt. Nevill, who charged them down hill only with
twenty horse an hour or more after their entry, and could have then beaten
them out, as he verily believed, and attested upon Oath, had he been seconded
with 30 or 40 horse or Musketeers. A very strange neglect, to suffer the Enemy
to lodge so long within the Line, ere they were encountered.

Fiennes in stead of commanding the next Guards and Companies then at the
Outworks, to fall upon and beat them out, as he was pressed to do by
Lieutenant Davison, Major Wood, Captain Bagnall, Mr Deane, Sergeant Hill, and
others, commanded all the Soldiers upon pain of death, by his Lieutenant
Clifton, to draw off the Line and Works on that side of the City the Enemy
entered, and to retire into the City with all speed to the Marketplace, full
sore against their wills: whereat diverse of the Soldiers Joan Battin, Will.
White-horne, Sergeant Gale, Captain Bagnall, Tho. Monday.
were very much discontented and discouraged, and many of them said, They were
betrayed. Whereupon they retreated from the Line and Out-workes in great
disorder, many of them leaving not only their Swords, Muskets, Powder,
Bullets, but their very Cannons behind them, which might with ease have been
easily drawn off being down the hill, and many Halliers horses ready at hand
for that service; at which the Gunners were so discontented, that some of them
spiked and nailed up the touch-holes, to make their Cannons unserviceable to
the Enemy, and the City-Garrison too, in case they had returned to the Works
and Line, which by this strange Soldiery were left naked of all defense near
two miles space together, so as the Enemy might have entered the Line where they
pleased, in sundry places of greater advantage, nearer to the City, Castle,
Suburbs, by much, then where they had made their first entry. Which strange
devise and unmilitary policy, if it favored not of apparent treachery, yet at
least it cannot be excused from extreme folly, and want of skill in Martial
affairs, which made Major Lewis, and other of the best experienced Soldiers
(who advised not to draw off the Line into the City, but to fall presently on
the enemy from the Line it self, which was the nearer, best, and speediest
way) exceedingly discontented.

Ninthly, that when the Soldiers were thus hastily and confusedly called from
Capt. Bagnall
they there stood idle, looking one upon another, without any command to make a
fally, or do any other service to secure the City; whereupon, for want of
command and imploiment, diverse of the Soldiers who had been upon duty at the
Line four or five days and nights together, departed from their Colors, some
to the Tavern, some to the Alehouse to drink, others to their beds to sleep,
so as their companies were broken, and not halffull, whereas if they had
marched orderly from the Line against the Enemies when they first entered it,
which was far the best and shortest way; or made a sally as soon as they
retreated from the Line, these inconveniences had been prevented, the Soldiers
kept in heart, the enemies cut off, or beaten out, the breach made up, and the
City preserved.

Tenthly, that when the sally was made, not before, but much about eleven of
Major Wood, Will. White-horne.
it consisted not of above 200 men, and that of those called off the Line, the
fresh men at the maine Guard, and Captain Stokes his company purposely kept
for a Reserve, with the Garrison soldiers in the castle, (who were not in the
fight at the Line, and might have made a present sally, without calling any
from the Line) being not employed on this service.

Eleventhly, that when the enemies upon the sally, though late, were driven
from Serieant Gale, Joan Battin, Mrs Hassard, Thomas Monday, Serieant Gale.
rather then the City should be yielded, and thereupon encouraged both the
Gunners and Soldiers to fight, working in the very face of the enemy, and
stopping up Froome-gate with a very thick work (made with earth and
Wooll-sacks) where the Enemy should have entered the city; yet such was the
Defendants extraordinary cowardice, that he even then sent twice out to the
Enemy for a Parley, whereas the Soldiers generally desired and offered to
fight it out to the utmost; which so much discontented diverse soldiers, that
they said they were betrayed, and in very anger brake their Muskets, Swords,
Pikes, lest the Enemy should gain them, swearing they would never serve the
Parliament more, and taxing the Governor for his Parley and cowardice.

Twelfthly, That the Castle was surrendered, the Prisoners released, the Enemy
Mayor Wood, Col. Stroode, and others.
through the Defendants hastiness; yea the soldiers and Townsmen pillaged
before his face, yet he took no care to see them righted, but left them to the
spoil, neglecting to take hostages to see the Articles performed; which
(contrary to the Rules of War) were not made between Prince Rupert, Richard
Winsto^e, Capt. Husbands and others.
the Kings General, and the Governor, but between him and the Princes
Commissioners only; and that he made such haste to quit the Town, that he
left Captain Blake, and Captain Husbands in Brandon-hill and Prior-hill Forts
behind him, never giving them notice of the Articles, nor any Warrant under
his hand to surrender them to the Enemy, to the endangering of their lives and
liberties.

13. That Colonel Fiennes being moved to send away the Prisoners before the
siege, refused, saying, He would keep them there to make his own conditions
the better, thinking of nothing before hand, but to surrender the City, to save
himself: That he told See Mr Talboyes deposition.
Mr Talboies, that he should not be in Bristoll for ought he knew at Saint
James tide then next ensuing, and used such expressions to him, as made him
believe he meant to surrender the Town by that time, (as he did the very next
day after Saint James his feast) who thereupon left the City, as intended to be
surrendered by the Governor: That he commanded Mr Hassard to lay by a Reserve
of 30 barrels of Powder, with Match and Bullets proportionable, to which when
he was reduced he would treat: Rich. Butlers testimony.
That there were about 140 Granado's in the castle, and one new Morter-piece,
and that John Warden one of the Gunners of the castle did often importune the
Defendant to give him leave to make a shot at the Enemy out of the said
Morter-piece, but the Defendant commanded him under pain of death not to make
any shot at them; whereat the said Gunner was so grieved, that he often
complained the Town was betrayed: All which Granado's, with the Morter-piece,
were surrendered to the Enemies, and not one of them shot against them, though
they shot many Granado's at the Town and Garrison.

Col. Stephens, Col. Strode, Mr Powell, Major Wood, Captain Bagnall, Thomas
Monday, Rich Lindon, Ed. Watlin, Nich. Cowling, Joan Batlin, Nich, Coals, Mary
Smith, Ethelred Huddy, Mich. Sparks, and others attest this.
the Townsmen and Soldiers reputed them so; that they might have been held
diverse months, yea to this very time, had not they been surrendered; that the
Enemy could not have taken them by force, even by their own confessions, nor
all the Devils in hell have taken the castle, had not the Defendant beyond
their expectation surrendered them basely into their hands, and bestowed them
upon them; for which surrender the very enemy called him a base Coward, and
said he deserved to be hanged for delivering up such a Town and Castle as that
to them so easily, for which they might thank Fiens, else they could not have
won them by force, had not he bestowed them on them beyond their hopes. From
all which particulars (fully proved by the ensuing testimonies) we concluded,
That the Town, Castle, Ammunition, Cannons, Arms, etc. were most
dishonourably, cowardly, and treacherously delivered up to the Enemy, and that
without and against the Parliaments or his Excellencies previous consents, who
abhorred the fact, and never gave the least way thereunto, being executed
before they had any thought or tidings of it, and before the City and Castle
was reduced to any extremity. And thus we concluded the second days work.

The Defendant (who spent not three full days in defense of the City) wasted
the three next whole days in defending himself against the first charge in
the third Article only; and no less then one days space in showing the
weaknesses, defects, and intenability of the Castle, on whose fortification he
has bestowed much money and pains, only to yield it up to the Enemy, before
one shot was made against it, as a Fort not tenable then, though before that
time a place almost impregnable, in his own and others opinions, which he
selected for his Magazine and last refuge, resolving to hold it against the
Enemy, and to lay his bones therein, rather then yield it up against his trust.
In this his defense (to spin out time) he led us in perambulation through all
the Works, Forts, Dikes, Rampires, Walls, about the City or Castle, proving the
height, length, depth, breadth, dimensions, strength, defects and weaknesses,
of all and every inch of each of them, before the Council by his Officers
only, (who were parties, and involved with him for the most part in the guilt
of this surrender) which were scarce ever measured and considered by him or
them before; and discovering so many weaknesses and imperfections in them all,
not formerly observed, as clearly manifested, that either his Engineers and he
were extremely ignorant and blameworthy, in putting the Kingdom, City,
Country, to such vaste expenses, in making such inconsiderable weak
fortifications, (which yet the Enemy did not, could not force, with all his
strength and storming, losing one hundred men to one of ours in the assault, so
strong and tenable were they till surrendered;) or else that these defects and
imbecillities were but fine new devices, found out since the surrender, (as in
truth they were) to palliate, or extenuate the treachery and cowardice of the
Defendant; who left no stone unmoved, no turfe unturned, no dike unfathomed, no
Cannon or Bullet unweighed, (for we had proof of each of these) to save his
head from the block, of which he had far more care then of the City or
Kingdom, and took us up about six whole days in the debate of this one
Article.

The sum of the Defendants tedious defense, consisted of the ensuing
particulars, to every of which, for brevitie and perspicuity sake, we shall
subjoine the distinct Replies then given, not in a continued Speech, as they
were uttered, (the whole three days first defense being made entirely
together, and then the Reply, Rejoinder, and Surrejoinder thereunto) but in
parcels, as each part of the Reply, Rejoinder, and Surrejoinder was applied to
each particle of the Defense.

First, Allegation 1.
the Defendant denied, that all the Arms were surrendered to the Enemy, for it
appears, by the first Article of the surrender, that all the Officers of
horse and foot were to march out with their full Arms, and the Troopers with
their swords.

To which Mr Prynne answered, Answer 1.
That by the first and tenth Article of surrender all the common foot Soldiers
were to march out without Arms, and the Troopers only with their Swords,
leaving their other Arms, together with all their Cannons, Ammunition, and
Colors, behind them; therefore since all the Arms of the foot, all the
Troopers Arms but their swords, (which were not many nor considerable) with
all the Cannons, Ammunition, Colors, were thus surrendered, the words of the
Article of Impeachment, that all the Cannons, Ammunition, Arms, etc. were
surrendered, were sufficiently and literally proved.

Secondly, 2.
that All, both in Scripture, Law, and common parlance, is frequently taken for
the greatest part, or well nigh all; as Matthew. 2. 3. Herodwas troubled and all
Jerusalem with him: Matthew. 21. 10. All the City was moved, saying, who is
this? All men think so, All affirm it; They have taken all their Arms,
Baggage, and the like: where all is taken for the greatest part, or all in
effect. And in this sense the Article is true, since the Officers Arms, and
Troopers swords, in respect of all the other Arms there left, were not
considerable.

Thirdly, 3.
most of all the Officers Arms and Troopers swords were taken from them by the
Enemy, as the Defendant confesses in his Page 11.
Relation, Answer, and we have proved; and if any escaped with their Arms by
chance, yet all their Arms were quite lost as to the State, which had no
benefit by, nor account of them: therefore in this regard the Article is most
true.

Secondly, Allegation 2
he denied he surrendered the City and Castle against the Parliaments and his
Excellencies consents, though it is true he did it without their previous
consents.

To which Mr Prynne replied, Answer:
that this was a very frivolous distinction: For He that is not with me is
against me, resolves, that what is done without the Parliaments and his
Excellencies consents (especially if they dislike and disavow it afterward) is
done against their consents, Matthew. 12. 30.
and that in strict propriety of speech: Hence, if a man's servant, cattle,
without his privity or approbation commit a Trespass in his neighbors ground,
or if one casually tread upon another toe, he usually says in these and such
like cases, It was against my will or against my liking and consent: Bristoll
therefore being undoubtedly surrendered not only beyond, but contrary to the
Parliaments and his Excellencies expectations and desires, was certainly
surrendered against their wills and consents, as well as without them.

Bristoll should be kept to the utmost extremity, and not surrendered to the
Enemy, this being the end wherefore they placed a Governor and Garrison there,
and made Works about it; the surrendering therefore of it, contrary to both
their express wills and directions, must needs be not only without, but
against their wills and consents. This all the world knows, unless the
Defendant can show their express consents thereto.

besides, but against their consents; and to think or speak otherwise, is but
to lay a grand imputation on the Parliament and his Excellency, in making them
accessaries to this dishonorable, trayterly action, which has almost lost the
Kingdom.

Thirdly, Allegation 3
he alleged, that four days before the fiege he sent one Scotten with a
Letter to his Excellency, to acquaint him with the weakness of the Garrison,
that he had not above 900 men besides Citizens, as likewise to see the estate
of his Army, and crave speedy succors from him: That he found his Excellency
had but 4000 Foot able to march, many of his men being then sick, and not in a
marching condition to relieve him; that it was clear (as he averres in his
Page 9.
Relation, and then also affirmed, to the Parliaments and his Excellencies
dishonor) they could not expect, nor have had any relief in six or eight
weeks time: And to justify this despair of timely succors, he produced a
Letter written by his Excellency to the Lord Say, his Father, to this effect;
That he was sorry Bristoll was in so much danger, as by Colonel Fiennes his
Letter to him it seemed to be; and that himself at that present was not in a
fitting posture to relieve it, which troubled him the more, for that his
Lordships son was engaged there: (which Letter being read, Mr Prynne
inquiring the date thereof, found it dated the 28 of July, two days after the
surrender of Bristoll, which was on the 26 of that July.) From all which the
Defendant inferred the necessity of surrendering the Town and Castle, for want
of succors, which had they been near, he could have made a shift to have held
out three or four days longer, and would have done it; but being hopeless of
relief, he could not in point of soldiery or policy have held it longer then
he did.

To which Mr Prynne replied, Answer 1.
first, that he did but his duty in sending thus to his Excellency, and that
this would no more excuse his treachery and cowardice, in surrendering the
Town, then See the Doom of Treachery and Cowardice.
Weston, Gomineys, and the Bishop of Norwich their sending to the Governor of
Caleyes, and the Lords of the Council, for timely relief, did excuse them.

Secondly, 2.
that in this Message and Letter to my Lord General, but four days before
the siege, he complained neither of want of Ammunition, Victuals, Moneys, nor
of the weakness or intenability of the Works, Town, Castle, (which
doubtless he would have done had there been real cause) but of the smallness
of the Garrison, which he said were then but 900, besides Citizens: But our
Col. Stevens, Arthur williams, Abel Kelly, Mayor Wood, and others.
Witnesses prove expressly, that at the time of the siege he had at least 2000
Foot and 300 Horse, besides Volunteers, which were near 200 more: and Major
Allen attested, that he brought near 200 men well armed from Malmsbury, but a
day or two before the siege; so as his 900 were increased to 2500 men, or more;
and he might have raised (as Mr Powell, his own Witness, attested) at least
six or eight thousand able men more, to bear Arms in the City, had he wanted
men: Therefore the want of men was but a pretense. Besides, had he needed only
men, why did he advise Sir William Waller to march out with at least 500
Horsemen, lest they should have helped to have spent the provision of
Bristoll, as he confesses in his Relation page 12? Certainly, either he
thought the Town tenable with the men he had, till all the provisions in it
were spent, and so the Garrison strong enough to defend it whiles they had
Victuals, or else he desired rather to spare the Victuals for the Enemy, (to
whom they were surrendered) then for Sir William Wallers men, who (had they
stayed in the City) would have made up his Garrison 800 Horse, besides 2000
Foot, and in all probability have preserved the City, which was partly lost (as
Relation p. 7
himself confesses) by the cowardice of the Horse, who refused to charge the
Enemy when they entered, whom they might easily have cut off, had they but
charged them, as they might and should have done. In brief, the Defendants
own Page 6. he writes he raised about 1000 or 1110 men, and procured as many
Arms within 5 days, which added to his former Garrison of 900 makes 2000
foot, besides those that came from Malmesbury and his horse. And p. 11. he
writes, he thought to have saved a body of 300 horse, and 1500 foot to the
State by the surrender: Ergo he had so many, besides Citizens and others that
would stay behind.
Relation and Letter to his Excellency inform us, that his Garrison consisted
of at least 2000 Foot, and 300 Horse, and was so strong and sufficient, that
when the Enemy stormed the Town on every side with all their Forces, they were
valiantly repulsed, with the loss of near a thousand of their best men,
besides 700 wounded; whereas he lost not above six or eight men at most, and
had very few or none wounded: If then the Garrison were thus sufficiently
strong to repulse the Enemy with so great loss, when their Army was
strongesest and best in heart, much more (...) be sufficient to repulse them,
and keep the Town, when near a thousand of their best men were slain, and 700
more wounded, with the loss of six or eight only of the Garrison, the
Assailants being much weakened, and Defendants as strong, or stronger, and more
courageous, by reason of their good success, then they were at first.

Thirdly, to his despair of succors in six or eight weeks time, by reason of
the weakness or sickness of the Army, it was answered, first, That as hope is
the last thing that forsakes a valiant man, so it is the first that deserts a
Coward, who places his confidence any where rather then at home in his own
bosom.

Secondly, 2.
that no man, much less a Christian and Soldier too, ought to despair of
Gods providence and protection in a just cause, even where he can see no humane
probability of succors, but ought to Psalm. 27. 14. Ps. 37. 7. Ps. 62. 5. Ps.
123. 2. Job 13. 15. Ps. 62. 8. Prove. 3. 5. Isay 26. 4. Isa. 50. 10.
wait, and trust on God to the utmost extremity, who many times sends relief
Ephesians. 3. 20.
exceeding abundantly, beyond all men can ask or think, as he did to
Jerusalem, Samaria, of old, and to Rochell of late: Andaces fortuna juvat, was
the Heathens observation; Fortes Deus adjuvat, the Christians: his causlesse
despair then of timely relief from God or man, the Parliament or his
Excellency, argued not only want of Courage, but Faith too, both in God and
men.

Thirdly, 3.
valiant Massy (if this plea might be admitted) had far more cause to despair
of timely relief then the Defendant: for both Fiennes and Clifton his
Lieutenant professed openly, after the surrender of Bristoll, that they would
be hanged if Gloucester could hold out two days, if the Enemy came before it:
and Colonel Pury and Captain Parry deposed, that the Walls and Works about it
were weaker then Bristols, their Garrison not above 1500, Club-men and all,
their Powder not above 32 single barrels, besides what they made during the
siege, their provision not so plentiful as Bristols, their Cannon but seven or
eight, whereas Bristoll had 55 Canon, besides Sir Francis Pophams Pieces; the
Enemies before Gloucester almost See Mr Dornyes Relation of that siege p. 1.
10000 more then those that besieged Bristoll, and likewise accompanied with
the Kings personal presence. Besides, his Excellencies Army, by reason of
sickness, was now far weaker, and more unable to relieve Gloucester, then it
was when it should have marched for Bristols relief; yet notwithstanding all
these discouragements, and the great damage and discouragement the sudden
unexpected loss of Bristoll struck into all men's spirits, Massy and
Gloucester men did not basely yield up the Town to the Enemy, as soon almost
as they came before it, but relying on Gods providence, and the Parliaments
care to the uttermost, received timely relief from both in less then three
weeks after they sent for succors; as Bristoll doubtless would have done, had
Colonel Fiennes had so much true Faith and Valor as Massy had. Now that
Bristoll would have been relieved far sooner then Gloucester, Mr Prynne
undeniably proved by these Arguments.

Bristoll was besieged, then it was at the siege of Gloucester, the number of it
being much decreased by sickness in the interim, and their courage, spirits,
much daunted by Bristols unexpected surrender in so short a time, upon such
dishonorable terms, which he doubted at all the whole Council present could
experimentally attest.

Bristoll as a place of the greatest consequence of any in England, next to
London, as the Metropolis, Key, Magazine of the West, which would be all
endangered, and the Kingdom too by its loss: as a Town of infinite more
consequence then Gloucester; by the gaining whereof the Enemy would be furnished
with all manner of provisions, and Ammunition by land, with a Navy and all
Merchandise by sea, and enabled to bring in the strength of Wales and Ireland,
for their assistance: therefore being of so great concernment, the Parliament,
his Excellency, London, and the Kingdom, would have been far more careful to
relieve it in due time, then they were, or would have been to relieve
Gloucester, of which they had yet a special care.

Thirdly, Bristoll was a Town of far greater commerce with London then
Gloucester, many Londoners having a great part of their Trading and estates too
in it: Therefore this particular interest would have made the Londoners more
forward to march to relieve Bristoll then Gloucester.

Fourthly, Colonel Fiennes and the Citizens of Bristoll had more powerful
Excellency, (as his Letter to the Lord Say imports) to solicit and expedite
their relief, then Massy or Gloucester had; therefore though the Parliament
and his Excellency were very ready to have sent timely relief to both, yet in
all probability, Bristoll in these respects had been sooner relieved (had it
held out) then Gloucester was or could have been; the rather, because the loss
of Bristoll made many men fall off from the Parliament, more to stand as
Neutets, and damped the activity and spirits of most men.

Fourthly, it was answered, that the Defendant produced no proof of his
despair, but only his Excellencies Letter, written and sent to the Lord Say,
not to him, and dated two days after the surrender made; this therefore could
be no ground, no cause at all of the surrender, which so long preceded it. To
supply which oversight and defect, Colonel Fiennes next day produced a
Witness, to prove, that the day before the surrender there came one into
Bristoll, who reported that the Lord Generals Army was very weak, and in no
posture to march; but who it was, or whence he came, or how he came in thither,
the Town being beleaguered, or whether the Governor ever had any certain
information of this report, there was not the least shadow of proof.

Fifthly, It was replied, That if a Govournours groundless surmise of an
Massy might have then upon far better grounds have surrendered Gloucester to
the King the first day; the Earl of Stamford, Exeter; and Col. Warnlow,
Plymmouh the second day they were besieged; then the Defendant Bristoll on the
third day, since there was a far greater improbability of relieving any of
these in time, then of Bristoll: And by this reason, had Col. Fiennes been
furnished with men, Ammunition, Victuals, to have kept the Town, five, or seven
weeks longer, yet by this way of arguing, he would certainly have surrendered
it when he did, (in less then three days space) and not have kept it to the
fifth or seventh weeks end; because he conceived an improbability of relief in
eight weeks time, out of a pannick fear, or out of a mere design to color
his surrender: He should have therefore held it to the uttermost extremity,
and God or ourvigilant Parliament (no doubt) by that time would have sent
relief, as they did to Gloucester; or if none had come; he had then discharged
his duty, and been excused: But since he kept it not to the last, but
prejudged Gods, the Parliaments, and his Excellencies care to relieve him in
due season, his fault is inexcusable and capital.

Fourthly, Allegat. 4.
He alleges, That he did not surrender the City, Castle, Arms, etc.
Traitorously, and that no treachery was proved against him.

To which Mr Prynne Answered: Answer.
First, that though there were no direct resolve this to be Treason. And being
thus treason, even in point of Law, he needed no other proof, that it was
traitorously surrendered, but the Law and Fact it self: And we ought to charge
it in the Impeachment, that it was Traitorously surrendered, as the Law resolves
it to be, else the impeachment was not good in Law, neither could Judgment be
given on it. Hence by the Rules of the Common Law, if a man be indicted of any
crime which is Treason, Felony, or Burglary by the Law, the Indictment must
run, that he committed the crime, Proditorie, Felonice, or Burglariter, else
the Indictment is vicious and defective. Therefore by like reason, the
surrendering of any Fort, before utmost extremity being Treason, it ought to be
charged in the Articles, That it was Treasonably surrendered, and for this end,
he inserted the word Treasonably into the Articles: The Check to the Checker of
Brittanicus has taken great hold of this passage, in his two last pages,
annexing seven Witnesses (if need be) to prove it, and all to justify, yea,
acquit Col. Fiennes from Treason. But if it be any honor to him to be thus
guilty of High Treason, and to deliver up Bristoll, Traitorously, in this sense
Mr Prynne then gave of it, before extremity (for which he was adjudged to loose
his head) there is no man will envy him this new Garland to crown his
condemned Pate withal, which is freely yielded him without further proof.

Rev. 21. 8.
fearful, marshalled in the very front of those, Who shall have their part in
the lake that shall burn with fire and brimstone: and quite Deuteronomy. 10. 1. 8
Judge. 7. 1. 2. 3. Isay 51. 12. 13. Matthew. 10. 26. 28.
exploded out of Gods temporal and spiritual Militia. Therefore if he
surrendered them out of fear or cowardice only, though without any trayterly
compact with the Enemy, the surrender is properly styled Traitorous, as well as
Cowardly, even in reality and Law.

Check to the Checker might have taken notice of) that though there were no
direct Treachery charged or proved in the fourth Article, yet there were
vehement presumptions, suspicions of it (which often times cast and condemn
Felons, Murders, Traitors, as experience manifests, as well as positive
proofs) directly charged and should be proved against him in the seventh;
which we would here make use off and bundle That he never undertook to keep or
not deliver the City or Castle to the Enemy without the Parliaments and his
Excellencies previous consents: That they neither in honor nor justice could
expect such a promise from him: That he ought not to have kept the. Castle
when the Enemy had entered the Line, but ought to have surrendered the same,
(although tenable) to the Enemy, together with the City, by the principles of
honesty and justice, the Rulers of wisdom and discretion, etc. Coupled with
his wilful misinforming of the Council of war; when they met about a
parley, that there was See here, p. 25. 26.
not above 20 barrells of powder left in the Castle (when as there were 70
French Barrels, besides what was in the Forts and City) and not above 3 or 400
weight of Match; and commanding Mr Hassard the store keeper to say there was no
more (as he confessed to Captain Birch) when as Mr Hassard deposes, there were
50 Barrels of powder, at and least 1400 weight of match, besides as much more
as four horses could draw, brought into the Castle that morning (as Arthur
Williams and Ione Batton deposed) and 140 bundels as Captain Bushel affirmed;
of purpose to draw the Council to a present parley and surrender, were
vehement presumptions and circumstantiall proofs of treachery and undirect
dealing: All which being secondly, compared with the Depositions of Captain
Loyde and Thomas Monday, that the Defendant called Monday, saucy knave, when he
informed him and Langrish of the danger and weakness of the very place, where
the Enemy the next morning entered, refusing to strengthen the Guards there as
he was advised by him, and appointing Major Langrish (a noted coward formerly
complained of to him for his cowardice and negligence) to guard this weakest
place, who never once offered to charge the Enemy, but gave them leave to
enter, and yet he never questioned him for this treachery, but countenanced him
by his favor, justified him in print, and produced him before the Council as
a competent Witness: With his refusing to send away the Prisoners in the
Castle before the siege, upon Sir William Wallers advise: saying, That he
would detain them there to make his conditions the better if the Enemy came
before Bristoll, (attested by Sir William, Col. Cook, and confessed by
himself:) with his speeches to Mr Talboyes (who moved him to respite a
Delinquents payment of a sum of moneys till St Iames-tide then ensuing;) That
he knew not whether he should be at Bristoll at St Iames-tide, etc. which made
Mr Talboyes then presently conceive he intended to surrender the City about
that time, (as he did the next day after St James day, viz. July 26 1643)
whereupon Mr Talboys presently removed and left the City: With his prohibiting
John Warden the Gunner, (as Richard Butler deposes) under pain of death to
shoot any Grando's at the Enemy, when he pressed him that he might do it, which
made him say they were betrayed: All these particulars laid together, and
coupled with Captain Ropers deposition, that the Lady Newport told this as a
special secret to the Countess of Desmond at her being in Oxford, a little
before Bristoll was besieged, that this City would be surrendered to the King as
soon as his Forces came before it; (which Captain further attested from the
mouth of the Right Honorable Earl of Denby, that there were diverse Wagers
laid at Oxford, and offered to be laid in and near London, as soon as the
siege of Bristoll was spoken of, that this Town would be surrendered the 26 of
July, the very day it was afterward yielded up;) The calling his men off the
Line under pain of death, and not suffering them to fall on the Enemy, which
made many then say, they were betrayed; with his late and slender sallie. All
these particular circumstances annexed to the premises, and subsequent
matters, seriously pondred, are sufficient to make a vehement suspicion, if not
a punctual evidence, that Bristol was not only cowardly, but traitorously
delivered, as well in a proper as a legal fense, notwithstanding the
Defendants (and Checkers) flourishes to the contrary, till time shall discover
the obscured secrets of this mystery more apparently to the world.

His fifth Allegation (wherein he spent most time and pains) was, Allegation 5
That the Town and Castle were not COWARDLY surrendered.

Before he came to make this good by proofs and arguments, Object. 1.
he first excepted against our Witnesses to prove the surrender cowardly,
because some of them were Women, others Enemies, who were not competent
Witnesses, and were ready to slander their opposites.

To which Mr Prynne replied, Answ. 1. 2.
First, that some of the Witnesses only were Women, 2.
and those seconded by men. Secondly, that they declared not their own weak
opinions, but the judgments of men; yea of the Enemies own Commanders in
private serious conference among themselves, as well as in open discourse to
others. 3.
Thirdly, that these Women-witnesses, and other Females in the City, showed
more true courage, undauntednesse, then the. Defendant and some of his
Officers, working boldly in the face of the Enemy, where they durst not appear,
opposing a Parley when he sent out twice for it, and offering to go in person
with their children into the very mouth of the Cannon to dead the bullets, if
the Soldiers were afraid, rather then the City should be surrendered: Being
then such masculine Females as these, he thought them meet Witnesses to prove
the surrender Cowardly. 4.
Fourthly, to the testimonies of the Enemies he answered, that it was in this
case the best and strongest of any other, it being the natural disposition of
every Soldier that takes any strong Fort or City, to extol the Enemies valor
and difficulties of winning it as much as possible, the more to advance their
own prowess. It Is no great honor in any man's judgment to conquer a Coward,
or place not tenable; therefore those who detract from their Enemies valor or
strength, derogate most from their own Honor, Conquest, Prowess, and as much
disparage themselves as their enemies thereby: Since then the enemies both in
private discourses themselves, and in conference with others, See Mary Smith,
Ethelred Huddy, Ioane Battin, Joseph Proud, Mich. Spark, Nich. Collins.
so frequently censured this surrender as cowardly, taxed the Defendant for a
Coward, and confessed they could not have taken the Town, nor all the Devils
in Hell the Castle, had the Defendant held them valiantly out against them, and
not cowardly surrendered them beyond their expectation: their testimonies backed
with the premises, must be a most convincing evidence in this particular.

Secondly, Object. 2.
he objected, that Mr Prynne had been tampering with some Witnesses, and urging
them to testify against him: for which he produced two inflances: The first
was, that Mr Prynne urged Mr Hassard, who kept the stores in Bristoll Castle,
to attest there were more then 50 barrells of powder therein when it was
surrendered; insomuch that Mr Hassard told him, he would not go against his
conscience. Secondly, that he meeting with Lieutenant Colonel Davison in the
Street, offered him a quart of Wine, pressing him to go to a Tavern, and to
set down what he could attest touching his advising Colonel Fiennes to sally
out upon the Enemy as soon as they entered, and his dislike of drawing his men
from the Line, and his refusing to follow this advice: which he denying to do,
Mr Prynne told him that he was engaged to give in his testimony, because Col.
Fiennes had given him the Lie in print, in his Reply to Mr Walker; and for
proof hereof he produced two Witnesses, that Davison told him this Story in
his chamber in Arundell^ house, in the presence of the Lord Say his, Father.

To which unexpected false casumny, Answ. 1.
Mr Prynne returned this answer, which he was ready to attest on his Oath:
First, that being summoned by the Defendant himself to appear before a
Council of War, to make good what he had written concerning the surrender of
Bristoll, he did thereupon repair to Mr Hassard, and other Witnesses present
at the siege, to desire them to witness the truth only of what they knew
touching that action; which he might lawfully do: and because Mr Hassard kept
the Magazine, he desired him to inform him how many barrels of powder there
were in the Castle when it was surrendered; who thereupon answered, there were
50: upon which he demanded, whether there were not more then fifty? for he had
sundry Witnesses to prove that he confessed to Captain Birch and Arthur
Williams, that there were 60; and to Major Wood, that there were 70 barrels
left when it was surrendered: and Captain Bushel (then a prisoner) affirmed he
found no less then 70 barrels there: if then there were more then 50, he
should do well to declare the utmost number which he certainly knew to be
there: To which he answered, he did think there were more then 50 barrels, but
how many more he could not certainly depose, and therefore he would rather
testify less then there were, in setting down fifty generally, without adding
this Negative to it, and no more, which he durst not swear, for then he was
sure not to wrong his conscience. To which Master Prynne replied, that he
desired him by no means to wrong his conscience in testifying more then the
truth, but to keep a good conscience, in witnessing the full truth, and not
concealing any thing to smother truth. At last Mr Hassard said, that he was not
willing to appear against Colonel Fiennes, for he had lost most of his estate
in Bristoll, and that there were arreares of pay due unto him, for payment
whereof the Colonel had lately given him a Bill under his hand, and if he
should lose his arreares it would go hard with him. Whereupon Master Prynne
then answered, he would not press him to any thing to his prejudice, and so
left him, he promising to give in his deposition in writing to the Advocate,
which he never did. And whether this were tampering with Witnesses, or who had
tampered most with Hassard, he or the Defendant against whom he was unwilling
to testify the truth, or all the truth, he humbly submitmitted to their
honorable judgments.

Secondly, 2.
for Lieutenant Davison, Mr Prynne protested, he never saw the man till he came
voluntarily to him in Westminster Hall, and told him freely, without any
inducement on his part, that he was in the siege of Bristoll under Colonel
Fiennes, and after that in the siege of Gloucester, from whence coming lately
to London, he met with a printed book, writ by Colonel Fiennes in disgrace of
Mr Walker, wherein he had given him the Lie, and a base Lie in the margin, to
his dishonor; whereupon being sensible of this open injury, he repaired to
Colonel Fiennes to Arundell-house, and there in the Lord Say his presence,
challenged him for giving him the Lie in print without cause; desiring him to
give him public satisfaction, or else he would take satisfaction himself, for
he would not take the Lie from any man in England: and withal told him to his
face, that he did advise him not to draw the Soldiers from the Line, but to
fall upon the enemies presently, and cut them off, as they might have done with
ease; but he rejecting his advise, called off the men, and so not making a
timely sally, lost the Town. Whereupon the Lord Say answered, Son you must
take heed how you wrong any Gentleman of quality, especially in print, and if
you have wronged this Gentleman you may do well to right him: Upon which Col.
Fiennes confessed before his Father, he did give him such advise, and that he
had done him wrong in putting the Lie over against his name; but it was much
against his will through his boys negligence; for after he had sent the copy
of his Reply to the press, wherein the Lie was written in the margin against
his name, he remembering this mistake, sent his boy purposely to the Printer to
charge him to blot it out and not print it, which it seems his boy (or
himself rather when he read the printed proof and revise, where he might have
expunged it had this tale been real) then neglected; but he would see it put
out in the next Edition (a pretty flamme, savouring both of a lying and
cowardly spirit, basely to confess that to be a truth in private, which he
proclaimed to be a Lie in print;) Whereupon I seeing his freeness with me, and
thinking his testimony material, told him that the surrender of Bristol was now
brought into question before a Council of war by Mr Fiennes himself, whom I
and Mr Walker were summoned to prosecute; and therefore we should desire his
presence as a witness there, and so we parted then. Soon after the Council
of war was adjourned, and then meeting with Lieutenant Davison (who made the
same Relation to above twenty more in Westminster Hall, as he had done to me)
he told me he was going suddenly out of Town to Gloucester, I desired him to
testify his knowledge touching the premises before the Advocate ere he
departed; Whereupon he told me, that the Lord Say was his very good friend,
and had promised to help him to his arreares, and therefore he was loath to
appear in the business, there being other witnesses sufficient. To which I
answered, I would have the Judge Advocates warrant to bring him in as a
witness, and then no exceptions could be taken; which warrant when I had
procured, I coming from the Advocates casually met Davison on horseback above
Ludgate near the Advocates lodging in Paul's Churchyard, where asking of him
how long he stayed in Town, he answered that he was to depart to Gloucester the
next morning; whereupon I told him, I had a warrant to bring him in as a
witness from the Advocate who was then in his lodging, which was close by; and
therefore since he was to depart so soon, I desired him to go with me then to
the Advocate, to set down his testimony upon oath: which he excused saying, he
had promised to meet some friends to drink a quart or two of wine with them
before his departure; and so we parted without more discourse: And was this a
tampering, only to desire a witness to set down what he voluntarily informed
me, before the Advocate, when I had a warrant to examine him? As for offering
him a quart of wine, or inviting him to a Tavern to drink, I protest I never
did it, and am so averse from such a courtesy, that to my remembrance, I have
never these eighteen years space gone into any one Tavern in London or
elsewhere, to give or receive one quart of wine, but only to eat a Breakfast or
Dinner, and therefore it is very improbable I should proffer this courtesy
unto him, who as I discovered then by his discourse had drunk sufficiently
before, and was going (as he told me) to drink more. But admit I proffered him
a quart of wine, and that in the open street, was a quart of wine, think you,
so considerable a thing as to tempt or corrupt a witness of that quality? or
the open street a fit place for such a purpose where so many saw and overheard
us? Certainly if this Gentleman were so ignoble as to be corrupted with so
poor a courtesy as a quart of wine in the open street; I am certain his
arreares of pay in Col. Fiennes own private Chamber in Arundell house, where
he had fair promises to receive them, are far more prevalent temptations to
corrupt, and keep him back from appearing here in person, whither the Defendant
might have brought him to testify my tampering with him, had he pleased, he
being still in London, and under his command, though he will not appear upon
our summons to testify the truth: But if he be such a one, as Col. Fiennes
would intimate him, (though I have a better opinion of the Gentleman's honesty)
that a quart of wine will biasse him more them truth, I should rather want his
testimony, then put him to his oath, were he now present: But being neither
examined by us, nor yet intended to be, this impertinent cavil sounds more of
Calumny then Judgment.

But because Col. 3.
Fiennes has now given me this just occasion, I shall in the third place
(which otherwise I should have concealed, but that his aspersions have provoked
me to allege it by way of just defense) truly inform your Lordships: First,
how Col. Fiennes and his Agents have tampered with, affronted, threatened, and
abused our witnesses: Secondly, what advantages, obligations, and engagements
he has upon his own witnesses, which may probably sway them to over much
partiality in their testimonies, of which we are wholly destitute in respect of
ours. First, most of the material witnesses in this cause were the Defendants
own Officers and Soldiers, from whom they expect not only future preferments,
but their arreares of pay, which they were in danger to lose if they should
either appear against him, or he miscarry in this case. Upon this ground not
only Mr Hassard, as you heard, was unwilling, and Davison refused to give in
his testimony, but one Captain Oland (as appears by Captain Haringtons
deposition) with sundry other materialll witnesses, denied to speak what they
knew: and some of his Officers since they came hither to witness for him have
said, that if the cause went with him, (as they made little question but it
would) they should have all their arrears paid, else they should lose them; Now
whether the promise of arrears be not a tampering with, and the loss of them
a threatening or terrifying of witnesses, we leave your Lordships to resolve.
Besides Mr Sprigge (Secretary to the Lord Say) went to a Noble Knights lodging
at Saint Albanes, produced as a witness by the Defendant, that same morning he
was to give in his testimony, with this strange prologue to an evidence, that
Col. Fiennes presented his respects to him, and desired him to come that
morning to the Council of war to give in his testimony for him; and that his
Lord likewise desired to be remembered to him, and to let him know that 200
pound (of the 500) due unto him was ready for him at London upon his return,
and the rest of the money should be ready for him as soon as it could be
provided: which Captain Harington then present in the Knights chamber heard and
deposed; nor could nor did Sprig deny he delivered such a message, but said he
had ill intentions in it. To which Mr Prynne replied, that whatever his
intentions were, the words spoken at that season, and upon that occasion,
tended more to corrupt a witness, then his offering a quart of wine in the open
street did (had he offered it as he did not) which was so much insisted on; And
though he knew the Knight so well, that no offers whatever could corrupt him;
yet how such speeches might work on other witnesses who expected debts and
arrears from the Col. he could not divine; and those who durst use such
tempting speeches so openly in St. Albanes during the Trial, would probably
make use of the like or worse temptations in private to witnesses, to corrupt
or take off their testimony. However the Court by this might clearly discern,
which side was most guilty of tampering with witnesses. Thirdly, that some of
our witnesses sent for thither by the Defendant, had been openly abused,
affronted, quarrelled by the Defendant and his witnesses, even in the Councels
presence and elsewhere; as namely Captain Bagnall; who though an extraordinary
friend to the Defendant, (for whom he took two journeyes to London for a
Commission at his own charge, and raised a Company to defend the Town) yet
merely for testifying the truth impartially, was strangely questioned and
affronted by the Defendant himself, abused with ill language, taxed with
perjury, quarrelled by Scotten who gave him the Lie in the Council Chamber
before your Honors were departed thence, challenged, scorned, reviled,
threatened to be mischieved, (for all which affronts we crave your justice.) And
if our witnesses be thus affronted, menaced, abused in your very presence, how
think you were others dealt with behind your Honors and our backs, to
strangle truth? A vehement argument all has not been rightly carried on that
side.

2. Consider the great difficulties on our parts to procure, the
impossibilities to suborn the witnesses we produce. First, all our witnesses
for the most part are mere strangers to us, all of them better known and more
obliged to the Defendant then to us: they are persons dis-interested,
dis-engaged, who neither gain nor lose by the Trial, however the sentence
go; they were never under our service, power, or commands, most of them were
such who served the State gratis, and were no mercenaries in that service. We
are no ways allied to them, have no command over them, no arrears or debts to
pay them, no rewards or preferments to bestow upon them, no engagement to
allure or enforce them; Whereas on the contrary, the Defendant has all the
advantages and bonds that can be tending to partiality over his witnesses. Many
of them are testes domestici, as his brother, kinsmen, servants, foot-boyes;
most of the rest his Officers and Soldiers, against whom we excepted as
incompetent; First, because they were parties in this case, joining with the
Defendant in a Petition to his Excellency for this Trial, which was granted at
their request as the Proclamation of his Excellency attests. Secondly, because
they were Confederates and equally guilty with him in this Treason of
surrendering Bristoll, most of them being of his Council of war, and
consenting to this act; which if it prove capital and criminal in him, will
likewise be so in them; In swearing therefore to acquit him of this Treason in
which themselves are involved, they do in verity swear to acquit themselves,
and one to justify and excuse the other, which ought not to be admitted; for
then the fowlest treachery that is, might and would be excused, yea the
greatest Traitors acquitted, if one might testify for the other in that
particular crime whereof they all stand guilty.

3. Because they all depose, as for their own lives and safeties, so likewise
for their own honor, reputation and repairation; some of them in their
speeches now, and most of them in their Petition to his Excellency, demanding
reparation in their honor from us by this very Trial: and so are both parties
and witnesses in this respect, very unequal to be admitted.

4. Some of them have carried themselves as passionately in this case, as
parties, in menacing and abusing our witnesses, and our selves too, threatening
no less then hanging to us for questioning this surrender, if the Defendant be
acquitted; and can such be competent witnesses?

5. He has very strong obligations upon most of them, the bond of
consanguinity and alliance; they are his kinsmen: of superiority and command;
they were his Officers, Soldiers, Servants, advanced by him at first, and
preferred, or promised preferment by him since; the bond of sundry debts and
arrears due to them from him, which they are promised to receive if he be
acquitted, and expect to lose if once condemned. And what strong engagements,
what great advantages all these are to tempt or corrupt witnesses on his part,
and silence them from testifying ought against him on our part; and how far
forth such witnesses who appear thus to be parties shall be allowed of in this
case (especially such as are Participes criminis (adjudged incompetent by all
Laws) and guilty of the same surrender, we shall humbly refer to your just
considerations.

3ly. Object. 3.
The Defendant endeavored to answer an objection made by Mr Prynne; To wit,
that it must needs be cowardly surrendered, because the Enemies that very
morning were valiantly repulsed in all places (but that one where only an
hundred and fifty of them entered) with the loss of 700 men's lives, and as many
more wounded, whereas the Garrison then lost not above 3, or 4, and had scarce
any one man dangerously hurt in the assault; So as the Enemy by this great
loss was far weaker, the Garrison much stronger, and more courageous then
before; Whereto he briefly answered, that the slaying of 700, and wounding 700
more, was not so great a loss and discouragement to the Enemy, as the entry of
the Line was an encouragement.

To which Mr Prynne replied, Answer:
First, that those who entered the Line, by their own confessions were so far
from receiving encouragement by it, Attested by Nicholas Collins and Mich.
Spark Senior.
that they gave themselves all for dead men, and had no other hopes but to be
quite cut off. Secondly, their companions discouraged with the general repulse
in all other places, See Serieant Hills Deposition.
knew not of their entry in two full hours space, during which time their
powder was quite spent, that they might have been all cut in pieces had the
Defendant done his duty. Thirdly, a See Nich. Collins testimony.
whole Regiment of their horse retreated four miles off, with a resolution
never to come on again; therefore the entry of so small a party, compared with
their great loss, could be but a very poor encouragement, since they might
have been so easily repulsed at the first, and sent back by weeping Cross
unto their retreated Companions.

After this he descended to his Arguments, to prove the surrender not cowardly;
the chief whereof are published in print (by himself or his Agents) in The
Check to the Checker of Britannicus, with the substance of his whole defense,
abstracted (no doubt) out of his own Notes.

His first Argument was this, Argum. 1.
That he was no coward, as appeared; First, by Essex: Secondly, by his
apprehending and executing the Conspirators at Bristoll in the midst of the
City, even at noone day: Thirdly, by quelling the Malignants, and disarming the
Traine-Bands of the City: Fourthly, by his valiant behavior at Worcester,
where he and his brother, when the Forces were there routed, were some of the
last Officers that came off the field: Fifthly, by his charging at Keinton
Battle, one of the next to Sir William Belfoure up to the very Cannon of the
Enemy, when the horse killed the Canoneers, as they lay under the Carriages;
and by other following particulars: Ergo, he did not cowardly surrender
Bristoll.

To which Argument, Mr Prynne Replied: Answ. 1.
First, in general, That they did not charge him in the Articles, to be a
coward, which was not now in issue; nor yet, that he had showed himself
cowardly in all Actions since he was Governor of Bristoll; But only, That he
had cowardly surrendered Bristoll: And, in hoc individuo he did and might deal
cowardly, though he might be valiant in other particulars. This is that
mistaken Passage the Check to the Checker much triumphs in; let him in Gods
name make his best advantage of it, to repair the Defendants honor if he can.

Nonsequitur, for as a very coward, may now and then do valiantly upon
occasion, and yet be no valiant man; (as sometimes desperatio timidos fortes
facit, an experimental proof whereof we find in Timorous Staggs, who run
away at the barking of the smalest curre, yet will encounter both dogs,
horses, men in extremity when they are at a bay, and can run no further;) so
a valiant man may sometimes commit a cowardly action, and yet be no habitual
coward. To put this out of question, We have a memorable example in the Apostle
Peter, who though he were of a bold resolute spirit, and no doubt the stoutest
of all the Apostles; as appears by his adventuring (at Christ's command) to
Matthew. 14. 28. to 32.
walk out of the ship upon the Sea it self in the midst of a storm, (which
he though the Defendant with all his faith and valor would scarce have
adventured to do,) his resolute telling our Savior Matthew. 26. 33. 34. 35.
Ioh. 13. 37. 38.
That though all else should be offended and forsake him, yet he would not; And
though he should die with him, yet he would not deny him (which all the other
Apostles likewise protested each for himself.) By Matthew. 26. Mart 14. Luke 2^.
John 18.
his resolute drawing out his sword to rescue Christ when he was apprehended by
the High. Priests servants, his cutting off Malchus ear therewith (which is
more then appears the Defendant yet did to any Enemy,) his not putting up his
sword, nor giving over fighting till Christ commanded him; and by his following
our Savior into the very Highpriests Hall, when the other Disciples forsook
him and fled: (all acts and Arguments of extraordinary courage:) yet after he
saw Christ brought into question for his life, he suddenly degenerates so
far from his former magnanimity, through a pusilaminous fear then seizing on
him, that at the very voice of a silly maid, and a High Priest servant, he no
less then thrice denied the knowledge of his Master Christ, and that with
bitter Oaths and Execrations; Should Peter in this case argue:

I was valiant when I walked on the Sea, in the Chamber when I told Christ I
would rather die then deny him, in the Garden, where I fought for him, and in
following him into the High Priest Hall, whether the other Disciples durst not
accompany me: Ergo, I did not cowardly nor unworthily, in thus denying him
thrice with Oaths and Curses in the Highpriests Hall?

Certainly, this were a most irrational false Argument, because courage in
some Actions, is no negation or extenuation of cowardice in others, almost in
the selfsame nick of time. Yet this is Col. Fiennes objected Argument; I have
showed my self courageous, (as well as Peter) in some Actions; in removing
Col. Essex, executing the Delinquents, disarming the Malignants of Bristoll, in
the fights at Worcester and Edgehill; yea, altogether as valiant as Peter, in
my vaunting words and promises See the Depositions of Col. Stroude, 11. Powell,
Captain Bagnall, Mr Hassard and others.
. That I would dispute every foot of ground with the Enemy to the utmost, who
should win it from me by inches; that my Flag of Truce should be my winding
sheet: that I would keep the City, or it should keep me, or I would lay my
bones therein? (Oh brave vaunting Peter!) yea, I was pretty full of courage
during the siege, till the Enemy entered the Line, and then I was just like
Peter entering the Highpriests Hall; I followed the Enemy a far off, and fell
from fighting, to Parling; from defending, to surrending the City and Castle;
before any Out-Fort taken, or one shot or assault made against City or Castle:
Ergo, I did not cowardly or unworthily surrender them now, having showed my
self so valiant in deeds before.

But since Peter's Pristine valorus acts, speeches, did no ways mitigate nor
extenuate, but aggravate his subsequent cowardly denyalls of Christ, so will
the Defendants his surrender.

Thirdly, his forementioned valorous exploits have no relation at all to the
Bristoll, being of a different nature from them, his prowess therefore in the
one, can never expiate, nor dis-affirme this cowardice in the other, the only
thing we now charge and prove, these other objected Actions being not here in
question.

Fourthly, He gave this Answer to the objected particulars; so far forth only
Bristols surrender: First, That the sudden surprisall of Col. Essex, being done
at a See the full Declaration, etc. p. 4. 5.
private house out of Bristoll, when the Defendant had his Troops about him,
and Col. Essex only three or four servants near him; was a greater act of
prudence then courage, and a man not really valiant would have done as much:
Secondly, That when he apprehended the Conspirators, he had the absolute
Command of the City and Castle, a strong Garrison in both, and the major part
of the City and Country siding with him: It was therefore no great argument of
extraordinary valor to apprehend them being but few in number, weak in power,
and suddenly surprised at unawares. And when he executed them, all the
Malignants were disarmed, the whole City, Country generally incensed against
them for their horred Treachery, and their party unable to make the least
resistance, so as a child might have put them to death as securely as the
Defendent. Therefore this could be no convincing evidence of his courage:
Thirdly, That the Malignants were quelled by the discovery of the Plot; and the
disarming of the Train Band, to arm his own soldiers, and best affected
Citizens, was by the general consent of the Mayor, Sheriffs, and most part of
the Citizens, after the conspiracy detected without any the least resistance;
Ergo no act of courage, but rather of discretion or distrusts: Fourthly, That
at Worcester, all the horse were routed and fled, and his own and brothers
Troops among the rest, is no great Argument of their valors, which received
some blemish by that action: And that he and his brother were some of the last
Officers of horse who there came off the Field, it might be, as well because
they were in the rear of all the horse, and so could not possibly fly out of
the field before the rest, as by reason of any extraordinary valor in them
more then others, and so no convincing proof of valor in them. Fifthly, That
his valiant charging in Sir William Balfoures Regiment at Edgehill where every
man did valiantly, and none turned their backs in all that Brigade, (whereof he
principally glories, and the Check to the Checker, most tryumpheth in) can be
no special proof of his courage, since every coward will charge in Company
where no man turns his back, and where there is greater danger in flying then
charging: However admit it were good evidence, yet this is a very ill sequel
if put into a logical form.

Col Fiennes charged valiantly with Sir William Balfoure at Edgehill: Ergo, he
did not cowardly surrender Bristoll.

His second Argument to prove the surrender not cowardly, Argum. 2.
was his not quiting of Bristoll, immediately upon Sir William Wallers defeat at
the Devises, and his raising of men, arms, and perfecting the works even after
that to defend it, when many of the Country Gentlemen left the Town, and
marched to London, with Sir William Waller.

To which Mr Prynne answered: Answ. 1.
First, that he did but his duty in all this, which was rather an Argument of
his deligence then courage.

Secondly, 2.
That it had been the greatest treachery and cowardice in the world upon Sir
Williams bare defeat, to quit a City of so great consequence, which he was
charged to keep by his Commission, and in fortifying whereof he had spent so
great costs, before the Enemy came before it: who might probably, as things
then stood, have no real intention presently to besiege it, upon that defeat.

Thirdly, 3.
Extraordinary diligence in fortifying, is the greatest Argument of fear and
cowardice if Hence as Plutarch (writes the Spartians would not wall about their
City, placing their safety in their Arms, not walls.)
not seconded with answerable prowess in defending what is fortified: a coward
will sooner provide Armor of Proof, then a truly valiant man; since therefore
the City was no longer defended, when fortified and manned, this reason will
rather convict then acquit him of cowardice.

Fourthly, The true reason why so many Gentlemen then diserted the City, was
(as themselves have confessed) not for that they deemed it untenable; but
because they feared and discerned, the Denfendant intended not to keep it to
the last, 4.
but to surrender it to the Enemies hand; which he has clearly enough
confessed in his Answer.

Fifthly, 5.
This Argument in verity, is no more in effect, but a Governor provides Arms,
Soldiers, Canons, Ammunition, to defend a Town of importance, or to encounter
the Enemy, and then surrenders it (as he has done) in less then three days
siege; or runs away after he has stood a charge or two; Ergo, he did not
cowardly herein, because he provided men and Arms, whose valiant use, not
diligent preparation, is the only proof of valor.

His third argument was; Argum. 3.
No man could have expected less safty of conditions then himself, he only
being excepted out of the general pardon offered to the Soldiers and
Citizens; Ergo, he surrendered it not cowardly.

To which was Answered: Answer 1.
First, That it is probable his speedy, unexpected surrender of the Town and
Castle, before extremity, proceeded either from a fear to lose his life in
holding them out till the last, or a desire to purchase his Peace and Pardon
out of which he was formerly excepted from the King, with so rich a prize of
consequence as Bristoll was, which would most certainly procure it, with
infinite advantage to the King, and greatest prejudice to the Parliament.
Secondly, 2.
That if he could have expected less safty of conditions then any other, for
the reason alleged, this should have rather engaged him, to hazard his life in
defending it to the utmost extremity; then to yield it upon any terms
prejudicial to his own security, which is first provided for in the Articles.

His fourth was, Argum. 4.
That he could never have undergone more danger in the Castle had he held it,
then he did in the Guards, which he diligently visited; Ergo, he surrendered it
not cowardly.

To which was Answered: Answer 1.
He received no hurt at the Guards, and lost but 6, or 8 men at most in the
siege. Ergo, if he might with as little danger and loss have held out the
Castle, his crime and cowardice was the greater in surrendering it so
dishonourably without stroke, or once retiring to it.

His fifth, Argum. 5.
Was from his carriage when the Enemies entered, to prevent whose taking the
City, he had only two means left. The first was, to fire the Suburbs, for
which he issued out a Warrant (as his universal witness for every occasion
Lieutenant Clifton affirmed, a mere party and Delinquent, who advised the
Parley, surrender, and called all off the Line upon pain of death:) which
warrant was not executed, See the Relation, p. 9.
but revoked for want (as he alleged) of men to fire them: The second, was to
fire the City behind them, and so to retreat into the Castle; which he could
not possibly do without the death of many innocents, men, women, children; and
ruining of many men's Estates: A fact so horrid, that his tender conscience
would no ways permit its execution, he being loath to begin so ill a
president, which would have infinitely redounded to the Parliaments dishonor:
Besides, the Castle being not large enough to contain half his horse and
foot, and the streets very narrow, he could not have retired into it, without
great difficulty and danger of being cut off by the Enemy, and those horse and
foot which could not be received would have been utterly lost, and exposed to
the Enemies cruelty. Upon which considerations only, not out of any cowardice,
he did by Cliftons advise call a Council of War, and propound a Parley,
whereupon the surrender ensued. Therefore it was not cowardly.

To which Mr Prynne replied: First, That it is apparent by this Argument, that
if the Suburbs had been fired, the City, Castle might have been saved, and the
Enemies beaten out when lodged in the Surburbs: Therefore he ought in this case
both by the 9. E. 4. 35 b. 12. H. 8. 16. b. Br Trespass 406. Dyer 36. b.
Common and Marshall Law, to have fired the Suburbs to preserve the City,
Castle, and must answer his negligence in not doing it; his want of men to fire
the Suburbs being a frivilous excuse, since he had at least 2300 Garrison
Soldiers; and Mr Hassard the Gunner (as he acknowledged to diverse,) and Major
Wood, with others offered to beat, or fire them out of the Suburbs but could
not be permitted, though it might have been done with ease, the houses being
combustible, most of them built with Timber, and that part of the Suburbs not
very large.

Secondly, That between the part of that Surburbs and body of the City, there
was a Key on the westside of Froome-bridge, unfordable by horse or foot every
Tide, by reason of the waters, and at low water too, through the deepnesse of
the mudde, being so deep in most places, that men must stick fast in it (as
some as the Conspirators did upon the discovery of the conspiracy, who were
taken Attested by Col. Popham and others.
sticking in the mudde;) That there is no matching over the Key in File or
Rank, but only one by one, in confused order. That on the Key side next the
City, there is a wall of stone near 8 or 9 foot high above the mudde, which no
horse can enter nor no foot scale, unless at a slip or two, which are but
narrow, and stand 4 or 5 foot above the water: That there are houses all a long
the Key, which commanded the College side where the Enemy entered in such sort,
that none of them could offer to wade over the Key, but they might be cut off
with ease, that two or three Pieces of Ordnance planted at the head and lower
end of the Key, would so scouer all that passage, that none could have passed
over without loss of life, and the passage, there, would have been so
difficult, that one hundred men would easily have kept out ten thousand, all
which was attested by Col. Popham, Lieutenant Col. Paleologus, Major Wood,
Lieutenant Col. Andrews, Cap. Bagnall, and some of his own witnesses upon
cross examinations: therefore there was no danger of the Enemies entry there.
For Frome-gate it self, it had a new Percullis, and after the Enemies entering
the Line, and late sally on them, the very Joan Battin, Mrs Hassard.
Maids and Women, in the face of the Enemy, made a Barracado and Bulwork
against it 15 or sixteen foot thick with earth and sacks of Wool, to keep them
from entering there, being their only passage into the City from that Suburbs;
That above the Gate was the River Froome (which runs under it) with a Wall
and Houses between the City and it, so as the Enemy might easily have been kept
from entering the body of the Town, and could not have entered it, without
infinite loss and disadvantage.

Thirdly, 3.
that had they gotten over the Key, or Froome River into the body of the City,
yet the streets were so narrow and disadvantagious to the Enemy, that their
passage might have easily been hindered, the streets blocked up with caskes,
carts, sleids, stools, and a Piece of Ordnance or two placed at the head of
every street, and the houses lined with Musketers would have so scoured and
secured it, that the Enemy must have sustained extraordinary loss, at least 50
or an 100 men for one of ours, as they lost before in the storming. Besides,
they must have all marched up the hill, in paved streets which are so slippery,
that the foot could have hardly stood to charge, and the horse would certainly
have slipped and fallen: in regard of which disadvantages, our men having the
hill, flankers, the shelter of houses, and charging downwards, must needs have
repulsed them with extraordinary loss had they forcibly entered, and made a
most safe retreat into the Castle at any time when they saw just cause, without
any such difficuly or danger as was suggested.

Fourthly, 4.
Admit they had taken the body of the Town beyond the Key, adjoining to the
Castle, which they could not have done without excessive loss and great
difficulty, yet all that part of the Town being commanded either by the Castle,
or other Forts and Out works all in our profession (as Clifton himself with
other of the Defendants Witnesses confessed, and Major Wood proved) they could
not possibly have held it long, and would have been in worse condition with in
it then before, and so no absolute necessity of firing it, had not his courage
and conscience served him to do it.

Fifthly, 5.
For his horse and foot, incontainability in the Castle, in case he had been
forced to retire into it, there were sundry other places to bestow them in,
besides the Castle: As first, the body of the City adjoining to the Castle,
which would have billited them all till the Enemy had forced it: Secondly, that
part of the Suburbs, under the command of the Castle next to Lawfords Gate,
distinct from the body of the City if taken, and very defensible, the Castle,
and Outworks then remaining ours: Thirdly, the Out-Forts, where the Guards
might have been doubled or trebled as there was cause, especially now when he
had an overplus of men that he know not how to bestow: Fourthly, that part of
the City beyond the bridge in Sommerset-shire side, which was very capacious,
able to contain all his supernumerary foot and horse, though the other Suburbs
and body had been taken; which part (the bridge being broken down or defended)
had been inaccessible, strong, and tenable for a long time against all his
Majesty's Forces, we having then all the Out-Forts in possession which
commanded other parts of the Town, and Ratcliff Church, Tower-Harris, and the
Castle (three extraordinary strong Forts) commanding and securing that part
beyond the bridge; which being fenced with extraordinary strong Outworks, and
deep watrey Dikes, Tower-Harris, and Ratcliffe Church on the one side, with the
River, and Castle on the other side, and strongly garrisoned with the Soldiers
retired from other parts, had been almost impregnable, and might have held the
Enemies play for sundrey Months, had the Defendant resolved to hold it to the
utmost. Having therefore so many several safe retreats, and receptacles for
his horse, foot, and not making use of any of them, though he promised to
dispute every inch of ground with the Enemy (as he might have done with honor
and great advantage) his pretense is false, his surrender cowardly beyond all
excuse.

Sixthly, 6.
He has often inculcated this to your Honors, that the Citizens were generally
very malignant, and disaffected to the Parliament; and we have proved, that the
James Powell, Abel Kelley, William Deane, Mrs Hassard, and others.
most of the best affected, had carried their estates and three months
provision into the Castle, where their persons and goods were by the Defendant
promised to be secured. His forbearing therefore to fire the City in case he
had bin necessitated to it, proceeded not from any public care he had of the
Parliaments friends or Kingdoms safety, but from his private respects to the
persons and estats of Malignants; which he would rather carefully preserve to
enrich, encourage, and strengthen the Enemies, then fire or endanger to
preserve the Parliament and Kingdom: Mercy and compassion are doubtless
commendable virtues in a Govournour, who should not use cauteries or firing
till the utmost extremity: But when such an exigency happens, that a City might
be fired, or both it and the Kingdom lost or hazarded, it is foolish cruelty
not Christian mercy, to be over-pitifull in such a case. It is a cruel
destructive mercy to save a City (especially a Malignant one, as this is
averred then to have been) to destroy a Kingdom, yea, our Religion, Laws, and
Liberties with it: Better the greatest part of the City had been turned into
Ashes to preserve the Castle and others parts of it to the Parliament, and
secure the Realm, then to surrender the whole so cowardly so unexpectedly, to
the loss of the West, and Kingdom in all probability.

Seventhly, 7.
the Defendant well knew of what extraordinary concernment the loss of
Bristoll would be to the Kingdom, of what infinite advantage to the Enemy, as
is evident by his own Letter to my Lord Say (dated March 20 1643. before it
was fortified or fully garrisoned) published in his printed Relation page 13.
where thus he writes.

May it please your Lordship to understand first the importance of this City of
Bristoll, etc. The Enemy has lately cast his eye upon it, prompted by the
witty malice of our Malignants, to espy his advantage: If he possess this
City, he will reap these benefits by our loss. 1. He will get much Money,
Arms, and Ammunition in a more cheap and less hazardous way, then he can have
them out of the Lowcountreyes; all which he will pay for with Monopolies, and
engrosments of Trade, things with which the great ones of this Town have been
well acquainted, and are therefore Malignant. 2. If he gain this Town, he
will It himself or some of his had been Governors of it.
soon subdue Gloucester, and become master of all the Tract between Shrewsbury
and the Lyzards point in Cornwall, a Quarter so plentiful, as his plundering
Army yet never saw. 3. He will become master of all the Traffic of that Inland
Sea the Severn, and make all the shipping both of the Welsh and English Coasts
his own. 4. His Neighborhood to Wales will from time to time supply him with
a body of foot. 5. We shall lose a great Port Town very important for the
service of Ireland, and Fit to give Landing to the Rebels of that place, or any
other Enemy. Since therefore he knew this City to be of so great importance to
the Kingdom, and the loss of it so extraordinarily advantageous to the Enemy,
he should in this respect have held it out to the utmost extremity, and rather
hazarded the firing of it by the Enemy which would not have done it,
(especially being Malignant) or himself, then quitted both it and the Castle
to, with all the Ammunition, Canon, Arms, Provisions, Colors, Ships,
Merchandise, Wealth therein, upon such poor dishonorable terms, before any
Out-fort taken, or one shot made against the City or Castle walls; he wanting
nothing but courage to defend them, the Enemy having lost so many, and himself
so few in the former stormings.

His sixth Argument was, Argum. 6.
that he stood in places of greatest danger with his Troop, near Alderman
Jones his house, where a Granado falling into the midst of his Troop, and
hurting no man, he thereupon encouraged his soldiers, saying, that God did
protect them.

To which was answered, Answer.
1. That not one of his Troop (for ought appears) was ever hurt in that or any
other place where he stood with them; therefore the danger was not very great.
2. That this place under Alderman Jones his house, was more then Canon proof,
and most secure against the Enemies shot, which the house and Garden walls
guarded off being between the Enemy and his Troop; therefore no place of danger
but security. 3. That this Grenades falling in among the Troop at that time,
was merely casual; and hurt not any though it frighted many, and made the
Defendant and his Troop presently to remove from thence, as his own witnesses
deposed. 4. Himself never charged the Enemy in person with his Troop after
their entry within the Line; his standing therefore with them in this secure
place before the entry, was no great proof of his valor, much less that the
surrender was not cowardly.

His seventh Argument, Argum. 7.
to prove the surrender not cowardly, was, That the Parley and Surrender were
both agreed on by the Council of war; Ergo not cowardly.

To which was answered, Answer 1.
That himself was both the Sea Col. Stroodes Deposition. his Letter to his
Excellency, and Remonstrance
first mover, perswader of this Parley, this surrender, and the principal man
that advanced it, drawing on the rest to consent to it, and not making the
least opposition against it. 2. That the Council of war wherein the Parley was
first propounded, was not general, as it ought to have been, but private, few
of his Officers or the Gentlemen there, having notice of it, till a Parley was
concluded, and a Drummer dispatched twice to the Enemy before they would take
notice of it. At this Council no Country Gentlemen were present, but Sis John
Horner, who gave no vote and Col. Stroods Deposit, confirmed by Sir John
Horners testimony.
Col. Stroode who voted against it, and not above six or seven Officers, of
which Lieutenant Col. Davison, and Major Holmes were two, who opposed the
Parley; as for Mr Edward Stephens (whom Col. Fiennes averred in Relations p. 9
print to be present at it) he denies upon oath, that See both their
Depositions.
he had ever any notice of it; and so does Col. Stephens to. Being therefore
such a private Conventicle and no general Council, and these thus voting
against the Parley, it is a greater evidence then disproofe of a Cowardly
surrender. 3. The Defendant and his brother John, to circumvent the Council,
and draw them on both to a Parley and surrender, misinformed them, that there
were but 20 barrels of Powder, and 400 weight of Match left: as he confesses
in his Answer to the eight Article, See Mayor Dowets testimony.
commanding Mr Hassard (who kept the stores) to affirm there was no more, when
as you have heard it proved there was above three times as much more then in
the Castle. His misinformation therefore being the chief motive to sway the
Council to this Parley and surrender, their consents will not excuse but
aggravate his Cowardice and treachery in seducing them. 4. If the Town and
Castle were tenable, sufficiently provided with all necessaries for a defense,
and not reduced to extremity, as we have proved, the surrender by a Council of
war will not make the Cowardlinesse and treachery less but greater; and
subject the whole Council to censure, as appears by the Cases of See the Doom
of Cowardice.
Weston, Gominyes, and others adjugded in Parliament: Otherwise, if this plea
should be admitted for a justification, a Governor and his Officers might
safely without danger betray any Fort or place through Cowardice or treachery by
voting it in a Council first, and then putting it in execution.

His eighth Argument was, Argum. 8.
That when he sent to the Enemy for a Parley, and their Hostages came to
Froome-gate which was barracadoed up, they swore, God damn us, we will come in
at Froome-gate (which was the nearest way) or have no Parley at all; whereupon
he sent them this resolute answer, that they should not come in there, but at
Newgate, which they were enforced to do after much contest; Ergo the surrender
was not Cowardly.

To which Mr Prynne answered; Answer.
1. That at that time Froom-gate was See the Depositions of Ione Battin and Mrs
Hassard.
barracadoed up with a Bulwark of earth and wooll-sacks 15 or 16 foot thick to
keep out the Enemy, made by the very women and maids, with the help of a few
men, in a short space; and when the Hostages came to that gate, the work was
raised so high, that Captain Tailor, the Defendants own witness confessed,
he could not see nor confer with them over it, but was enforced to go to
speak with them through a window, when he received their God-damne-me message,
that they would come in at that gate, or else return: from which window
likewise he returned the Governors answer to them. Now to demolish such a
Barracado as this, to let in these peremptory Hostages, and the Enemy too, who
might then have clear passage into the City, had been such an undiscreet and
cowardly Act, as was not only below the spirit of a Governor, or soldier, but
of a sucking child, and would have argued the Defendant (if condiscended to) a
man utterly destitute, not only of courage but common discretion. 2. This
braving unreasonable request argues plainly, that the enemies had a very mean
conceit of the Defendants valor, else they would never have presumed to send
him such a disdainful message, which an Heroic spirit would have so far
resented, as not to brook a Parley upon any terms; and his not yielding to
it, is no greater an evidence that the surrender following was not Cowardly,
then that the building of Tinterton Steeple was the cause of the increase of
Goodwin sands.

His ninth Argument was his courage and speeches at the Parley, Argum. 9.
wherein he confessed, 1. See his Letter to his Excellency, p. 3. 10. called a
Counceil of war, and proposed to them our condition, and besides laid open
unto them our small store of Ammunition, etc.
That the motion of the Parley proceeded merely from himself. 2. That the
Parley was concluded on before ever the Mayor repaired to the Council. 3. He
said, the Mayor was extraordinary fearful, and pressed earnestly for an
agreement with the Enemy. 4. That when the Enemies Commissioners at the Parley,
upon the motion of Captain Birch, that the Citizens might have liberty to carry
away their estates if they pleased, stuck at this demand, he thereupon rose
up, and with great earnestness protested, that he would break off the Parley,
and rather lose his life, AND HOLD AND PUT IT TO THE UTMOST EXTREMITY, then not
provide for the security of the Citizens estates: which speeches he proved by
the testimonies of Captain Birch, and Mr Prickman. Ergo he did not cowardly
surrender the Town and Castle.

To which Mr Prynne replied; Answer.
1. That the motion of the Parley proceeding originally from himself before
any solicitations from the Mayor or Citizens, argued that himself was more
fearful then the Mayor, though thus extraordinary timorous; and that both the
Parley and surrender proceeded from his excessive fear. 2. That we had here
confitentem reum, that he held not the Town till utmost extremity, as his duty
bound him. For he told the Commissioners, if they would not yield to secure the
Citizens goods (whom he frequently brands for desperate Malignants) he would
then venture his life, and put and hold it to the utmost extremity: therefore
he held it not by his own confession till such extremity; and so by the very
Articles of War, and construction of Law, is guilty of a Cowardly, and
Traytorly surrender, for which he ought to dye. And here observe the strange
temper and guilt of the Defendant: My Lords, he was constituted Governor of
Bristoll, not by the Mayor and Citizens, but his Excellency and the Parliament,
to preserve it from the Enemies hands, rather for the Kingdoms safety, then
security of the Malignant Citizens goods. He had formerly often protested to the
best affected Soldiers and Citizens, that James Powell, Col. Strood, Capt.
Bagnall, Abel Kelley.
he would dispute every inch of ground with the Enemy, from the Outworks to
the gates, from thence to the Castle, whither he would make his last retreat,
and there lay his bones, making his winding sheet his flagge of truce, and the
like, for the Common good and security of them and the Realm. But now alas, as
soon as the Enemy entered the Line, Heu quantum mutatus ab illo? he became a
quite other man, and forgetting all former valiant promises, heroic
resolutions for the Republicke, he presently sent for a Parley, and disputes not
so much as one inch of ground with the Enemy near the Gates or body of the
City, retires not one foot toward the Castle, and instead of adventring his
life to preserve the City for the Parliaments and Kingdoms safety against the
Irish Rebels, and Welsh Malignants incursions, he has not so much as one word
or thought tending that way: but all public engagements set aside, he now only
looks after the security of his own person, and of the Malignant Citizens
persons, Estates for the Enemies future advantage, and rather then these shall
not be saved, he now protests he will lose his life, and put all to utmost
extremity. Had he really intended to make good this his protestation for the
Citizens benefit and safety, in case the Enemies had denied his demand in their
behalf, (which I much doubt of, since notwithstanding his foresaid
Protestations, he would not do it for the public;) I humbly conceive he
ought much more in point of honor and duty to have executed it for the whole
Kingdoms preservation and utility; which since he did not really perform nor
intend to do it, you have here confitentem reum, an evidence dropping from his
own mouth sufficient to condemn him: And therefore my humble motion to your
Honors is, that his person may presently be secured as by Law it ought. The
rather, because it plainly appears by all the cariages of the Defendant from
the enemies first entry till his return to London, that this surrender
proceeded merely from timidity and cowardice at the best, as I shall evidence
by these particulars.

First, by his Cap. Bagnal William Deane. Will. Whithorn.
calling the Soldiers from the Line under pain of death, and

Secondly, by giving no order nor direction to the Soldiers drawn off, for any
present service or sally in diverse hours, Cap. Bagnall.
by means whereof, many of them

Thirdly, by not employing his reserve under Captain Stokes, not his
Maine-Guard, nor Soldiers in the Castle (consisting of at least 500 men) who
were Major Wood. Will. Whithorn.
who might with ease have been cut off by them without calling any from the
Line.

Fourthly, by his contradictory commands, and pale looks, attested by William
Deane, Mary Smith, Captain Bushel, Thomas Thomas, and generally taken notice

Fifthly, by his hastiness to See his Letter, p. 3.
propound and send for a Parley to the Enemy, even before the sally made, as
Col. Strood deposes, contrary to his advise; and then

Sixthly, by the forgetfulness of all his former promises, and of the very
Castle it self, James Powell Mr Hassard. Cap. Bagnall. Col. Strood.
formerly accounted by him the strongest Rampart and last Retreat,

Sevently, by his own confession in his Relation, p. 10. he writes, That all
the conditions they desired, See the Articles of surrender.
were yielded to: yet had he not then so much heart or brain left within him,
as to demand or make more honorable conditions, then to deliver up the Town
and Castle, with all Artillery, Arms, Ammunition, Cannon, Victuals, Prisoners,
and Colors too (which was all that could be lost or given away from the State)
or to demand convenient time or Carriages to convey away their goods from
thence.

Eighthly, by accepting Articles in the Commissioners names, when as they should
have been in Prince Ruperts then present, who else was not obliged to observe
them; and not exacting an Oath, or due sufficient caution for performing them,
after so many experiences of their treachery and truce breaking.

Ninthly, by suffering one of the Enemies, Hostages to depart the Town as soon
as the Articles were concluded, and giving liberty to the other to do the
like, Major Allen.
but that Major Allen coming casually into the room withstood it; by means
whereof they had all been wholly exposed to the Enemies mercy and sudden
assaults, having no security for himself, his Soldiers or the City; whereas
both his Hostages continued still in the Enemies hands.

Tenthly, Mr Baynton.
by his not publishing the Articles after they were concluded, till Captain
Bushel (a Prisoner of the Enemies party) put him in mind thereof, and
published them at his request. Major Wo^d, Mr Powel, Captain Bagnall.


Eleventhly, By suffering his men to fall off their Guards, the Prisoners to
get loose, the Enemies to enter the Town and Castle before the time appointed
for the surrender, See the Tragedy of Bristol. p. 2. 3. 5. 6.
Whereby many rapines and violence were committed both on the Soldiers and
Townes-men in the very streets and Castle, which the Enemy could not prevent,
and the Colonel never endeavored to see righted: Which caused Col. Gerrard (
foreseeing some complaints would be made) to desire Major Wood ( who in these
disorders suffered three days imprisonment there) to carry a letter from him
to Nath. Fiennes ( which he showed to Major Wood) to this purpose.

That whereas many outrages had been committed contrary to the tenor of the
Articles, which might happily be imputed to the Kings Grace, he gave him to
understand that the fault was in himself, who had most unsouldierly neglected
to look to the performances of them upon his party: and if this Declaration did
not, gave him satisfaction, he should be ready for further clearing of
himself to wait upon him with his sword in his hand, Your friend whom you
call Cavalier,

Charles Gerrard.


Twelfely, Captain Husbands, Rich. Winston.
by his leaving Captain Blake, and Captain Husbands with their Soldiers in
Windmil-hill and Brandon-hill Forts, when he marched out of Bristol, and giving
them no notice of the Articles of surrender, not Warrant under his hand to
deliver up these Forts according to the Articles; the first notice they had
both of the Articles and the Defendants leaving the Town, being given them by
the Enemy, who demanded the Forts, which they held after the Governors
departure, from whom they received no Order to quit them, which might have
endangered their lives.

Thirteenthly, Major Wood.
By his taking no care to march away with his men in a Body (which they could
not well do because their Colors and Drums were surrendered by agreement)
whereby they might have been kept together for the service of the Parliament.
And yet the preservation of his men and horse in a body for their present
service, is the best and only reason he gives for the surrender of the City and
Castle, both in his Page 11.
Relation, Letter, and Answer to the Articles.

Fourteenthly, Mr Brown, Mr Pury.
By his cowardly and unadvised speeches concerning the intenability of
Gloucester for three days space, if the Kings Forces came before it, and his
discourse to Mr Pury after its relief; his fear transporting him into such an
uncharitable opinion, as to judge brave Colonel Massy, as pusillanimous and
cowardly as himself.

Fifteenthly, By his very printed See his Relation, p. 9. 10, 11.
Relation, Letter, Replies, and Answer to the Articles, in all which the
intelligent Reader may palpably discern a spirit of trepidation and cowardice
to have seized both on his brain and pen, which made him invent so many
unworthy shifts, untrue surmises, ( as of close decked botes prepared by the
Enemy, a resolution to storm the Castle, and take it in two days at most,
etc.) And utter so many strange Paradoxes, yea contradictions, unworthy a man
of honor; and deny, not only Col. Essex, but himself, to be Governor of
Bristol, or of the Castle there; of which before: If all these evidences may be
credited against his bare prooflesse Allegations, the surrender must needs be
cowardly and unworthy at the best.

Upon this Col. Object. 2.
Fieenes very confidently affirmed, That the Report that Bristol was cowardly
and unworthily surrendered, was first raised by Mr Prynne, the Prosecutor, in
his Book entitled Romes Masterpiece, p. 35. published (as he said) the first
of August 1643. within five days after the surrender of Bristol; and that
before the publishing of this Book, it was not so reported, reputed by any.

To which Mr Prynne replied: Answer.
That this was a most false calumny without the least shadow of truth; For
first, though the Title of his Romes Masterpiece, was written and licensed for
the Press by a Committee of the Commons House (who earnestly, desired him to
translate and publish the Letters and Plot therein comprised, with such
observations as he thought meet, and they should approve) on August. 1. 1643,
yet the Book it self was not compiled, nor fully printed off till the end of
August or after, the publication being near a Month space after the license;
before which time, not only Mercurius Aulicus had informed the world in Print;
That Nathaniel Fiennes (by name, whom I named not) had bestowed Bristoll on the
King, etc. (which words were read out of Aulicus;) but likewise many London
Mercuries (and namely, that from Monday the 31 of July till Aug. 7. p. 17) had
divulged in Print, That Bristoll was cowardly delivered to the Enemy; that if
Col. Massey had been Governor in his place it had not been surrendered at all,
but held out still, etc. And in truth the surrender thereof to the Enemy in so
short a space, was so far beyond all men's thoughts or apprehention, that the
very first tidings of it, made most men openly aver in every place, it was most
cowardly and unworthily at least, if not treacherously surrendered to the
Enemies. This was not only Vox Popult, in London, Westminster, and elsewhere;
but Vox Parliamenti, the opinion of the Commons House (if not the Lords too)
who were much dejected at the news; which the Defendant himself self taking
notice off upon his very first every into the house after his return from this
noble exploit; where every one looked strangly on him with a discontented
aspect, and few or none of his dearest friends once moved their hats unto him,
(as they usually do to all other members, upon their arrival from any public
service after some time of absence;) and some of them minded him of Mr Samuel
Brown.
Gomineys and Westons case; whereupon he conscious to himself of the Commons
general ill opinion of this action, to avoid their examination and censure,
was enforced to make his Apology for it oprnly in the House, August 5. 1643. in
the close whereof (containing his bare Relation, no ways satisfactory,) he
desired Page. 13.
, That what he had affirmed might be examined at a Council of War, that so
he might be cleared or condemned according as they should find the truth or
falsehood of what he had declared. Which passage of his, published in Print
long before Romes Masterpiece, is a pregnant evidence and acknowledgement,
that the very House of Commons conceived this surrender proceeded either from
his cowardice or treachery; else there had been no need of any long Apology, or
such a reference as this to a Council of War: And indeed his own printed
Relation, is so full of palpable shifts, and See p. 8. 9. 10. 11. and Letter to
his Excellency, p. 3. 4. etc.
expressions of a timorous spirit, that the very reading of it, confirmed me
and others in this opinion, That the surrender was cowardly or treacherous; and
my passage in Romes Masterpiece concerning the inconveniences of Bristols
surrender, with reference to the Welsh, and Irish Rebels, were taken verbatim
out of his own printed Relation, p. 13. where thus he writes, If the Enemy
possess Bristol, his neighberhood of Wales will from time to time supply him
with a body of foot. We shall loose a Port Town very important for the service
of Ireland, and fit to give landing to the Rebels of that place or any other.
By all which it is clear, that I was not the first raiser of the Report of its
cowardly surrender, but that himself and others then in print had raised this
report, before I published any thing to this purpose. Secondly, To put this out
of question; First, it evidently appears by the Depositions of Mr Edward
Stephens, Thomas Monday, William Deane, Joan Battin, Abel Kelly, Arthur
Williams, Mistrisse Hassard, Richard Butler, Mary Smith, Ethelred Huddy, Joseph
Proud, Jeremy Holway, Anthony Gale, and others, That both the Soldiers and
Citizens of Bristoll were much discontented with the Governors Parley and
surrender when it was but in agitation, and openly said, they were betrayed;
and that not they only, but the very Enemies, concluded the surrender to be
cowardly, before we had any tidings of it; Secondly, Sir John Horner (his own
witness) deposes; that in their coming up to London, before we had any
notice of it, (they being the first who came thence and brought tidings of it,)
two or three Ministers spoke against it, Yea, himself by the way told Mr Powell
and others, he would not come to London, but pass into France to avoid the
shame of this action.
as cowardly and unworthy; Thirdly, Major Allen attesteth, that he and some
other Officers present in the siege, concluded it so in their private
discourse, as they retreated from Bristol before they came to London; Fourthly,
it was generally reported cowardly or traitorly both in London and Westminster
upon the first notice of it; and some women in the streets openly called the
Defendant a coward, for this unworthy action; which his own Mr Hodges, and Mr
Whetcomb, can attest this.
Lady Mother condemned, and would not believe at first (affirming, that her
Son was of a more valorous spirit and honorable extraction, then to deliver
up a place of such consequence as Bristol in so short a time, where he had
promised to spend his life and lay his bones, rather then quit it; and all this
before I took any special notice of it. Whereupon having some relation to
Bristoll, in and near which I had diverse friends, I made a more particular
enquiry into this action from such Soldiers and Citizens present in the siege,
who could give me the best information; and upon due examination of what was
alleged on either part, I found the surrender such as I published it to be in
Rooms Masterpeece, by approbation of a Committee of the Commons House, who
both authorized the Book, and concurred with me in this opinion. From all which
it will appear, that I was not the raiser, nor first inventer of this bruit,
That Bristoll was cowardly and unworthily surrendered, it being published in
print by diverse, and the common received opinion of all men in City and
Country, before I gave my censure of it, which I have here made good.

His tenth Argument was, Argum. 10.
That both the City and Castle were untenable against the Enemy; Therefore the
surrender not cowardly, nor unworthy. Their intenability he endeavored to
prove;

First, from the weakness and insufficiency of the Line, Outworks, Walls,

Secondly, from the want of a sufficient Garrison to defend the Town, to
manifest page 14. complaining of the weakness of the Garrison of Bristoll, and
desiring an augmentation of it. Secondly, on his Excellencies opinion, Ibid.
page 16. who thought it necessary this Garrison should consist of three
Regiments of foot, two Troops of horse, and one company of Dragoones. Thirdly,
on a draught of an Ordinance presented to the House of Commons by the Lord Say;
for the settling of a sufficient Garrison at Bristoll (ibid. page 17.) wherein
he propounded, that the Garrison might consist of three Regiments of foot, the
first consisting of 1200. the second of 1000. the third of 800. men, and of two
Troops of horse, and one company of Dragoones; with less then which he could
not possibly (as he said) maitaine the City against the Enemies forces that
came then against it, who had few less then seventy Colors of foot ( as
Lieutenant Clifton affirmed, who told them) on Gloucestershire side, which
Captain Husbands telling them with his Prospectiveglasse, multiplied the
colors to one hundred.

Thirdly, from his want of Powder and Ammunition, See his Relation p. 9. 10.
and his Letter to his Excellency.
he having no Match which he endeavored to prove by the proportion of Powder
they spent in two days before, and by a Letter from Colonel Warnloe from
Plimoth (attested by Master Nichols) who writ, that they spent forty barrels of
Powder there in one day, when they beat the Enemy out of their works.

The City and Castle being therefore untenable in all these respects; and no
succors near to relieve them in due season, his surrender could not be deemed
cowardly, but discreet and honorable, to preserve both the Citizens goods, and
the Garrison (consisting of above 1500. foot and horse) to serve the
Parliament, (which then wanted men) in other places of advantage.

To which particulars Mr Prynne gave these ensuing Answers. Answer.
First, that the works about the City and Castle were very strong, defenceable,
tenable against all the enemies power, which he proved; First, by the judgment
and opinion of the Defendant himself, who never once complained of the
weakness or insufficiency of the Works or Castle till the surrender, but often
affirmed the Works to be very strong, sufficient, and tenable, before the
seige, and that he doubted not to make them good against all the enemies power,
as Colonel Stephens, Colonel Strood, Captain Bagnal, Master Powel, with others
depose. And he publikly confesses in his printed Relation, page 10. that
himself (and some others too) had a great opinion of the strength of the
Castle, before it was surrendered; though now upon a sudden, he would make your
Honors believe and endeavors to prove it, the weakest most untenable piece in
the world, having spent one whole days time in demonstrating its several
weaknesses, or rather in them his own, who notwithstanding all these
imbicilities had so great an opinion of its strength; And indeed did not the
Defendant deem the works sufficient, the City and Castle strong, he must
discover himself guilty, either of extraordinary folly, in putting the
Parliament, Country, City, to so great costs to fortify, garrison, furnish
the City and Castle with all necessaries to hold out a siege, if it were not
really tenable, and of no considerable strength at all, in the upshot: Or else
of extraordinary treachery, if he knew it not tenable, and yet gave it out to
be very defensible, on purpose to induce the Gentry and Country in those parts
to bring their money, plate, estates, provisions thither, as to places of
strength and security, as we know they did, upon his promises to defend them to
the last, that so they might become a prey to the enemies, who had all the
Ammunition, Provisions, Arms of those parts delivered into their hands at
once, which they could have never gained, had not the Defendant fortified the
Town, Castle, and affirmed them to be strong and tenable; Besides, his own many
liberal promises to defend the Castle to the utmost, in case he was forced to
retreat into it, and there to secure the best affected Citizens and their
goods, argues its tenability in his own apprehension. Secondly, as the Town,
but Castle especially, was tenable in his own judgment, so likewise in the
opinion of others. First, of the Gentry and Country who repaired thither, as
to a most secure sanctuary against the enemy, toward whose fortification and
defense they liberally contributed. Secondly of the Citizens, who all deemed
the Town, but the Castle especially (to which they carried their estates, and
above three months provisions) to be defensible against all the enemies power,
as appears by the Depositions of James Powel, Able Kelly, William Deane,
Mistress Hassard, others, and by the Tragedy of Bristoll, lately published by
Captain Birch, Mr. Powell, and other Citizens of it; who write thus of the
Castle, page 5. The Castle being strongly fortified and victualled, as being
the last place to retreat unto, if the Town should be taken; being ASSVRED we
should be able to keep it (till relief came,) as a sanctuary for the persons
and estates of such as were most active for the Parliament; diverse of us
accordingly brought in our goods, with provisions for our selves, and to help
victual the Soldiers that were to be entertained in it, etc.

Thirdly, by the opinion of diverse Soldiers of our own party, as Colonel
Stephens, Colonel Strood, Lieutenant Colonels Paleologus, and Andrews, Major
Wood, Major Allen, Captain Bagnall, Nicholas Cowling, Mr. Hassard, Richard
Linden, Edmund Wathorne, Thomas Monday, and Richard Butler attest. Fourthly, by
the speeches of the enemies own commanders, who viewing the Works of the said
Castle, soon after its surrender, swore, God damme them, all the Devils in
Hell could not have taken the Castle, it was so fortified had not the Governor
cowardly surrendered it, that they might thank Fiennes for it, and that they
could not have taken the Castle, had it not been yielded up to them beyond
expectation: as Mary Smith, Ethelred Huddy, Ioane Battin, Thomas Thomas, and
Michael Spark senior witness.

And whereas he alleged, Object.
that Sir William Waller, and Sir Arthur Haslerig, deemed Bristol not tenable,
which he endeavored to prove by this passage in their Letter to him dated July
1. 1643. -- ( attested by Mr. John Ash, and printed in his Relation, page 27.)
We think the enemy will fall on this night, if not, to morrow morning; and if
so, what good will this Regement do Bristoll if we perish? It is a wonder to
us, to see our friends delay help where there is safety, etc.

Mr. Answer.
Prynne answered. 1. That this letter declares not their opinion conceruing the
intenability of Bristoll, but their importunity to have speedy supplies from
thence. Secondly, it expresses that Bristols greatest security consisted in
their Armies success, there being no danger of a siege as long as their Army
were masters of the field. Thirdly, it proves nothing, that either the City or
Castle might not have held out till relief should arrive from his Excellency,
or that it could not hold out above three days longer. Fourthly, the Defendant
confesses that had Colonel Pophams Regiment continued in the Town, it had not
been lost, and that his sending of them to Sir William Waller, was the loss
of the Town; therefore the Castle and Town in respect of the fortifications
were both tenable, and had no want at all but of Colonel Pophams men, which he
supplied by his new raised Regiments, before the siege.

Secondly, Object.
whereas he alleged, that diverse Gentlemen left the Town, and went away with
Sir William Waller, and Sir Arthur Haslerigge, because they deemed it not
tenable.

It was answered, Answer.
that the reason of their departure (as themselves have confessed) was, the
fear and assurance they had, the Defendant would not hold it out to the last;
whereas Colonel Strood, Colonel Stevens, Mr Talboye^
and others who had his promise to hold it out, to the utmost, continued with
him still.

Fourthly, it was answered, that the objected weaknesses and defects of the
works and Castle, were mere inventions of the Defendant since the surrender,
not thought or spoken of before, nor once propounded at the Council of War
when the Parley was in agitation; where the debate of this particular of the
Tenabilitie of the Town and Castle was never disputed, for if it had, the
Town would have been held some four days longer, whiles this point had
been debated, which has taken up four days here. As for the Castle, the
Defendant himself confesses, and his Lieutenant Clifton with Major Holmes
depose: * that in the whole debate of the Parley and Surrender, Nota.
the Castle was never mentioned nor thought on: therefore the weakness and
untenability of it was no ground of its surrender, as is now pretended.
Finally, the Defendant in his printed Relation, page 9. 10. and in his Answer,
affirms; that the cause why the Castle was not tenable against the enemy, was
for want of Match and Powder, not inregard of its inconvenient situation, and
weak fortification, the only causes now insisted on; therefore this is but a
mere pretense invented since the surrender.

To the second pretense of wanting a sufficient Garrison to hold it; Answ. 2.
Master Prynne answered, 1. That that Defendant had two thousand foot besides
two hundred voluntires, and three hundred horse and Dragoones at least, which
were sufficient to defend the Town against all the enemies power, as is
infallibly evident by the repulses every where given to the enemies when they
stormed it, and the great slaughter of hundreds of their men, with the loss
but of three or four of ours, attested by his own witness, and published in his
own Relation and Letter to his Excellency. And if the Garrison were sufficient
thus to repulse the enemy in his greatest strength and assaults at the very
outworks, then certainly they were abundantly able to defend the Town and
Castle after the slaughter, and wounding of above 1700 of the enemies, had they
been discreetly and courageously commanded by him; but doubtless they were
more then enough to have defended the Castle, the body of the City, and that
part beyond the Bridge after the Suburbs entered, and the Line wholly quitted on
Glocestershire side. Secondly, if the Garrison had been too weak, he might
have raised six or eight thousand able men more in the City, or retained See
his Relation p. 12.
five hundred of Sir William Wallers Soldiers, whom he sent out of the Town
to save the expense of provisions. Thirdly, the Garrison Soldiers that were in
it, would have fought, and held the City and Castle out against the enemy,
thinking themselves strong enough to do it, but the Defendant would not permit
them, as sundry witnesses attest; the want therefore of a sufficient Garrison
is but a mere pretense. Fourthly, a Garrison must be judged to be sufficient
or insufficient to defend a place, only in regard of the enemies strength that
comes before it; that Garrison being sufficient to defend a Town against seven
or eight thousand beseigers, which perchance is insufficient to guard it
against twenty thousand. Now, we confidently affirm, that the Garrison then in
it, was sufficient to guard it against all the power then before it, as
appears by the enemies several general repulses with extraordinary loss to
them, and none to the Garrison: by the enemies paucity, not being above seven
or eight thousand at most; (most of them horse) and their Quarters divided with
an unfordable River, so as they could not come to rescue or relieve one the
other. And whereas he pretended the enemy was near fourteen thousand strong,
because they had about seventy or one hundred foot Colors only upon Durdham
Down; this is a most fallacious Argument: because every puny Soldier knows,
it is a common policy in wars, to carry and display a multitude of Colors
more then there are Compaines, a far off, at a distance, of purpose to amaze
or terrify the opposites, and make themselves appear more numerous then in
truth they are; which policy was now used. And whereas Captain Husbands
affirmed, that he told one hundred foot colors on Durdham Down; he says,
that it was but with his prospective glass, (an uncertain instrument to tell
colors with) which multiplied the colors more then they were, Leiutenant
Clifton telling not seventy at most. And how full these companies under those
colors were, we shall produce only the testimony of Mr. Savidge, a late
Soldier in Ireland, who deposed Viva voce; that he was in Bristoll within two
days after its surrender, when there was a General Muster of Prince Ruperts
foot in the Marsh there, at which both Prince Rupert and Mawrice were present,
where he told (to his best remembrance) 52. but for certain above 42. of the
enemies Colors, which had not above 1400. Soldiers at the most belonging to
them, for he particularly told and took special notice of them; Whereupon he
demanded of one of the Officers on the place, why they had so many Colors, and
so few men? Who answered, that they had many of their men slain and wounded in
the seige: so as by this account, they had more foot in the City by seven or
eight hundred when it was surrendered, then Prince Rupert had without it, whose
forces were most horse; and therefore a sufficient Garrison to defend it
against so small a force. Besides, it appears by the Relation of Gloucester
seige, page 1. (attested by Mr. Pury to be true,) that there were about nine
thousand men more before Gloucester then there were at Bristoll seige; if then
Gloucester Garrison, consisting at the most but of 1500. men were sufficient to
guard it against 9000. more then were before Bristoll, then Bristoll Garrison
of above 2000. foot, and 300. horse, must needs be abundantly sufficient to
defend it against 9000. enemies less then were before Gloucester. And whereas
the Defendant alleged his Letter of complaint for want of a sufficient
Garrison; this was in March 20. 1643. when he had but one complete Regiment of
foot, and but two Troops of horse, not at the siege, that the Garrison should
consist of three Regiments of foot, and three Troops of horse and Dragoones. It
was answered, that he had above that number of horse, and almost his full
number of foot at the siege, and might have raised more had he pleased;
therefore a competent Garrison, according to his own desire. But that which
quite takes off this objection, is, That such a large Garrison as this, was not
desired by him, or thought meet by his Excellency, only to defend Bristoll
against a siege, but likewise to defend Bath, Barkly Castle, and the Country
round about for twenty miles space, and to suppress insurrections, if any
should happen in the Western parts; as appears by his Excellencies Letter,
and his own propositions. Therefore this pretense, that he had not a full
Garrison to defend the Town, because he wanted some of his number of foot,
which should have defended Bath and the Country twenty miles round about, is
but an impertinent plea. Seventhly, for his Stokes, whose Company was a mere
reserve, standing in Saint James Churchyard, when the enemy entered, though not
employed to repulse them at the first, nor afterward in the sally. If then he
had reserves for some special services, he had no doubt a competent Garrison,
it being unusual to have a whole reserve, and a vast unnecessary expense to
maintain a double Garrison in any place. Eighthly, whereas he alleged, that
his men for want of relief and reserves would have quite been tired out in
three or four days more, having been near five days on duty without
relief; and that a man might die of a lingering Consumption well as of a
Fever. It was answered, That the Garrison of Gloucester had no reserves at all,
and were constantly upon duty without * relief above thirty five days and
nights together, Lime has done the like for six weeks space.
yet held it out courageously, without dying of a Consumption; and why Bristol
Garrison might not have done the like (being furnished with good store of
Bristoll milk, strong wines and waters) with as good success, had the
Defendant put them to it, (especially having some reserves to relieve one
another) he could see no reason, but only his willingness to yield up the Town
to the enemy, for fear of a Consumption, of which none are willing, or use to
die till nature be totally spent: Ninthly, there was then no sickness at al in
the City, no want of provisions or necessaries; no loss but of eight men at
the most when yielded, how then the City, Castle, could be surrendered upon this
pretense of an impossibility to keep them longer, for want of a sufficient
Garrison, we cannot conceive; especially since the women with their children
proferred to go unto the Cannons mouthto dead the bullets.

Thirdly, Answer 3. Ione Battin, Arth. Williams, Mayor Wood.
to the pretended want of Match, Powder, Ammunition (for a sufficiency of all
other provisions and victuals was akcnowledged) it was answered, First, that we
had proved there were 1400. weight of Match, (besides a Dray load more of
Match) in the Castle it self, when surrendered; and a Match-maker with materials
to make more Match in the Castle as fast as they could spend it, besides much
Match in the City: and he might as soon have alleged want of water in the
river Avon, as of Match in Bristoll, which makes Match and cordage for all the
West of England and other parts. Secondly, for Powder, we have proved by some
witnesses, that there were at least sixty barrels in the Castle only, besides
as many more in the City, Forts, and what was weekly made in the Town: yea
some witnesses prove there were seventy double barrels in the Castle, left to
the enemy. Captain Husband confesses he had two barrels of Powder in his
Fort, Arthur Williams attesteth there were sixty barrels in the Town and Major
Allen brought nine Barrels more from Malmesbury: And by his own printed
Relation, Page 9. 10.
there must be at least 90 Barrels left; For he therein confesses (a) that he
found 45 Barrels of Powder in the Town, when he first entered upon the Charge
thereof: after which he received 30 Barrels more from London, 126 Barrels from
France, besides six or seven Barrels weekly made in the City, all the powder
taken out of Shops, Ships; and the nine Barrels from Malmesbury: all which
(admit the Barrels out of France single) amount to 210 Barrels; but to 336
Barrels, if those from France were double, as they were: Of these he says, Sir
William Waller had about 60 Barrels, and that he spent about 60 more in the
siege: deduct then 120 Barrels out of 336, there remained no less then 216; or
120 out of 210, there were left 90 Barrels at least by his own confession,
allowing him all that was made or found in the City and Ships merely for wast
and Musters. And whether there were a necessity of surrendering the Town for
want of powder when so many Barrels remained only in the Castle; besides what
was in the Forts and City, let all men judge: there being 60 Barrels more then
Col. Massey had when Gloucester was first besieged.

But his grand pretense is, That this powder would have lasted them only two or
three days at most; whence this Pordigall of his powder, not blood or coin,
writes thus in his Relation, page 9. 10. That which made it evident, We could
not hold out the Castle above two or three days, was, because we had
Ammunition for no longer time, having only 50 Barrels of Powder, and no Match,
at all: (No Match for himself, he means for cowardice, else there was Match
enough,) and according to the proportion of Powder, we had spent the days
before this would not have served us above two days, and it is clear we
should not have had any relief in six or eight weeks. A pretty prejudicating
fancy, not to be admitted on any terms: For by the same Argument he surrendered
it up now when he had 90, or admit but 50 Barrels left; he would have then
yielded it had he 500 remaining: For thus he would have argued, 500 Barrels
after the rate of 50 Barrels we spent the two first days, would have lasted us
but twenty days at most: and we could have no succor in six or eight weeks,
therefore I was necessitated to render the Town for want of powder to hold out
till relief might come: Nay, if he had a 1000 Barrels then left, he would by
this reason have yielded the Town up, for want of powder, for he argued thus;
Col. Warnslow at Plimmouth spent 40 Barrels in one day: Ergo, I should have
spent so many every day at Bristoll, and by this computation a 1000 Barrels
would have lasted me but 30 days, and I had no hopes of relief in forty or
fifty days at nearest; Ergo, I was necessitated to yield for want of powder to
serve me till relief might come. Had valliant Massey argued thus at Gloucester,
he might have surrendered it to the King on this pretense the very first day and
hour he came before it. He might have alleged (with better reason then Col.
Fiennes) we have but 30 Barrels of powder in all to defend the Town with, and
these will not last above one day; for Col. Fiennes spent 30 Barrels a day as
Bristoll, and Col. Warnslow 40 in one day at Plymmouth: Therefore our 30
Barrels against a far greater Army of Enemies, will not last above one day,
and we lawfully may and ought in true Millitary policy to surrender Gloucester
to the Enemy the first hour they come before it for want of powder, since Col.
Fiennes surrendered Bristoll for this very cause, when he had twice as much
powder as we. Had Massey done or argued thus, what had become of Gloucester and
the Kingdom ere this? But since he made no such anticipating Argument, but with
his little store of powder (far less then was in the Castle of Bristoll
only) maintained the siege for 31 days, and preserved) the Town when he had
more cause to despaired of relief then Col. Fiennes, Why the Defendant might
not, should not have done the like at Bristoll, I cannot yet conjecture.
Indeed, he says, in his Answer to the eight Article, That he was less able to
defend the Town four, or the Castle fourteen days, then Massey was to defend
Gloucester 24 days with the same proportion of Powder. Certainly, if it were
possible for Massey to defend Gloucester against a far greater Force then was
at Bristoll with 50 Barrels of powder for 31 days: It was more possible for
the Defendant to have defended the Castle of Bristoll of less circumference by
three parts then it, with 90 single or 70 double Barrels (which he surrendered)
for three times 30 days, and till succors had arrived. But to exclude all
fond pretenses to palliate treachery or cowardice, Mr Prynne affirmed, that
there must the same Rule and Law be observed in case of powder, Ammunition,
and men, as there is in case of victuals: And what that is the King of Swedens
and his Excellencies Articles of War (newly reprinted) define, to wit, a
present and absolute want of Victuals, and all edible things to sustain
nature: And so a present absolute want and expense of all powder and
Ammunition; else any Fort may be betrayed upon remote pretended necessities. A
Governor must not argue thus, It may be I may spend 50 Barrels of powder in
two days: Ergo, 50. being all my store, I will presently surrender before I
put it to the hazard, and yield up my present stores to the Enemy before the
two days expire. For then what place can be secure, or will hold out to real
extremity? But on the contrary, he must thus resolve, I have thus much powder
yet left, and by good husbandry it may last much longer then I apprehend; the
Enemies Ammunition, for ought I know, may fail before it, who knows not how
small our stores now are; however it is better I should spend that little I
have left against the Enemy, rather then yield it up to supply their wants and
annoy our friends, Therefore I will, yea, I ought in reason and duty to be
reduced to a present, real, not a surmised possible want of powder, before I
will yield up the Fo^t, committed to my trust, to the whole Kingdoms
prejudice. This was Col. Massey his resolution, this ought to be the conclusion
of every Governor whatsoever, and of the Defendant at Bristol, which wanted
neither Fortifications, Men, Victuals, Ammunition, Canon, Powder, Wine, Bear,
Match, Water, nor any necessaries when it was surrendered, to defend it till
supplies might have arived. Therefore it was yielded up before any the least
extremity, and so unworthily, and Cowardly, both in Law and real verity.

Fourthly, Answer 4.
as to his best and most special plea or enducement, See his Relation, p. 11.
Letter, p. 3. 4.
That he surrenrendred the City and Castle so speedily, as he did, of purpose
to preserve a body of 1500 foot and horse for the service of the State, then
wanting men: And the lives and estates of diverse of our friends.

Prynne answered, First, That he might be ashamed of such a poor absurd
pretense as this, to veil his cowardice: his surrender in truth being but to
save his own life and estate, not the Garrisons, who were safer in the Town,
Castle, then in any other place whatsoever, and lost both themselves and their
estates by surrendering them, which they had preserved (as Gloucester men did
their City and Estates) had they manfully held them out to the last.



Thirdly, neither did he save those 1500. naked men as he pretended, nor yet
London. He lost the City, Castle, Arms, all else in them before only to save
the men, and their estates; and after lost both the men and their estates, to
save himself, never reserving so much as one Ensign, Drum, Trumpet, upon the
Parley to call or keep his men together, nor yet mustering them into order, nor
marching away with them in a body, nor releeving them, when dismounted,
plundered, abused in his sight, leaving every man to shift for himself the
best he might. And was not this a pretty saving of men to serve the Parliament
elsewhere, thus carelessly to lose them, and of 2300. men completely armed to
serve them, to preserve scarce 200. stripped of all their Arms, and quite
disbanded? God preserve the Republike from such frugall Stewards, such
pernicious bargains.

Fourthly, admit he had saved full 1500 unarmed men to serve the State, was

Fifthly, The Parliament needed no men at that time to serve them elsewhere,
Bristoll were it lost, far more then they wanted men: It was a bootlesse
service then, to lose what they should certainly most of all want, to preserve
only what they needed not.

Sixthly, These men's service was useful no where but in Bristoll, where the
Ulysses had the Winds) and might fight only where they were sure of no
resistance, to gain Sarmacida spolia, sine sanguine and sudore.

Seventhly, They could do the Parliament no such good service any where as
Bristol; there most of them were in their proper center, their native soil
where they fought for their lives, estates, lands, houses, wives, children,
liberties, in the very hight and strength of their spirits; there they were
entrenched in strong Forts and Bulworks, well manned, victualled, Ammunitioned;
where, in respect of the Enemies disadvantage in assailing, and their own
convenience in defending, they might have slain one hundred Enemies for one of
ours, as they had done before, killing and wounding above 1500 of the Enemies,
with the loss only of eight of the Garrison; after which rate they might have
slain the Enemies whole Army with the loss only of one hundred men, (a
service they could never hope to attain to in the open Fields,) and also have
saved not only 1500, but 2200 of their own men, to serve the State, together
with the City, Castle, Ships, Arms, Magazines, and Western Parts, all
depending on them; and that with the total ruin of the Enemies Forces.



England, Wales, or Ireland can afford, whence diverse thousands of Enemies and
Rebels are lately arrived in Bristoll Ships, to cut our throats, possess our
Estates, yea lay our Kingdom wast; And was not this a good piece of public
service, worthy our highest applause?

Bristoll, (for ought any wise man can yet perceive) is like to cost the
Parliament and Kingdom the lives of above 15000, nay, 30000 men, (as it has
cost them some thousands already) ere Bristoll and the West be reduced, to that
condition they were when this City was surrendered. And is not this a sweet
piece of good husbandry to endanger the loss of 30000 men's lives, but to save
the lives of 1500 only, and that when they were in no greatest security, and
danger at all of being lost, had they stood it out?



Massey at Gloucester, or Col. Warnslow at Plymmouth made this plea, of saving
their own and their Garrisons lives, to serve the Parliament elsewhere, these
Towns might have been yielded up upon better Articles then Bristoll long ago.
Had his Excellency been acquainted with this frugall State policy by Col.
Fiennes at the famous Battles of Edgehill and Newbury, he might easily before
the Fights began, have sounded a Parley, and yielded up all his Ammunition,
Cannons, Arms, Carriages, Colors, Drums, Cornets, Prisoners to the Enemy,
and given them the honor of the Field, of purpose to save the effusion of
Christian blood, and reserve the lives of his Soldiers to serve the
Commonwealth in other places, (there being the same pretense of reason in
these cases, as in Bristoll:) And then I pray, what had become of our
Parliament, Religion, Laws, Liberties, Estates, and Lives too ere this? I
doubt they had all been lost by this new kind of saving. And then what service
could these men do the Parliament or State when all was certainly lost? We owe
our lives, limbs, fortunes, all we have to our dear Country, delete this
principle out of men's hearts and you dissolve, yea ruin all civil society. It
is therefore no excuse at all for the Defendant to lose this place of
consequence to save a few men's lives, or estates, together with his own.

Thirteenthly, it is the greatest honor of a Governor, a Soldier, to die
Heathen Romans, and Tully teach us thus much Martial Divinity. Dulce and
decorum est pro patria mori. But this unmanly Governor was clear of another
mind, he will neither hazard his own, nor other men's lives to save a City, a
Parliament, a Kingdom. Better all these were lost then his life, or Garrison
endangered by any bloody assaults. And is not then this his principal excuse,
the highest manifestation of a degenerous cowardly spirit? Our Savior Christ
informs us Luke 17. 33. Matthew. 16. 25.
He that loses his life (by adventuring it for his Religion, God, Country,)
shall save it; yea, and the place committed to his trust, as Massey and others
have done: but he that will save his life (or others) by a cowardly and
unworthy surrender, as this Gentleman did, shall lose it, and that deservedly
by the Axe of justice, for such unmanly cowardice. It was Caiphas his Divinity
concerning Christ himself: It is expedient for us that one man should die for
the people, John 11. 50.
that the whole Nation perish not: And it should have been the Defendants
honor and integrity to have said the like; better that I, being but one man;
yea, better my whole Garrison had died in defending this noble City, then that
the whole Nation should perish through its surrender, to preserve our lives. It
was the Defendants promise before the siege, Mr. Powel, Mr. Hassard, Capt.
Bagnall.
to die in Bristols defense, and lay his bones therein; But this he now
professes, was spoken only in policy, to encourage and keep his Soldiers in
heart, not in realey with any intent to perform it. Certainly if it be a sign
of a John 10. 11.
good Shepherd or Governor, to lay down his life for his Sheep, his
Country; it is an undoubted badge of a evil and timorous one, to refuse to
do it after so many promises. This is the Defendants case, who would rather
adventure his head in a Martial trial, then his life in a breach, and for
this deserves the loss of both.

After this we next fell upon the debate of a point of principal concernment;
What shall be judged utmost extremity to excuse a Governor, and what not, etc.
namely, what should be judged utter most extremity inregard of men,
Ammunition, victuals, or intenability of any Fort, to justify the Governors
surrender of it to the enemy? And whether the Defendant were reduced to any
such extremity, ere he surrendered Bristol?

For resolving of this grand question, Mr. Prynne alleged, that his
Excellencies Ordinances of War determined. That whosoever yields up any
Town, Fort, Magazine, Victuals, Ammunition, Arms, or that moves any such
thing but upon extremity, and that to the Governor, or in Council, shall be
executed as a Traitor. This is the general Law. Now what this extremity is,
will be the sole question; For resolution whereof (he affirmed) we need go no
further then to the several Cases of See the Doom of Cowardice and Treachery.
Gomineys, Weston, Cressingham, Elmham, and the Bishop of Norwich, anciently
resolved in Parliament, to the late King of Swedens Millitary Laws, and his
Excellencies own explanation this point (taken out of them) in the second
Edition of his Laws and Ordinances of War newly printed, which reduce
extremity to these three heads; (where there is no absolute present want of men
through slaughter or mortality to defend the place.)

First, if the Garrison be reduced to an utter extremity of all eatable things
whatsoever, so as they have no kind of food whereby to subsist, but must
necessarily perish by famine, if they yield not presently.

Secondly, if there be no hope at all left them in such a case of any succor
or relief.

Thirdly, if without parlying at the very instant, both the Forts, men, and
arms must of necessity fall into the hands of the enemy. If the Governor can
prove by pregnant witnesses that he was really reduced to all these
extremities, then he is to be acquitted, but if he fail in real proof of any
one of these, then he is to be condemned and executed as a Traitor, both by the
King of Sweeds and his Excellencies Martial Laws; and this is the general
Law Martial of all Nations, approved by our own Common Law, of purpose to
establish Millitary Discipline against cowardice, negligence, treachery, which
are apt to be varnished over with specious, though false pretenses.

To prove this definition of extremity, Object.
Mr. Prynne produced the last Edition of his Excellencies Ordinances of War,
then newly printed by his special command, and the Judge advocates License.
But the Judge Advocate opposed the reading of them, pretending they were not
yet approved by his Excellency so far as to be used at a Council of War, and
that they were made since the loss of Bristoll.

To which Mr. Answer.
Prynne replied, that they were printed by his Excellencies special direction,
and enjoined to be observed by all, (as appears by the Title:) having been
first Voted and agreed on at a Council of War; that the publishing of them
in print, by special command, was the highest approbation that might be, and
it were in vain to ratify and publish them, if we might not make use of them
at this Council of War, in a case which falls punctually within their
resolution; and though Bristoll was surrendered before the last Edition of these
Ordinances yet this clause which defines extremity, being only an exposition
of the former Laws, and no new addition all Law not formerly published, we
might and ought to read it of right, to determine this difficulty, for which it
was purposely added. But the Advocate being very earnest against the reading
thereof, the Council referred it to my Lord General, whether the explanation in
the new printed Ordinances and Laws of War should be used at this trial? Who
declared his judgment, they should not now be read, or used.

Whereupon Mr. Prynne laid down this conclusion for a positive and necessary
principle in War, that utmost extremity to justify the surrender of any
Garrison, Town, Fort, or place of consequence, must not be an imaginary, or
possible extremity, or a conjecturall improbability of holding out any long
time, but a real, necessary, and present impossibility of holding out any
longer against the enemy: affirming, that no governor of any fortified Town
or Castle ought to surrender the same upon any pretense of extremity, but
wherethere is an absolute, real, and present impossibility of holding out any
longer, then that very instant time wherein he makes the surrender. The reasons
whereof (he said) were very observable, grounded upon the highest principles of
policy and war; as namely,

First, to retard the enemies progress and conquests, lest a whole Kingdom
England would have been long ere this, had Gloucester, Hull, Plymouth, Exeter,
and other places, made no longer, nor better resistance then Bristoll, though
not of such importance to the Realm, nor so well furnished as Bristoll with
all manner of provisions for a siege. A General of an Army, Governor of a
Town, must defend his part, with respect to the whole Kingdom; and therefore
though he cannot hold his ground, or guard his Fort absolutely, or for any long
space against the enemy, yet he must lose ground but by inches, not give it
away by whole Towns or Countries; and though he cannot defend his chage still,
yet he must hold out till the last minute to stay the enemies progress, and
prevent a sudden total conquest of the Realm.

Secondly, to spend the enmies men, ammunition, provisions, a long siege,

Thirdly, to give a good president and encouragement to other Governors,
Gloucester) giving great encouragement to the adjoining places to hold out
strenuously to the last, and animating all the party adhearing to them; whereas
the sudden loss, or yielding up of any eminent City, strikes terror into all
adjoining Towns, Forts, Counties, who presently wheel about to the conquering
enemy, as appears by the example of Bristoll; whose unexpected surrender drew
on the loss of Dorchester, Barnstable, Exeter, Dartmouth, with most of the
Western parts; and it had hazarded the loss of London, yea of the whole
Kingdom, had the enemies pursued their victory to London walls, and not been
unexpectedly beaten off at Gloucester, endangered by Bristols surrender, and
quite given for lost by Col. Fiennes and his officers.

Fourthly, To give advantage of surprising other places, or quarters of the
Bristoll been held out to the utmost, in case his Excellency could not have
timely releeved it; yet he might have carried Oxford, or surprised diverse of
the enemies Garrisons, Forts, Men, Arms, Horse, in other quarters, whiles they
were occupied at Bristoll, when as its sudden surrender before three full days
siege, anticipated all diversions, and recoveries in value, to help balance
Bristols loss.

Fifthly, to deprive the enemy of the Ammunition, Provision, Victuals, and
surrender gained a City and Castle ready fortified, victualled, ammunitioned,
provided with all necessaries to their hands, fit for present defense, without
any cost or labor; with Canon and Arms almost sufficient to furnish an Army
by land, and shipping enough to set out a strong Fleet by Sea.

Bristoll was; all the neighboring Garrisons, Counities, Cities, Castles, who
depend upon its three months defense, are in danger of surprisall, and being
taken unfurnished at unawares, as infinite historical examples evidence; and
the unexpected surrender of Bristoll (as the Page 1.
Relation of Gloucester siege truly styles it) was likely to have endangered
Gloucester, whose vigilant Governor would doubtless have been better furnished
with Men, Ammunition, Victuals, had not Bristols overhasty surrender
forestaled his intentions: And who knows not, that this surrender might have
endangered the loss of London through an unexpected surprise, had the enemy
presently advanced toward it, as some advised.

Bristoll Angel in one night 2 King. 19. 35. Isa. 37. 36. 37.
an hundred fourscore and five thousand men, And for ought the Defendant knew,
God might have sent an equivalent destroying Plague among the Goddammee Army of
Cavaliers, who besieged Bristoll. Sixthly, by unseasonable tempestuous weather,
which has broke up many Leaguers. Seventhly, by the death or slaughter of some
principal Officers or Commanders. Eighthly, by sudden pannick fears and
apprehentions of approaching rescues, 2 Kings 7.
of which we have an eminent Scripture president in the * besiegers of
Samariah; to omit profane Histories. 2 Chronicles. 20. 22 23, 24, 25.
Ninthly, by sudden mutinies and discords among themselves, Scripture, and
Stories are copious. Tenthly, by scarcity of provisions with which the Enemy
before Bristoll was very much pinched as Mr Savidge deposes: Eleventhly, By
want of Ammunition, the Enemies condition at Bristoll, who had spent most of
their powder, shot, of which they had far less in their Camp, then the
Defendant surrendered to them in the Castle: Twelfely, Bristoll in two or three
days more, had those who entered the Line at first been repulsed, as they might
have been with ease, though the Defendant alleged they had taken a solemn
Oath, not to raise the siege till they had taken the Town; which might have bin
as easily frustrated, as that Oath of the Jewish Conspirators, Acts 23. 13. 14.
Who vowed they would neither eat nor drink till they had murdered Paul: yet
missed of their design. Besides all these (whereof Histories afford plenty of
Examples) there are infinite other contingencies frequent in Story, whereby God
out of his divine Providence has many times miraculously preserved Forts and
Cities, even in their utmost extremities, against their potent Enemies; when
they have been resolute to stand out to the last, especially in the cause of
God, Religion, or their Country. And in such a case as this is, where we may
with confidence expect the best, the speediest assistance the Lord of Hoasts
and God of Heaven can provide for us (if we dare rely upon his promises, or
providence without distrust) he deserves not the title of a Soldier, much
less of a Christian Soldier, Governor or Commander, who will not trust God
to the utmost exigency, and rely upon his power, wisdom, faithfulness for
seasonable deliverance and relief, which the Defendant (for want of faith as
well as courrage) durst not do, and so yielded up all.

Ninthly, 9.
If absolute and present impossibility of longer defense, be not made the only
Rule of utmost extremity, we shall open a wide gap to the treachery,
cowardice, negligence, indiscretion, avarice, ambition, discontent of every
Governor and Commander, to the overthrow of all Martial Discipline, and
expose the whole Kingdom to speedy loss and ruin: It being an easy matter
for any Governor or Commander, how cowardly, false or treacherous soever, to
invent many plausible excuses, many forged, supposed, probable extremities, and
to find Witnesses under his command to attest them; and by pretext thereof to
betray and yield up the most considerable Towns, Castles, Forts, throughout the
Realm to the Enemy without any stroke at all, or after a few days counterfeit
siege, the better to paliate his treacherous designs: And therefore upon all
these grounds, as likewise to reduce extremity to a certainty; no other
extremity ought to be admitted, but only a present absolute impossibility of
holding out any longer; to which the Defendant was no ways reduced, as we have
already proved.

In opposition to these impregnable Reasons, Col. Fiennes maintained these
three Paradoxes, sufficient to corrupt and cowardice all Governors, Garrisons
whatsoever, to subvert all military Discipline, and betray any Kingdom in a
moment.

The first was this, Paradox 1.
that when ever the principal Rampart of any Town was once entered by the
Enemy, this was a sufficient extremity to justify both a Parley and surrender.
But the Line of Communication which the Enemies entered at Bristoll was the
Principal Rampart, as he pretended: Therefore his surrender of it upon their
entering the Line, was justifiable.

To which was answered; Answ. 1.
First, that the Enemies entering the principal Rampart is no lawful
sufficient ground of a Parley or surrender, no nor yet the taking of the
principal Fort (for the reasons aforesaid) as long as the other Forts or
Towns are tenable; by holding whereof the Enemy may in time be repulsed out of
the works they have entered. If this were true Military Doctrine, then London
should by like reason be surrendered to the King in case he came before it
together with the Tower, as soon as the Line of Communication (the chief
Rampart) were entered, or any Out-Fort taken; and an whole Army should yield the
Field, if one Troop or company of the Forlorn hope were routed. Secondly, 2.
Though the Line of Communication of Bristoll were entered, in one only place,
yet not one of the Out-Forts was taken; the body of the City defended by the
Key, and all that part beyond the Bridge, together with the Castle (the
chiefest Fort Rampart, Sconce,) and every Street in the Town both tenable and
defensible, as we have formerly proved: therefore the Enemies bare entry within
the Line of Communication only, was no extremity at all to justify its
surrender in the judgment of any but extreme cowards. 3.
Thirdly, That the maintaining of such a cowardly Paradox to excuse this
surrender, was an argument it proceeded from cowardice, and a sufficient proof
of a timorous spirit.

His second Paradox was; Paradox 2.
That if the Enemy had once entered or possessed the Town, the Castle ought not
to be kept to the prejudice of the Citizens, but ought to be surrendered
together with the Town, by the constant practice and policy of War in all
places, all ages; in which he was so confident, that he challenged Mr Prynne
to show one president to the contrary, and produced diverse examples in
foreign Parts out of French Mercuries and Gallobelgicusses; with some late
examples at home to justify this assertion: as namely, the example of
Leypsick, Mentz, Philips-burb, Prague, Ausburge, the Burse, Breda, and other
Towns abroad, of Portsmouth, Exceter, Lincoln, Worcester, Winchester,
Chichester, Malmesbury, Hereford, Taunton Town and Castle, Bridgwater,
Dorchester, Dartmouth, Lime, He should have added Banbury and Oxford to the
Catalogue.
Reading; where he says the Towns and Castles were both surrendered together
and not the Castles held out when the Towns were taken; yet none of these
Governors were ever questioned by the King, or Parliament. And he gave this
reason to prove this Paradox, that if Castles should hold out when the Towns
were taken or yielded, it would much dishearten the Citizens, and make them
unwilling to entertain or assist any Garrisons in the Castles.

To which Mr Prynne retorted; Answer. 1.
retorted; That this was the grossest absurdity that ever was broached by any
man in his right senses, and had he not been intoxicated with a spirit of
pusilanimity, he would never have invented such a poor subterfuge, or made such
an ignorant challenge as this to save his endangered life. For first, Castles
and Citadels in most Towns are usually the strongest, most tenable, most
impregnable pieces of all others, best able to resist and annoy the Enemies;
the Outworks, Line, and Towns themselves less tenable and resistible then
they; to argue therefore that the Castle ought to be surrendered as soon as the
Town is entered or taken by the Enemy, is in effect to aver, That the
strongest Fort of all must be yielded, because the weakest part of all is
entered: If this were a good Souldierly argument; then by the selfsame reason
if there were twenty strong Forts or Castles about a Town, and but one weak
one; the whole twenty strong ones, though tenable, must be yielded, because
only the weakest one was forced; and the Lord Mayor of London (in case that
City were besieged) might yield up both the Tower, Town, and all the other
Forts to the King, if the weakest part of the Line were but entered, or
Hide-Parke, or Islington Fort once entered by the Enemy; Yea, by this kind of
Souldery, if the weakest Troop or Company in an whole Army be routed; the maine
Body and Battalio of it, must presently yield up themselves and the Field too,
because this weak party thereof is defeated: and his Excellency at Edgehill
fight, where some of his horse and foot run shamefully away upon the first
charge, should by this senseless policy, have fled or yielded, and not won
the day, (as he did with greater honor,) because the worst and weakest part of
his Army was routed: But since all men know, that the strongest Forts and
parties are to defend the weakest, not the feeblest them; and the Castles in
Cities made more strong and tenable then other parts, for this very purpose,
that they might hold out when the weaker parts are taken, (this being the only
use for which they were built and made so strong) the reason holds good on the
contrary part; that because the Town which is the weakest is taken, therefore
for this very reason the Castle which is the strongest part ought to be held
out and not surrendered.

Secondly, 2.
Castles in most Towns, command the whole Towns where they are, and those who
are Masters of them, are still Masters of the places, and will soon regaine the
Towns: but if once surrendered, the Enemies become presently absolute Masters
of both; and no hope is left of regaining either Town or Castle again without
a siege or infinite expense and danger. Therefore there is all the reason in
the world to maintain the Castles to the utmost when the Towns are entered,
and not to yield them up together, both to preserve the dominion of the place,
and regaine the Towns with ease and speed.

Thirdly, 3.
As long as the Castles hold out, the Enemy can enjoy little benefit by the
Towns, and have less security in them. Besides, their Conquest is incomplete,
less terrible, not advantageous; their progress from thence to other places
retarded unless they leave the Castles unbesieged. And their forcing of the
Castles will consume them far more men, Ammunition, money, then the entering
of the Towns, which without the Castles commanding them, are little worth.
Therefore for all these reasons it is apparent; that Castles ought to be kept
by the constant exquisitest grounds and policy of war when as the Towns
themselves are taken or surrendered.

Fourthly, 4.
Neither will this be a discouragement, but the greatest encouragement that may
be to the Citizens, that the Castles must thus hold out to utmost extremity:
First, because the persons and estates of the wealthiest Citizens Bristolians
thought to have saved their persons and estates by retiring into the Castle
when the Town had been forced, which were lost by surrendering it:) Secondly,
Enemy and new Lords to control them, whereas if the Castles be yielded their
persons, estates, laws, liberties, will be wholly exposed to the Enemies will
and pleasure, and subjected to their Tyranny. Therefore upon all these grounds
the Defendant ought to have kept the Castle of Bristol being strong and
tenable, to the utmost extremity, and not to have surrendered it with the Town,
though the City had been taken or yielded by composition.

Fifthly, 5.
For examples, Mr Prynne answered, That if he had his Books about him, he
could show him at least one thousand Examples in Story to one of his, where
Castles have held out when the Towns were taken or yielded: but since his
challenge was to produce but one Example to the contrary, he should out of
present memory furnish him with diverse. The first, was a very ancient and
memorable one recorded in Scripture (which he wondered the Defendant who had
read the Scriptures could forget) to wit, that of Thebez, Judge. 9. where we
read Judges 9. 50. 51. 53.
That Abimeleck went to Thebez and encamped against it, and took it, But there
was a strong Tower (or Castle) within the City, and thither fled all the men
and women, and all they of the City, and shut it to them; and got them up to
the Tower: but did not yield it up though the City was taken: And Abimeleck
came to the Tower and fought against it, and went hard to the door of the
Tower to burn it with fire: And a certain woman cast a piece of a Millstone upon
Abimelechs head, and all to brake his scull: Then he called hastily to his
Armor-bearer, and said unto him, draw thy sword, and slay me, that men say not
of me, A woman slew him; and he thrust him through and he died, And when the
men of Israel saw that Abimeleck was dead; they departed every man to his
place: Thus the siege was raised, the Town preserved, regained, and that by a
woman. Had Col. Fiennes, in case the City of Bristol had been taken, retired to
the Castle, according to his promise and there stood upon his guard, perchance
Prince Rupert coming for to assail it as Abimeleck did the Tower or Thebez,
might have been slain with a Millstone by one of those valiant women who
offered to go up to the Canons mouth to dead the bullets in case he or his
Soldiers were afraid to charge; or at least by some Musket or Cannon bullet;
and so the siege might have been raised and the Town regained: No man could
tell whither such an accident might not have happened, had the Defendant
patiently expected the issue of Gods providence in the Castle till utmost
extremity, which no man ought to despair of, since (as the wise man enformes
us) Eccles. 9. 11.
time and chance happen alike to all men. Besides, the siege might by sundry
other forementioned casualties have been raised, and the City preserved: But
alas, the Defendant was so far from having the faith and courage of a man,
that he fell infinite short of the courage and prowess of this woman of
Thebez; stiling the holding out of the City and Castle, though but a day or two
longer, Letter to his Excellency, p. 4. Relation, 9.
A desperate Resolution, etc. not staying till they were assaulted, but
presently yielding up both without any) assault, contrary to this Scripture
president, which he had neither heart, nor courage to imitate. But least he
should pretend this one example to be singular, I shall furnish him with sundry
others, which I wonder he could forget. If he had read the Roman Story, he
should have found the Livi. Romans Hist. l. 9.
Capitol defended against the Gauls when the City of Rome was taken; and
preserved from surprise only by the crying of a Goose. Had his try all been at
London, I could have informed him, that in our unhappy ancient Civil wars;
the Tower of London has of times been held out when the City has been
yielded: the like we read of the Castles of Edinburgh, Barwick, Northampton,
Salisbury, Devises, Oxford, (in the time of Maud the Empress) Rochester,
Bedford, Nottingham, Pomfret, frequently kept in former times, when the Towns
were yielded, or taken; and not to rove farther for presidents; even Bristol
Castle it self was held out by See Graftons Chron. p. 211. 212. 213.
King Edward the Second, and the younger Spencer (in the last year of this
Kings reign) against the Queen and her Son Prince Edward, after the Town was
yielded up to them by composition, to save their lives and goods: and in these
days Bristol was styled and reputed, A good Town and a strong, well closed,
standing on a good port of the Sea, having Yea Houden Annal. pars prior p. 461.
styles it Castrum fortissimum in William Rufus his reign.
A STRONG CASTLE, and the Sea beating round about it, Writes the Historian.
Certainly had this Gentleman well studied the History of Bristol whiles he was
there, he might have found a president for holding out this very Castle after
the City surrendered, and then he would not have made such a silly challenge,
to show him one such example; But if these Ancient Examples had been forgotten,
yet we have fresh presidents enough of this kind which he cannot but
remember. The Castles of Warwick and Nottingham both held out lately against
the Kings Forces when the Towns were taken. Nay, the very Close at Litchfild
(though no Castle but a Cathedral) held out against the Lord Brooks, when the
Town was yielded; and since the Parliament took it, against all Prince Ruperts
Forces, almost as many weeks as Bristol it self did days, and against near
as great an Army, though it had not above eightscorce Soldiers in it: Yea,
when the Prince had drained the More about it, sprung a Mine, blown up a great
part of the Wall, and entered the breach with above 200 men (being 50 more then
first entered the Line at Bristol) yet the Garrison there was so far from
yielding the place by a Parley, that they encountered the Enemies, took 200 of
them Prisoners, beat the rest out, made good the breach till all their Powder
within half a Barrel was spent; and then came off upon more honorable terms
by far then the Defendant at Bristol (which was not so much as assaulted,
much less entered) even with their Colors displayed, their Bag, Baggage,
Arms, and restitution of their Prisoners taken by the Enemy; which conditions
were most punctually performed, because they showed themselves men of valor,
and had their arms about them to defend themselves from violence; when as the
Defendant yielded up both Arms and Colors. To these I might add the Examples
of Limerick and Galloway Castles in Ireland, who held out many Months against
the Irish Rebels after the Towns were yielded; Of Staffords Castle defended
long against the Parliament after the Town taken; and the fresh Example of
Lincoln, where the Close was kept against the Earl of Manchester, after the
Town surrenderd: But examples of this kind are so frequent in all Stories, and
so experimentally known to every one who has been bred a Soldier, that I
shall forbear to trouble this honorable Council (so well versed in Histories
and War) with any more presidents of this kind.

Sixthly, 6.
To his objected presidents; Mr Prynne answered: First, that they were only
alleged, not proved by witnesses, or Records; Gallo. Belgicus being neither a
legal testimony, nor record to be given in evidence at a trial. Secondly,
That many of his presidents were foreign, and it did not legally appear what
were the grounds of those Towns or Castles speedy surrenders; which in all
probability was want of food, there being such a scarcity of it in Germany by
reason of the long continued wars, that few Towns or Castles were victualed
for one fortnights siege: and perchance they wanted Ammunition as well as food.
Thirdly, It appears not whether those Governors were not questioned and
capitally punished for delivering up these Towns and Castles; since we find
that in these late Germane wars, some have been condemned and executed for
yielding up Towns too suddenly. Fourthly, many of our Towns he named had no
Castles in them, at least none fortified to keep out an Enemy. Fifthly,
Although the surrendering and quitting of these Towns to the Enemy, was
connived at, and never brought legally into question as the surrender of
Bristol now is, yet they deserved to be both questioned and punished, (as the
quitting and yielding of Taunton, Dorchester, Lincoln, Banbury, Oxford, and
other places:) And if so, these examples can be no justification nor
extenuation of the Defendants crime. It is no plea for a Thief when taken,
arraigned, to say. Such and such Theives have robbed others, and yet were never
indicted nor punished for their robberies; Ergo, my robbery is lawful, and I
must not be condemned for it: Had they been apprehended and indicted, it had
been no plea for them, that some other thieves escaped without questioning;
therefore no justification, nor excuse for him who is arraigned; Yet this is
the sum of the Defendants argument: Other Governors in Germany and England, who
have cowardly and treacherously surrendered and quitted Garrison Towns, have not
been questioned for it: Ergo, I must not be condemned nor blamed for my
cowardly, traitorly surrendering of Bristol, now I actually impeached and
convicted for it. If this be a good plea, to what end are Martial Laws? Every
Coward, Traitor shall then escape scotfee, though he undo, betray an whole
Kingdom.

Seventhly, 7.
Some of the Towns he instanced in were cowardly quitted or yielded up upon
his surrender of Bristol, (as Barnstable, Dorchester etc.) whose loss must be
put on the Defendants scorce. As for the loss of Exceter, which he instanced;
it was answered: First, that Exceter was besieged, and held out more Months
then Bristol did days; being beleaguered above three Months space ere it
yielded: and had he held out Bristol so long, as he easily might, it would have
been relieved in half the time, and kept safe till now: Secondly, that the
yielding up Bristol, was the loss of Exceter, which was much discouraged by
its ill president, and left destitute of all hopes or probabilities of relief
by its surrender; being too remote for his Excellency to relieve it, without
endangering the loss of Kent, London, and Essex, during his absence hence; and
there being no other Forces near that could in any possibility or probability
relieve it: yet though it were thus hopeless of all succors, and much
discouraged with the ill examples of Bristol, Barnstable, Dorchester,
Bridgwater, Taunton, and other Western Towns, it held out till the principal
Fort was taken, and all their powder spent; yea the Garrison, Citizens, were
all resolved to have kept it with their Pikes and swords when their Ammunition
was exhausted, had they had but any probable hopes of succors from any part;
of which being utterly hopeless; they did for want of powder, after above
three Months siege, surrender the Town and Castle upon somewhat more
honorable Terms then the Defendant did Bristol. Wherefore this president was
so far from justifying his ignoble act, that it was a pregnant testimony and
conviction of his guilt in not holding out Bristol three days, when Exceter
held above out three Months siege, and spent all their Ammunition before they
fell to Parley.

His third Paradox was, Paradox 3.
That some Generals had sentenced Commanders to death for being too obstinate
in defense of Forts, and standing it out overlong; and that a French Author
(there produced) affirmed; it was a capital offense to stout out a place
overlong.

To which Mr Prynne answered. Answ. 1.
1. That this new Doctrine was certainly calculated only for that Meridian
where this great Soldier was borne, and fit for none but it. 2.
Secondly, That the Defendant was so far from this fault of stouting it out
overlong; that he deserves to lose his head for yielding Bristol up too soon;
which certainly, in all men's judgments, is the more capital crime of the two.
3.
Thirdly, That no one president could be produced in Story, where ever any
Governor of a Town or Fort was judicially condemned or executed by the Prince
or State that entrusted him to keep them, for holding them against the Enemy
overlong: And if the Defendant had been guilty of this crime, we would have
been so far from impeaching, that we and the whole Kingdom should have
honored him highly for it, though we have both just cause to prosecuted him
for the contrary; for which sundry Governors have legally been condemned.
Fourthly, That it was a most ingrate requital to execute any man for his
overmuch valor and fidelity, 4.
and if this were once allowed for Martial Law, it would quickly make all
Governovrs, Soldiers, Cowards or Traitors; therefore certainly the Defendant
had much mistaken his French Author; who writes only in general: that some
have been put to death for stouting and holding out a Town overlong; without
defining by whom this was done. He pretends it was done by those who entrusted
them with the Towns, of which no example can be produced; but certainly the
Author meant it only of the Enemies, who have sometimes put a Governor to death
when a Town has been forced, for holding it over obstinately out against them,
for which there are diverse presidents: And in this sense (which doubtless is
the true) it suites very well to the Defendants case. The poor man was
excepted (as he tells us) out of the Kings pardon sent to Bristol, and so like
to suffer if he held the Town or Castle till it were forced by the Enemy:
Wherefore to prevent all danger and save his best-beloved life, he thought
good to avoid the rigor of this Law, by purchasing his impunity with the
overhasty surrender of them to the King; and so by this unworthy shift Incidit
in Scyllam qui vult vitare Carybdin:


Forfeiting his head to the Parliament and Kingdom, to secure it from the King.

These three Paradoxes (discovering a most unsoldierly, cowardly, untrusty
spirit in the maintainer of them) being answered, Mr Prynne concluded his Reply
to the Defense of the fourth Article, and those that followed it, with Colonel
Fiennes his Commission for Bristoll, and some presidents in point resolved in
Parliament, the Transcripts whereof out of the Parliaments Rols proved upon
Oath to be true Copies, he there delivered to the Council.

Colonel Fiennes his Commission (the Original whereof he there produced) was
read as follows.

RObert Earl of Essex, etc. To Colonel Nathaniel Fiennes. By virtue of an
Ordinance of the Lords and Commons in Parliament, I do constitute and appoint
you Governor of the City of Bristoll, as also Commander in chief of all the
Forces raised, or to be raised and employed for the defense of the said City,
and the Liberties of the same, and of the Garrison there, to serve for the
defense of the King, Parliament, and Kingdom. These are therefore to will and
require you by virtue of this Commission to take the said City and Forces into
your charge as Governor in chief, and by all possible ways and means (
except in point of Civil Government) to provide for the defense and security
of the same, and to maintain the same against all enemies and opposition
whatsoever: and from time to time diligently to exercise the said Forces within
the said City and Liberties, in Arms; commanding all Officers and Soldiers to
obey you as their Governor and Commander in chief for the service above
mentioned, according to this Commission given you: And you are likewise to
observe and follow such further order and direction as you shall receive from
my self, or from both Houses of Parliament. Given under my hand and Seal of
Arms this first day of May 1643.

ESSEX.

From this Commission it appears, first, that Colonel Fiennes was constituted
Governor of Bristoll by Commission from his Excellency under his Hand and
Seal. Secondly, that he had the command in chief of all the Forces and
Garrisons there, who were to be employed FOR THE DEFENSE OF THE SAID CITY, and
the Liberties of the same; and to serve for the defense of the King,
Parliament, and Kingdom. Thirdly, that he was specially charged by that
Commission to take the said City and Forces into his charge as Governor, and
BY ALL POSSIBLE WAYS AND MEANS TO PROVIDE FOR THE DEFENSE AND SECURITY OF
THE SAME, AND TO MANTAIN THE SAME AGAINST ALL ENEMIES AND OPPOSITION
WHATSOEVER; and that all Officers and Soldiers were there to obey him as their
Governor and Commander in chief for this service: Therefore he and his
Officers were expressly enjoined by this commission to defend and keep it
against the enemy, to the uttermost extremity, and were there placed for that
very purpose: and that he sent for, and accepted this Commission upon these
very terms, and not only to rule his soldiers, not to keep the Town and
Castle, as he falsely at first pretended. Fourthly, that he was to observe and
follow such further order and direction from time to time, as he should receive
from his Excellency and both Houses of Parliament; therefore not to surrender
the City and Castle without their special order or direction, which he never
had to do it, as himself confesses. His very Commission therefore being
expressly violated in all these particulars by this his surrender, before he was
reduced to utmost extremity, is a sufficient evidence to declare and condemn
him for a Traitor by the very Ordinances of War, especially since he knew the Sea his Relation page 13.
grand importance of the place, for the Kingdoms safety.

For Presidents adjudged in point, I could produce many out of foreign See
Grimstons History of the Netherlands p. 827, 828.
Histories, which I shall pretermit, because they are no binding evidence in
Law; Wherefore I shall confine my self to such domesticke examples of this
nature as have been formerly adjudged in Parliament, (the supremest Council of
War, whose judgments must direct all others) registered amongst our
Parliamentarie Records, which cannot be controlled, and are the best evidence
of any other. The Records themselves (examined by the Parliament Rolls) are
long, and written in Law-French, which perchance some of this Honorable
Council understand not; I shall therefore briefly open them in English, into
which I have faithfully translated them at large in The Doom of Cowardice and
Treachery, (printed by authority of Parliament) and apply them to the present
case in order as they are opened: which course the Council very well approved.

The first 7. R. 2. number. 38, 40.
President is the case of John Lord of Gomineys, who in the Parl. of 1. R. 2.
n. 38. 40. was indicted and arraigned before the Lords for that he being made
Governor of the Town and Castle of Arde ( in France) by K Edward the third, to
this intent, that he should safely, keep the same for the King and his heirs,
without surrendering them to any person without their command, did yet in King
Richard the second his reign deliver and surrender the same to the Kings
enemies, without any command from him, to the dishonor and dis-inheriting of
the King and his Crown, and of the Realm of England, against his undertaking
aforesaid, without any duresse or default of Victuals or Artillery, or of any
other things necessary for the defense thereof. To which Indictment the
Defendant pleaded, that the Town and Castle were so weak, that he could not
well keep them against so great a power of the enemies as was then ready to
assail them: Whereupon he assembled all the Knights, Esquires, and others in
the Town, and informed them of the dangers the Town was in, and of the enemies
forces; and by common counsel and consent of them all he entered into a Treaty
with the enemies, to save the Lieges of the King within the Town and Castle;
and thereupon yielded up the same upon terms of composition, receiving no
reward at all for surrendering the Town or Castle. But because one Geoffrey of
Argentine Knight affirmed in Parliament, that he was then in person within the
said Town and Castle, in the defense whereof he was always ready to live and
dye, never consenting to the surrender thereof: and because Sir Ralph de
Ferrers Knight had valiantly defended them in former times against a great
force of the enemy when they were not so strong as at the time they were
surrendered: And because de Gomineys had undertaken to keep them, and if he
could not have done it, he ought in no wise to have undertaken to keep them;
and that another should and would have undertaken the safe keeping of them, had
not he undertaken it: and for that he yielded them up in this sort before
utmost extremity, when he wanted neither men, nor victuals, nor ammunition, he
was adjudged to lose his head, notwithstanding his plea, that he did it by the
advice of a general Council of War, War, to save the Kings liege Peoples
lives and estates, and that the Town and Castle were weak, unable to resist
the Enemies power.

This Town was of far less importance to the Realm of England then Bristoll;
no treachery at all appeared in the surrender, made by the vote of a general
Council of War: yet we see the Governor adjudged to lose his head, for not
holding it out to the utmost extremity, according to his duty. And if his plea
could not secure him from such a sentence, Colonel Fiennes his plea being the
very same with his, that he surrendered the City and Castle of Bristoll to the
enemy before utmost extremity, because they were weak and untenable for any
long time, to save the lives and estates of the Garrison, and Parliaments
friends, and that by the counsel and assent of all the Knights, Esquires,
Soldiers, and Inhabitants thereof, must needs be frivolous, and can no way
extenuate his fault, nor save his neck from the block; the rather, because
Bristoll was of far greater consequence to the Kingdom now, and better
provided, fortified, manned, victualed, and more likely to be relieved, then
Arde was then.

The second President was of Pierce de Cressingham and John de Spikesworth
Esquires, who were arrested and arraigned in Parliament 7 Rich. 2. number. 17. for
yielding up the Castle of Drinkham in Flanders to the enemies, from whom it was
gained by the Bishop of Norwich, though it were well and sufficiently stored
with victuals and other necessaries, and strong enough to be held against the
enemies, without the will or command of the King or his Lieutenant. To which
Spikesworth pleaded, That he had never the custody of that Castle, or any thing
to do therewith, but was chased into it by the enemy, it being then in the
custody of Piers de Cressingham: That soon after the enemy assaulting the
Barbican, he was unhappily routed, and one of his Varlets slain close by him:
That he had never any thing to do in the Castle, neither as a Soldier
thereof, nor in any other manner whatsoever, but only continued in it in
manner aforesaid till it was surrendered by the said Piers; And therefore
prayed, that it would please the King to have him excused. Whereupon it was
ordered he should be set at liberty, if nothing else could be said against him.
Piers Cressingham, who had the custody of the Castle, alleged, That upon the
yielding up of the Town and Castle of Burburgh to the enemy, of all the
Garrison soldiers he had with him at Drinkham none would continue with him for
the safeguard of that Castle but only five persons; by reason of which great
necessity, he was constrained for the safety of his own person and people, to
enter into a Treaty with the enemies to deliver up that Fort; and thereupon he
yielded it up, and not for any other cause, nor in any other manner, but only
by constraint of the power of the enemies, aforesaid; denying that he ever
received any thing from the enemies by way of gift, or in any other manner:
Whereupon he conceived that no man ought to impute any manner of blame or
reproach unto his person; but if it should be thought he had done ill in any
manner, he most humbly cast himself upon the grace of his Liege Lord. But
because this excuse was held insufficient, he was committed to prison, till the
King should otherwise declare his opinion concerning him.

Here was a case of far greater extremity then Bristoll, without any apparent
mixture of treachery; but only five of the garrison left to defend the Castle,
when as the Defendant had 2300 Soldiers at least in Bristoll; and a surrender
by common advise for the Governors and Inhabitants safety; yet because
Cressingham the Governor, by virtue of his office was bound to hold it till
the utmost extremity, he was for the present adjudged to prison, and to expect
a further sentence afterward; whereas Spikesworth was acquitted, because he
came casually into the Castle, as forced by the enemy, and had no charge of it,
as a Governor, Officer, or garrison. Soldier; all which (as appears by this
resolution) are answerable and punishable for delivering up the smallest Fort
before utmost extremity.

The third president is the case of the Bishop of Norwich, accused in
Parliament 7. R 2 number. 32. for surrendering the Town of Gravelin to the enemy,
before utmost extremity, upon condition that it should be totally demolished,
To which the Bishop pleaded, that by reason of the disobedience of his
Captains, who quitted the field, and betook themselves to their Forts, he was
constrained to retire with his Forces to the Town of Graveling, which he would
have held out well enough against all men, and did hold out till the other
Captains had surrendered their Forts adjoining, to the French; and after that,
until speedy supplies might have arrived from England: But because there were
six or 7000 Englishmen, who came out of the Forts surrendered, lying on the
sands near Calice, who could not get into the Town, and were in danger to be
slain by the French within two or three days, (the Truce being then expired)
whose loss would have been charged principally upon him; thereupon he was
commanded by the King himself, to render the Town to the enemies or else to
demolish it, and then to march to succor the said English, and after that
toward England, to save himself and others of his Army, in case they were in
any great want of victuals, as in truth they were: and because it behoved him
to abate and void the Town, as it was lawful for him to do at his pleasure,
being gained by his proper conquest from the enemy: it seemed to him, that he
ought to be well excused of what ever was surmised against him (for Walsingham
hist. Angl. p. 327 to 330. Holinshed. Speed. Grafton in an. 6 Rich. 2.
compounding with French to raze the Town to the ground, and to depart whither
he would with his bag, baggage, and men.) To which was answered by the Lord
Chancellor, That there was sufficient victuals in the Town when the Kings
Letter came there; after which the King sent other victuals thither in great
plenty, with Letters importing, how he had appointed his Uncle to come speedily
to his aid and succor; yet notwithstanding he departed thence, leaving the
Town to the enemies, against the form of his Indenture, by which the King
granted him whatever he should conquer, not at all to surrender, sell, or leave
the same to the enemy, but to hold and possess it. And as for the disobedience
and defaults of his Officers, and their surrender of the Fortresses, they
neither could nor ought at all to excuse him, seeing they were all named and
chosen by himself, not by the King or his Council, and the Articles of the
surrenders sealed between them and the enemies, were made without the authority
and consent of the King: Wherefore by the assent of the Earls, Barons, and
other Lords temporal present in Parliament, it was assented and decreed, That
the Bishop should be in the King mercy, (who out of his grace would forbear to
lay hands on his body in regard of his function, though he might justly have
proceeded against him as a Layman:) that he should be put to a fine and
ransom, according to the quantity and quality of his offense, for which his
Temporalties should be seized, and whatever moneys he had received from the
King, and employed to his own use, he should presently make full payment
thereof into the Kings Treasury, without delay or difficulty. Had he been a
Layman his censure had proved capital, and more rigorous.

Here we have all Colonel Fiennes excuses pleaded to justify this action:
First, the saving not of a body of 1500, but 7000 Englishmen to serve the
State, whose lives were all endangered, not in a garrison Town or Castle well
victualed, or ammunitioned, as those in Bristoll were, but lying on the open
sands without defense, and that not in their own native soil, but beyond the
seas in an enemies country. Secondly, Despair of timely relief, and greater
want of Victuals then was in Bristoll, where there was too much plenty.
Thirdly, a Letter from the King himself, injoining the Bishop to quit the
Town to the enemy in case they wanted Victuals, as he alleged they did; when
as Colonel Fiennes received no such Letter from the Parliament or his
Excellency, to quit or yield up Bristoll. Fourthly, this Town was won from the
enemy by the Bishop himself, not immediately committed to him to guard by the
King or Parliament, as Bristoll was to the Defendant, who had less right to
surrender Bristoll, then this Bishop Gravelin, being his own conquest.
Fifthly, he did not yield up the Town, with all the Cannon, Arms, and
provisions in it to the enemy, as the Defendant did Bristoll; but only
demolished it and slighted the Fortifications, departing thence with bag,
baggage, cannon, and his men; yet notwithstanding all these particulars, and
the gallant service this martial Bishop had done in this Expedition, he
incurred this heavy censure, and had his Temporalties seized diverse years for
his Fine and Ransom. And if he deserved such a censure, no doubt the Defendant
deserves a far greater, notwithstanding his excuses.

The fourth president is that of Sir William de Elmham, Sir John Tryvet, Sir
Henry de Ferrers, and Sir William de Farendon, Knights, and Robert Fitz-Ralph
Esquire, impeached in the Parliament of 7. R. 2. rot. Par. n. 24. for
surrendering the Town and castle of Burburgh to the enemy, and receiving moneys
for the Arms, Victuals, Prisoners, and goods within the same. To the which Sir
William de Elmham, and most of the others pleaded, that they were enforced to
surrender the Town and castle to the enemy of fine force, for the salvation of
themselves, the Garrison and people therein, the enemy having besieged and
assaulted it in very great number, and set the Town on fire within, who would
have taken it by force, and taken or slain all those within it, had they not
yielded it by agreement: And that the moneys they received, was only for the
Prisoners, Victuals, and other goods within the same not for the surrendering of
the Town it self. Yet notwithstanding this excuse was adjudged insufficient,
and the parties ordered to make full payment to the King of all the moneys
received from the enemy, to stand committed to prison, to make ransom at the
Kings will according to the quantity of their several offenses, and Sir
William de Farendon left to the Kings mercy, both for his body and goods, to
do with them what he pleased.

Here we have a Town assaulted by a multitude of enemies, fired in part, and
thereupon a surrender upon composition, to save the Officers and Soldiers from
being taken or slame by the enemy: yea, a better market then the Defendant made
at Bristoll, even a sale of the prisoners, Victuals, and goods in the Town to
the enemy for money, when endangered to be all surprised by force; yet this was
judged no excuse: Therefore certainly the Defendants pretended necessity, and
danger of forcing the Town by the enemy, not half so real as this, cannot
excuse his crime, nor extenuate his guilt, nor yet his pretense of saving his
Officers and Garrisons lives and estates, to do the Parliament service else
where.

The fifth president, is that famous case of William de Weston in the Parliament
of 1. R. 2, number. 38, 39, 40. The Commons in this Parliament prayed, that all
those Captains who had rendered or lost Castles or Towns through their
default, might be put to answer it in this present Parliament, and severely
punished according to their deserts, by award of the Lords and Barons, to
eschew the evil examples they had given to other Governors of Towns and
castles. Whereupon John de Gomineys (whose case I began with) and William de
Weston, then detained Prisoners in the Tower, because they had lost and
rendered the Kings Towns and castles to the enemies, were brought by the
Constable of the Tower before the Lords in full Parliament in the White
chamber; where Weston by the Lords command was arraigned by Sir Richard Lescop,
Steward of the Kings house, in manners following.

William de Weston, you took upon you from the most puissant Prince (whom God
ass^ile) Sir Edward late King of England, Grandfather to our Lord the King
that now is, safely to keep to him and his heirs, Kings of England, the castle
of Outhrewyke, without surrendering it to any one but to the said Grand. father,
or to his said heirs, or by command from him, or from his said heirs; have
you William, who are a Liege man of our Lord the King, in times of the same our
Lord the King who now is, true heir to the said Grandfather, delivered and
surrendered the same to the enemies of our Lord the King, without command from
him, to the dishonor (or damage) of him and his Crown, and of the estate of
his Realm of England, against your allegiance and undertaking aforesaid? What
will ye say hereunto?

Whereupon the said William put in his final Answer in this behalf. To the
most sage Counsel of our Lord the King, and to the other Lords and Commons of
the Parliament, supplicates and shows William de Weston, that albeit he be
accused of this, that he has maliciously rendered the castle of Outhrewyke, of
which he had the custody by delivery and assignment of our Lord the King, may
it please your sage and just discretion to have the said William excused
thereof, for these causes ensuing. First of all, may it please you to remember
how that the said William was lately informed by a Spy, that a great power of
the enemies would come upon him to besiege the said castle, with very great and
very grievous Ordnances; whereupon he the said William presently by his
Attorney, and by his Letters, required of the said Council, that it would
please them to re-enforce the said castle with more men, for the defense and
safeguard thereof, in regard that the Garrison of the said castle that then
was, were not half sufficient in respect of multitude to resist so great a
force in so large a place; but in conclusion, for all this, he could not have
any succor from the said Council: And so the said William, not at all through
his default, was left without people sufficient for to keep and defend the said
castle any long time; which he beseeches you to take into your just and
benign consideration. Also please you to know, how upon a Muaday about one of
the clock the enemies came to besiege the said castle, to the number of 2600
men of Arms, and 700 Arblasters Genevoyes, and with 5000 of the commonalty of
the country, having nine great Cannons, diverse Engines, and one great
Mortar-peece, beyond all measure greater then ever they had seen any before in
those Marches; and the same hour presently a great number of the men of Arms
and Arblasters aforesaid came before the Gates for to assail the said castle,
and at this time ae Knight of theirs was slain, who was cousin to the Lord de
Clifton as was reported, and many others were likewise then slain and wrecked.
And within a short time after they began to shoot with their Ordnances and
other Engines, and so continued their assault from one day to another, that is
to say, Tuseday, Wednesday, Thursday, and then were the walls and houses of the
castle battered down and bruised in many places; and they had likewise by
force trenched the ditches of the said castle in three places, so as the water
was drained out; and that night came a great party of them, and by fine force
made an assault, and abated the Barricado's; and the next day (which was
Friday) they came about day breaking with all their Forces to assault the said
castle, but with Gods assistance they were yet repulsed with force from their
assault, and of the one part and the other were some slain and wounded. And
the same day the Marshall of Burgone sent to the said William and others of the
said castle, to render it; whereupon having consideration that the said castle
could not be kept, as well in regard of the small number of the people, as by
reason that the walls in many places were enfeebled by their mavelous
Ordnance, there was a Treaty with the Lords to this end; That the said William
and his company might advise themselves against the next morning; and so they
departed each to his own. Also this same night the enemies caused all their
Ordnances, Engines, Morter-peece, Cannons, and Faggots, with Scaling-Ladders,
Galleries, and all other necessaries, to be drawn up near to the very ditch
of the aforesaid castle; and the next day (which was Saturday) they made all
things ready plainly for to assault the plaece: And then first of all sent an
Herald to the said William, to know if the said castle should be rendered to
them or not? Whereupon the said William, by advice of the wisest of his
companions, taking consideration how that the said place was destroyed and
enfeebled with their Ordnance, and also that they were too few men for its
defense, by renson that twelve of their companions were in this time slain,
wounded and sick, so as there remained of all the people in the Garrison in
health, but only 38 men to defend the same: hereupon by common assent the said
castle (which could be kept no longer) was by force surrendered, for to save
their lives granted to them, and their goods: And that all these things
aforesaid are true, the said William puts himself upon his proof, according
to your most discreet Ordinances. Also it is to be remembered, that when the
said castle was thus rendered as aforesaid, certain French people bargained
with the said William for his victuals, to buy them, together with certain
Prisoners which the said William held imprisoned within the said castle, for
which things he received of them for his payment 1500 Franks; of which he paid
to his companions for part of their wages which was behind unto them for one
quarter of a year^ and an half, 78 Franks; likewise after was paid at Calice
for the victuals of the said castle before that time due, 442 Franks: Also for
the passage of the said William and of his companions into England, and
likewise for the expenses of the said William being at Calice 135 Franks: And
therefore the said William prays in this regard your justice and benignity,
seeing by envious suggestion he has against all reason been accused, whereby
his estate and name, by the grievous sin of mis-informers, and he also is
ruined; having likewise consideration, that out of his proper goods he has for
the greater part paid his companions their wages which were due unto them as
aforesaid, and also for the great costs he has been at before this time, for
to victual the said castle, (for which he has given his obligations in diverse
places, and owes great sums, by reason whereof he is on all sides undone, if
your just benignities do not succor him) that you would be pleased for Gods
sake, and for pity, to ordain likewise for him, that he may by your discreet
nobleness recover his estate and goods. Also the said William Weston shows,
how the first day when the enemies came before Arde, that he went in haste to
Calice unto the Captain, and desired of him more succor and aid of men, for
the better guarding of his Fort of Outhrewyke, and to defend it if the enemies
should come thither; and the Captain answered him briefly, that he would not
deliver nor give him aid nor succor at the said time, because he doubted that
the said enemies would come before the town of Calice. But notwithstanding all
these pleas, the Lords in this Parliament, together with the most valiant and
discreet Knights and other Members thereof, after good and mature deliberation
hereupon, delivered their judgment and resolution against Weston in form
following. It seems to the Lords aforesaid that you William, who had taken
upon you safely to keep the castle of Outhrewyke, as before is said, that you
have without any duresse or default of victuals evilly delivered and surrendered
the same to the enemies of our Lord the King, by your own default, against all
apparent right and reason, and against your allegiance and undertaking
aforesaid; and having by due information read the case of the late Baron of
Graystock, who was a Lord, and one of the Peers of the Realm, who had taken
upon him safely to keep for the foresaid Grandfather the town of Barwick: the
said Baron perceiving afterward that the said Grandfather addressed himself
to go into the Realm of France, the said Baron (without command of the said
Grandfather) committed the said town of Barwick to a valiant Esquire Robert de
Ogle as Lieutenant to the said Baron, for to keep safe the said town of
Barwick to the said Grandfather, and the said Baron went as an horseman to the
parts of France to the said Grandfather, and there remained in his company:
during which time an assault of war was made upon the said town of Barwick by
the Scots, and the said Robert as Lieutenant of the said Baron valiantly
defended the same, and at last by such forcible assaults the said town was
taken upon the said Robert, and two of the Sons of the said Robert there
slain in the defense of the same. Notwithstanding because that the said Baron
himself had taken upon him the safeguard of the said town to the said
Grandfather, and departed himself from thence without command of the said
Grandfather, and the said town of Barwick was lost in the absence of the
Baron, he being in the company of the said Grandfather in the parts of France,
as is aforesaid: It was adjudged, by advice of the said Grandfather, the King
of Castile who is present, the Nobles, Dukes, and Counts, Henry late Duke of
Lancaster, the late Earl of Northumberland and Stafford, and Sir Walter de
Manny, that the said town was lost in default of the said Baron, and for this
cause he had judgment of life and member, and that he should forfeit all that
he had; and to render his judgment in these words the said Sir Walter had a
command from the said Grandfather. Which things considered, and this also, that
you William surrendered the said castle of Outhrewyke to the enemies of our Lord
the King aforesaid, without any duresse or want of Victuals, against your
allegiance and undertaking aforesaid, the Lords abovementioned sitting here in
full Parliament adjudge you to death, and that you shall be drawn and hanged.
But because that our Lord the King is not yet informed of the manner of this
judgment, the execution thereof shall be respited until the King be informed
thereof: Whereupon it was commanded to the said Constable safely to keep the
said William, until he had other command from our Lord the King.

This case is very punctual, this judgment fatal to the Defendant, wherein
all his former pleas, and far better then he could make, are overruled against
him long since even in full Parliament. First, this Weston as soon as he heard
of the enemies approaches and intent to besiege Outhrewyke castle, sent post to
the Council, and to the Governor of Calice, acquainting them with the
weakness of the Garrison, and craving present aid, (as the Defendant pretended
he sent to his Excellency) yet could receive no supplies from either. Secondly,
his Garrison was not half enough to resist the enemies great power, neither
had he means to increase it; when as Bristoll garrison was abundantly
sufficient to resist the enemy, and the Defendant might have doubled it had he
pleased, there being 6000 or 8000 able men more in the town, whom he might
have employed in its defense. Thirdly, there were 8400 enemies before it, as
many or more then were before Bristoll, and but 50 men only in the castle to
defend it; whereas there were 2000 foot and 300 horse at least to guard
Bristoll: a vast disproportion. Fourthly, they had nine great Pieces of
battery, a great Ram or Morter-peece, greater then ever were seen in those
parts before, with many other Engines, as many or more then the enemy had at
Bristoll. Fifthly, the siege, battery, and assault thereof, continued from
Monday till Saturday; whereas Bristoll was besieged only from Monday till
Wednesday noone (not half so long) and then yielded upon parley. Sixthly, all
the walls and houses of the Castle were beaten down and battered exceedingly,
and the ditches drained of the water by trenches, and all their barricado's
beaten down, yet they still held it out: whereas not one shot at all was so
much as made against the Castle or walls of Bristoll, but against the Outworks
only. Seventhly, after the walls and barricado's were thus broken down, and
the ditch drained, they manfully repulsed the enemy, who fiercely assaulted it,
and slew diverse of them, with the loss and wounding of some of the garrison;
whereas Bristoll Castle, and the body of the Town, were yielded up before the
least battery, Mine, or Assault. Eighthly, they made all things ready for an
assault, planting all their Ordnance, Engines, Galleries, and Faggots, close to
the Castle-ditch, and sent two several Heralds and Messengers to him for a
Parley ere he would treat: whereas the Defendant before any battery or assault
against the City or Castle sent out twice to the enemy for a Parley, with so
much haste, that he would not hearken to any who would beat them out, or oppose
or delay the Treaty. Ninthly, twelve of his fifty men were by this time slain,
sick, and wounded, so that he had only 38 left, to make good the castle thus
battered and assaulted with so great a power; whereas the Defendant lost but
eight men at most, and had at least 2300 horse and foot, when he fell to
parley. Tenthly, he surrendered the Castle, by the advice of a general Council
of War, upon better grounds then the Defendant yielded up Bristoll; to wit,
because the walls were beaten down, the garrison over small to defend it, the
enemy very likely to force it by the assault, no present relief near at hand,
and to save his own with the Soldiers lives and goods, which else were
endangered to be lost; none of which the Defendant can justly allege, as we
have manifested. Eleventhly, he made the most of an ill bargain, by selling
the Victuals and Prisoners in it to the French for 1500 Franks, with which he
paid his Soldiers their arrears of wages, discharged the debts of the castle
owing for Victuals, and defrayed the charges of their passage into England;
whereas the Defendant yielded up all the Prisoners and Victuals to the enemy
gratis; with which provisions the ships that brought over the Irish Soldiers
were victualled, and left the State to pay the Soldiers arreares, and other
debts contracted by him there, amounting to many thousand pounds, which ought
to be made good out of his own estate. Therefore in these respects he ought to
undergo the self same judgment of death, and to be drawn and hanged much
more justly then he.

To these Presidents, Answer 1.
Col. Fiennes Answered: 1. That these Governors had all of them Commissions
under the great Seal of England, to keep these Towns and Castles, and that
made their offense so great; but he had no such Commission under the great
Seal of England, to be Governor of Bristoll, and this he conceived
differenced the cases much.

To which Mr Prynne replied: Reply:
First, that the Defendant was much mistaken in this point; for these Towns and
Castles lying in France, if the Commissions of their Governourships were under
any Seal, it was under the great Seal of France not of England, as appears
by the express Statute, of 14. E. 3. Stat. 4. and 1. H. 6. Rot. Parl. Number. 14.
15. Secondly, that the great Seal being carried from the Parliament when his
Commission was granted, he could not expect any such Commission under the great
Seal, but from the King himself in opposition to the Parliament, to whom he
surrendered Bristoll, perchance for want of a Commission under the great Seal to
keep it. Thirdly, if this were a good plea or warrantable distinction, then all
the Governors of Towns and Castles within the Parliaments power might
treacherously or cowardly surrender them forthwith to the King without
punishment or danger, because they wanted a Commission under the great Seal to
keep them. Fourthly, he had a Commission under his Excellencies hand and seal
to keep the City; under whose Authority he took the custody of it for the
Parliaments and Kingdoms safety in these distracted times, by virtue of a
Commission of both Houses granted to his Excellency: therefore his offense is
as great, as capital for surrendering it contrary to his trust and his
Excellencies Commission to keep it, as if it had been under the great Seal.
Fourthly, when his Commission was first granted the Parliament had not made a
New great Seal to seal it, but since his surrender of Bristol, they had made
one: and he durst assure the Defendant, had his courage and fidelity been such
as to hold out Bristol till the new Seal was made, he would have procured him
a Commission under it to keep Bristol, rather then he should have yielded it
up cowardly to the Enemy for want of a Commission under the great Seal of
England. But because he held it not till such Commission might be obtained, he
must be condemned for rendering it contrary to that Commission which he both
sent for and received from his Excellency under his Seal of Arms alone.

His second Answer was, Answer 2.
that it appeared not in these Records what other matters and proofs were
produced against these persons, besides those mentioned in them, and therefore
for ought he knew they might be condemned for something else besides what is
alleged in these Records, else the cases might seem very hard and the
sentences none of the justest.

To which Mr Prynne Replied, Reply.
That the Defendant by this strange Answer betrayed his extraordinary ignorance
in matters of Law and Records, into which no Depositions of Witnesses are wont
to be inserted, but only the true state of the case it self, and the
Judgment given thereupon, And therefore to surmise they were condemned for any
thing else, then what is expressly mentioned in the Records and Judgments
themselves, is to aver against the very Records, and the Judges that gave the
sentences; and so to falsify and nullify all Records. The cases therefore
being admitted to be really such as the Records relate in nature of a demurrer
or concession, and the Judgments determining them to be such; this answer must
rather be deemed an ignorant mistake, then any solid reply.

His third Answer was, Answer 3.
That the Castle of Outhrewik, Arde and Burbugh, were places of no great
consequence or wealth and therefore ought to be held out to the utmost. But
Bristol being one of the richest, chiefest Cities in the Realm, and of great
importance, ought not to be endangered or ruinated by holding it to the utmost
extremity, as Castles and other such places of less concernment might be.

To which Mr Prynne Answered: Reply.
First, that if places of smallest concerment ought to hold out to extremity,
and if it be death to yield them up before; then certainly Bristol, and places
of greatest consequence to the ruin or safety of the Realm ought much more to
be kept till extremity, and the yielding of them up must be more capital: else
he that betrayeth the greatest trust, and does most mischief to the State,
shall be less culpable, and undergo a milder censure then he that betrays
the smallest Fort: yea if this were either good justice, law, or Lodgick; the
Defendant might argue, that he who steals ten thousand pounds or murders a
man, deserves not death, but he who steals thirteen pence halfe-penny, or
strikes a man ought to be hanged without pity. The president and Argument
therefore held a minori ad majus: If these were condemned for their cowardly
surrendering of those inconsiderable Towns and Castles before utmost extremity,
which did but little prejudice to the Republike; then much more ought the
Defendant to lose his head for yielding Bristoll thus, a place of highest
concerment to the Kingdom, which is almost lost in, and by its loss. And
doubtless the Defendant who would not adventure his life to preserve such a
most considerable City as Bristol to the utmost exigent, would never adventure
it to hold out any other inferior places till the last, but yield them up
without resistance. Since therefore it appeared by these presidents; that the
parties impeached for surrendering up any Forts were always detained under
custody during their trial; He desired the Council the second time, that Col.
Fiennes might presently be put under safe custody, and judgment given against
him according to these presidents and the Laws of war: the rather, because
they were seconded by his own late judgment against Yeomans and Butcher, whom
he condemned and executed by Martial Law only for endeavoring to deliver up
Bristoll to the Enemy before it was fully fortified, when as himself thus
cowardly and traitorously surrendered it to them after it was fortified, and
abundantly furnished with all necessaries to hold out a siege, their
intentionall surrender being not so criminal or fatal to the Republike, as
his actual.

When we had thus made good the several Articles of our charge, and fixed the
loss of Bristol and the West too on Col. Fiennes, who by his not denying it in
his Answer to the fourth Article, did thereby in point of Law confess it. The
Colonel to free himself from this heavy charge, took the boldness to
translate it, to one no ways guilty of it; averring before the Council with
greater impudency then verity, That Bristol and the West were not lost by him,
but by Sir William Waller: to prove this Paradox, he produced several
impertinent Allegations, casting sundry false aspersions upon that eminent
Knight behind his back, which he durst not have uttered in his presence. Upon
which Mr Prynne humbly moved the Council, that a Gentleman of his worth and
honor might not be thus publicly traduced, where he was neither present to
make his defense, nor a party to the Articles; desiring that either he might
substantially prove this palpable slander by pregnant evidences, or else be
exemplaplarily punished for it.

Hereupon the Defendant first alleged, Calumny 1.
that he sent Sir William Waller 1200 Foot out of Bristoll (to wit, Colonel
Pophams whole Regiment) very well armed, who at the rout of Sir William near
the Devises lost all their Arms, (not many of these men returning thenceto
Bristoll, and those without Arms;) the loss of which Regiment so weakened the
garrison, that it lost both Bristoll and the West, which he could not defend
for want of men.

To which Mr Prynne answered, Answer 1.
first, that Bristoll was not lost for want of men; and that this Regiment was
fully made up and supplied by the Defendant his own confession, with a great
overplus; Sir William Waller not receiving above 7 or 800 Foot out of
Bristoll, in lieu whereof the Defendant raised 1100 or 1000 at the least, 2.
besides those from Malmsbury. Secondly, that when he sent forth that Regiment
he had an independent Commission, and could not be enforced to it, not ought to
have sent them if the City were thereby endangered, without special command
from the Parliament or his Excellency: His sending out then of this Regiment
being his own voluntary act, (as his own Letter to Colonel Popham attests,
and he confessed) it is clear that himself only was the loss both of
Bristoll and the West; and if there were no other evidence, this alone would
endanger his head, it being capital by all Laws of war for any Governor to
send out his Garrison, or to absent himself from his charge, without special
command, if the place be by this means lost or surprised, as was adjudged in
Parliament in the case of the Baron of Greystock cited in Westons case; of the
Earl of Northumberland Waising. hist. Angl. p. 337. See 56. E. 3. n. 23
Henry Percy in 7. R. 2. and others: Upon which ground we find the Governor of
Calice refused to part with any of his Garrison for the defense of Outhrewyke
Castle: And the reason is apparent, because if Governors might draw out their
Garrisons, or desert their charges at their pleasure, their Forts might be
easily surprised, betrayed, and a gap opened to infinite treacheries; so that
in this confession we may see the just hand of God upon this slanderer, who by
endeavoring to impeach Sir William Waller, has thus made an halter to hang
himself, and thereby acquitted him from all imputations of the loss of
Bristoll or the West.

Secondly, Calumny 2.
he produced his Cousin Captain Temple to testify, that a Gentlewoman of his
acquaintance, and of kin to Colonel Fiennes, overtook another Gentlewoman upon
the highway, newly come from Oxford, of whom asking what news, she answered,
that the greatest News now at Oxford was, that though Sir William Waller had
occasioned the loss of Bristoll and the West, yet Col. Fiennes was like to
suffer for it, and become his Sacrifice; who being the great Diana of the
people, and so necessary a man to the Parliament, now in the field with an
Army, they would forbear to question him, and sacrifice Col. Fiennes, to
humor him and his party.

To which Mr Prynne answered, Answer 1.
first, That this extravagant report, testified only at the third or fourth
hand, was no evidence at all, and savoured rather of a direct plot to traduce
Sir William Waller, then to justify Colonel Fiennes. Secondly, 2.
that all the Western Gentlemen had a quite contrary opinion of this business,
that Bristoll and the West were lost by the Defendant, not by Sir William, as
appeared both by their extraordinary respects unto him, and present employment
of him to regaine the West. 3.
Thirdly, admit this fabulous report to be bruited in Oxford (to asperse Sir
William, the Parliament, and justify the Defendant) yet it signified no more,
but that Colonel Fiennes had better friends and respect at Oxford then Sir
William Waller, perchance for his good service in surrendering up Bristoll to
them at so easy a rate in so short a time, (enough to purchase him both
friends and favor at the Court) where Sir William was not so grateful,
because he never did them so great a courtesy, or good piece of service, nor
the Republike so grand a mischief.

Thirdly, Calumny 3. Nota.
Colonel Fiennes for a conclusion of his defense, had the impudence to inform
the Council, That this trouble, prosecution, and disgrace had never befallen
him, but for that constant affection and service which he and his family had
always showed to his Excellency and his Army, for which Sir William Waller and
his party did malign him.

To which Mr Prynne replied, Answer.
that this was a most false, scandalous, seditious speech, discovering who they
were that raised, fomented, the late unhappy differences between his Excellency
and Sir William, and to what finister end; that nothing could be uttered more
effectual to set all the Parliaments several Armies into a faction against
one another, in stead of joining against the public enemy, And therefore
having neither the least ground nor proof to justify this calumny, he desired
he might be exemplarily proceeded against for it.

In fine, after some impertinent hearsay proofs, what opinion the enemies had
of his valourous defense of Bristoll, and the intenability thereof, (which were
then fully answered by the proofs themselves) and a recapitulation of all the
heads of his defense, he concluded with this peroration.

My Lords, I have at last ended my defense, and (as I hope) sufficiently
cleared both my honor, valor, and fidelity to the State in the defense of
Bristoll: And now I beseech you to consider, whose honor or life can be in
safety, if Lawyers (feed by their own malice) may fifth and turn up all his
actions, and snarle at his words If such who are no Soldiers, may upon the
information of Atturnies, and testimony of Shopkeepers, Ale-wives, Enemies,
but of no Soldiers at all, (except such who appear out of particular spleen)
be brought thus upon the Stage for their lives, and the great Privileges of
Parliament broken by such an Impeachment of a Member of it, which could not be
paralleld but by that accusation of the five Members. Wherefore I desire, that
as I have served my country faithfully, and done many good services for it, so
I may by this Honorable Council be justified in my faithfulness, and
repaired against the Prosecutors in my Honor, more dear unto me then my life,
that so after all my public services, I may not now be cast behind the door
like a dish-clout, unfit for any further employment.

To which Mr Prynne replied, First, that he wondered much why the Defendant
should thus except against him as an unfitting Prosecutor, since himself
(without his privity or desire) had by a Proclamation under his Excellencies
hand and Seal, posted up at Westminster and the Exchange, selected him and Mr
Walker by name to prosecute this business against him; if then we were unmeet
Prosecutors, it was his own not our error, and he must blame only his own
judgment in the choice, not us. Secondly, that though he were but a common
Lawyer, yet he deemed one of that profession a very fit prosecutor of him who
had betrayed his trust, and in it the Kingdom, contrary to Law: And whereas
the Defendant scandalously objected, that he was feed by his own private
malice, he protested, that there was never any malice, nor cause thereof between
them; that he formerly honored the Defendant for his Pen, but never for his
Sword, and bestowed some courtesies on, though he never received any from him;
that he was born not far from Bristoll, bred up some years therein, had many
friends, kindred, in or near it, who lost much, and himself not a little, by its
surrender; that nothing had engaged him in this prosecution but the Defendants
own summons, nor feed him but the public service of the Parliament, and
security of the Realm, that although he had lost and suffered much for the
Church and State, yet he never received nor expected the least recompense, much
less reward from either, nor ever had any pay for public services, whereas
the Defendant received good wages for all his services, and for losing Bristol
too: that himself had never lost any thing of the States, as he had done, but
only what was his own, (his Liberty, Calling, Estate, Members,) and that only
for doing the Church and Kingdom service, neither of all which the Defendant
had parted with for the public: And therefore whereas the Defendant boasts of
his public actions, he could without vanity or prejudice truly affirm, he had
done ten times more service for Church and State, and suffered a thousand sold
more for both, not only gratis, but even with the loss of all his earthly
comforts, then this boaster had done upon pay; and that he doubted not through
Gods assistance he should be able to do the Church and State as good or better
service for the future, as he; wherefore he had little reason to extol himself
so much, or depresse him so low, as not to be a fitting prosecutor of such an
unworthy action. That though he were no professed Soldier, yet he doubted not
but he had read as many or more Treatises of military affairs as himself;
that he had for eight years space of his restraint in the Tower of London and
Mount orguiell Castle, conversed with old Soldiers, (and by name with Sir
William Balfoure for five years in the Tower) from whom he gained so much
experience in martial affairs, as he would have undertaken to have kept the
City and Castle of Bristoll till this day, had he been Governor there as the
Defendant was, notwithstanding their pretended intenability, and the enemies
power: that in the managing of this very business before this Honorable
Council, he had in sundry particulars manifested himself, if not a better,
yet at least as good a Soldier as the Defendant, (for which he appealed to the
Council) and in regard of his long suffering and restraint in Castles was the
ancienter Soldier of the two: That the Defendant had confessed to Lieutenant
Col. Paleologus and Andrews, when he first undertook the Government of
Bristoll, That he was no Soldier, and his yielding of it up in so short a
time, before extremity, upon such poor conditions, manifested him in truth to
be no Man at Arms; and therefore though he were no professed Soldier, yet why
he should not be a Soldier sufficient to prosecute him who by his own
confession and action is no real Soldier, he could yet discern no reason. For
his Witnesses, whom he here vilified and traduced, they were many of them
persons of quality and honor, some of them Members of Parliament; others, more
expert Soldiers, and persons better versed in martial affairs, then any of
the Defendants Witnesses; all of them persons of good fame and conversation,
dis-interessed, dis-ingaged in the cause, against whom no exceptions can be
taken: whereas all his material Witnesses were his own Officers, Brother,
Kinsmen, Servants, Creditors, and parties in the cause, most of them involved
with him in the self-same guilt. That his Life and Honor were now drawn in
question only by himself, upon his own motion and engagement of us, and if he
lost them (as he lost Bristoll) he might thank himself for interessing us in
this public service, for our Countries honor and future security, the only
thing we aimed at in this present prosecution. That his pretended breach of
privilege of Parliament was but a fancy, already answered and overruled in
the Commons House, who referred him to a Trial before a Council of War by two
several Orders upon his own motion and pretended voluntary waiver of his
Privilege, before any impeachment put in against him; which impeachment was
first tendered to the House of Commons, who upon the reading of it with one
unanimous Vote referred it to his Excellency, to be proceeded on by a free and
fair hearing before this Honorable Council; and if the proceedings on this
impeachment upon his own motion by the Commons direction be a breach of
Privilege, it is only in himself and the Parliament, not in us; and it has
no more resemblance to the case of the five Members then an Ape to a Lion: That
he was now questioned, not for his faithful but unfaithful service to the
Republike and Parliament, in the surrender of Bristoll, in which he presumed he
durst not manifest himself so far a Papist as to plead a justification by
works, or absolution by preceding merits. That he needed not to crave
reparation of his honor and reputation from us or any other in this case,
since they were both impaired and ruined by himself through this ignoble
action: that he had given the whole Kingdom an incurable fatal wound, an
irreparable loss (which the loss of his head and estate could no way
recompense) by this surrender, for which in the whole Kingdoms behalf we here
demand judgment against him according to the quality of his offense: That our
services for the Republike were every way equivalent to, if not transcending
his, our credits, our reputations, as dear to us as his to him, which we hoped
should no ways suffer for our zeal and fidelity in this public prosecution
upon our own expenses, without thought of recompense. That if the Defendant
should be pronounced guiltless by this honorable Council, after so full a
charge and hearing, he was obliged to us for bringing him to such a public
vindication of his suspected fidelity, which else would have layen eclipsed
under a black cloud of jealousies: But if he were pronounced guilty of the
impeachment, (as we made no doubt he would, the evidence being so clear, the
proofs and presidents in point so punctual) we should deserve thanks, if not
from him (who pretended a desire to be tried to the uttermost) yet at least
from the Parliament, Kingdom, and our native Country, for bringing such a
grand, politic, daring Delinquent to his Trial and condign judgment, who by
surrendering Bristoll has endangered the loss of three whole Kingdoms, and of
our Laws, Religion, Liberties, Lives, and present Parliament.

And now (my honored Lords and Gentlemen) lest we should incur your just
censure (according to the Defendants doctrine) for stouting out this cause
overlong, which by the Defendants tediousness hath-lasted nine days dispute,
(though the Cities siege continued not three full days) we shall close up all
in a word or two: We render you many hearty thanks, in our own and the
Kingdoms names, for your nine days pains, patience, and that fair,
honorable, impartial hearing, you have afforded both parties in the trial of
this great public cause, in which the whole Realm is interessed, and whereon
their eyes are fixed; not doubting but as you have granted us a most full,
fair, indifferent hearing, so you will in due season (after serious perusal
of your Notes and the Evidence on both sides) give such a just and equal
sentence, as shall chronicle your justice to, and make this case a leading
President for all future times, to deter all Governors of Towns or Castles
from cowardly, traiterly, or unworthy surrenders of them.

Thus ended the long debate of this great cause, begun on Thursday the 14 of
December 1643. and concluded on Saturday December 23. After which both parties
were ordered to attend the Council again on Friday following being the 29 of
December, to hear sentence, the Council desiring so much respite to peruse
their Notes and prepare their Judgment. Who sitting again, and we attending
them, on the designed day, the Council first delivered their several
judgments of the cause among themselves in private; after which Colonel
Fiennes was disarmed at the Councell-chamber-doore, (whereat he was much
appalled) and then he and we being called in, the Iudge-Advocate read his
sentence out of a paper in haec verba.

Colonel Nathaniell Fiennes, you have been arraigned and convicted before this
Honorable Council, for surrendering and delivering up the Town and Castle of
Bristoll, with the Forts, Magazines, Arms, Ammunition, Victuals, and other
things thereunto belonging, and for not having held the same to the utmost
extremity, according as by your duty you ought to have done; For which offense
this Honorable Council has adjudged you to be executed according to the
tenor of the Articles of War, by having your head out off. God have mercy on
your soul.

The Defendant astonished at this sentence, told the Council in an insolent
manner, that he little expected such a sentence from them; and (as if he had
been their Controller) demanded upon what grounds and reasons they thus
condemned him? and whether they did allow of our paper-witnesses, or disallow
the testimonies of his Officers? Whereupon all being commanded to withdraw for
a short space, and then called in again, the Defendant was told, it was
against the style and honor of the Council, to be demanded the reasons of
their judgment after it was once pronounced. Upon this the Defendant (prompted
by his brother) alleged, that he was a Parliament Man, and claimed his
privilege, that he ought not to be condemned without the privity of the
Commons House, to which he appealed against this sentence, and desired his
appeal might be entered.

To which Mr Prynne answered, that he had formerly appealed from the Parliament
(the ancient proper Judge of his cause) to a Council of war, and by his own
voluntary motion waived his Privilege to put himself upon this trial, as
appeared by two Orders of the House; therefore he could not now appeal back
again to the House, or resume or claim his waived Privilege after judgment.
Notwithstanding upon his request his appeal was entered; yet a Guard was set
upon his person at his Lodging; and upon better consideration he sent to
withdraw his appeal that night, (though the Council assented not to it) being
well assured that the Parliament would confirm the sentence, and perchance see
it put in due execution.

The Prosecutors protesting their sorrow for the Defendants folly, in pulling
such a sentence on his own head through his vain pride and ambition to
justify himself, left him under restraint, and returned early next morning to
London: where the first News they heard, was, that the Defendants friends had
reported over all the City, the very evening the sentence was given, some
hours before it was pronounced (by way of Prophecy, or Policy rather) that
Colonel Fiennes was absolutely acquitted by the Council, and came off with
such honor as none ever did before him; that not one of the Articles was
proved against him, his Prosecutors very much blamed, and ordered to ask him
forgiveness at the least, if not to undergo some heavy punishment for
slandring him; which reports were averred with so much confidence, that the
news of his condemnation would hardly be credited at first, till our Relations
of the truth of his sentence to some Members of the House, seconded with
Letters from Saint Albans, and some of the Counsels own attestations, quite
allayed this false Alarm by degrees.

After which the Defendants Friends and Partisans altering the Scene of this
unexpected Tragedy, confessed he was in truth condemned to lose his head, but
yet he was absolutely acquitted by the Council of War from the Articles
exhibited, and all pretenses of Cowardice or Treachery, and condemned only for
not firing the City, which his tender conscience, and care of the Parliaments
honor, would not permit him to turn into ashes, to the ruin of many
innocents: And withal they further bruited, that the Defendant was wholly
acquitted by three of the ancientest best experienced Soldiers and religious
party in the Council, and condemned only by some of the younger deboister
Colonels, etc. casting sundry gross aspersions both upon the Prosecutors and
Council, to their intolerable disgrace in all places, companies, with
incredible impudence, (young Sprigge a Minister presuming to censure both the
Council, Prosecutors, and Sentence, in the very Pulpit,) making lies their
refuge to overtop the truth. To make these false reports more current, they
likewise reported, that the Colonel was set at liberty and pardoned within two
days after his sentence by his Excellency, who thereby declared him innocent
and unjustly condemned. Hereupon the Prosecutors to vindicate the Council and
themselves from these impudent scandalous reports, (divulged with so much
confidence, that they passed every where for current truths) drew up and
exhibited this ensuing Petition to the House of Commons.

To the Honorable, the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses in this present
Parliament assembled,
The humble Petition of Clement Walker and William Prynne, Esquires.
Shows,

THat your Petitioners, by public Proclamations (posted up at Westminster and
the Exchange) and by private Summons, were involuntarily engaged by Colonel
Nathaniell Fiennes (who by several Orders of this House, upon his own
spontaneous Motions, put himself upon the Trial of a Council of War,
declining the Parliament, though a Member of it) to exhibit Articles of
Impeachment against him, not out of any private interests, but only in the
Kingdoms behalf; that he, contrary to his trust, duty, and sundry promises,
to defend the City and Castle of Bristoll (of which he was Governor) to the
uttermost extremity, to dispute every foot, yea inch thereof, with the enemy;
to lay his bones therein, and to make his Flag of Trace his Winding Sheet; did
most cowardly and traitorously surrender the same with all the Ammunition,
Cannon, Arms, Magazines, Provisions, Prisoners therein, and the very Colors
too, into the hands of Prince Rupert, and other common enemies of the Kingdom,
upon the entering not above one hundred and fifty enemies within the Line, at a
place worst fortified and guarded (who all gave themselves for dead men, and
might have easily been cut off at first;) and that before any one of the
Out-sorts taken, the Walls of the City or Castle once battered, assaulted, or
the siege thereof continued three whole days, (though he wanted neither Men,
Ammunition, nor Victuals, to have defended the same for three months space or
more, against all the Enemies power) to the irreparable damage of the
Republike, the loss of the Western parts, the hazard of the whole Realm, and
infinite enriching, strengthening, advantaging of the common Enemy both by Land
and Sea. Upon which Articles, after a full and honorable hearing for nine
days space, before a Council of War at Saint Albanes, the said Colonel the
29 of December last was found guilty of the premises, and judgment pronounced
against him, That his head should be cut off.

Yet notwithstanding some friends of his, to blemish your Petitioners, and that
Honorable Counsels just proceedings, have confidently reported in London,
Westminster, and elsewhere, That your Petitioners did retract all, and could
not prove any of their Articles; that they cried Peccavi, asked the Colonel
forgiveness; (who made such a brave defense, and came off with such honor as
never any man did before him;) that he was absolutely acquitted from all
cowardice and treachery, and condemned only for not firing that famous City,
which his conscience would not permit, nor the Parliament in honor could not
have suffered him to do; That his guard continued upon him but two days after
sentence, that he is already set at liberty, pardoned, (though we humbly
conceive no person can The King himself cannot pardon a common nusans nor an
offense or injury against the Commonwealth without the Parliament; nor any
offense where any private person shall have a particular interest, as our
Lawbooks resolve.
pardon his judgment in this common case, without special order of both
Houses,) and shall shortly sit in the house again. By reason of which false
reports, your Petitioners for their cost and paires in this public
prosecution, have been much defamed; his Excellencies, and the Honorable
Council of Wars proceedings insufferably traduced, truth disguised, the
well-affected party discontented, Malignants mouths opened to complain of
partiality, the Honor and justice of the high Court of Parliament principally
interessed in this Trial (directed by several Orders of this House)
blemished, and a highway prepared in these perilous times (which daily
produce new monstrous Plots to undermine us) to betray all Forts, and Cities
yet remaining in your power, through treachery or cowardice, if this signal
leading president, of grandest public concernment, shall be thus openly
traduced, and the execution of it so suddenly, so slightly passed over as is
reported; especially since the condemned Delinquent has both in Speeches and
printed Relations justified this his unworthy action to the utmost before this
Honorable House, the Council of War, World; not yet making the least
acknowledgment of, submission or satisfaction for the same; and denied at the
Trial that Colonel Essex was ever Covernour of Bristoll, or that he did
apprehend or remove him, or that himself was ever Governor of this City and
Castle, or undertook to defend the same, or had any Commission to keep it, but
only to keep his Soldiers in order: the contrary of all which appeared by his
own Evidence, and that he had twice sent for, received, accepted an
independent Commission, by all possible ways and means to provide for the
defense and security of the same City against all enemies and opposition
whatsoever: And when his sentence was pronounced, he appealed from it to the
Parliament, which he had formerly declined, arraigned his Judges after
sentence, by demanding the reasons of their judgment, (which he said he little
expected) and what Witnesses they allowed or disallowed? and most injuriously
attributed the loss of Bristoll and the West, with our prosecution of this
cause (proceeding meetly from his own solicitation) to an Honorable Member
of this House, now employed in great command with happy success; most falsely
averring to the Council, that he was thus eagerly prosecuted by your
Petitioners at Sir William Wallers instigation, only for the great affection
which he and his father did bear, and the good services they had done to my
Lord General and his Army.

In tender consideration whereof, they humbly supplicate this Honorable House
to take the premises into your just and serious examination, that so the
Authors of these false reports may receive such exemplary punishments as may
deter others from like slanders; your Petitioners, and others defamed by
them, such just reparation in their Honors, as may encourage them to do your
Honorable House and the Kingdom further service; and the Delinquent such
impartial execution, as shall most redound to the Parliaments, Republikes
future security, and prevention of Offenders of this nature, without which no
safety can be expected.

And your Petitioners shall ever pray, etc. Clement Walker.

Which Petition being published in print, conjured down the former false
rumors, and forced the shameless slanderers to pull in their lying tongues
for a season: But not long after Britannicus (bribed by the Defendant or his
Partisans) most impertinently and unseasonably pleaded this condemned persons
innocence and pardon, notwithstanding his censure; making his pretended Pardon
(if granted by his Excellency) without the Houses privity a mere act of
justice, not of grace; for which he received a just Check in print; Upon this
Britannicus not only pleads for him the second time against the Check, but the
Colonel himself assumes the boldness (instead of lamenting, acknowledging
his grand state-ruining offense) once more to justify himself, and censure
both his Judges and Prosecutors, in a printed Pamphlet inscribed, A Check to
the Checker of Britannicus, or, The Honor and Integrity of Colonel Fiennes
revived, re-estated, and cleared from certain Prejudices and Mistakes,
occasioned by the late Misreports, etc. London Printed by Andrew Coe, 1644.

That this Treatise was penned by himself, is clear by the style, by his own
expressions in it uttered at his Trial, the catalogue of the Witnesses
produced on his part, and this equivocating passage in the Preface To all the
well-affected party in the Kingdom, viz. Rather then a Gentleman should by
his own patience and modesty suffer his blood to be thus hunted to the last
drop (though for my own part I never saw his face) yet having seen the
transactions and prosecutions of his business, I shall write not to
contradict, etc. but to state the condition of a sentence, etc. Doubtless no
man can be so sottish as to imagine that Britannicus (to whom some attribute
this Treatise) never saw Col. Fiennes sweet face, much less that this Pamphlet
was writ by a meet Stranger, who never really viewed his Physiognomy; for why
should any Stranger be so zealous for a condemned person whom he never beheld,
as thus professedly to plead his cause in his own words; or how could he come
to know the transactions, prosecutions of this business, and names of his
Witnesses, as they are there related, being never yet published in print?
Therefore this equivocating passage proves it was penned by himself, who never
saw his own face really, but only the shadow of it in a glass, though he
might happily view his ruby Nose without a Mirror.

The whole scope of this new Check-worke is, First, to justify this
Delinquents innocence against his censure, to lay an aspersion on his Judges
and the Law of War, by which he was condemned, the whole contexture tending
to prove he had See Objection 7. in the Check.
summum jus, and so summa injuria in his condemnation; that the Law of War is
unjust, yea against Gods Law; and that he was condemned for not holding
Bristoll to the utmost extremity, not according as extremity is commonly taken
and received, but according to the strict Martial interpretation of extremity;
for obeying the Law of God before the Law of War, in not burning to the ground
the second City of the Kingdom, and for not doing so much evil that good
might come of it: Whereupon he professes himself no Delinquent, but a just
person, notwithstanding his condemnation, in these very terms; I am far from
writing an Apology for A DELINQUENT, and as far from writing A DELINQUENCY ON
A JUST PERSON: (O strange self-Iusticiary, O most impudent affronter of
Justice!) But whether he be such an one or not, the premised Relation, and
subsequent Depositions, will soon discover to his shame.

Secondly, to magnify his own (unknown) valor, and to applaud himself, as
See his Commentary on his pretended Pardon.
a person enabled with excellent gifts and endowments, deserving highly of the
Republike for his former Valor and Services, etc. A pretty modest Trumpeter of
his own praises.

Thirdly, To asperse his Prosecutors with injurious calumnies, who only for
craving Justice against this impenitent obstinate Malefactor (who will neither
confess nor lament his Realme-ruining offense) are falsely branded with the
Titles of Hunters after the last drop of his blood, men destitute of Charity,
The Prologue to all the well-affected Party, and Quere's.
bribed Lawyers, sad and fatal instruments of Malignants, wittingly or
ignorantly put on by: some Malignant, or Jesuitical spirit to fement
divisions; to carry on the grand design of the Enemy, etc. whereas their
fidelity and services to the State, their opposition against Malignants, and
their mischievous designs, (which the Defendant has advanced more then any
man) with their patient, unbloody, charitable Deportment after so many public
Defamations, and unsufferable affronts to public Justice, might have demerited
better language from him, who endeavored (out of his abundant charity) to
deprive them both of their Liberties, Reputations, Members, Lives, (had he been
acquitted) only for impeaching him for this dishonorable surrender upon his
own engagement.

Fourthly, To ward off his feared Execution of his demerited Sentence and crave
the allowance of his pretended Pardon, to save his unworthy life (which he
refused to hazard to preserve the Kingdom in holding Bristol;) when as a man
of true valor and honor would rather have lost a thousand lives, then
endeavor to save one by such ignoble shifts and impudent false Apologies.

It is not our intention to give any particular Answers to the Arguments
produced in his Check, whereunto this whole Relation of the Trial gives the
Mate; only we shall briefly examine the validity, detect the absurdity of the
two best Arguments of his Innocence deduced from his sentence and pretended
Pardon, not formerly answered, being since the Trial, and so conclude.

His Argument from his sentence is this: Argum. 1.
The Article of war is the hinge upon which the sentence only moves: here is
no concomitant expression of cowardice or treachery, so as the guilt is
external, and not internal; a guilt of disproportion and want of
commensuration to the Article: and he was condemned to lose his head only for
not holding out the Town to extremity in a Marshall interpretation, according
to the very Article of war; for not firing the second City of the Kingdom,
and for obeying the divine Law of God against the Law of War in not doing so
much evil, that good might come thereof: (So he most absurdly falsely and
scandalously argues,) Ergo, the surrender was neither cowardly nor traiterous.

To which we Answer: Answer. 1.
1. That this is the first Argument we ever yet heard of this nature, that a
man's very sentence of condemnation, should be a Declaration of his Innocence in
that for which he was condemned. I am condemned only according to the Letter
and true meaning of the Law: Ergo, I am Innocent, Guiltless, and deserve a
Pardon; (the whole substance of this Argument) is such a nonsense
contradiction, as becomes none but such who have lost their Heads, as least
their brains.

Secondly, 2.
The very sentence expresses, that he was arraigned and convicted before this
Honorable Council, for surrendering and delivering up the Town and Castle of
Bristoll, with the Forts, Magazines, Arms, Ammunition, Victuals, and other
things thereunto belonging, and for not having held the same to the utmost
extremity, ACCORDING AS BY YOUR DUTY YOU OUGHT TO HAVE DONE: (this is the only
ground and reason of the sentence:) For WHICH OFFENSE this Honorable Council
has adjudged you to be executed ACCORDING TO THE TENOR OF THE ARTICLE OF
WAR, by having your head cut off from your body; So as the Article of war,
is made the rule only of the Judgment and execution, but the not doing of his
duty the crime, and ground of his Judgment, by the very words of the sentence:
So that all his large Discourse that he was condemned only by the rigor of the
Article of War, which is Summum Ius, is a mecre wilful calumny.

Thirdly, 3.
whereas he principally objects; that the Sentence charge him not with the
concomitant expressions of Cowardice or Treachery: Therefore he was guilty of
and condemned for neither. The answer is very clear, that he was condemned for
both by the very Sentence: For it recites, that he had been arraigned to wit,
upon our Articles of Impeachment, which expressly charged him that he had
Traitorously and Cowardly surrendered the City and Castle: upon which
impeachment he was both convicted and condemned to lose his head: Now if the
surrender had not been traytorly and cowardly, he could neither in Law nor
equity have been convicted or condemned upon this impeachment, but acquitted.
His condemnation therefore being grounded on, and his sentence relating unto
our Impeachment: He must of necessity be guilty of treachery and cowardice;
and though the very words be not expressed in the sentence, yet they are
necessarily employed in this clause; For surrendering and not holding out the
same to the utmost extremity, according as by your duty you ought to have done:
For he that surrenders a fortified Town before utmost extremity contrary to his
duty; must of necessity be interpreted to do it out of treachery or
cowardice, or both conjoined (cowardice being the greatest betrayer of trust)
and the only reason why the Law Marshall makes such a surrender Treason,
punishing it with death, is, because it presumes it traytorly and cowardly: Yea
the sole cause why these expressions were omitted in this Sentence was, because
they are not mentioned but merely employed in the Article of War it self, by
which the sentence was drawn, and to avoid prolixity in reciting that at large
which is necessarily understood and supplied by other words.

Fourthly, 4.
Whereas he says, his guilt is external, it is very true; the whole Kingdom
beheld his cowardice and treachery with grief, yea detestation, and thought
him worthy to suffer for it: but that it was not internal, is but his own
averment, which his external guilt disproves; and himself confessing that he
was externally guilty (and for this most justly condemned according to the
Letter of the Law) he may be as justly executed.

Fifthly, 5.
For his pretended mortal equity to extenuate his offense; that he must have
fired the City to the ground, etc. it is but a mere groundless argument; and
an insufferable aspertion both to the Parliament and Honorable Council, he
being neither accused nor condemned for not firing the Town, but for not
holding it and the Castle to extremity, which he might easily have done without
burning it to the ground, as the premises demonstrate.

The last Argument of his guiltlesnesse (on which he principally relies) is his
Excellencies pretended Pardon, Argum. 2.
whereon he has made a large comentary.

To which we shall give these Answers, Answer 1.
we hope without offense to any. First, that we are not assured that the
Defendant has any real Pardon of his Sentence; the rather, because the House
of Commons whereof he is a Member, and which referred him to his trial, was
never yet acquainted with it, nor privy to its granting, for ought we find in
the Journall Book, as we conceive of right they ought to have been, at least
wise by the Defendant, who has forfeited the benefit of it, by this slighting
of the House.

Secondly, 2.
Admit he has a Pardon from his Excellency, yet then we may justly question:
1. Whether it was not surreptitiously procured, upon mere misinformations, of
the Defendant, or his Friends (his Lordship being not present at the Trial)
which mis-informations (over-frequent in all ages) nullify the Kings own
Pardons, Charters under the Great Seal of England; much more his Excellencies,
by like reason? 2ly, whether it was not penned, at leastwise altered, corrected
by the Delinquent himself (or some near friend of his) before it passed his
Excellencies signature? the whole contexture savouring of his style, containing
many expressions verbatim, which he used in his defense: and his bold
Commentary on it, giving us some grounds of conjecture, that he first made or
corrected the Text it self, before it was Authentic, it being frequent in
other cases to do the like. 3ly, whether the Copy printed by him, be agreeable
to the original Pardon? the Record whereof being no where extant to our
knowledge by which we may compare it, and the etc. in it assuring us, that
something is concealed in the printed Copy which would have made for our
advantage, if recited? Now if all or either of these prove true (as we doubt
not but they will upon due examination) that this pretended Pardon was
surreptiously obtained by misinformation; or perused, corrected, by the
Delinquent or his friends; or the printed Copy of it, false or maimed; his
Arguments from and gloss upon it, will rather discover his fraud and
guiltiness, then vindicate his valor, fidelity or innocence in this Action.

Thirdly, we answer, that the Pardon recites how his Excellency by virtue of an
Ordinance of both Houses of Parliament has given and granted to the said
Colonel a free and full pardon of all manner of offenses, errors, and
oversights committed in the said surrender of the City and Castle of Bristol.
But we never yet heard of any such Ordinance of both Houses authorizing or
allowing this Defendants Pardon, having cause to believe that the Houses will
be very cautelous of granting or allowing any Pardon in this case, which so
highly concerns both Houses, and the whole Kingdoms safet, by reason of the
ill consequences it may produce. We read in Emanuel Belgica Hist. Vniversalis
l. 13 p. 402. 403. 404.
Meteranus, Page 827. 828.
Grimstons History of the Netherlands, Thuanus and others, Anno. 1587. That Van
Hemert a very wise and brave young Nobleman, one of the chief houses of the
Netherlands, and Governor of the Town of Grave, together with two of his
Captains, Du Banck and Korfe were imprisones, condemned by a Council of
war, and then beheaded and executed at Bommel by command of Robert Dudly
Earl of Leycester (Governor of the Law-Countreys under Queen Elizabeth of
famous Memory) for that they surrendered the said Town of Grave to the Prince of
Parma, when he had besieged it above three Months space, with a puissant army
and beaten down the walls of it leavell to the ground with perpetual batteries
and assaults: And although there appeared no treachery at all, nor any
intelligence held with the Enemy, in this case, and that the Governor
condescended to a Treaty and surrendered the Town to the Enemy only upon the
Citizens importunity, who earnestly entreated him upon their knees with tears
in their eyes to embrace a Parley, for the saving of their lives, estates, and
liberties, which were granted them upon the Articles of agreement; and although
the Garrison soldiers likewise marched away with their Arms (which they left
behind them at Bristoll) and had all the Articles punctually fulfilled; and
although himself and his potent friends earnestly besought the Earl of
Leycester, that he might serve the Queen of England either by Sea or Land, at
his own charges, and by his valor and fidelity make recompense of his fault
committed only through want of understanding and marshall policy, contrary to
the will and intent of the Earl then Governor General under the Queen, yet
the Earl, for upholding martial Discipline, and to prevent all future
surrenders of this kind, would on no wise dispense with the execution;
whereupon they were all there openly beheaded at Bommel, June, 28. 1587, which
was held a good example, to the great furtherance of marshall discipline, which
at that time was much decayed. And whether these times call not for a like
example (when so many treacheries and acts of cowardice break forth in sundry
places to the endangering of the State and Parliament) we submit to the
determination of the supreme Council of the Realm to whose descition it
properly belongs, to pertermit or hasten the Defendants execution: who showed
far more cowardice at least (if we say not treachery) in surrendering Bristol
in less then nine days siege, then Van Hemert did, who held out Grave above
three months, till the Walls were demolished, and yet then marched away withal
the Garrison and their arms too; and then most Governors else have done: the
very inconsiderable small Town of Lime standing but in a hole, and having no
considerable works about it, or provisions in it comparable to Bristol,
together with Warder Castle, and other places, holding out more months against
the Enemies stormings and assaults, then the great City and Castle of Bristol
under his command held out days; yet he will needs justify to the world both
in his See here, p. 21.
Answer and printed Pamplets (with how little truth or color let all men
judge,) That he held it out to the utmost point, not only of duty, but also of
Honor, that any Soldier could or ought to have maintioned the same.

Fourthly, We answer, that the suggestions and principal grounds of the
Pardon relating to the Prosecutors, and Counsels sentence, in the sense they
are pressed and made use of, are meare misrecitalls, misinformations, (which
vitiate the Pardon) as all the premises, and succeeding testimonies evidence;
As for his Excellencies own testimony of his Integrity in the Scottish
Negotiation, Ann. 1641, and endowments FOR OTHER EMPLOYMENTS in the State; they
are no convincing Arguments of his courage, integrity, or extenuations of his
cowardice and treachery in surrendering Bristol; nor yet his pretended valorous
carriage at Keinton Field attested by Sir William Balfour, as we have formerly
evidenced. Therefore there is nothing in his Pardon that can any way acquit him
from cowardice or Treachery in the surrender of Bristol. And the words OTHER
EMPLOYMENTS, etc. discover, that his Excellency deemes him a better
Commissioner then Soldier, and we wish he had showed himself either a good
Treater or Commander at Bristoll, where he was neither one nor other, for then
we are certain, he would never have yielded up all the Ammunition, Canon,
Magazines, Arms, Prisoners, and Colors to the Enemy, together with the City
and Castle, before any one For taken, or any one assault so much as given, or
Canon shot made against the City or Castle walls, which had 2300 armed Garrison
Soldiers at the least, then ready to defend them.

In fine, both his Sentence and Pardon (be it what it will) are apparent
demonstrations of his guilt and capital offense. And whether his carriage in
this action has been so valorous, so free from all umbrages of Treachery, as
may justly demerit an See the close of his Pardon.
absolute Pardon and discharge from the execution of his capital punishment;
and such a speedy release from all future imprisonment, restraint, and likewise
from all further impeachment, or prosecution concerning the said surrender; (at
leastwise from giving any account of the many vast sums received by him at
Bristol; and the debts he there contracted on the State, of which no account at
all has hitherto been given, though long since promised and required) let the
ensuing Testimonies at the Trial determine, with which we shall conclude this
tedious Relation.

Errata, transpositions, and omissions at the Press.
PAge 21. l. 46. read; he did. p. 22. l. 36. 37. ran fast; he was. p. 52. l.
37. murderers p. 53. l. 6. and av. p. 57. l. 46. no ill. p. 65. 4. their
incontainability. l. 12. knew l. 42. might must. p. 78. l. 8. as well. p. 92.
l. 25. I am.

A Catalogue of the VVitnesses and Testimonies produced by the Prosecutors of
Colonel NATHANIEL FIENNES, at his Trial.
THe Author of the Check to the Checker of Brittanicus, to amuze the world,
has prefixed to his Pamphlet, the Names of those Gentlemen and Persons of
Honor and Quality, who were witnesses for Nathaniel Fiennes; without
expressing what they testified.

The persons of most honor and quality there named (most of the others being
persons of no quality, honor, or Gentility) are such as were, either no
witnesses at all for him; as Sir William Waller, and Sir Arthur Hazelrigge,
whose letter only long before the siege, formerly Printed in his Relation, p.
26, 27. was produced and made little to the purpose: Or such whose Testimonies
were altogether impertinent; as Sir William Balfore his Testimony, that he
charged up with him at Edge hill batell, formerly answered: Mr Anthony Nichols
testimony, That Colonel Warnslow in a Letter of his lately written, affirmed,
that they spent 40. Barrels of powder at Plymouth in one day, when they
repulsed the Enemy out of their Works, and Master John Ash, who attested only
Sir William Wallers and Sir Arthurs Letter. Or not much material, as Mr Thomas
Hodges, that The Castle walls of Bristoll were ancient and decayed when he was a
Schoole-boy in Bristoll. All the rest of the witnesses, except Sir John Horner
(who professed he was no Soldier, and meddled not with any military affairs)
were either his own kindred, Officers, servants, who were parties involved in
the same crime, and had pay due from him; and some of them young heardlesse
Soldiers, never in Arms before, who refused to charge the Enemy; or Citizens
to whom he owed money, and so scarce competent witnesses in Law, in such a Case
as this.

To balance, yea overbalance, these his mere nominall witnesses; we shall
here present the Reader with a Catalogue of our Testimonies in this Case; many
of them being persons of quality and honor, others experienced Soldiers; all
the rest, persons wholly indifferent and dis-ingaged, who had no relation or
obligation to the Prosecutors: their Names, Qualities, and Testimonies, here
follow in Order; first, Members of the House of Commons; next Colonells,
Leiutenant Colonels, Majors, Captains, Officers; then Common Soldiers,
Citizens and others of inferior rank, with figures in the Margin, relating to
the several Articles of Impeachment to which they were applied.

The Testimony of Sir William Waller Knight, a Member of the House of Commons.
Upon my return to Bristoll immediately after my defeat at the Devises, Col.
Fiennes complaining to me that he was burdened with a multitude of Prisoners
(...) him to take the opportunity of a ship that was then going out, to
transport them to London; He replied Artic. 7.
That he would keep them to make his own Conditions the better.

William Waller.
Farnham 20. November. 1643.
This was written with Sir Williams own hand, who offered to depose it upon
Oath; but in regard he was a General, his hand and reputation well known to
the Counsel and Defendant, and a Generals testimony in Counsels of War
usually admitted without an Oath, we thought meet to do him so much right, as
to take his testimony upon his honor without an oath.

The Testimony of Edward Stephens Esquire. a Member of the House of Commons.
Master Edward Stephens of Little Sudbury in the County of Gloucester attesteth
upon Oath Artic. 4. 6. Yet he prints in his Relation p. 9. that Mr. Stephens
the deponent was present at a Counsel of War which consented to a Parley.
That there was not any Counsel of War to this Deponents knowledge called by
Colonel Fiennes, the then Governor of Bristoll, to consult of a Treaty to be
held with the Enemy to surrender Bristoll, and this Deponent further says,
that being in the Castle he heard a discontented tumultuous rumor of the
Soldiers and the common people, that Colonel Fiennes had sent a Drummer,
Major Langridge and Captain Hepsly to the enemy for a Treaty, and this
Deponent was earnestly importuned to go to the Colonel, and endeavor to
hinder and break off the Treaty; Colonel Fiennes man met this Deponent going
out of the Castle, and desired him to come and speak with his Master; when
this Deponent came to the house of the said Fiennes, he found the said Colonel
there, and the Major and Sheriffs of Bristoll, and some chief Citizens, and
diverse Soldiers and Gentlemen; Colonel Fiennes had the Articles ready
prepared for himself and the soldiers, the Major and Citizens had done the
like for themselves, there remained nothing but that the Gentlemen should
consider of conditions conducing to their safety; the Hostages from the Enemy
were come to Frome-gate, before this Deponent came to the Governor, but that
Gate being barred, they were feign to come in another way; this Deponent
averreth, that he was not present at any Counsel of War, to consult whether
a Treaty should he held with the enemy or not.

Edw. Stephens.

The Testimony of Edward Baynton Esquire. a Member of the House of Commons,
delivered both in writing, and personally upon Oath at the Counsel.
About three weeks or a month since, Captain Bushel (sometime a Captain in
the Kings Army) and a Prisoner in Bristoll Castle at the time of the surrender
of the said City and Castle, told me in the Fleet-Taverne in Covingarden (at
which time diverse other Gentlemen were in our company;) That when he heard the
Governor Colonel Nathaniel Fiennes had agreed unto Articles for the surrender
of the Town and Castle of Bristoll, he inquired of very many what the Articles
were, but could not be informed by any; wherefore having cause to suspect that
they were not published, he forth with repaired unto Colonel Nathaniell
Fiennes the aforesaid Governor ( whom he found with his brother telling of
money, Artic. 4. 6.
trembling and quaking, and in such a fright as he never saw man in all his
lise) and told him, that he heard he had concluded on Articles for the
surrender of the said City and Castle, and asked him whether it was true? to
whom Colonel Nathaniell Fiennes answered, it was true; then Captain Bushel
asked him, why he did not publish the said Articles, that so both soldiers and
Townes-men might know what they had to trust unto? Captain Bushel then said
unto Colonel Nathaniell Fiennes, Sir; If you please I will be ready to do you
the service to publish the Articles for you; where-upon the said Colonel
trembling and quaking, delivered to Captain Bushel the Articles, that he
might publish them in the street, and elsewhere up and down the Town.

Then I said unto Captain Bushel, here is great talk about London of the great
quantity of Ammunition, and Victual that was in Bristoll Castle when it was
surrendered, I desire to hear something from you concerning it. To which
question of mine Captain Bushel answered; Sir, I believe there is not any man
can give you a more exact account of this then I can, for though the Keys of
the Castle and Magazine, according to the Articles of the surrender of the said
City and Castle, were delivered up to Prince Rupert, yet I doubting least some
lighted Matches might be left in the Magazine of powder, did break open the
doors of the said Magazine, where I Artic. 8.
found 70. barrells of Powder; Then I asked him whether they were double
Barrells? he said, that they were commonly called by the name of French
Barrells, and that they did hold as much as any two of our ordinary barrells.
He said further, that there were at the same time in the said Magazine 140.
bundles of Match, and that in the Castle there was Bullet answerable, with
materials to make more; he told me likewise, how many barrells of Beef, how
many Butts of Sack, and how many Tun of Beer he found there, the number of
which particulars I have now forgotten; but I remember, they seemed unto me to
be a very vast proportion; for sea Coals he said, that he did believe there
were enough to serve half London for a month: some other things he told me
concerning Bristoll, but not worth the mentioning: what I have here set down,
if it does not contain in it the very words which Captain Bushel spoke unto
me, I am certain it contains the effect of them. Dated the 12. of December.
1643.

Edward Baynton.

The Prosecutors could not meet with Captain Bushel himself as they
endeavored, to have him examined upon Oath, during the Trial, but he coming
casually to St. Albanes the very last day of the Hearing, as soon as the
Counsel were risen attested all the Premises, and much more, before diverse of
the Counsel, and offered to make Oath thereof.

The sum of Col. Alexander-Pophams Testimony, (a Member of the Commons House)
delivered Viva voce before the Council.
That his taking of Sherborn was after Article 4. 6.
Colonel Fiennes had his Commission to be Governor of Bristoll: that he
marched out of Bristoll with his Regiment, to Sir William Waller, by Col.
Fiennes his own Orders, as appeared by this Letter written to him with his own
hand.

Sir,
YOu may please to march with your Regiment from hence to Bathe, where you are
to attend upon Sir William Waller in this present Service, and to receive
Orders from him from time to time, till you receive Order from my self, or my
Lord General for your return unto this Garrison.

Your assured friend and Servant,
Bristol July, 2. 1643.

That he conceived the Fortifications about the City and Castle of Bristoll, to
be very strong and substantial; that the Out-Forts and Castle commanded the
City and Suburbs; that when the Enemy entered the Line, they could not enter
the Town without great danger and difficulty, the Key being unfordable for
horse or foot at low water, by reason of the deepnesse of the mud, and at
high water by reason of the Tide. And that he complained to Col. Fiennes of
Major Langrist his Cowardice.

The effect of Col. Thomas Pury (a Member of the House of Commons) his
Testimony, delivered personally upon Oath before the Council, and of Captain
Parry.
That he was present in Gloucester all the Siege thereof, soon after the
surrender of Bristoll, and was likewise in Bristol but a little before its
Seige and surrender, to buy Match and other provisions for Gloucester; where he
found plenty of Match, Powder, Ammunition, provisions of all sorts, and the
Garrison and Works far more strong and tenable than those of Gloucester. That
when Gloucester was first besieged, they had but 30. single barrels of Powder,
which with two barrels and a half they received from Barkley Castle, and the
Powder they made during the siege, (which was about 4. or 5. barrels a week,
they setting up diverse Powder Mills to provide what quantity they could)
amounted in all but to 50. single barrels, with which they maintained the
Siege, notwithstanding their frequent sallies, against a far greater power of
the Enemy then came before Bristol, for 31. days, having but half a barrel of
powder left, when his Excellency relieved them; and yet the business was
carried so discreetly, that none but the Governor and himself (who had the
care and providing of most of the Provisions and Ammunition) knew their Powder
was so near spent; That they were all resolved when their powder was al gone,
to hold it out to the last, and rather to dye and burn the Town when they could
keep it no longer, than surrender it; That they had not above 7. or 8. Pieces
of Canon in the Town, and those very small; but 1500. Soldiers of all sorts,
Club-men and Armed, who were constantly upon duty day and night all the Siege,
they having no reserves nor spare men to relieve one another: That their Works
were about 3. miles in compass and far weaker than those of Bristol, where
they were strongest; and that for want of men they were enforced voluntarily to
quit the Vineyard, one of their strongest Out-Workes; which the Enemy
thereupon took possession of, to their great disadvantage. He farther deposed,
that the Enemy (as they were certainly informed) had most of the Powder,
Bullet and Ammunition they spent at the Siege of Gloucester from Bristol, which
was brought from thence by water. And that he being in London soon after the
Siege of Gloucester, Colonel Fiennes entering into discourse with him concerning
the Siege thereof, amongst other things, demanded of him, How many barrels of
Powder they had when the Enemy came first before the Town? He answered, That
they had only 30. single barrels; which Colonel Fiennes much wondering at,
demanded of him, Nota.
How they durst adventure or could think to hold out the Town against the Kings
Forces, when they had but 30. barrels? To whom he replied to this effect, That
they being all resolved to hold it out to the last, and not to quit the Town
upon any Terms, did not much trouble themselves to consider how little powder
they had, but how they might spend what they had to the best advantage. Then
Col. Fiennes demanded of him, How much Powder they had left when the Town was
releeved by his Excellency? To which he replied, only half a barrel.
Colonel Fiennes asked, How they durst hold out so long and not parley, when all
their powder was so near spent? or used words to this effect. To which he gave
answer, That they resolved to hold it as long as they could, and rather to dye
than quit it, after they had spent all their Powder, and therefore they thought
not of yielding whiles they had any left: He farther attested upon Oath, That
the Printed Relation of the most material passages that happened in the Siege
of Gloucester, set forth by John Dorney Esquire, (who married his daughter) was
true, except only in the number of the barrels of powder; which were but
thirty, when the Siege began, and but fifty in all during the whole Siege, (not
half so many as were in the Castle of Bristoll when surrendered.)

The small quantity of Powder, Ammunition, Canon, and Number of Soldiers,
during the Siege of Gloucester, the circumference and weakness of the Works,
and want of reserves to relieve their men, who were constantly upon duty day
and night, during all the Siege of Gloucester, was likewise attested upon Oath
by Captain Parry, who agreed with Colonel Pury in all these.

The substance of the Testimony of Samuel Brown Esquire a Member of the House of
Commons, delivered personally upon Oath before the Council.
That Colonel Fiennes soon after his coming from Bristoll having conference
with him concerning the surrender thereof, and likewise concerning Gloucester,
told him. That Article.
he verily believed, or was certain, that Gloucester could not hold out many
days (and as he remembered he said, not above 3. or 4. days) if the Kings
Forces came before it: of the which words he took the less notice because he
never thought he should have been called to attest them, and that he told Col.
Fiennes of Gomines and Westons case.

Master John Sedgwick the Minister who dyed before the trial, would have
attested upon Oath, Artic. 9.
had he lived, That Colonel Fiennes the same day he came to London told him,
he would be hanged, or lose his head of Gloucester would, or could hold out one
day if the Kings forces once came before it.

John Stephens Esquire, his Deposition, December. 12. 1643. afterward attested
viva voce.
I John Stephens, Artic. 9. This was the Defendants chief Officer and witness,
of whose judgment you have here a taste.
of the Middle Temple, Esquire, attest upon my Oath, That * Sergeant Major
Clifton (who as I hear was afterward Lieutenant Colonel to Col. Nathaniell
Fiennes, late Governor of Bristoll) did within one or two days after the said
Nathaniell Fiennes came to London from Bristoll, say in my hearing, in the
Court of Requests at Westminster, That he did not believe, or conceive it
possible, for the City of Gloucester to hold out three days, if it were once
besieged by the enemy, as it was then like to be.

The Testimony of Colonel Ewdard Cook, delivered in writing.
I Colonel Edward Cook, Artic. 7.
do attest that Colonel Nathanell Fiennes, late Governor of Bristoll, in his
own Lodging there, consulting with some of his own Officers, took me aside,
and privately demanded of me, what were sir William Wallers Resolutions?

I answered, that it was not certain, but believed his intents were, to venture
his life in the defense of that City, if the enemy advanced thither: whereupon
the said Colonel Nathaniell Fiennes imparted to me as his opinion, that the
said Resolution of sir William Waller would be of ill consequence upon these
grounds; his forces consisted chiefly of Horse, his men abated in courage, his
horse in flesh by his sad fortune at the Devises, nor was that Country
(consisting of Enclosures) advantageous for horse service, the enemy being
possessed of Bathe, so that his chief forces being horse, would not only be
useless, but also hurtful, by consuming the City provisions: He further said,
he foresaw this inconvenience, that though his modesty would restrain him from
commanding sir William Waller, yet his independency upon sir William Waller
must enforce him the said Colonel Fiennes to issue forth all Orders in that
Garrison; whereupon I advised the said Colonel Fiennes to impart the said
Reasons to sir William Waller; but the said Colonel Fiennes desired me to
impart them to sir William in his behalf, which I did; and these Reasons from
Colonel Nathaniell Fiennes occasioned the first debate of sir William Wallers
march from Bristoll; much to this purpose (though not so fully) was the
Argument of Colonel John Fiennes, and Lieutenant Colonel Clifton. I further
remember, sir William Waller (amongst other opinions,) declaring his advise to
the said Colonel Nathaniell Fiennes, for removing the Prisoners from Bristoll
to another place of safety, the said Colonel Nathaniell Fiennes answered him,
he would keep them to better his condition with, if the enemy came before the
Town. This is the effect of what I heard and remember, and this accordingly I
affirm upon my Oath.

Edward Cook.

The Deposition of Colonel Thomas Stephens, taken before the Judge Advocate.
I Colonel Thomas Stephens affirm on Oath, That Colonel Nathaniell Fiennes
did diverse times say; * Artic. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
he conceived the Town and Castle of Bristoll was Tenable, and did not doubt
to keep them, if he might have relief in any convenient time; for the
obtaining of which, he dispatched Lieutenant Col. Baker to my Lord General,
and in the mean time endeavored the increase of his men, and making up the
works, and the victualling of the Castle; the Castle was well victualled, not
any ( as I could learn) came in that brought not a fortnights provision; there
were in the Town and Castle, and at the Works and Forts, 2000. men and Arms,
( as I verily believe) besides 300. horse: in this condition the enemy found
us, who showed themselves before the Town the 23th of July, but assaulted not
the Town till the 25th. day in the morning, where they were repulsed with
some loss: the next morning being the 26th. they furiously assaulted the City
on both sides, but were every where repulsed with great loss, except at one
place, where entered about 200. or 300. of the enemy, the Line being imperfect,
and a vveake Guard, only strengthened by some horse under the command of
Langrish, whom Lieutenant Clifton complained of to the Governor but the day
before for his usual neglects on service, and desired the Governor to remove
him to walk the streets; his desire I seconded, telling the Governor, he had
played the covvard formerly, and was not fit for such a Charge; ( or words to
that effect:) notvvithstanding he continued him there. Presently upon the entry
of the enemy, Colonel Fiennes drevv off all his men from the Line on that side
the Town the entry was made, and would not hearken to any Officer that
advised him to sally and fall upon the enemy presently, but delayed till three
hours after, when the enemy had possessed himself of places of advantage in
the Suburbs. I further affirm, that he had sent to the enemy for a Treaty,
before I knevv or heard of any such thing, and for ought I know, he called no
Counsel of War for that end. Jurat. November. 14. 1643.

Thomas Stephens.

The Testimony of Col. William Stroode, delivered first in writing, and
afterward Viva voce before the Counsel.
I depose, that the 17. of July at night, sir William Waller departing from
Bristoll with his Troops, Artic. 4, 5, 6, 8.
and many Gentlemen of the Country leaving the Town, I thereupon conceived,
that Col. Nathaniell Fiennes then Governor thereof might want assistance for
its defense; whereupon I repaired to the said Governor the next morning, and
told him, that seeing most of the Gentlemen left him, yet I, though I had no
Command there, if he resolved to keep the Town, would stay there with him;
for which he thanked me, and told me, * That he would dispute every foot of
the Town and Castle thereof with the Enemy, and doubted not the keeping of
the same. Whereupon I promised to stay with him, and disposed my horse which
were near 20. under the said Governors Command; Who was * very confident (as
I conceived) that the Line and Works about the said City were very
sufficient, Nota.
and the Castle thereof in very good defense, the Works whereof, he was very
diligent to perfect, and to increase his men and Arms till the Enemy came
before it. And I my self conceived the said Town and Castle tenable against
all the Enemies power, else I would not have continued therein: And although
I pretended not to have a lodging in the Castle, yet Captain Birch told me I
might have one, so as I would send in ten pounds a man for my self and my
retinue, to buy provision of victuals. That the 23. of July last the Enemy
appeared in small bodies before the East and South parts of the City, but
retreated again to their Quarters; and the next day they appeared in greater
bodies, and that night Quartered somewhat near unto it. The 24. of that month
they assaulted some of the Out-Workes very weakly, and shot their Ordnance at
random: The 25. day they appeared in greater number, and discharged diverse
Canon shot against the Out-Workes, some of which fell into the City, but did no
harm. The 26. they furiously stormed the Town from one a clock in the morning
till after daylight, and were repulsed with great loss every where, but in
one place where the Line was defective; where some of the Enemy entered between
5. and 6. of the Clock (as I heard) that morning. Not long after the said
Governor meeting me, desired me to come to a Council of War, at which there
met some 8. or 9. Officers and no more: Where the said Governor himself, Nota.
propounded a Parley with the Enemy, complaining then (and not before) of the
Weakness of the said Town and Castle, pretending to save the men and Which
were all surrendered.
Arms therein for the service of the State, by yielding up the place upon
conditions: But in the debate thereof, Lieutenant Col. Davison, Major Holmes
and my self, opposed the Parley, and Major Holmes and I, gave our Votes against
it; there being no Gentlemen of the Country present at the Council, but Sir
This Sir John himself confessed on his Oath before the Council. Nota.
John Horner, who (as I remember) gave no Vote at all: And the Governor then
pressing to have the Parley * speedily and openly, I was much against it,
desiring it might be forborne till the Enemy came on once more upon us, for if
we should Parley with them now, it would discourage the Soldiers, and make them
to fight no more: but all I then alleged could not prevail with the
Governor, who presently sent out a Drum for a Parlee; and in the Treaty about
the surrender, the Article of delivering up the Troopers Arms, and the last
Article of leaving all the Ammunition, Canon, Arms, and Colors to the Enemy,
was never consented unto by me, or any of the Council of, War in my presence,
but yielded unto by the Governor alone, without the said Counsels consent and
privity, (as I conceived) after some private discourse between the Governor
and Col. Gerrard in the Garden, upon whose return from thence the said
Articles were delivered. After which the Governor wholly neglected to see the
Articles punctually performed, to the (...) the streets, in the presence and
view of the Governor, (whose Sumptor was in danger to be pillaged) we being
posted from one Gate to another ere we could get out of the Town.

Colonel Stroode likewise confidently affirmed to the Counsel on his Oath,
that this Counsel was called, and the Parley resolved on before the sally, and
the first Drummer sent out for a Parley about nine of the clock, which he well
remembered, because the Governor having no Watch called for his (which he
brought with him to London) and it was then but nine, whereas the sally as he
(together with Major Homes, Captain Tyson and others) attested, was not made
till between eleaven and twelve, after the first Drum was beaten in by the
enemy through mistake; and then after the sally a second Drum was sent out,
upon which the parley and surrender ensued.

The substance of the Depositions of Lieutenant Colonel Paleologus, and
Lieutenant Colonel Andrews.
These two Gentlemen attested; Artic, 4. 6. 8.
that they being in Bristoll when Colonel Fiennes removed Colonel Essex
thence, and took upon him the government thereof; he sent for them to his
Lodging as soon as he was Governor, and told them; that he was no Soldier,
nor knew well what belonged to the keeping of a Town, and therefore desired
them being Soldiers, to take the charge of the Town wholly upon them under
him (who would be advised by them being Soldiers) the one within the City, the
other without in the Works and Suburbs, which they did. That Essex Fort
commanded the place where the enemies entered, and if it had been manned with
twenty or thirty Musketeers, would easily have kept out all the enemies partee,
(which diverse of the Defendants Witnesses upon cross examination acknowledged)
that the key was unfoardable by reason of water and mudde, and the enemy could
not have passed over there but with great loss and disadvantage, that the
Castle as they found and left it, was a place of such strength as was able (if
victualed) to defend it self easily till relief might come, and to make good
conditions for it self and the Town in case it were necessitated, and as they
heard it was after fortified by the Defendants, they conceived it very tenable,
and hardly to be forced by the enemies whole Power. Paleologas likewise
deposed, that when Prince Rupert came first before Bristoll, and they preparing
and marching to withstand him, the Governor (for what intent he knew not)
demanded of him, which way they might best retreat? whereupon he desired him
earnestly, and wished Colonel Popham to do the like; for Gods sake not to
talk of retreating, for that would greatly discourage his Soldiers, and make
them not to fight, but disert their colors.

The Deposition of Sergeant Major Edw. Wood, concerning the surrender of the
City and Castle of Bristoll, first delivered in writing, and after attested
before the Counsel Viva voce.
That I was at Bristol the whole time of the siege: Artic. 3, 4, 5, 6, 8.
that certain days before the siege, I viewing the works with the Governor,
observed a disadvantagious piece of ground, which by reason of its height and
neerenes (being within Carbine shot) commanded our Works, and desired him by
all means to take it in, by raising some small Work there; from which we
might have retreated with much safety if distressed; affirming, that it was the
most advantageous place that an enemy could find about all the Town, the
which we found to be so within few days after, for that was the chiefest place
the enemy possessed, and there was their nearest batteries; Nota.
but notwithstanding, without all reason Colonel Nathaniell Fiennes * refused
the acting of any such advice; the enemy made their chiefest and greatest
assault upon and from the ground aforesaid, which lay fronting that part of the
Line which was committed to my charge, being Windmill Fort, and thence to
Prior-Hill Fort, where they made their often attempts with scaling Ladders,
Fire-pickes, Grenades, and the like, but were beaten off with great loss,
especially that morning they entered that part of the Line which was in
Lieutenant Colonel Cliftons charge, who came to me (not fromwards his charge
but the Town) and was the first man that gave me certain intelligence, that
the enemy was entered the Line, for he brought these Orders; that I must with
all haste dravv my men from off the Line, and retreat suddenly into the Town,
and my retreat must be in at Nevvgate. I wondered at this strange alteration,
and began to question the reasons; unto which he replied: the enemy had entered
the Town, possessed themselves of From Gate, (which was our nearest Gate
to retreat in at) and the College Green, and that if I did not immediately
retreat, the enemy would get betwixt us and the Town, and so cut us off
every man. Captain Husbands (who might perfectly see their entrance) told me
since, he could not guess the number of the enemy that had entered to be more
then two hundred men, which I conceive in my conscience to be the utmost; Nota.
* now we might easily have spared twice their number from off the Line to have
cut them off, and to have made good the place where they entered; for I am
confident we had no less then two thousand men in the Town that were under
pay; also a Regiment of Horse, besides considerable numbers of Volunteers,
Townes-men; for I had (as I believe) at that part of the Line that was in my
charge, no less then one hundred Citizens, that defended the Works
voluntarily; Nota.
when we were retreated into the Town * Colonel Stephens, Lieutenant Col.
Davison, and I, met together and agreed upon a sally.

I was directed to go to the Governor to press him so to do, but all the
language I could make could not cause him to cause a sally forth; he replying,
that the enemy had possessed themselves of sir Ferdinando Gorges House, and had
entered the suburbs with most of their Army: unto which I replied it could not
be, and as for sir Gorges House, if he would but give me 200. Musketeers, I
would undertake either to clear the House of them, or fire the House about
their ears, or lose my life; but notwithstanding my Colonells, and my own
often pressing of him to make a timely sally, he would allow of none, until
such time as it was too late; for he neglected it at my guess at the * least
two hours; Nota.
by which time the enemy had liberty to send for their Foot unto the other side
of the Town, which had near two or three miles to march before they could
come about to the breach. When the Governors too late sally was beaten back
(which if he had made seasonably, in all probability had freed the Town of the
enemy) he sent to the enemy for a Parley, but the first news I heard of it (I
being at supper in my quarters, and not so much as hearing of any that was sent
from the enemy to treat) was, that the Town was to be delivered up, and we
to march away next morning. I presently repaired to the Governors quarter,
where I met the Governor, and those the enemy sent to treat coming forth of
the Garden, where it seems the Governor and Treaters made conditions, without
the advice or consent of any Counsel of War. Diverse hours before nine of
the clock next morning (the hour agreed on for surrendering Town and Castle)
the Castle was delivered into the hands of some few Officers of the enemies,
many of us going to fetch out what we had there, were denied entrance into the
Castle, and many others of us were detained and kept Prisoners within, and
plundered by the enemy, until such time as after our convoy was marched forth
of the Town; through which fault of the Governors, many suffered very much;
As for my own part, I was kept prisoner in the Castle, and could not get from
the Town until the third day following. The Governor broke the conditions
with the enemy, in not Soldier like delivering up the Town, and Arms
according to the Articles agreed on, for the which cause the enemy (as they
told me themselves) had no reason to perform their conditions to us, when our
Governor in the first place broke his conditions with them. I know no greater
cause why the Officers, Soldiers, and others were so plundered, miserably
abused, and many seduced to forsake us and take entertainment of the enemy,
then the miscarriage of the Governor, whom (so far as I could discern) wholly
put every man to shift for himself; and neglected performing conditions,
causing Guards to be kept at Forts or other places, and suffering many of the
enemy to enter the Town, insomuch that betwixt those that entered, and the
prisoners that were let out of the Castle (long before they ought to have been
by their conditions) many of us were miserably abused both in the Town and
Castle, and wholly left to the merciless cruelties of the enemies. At this
time the ill-affected had a fair opportunity to show and revenge themselves,
yet notwithstanding, I never knew that in all the time either during the siege,
or after it, they made any commotion to hinder us, but we were afforded by the
Inhabitants very much assistance both by their persons and Arms. Nota.
* The Castle was a very large strong Hold, fortified with a very broad deep
ditch, or graft, in part wet and dry, having a very good Well in it: the Castle
stood upon a lofty steep mount, that was not Minable, as Lieutenant Col.
Clifton informed me, for he said the mount whereon the Castle stood was of an
earthly substance for a certain depth, but below that a firm strong Rock,
and that he had searched purposely with an Awgor and found it so in all parts;
the foot of the Castle upon a Mount or Rampart was fortified with a gallant
Parrapet well flanking, which with its well scraping must needs strengthen it
from battering, the Parrapet at the base being as I guess twelve foot thick,
the Walls of the Castle were very high, well repaired, stored with strong
flancking Towers and Galleries on the top, and if with a little earth lined, I
am sure had been past the power of Canon to batter; but as they were, not much
hurt, I think, could have been done by the enemy unto them. Nota.
* Within these vvalls was an exceeding high Fort or Tovver, that commanded
both Town and Castle, and I am persuaded so strong that it could not have
been battered, and in case the Walls of the Castle had been beaten down, there
was open ground large and possible enough to have made retrenchments; As for
Soldiers and Arms to defend this Castle, there were more then was needful,
Nota.
Mr Hazard (who was Reported the chief store keeper) said in my hearing, that
there were 70. barrels of powder remaining in it at the surrender; and the
Governor said, he could make match every day as fast as he should spend it. I
know not any necessary provisions either of men, Arms, Artillery, Victuals, or
any thing else necessary for the defense of the Castle that was wanting, but
that there was plenty of all things for its defense, for diverse months; as
likewise the Forts about the Town were held and victualled, by which means of
holding the Forts and Castle, the Enemy would have had bad possession of the
Town, which was commanded by these: I conclude this Testimony with this
Opinion, Nota.
* That the Castle of Bristoll might have been kept until this day, November,
1. 1643.

EDW. WOOD.

This Testimony being full and home; Col. Fiennes, excepted against the
witness, because there had been some differences between his brother Col.
John Fiennes and him; whose valor was such, that he drew his sword and cut off
Major Woods finger, when as two men held his Arms. To which Master Prynne
answered, that the difference was not between the witness and defendant
himself, but the defendants Brother, which concerned not him. That this
quarrel grew since the surrender of Bristoll, and its reference to a Council
of War, not before; and that upon this very point now in issue; that Major Wood
affirmed this Town and Castle when surrendered, to be strong and tenable against
all the Enemies power: Whereupon Col. John Fiennes gave him the lie, and cut
off his finger as aforesaid; And if this should be a good exception against a
witness, then the Defendant and his Brother (as deeply guilty in this fact as
himself) might quarrel thus with all other witnesses (as they did with
Captain Bagnall even in the Councell-chamber) and so by this practice deprive
us of their Testimonies, if they could not persuade them by promises of
preferment and areares to hold their peace. Upon which ground the Counsel
ruled his Testimony should be received.

Then the Defendant endeavored to battle and disgrace him all he might, by
demanding of him many impertinent and captious questions. As namely, whether he
were an Engineere, and had studied fortifications, as he gave out he had don?
How long he had so studied, and whether he had been in service beyond the seas?
etc. To all which he replied, he would give answer, if the Council, not he
alone required it. To which questions they willing him to answer, he affirmed
on his Oath, that he was an Engineere, and had made it his study eight or nine
years; that he had been in service in foreign parts: and upon the
Defendants questions touching the strength of the Castle and Works (in which
he thought to entrap him,) he gave so good an account in each particular, as
manifested his skill in Fortifications, and the Castle and Works to be very
strong and tenable diverse months, against all the Enemies power. Then he
interrogated him, where he and Colonel Stephens were, when they pressed him to
make a Sally? to which he gave a punctual answer: Next he demanded, whether he
went forth in the Sally, and where he was when the Sally was made? To which he
answered, That himself commanded him particularly to look to the Percullice at
From gate, and to see it let down in case the Sally should be beaten back, to
keep out the Enemy from entering; which service he proved by some of the
Defendants own witnesses, that he performed: he likewise upon this demand
attested; that the Sally consisted not of above 200. men, when as they might
have sent out thrice as many: that the Sally was made with all disadvantage up
the hill, that they beat the Enemy through diverse streets, and had in
probability driven them out of the Suburbs, but that the horse sent out in the
sally under Captain Vaughan (who charged not, but retreated at the Enemies
first entrance) basely retreated upon the fall of one horse which was shot, and
so both dis-heartened and dis-ordered their Foot, and caused their retreat;
yet he never questioned the Horse or Captain of them. That Major Lewis (whom
the Defendant labored to asperse all he could) went out in this Sally, where
he behaved himself very gallantly and received a wound; and that he being an
old experienced Soldier, exceedingly disliked the calling off the Soldiers
from the Line at first; and advised the Governor to fall upon them from the
Line, as soon as they entered, when they might have easily been cut off. And
whereas the Defendant alleged, that Colonel Washingtons whole Regiment of
Foot had possessed themselves of the Suburbs when the Sally was made, it
appeared upon the strict examination of this witness, that his whole Regiment
that entered were not above 300. men, most of the rest being slain or wounded in
the storm or assault that morning. So little advantage gained he, by examining
this witness; who surther affirmed, that the bullets one night flying somewhat
thick in the street where he and the Governor stood talking together, being
shot only at random in the dark; the Governor was so fearful, that though
he had an Armor of proof upon him, he presently cried out, they have found me
where I stand, and thereupon removed cut of Gunshot. He likewise testified,
that the place where the Governor used to stand with his Troop, under
Alderman Jones house, (which he alleged to be a place of greatest danger,
because a Granado casually fell there almost into the midst of his Troop
though it hurt no man) was one of the securest places about the City, the Walls
of the Gardens and house between them and the Enemies, being more then double
Canon proof, and the place they stood in, not commanded from any the Enemies
quarters, being free from all kind of shot, but this Granado mounted so, as it
fell just under the House Walls from over the house top. And therefore it was
no great Argument of his valor to stand in a place of such security.

The Testimony of Major Allen, viva voce, at the Council.
That he some 2. or 3. days before the Seige of Bristoll brought near 200.
men, well armed from Malmesbury into Bristoll, whom Colonel Fiennes
entertained, and some 7. or 8. barrels of powder in sackes. That the Castle was
so strong and Fortified that he conceived it tenable, and would have held it
out against the Grand Seigneur, and all his Army, had they come before it: That
he was not called to a Council of War though an Officer, either to deliberate
whether they should Parley, or to consult of the Articles of the surrender:
That he casually coming to the Governors lodging after the Articles agreed
on, found that the Governor had released one of their Hostages, and would have
sent away the other, but that he persuaded him to stay him, for having else no
security, himself the City and Soldiers might be all endangered, the Enemies
detaining their Hostages, and he releasing the Enemies. That the City and
Castle were surrendered before the hour agreed; the Soldiers Pillaged,
dismounted in the streets contrary to the Articles, through the Governors
carelessness and neglect. That he and some other Commanders after the surrender
left the Governor, and for their better security crossed the Country; and by
the way having conference among themselves touching the surrender, many of them
concluded it was very shameful, cowardly, and dishonorable. That Colonel
Fiennes at Colebrook earnestly pressed him, to subscribe his Letter to his
Excellency (since Printed) as some others had done, but his conscience telling
him, that many things in it were false, he had the grace to refuse the
subscribing of it, and did not set his name thereto.

The Testimony of Captain Samuel Roper of Lincolns Inn.
I Captain Samuel Roper do testify upon Oath, Article 7.
that the Right Honorable the Earl of Desmond did tell me about six weeks
since, that the Lady Newport did affirm to his Lady at Oxford before the time
that Bristoll was delivered up, That Bristoll should be surrendered to the Kings
Majesty, or words to this effect.

Samuel Roper.

We would have Examined these Honorable Persons, but that the thing was not
denied: And Captain Roper (since the Trial) has attested; that theRight
Honorable, Earl of Denby informed him that * there were diverse wagers laid at
Oxford, and here about London, both before and during the seige of Bristoll,
Nota.
that Bristoll would be surendred on the 26. of July to the King* as in truth
it was.

The Deposition of Captain James Harrington.
I Captain James Harrington, do attest upon my Oath, that I did hear Captain
Oland, This Deposition came in only occasionally, by reason of the Defendants
falls Allegation, that we had been tampering with witnesses, whereof himself
was only guilty.
Capt. of Dragoones at the siege of Bristoll say; that he could speak much of
the carriage of the business of Bristoll at the siege, and after (within two
hours) being demanded what he could speak truly touching the forementioned
passage, by Mr. Walker, he answered him in my hearing, Oh Mr. Walker, I have
much Arrerages behind; or words to that effect. I further affirm upon my Oath,
that I being in sir John Horner his chamber on Friday morning last past, at the
Dolphin here in St. Albans, Master Sprigge the Lord Says Secretary, who
confessed the words.
heard an ancient Gentleman say, that he came to sir I. H. from Colonel
Nathaniel Fiennes, to entreat him to be at the Counsel of War that morning
by ten of the clock, (to whom sir I. H. answered he would) that my Lord Say
desired to be remembered to him, and that he had 100. or 200. l. ready for him
at London, and would pay the residue that is due unto him by such sums
speedily; or words to that effect.

James Harrington.

The Deposition of Capt. Robert Bagnall touching the late surrender of the City
and Castle of Bristoll to the Enemy, by Colonel Nathaniell Fiennes, late
Governor thereof, taken before the Judge Advocate in London.
The Deponent attesteth upon his Oath, Artic. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 8.
that the Thursday before the Enemy came to besiege the said City of Bristoll,
this Deponent was earnestly desired by the said Governor Col. Fiennes to raise
a foot Company of Soldiers, to increase the Garrison thereof, which he
accordingly did upon his own cost, being induced thereto only by the promise
of the said Governor made to this Deponent, to defend and keep the said City
and Castle to the uttermost, and by his solemn protestations to him, that he
would either hold the same against the enemy, or else the City should hold him,
and he would leave his bones therein. After which the Enemy approaching the
said City on the Monday, and storming the Outworks of it in sundry places on
the Wednesday morning very early, they were valiantly repulsed with great loss
in all places but one, Nota.
near Brandon Hill Fort, where about one hundred and fifty of the Enemies and
no more (as this Deponent who viewed them conceived) entered the Line: upon
which their entry, this Deponent and his Company were several times commanded
by the said Governor to come off the Line, and retire into the City, which
they were very unwilling to do, as conceiving it a very great advantage and
encouragement to the Enemy: whereupon this Deponent repaired to the said
Governor, Nota.
and earnestly importuned him, to be pleased to give order, that he and his
Company, Captain Sampson and his Company, Captain Richard Hipsly and his
Company might instead of retreating into the City from the Line, make good the
breach where the Enemy had entered with one of those Companies, and that the
other two Companies might fall upon the Rear of those that were entered; and
did further desire him, that Captain Stokes, being then with a reserve in
Saint James Green, might Sally out at Froome Gate in Front against the Enemies
so entered to out them off: which advice the said Governor utterly rejected,
and required and enjoined them upon pain of death, to draw off the Line into
the City. And then of his own accord, without calling a Never employed either
to repulse the enemy at the line, nor in the sally.
Council of War; and without the privity or consent of any, or at least of
Nota.
very few, of his Officers or Captains, He means a public one.
the said Governor sent to the Enemies to desire a Parley with them, After
which he summoned a Council of War to Treat about the Articles of surrender of
the said City and Castle; But 8, or 9.
the Council upon debate resolved that it was neither honorable nor safe for
them or the Kingdom to quit the place, unless they were permitted to march
away with half their Arms; yet notwithstanding, the said Governor and his
Lieutenant Clifton going forth into the Garden to Colonel Gerrard one of the
Enemies Commissioners for the Treaty, after some private conference with him,
upon his return to the Council, the said Governor told them plainly, that
they must now deliver up all the Arms and every thing else to the Enemy,
saving what was expressed in the Articles of Agreement, which he then produced
to them, and accordingly he did surrender up all the same to them, Nota.
and that * before the hour agreed upon in the said Articles, to the great
damage and prejudice both of the Soldiers and Inhabitants.

Robert Bagnall.

This Witness coming very close, the Defendant was very much netled at it,
and thereupon sent a Warrant to bring him from London to Saint Albanes, where
he personally appearing before the Council, the Defendant charged him for a
partial witness, and that he had forsworn himself in his Deposition.

As to his partiality Mr. Prynne answered, that he was the most indifferent
witness of all others, because he was no mercenary Captain to whom arrears
were due, but one who served his Country freely, and raised his Company on his
own charge; whereas all the Officers he produced served only for hire, not
gratis. And if there were any partiality, it was likely rather to be for then
against him. For whereas Captain Bagnall was a mere stranger unto us, to whom
he had no relation nor obligation; he had been a long acquaintance, and active
faithful friend to the Defendant, for whom he had done many good services. As
first, he had taken two dangerous journyes to London and his Excellency at his
own proper charge, to procure him an Independent Commission for his
Governour-ship of Bristoll. Secondly, he had been very active in furnishing
him with men and moneys, from time to time during his residence in Bristoll.
Thirdly, he did at his earnest request and upon his promise to defend the Town
and Castle to the utmost, raise him a company of men (most of them Volunteers)
at his own charge, who did very good service and behaved themselves manfully in
the Siege. Fourthly, he had adventured his life and estate for him, and done
him more faithful service upon his own purse without the least recompense,
then any man of his quality in those parts, and there was never any enmity
between them. It was therefore, very improbably that this witness would be
partial on our parts against the Defendant, without any ground or motive. And
it was a very ingrate requital of all his costs, travel, respects,
disbursments, for the Defendant thus to baffle, and charge him openly with
perjury. And if he thus affronted abused this witness to whom he was so much
obliged, before the Councels faces, only for deposing truth (to stop whose
mouth Colonel John Fiennes proffered him a Captains place in a new Regiment
he said he was to raise) the Council might easily conjecture how he dealt with
others by threats, or promises behind their backs, and how difficult a thing it
was for us to procure any to attest the truth of his unworthy actions.

To prove him perjured, the Defendant alleged, that Captain Bagnall among
others subscribed his name to the Letter he sent to his Excellency, which in
many things was contrary to his Deposition. To which he answered, that he
subscribed the Letter at his importunity: that he disliked many things in it,
which he told the Defendant he knew and would justify, to be mistakes: That he
subscribed not to all the particulars in the Letter, (which no one that signed
it could certainly attest on his own knowledge) but only to such things in
it as he knew; some attesting one part which the others knew not of, and all of
them attesting the whole between them, not every one that subscribed every
particular, as appears by the letter it self, and is usual in such kinds of
Relations of fights and sieges, where though the whole Relation be subscribed
by many as true, one attesting one part, another another distributively, yet no
one subscriber can or does attest the whole in common judgment, but only so
much as himself did act or see. Which answer clearly took off this objection.
This device failing him, he began to interrogate the Captain upon every branch
of his Deposition to entrap him, but yet failed in his project. He demanded of
him when and where he saw the Enemy enter? where he was, and what he did when
the Enemy stormed the Works that morning? To which he gave punctual answers.
Then he demanded, whether he drew his men off the Line as soon as he received
his command to do it? He answered no, because he thought it inconvenient, and
the readiest way to lose and betray the City, as it proved. Upon which answer
the defendant demanded Judgment of death against him, for disobeying his
Orders: To which was answered, that he was a volunteer, and under no pay or
strict command as others: that his disobeying the first command, was upon good
grounds to prevent the loss of the Town: that he came immediately to the
defendant himself to acquaint him with the reason of his disobedience, and
importuned him, instead of drawing his men into the City from the Line, to make
good the breach, and charge the Enemy presently, which had saved the Town;
which Council he refusing, he did thereupon draw off his men as he was
commanded: that if his disobedience had been capital, he should have
presently questioned and proceeded against him for it; or have Articled against
him before this Honorable Council longere this; but having thus long
neglected to do either, himself was most faulty of the two, and this
exception savoured more of malice then justice. Then he demanded of him, In
what place it was that he importuned him to fall upon the Enemy in such sort
as his Deposition mentions? Who answered, it was in a signal eminent place,
even in the midst of the City, just over against the place where Yeomans and
Butcher were hanged by his directions, for offering no surrender and betray
Bristol to the Enemy. At which the Defendant grew blank, saying, he did not
remember that he spoke any thing to him there. After this he demanded of him,
how long he stayed in the Town after he was drawn off the Line? To which he
answered, that he staid with his men in Winestreete, near the Market house
above 2. hours, as diverse other companies also did, and in all that time
received no Orders for a Sally, or any thing else; by means whereof many of
the Soldiers departed from their Colors to Tavernes, Alehouses to drink, and
so gave the Enemies time and respite to enter further into the Suburbs without
resistance, and to possess themselves of Essex Fort, and Sir Ferdinando Gorges
house, and some of them came under the College wall over against Alderman
Hooks house, and played upon our Forces, I in the Marsh, whereupon he hearing
from Colonel Stephens, that they needed some help in the Marsh, and having no
other commands, marched with his men into the Marsh, and played upon the Enemy
under the College wall, and mounting one of Sir Francis Pophams pieces, on the
top of Alderman Hooks house, he played so hotly on the enemies there, that he
made them quit the College green, the rest of the Forces standing idle in the
midst of the City in the mean time for want of command, and not making any
Sally against the Enemy to beat them out. Then he charged him with perjury,
for Deposing he sent for a Parley without calling any Council of war; for that
others proved he did call a council. To which was answered, that the Article
runs, no common Council was called, and so the Deposition must be intended
as the Article runs, that there was no Common Council; and that is most
certain, for first Colonel Stephens, and Mr. Edward Stephens (whom Colonel
Fiennes in Print avers to be at the Council) expressly depose, that they were
not at any such Council, nor ever had notice of it: Major Allen and other
Officers depose the like. And such a Council for a Parley ought to have been
general, of which all chief Officers should have had notice. Besides Colonel
Strood and others depose, that there was not above nine or ten at it, and that
of them two or three Voted against the Parley, and one gave no Vote at all.
Therefore he might safely enough depose, it was done without a common Council
of War, and without the Privitie or consent of any, or at least of VERY FEW of
his Officers; five or six being the most that consented to it. Next he
quarrelled him as perjured, for saying the place where his Company guarded the
Line, was in his judgment (for he never measured it) nearer the place where
the Enemy entered, than it was to the maine Guard, and that they might have
marched sooner to the breach directly from the Line, then from thence to the
main Guard, and so to the breach; because Captain Tyson deposed, it was almost
a quarter of a mile nearer to the maine Guard then to the breach. To which was
Answered; First, that Captain Bagnall deposed only, that he could depose
nothing certain in point of knowledge of the distance, because he never
measured it, but only in point of his opinion and judgment it was nearer to
the breach than to the main Guard. Therefore admit it were further, it was no
perjury at all, because he swore only as he conceived, not as he knew it, and
so only a mistake in point of opinion. But admit it were further to the breach
than to the maine Guard, yet Captain Tyson himself deposed, that it is nigh
half a mile the nearer way to march from Newfound-land where Captain Bagnalls
company was, to the breach by the Line, then to march from thence to the maine
Guard at the Tolsey, and from thence to the Line; and that was the sole
question put to Captain Bagnall by Mr Prynne, Whether it was not much the
nearer way for his Company to have marched directly from the Line to the breach
by the Outworkes, without passing through the City, then to march through the
City by the maine Guard, and so to the breach? To which he answered, he
conceived it was: for which the Defendant would make him forsworn, when as his
own Witness Captain Tyson swears the same, that it was the nearer way near
half a mile, though it was nearer to the maine Guard it self, then to the
breach. Then he pretended him perjured, because he swore, he saw some of the
Enemies horse marching back toward Durdham Down after their Foot were entered,
when as Captain Husbands and Cornet Husbands in their Fort saw none march
back: To which was answered; first, that one man might see that which another
saw not, Secondly, that these opposite witnesses plainly confessed, that the
horse might march back and yet they not see them, and that they could not
swear no horse retreated. Thirdly, Captain Hill and Lieutenant Taylour
deposed, that the horse retreated back to Durdam Down, and that they saw them
retreat; and his own witness Samuel Allen deposed; that they retreated with
their horse above 200. yards from the Forts: Captain Bagnall therefore having
three express witnesses to back him, must stand rectus in Curia,
notwithstanding Captain Husbands and his brother, saw no Horse retreat. His
last instance to prove him perjured was; that he deposed the Defendant had
Conference with Gerard in the garden, and after that, returning to the Council
told them, they must deliver up all their Arms; etc. when as Capt. Bagnall was
not in the garden; Ergo, he could not swear he had conference with him there.
To which was answered; First, that Capt. Bagnall swore expressly, that he saw
him go in, and come out of the Garden, and that there was a window in the room
where he was that looked into the garden, through which he saw him confer with
Gerrard: therefore his being not in the Garden is no proof that he saw him not
confer with him in the Garden. Secondly, admit he saw him not there with
Gerard, yet diverse others saw him confer with him, and himself confesses he
did so, and that in the presence of the Mayor and diverse others: how then can
it be perjury to swear that which so many saw, and himself confesses to be a
truth? Thirdly, Col. Strood deposes the very same Captain Bagnall does,
without any exception taken to it: therefore the one can be as little perjured
as the other. In fine, Mr. Prynne informed the Defendant, that since he thus
labored very maliciously and unworthily to impeach the truth and Testimony of
his indifferent honest witness, he would by way of requital inform the
Council and him, of some palpable contradictions or oversights in the
Defendants chief witnesses, which else he would have concealed.

First his universal chief witness, Lieutenant Clifton, confessed yesterday
Langrish his neglect and cowardice, advising him to cashiere him; yet this day
in Langrish his presence he denied upon oath, that he complained of him. Again
he deposed upon oath that Gloucester was far stronger and more tenable then
Bristoll: And yet Mr. John Stephens deposes, that he said openly in the Court
of Requests, it was impossible for Gloucester to hold out 3. days against the
King.

Secondly, Captain Rawlins deposed, the Enemy had planted a battery and
Captain and Lieutenant Husbands both expressly depose, that no Canon were
brought in till two of the clock at least; which they were certain of, because
there could no Canon be brought in but by the Fort wherein they stood.

Thirdly, Lieutenant Husbands deposed, that the Horse entered the Line within
one hour after the Foot first entered; and upon cross demands he attested,
that the Foot entered before sunrising about 4. of the clock, and the Horse not
till 6. or 7. which is two or three hours at least; yea Captain Nevill with
other of his own witnesses attested, the Horse entered not till 7. or after.

Fourthly, Major Holmes deposed: that he voted at the Council of War against a
Parley; and being demanded the reason; he answered, It was because he thought
the Town to be in as good condition in Glocestershire side, as he left it in
Somersetside where his charge was: Which could not be, for the Enemy had made
no entry on that side, as they had done in this. Besides, he deposed he was in
the Sally which was beaten back: therefore the Parley was concluded on before
the Sally made, as Colonel Strode expressly deposed; though the Defendants
witnesses and Major Holmes denied it; or else this could not be the reason of
his vote against a Parlcy; for after the Sally beaten in, he must needs know
they were in worse condition on Glocestershire side, then in Somerset, where
the enemy never entered.

Captain Bagnall thus cleared in all particulars; was bafiled unsufferably by
the Defendant himself before the Council, and by his witnesses as soon as the
Council was risen, some of them giving him the lie in the Council chamber,
others challenging him, others menacing him, in such sort, that Mr Prynne
complaining of these insufferable abuses to the Council, it was ordered to
exhibit Articles of complaint in Captain Bagnalls name against those who
challenged and gave him the lie; which he did accordingly.

The Testimony of Captain Henry Loyde.
I Henry Loyde, Artic. 4. 6, 7.
who commanded a Company for the defense of the City of Bristoll during the
late Siege, affirm upon my Oath, That I was commanded to attend in the Marsh,
with my Company, where the Governor Nath. Fiennes coming to them, A Soldier
of my company pointing with his finger to that Part of the Line between
Windmill-Hill Fort and Brandon Hill Fort, (where the said Line was not yet
perfected, and where the Enemy afterward entered) advised the said Governor to
have a care of that place as the only likely place for the Enemy to enter at,
and did further admonish the Governor, that the Line in that place was very
weakly manned, for which the said Governor called him saucy knave: this
Deponent farther affirms that he advised the said Governor to plant some
Musketeers upon the Key, which he neglected: he farther affirms that the
said Governor Entered into Articles to surrender the said City and Castle with
all the Ammunition, Colors, Arms, Provisions and Prisoners before any one
Fort was taken, or any battery or assault made upon the Walls of the said City
or Castle.

Henry Loyde.

The Testimony of Nicholas Cowling Commissary.
I Nicholas Cowling Commissary of victuals in the Castle of Bristoll, Artic.
4. 6, 8.
under Colonel Nathaniell Fiennes late Governor of the said City and Castle,
having the custody of the victuals, laid up against the siege, being required
to disover the true quantity thereof to my knowledge which was in the said
Castle, when it was delivered up to the enemy by the said Governor, do here
declare upon Oath, that there was then in the said Castle Eleaven thousand
weight of Biscuit. Eight hundred Bushells of Wheat or near about. Some
reasonable store of Pease. Beef of the first salting 60. barrells. Porke 10.
barrells. 12. Fat Oxen ready to be killed. 20. Leaner Oxen which would serve. 6
Milk Kine. Hay for two months. Coals for a year. Cheese and Butter good
store. Sixteen Butts of Sack. Good store of Tobacco.


Which victual and Ammunition which was in the Castle, with the men belonging
to the Garrison, having the Forts in our possession, it was not possible for
the enemy to gain the City if we had fought it out; the Castle being so
fortified with Out-workes, and the City not entered, but only the suburbs; and
this was likewise the opinion of the * Controwler of the Ordnance. Mr. Hassard.


Nicholas Covvling.

The substance of Henry Hassard his Deposition.
I Henry Hassard, late Master of the Ordnance in the City and Castle of
Bristoll, having all the Ammunition thereto belonging in my custody, and being
desired to discover the quantity to my knowledge of all such Ammunition as was
in the said Castle, when it was surrendered to the enemy by Col. Nath. Fiennes
late Governor thereof, do here declare upon-my Oath, that there was then in
the said Castle, 50. Mayor Wood deposes he confessed there were 70. Arth.
Williams that there were 60. and Cap. Bushel found there 70 double Barrels
Barrells of Powder (he says not, and no more) 1400 weight of Match. Half a
Tun of Musket bullets ready made. 50 Richard Butler deposes, 140. Grenades
not one of them used.
Great Grenades. 500. Canon shot for the pieces on the white Tovver, besides
other shot.


55. Pieces of Canon in the City and Castle, mounted (besides sir Francis
Pophams Gunnes and some pieces unmounted.) I do likewise further declare, that
I have often heard Col. Nathaniell Fiennes say, That he would defend the
Castle, and keep the City and Castle to the utmost; that his Flag of Truce
should be his Winding Sheet: and that he commanded me to lay aside a reserve of
thirty barrells of powder, with shot and match proportionable, in the said
Castle, which I did.

Henry Hassard.

He likewise confessed to Mr. Prynne, Captain Birch, and others, that Col.
Fiennes charged him to give him notice, when all the Ammunition, but this
reserve of 30. Barrells was spent, for that he would then treat with the enemy,
but not before; that they had a Match-maker, a Bullet-maker in the Castle, and
store of materials, Lead, and Tin to make Match and Bullet, as fast as they
needed them. That after the enemy had entered the Line of Communication he
planted one piece of Ordnance at the head of the Key, and three at Gyb-Tayler,
and did beat the enemy out of fir Ferdinando Gorges house, being a place of
advantage the enemy had gained in the suburbs upon their entry, and that he
offered to fire the huses in the Green, and beat the enemy out of them; but
because Col. Fiennes owed him arreares of pay, for payment of which he had
given him a Bill under his hand, he was unwilling to testify against him, in
all particulars so fully as else (perhaps) he would have done; or this which
Major Dovvet (the Defendants chief witness against sir William Waller) has
attested under his own hand, and denied not when cross examined upon Oath,
(viz.) The said Major Dovvet says, that he heard Captain Birch declare, when
the City of Bristoll was upon surrendering he would have taken possession of
the Castle, Article 6. 7. 8.
with intent to make that good against the enemy, but he was discouraged
therein by the Gunner, Nota.
who told him that there was but ten barrells of Powder in the Castle, and
thereupon he came forth and diserted his resolution; but since that the Town
and Castle was delivered up, the said Gunner told him that there were
threescore barrells of Powder in it; the said Birch asking him, what reason he
had to tell him there were but ten; the Gunner answered, that Col. Nathaniell
Fiennes, Governor of the said City and Castle commanded him to say so. All
which the Major Dovvet heard from the mouth of the said Captain Birch, and
will testify the same upon his corporal Oath.

Francis Dovvet.
London 17th. of October 1643.
The Deposition of Mr. Talboyes Gent.
The sum of his testimony was this; that a neighbor of his being fined 40.
l. by Colonel Nathaniell Fiennes Governor of Bristoll for Delinquency, and
imprisoned till he should pay this Fine, Article 7.
did thereupon pay down all but 18. l. which he could not presently procure;
whereupon he desired the Deponent to move the Governor to respite the payment
of this sum till St. James tide, and then it should be paid in; which the
Deponent did accordingly, presuming he should have obtained this courtesy for
his Neighbor, but Colonel Fiennes answered him, I must have all the money
presently, for I know not where I shall be at St. James tide; to which the
Deponent then replied, He hoped he would be then in Bristoll; who answered, He
did not know whether he should or not. Whereupon the Deponent presently
apprehending the said Governor had a resolution to deliver up, and not keep
the Town against the enemy, thought it not safe to remain therein, and
thereupon removed thence to London; and the very next day after St. James day,
viz. 26. July, 1643. he surrendered the city and castle to the enemy.

The Deposition of Sergeant William Hill.
I do hereby testify and declare my knowledge concerning the surrender of the
city and castle of Bristoll, Artic 4. 6. 7. 8.
that at the time when the enemy had entered the Line about the Barn, between
Brandon-hill and the Windmill Fort, and that they were gotten in possession of
Essex Fort and the suburbs adjoining, being as was conceived betwixt two or
three hundred of them, the enemy that were without being repulsed in several
other places which they had stormed, were with-drawne back as far as Durdam
Down; the cause of my knowledge was, in that after they were beaten out of sir
Ferdinando Gorges his house, and several other houses on that side of the
water, with our Canon shot from the Key, and with our Musketeers that were
placed in several houses on the Key, I rode forth at Newgate, and from thence
up to the Fort of Pryors Hill, from thence a long the Line to the redoubt, and
so on to the Windmill Fort, all which places I found secure, and our men very
courageous; from thence I rode to the place where the enemy entered, and almost
to Brandon-hill Fort, all which part of the Line was clear and no enemy nearer
it, then the Down aforesaid: and as I returned back the Soldiers in the
Forts, and in the Redoubt earnestly desired me to procure some strength to be
sent out of the city to assist them, and likewise to make good the Line again,
which I promised to certify the Governor of. I came immediately to the Town,
and met the Governor with several other Gentlemen riding then through Newgate
forth of the city: I told him that the Forts were all secure, and that the Line
was clear, and that I conceived that if he would be pleased to send forth a
matter of two hundred men, Nota.
he might not only secure the Line, but also take all those that were entered,
which he not only refused to do, but sent a Warrant to a Major that then was
upon the Line, betwixt the Windmill Fort and the Redoubt, commanding him on
pain of death to draw his men off the Line, and to repair into the Town with
them; which Warrant I saw, and read it, and as some of the Cavaliers told me
the next day, the enemy that was without the Line knew not of those that were
within, at least two hours time, in which time their Ammunition was spent, and
then did those that were within Essex Fort aforesaid send out Messengers to
those of the enemy that were without, intimating, that if they did not come
speedily into their relief, they should be all cut off; and then, and not till
then came the enemy within the Line both horse and foot, and possessed
themselves of the suburbs: whereupon the Governor presently desired a Parley
with the enemy, which accordingly was done: All which I humbly certify on
Oath, as witness my hand this 13th of Novem. 1643.

William Hill.

The Deposition of Sergeant Anthony Gale.
1 Anthony Gale Sergeant to Lieutenant Colonel Baker of Col. Artic. 4, 5, 6,
7, 8.
Stephens Regiment, in the late siege of Bristoll, do affirm upon my Oath,
that upon Wednesday morning July 26th. when the enemy entered the Line between
Pryors Hill Fort and Windmill Hill Fort, I was upon the Line between the said
two Forts, and that when the enemy came upon the said work where he made the
breach, there entered not above 100. men (as I conceived) at the first, I my
self offered to venture my self to make up the said breach, but Langrishes
horse being there to defend that place, would not fall on, although they were
called upon, for that purpose; Langrish himself (as was said) being gone into
the Town, and presently Lieutenant Colonel Clifton came, and commanded all
men to quit the Line and draw off into the Town; Nota.
which after some time they did; yet * after three hours respite (when the
enemy was entered in greater numbers, and had possessed diverse places of advantage
in the suburbs) we sallyed out upon them at the College Green, the enemy
throwing down their Arms and crying for quarter; when presently a Parley was
sounded, and a command came to the soldiers that they should presently retreat
into the Castle, which caused some of the soldiers in discontent to break
their Arms, and swear they would never serve the Parliament again. And upon
Wednesday night it was concluded, that the said Town and Castle should be
yielded up the next morning about nine of the clock (as this Deponent heard
diverse officers say) but yet the Prisoners in the Castle were set at liberty
the said Wednesday night, and very early in the morning took possession of the
said Castle, committed diverse plunders, and enticed and seized on diverse of the
Parliaments soldiers: and the enemy having so got possession of the Castle,
would not suffer any Goods to be carried from thence. And I further say, that
many soldiers were plundered, Prince Rupert protesting he could not help it,
for that Colonel Fiennes had drawn the soldiers to a wrong Gate, where the
convoy of horse was (by agreement) appointed to attend their coming forth. I
further affirm, there were near upon two thousand foot in the Town, besides
three hundred horse and Dragoons.

Anthony Gale.
November. 9. 1643.
The Deposition of Stephen Radford.
I Stephen Radford, Artic. 4, 5, 6. etc.
Ensign to Captain Bagnall, at the time of the siege and surrender of
Bristoll, affirm upon Oath, that Captain Bagnalls company (in which this
Deponent then served as Ensign) maintained the Works by the Pesthouse, and
by Newfound Land, and hearing that the enemy had entered the Line, between
Windmill Hill, and Brandon Hill Forts, this Deponent went thither to see
whether it were true or no, and found that about 150. (as he guessed) had
entered the Line, and were sitting together by the Red Lodge; who gave fire upon
this Deponent as soon as they saw him; but this Deponent hastened away toward
the Line, and could not perceive that any more had entered; whereupon this
Deponent went to the Governor Nathaniell Fiennes, acquainting him how few
there were of the enemy that had entered, what strength of our defendants were
at the Line, and how desirous they were to fall upon those which were entered,
and to make up the breach; the Governor charged this Deponent upon pain of
death, that the soldiers should not fall upon the enemy, but draw off from the
Line, and come into the Town; whereupon this Deponent desiring to know the
Reasons, why he would not suffer them to fall upon the enemies entered; Note
this discreet reason.
the said Governor replied * because if they should do so, the enemy would
enter in a greater number, and falling in upon our soldiers in the rear,
would hem them in and cut them off. This is the effect of what I heard and saw,
and I further affirm, that I seldom or never observed the said Governor to
give any words of encouragement, or money to the soldiers during the siege.

Stephen Radford.

The Deposition of James Powell.
I James Powell of Bristoll, Artic. 3. 4. 5. 6. 8.
one of the Trained Soldiers of that City, being there during the late siege
thereof, do attest upon my Oath, that Col. Nath. Fiennes, Nota.
late Governor of the City and Castle of Bristoll, did before the siege
thereof in my hearing promise and give out in speeches, that he would defend
the same against the enemy to the utmost, and dispute every inch of ground from
the Forts to the Gates, and if they won it they should win it by inches, and
from the Gates of the City to the Castle, which he would defend to the last.
And that upon the said speeches and promises, and intimation from the said
Governor, he this Deponent did send in three or four months provisions, or
more into the Castle for himself and his Family, and did bring the greatest
part of his estate thither, conceiving the said Castle to be strong and
tenable, and that he should have been there secured, though the City had been
forced by the enemies: who afterward besieging the said City, were several
times manfully repulsed with great loss of many of their men, and but few of
ours. And when some of them had entered the Line in one place (the rest in all
other places being beaten off) on the Wednesday morning when they last stormed
it, this Deponent repaired to the said Governor in the morning, and desired
him earnestly to beat them out again; after which, the Enginere told this
Deponent, that he with one hundred men would undertake to beat them out that
were entered. And further says, that when the said City and Castle were
surrendered to the enemy, the Out-forts thereof were not taken, nor the walls of
the Castle battered, neither were they besieged above four days; and that he
lost his goods in the Castle, which the enemy seized on.

James Powell.

James Powell likewise attested Viva voce, upon Oath, before the Counsel where
the defendant produced him, as a principal witness for him, That there might
have been raised in Bristoll (over and above the Garrison and soldiers in it
during the siege) at least six or eight thousand able men fit for service;
Judge then whether he had any want of men, when as he might have raised so many
thousands there.

The Testimony of William Deane.
I William Deane of the City of Bristoll, Artic. 3. 4. 6 8.
Baker, lately one of the Train Soldiers there, serving under Captain Grig
in Prior-hill Fort, when the same was lately besieged by Prince Rupert and the
Kings forces, do testify upon my Oath, that Col. Nath. Fiennes, late
Governor of the said City and Castle thereof, did two or three weeks before
the siege thereof, cause public Proclamation to be made. Nota.
That all Inhabitants of this City should furnish themselves with three months
provisions for them and their families, and intimation was given then likewise
to this Deponent, and diverse best affected to the Parliaments service, to send
in part of their estates into the Castle, to be there secured in case the City
should be taken, with three months provision or more; whereupon this Deponent
sent part of his estate, and provision for himself and his family for at least
three months into the said, Castle, presuming that the Governor would have
defended it to the uttermost. And he further deposes, that on Wednesday
morning the twenty sixth of July last, the enemy stormed the Out-workes of the
said City very furiously, but were generally repulsed with extraordinary
slaughter of their men, and namely at Prior-hill Fort, where this Deponent
served, where they flew and hurt many of the enemies * without the hurt or
loss of any one of their men, Nota.
and made them retire in disorder; and that morning a few of the enemies (
conceived not above two hundred or thereabouts) having entered within the Line
near the College Green; thereupon one came riding Post in a furred Cap to
the Fort and Line where this Deponent was, commanding the soldiers there upon
pain of death to come off thence; and retire into the City, for the Cavaliers
had taken the Town: which the soldiers not believing, having then newly
beaten off the enemy with great loss, from that quarter, sent this Deponent to
know the truth thereof; who repairing to the maine Guard, they informed him
that all was well in the City and elsewhere: whereupon he returned presently to
his companions that sent him, acquainting them therewith, Nota.
and within one quarter of an hour after, another came riding up to the said
Fort and Line, crying out, Gentlemen what do you mean, you must under pain
of death come off from the Line and Works. And immediately after a third
Horseman came, saying, Gentlemen, under pain of death stand to your Arms;
upon which contradictory messages, this Deponent was sent by his company to
know what they should do; who meeting the said Governor in the street at the
Pitty-heard by accident, Nota.
used these words to him, Noble Governor, we are commanded upon pain of death
to quit and come off from our Works and Line, which we are very unwilling to
do, this being that the enemies desire, it being an easy matter to take the
Works when there are none to guard them; to which the Governor flatly
answered, That they must come away thence: Whereupon the soldiers very
unwillingly left the said Works and Line, the Gunner threatening to shoot all
those that should depart; and this Deponent and other soldiers spoiled about
one barrel of Powder, and another of Shot at the Line, because the enemy
should not gain it in their absence; after which this Deponent repaired to the
Governor to his House in Broad-street, where he was taking Horse, Nota.
and said unto him; Noble Governor, if you please to give me a Warrant, I will
go to our Captain, and cause him to beat up his Drums, for he and his
soldiers are all willing to fight, and we will go into the Suburbs where the
enemy is entered, and try what good we can do among them; to which he gave no
answer at all, but instead of encouraging us to beat out the enemy as we
desired, and were ready to do, he fell to treat with them about the surrender
of the Town and Castle, to the great grief and discontent of this Deponent
and others, who would have defended them to the utmost; and of some women, who
in this Deponents hearing desired Captain Styles (as he remembers) and his
men to go courageously against the enemy, and if they feared the Canon, we
(said they) and our Children will put our selves between the Canons mouth and
you, to dead and keep off the Bullets; or words to this effect; which much
moved and encouraged this Deponent to have beaten the enemy out of the suburbs.
And this Deponent says, that when the said Governor treated with the Enemy,
they had not taken any of their Forts to his knowledge, nor made any one shot
against the Castle or Town Walls, for ought he knew or heard; and that there
wanted neither provisions nor Ammunition, nor men to defend the same, or at
leastwise the said. Castle, which was strongly fortified, victualled, and
provided with all necessaries for a long siege; all which, together with the
soldiers Arms, and Colors, were unexpectedly surrendered to the enemy, to the
great grief of this Deponent, and others of his company.

William Deane.

The Deposition of Thomas Monday.
I Thomas Monday, Art. 4. 5. 6, 7. 8.
late Garrison Soldier in Bristoll under Captain Loyde during the siege
thereof, do attest upon my Oath, That I being in the Marsh at Bristoll, with
my Captain and Company, the Tuesday before the Enemy entered the Line, Captain
Langrish coming to the Works there, and Col. Nathaniell Fiennes then
Governor of the City, I said to Langrish, Captain, yonder is a very
suspicious place and not fully fortified, between Brandon Hill and Windmill
Hill Fort, and it is very doubtful, that unless you set an hundred Musketeers
more there, it being very weakly manned, the enemy will there make the first
breach, pointing to the place with my hand; which words the Governor hearing,
Nota.
asked in an angry manner, What, does he prate? whereupon this Deponent
replied; I hope it is no offense to you sir what I speak; and the very next
morning the enemy made a breach, and entered at that very place. After whose
entry this Deponent spoke to Master Cowling and to a City Captain, one after
another, to advise the Governor to stop up the way which came down from the
Back and the Key, and to place Musketeers upon the City Wall, and thrust three
or four piece of Canon through the Wall over against the Marsh; which had it
been done, the enemy could not have entered the Marsh or City, when they were
within the Line, but we must have slain abundance of them: Which thing was not
done, nor yet the Hedges near the City cut down before the siege, Nota.
which gave great advantage to the enemy to annoy us; and he says, that the
Castle was extraordinary strongly fortified, and stored, and very tenable as he
believes, and that he knevv nothing of the agreement, to surrender the City
and Castle to the enemy till a little before they were to march out of the
same, so as he had no time to hide his sword or Arms, and that he and sundry
of the other soldiers were much discontented at the surrender thereof, Nota.
and would have fought it out to the last; and that he saw diverse of the
soldiers break their Rests and Pikes, and beat their Muskets on the ground
in discontent; and that when they were to march forth, they were led up, and
down from one gate of the City to another several times, and pillaged openly
as they marched through the Streets, without any order taken by the Governor
for their Relief, for ought he heard or saw.

Thomas Monday.

The Testimony of Richard Butler.
I Richard Butler, Art. 4. 7. 8.
who served under the Enginere John Warden in the Castle of Bristoll, both
before and at the siege and surrender of Bristoll affirm upon Oath, That we
had in the Castle at that time one hundred and forty Grenades, and a new
Morter-peece; Nota.
that the said John Warden did often importune the Governor Col. Nathaniell
Fiennes to give him leave to make a shot at the enemy out of the said
Morter-peece, but the said Governor commanded him upon pain of death not to
make any shot at them without his special License, but the said Governor
never gave the said Warden License to shoot at them; whereat the said John
Warden was so grieved, Nota.
that he often complained the Town was betrayed. He says he wrought fifteen
or sixteen weeks, but never received any money excepting twenty shillings.

Richard Butler.

The Deposition of Abell Kelly.
I Abell Kelly one of the Trained soldiers in the City of Bristoll, Art. 3. 4.
5. 6. 8.
under the command of Colonel Charlton, whiles Col. Nathaniell Fiennes was
Governor of the said City and Castle of Bristoll, and during the time it was
besieged by the enemy, do testify upon Oath, that Captain Birch by the
direction of the said Colonel Fiennes did give order to this Deponent and
diverse other Citizens of the said City, who were best affected to the
Parliament, about a week before the same was besieged, to bring in their
estates into the Castle of the said City, and so much provision as would well
serve them for the space of three months, promising them, that in case the
said City should he forcibly taken by the enemy, Nota.
that then he the said Colonel, and they who should send in their estates and
provisions would retreat into the said Castle, and maintain the same.
Whereupon this Deponent and diverse other Inhabitants of the said City did bring
in their estates, and three months provisions into the said Castle, presuming
that the said Col. Fiennes would have manfully defended the same against the
enemy according to his said promise; but he beyond our expectation, before any
of the Out-forts taken, or Walls of the said City, or Castle were battered, or
assaulted by the enemy, upon the entry of some few of the enemies within the
Line of communication, and before the said City had been besieged the space of
four whole days, delivered up both the said City and Castle, with all the
Arms, Magazines, Canons, Ammunition, Colors, and Prisoners therein to the
enemy, though this Deponent verily believes there was sufficient provision and
victuals in the said City and Castle, to have maintained the same for the
space of three months; the said Governor having about a Fortnight before the
said City was besieged, made public Proclamation throughout the said City
with a Trumpet, that every Inhabitant should furnish himself with sufficient
provision for three months space; and this Deponent further says, that at the
time of the said siege, in the said City and Castle and the Forts thereof,
there were about two thousand foot soldiers besides Horse, to defend the
same, there being not above eight of our men lost during the said siege, many
of which soldiers were much offended and discontented at the surrender thereof
to this Deponents knowledge, and himself among the rest, who lost all his
estate that he carried into the said Castle, by reason that many of the enemies
were admitted into the same, and the Prisoners there released by the said
Governor before the hour agreed on in the Articles, who seized upon and
plundered the goods which were brought into the Castle as aforesaid, to be
there secured.

Abell Kelly.

The Deposition of Arthur Williams.
I Arthur Williams Stationer, Artic. 4. 6. 8.
and late soldier under Captain Birch, in Tower Harris in the City of
Bristoll while the same was lately besieged by the enemy, do testify upon my
Oath, That the very morning that Collonell Nathaniell Fiennes then Governor of
the said City treated with the enemy about the surrender thereof, he this
Deponent did see as much Match as four Horses could well draw, brought out of
the said City into the Castle thereof, and that the Keeper of the Magazine of
the said Castle, did then deliver unto this Deponent two Barrells of Musket and
Carabine shot, and two slings of Match for the use of the said Tower Harris;
and did likewise tell this Deponent that there were sixty barrells of Powder or
there abouts then remaining in the Magazine of the said Castle, and that this
Deponent does verily believe, that there was sixty barrel of Powder more in
private men's houses that sold Powder, besides Match, then within the said
City, wherein five or six barrells of Powder were made every week; and
this Deponent does likewise believe, that there was victuals and provisions
enough of all sorts within the said City and Castle of Bristoll, at the time
when they were surrendered to the enemy, to have kept the same for at least
three months space; And further deposes, there was not any one of the
Out-forts of the said City or Castle taken, nor any Battery made, or Assault
given to the Walls of the said City or Castle, and but eight of the said
Garrison slain, with the loss of above five hundred of the enemies; And that
there was in the said City and Castle when they were surrendered by the said
Governor, near about two thousand five hundred soldiers foot and horse to
defend the same, many of which at the surrender were very much discontented,
and would have defended the same to the utmost.

Arthur Williams.

The Testimony of Richard Winston.
Richard Winston an Inhabitant of Bristoll, Artic. 4. 6. 8.
and a Soldier at the time of the siege and surrender thereof under Captain
Husbands, who had the defense of Brandon Hill Fort, affirms upon his Oath,
that he saw when the breach was made in the Line of Communication, where the
Enemy entered early upon a Wednesday morning, he conceived there were not above
150. of them who entered at the first, and the Enemies Horse stood in a body
without the Line, and offered not to enter and second them, but gave them ( as
this Deponent conceives), for lost men for almost two hours together, and
then at last the said horse entered. He further says, that the first nevves
they heard of an agreement made to surrender the Town and Castle, was from
the Enemies, which not being believed by Captain Husbands, he sent into the
Town to know the truth thereof, and found that Colonel Nathaniel Fiennes the
Governor * was gone out of the Town with his Company, Captain Husbands
attested the same, that he had no notice nor Warrant from the Governor to
surrender the Fort before he departed the Town.
and left the City and Castle in possession of the Enemy that morning, being
Thursday. The Governor gave no encouragement to the Soldiers, and often
called upon them to be sparing of their powder.

Richard Winston.

The Testimonies of Richard Lindon and Edmond Wathin.
The Testimonies of Richard Lindon and Edmond Wathin Gunners in the Castle of
Bristoll, Article 4. 5. 6. 8.
before and at the late siege and surrender thereof; each of them for himself
affirms upon his Oath, That considering how the said Castle was furnished
with Ordinance well planted, Nota.
and stored with Powder, Ammunition, Victuals and all things else fit to hold
out; and Comparing it and the Situation thereof, and the manner of its
Fortifications with the present strength of the Enemy, to whom it was
surrendered: they do not think it possible for the said Enemy to have taken
it, if the Governor Colonel Nathaniel Fiennes had not surrendered it.

Richard Lindon, Edmond Wathin.

The Testimony of James Coals.
I James Coals late Citizen of Bristoll, Article 10.
and a Trained Soldier long before and during the Siege thereof, when Colonel
Nathaniel Fiennes was Governor there, do Attest upon my Oath, that I
continuing in the City about three weeks after the same was surrendered to the
Enemy by the said Governor, Nota.
Did hear diverse of the Enemies Soldiers, who first entered the Line say, and
confess, several times in this Deponents Company, that when they first entered
the Line, they did all give themselves for dead men, and that they thought they
should have been shut in, and the breach made good against them: And this
Deponent further says; That he heard three of the Enemies Cavaliers, who were
quartered in his Fathers House, often say and confess, that after their repulse
on: Whitechurch side, before the Parley with them, they were so discouraged,
and out of hopes of gaining the City, that a whole Regiment of their Horse
retreated 3. miles from Bristoll to Whitchurch, with a Resolution to come on no
more, and that soon after word was sent to them to come away, for they had
hopes that the City would be delivered up unto them upon a Parlee; which was
accordingly surrendered by the said Governor, to the Enemy; before any the
Out-Forts thereof were taken, or the City or Castle were assaulted.

James Coals.

The Testimony of Joseph Proud.
I Joseph Proud, Article 10.
late Inhabitant of the City of Bristoll and a Soldier there, do testify on
my Oath, that I continuing in the said City, some six days after the surrender
thereof, Did hear diverse of the Enemies Cavaleers say, what a Cowardly fellow
was Colonell-Fiennes to leave such a City as Bristol, and diverse words to the
like effect.

Joseph Proud.

The Testimony of Ione Batten.
I Ione Batten an Inhabitant of Bristoll, Article 4. 6. 8.
do Testify upon my Oath, that I was in the said City during the late Siege
thereof, and lived at Saint Austins back in Bristoll. That the Enemy began to
approach upon Sunday: that upon Monday and Tuesday they were in fight: that
upon Tuesday night about eleven or twelve of the clock at night, I saw Major
Langrish go, with one man bearing a Torch or Link before him, over the Back
toward the College Green, but saw him not come back again until after the
Enemy had entered the Line, which was about four of the clock on the Wednesday
morning. And the Soldiers upon the Enemies entering the Line, were called off
the Line, and did then report there was not above one hundred Enemies entered.
And that the said Langrish afterward coming back to Froom Gate, his Troop
came along with him whom he had brought from the Lime-Kilnes or thereabouts.
And upon the sound of the Trumpet he was let in at Froom Gate; Nota.
* all men then crying shame that the Soldiers were called off the Line, and
complaining they were betrayed; I further say, that one of the Soldiers drawn
off the Line then Reported, they were Commanded to retreat into the City upon
pain of death, for that the City was like to be lost. And that thereupon there
were about 200. women of the said City, whereof this Deponent was one, who went
to Colonel John Fiennes, begging of him that he would be a means that the
City and Castle might not be yielded to the Enemy, offering themselves to Work
in the Fortifications in the very face of the Enemy, and to go themselves and
their children, into the mouth of the Canon to dead and keep off the shot from
the Soldiers: and the said John Fiennes answered them, Nota, I doubt he will
not make good the last part of his promise.
That rather than he would consent to the surrender of the City or Castle, he
would consent to be hanged. And presently the same day being Wednesday, a
message was brought from the Governor Colonel Nathaniel Fiennes to the said
women, Commanding them to go to Froome Gate, and there make a Bulwark of
earth; which by direction of the Engineer they did, this Deponent being one of
them. But while they were at work and had almost finished the said Bulworke
(being about 15. or 16. foot thick) the Treaty was in agitation and concluded
upon, to their great grief. I further affirm upon Oath that I saw a large
broad Dray, heavy laden with roles of Match, the same morning the Parley was,
drawn into the Castle by three or four Horses. This I testify upon Oath, the
14th. day of November 1643. In witness whereof I have here set to my hand.

Ione Batten.

The further Deposition of Ione Batten touching the surrender of Bristoll.
I Jone Batten late Inhabitant of Bristoll, Article 10.
do testify upon my Oath, that I and some other Inhabitants and Soldiers of
that City, departing thence on the Thursday after the surrender thereof by
Colonel Nathaniel Fiennes, did on that day and the next, meet with diverse of
the Cavalieers on the way in several Companies riding toward Bristoll, many
of them very gallant, clothed in Scarlet, who several times demanded of this
Deponent and the rest, whence they came, who answering from Bristoll, they
thereupon severally demanded of us; Where is Fiennes the Governor? We
answered, we could not tell: whereupon they severally replied often times, We
hope the covvard is taken, and cried out with better Oaths and curses, hang
him, hang him; and likewise reviled him, and the Soldiers and Troopers they
met, often calling them cowards, and cowardly slaves, for giving up such a City
as Bristoll was, so cowardly as they did.

Ioane Batten.

The Deposition of Etheldred Huddy.
I Etheldred Huddy late Inhabitant of Bristoll, Arti. 4. 6. 8. 10
and continuing in the Castle thereof during the Seige and since the surrender
thereof by Colonel Nathaniel Fiennes, to the Enemy; affirm upon Oath that I
being in the said Castle since the said surrender, did hear some of the
Enemies Cavaliers discoursing together, say one to another openly, we may
thank Fiennes for this. And that diverse of the said City to her knowledge were
much grieved and discontented with the said Governors unexpected Parley with
the Enemy, and his surrender of the same unto them, which they expected he
should have held out to the last.

Etheldred Huddy.

The Testimony of Dorathy Hassard.
I Dorathy Hassard, Artic. 3. 4. 6. 8
wife of Matthew Hassard of Saint Evvins in the City of Bristoll, do Testify
upon my Oath, That I was in the said City during the late siege thereof when
Colonel Nathaniel Fiennes was Governor there, Artic. 4. 5. 6.
and that I did send into the Castle of Bristoll during the siege thereof,
above three months provision for our family there, and a great part of our
Estate, hoping the same would be there preserved, and the Castle defended to
the utmost, according to diverse promises by the Governor to defend the same,
as we were informed by diverse of our friends; and that when the news came into
the said City on the Wednesday morning, that some of the Enemies were entered
within the Line, this Deponent with diverse other women, and maids, with the
help of some men, did with Wool-sackes and earth, stop up Froome gate, to
keep out the Enemy from entering into the said City, being the only passage by
which the Enemy must enter, and when they had so done, they the said women went
to the Gunners (this Deponent being one of them) and told them, that if they
would stand out and fight, they would stand by them, and told them that they
should not want for provision, during which time the said Governor treated
with the Enemies, and beyond their expectation yielded up the said City and
Castle to them, (to her great grief and discontent) before the time agreed on,
whereby all her goods in the said Castle were lost, and seized on by the Enemy.

Dorathy Hassard.

The Deposition of Mary Smith.
I Mary Smith late Inhabitant of the Castle of Bristol both before, Art. 4. 6.
8. 10.
during, and after the Siege thereof, and its surrender to the Enemy by
Colonel Fiennes, late Governor of the said Castle, do Testify upon my Oath,
That since the said surrender, I did often times hear diverse of the Enemies
Commanders, when they viewed the Works of the said Castle say in my hearing;
Nota.
* God damn us, All the Devils in Hell had never been able to take this Castle
if the Governor would have held it out against us: and likewise said diverse
times in my hearing, That the said Castle and City were very covvardly
delivered up unto them, beyond their Expectation. And further deposes, that
she this Deponent, going up with provisions to the Out-workes the morning
before the Parlee, when some few of the Enemy had entered the Line, heard diverse
of our Soldiers and Gunners complain and murmur, that the said Governor rode
thrice up in person to them that morning, and commanded them upon pain of
death, Nota.
to come from the Works into the City; and that * he looked as pale as ashes,
and had no heart. And that they would have held the City out till Sir William
Waller or others had come and rescued the same. And that the Soldiers and
people were * generally discontented and offended, Nota.
both with the said Governors Parley with the Enemy, and with the surrender of
the City and Castle to them: and that diverse of the City who were reputed
Malignants, went out to the Works and fought Valiantly to her knowledge, she
being often among them to carry provisions, and were very much grieved at the
Parley and surrender. And she further says, she heard only of two Garrison
Soldiers and Citizens slain during the siege; the Bullets which fell into the
City miraculously hurting neither man, woman, nor child. And that there was a
bundance of Wheat, Pease, Biscuit, Wine, Beer, Beef, Cheese, Butter, and all
manner of Provisions in the said Castle sufficient to serve them for diverse
months. She further attested in the Advocates chamber and presence, Nota.
after her Deposition given in (wherein it was omitted) that the Bristoll Ships
sent into Ireland to transport the English soldiers, and Irish Rebels thence
to fight against the Parliaments forces here, were victualed with the
provisions, left by Col. Fiennes behind him in the Castle.

Mary Smith.

The Deposition of William Whithorne Gunner.
He personally deposed before the Counsel, Art. 4. 6. 8.
that he came from Malmesbury to Bristoll with Major Allen, and brought along
with him near 200. men, and Arms, with such Powder as the Major formerly has
deposed; that the Hedges about the City were not cut down, whereby the enemies
were very much sheltered, and the Garrison annoyed. That he was Gunner in the
Sconce near Alderman Jones his House, where the enemies were repulsed with
great loss, the twenty sixth of July in the morning when they stormed it; that
some few of them entering the Line in one place, all the soldiers on the Line
on that part, and in the sconce where he was, Nota
were (to their great grief) unexpectedly called thence by Major Clifton, upon
Colonel Fiennes his Commands, into the City, and that in such a disorderly and
tumultuous manner, that many of them left their Muskets, Pikes, Arms, Swords,
Powder, Cartrages, Bullet, and their very Canons behind them; whereupon
himself, and one Harris (another Gunner in Priors-hill Fort, according to
former directions given them) did spike up the touch-holes of their Canons to
make them unservisable to the enemy, to whose Prey they were exposed, having
none to guard or draw them off. That the Sconces and places of the Line which
they wholly quitted upon this Command, were much nearer to the body of the
City, and more advantageous for the enemy then the place where they entered;
that they might have drawn the soldiers at the Line into Battalio there, and
marched directly thence to Charge the enemy immediately without retreating into
the City, which had been far the nearer, speedier and more advantageous way
to charge them, for then the Companies had been kept entire, and in heart, the
enemies entered had not received timely succors, and we should have had the
upper ground of them, to charge them down the Hill; whereas by retreating into
the City, we lost much time, discouraged and disordered the Soldiers, and at
last in the long-delayed Sally, were enforsed to charge the enemy up a very
steep Hill, and narrow street rising up with steps; which much disadvantaged
both Horse and Foot, and gave the enemy great advantage to beat them in
again. That Major Jews went out in the sally (which was not till eleaven of
the Clock) and was wounded in it. That in the sally the Horse basely retreated
upon the discharge only of one Drake, when only one man of ours was slain in
the sally, and thereupon the surrender was made without any other encounter.

William VVhithorne.

The effect of the Deposition of Michael Spark Senior.
That one Master Williams of London Booke-seller, Artic. 10.
living in Paul's Churchyard, informed this Deponent and diverse others, that he
was in Oxford when sundry of the enemies Commanders came from the siege of
Bristol after its surrender, and that he being oft-times in their company
drinking, heard them several times vow and protest, God Damme us, That when
they first entered the Line at Bristoll, they gave themselves all for dead men;
believing verily that they should all have been cut off, or blovvne up, as they
might have been easily, having no relief in two hours space: That they could
never have taken the City or Castle, which were extraordinary strong, had not
the Governor most cowardly surrendered the same up unto them beyond their
expectation: swearing God Damme them, the Governor was so hasty to yield up
the Town and Castle to them upon any terms, that he was ready to yield more
then they desired, and whatsoever they propounded, as soon as they moved it,
saying, that if they had had such a cowardly Governor, they would presently
have hanged him up: All which the said Williams (being questioned by the
Deponent for these speeches, whether he would avow them) protested he would
justify on his Oath when ever he should be called thereunto, before any
Magistrate whatsoever.

Michael Spark senior.

This Williams who could not be met with before the Trial, being in the
enemies Quarters in the Country, has since attested the premises to diverse
others, and is ready to depose the same upon any occasion.

The Testimony of Thomas Thomas of Bristoll.
He being a youth about twelve years of age (and Children commonly speak
truth) did attest without Oath before the Counsel, Art. 4. 6. 8. 10.
De been esse, that he saw Colonel Fiennes the Governor in the high street
of Bristoll, not long after the enemies entered the Line, and that he looked
very pale and fearful: that diverse of the soldiers in the Castle in his
hearing, cursed Colonel Fiennes for yielding up the Castle to the enemy, which
they would have defended to the last; saying, what, have we been thus long
watching and guarding the Castle to no purpose, and must we now yield it up
after all our watching and pains without striking a stroke, or fighting it
out? That he heard diverse of the Cavaliers and enemies Commanders, both in his
fathers house where Prince Ruperts Chaplains lay, and in other places in
conference among themselves say; that Colonel Fiennes was an arrant Coward,
that if they had such a cowardly Commander they would presently have hanged him
up; and that they could not have taken the City or Castle had not he
surrendered them so hastily beyond their expectation. He further says, that he
being at work in making up the Line where the enemy first entered after the
surrender of the Town, heard Marshall one of the Engineers who made the
Works, and revolted to the enemy when the Town was yielded, tell the enemies
Captains, who demanded why that place was not perfected, and no better
fortified; that he left it purposely for them to enter there, it being a place
of greatest advantage for them to enter; who thereupon demanding of him; why he
came not out to them to give them notice of it? He answered, that he knew them
to be men of that skill and judgment, as they were able without any
information from him, to take special notice of this place, and to make their
best advantage of it.

Confessions of the Defendants own Witnesses upon cross Examinations, viz. of
Captain James Husbands, Captain Nevill, Lieutenant Col. Clifton, Mayor Holmes,
Mayor Langrish and others.
That the enemies who entered at first were but two hundred or thereabouts; that
no Horse or foot entered to second them till two hours or more after their
first entry. That they entered before Sun rising, and that the sally was not
till between eleaven and twelve a clock. That the soldiers on
Gloucestershire side upon the entry of the Line, were all called off the
Out-workes under pain of death, and came off in disorder, many of them running
the next way out of the field. That they lost only six or eight men at most,
had very few hurt, killed one thousand two hundred of the enemies, as Prince
Maurice told Major Langrish, and maimed seven or eight hundred more. That none
of the Out-forts were taken, and had Powder, Shot, and Provisions in them for a
fortnights siege at least. That they never thought of the Castle, or of
retreating to it in the Parley. That the enemies plundered our soldiers in the
streets, dismounting, pillaging, and disarming them. That Major Langrish and
his Squadron of Horse refused to charge the enemy when they first entered; that
they might have then easily repulsed them had they changed; (and yet Colonel
Fiennes never questioned him for his cowardice and treachery, but used him as a
Witness.) That Captain Blake, and Captain Husbands were left by the Governor
in Brandon-Hill, and Windmill-hill Forts, and that he was marched out of the
City toward London, before they heard of the surrender of the City; and that
they received no command in writing from him, to surrender those Forts to the
enemy.

The Testimony of Anthony Nicolls Esquire, A Member of the Commons House,
concerning Langrish, not used.
While Sir Ralph Hopton had taken Taunton and Bridge-water, I was with the
Horse that came out of Devon, at Somerton: Major Langrish was then Quartered at
a Town at least seven miles from Bridge-water; but on the Alarm of the loss
of those Towns he came presently away with his Troops to Somerton, and would
have gone to Wells, had not Colonel Gold and my self threatened to present
that carriage of his to the Parliament: he coming in that have to Somerton,
put all our Forces in a running posture, that had not we persuaded some, by
fair means, and punished others, they had all gone away in a great disorder,
but our staying of Langrish made all quiet: Thus much I am ready to Testify on
my Oath if I am called to it, 19. of December. 1643.

Anthony Nicoll.

The Testimonies of some witnesses under their hands, who were dispersed into
such places as we could not well find them at the Trial, and were not used in
evidence, by reason of absence.

The Testimony of Captain Council.
I Captain Council do affirm upon Oath that the Castle of Bristoll was very
strongly Fortified, and that I verily believe we might have defended it three
months at least, And that when the Enemies entered the Line of Communication
(there not being above 200. of them entered, as this Deponent believes,) The
Common Soldiers said, that if the Governor would give them leave, they made
no doubt but to beat them out again; and were discontented they had not leave
given them.

Captain Council.

The Deposition of Thomas Tailor, Lieutenant to Sergeant Major Wood, touching
the surrender of Bristoll.
This Deponent says upon his Corporal Oath, that he was a Lieutenant under
Major Wood, when the City and Castle of Bristoll was lately besieged by Prince
Rupers; Colonel Nathaniel Fiennes being then Governor thereof. That on
Wednesday the 26. of July last, the Enemy giving a general storm and assault
to the Out-workes of the said City, were valiantly repulsed by the Garrison
Soldiers with great loss and slaughter to them, and the loss of not above 5.
or 6. of our men only: about 200. of the Enemies as was generally reported and
no more, entered the Line near the College green, whereupon our men were by
the Governors direction commanded off the Line, and particularly those of our
Regiment were by Order drawn into the Castle, whether this Deponent came about
an hour and a half after the Enemies entering the Line; where finding a great
company of men, women, and children, of mean condition in appearance; this
Deponent betook himself to the top of the Castle, where he viewed that side
of the Works where the Enemy entered, but in two hours space of his
continuance there, he could not perceive one Enemy more to enter, neither
indeed was there any probability they should, having so sharp a repulse upon
their desperate assault, that morning every where, at Priors Fort and Brandon
hill Fort; the multitude of their slain men in the Trenches and near those
Forts, caused them to quit the places in great disorder, and to fly and
disperse themselves as this Deponent then well perceived, who afterward could
discern no Enemies between that and the Windmill Fort, having received such
hot entertainment from our Soldiers all along those Works. And when this
Deponent first ascended the Castle Wall, he perceived about 300, of the Enemies
Horse marching off, a mile as he conceived, from the Works: whereupon diverse of
the Soldiers were very desirous to return to the Line from whence they were
called, and one whom this Deponent supposed to be an Officer, being below in
the Green, exclaimed against us on the Wall, because we went not again to the
Line; further crying upon this Deponents demands, that he had a Command for
that purpose; whereupon this Deponent applied himself to the Governor
Colonel Nathaniel Fiennes, whom he met at the Castle gate, and acquainted him
therewith, which he then contradicted, commanding this Deponent not to stir
without Order from himself, or his superior Officers, which this Deponent
obeying, had no further notice of any thing, only a little before night he
heard there was a Parley with the Enemy, and about eight of the clock at night
as he and his Major were at Supper; they received Intelligence that the
conditions of surrendering the Town and Castle were concluded: whereupon this
Deponents Major went to know what the Terms of surrendering were, and upon his
return gave him notice to prepare for a march by 9. of the clock the next
morning; and going about 8. of the clock to the Castle that morning for his
cloak-bag and clothes, he found the gates thereof shut, and no admittance, but
immediately after he pressing into the Castle upon the opening of the wicket,
found Colonel John Fiennes with some of his Troopers, and many of our Foot
Soldiers there; but the Keys of the Castle, contrary to the Articles of
agreement, were in the custody of one of the Kings Commanders, who assisted
with 3. or 4. more, would suffer none of our men to pass in or out, but when
they pleased; beating and abusing many of our Soldiers, and dis-arming most of
our Officers and Troopers there, contrary to our conditions; where we were
detained by an Inconsiderable number, till 3. of the clock that day; many
affronts being offered unto us in the interim, the Governor of the Castle, and
Colonel John Fiennes being gone away long before; and whilst we were thus
detained by the Enemies in the Castle, notice was given us of the many injuries
and violences offered to our Commanders, Officers, and Soldiers in the Town,
so as this Deponent and his Major, were constrained to procure one of the Kings
Officers to guard them to their lodgings at the Gillards Inn, from whence
after 6. of the clock by favor of one of the Kings Captains, they were
conveyed toward Bathe, and as this Deponent passed the Suburbs, he met diverse
Common Soldiers of his own and other Companies, who seemed fully resolved to
march away with the Governor in the morning, that had listed themselves in the
Enemies Service upon no other ground (as this Deponent conceives) but that no
care was taken by the said Governor for their security, and provision, or to
see the Articles of Agreement performed. And this Deponent further says, that
when the said Town and Castle were surrendered, there was neither want of
Victual nor Ammunition, nor Soldiers to defend the same; and that the Enemy
to his knowledge had taken none of their Forts, nor made any breach into, nor
battery against the Walls of the said City or Castle, and that the said Castle
was then well fortified and provided to hold out a Siege; and all the Canons,
Ammunition, Arms, Prisoners, Victuals, Colors, were resigned up to the Enemy
by the said Governor.

Thomas Tailor.

The Deposition of Jeremy Holway, of the City of Bristoll Mercer, concerning
the losing of Bristoll, taken before the Lord Mayor of London upon Oath. 16.
December. 1643.
The 26. Artic. 4. 5. 6.
of July 1643. I was at the Brest-work, nigh the place where the breach was
made, and did see those Soldiers that did enter, being not two hundred as I
did conceive: upon the entry the Soldiers that were there placed to keep the
Works, did run from the Works, and some Horse did the like; whereby the Enemy
made their entrance without much opposition; but after their entering the Works,
they being not (as I said before) two hundred, there was no means used to take
the Enemy before expressed, and to make good our Works again; but we were
within one hour after the entry of the Enemy, commanded by Lieutenant Colonel
Clifton to come off the Works: these were his words: The Governor does
Command every man upon pain of death, to come off the Works, and to march
under their several Colors and Commanders in at Newgate. Whereupon I said,
but that Colonel Fiennes was an honest man, other ways, I should think we
were betrayed: this I know, that if there had been men drawn off the Works in
other places which might have been spared, or if Captain Stokes men, which were
upon no service, but stayed in Town, in S. James Churchyard, as he told me
himself, made use of, the Enemy in all probability had been taken, and our
Works for that time made good, but there being no means used, as I said
before; by this means they came to possess the Suburbs of the City, and then
it was hard for us to resist them long.

Jeremy Holway.

The Testimony of Samuel Wood.
I Samuel Wood being a Soldier in Sir Edward Hungerfoords Regiment, do say and
Testify, that part of the said Regiment was put to keep Ratcliffe-gate, and
that there was no probability of the Enemies taking of the Town by force of
Arms; And do further say and attest, That Colonel Nathaniel Fiennes sounded a
Parley with Prince Rupert, and sent a strict command to the the Soldiers to
forbear firing upon the Enemy upon pain of death, unto which the Soldiers
replied, that they would fight it out till the last man, and were discontented
at the Parley and surrender.

Samuel Wood.

If in the Deuteronomy. 16. 6. Mat. 18. 16.
mouth of two or three Witnesses only, (as the Scripture and our Savior
Christ resolves) every word shall be established; then certainly our Articles
of Impeachment proved by such a Heb. 12. 1.
cloud of Witnesses, and sundry others not examined, (ready to depose all the
premises and more if need be) must for ever satisfy the deluded World; and
silence the Defendants Tongue, Pen, which have been formerly so extravagantly
fruitful in mis-relations both of his Surrender, Trial, Judgment, See the
Title of the Check to the Checker
to revive, re-establish, clear, his decayed Honor and Integrity, which have
been more impaired, then repaired by all his fabulous Apologies.

FINIS.

