A LETTER FROM Sergeant Major Purefoy Governor of Compton-House in
Warwickshire, To his Colonel Colonel Purefoy A Member of the Honorable House
of COMMONS.

Wherein is related the good success it pleased God to give unto that Garrison
against the Enemy, that came with a great strength to have surprised it.

With a List of the persons slain and taken, and the number of the Arms there
taken.

London printed for A. R. Febr. 7. 1644.

A Letter from Sergeant Mayor Purefoy Governor of Compton House in
Warwickshire to his Colonel, Colonel Purefoy.
SIR,
I Shall here relate in part (for all passages would be too tedious for me to
trouble you with all. First, with all my soul I desire God may have his praise
and glory which is due to a God that has now and ever showed himself to me
almost by miracles, in delivering me and all under my command. This night about
two of the clock about 1000. or 1200. Horse and Foot fell upon me at Compton,
stormed my outworks, gained the stables, and cut down my great Drawbridge,
and possessed themselves of all my Troop horses, and took about 30. of my foot
Soldiers in their beds, who lay over the stables, almost before a man could
think what to do; we received that alarm as we had good cause, and presently
made good the new Sconce before the stone Bridge, and beat them out of the
great Court, there being about 200. entered, and ready to storm the Sconce; but
we gave them so hot a sallie, that we forced them to retreat back to the
stables, barnes and Brew House, where from the windows they played very hot
upon us: I then commanded Lieutenant Purefoy and my Quartermaster (having no
other Officers of quality at home, the rest being abroad with about 30. of my
best Troopers) to sally out upon the enemy with a party of 40. and to attempt
the regaining of the Brew House and the rooms above, which they did with
gallant resolution and courage; Sergeant Bird was one who came not short in
bravery of any. This party fought with the enemy and came to push of Pike, nay
to swords point, and did lay about so bravely, that they forced the enemy to
retreat from chamber to chamber; I then sent out my youngest brother the
Ensign with my three Corporalls of horse, and about 40. more men, to relieve
the first party, and I will assure you the young boy will fight, he led on his
men bravely and relieved his brother; by which means all the upper rooms were
gained, and the enemy kept only the stables and the barnes stoutly; my
Soldiers did then so thunder their horse, and reserves of foot that stood
within Pistol shot, that Sir William and Sir Charles Compton began to give
ground, which my Soldiers perceiving, some leapt out at the windows, and so
into the outworks, by which means I recovered my outworks again, and made
good a sally port, by which the enemy endeavored to retreat at, but finding
they were frustrated of their hopes, and that my Musketeers did play so hot
upon the great Drawbridge that they could not be releived; and withal having
beaten the enemy out of that work which we stormed when you took the house, I
had time to recover the great Drawbridge, and presently got new ropes and new
locks, and drew it up again in spite of them all. Now these (whose names you
have here enclosed were all in Cobbs pound, having no means in the world to
retreat, whereupon they fought desperately for the space of 3. hours, and the
valiant Comptons perceiving their extreme loss, attempted three several
times to storm and to regain my outworkes, but all three times were beaten off
with as much resolution and gallantry as could be. The enemy within set fire
on the hay, straw, and all combustible stuff, to smother my men out of the
upper rooms, which did indeed much annoy them: And the Enemy without threw at
least 100. hand-Granadoes upon the houses, that they set them on fire in diverse
places; Sir Charles and Sir William Compton then thinking all was their own,
sent a Trumpeter to parlie, but I commanded that none should parlie, nor would
I permit the Trumpet to speak at all, though feign he would have said something
to the Soldiers, but commanded him upon his life to be gone and return no
more at his peril. We continued in fight still, and the fire did so increase,
that I thought it fit to offer quarter to all those in the stable, for their
lives only, but they would not hear me: Upon which I drew all my men together
and fell violently in upon them, wherein was slain and taken prisoners all
whose names are in the ensuing list. This did so dishearten the Comptons and
all their forces, that they did presently draw off all their foot, and only
faced me with their horse, and sent another Trumpeter to parley, but I
commanded to give fire upon him, so that he returned with no other answer but
what a Musket could speak.

Sir, this is as true and as short a Narration as I can give you. I am (as we
are all)

Your obliged servants and kinsmen, GEORGE PUREFOY. WILLIAM PUREFOY.

Compton, Jan. 30. at 9. a clock at night. We recovered all our own men again
that the enemy had taken.



A List of the Officers slain, and taken Prisoners.
Capt. Chamberlain. Capt. Colburne. Capt. Gannock. Ensign Layton. Quarterm.
Blackford. Corporal Bayleyes.
The names of the Officers we have Prisoners.
Lieutenant Harvey. Lieutenant Clarke. Cornet Bishop. Corp. H^yworth Corp. of
Horse. Corp. Lambert Corp. of Horse. Serg. Francis. Serg. Linsey. Serg.
Farbush. Corp. Morgan. Corp. Scargill. William Atkins.
Troopers of Captain Coleburne.
John Webb. Thomas Tusker. William Mason. Simon Berry. Thomas Foster. William
Chamberlain, William Adams, Earl of Northamptons man. Thomas Dorrington. Robert
Moore. Richard Collins. Richard Willer.
Foot Soldiers of the Earl of Northamptons own Company.
George Grumbell. John Child. Anthony Smith. William Eason. Henry Tailor.
Roger Smith.
Sir Williom Comptons men.
Richard Abram. John Atkins. Joseph Walks. John Moore. Thomas Smith. William
Ward. William Robinson. Thomas Norman.
Major Waldrums men.
William Ansill. William Freeman. Robert Hurlestone. Thomas Aires. Edward
Gibbs. Thomas Cotforth.
Captain Willoughbies men.
Richard Collins. William Walker. Captain Territs. Thomas Tradde. Thomas
Roberts.
Capt. Rawleys men.
John Beeson. William Worsley.
Captain Wards men.
Richard Conerley. William Milburne. Henry Fenne. John Clarke. Thomas Lisseman.
Henry Musgrave.
Captain G^nnocks men.
William Smith. George Prince. William Wilkins.

Besides six Cart-load of wounded men carried off. And near upon forty Common
Soldiers left dead behind them.

Of mine own men, both Horse and Foot, only one desperately wounded, and
another slightly hurt.

Horse and Foot Arms taken from the Enemy. Muskets 100 Pistolls 40. about 20.
hand Grenades.

The fight began about two of the clock in the morning, and continued till
about nine, in which they stormed us four several^ times, and were beaten off.

The number of the Enemy, Horse and Foot, were between 1000. and 1200. as the
Prisoners confessed.

With their hand Grenades they fired the Stables, Barnes, and Brew House, in
three several places.

We lost about twenty Horse and some Muskets.

FINIS.

