THE HEADS OF A CONFERENCE DELIVERED BY Mr. Pymm.

At a COMMITTEE of both Houses, Junii 24. 1641.

OS HOMINI SVBLIME DEDIT

Printed in the year 1641.

Die jovis 24. Junii, 1641.
THe first Head is concerning the disbanding of the Armies, and under this
there are several particulars.
1. That five Regiments, according to the former Order of both Houses, be first
disbanded. 2. That the Commissioners for Scotland be entreated to retire some
part of their Army. 3. That their Lordships will join with us in a petition to
his Majesty, to declare his pleasure concerning the disbanding of the five
Regiments, for which there is present moneys provided, and of the rest of the
Army as soon as money is ready. 4. And to declare if any be refractory, and
contemn his Majesty's authority, that he will use it for the punishment of
them. 5. And that the Lord General go down to his charge of the Army, and
begin his journey on Saturday next, and that the Master of the Ordnance go then
down also, to take care of his charge of Artillery.
The second Head is concerning his Majesty's journey to Scotland.
That his Majesty will be pleased to allow a convenient time before his
journey into Scotland, that both Armies be first disbanded, and some of the
business of importance, concerning the peace of the Kingdom depending in
Parliament, may be dispatched before his going: This is seconded with diverse
reasons. 1. The safety of his Majesty's person. 2. Preventing the Jealousies
of his Subjects. 3. Suppressing of the hopes of persons* illaffected, that may
have designs upon the Army, to disturb the peace of the Kingdom. 4. Great
advantage to the Kings Affairs, and contentment to his People. 5. That some of
the Bills now depending in Parliament, whereof diverse are sent up already to
the Lords, and some proceedings in this House may receive his royal assent
before he go to Scotland, and that we may have time to pass the Bill of
Tonnage to his Majesty, for supporting of the royal estate, and to settle his
Majesty's Revenues for the best advantage of his service, and for these reasons
to allow some time before he go into the North.


The third Head concerning his Majesty's Council and Ministers of State.
Both Houses to make suit to his Majesty, 1. To remove from him all such
Counselors as I am commanded to describe, viz. such as have been active for
the time past, in furthering those courses contrary to Religion, liberty, good
government of the Kingdom, and as have lately interessed themselves in those
Councels, to stir up division between him and his people. 2. As we desire
removal of those that are evil, so to take into his Council, for managing of
the great affairs of this Kingdom, such Officers and Counselors as his
People and Parliament may have just cause to confide in. This is all concerning
the third Head.


The fourth Head touching the Queens most Excellent Majesty, which contains
diverse particulars.
1. That his Majesty be pleased, by advice of his Parliament, to persuade the
Queen to accept some of the Nobility, and others of trust into her Majesty's
service, into such places as are now in her disposal. 2. That no Jesuit nor
none of Orders, what Contrymen soever, whether French or Italian, be
received into her Majesty's service, nor any Priest of his Majesty's Dominion,
English, Scottish, or Irish, and that they be restrained from coming to Court.
3. That the College of Capuchins at Somersethouse may be dissolvd, and sent
out of the Kingdom. These two which I last mentioned, concerning the Queen,
Priests, Jesuits and Capuchins, I am commanded to deliver you some particulars
for. 1. Public danger, and scandal of this Kingdom, and peace of the
Kingdom. 2. Dis-affection of some of those wicked Conspirators is expressed in
two Letters, which Letters were here read openly. 3. A particular Letter of
Father Phillips here also read. 4. Because of the Priests, Jesuits, and the
College there are diverse great quantities of Gold transported frequently.
4. Particular that concerns the Queen, is upon special occasion of his
Majesty's absence; that their Lordships will be pleased to join with us to
advise the King, that some of the Nobility and others of quality, with
competent Guards, may be appointed to attend the Queens person, against all
designs of Papists, and of ill-affected persons, and of restraining resort
thither in his absence.
The fifth Head concerns the Kings Children, That some persons of public
trust, and well affected in Religion, may be placed about the Prince, who may
take care of his education, and the rest of his Children; especially in matters
of Religion and liberty.

The sixth Head concerns such as shall come into the Kingdom, with titles of
being the Popes Nuntio, that it may be declared, that if any man come into this
Kingdom with Instructions from the Pope of Rome, be in case of high Treason
out of the Kings protection, and out of the protection of the Law. And I am to
inform you that there is notice given, upon very good grounds, that Count
Rocetto does yet continue in the Kingdom, and yet resorts unto the Court.

The seventh Head is concerning the security and peace of the Kingdom.
1. That there may be good Lord Lievtenants, and Deputy Lievtenants* and such
as may be faithful and trusty, and careful of the peace of the kingdom. 2.
That the Trained Bands be furnished with Arms, and Powder, and Bullets, and
exercised, and made fit for service; and that a special oath may be prepared,
by consent of both Houses, authorized by Law, and to be taken by the Lord
Lievtenants, and Deputy Lievtenants, Captains, and other Officers; such an
oath as may be fit to secure us in these times of Danger. 3. That the Cinque
Ports, and all the Ports of the Kingdom may be put into good hands, and a list
of those in whose charge they now are, may be presented in Parliament; and
special care for the reparation and provision of those Forts. 4. That my Lord
Admiral may inform the Parliament, in what case his Majesty's Navy is, which
is to be provided for, out of Tonnage and Poundage, for the security and peace
of the Kingdom.


The eight Head, That his Majesty be pleased to give directions to his learned
Council, to prepare a General Pardon in such a large manner, as may be for
the relief of his Majesty's Subjects.

The ninth Head: And that does concern a Committee of both Houses, that their
Lordships would appoint a number of their members, to join together with a
proportionable number of this House, who from time to time may confer upon such
particular Causes, as shall be most effectual for the Common good.

The tenth Head, That his Majesty be moved, that he would be pleased to be
very sparing in sending for Papists to Court, and that if any shall come
without being sent for, That the Laws be severely put in execution against
them: And that the English Ladies that are Recusants be removed from Court;
and that his Majesty be moved to give his assent, that the persons of the
most active Papists, either Lords, or Commons, may be so restrained, as may
be most necessary for the safety of the Kingdom, and that no pensions be
allowed to such Recusants as are held dangerous to the State.

FINIS.

