A SPEECH DELIVERED IN PARLIAMENT, BY A worthy MEMBER thereof, AND A most
faithful VVell-wisher to the CHURCH and COMMONWEAL; Concerning the
grievances of the Kingdom.

By I. P. Esquire.



LONDON, Printed for (...)

A SPEECH DELIVERED In PARLIAMENT, BY A worthy Member thereof, and a most
faithful well-wisher to the CHURCH and COMMONWEAL.
NEver Parliament had greater businesses to dispatch, nor more difficulties to
The precedent consideration of grievances will further the supply
encounter; therefore we have reason to take all advantages of order and
address, and hereby we shall not only do our own work, but dispose and
enable our selves for the better satisfaction of his Majesty's desire of
supply. The grievances being removed, our affections will carry us with speed
and cheerfulness, to give his Majesty that which may be sufficient both for
his honor and support. Those that in first place shall endeavor to redress
the grievances, will be found not to hinder, but to be the best furtherers of
his Majesty's service: he that takes away weights, does as much advantage
motion, as he that adds wings.

Diverse pieces of this maine work have been already Great works are first to
be considered in the model.
propounded, his endeavor should be to present to the House a model of the
whole. In the Creation God made the world according to that Idea or form,
which was eternally preexistent in the divine mind, Moses was commanded to
frame the Tabernacle after the pattern showed him in the Mount. Those actions
are seldom well perfected in the execution, which are not first well molded
in the design, and proposition.

He said, he would labor to contract those manifold A double method compounded
of grievances and cures.
affairs both of the Church and State, which did so earnestly require the
wisdom and faithfulness of this House, into a double method of grievances
and cures: and because there wanted not some who pretended, that these things
wherewith the Common wealth is now grieved, are much for the advantage of the
King, and that the redress of them will be to his Majesty's great disadvantage
and loss (he Public grievances disadvantagious to the King.
said) he doubted not but to make it appear, that is discovering the present
great distempers and disorders, and procuring remedy for them, we should be
no less serviceable to his Majesty, who has summoned us to this great
Council, than useful to those whom we do here represent: for the better
effecting whereof, he propounded three maine branches of his The first general
division.
discourse.

In the first (he said) he would offer them the several

In the second, he undertook to prove, that the disorders

In the third, he would advise such a way of healing

In the handling whereof he promised to use such Sharp matters to be mitigated
in the expression.
expressions as might mitigate the sharpness and bitterness of those things
whereof he was to speak, so far as his duty and faithfulness would allow.
It is a great Prerogative to the King, and a great honor The King can do no
wrong.
attributed to him, in a Maxim of our Law, that he can do no wrong, he is the
fountain of Justice: and if there be any injustice in the execution of his
Commands, the Law casts it upon the Ministers, and frees the King. Activitie,
life, and vigor, are conveyed into the sublunary creatures, by the influence
of Heaven: but the malignitie and distemper, the cause of so many Fpidemicall
diseases, do proceed from the noisome vapors of the earth, or some ill
affected qualities of the air, without any infection or alteration of those
pure, celestial and incorruptible bodies. In the like manner (he said) the
authority, the power and countenance of Princes may concur in the actions of
evil men, without partaking in the injustice and obliquitie of them. These
matters whereof we complain, have been presented to his Majesty, either
under the pretense of Royal prerogatives, Hurtful projects presented to the
King under plausible notions.
which he is bound to maintain, or of public good, which is the most
honorable object of Regal wisdom. But the covetous and ambitious designs
of others, have interposed betwixt his Royal intentions, and the happiness of
his people, making those things pernicious and hurtful, which his Majesty
apprehended as just, and profitable.

He said, the things which he was to propound, A promise of moderation.
were of a various nature, many of them such as required a very tender and
exquisite consideration, In handling of which, as he would be bold to use the
liberty of the place and relation wherein he stood, so he would be careful to
express that Modesty and humility, which might be expected by those, of
whose actions he was to speak. And if his judgment, Submission to reformation.
or his tongue should slip into any particular mistake, he would not think it
so great a shame, to fail by his own weakness, as he should esteem it an
honor and advantage, to be corrected by the wisdom of that House, to which he
submitted himself, with this protestation, that he desired no reformation so
much as to reform himself.

The greatest liberty of the Kingdom, is Religion; Religion.
thereby we are freed from spiritual evils: and no impositions are so
grievous, as those that are laid upon the soul. The next great liberty is
Justice, Justice.
whereby we are preserved from injuries in our persons; and estates, from this
is derived into the Commonwealth, peace, and order, and safety, and when this
is interrupted, confusion and danger are ready to overwhelme all: The third
great liberty consists Privilege of Parliament.
in the power and privilege of Parliaments, this is the fountain of law, the
great Council of the Kingdom, the highest Court: this is enabled by the
Legislative and Consiliarie power, to prevent evils to come; by the Judiciarie
power, to suppress and remove evils present. If you consider these three great
liberties in the order of dignity, this last is inferior to the other two, as
Means are inferior to The order propounded in handling these 3 great
liberties.
the end; but if you consider them in the order of necessity, and use, this
may justly claim the first place, in our care, because the end cannot be
obtained without the means: if we do not preserve this, we cannot long hope
to enjoy either of the other. Therefore (he said) being to speak of those
grievances which lie upon the Kingdom, he would observe this order.

1. First to mention those, which were against the privilege of Parliaments.
2. Those which were prejudicial to the Religion established in the Kingdom.
3. Those which did interrupt the justice of the Realm, in the liberty of our
persons, and propriety of our estates.
The privileges of Parliament were not given The necessity and importance of
the privilege of Parliament.
for the ornament or advantage of those, who are the members of Parliament,
they have a real use and efficacy, toward that which is the end of
Parliaments: we are free from suits, that we may the more entirely addict our
selves, to the public services: we have therefore liberty of speech, that our
Counsels may not be corrupted with fear, or our judgments perverted with
self respects; those three great faculties and functions of Parliament, the
Legislative, Iudiciarie, and Consiliarie power, can not be well exercised
without such privileges as these. The wisdom of our Laws, the
faithfulness of our Counsels, the righteousness of our Judgments can hardly
be kept pure and untainted, if they proceed from distracted and restrained
minds.

It is a good Rule of the Moral Philosopher, Et non laedas mentem
gubernatricem omnium actionum: These powers of Parliament are to the body
politic as the rational faculties of the soul, to a man. That which keeps
all the parts of the Commonwealth in frame, and temper, ought to be most
carefully preserved in that freedom, vigor, and activitie, which belongs to
it self. Our predecessors in this house, have ever been most careful in the
first place, to settle and secure their privileges: and (he said) he hoped
that we having had greater breaches made upon us than heretofore, would be no
less tender of them, and forward in seeking reparation for that which is past,
and prevention of the like for the time to come.

Then he propounded diverse particular points Particular breaches of Privilege.
wherein the Privilege of Parliament had been broken.

First, in restraining the members of the House 1 Restraint of speech.
from speaking.

Secondly, in forbidding the Speaker to put any 2 Interdict of questions.
Question.

These two were practiced the last day of the last Parliament (and, as was
alleged, by his Majesty's command) and both of them trench upon the very life
and being of Parliaments, for if such a restraining power as this should take
root, and be admitted, it will be impossible for us to bring any resolution to
perfection in such matters as shall displease those about the King.

Thirdly, by imprisoning diverse Members of Imprisonment of Members.
the House for matters done in Parliament.

Fourthly, by indictments, informations, and judgments Judicial proceedings.
inordinarie and inferior Courts, for speeches and proceedings in Parliaments.

Fifthly, the disgraceful order of the Kings Order to be bound to the good
behavior.
Bench, whereby some members of this House were enjoined to put in security of
the good behavior, and for refusal thereof, they were continued in prison,
diverse years, without any particular allegation against them: one of them was
freed by death, others not dismissed till his Majesty had declared his
intention, to summon this Parliament. And this he noted, not only as a breach
of privilege, but as a violation of the common justice of the Kingdom.

Sixthly, by the sudden and abrupt dissolution of Abrupt dissolutions of
Parliament.
Parliaments, contrary to the law and custom. It has been often declared in
Parliaments, that the Parliament should not be dissolved, till the petitions be
answered. This (he said) was a great grievance because it does prevent the
redress of other grievances.

It were a hard Case, that a private man should be put to death without being
heard: As this representative body of the Commons, receives a being by the
summons, so it receives a Civil death by the dissolution. Is it not a much
more heaviedoome, by which we lose our being, and have this civil death
inflicted on us, in displeasure, and not to be allowed time and liberty to
answer for our selves? that we should not only die, but have this mark of
infamy laid upon us, to be made Intestabiles, disabled to make our Wills, to
dispose of our business, as this House has always used to do, before
Adjournments or dissolutions? yet this, has often been our case; we have not
been permitted to power out our last sighs and groans, into the bosom of
our dear Sovereign; the words of dying men are full of piercing affections:
if we might be heard to speak, no doubt we should so fully express our love,
and faithfulness to our Prince, as might take off the false suggestions and
aspersions of others: at least we should in our humble supplications, recommend
some such things to him in the name of his people, as would make for his own
honor, and the public good of his Kingdom.

Thus he concluded the first sort of grievances, Grievances concerning
religion.
being such as were against the privilege of Parliament, and passed on to the
next, concerning Religion: all which he conveyed under these four heads.

1 The first, was the great encouragement given Incourageme^t of popery.
to popery, of which he produced these particular evidences.

1 A suspension of all Laws against Papists, Suspension of Laws.
whereby they enjoy a free, and almost public exercise of that Religion, and
those good Statutes which were made for restraint of Idolatry, and
superstition, are now a ground of security to them, in the practice of both,
being used to no other end, but to get money into the Kings purse: which as it
is clearly against the intentions of the Law, so it is full of mischief to
the kingdom.

By this means a dangerous party is cherished, and increased, who are ready
to close with any opportunity of disturbing the peace and safety of the
State. Yet (he said) he did not desire any new Laws against popery, or any
rigorous courses in the execution of those already in force; he was far
from seeking the ruin of their persons or estates, only he wished they might
be kept in such a condition, as should restrain them from doing hurt.

It may be objected, there are moderate and There can be no security from
papists.
discreet men amongst them, men of estates, such as have an interest in the
peace and prosperity of the Kingdom, as well as we. These (he said) were
not to be considered according to their own disposition, but according to the
nature of the but In their disabilitie.
body, whereof they are parties. The Planets have several and particular
motions of their own, yet they are all rapt and transported into a contrary
course, by the superior Orb which comprehends them all. The principles of
Popery are such, as are incompatible with any other Religion: there may be a
suspension of violence, for some by respects, but the ultimate end, even of
that moderation, is, that they may with more advantage extirpate that which is
opposite to them. Laws will nto restrain them, Oaths will not, the Pope can
dispense with both these, and where there is occasion, his command will act
them, to the disturbance of the Realm, against their own private disposition,
yea, against their own reason and judgment to obey him, to whom they have
(especially the Jesuitical party) absolutely and entirely obliged themselves,
not only in spiritual matters, but in temporal, as they are in order ad
Spiritualia, Henry the third, and Henry the fourth of France, were no
Protestants themselves, yet were murdered, because they tolerated the
protestants, by which and many other presidents it appears, that the King,
that the Kingdom can have no security but in their weakness and disabilitie to
do hurt.

2 A second encouragement is, their admission into Admission into places of
power.
places of power and trust in the Common wealth, whereby they get many
dependants and adherents, not only of their own, but even of such as make
profession to be protestants.

3 A third, their freedom of resorting to London, Free resort to London and
the Court.
and the Court, whereby they have opportunity, not only of Communicating their
Counsels, and designs one to another, but of diving into his Majesty's
Counsels, by the frequent access of those who are active men amongst them, to
the tables and company of great men, and under subtle pretenses and disguises,
they want not means of cherishing their own projects, and of endeavoring to
mould and biasse the public affairs to the great advantage of that party.

4 A fourth, that as they have a congregation of Cardinals at Rome, to consider
of the aptest ways and means of establishing the Popes authority and
Religion in England, so they have a Nuncio here, to act and dispose that party
to the execution of those counsels, and by the assistance of such cunning and
Jesuitical spirits as swarm in this town, to order and manage all actions,
and events, to the furtherance of that maine end.

2 The second grievance in Religion, was from Innovations in matters of
Religion.
those manifold innovations lately introduced into several parts of the
Kingdom, all inclining to popery, and disposing and fitting men to entertain
it: the particulars are these.

1 Diverse of the chiefest points of Religion in Maintenance of popish tenets.
difference betwixt us and the papists have been publicly defended in
licensed Books, in Sermons, in University acts and disputations.

2 Diverse popish Ceremonies have been not only practiced, Practice of popish
ceremonies.
but countenanced, yea little less than enjoined, as Altars, Images,
Crucifixes, bowings, and other gestures and observances, which put upon our
Churches a shape and face of popery. He compared this to the dry bones in
Ezekiel, first they came together, then the sinews and the flesh came upon
them, after this the skin covered them, and then breath and life was put into
them: so (he said) after these men had molded us into an outward form and
visage of popery, they would more boldly endeavor to breath into us the
spirit and life of popery.

3 The third grievance, was the countenancing Preferment of men popishly
inclined.
and preferring those men, who were most forward in setting up such
Innovations, the particulars were so well known, that they needed not to be
named.

4 The fourth was, the discouragement of those Discouragement of true
professors.
who were known to be most conscionable, and faithful professors of the
truth: some of the ways of effecting this, he observed to be these.

1 The courses taken to enforce and enlarge those Enlargement of the
differences among our selves.
unhappy differences, for matters of small moment, which have been amongst our
selves, and to raise up new occasions of further division, whereby many have
been induced to forsake the land, not seeing the end of those voluntary and
humane Injunctions in things appertaining to Gods worship: whereas those who
are indeed lovers of Religion, and of the Churches of God, would seek to make
up those breaches, and to unite us more entirely against the common enemy.

2 The over rigid prosecution of those who are Over-rigid prosecution of the
scrupulous for things indifferent.
scrupulous in using some things enjoined, which are held by those who enjoin
them, to be in themselves indifferent. It has been ever the dersie of this
House, expressed in many Parliaments in Queen Elizabeth's time and since, that
such might be tenderly used. It was one of our petitions delivered at Oxford
to his Majesty that now is: but what little moderation it has produced, is
not unknown to us all, any other vice almost may be better endured in a
Minister than Inconformitie.

3 The unjust punishments, and vexations of sundry Unjust punishments for
matters not by law.
persons for matters required, without any warrant of Law: as

For not reading the book concerning recreation Reading the book.
on the Lords day.

For not removing the Communion Table to be The Table set Altarwise.
set Altarwise at the East end of the Chancell.

For not coming up to the Railes to receive the Coming to the Railes.
Sacrament.

For preaching the Lords day in the afternoon.

For catechizing in any other words and manner Preaching upon the Lords day.
Varying from the chatechism
than in the precise words of the short chatechisme in the Common prayer book.

The fifth and last grievance concerning Religion, Abuse of Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction.
was the incroachment and abuse of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction: the
particulars mentioned are these.

1 Fining and imprisoning in cases not allowed In fining and imprisoning.
by law.

2 Their challenging their jurisdiction to be appropriate Claiming jurisdiction
to be Jure Divino.
to their order, which they allege to be Iure Divino.

3 The contriving and publishing of new articles, Articles of the visitations.
upon which they enforce the Churchwardens to take oaths, and to make
inquiries and presentiments, as if such articles had the force of Canons: and
this, he said, was an effect of great presumption and boldness, not only in
the Bishops, but in their Archdeacons, Officials, and Chancellours, taking upon
themselves a kind of Synodall authority: and the Injunctions of this kind,
might well partake in name with that part of the common law, which is called
the Extravagants.

Having dispatched these several points, he proceeded Grievances concerning
the liberty of persons and estates.
to the third kind of grievances, being such as are against the common justice
of the Realm, in the liberty of our persons, and propriety of our estates, of
which (he said) he had many to propound: In doing whereof, he would rather
observe the order of time, wherein they were acted, than of consequence: but
when he should come to the cure, he should then persuade the House to begin
with those, who were of most importance, as being now in execution, and very
much pressing and exhausting the Common wealth.

He began with the Tonnage and Poundage, and Tonnage and Poundage impositions.
other impositions not warranted by law: and because these burdens had long
lain upon us, and the principles which produced them, are the same from whence
diverse others are derived, he thought it necessary to premise a short
narrative, and relation of the grounds and proceedings of the power of imposing
Not to be taken but by consent in parliament.
herein practiced. It was (he said) a fundamental truth essential to the
constitution and government of this Kingdom, an hereditarie liberty and
privilege of all the free born subjects of the land, that no tax, tallage, or
other charge might be laid upon us, without common Acknowledged by the
Conqueror.
consent in Parliament, this was acknowledged by the Conqueror, ratified in
that contract which he made with this Nation, upon his admittance to the
Kingdom, declared and confirmed in the laws which he published.

This has never been denied to any of our Kings, Sometimes broken by other
Kings, but never denied.
though broken and interrupted by some of them, especially by King John, and
Hen. 3. then again confirmed by Mag. Chart. and other succeeding laws: yet
not so well settled, but that it was sometime attempted by the two succeeding
Edwards, in whose times Those breaches repaired by succeeding Parliaments.
the subjects were very sensible of all the breaches made upon the common
liberty, and by the opportunity of frequent Parliaments, pursued them with
fresh complaints, and for the most part, found redress, and procured the right
of the subject to be fortified by new Statutes.

He observed, that those Kings, even in the Acts Some mixture of evidence for
the subject in these very breaches.
whereby they did break the law, did really affirm the subjects liberty, and
disclaim that right of imposing, which is now challenged, for they did usually
procure the Merchants consent, to such taxes as were laid, thereby to put a
color of justice upon their proceeding,, and ordinarily they were limited to a
short time, and then propounded to the ratification of the Parliament, where
they were cancelled or confirmed, as the necessity and state of the Kingdom did
require.

But for the most part, such charges upon merchandise, The grant by parliament
most usual.
were taken by authority of Parliament, and granted for some short time, in a
greater or lesser proportion, as was requisite for supply of the public
occasions, six or twelve in the pound, for one, two, or three years, as they
saw cause, to be employed for the defense of the Sea, and it was acknowledged
so clearly to be in the power of Parliament, (...) they At first variously
limited, in respect of time and persons. Afterward, Confirmed to the King for
life.
have sometimes been granted to Noble men, sometimes to Merchants to be
disposed for that use. Afterward they were granted to the King for life, and so
continued for diverse descents, yet still as a gift and grant of the Commons.

Betwixt the time of Edward the third, and Queen No contrary practice between
Edw. 3 and Q. Mary.
Maay, never Prince (that he could remember) offered to demand any imposition,
but by grant in Parliament: Queen Mary laid a charge upon cloth, by the
equity of the Statute of Tunnage and Poundage, because the rate set upon wool
was much more than upon cloth: and there being little wool carried out
Pretended equity for the Custom upon cloth.
of the Kingdom unwrought, the Q. thought she had reason, to lay somewhat more,
yet not f^ll so much, as brought them to an equality, but that still there
continued a less charge upon wool wrought into cloth, than upon wool carried
out unwrought; until King The grounds of the pretermitted Custom.
James's time, when upon Nicholsons project, there was a further addition of
charge, but still upon pretense of the Statute, which is that we call the
pretermitted custom.

In Queen Elizabeth's time, one or two little impositions crept in, the
general prosperity of her reign Bates Case.
overshadowing small errors and innovations: one of these was upon Currants;
by occasion of the Merchants complaints that the Venetians had laid a charg
upon the English cloth, that so we might be even with them, and force them the
sooner to take it off: this being demanded by King James, was denied by one
Bates a Merchant, and upon a suite in the Exchequer, was adjudged for the King.
The judgment therein for the King.


The manner of which judgment was thus: There were then but three Judges, in
that Court, all differing from one another in the grounds of their sentences.
The first was of opinion, the King might impose upon such commodities as were
foreign, and Resulting from different opinions of the Judges.
superfluous, as Currants were, but not upon such as were native, and to be
transported, or necessary, and to be imported for the use of the kingdom.
The second Judge was of opinion, he might impose upon all foreign Merchandise,
whether superfluous or no, but not upon native. The third, that for as much as
the King had the custody of the Ports, and the guard of the Seas, and that he
might open and shut up the parts as he pleased, he had a prerogative to impose
upon all Merchandise, both exported and imported.

This single, distracted and divided judgment, is The only foundation of the
power of imposing,
the foundation of all the impositions now in practice: for after this, King
James laid new charges upon all commodities outward and inward, not limited to
a certain time, and occasion, but reserved to himself, his heirs and
successors for ever: The first, impositions in fee simple, that were ever heard
of in this followed with complaints, and preserved by breaches of Parliaments.
Kingdom. This judgment, and the right of imposing thereupon assumed was
questioned in septimo and duodecimo of that King, and was the cause of the
breach of both those Parliaments. In 18. and 21. Iacobi, it was declined by
this House, that they might preserve the favor of the King, for the dispatch
of some other great businesses, upon which they were more especially attentive.

In 1. of his Majesty, It necessarily came to be remembered, The redress
desired without diminution of the K. profit.
upon the proposition on the Kings part, for renewing the bill of Tonnage and
Poundage, but so moderate was that Parliament, that they thought rather to
confirm the impositions already set by a Law to be made, than to abolish them
by a judgment in Parliament, but that and diverse ensuing Parliaments have
been unhappilie broken, before that endeavor could be accomplished, only at
the last meeting, a Remonstrance was made concerning the liberty of the
Subject, in this point, and it has always been expressed to be the meaning of
the House, and so it was (as he said) his own meaning in the proposition now
made, to settle and restore the right according to law, and not to diminish the
kings profit, but to establish it by a free grant in Parliament.

Since the breach of the last Parliament his Majesty has by a new book of
Rates very much increased New burdens since the last Parliaments.
the burden upon Merchandise, and now Tonnage and Poundage, old and new
impositions are all taken by Diverse mischiefs from these grievances.
Prerogative, without any grant in Parliament, or authority of law, as we
conceive, from whence diverse inconveniences and mischiefs are produced.

1 The danger of the president, that a judgment in The Kingdom bound by one
private case.
one Court, and in one case, is made binding to all the Kingdom.

2 Men's goods are seized, their legal suits are stopped, Interruption of
justice.
and justice denied to those, that desire to take the benefit of the Law.

3 The great sums of money received upon these Misimployme^t of the sums
received.
impositions, intended for the guard of the Seas, claimed and defended upon no
ground, but of public trust, for protection of Merchants, and defense of the
ports, are dispersed to other uses, and a new tax raised for the same purposes.

4 These burdens are so excessive, that trade is The burdens excessive.
thereby very much hindered, the commodities of our own, grows extremely
abased, and those imported much inhaunsed, all which lies not upon the Merchant
alone, but upon the generality of the subject, and by this means the stock of
the Kingdom is much diminisht, our exportation being less profitable, and our
importation more chargeable. And if the wars and troubles in the neighbor
parts had not brought almost the whole stream of Trade into this Kingdom, we
should have found many more prejudicial effects of these impositions, long
before this time, To the American plantations especially.
than yet we have done; especially they have been insupportable to the poor
plantations, whither many of his Majesty's subjects have been transported, in
diverse parts of the Continent; and Islands of America, being a design tending
to the honor of the Kingdom, and the enlargement of his Majesty's dominions:
The adventurers in this noble work, have for the most part, no other support
but Tobacco, upon which, such a heavy rate is set, that the King receives
twice as much, as the true value of the commodity to the owner.

5 Whereas these great burdens have caused diverse Impositions upon trade
intercoursorie.
Merchants to apply themselves to a way of traffic abroad by transporting
goods from one Country to another, without bringing them home in to England.
It has been lately endeavored to set an Imposition upon this trade: so as
the King, will have a duty out of those commodities which never come within
his dominions, to the great discouragement of such active and industrious men.

The next general head of Civil grievances, was enforcing men to compound for
Knighthood, which Compositions for Knighthood.
though it may seem past, because it is diverse years since it was used, yet
upon the same grounds the King may renew it, as often as he pleases, for the
composition looks backward, and the offense continuing, is subject to a new
fine, The state of that business, he laid down thus:

Heretofore when the services due by tenure, were The Original ground of the
charge.
taken in kind, it were fit there should be some way of trial, and approbation
of those, that were bound to such services. Therefore it was ordained, that
such as were to do Knights services, after they came of age, and had
possession of their lands, and should be made Knights, that is, publicly
declared, to be fit for that service, diverse ceremonies and solemnities were
in use for this purpose: and if by the parties neglect this was not done, he
was punishable by fine: there being in those times an ordinary and open way to
get Knighthood, for those who were borne to it.

Although the use of this has for diverse ages been An old grievance in the
kind, but New in the manner and excess, in Respect of The generality
Greatness of fines.
discontinued, yet there have past very few Kings, under whom there has not
been a general Summons, requiring those who had lands of such value as the law
prescribes, to appear at the Coronation, or some other great solemnity, and
to be Knighted, and yet nothing intended but the getting of some small fines:
So as this grievance is not altogether new in the kind, though it be new in
the manner, and in the excess of it, and that in diverse respects.

1 First, It has been extended beyond all intention of, and color of law,
not only Inneholders, but likewise Lease-holders, Copyholders, Merchants and
others, scarce any man free from it.

2 The Fines have been Immoderate, far beyond thproportion of former times.

3 The proportion have been without any example, president, or rule of
justice: for though those that were summoned did appear, yet distresses
infinite were made out against them, and issues increased Multiplication of
distresses and issues.
and multiplied, and no way open to discharge those issues, by plea or
otherwise, but only by compounding with the commissioners at their own
pleasure.

3 The third was, The great Inundation of Monopolies, whereby heavy burdens
are laid, not only Monopolies introduced by the Soap patent undertaken by
papists.
upon foreign, but also Native commodities. These began in the Sope-Patent,
the principal undertakers in this, were diverse popish Recusants, men of estate
and quality, such as in likelihood did not only aim at their private gain,
but that by this open breach of Law, the King and his people might be more
fully divided, and the ways of Parliament men more thoroughly obstructed.
Amongst the infinite inconveniences and mischiefs Full of mischief.
which this did produce, these few may be observed.

1 The impairing the goodness, and inhauncing the price of most of the
Commodities and Manufactures 1 The price of commodities increast and goodness
abated.
of the Realm, yea of those, who are of most necessary and common use, as
Salt, Soap, Beer, Coals, and infinite others.

2 That under color of Licenses, Trades, and Manufactures are restrained to a
few hands, and many Restraint of trade.
of the Subjects deprived of their ordinary way of livelihood.

3 That upon such illegal grantss, a great number of persons had been
unjustly vexed by Illegal imprisonments and vexations.
Pursevants, Imprisonments, attendance upon the Council Table, seizure of
goods, and many other ways.

4 The fourth, that great and unparalleld Shipmoney.
grievance of the Shipmoney, which though it may seem to have more warrant of
Law than the rest, because there has a judgment past for it, yet in truth it
is thereby aggravated, if it be Aggravated, not supported by the judgment.
considered, that that judgment is founded upon the naked opinion of some
Judges, without any written law, without any custom, or authority of Law
books, yea without any one Which is not grounded upon any law, custom
president or authority of law books.
president for it. Many express laws, many declarations in Parliaments, and
the constant judgment and practice of all times being against it, yea in the
nature of it, it will be found to be disproportionable to the case of
necessity which is pretended to be the ground of it.

Necessity excludes all formalities and solemnities, The course unproper for a
case of necessity.
it is no time then to make levies and taxes, to build and prepare Ships, every
man's person, every man's Ships are to be employed for the resisting of an
invading enemy: the right on the subjects part was so clear, and the
pretenses against it so weak, that he thought no man would venture his
reputation or conscience in the defense of that judgment, being so contrary to
the grounds of the Law, to the practice of former times, and so inconsistent in
it self. amongst many inconveniences and obliquities of Abounding in variety
of Mischiefs.
this grievance he noted these.

1 That it extends to all persons, and to all The General extent and
remediless condition.
times, it subjected our goods to distress, and our persons to imprisonment,
and the causes of it being secret and invisible, referred to his Majesty's
breast alone, the subject was left without possibility of exception, and
relief.

2 That there was no rules or limits for the Arbitrary proportion.
proportion, so that no man knew what estate he had, or how to order his course
or expenses.

3 That it was taken out of the Subjects purse, Imposed by writ disposed by
instructions.
by a writ, and brought into the Kings Coffers by instructions from the Lords
of his Most honorable privy Council. In the legal defense of it, the Writ
only did appear, of the instructions, there was no notice taken, which yet in
the real execution of it, were most predominant. It carries the face of
service in the Writ, and of Revenue in the instructions, if this way had not
been found to turn the Ship, into money, it would easily have appeared how
incompatible this service is with the office of a Sheriff, in the inland
Counties, and how incongruous Improper for the Sheriffs.
and inconvenient for the inhabitants. The law in a body politic is like
nature, which always prepares and disposes proper and fit instruments and
Organes, for every natural operation. Unprovided for by law.
if the Law had intended any such charge as this, there should have been
certain rules, suitable means and courses, for the leviing and managing of it.

5 The fifth was the Enlargement of the Forests Enlargement of Forests.
beyond the bounds and perambulations appointed and established by act of
Parliament, twenty seven, and twenty eight Edward the first, and that this is
done upon the same reasons Against express Statutes.
and exceptions which had been on the Kings part propounded, and by the
Commons answered in Parliament, not long after that establishment. It is not
unknown to many in this House, that those perambulations were the fruit and
effect of that famous Charter, which is called Charta de forresta, whereby many
tumults, Charta de forresta made useless.
troubles, and discontents had been taken away, and composed between the King
and his subjects, and it is full of danger, that by reviving those old
Questions we may fall into the like distempers.

He said, that hereby no blame could fall upon Justice in Eyer cleared.
that great Lord, who is now Justice in Air, and in whose name these things
were acted, it could not be expected that he should take notice of the laws
and customs of the realm, therefore he The Answer lies upon the Judges.
was careful to procure the assistance and direction of the Judges, and if any
thing were done against law, it was for them to answer, and not for him.

The particular irregularities and obliquities of Particular obliquities.
this business were these.

1 The surreptitious procuring a verdict for the Surreptitious proceedings.
King, without giving notice to the Country, whereby they might be prepared to
give in evidence for their own interest and indemnitie; as was done in Essex.

2 Whereas the Judges in the Justice seat in A judgment pretended.
Essex were consulted with, about the entry of the former verdict, and
delivered their opinion touching that alone, without meddling with the point of
right, this opinion was after enforced in other Counties, as if it had been a
judgment upon the matter, and the Council for the County discountenanced in
speaking, because it was said to be already adjudged.

3 The inheritance of diverse of the Subjects The Subject disturbed.
have been hereupon disturbed, after the quiet possession of three or four
hundred years, and a way open for the disturbance of many others.

4 Great sums of money have been drawn Enforced to compound for great fines.
from such as have lands within these pretended bounds, and those who have
forborne to make composition, have been threatened with the execution of the
forest laws.

5 The fifth, was the selling of Nusances, or Selling of Nusances.
at least, some such things as are supposed to be Nusances.

The King as Father of the Common wealth The legal trial of Nusances omitted.
is to take care of the public Commodities, and advantages of his subjects, as
Rivers, Highways, Common Sewers, and such like, and is to remove whatsoever is
prejudicial to them, and for the trial of those, there are legal and
ordinary writs, of Ad quod damnum: but of late A new extrajudiciall way
practiced.
a new and extrajudiciall way has been taken, of declaring matters to be
Nusances, and diverse have thereupon been questioned, and if they would not
compound they have been fined; If they do compound, that which was first
prosecuted Compositions enforced, and
as a common Nuisance, is taken into the Kings protection, and allowed to stand,
and having yielded the King Money, no further care is taken, whether it be
good or bad for the common A public trust broken or abused.
wealth. By this a very great and public trust is either broken or abused: if
the matter compounded for be truly a Nuisance, then it is broken to the hurt of
the people: if it be not a Nuisance, then is it abused to the hurt of the
party: The particulars.
the particulars mentioned, were:

1 The Commission for buildings in and about Commission for building.
this Town, which heretofore has been presented by this House as a grievance
in K. James his time, but now of late the execution has been much more
frequent and prejudicial than it was before.

Secondly, Commission for Depopulations, which began some few years since, and
is still Depopulations
in hot prosecution.

By both these, the subject is restrained from The several mischiefs of both.
disposing of his own, some have been commanded to demolish their houses,
others have been forbidden to build, other after great trouble and vexation,
have been forced to redeem their peace with large sums, and they still
remain by law, as liable to a new question as before, for it is agreed by all,
that the King cannot license a common Nuisance: and although in deed these are
not such, yet it is a matter of very ill consequence, that under that name they
should be compounded for, and may in ill times be made a president for the
Kings of this Realm to claim a power of licencing such things as are Nusances
indeed.

The seventh, The Military charges laid upon Military charges.
the several Counties of the Kingdom, sometimes by warrant under his
Majesty's signature, sometime by Letters from the Council Table, and sometimes
(such has been the boldness and presumption of some men) by the order of the
Lord Leivtenants, or Deputy Lieutenant alone.

This is a growing evil still multiplying and A growing evil.
increasing from a few particulars to many, from small sums to great: it
began first to be practiced as a loan, for supply of coat and conduct Coat and
conduct money how practiced by Q. Eliz.
money, and for this it has some countenance, from the use in Queen
Elizabeth's time, when the Lords of the Council did often desire the deputy
Lievtenants to procure so much money to be laid out in the Country as the
service did require, with a promise to pay it again in London; for which
purpose there was a constant warrant in the Exchequer. This (he said) was the
practice in her time, and in a great part of King James's, and the payments so
certain, as it was little otherwise, than taking up money upon bills of
Exchange; at this day they follow these presidents, in the manner of the demand
(for it is with a promise of a repayment) but not in the certainty and
readiness of satisfaction.

The first particular brought into a tax (as Muster masters wages.
he thought) was the Muster Masters wages, at which many repined, but being for
small sums it began to be generally digested: yet in the last Parliament,
this House was sensible of it, and to avoid the danger of the president that
the subjects should be forced to make any payments without consent in
Parliament, they thought upon a Bill that may be a rule to the Lievtenants
what to demand, and to the people what to pay. But the hopes of this Bill were
dashed in the dissolution of that Parliament. Now of late diverse other
particulars are growing into practice, which make the grievance much more
heavy: those mentioned were these,

1 Pressing men against their will, and forcing Pressing.
them which are rich or unwilling to serve to find others in their place.

2 The provision of public Magazines for powder, and other Munition, Spades
and Public Magazins.
Pickaxes.

3 The Salarie of Diverse officers besides the Muster-Master. Salary of officers.


4 The buying of Carthorses and Carts, and hiring of Carts for Cariages.
Cart-horses and Carts.


The eighth, The extrajudiciall declarations of Judges, whereby the subjects
have been Extrajudiciall declarations of Judges.
bound in matters of great importance without heareing of Council or Argument
on their part, and are left without legal remedy, by writ of error or
otherwise: he remembered the expression used by another member of the house of a
teeming Parliament: this (he said) was a teeming grievance: from hence have
issued most of the great grievances now in being, The Shipmoney, A teeming
grievance.
the pretended Nusances already mentioned, and some others which have not yet
been touched upon: Especially that concerning the proceedings of Ecclesiastical
Courts.

The ninth, That the authority and wisdom Monopolies countenanced by the
Council Table.
of the Council Table, have been applied to the contriving and managing of
several Monopolies, and other great grievances (he said) The institution of
the Council Table, was much for the advantage and security of the subject, to
avoid surreptions and precipitate Courts in the The ancient oath of
councillors.
great affairs of the Kingdom: That by law an oath is to be taken by all
those of the Kings Counsel, in which amongst other things it is expressed, that
they should for no cause forbear to do right, to all the Kings people, and if
such an oath be not now taken, he wished it might be brought into use again.

It was the honor of that Table, to be as it Their trust and dignity.
were incorporated with the King, his royal power and greatness did shine
most conspicuously in their actions, and in their Councels: We have heard of
Projectors and Resurees heretofore and what opinion and relish they have found
in this House is not unknown. But that any such thing should be acted by the
Council Table, which might give strength and countenance to Monopolies, as it
has not been used till now of late, so it cannot be apprehended without the
just grief of the honest subject, and encouragement of those who are ill
affected.

He remembered that in Tertio of King. a Noble Gentleman, then a very worthy
member of the Commons House, now a great Lord Much diminished and debased.
and eminent Counselor of State, did in this place declare this opinion
concerning that clause used to be inserted in Pattents of Monopoly, whereby
Justices of peace are commanded to assist the Pattentees, this he urged as a
great dishonor to those Gentlemen, which are in commission to be so meanly
employed, with much more reason, may we in jealousy of the By being employed
in matters of such ill report.
honor of the Council Table, humbly desire that their precious time, their
great abilities designed, to the public care and service of the Kingdom, may
not receive such a stain, such a diminution, as to be employed in matters of
so ill report, in the estimation of the law: of so ill effect, in the
apprehension of the people.

The tenth, The high Court of Starchamber, Star Chamber a great Council.
which some think succeed that, which in the Parliament Rolls is called,
Magnum Concilium, and to which, Parliaments were wont so often to refer those
important matters, which they had no time to determine. This Court, which in
the late restoration or erection of it, in Henry A court erected against
oppression.
the seventh's time, was especially designed to restrain the oppression of
great men, and to remove the obstructions and impediments of the law, This
which is both a Court of Council and a Court of Justice, has been made an
instrument of erecting and defending Monopolies and other grievances; to set a
face of right Applied the establishing of Monopolies.
upon those things, which are unlawful in their own nature: a face of public
good, upon such as are pernicious in their use and execution. The Soape-patent,
and diverse other evidences thereof may be given, so well known, as not to
require a particular relation: And as if this were not enough, this Court has
lately intermedled with the Ship money, diverse Sheriffs have been questioned,
for not levying and collecting such sums, as their Counties have To the
recovery of Shipmoney.
been charged with, and if this beginning be not prevented, the
Star Chamber will become a Court of Revenue, and it shall be made crime not
to collect or pay such taxes, as the State shall require.

The eleventh, He said, he was gone very The Kings edicts and Proclamations.
high, yet he must go a little higher: that great and most eminent power of
the King of making Edicts and Proclamations, which are said to be Leges
Temporis, with which our Princes have used to encounter with sudden and
unexpected danger, as would not endure so much delay, as assembling the great
Council of the Kingdom, This which is one of the most glorious beams of
Majesty, most rigorous in commanding reverence, and subjection, For the
erecting of Monopolies.
to our unspeakable grief, has been often exercised for the enjoining and
maintaining sundry Monopolies, and other grants, exceeding burdensome, and
prejudicial to the people

The twelfth. Although he was come as high The word and truth of God.
as he could upon earth, yet the presumption of evil men did lead him one
step higher, even as high as Heaven, as high as the Throne of God. It was now,
he said, grown common, for ambitious and corrupt men of the Clergy, to abuse
the truth of God, and the bond of conscience, preaching down the laws and
liberties Pretended for the absolute power of Kings.
of the Kingdom, pretending Divine authority, for an absolute power in the
King, to do what he would with our persons, and goods, this has been often
published in Sermons, and Printed books, and is now the high way to preferment.

The last Parliament, we had a sentence for an offense of this kind, against
one Mannering, The offense of D. Mannaring.
then a Doctor, now a Bishop, concerning whom (he said) he would say no more
but this, that when he saw him at his Bar, in the most humble dejected
posture, that ever he observed, he thought he would not so soon have leapt
into a Bishops chair, but his success has emboldened others, therefore (he
said) this may well be noted as a double grievance, that such doctrine should
be allowed, Now practiced by others.
that such men should be preferred, yea as a root of grievances whereby they
endeavor to corrupt the Kings conscience, and as much To the great hurt and
grievance of the people.
as in them lies, to deprive the people of that Royal protection, to which his
Majesty is bound by the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, and his own
personal oath.

The thirteenth: The long intermission of The Intermission of Parliaments.
Parliaments, contrary to the two statutes yet in force, whereby it is
appointed there should be Parliaments once a year, at the least, and most
contrary to the public good of the Kingdom, for this being well remedied
would produce remedies for all the rest.

Having put through the several heads of The subjects grievances hurtful to
the King.
grievances, he came to the second maine branch, propounded in the beginning.
That the disorders from whence these grievances issued, were as hurtful to the
King, as to the people, of which he gave diverse reasons.

1 The interruption of the sweet communion Bb interrupt* their communion.
which ought to be betwixt the King and his people, in matters of grace and
supply. They have need of him by his general pardon, to be secured from
projectors, and informers, to be freed from obsolete laws, from the subtle
devices of such as seek to restrain the Prerogative to their own private
advantage, and the public hurt; and he has need of them for council and
suport, in great and extraordinary occasions. This mutual intercourse would so
weane the affections and interests of his subjects, into his actions and
designs, that their wealth and their persons would be his, his own estate
would be managed to most advantage, and public, undertakings would be
prosecuted at the charge and adventure of the subject: The victorious attempts
in Queen Elizabeth's time upon Portugal, Spain, and the Indies, were for the
greatest part, made upon the subjects purses, and not upon the Queens, though
the honor and profit of the success, did most accrue to her.

2 Those often breaches and discontentments By domestical breaches and
discontents.
betwixt the King and the people, are very apt to diminish his reputation
abroad, and disadvantage his treaties and alliances.

3 The apprehension of the favor and encouragement By weakening his party
abroad.
given to Popery, has much weakened his Majesty's party beyond the Sea, and
impared that advantage which Queen Elizabeth and his Royal Father have
heretofore made, of being heads of the Protestant union.

4 The innovations in Religion and rigor of By forcing his subjects to leave
the Kingdom.
Ecclesiastical Courts, have forced a great many of his Majesty's subjects to
forsake the land, whereby not only their persons, and their posterity, but
their wealth, and their industrey are lost to this Kingdom, much to the
demolishing of his Majesty's Customs and Subsidies. Amongst other
Inconveniences, this was especially to be observed, that diverse Clothiers
driven out of the Country, had set up the manufacture of Cloth beyond the
Seas, whereby this State is like to suffer much by abatement of the price of
Woolls, and by want of employment for the poor, both which likewise tend to
his Majesty's particular loss.

5 It puts the King upon unproper ways By unproper ways of supply.
of supply, which being not warranted by law, are much more burdensome to the
subject, than advantageous to his Majesty. In France not long since, upon a
survey of the Kings Revenue, it was found that two parts in three, never came
to the Kings purse, but were diverted to the profit of the officers or
ministers of the Crown, and it was thought a very good service and
reformation, to reduce two parts to the King, leaving still a third part to the
Instruments as were employed about getting it in. It may well be doubted, that
the King may have the like or worse success in England: which appears already
in some particulars.

The King has reserved upon this Monopoly of Wines, Thirty thousand Pound Rent
a year, the Vintner pays Forty Shillings a Tun, which comes to Ninty
thousand pounds: the price upon the Subject by retaile, is increased Two pence
a Quart, which comes to Eight pound a Tun, and for Forty five thousand Tun
brought in yearly, amounts to Three hundred sixty thousand pounds, which is
Three hundred and Thirty thousand pounds loss to the Kingdom, above the Kings
Rent; other Monopolies, as that of Soape, have been very chargable to the
Kingdom, and brought very little Treasure into his Majesty's Coffers.

The law provides for that revenue of the Crown; which is Natural and proper,
that it may be safely collected, and brought to Account, but this illegal
Revenue, being without any such provision, is left to hazard, and much
uncertainty, either not to be retained, or not duly accounted of.

6 It is apt to weaken the Industry and Courage of the Subject, if they be
left uncertain: By weakening the industry and courage of the subject.
whether they shall reap the benefit of their own pains, and hazard those
who are brought into the Condition of slaves, will easily grow to a slavish
disposition, who having nothing to loose, do commonly show more boldness in
disturbing, than in defending a Kingdom.

7 These irregular Courses do give opportunity to ill Instruments, to
insinuate themselves By introducing ill Instruments into the Kings service.
into the Kings service, for we cannot but observe, that if a man be officious
in furthering their inordinate burdens of Ship money, Monopolies, and the like:
it varnisheth over all other faults, and makes him fit both for Employment and
Preferment: So that out of their offices, they are furnished for vast expenses,
purchases, Buildings; and the King loses often more in desperate debts at
their deaths, than he got by them all their lives, whether this were not lately
verified in a Western man, much employed while he lived: he leaves to the
Knowledge of those who were acquainted with his Course, and he doubted not but
others might be found in the like case.

Those that are Affected to Popery, to profaneness, and to superstitious
innovations, in matters of Religion. All Kind of Spies and intelligencers have
means to be countenanced and trusted if they will be but zealous in these
kind of services, which how much it detracts from his Majesty, in honor, in
profit and prosperity of public affairs, lies open to every man's
apprehension: and from these reasons or some of them, he thought it proceeded
that through the whole course of the English story it might be observed, that
those Kings who had been most respectfull of the laws, had been most eminent
in Greatness, in Glory and success, both at home and abroad; and that others,
who thought to subsist by the violation of them, did often fall into a state of
weakness, poverty, and Infortunitie.

8 The differences and discontents betwixt By diverting the Kings thoughts from
diverse great and hopeful enterprises.
his Majesty, and the people at home, have in all likelihood diverted his
Royal thoughts and Counsels from those great opportunities which he might
have, not only to weaken the House of Austria, to restore the Palatinate, but
to gain to himself a higher pitch of power and greatness, than any of his
Ancestors.

It is not unknown how weak, how distracted, how discontented the Spanish
Colonies are in the West Indies. There are now in those parts in New England,
Virginia, and the Caribe-Islands, and in the Barmudos, at least Sixty thousand
able persons of this Nation, many of them well armed, and their bodies seasoned
to that Climate, which with a very small charge might be set down in some
advantageous parts of these pleasant, rich and fruitful Countries, and easily
make his Majesty Master of all that treasure, which not only foments the
War, but is the great support of Popery in all parts of Christendom. By
producing many chargeable distempers*


9 Lastly, Those courses are apt to produce such distempers in the state, as
may not be settled without great charge and loss, by which means more may be
consumed in a few months than shall be gotten by such ways in many years.

Having past through the two first general The ways of remedyinge their
grievances.
Branches, he was now come to the third, wherein he was to set down the ways
of healing and removing those grievances; which consisted of two maine
Branches, first in declaring the law where it was doubtful. The second in
better provision for the execution of law, where it is clear: But (he said)
because he had already spent much time, and began to find some confusion in
his Memory, he would refer the particulars to another opportunity, and for
the present only move that, which was general to all, and would give weight
and Advantage to all the particular ways of Redress; that is, that we should
speedily desire a Conference with the Lords, and acquaint them with the
Miserable Condition wherein we find the Church and State, and as we have
already resolved to join in a religious seeking of God, in a day of fast and
humiliation, so to entreat them to concur with us, in a Parliamentary course,
of petitioning the King as there should be occasion, and in searching out the
causes and remedies of these many insupportable grievances under which we lie,
that so by the united wisdom and authority of both Houses, such courses may
be taken, as (through Gods blessing) may advance the honor and Greatness of
his Majesty, and restore and establish the peace and prosperity of the
Kingdom.

This (he said) We might undertake with comfort and hope of success: for
though there be a darkness upon the land, a thick and palpable darkness, like
that of Egypt; yet as in that, the Sun had not lost his light, nor the
Egyptians their sight, the interruption was only in the Medium, so with us
there is still (God be thanked) light in the Sun, Wisdom and Justice in his
Majesty to dispell this darkness, and in us there remains a visual faculty,
whereby we are enabled to apprehend, and moved to desire light, and when we
shall be blessed in the enjoying of it, we shall thereby be incited to return
his Majesty such thanks, as may make it shine more clearly in the world, to
his own glory, and in the hearts of his people, to their joy and contentment.

FINIS.

