ENGLANDS REMONSTRANCE.

OR, A WORD in the EAR TO THE Scattered, Discontented MEMBERS of the late
PARLIAMENT.

SHOWING, That Self-seekers are Self losers; and that no Member ought to
Feather his own Nest, but freely to permit every Bird to enjoy his own
Feathers, and every Honest man to sit under his own Vine, and enjoy the Fruits
thereof.

Likewise, A Word to the present Assembly at Westminster, and the Council of
State at White Hall, in Order to their present Power, Rule, Government; and the
Peoples Rights, Liberties, and Privileges.

By ROBERT PVRNEL.

Matthew. 23. 13. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, for ye shut up the Kingdom
of Heaven; ye neither go in your selves, nor suffer them that are entering, to
go in.

Jer. 2. 13. For, ye have forsaken Me the Fountain of living Waters, and have
dug pits, even broken pits, that can hold no Water.

Oh would to God I had never Reigned! Oh that I had lived a solitary life with
God, and not oppressed the People! What does all my Honor profit me, but, that I
have so much the more torment in my Death, and my day of Account is now very
near.

Hist. Phil. 3d. K. Spain. LONDON: Printed by E. Alsop. 2653.

A WORD to the Discontentd MEMBERS of the late PARLIAMENT.
HAve ye sat so long at the Stern, and could ye not steer your Ship aright,
but let it split against a Rock? Had ever any Parliament longer time to learn
to do well then ye had? Had ever any Parliament such a prize put into their
hands as ye? Had ever any Parliamen: so many Prayers, Tears, and Petitions, as
ye had? Had ever any Parliament so many signal Testimonies of Gods free Love,
in giving so many victories both by Land and Sea as you? Did ever a Parliament
make more show of Piety and Reality then you did? Did ever Parliament make so
many Protestations, Covenants, Engagements both to God and Man, to establish
Righteousness, Truth and Equity, as you? And yet this Honorable, long
standing, victorious, engaging Parliament, (if not falsified the trust reposed
in them) they did frustrate the expectation of the People that had chosen them:
and so at last came to be laid aside, either by God, or man, or both, and
scarce a tear for them. And why so? Did ever Parliament promise more and
perform less? Did ever Parliament seek greater things for themselves then this?
Were I near them, and had the advantage of their Ear, I would whisper a Word of
Advice unto them, I would entreat them to read, and seriously to consider, that
portion of Scripture, Daniel 4. and 27.

I would further desire them to do as our brother Zacheus did, Luke 19. 8. And
Zacheus stood forth and said unto the Lord Behold Lord, the half of my goods I
give to the poor; and if I have taken any thing from any man by for god
Cavillation, (or they may say, Either upon Public Faith, or false Accusation)
I will restore fourfold.

If you take this advice, it may be you may be hid in the day of the Lords
Anger, as in Zeph. 2. 3.

Oh! let it never be truly said of you, that ye Gain while the Nation loses;
neither let it be said of you, that ye have spent your time in feathering your
own nests: But now be willing to let every bird have his own feather, that
every man may sit down under his own Vine, and eat his own bread, unless it be
those that have been Instruments of our Troubles,

I trust I may say of some of the late Parliament, as once was said of the
Church of Sardis, Rev. 3. 4. Thou have a few Names yet in Sardis which have not
defiled their Garments, etc.

But to the rest of that House, let me tell them, that if they do not lay these
things to heart, but rather comfort themselves in the consideration of any good
that they have done; Then I say unto you, that the Divine Wisdom knows how
to use b^d men to good purposes; and in the end not only to cast them off but
to punish them when the world is done. Remember the stories of Haman, Iehu, and
Saul, and you will find that in all Ages, self-seekers were self-losers, and
self-destroyers, viz. Adam sought himself, and lost himself; Absalom sought
himself, and thereby lost himself; Who ever sought himself and prospered? Who
ever continued to seek himself, but perished?

If ye say, we had a self-denying Ordinance; I say, ye had not a self-denying
heart and principle; (I am sure, for mine own part, I know it to be so;)
Besides, it appears by your endeavoring to make your selves a perpetual
Parliament, that the next might not question you: It seems that you had
forgoten that next under God, all Power Fundamental, was in the People, and
that persons entrusted with it as their Trustees: and accordingly it is
provided, that such Trustees be Questioned for betraying, or ill managing their
said Trust.

Some of your Actions do call for siftings, and the Lord will search you (as
with candles) and turn your insides outward, that so ye may give an account of
your Stewardship, for ye may be no longer Stewards; surely there is shame
written upon some of your footsteps, who are standing in slippery places. Oh!
might ever a Parliament have come off with more Honor then you, if you had but
denied your Natural self, Sinful self, and Religious self?

Well, I perceive that a bird hoppeth from tree to tree, so do the Honors and
riches of this world from man to man: Nay, Honors and Riches are like the Moon
and Tide, always changing, increasing or decreasing; The Moon has been
increasing, and the Tide coming in you (as is humbly conceived) these eight or
ten years: but now the Moon being at full, and the Spring tide at highest, the
Moon is upon decreasing, and the Tide upon returning.

Well, I see a man may have enough of the world to sink him, but he can never
have enough to save him; surely many times the worst of men have most of these
outward things, and the best of men have least of the earth and most of heaven.

I find in Scripture-record that a man may be great and Graceless with Pharaoh,
Honorable and Damnable with Saul, Rich and miserable with Dives.

Oh! I see, I see, that one storm at sea, one coal of fire, one false friend,
one unadvised word, one false witness, may make a Rich man a Beggar and a
Prisoner altogether: Surely if this had been considered, some things had been
reformed which were not. Did you never read Psa. 12. 5. Now for the oppression
of the needy, and for the sighs of the poor, I will up says the Lord and will
set him at liberty, etc. and Psa. 126. 9. The Lord keeps the stanger, he
relieveth the fatherless and widow.

Did you not know thar the oppressions of the poor, which was so great in the
midst of us, would pull down the Judgments of God upon the heads of them that
had power to relieve them, and would not?

May not many of you hereafter say, as Philip the third of Spain (whose life
was free from gross evils) yet being in the Agony of Death, fear struck into
him, and these words burst out, O would to God I had never Reigned! Oh that I
had lived a solitary life with God, and not oppressed the people! What does all
mine Honor profit me, but that I have so much the more torment in my Death!
the day of my Account is very near. And let all men know, that the overflowing
of Sin, and the overflowing of Oppression causes the overflowing of Vengeance.

Abused Opportunity will most certainly turn inro Fury; for Gods long
forbearance (...); the day is at hand, when he will pay neglig^^^ men and women
for mispending precious time, and for the abuse of Old and New mercies in the
day of Account. Men's Actions are all (or will be in Print) and shall one day be
read aloud in the ears of all the world, that all the righteour Nation that
shall enter in may say Amen to that righteous sentence that Christ shall pass
upon all those that had a prize put into their hands to mind his Glory, and to
unload his people of their heavy burdens, that the oppressed might go free;
but they had no mind to it, as in the Proverbs, but in stead thereof sought
great things for themselves, as in Jeremy 45. 5. Nay, though Moses and Aaron
(two choice Champions) did lead and Govern Israel for a long time,
notwithstanding many dangers and difficulties, yet they were at last shut out
of Canaan, because they did not sanctify the Lord in their hearts at the water
of Meribah, Deuteronomy. 32. 15. Number. 14. 15. For ye were disobdient to my Word in the
strife of the Assembly.

A Word of Advice to the present Supreme Authority of England, etc.
Most Noble and Honored Sirs,
WHom God even the God of the spirits of all flesh has entrusted at present
with the highest places not only in the field, but also in the seat of
Justice: the prayers of the Godly for you are; that the Lord would rather make
you gracious and inwardly holy, then outwardly happy; and give you a spirit of
divine wisdom and valor, suitable to the work in hand, that ye may improve the
present opportunity that is put into your hands, for the glory of God that gave
it you; consider that the presence of God is in the midst of you, the prayers
of the Saints and servants of God are continually poured out for you, the eyes
of the people are upon you all, expecting some great things to be done by you;
yea, and the other parts of the world look upon you (as if they intended) if
you go on in any way of righteousness, to follow you; it will be a glory for
the English nation to give a blessed example to all the people of the earth to
free themselves from Tyranny and Slavery,

If a worm might be thought worthy to advise you, then give me leave to tell
you, there is but one thing in the main that God and his people do expect from
you, viz. that you would eye the Lord Jesus in all your actings, and advance
his Kingdom as much as in you lies, and if this be uppermost in your hearts,
first in your thoughts, and constant in your purposes; so as you do in your
judgments prefer, and in your wills deliberately mind the glory of God, the
advancement of the Kingdom of his dear son, by the assistance of his holy
spirit, then shall the work of the Lord prosper in your hands, and the day
shall be light before you, and his footsteps that are not yet known, shall be
discovered unto you, and ye shall see your work before you.

Christ was once humbled that we might be exalted; let him be now exalted that
we may be humbled by him.

Although he be willing to give you grace, yet his glory he will not give to
any other: let it be a comfort to you that he has exalted you in the heart of
his people, although you are a table-talk, and a byword, and a scorn, in the
hearts of his enemies.

Well, would you stand your selves now others are fallen, and not only keep,
but also add to the honor which God has given you, then make it your business
to exalt the Kingdom of Christ not only in your selves, but also in the
neighboring nations; and remember that the rock of ages pulls down some, to
the end that others might not exalt themselves when they are in power; for the
Lord has decreed to stain the pride of all earthly honor, and to bring into
contempt all the honorable of the earth, that so all flesh might be humbled,
and the Lord alone exalted: Therefore seek you not great things for your selves
(as many of those before you did) lest you be also laid aside, and no eye pity
you.

Provide no more for your selves then you have (I beseech you) but to seek the
honor of Christ, and the freedom of the Saints, and these nations, wherein
your own freedoms and safeties are involved: Consider that the Lord has
hitherto made you friends to some of his people, and a terror to their and his
enemies: and our prayer to the Lord is, that he would teach you, as once he did
good Nehemiah, to do many years hard service freely, because the payments were
heavy on their brethren. Nehem. 5. 14. 18. That you may say as that servant of
Christ did, to the glory of God. and the shame of the former self-seeking
powers, ver. 15 but the former Governors that had been before me, were
chargeable unto the people, and had taken of them their bread and wine, besides
40 shekles of silver, but so did not I (says the good man) because of the fear
of the Lord. I have but a few things more to beg (as upon my bended knees, and
with weeping eyes) which if you will but hear and grant, it may make much for
the glory of God, the honor of the three nations, and the comfort of your own
souls.

1. The first thing is, that you would set some time and persons apart to hear
and receive the private Petitions of poor widows, and fatherless so much
neglected by the former power; for they have poured out their complaints in the
midst of their wants, and their cry came up before the Lord, before the
dissolving the late Parliament.

Consider (I request you) that the earth is the Lords, and all that is therein,
(and not our Storehouse) and you are at present his Stewards, wherefore as in
Prove. 3. 27. With hold not good from them to whom it is due, when it is in the
power of thine hand to do it. So shall you in the end be able to say with Job,
that you have not withhold the poor from their desire, nor caused the eyes of
the widow and fatherless to sail, nor seen any perish for want of clothing
nor seen any poor in the streets without covering.

I could almost say to you, as Abraham did once to the Lord, Genesis 18. 27.
behold now I have taken upon me to speak which am but dust and ashes; I would
beg leave to present a few more things to your consideration.

2. The next thing is, that when you make inquisition for Wolves prophesied of
by Christ and his Apostles, Matthew. 7, 15. compared with Acts. 20 19. That come
to us insheeps clothing; that you would not do as the late Parliament did, to
stop the wolves mouth in one town, and let him go and devour in another; if he
be adjudged unfit to bite or devour in one place, let him be held as unfit in
another, lest you should do in effect as they did, put out the fire Can and
send it to Marlbrough, or endeavor to stop the Plague at Bristol, by sending
the infected persons to London.

3. The next thing that I would beg of you for this poor nation, is, that
whereas the last power did promise much and perform little; be you more like
God, (I both humbly and earnestly request you) by promising less then you
intend to perform; that you may in very deed appear to be like him: He promised
the children of Israel only the land of Canaan; but besides that he gave them
two other Kingdoms, which he did never promise to give them: and to Zacharias,
Luke 1. 20. he promised to give him his speech again at the birth of the child,
but besides that he gave him the spirit of Prophecy; so that as Paul says, he
cau do abundantly above all that we are able to ask or think.

And you that say ye abide in him, ought so to walk, as ye have him for an
example; see Ephesians. 3. 20. 1 John 2. 6.

4. The next thing that I would beg of you, Most Honorable Senators, is this,
that you would endeavor to unite all the Saints sound in the faith to an union
in the spirit of love. Though England be but as a garden to the whole world,
and the people in it but a handful* and scarce one of twenty of this handful
Godly men; yet were these few Saints united by the blessed spirit, so as their
hearts might agree together, as touching any thing they ought to ask; and were
so well affected to lift up one voice and one heart (according to the will of
God) they would have the thing they ask for, so as nothing should be too hard
for them to do; all the world could not stand before them, nor undermine them,
for they would be wise in the Lords wisdom, and strong in him, and in the
power of his might: Shall Herod and Pilate agree? Turks and Pagans? Bears and
Lions agree? Tigers and Wolves agree? and shall not Saints agree? if the Saints
were but but once united, Antichrist would soon be destroyed. Oh! let not our
Supreme power, under God, be angry, and I will speak but this once. Oh! let me
then say as once Mordecai did to Hester. Hester 4. 14. If thou altogether
hold thy peace at this time, then shall deliverance arise from another
place, or power, but thou and thy fathers house shall be destroyed, and who
knows whether thou art come to the Kingdom for such a time as this? (And
under Correction) let me tell you the work is the Lords, and if you will not
carry it on, he will lay you aside with shame, and raise up those that he will
own and bless.

And whereas most of the Godly people in England, are crying to God mightly for
you, to purge out self-seeking, and to plant a spirit of government in you, and
to furnish you with natural and spiritual abilities suitable to the work that
lies before you; but if you begin to flag (as the former power did) and so let
the work stick in the birth, and every one minding his own things, and not the
things of Jesus Christ; Then let me tell you, that all the Lords people in
England, and the other nations, will be praying to him, and wrestling with him,
and give him no rest night nor day till the Lord turn you also out of doors,
and bring in those that he will own and bless.

FINIS.

