DISSERTATIO de Pace, etc. OR, A DISCOURSE Touching the PEACE and CONCORD OF
THE Church.

Wherein is elegantly and acutely argued, That not so much a bad Opinion, as a
bad Life, excludes a Christian out of the kingdom of heaven; and that the
things necessary to be known for the attainment of salvation, are very few and
easy: and finally, that those, who pass amongst us under the name of
Heretics, are notwithstanding to be tolerated.

LONDON: Printed by Ja: Co^trel, for Rich. Moon, at the seven stars in Paul's
Churchyard. 1653.

The Publisher TO THE READER.
THe Author of this Discourse, Christian Reader, a man, as it appears, both
pious and learned, knowing that of all the Families and Societies of
Christians, they are most hated, who by their Profession and Writings maintain
the Opinion of Socinus touching the Essence and Office of Christ, endeavored
by this Discourse to abate the hatred of certain Zelots against the Socinians,
not that he approved their Doctrine (for he once and again disowns it) but
because he was persuaded, that if the harsh judgments of men were once
mitigated concerning the most odious Opinion of all, the heat of that bitter
zeal wherewith Christians are generally incited to persecute dissenters in
Religion, would by degrees evaporate. But if thou, Christian Reader, do from
thy heart aspire to the knowledge of GOD, and his Son Jesus Christ, wherein, as
Christ himself testifies, eternal life does consist, John 17. 3. fetch not the
beginning thereof either from Socinus, (a man otherwise of great understanding
in the mystery of the Gospel) nor from his Adversaries, but being mindful of
those words, Luke 10. 22. None knows who the Son is, but the Father; and who
the Father is, but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him; Lay aside
for a while Controversal Writings, together with those prejudicate Opinions
that have been instilled into thine unwary Understanding; and closely applying
thy self to the search of the New Covenant, most ardently implore the Grace of
Christ, that he would be pleased to manifest Himself and the Father to thee,
and make no doubt but the true Light will at length illuminate the eyes of thy
mind, that thou may walk in the way that leads unto Life. Farewell.

The Contents.
CHAP. I. THe lot of Truth and Innocence in this world. A Ghess of the Author
touching himself. CHAP. II. What things concerning God and Christ are necessary
to be known unto salvation, and what are the parts of True Faith. CHAP. III.
That sincere Love toward God and Christ is sufficient to Salvation; and that
the same may be in such as err. CHAP. IIII. That though Faith and the Holy
Spirit be the Gifts of God, yet erring persons have and may have them. CHAP. V.
That nothing but Disobedience and Unbelief exclude a man from Eternal
Salvation; and that such as err, are free from these. Whether bare Errors of
the Understanding damn a man. CHAP. VI. That the things necessary to be known
unto Salvation, are few and very simple, and easy to be understood by the
simplest. Such is not the common doctrine touching the Trinity. CHAP. VII. That
there is not in this life a perfect knowledge of God, and of Divine Mysteries,
but in the other life; and that Faith, Hope, and Charity, are sufficient to
Salvation. CHAP. VIII. A General Apology for the Socinians, that they are not
of such a Persuasion out of Ambition, Avarice, Pleasure, or Superstition, nor
offend out of any Malice, but only out of the Care of their Salvation. CHAP.
IX. An Answer to the Objection about rejecting the Consent of the Church, for
the Authority of the Scripture only. CHAP. X. An Answer to three other
Objections: a Comparison of Calvin's Doctrine touching Fatal Predestination,
with the Doctrine of others. CHAP. XI. Reasons and Examples for tolerating
Heretics; and who are true Heretics. CHAP. XII. What Heretics are to be
excommunicated, what not; and a fuller Apology for those who in our Age pass
for Heretics.
A DISCOURSE Touching the PEACE and CONCORD OF THE Church.
CHAP. I. The lot of Truth and Innocence in this world. A Ghess of the Author
touching himself.
TRUTH was never called into question, but Innocence was fain to plead for her
self at the same bar; nor has the one been more hated, then the other always
envied. Indeed, we men are very prone to evil, and therefore hate not only the
open freedom of a true judgment, but also the tacit censure of another's
integrity. Nor is this a crime peculiar to our Age. 'Twas heretofore the
disposition of Wickedness, no less to fear the mute innocence of another, then
the living voice of a reprover; nor can it be otherwise hereafter, but that
virtue should become a goad to their senses, whose minds have been seized with
vices. But though our wickedness may seem to have a kind of right to detest
such Truth, as touches the ulcers of ours sins, yet why should we abominate
her that casts a harmless eye toward heaven? Is it because, as both these cure
the two diseases of the mind, our Errors namely and our Vices, so we are
delighted with both those Distempers? Undoubtedly here lies the pinch. We are
more enamoured of our Errors, then of all our darlings, either because they
wink at the scapes and dalliance of our affections; or because we are enraged
against dissenters with obstinate prejudice and frantic affectation of
parties. Howbeit we never err with greater delight then about the sense of
divine matters, and are so far from acknowledging those slips, (the witnesses
of humane imbecility) that we account them for Oracles. Nor is our rashness
content to have pleased her self herein, but obtrudeth her notions upon others
against their wills: and the license of determining is wont to assume so much
to it self, that it excludes a liberty of dissenting in the smallest tittle.
After the judgments of mankind had been oppressed in this manner, the Church
for many ages was overspread with thick darkness, whilst the greatest part had
neither liberty to utter what they understood, nor list to understand what they
might not utter. And though there have been so many winds and storms of
Contention in the Christian world, yet have they not to this very day been able
to dispel so great a fog, so that amidst the clouds dispersed over all the
sky, there are some few who through the intervals behold the whole face of the
sun; whilst others see afar off some gleams of the light, but shall ere long
discover the very sun it self. The Truth being thus muffled with errors, has
not yet shown her self to all with a full countenance, although she has
aforehand darted out the rays of her light unto a great part of men. But
whatsoever is to come hereafter, divine things are at present envelloped with
gross darkness. Yet is there nothing that more obscureth the Mystery of Eternal
Salvation, then the ignorance of the way, that leads us to the top of so
great happiness. For as all things situated on high, are wont to have a hard
and difficult access; so also has that towering height of the life to come. Nor
is it for every man to get up through steep ascents, especially for them whose
earthly minds and dull spirits press them down to low desires. And therefore,
to the great destruction of mankind, another way to happiness has heen
invented, easy indeed and expedite, but such as reaches not to the end aimed
at. For the greatest part of men, thinking it very toilsom to ascend thither by
holiness of life, sought out a shorter cut, consisting in the mere confession
of faith. And this is the way by which the greatest part as yet ascend to
heaven, not caring what their actions are, so their opinions be right; and
though extremely curious to pry into other things, yet having no regard to
their life and manners. So that it is no marvel, inasmuch as men everywhere take
greater care of their wit, the^ of their mind, that the very least failing in
the knowledge of divine things should be esteemed of greater moment to eternal
destruction, then then the commission of the foulest crimes. But this seems
somewhat monstrous, how some men should arrive at so much confidence, as that,
though in their life and manners they even against their wills acknowledge the
failings of their mortality, yet in their judgments and opinions they should
forget their condition: and though in the very soul of faith, I mean good
works, they do by reason of their sins so often slip, should yet imagine that
in the carcass only, I mean faith, they cannot possibly offend. For, whence
proceeds this blind and precipitant humor of condemning others, but from
rashness of defining? whence so great boldness of determining, but from the
presumption of an infallible judgment? And, which is worst of all, a man
nowadays can no sooner fail in his wit, but presently his honesty is
reproached; and oftentimes the reprehension of opinions degenerateth into the
accusation of manners. As for my self, before I lanch out of the haven, I do
already foresee storms; nor am I in so great fear for the Opinion which I
propose in this Discourse, as for my credit and security. For how few are there
who will censure this Treatise, without doing injury to the Author? who is
there, that will set a mark on some mistake thereof, and not withal brand me
with some reproach? If any thing here shall seem false to some men, they will
account me not only a liar, but an impious person. They will call me Deceiver,
and Patron of damned Heresy; and this writing will be so fifty-cuffed by many,
that I my self perhaps, were I known, should not escape Scot-free. But my mind
being pure and untainted, will from my conscience reap that fruit of my labor,
which was due to it from the judgments of men: nor will I esteem it a weak
argument of having defended the Truth, to have my innocence so wickedly
traduced. For the same spirit is wont to oppose both of them: nor ought it to
seem strange to any man, that a most true Opinion should be unjustly taxed of
error, when he shall see his own innocence circumvented with false
accusations. Nevertheless I instantly beseech them, who after they have read
this Discourse, shall vote concerning my reputation, that they would not charge
me with other men's faults; and that my harmless freedom may not be any
prejudice to me. Let none impute to me the patronage of Error, if I have
perhaps been favorable unto such as err; unless he suppose it to be the duty
of a man, when he is displeased with the vices, to be angry with the persons
also.

CHAP. II. What things concerning God and Christ are necessary to be known unto
Salvation; and what are the parts of true Faith.
THe whole body of the Church has now for a long time been infested with an
evil spirit, which sets the several members at odds amongst themselves.
Certainly it is obstinate Ambition that cherishes the humor of raising
parties, and much oil is poured on this flame by a vain persuasion concerning
the points in controversy, that in each of them the sum of our Religion lies
at stake. How deeply this opinion has taken root in our minds, is evident
from the Civil wars amongst us, whereby our hatred turns to our mutual ruin.
But how frivolous and false it is, shall plainly appear from what we mean to
speak afterward; wherein to examine all things that come into debate, would be
a long and toylsome business. It is sufficient to cull-out one of the chiefest
points, which if we shall evince not to be necessarily required to the
attainment of eternal Happiness, much less will it be true in the other lighter
ones. And this is an exact knowledge of the Divine Essence, (as they term it)
and a distinct explication of the Holy Trinity. Undoubtedly no man can
comprehend the nature of God, and the restless disposition of our mind does
here in vain bestir it self, to reach so high a mystery in this life. We may
indeed by our Reason very easily separate not only defects, but also the very
shadow of imperfection from so great a Majesty, but to form in our mind an
image worthy of that most noble Essence, is beyond the compass of our
mortality. And consequently, we may and ought to know what it is not: but to
know what it is, though we were never so much bound to it, yet are we not able;
unless perhaps that God is the King and Lord of the Universe, and other
suchlike things, which if we speak properly, belong not to his essence. It
cannot be denied, that some of these things are discovered to us by the sacred
Oracles, but they are very few, and some of them only shadowed out with
obscure lineaments: and if there be any, wherein all Christians are not agreed,
they are at this day enwrapped with so many twisted thorns of Sophisters, and
also heretofore discussed with so much wrangling, that they are as yet
doubted-of by many. Add hereunto the probable allegation of the Scriptures on
both sides, so that if one will hear both parties without prejudice, he will
not for the most part easily rid himself out of so great intricacies. It is not
my purpose to stretch mine own wit, to engage in dispute on either side. It is
sufficient if I demonstrate, that those questions that concern the more special
explication of the Divine Essence, and the accurate distinction of Persons,
although they be never so profitable, yet are not necessary to salvation: or,
which is all one, that a Christian may arrive at the promised goal of
happiness, although he be either ignorant of those things, or (such is the
condition of our weakness) in an error or mistake about them. If Error in these
things takes not away salvation, much less Ignorance. And therefore, that
there may be no superfluity in this Discourse, we will at present insist only
on the former.

When I consider the way that brings us to heaven, methinks such
contemplations as these are out of the road of our journey. For indeed, what
makes us sufficiently, yea abundantly fitted for Eternal life, but Faith
working by Love, for which only we shall be pronounced just? But if one may
have this Faith, although he have a wrong conceit touching the Mystery of the
Holy Trinity, what hinders but that he may together with this Error be
received both into Heaven, and into the Church? Now lest any one should be
deceived in the notion of Error, I do not now give so mild a name to their
wickedness, who whilst the Truth was yet clear and open in the Church, and
called into doubt by none, did first spread darkness over this Article; but to
their failing; who in our times

Do fear the Greeks even when they offer Gifts: that is, who having been
cozened with so many lies and cheats of Antichrist, dare not believe him even
when he seems to speak Truth: as shall be further made appear by the sequel
of the Discourse. Moreover, that perfect Faith is not taken away by that error,
we shall easily perceive, if we enquire into every part thereof. Nor verily
shall you find in the whole compass of our Faith, that more duties are
required of believers, then Assent to the Promises of Jesus Christ, and
Obedience to his Precepts. The first of which the Apostle James, chap. 2. very
aptly intimates to be the Body of Faith; and the second, the Soul thereof. To
the belief of the Promises that plain Confession is sufficient, which passes
under the name of The Apostles Creed: and if there be any thing else requisite,
I see not what can be added, besides the Reverence due to the holy Scriptures,
to which if credence be once denied, the certainty of our Salvation is brought
into danger. Now whether both, or one of these complete the whole nature of
that Faith, which is due to the Divine Promises, certainly experience it self
testifies, that such as err in the knowledge of the foresaid Mystery, may
excellently discharge this part of Faith. For they without any exception give
credence to the holy Scripture, and to the Apostles Creed. And therefore what
is wanting to beget in them a full belief, that God cannot choose but perform
his promise? For, that the things aforesaid are sufficient to the belief
hereof, is even from hence manifest. God has promised us Salvation by his Son.
To rely on this promise, it is enough if we be persuaded, that God both can and
will give unto us what he has promised. For by this means all the causes of
distrust being pared away, there will be no ground left to doubt of so great a
Promise. But whilst they believe the holy Scriptures, and their Abridgement the
Apostles Creed, they cannot in the least doubt concerning the power or will of
God; when notwithstanding they may mistake in the knowledge of his Essence.
Wherefore this first part of Faith is not taken away by that Error. As for
Obedience to the Precepts of Christ, certainly this can much less be taken away
by such mistakings. For neither was it the purpose of God, by giving his
Commandments to exercise the sharpness of our Wit, but the goodness of our
Will. And therefore how blind soever our Knowledge is in abstruser things, yet
may our Will be conformed to the obedience of the Divine Law, then which
nothing is more manifest and open. Nor does the Piety of sundry erring persons
here need an Advcoate, in that it sufficiently pleads for it self, and
oftentimes shows its Faith even in silent works, which very many vainly
boasting of, cannot find in their life and actions. Neither indeed has any
thing been enjoined us, wherein our virtue and obedience may not show
themselves. For what need is there to invite us with rewards to those things,
which we willingly perform of our own accord? But they buy Happiness at a very
cheap rate, who spend nothing but the labor of their Wit upon it. For he that
is never so wicked and careless of his Salvation, may know some truth
concerning God. Nor can we boast of our obedience in such things, unless we
admit the damned Spirits to a share in our praise. Besides, the nature of all
Precepts ought to be such, as that it might evidently appear to all, who are to
perform them, that they are prescribed. But how manifest this doctrine touching
the Trinity is, the incredible height of the very thing it self shows; and
how manifestly it is prescribed, the labors and contentions of so many Fathers
and Councels heretofore testify. Yea, though something in this point were never
so much enjoined to be known and believed, yet none refuses to believe those
things, that are expressly extant in the holy Scriptures: nor is there any one
so impious as to contradict them. All the controversy is about meanings and
consequences, wherein an error and failing does no more infer disobedience, and
consequently damnation, then the simplicity of an obsequious servant, who not
rightly understanding the command of his Master, did yet obey as far as he was
able. But if we may believe the Promises of Jesus Christ, and obey his
Precepts, although we are mistaken in such a manner, what shall we want to the
full possession of a lively Faith? Is there yet any thing in the nature of
Faith, uncomprehended in those two parts? But there is a wonderful silence in
the Sacred Oracles concerning that third part; nor do I see how that Faith is
not perfect, which is lively; or how that is not lively, which consists in a
manner of its body and soul. But you will say, that we are necessarily to
believe many things, which are neither the very Precepts, nor the Promises. To
which I answer, that they so belong to one of these, that without them neither
can be rightly performed; of which sort is the Omnipotency of God, and the
like attributes, as also the Creation, Providence, etc. which though they be
neither the Precepts, nor the Promises, yet cannot the belief of the Promises
consist without them; so that an error in them is not now dangerous, but
altogether pestilent and pernicious. But it has been clearly proved that
errors about those doctrines, touching which the whole Discourse has been set
on foot, subvert neither member of Faith, at least in their own nature, and
unavoidably.

CHAP. III. That sincere Love toward God and Christ is sufficient to
Salvation; and that the same may be in such as err.
LEt us add an Appendix to this argument, which may even be in stead of a new
reason. Who therefore dares to condemn him to the punishment of Eternal Death,
in whom lives the sincere Love of his Creator and Redeemer? or what more
certain pledge of Eternal Happiness is there, then to love God and the Lord
Jesus Christ, with the whole heart, and with all the powers of the mind? This
indeed is too too manifest, inasmuch as the sum of our Obedience lies herein,
which though it be not the cause of our Salvation, yet is it at least the way,
and an evident argument and most certain sign thereof. Now if it shall be made
plainly to appear, that they, who are not able to extricate themselves out of
those perplexed and craggie Questions, whereof we have spoken, may
notwithstanding in the mean time love God and the Lord Jesus Christ, with all
the powers of their mind; what cause will there be, why we should not think
that the same persons may be saved? Logicians say, that the next and immediate
cause (as they term it) cannot be hindered, but it will out of hand produce the
effect. Let us therefore in the first place consider the next cause of this
Love; and then we shall see whether it may be in men so erring.

The perfect Love of any one is bred in the minds of the lovers chiefly for
three causes concurring together. 1. From the firm and constant memory of such
benefits as are past, and from the sense of such as are present. For gratitude
also is a part of Love. 2. From a certain hope and confidence of Supreme
Happiness to be obtained from the beloved thing, if you come to enjoy it. For
love languisheth without desire. 3. And finally, from a perfect apprehension, as
far as may be, of the soverain beauty and excellency of the object: which is
the true and principal cause of the Love it self. Now forasmuch as neither the
perfect Love of God, nor the perfect perception of his Excellency can fully
happen to us in this life: we mean not an absolute perfection of both, but such
as is the chiefest in its kind, namely as great as can exist in this state of
mortality. Nor do I understand, what can be further required unto perfect love.
For who sees not, that our will can no more abstain from loving a perceived
beauty, then fire from burning stubble put unto it? Which beauty, if it be
perfitly seen, a perfect love also will arise: but if no more then perfitly in
its kind, a love also perfect it its kind will arise. Certainly if any one
denies that soverain Love necessarily proceeds from such a cause, he
subverteth the Principles of Nature, which dictateth even to children, that
whatsoever seems good or beautiful, will also prove very pleasing; and so
Love will be increased according to the measure of the apprehended beauty. It
remains that we consider, whether such a perfect perception of the Excellency
of God and his Christ, accompanied with those two helping causes, may not be in
them, who comprehend not those hidden and abstruse Mysteries of the Divine
Essence. Which if it be in us who do not err, it may also be in them, or it
will be necessary to show a reason of the Prerogative which we have above them
in this behalf. And first, let us speak of God the Father. As for the
remembrance of his favors, they acknowledge themselves together with us to be
obliged unto him, perpetually making mention of his infinite mercies; the
chiefest whereof consists in taking us for his children. As for the certain
expectation of a very great benefit, what vaster hope, what lavisher wish can
be fained, then that which they together with us desire and expect from the
most high God? There remains behind the contemplation of his beauty and
majesty. I confess there is nothing in humane matters so exact, that can lend
a shadow to the image of so great a Majesty. Nevertheless as touching God the
Father, they do in a manner agree with us. For we are able to conceive nothing
so great and sublime touching him, which they also do not conceive. Nor does it
follow, that because they do not reach the curious subtilty in the received
distinction of Persons, therefore they cannot according to their capacity
conceive the beauty of the Divine Countenance, not to be seen by profane
minds; and consequently dedicate and worship the image of that unspeakable
Majesty within the Sanctuary of their breast. As if it were a hard matter to
have all manner of high conceptions touching him, whom you certainly know and
continually think to be the source and original of all goodness and beauty,
although you do not comprehend doctrines snarled and entangled with so many
knots. Enough seems to be already spoken touching God the Father. But what if
they have like, yea the same causes with us of Love toward the Son of God,
will any thing hinder them from being as capable of this love as we our selves
are? Let us begin from Hope. Do not they expect the same bountiful right hand
of the Lord Jesus, which will hereafter reach out a heavenly reward to all the
faithful? Do they not luxuriate in this wish? And who can choose but feel his
heart wounded with the love of Christ, who sets Christ before his eyes as
giving him the pay of his warfare? But you will say, that in making an estimate
of his favors they seem to be injurious to him, whilst they affirm, that the
Fathers anger toward us was appeased without the entermise of Christ, and that
no price, properly so called, was paid for our sins. For I perceive that almost
all, who in the article of the Holy Trinity dissent from us, are of that
opinion. I defend not the opinion of the men, nevertheless I perceive that they
judge a Redemption, properly so called, to be both absurd, and impossible. What
derogation therefore is it either to gratitude toward the Lord Jesus, or to
the holy memory of his merits, if they imagine that he did not those things for
our sakes, which could at no hand be done; when in the mean time he abundantly
performed all other things which might proceed from him toward us? For no other
thing is required to the most strict obligation of a benefit, then that the
benefactor do for ones sake all that he is able. But they acknowledge that the
Lord Jesus did for our salvation spare no pains, yea not his very life. And
though they do not think that his blood was spilt to appease God, and therefore
not so rigidly to make satisfaction for our sins, yet do they hold that it was
spent and given for our sakes; so that although they assert another special
scope and effect of his death, then we do, nevertheless they seem to
acknowledge the same merit in general. And who would not be imbued with a most
tender affection toward him, whom he supposes to have undergone a most bitter
death for his life's sake? who would not most ardently love him, whom he
thinks perpetually busied in conferring benefits upon him? To which if you
add an expectation of Supreme Happiness from his hands, it cannot now happen
otherwise but that the mind should melt in the resentment of a most delicate
flame. I come now to the excellency of the Lord Jesus, which being imperfitly
conceived by them, seems unable to excite a perfect love of it self. For how
great a diminution is it of his majesty and nobility, to have all that taken
away from him, which he had from all eternity? The question is not now, whether
their opinion be right, who think that all power both in heaven and earth was
at a certain time given to the Son of God, whereas he was formerly nothing but
the Word and chief Prophet. But if true Love be conversant about the things
that are present, and not about such as are past, (for neither does this
affection look backwards, to embrace the things that have been heretofore)
certainly it is more to the purpose to consider, what they imagine touching his
present, then what they conceive touching his past state and condition. For as
beauty, being quite extinct, exciteth no love of it self, because it flourished
heretofore: so if the same be at present very happy, it causes never the less
love and admiration of it self, because it was not such formerly. What
therefore do they attribute to our Savior at present? Even a majesty equal
unto God the Father, and such excellency as riseth-up above the highest pitch
that can be imagined. For they serve and worship him as the only Son of God,
as a true God, and disposing all things with his beck; who describes the laws
of the Universe according to his pleasure; who lays tasks and commands upon
the blessed Natives of heaven; who with the bridle of his invincible power
restrains the spirits banished out of heaven; to whom the stars and elements
willingly yield obedience, and who finally has the very nature of things
tributary to him, from whence he levyeth the tax of his Church, and the
assesment of his people. Now what derogation is it to his honor, that he is
beholding to his Father for the fortune of so great a Dominion? which thing
even we our selves dare not wholly deny. Will the opinion touching the
excellency of our Savior flag in the judgment of our love, when we shall
erect the eyes of our mind to his so sublime majesty, who is fairer then the
stars and all light, and more gay then the world it self? Why should I now
commemorate his immense goodness and wisdom, and his other Divine Splendour, at
the sight whereof the eyes of our mind grow dim? Why should I recount his
other praises, at which the poverty of humane language waxes dumb? All which
they without any tergiversation ascribe to Jesus Christ their Savior, although
they otherwise err in their opinion of him. Now we must either hold that those
things are not sufficient to excite soverain love toward God the Father, and
his Son: or that they cannot possibly be in those men, of whom we treat, if we
suppose them incapable of being touched with that holy ardour. Of which twain
since neither seems probable, there is no question to be made, but they also
may be ravished with that heavenly love, and so delivered from eternal
destruction, and put in possession of heaven, if so be they persevere therein
unto the end.

CHAP. IIII. That though Faith and the Holy Spirit be the Gifts of God, yet
erring persons have and may have them.
YEt some body may justly make a doubt, if Faith be the gift of God, and such a
perfect and entire love ought to proceed only from the impulsion of the Holy
Spirit, with what warrant we attribute that to the power of the receiver, which
lies in the mere pleasure of the donor. For if we have Faith no other way then
from the liberality of God, and that happens not to every one, certainly the
benefit of so great a gift consists in the mere good-pleasure of the
mu^ificent donor. Now shall we little manikins prescribe a law to his most free
arbitrament, according to the form whereof he must of necessity make good this
bounty of his to a certain sort of men? Or shall we arrogate that to our power,
which the sacred Oracles place in his hand? But is it credible that he will
lavish out so excellent gifts, (I speak of Faith and the Holy Spirit) on men
depraved with so many errors, and imbued with perverse opinions concerning him?
Admit they are naturally capable of so great a good, yet ought they not
presently to promise to themselves this grace of God, which no man, that was in
his wits, did ever imagine to be due to the deserts of men, much less to the
perverseness of so many errors. To which I answer: Had I to do with none but
them, who exclude all action of our free reception from the donation of Faith,
or imagine that Eternal Salvation is in good earnest promised to fewer, then it
is outwardly offered, it would be suitable to handle these matters in this place
more largely. But now forasmuch as not a few of the Reformed abhor those
errors, it would cross the design of my discourse to digress and expatiate
very far. It shall suffice to have touched a few, and those not of the best
arguments for the truer opinion, but such as first occur at present. In the
first place therefore we must choose one of these twain, either to imagine that
Eternal Salvation is upon condition of Faith really promised unto all, to whom
it is preached and offered; or that God offers that to certain men in word and
tongue, which he has decreed not to perform in deed and truth. Whosoever shall
make choice of the latter, I entreat them that they would invent a new name for
this thing, or confess it under the old name to be hypocrisy, that is,
guileful dissimulation and deceit, what they imprudently ascribe to the most
high God. But I have little to do with such, as had rather God should be taxed
and convinced of evil dissembling, then themselves of error: and therefore I
lay this first ground of my answer; that God is faithful, and willing seriously
to give Eternal Happiness, to whomsoever he offers the same by the preaching
of the Gospel, unless men themselves be wanting to their duty. But he has
excluded none of those, to whose ears the voice of so joyful a message comes,
desiring to gather even them that are unwilling, if so be they leave off their
unwillingness. Now if God in the preaching of the Gospel has promised Eternal
Salvation promiscuously to all, who desire to attain it, he has also promised
all means tending to this end, which are on his part necessarily required. For
he would be ridiculous, who should promise to a beggar that he would presently
give him an alms, and in the mean time be careless, yea unwilling to put his
hand to his purse, that he may reach-out what he has promised, especially if
the beggar can receive that alms no other way then by his reaching of it out.
Nor can he be said truly to promise any thing, who reserveth to himself a free
power to bestow something, without which what he has promised can by no means
be received and acquired. Far be it from us to have so impious a thought
toward God, as that we should suspect any evil concerning the reality of his
Words. To whomsoever he has promised any thing, he has truly and sincerely
promised it, nor will he circumvent any ones credulity with any slights and
put-offs. Nothing drove him to the indulgence of so great a benefit, but his
own good will toward mankind. Wherefore he is favorable to his own gifts,
and leaves no impediment to them, so that now nothing can be wanting on his
part to the attainment of them, which he does not willingly impart to all.
Whereby it comes to pass, that the gift of Faith, and whatsoever God
conferreth to the office of believers, although it be, like the very Salvation
it self, free and voluntary, and no ways deserved, yet is it denied to none,
who having heard the conditions of the New Covenant, does willingly assent to
them, and is not wanting to himself in so great mercy of God: which I would
have also understood concerning all spiritual gifts, without which his promise
cannot be acquired. For I will not deny that there are some, to the promiscuous
bestowing whereof he has engaged his faith to none; which lying out of the
direct road that leads to the kingdom of heaven, are not pertinent to the
thing in hand. But the conditions which are on Gods part required to the nature
of the New Covenant, are already, or shall certainly be fulfilled by God: all
that remains is, that the other party will be mindful of so holy a
stipulation, and both believe and obey this Covenant. Which latter, since it
may agree to this sort of men, whereof we speak, as has been made evident from
the precedent discourse, what is there lacking unto them, being comprised in
this transaction of God with men, to the full freedom and property of all the
gifts and promises? For the errors of the understanding, especially in things
not concerning the very nature of the Covenant, cannot hinder them from reaping
the fruit thereof, in that (as we have Already shown) the knowledge of those
things is out of the conditions of the Covenant, (that is, lively Faith and
Obedience) and therefore may be absent, and depraved, whilst in the mean time
those conditions remain entire. But of these things we will more largely treat
in the ensuing Chapter.

CHAP. V. That nothing but Disobedience and Unbelief exclude a man from Eternal
Salvation; and that such as err, are free from these. Whether bare Errors of
the Understanding damn a man.
WHat it is lawful for almighty God to do toward mankind, is questioned by
none, that is not ignorant of his absolute dominion. What he is willing and
wont to do, and how he orders and guides his commands, and the whole
commonwealth of the world, with rewards and penalties, is a thing right worthy
to be taken into consideration. Certainly we are all born in a Kingdom, which
is by the goodness of the most high God made so mild and pleasant to us, that
all the sweetness of liberty is sordid in comparison thereof. But he shows
himself a Father, in stead of a Lord and Prince, unto a great part of men, of
which alone we will at present discourse. For we who have heard the voice of
his Promises, are all called from the meanness of our rank to the condition of
the Divine Adoption. To enjoy so great felicity as it is happy: so to mis^ it
is very wretched and calamitous. It therefore very much concerns men, to
foresee by what steps they may be tumbled down from so great a height. And they
who have already got-up so high, that they have a hope of Eternal Salvation
upon the conditions of the New Covenant, cannot be pulled down from their
station but by unbelief and disobedience. For since in this last Covenant
nothing is required of us besides a lively Faith, concerning which we have
formerly spoken, certainly we can by no other means violate the Holy Engagement
of that compact, then if we become destitute of that very faith, which cannot
be done without the crime of manifest disobedience. For it is enjoined and
commanded us, unless we had rather perish. And what else is faith then
obedience to God under a certain hope and confidence of his promises? As
Abraham being called obeyed by faith, Heb. 11. ^. wherefore if this one rock of
disobedience be avoided, we have no cause to fear the shipwreck of our
salvation. It now remains to be considered, whether bare errors of the mind
are disobedience. That they are not so, is even from hence apparent, because
they consist in the mistaking of the understanding, but this in the pravity of
the will. Again, since God regards not the actions themselves, but the mind
of the agents, who sees not that they who desiring from their hearts to obey,
yet through error and imprudence do not so, cannot be justly accused of
disobedience? A servant does not refuse his service, if not rightly
apprehending his masters will, he fulfilleth it according to his understanding;
much less may he be punished for disobedience, and that with eternal
punishment. Nor does God so much regard the effect as the decree of our
counsel. And if you look to the event of the thing, neither did Abraham indeed
obey God, commanding to sacrifice his son Isaac, yet did he obey in his heart
and mind. For he was willing to obey God, and did all he could, being
prohibited by the Angel to do the rest, Genesis 22. Suppose it to be commanded
that we believe the true explication of the Holy Trinity. Such as simply err
do not indeed obey this precept, for they dissent from such as are orthodox,
yet do they obey in their mind and heart, because they are willing to believe,
and do believe all that which they think to be true, although they do not hit
in all things the genuine sense of that which is true. And so they do what they
are able, being hindered by ignorance from doing more. But you will say, that
ignorance is gross and affected. I excuse not that which is affected, such as
was in them, who whilst the Apostles were living, or their successors, did err
willingly and of set purpose. For this was mere malice. But they who after so
great darkness had bespread the Church, do not discern the rising light from
counterfeit torches, cannot be said to sin out of malice and through their own
fault, as shall also hereafter be more largely handled. But what if it has
been shown that it is not commanded, nor pertains to the nature of our faith
and obedience? Shall they presently be disobedient, who do not fully understand
a mystery, which is nowhere commanded to be fully understood? In short, whether
they, who are called Socinians, do sin out of a bare error of mind, we shall
see hereafter. It is sufficient for me at present to evince, that bare errors
of mind are not punished by God with eternal punishment under the New
Covenant. Elegant is that of Bernard, Nothing burns in Hell, but our own will.
For it only is capable of receiving the filthiness of sin: for which in the
whole Universe there had been no place, unless God had left to intelligent
creatures a free and entire will. Unless (I say) God had discharged the will
from all condition of servitude, all proof of virtue had perished together with
the license of sinning. Although very many had rather acknowledge God the
author of sin, then the bounteous giver of this liberty. Of which liberty
notwithstanding it is an evident sign, that we abuse it alone to the license
of sinning: so that the failing of our understanding deservedly seems worthy
of commiseration and pardon, whereas the pravity of our will deserves hatred
and punishment. It is therefore no wonder if God punishes this, rather then
the other, with eternal destruction; because in this there is place for guilt,
in the other only for imbecility. But he never punished imbecility and
ignorance for contumacie, especially with extreme and everlasting punishment.
Likewise in the Law of Moses, whereof he was so severe an exactor, as that he
ratified the reverence of one ceremony with the blood of a man that went to
gather sticks, Number. 15. yet did he leave pardon for error, and a refuge for
ignorance, and that in the most grievous crimes, which concern the life and
safety of a man. The rigor of the Mosaic Law pardons his offense who killed
a man unawares, and grants him a repeal after the death of the High Priest.
And why should not also the lenity of the Christian Covenant absolve the fault
of such as err, after the death of Christ our High Priest, whose yoke is
sweet, and burden light, and who refuses not to disburthen and case us of the
fardle of our sins? who has left on record in the latter end of his Testament,
how worthy he accounted errors of pardon, whilst in the most cruel nick of his
death he prayed for those that erred, Luke 23. Indeed to pray for them who sin
unto death, it is not lawful: nor would the Lord ever have done that amidst the
sacrilegious boldness of so great a crime, had he not taken pity on their
unhappie ignorance. Forgive them, says he. For what reason? Because they know
not what they do. Now if in the ignorance of so great a murder there remained,
even in our Saviors judgment, some place for pardon, shall we with our
censures damn to eternal punishment the mere clouds of the mind, and harmless
ignorance? But you will say, Shall we hold that ignorance and errors are never
punished with everlasting destruction? What shall become of the souls of so
many thousand Infidels? what of those barbarous Brasilians, and others of that
sort, the greatest part whereof have not had so much as a suspicion touching
God and Christ? Shall we say that these shall be punished for contumacie, who
know not any law, from whose obedience they may revolt? Shall not the ignorance
of God and Christ in them undergo everlasting punishment? In the first place, I
deny that they are in any sort punished, to whose ears the sound of the saving
doctrine never came, and say that they are only left in that wretched
condition, to which they were liable by their very birth. For inasmuch as the
punishment of our first parent derived the most wretched state of eternal death
to his posterity, God might according to his wisdom and good-pleasure exempt
whom he would from this misery, leaving the rest in the same. For who shall
prescribe a law to his absolute power? or set bounds to his clemency? Those
therefore, to whom he has revealed his law, he punishes as rebels, unless
they obey, not with any new kind of punishment, (especially after death) but
only by leaving them in their miserable state together with the rest. Others,
to whom he has not vouchsafed so great a benefit, he leaves indeed in the
same state, but does not therefore punish. For the reason of eternal death, as
it is to be called a punishment, consists not in the appointment of a new
punishment, but in a certain ademption of the Divine Grace, which might free
them out of the servitude of the old punishment; which certainly is not taken
away from them, to whom it was never offered. But some one will reply, Why
should those wretched Ignorants be in the same condition with the impious and
disobedient? As if God were unjust toward those, because he uses clemency
toward these. Does the Lord of the vine yard do wrong to the laborers, when
he recompenseth the unequal merits of sundry persons with one reward, not by
taking somewhat away from them that were more deserving, but only by adding
somewhat to them that were less deserving? Mat. 20. But if something may be
added to their reward, who are less deserving, without wrong to those who are
more deserving; something also may be taken away from their punishment, who are
more deserving, without wrong to them who are less deserving. Suppose that one
has promised liberty to Titius his captive upon a certain condition, without
promising any thing to Sejus. Titius for his contumacie loses the reward,
receiving nothing from his master, but remaining captive and miserable together
with Sejus. Can Sejus now complain, that he being innocent, endures the same
things with Titius who was disobedient? Titius may rather acknowledge the
clemency of his master, who would content himself with the mere ademption of
the reward. As therefore innocent Sejus is not punished by his master, although
he be left in the same misery with guilty Titius: so neither shall the ignorant
Brasilians be hereafter punished by not receiving that which was never promised
to them. These may rather ponder on the grievous punishment of their
contumacie, who see their Salvation, and pine away for having forsaken it. We
have, I suppose, shown sufficiently, that such Ignorants, whereof we speak, are
not punished. But if we grant that they also are punished, shall they be
presently punished for their ignorance? As if that ignorance were that which
ought to be punished, and is not it self rather a certain punishment. Who
knows not that God oftentimes avengeth wickedness and crimes with errors? Who
would not reckon such ignorance amongst the horrid punishments of God? This
therefore will remain to be enquired further, for what causes he has punished
them with so great blindness? But who has known the thoughts of the Lord? or
who has been his counselor? There is no cause why any one should fish this
secret out of me, but that I certainly know that God proceeds slowly and
unwillingly to punishment, and that every one is undoubtedly the author of his
own destruction. Of all them that were wicked and included under sin, the most
high God might take pity on some, and punish others. So that the cause of this
punishment should, as it seems, be sought-for, not in the ignorance but the
wickedness of men, and in the special good-pleasure of the wise God. Let us
proceed further. Suppose those barbarous Brasilians to be punished for
ignorance. What is this to our errors? Their ignorance takes away all faith,
religion, and piety. We speak of the bare errors of the mind, which are so far
from weakening faith, or religion, that they ought, under the penalty of
everlasting destruction, to be free even from all contagion of wickedness.
Finally, admit that the Brasilians are punished for the bare ignorance of their
mind, (which notwithstanding we do not grant) shall we therefore say that the
same ignorance is punished by God with so grievous and bitter a punishment in
our erroneous ones? The punishment of those does infinitely differ from the
punishment of these. It is an easy matter to lose such things as the mind
with a flattering hope never promised to it self. The reward of eternal Life is
not promised to them, no hope of immortality given them, no taste of
everlasting joy offered to them: they never endeavored to enter in through the
strait gate; to deny themselves; they have not attempted to bear their cross;
to follow their Savior through the afflictions of this world. But the greatest
part of them who err through the bare imbecility of their wit, have omitted
nothing to the most certain hope of Salvation, and to all the toil of a pious
life, and to the tolerance of Christ's cross. Shall we imagine that these shall
for their mere ignorance, and the mistakes of their understanding, be discarded
from the forethought and foretasted expectation of eternal joy? Shall we think
that their labors shall be in vain, and their hope and faith vanish into
smoke? Certainly this would be a most wretched condition, and not to be
compared with that punishment of those Barbarians. So that it can at no hand
seem probable to any man, who sets before his eyes the infinite grace and
mercy of God, especially under the new Covenant, that ignorance should have so
severe a punishment inflicted on it.

CHAP. VI. That the things necessary to be known unto Salvation, are few and
very simple, and easy to be understood b^ the simplest. Such is not the common
doctrine touching the Trinity.
THere are not wanting some, amongst so many families of Christians, who
im^gine certain particular men, whom they call Reprobates, to be by name
excluded from the Heavenly Inheritance: yet do the opinions of almost all
dissenting parties herein agree, that the way to Salvation is beforehand
shut-up and obstructed to no sort of men. And indeed, not without good reason.
For since they are all equal in the sight of the most high God, and no man's
dignity exempteth him out of the condition of the rest, there is no respect of
persons with God, no regard of eminency. He vieweth not the minds of men
through those coverings of the body, or through the dress and ornament of the
outward fortune, but naked and sequestered from all disguises; and therefore the
condition, which is for the most part without the verge of the man himself,
ought to difference none before him. As for the counsel therefore of the great
God, all are alike destinated to Eternal Happiness, whether they be men or
women, young or old; clad in scarlet, or courser wool; having so much land that
they cannot count it, or having no land to count; in short, whether they be
born to rule, or servitude; exercise liberal, or manual arts, all are
promiscuously and in the same degree called to that Heavenly Inheritance. How
few of all these can penetrate into those abstruser secrets of sublime
doctrines? And therefore by the most wise counsel of God, the heads necessary
to salvation are so ordered, that they may without any pains be understood and
comprehended by all. Howbeit that doctrine, touching which the present
discourse is intended, is so intricate and hard, and does so far surpass the
apprehension of the simpler sort, that very few of them can promise Salvation
to themselves, if it be prejudicial to any one to have a misunderstanding of
these things. For the question is not concerning the Holy Trinity, which all
confess and adore, even they who are nicknamed Samosatenians, but touching the
difference of Essences and Persons, touching the communication of properties,
touching those Mysteries, which no man ever saw, nor sufficiently understood.
These things rise-up so high above our imbecility, and so great a crop of
thorns and briars springs up when they begin once to be discussed, that
nature seldom produces so happy a wit, as can in good earnest rid himself out
of that brake. If any one of the duller sort (and who seems acute enough for
so subtle things?) stick in those briars, why should we impute that to his
wickedness, which is due to the weakness of his wit? The very sublimity of the
things, argues their difficulty, as also the excellency of the object, which
never was, never will be comprehended by the mind of man. And therefore not
long after the Apostles times, a great bickering about these things disturbed
the whole world, and did so exercise the wits of the Fathers, that after so
many toils and Councels, neither did all agree with one another, nor every one
with himself. By so much easier a task it is to search the Majesty of God, then
comprehend it. Which curiosity, how fatal it proved to the world, let us
believe the complaint of Hilary, who pronounces the Bishops of France happy,
in that they had neither forged, nor received, nor known any other Confession,
then that old and most simple one, which had from the age of the Apostles been
received in all Churches. O that we had rather be happy with those French
Bishops, then by being over-wise disturb the quiet of the Church, or banish out
of heaven such souls as are incapable of so great Mysteries! How many men
truly pious and simple shall you find, who are not able to maintain and
defend their own opinion, though sometimes true? If these happen to doubt of
the truth, or through imprudencie to slip in such matters, shall they presently
be excluded from the entrance both of Heaven and the Church, as enemies of God
and Christ? What shall the wretches do, whilst oftentimes they hang in suspense
between a great show of probability on both sides? And why should not the
knowledge of such things, as are altogether requisite to Salvation, be as
obvious to the simple, as to learned wits? Has God paved an easier way to
Salvation for the learned and ingenious, then for others? Nor is it very
material, that the ruder sort may apprehend by the teaching of the more
learned, what they perhaps cannot of themselves attain unto. For since amongst
the learned themselves there are so many controversies, either the ruder sort
shall judge of them by their own understanding, which is all one, (for it is as
hard to determine between the arguments on both sides, as between true and
false opinions) or shall hand over head follow the authority of others. But if
the choice of the true opinion exceeds their ability, so that they are
altogether enforced to follow others without any premised deliberation; what
fault of theirs will it be, when they are mistaken? Therefore they shall either
be punished guiltless for the fault of others, or if they perish guilty, their
only offense will be this, namely, that they are somewhat dull; which is
ridiculous. For let us suppose, what often comes to pass, that there are
certain simple men of an innocent life, and who according to the power of their
mortality live piously and devoutly: let us also suppose, what often falls
out, that there are learned and ingenious men, but overwhelmed with sins and
trespasses. In both perhaps God may find just cause of punishment: but he
sets not so high an estimate on wits, as to deal more severely with better
men only for their rudeness, then with the worst of men, and such as by their
very ingratitude for his gifts provoke his vengeance. But he should deal more
severely with better men, were a certain and infallible way to Salvation quite
shut up to them for the dullness of their wit; and only an uncertain, and
slippery one, depending on another wit or piety, left them. And if, on the
contrary, wicked men, so they be ingenious, have always (if they please) a
privilege to go through the right and saying path. But you will say, God is
bound to none, and when he finds in both a cause of just severity, though not
equal, he may according to his own good pleasure prosecute his right in those,
and pardon these their greater sins. I answer: What God may do, is not here so
much questioned, as what he will, and is wont to do. And therefore though we
should grant, that he may do this, yet would it not as yet appear, that he
will, and is wont to do so. For God may do many things toward men, without
impeachment to his justice, which otherwise his wonted mercy seems not to
permit. But would not a respect of persons be by this means apparently ascribed
unto God, if before him learned men should be in a better condition, then
simple ones? And yet notwithstanding he is wont to reveal his mysteries not to
the wise of this world, but to the simple and ignorant, as the face of the
Primitive Church witnesses, which had very few learned men: which very thing
evinceth the condition of simple men in point of Religion, to be if not better,
yet at least equal to that of the learned. I am sorry to dwell longer on a
thing so evident. For these things cannot be obscure to any one, but him, who
being puffed up with a vain confidence of himself, and his knowledge, has
quite evaporated and breathed-out all charity and mildness of Christian
forbearance. And therefore such as err are oftentimes by us accused of
wickedness, not that they themselves err grievously, but because they think us
to err grievously. Our pride may seek what pretenses she pleases, yet does
she for the most part plead her own cause: and a great part of those that err
are damned and anathematized not so much for their own ignorance, as for their
dissent from us.

CHAP. VII. That there is not in this life a perfect knowledge of God, and of
Divine Mysteries, but in the other life; and that Faith, Hope, and Charity, are
sufficient to Salvation.
IF in the business of our Salvation a difference were made between the very
work of our felicity, and such means as tend thereunto, we should esteem fewer
things as necessary to be known, and a far easier course might be taken to
repair concord in the Church. Whereas now, whilst we confound the means with
the end, it comes to pass that in a preposterous order we will have that which
was first in the intention, to be also first in the execution, when
notwithstanding the means do in their nature so follow the end, as to go before
it in time. What is it to which the desire of the noblest minds aspireth? Even
the pleasure of Eternal Joy, which man's mind cannot so much as conceive,
without the exact knowledge of God. But that contemplation, happy even to
envy, awaiteth us in the heavens: nor can the narrowness of our earthly temper
in this frailty comprehend it. As therefore he would be ridiculous, who should
hope for the fruit of soverain happiness in this life: so are we also seized
with a very foolish humor, whilst in this Inn of our mortality we require of
all the suitors for heaven, a perfect knowledge of Gods nature: which is not a
taste or hansel of our felicity, but the very top and complement thereof. If
the capacity of our understanding does (as has been said) in vain attempt to
comprehend this fully on the earth, it is fit that we, together with the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 13. knowing and prophesying in part, expect the perfection that
is to come. But with what spaces shall we circumscribe that wandering and
imperfit knowledge? It is the safest way to set those limits thereunto, which
the very nature of the New Covenant has appointed. Namely, that we chiefly and
necessarily inculcate on all only that knowledge of God and Christ, without
which those things cannot consist, which are required of us by virtue of the
New Covenant. Of which sort are a firm confidence placed in God and his Christ,
together with a hope of his promises, and perfect charity. All these things are
easily consistent with those mistakes about the subtle search into the nature
of God and Christ. Moreover, the greatest difficulty in such dissentions is for
the most part wont to arise about the state of our Savior, before he repaired
the lapsed condition of men. Howbeit, if we make a true estimate of the matter,
although this mystery of his Eternity be true and altogether Divine, yet does
it not properly belong to us, to whom he has presented and revealed himself a
Mediator in a humane nature and condition only. So that they are altogether
worthy of excuse, who see and look upon him only in that part, wherein he
showed himself to mankind. For as they lose not the rewards of a Covenant, who
do not exactly know and comprehend his nature, with whom, and by the entermise
of whom, they enter into league, so that they know both so far forth, as the
reason of the Covenant, and common utility requires: so neither seem they
exclusible from heaven, who in the knowledge of God and Christ the Mediator
want nothing to the reason and observance of the New Covenant, although they
rise not up to the sublimer contemplation of both. Especially since the
greatest part of them, who at this day recede from the common sense of the
Church in so great a matter, are not out of any rashness so persuaded touching
the Son of God, but rather out of a pious fear, lest they should detract from
the Father somewhat of his honor. Wherein if they unwittingly offend against
the Son out of love to the Father, (so that improbity mingle not it self with
their error) it seems very credible, that the Son will, for the very love of
the Father, forgive them this error. For he gave a notable proof of his
meekness, when he prayed for his ignorant murderers, as we also did before
hint. What, think we, will not he do for the love of the Father, who for the
love of Men forgave so great an injury to his enemies? Now if he out of love to
mankind doubted not to assume the form of a servant, and really to endure
extreme disgraces, certainly he will bear with the errors of men, who do not
conceive worthily enough of his Majesty and Dignity, especially that which is
past. Will he, who for the sakes of men did of his own accord debase himself to
the lowest condition, punish them for this very thing, namely, because they out
of ignorance think more meanly of his condition, then is fit? Especially when
he himself by his debasement did in a manner give an accasion of such ignorance.
Certainly it is incredible, that he who of his own accord underwent for the
sins of men a reproachful kind of death, will not pardon to humane weakness a
simple opinion, that derogates something from his ancient Excellency, if so be
the error be harmless, and removed from all sin of malice. More might be said
on this occasion; but neither is it my intention to say all things, and what
has been spoken will suffice courteous judgments. As for moody dispositions,
we may sooner wish, then hope to bring them from their inbred prejudices. Now
let us descend to such things as are more special.

CHAP. VIII. A General Apology for the Socinians, that they are not of such a
Persuasion out of Ambition, Avarice, Pleasure, or Superstition, nor offend out
of any Malice, but only out of the Care of their Salvation.
AY me! what contumacie is this, and scorning to obey, that we men depart from
our heavenly allegiance in nothing sooner, then that which has most accurately
been enjoined and prescribed? Does that unhappie exile of heaven, soliciting
the earth to a society of rebellion, tempt us in that part chiefly, where he
may make us most guilty of Treason? Or rather, did the Divine Providence more
strictly command that, wherein he most suspected our obedience? Whatsoever it
be, certainly the more frequently mutual love and good will is enjoined us in
the sacred Oracles, the more obstinately do we refuse it. And (which is the
more to be lamented) we follow them as guides herein, who ought at no hand to
go before us, I mean the Ministers and Teachers of Religion, who being cozened
with the zeal of inhumane piety, make it a part of our duty to hate dissenters.
A great part of them begins to hate the persons before the vices, and (which
is a thing very unjust) under a pretense of the public cause they exercise
private hatred. Yea further, to an inexpiable and most hateful War, the bare
name of parties is sufficient: and in a preposterous order the judgment here
follows hatred and enmity, as elsewhere it does love. Besides, it is
prejudicial to the truth to have been uttered or defended by such as err; nor
is virtue valued at her worth in them, who have been once blasted with the
suspicion and prejudice of errors. No honesty, guilty of the least heresy, is
safe in the Church of Rome: nor is the honesty of a Catholic more gently dealt
withal amongst Protestants, who being themselves also divided into sundry
factions, with proud determinations denounce heaven or hell to one another.
There is no remembrance of mortality; no pardon to mistaking, anywhere.
Although you offend not in your manners, yet is it a capital offense to trip in
the understanding of Divine matters. Yet has the public hatred of the world
more easily conspired against no sort of men, then against those who commonly
pass under the name of Socinians or Photinians. Certainly an unhappie race of
men, and amidst so many injuries and reproaches, honest in a manner gratis. For
neither do I excuse the errors which they hold. The thing I wonder at is this,
How men so distant from all ambition and avarice, and innocent in all the parts
of their life, should be so grievously mistaken. To aim at high matters, is the
undoing of very many wits, born and framed to the best things. But this vice,
arising from the desire of glory, has there no place, (if other lusts be
absent) where ambition finds not room enough for her swelling to expatiate
in. For what man, being well in his wits, would promise to himself a name of
renown amongst the most contemned and universally-hated part of the ignoble
vulgar? Who would seek after the rays of an illustrious fame amidst the
darkness of obscurity, who might find it in the light and sunshine? As we see
very many of them might do, whom neither the splendour of their birth, nor their
wit and learning exempteth from a voluntary debasement. Nor can you justly
charge them with avarice, a great part of whom does generously despise all
means of growing rich; and you shall hardly find anywhere either poorer men,
or such as by the rule of their sect, are necessitated to give more then they.
There remains superstition, whose timorous nature always condemns another
liberty in that which she her self does with a scrupulous religion refuse.
Certainly Superstition is either banished from amongst them, or has there
put-off that which was in her nature most odious, since they in all their
doctrines so dissent from others, as that they exclude none either from eternal
Salvation, or from brotherly communion, but such a one as is a patron of
manifest vice. Which very carriage wipeth away even the least suspicion of
pride, which never debaseth her self unto so great modesty, as not to prescribe
that truth, which she arrogateth to her self, to be held and observed by all
others almost under a form: so that I am utterly unable to find out the cause,
why they should expose themselves to the cruel hatred of all, and to dangers,
unless it be an ardent desire to please God, and study of true piety. In which
regard they are worthy of more pardon, if any disaster befall them in the
search of sublime things. For indeed I cannot apprehend what it is that
inflameth us with so implacable prejudice against them, when neither the
sweetness of fame, nor the spur of riches, nor the allurements of a dissolute
life, but only the sollicitous care of their salvation, has cast them into
these straits. We ought rather to favor the wretches, and reach forth a saving
right hand to them, even against their will. Whereas now on the contrary we
reject them suing for our favor, and had rather hate and abominate, then
instruct them in a friendly manner. But by what right, or for what demerit of
theirs? Is it because they defend things. which they conceive to be true, with
so great prejudice to their honor and security? What? would we have them
sacrifice their faith and conscience on the pleasure of others? Or is it
because they think those things to be true, which are false? Truly we are very
injurious to mortality, if we suppose the errors and failings of our mind to
be crimes. You will say, They sin of set purpose: and fall not casually, but by
a voluntary slip. But who told you so? Or who has discovered unto you their
intimate counsels? Certainly not charity, which is an enemy to evil surmises,
but bitterness and malignity of spirit, which is apt to make a sinister
construction of another meaning. Although they had no evident proof of their
innocence, yet in a doubtful matter, and such as is known only to the judge of
hearts, it became us not to make any sad decree against them. How much less can
they be condemned, when there appears nothing that might invite and drive
them to so wretched and dangerous malice? we should at least here make use of
that notable saying of Piso's, For what advantage is this done? For if they be
neither seized with a longing after honors and riches, nor with an itch of
pleasures, nor can have any hopes of earthly solace; and if they conform their
life to the prescript of that most holy Law, where lies the incitement to so
great improbity, as that they should purposely procure to themselves so many
troubles together with eternal destruction?

CHAP. IX. An Answer to the Objection about rejecting the Consent of the
Church, for the Authority of the Scripture only.
BUt you will say, that they have been so daring as to question a Mystery for
so many ages since received by all the Christian world with great applause, and
venerable for its very antiquity, and ratified by the authority of so many Holy
Fathers and Councels: and so are come to the very height of wickedness, in
attempting to discuss with sacrilegious curiosity such things as ought to be
believed. The reprehension then is this, that they have begun to make a doubt
of so certain a thing. But what? Is it unlawful to busy your wit about a thing
of undoubted truth, that after a more strict examination you may the sooner
impetrate assent from your self? Certainly it is a disparagement to the Truth,
if we suppose her to be afraid of men's judgments. For neither is it unbecoming
her to plead for herself at the bar of Reason, that she may bravely overcome,
and draw the very judge to her side: whereas if she decline the trial of this
court, she suffers not a little in the confidence of her cause. For though we
may not enquire into the truth of the Divine Oracle, yet we both may and ought
into the true meaning thereof: and they are slanderers, who say that the
Socinians believe not the words of the Scripture, because they doubt of the
received sense. But what if they seem also to have just causes of doubting? For
they conceive that the Holy Fathers, and the consent of so many ages, do add
more dignity and veneration, then stress to the doctrine of the Trinity. How
well grounded this conceit is, I dispute not. However, certain it is, that they
are not the first who have charged the public authority of the Church, and the
consent of many Synods and ages, with the suspicion of most grievous crimes.
For since they see the foresaid authority in many other things of great moment,
not only accused, but also convicted of falsehood* what so heinous crime have
they committed, who dare not entrust their faith and opinion of Divine things
unto her? For of sixteen ages, the twelve latter cannot warrant many things to
the greatest part of Christians. It cannot be denied that the Socinians going
farther then others, do also reject the consent of the four former, but
especially of the third and fourth ages. For since the Truth has found little
assurance in humane authority for so many ages of the lowest antiquity, they
thought that their opinions were to be squared only by the rule of the holy
Scripture. Wherein truly they could not err so greatly, but that they had a
far greater cause of erring. For what could the faith of the Church, being once
suspected, ratify to them? how could they know, that the Christian world has
groaned under the darkness of errors no longer then for ten or twelve ages? Or
that those ancient times had any privilege above the following ones, so that
they could not err? They saw them to be men, yea such men as were, alas!
defiled for a great part with vices and crimes. Nor could they be ignorant of
the factions amongst the Nicene Fathers, nor of their evident ambition, nor of
the evil arts of sundry others, nor of the shameful errors of men otherwise
most holy. And though it were to be held that about the three hundredth year of
Salvation the Church did still retain the primitive Truth, yet in so many
dissentions, and so many adverse Councels, they judged that at least the choice
of the truer opinion did pertain to themselves. In choosing which, they ought
not to follow the judgment of the successive Church, which had been already
justly condemned in many points of fait^ but the infallible rule of the holy
Scripture. For how could the Church warrant unto them the opinion of others,
when she was not able to make good her own. Besides, they called to mind the
genius of that age, and the dispositions of those Fathers, concerning whom that
great man Justus Lipsius in our age wrote, that many did then so put-on Christ
by an outward profession, that in their mind they did not put-off Plato. And
therefore they not without cause suspected, that in many heads of doctrine,
plain words were wrested to foreign and Philosphical senses, whilst the Fathers
did with ingenious comments tack the mysteries of their Philosophy to the word
of God, that they might not seem to have learned in vain. For what should be
the cause, say they, that touching the received explication of the holy
Trinity, Plato and Trismegistus speak more clearly, then the sacred Scripture?
Or what reason should there be, why the Scripture should more timorously and
obscurely deliver so holy a Mystery, then the foresaid Philosophers? These and
the like things, though they do not acquit them of error, yet do they clear
them from the imputation of rashness. For nothing is more certain, then that
the doctrine of Christ is not built on so weak a foundation, as some constitute
in humane authority. Now did we heretofore wrest these arms out of the hands of
Papists, that we our selves might use them against others? Certainly it
becomes not us either to take their weapons, or deliver ours up to them: but
when we are summoned to the tribunal of the holy Scripture only, we ought not
to yield this p^aise to the Adversaries, that they should seem to hope better
then we concerning the equity and favor of so great a judge.

CHAP. X. An Answer to three other Objections: a Comparison of Calvin 's
Doctrine touching Fatal Predestination, with the Doctrine of others.
BUt it will be further objected, that the Socinians impiously contradict the
manifest words of the sacred Scripture, and scornfully reject the clear Truth
coming-in upon them. To which I answer, That whatsoever pains and travel they
undertake in this business, is employed not against the holy Trinity, (as they
are unjustly defamed) nor against the Sacred Scripture, but against the Humane
Explications of both. Hence we may see that they willingly assent and give
credit to all the Sacred Oracles touching this matter, only rejecting certain
interpretations and forms, sprung-up certain ages after. They believe that they
are according to the command of Christ to be baptized into the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, Matthew. 28. They believe those
three sacred Witnesses in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Spirit, 1 John 5. They acknowledge that in the beginning was the Word, and the Word was a
God, Joh. 1. yet such a one, to whom all power in heaven and earth was given,
as he speaks of himself, Matthew. 28. It would be tedious to recko^ up all the
Scripture-testimonics of this kind, to which they give credence without any
exception. Those hard and subtle opinions concerning the Essence and Person of
God, concerning the communication of properties, and others of that batch, they
either understand not, or think them repugnant to the simple and plain word of
God. Give us leave, say they, to be ignorant of such things as are believed
with danger. In these so subtle and thorny explications, if they after the
manner of men chance to err, shall they presently be termed the enemies of God
and Christ? Shall there be found no pardon for an error in so great difficulty
of things; no excuse for weakness? which notwithstanding we ingeniously seek
even for the greatest crimes, though we be never so well provided of means to
avoid them. Are they, who out of ignorance and error violate the Edicts of
Princes, acquitted from the crime of treason? and shall he that offends about
the Divine Oracles, in our opinion, have no refuge for his weakness in the
mercy of the Heavenly Father? But you will reply, that their Blasphemies are
horrid, wherein impiety leaves no place for pity; and reproachful against the
Son of God, and overthrowing the foundation of our faith. To which I answer,
that if there have been any amongst them of a more intemperate tongue or quill,
they are infamous not only with us, but also with them. But what is here meant
by the Foundation of Faith, I do not sufficiently perceive. It has been
abundantly evidenced before, that such errors do necessarily take away neither
our Faith nor our Salvation. For it is not the foundation of Salvation, to know
his Essence, who has promised the salvation to us, so that we have no impious
and contumelious opinion of him: as the ignorance of the nature of the promiser
takes not away the certainty of the promise, unless he has promised us
anything under the condition of such knowledge. As for the knowledge of the
Father, they therein do in a manner agree with us. They likewise adore and
reverence with Divine worship the Son of God, as the author and mediator of
their Salvation, the heir and Lord of the Universe, and the General of our
warfare. But you will here reply, that they deny his eternity. I answer, that
they together with holy Paul care not much to know any thing, but Jesus Christ,
and him crucified; and had rather with so great an Apostle rest in the
simplicity of this knowledge, then either with Arius to ascend to non-enliti^s,
or with Athanasius to co-essentialities. As for the honor which they give to
the Holy Spirit, the greatness thereof appears, in that they scarce
distinguish him from the Supreme Father. Shall they then be said to blaspheme
against these, if they be somewhat mistaken in the other knowledge of them?
Indeed many opinions are drawn out of their doctrines, that the wretches may be
loaded with more envy, and that by them, who whilst they are so vigilant in
other men's errors, are fast asleep in their own. But if all the chaff were to
be sifted out of humane opinions, I would wish that a great part of the
Reformed Churches would labor to defend their own cause, before they undertake
to oppose that of others: but those above all, who have from the age of
Chrysippus recalled down to these very times that secret and inevitable law of
Fate* and who hold also, that the sins and destruction of mankind, and finally
all and singular motions and impulsions of our will, proceed from the Decree of
Eternal Destiny; to whom this false persuasion also seems to be fatal. From
which opinion, if we lay aside prejudice, more and more shameful errors will be
deduced, then out of the books of Socinians. For which is more reproachful unto
God, to hold that he is one as well in Person, as Essence; or (that I may
clothe naked injustice with soft words) to bring-him-in punishing men, for not
doing those things, which by his own procurement were impossible? Is it more
absurd to conceive that there is one Essence of the Father, another of the Son,
then that God (I shudder to speak it) has one thing open in his tongue, and
another thing, contrary thereunto, shut-up in his breast? This is reproach
enough to the most high God, although we do not add, that this dissimulation
is joined with deceit? Is the dignity of the Holy Spirit more traduced, whilst
he is said to be only the virtue and power of God; then the goodness of God,
whilst he is held the author of sin? which consequence does also flow by a
fatal and inevitable flux from that doctrine of Fate. For he that decreed men
should necessarily sin, certainly would have them sin: otherwise he would have
decreed every thing against his own desire. Now he, whose decree and will the
event does immutably follow, may certainly be termed the cause of that event,
whether he effect it by himself, or by another. Finally, is it a greater
derogation to the dignity of Christ, to deny two natures in him, lest we should
make him two persons, then to the wisdom of God, to affirm that he would
persuade men to that, whereto nevertheless he has not persuaded them, namely
that he would give salvation unto all, when notwithstanding he has designed it
only to a few? Truly if we look more narrowly into the matter, the doctrine of
the Socinians touching the Holy Trinity, is not to be accounted so much evil
and impious in its own nature, as imperfect, and maimed. For it seems to
ascribe to the Holy Trinity nothing false or absurd, but only to take away
something that is true, namely the divine nature of Christ, and the proper
person of the Holy Spirit. Whereas this doctrine touching the fatal
predestination of particular men, labors not with any defect, but with
manifest ptavity. For it not only offers injury to God by most unworthy
calumnies, but also strikes at the foundation of our faith. For to omit
security and despair, with which two rams it battereth the wall of our piety,
it wonderfully weakneth the very belief of Gods promises, whilst it
bringeth-in God wickedly dissembling, the more is the grief!

CHAP. XI. Reasons and Examples for tolerating Heretics; and who are true
Heretics.
TO what purpose speak I these things? namely to show that there is no cause,
why we should not think that they ought to be tolerated in the Church, whose
tenets either by themselves, or for their absurd consequences, seem scarce
tolerable, so that they do not wilfully ascribe some impious thing to God, and
testify their love toward the Lord Jesus Christ by obeying his commandments.
For although both the patrons of the forecited opinions did build unprofitable
yea damnable tenets, as it were hay and stubble, upon our foundation, which is
Jesus Christ, yet, as it has been also shown at the beginning, the tenets,
which they through error have brought in, shall be destroyed by fire, whilst
they themselves in the mean time (unless some other thing hinder) shall, as the
Apostle testifies, 1 Cor. 3. obtain pardon and salvation. Neither indeed ought
we to refuse or scorn their communion, whom God will receive into the society
of eternal happiness; nor should we hate them on earth, to whom eternal love in
heaven is due. We are unworthy to bear the title of Gods children, if we
disdain to be their brethren, whose Father God desires to be. But if we be
afraid of the contagion of such errors either in behalf of our selves, or
rather of the weaker ones, in the first place we may not thereupon renounce
brotherly love, which we owe to them although they err. For we ought not to
forsake a certain and clear duty, lest an uncertain evil should happen, nor to
pursue even the most holy ends by unlawful means. But secondly, that fear is
vain. For if we have not the truth, there is little danger to be feared from
them, much less if we have it. For since they maintain their tenets with no
arms, nor with any force, and think it not so much as lawful so to do, nor set
them off with any carnal allurements, certainly the truth can never be by them
either oppressed with force, or overthrown with fraud, inasmuch as the nature
of truth is such, that like to Eagles feathers she devoureth all other light
plumage of opinions, never withdrawing her self from us, unless she be tired
either with our servitude, or sins. Which twain being not to be feared by us in
a modest liberty of dissenting, and study of true charity, what cause is there
why we should so warily sense our opinions from their tenets? Let us rather be
possessed with a certain hope, that as earthen vessels being joined with those
of tin or silver, are broken to pieces: so also if God the author of peace
shall bring bring back into the Church that happy tolerance, all false opinions
fighting hand to hand with the the true, will be dashed to shivers, and perish.
Otherwise if we so much fear that mutual patience, and friendly conference, we
do not think well enough concerning the goodness of our cause. Heretofore when
the dawning of Gospel Light was returned, Luther and his followers would have
wished that they might be tolerated in the communion of the Roman Church. But
it concerned the Pope to secure his darkness, from the approach of the morning.
Again, when a dissension was risen up between the Lutherans and the Reformed,
who was it that refused the form of agreement that was offered, but he that
doubted of his cause? Now also in the very reformed Church it self, upon the
dissension concerning Fate, none are more displeased with tolerance, then they
that suspect the truth of their doctrine. Would error were so circumspect in
the cradle of its infancy, as it is provident being once grown-up. But it
being blind when it is born, does afterward become sharp sighted, foreseeing
its fate afar off, and eschewing it, and is never more ingenious to prolong its
life, then when it is pressed with the conscience of its own weakness. But you
will say, Shall we acknowledge a Heretic even for a brother, when the Apostle,
Tit. 3. commands us to avoid him after two or three admonitions? why shall we
be more merciful then the Holy Spirit? Let not that mercy turn to our misery,
when once the Lord begins to require at our hands the souls of so many
seduced innocents. Shall we not esteem him a Heretic who in so great a matter
departs from the sound doctrine of the Church? do we not think our own
doctrine sound? How often have they been admonished both with writings and
disputations, and yet nevertheless stick to their errors as to rocks? I answer,
Let none please himself so much, as to vie with the Apostolical meekness. It is
an incurable member, that the Apostle enjoyneth to be cut off from the rest of
the Churches body. Howbeit there may be error in them that undertake the cure,
and they themselves may be overspread with much darkness. For neither can the
sound part be always discerned from the diseased one, and the one does
oftentimes deceive us with the disguise and image of the other: And though it
be never so manifest what part is entangled with a true disease, yet does it
sometimes remain to be scanned whether it be to be cut off or cured with
mollifying remedies; for those members only ought to suffer amputation,
wherein the gangrene leaves no place for a milder medicine. Nor is the Apostle
of another mind, when he commands many admonitions to be premised before
excommunication. And lest it should be doubtful whom he designed by the name of
an Heretic, he subjoyneth arguments thereupon, which are indeed effects of the
Heretic himself, but unto us impulsive causes, that we may avoid him. For he
says, that such a one is overturned, and sins being condemned of himself.
And lest any one should think that these are indeed impulsive causes, but not
of our fact, and our avoiding, but only of the Apostles injunction; so that he
indeed for these causes excludes every Heretic from the communion of the
Church, but yet it is not necessary for us to have respect to them, he
premiseth the participle, knowing; to intimate that we also ought to know the
causes, why we discommon any of the citizens in that heavenly commonwealth, nor
hasten rashly to such Proscriptions, but after we have certain knowledge of so
great malice in them. And truly although the Apostle had not added this, yet
did very charity, and the analogy of our Religion, dictate so much unto us.
For this is a great punishment, nor to be inflicted but on such as sin
evidently. And forasmuch as in so great a matter no error can be little, we
ought first of all to be ascertained, that the man to be condemned is worthy of
so rigid a sentence, namely such a one, as is here painted out in his colors.
Which not belonging unto men, who go astray from the common road, out of mere
ignorance, or injury of the times, what shall we do to them that make use of
this exception? Shall they, who in these calamitous times, in this desolation
of the Church, (being born a great while after the rise of Antichrist, and not
able fully to dispel the darkness of that long night) turn aside into by*
paths, be judged to sin out of perversity of mind? Where now is that royal
highway, through which the godly may pass securely on with an unerring foot to
Salvation? If it lie in the authority of the Church, she has now for many ages
been beset with the snares of Antichrist. We wonder that they are afraid of the
suspected faith of the Church, when they do the same after our example, and in
so great danger to fear even all the things that are safe is a point of
prudence. And we still dare to upbraid them with rashness in departing from the
common doctrine, when they seem to do it out of a just and well-grounded fear.
But if this way consists in the authority of the holy Scripture, they do not
stray from it, whilst they together with us honor those Sacred books with due
reverence. But you will say, that the right and orthodox sense of the Holy
Scripture is rather the only path, that is able to bring us to the very
citadel of Truth. I confess that this way was heretofore worn with the public
going of Christians; but now, being first hidden with the springing briars of
Antichrist, and therefore trodden by very few, and not as yet discovered by
having all the brake cut down, and besides called into doubt by so many
intervening false paths, it has not as yet recovered the name and nature of a
Royal highway, which it had for a long time lost. And therefore the greater
pardon is due unto such as deviate from the same. For neither do they err
through desperate malice of heart, who do not always walk therein amidst so
many cross-ways and turnings. Let any one reckon up to me all the sects of
Christian Religion, and I will say he is a brave fellow if he omit none. In so
great a concourse of opinions, if they have not chosen the truer, who will say
that this is rather done out of improbity, then out of ignorance? For by what
argument, after so many errors have been introduced, ought the Truth to lie
open to their view? By the unanimous consent of the Church? O unanimous consent
amidst six hundred different sects! You will say, that in the doctrine contrary
unto them the greatest part are agreed. But this is nothing, since they have
also agreed in very many errors. So that we must again seek out a privilege
for the doctrine of the Trinity, whereby it came to pass that though men erred
in other points, yet could they not mistake in this. But if we suppose that
they ought to examine all opinions by the rule of the Holy Scripture, and
afterward to choose the truer; they have done both, save that in the latter
they have not followed that which indeed was, but only that which they thought
to be truer. Which certainly is an error, and no malice; nor can they be said
to sin self-condemned in holding such an opinion, for which they are ready to
lose their life and fortunes. For neither does he condemn himself, at least in
his conscience, who in the midst of cruel tortures hops for eternal life from
God, as the reward of defending the truth. Wherefore since we are not certain,
that they are perverse, and self-condemned, but well assured that they are not
such, even from the death which they willingly undergo for their Errors; and
since such Errors (as has been before proved) do not subvert eternal
salvation, it seems that they ought not to be segregated from the communion
of the Church, if they will testify their love toward the Lord Jesus, by
obeying his commandments.

CHAP. XII. What Heretics are to be excommunicated, what not; and a fuller
Apology for those who in our Age pass for Heretics.
BY this reckoning, will some say, How few Heretics must be excommunicated?
who will not invent plausible pretenses for his pravity? There is no doctrine
so absurd and pestilent, which being palliated with that cloak of error, may
not creep into the Church. To which I answer, that there is no cause why we
should be solicitous, lest we should have no occasion to use this rigid law of
excommunication. Would the Church had even at this day no voluntary rebels
against the Divine Majesty. But neither in the times of the Apostles were there
men wanting, who subverted either our faith in God, or the hope of immortality,
or the piety and love that is enjoined us, and such as did not by deductions
and consequences, but with open face, as they say, vent blasphemies and
impieties. Whose endeavor and impiety is not so obscure, but that it is
apparent that they were conscious to themselves of their pravity and fraud. As
if any one should deny the resurrection of the dead, who sees not that such a
man, after he has viewed the clear and certain sentence of the Holy Scripture,
will be convicted in himself, although he may perhaps dissemble it? There is
the same reason in the patron of some manifest vice. All which being manifest,
(for so are the works of the flesh) and manifestly forbidden, such a man has
no starting-hole in the ambiguity or obscurity of the Sacred Scripture, unless
he disbelieve the same, and so overthrow all Religion. Whosoever therefore
bring into the Church such doctrines, as do in their own nature subvert our
Salvation and Faith, they are deservedly commanded to depart together with the
former, not only lest they should hurt others, but also because they
themselves, as has been shown, are of incorrigible malice and perversity, and
consequently self*condemned. For a Chirurgian does not presently fear or
cut off an infected part, because it may with its contagion hurt the rest of
the body, but would first have that very part cured of the infection: which if
it does not succeed, he then cuts it off as incurable. But those doctrines that
stand not within the boundaries of necessity to salvation, are such, that an
error in them, especially in this disturbed state of things, cannot be taxed
of wilful pravity, nor can it either damn its author, or exclude him from the
bosom of the Church. But some one will here object, Shall we brand with this
spiritual censure the obstinate maintainer of none, even the greatest error, if
so be it overthrow not our Salvation? But there are many things, which though
in their own nature they take not from us our Salvation, yet do they by degrees
so undermine and weaken the same, that afterward it falls down of its own
accord. And do you like it, that such diseases should be cherished in the
Church? To which I answer, that I would have these distempers cured without
wounds and cauteries, especially because the Truth, unless it be oppressed by
force, or scorned by men, who are blind with the love of vices, is never wont
to be supplanted by those pernicious errors; yea this daughter and
foster-childe of time, always growing stronger with very age, does with the
beams of her light dissolve and melt all the waxen arguments of falsehood,
unless one of those twain before mentioned, does hinder: both which ought to be
banished from the true Church of Christ. For since by force, or the allurement
of our affections, as well falsehood as truth may be promoted, (if yet truth may
be so promoted) but by a free dispute in mutual love, only truth; and falsehood
sometimes puts on the vizo^ of Truth; it is a safer course to keep this way
only in the Church, which having shut-out error lies open to truth, then
whilst we endeavor by all means to insinuate truth into men, to leave and
prepare an entrance for falsehood. And therefore to cashiere the lighter errors,
(for the Objection speaks not of the lightest) the care and vigilancie of the
Pastors is sufficient; who will find that the love due to erring persons will
no whit retard them in pulling up false opinions according to their ability.
However, should it never so much be granted, that in the infancy of the
Church, and in her following growth, these errors, which outwardly appear
somewhat light, but inwardly contain very much, were not tolerated, yet will it
not be evinced from thence, that they ought not at this day to be tolerated in
the old age of the Church. For they deceive and are deceived, who model our
times by the pattern of that flourishing age. The crazie health of the Church
cannot be restored with the same remedies. Many things stifle a disease in the
birth, which when it is grown up do foment it. When the Church was found and
lusty, in the prime flower of her age, and whilst the college of the Apostles
was yet living, even violent remedies were to be used toward her, because of
her vigor. Whereas now being spent with diseases and old age, and become
feeble, she does in a manner sink under the weight of her prevailing sickness,
and is never in more danger, then when she falls into the hands of cruel
Physicians. Heretofore her former vigor did admit the opening of a vein, and
taking away of blood: but now after her strength has been exhausted with so
many maladies, if there be any vital juice remaining, it cannot be let out, but
the very life and spirit will issue forth together. Believe me, ye that talk of
nothing but launcets and cauteries, will with your unseasonable Physic kill
the Church, if ye let out that little blood which is remaining, in this nick of
time when she seems to be almost a dying. Whatsoever remedies have been
invented for the health and conservation of the Church, as this is touching the
punishment of Heretics, should then, as prudence teaches, be omitted, when
they bring more hurt and danger, then profit. For why desire we that the people
of God should like a lump of mouldring stuff be further crumbled into infinite
pieces? What end of Schisms will there be, if a promiscuous dissent be
sufficient to make a rent? Why take we pleasure to behold not the coat only,
as a Great man wrote, but the very body of Christ, whereof he is the head, to
be cut and torn in pieces? But let the respect of profit take place: let us see
whether it be lawful for us at this time to chase those erring persons from the
communion of Christ's Church. For there is a wide difference between them, and
those heretics that were contemporary with the Apostles. For suppose them, who
nowadays err in matters of faith, to make their appearance before the
reverend consistory of the Apostles and their associates; suppose them to be
often convicted and admonished, and nevertheless to persist obstinate, though
in the least error, who would not detest their malice? Certainly a very slight
error would now be transmuted into the nature of a wicked crime. And why so?
Because they durst resist the holy Spirit speaking by the Apostles: and when
they had no cause to question the doctrine and faith of that most sacred
Council, unless they would withal question the whole Christian Religion, yet
did not give credence thereunto, nor obey it, and nevertheless would be
accounted Christians. What madness, what wickedness, what perverseness was it,
when by this very incredulity they do sufficiently testify that they were not
Christians, as who denied belief to the Apostles and their associates, and yet
under a pretense of Christianity, did pester the Church with deceit and lies?
Besides, the malice of such men was in the beginning far more manifest, in that
a blemish may sooner be discovered in a clean body, then in one that is
spotted. And therefore it was an easy matter to epsy and punish the
wickedness of such men, as did turn aside out of the common road, that never
had been called in question. But now though we have a very strong persuasion
concerning the certainty of our faith, yet who has herein given us caution, or
security, that we cannot err? What Council can we at this day imagine so
incorrupt, as that of the Apostles, or the Primitive Church? And yet how many
Proscriptions may you behold in this age? how many Decrees, whereby men for the
slightest matters exclude one another out of heaven and the Church? I speak not
these things, as if I thought any question were to be made concerning the
soundness of the Orthodox Opinion: but to make it plain, first, that we ought
more timorously, then the Apostles heretofore, to condemn such as are tardy in
this behalf; and secondly, that we should not in lighter matters be
over-confident of our knowledge and persuasion* and finally, that even in
weightyer things, provided they do not subvert our faith in the Lord Jesus, and
the obedience of his commandments, we may and are bound to tolerate the
weakness of such as err. For what matters it, for me certainly to know that I
hold the saving doctrine in these points, if this be not manifest to all
Christians, or if I cannot always very clearly demonstrate the fame to him that
erreth? Have not all a far juster cause of questioning the true opinion
nowadays, then heretofore in the time of the Apostles? And suitably a man may
very easily slip in such things through imprudence, which heretofore could not
be done without the intervening of extreme impiety. Nor is there need of malice
for continuance in error, where prejudice is sufficient, and a suspicion of
error firmly imprinted in the mind against the patrons of the true opinion.
Which certainly may easily seize even on an honest heart, especially because
every sect of Christians instill into their partisans at the first a hatred and
abhorrencie of others, and from their very cradle sow in their hearts their own
tenets, which having once taken root, can hardly be pulled thence in their
riper age. Now what cruelty is it, to cast out of the bosom and lap of the
Church, such persons as are studious of honesty and truth, yea seek an
agreement, only for those errors, which have been implanted in them without
any fault of theirs, and do not overthrow salvation? But they are Heretics,
and to be avoided, as such who are condemned of their own conscience. Yea for
the fore-alleadged causes they are not condemned of their own conscience; And
therefore neither now to be avoided, nor Heretics. Or if we take no compassion
on them, yet let us at least take pity on the very truth which we defend, whose
growth we envy, first, because we drive others from a nearer prying into her;
and next, because we teach by our own example, that she, if charged with false
suspicions, of right may and ought to be excluded by other Christian Churches.

FINIS.
The Postscript to the Reader.
LEst the following papers, Christian Reader, being left empty, should beguile
thy sight, I have thought good in this place again to bespeak thee with a word
or two. By this time thou have perceived our mind and drift, which both the
author of this Discourse had before his eyes when he wrote it, and I also when
I published the same for thy behoof and benefit. If thou have but a grain of
candor in thy heart, and wilt pass sentence according to the prescript of
Truth, thou will judge and call this Writing not Heretical but Peaceable. But
you will say, What peace, what agreement either can or ought a Christian man to
have with Heretics? Good Reader, we undertake not the patronage of Heretics.
But before you exclude others out of the verge of Christian Charity, and throw
the thunderbolt of an Anathema upon them, you should well weigh and consider,
to whom the crime of Heresy is justly to be imputed. In passing censure upon
Heretics, it was not so easy a matter to mistake in that Golden age, wherein
the Christian Church was founded by the Apostles, and governed by themselves,
as is in this Age of ours. For though in those beginnings of the Christian
Church there did diverse errors, yea and heresies spring up, nevertheless, from
that confusion of dissenting opinions, there were not peculiar Churches,
distinguished by diverse forms of Confessions and Ceremonies, as yet started up,
but there was then one only Christian Church, and she truly Apostolical, and
in all points of doctrine, which she professed, of a sound belief. Wherefore to
contradict this Church, and her doctrine, was truly blasphemous, truly
heretical: and whomsoever either the Apostles themselves, or also other
Apostolical Doctors of the Primitive Church declared Heretics, they might also
deservedly be accounted such by all Christians, and there was no danger of
error in that censure, no not among the more ignorant Christians, as following
the judgment of the very Holy Spirit, by whom those Divine Governors of the
Church were guided, as appeared by most evident arguments. But at this day
inasmuch as there are, alas! so many and so various Churches of Christians,
which of all will be so bold as to ascend with like confidence to that of the
Apostles, to that sacred Tribunal, from which she may pronounce sentence on the
rest, as Heretical? It is out of controversy, that such an authority can agree
to no more then one of them. For the true Church can be but one: and only the
true one is able to judge and condemn all the rest as Heretical. Now forasmuch
as amongst all those Churches, which will at this day be called Christians, (I
justly here except the vain arrogancy of the Roman Church) none dares
undoubtedly to arrogate to it self the infallible certainty of the Apostolical
Truth in all the heads of her Confession, it may hence clearly enough appear,
that the censure of Heretical Pravity does so evidently agree to none of them,
that we deservedly ought also to acquiesce in her determination. I am not
ignorant of what the greatest part of our Divines are here wont to reply. That
the Primitive Apostolical Church, say they, is ceased, we do not deny: yet
inasmuch as we have the doctrine of that Church consigned in the monuments of
the Evangelists and the Apostles, we cannot choose but pronounce them Heretics,
who contradict the doctrine there expressed. I also, dear Friends, easily
permit, that in this dispute of ours, the Divine Writings of the Apostles stand
in this stead, so that he which contradicts them, ^e no less esteemed an
heretic, then he that heretofore contumaciously opposed the Apostles preaching
by word of mouth. But even thus can we not challenge that cens^rian r^d against
Heretics. For they, whom ye place in the rank of Heretics, are so far from
contradicting the Holy Scripture, that they wage war against you out of the
same, and appeal to the judgment thereof, not without a certain hope of
victory, in the examination of their cause, inasmuch as they embrace the
Scripture in all things with as great veneration of mind as you do: nor
amongst all the Christian Churches, which are at this day extant, shall ye show
any one, (that I know of) which does not religiously and from the heart yield
an undoubted assent to all those things, that are proposed and taught in the
Holy Scripture. Wherefore there is no cause why ye should condemn any one of
them for heresy, since they agree with you in giving due credence to the
Sacred Writ. And therefore whatsoever pretense ye seek for your carnal zeal
against such as you call Heretics, yet to indifferent judgments can no other
ground hereof appear, then their dissent from your interpretation of the Holy
Scripture, as to the controverted doctrines. But I will here bountifully grant
you, that ye have in all things hit the true sense of the Scripture, and defend
it. Nevertheless it is further requisite, that ye make this plain to them, whom
ye brand with the crime of Heresy. But what here is the stress of your
Arguments? Ye appeal again to the Holy Scripture, and from thence condemn
Heretics. But they have already stricken this weapon out of your hands,
showing that the Holy Scripture makes for y^^, only in your own sense and
interpretation, and that they are accordingly condemned by you, not from the
sacred Scripture, but from your interpretation of the sacred Scripture. And
this is the circle of your arguing, which they deservedly reject. Draw-out
therefore against Heretics those truly Apostolical weapons, not the
T^rasonical prating of the Chayr in the University, but the power of the holy
Spirit, wherewith the Apostles being endued, could deliver Blasphemers to
Satan, 1 Timothy 1. 20. and slay Hypocrites with the speaking of a word, Act. 5.
If ye want the powerful efficacy of this Spirit, acknowledge your rashness and
iniquity in condemning them, to whom ye are not able with evident and
sufficient arguments to demonstrate your interpretation of the holy Scripture,
and who by the same right, and from the same foundation object to you not only
errors, but also heresies. Ye know that of Christ: Condemn not, and ye shall
not be condemned. What account will ye give to this just Judge, for so often
violating this precept? Your zeal of the Divine Glory will not then excuse you:
for though it palliate it self under this reverend name, yet is it wholly of
the flesh, and odious to God. But if ye affirm that it proceeds from the Holy
Spirit, produce arguments worthy of so great an Author. For neither i^ this
Spirit so weak, but that ^e can show forth tokens of his Divine authority and
presence in his Ministers, and by them against his enemies. But whither am I
carried away? I beseech thee, good Reader, to pardon this digression of mine;
and having liked the pious counsel of our Author, entreat God, that he would
instill into other Readers also a mind studious of peace and concord. Farewell.

FINIS.
These books are to be sold by Richard Moon, at the seven stars in Paul 's
Churchyard.
A Pathway unto Englands perfect settlement, and its center and foundation of
Rest and Peace discovered, by Capt. Robert Norwood.

2. An Additional Discourse, relating to the Treatise aforesaid. By Capt.
Robert Norwood. Many things therein are fully opened, several Doubts and
Objections answered; a brief account given of the Ancient Laws, Customs, and
Constitutions of this Nation before and since the Conquest, so called.

3. The Life of that incomparable man, Faustus Socinus Senensis, described by a
Polonian Knight. Whereunto is added, An excellent Discourse which the same
Author would have had premised to the Works of Socinus. Together with a
Catalogue of those Works.

4. Brevis Disquisitio: or, a brief Enquiry touching a better way then is
commonly made use of, to refute Papists, and reduce Protestants to certainty
and unity in Religion.

5. The Apostolical and true opinion concerning the Holy Trinity, revived and
asserted; partly by 12 Arguments levied against the Traditional and false
opinion about the Godhead of the Holy Spirit; partly, by a Confession of faith
touching the three Persons, etc. By John Biddle Mr. of Arts.

6 A short Treatise touching the death of Christ; also, the point of baptism is
handled, with the qualifications and demerits sufficient to the receiving in
and casting out Church Members. By J. Dell.

7. The Army Vindicated in their late dissolution of the Parliament. By John
Spittlehouse.

8. A Warning-piece discharged: or, certain intelligence communicated to his
Excellency the Lord General Cromwell. By John Spittlehouse.

9. The first Addresses to his Excellency the Lord General, with the new
Representative elected by him and his Council, etc. By John Spittlehouse.

10. The new Earth, or, the Magna Charta of the past Ages, and of the Ages or
World to come; called, The Jews Commonweal. By Joh. Brain.

11. The unknown being of the Soul and Spirit, etc. By John Brain.

12. The Way of disputing practiced by Christ and his Apostles in deciding the
Controversies of that Age, and the Rule for the determining of our own: or, the
right use of spiritual weapons, etc. By John Brain.

13. Baptism without Basin: or, plain Scripture Proof against Infant Baptism,
in Answer to Mr. Baxters Arguments, and the Exercitations of Mr. Sidenham. By
William Kaye, Minister of the Gospel at St^kesley.

These things he has now in the Press.

Judah's Witness sounding the Trumpet, etc.

A Crier in the Wilderness of England, declaring the Baptism of the Eternal
Spirit to be the only Baptism in Christ's Kingdom, etc. By Edward Punch.


