THE WAY TO HEAVEN DISCOVERED: And, The Stumbling Blocks (cast therein by the
World, Flesh, and Devil) removed.

OR, The ready way to true Happiness: Leading to the Gate of Full assurance.

WITH A word of Reproof to the scattered, discontented Members of the late
Parliament.

And a word of Advise to the present Supreme Authority of ENGLAND.

By ROBERT PURNELL.

MAT. 23. 13. Woe unto you, Scribes and Pharisees, for ye shut up the kingdom
of heaven; ye neither go in your selves, nor suffer them that are entering, to
go in.

ISA. 57. 14. Take up the stumbling blocks out of the way of my people.

Printed for William Ballard of Bristol, and are sold by J. Grismond in
Ivie-lane, London. 1653.

THE EPISTLE TO THE Impartial READER.
Unbyased Reader,
THe Lord by the Prophet, Isa. 57. 14. ver. latter part, says, Take up the
stumbling blocks out of the way of my people, that so they may walk, as Jer.
31. 9. in a straight way, wherein they shall not stumble. Mal. 2. 8. But
contrary to this, not only the World, Flesh, and Devil, but many of the
leaders of the people have cast blocks in the way, and caused many to stumble,
not minding the commands of Christ by Paul, Romans 14. 13. Let no man put a
stumbling block, or an occasion to fall, in his brothers way. I have
endeavored in this ensuing Discourse, or Treatise, to remove those stumbling
blocks that by experience I have found cast in mine own way, either by the
World, Flesh, or Devil, which in some measure are now removed, and my desire
is, that I might be an assistant to others that have not these blocks removed;
which is my end in presenting these things to public view: that which I have
received by immediate inspiration, and mediate Declarations, viz. some of those
things I learned in reading the Scriptures, some in hearing the word preached,
some in conference amongst Christians, some in reading the writings of godly
men: but I have not (as I know of written one line received from either of
these, but that and only that which I have not only heard, but heard and
seen by experience in mine own soul, so that the things are living upon mine
own spirit, and I doubt not but that the spirits of many shall be refreshed by
it when it comes to public view; and I could wish that those that have
greater measures of light* would undertake to write more distinctly and clearly
in order to the removing of these stumbling blocks, or any other blocks cast in
our way, by our soule-murthering enemies: especially, in these dividing days,
wherein men make it their great work to cast stumbling blocks one in another
way, so that while we are contesting about the garment of Religion, the power
thereof is much abated: Men dispute for Honor sake, and Victory sake, not for
truths sake; and in the mean time, many poor drooping souls lie languishing,
and the enemies of Christ and his Kingdom rejoicing, and the souls of most
starving, our Gospel is turned into a Covenant of works, by our Legallists;
or else into a doctrine of Licentiousness, by our new upstart wantons: I mean
the Raunters, and Hypocritical dissemblers, and Vice-advancers, and Ordinances
for sakers who like swarms of Drone Bees are buzzing in our ears) whose days
are ending, and plagues be coming, as in 2 Pet. 2. 10, 12, 13, 15, 17, 18, 19,
21, 22.

But for all ye whose hearts are upright with the Lord, the time is at hand,
when the reproach and contempt that is now cast upon you, shall be quite taken
away; for your Father will make you the head and not the tail, as does appear
by these Scriptures, Isa. 62. 8, 9. Joel 2. 23, 24. Mich. 4. 4. Amos 9. 13, 14.
Zech. 8. 12. Isa. 41. 18, 19. Jer. 31. 12. Isa. 30. 23. Isa. 55. 13. and Isay.
66. 6, 7. and 65. 21, 22. and 61. 4. and 60. 10. etc.

Those contemptible despised Saints that now many do thrust sorely at, and
others look a squint upon, some shut the door against, others turn their backs
upon, and most of men, do either neglect them or despise them; But, Oh! poor
Saints lift up your heads, your redemptirn draws nigh, ye shall receive of
his fullness grace for grace, what soever grace there is in Christ, there is
the like stamped upon every true Christian. Is Jesus Christ called the beloved
of God? so are the Saints too. Is he called the Son of God? the Saints are also
called the Sons of God. Is Christ called Heir? the Saints are said to be
Heirs, coheires with Christ. Is he said to be elect and precious? so are the
Saints, 1 Pet. 1. 2.

Is he called the light of the world, the true light? they are called also,
light in the Lord, Ephesians. 5. 8.

Is he said to be sanctified? So are the Saints also, For their sakes sanctify
I my self, that they also may be sanctified through the truth, John 17. 19.

Is he said to be full of Grace and Truth? so are the Saints too; some of them,
as Stephen, full of Grace, Acts 7. 55. and Mary full of Grace. Thus does the
Lord honor those that do honor him with such titles of honor; and the
consideration of this does put the Soul upon Spiritual duties from Spiritual
principles, as from the sense of Divine love that does constrain the soul to
wait on God, and to act for God, Romans 6. 1. How shall we that are dead to sin
live any longer therein? So again, I beseech you brethren, by the mercies of
God; that ye present your bodies a living Sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto
God, etc. Romans 12. 1. So John, These things I write unto you, that ye sin not.
What was it that he wrote? He wrote that we have fellowship with the Father and
the Son, and that the blood of Christ cleanses us from all sin. And that if
we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins; and
that, if we sin, we have an Advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the
righteous: These choice favors and mercies the Apostle holds forth as the
chiefest means to preserve the soul from sin. There is nothing in the world
that renders a man more unlike a Saint, and more like to Satan, then to argue
from mercy, to sinful liberty; from Divine goodness, to licentiousness,
which is the Devils Logic.

The love of Christ being placed in us, the same love will be constraining of
us to have all our conversations and wilkings to be ordered as becomes
children of such a Father; the members of such a body; the Heirs of such
promises; the Temples of such a Holy Ghost: and the hearing and believing then
of what God has done for us in Christ, is the most prevailing means of
drawing men in to believe in Christ. Romans 5. 9, 10. God has commended his love
to us in this, that while we were yet sinners, Christ dyed for us, and so a
right trusting in him springs from the very power of his Holy Spirit in us
working the same, in the opening and Declaration of his name unto u^. Psalm 9.
10. this is a Faith that springs from, and works by love.

But such a Faith none can have, till the love of God is discovered to them,
and so they see and believe his goodness toward them. The serious
consideration of this would put a check upon that preposterous mistake about
men's teaching the Doctrine of Election and Reprobation unto the world, and
limitting the Gospel and death of Christ unto a few only, which is not in the
Commission of Christ given to the Apostles, but rather to preach the Gospel to
every creature, and to invite them to that feast prepared by Christ, and all
things ready for their entertainment, and that God is willing to receive them,
and so invite all and call upon all to go to the wedding to believe and submit
unto him; and when this Gospel has taken its effect upon some, that they are
persuaded to let go all for him, to receive him, to believe in him, and cleave
to him, then to mind them of the Doctrine of Election, as the Apostles did
apply it to believers, minding them it was Gods goodness and free grace to
elect them in Christ before the foundation of the world; so that now they are
begotten to the Faith, they are to give all diligence to make their Calling and
Election sure; but many men endeavor to hold forth to the world those decrees
of Election and Reprobation, which they rightly understand not, making them
dangerous and unprofitable Doctrines, which otherwise in due place and manner
propounded are very safe and wholesome, for herein they go besides the rule,
preaching an uncertain sound, which the world can make no good use of: for
when they hear it, what use can they have of it, but to perplex, or harden
them? for what other consequence can they naturally draw from thence then this,
Either I am Elected, or not; If I be, then I am well enough, no sin can, or
shall hurt me: no matter whether I hear, pray, read, or not: If otherwise, I
shall but here torment my self with a melancholy and religious life in vain:
what profits it for me to pray unto him? no duties will profit me, therefore I
will take my pleasure; no actions of mine can either help or hinder, etc.
whereas he should be wrestling with God, as Jacob, and give him no rest till he
had obtained the blessing.

What I have endeavored to present before you, in this ensuing Treatise, as in
a Map, do you consider more particularly, viewing and weighing well the
stumbling blocks cast in youo way, and the corruption of your own
understanding, memory, conscience, will, and affections, with thoughts, words,
actions, omissions, commissions; we cannot likely go too far in these things,
nor wrong your nature: yea, take a man that thinks worst of himself, he is
far worse then he thinks himself to be. In a word, our well-being does much
depend upon our removing these stumbling blocks; and removed, they cannot be
without Faith, and Faith is the work of the Spirit of God in us, out of the
free love of God to us, not for any good done by us, or foreseen in us; but
being by nature all in misery we were objects of mercy, Ezekiel. 16. 6. and so
after in mercy he had cleansed us, we were beautiful through the comeliness
that he had put upon us, ver. 14.

Election is the Election of grace; Vocation is according to grace;
Regeneration was of Gods own will, Faith is the gift of God, Justification is
freely by grace, Forgiveness of our sins is according to the riches of his
grace, Eternal life is the gift of God; all the Portion that God expects of
us is Poverty.

Oh! the consideration of this free love of God held forth in the Gospel, will
engage the soul to a constant spiritual combat by faith, and hope, and other
graces of the spirit against the flesh, and so by the spirit mortify the deeds
of the flesh, daily crucifying the flesh with the affections and lusts; this
love, as an inward principle, works out pollution and corruption, as being
repugnant thereunto; it puts the soul upon true endeavors, to purify both
soul and body, person and conversation, from all corruption universally, both
in kind and degrees.

This word of grace has a purifying faculty in it; Ye are clean through the
word I have spoken to you, says Christ, John 15. 3.

Again, the Word is as an Antidote against sin, Psalm. 119. 11. and as a lamp
discovering the spot, Romans 7. 7. and as a Star conducting to Christ the
Fountain of purifying, 1 John 2. 1, 2. Zach 13. 1. and as a rule according to
which we are heedfully to order our conversation, Psalm. 119. 9. and the
chiefest motive unto selfe-purifying, 2 Cor. 7. 1. The appearing of this
stirs up fervent desires and prayers for thorough purity. Psalm. 19. 9.
Cleanse thou me from secret faults; purge me with Hysop, and I shall be clean,
Psalm. 51. 7. Wash me, and I shall be whiter then snow, etc.

Avoid Satan, How can I do this evil, and sin against God? I must love him
because he loved me first, his free grace has appeared unto me; I must run
after him, he has set my feet at liberty.

I must run the ways of his Commandments, he does let my soul live,
therefore I must praise him: he has made the Tree good, therefore the Fruit
must be good.

Robert Purnell.

The way to Heaven discovered, and the stumbling blocks (cast therein by the
World, Flesh, and Devil) removed.
ALL Men, Women, and Children under the Sun, are either in the state of Nature,
or in the state of Grace; in Christ, or out of Christ: only here is their
misery, many that are in the state of nature, do think they be in the state of
grace, and many that are in the state of grace, do think they be in the state
of nature: Now although there be but these two states, yet there be several
degrees in each of these states, viz. Those that are in the state of Grace, are
in one of these four fourmes, either babes, children, young men, or old men.

1. Babes, 1 Pet. 2. 2. 2. Children, little children, 1 John 2. 12. 3. Young
men, 1 John 2. 13. 4. There is Old men, or Fathers, 1 John 2. 14.
So also for those in the state of Nature, there be some nearer, some further
from the kingdom of God, Isai. 46. 12. Hearken unto me ye stout hearted, that
are far from righteousness; all stout hearted, obstinate, self-conceited,
Ranters, and Ordinance-forsakers, and vice-advancers, Scripture-rejectors, and
hypocritical dissemblers, etc. These are far from the kingdom of God. But
then there is another sort of those in the natural state, spoken of by our
Lord Jesus Christ, Mar. 12. 34. And when Jesus saw that he answered discreetly,
he said, Thou art not far from the kingdom of God, etc. Thou art more
moderate, more teachable, more tractable, thou have in thee many good things,
thou want but that one thing needful, and thou shall be perfect: make
Christ thy portion, and sell thy own portion and follow him, Mat. 19. 21. Thou
have almost persuaded me to be a Christian, Act. 26. 28.

Object. But what shall we that are in the state of nature do, that so we
might, if not get immediately out of that state into a state of grace, yet that
we might be continually waiting upon God, in the use of those means appointed
by him to change us, etc?

Answ. The way with the wise man in Mat. 7. 24. to build our house upon the
Rock, is as follows.

1. Be thoroughly convinced that thou have hitherto built upon the sand: which
will easily appear, if thou consider,

1. What thou art by nature. 2. What thou art by practice.
1. What thou art by nature, not only born in sin, but left in a condition
unable to recover thy self. Job 14. 4. Who can bring a clean thing out of an
unclean? not one: Job 25. 4. How can he be clean that is born of a woman? Psalm.
51. 5. Behold, I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me:
Mic. 7. 2. There is none upright amongst men: Romans 5. 12. Wherefore as by one
man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, so that death passed upon all
men, for that all have sinned: Romans 3. 9, 10. Both Jew and Gentile, they be all
under sin, as it is written, there is none righteous, no not one: Romans 3. 12.
They be all, and altogether become unprofitable, there is none that does good,
no not one: Psalm. 14. 3. We are all gone out of the way, we are all become
unprofitable and filthy, none righteous, not one. Now if all this be too little
to complete our condemnation, woe go astray as soon as ever we are born, Ps. 58.
3. Genesis 6. 5. Every imagination of the thoughts of our hearts, was only evil,
and that continually. Yea all the Saints themselves, before conviction,
conversion, and regeneration, were guilty of original and actual
transgression, Ephesians. 2. 3. and were by nature the children of wrath as well as
others. 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10, 11. Neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor
Adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves, nor thieves, nor
covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners shall inherit the
kingdom of God, and such were some of you, but ye are washed, but ye are
sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ. Tit. 3.
3. For we our selves, were sometimes foolish, disobedient, serving diverse lusts
and pleasures, living in malice and envy, hateful and hating one another. 1 Timothy 1. 13. I was before a blasphemer and a persecutor. Eccles. 7. 20. So that
there is not a just man upon earth, according to creation and practice, that
does good, and sins not: and thus man which at the beginning was created
happy, is become of all creatures most miserable, viz. a slave to the Devil, a
child of wrath, and an enemy to good, and an heir to eternal damnation, Ephesians.
2. 3. Now we cannot come out of this miserable estate, until we come to him
who is the fountain of life, and brought to him, we can never be but by faith,
Heb. 11. 6. For as God is the life of the soul, and the soul is the life of the
body, so faith is the life of our enjoyments, and the promises are the life of
faith; now when a man or woman comes to be thoroughly, and powerfully, and
effectually convinced, that he or she was born in sin, and have ever since
lived in sin; and that all the plagues and judgments threatened in the whole
Bible are due to them for their sins, as appears by these Scriptures: Romans 6.
23. The wages of sin is death: Rev. 14. 10. These shall drink of the wine of
the wrath of God, which is powered forth without mixture, in the cup of his
indignation: Psalm. 9. 17. The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all they
that forget God: Romans 2. 9. Tribulation and anguish, indignation and wrath,
upon every soul of man that does evil, of the Jew first, and also of the
Gentile: see Deuteronomy. 27. 26. Deuteronomy. 28. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.

But besides all this the sinfulness of man by nature will further appear, if
we examine every faculty of the soul: viz. the understanding is full of vanity,
see Psalm. 94. 11. nay it is full of blindness, 1 Cor. 2. 24. unteachablenesse
and incredulity, 2 Cor. 4. 4. So the will of man is wholly depraved: 1. It is
contrary to God, his word and Spirit in all things; 2. It will not depend nor
wait on God; 3. it is unconstant in good resolutions; 4. it disobeyes the will
of God: as we may see in Adams eating the fruit, and Saul's sparing the
Amalekites King and Cattle. Then for the memory, that also is full of
corruption. 1. That will forget the things that it is commanded to remember: 2.
It will remember the things, that we are commanded to forget, it will hold
trifles, and let go matters of moment. So the conscience that is wholly
corrupted; 1. it is without feeling, it is neither clear to see things that are
amiss, nor sensible of sins committed: 2. Whereas it should excuse or accuse,
it does abuse and pervert the light it has by making great sins small, etc.
Then for our affections, they are also corrupt, they come as a tempest and
carry us away, either to make us over-love, over-grieve, over-joy; etc. we hate
our brother which we should love, and love our lusts whom we should hate: by
all which we may see that our nature is full of unrighteousness, and
ungodliness.

2. If thou, and I consider what we are by practice, we may quickly find our
sins to be more then the hairs of our heads, or sands on the sea shore. Examine
first thy actual sins, of thought, word, and deed: in our thoughts there is
much corruption, they being idle, vain, wicked, and so foolish, as Dr. Preston
says, If a man should write his thoughts of one day, and read them at night,
he would think he was half out of his wits: now thoughts are the first born,
and blossom of the soul, and are the first plotters and contrivers of good or
evil, with them we entertain good in the temple of our hearts. Then for our
words, the tongue being very slippery, we offend easily, St. James compares the
tongue to a bit, which keeps in the wildest horse, and to a rudder, which
turns the greatest ship, and to a fire, which inflames the whole course of
nature, Jam. 3. 3, 4, 5. Yet most men think it nothing to let their tongues
walk up and down at random, from morning till night, from week to week, from
month to month, from year to year. Then see it again by most men's actions,
their sins of commission, their number, greatness, frequency, and thou will
soon say as in the Psalm. 19. 12. Who can understand his errors? Then again,
for sins of omission, thy barrenness and unfruitfulnesse, thy omitting of time
that is so precious, and omitting of occasions of doing good, see Mat. 25. 45.
Again let us consider the aggravations of sin, first every sin is against the
great Majesty of God, the greater the person offended is, the greater the sin
committed is.

Again, we sin against knowledge: it was the great sin of the Gentiles, that
when they knew God they glorified him not as God; to sin against knowledge, is
a resisting the holy Ghost: tribulation therefore is first to the Jew, that
knew the will of God, and then to the Gentile Now the Gentiles had but the
light of nature: see Romans 2. 9. Again, another aggravation of sin is this, we
have sinned against vows and covenants made with God; now sin after covenant
is greater then it was before, though in act it be but the same. Again, we sin
against means, yea against those means that God has put as weapons in our
hands to resist it; as mercies or corrections of God, or his word, whereby we
profit not.

Now all this that has been spoken hitherto of our sinful condition by nature
and practice, is but a taste of one drop to the Ocean, to that bulk and body of
corruption that lies covered in our hearts, as fire under ashes; see Psalm. 19.
12. Who can understand the errors of his life? says David, I will set thy sins
in order before thee, says the Lord, Psalm. 50.

The next thing to be considered, is the judgments threatened against those
sins: Psalm. 50. 22. Now consider this, says the Lord, lest I come and tear you
in pieces: Cursed is he that continues not in every thing that is written,
Gal. 3. 10. and, he that keeps the whole Law, and offends but in one point is
guilty of all: Jam. 2. 10. so that sin and punishment are linked together. See
the forementioned places, Romans 6 32. Rev. 14. 10. Psalm. 9. 17. and Romans 2. 9.
and Deuteronomy. 28. 16, 17, 18.

Now when the soul sees his sin, and the judgments due to him for sin, then
the soul does begin to make a stop, and to consider where it is, and whither it
is going; and as it looks up, it sees an angry Judge ready to pronounce his
condemnation; and as it looks down, it sees hell mouth open ready to receive
it: If thou look before thee, all the world seems in a flame of fire: and
behind thee a hideous noise of an innumerable number of thy fellow sinners, at
their wits ends, crying out with the Jailer, What shall I do to be saved? or
else with the four leapers 2 King. 7. 3, 4. If we should enter into the city,
the famine is there, and we shall dye; and if we sit still here, we die also;
Now therefore let us fall into the hands of the Assyrians, if they save us
alive we live, if not we shall but die: Even thus is it with every soul, a
little convinced of his sinful life, lost and undone condition. First, if we
should look back, and enter into the City of all the good that we have done,
the famine is there, and we shall die; and if we sit still here in this state
of nature, not improving the opportunity, nor ability that is in our hands, we
die also: now therefore let us fall into the hands of the Assyrians, if they
save us alive, we shall live, if not, we shall but die. This third and last
resolution of the Lepers, does show and fully discover to all men that have
their eyes in their heads, that a man or woman once convinced of sin, both
original and actual, of omission and commission, both in flesh and spirit,
with all its aggravations and denominations, this party seeks for healing, but
it goes to the Assyrians, an enemy that could not help themselves: so we, even
we the most of men, awakened out of a secure estate of sin, the soul seeks and
comes to the Assyrian of his own righteousness, and when he comes to the camp,
he finds that fled away, then he returns to all his friends and relations, and
finds them unable to help themselves, much lest to help him: Then the soul
comes to the Assyrian of his own duties, and ordinances, and so rests upon a
form without the power, and so we will never come to Christ, the true and only
physician of the soul, until with the woman in Mar. 5. 25, 26, 27, 28. we have
spent all our money, time and pains, and left no stone unturned, no means
unattempted, to get cu^e and healing in something beside, the Lord Jesus
Christ; but when with this woman we have spent all, and yet grow worse and
worse, then the soul begins to make a halt or stop again, and so begins to
reason with it self; If I sit still here in the state of nature, I shall die,
or if I should go into the City of my own works, the Lord has written death
upon that, no flesh shall be justified by that: I will even fall into the hands
of God, the great Creator of the Assyrians, Who can tell but that he may be
gracious unto me, that I perish not? Jonah 3. 9. Joel 2. 14. Nay the Lord may
be gracious to me and save me, Amos 5. 15. Oh let me and all those my fellow
sinners, fall into his hands, it may be we shall be hid in the day of the Lords
wrath: It is true, we being wicked he may say to us as in Psalm. 50. 16. What
have thou to do to take my Covenant into thy mouth? But for all this, I am
resolved says one, I am resolved says another, to go to him, and cast my self
upon him, although it does seem to be contrary to his law, which is our
Debt-book, yet there does seem to be a way opened in the Gospel, which is the
Pay-book, where if I mistake not, are Receipts for most of my debts, if not for
all: Wherefore as Esther 4. 16. she resolved to go to the King, though it was
contrary to the Law; So am I, says the convinced sinner, resolved to go in to
the King of Kings, and if I perish I perish.

Now sometimes before the soul comes to this strong resolution, even when once
it begins to be thoroughly convinced of sin, it makes a stop or halt, like a
traveller meeting with two ways, and knows not which to take, he stands still
and takes neither of them for the present, but continues inquiring of all that
pass by, and at last having silenced his own thoughts, he hears a voice
behind him saying, as in Isa. 30. 21. This is the way, walk in it, and so the
Lords gives a mighty turn to the soul by that secret voice; but before the soul
comes thus far, there is wrought in the soul the assenting act of faith, but
not the applying act; now the assenting act is that whereby a man assents to
the truth of the Scripture; that he is such a miserable wretch as the Scripture
says, that he shall perish eternally, if he be not new born, and taken out of
the first Adam, and graffed in the second.

But some will object or demand, Whether a soul thus convinced does believe
first, or repent, before it does believe.

But for answer hereunto, consider that there are three acts of faith, viz.

1. The assenting act. 2. The relying act, or Faith of relyance. 3. The Faith
of evidence or persuasion.
Now the assenting act of faith is repentance; and so godly sorrow is an effect
of it; so that this assenting act of faith, leads a soul to an ordinance in
Gods hand, as to the first part of repentance, consisting in conviction,
contrition, and humiliation; now the habit of faith and repentance are both
together in the soul, we only question which God does give the soul power to
act first; and for the further clearing hereof consider, That a soul cannot
come to Christ, till it goes out of its self; now a soul will not go out of
its self, till it does see the danger of continuing in its self: this danger
works fear, this fear works sorrow, and this sorrow is humiliation; and this
cannot be without the first act of faith, seeing we cannot dive into the
dispensations of God, by a bucket of reason. It is true that the troop of
Converts Act. 2. 37. they were pricked at their hearts, and said unto Peter and
the rest of the Apostles, Men and brethren what shall we do? and in Act. 16.
29. the Jailer came trembling, and fell at their feet and said, Sirs, what must
I do to be saved? So that repentance is the effect of faith, and the cause must
needs go before the effect; only mind that repentance has three parts, to
wit, conviction, contrition, and humiliation, or the turning of the soul from
sin, and the conversion of the soul to God, and this cannot be done in Gods
ordinary way, before the habit of faith be wrought in the soul; so that we may
judge of the habit of faith, by the acts of humiliation that it does work in
the soul.

The next thing to be considered is, What is that conversion of a sinner, so
much spoken unto in the Scriptures?

For answer unto which, it is most clear by Scripture, and experience, that the
conversion of a man is as hard a thing as to turn the course of nature: rewards
and punishments proposed may turn men's actions, but to turn the inclination of
the heart is proper to the Spirit of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3. 18. By the Spirit of
the Lord we are changed into the Image of God; and this Spirit will show you
the corruption of your understanding, memory, conscience, will, and affections,
with thoughts, words, and deeds, and actions, omissions, commissions, and by a
mighty power change all these into the Image of God. There is no power below
that power, that raised Christ from the dead, and that made the world, that can
turn the heart of a sinner; we are as well able to turn a flint into flesh, as
to turn our own hearts to the Lord; to raise the dead, and to make a world, as
to repent; Repentance is a flower that grows not in natures garden; Can the
Ethiopian change his skin, or the Leopard his spots? then may they also that
are accustomed to do evil, do good, Jer. 13. 23. Repentance is a gift that
comes down from above, men are not born with repentance in their hearts, as
they are born with tongues in their mouths; the same power that forms the
child in the natural womb, for the child does not form its self; and its
father and mother are but the means; I say, the same power that gives it the
first birth, must give it the second birth, or else it will not be borne again,
and if not, it can never enter into the Kingdom of heaven, Joh. 3. 3. No
power, but the power of the Almighty, can convert a sinner or recover a
backslider; Turn thou me, and I shall be turned, says Ephraim: After that I
was turned I repented, says he. For as Mr. Thomas Brooks well observes,
repentance has in it these three things; 1. The act; to turn from darkness
to light. 2. The subject changed, that is, the whole man, both the sinners
heart and life; first his heart, then his life; first his person, then his
practice; it is a through change both of the mind and man. 3. The terms of his
change and conversion, from what, and to what, the whole heart and life must be
changed, and that is, from all sin, to good; repentance is not only a turning
from all sin, but also a turning to all good, at least to love all good, to a
prizing of all good, and to a following after all good, Ezekiel. 18. 21. etc. it
is not enough that the tree bears not bad or ill fruit, but it must bring
forth good fruit, else it must be cut down and cast into the fire; true
repentance strips a man stark naked of all the garment of the old Adam, and
leaves not so much as a skirt behind in this rotten building. It makes a man
poor, hungry, empty, naked, lost, and blind, etc. these are those to whom the
promises be made, and these are those that Christ came to seek and save, heal
and pardon.

Object. But say many sinners, If this work be such a mighty work, that none
can do it but the almighty power of God, to what end shall I look or dive into
my self, and my lost condilion, seeing I cannot recover my self out?

Answ. It is the Pool of Bethesda, appointed by God for a sinner to wait at,
and the way of God that he will be found in, and the place in which he has
abundantly promised in his Word, that he will manifest himself to us in; he
never said to any soul that does wait upon him in the way of his ordinances,
seek ye me in vain; but he says, seek ye me in this way, and you shall find
me; ask, hear, and you shall have; for these ordinances are my Pipes of
conveyance.

Object. But why does God promise eternal life only to those that believe,
and threaten death to those that do not believe, seeing it is not in a man's
power by nature to believe?

Answ. 1. That the Lord might by means of these promises and threats work us
unto that which by nature we are averse unto, 2 Cor. 11. 20, 21.

2. That the grace of God might as well appear in giving power to believe, as
in giving Christ, and in him forgiveness of sins to be believed, Romans 9. 16. So
then it is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that
shows mercy: so again Romans 11. 5, 6, 7.

3. That all men might appear more and more inexcusable, when neither promises
nor threats will move them to embrace free mercy, Acts 13. 46. Seeing you put
the word from you, lo we turn to the Gentiles, and in the 51. verse, so they
shook the dust of their feet against them; Acts 18. 6, 7.

4. That we might apply our selves unto God in the use of those means that he
has appointed for the working of faith in us: Joh. 6. 27. Labor not for the
meat that perishes, but for that which endures unto everlasting life: Isa.
55. 3. Incline your ear and come unto me; hear and your soul shall live.

5. That we might wholly deny our selves, and search, and by searching find in
the Covenant of grace matter of free conveyance of power to believe whatsoever
is required to be believed, Romans 10. 17. Joh. 5. 39. and Psalm. 119. 9, 98, 99,
104, 105. and Romans 4. 6.

The soul being brought thus far on his journey toward heaven; as, 1. To be
powerfully convinced by the Spirit of God, as in Joh. 16. 8. this Spirit does
convince us of our own natural misery; and of Christ's supernatural
al-sufficiency to remove it.

In the next place, the soul begins to enquire after a remedy, and finds that
there is no other name given under heaven, whereby it can be saved, but by
Christ alone; so the soul begins to hear what Christ says in his Word to poor
sinners, Mat. 11. 28. Come to me, says Christ, I will give thee rest. Isa. 55.
7. I will abundantly pardon thee. Isa. 55. 1. Come, come, come to me, says
Christ. Revel. 22. 17. Take the water of life freely. If thou do confess
and forsake thy sin, thou shall find mercy, Prove. 28. 13. and 1 John 1. 9. Nay
if thou can not forsake them, if thou do but truly confess them, he will
pardon thee, Jer. 3. 13. and Mica. 7. 18. 19. But if thou find not the
conditions of the promise wrought in thee, then apply those absolute promises,
that are made without condition, viz. They shall be all taught of God, Joh. 6.
45. And I will blot out all thy sins, for my own Name sake, Isa. 43. 25. and
Jer. 31. 34. I will forgive their iniquity, and their sin I will remember no
more. I will sprinckle clean water upon you, and you shall be clean, Ezekiel. 36.
25. and again, I will give you a new heart, and take away the stony heart,
Ezekiel. 36. 26. Isa. 48. 9. and 28. 11. and Dan. 9. 17. 1 John 1. 1, 2. He (the
Lord Jesus Christ) is the propitiation for our sins. Heb. 8. 12. For I will be
merciful to their unrighteousness, and their sins will I remember no more.
Romans 5. 20. Where sin abounded, grate did much more abaund. Romans 4. 5. But to
him that works not, but believes on him that justifies the ungodly, his
faith is counted for righteousness. Jer. 24. 7. I will give them an heart to
know me that I am the Lord, and they shall be my people, and I will be their
God. Romans 5. 6. For when we were yet without strength, in due time Christ dyed
for the ungodly. 2. Cor. 5. 21. For he has made him to be sin for us, that
knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. Isa. 5. 3.
6. The Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all. 1 Pet. 2. 24. Who his own
self bare our sins in his own body on the tree, that we being dead unto him,
should live unto righteousness: by whose stripes we are healed: Now all this
is written, that we might have a strong consolation, who have fled for refuge
to lay hold upon the hope set before us; as in Heb. 6. 18. and so sit down
quiet in hope of eternal life which God that cannot lie has promised before
the world began, Tit. 1. 2.

In a word, Our heavenly Father has made his Will, and given us poor undone
sinners, great wealth, rich possessions, and large legacies, so that all his
children are great heirs, Romans 8. 17. Wherefore we ought to have an unshaken
expectation, and a frequent seeking for all that is promised, and not to suffer
the heavenly Father to purse or keep a penny that is due; but he shall be sure
to hear of his promise made to us in his Will and Covenant; and if he do not
presently give in according to Covenant, let us draw a petition, and preserre
it in the Court of heaven, where we have an Advocate prepared, Jesus Christ the
righteous, to plead thy cause without a see: 1 John 2. 1. and Isa. 43. 25.

Now when a soul begins to clear up and to believe, and apply these and the
like precious promises, the Devil comes in as a roaring Lion, like a Jailer
that has lost a prisoner; the World comes and holds forth her two fair breasts
of profit and pleasure, to a lure the soul to return to its first state of
security: and so both the World and the D^vill, lay siege against our own
misgiving hearts; and so all three, bending their forces together to cheat the
soul, or at last to engage the whole man to put a stop to this blessed work;
they begin again to cheat the soul under more specious pretenses, covering
all the gross sins flowing from the deceitful heart with the mantle of
Religion; and so promise the soul peace, and bring it into trouble; promise it
honor, and bring it to disgrace; promise it liberty, and bring it into
bondage; promise the soul life, and bring it to death; and so hide pride under
the name of decency; and bring in Covetousness, under the name of good
husbandry; clothe Drunkenness, under the name of good fellowship; and hide
Frowardness, under the name of Zeal: so that sin sings to us, and sinks us,
it kisseth us, and betrays us. Who would imagine that whiles a man cries out
against Pride, Covetousness, Cruelty, Treason, Heresy, Blasphemy, etc. that
he himself should be the spring from whence these issue? In a word, a man may
as well tell the stars, and number the sands of the sea, as reckon up all the
deceits in ones own heart.

At length the poor soul is awakened again, and begins to see it is cheated
on every side, and so breaks forth in these or the like words, thoughts, or
both, Well, says the poor soul, you have convinced me of sin, or rather the
Spirit of God in the of reading the forementioned Scriptures, and you have also
laid before me the remedy, but unless you can as an instrument in Gods hand
take away all the stumbling blocks that are in my way to heaven, I see I shall
do nothing but fall; for the Devil is ever and anon casting a stumbling block
in my way, and so does the World, and so does my own deceitful, desperate,
wicked heart, my worst enemy of all, that I no sooner have gotten over one
stumbling block, but another is laid in my way, and I walk in the dark, and see
little or no light, and so am ready to fall over every block, and my falling so
often, does make me so weak, that I fear I shall fall so long, that I shall
never be able to rise again: see in Psalm. 140. 10. and 1 Pet. 2. 8. and Jer. 6.
21.

For answer unto which let me acquaint the reader that I have had a little
experience of these blocks in the way of a sinner, to its Savior.

The first stumbling block that lies in the way is this; says one, I am
sometimes unsatisfied and remain staggering, and doubting whether the
Scriptures called the Old and New Testament be the Word God, yea or no.

Answ. If the Scriptures be not the Word of God, then there is no rule to walk
by, but that every man may walk according to his own heart, and as it seems
good in his own eyes: and this is a most pleasing bait, whereby our Rantors and
new upstart wantons are ensnared, and become the tribe of disobedience,
begotten by the seed of the Serpent, and traveling toward the land of
confusion, and they will shortly arrive at the anger of God, and be cast into
the pit of his eternal displeasure. But that the Scriptures are the Word of
God, it will clearly appear, if we consider

1. By the powerful effects that the Word has, and does work upon the
consciences of men, as to avoid the evil and to choose the good, besides many
wonderful effects that have been wrought thereby in all ages.

2. It does appear that the Bible is the Word of God, because it holds out
holiness more then any book in the world, and they hold forth a self-denying
spirit, more then any book besides in the world, by all which it does appear,
that it is the Word of God.

3. It does further appear to be the Word of God, because we find many of the
same things written in our hearts by the Finger of God, his Spirit bearing
witness with ours that we are his, and both bearing witness that this is his
Word.

4. In respect of the matter of the Scripture, it does appear to be the Word of
God; for there cannot be more glorious matter for the creature to be centred
upon; so also for the sweet dependency of the creatures one upon another:
beasts nourish men, and grass them.

5. The Scripture does appear to be the Word of God, because those things that
have been promised the rein, have in the appointed time come to pass in all
ages, so that things have fallen out in every age, according to their several
prophesies: and all this being so, does make it plainly appear to be the Word
of God. Now when a poor sinner converted has gotten over this stumbling block,
and is in some measure satisfied that this is the Word of God, so that the
subtle Devil, and his own deceitful heart, cannot cheat him here, then he
casts in a second stumbling block.

II.
It is true, it cannot be denied, but this is the Word of God, and were it
truly translated as it was left by the Prophets and Apostles, in Hebrew and in
Greek, it were something, but alas, the Scripture is corrupted by a spirit of
ignorance, or a spirit of self ends, in our translations.

Answ. It is possible here and there a word is not so clearly translated, but
what is that to thee, seeing thou art not to build thy faith, and adventure thy
soul upon God as held forth in any single text, but according to the harmony of
Scriptures, or general scope, and so they be truly translated: as to instance,
in the Scriptures of the Old Testament. Christ exhorted them to read the
Scriptures, and it cannot appear that the Bible should be corrupted since: for
besides the Apostles, there were many thousands of learned Jews, that came to
profess the Gospel: Act. 21. 20. Jam. 1. 1. And the truth being so gloriously
planted, it does appear it could not be corrupted: the generality of Scriptures
are truly, clearly and faithfully translated, so that whosoever reads, and
understands, affects, believes, and applies, and practices, what is
there held forth, it is able to make him wise, thoroughly furnished unto every
good work, etc. and so we come to the third stumbling block.

III.
I cannot but grant, says the doubting sinner, but that the Scriptures are the
Word of God as has been proved, and that they are not so much corrupted by the
Translators, but in the main and general bulk, are pure and clear; but what is
all this to me? (says the poor soul) If God had spoken particularly to me by
his Prophets and Apostles, as he did to the Jews and Gentiles, then it it were
something; but alas, these promises were made to the people then as being, and
what is that to me, unless God had spoken to me as he did to them?

Answ. The promises do belong unto us now in being as well as unto them, as
does clearly appear by these and the like Scriptures: Romans 15. 4. For
whatsoever was written afore-time, was written for our learning: Joh. 17. 20.
Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also that shall believe in me
through their word: 1 Cor. 9. 10. Says he it altogether for their sakes? for
our sakes no doubt this is written: Romans 4. 23, 24. Now it was not written for
his sake alone, but for us also: 1 Cor. 10. 11. Now all these things happened
unto them for ensamples unto us: and they are written for our admonition, upon
whom the ends of the world are come. Peter tells us from the Lord, 2 Pet. 1. 20.
that we must not make the Scripture speak in a private sense: that is, we must
not analyze or interpret them so, as if the Prophesies thereof did relate only
to the particular times, places, and persons, in, by and to whom they were at
first uttered, etc.

IV.
After the sinner is got over the three former stumbling blocks, he begins to
run the ways of Gods Commandments; and in his way he meets with a fourth
block; It is true, says he, the Scriptures are the Word of God, and in the
main truly translated, and they speak to me, upon whom the ends of the world is
come, as well as unto the people in former ages; But how shall I know what they
mean? The Scripture is to be understood in a spiritual sense, the Book is
sealed to me, I cannot open the seal: I want the Key of the Bible, the Spirit
of the Lord, Isa. 29. 11.

Answ. It is true, the word is a spiritual word, for holy men of old, spoke as
the Spirit gave them utterance; and the Apostles spoke as the Spirit gave them
utterance, Act. 2. 4. So that neither the learned man, nor the unlearned man
can understand this Book, till the Spirit of God does open this unto them: see
Isa. 29. 11, 12. And the Apostles themselves, although they had been a long
time with Christ, and heard his wo^ds, and seen his miracles, yet Christ after
his resurrection, must come and open their understandings, before they could
understand the Scriptures, Luke 24. 45. Again the Scriptures are sometimes to
be understood in a literal sense, sometimes in a spiritual sense, and
sometimes in both: sometimes as they are expressed, sometimes as included,
sometimes as employed: but for removing this stumbling block, take notice, that
the same God that commanded us to read, has promised to open our
understandings, that we may be able to understand and apply his Word: the Word
of God it self shines as a clear light, but as the pillar of fire was
darkness to the Egyptians, so is the Scriptures to carnal corrupted minds;
for it is spiritually discerned: 1 Cor. 2. 10. Until the Spirit open the
understanding, the understanding cannot apprehend, and when it is opened it
does understand, but according to the measure of that light, set up in the
soul, etc.

Obj. But for the full removing of this fourth stumbling block, I desire
satisfaction in these ensuing things.

1. Whether many of the promises are not made to Christ; and if so, what they
are.

2. Whether many of them are not made to the Jews, and what those promises are.

3. Whether there be not many promises made to the Gentiles; and if so, what
those are. These and many other things must be cleared unto me, and in me; and
all mountains and stumbling blocks, that lie in my way removed, or else I shall
not, nay I cannot believe nor apply the promises.

Answ. In answer to the first Quaere, what promises are made unto, and do
belong to Jesus Christ.

1. It was promised that he should be conceived of the Highest, and born of a
Virgin, Luke 31. 35.

2. That he should be a Savior and Redeemer, Act. 5. 31. and Hos. 1. 7. and
Zach: 9. 16. and Mat. 1. 21.

3. That he should be given for a Covenant to the people to perform all for
them, and to work all in them, and to perfect all concerning them, Isai. 42. 6.
and 49. 7.

4. That he should build his Church, Isai. 59. 20. and Zech. 6. 12, 13.

5. That he should have the heathen for his inheritance, and judge among the
nations, Isai. 2. 4. Psa. 2. 8, 9. and 110. 1.

6. That he should be exalted above all, and his throne established for ever
and ever, Luke 1. 32, 33.

2. Quaere is, Whether many of the promises are not made to the Jews, and what
those promises are, that are yet to be fulfilled to them.

Answ. 1. That the Lord will gather them, and restore them out of, and from
amongst all nations, where they be scattered, Isa. 27. 12. and Ezekiel. 24. 13.
and 36. 24. and 37. 21.

2. That they shall repent of their sins, Zach. 12. 10, 11, 12.

3. That they shall be fruitful, Ezekiel. 24. 26, 27. and Jer. 31. 12.

4. That the great ones of the earth, as Princes and Nobles, shall serve them,
Isa. 49. 23. and 60. 10.

5. That their state shall be so glorious, that it shall be called a new
heaven, and a new earth, Rev. 21. 1.

6. That the Gentiles shall come in to them, Zach. 8. 23. and Isa. 60. 3, 5, 7.

3. Quaere is, Whether there be not many promises made to the Gentiles; and if
so, then what those promises were and are.
Answ. I suppose that all, or at least many of the spiritual promises made to
the Jews do belong, and may be applied to the Gentiles, but there are promises
that do more peculiarly belong to them. Hos. 1. 10. And it shall come to
pass, that in the place where it was said unto them, Ye are not my people,
there shall it be said unto them, Ye are the sons of the living God: Hos. 2.
23. And I will have mercy upon her that did not obtain mercy, and I will say to
them which are not my people, Ye are my people: and they shall say, Thou art
our God, see Act. 15. 17 and Mal. 1 11. and Isai. 2. 3, 4. and 11. 10. and 56.
8. and Jer. 16. 19. and Ezekiel 17. 23. Luke 13. 29. and Mat. 12. 21. and 21. 23.
and Rom 15. 12.

V.
Object. But says the poor staggering soul, you have removed four stumbling
blocks that lay in my way, as so many iron gates, barred against me; but behold
a fifth block, I know not how to apply the promises, therefore show me how I may
apply them, and make a spiritual use of them.

Answ. You are to apply them understandingly, and that you may so do, consider
in what condition or state you are in; if a sinner, then you must apply those
promises that are made to sinners, viz.

1. As that Christ dyed for the ungodly and for sinners; and that he came into
the world, to save sinners.

2. The promises are to be applied orderly; that is according; to the intent of
the promiser; seek and beg pardon and forgiveness, before you beg assurance,
apply the promise of grace, before the promise of glory.

3. Apply the promises particularly; He loved me, says Paul, and gave himself
for me: and again, My Lord and my God, see Psalm. 18. 2. The Lord is my rock and
my fortress, and my deliverance: my God, my strength, in whom I trust, my
buckler and the horn of my salvation, and my high tower, etc.

4. Apply the promises strongly; for a man can never be established unless he
believe confidently, Isai. 7. 9. Again, Christ does often check his Disciples
for doubting and staggering. And that we may believe strongly, consider

1. His power that has made these promises; he can and will perform them, Heb.
11. 19. Romans 4 21.

2. Consider his faithfulness that he will perform them, Heb. 10. 23. and 11.
11.

3. Consider he is ever mindful of his promise, Psalm. 111. 5. and Isai. 49. 15.

4. Consider his goodness, he will make good his words in every part, 2 Timothy
2. 13. and Mic. 7 20.

Object. But for the full removing of this fifth stumbling block, I desire
satisfaction, says a poor staggering sinner, in this; many or most of the
promises are made conditionally, and I find not the conditions in me, how then
shall I apply them, nay how dare I to apply them?

Answ. It is true, many of the promises, are made conditionally.

1. If thou do confess and forsake sin, thou shall find mercy, Prove. 28.
13.

2. If thou do forgive all those that do trespass against thee.

3. If thou art weary and heavy laden with sin, thou shall find mercy, if thou
do come to Christ* Mat 11. 28.

4. Christ does call all those that are a thirst to come to him, as in Isai.
55. 12. and Rev. 22. 17.

These and many more are made conditionally: but consider,

1. That the Lord has promised to work those conditions in thee that he does
require of thee.

2. When we read the conditions of the promises in the Gospel, they be not
like the promises of the Law, made to the perfect fulfillers of them: these
promises are Evangelically made to those that endeavor to keep them.

3. Consider whatsoever promises are made in general to all those that hunger
and thirst, etc. every one may particularly apply it to themselves; as to
instance, the Messiah, Genesis 3. 14. is promised to all, which every one ought to
apply to themselves particularly; see Josh. 1. 5. compared with Heb. 13. 5.

4. Consider in our weak endeavors to keep the promises, we should believe the
performance to us, in, and through, and by Christ, in whom all the promises are
Yea, and Amen, 2 Cor. 1. 20. When we can see nothing in us, why they should be
performed to us, even then we are to claim them for Christ's sake, to whom the
promise was made, and in whom we have the condition.

Again, sometimes general promises are applied particularly, as you may see 1
King. 8. from the 37. 39. and sometimes the same promise, that is particularly
in one place, is made general in another place, viz. 2 Samuel 7. 14. If he
commit iniquity, I will chasten him with the rods of men: Psalm. 89. 29, 32. If
his children forsake my Law, and walk not in my Judgments, then will I visit
their transgressions with a rod.

Again, sometimes one and the same promise, is applied in several cases, as
Josh. 1. 5. compared with Heb. 13. 5. that promise which was made to Joshua
against fear, is applied to the Hebrews against Covetousness, etc.

Object. Well, says the weakened sinner, or rather young Saint, I have
considered all this, and yet I remain unsatisfied: the Lord Jesus does affirm
to me, Mat. 6. 15. that, If I forgive not all men their trespass^s against me,
then his Father will not forgive me: Nay the Lord Christ tells me further in
Mat. 18. 35. So likewise will my heavenly Father do also unto you, if ye from
your hearts, forgive not every one his brother their trespasses. So again in
Luke 6. 37. forgive, and you shall be forgiven: and in Mar. 11. 25, 26. this is
more fully confirmed, viz. And when ye stand praying, forgive if ye have ought
against any, that your Father also which is in heaven may forgive you your
trespasses. Verse. 26. But if ye do not forgive, neither will your heavenly
Father which is in heaven forgive your trespasses. By all which I see, that I
must forgive, not only some, but every one; not some offenses, but all injuries
and wrongs of what kind, degree, nature or quality soever, and that from my
heart too, or else, the Lord does assure me by these Scriptures he will never
forgive me; but this I cannot do, how then can I believe that God will pardon
me? or how can I presume to apply any promise, seeing I have not the conditions
of the promise in me?

Answ. It is true, mercy in us is but a drop of his Ocean, and but a beam to
the fullness that is in him, yet we ought to forgive all wrongs and injuries
done to us, even before they acknowledge it, and that from our hearts; Mat. 18.
35. though the manifestation of that forgiveness may be sometimes concealed
till the party wronging confess his fault. Again consider, that although the
Lord tells us in all the fore-alleadged Scriptu^es, that we must forgive every
one before he will forgive us: here is a mystery in these words, for he does
forgive us, before we can forgive others; yea, and in some measure manifest the
pardon of our sin to us; but the full confirmation of that manifestation, is
given to us, after we have forgiven from the heart every one every thing; but
before all this, the Lord lets into the heart a little light of his love to us
in Christ, and that makes us more like unto Christ, Luke 23. 34. Oh says
Christ, Father forgive them, they know not what they do: Christ did not stay
for an acknowledgement, a poor and a low thing for a Christian, enough for a
Heathen to say so. Mat. 18. from the 23. to the end of the Chapter, In this
Parable we read of a certain King, that would take an account of his servants,
and one was brought unto him which owed him ten thousand talents (now a talent
contains three thousand shekels, Exodus 38. 25, 26. and every shekel is two
shillings six pence, so that every talent makes three hundred seventy and five
pounds) well this man, thus deeply in debt, entreats his Lord to have
patience with him, and he would pay him all: in the 27. ver. we read that the
Lord forgave him all the debt, being ten thousand talents; he desired but days
of payment, and the King remitted the whole debt: Luke 7. 42. and when he had
nothing to pay, we read, he frankly forgave him all. Now put put all the wrongs
together, that ever any of us have received from others, and it amounts (in
comparison) but to an hundred pence, how can we expect to have ten thousand
talents forgiven us, seeing we are unwilling so as this man was, to forgive his
brother an hundred pence? shall the Lord forgive thee and I a thousand talents
a piece, and we deny our fellow servant time to pay an hundred pence? Surely if
we gather up a Catalogue of all our sins against the Almighty God, original
and actual, of omission and commission, secret and open, and lay them in one
balance, and then gather up all the injuries done to thy self, from all thy
fellow servants, and lay them in the other balance; thou will find at least
ten thousand talents that thou owe, and scarce an hundred ^ence owing thee;
and if thou art not freely forgiven all thy debt by the God of mercy, thou must
perish for ever; and will thou not forgive thy fellow servant his hundred pence?

And but by the way, consider that this has relation to personal injuries,
not to national; such as do oppose Christ and his Kingdom, for the Scripture
says, Cursed is that man that keeps back his Sword from shedding their
blood, Jer. 48. 10. and John tells us in the Revelation, that we should give her
to drink double of the cup that she has given us.

VI.
Object. Well, the poor soul having gotten over the forementioned stumbling
blocks begins to clear up, and immediately Satan throws in another stumbling
block; and indevours to persuade the soul that the day of mercy is past;
saying to the soul in these or the like words, Thy glass is out, thy sun is
set, the door of mercy is shut, the golden scepter is taken in, as thou may
see by these ensuing Scriptures, there is no hope o^ thee; Prove. 1. 24. Because
I have called, and ye have refused, ye shall call upon me, but I will not
answer. Heb. 12. 17. When Esau would have inherited the blessing, he was
rejected, and found no place for repentance, though he sought it carefully with
tears Mat. 25, 12. The foolish Virgins coming too late, when the door was shut,
cried, Lord, Lord, open unto us, and yet could not be admitted. Luke 13. 24.
Many shall seek to enter in, and shall not be able; from hence many a poor
drooping soul being under temptation, do conclude, that the time and date of
their conversion is past.

Answ. It is true, Repentance is a work that must be timely done, or men be
utterly undone; for God would have us to walk and work, whilst we have the
light, Joh. 12. 36. And whilst it is called to day to r^turne unto him, and to
accept of grace offered, and not to harden our hearts against it, Heb. 13 13,
15. And our Savior b^wayleth Jerusalem, because she had let sl^p the day of
her visitation: therefore all those that have let slip the first tender of
grace have cause to ^epent of it, but no cause to despair; for if God make
them now willing and desirous to accept of mercy; then the day of salvation is
not yet past to that man or woman; nor the date of Gods acceptance of him in
Christ as yet out, but he or she may in the careful and conscionable use of
means appointed by God, find comfort: And hereof we have a lively example of
Manasses, for though the Lord spoke often unto him by his Prophets, he would
not regard, but still refused all grace offered unto him, as appears in 2 Chronicles. 33 10. yet at last though but in his tribulation he called unto God for
mercy, and humbled himself before him; he was heard of him, and received to
mercy, ver. 12. 13.

And for that place in Prove. 1. 24. Because I have called and ye refused, they
shall call upon me, but I will not answer; by calling here is not meant an
hearty praying with godly sorrow for sin, but a crying and howling rather, like
those in Hos. 7. 14. under the sense of Gods judgments, desiring only to be
eased of it, as Pharaoh was wont to do; but for all this, God is mighty to all
that call upon him in truth, Psalm. 145. 18. and by refusing here is meant, a
constant and obstinate refusing of wisdoms counsel, until such time as God
has brought upon them some fearful judgments.

Again, for that place in Heb. 12. 17. touching Esau his seeking of repentance
with tears, it is as much mistaken as the ormer; for it is not to be understood
of Esau his own repentance from his profaneness, but of his Father Isaacs
repentance; he would have his Father repent of what he had done, and to change
his mind, by revoking the blessing which he had given to his brother, and to
bestow it on him; but he could find no such repentance in his Father: no
though he sought it with tears, as appears, Genesis 27. 34, 38.

And as for the other place, Mat. 25. 11, 12. touching the foolish Virgins,
being excluded out of the bride-chamb^r for coming too late; we are to consider
that this is a parable, and parables must not be urged beyond their general
scope: now the general scope of this parable is this, that formal professors,
viz. such as have only a for of godliness without the power of it, although
they will not live the life of the righteous, yet they could wish with Balaam,
that their end might be like theirs; but forasmuch as they have not provided
the oil of truth and righteousness, and holiness, therefore at the day of
judgment they shall be disappointed of entering into heaven: so that this
parable is not to be understood of what shall betide poor penitent sinners,
but of what shall betide hypocritical professors at the day of Judgment, when
the gate of mercy shall be shut.

And for that place Luke 13. 24. Many shall strive to enter in, and shall not
be able; that is as much mistaken as any of the rest, or rather more, for
Christ says not, many shall strive to enter in and shall not be able, but many
shall seek to enter, and shall not be able; betwixt which there is a great
difference, for seeking imports only a bare professing of Christ, but to strive
is to put all his indevours thereunto, to withstand all lets and hindrances
that may oppose him, to take every advantage that may make the way more
passable, and to make use of the time and means that is offered; when the way
is so opened, this is properly to strive to enter. Now never did any thus
strive as we read of in Scripture, though it were but at the last day of their
lives, but they received mercy: witness the penitent Thief, Luke 23. 40, 41.

VII.
Well says the poor soul, I am fully satisfied in all the forementioned
particulars, which were as so many mountains, or at least so many stumbling
blocks in my way. But behold here is another unmovable mountain in my way,
that I fear I shall never get over. And in brief that is this, I fear I am
not elected to salvation, and I find in Scripture, that none shall believe and
be saved, but those only that he has chosen or elected, predestined and
ordained, Ephesians. 1. 4. and Act. 13. 48. and Romans 8. 29.

Answ. Thou art not to enquire after, or once to question thy election, till
thou do first believe; and so the Apostle teaches, Romans 10. 6, 7. Say not
in thy heart, Who shall ascend into heaven? that is, to bring Christ down from
above: or, Who shall descend into the deep? that is, to bring up Christ again
from the dead; look neither upon election nor predestination, but look upon
the invitation that is laid before thee, and preached unto thee, Isa. 55. 1.
Ho! every one that thirsts come, and he that has no money come, without
money and without price. Revel. 22. 17. The Spirit of the Bride say, Come; and
let him that hears, Come; and let him that is athirst, come, and whosoever
will, let him come and take the water of life freely: there are in each of
these texts three whatsoevers. I say again, there are three whatsoevers.

1. What person soever he be, viz. Jew, Gentile, Barbarian, Scythian, Bond, or
Free, or whether an unconverted sinner, or a backslider, Act. 10. 35. and Joel
2. 32.

2. What sinner soever he be, either for number or nature, Isa. 1. 18. and 1 John 1. 7, 9. Act. 13. 39.

3. What time soever he does come he shall find mercy, Luke 23. 43. Now
election and reprobation are not as many imagine, the causes of salvation and
damnation; for Christ is the proper and meritorious cause of salvation, and sin
the proper and meritorious cause of damnation. Election and reprobation, they
are but president and peculiar acts or decrees; and the causes of salvation and
damnation, they come in between the decrees and the execution thereof. The
Woman of Canaan had as great cause to question her election, as any other vile
sinner; for Christ tells her, that he was sent but only to the lost sheep of
Israel, and she was an Heathen, a Canaanite and so tells her, It is not meet to
take the childrens bread, and give it to dogs, Mat. 15. 24. 26, etc. Now when
there be temptations about election and predestination thrown in upon thee, the
best way for the present is, to lay that dispute by, as this woman did, and to
run to mercy, and say as she did, Lord help me. Election was never laid down
as the ground of faith, nor as the ground of repentance; but rather as a seal,
or undeniable confirmation of our relation unto, and interest in Christ, and
the promises: for a Christian must be well grown in grace, before he can be
well assured that he was elected before the world, and since called out of the
world; although these things be sure enough in its self by Gods decree and
immatability, 2 Timothy 2. 19. Mal. 3. 6. Joh. 6. 40. Romans 11. 29.

VIII.
Well says the fainting, misgiving soul, you have help me over this stumbling
block touching my election, I see I have no just ground to question that no
more; no nor yet so much as that woman of Canaan had, Mat. 15. 24, 26. so that
I am gotten over that stumbling block, and have for a few weeks had a little
peace and comfort, and me thought my soul began steadily to rest upon the
mercy of God through the merits of Christ; and whiles I was thus solacing my
self, behold another stumbling block was cast in my way, viz. That I am not
one of Gods children, neither do I belong to him, because I have fearful
thoughts suggested unto me, as to blaspheme God, his Word, the Lord Jesus
Christ, and to make away my self, or to kill some other body.

Answ. This temptation is no other, then what is common to man; nay, the best
of men have had their share in these and the like things: see Heb. 4. 15. the
Lord Jesus Christ himself was not free from temptations, for the text says,
We have not a high priest, which cannot be touched with the feeling of our
infirmities, but was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin,
Mat. 4. 6, 9. Job had the same temptations upon him, Job 7. 15. So that my soul
chooses strangling and death rather the^ life. Now strangling was one of those
punishments used amongst the Jews, for the punishment of Capital offenders,
such as struck Father or Mother, or that prophesied in the name of an Idol,
and such as committed folly with a Priests daughter, etc. and when the Romans
overcame the Jews, they brought in Crucifying in stead of it. In a word, there
is no ground for any man or woman to think they are not Gods children, nor
belong to him, because he permits the Devil thus to tempt and trouble them:
2 Cor. 12. 7. Paul had the messenger of Satan to busset him. Luke 22. 31. Satan
does sift the best as well as the least Christians, I say he does sift them as
wheat. James 1. 12. Blessed is the Man that endures temptation, for when he is
tried he shall receive the crown of life. And that the Lords own beloved ones
have been in all ages thus troubled with inward and outward temptations, it
will yet further appear if you read these ensuing Scriptures, 1 Cor. 10. 13.
and Genesis 3. 15. Romans 16. 20. Revel. 2. 10. Ephesians. 6. 12. Revel. 12. 17. Luke 4.
13. and Isa. 50. 10. Psalm. 88. throughout. Psalm. 6. 3. Prove. 3. 11, 12. and
Heb. 12. 6, 7, 8. Revel. 3. 19. The dearest Saints and servants of God may be
buffeted and sifted with such sad temptations and horrid thoughts against God
the Father, Son or holy Ghost, blasphemous thoughts arising in our hearts,
yet not consented to by us, but rather abhorred, these are the Devils sins,
not our sins, they be our sorrows, afflictions, and miseries, but not our
sins: an upright heart is no more guilty of them, then Benjamin of Joseph's
cup, put into his sack: fearful thoughts not consented to by us, are not our
sins, but the Devils, and Satan must answer for that himself.

IX.
The ninth stumbling block, is this, Surely if the Lord did love me and intend
mercy to me, he would not continually follow me with afflictions, wrath, and
misery, for so it has been with me for a long time, as one hour passes away,
and another comes, so does one cross after another come upon me like hail;
and if the Lord do intend good to me, why is it thus, and thus with me? was
any sorrow like my sorrow?

Answ. Thou may be dearly beloved although sorely afflicted, for Gods house
of Correction, is his School of instruction; he had one Son without
Corruption, but no Son without Correction, God had one Son without sin,
but no Son without sorrow: the Almighty can look sowrely, and chide bitterly,
and strike heavily, and even where and when he loves dearly, for there may be
true grace where there is not one drop of comfort, nor one dram of joy; It is
true, the mercies are thine, but the time of giving them to thee, is the Lords:
Was not Job, the justest man then alive, fought against by the terrors of the
Lord? Job 6. 4. Was not David a man after Gods own heart, so washed with the
grief of his heart, that his moisture was turned into the drought of the
summer? Psalm. 32. 3, 4. Must Hezekiah who walked before the Lord, in truth, and
with a perfect heart, have the anger of the Almighty break his bones like a
Lion? Isai. 38. 13. Nay, must the Son of God himself, by bleeding upon the
Cross, cry out in the bitterness of his Spirit, My Ged, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? and do thou think to be brought out of the state of nature,
into a state of grace, and grow up in that state without afflictions and
temptations? Do think that the Devil will let go a prisoner, and send no
Hue and Cry after him? or do think he will lose one of his goats, and not
endeavor to look after him, and find him, and bring him home again? No
surely, he will leave no stone unturned, no means unattempted to betray thy
soul, he will throw out his golden bait and hide the hook; and if that will not
do, then he throws out his golden bait, and transformes himself into an
Angel of light, that he might draw thee and others again into a state of
darkness, he does spread his nets, and cast forth his baits, in all places,
and in all companies, he has snares for the wise and snares for the simple;
snares for the rich, and snares for the poor; snares for the aged, and snares
for the young: in a word, he tries all opportunities to bring us back again,
and to break our peace, to wound our consciences, to lessen our comfort, to
impair our graces, to slurre our evidences, and to damp our assurances; for he
knows if he can trip up our heels by yielding to the least sin willingly, it
will cost us more grief, sorrow, heartbreaking, and soul-bleeding: be fore
conscience will be quieted, Divine Justice satisfied, and our comforts and
enjoyments restored, our evidences cleared, and our pardon in the Court of
conscience sealed, see Judge. 6. 13. and Gideon said, If the Lord be with us,
why then is all this befallen us? but the Lord was with Gideon notwithstanding,
as appears in that Chapter; so that these and the like troubles is no sign of
Gods hatred, but rather of his love; Isai. 48. 10. I have chosen thee, says
the Lord, in the furnace of affliction, so that afflictions are a seal of
adoption, no sign of reprobation; for the purest corn is cleanest fanned, and
the finest gold is oftnest tried, the sweetest grape is hardest pressed, and
the truest Christian heaviest crossed, etc. see Heb. 12. 6, 7, 8.

X.
The tenth stumbling block, that a poor doubting Christian does many tim^s meet
with, is this, Oh but I have been a blasphemer my self for many years, and have
caused others to blaspheme also: and how do you think that I can expect pardon
and mercy from the Lord whose name I have so frequently and fearfully
dishonored?

Answ. Were there not a height and a depth, a breadth and a length in Gods
pardoning mercy, and had he not pardoned others left upon record in Scriptures,
then there were cause to doubt and fear indeed, that he would not pardon thee
for thy blasphemies; but thou have no cause to doubt of thy interest in him,
and pardon from him, and that for these two reasons.

1. Because he has promised to pardon thy blasphemies, and all other sins,
Mat. 12. 31.

2. Because he has left thee an example in his Word, of one that blasphemed
himself, and compelled others to blaspheme, and yet he received pardon, and
became a most glorious Saint; see Act. 26. 11. compared with 1 Timothy 1. 13.

It is said of Paul in Scripture, that he punished the Saints often in every
City, and compelled them to blaspheme, and being exceeding mad against them,
persecuted them even unto strange Cities, Act. 26. 10, 11. and yet the Lord had
mercy on him, and called him when he was in his course of destroying his
Church, Act. 9. 1, 2, 3. and 26. 12, 13. Nay the persecutors and murderers of
Jesus Christ himself, find mercy, and are converted, Act. 2. 36, 37. Oh let
heaven and earth, men and Angels, admire this mercy, he pityed him that was
cruel to his Saints, yea, he pardoned them that crucified his Son, who would
despair when Christ opens to us such a door of hope? etc.

XI.
The eleventh stumbling block cast in a weak Christians way, either by the
World, Flesh, or Devil, is this: Oh says the poor staggering sinner, I fear I
was never firmly built upon the true foundation Jesus Christ, because I have
fallen, and fallen, into one and the same sin often, so did not the Saints or
children of God, as I can find; I fear my heart is not right with God, surely
my estate is not good, I should but flatter my self, If I should think that
ever God will eternally own and embrace such a one as I am, who complain
against sin, and yet relapse into the same sin, who with tears and groans
confess my sin, yet ever and anon fall into the same sin, etc.

Answ. I must confess this is a sad condition, It does give Satan an advantage
to triumph: besides it does raise such fears and terrors, horrors and doubts
in the soul, that the soul can not be so frequent in duty as formerly, nor so
confident in duty as formerly, nor so bold and familiar, and delightful with
God in duty as formerly, nor so constant in duty as formerly; but for all this
the soul has no cause to distrust, much less to despair of mercy; for though
grace do free from the dominion of sin, and from the damning power of sin,
and from the love of sin, yet grace does not free any man from the seed of
any one sin, and therefore it is possible for a soul to fall again and again,
viz. Lot was twice overcome with wine: John twice worshipped the Angel:
Abraham out of fear did often dissemble, and lay his wife open to adultery to
save his life; see Genesis 20. 13. and Genesis 12. David was resolved to kill Naball
and all his innocent family, and a little after he fell into the foul murder
of Vriah; Jehoshaphat, though a godly man, yet joins affinity with wicked
Ahab: and though he was saved by a miracle, yet soon after he falls into the
same sin, 2 Chr. 18. 1, 2, 3, 30, 31. and joined himself with Ahaziah King of
Israel who did very wickedly: Sampson also fell often into one gross sin, as
is evident, Judge. 14, 15, and 16. Chapters. Again, Peter relapsed often, and so
did Jonah. Our falling into sin then should humble us, but not utterly
discomfort us, for sin shall never be our bane, if it be our burden; for
those that were borne of God, have relapsed again and again; Jacob twice told a
lie for compassing the Blessing, Genesis 27. 19, 21. Lot twice made drunken,
commits incest with both his daughters, Genesis 19. Peter thrice denies his
Master, and every time worse then other, Mat. 26. etc. These are in record, to
caution them that stand, that they fall not, and to comfort them that have
relapsed, that they despair not.

XII.
The twelfth stumbling block is this, Sir says the fearful timorous drooping
soul, I have according the Apostles command, 2 Cor. 13. 5. examined my self,
and put my self upon the trial, to see whether I were in the faith or no, and
whether Christ were in me or no: but upon this trial and examination, I can
find no such thing in me; and therefore by the Apostles verdict, I must needs
be a reprobate, and so a castaway.

Answ. None of the elect before their conversion, can know by any search that
they are in the faith, or that Christ is in them, for that cannot be known
which is not yet manifested. Again, many are not converted until they be
thirty, forty, fifty years old, or upwards; and shall we say, that such in
their younger years were reprobates? we might indeed say, that they were in the
state of damnation, but cannot, nor dare not say they were reprobates, etc.

Again, it is not proper for a man to conclude, that he is not in the faith,
and not to have Christ in him, because does not know so much; for many of Gods
dear children, may have faith and Christ, and yet for a season not know so
much, as we may see by daily experience.

Again, this text, 2 Cor. 13. 5. Prove your selves whether you be in the faith,
examine your selves, know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in
you except ye be reprobates? This place is often mistaken; for the thing now in
question, by the Corinthians, was this, whether Paul were lawfully called to
the Apostleship, and therefore they require of him to give them a proof of
Christ's speaking in him, to which his answer is this, or to this purpose, I
will go no further to seek a proof of Christ's speaking in me, then unto your
selves, Has not the Word and Gospel of Christ been powerful by my Ministry
to convert you, and to beget faith, and to form Christ in you? look into your
selves, examine whether you be not in the faith; for if you find this, it need
no other proof of my calling; if you find it not, then you have but a form of
godliness; or if ye be Christians in truth, yet you are unexperienced
Christians, and without proof of the truth of it in your selves: so the word
here rendered Reprobate, cannot be meant of such as be reprobates indeed; but of
such only as can give no proof for the present that they are in the faith, or
that Christ is in them: and this is one great cause of a Christians
dejectedness, and uncomfortablenesse, that although they be in a state of
grace, yet they cannot discern themselves to be in such a gracious state; as
Hagar when her bottle of water was spent, and her child ready to die, she sat
down full of perplexity; and yet there was a Well in the place: the Well did
not comfort her, though close by her, till the Lord opened her eyes to see it.
How pensive and sad were the two Disciples going toward Emmaus, about Christ's
death, though Christ risen from the dead, was in their company, and talked with
them? Luke 24. 14, 15. how did Mary Magdalen, Joh. 20. 14. 15. stand weeking
before Christ's Sepulcher, supposing that his dead body was thence stolen away,
though Christ revived and risen, stood close by her? Christ was present, but
she did not know him: so there is many a poor soul, that stands close by the
Well of grace, and is in the presence of Christ, and yet complains for want of
both, 1 Samuel 12. 13. David was told by the Prophet, The Lord has put away thy
sin, but because he had not the manitestation thereof, Psalm. 51. 8, 12. He
groaned still under his broken bones.

It is true, there be many men and women, that do think they have faith, and
yet they have none; and it is as true, that many poor weak Christians do think
they have no faith, and yet they have faith; they have the assenting act, but
not the applying act, they have faith of adherence, but not the faith of
evidence; now the faith of adherence is wrought in the soul, by discovering the
necessity of Christ to salvation; Acts 4. 12. and by displaying the
sufficiency, and alluring excellency of Christ for salvation, Heb. 7. 25.

XIII.
Well, says the weak, timorous trembling Christian, I did not think that all
the Devils in hell had been cunning enough, nor able enough to have cast so
many stumbling blocks in my way, but through mercy they be all removed, and my
heart cleared: now I see that God is no hard taskmaster, he takes not up, where
he lays not down; no, no, none but a fleshly understanding can condemn God
for a hard taskemaster: Oh what love is that in the Father to choose me, and to
send Christ to die for me! Oh what love was this, that Christ should come from
the bosom of his Father, and that God should be manifested in the flesh; the
Creator made a Creature! that he that was clothed with glory, should be wrapped
with rags! that the God of circumcision, should be cercumcised! that he that
binds the Devils in chains, should be tempted! that the Judge of all flesh
condemned, and that for me! that the God of life, should be put to death! that
he before whom the Angels do cast down their crowns, should be crowned with
thorns, and those eyes more pure then the sun, put out by the darkness of
death, and that for me his enemy! Oh that those ears which heard nothing but
Hallelujahs of Saints and Angels, should now hear the blasphemies of the
multitude! that face that was fairer then the sons of men, to be spit upon, by
those filthy Jews! that that mouth and tongue that spoke as never man spoke,
should be accused for blasphemy! those hands that freely swayed the scepter of
heaven, nailed to the Cross! and that he should suffer all this for me, and
such vile sinners as I am! when I was a slave to the Devil, and a firebrand of
hell, even then did Christ rescue me from the power of the one, and redeem from
the plague and punishment of the other; 2 Timothy 2. 26. Well, I had not enjoyed
this Heaven upon earth but a few months, but I fell into some gross sin: and
God does hide his face again, and my soul is sore troubled, and if I mistake
not, I see a greater stumbling block before me now, then ever I saw before; and
I find by Scripture, the sentence of death and damnation put upon me. Oh! I
was enlightened and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and yet I am fallen away.
Oh! here is my state set forth in these three Scriptures, Heb. 6. 4, 5. For it
is impossible, that they which were once enlightened, and have tasted of the
heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the holy Ghost, if they fall away,
should be renewed again by repentance. Heb. 10. 26. For if we sin willingly
after we have received the truth, there remains no more a sacrifice for
sin, but a fearful looking for of Judgment and violent fire. 2 Pet. 2. 20.
21. They that have escaped from the filthynesse of the world, if they be
entangled again therein, and overcome, the latter end is worse with them then
the beginning; for it had been better for them not to have acknowledged the way
of righteousness, then after they have acknowledged it, to turn from the holy
commandments given unto them. This is my state says the soul, I have fallen
shamefully, and sinned willingly, and certainly I must never look to repent,
nor to find mercy with God, but expect hellfire hereafte, and some fearful
end here, etc.

Answ. That place Heb. 6. 4, 5. is not to be understood of one or more
particular faillings, but of an invincible apostasy and falling from Christ;
for the Apostle says not, if they fall, but if they fall away utterly,
renouncing Christ, not sparing what lies in them to crucify him afresh.

That place Heb. 10. 26. is in like manner not to be understood of any one or
more sins voluntarily committed, for see even the best of Gods children after
regeneration have sinned, but to sin wilfully, that is spitefully and
maliciously, treading underfoot the Son of God, and counting his blood an
unholy thing, and even despiting the spirit of grace, this I suppose every
backslider does not do.

Again, it is one thing to have the whole consent of the will unto some sin
stolen away by some particular temptation, and another thing to be wholly
addicted and devoted to the ways of sin, to have a whole heart universally
married to Just, and filled with Satan; the dearest Saints have fallen in the
former, but not in the latter.

And as for that place 2 Pet. 2. 20. it is not meant of every re-insnarement,
and re-intanglement into sin after conversion; for which of all Gods children
can so carefully look unto himself, but that some of Satan's nets, snares,
baits, traps, which he sets in a Christians way, if God leave him never so
little to himself, Satan will re-insnare him? but it is to be understood of
such a re-insnarement, and re-intanglement, in sin and sinful courses, as
that he is thereby overcome and made the servant and slave of sin again; for
of whom a man is overcome, of the same is he brought into bondage, to do the
will of sin, to obey it in the lusts thereof, and to give up his members as
servants to commit iniquity, and that with greediness: But I trust this is not
thy state, and if not, consider, that we have proved before that sins against
light and checks of conscience have been pardoned, and sins against
experimental tastes of Spiritual things have been pardoned, and blasphemous
thoughts have been pardoned, and some fallen from their first love, have been
restored: so thou have no just cause to doubt of, but rather to betake thy
self unto Gods pardoning mercy freely tendered to thee in Jesus Christ.

XIV.
The fourteenth stumbling block; Well, say many misgiving hearts, I could
almost believe, but that it is so difficult a thing; to believe in health and
prosperity is easy, but to believe when trials come; O then, O then the
difficulty appears: wherefore I would not have my wounded soul healed
slightly, as in Jer. 6. 14. Most men by their glossings and flatteries, lull
people asleep in security, bearing them in hand, that there is no such
dangerous matter against them, and so draw a skin over places full of corrupt
matter, which will cause the wound to fester the more inwardly, to the patients
greater and further evil; I fear my graces are not true but counterfeit, for
all is not gold that glisters; and that which men call faith, is but fancy;
and that which they call zeal, is but unnatural heat, and passion; and that
light men have is but common, it is short of that many have attained to, that
are now in hell.

Answ. If thou have but the least grain of faith in thee, it will lead thee to
the Sun of righteousness, that arises with healings in his wings, Mal. 4. 2.

1. This Physician will cure thee speedily, Psalm. 46. 1. 2. He will heal thee
perfectly, Matthew. 14. 36. 3. He will cure all thy diseases whatsoever
universally, Mat. 9. 35. 4. He cures every one he takes in hand freely, Isa.
55. 1. Revel. 22. 17. 5. He does heal those that come to him eternally, Jer.
17. 14.
And if any say their sins are great, he says his mercy is greater; If thy
sins be of diverse sorts, he tells thee in his Word, that in him there is
multitudes of mencies; If thou say thy sins have been repeated, he tells thee
his mercies are revealed and renewed every morning; If thou say thou art unfit
for mercy, he says in his Word, if thou thoughtest thy self fit for mercy,
thou should not have mercy.

We read in the book of Martyrs, of some that were so full of misgivings of
heart and fears, did doubt, they should never hold out to suffer for Christ,
but when they came to the trial, they prayed earnestly, and were strengthened
immediately, and suffered valiantly; when some others that boasted of their
strength, had no strength to suffer: We also read of some others that could not
dispute for Christ, and yet they would die for him; one ^icely Ormes Martyr,
when she was brought to the stake lays her hand on it, and says, Welcome the
Cross of Christ; and then kissed it, and said, Welcome the sweet Cross of
Christ. Again, we read of one Mr. John Bradford, being brought to the stake,
took up a faggot and kissed it, and turning his head to the young man that
suffered with him, said, Be of good comfort brother, for we shall have a merry
supper with the Lord this night; and embracing the reeds said, Straight is the
way, and narrow is the gate that leads to eternal salvation, and few there
be that find it. By all which we may see that many precious souls have had
true grace, and yet have feared that they have had none; true grace we see will
enable a man to step over the worlds Crown, to take up Christ's Cross; to
prefer the Cross of Christ, above the glory and bravery of this World. One
Godfry of Bullein first King of Jerusalem, refused to be crowned with a Crown
of gold, saying, that it became not a Christian to wear a Crown of gold, where
Christ had wore a Crown of thorns: and we may see by daily experience, that
there is many a poor questioning weak Christian, will follow Christ through
thick and thin, whilst many of the great professors that did seem to be
pillars in the Church, do fall away with Doctor Demas from Christ to embrace
this present World; or else with the young man in the Gospel, come and bid
fair for heaven, but when Christ sets his Cross before him, he steps over that
to enjoy the Worlds Crown; when Christ bid him go and sell all that he had
and give to the poor, he went away sorrowful, for he had great possessions:
if heaven be to be had upon no other terms, Christ may keep his heaven to
himself, he will have none of it; but true grace does work the heart to the
hatred of all sin, and to the love of all truth; it works a man to the
hatred of those sins that for his life he cannot conquer, and to loathe those
sins that he would give all the World to overcome, so that he can say, though
there be no one sin subdued in him, yet every sin is hated and loathed by
him, so that though sin dwell in him, yet it does not live in him. Now, if
thou have any wisdom from Christ, it will lead thee to center in the wisdom
of Christ; and that love the soul has from Christ, it leads the soul by
degrees to center in the love of Christ; and that righteousness the soul has
from Christ, it lead the soul to rest and center in the righteousness of
Christ; the stream does not more naturally lead to the fountain, nor the
effect to the cause, then true grace leads the soul to Christ. But pretended
grace leads the soul to rest and center in the promises of men, or in the
rewards of cre^tures; whereas true faith, if it enjoy Christ without honor, it
will satisfy the soul; the enjoyment of Christ without riches, will satisfy
the soul; the enjoyment of Christ without relations, the enjoyment of Christ
without pleasure, and without smiles of the creatures, will content and
satisfy the soul; though honor is not, and riches are not, and health is not,
and friends are not, it is enough that Christ is mine, and I am his; my being
and well being, consists not in honor, for then Pharaoh had been blessed;
neither in wit natural, for then Achitothel had been blessed; not in wealth,
for then Ahab had been blessed; all these are but leaves that may grow on such
a figgetree as Christ has cursed; wherefore I would be such a tree that has a
root, which is hope; a heart, which is faith; a bark, which is charity; and
branches, which are spiritual virtues; green leaves, which are good words; and
fruit, which are good works.

Besides, thou may know whether thou are sound in the maine, by these
things; 1. Thou will walk more by rule then by example. 2. And be willing to
be searched in all things, and not only to do, but to suffer for the name of
Christ, and to mourn in secret when God is dishonored. 3. Thou will do all to
the glory of God, 1 Cor. 10. 31.

XV.
The fifteenth stumbling block; I have sinned that unpardonable sin against
the holy Ghost, that God will not pardon in this life, nor in the life to come,
there is no hope for me, Mat. 12. 31, 32. I have sinned against my light, and
the checks of mine own conscience; I have sinned against the experimental
tastes of spiritual things; I have crucified Christ afresh; I have had many
blasphemous thoughts in mine heart; I have fearfully fallen away from my first
love; and I find my heart as hard as a stone, without all repentance for all
this.

Answ. Original sin is the proper seed, spawn and fountain of this sin, as well
as of any other, but every sin against the light of mind, and checks of
conscience is not that sin, Romans 7. 15, 19. nor every falling away from the
first love, Revel. 2. 4. Nay farther, the sin against the Holy Ghost is not
every blasphemous temptation, for the dearest Saints and servants of God, have
been so, as frequent experience does prove: not every sin against knowledge
is that sin against the Holy Ghost, for the best of Gods people have so done,
Romans 7. 19, 20. Peter knew he ought not to deny his Lord and Master; David knew
he ought not to commit adultery, nor kill: yet strength of corruption drew him
into both: not every sin against the truth of Christ and the Gospel is the
sin against the Holy Ghost, as those in the Church of Corinth, that denied
the Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15. 12. and those in the Church of Pergamus, that held
the Doctrine of Balaam, and the Doctrine of the Nicolaitanes, yet are not
accounted hopeless, but invited to repent of their opinions: Neither is it
every sinning against the gracious motions, strivings and operations of the
Holy Ghost: for it is possible men may thus sin, and sometimes with an high
hand, and yet not sin against the holy Ghost, Act. 7. 51, 52. Neither is it
sinning against grace received; for the most heavenly and gracious souls, are
daily perplexed with inseparable and invincible infirmities, as doubts, fears,
distracting thoughts, distempered passions, they may and do too often quench
the spirit, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 19. and grieve him, Ephesians. 4. 29, 30. by suppressing
his good motions: nay, a man may grossly fall and break his bones, yet not quite
fall away: as Noah to drunkenness, Genesis 9. 21. Lot to incest, Genesis 19. 33.
David to murder and uncleanness. I suppose that these are recorded to caution
them, that stand, that they fall not, and to comfort them that are fallen, that
they despair not.

Now the Judgments of men are various, as to the nature of this sin; some
say it is despair, others that it is presumption, or an obstinate purpose of
continuing in sin, or a fixed will never to repent: an opposing of the known
truth, and an envying of our brothers graces, etc. Others say that the sin
against the Holy Ghost is this, viz. An universal, final, and wilful falling
away from the truth and common graces of the Holy Ghost once received and
professed, etc. to a malicious, obstinate, and incurable opposition thereof,
etc.

(1) Here is the general nature of this sin [a falling away]. (2) Here is the
properties of this falling away. 1. An Universal. 2. Final. 3. Wilful.
(3) The good from which he falls; 1. From the truth, once received and
professed. 2. From the common graces of the Spirit or Holy Ghost.
(4.) The evil into which he backslides, which is threefold. 1. Blasphemous
despiting of the Spirit of grace. 2. Horrid contempt and malice against the Son
of God. 3. Violent persecution of the way of Christianity.



Now where these particulars dwell jointly, and act vigorously, mark that man
or woman; for in Scripture sense, that man does commit the sin against the
Holy Ghost; and this is the highest sin against the saving remedy; this is to
sin wilfully, m^liciously, incurably; this is to crucify Christ afresh, and to
put him to an open shame, and to tread him under foot, and to count his blood
of the Covenant an unholy thing, etc. This sin never can possibly be repented
of, for so the Apostle tells us, Heb 6. 4, 5, 6.

Again, this sin is impardonable, so Christ tells us, the blasphemy against
the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven, neither in this world, neither in the
world to come, Mat 12. 32. Heb. 10. 26. and Mar. 3. 29.

So this sin is damnable, for if it can never be repented, and if it will
never be pardoned, it must needs always be punished with eternal death and
damnation, but such is the love of the Almighty God, that he has placed that
sin in so high a degree, that most men cannot commit that sin if they
would, for there must be knowledge in the mind, and malice in the heart, and
that not in an ordinary but in an extraordinary measure, or else thou can not
commit that sin: Peter had knowledge in his mind, but no malice in his
heart, when he denied his Master; again, Paul he had malice in his heart, but
no knowledge in his mind; so that neither Paul nor Peter, sinned against the
Holy Ghost; but take the malice in Paul's heart, and the knowledge in Peter's,
and join them both together in one man, if that man deny Christ with cursing
and swearing as Peter, and persecute the Church of Christ with Paul; then we
may safely say, that man has sinned that unpardonable sin. But we may take
notice by the way, that those persons that are truly regenerate and born again,
cannot sin against the Holy Ghost, for the Scripture says, that the
regenerate sin not this great sin, Whosoever is borne of God, sins not,
as in 1 John 5. 16, 17, 18.

For if the regenerate might sin against the Holy Ghost, then they might
totally and finally fall away from God, but that it is impossible, as that Gods
Promises, Covenant, and faithfulness should fail, or that Gods Spirit, grace,
and power preserving them should be overcome, or that Gods immutable decree for
their salvation should be shaken, so that there is a vast difference, between
the sinning of a regenerate person, and their sinning that sin against the
Holy Ghost.

1. They that sin against the Holy Ghost, are not, nor cannot be in any fear
or trouble, because they have sinned, but are wickedly hardened; for no person
that ever sinned against the Holy Ghost, either was or could be afraid,
perplexed, or troubled in spirit about it, such trouble being inconsistent with
the nature of that sin which leaves no place for any religious fear,
suspicion, jealousy, or trouble of heart about it, for they sin wilfully,
obstinately, maliciously, and blasphemously, without all color, shadow, or
possibility of remorse or repentance: the proof, Mat. 12. 31, 32. and Heb. 6.
4. and 10. 6. to the 31.

2. They that sin against the Holy Ghost, are such as are under the reign and
dominion of sin, such as never had any power of godliness but only a form,
etc.

3. They that sin against the Holy Ghost, apostatize and fall away finally,
but although regenerate persons, sometimes fall woefully, as we have proved
before, yet they never fall finally, they always rise again.

4. They that sin against the holy Ghost, were never advanced beyond the
degree of hypocrites, as has been evidenced by regenerate persons, for they
partake of the truth of grace, power of godliness, and life of God: and men
nor Devils cannot pluck them out of Christ's hand

5. They that sin against the Holy Ghost, universally fall away both from
profession and approbation of truth and grace; but the new born never fall away
thus universally.

6. They that sin against the Holy Ghost, so sin, that it is impossible to
renew them again unto repentance; but they that are regenerate, repent of every
sin, that they fall into before they die either in general or particular.

7. They that sin against the Holy Ghost, sin wilfully, and maliciously;
but as has been cleared, regenerate persons sin out of weakness and
infirmity, not of malice or wilful obstinacy: they hate the evil which they
do, Romans 7. 15.

Mr. Francis Roberts in his Book called A Believers evidence for eternal life,
says it is possible that men may fall totally, and finally, and yet not commit
this sin, unless they also fall maliciously: these three properties of this
grand apostasy, 1. Universal, 2. Final, 3. Malicious, must be jointly all
together, not disjoyntly or severally one from another, if by them we would
describe the sin against the Holy Ghost, and rightly understand the Scripture
about it.

Wherefore to close up my answer for the removing of this stumbling block, let
all poor souls forbear a little their hard conceits of themselves, and suspend
their censures; for they that have worst thoughts of themselves, are not
always in the worst condition; every one that fears he has sinned against
the Holy Ghost, must not presently be concluded to have committed that horrid
sin of sins; for such sins may arise first from the weakness, not
knowing thy state, or the nature of this sin truly and distinctly, and partly
from Satan's wickedness abusing thy weakness, that so, if it were possible, he
might drive thee to despair; but credit neither thy own weakness, nor Satan's
wickedness, lest thou bar the door of mercy, that God has opened so wide to
thee, and all other trembling misgiving babes; lay these things together, and
enter into a serious searching of thy own heart, and take the answer of thy
own conscience, so far as it is regulated by the Word, and thou will
presently find, that thou have not committed this unpardonable sin, neither
in thought, word, nor deed, etc.

XVI.
The sixteenth stumbling block, Well says the poor soul, I see I have not
sinned that unpardonable sin, that block is removed, and my heart begun to be
cheared, and the mercy gate by faith I saw opened; but behold I see another
stumbling block; even a mighty mountain, or many blocks and mountains, laid all
together, so that I have no hope at present either to get over it, or to have
it removed, viz. original sin in every member of my body, and every faculty
of my soul, and actual sins in all things that ever I have done, so that the
whole man is a lump of sin. Besides, I see the world, flesh, and Devil join
all together against me, and I do find them too strong for me; it is better
for me to die that I might cease from sin, and know the worst of my torment,
for I see all the plagues threatened against sinners both in the Old and New
Testament, hang over my head; therefore sure speak to me no more unless you
speak of the torments of hell; as for me I have no hope of obtaining mercy and
pardon: I am even ready to say with Cain, Genesis 4. 13. My punishment is greater
then I can bear: Wherefore with Judas I am ready to hang my self; but before I
do either, I will with Job, curse the day of my birth, Job 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
After this Job opened his mouth, and cursed his day: Let the day perish wherein
I was born, let that day be darkness, let not God regard it, and as for that
night, let darkness seize upon it, let it not be joined unto the days of the
year, let it not come into the number of the months. If I could reckon up how
many minutes since the time I was born, then I might know the number of my
sins, for I am guilty of as many sins, as I have lived minutes, if not more,
and who can dwell in everlasting burning? Oh! I hear that voice sounding in
mine ears, Rem. 2. 8, 9. Tribulation, and anguish, and indignation, and wrath,
upon every soul, of man that does evil, upon the Jew first, and also upon the
Gentile; shall one sin cast down the best Saints, and shall not ten hundred
thousand sins damn me body and soul? one sin tript up the heels of Noah,
the righteousest man in the world; one sin cast down Abraham, the greatest
believer in the world; one sin threw down David, the best King in the world;
one sin cast down Paul, the greatest Apostle in the world; one sin threw
down Sampson, the strongest man in the world; one sin cast down Solomon, the
wisest man in the world; and another Moses, the meekest man in the world; and
another sin cast down Job the patientest man in the world.

Answ. For the removing of this great stumbling block, consider that thy sins
are but finite at the most, but Gods mercy is infinite; I say, his pardoning
mercy is infinite; wherefore give over saying with Peter, Luke 5. 8. Depart
from me, for I am a sinful man; and say with David, Pardon my sin, for it is
wondrous great, Psalm. 25. 11. It is true, every soul is empty of all good, and
filled with all evil, and is a transgressor from the womb, so that man is born,

1. An enemy to God, Ephesians. 2. 5. Col. 1. 21. 2. A child of the Devil, Ephesians.
2. 1. and 1 John 3. 8, 10. 3. An heir of hell, Mat. 23. 15.
So that man in his conception, birth, thoughts, words, and actions, is become
altogether, from the crown of the head to the sole of the foot, sinful; there
is nothing but wounds and sores, iniquity, transgression, and rebellion: yea,
the choicest piece also, the soul, in all its faculties is corrupted, the
Understanding is blinded as to spiritual things, 1 Cor. 2. 24. and so the Will
of man is wholly depraved, it is contrary to God in all things, it will not
depend nor wait on God, it is unconstant in good resolutions; the Memory also
is full of corruption, being apt to forget the things we are commanded to
remember, and to remember the things we are commanded to forget, Jam. 1. 25. So
likewise the Conscience is corrupted, it abuses and perverteth the light it
has, to make sins small, where it should accuse it great, and sometimes to
make sins so great, as to say there is no mercy for them; whereas it should
rather excuse and comfort. And so for our Affections, how are they corrupted,
being misplaced, and ready to run over, either to over-love, over-grieve,
over-joy, or to hate what it should love, and to love what it should hate; as
our lusts, why else do we lodge them, and turn enemies to those that reprove us?

Behold, here is a taste of man's corrupt nature, and the Apostle says, if a
man live and die in this condition, he cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, 1
Cor. 15. 50. the whole sense is, no man can know the mysteries of the Kingdom
of grace, without a regenerate mind, and therefore no man can be saved by
adoption, without regeneration, and renovation of the whole man; for as has
been proved, we are born aliens from the kingdom of God, Ephesians. 2. 1, 12, 13.
and mere enemies, Romans 5. 10. until we are born again of water, and of the
Holy Ghost: hence it is that the Apostle requires, a new creature, a new man,
1 Cor. 5. 7. and 2 Cor. 5. 17. and Gal. 6. 15. and Ephesians. 4. 24. Col. 3. 10.
The unregenerate man perceives not the things of the Spirit of God, neither
can he because they be spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2. 14.

Wherefore wait at the pools of Bethesda, at the ordinances of God, being the
pipes of conveyance, for the finishing of this great work in thy soul: I say,
wait upon God in hearing, reading, conversing, and inquiring, and that
diligently and constantly; this work deserred, will be still greater, the time
to do it in, will be shorter, the strength to do it will be less; therefore
to day if thou will hear his voice, Heb. 3. 15. 13. to day, lest any of you be
^ardned through the deceitfulness of sin.

Now thou being thoroughly and powerfully convinced of sin which is the
stumbling block that seems to lie in thy way, consider that this conviction is
the first step toward heaven, Joh. 16. 8.

1. Then consider, that these sins of thine, were laid on the Lord Je^us
Christ, Isa. 53. 6. God laid on him the iniquities of us all, and he has
suffered the judgments due to them. I^a. 53. 7, 8, 9. And the Lord saw the
travel of his soul, and was satisfied.

2. Consider, that God has promised to pardon them, and those promises are of
two sorts, some conditional, and some free without conditions: first, some
conditional, Matthew. 11. 28. and Prove. 28. 13. If we confess and forsake our
sins, we shall find mercy. Then secondly, there be some promises without
conditions. Isa. 43. 25, 26. Heb. 8. 12. I will do it for my own names sake
freely.

3. Consider, that this God is mindful of his promise, Psalm. 111. 5. He will
ever be mindful of his covenant, that is, he looks not at their sins, but
at his own promise. I^a. 49. 15, 16. Can a Woman f^rget her suck^ng ch^^de,
that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb; yea, they may
forget, yet will not I forget thee, for I have graven thee upon the palms of
my hands, etc.

4. Consider, he is able, and willing to make good what he has promised; Romans
4. 20, 21. He staggered not at the promises of God: 21. For he was fully
persuaded, that what he had promised he was able to perform. Again, he is
willing, he does not afflict willingly: Mica. 7. 18, 19. Who is a God like unto
thee that pardons iniquity, and passes by the transgression of his people?
he retains not his anger for ever, because he delights in mercy.

5. Consider, he is faithful, he cannot lie; Heb. 10. 23. Let us hold fast the
profession of our faith without wavering, for he is faithful that has
promised. 1 Cor. 1. 9. 1 These. 5. 24. and 2 These. 3. 3. In a word, he is so
faithful, that he cannot but make good every title promised: Tit. 1. 2. In
hope of eternal life, which God that cannot lie has promised; the best of men
may promise and lie, but it is God that cannot lie, that has promised us life.

6. Consider, that he has entered into covenant to us, to make it good: Now a
Covenant gives strength to the truth of any engagement, when we have but a
promise, we use to say, we have nothing but a bare promise for such and such
things; now God has made many promises all sealed and made sure to us, by an
unchangeable Covenant; see 2 Samuel 7. 14, 15. Psalm. 89. 28, to the 37. compared
with Heb. 8 9, 10.

7. Consider, that he has sworn to us, that he will make good his Covenant to
us, because he delights not in the destruction of us. Ezekiel. 33. 11. As I live,
says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the the wicked. Heb. 6.
17, 18. Wherein God willing more abundantly to show unto the heirs of promise
the immutability of his counsel, confirmed it by an oath, that by two
immutable things, we might have a strong consolation.

8. He has sealed his Promise, Oath, and Covenant, etc. with the blood of his
Son, Romans 5. 6. and Heb. 9. 23. and Revel. 1. 5. In a word, to wind up all;
the Lord has taken away all the stumbling blocks that lay in our way, either
from the truth of him that makes the promise, or from his ability to make good
his word, or of his sincerity to intend really what he speaks, or of his
constant memory of taking the opportunity of doing the thing promised, or of
his stablenesse to be still of the same mind.

XVII.
The seventeenth stumbling block, that does many times lie in a Christians way,
may be this about the Trinity. I having received satisfaction, in all the
former things, thought all was well with me, says another Christian, but
behold I see a greater mountain lying in my way, then any of the former, and I
have no hope either to get over it, or to have it removed; and that is, I do
not know God; and He will come in flaming fire, rendering vengeance on them that
do not know him, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 8. Nay, it seems to be a paradox to me, that
there should be three Gods, and yet but one God; nay, some of our Ministers do
say, that there are three persons; and if so, there must be there distinct
beings; others say again, that there is but one God, and the Scripture says, O
Israel, the Lo^d thy God, is one Lord! and whom to believe, or what to think
of it, I know not; only this I know, that all those that live without God in
the World, and die in ignorance, shall never go to heaven, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 8.

Answ. I must confess, if a man should go about to know what God is by those
definitions, and descriptions, that most men give of God; a man may spend all
his days in learning, and yet die in ignorance: So confused are most men's
notions of God, some declaring him to be that which he is not, and others
saying, he is not what he is: And for mine own part, I can speak by sad
experience, who was my self about 14. years since, at such a loss in my soul
about this very thing; that had not he that does live in that inaccessible
light, that no mortal eye can appro^h unto, satisfied my soul in some measure,
I had been mad, for I was in that condition for the space of one month; during
which time I remained restless in my soul; and sometimes felt the flames of
hell burning within me as it were; then I felt what a wounded conscience was,
and could say by experience, who can bear it? Well, I set my self, sometimes
to reading several Authors upon the attributes of God, and the more I sought
after the knowledge of him there, the more ignorant I saw my self of him; I
inquired also of many Ministers, and of some Ancient professors, but they could
make out but little to my understanding; at last I went to another Minister,
Mr. Stubbs by name, and declared to him my condition, and after a little
serious consideration, he gave me a mild and tender answer, as one that did
sympathise with me in my misery, and as he was speaking to me, or within few
hours after, my spirit was finely calmed, and my trouble abated. The substance
of what he said unto me was in these two heads; First, that whereas I was so
troubled that I did not know God; he said that neither I, nor any man under
heaven did know him so as we ought to know him, and as hereafter we shall know
him; Paul himself said he knew but in part. Secondly, he further said, this my
ignorance of God, is not a willing ignorance; and God never comes in flaming
fire rendering vengeance upon those that are willing to know him, but he comes
to render vengeance upon those that are willingly ignorant of him. With these
and such like words, the Lord was pleased to calm those storms that were
within me, which mercy I trust I shall never forget etc. And to proceed for the
removing of this stumbling block, that God has in mercy removed from me;

Consider, that God in himself is wonderful, and God in Christ is wonderful,
see Isa. 9. 6. Father and Son in the Spirit is wonderful, the Fathers ways
are in tho deep, the Sons ways are in the deep, the holy Ghosts ways are in
the deep, and so their footsteps are not known, Psalm. 77. 19. If any ask, How
can these be three, and yet but one God? I answer, great is the mystery, the
Son in the Father, and the Father in the Son, and the Spirit of truth which
is sent by the Father and the Son, Joh. 14. 11. with 15. 26. and 14. 26. God
is incomprehensible, there is something in Gods essence, not to be inquired
into; and there are some things that may be known of God, and some things not,
Romans 1. 20. Of his great and glorious being, we can see but the glimmerings.
Exodus 33. 20, 23. No man can see and know him as he is, and live in this
sinful body; we may admire his essence, but not comprehend it. Romans 11. 33. It
is life eternal to know him, as we may read Joh. 17. 3. But he dwells in
that light that no man can approach unto, whom no man has seen or can see. 1 Timothy 6 16. No man has seen God at any time, the only begotten Son, which is in
the bosom of the Father, he has declared him, Joh. 1. 18. And as he is
immortal, so he is invisible, 1 Timothy 1. 17. and 1 John 4. 12. But more
particularly, how can these be three, and yet but one God? I answer, they are
distinguished, not divided, they be distinguished into Father, Son and holy
Ghost, 1 John 5. 7. There are three that bear record, and these three are one,
he is so eternal as is not only without beginning and ending, but by and in
him all things begin and end.

For the further clearing hereof, Consider, at the first the Lord made man of
the dust of the earth, and breathed in him the breath of life, and he became a
living soul; and in this soul there is a spiritual substance as is God, but
finit and not being of it self, so is not God; the Lord stamped his own
likeness of an holy Trinity in Unity, and of an holy Unity in Trinity; as the
soul is but one essence, yet there arises three diverse faculties in that one
substance: first, there is the Mind; secondly, there is the Will; thirdly,
there is the power of doing or working; the mind conceives and understands
things; the will affects the object according as the mind first conceives
of the thing, and from this mind conceiving and will affecting, there
proceeds the working power by which something is done; the mind so
conceiving resembles the Father, the will having his affections begotten by
the mind, conception resembles the Son begotten of Father, and the power of
doing proceeding both from the mind and will, resembles the holy Ghost,
proceeding from the Father and the Son: and as these three, Father, Son, and
Spirit make but one God; so these three faculties do make but one spiritual
substance or soul. But as the Father works not without the Son, nor the holy
Ghost without the Father and the Son; so neither does the mind or will or
working power, effect any thing apart, but jointly together; yet as we
attribute Creation to the Father, Redemption to the Son, Illumination to the
Spirit; so to the mind we attribute understanding; to the will we attribute
both well or ill affecting; and to the working power we attribute the thing
wrought or done: And as in that one God, no person is before or after another
in time but only in order; so neither in that one soul, is the mind before the
will in time, nor the working power behind them in time, for the power of
working is before the thing wrought: There is no distinction but only in order,
for there is no sooner the soul in the body, but there exist all them three,
and without any one of them the soul cannot be. If any demand, who created all
things? I answer, God. Who redeemeth man fallen? God. Who does inlighten man?
God; yet there are not three, but one God. So if any man demand, What is that
in me that understands? I answer, the soul. What is that wills or affects
any thing? I answer, the soul. What is that whereby I am enabled to live? I
answer, the soul; yet I have not three, but one soul in me, whereby I live and
act.

But as the image of any thing, cannot attain the perfection of that thing
whereof it is an image; so neither this Image of God in man, cannot attain the
excellency of the Highest, who in every thing is infinite only, and the cause
of all things; and although man was by him made of the dust, yet
notwithstanding this almighty Being preferred him above all other creatures,
viz.

1. By putting in man's soul an Image of himself. 2. By setting him in the most
glorous place of the earth called Eden or Paradise. 3. By giving him dominion
over all other his Creatures. 4. By revealing his mind to man, what he would
have him to do, that thereby he might profess subjection to his Creator.
Now this great, incomprehensible and everlasting God is every way so glorious,
that if thou did but see him thou would admire him, and account all things
lighter then vanity in comparison of him, if thou did but know him, thou
would be so ravished with the love of him, that many waters could not quench
it: if thou did but taste him, thou would hunger and thirst after him, more
then the heart does after the water brooks. In a word, it is life to know him,
Joh. 17. 3. It is heaven to behold him, it is melody to hear him, it is
endless happiness to enjoy him, he is all thy tongue can ask, thy heart can
wish, thy mind conceive; he is light in darkness, joy in sorrow, rest in
trouble, health in sickness, food in famine, life in death, heaven in hell.
Isa. 40. 22, 23. It is he that sits upon the circle of the earth, and all
the inhabitants thereof are as grass-hoppers: this is he that stretches out
the heavens as a Curtain, and spreads them out as a tent to dwell in; this
is he that brings the Princes to nothing, and makes the Judges of the earth
as vanity; it is he that dwells in everlastingnesse, whose throne is
inestimable, whose glory may not be comprehended, before whom the host of
Angels stand with trembling: Job 11. 7. Who by searching can find out God? can
any mortal man find out the Almighty to perfection? We may know something of
God and of his will, but not perfectly, for that is too great a task for any of
us, or any creature to do, it goes beyond all created understanding, man's eyes
cannot see, nor his understanding comprehend: take the most knowing men in the
world, and they are not able to comprehend the highest heavens, nor the lowest
hell, nor the length of the earth, nor breadth of the sea: much less the
perfection of the Almighty, which is higher then heaven, deeper then hell,
longer then the earth, broader then the sea, Job 11. 8, 9.

We cannot give an account of the causes of things in heaven, as of the motion
of the Sun, Moon, and Stars; what can poor mortal man say to it? deep things
are hard to be found out, and sometimes impossible: Job 9. 11. Job says, that
the Lord goes by him, and yet he could not see him: not that the Lord moves
from place to place as men do, but he being spiritual is as invisible and
incomprehensible to the eye and mind of man, as a man that passes by unseen
and unthought of.

In a word, he is such a one that is present in all places; The Lord was in
this place, and I knew it not, said Jacob, Genesis 28. 16. and David, in Psalm.
139. 7, 8, 9, 10. Whither shall I go from thy Spirit, or whither shall I flee
from thy presence? if I ascend up into heaven, thou art there, if I make my bed
in hell, behold thou art there, If I take the wings of the morning, and dwell
in the uttermost parts of the sea, even there shall thy hand lead me, and thy
right hand shall uphold me: what shall I say? all things had their being from
him, and all things do center in him, all things lead us to him; wherefore let
us forsake all things for him, and follow hard after him, and cleave close to
him, that we may know, that we have a relation to him, and an interest in him:
all other relations, and interests, which vain man is apt to rest upon and
center in, will prove a sandy foundation. If thou do expect comfort from
friends as near to thee as Jobs friends, they will prove but sorrowful
comforters, as his friends did to him: if thou do expect comfort from the
Magistrate or Minister, they are mutable, sometimes smiling upon thee,
sometimes frowning: if thou do expect comfort from thy children, they may
bring abundance of sorrow upon thy heart, as Jobs sons and daughters, and the
sons of Eli; or as in the Proverbs, A foolsh son causes shame to his
father: if thou do expect comfort from thy neighbors, they will speak thee
fair to thy face, and make thee their table-talk behind thy back: if thou
do expect comfort from thy servants, the one will be apt to run away, and
the other to answer thee again, or else to serve thee with eye-service: if thou
do expect comfort from the King or Prince, alas! he is turned tyrant, for
which he must lose his life or be banished, and so is unable to comfort
himself: if thou do expect comfort from he or she that does lie in thy
bosom, bone of thy bone, and flesh of thy flesh, which was made to be a help
one to another, this bosom friend is either given to idleness, or pride and
wastfulnesse, or both; or if free from that, then full of frothy talking, to
the grief of thy heart; or else froward and touchy to thy self and servants,
that as Solomon says, you were as good be in house with a roaring Lion, and a
raging Bear, and so thy bosom friend from whom thou did expect some
comfort, when all other creatures comfort faild; why, this frined above all the
rest proves the greatest enemy, and brings more sadness upon thy heart, and
sorrow upon thy spirit, then all the losses, crosses, scandals, and reproaches
that ever thou mett'st with before, from all the world besides; so that now
thou art fain to keep thy self from him or her that lies in thy bosom, and
the one must not reprove, for fear the other will fly in the face; the fairest
face is sometimes matched with the foulest heart; and the smiling looks with
hellish thoughts, Prove. 6. 26. and 9. Prove. 13. and 21. 19. Prove. 27. 15.
Eccles. 7. ^8.

Again, if thou do expect any comfort from thy estate, one Scripture says
that riches make themselves wings and fly away: another Scripture says, that
moth and rust does corrupt, and thieves will break through and steal: another
Scripture, namely the second of Ecclesiastes, says that all is Vanity, and
vexation of spirit, vanity on the door posts into which we enter, on the tables
where we sit, on the dishes out of which we eat, on the cups out of which you
drink, on the bedsteeds where you lie, on the walls of the house where you
dwell, on the garments which you wear, and on the foreheads of all them whom ye
meet, and on your own selves in every member of your body, and faculty of the
soul, Psalm 39. 5. Every man at his best estate is vanity: Where is the glory of
Solomon, the sumptuous buildings of Nebuchadnezzar, the nine hundred Chariots
of Sicera, the power of Alexander, the authority of Augustus, that commanded
the whole world to be taxed? all these at their best estates we^e but vanity;
nay take Solomon for beauty, Samson for strength, Achitophell for policy, Haman
for favor, Ahasael for swiftness, Alexander for great conquests; and yet all
these at their best estate are altogether vanity.

Wherefore center not in any creature comfort, take not up thy rest in any
thing be this side God, the God of rest and peace; for all is mutable that has
the name of creature upon it, only the Creator is immutable and unchangeable,
in all that he says or does; if he be once a Father, he will be ever a Father;
if once a Friend, he will be ever a Friend; if he once love thee, he will never
hate thee: and for this ground it is we are commanded to love him with a
supreme love; if we love father, mother, wife, or children, more then he, we be
not worthy of him, nay we cannot be his disciples, unless we, in a sense, hate
all the^e for his sake, Luke 14. 26.

Moses desired to see the Lord, that he might know him more perfectly, and the
Lord told him, Exodus 33. 20. Thou can not see my face, for there shall no man
see me and live, and Paul renders the reason of this, 1 Timothy 6. 16. who only
has immortality, dwelling, in the light, which no man can approach unto, whom
no man has seen or can see: in a word, man is so veiled, and clouded, and
narrow spirited, that at the highest degree, he can know God but only in his
attributes, and that but in part neither, for he is wonderful in every
attribute; and as the Prophet says, such knowledge is too wonderful for me:
wherefore, to wind up all, and for the removing of this stumbling block,
endeavor to believe in one God, Father of all; and in one Lord Jesus Christ,
redeemer of all; and in one sanctifying Spirit of grace; it is the office of
the Father to Elect, the office of the Son to Redeem, and the office of the
Holy Ghost to Sanctif^e those, and only those, whom the Father has elected,
and the Son redeemed: Endeavor in the Name of the Lord, to see the Father
love thee freely, and the Son manifesting that unto thee, and the Spirit
beginning to evidence it in thee; further, endeavor to see that the Father
loves thee as redeemed by the Son; the Son looks upon thee and loves thee
as being given by the Father, for him to redeem; and the Holy Ghost seeing the
love of the Father in choosing thee, and the love of the Son in redeeming
thee, he also sets his love upon thee, and will shortly manifest it unto thee,
and evidence it in thee; this is that intenall eternal Word by which all
things were made, supported, ruled, quickened, enlightened, and judged: this
glorious infinite wisdom was veiled in flesh, and so God manifest in the
flesh, was the mirror of Angels, the terror of Devils, the expectation of the
new creation; in a word, it is as easy to compass the heaven with a span, and
to contain the sea in a nut-shell, as to apprehend, or comprehend this
internal, eternal being in the fullness thereof; we may as soon fill a bag
with wisdom, and a chest with virtue, and a circle with a triangle, as the
heart of man with the knowledge of God: man may have some glimerings, and know
him in part, and this is life eternal, but dark man is so narrow spirited that
in all things God is above him; he says of himself to man, My ways are not
your ways, nor my thoughts your thoughts, for as the heavens are higher then
the earth, so are my thoughts above your tho^ghts, and my ways above your
ways, Isai. 55. 9. as if the Lord had said, there is as vast a difference,
between my knowledge of you* and your knowledge of me, as there is distance
between the heaven and the earth, my dispositions and dealings both for mercy
and goodness, and for firmness and faithfulness, are as far above your
understanding, as the highest heavens are above the very center of the earth,
and far higher: for the one is unmeasurable, yet finite; whereas the other
because infinite, is for greatness, and amplitude, and immensity
inconceivable. The best of men that have bowels of compassion, some tender
heartedness, some ingenuity, and readiness to remit a wrong, or some
firmness, or faithfulness in making good what they promise, what is all this
to that which is in God? for so much as God is above man in point of Majesty,
so he is above man in mercy; he is a guide to lead you, a staff to uphold you,
a cordial to strengthen you, a plaster to heal you; he will stand you in
stead, when friends forsake you; he is as swift to show mercy, as he is slow to
anger; he will carry you through the hardest services with the greatest
swiftness; if he give us more knowledge of him, we shall live more upon him,
and delight more in him, and be more conformable unto him: true happiness lies
only in our enjoyment of a suitable good, a pure good, a total good, an
eternal good; and God is only such a good; the treasure of the Saints is the
knowledge of God, the presence of God, the favor of God, union and communion
with God, the pardon of sin, the joy of the Spirit, and peace of conscience,
all which c^mes into the soul, by the knowledge of Christ, and is clouded
again in the absence of Christ: a man without this knowledge of Christ and God,
is as a workman without hands, a painter without eyes, a traveller without
legs, a ship without sails, or a bird without wings, or as a body without a
soul; all our discouragements do flow from our ignorance, and want of faith in
this Almighty God, viz. it springs from our ignorance of the riches, freeness,
fullness, and everlastingnesse of Gods love, or from our ignorance of the
power, glory, sufficiency, and efficacy of the death, and of the sufferings of
Christ Jesus our Lord, or from our ignorance of the worth, glory, fullness, and
compleatnesse of the righteousness of Jesus Christ, or from our ignorance of
that real, close, spiritual, glorious, and inseparable union, that there is
between Christ and our precious souls: To drive further into this mystery, time
would fail me, strength fail me, light would fail me, I do rather lispe then
speak in the things of God, and therefore must I needs stammer in so mysterious
a point as this I have been speaking to.

XVIII.
The next stumbling block is or may be this, I fear, says another poor
stammering soul, that I shall never be saved; for Christ tells me plainly, Mat.
5. 20. that except my righteousness do exceed the righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees, I shall not be saved, and I have examined my self, and
do find that my righteousness is so far from exceeding theirs, that theirs
do much exceed mine.

Answ. The Scribes and Pharisees, sought righteousness only by the works of
the Law, which made none perfect, in that the Scriptures says it was weak
through the flesh, Romans 8. 3. none were able to fulfill it, therefore Israel
attained not to the Law of righteousness, because they sought it not by faith,
but as it were by the works of the Law, Romans 9. 31. our righteousness must
exceed this, as does the righteousness which is of faith in Jesus (who
perfectly fulfilled the Law for us) or you shall not enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven: For by the deeds of the Law, there shall no flesh be justified, Romans 3.
20. and we are justified by faith only, without the works of the Law. Now if by
righteousness, was meant works of men's own acting, as temperance, obedience,
mercy, and justice, and upright dealing, then we find in Scripture, that
Heathens have outstript many, if not most of us.

1. For temperance, King Ahasuerus, Hester 1. 8. a Heathen King, made a law,
that no man should be compelled to drink, and yet many that call themselves
Christians, can hardly lay aside their drinking of healths.

2. For Obedience, when King Abimelech took Abraham's Wife, no sooner did the
Lord command him to deliver her to Abraham again, but he obeyed the command of
the Lord. Jonah preached at Niniveh to the Heathen, and no sooner did they hear
him, but they did believe and repent.

3. For Mercy, when Paul and the rest of the company suffered shipwreck, the
Heathen came and did receive them. See Act. 28. 1, 2, 3.

4. For Justice and upright dealing, the King of Sodom a Heathen, when Abraham
had overcome the four Kings and brought home the Sodomites, the King of Sodom
said unto him, Give me the men and take thee the goods for thy pains.
Belshazza^, see how he kept promise with Daniel; for when he saw the hand
writing on the wall, he said unto Daniel, If thou will interp^et it for me. I
will make thee the third ruler in my kingdom: Daniel told him that it tended
to the ruining of him and all his house, and notwithstanding this Heathen King
kept promise with him, and made him the third ruler in the land, Dan. the 5.
from the 16. to the 29. verse. Again, consider well this Scripture, Ezekiel. 5.
from the 6. verse to the end of that chapter, the Lord does send heavy
judgments upon his people for being out stripped by Heathens. Verse. 6. She has
changed my judgments into wickedness more th^n the Nations, and my Statutes
more then the Countries round about: therefore Verse. 7. Thus says the Lord
God, because ye multiplied more then the Nations that are round about you, and
have not walked in my Statutes, neither have kept my Judgemen^s; Verse. 8.
Therefore thus says the Lord God, Behold, I, even I am against thee, and will
execute Judgments in the midst of thee, in the sight of the Nations, and I
will do in thee, that which I have not done; and whereunto I will not do any
more the like; because of all thy abominations. Verse. 12. Therefore a third
part of thee shall die with the pestilence, and with famine shall they be
consumed in the midst of thee; and a third part shall fall by the sword round
about thee, and I will scatter a third part into all the world, and I will draw
out a sword after them. Ver^. 13. Thus shall mine anger be accomplished, and I
will cause my fury to rest upon them, and they shall know that I the Lord have
spoken it in my zeal, when I have accomplished my fury in them, etc. From all
which we may clearly learn, that God will not spare a sinful people, but let
out his fury to the full, to the highest degree, stir up all his wrath, pour
out his full vials upon a disobedient people, although they were known by the
name of the Lords own inheritance, if their righteousness does not exceed the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees. But on the contrary, if their
wickedness do exceed the wickedness of the Heathen, then there is no
escaping from Gods judgments, one or other will overtake them: 1 King. 19. 15.
The Lord will scatter them into Babylon, Moab, Ammon, Egypt, Psalm. 44. 12. So
that if we look only upon the external performance, and judge according to the
outward appearance, you shall find many civilized men and women outstrip some
of the Saints, but yet for all that, we are exhorted by Christ in some cases
not to judge according to the outward appearance, but to judge righteous
judgment, Joh. 7. 24. Now the righteousness of a Christian does exceed the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, and all Heathens in the world, in
these two things.

1. By faith in Christ, whereby all the righteousness of Christ is made his.

2. In works done in faith, which the other cannot do; one thing done in
faith, is better then a thousand in unbelief, Romans 14. 23.

1. Every Christians righteousness, does exceed that of the Pharisees, by
says in Christ, whereby the righteousness of Christ is made his; by faith the
poor creature sees all his sins, which the Spirit of God had convinced him
of, laid upon Christ, Isai. 53. 6. Again, by faith he comes to see Christ made
unto him, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption,, 1 Cor. 1.
30. And so by faith in him, he can say, the Lord our righteousness, and hear
the Lord say unto him, in me is thy fruit found. So the soul looking upon
Christ, in whom he is accepted, Ephesians. 2. 13. and so he sees all is of grace,
nothing of debt; election is the election of grace, vocation is according to
the good pleasure of his will, 2 Timothy 1. 9. regeneration, was of Gods own will,
Jam. 1. 18. Faith the gift of God, Phil. 1. 29. Justification is freely by
grace, Romans 3. 24. and a free gift: Romans 5. 15, 18. and forgiveness of our
sins, according to the riches of his grace, Ephesians. 1. 7. Eternal life the
freest gift of God, Romans 6. 23. and Act. 15. 11. even the life of glory, is the
grace of life, 1 Pet. 3. 7. Christ himself was a token of free love, from the
Father to mankind; and as his whole work was to love, so his whole love was
free, and as we said before, there is not one soul that ever be loved, but it
was poor, and empty; sick, and impotent; unamiable, and filthy; regardlesse of
him, and opposite to him. The language of the Law is, Do this and live, if
not, die; no work, no wages: but in the Gospel, the yoke of personal
obedience is translated from believers to their surety; there is nothing for
them to pay, all that they are to do is to hunger and feed, their happiness
is free to themselves, though costly to Christ, who purchased for them,
whatsoever they would obtain, and by his Spirit freely works in them,
whatsoever he requires of them; and this the Lord does freely. First, that none
might boast, but only glory in the Lord. Secondly, that none might challenge it
as due, but receive it as free grace. Next, that it might be sure to all the
seed; whereas by the Law, and the fulfilling thereof none can be saved, because
we fail in our obedience, either in the principle from which we act, or else in
the matter acted, or in the manner of our acting, or in the ends we have in so
doing; but the Lord Jesus Christ is our righteousness, 1 Cor. 1. 30. our
husband, Isai. 45. 5. our King, Priest, and Prophet, Mat. 21. 11. our new and
living way, the true only way, the safe and sure way, the peaceable and
pleasant way: Act. 4. 12. Prove. 3. 17. Now whosoever has faith in Christ does
look upon himself according to the measure of that faith, as he is and stands
before God the Father in and upon the account of an others (not his own)
obedience or righteousness, and so judges of himself according to the measure
of righteousness, that is made over to him in his head Christ, and so although
he find nothing but sin in himself, from the crown of the head, to the sole
of the foot, Isai. 1. 6. Yet as he is in Christ by faith, he sees himself
clothed with the robe of Christ's righteousness, so he looks upon himself to
be complete in him, Col. 2. 10. that is, wanting nothing because all things is
made over by covenant by God his Father, through his Son: and the great
mystery of the Gospel lies much in this point, as appears by the testimony of
Paul, Col. 1. 22. to present you holy, and unblamable, and unreprovable in his
sight; now no man can be thus presented, holy, unblamable, and unreprovable
before God the Father, but he only that is clothed with the righteousness of
Christ, for so the 28. verse does expound this, that we may present every man
perfect in Christ. Peter bears witness to the truth hereof, 2 Pet. 3. 14. Be
diligent, that ye may be found in him without spot and blameless, Ephesians. 5.
27. that he might present it holy, a glorious Church, not having spot or
wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it should be holy, and without blemish, so
Jude 24. Again 2 Cor. 11. 2. I have espoused you to one husband, that I may
present you as a chaste Virgin unto Christ, not having spot or wrinkle, Ephesians.
5. 27. By spots we may understand greater sins which defile the conscience,
and stain the reputation: by wrinkle, lesser sins, those of infirmity, which
are some blemishes to our spiritual beauty; and this is that righteousness
that does exceed the Scribes and Pharisees spoken unto by Christ, Mat. 5. 20.
from which this question was raised. Now we are further to consider that all
our own righteousness, as the Prophet Isay says, Isai. 64. 6. Is as filthy
rags, and we all do fade as a leaf, and our iniquity like the wind have taken
us away: Jer. 2. 22. For though thou wash thee with nitre, and take thee much
soap, yet thine iniquity is marked: Job 9. 30, 31. If I wash my self with snow
water, yet mine own clothes shall abhor me, Isai. 28. 20. The bed of man's
own righteousness is shorter then that a man can stretch himself on it, and
the covering is narrower, then that a man can wrap himself in it, Isai. 50. 11.
Behold all ye that kindle a fire, walk in the light of your fire, and in the
sparks that ye have kindled, this shall ye have of mine hand, ye shall lie down
in sorrow, Phil. 3. 8, 9. Paul says, Yea doubtless, and I count all things
but loss and dung, that I may win Christ. Verse. 9. And be found in him not
having mine own righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is through
the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of god by faith: and yet this
Paul had as many fleshly privileges as any man, for he says, Phil. 3. 4. If
any man thinks that he has whereof he might trust in the flesh, I more,
circumcised the eight day, of the stock of Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin,
brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, and taught according to the perfect manner
of the Law, and profited in the Jewish Religion above many my equals, and for
my conversa^ion, as touching the righteousness of the Law, I was blameless,
Phil. 3. 6. But all this is but dung: Yea doubtless, and I count all things
but loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, and do
account them but dung, that I may win Christ, and be found in him, not having
mine own righteousness, but that which is through the faith of Christ, the
righteousness of God by faith, Phil. 3. 10. That so I may live out of my self
in the Spirit upon Christ, unto God above the world, under ordinances, looking
to election behind, and perfection before.

2. The righteousness of a Christian, does exceed the righteousness of a
Heathen; yea, and the Scribes and Pharisees also, in this; he endeavors to
walk more by rule, then by example; whereas the Scribes walk more by example,
then by rule: again, a true Christian is willing to be searched in all things,
the other is not: again, he is not only willing to do, but to suffer for the
name of Christ, so is not the other: again, he mournes in secret when God is
dishonored, the other mournes when self is dishonored: lastly, an upright
heart does all things to the glory of God; when he has done any good thing, if
he does not apprehend God glorified by it, he is not satisfied, 1 Cor. 10. 31.
So then a Christians righteousness does exceed that of the Scribes and
Pharisees, in these four ensuing things;

1. In the matter. 2. In the ground. 3. In the form. 4 In the erd,
he propounds to himself in the performance of every duty.

(1.) For matter, that may be sometimes good, when the manner and circumstances
are naught; but nothing can be good, if the matter be naught; such as are men's
principles within, such are their practices without; Matthew. 12. 33, 34. Either
make the tree good and his fruit good, or else make the tree corrupt and his
fruit corrupt, for a tree is known by his fruit. Jehu did for matter that which
God required, but not from a right principle, 2 Kings 10. 30, 31.

(2.) Now the right ground and principle from which all holy, and righteous
acts should flow, is threefold.

1. A pure heart, purifyed by the blood of Christ, by the way of justification,
Zech. 13. 1. 2. A good Conscience purged from dead works to serve the living
God. 3. Faith unfeigned, 1 Timothy 1. 5.


Now faith may be said to be unfeigned, when it has the true nature of faith,
of assenting to the truth revealed, and applying particularly those truths
assented to.

(3.) For form and manner; do things required in such sort as God requires
them, not only doing good things, but doing them well;

1. Spiritually and heartily, with heart and spirit, not with body only; this
God requires, Proverb. 23. 26. My son give me thy heart, and let thine eyes
observe my ways. Joh. 4. 24. and 1 Cor. 6. 20. Romans 1. 9. God abhorres all
other services; Matthew. 12. 7, 8. Ezekiel. 33. 31, 32.

2. Sincerely and uprightly as in the sight of God, Genesis 17. 1. God said to
Abraham, Walk before me and be perfect. 2 Cor. 2. 17. As of God in the sight of
God speak we in Christ.

3. Constantly: perseverance in well doing, crowns well doing, Psalm. 1. 2. In
his law does he meditate day and night. Psalm. 92. 14. They shall still bring
forth fruit. Romans 2. 7. To them who by patience continuing in welldoing.

4. Obediently: because God commands it, therefore in conscience and love to
the command, obedience is performed, as in Noah, Heb. 11. 7. By faith Noah
being warned of God prepared an Arc. Heb. 11. 8. By faith Abraham obeyed and
went out not knowing whither he went. So we might instance in David, Psalm. 40.
8. and Paul, Romans 7. 22.

5. Universally, without reservations and exceptions: Hypocrites may do many
things, as Jehu, 2 Kings 10. 30, 31. Herod, Mark 6. 20. But an upright heart
has respect to all things required, as we may see and read in David, Psalm.
119. 6. Caleb, Number. 14. 24. Zachariah and Elizabeth, Luke 1. 6. Now O
Christian, do thou practice or perform the things required spiritually,
sincerely, obediently, universally, and constantly? If so, then thy
righteousness in the practical part, does exceed the righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees.

4. And Lastly, do thou do the thing commanded for right ends? viz. Gods
glory primarily; 2 Cor. 10. 41. Thine own and others spiritual or eternal
good, Matthew. 5. 16. and 1 Pet. 4. 2, 3, 4. Low and base ends, spoil the
highest undertakings, as we may see in Jehu, 2 Kings 10. and the Scribes and
Pharisees, Mat. 6. 15, 16. and Saul, 1 Samuel 15. 30.

Now then, lay these four things together upon thy heart, and state the
question to thy own soul; Soul I charge thee in the presence of the
Allmighty God, as thou shall answer at the last dreadful day of Judgment;
do thou look to the principle from which thou do act, and to the matter,
and to the manner, and to the ends, and art thou pure in all this in some
measure? then let me tell thee, thy righteousness does exceed the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, both in the doctrinall part, and
in the practical part; for they act from a corrupt principle, and for base
ends to be seen of men; and so the righteousness of the Scribes cannot
justify a poor soul, because it does cross the ends of the Lord in giving
the Law, the Lord gave the law to show people their sin, and the judgments
thereunto due: Again, it cannot justify a sinner, because then it would
frustrate the death of Christ, then Christ dyed in vain.

XIX.
The nineteenth stumbling block; Oh! but for all this, I fear I have but a
form of Godliness, and so shall not be saved; for I find my self apt to look
more upon gifts then upon grace, upon law then upon Gospel, upon a form more
then upon the power of Godliness: Oh! I shall b^tray Christ with Judas, or
embrace the present world with Demas; I have but only tasted of the Heavenly
gift, Heb. 6. 4. Note, it is not said, to have eaten or drunken, but only
tasted; that is, I have had some kind of relish, or small sense by a temporary
faith of the excellency of Christ; I have but only tasted of the good word of
God, as those cast-awayes did, Heb. 6. 5. And so again, I have tasted of the
powers of the World to come; but alas! I see, I have only a name to live,
though in truth I am dead; I live in a form but I want the power of
Godliness, I have deceived my self and others have been deceived by me, and
the Lord alone knows what will become of me.

Answ. The Devil has many ways to keep poor souls in a sad doubting and
questioning condition, sometimes by suggesting that their graces are not true,
but counterfeit; sometimes by tempting men to cast off all forms, as things
too low for strong Saints at least to make use of; and sometimes by making men
to rest or satisfy themselves in a form without the power; and by this
Dragons tail, a third part of men and women are deceived, see Revel. 12. 4.
All men that would walk with God, and worship him in spirit, take heed of
formality in all holy duties, take pains with your hearts in them, labor for
the power of Godliness, strive to get up to God in them: it were well if when
we did perform holy duties, we did but keep close to the duty it self, few
go so far; but it is one thing to keep close to the duty, and another thing
to keep close to God in the duty, to find God in all duties that we wait upon
him in; and in the use of all ordinances to take pains to find God there, and
not to satisfy and quiet our hearts, except we find God in the duties that we
perform. We have a full Scripture for this, Exodus 20. 24. In all places where
I record my name, I will come unto thee; that is, where ever there is any
Ordinance or any holy duty to be performed, there is a recording of Gods name,
and says he, I will come unto thee, and there I will bless thee; if you would
find God, you must go where God is promised to be manifested, and that is in
the way of his ordinances; when men come to rest in a form, as most do, they
never honor their profession, they have little comfort to their own souls,
they go on in a dead heartlesse condition, they know not what it is to have
communion with God: It may be thou have prayed, preached, conferred, meditated,
but have you been in heaven that while? what converse with God have you had
there? Oh take heed of formality, it will drown men in perdition, even when
they expect salvation; but now a Christian that can but chatter to God, and
speak a few broken words, and half sentences, yet if he does not rest in
formality, he may have much converse with God, whereas others that have
excellent parts, yet resting in the work done, never know what the meaning is
of having communion and fellowship with the Father, and the Son, and Saints
in the spirit; they are just such a people spoken to in 2 Timothy 3. 5. Having a
form of Godliness^, but denying the power thereof: they have a resemblance,
visard or show of holiness, heir religion consists in formal profession of
Godliness, (Tit. 1. 16.) without expressing the power and efficacy thereof in
their lives, or in external gestures, behaviors, rites and ceremonies,
without the pure inward worship of God in spirit and truth. Oh! it is very sad
to consider, what a spirit of formality is powered forth, and freely entertained
in this little Commonwealth; the Parliament embraced it, before and since they
are outed; Magistracy and Ministry were, and still are clothed with it, as with
a garment; and the poor silly people sit down under it, and freely entertain
it; where is there a Parish or a Congregation extant, that is altogether free
from this soul-deceiving thing called Formality? most men hear with other men's
ears, and see with other men's eyes, but at last let them know they must answer
for themselves; look where the power of Godliness dwells, there dwells a spirit
of love, meekness, gentleness, long-suffering, and forbearance; there dwells
tender heartedness, and bowels of compassion each to other. But though most
men do rest upon forms, yet let all spiritual Christians take heed how they
do cast away forms; for you must know, that although there may be a form of
Godliness without a power, yet there cannot be the power without the form, as
our blind Ranters imagine, for no man can carry grace in his heart, but it will
spread forth and appear in his life, but oh thou Rantor, and
Ordinance-forsaker, thou do oppose that whereby God communicates himself to
the souls of his people, thou do as much as in thee lies, shut the door
against Christ, and stand in defiance of him.

Again, many men take up a form of religion to serve their sinful designs,
and so makes a form, a Canopy to to cover all their abominations, or as the
fig leaves to cover poor sinful man's nakedness; Oh the many ends that men
have in taking up a form, viz. one he takes up a form only in relation to the
present and temporary credit and fashion of religion, because the State favors
it, or the current of the times runs that way; so that many men choose their
religion more out of fear of men then love to God, and this makes them form
and fashion themselves unto the government of the times, whether it be of the
old stamp or the new cut.

Others take up a form of Religion, that they may be gainers by it; for now
Religion, at least in the form, is in fashion; men begin to consider, that
they shall hardly get into a place either into the Custom or Excise-office,
unless they are veiled with a form of Religion; and does not England swarm
at this day with such finger-licking Officers? and is not Custom and Excise
become the neat art of theeving? But I trust, the same God that has overturned
the highest power, will overturne, overturne these subo^dinate brats that live
by the ruin of others, that so if there be a necessity of keeping up these
Monopolies, there may be selfe-denying men employed in those places, that may
not oppress the poor, nor take a bribe of the rich, and allunder a form of
Religion.

Others they take up a form of Religion to please their friends; so Absalom
would draw his Father into a belief that he was very Godly, and made
conscience of paying his vows and that at Hebron, he knew this would please
his Father well.

Again, others take up a form, knowing that it does not displease the World;
for a man to keep his Parish Church, to live peaceably amongst his neighbors,
and to pay every man his own, to be indifferent in matters of Religion, not
daring to profess too much, this is the godly man, in the eye and esteem of
the World, this man shall be honored by the World, as our late Parliament was;
but remember, I will overturne, overturne, overturne, Ezekiel. 21. 27.

Lastly, the Devil himself is the grand Formalist, nay he can assume variety
of forms, and no wonder if his servants effect the same. Oh whited walls! oh
painted Sepulchers! O form of Godliness, where is thy power! these are the
men which crucified Christ, and persecuted the Apostles, and hated the Saints,
and inbraced the present World; these are the Judasses that carry the bag,
and betraye their Master; these be those by whom offenses come; these are the
wells without water, the clouds without rain: In a word, these be those spoken
unto, and prophesyed of 2 Pet. 2. that whole Chapter, 1 Timothy 4. 1, 2, 3. Jude
8, 10, 11, 12.

But to wind up all, that I shall at present write to this point in hand, I
will lay down some Characters of one that has.

1. Only a form of Godliness without the power. 2. Of one that has the form
and power too.
1. One that has only a form of Godliness may be discerned or known by these
evidences; first, internal; secondly, external.

(1.) Internal, he can but act as a Christian, move as a Christian, and
appear as a Christian, but not from any principle of life living in the soul;
Did not Saul act as a Christian, and yet he was but a Hypocrite? Jehu in the
form did the thing which was good, but from a corrupt principle within; Judas
also he was an exact picture of a Christian only in form, but his principle
was covetousness; Demas had a form but not a power, and so he embraced the
present World.

2. A man resting in a form, cannot endure to hear of any to be better then
himself, he will shut up the Kingdom of heaven against others, and yet not
go in himself, Matthew. Chap. 23. ver. 13.

3. A man resting upon a form, may discern it by this, he will frown upon one
sin, and smile upon another; he will strike at some sins, and stroke
others; he will thrust some out of doors, but keep others close in his bosom,
and as we may see in Jehu, Herod, Judas, Simon Magus, and Demas: In a word, he
will fight against those sins that fight against his honor, profit,
pleasures, etc. but make truce with those which are as right hands, and as
right eyes, etc.

(2.) There be some external characters of a man or woman resting upon a form.

1. He may grow up in degrees of zeal, he will seem with Jebu to be zealous,
Romans 10. 2. I hear them record they have a zeal, but not according to
knowledge.

2. He will be a great exactor of holiness upon others, but he will do little
himself: they bind heavy burdens and grievous to be borne, and lay them upon
other men's shoulders.

3. He is one that does clothe and cover wicked practices, with specious
pretenses; he will devour Widows houses, and for a pretense make long prayer.

4. You may also know him by this, the maine bent of his discourse is about the
form, the garment, judging men that do not see by his eyes; to question any
thing they do is faction, and to contradict them is heresy; if you go before
them, then you go too fast; if you come after them, you go too slow; if you
speak against them, it is blasphemy.

5. And as for gifts and seeming graces, they abound with them; it is said of
Simon Magus that he believed, Act. 8. 13. Again, if we instance in repentance,
it is said of Judas, that he also repented, Mat. 27. 3. Shall we instance of
hearing the Word with joy? so did those cast-awayes we read of Mat. 13. Shall
we instance in partaking of the heavenly gift and power of the World to come?
we find men have had a taste of this and yet fallen away, Heb. 6. 5, 6. Shall
we instance in sanctification it self? it is said in Heb. 10. that they did
trample under foot the blood of Christ, wherewith they were sanctified; so that
a Formalist may be said to repent, to believe, to receive the Word with joy,
and to be sanctified in a large sense, etc. And these be those men pointed to
Galat. 6. 12. As many as desire to make a fair show in the flesh, constrain
you to be circumcis^d.

6. If most men under a form, did not rest upon a form, what is then the
reason of that stupidity, that neither mercies nor judgments will work upon
men, but only present strokes or rewards? What is the reason that men be so
careful about, and taken up so much with present and future things that are
temporal, and so careless about present and future things that are eternal,
if we do not stick in a form? What is the reason that we be so apt to go to
Creatures for help, and not to God? Again, What is the reason that we refuse
crosses rather then sin, although we know that sin is the greatest evil?
What is the reason that we be so fearful to displease a potent enemy, rather
then God? Again, What is the reason that men make so many shifts and lies to
cover their sins before men, to make all things appear fair to them without
respect to God? so that most men will rather lay their folly open by multitudes
of vain excuses, then to suffer the blemish of indiscretion to lie upon them.

2. In the next place, let me according to the measure of light in me, give
some Characters of one that has the power of Godliness as well as the form.
The power of Godliness in its highest excellency, is but the fruit of grace;
grace is the cause of Godliness, as fire is the cause of heat; and yet as the
cause is, such is the effect, for powerful causes makes powerful effects:
Godliness is the right exercising and acting of those graces which the soul
has received of the Spirit of God, both to the glory of God, and the good of
man, or the bringing forth of the fruits of grace in holiness of life and
conversation; that is, when he improves all his spiritual strength given unto
him to the advantage of his Master Christ; not only to improve, but also to be
glad of every occasion whereby he may advance the glory of that God that has
advanced him by the glory of his grace. Oh the invincible power of grace to
make such a change in man! his eyes are now opened, his understanding
enlightened, his judgment informed, his affection turned, he is not now the man
he was; Oh happy conviction! Oh blessed change indeed! for a man in one hour
to have his night turned into day, his form into power, his darkness into
light, his bitter into sweet, Gods frowns into smiles, his hatred into love,
his hell into heaven, his bondage into adoption, his task into privilege, his
greatest work into the greatest pleasantness! this man runs the ways of his
Commandments with delight; Oh! what is become of those breathings and longing
that were in the primitive Saints?

Again, that man that has the power of Godliness is not satisfied in the bare
use of the form when he goes to hear the Word preached; unless it comes in
with power, and warm his heart, he comes home unsatisfyed.

So again, when he does read, and confer and meditate, unless his heart be
affected with, and his soul refreshed by these Pipes of conveyance, he remains
unsatisfyed: whereas the other that rests in the form is quiet in the work
done: and so we might instance in every ordinance, he looks to God through
them, he dares not make Saviors of them, but waits upon God in the use of
them, as the man at the pool of Bethesda, or as a path that leads him to a rock
that is higher then he, where he has private salutations, interchangeable
embraces, sweet fellowship, refreshing familiarities, infinite, soul-satisfying
communities; this soul takes up his resting place be this side heaven; and in
the performance of any duty required by God, the soul looks to the principle,
manner how, and to the ends why he does it, and if he find not all clear, then
he looks upon his obedience as disobedience.

Again, he that has the power of Godliness will persevere in the use of all
Gods ordinances, he will pray again and again, at all times, with all manner of
prayers, and will not admit of a denial, he prays and waits, and prays and
waits, and beleives, saying, he will arise and give, he will send me an
answer of peace.

Now oh thou misgiving soul, do not thou find truths in thy inward parts,
and that although thou do not make so fair a show in the flesh as some
others, have thou not some inward breathings, and spiritual longings, and
soul-meltings? do thou not esteem one smile of Christ better then the smiles
of all relations? Do thou not look upon all the forms of godliness as
pipes of conveyances, walks and paths, wherein thou expectest to meet with thy
Savior, and art not satisfied in the use of them, unless thy soul meet with
Christ in them.

XX.
The twentieth stumbling block, is this, O sir, I have no power to do any of
those things which you have laid before me; is not God all in all? will you put
the creature upon acting? does not the Prophet J^remiah say, Jer. 10. 23. The
way of man is not in himself, it is not in man that walks to direct his
steps. Does not the Scripture say there is no power but of God? now sure as you
have laid before me my duty in all the forementioned things, lay now before me,
or if you can, give unto me a power to do the thing or things required, or
else. I shall sit still and not attempt to go over this stumbling block.

Ans. Shall we make account that God is like unto Pharaoh, to command the full
tale of brick, and give no straw? No, far be it from all men that have their
eyes in their heads, to have such hard thoughts of God, the just and righteous
Lord God: to unfold this a little, let us consider,

1. That there is no power but of God. 2. In a sense warily understood, there
is a power in every creature.
1. There is no power but of God, essentially, originally, or habitually.

2. There is a power in every creature, distributively, and virtually, by way
of participation.

Now there is no power in any beneath God himself, essentially, and originally;
in this sense, all creatures are powerless and strengthlesse: but then in the
second place, as God in whom all power is, has empowered man, so far man
has a power: and although this talent, or talents was given him by the Lord,
and was the Lords; yet it being given man, it becomes his, and is called man's,
and God at the last commends or condemns the party for improving, or not
improving this power bestowed on him, to speak after the manner of men: let us
then consider, the most inconsiderable creatures, as the Swallow, the Pismire,
the Crane, and the Sparrow; all these have received a power from God, and has
God given no power to man, whom he has made Lord of all these creatures? Man
has a great power over the beasts; for man is a superior: but the beasts
themselves have a great deal of power over the grass and herbs, for the beast
is the superior. In a word, if the Scriptures shall be our rule, and the
Spirit our guide, and the glory of God our aim, then the Scripture holds forth
a twofold power that is distributed or given forth to the creature: the first
is common to all, the second is proper only to some. The first is natural, the
second is spiritual. The natural power is given forth universally to every
mothers son and daughter of us, as one talent which we ought not to hide in a
napkin: so Pilat had received power, as Christ tells him, Joh. 19. 10, 11.
Again, have any of us done so much good, or refrained so much evil, as we
might have done? See Heb. 5. 12. see Jer. 35. 6. 18, 19. Yea the worst of all
created creatures, the Devil himself has a power: First, he has the power of
conquest; for in Adams fall, Satan conquered the whole world, all mankind,
they were the Devils conquest upon the fall; so that when a man is converted,
then he is said to come out of the Kingdom of Satan; but since this head does
begin to be bruised, he cannot do all things without leave. There was a
special temptation upon the country in his running their heard of swine into
the sea, and he had leave for that before he did it: there was a special
temptation upon Ahab in the lying spirit of the Prophets, and he had a special
leave and permission from God: there was a special temptation coming down upon
the Disciples, and he would have had leave for that; Simon, Simon, Satan has
desired you: he was fain to ask leave, before he can execute his power; he is
called in Scripture, The Prince of the power of the air; the same words that
are given unto God for good in Scripture, are given also unto Satan for evil,
the Holy Ghost is said to enlighten a man, Satan is said for to blind him; The
god of this world has blinded their eyes, says the Apostle: the Spirit is
said to rule in us, Satan is said to rule in the children of disobedience: the
Holy Ghost is said to work in us mightily; the same word is used for him; also
the Holy Ghost is said to fill the hearts of believers, they were filled with
the Holy Ghost; so are men's hearts said to be filled with Satan. Says Peter to
Ananias, Why has Satan filled thine heart? Now does God empower Fowls, and
Fishes, and Beasts of the earth, and every one to act in his kind, and is man
left powerless? Nay, has the Devil himself a power, and man none? this is
the error of men, not the language of the Scripture; for the Lord is so just,
and his ways so equal, that he never requires impossible things of his
creatures: Only take notice of this by the way, although I do affirm that all
men have a natural power, yet I do not say that every man naturally has it
in the same measure; neither do I say or affirm that natural power can act
in supernatural things, no more then a bird can live in the sea, or a fish in
the air. See Romans 1. 19, 20.

2. There is a spiritual power, and this is not given forth to all
universally, as the other is, but only to those that are new born: by this
power according to the measure of the gift of Christ, they can pray in the
Spirit, rejoice in the Spirit, and worship God in the Spirit; by this power
they pull down strong houses, and cast down imaginations, by this power they
can keep down their corruptible body, as Paul, 2 Cor. 9. 27.

Now if any body should say, that a new creature has no spiritual power, I
will ask him, to what end is there so many precepts, exhortations, and
persuasions to these people? If no power in these men (cease to teach man) as
good go teach the Sun, Moon and Stars which way they shall go, the wind to
blow, or the sea to ebb and flow; go teach the fish to swim, the bird to
fly; for they have power, but by their opinion, man has none: and indeed if
man spiritually should have no power to act, go and raze out these and the
like ensuing Scriptures, as requiring that of man, which he has no power to
do, Luke 13. 24. Romans 15. 30. Heb. 12. 4. Heb. 12. 1. and 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7.
and 2 Pet. 1. 10. Phil. 2. 12. Jer. 4. 14. Mat. 11. 28. Jer. 3. 13. Let no man
therefore say, that he has no power in any sense, lest he make God the author
of all his omissions, which should be charged upon the creature, not upon the
Creator; for he gives to every man some talent, or talents, (as to some worldly
and natural talents, as wisdom, wealth, and art, etc.) and to others
spiritual talents or gifts, as to prophecy, interpret, work miracles, etc.
Questionless there is no man that improves his talent so well as he ought and
might improve it: and God may, upon the non-improvement of what we have, deny
us more, and where he finds us faithless in a little, it is but meet that he
should deny us much: also God may very justly damn men for not improving what
he gives them, and call them to an account as a Lord does his faithless and
unprofitable servant and steward; therefore the very Heathens that had but the
very light of nature, will be inexcusable at the day of Judgment, for not
walking and acting according to that light and instinct in them, though they
never heard Scripture, Law, nor Gospel. So that to sin against the law of
nature only, is enough to damn men: if the improving of the law of nature is
not sufficient to save men, for there is a knowledge of Christ, faith in him,
obedience to him, required as absolutely necessary to salvation, Joh. 17. 3.
Joh. 3. 36. 8. 24. Psalm. 2. 12. Luke 19. 27. So that election and reprobation,
are not in any sense, causes of salvation and damnation, but Christ is the
proper and meritorious cause of salvation, and sin the proper and meritorious
cause of damnation; so that election and reprobation, they are but precedent
acts or decrees, and the causes of salvation and damnation, they come in
between the decrees and the execution thereof. So then if we consider men in
themselves, and without Christ, they are dead in their sins, without any
spiritual strength, and having neither will nor spiritual power, neither in
themselves, nor of themselves either to believe, or to do any good work from
any true principle, or for any good end; therefore Gods grace prepares us
before we can be able, and works in us that we may be able: nay, the Lord
does work all our works in (or for) us, as well after believing, as before
believing. Take a man that is quickened, enlightened, converted, and empowered by
the Spirit of God in the inward man, this man has need of a continual supply,
Phil. 1. 19. of the Spirit of God, of renewed strength; for we read of Peter,
that he rested upon some old received strength, and so falls before a new
temptation. So again Paul, I can do all things through Christ enabling me; he
knew he must not rest upon what he was enabled to do, but expect a continual
enabling by the same Spirit that at first enabled him, Ephesians. 6. 10. Be strong in
the Lord: that is, be ye strengthened daily more and more by the power of the
Lord; that is, be ye encouraged to do the thing required of the Lord by that
union ye have with him, by faith drawing from him, all the strength ye stand in
need of.

1. Consider thou have a power already given thee, by which thou art able to
do the thing required.

2. Or else with the command the Lord conveyes a power to enable thee to do the
thing commanded.

Thirdly, when thou look upon the command on thy left hand, then look upon
the promises on thy right hand, wherein the Lord God has promised to enable
thee, and not, not, not fail thee, nor, nor forsake thee, Heb. 13. 5. It is
observed that there are five Negatives in these words, although our Translation
does express but one: but for more careful practicing, doing and observing
all the commands of our God, consider these few things as encouragements.

1. He requires no more of us then he has enabled us to do, (or at least
promised to enable us to do.)

2. For our encouragement, he has promised to reward us for doing our duty, so
that to every precept there are two Promises; the one to reward us, the other
to enable us, and both to encourage us.

And in case of slothfulness, and negligence, in leaving undone what we ought
and might have done: First he complains on us, Secondly he exhorts us, Thirdly
he threatens us, Fourthly he tells us that he did put a prize into our hands,
but we, like fools, had no heart to it; and so our cloudings, eclipsings,
mis-givings* and doubtings, are but the effects of our negligence. See Isa. 59.
2. Isa. 1. 15. Jer. 5. 25. Psalm. 107. 17. 34. The Lord does protest we are not
straightened in him, he is not wanting to us, what could I, says the Lord, have
done more for my Vineyard? Isa. 5. 4. And when I looked for Grapes it brought
forth wild Grapes: wherefore judge, are not my ways equal, and yours
unequal? Hear O Heavens, and give ear O Earth, be astonished, I have
furnished a people with strength to obey me, and they have rebelled against me:
What, will no man believe me? did I ever say, seek me in vain? did not your
Fathers trust in me, and were saved? are not my ways equal, and yours
unequal? do I reap where I have not sown? do I require much where I have given
little? is not my promise before you, and my presence with you? is not my
blessing upon you, and my Angels guarding you? do thou want strength? ask of
me; do thou want wisdom? ask of me. Have not I said in my Word that I do
give liberally and upbraide not? have I not said I will withhold no good thing
from thee? and have I not promised to work faith in thee, and protested I will
never fail, nor forsake thee? Why do thou not take hold of my Covenant, and
assure thy self I will never fail thee?

The soul having all its stumbling blocks removed, it begins to clear up and
solace it self in the apprehension of Christ, and application of his promises,
and so breaks forth into these or the like words, Ever blessed be the name of
God that has removed these terrible stumbling blocks that lay in my way; now I
see that I never saw, now I know that I never knew, he has anointed mine eyes,
he has scattered all my doubts, he is my God, and I will prepare him a
habitation in my soul, and the chiefest room in my heart: God told Moses he
could not see his face and live: If I cannot see his face and live, then let me
dye, that I may behold him as he is, and have full enjoyment of him; O I am
sick for the love of him, that dyed for the love of me; I was ignorant as a
beast before him, but now I know him and have experience of him, he has
avouched himself to be mine, and I have avouched my self to be his; Jacobs
life was bound up in Benjamins, but my soul is bound up in the bundle of life
with the Lord my God, so that for me to live is Christ, and to dye is gain, he
has overcome me with his love, he has made known his mind to me, in
removing these stumbling blocks from me, I am overcome with admiration, and
replenished with exceeding consolation.

21.
The last stumbling block that I shall name is this, And, says many a poor
soul with-within it self, I know not with what Society or Assembly to join
with, there are so many opinions, viz. Presbytery, Independency, Anabaptist,
Arminians, Antinomians, Ranters, Quakers, Seekers, I know not with whom to sit
down. O tell me, O thou whom my soul loves, where thou feedest thy flock,
that so I may be able to discern between him that serves God in pretense, or
in truth.

Ans. My advise is, That thou would own all men and women, let them go under
what name soever, if thou see any thing of the appearance of Christ in them,
and know no man after the flesh, 2 Cor. 5. 16. that is, do not so much take
notice of men's outward appearances, viz. kindred, quality, honor, wisdom, or
eloquency, but merely know them after the spirit, that is, according to the
spiritual power, virtue, and grace that is in them; the true Church then are a
people created in Christ Jesus, or begotten and born to God in the faith and
knowledge of his Son by the power of the spirit, and so are become new
creatures, partakers of Christ, a chosen Generation, a royal Priesthood, an
holy Nation, Kings and Priests unto God, Members of Christ, anointed with the
same holy Unction, and to the same glory and dignity, only in subordination to
him, as the Members to the head, the younger brethren to the firstborn, for in
all things Christ has the pre-eminence, and yet they are all one in him
according to the spirit, however different according to the flesh one from
another; according to the spirit they are Sion, the beloved City, the Kingdom
and temple of God, and he and his glory appertains to them, and is their
portion, glorious things are spoken of thee, O thou City of god, the most high
in the midst of thee, he shall exalt thee and delight in thee. This is Sion
that no man regards, the place and habitation that God has chosen, in which
he will dwell and rest for ever, because he has loved and desired it: yea God
the Father disdains not to count them his Sons and Daughters, the Son is not
ashamed to call them Brethren, the Holy Ghost is pleased to make them his
Temples; they are called effectually, justified freely, sanctified graciously,
and shall be glorified eternally they are servants of God, not only servants
but friends, not only friends but Sons, not only Sons but Heirs to inherit his
Kingdom, not only Heirs but coheirs with Christ, no condemnation shall befall
them, nothing in the world shall separate them from the love of God in Jesus
Christ, all things in the world shall work together for their good, all the
surest promises are theirs, all the richest graces are theirs, all the sweetest
comforts are theirs, all the highest privileges are theirs, all the noblest
hopes are theirs, what shall we say? theirs is Christ, and in Christ all
things: O happy! happy is that Assembly of Saints, that thus have the Lord to
be their God.

Obj. But I cannot see nor hear of any such pure Church upon earth as you have
hinted at, and with whom to join I know not, therefore let me entreat you to
lend me your advice, in giving me some clear characters of a visible Church,
that are pure in doctrine, and holy Life and Conversation, that I may sit down
there.

Answ. The Church of God in Scripture is resembled to a natural body, wherein
are many Members united each to other, and to one head and by one spirit,
growing up in unity. Now as in the natural body there may be many infirmities,
and many things are liable to offend and hurt it, so also it is in this
mystical; sometimes it may be subject to distempers, by undigested humors, the
want of through closing with, and drinking in Divine truths, or the receiving
untruths, may occasion a surfeit; sometimes windy humors of pride,
highmindednesse, and lying spirits, getting into some of its Members may
distemper it. Sometimes Feverish heats of violent headiness, in stead of
well-tempered zeal for God and godliness, may inflame it, and sometimes the
cold anguish or Palsy-humours of deadness in and benumednesse to spiritual
motions, in its tendency to its spiritual and supreme end, may so sease upon
him, as much to impair its strength, and to outward appearance bring it nigh
unto death; but God whose temple it is, command thee not to judge according to
outward appearance, but to judge righteous judgment. Because he whose Temple
it is, has provided for it against such distempers, both Meat and Medicine, to
feed and cure it, so is every one that through grace is brought to believe in
Christ, and gathered up in the fellowship with those that have fellowship with
the Father and the Son in one spirit, 1 John 1. 3. Now this body may have many
weaknesses within, and enemies without, indangering it, yea that many parts of
it may be sorely laid open to infections from diverse that seem to be of it, or
at least converse with it, and so to poison it by the insnarement of false
Prophets, holding forth false Christ's; these deseivers in stead of hastening
men's growth up in Christ, which they pretend, do secretly and subtilely
corrupt men from the simplicity that is in Christ: These are those hirelings
that Christ speaks of, that come to us in sheeps clothing; but let us beware of
them, and hold fast the head ftom whence we receive the right and true Spirit,
that we may grow up together by that which every joint supplyeth: so shall our
feet abide within the gates of new Jerusalem, and the Lord himself shall dwell
amongst us, judge, rule, and teach us, and in his teachings we shall not be
vainly pust up with a Carnal mind. Now if thou would find out an Assembly
of Saints, living stones, not only hewn and squared, but built up together, a
Spiritual house, Ephesians. 2. 20, 21. and are built upon the foundation of the
Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief cornerstone, in
whom all the building fitly framed together grows unto an holy Temple in the
Lord, in whom the true Church of Christ is built together for an habitation of
God through the Spirit; this holy City, this Spouse, this Kings Daughter, Wise
of the Lamb, this Virgin, this garden enclosed may be known.

1. By her keeping up the garment of Christ's righteousness within, viz. pure
distinct in the doctrinall part. Secondly, by her keeping up or putting on the
garment of Christ's holiness without, viz. holy in life and conversation, and
so I shall proceed to lay down some characters of both, by which this true
Church may be discerned.

1. That Church that is pure in doctrine, does hold the Scriptures known by the
names of the Old and new Testament, are the holy Word of God, and the rule of
knowing and living unto God, whosoever betakes himself to any other way cannot
be saved, see and well consider these Scriptures, 2 These. 2. 10, 11, 12. and 2
Cor. 15. 1, 2, 3. and 2 Cor. 1. 13. Act. 26. 22. and John 5. 39. John 4. 22.
and 2 Pet. 2. 1. and 2 Pet. 3. 12.

A true Church holds that all men by nature are dead in Trespasses and sins,
nay that all persons by nature, are children of wrath, being guilty of Adams
sin, and sinful in their own nature, deserving thereby eternal damnation,
from which no person, no not by the death of Christ, who is not regenerated and
borne again, or made a new creature is freed from, Acts 17. 30, 31. and Acts
26. 17, 18, 19, 20. and Luke 24. 47. and Acts 20. 20, 21. and John 5. 24, 25.

3. A true Church holds, that there is an Almighty God, filling Heaven and
Earth with his presence, who is the Creator, and Governor, and Judge of the
world, Heb. 11. 6. Romans 1. 19, 20, 21. and 1 Cor. 1. 21. and 2 These, 1. 8. Romans
1. 18. 25. and 1 Cor. 8. 5, 6. and that this God is one Lord, and yet there is
a Trinity in Unity, and a Unity in Trinity, viz. Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
1 John 5. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. 18, 19, 21. Mat. 28. 19. Ephesians. 4. 4, 5, 6. and 1 John
2. 22, 23. and 2 John 9. 10. and 1 Timothy 2. 4, 5, 6. and 2 Timothy 3. 15. 1 John 2.
22. Acts 4. 10. 12. and 1 Cor. 3. 10, 11. Isaiah 45. 21, 22, 23.

4. A true Church may be known by this also, I say a true Church that is
perfectly joined together; for of such a Church I am now speaking, 1 Cor. 1.
10. I say that this Church does hold that Jesus Christ is very God and very
Man, of the very Substance of the Virgin Mary, begotten by the spirit of God, 1 John 4. 23. 2 John 7. and 1 John 4. 3. That Jesus Christ is God and Man does
further appear in these Scriptures, Mat. 16. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. Isaiah
53. 11. 1 Pet. 2. 24, 25. 1 Corinthians. 15. 2, 3. 2 Timoth. 2. 4, 5, 6.

5. That the same Lord Jesus Christ dyed for the sins of the people, being
crucified at Jerusalem, and rose again, and ascended into Heaven, whereby
there is a way opened for all sinners, whom God shall draw and make willing,
freely to come to God, and their duty so to do, and whosoever does come and
none else, he does wash away their sins in his own blood, and present them
to his Father pure in his own purity, John 8. 24. Acts 4. 10, 11, 12. Acts 10.
38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43. and 1 Cor. 15. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Act. 22. 8. Acts 2.
36, 37, 38. Rev. 22. 17. Isa. 55. 1, 2. Col. 1. 22. 28. Ephesians. 5. 27. 2 Peter
3. 14. Colos. 2. 10.

6. A true Church, sound in the Faith, and holy in Conversation, does hold that
this same Jesus Christ, being the only God and Man in one person, remains for
ever a distinct Being from the Saints and Angels, notwithstanding their Union
and Communion with him, Col. 2. 8, 9. 19. and 1 Timothy 3. 16.

7. A true Church does hold that precious faith, or coming to God is a
spiritual and peculiar gift of God, and that there is no freeness or
willingness in any natural man to that which is spiritually good, but an
absolute enmity thereto; so that no natural man can by any thing that he can
do, bring himself into a state of grace or holiness, or sit himself thereto.

8. A true Church sound in the Faith, does hold, that we are justified and
saved by grace and says in Christ and not by works, Romans 1. 16, 17. 31. Romans
8. 13. Romans 9. 31, 32, 33. and 10. 3, 4. Act. 15. 24. Gal. 1. 6, 7, 8, 9. Gal.
5. 2. 4, 5. Ephesians. 2. 8, 9, 10. and 1 John 1. 6. 8. 1 John 3. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
and 2 Pet. 2. 19, 20.

9. A true Church does hold, that God merely of his good pleasure, without the
foresight of any good in the creature, elected a certain number by name unto
eternal salvation, and has decreed also to effect all the ways for them, and
in them, to bring them thereto, Ephesians. 1. 4. Mat. 24. 22. 24. 31. Romans 8. 33.
and 9. 11. and 1 Timothy 5. 21. and 2. 2. 10. and 1 Pet. 1. 2. and 2 Pet. 1. 10.
and 2 These. 2. 13.

10. A true Church holds, that no person that is so elected and regenerated,
shall fall away out of that state and be damned, but shall be undoubtedly kept
by the power of God in that state of regeneration unto salvation, 2 Timothy 2. 19.
Titus 1. 2. and Mat. 24. 24. Phil. 1. 6. 1 Per. 1. 5. Romans 8. 1. and 6. 22. and
8. 30. Ephesians. 4. 30. and 5. 27. Heb. 12. 2. 1 Pet. 1. 23. Prove. 24. 1^. 1 John
3. 9. Jude 24. Mat. 7. 24, 25. Besides, the Lord has engaged by way of
promise, that none of his shall fall finally, John 10. 27, 28, 29. and 4. 14.
and 3. 36. and 5. 24. and 6. 40. 47. 54. and 14. 16. and 1 Cor. 1. 8. 1 Pet. 2.
6. and 2. 1. 10. 1 Samuel 12. 22. Psalm. 94. 14. Prove. 10. 30.

A true Church does hold, that God is to be worshipped according to his own
will, but those that slight his Ordinances, and despise the duties of his
worship, do manifestly declare that they are none of those that shall be
saved, Jer. 10. 15. Psalm. 14. 4. Jude, 18, 19, 20, 21.

12. That Church that is perfectly joined one to another in one spirit, does
hold, that the dead shall rise, and that there is a day of Judgment, Acts 17.
30, 31. 1 Cor. 15. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. Heb. 9. 27. 1 Pet. 4.
17. Jude 6. Rev. 20. 12, 13. Romans 2. 16. In a word, to say no more; a true
Communion of Saints according to a Gospel-institution, is a Communion of Saints
arising from a clear apprehension of their Union with Saints: 1 Cor. 12. 13,
14. for by one spirit we are all baptized into one body, whether we be Jews or
Gentiles, bond or free, (...) have been all made to drink into one spirit, for
the body is not one member, but many, ver. 20. for now are they many members,
but one body. Now when a Saint comes to see that every one in whom the Lord
Jesus appears, is a member together with him in the same body whereof Christ
is the head, then his heart longs to join himself in fellowship with such
who have fellowship with the Father and the Son. 1 John 1. 3.

Obj. But I am a little unsatisfied in this, says some soul, I hear that
those Churches that walk nearest to those Rules, before laid down, do suffer
some to speak and teach amongst them that are not Ministers, but private
Members: pray Sir how is that exercise proved?

Answ. Their exercising their gifts may be proved by these four demonstrations:

1. By examples in the Jewish Church, where men, though in no Office, either in
Temple or Synagogue, had liberty publicly to use their gifts, as does clearly
appear by these Scriptures, Luke 2. 42. 46, 47. Luke 4. 16, 17, 18. Acts 8. 4.
and 11. 19, 20, 21. and Chapt. 13, 14, 15, 16. chap. 18. 24, 25, 26.

2. By the Commandment of Christ and his Apostles, Luke 9 10. chap. 10. 1. 1
Pet. 4. 10, 11. 1 Cor. 14. 1. 5. 30, 31.

3. It will appear plainly by the prohibiting of women to teach in the Church;
hereby liberty being given unto men, their husbands or others. 1 Timothy 2. 11,
12. 1 Cor. 14. 34, 35.

4. This will yet more fully appear, by those most excellent ends which by
this means are to be obtained: As

1. The glory of God, in the manifestation of his manifold graces. See 1 Pet.
4. 10, 11.

2. That the gifts of the Spirit in men be not quenched. 1 These. 5. 19, 20.
Quench not the Spirit, despise not prophesying, that is, Stop not the motion of
the Spirit in your selves, nor restrain the gift thereof in others. Despise
not prophesying, that is, Contemn not the Word, how mean soever the speakers
gifts seem unto thee. Set not lightly by the declarations and applications of
the Scriptures, either by such as have the extraordinary gifts of prophesying,
see 1 Cor. 14. 15. or by the ordinary gifts.

3. For the fitting and trial of men for the Ministry.

4. For the preserving pure the doctrine of the Church, which is more
endangered, if some one or two alone may only be heard and speak. Act. 2. 42.

5. For the debating and satisfying of doubts, if any do arise. Act. 13. 15.

6. For the edifying of the Church, and conversion of others, always provided
that he have the gift of the Spirit, to speak unto edification, exhortation and
comfort, 1 Cor. 14. 3. Now to say no more in order to the removing of this last
stumbling block, let me exhort thee in the name and fear of the Lord, to
inquire and make diligent search amongst all sorts of Assemblyes, prophesying
and pretending to Christ; for such a Congregation, that of lively stones have
built up a spiritual house, and set down therewith many at the feet of Christ;
hear his words, and endeavor to be serviceable to his Lambs, thy fellow
Members; so shall thou dwell in his house, and behold his glory, and inquire in
his Temple; Psalm. 27. 4. and thou being thus planted in his house shall
flourish in his Courts, Psalm. 29.

And this is all I shall lay before thee, or commend unto thee; as touching the
removing those stumbling blocks that lie in a Christians way to Heaven, and the
maine end next to the glory of God, that put me upon removing these stumbling
blocks, is that we might keep up faith in our souls, which will be of singular
use unto us, viz.

1. It will purify the heart, Acts 15. 9.

2. It will enable us to hear the word with profit, Heb. 4. 2.

3. It will enable us to overcome the world, 1 John 5. 4.

4. It will enable us to overcome the Devil, Ephesians. 6. 16.

5. It will make mercies present that are absent, Heb. 11. 1. 13.

6. It will fill the Soul with joy unspeakable, 1 Pet. 1. 8.

7. It will multiply peace in the Soul, Romans 5. 1, 2.

8. It will assure a Soul that God will answer his prayers, James 1. 5, 6.

9. It will enable us to be fruitful in well-doing, even to show forth our
faith by our works: James 2. 18. it will enable us not only to do the thing
commanded, but as it is commanded, Romans 14. 23.

10. It will not only give us the title of honor of being called the children
of Abraham, but it will furnish us with a heart and principle to walk in the
steps of our Father Abraham: to come forth of our own Country as he did, if
God call us; and to trust upon God, although he had but a bare word for it, and
to give God as he did his own time, to make God his own promise, and to part
with the nearest and dearest thing for God at first word, and to look through
all difficulties and impossibilities unto the fullness of God, and so to
believe in hope against hope, and so to wait upon God as not to neglect the
means, Faith, Prayer, Hope, etc. for the accomplishment of the mercy promised;
yea, this faith will help the soul to act in Spiritual duties, from
Spiritual ends, as from the sense of Divine love, that does as it were
constrain the soul to wait upon God, and to wait upon God, and to act for
God, in love to God, the choice and precious discoveries that the soul has
formerly had of the beauty and glory of God, whilst it has been in the service
of God, the blessed love letters, the glorious kisses, and the sweet embraces
that a believing soul has had from Christ in his service; this does provoke
and move the soul to wait upon him in the way of his Ordinances, but an
unbeliever does put himself upon religious duties, only from external
motives, as the Ear of the creature, the Eye of the creature, the reward of
the creature, and the keeping up of a name amongst the creatures, and a
thousand such l^ke considerations, and as we may see in Jehu, Saul, Judas,
Demas, and the Scribes and Pharisees, etc.

It would much heighten our Faith if we did seriously consider the sweet
condescentions of our tender Lord God to all staggering, misgiving, weak
Christians, viz. Luke 9. 56. but The Son of Man is not come to destroy men's
lives but to save them. 1 Timothy 2. 5. I am says Christ, willing that all should
be saved and come to knowledge of the truth. Mat. 9. 13. I came not to call the
Righteous, but Sinners to repentance. Heb. 2. 15. I am says Christ, to deliver
those that were all their life time subject to bondage. Jer. 3. 12. Heb. 8. 12.
I am very merciful, and will be merciful, and will pardon thy Sins. Isa. 43.
25. Though thou deservest nothing of me, yet I will pardon thy Sins for my own
name sake, and though it does seem impossible to thee, that I should be so
merciful, Mark 9. 23. Consider, all things are possible to him that believes.

Obj. O but I am the child of wicked Parents, and the Lord has said he will
visit the sins of the Fathers upon the children to the third and fourth
generation.

Answ. If a wicked Father and Mother beget a Son, that sees all his Parents
sins, and considers and does not such like, that Son shall not bear the
iniquity of his Father, Ezekiel. 18. 14. 20. Ezekiel. 16. 3. to the 13. besides we
find in Scripture that wicked Parents had good Children, 2 Kings 16. 20.
wicked Ahab had good Hezekiah, Idolatrous Ammon zealous Josiah, 2 Kings 22. 2.
see 2 Kings 21. 21, 22. and ungodly Saul had a godly Jonathan; nay, if thou be
a Bastard, the child of a Whore, that does not hinder thee neither to be saved,
for Gods servant Jeptha was a Bastard, so was his servant Phares, who is
reckoned in Christ's own Genealogy, compare Judges 11. 1. with Heb. 11. 32.
compare Genesis 38. 18. and 29. and Ruth. 4. 12. with Mat. 1. 3. in a word, he
that is borne a Bastard, if he be borne again of the Spirit, he is reckoned
among the Sonns of God.

Obj. But I am an old Sinner, and have one foot already in the grave, says
another trembling Soul.

Answ. Christ does call some at the ninth hour, yea some at the eleventh
hour, and says, Jer. 3. 5. return unto me and I will not cause mine anger to
fall upon thee, I will multiply pardons for thee, Isa. 55. 7. Nay, if thou have
been an Idolater, an Adulterer, a Thief, a Drunkard, yet we find in Scripture,
such were many of the Lords dear ones that are now in Heaven; 1 Cor. 9. 6. 9,
10, 11. Tit. 3. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. What shall we say, Christ left his own glory,
and came into the world to save Sinners. Joh. 17. 5. 1. Tim. 1. 15. though he
was the only Son of his Father, yet he took upon him the form of a Servant.
Joh. 1. 14. Phil. 2. 6, 7, 8. yea though he was Heyr of all things, and
possessor of Heaven and Earth, yet he became poor and hungry, that we might be
made rich, 2 Cor. 8. 9. Though he had no sin, yet he was made sin, that we
poor sinners might escape sin, 1 Pet. 1. 19. and 2. 22. and 2 Cor. 1. 21. and
though he was a Law giver, and a Law maker, yet he became under the curse of
his own Law, to redeem us from that curse, Isay 33. 22. Gal. 3. 13. though he
was his Fathers delight, and an object of his love from everlasting, yet he
became an object of his wrath, for his love to us, who were yet in our sins,
Psalm. 88. 16. and 102 Ps. 10.

When we were slaves to the Devil, and firebrands of Hell, even then did
Christ rescue us from the power of one, and redeem us from the plague and
punishment of the other. 1 These. 1. 10. Amos 4. 12. 2 Timothy 2. 25. Heb. 2. 14.

Obj. But is there nothing in the way that hinders men and women that are
willing to come to Christ? are all the stumbling blocks removed?

Answ. There is nothing on Gods part, for he has taken all things out of the
way, that hindered thee to be saved, Col. 2. 14.

Nay further, we are to do nothing at all toward our own salvation, for
Christ has freely purchased us life and Salvation, 1 Cor. 6. 20. 1 Pet. 1. 18,
19. Ephesians. 1. 14.

Even thus does the Lord do for us, that we might acknowledge we are nothing,
but what we are in him, and that we have nothing but what we have received from
him, that so all the glory might be to him; First, he will have us to see our
selves to be the greatest and vilest sinners, and again to see all our own
righteousness and performances to be as filthy and monstrous rags, that so we
might deny our own righteousness wholly, and look to be found in the
righteousness of Christ only.

Obj. But, says another timorous weak soul, I am a liar, and the Lord says
in the Revelation, that liars shall not enter into Heaven, but have their
portion in the lake that burns with fire and Brimstone.

Answ. The house of Israel and the house of Judah dealt treacherously against
the Lord, and belyed him, etc.

So that the Lord says, Ephraim my dear son compasses me about with lies,
yet was I gracious to them, and forgave them, as thou may see, Jer. 5. 11,
12. Hos. 11. 12. Jer. 23. 6. and 31. 20. so that it is he that loves and
makes a lie that shall be cast out and forsaken of God; even he that delights
in sin, not he that complains and mourns under sin.

Obj. But I am a very great sinner, and I go many times to Prayer, and to
hear Sermons, and I find no more working or relenting upon my Soul, then if
I were a dead Stock or Stone, nay for there I have lain long under the means
of grace, and yet I am altogether fruitless, and like the barren Fig Tree.

Ans. If thou did see all thy sins with their nature, number and
aggravations, thou could never look upon them but with despair, as Caine and
Judas; but if thou will look upon them as they were laid upon the Scapegoat,
thou will see them carried into the land of forgetfulness, Levit. 16. 22.

Again, these sins so numerous were laid upon Christ, Isa. 53. 6. and he was
bruised for our iniquities, verse 5. he shall see the travel of his soul and
shall be satisfied, ver. 11.

Again the Lord says, he will blot them out as a thick cloud, and freely
forgive them, and remember them no more.

Again he tells us, that in him is our fruit found, and he is our
rightousnesse, and he will purge us, and then we shall bring forth fruit
abundanly: See John 15. 2. 5. Psalm. 92. 12, 13, 14.

And now to draw toward a conclusion, let us seriously consider where the
fault lies, that there is so much weakness, bondage, fears, affrightments,
timerousness, and weakness in the professing men and women of our times; the
fault or defect herein, must be either on Gods part or on our part, and that it
is not on Gods, it is most clear, for he has left us a remedy in his Word for
every Malady, Psalm. 103. 3. 1 John 1. 9. and does assure us we are not
straightened in him, but in our own bowels, 2 Cor. 6. 12. he bids us open our
mouths wide and he will fill it. Psalm 81. 10. Are not my ways equal, and
yours unequal, says the Lord, Ezekiel. 18. 25. 29. and 33. 17. 20. 29. What
could I have done more for my Vineyard, Isaiah 5. 4. then I have done?
wherefore when I expected Grapes it brought forth wild Grapes: Isaiah 1. 2.
Hear, O Heavens, and give ear O Earth, for the Lord has spoken, saying, I
have nourished and brought up Children, and they have rebelled against me,
Jerem. 2. 13. my people have committed two evils, they have forsaken me, the
Fountain of living waters, and hewed them out Cisterns, broken Cisterns, that
can hold no water, etc. By which it does appear, that the defect does lie on
our parts, and not on Gods. And now let us a little consider what is the reason
we spend much time in reading, hearing, conferring, meditating, day after day,
week after week, year after year, yet little or no growth, we are at the same
place as we were four or five or six years ago. Surely, dear friend, whosoever
thou art, that read these few lines, there is a spiritual art or skill if
thee and I could hit upon it, that we might profit more in one day then before
in seven year, that so we might read and understand, effect and keep, believe
and apply the precious promises to our own souls, and then we might understand
what we hear preached, and apply what we understand, and practice what we
apply. O there is a spiritual skill, if we could hit upon it, that would be of
exeeding great advantage to us; we may yet break forth and say, as in Isa. 49.
4. I have labored in vain, I have spent my strength for naught; or else we
may all say with Peter, Luke 5. 5. Master we have toyled all the night, and
have taken nothing: Oh how do we study, and inquire, and search, and strive,
and pump, and act flesh, and grope in the dark? how do the Ministers turn
their preaching into labors, form, or else boast in another man's line, of
things made ready to their hands, or vent their own natural wisdom, and so
befoole themselves, confessing that in Doctrine they deny in Reason, and
acknowledge that in Reason that they deny in Use, and hold forth that in Use
that they deny in Practice? And then for the Hearers, how is hearing turned
into a form, and so Satan deceives us? if Satan can he will keep the Gospel
from being preached; if he cannot do that, he will labor to poison the
doctrine; if he cannot do that, he will endeavor to keep the people from
hearing; if he cannot prevail in that, he will endeavor to have them hear
negligently; if he cannot do that, he will endeavor to hinder them in receiving
those things that do most concern them; if he cannot do that, then he will do
what he can to hinder them in the practice of what they have heard, learned,
received, and treasured up; and if so, no mervail that there is so much
preaching and hearing, and so little good done, that we might even say, the
converting power of the Ordinances are gone, we see not God in them, it is even
dark, and professors themselves walk in the dark, and are so beset with
temptations that they have much ado to hold up.

Surely there is a way, if we could light on it, there is a spiritual skill if
we could attain it, if we could find it, we should take a Bible and read, and
understand what we read, and effect it, believe it, and apply it, and enjoy it;
O Lord pour out thy spirit and open those Seals wherewith our Bible is sealed;
the Key of Logic cannot open the Seals, the Key of Rhetoric and Philosophy
cannot open it; it is that golden Key, the spirit of the Lord, that can do it;
that spirit will show us how much of the Scripture is already fulfilled, what
is now fulfilling, and what is yet to be fulfilled; yea this is the way to know
what Scriptures are to be understood literally, and what spiritually; this
will help us how to know when Christ speaks Mysterially, and when he speaks
Regally; when he speaks to us as a Priest, or as a Pprophet, etc. Now is not
this blessed Key of the Bible, the Spirit of the Lord, worth an asking? Luke
11. 13. If ye then being evil know how to give good gifts unto your Children,
how much more shall your heavenly Father give the holy spirit to them that ask
him? Oh let us ask then that we may receive, that our joy may be full, it is no
^esse then the mighty work of God to give us understanding in his Word. Luke
24. 25. Then opened he their understanding, that they might understand the
Scriptures, by his holy spirit, giving them understanding; it is true, the Word
of God shines as a true light, yet as the cloudy pillar was darkness to the
Egyptians, so are the Scripures to carnal and corrupt minds, because it is
spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2. 14. until the Holy Ghost open the
understanding it cannot apprehend, there is no worse cloud to obscure the light
of the spirit then confidence in our own wisdom: 2 Cor. 2. 3, 4. Psalm. 119.
18. 1 Cor. 3. 7.

So that where God who has the key of David, opens not, there the Gospel,
though never so powerfully preached, is hid, and nothing affects the stupid,
the drowsy hearer: See 2 Cor. 2. 4. Therefore let every Christian have a
recourse to those promises in Scripture, wherein he has promised to open our
blind eyes, and soften our hard hearts, and fill us with the knowledge of his
will, and write his Law in our hearts, and manifest himself to our souls; our
heavenly Father has made his will and given us great wealth, rich possessions,
and large legacies, so that all his children are great heirs, wherefore we
ought to come to him with an unshaken expectation, and a frequent suing for all
that is promised, and not to suffer our heavenly Father to purse or keep one
penny that is due to us by promise, but he shall be sure to hear of it, and if
he do not presently give in according to his covenant, then let us draw a
Petition and prefer it in the Court of Heaven, where we have an Advocate
pregared, Jesus Christ the righteous, to plead our case without a fee: 1 John
2. 1. Now this spiritual skill before spoken of, which here I do endeavor to
point at, does lie much in these three things,

1. Consider whose Word it is, and by whom it was spoken. 2. Consider what he
is that has thus spoken to us by the Prophets. 3. Consider what are the
particular things or promises in it.
1. Consider whose and by whom it was spoken, and how it has relation to us of
these things, or at least of some of them, I have spoken something to in another
Treatise; but for two reasons I do write them here;

First, because they are suitable, and will fall in in order to what I have
been writing in this Book: Secondly, because the Lord has enlarged them upon
my own heart, well to return to the businesle in hand, whose Word it is. My
friends, that book which we call the Bible, is the Word of God, as we have
proved at large, in removing the first stumbling block, the Prophets and
Apostles were the mouth of God to the people, as does appear in and by these
Scriptures which I shall only quote, and leave the Reader to consider them,
Acts 3. 21. Heb. 1. 1. Acts 2. 4. Luke 10. 16. Mat. 10. 20. Now if these be the
sayings of God, they shall be undoubtedly made good, so that every tittle of
them shall be fulfilled. Mat. 5. 18. Luke 16. 17. Tit. 1. 2. Heb. 10. 23.

Obj. I grant this, that it is the saying of God, but what is that to me? says
a misgiving heart: Alas, these precious promises that you lay before me are not
mine, they were made to the people then in being.

Answ. They do belong to us as well as unto them, and were written for our
learning as well as theirs, as does appear by these, John 17. 20. Romans 15. 4.
1 Cor. 9. 10. Romans 4. 23, 24. 1 Cor. 10. 11. By all which it does fully appear,
that the promises and threatenings do reach and relate to us as well as the
people then in being, to whom it was spoken, 2 Pet. 1. 20. for no prophecy of
the Scripture is of any private interpretation, that is, we must not analise or
interpret them so, as if the Prophesies thereof did relate only to the
particular Times, Places, and Persons, in, by, and to whom they were at first
uttered, etc.

2. Let us consider what he is that has thus spoken to us in the Old and New
Testament, by the Prophets and Apostles, for it is of exceeding great advantage
to us to know him: They that know thee, will put their trust in thee: And the
reason wherefore we have so little faith in him, is, because we have so little
knowledge of him, etc.

1. He is one that waits to show mercy, and does not afflict willingly, Mch.
7. 18. Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons iniquity, because thou do
delight in mercy, therefore verse 19. he will have compassion upon us, he will
subdue our iniquity, and cast all our sins in the deep of the Sea.

2. He is one that has made many promises unto us, viz. that he will withhold
no good thing from us, that he will never fail us, nor forsake us, yea we may
find in the Old and New Testament, whole clouds of promises suitable to every
condition, that a man or woman is subject to be in.

3. He is one that is always mindful of his promise, Psalm 111. 5. Isaiah 49.
15, 16.

4. He is able and willing to make good his promises, Romans 4. 20, 21. See Micha
7. 18, 19.

5. He is so faithful he cannot lie, Heb. 10. 23. Let us hold fast the
profession of our Faith without wavering, for he is faithful that has
promised, 1 Cor. 1. 9. and 2 These. 5. 24. and 2 These. 3. 7. Tit. 1. 2.

6. Consider that he is one has entered into covenant to make good every tittle
promised. Isa. 54. 10. The mountains shall depart, and the hills shall be
removed, but my kindness shall not depart from thee, neither shall the
covenant of my peace be removed, Jer. 33. 20. If you can break my Covenant of
the day, and my Covenant of the night, that there shall not be day and night in
their season, then may also my Covenant be broken; it is true, we may fall and
lose degrees of Faith, and recover them again, we may fall off and be
restored, and backslide, and be recovered, but God has said, Jer. 32. 40. I
will write my Laws in their hearts, and they shall not depart from me.

7. He is one that has sworn to us, that he will make good his Covenant with
us, Heb. 6. 17, 18. Ezekiel. 33. 11.

8. He has sealed his Promise, Oath, and Covenant, with the blood of his Son,
Heb. 9. 23. and Revel. 1. 5. by all which we may see he is immutable,
unchangeable, the same yesterday, to day and for ever, and whosoever does thus
know his name, cannot but trust in him, etc.

3. Consider what are the particular promises in it, we have spoaken already to
the two first, namely, First, whose word it is. Secondly, what he is that spoke
it; now the next thing to be considered is, what are the particular promises in
it? to which I answer as before, there are promises of all sorts, viz. there
are promises Absolute or Conditional, Evangelicall or Legal, General or
Particular, Common or Special, Direct or by Consequence, Spiritual, Temporal
or Eternal, or promises for the life that now is, or that which is to come,
there are informing and assuring promises, promises to one sensible of Sin,
promises to a Child newly begotten to the Faith, promises for the young man,
promises for an old man; in a word, I know no State, Nation or People, but in
one sense or other have promises relating to them, unless those people that
have sinned against the Holy Ghost, and the nature of that sin is discovered
in removing the 15. stumbling block: Now me thinks a Spiritual soul should
stand upon his guard, and when Satan comes with his temptations, he should
resist him with the promises, as our Savior did, Mat. 4. 4. 7. 10. the only
way to conquer is still to plead it is written, therefore when a soul is tempted
to uncleanness plead, 1 Pet. 1. 15, 16. It is written, be ye holy, as I am
holy, and let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of flesh and Spirit,
perfecting holiness in the fear of the Lord, as in 2 Cor. 7. 1, 2. and when
he tempts us to distrust Gods providence and Fatherly care of us, let us plead
it is written, they that fear the Lord shall want nothing that is good, Psalm.
34. 9. Again, Psalm. 84. it is written, the Lord will give us grace and glory,
and no good thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly. If we fear
we shall faint on our way, then plead it is written, Job 17. 9. the righteous
shall hold on his way, and he that has clean hands shall wax stronger and
stronger, Jer. 32. 40. It is written I will make an everlasting Covenant with
them, I will not turn away from them, to do them good, I will put my fear in
their hearts that they shall not depart from me, Isa. 40. 31. It is written,
they that wait upon the Lord, they shall renew their strength, they shall mount
up with wings as Eagles, they shall run, and not be weary, and they shall walk
and not be faint. It is written, Micha 7. 19. He will turn again, he will
have compassion upon us, and cast all our sins into the depths of the Sea:
Isa. 54. 7. It Is written, For a small moment have I forsaken thee, but with
great mercies will I gather thee, ver. 8. In a little wrath I hid my face from
thee for a moment, but with everlasting kindness will I have compassion on
thee, says the Lord thy Redeemer, verse 10. It Is written, the mountains shall
depart, and the hills be removed, but my kindness shall not depart from thee,
neither shall the Covenant of my peace be removed, says the Lord that has
mercy on thee, Isay 49. 15, 16. It is written, Can a woman forget her child,
that she should not have compassion on the Son of her womb? Yea, they may
forget, yet will not I forget thee, for I have graven thee upon the palms of
my hands, thy walls are ever in my sight.

Obj. Now who is this that has made these, and a thousand such like promises?

Answ. We have proved before that it was God. Those holy men spoke as they were
moved by the Spirit of God. To whom he did make these precious promises, that
we have also answered before, that these were made to us now in being, as well
as to those then in being, as we have fully proved.

Quest. But what is this God that has thus covenanted with us?

Answ. 1. He is one that delights in mercy.

2. He is one that is mindful of his promises.

3. He is one that is able to make good what he has promised.

4. He is faithful, he cannot lie.

5. He has sworn that he will make good every tittle by him promised.

6. He is one that seals all with the Blood of his Son, and gives us the
reason of all this, Heb. 6. 18. That we might have strong consolation, which
have our refuge to lay hold upon that hope that is set before us. This also
made our Father Abraham to live in hope against hope: The stability of a
Promise, Covenant or Oath, stands much upon the qualifications of the
promiser; as to instance, if a man make me a promise to do such and such things
for me, and yet I question whether he will make it good, it must be from a
doubt of the want of one of these ensuing things in him that makes the
promise; (as Master Owen in his book called, [The steadfastness of promises]
very well observes.)

Our staggering or doubting then does arise,

1. Either from the truth of him that makes the promise. 2. Or, from his
ability to make good his word. 3. Or, of his sincerity to intend me really,
what he speaks. 4. Or, of his constant memory of taking the opportunity of
doing the thing promised or intended. 5. Or, of his stableness to be still of
the same mind.
Now, if there be no want of any of these in him, whose promise we speak of;
there is then certainly no ground of doubting, or staggering, or misgiving, but
rather a firm ground of confidence and assurance.

The serious consideration of this will skrew up a Christian to a holy
boldness, and spiritual confidence: where is that boldness as there was in
David? I will not, said he, fear, though ten thousand should hem me in: if
war should rise against me, in this will I be confident: Psalm. 27. 1, 2, 3.
The Lord is my light, and my salvation, whom shall I fear? The Lord is the
strength of my life, of whom shall I be afraid? ver. 2. When the wicked, even
mine enemies and foes come upon me to eat up my flesh, they stumbled and fell,
etc.

Where is such boldness and strength as was in Jacob, when he wrestled with
the Angel, and prevailed with God, to put him in mind of his promise made to
him? Where is such a spirit of prevailing with God, as there was in Moses, when
the Lord said, Let me alone Moses, etc.

Where is such joy in sufferings as there was in Paul, and the rest of the
Saints? Romans 5. 3. We rejoice in tribulation, knowing that tribulation works
patience, and patience experience, and experience hope. Where are those noble
overcomming Saints, that would not be afraid of a man that should dye? What,
have we the same Father, and so unlike our Brethren? do we not disparage our
Fathers house, by looking so like Pharaoh's lean Kine? and in stead of holy
boldness, and spiritual confidence, one is whining, another piping, some
sighing, and all doubting, and complaining.

Surely, this fearfulness and timerousnesse does arise from weakness and
feebleness, and weakness and feebleness does arise from imbecility or
incredulity: In a word, it springs from our ignorance of the riches,
freeness, fullness, and everlastingness of Gods love; and from our ignorance of
the power, glory, sufficiency, and efficacy of the death and sufferings of the
Lord Jesus Christ; and from our ignorance of the worth, glory, fullness,
largeness, and compleatness of the righteousness of Jesus Christ; and from our
ignorance of that real, close, spiritual, glorious, and inseparable union
that there is between Christ and our precious souls: here lies the defect,
and how shall this be removed, and the soul revived, and the heart cheared,
and the whole man quickened, but by the spirit of God in the applying of these
promises?

Oh then! oh then! consider there are many promises, and they do belong to us,
and he that made them is the mighty God, he is able to make them good, he is
faithful and willing to accomplish them, he is unchangeable in his love to us,
and always mindful of us, and waiting to be gracious unto us.

Oh! How earnestly does he knock? how powerfully does he strive? how long does
he wait upon us to make known himself unto us? Our Fathers trusted in him and
were saved.

Surely, the Lord is never worse, but many times better then his promise. He
promised the children of Israel only the Land of Canaan, but besides that he
gave them two other Kingdoms which he never promised; and to Zacharias he
promised to give him his Speech at the Birth of the Child, but besides that he
gave him the gift of prophecy.

And hence it is, that the Apostle in Ephesians. 3. 20. says, That, God is able to
do exceeding abundantly, above all that we can either ask or think. In the
Name of the Lord then let us arise, and take the Bible and read, and
understand, and effect, and believe, and apply, that so the word of God may
dwell plentifully in us, so shall the Word be our rule, the Spirit our guide,
and the Glory of God our aim; so shall an entrance be administered unto us
abundantly, into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
the Rock of Ages, the light of the World, and King of Saints, to whom be Glory
for ever, Amen.

But now, if after all these earnest knockings, long waitings, and powerful
strivings: if after all these invitations, removing stumbling blocks, answering
objections, callings, waitings, beseechings, and intreatings, after this day of
grace is over: then to those souls that come not in; Christ does change his
voice, and does protest that none of those souls thus invited, shall ever taste
of his Supper. Luke 14. 24.

Nay, he says, Though they call, he will not answer, Prove. 1. 28. And, if they
seek him they shall not find him, ver. 26. He will laugh at their calamity,
and mock when their fear comes, Mat. 23. 37. I would have gathered you
together (as a hen gathers her chickens under her wings) and ye would not:
38. Behold your house is left unto you desolate. And then if ye would, he will
not, etc.

Jer. 7. 16. Pray not for this people, for I will not hear says the Lord;
Isa. 65. 12. Therefore will I number you to the sword, and ye shall bow down
to the slaughter, because when I called ye did not answer; when I spoke, ye
would not hear, but ye did choose that wherein I delighted not.

Isa. 66. 4. Therefore will I choose out their delusions, and I will bring their
fear upon them, because I called, and none would answer; I spoke, and they
would not hear.

Jer. 7. 13, 14, 15, 16. Now therefore because ye have done all these evil
things, says the Lord, and I rose up early, and spoke unto you, but ye would
not hear me, neither when I called would ye answer, Therefore, etc. I will cast
you out of my sight as I have cast out all your brethren; Therefore pray not
for this people, I will not answer, etc.

Obj. But (if any may then say) Why Lord will thou not hear us? (thou have
manifested thy self, that) thou art merciful.

Answ. I will not hear you (the Lord may then justly say) because the day of
Grace (for you) is past, the Sun is set, your Glass is run out, the Golden
Scepter is taken in, and Repentance is a work that must be timely done, or
whoever (men or women that have been called, and neglected their time) be
utterly undone. Ye did not obey my voice spoken to you by my Servant Isaiah, in
Isa. 55. 6. Ye did not seek me, while I was to be found; ye did not call upon
me while I was near, whereas every one whose heart was upright with me, did
come to me in a time when I was to be found. Psalm. 32. 6. For this shall every
one that is Godly pray unto him, in a tinse when he is to be found. But ye did
not come to me (will the Lord justly say,) etc.

1. Until the term of time allotted for repentance was past. See Heb. 3. 15.
and 13. compared together.

2. Neither did ye enquire after me till the Decree came forth: Zeph. 2. 1, 2,
3. Now my fierce anger is coming upon you, etc.

3. It shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah then for you: Mat. 10.
15. and Mat. 11. 24.

Good had it been for you, if ye had never been born, or (at least) if ye had
not been invited, or waited upon by me.

4. Ye sought not unto me, until ye had abused my patience, so as to weary me,
so as that I could bear no longer. Jer. 15. 6. Thou have forsaken me says the
Lord, and gone backward, therefore will I stretch out my hand against thee, and
destroy thee; for I am weary with repenting. Jer. 44. 22. So that the Lord
could no longer bear, because of the evil of their doings.

5. They did never heartily seek to me, until I had said, none of those which
were bidden should taste of my Supper, Luke 14. 24. and sworn, surely they shall
not enter into my rest, Psalm. 95. 11. and therefore, Depart from me ye cursed
into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels, Mat. 25. 41.

Do ye think, o ye rebellious souls, that I would have cast the Angels out of
Heaven for one sin, and spare you who are guilty of so many millions of sins?
did not one sin make Saul lose his Kingdom? and Esau his Birthright? And how
can ye escape, seeing ye have judging your selves unworthy of eternal life, in
neglecting so great salvation?

I am sure I have waited upon some of you ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty
years (or upwards) o ye stout-hearted sinners, that are far from righteousness.

O ye damned souls, I will set your sins in order before your sight, with the
number, nature, aggravations, and circumstances, that ye may be your own
Judges, and so despair with Cain, and hang your selves with your Cousin Judas.

Are ye come now it is too late to my Supper, without a Wedding Garment? Go
mine Angels, bind them in chains and cast them into utter darkness, where
there is weeping and gnashing of teeth, Mat. 22. 12. 17. For, they have
forsaken me the fountain of living waters, and have dug themselves pits,
even broken pits that can hold no water. Jer. 2. 13.

If ye would then (if ye could) give all the world to recall one day again,
that ye have misspent, ye cannot have it: your sins against mercy will bring the
greatest misery, ye have spun fair threads in going on from folly to folly,
until ye are ripe for eternal misery, from which there is no redemption, for
sin and punishment are linked together: Ye have been wicked, and ye must be
tormented.

Oh condemned souls! Did ye never read that in all ages I have severely
punished sin in mine own people, in Covenant with me, and as dear to me as the
apple of mine eye; and yet think ye that I would spare you? did ye never read
Mat. 12. 36. That, For every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give
an account at the day of Judgment. And do ye think to be freed, who are guilty
of the breach of every command?

1. Consider to your torment, That whereas I have promised to pardon the sins
of my people; so I have pronounced that your sins shall not be pardoned,
Isaiah 22. 14. Surely, this iniquity shall not be purged till ye dye, says the
Lord God of Hosts.

Ezekiel. 24. 13. Because I would have purged thee, and thou wast not purged, thou
shall not be purged from thy filthiness any more, till I have caused my fury
to rest upon thee. See Heb. 10. 29. and Numb. 15. 31.

2. Whereas the Lord is able to bring in the mercy promised to his people (as
we have held forth at large) so he is able to bring all the plagues threatened
upon all unbelievers, Mat. 10. 28. to destroy soul and body.

3. And whereas the Lord is mindful of the mercies promised to his people, so
he is as mindful of the judgments threatened against his enemies. See Eccles.
8. 12, 13.

4. Whereas he is faithful to do all that he has said for his people, so he
is as just in pouring out the vialls of his wrath upon obstinate stout-hearted
sinners. 1 Samuel 3. 14.

5. Whereas the Lord has covenanted to, and with his people, to assure them
that he will not fail them; so also has he entered into Covenant with all
unrighteous people, that he will ease himself of them his adversaries, and
avenge himself on his enemies, Isaiah 1. 24. and bring upon them all the
curses of the Covenant, as in Deuteronomy. 29. 21.

6. Whereas the Almighty God has sworn that he will make good all things to
his people in Covenant with him, and withhold no good thing from them; So he
has sworn, that the iniquity of those wilful opposers and neglecters of him
shall never be purged with Sacrifice nor Offerings for ever, 1 Samuel 3. 14. Yea,
The Lord has sworn in his wrath, that they shall never enter into his rest,
Psalm. 95. 11.

Behold, here is the portion of all filthy dreamers, Jude ver. 8. (Lo here is
the reward of all) Raging waves of the Sea, foming out their own shame,
wandering Stars, to whom is reserved the mist of darkness for ever, Jude 12,
13. Lo these are those natural bruite-beasts made to be taken, and destroyed;
Speaking evil of the things that they understand not, and so shall utterly
perish in their own corruptions. These are those wells without water, clouds
that are carried with every tempest, to whom the mist of darkness is reserved
for ever. 2 Pet. 2. 12. 17. etc. Ye Serpents (says Christ) how can ye escape
the damnation of Hell? Mat. 23. 33.

The Lord in Scripture gives a man a name suitable to his nature. The
Scripture calls them, Lions for their fierceness, and Bears for their
cruelty, and Dragons for their hideousness, and Dogs for their filthiness,
and Wolves for their subtilenesse: In a word, the Spirit of God styleth them,
Scorpions, Vipers, Thorns, Briars, Thistles, Brambles, Stubble, Dust, Chafe,
Dirt, Dross, Smoke, Scumme: Lo here are your titles of honor, O ye great
ones that stand so much upon your gentility, and look so big to jet up and down
the Streets, Isa. 23. 9. The Lord of Hosts has purposed to stayne the pride of
all glory, and to bring into contempt all the honorable of the earth.

Oh ye that fare deliciously every day, ye must go to Hell with your Brother
Dives; Oh ye that adorn a stinking carcass with the best array, and Lord it
over your brethren; ye are (most of you) the poorest men in the world, for all
that ye think your selves rich.

A wicked man, though a Gentleman, is the poorest needyest man in the world,
for he wants trust in God, Christ, the Spirit, the Promises, the Covenant of
grace; he wants peace of Conscience, and peace with God; he wants
acceptance and reconciliation with God; he wants righteousness,
justification, adoption and redemption: he wants the pardon of sin, and
power against sin, and freedom from the dominion of sin: he wants grace,
(the least spark of which is more worth then all the visible Heaven and Earth)
he wants those Riches that perish not, that Glory which fades not, that
Kingdom that shakes not. A man may be great and graceless, with Pharaoh;
honorable and damnable with Saul; Rich and miserable with Dives; usually the
worst of men have most of these outward things; and the best of men, have least
of Earth and most of Heaven: and although the Saints have but little in
possession, yet they have a glorious Kingdom in reversion; there is no Saint
but he is a great Heir, Romans 8. 17. there is but a breath between him and the
possession; what say thou to this oh thou proud Peacock? why do thou so
vaunt thy self in thine apparel? thou have but borrowed it, it is none of
thine own, and it is but the cast garments of other creatures, and thou shall
be called to account for thy abusing them, as thou may clearly see, Isa. 3.
16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25. And it shall come to pass, that in
stead of sweet smell, there shall be stink: and in stead of a girdle, a rent;
and instead of well-set hair, baldness; and in stead of a stomacher, a
girding with Sackcloth, and burning in stead of beauty, etc. Though at present
thou have Honors, and Riches, and Pleasures, and Friends, and Power, and so
do Lord it over thy fellow creatures; and so (like a soole) do not
consider, that this night thy soul shall be taken from thee: if thou know
thy self, thou would know that thou art the poorest and needyest beggar in
the world; And those whom thou disdaynest and despisest as beggars, are Kings
and Princes, and the greatest Heirs, as Romans 8. 17.

A mild and gentle word of Reproof to the scattered discontented Members of
the Late PARLIAMENT.
HAve ye sat so long at the Stern, and could ye not steer your Ship aright,
but let it split against a rock? Had ever any Parliament longer time to learn
to do well then ye had? Had ever any Parliament such a prize put into their
hands as ye? Had ever any Parliament so many Prayers, Tears, and Petitions, as
ye have had? Had ever any Parliament so many signal Testimonies of Gods free
love, in giving in so many victories both by Land and Sea as you? Did ever a
Parliament make more show of Piety and Reality then you did? Did ever a
Parliament make so many Protestations, Covenants, Engagements both to God and
Man, to establish Righteousness, Truth, and Equity, as you? and yet this
honorable, long-standing, victorious, engaging Parliament, (if not falsified
the trust reposed to them) they did frustrate the expectations of the people
that had chosen them: and so at last came to be laid aside, either by God, or
Man, or both, and scarce a tear for them, or any eye to pity them. Why so? did
ever a Parl. promise more and perform less? did ever a Parl. seek greater
things for themselves more then this? were I near them, and had the advantage
of their ear, I should whisper a word of advice unto them, I would entreat them
to read, and seriously consider that portion of Scripture, Daniel 4. 27.

I would further desire them to do as our Brother Zacheus did, Luke 19. 8. And
Zacheus stood forth and said unto the Lord, Behold Lord, the half of my goods
I give to the poor; and if I have taken any thing from any man by forged
cavillation, (or, they may say, either upon Public Faith, or false accusation)
I will restore him fourfold.

If you take this advice, it may be you shall be hid in the day of the Lords
anger, as in Zephan. 2. 3.

Oh! Let it never be truly said of you, that ye gain while the Nation loses;
neither let it be said of you, that ye have spent your time in feathering your
own nests: but now be willing to let every Bird have his own Feather, that
every one may sit down under his own Vine, and eat his own Bread, unless it be
those that have been the cause (or instruments) of our troubles.

I trust I may say of some of the late Parliament, as once was said of the
Church of Sardis, Rev. 3. 4. Thou have a few names yet in Sardis which have not
defiled their Garments, etc.

But to the rest of that House, let me tell them, that if they do not lay these
things to heart, but rather comfort themselves in the consideration of any good
that they have done; then I say unto you, that the divine wisdom knows how
to use bad men unto good purposes; and in the end not only to cast them off,
but to punish them when the world is done. Remember the stories of Haman, Jehu,
and Saul, and in all ages, self-seekers were self-losers, and self-destroyers,
viz. Adam sought himself, and lost himself; Absalom sought himself, and lost
himself; who ever sought himself and prospered? who ever that continued to seek
himself but perished?

If ye say, We had a selfe-denying Ordinance; I say, ye had not a self-denying
heart and principle; (I am sure, for mine own part, I know it to be so;)
Besides, it appearth by your endeavoring to make your selves a perpetual
Parliament, that the next might not question you: it seems you had almost
forgotten that next under God, all power fundamentally was in the people of
God, and that all persons entrusted with it as their Trustees: and accordingly
it is provided, that such Trustees be questioned for betraying, or ill managing
their trust.

Some of your actions do call for siftings, and the Lord will search you (as
with candles) and turn your insides outward, that so ye may give an account of
your Stewardship, for ye may be so no longer Stewards; surely there is shame
written upon some of your footsteps, who are standing in slippery places. Oh!
might ever a Parliament have come off with more honor then you, if ye had but
denied your natural self, sinful self, and religious self?

Well, I perceive that as a Bird hoppeth from tree to tree, so do the honors
and riches of this world from man to man: Nay, riches and honors are like the
Moon or the Tide, always increasing or decreasing; the Moon has been
increasing, and the Tide has been coming in (as it is humbly conceived) with
you these eight or ten years; but now the Moon being at the full, and the
spring Tide at the highest, the Moon is upon decreasing, and the Tide upon
returning.

Well, I see a man may have enough of the world to sink him, but he can never
have enough to save him; surely many times I see the worst of men have most of
these outward things, and the best of men have least of earth, and most of
heaven. I find in Scripture-record that a man may be great and graceless with
Pharaoh, honorable and damnable with Saul, rich and miserable with Dives.

Oh! I see, I see, that one storm at Sea, one coal of Fire, one false Friend,
one unadvised word, one false Witness, may make a rich man a Beggar, and a
Prisoner altogether: Surely if this had been considered, some things had been
reformed that were not. Did you never read Psalm. 12. 5. Now for the oppression
of the needy, and for the sighs of the poor, I will up says the Lord, and
will set at liberty? etc.

And in Psalm. 146. 9. The Lord keeps the Stranger, he relieveth the
Fatherless, and Widow, etc.

Did you not know that the oppression of the poor, which was so great in the
midst of us, would pull down the judgment of God upon the heads of those that
had power to relieve them and would not?

May not many of you hereafter say, as Philip the third of Spain (whose life
was free from gross evils) being in the Agony of death, fear struck into him,
and these words burst from him, Oh would to God I had never reigned! Oh that I
had lived a solitary life with God, and not oppressed the people! What does all
my honor profit me, but that I have so much the more torment in my death! My
day of account is very near, and all men shall know and feel that the sleeping
of vengeance causes the overflowing of sin, and the overflowing of oppression
causes the overflowing of vengeance.

Abused opportunity will most certainly turn into fury; for Gods long
forbearance is no acquittance; the day is at hand when he will pay negligent
men and women for mispending precious time, and for the abuse of new and old
mercies in the day of account. Men's actions are all in print, and they shall be
read aloud in the ears of all the world, that all the righteous Nation that
shall enter in, may say Amen, to that righteous Sentence that Christ shall pass
upon all those that had a prize put into their hands to mind his glory, and to
unload his people of their heavy burdens, that the oppressed might go free;
but they had no heart to it, as in the Proverbs.

But instead thereof, sought great things for themselves, as, in Jer. 45. 5.

Nay, though Moses and Aaron (two choice Christians and Champions) did lead and
govern Israel for a long time, notwithstanding many dangers and difficulties,
yet they were at last shut out of Canaan, because they did not sanctify the
Lord God at the water of Meribah, Deuteronomy. 32. 15. and Numb. 27. 14, 15. For ye
were disobedient unto my Word in the strife of the Assembly, etc.

A word of Advice to the present Supreme Authority of ENGLAND, etc.
Most noble, and honored Sirs,
WHom God, even the God of the spirits of all flesh, has at present entrusted
with the highest places, not only in the Field, but also in the seat of
Justice: My prayers to God for you are, that the Lord would make you rather
gracious, and inwardly holy, then outwardly happy; and give you a spirit of
divine wisdom, and valor suitable to the work that lies before you, that ye
may improve the present opportunity that is put into your hands, for the glory
of God that gave it you; Consider, the presence of the Lord is in the midst of
you, the prayers of his Saints and Servants are continually poured out for you,
the eyes of the people are upon you, all expecting some great things to be done
by you: yea, and the other parts of the world look upon you, if ye go on in a
way of righteousness they will follow you.

It will be a glory for the English Nation to give a blessed example to all the
people of the earth, to free themselves from tyranny and slavery.

If a worm might be thought worthy to advise you, then give me leave to tell
you, there is but one thing in the main that God and his people do expect from
you, viz. That ye would eye the Lord Jesus in all your actings, and advance his
Kingdom as much as in you lies: and if this be uppermost in your hearts,
first in your thoughts, and most constant in your purposes, so that ye do in
your judgments prefer, and in your wills deliberately mind the glory of God,
the advancement of the Kingdom of his dear Son, by the assistance of his holy
Spirit; then shall the work of the Lord prosper in your hands, and the day
shall be light before you, and his footsteps that are not yet known, shall be
discovered to you, and ye shall see your work before you.

Christ was once humbled, that we might be exalted; let him now be exalted,
that we might willingly be humbled by him; although he be willing to give you
grace, yet his glory he will not give to any other: Let it be a comfort for you
that he has exalted you in the hearts of his people; although you are a
table-talk, and a byword, and a scorn in the hearts, and by the tongues of his
enemies.

Well, would you stand your selves now others are fallen, and not only keep,
but also add to the honor which God has given you? Then make it your business
to exalt the Kingdom of Christ, not only in your selves, but also in this, and
the neighboring Nations; and remember that the rock of ages pulls down some
to the end that others might not exalt themselves when they are in power; for
the Lord has decreed to stain the pride of all earthly honor, and to bring
into contempt all the honorable of the earth, that so all flesh might be
humbled, and the Lord alone exalted: therefore seek not ye great things for
your selves; (as many of those that went before you) lest ye be laid aside, and
no eye pity you.

Provide nothing more for your selves then ye have (I beseech you) but to seek
for the honor of Christ, and the freedom of the Saints, and these Nations
wherein your own freedoms and safeties are involved: Consider that the Lord
has hitherto made some of you friends to his people, and a terror to their
and his enemies: and our prayer to the Lord is, that he would teach you as once
he did good Nehemiah, to do many years hard service freely, because the
payments were heavy upon their fellow creatures, as you may see in Neh. 5. 14.
18.

That ye may say as that servant of Christ did, to the glory of God, and the
shame of the former self-seeking powers, ver. 15. But the former Governors
that had been before me, were chargable unto the people, and had taken of them
their Bread and Wine, besides forty shekels of Silver; but so did not I (said
this good man) because of the fear of the Lord. I have but a few things more
to beg of you (as upon my bended knees, and with weeping eyes) which if ye
will but hear and grant, it may make much for the glory of God, the honor of
the three Nations, and the Comfort of your own Souls.

The first thing is, that ye would set some time and persons apart, to hear
and receive the private petitions and grievances of the poor Widows and
Fatherless, so much neglected by the former power; for they have poured out
their complaints in the midst of their wants, and their cry came up before the
Lord, before the dissolving of the late Parliament.

Consider (I request you) That, the earth and all thereen is the Lords, (not
our Storehouse) and ye are, at present, his Stewards: wherefore, as in Prove. 3.
7. Withhold not good from them to whom it is due, when it is in the power of
thine hand to do it. So in the end ye shall be able to say with Job, That ye
have not withheld the poor from their desire, nor caused the eyes of the Widow
and Fatherless to fail, nor seen any perish for want of clothing, nor seen
any poor in the streets without covering.

(I could almost say to you, as once Abraham did to the Lord, Genesis 18. 27.
Behold, now I have taken upon me to speak, which am but dust and ashes; I would
beg leave to present a few things more to your serious consideration.)

The next thing is, That when ye make inquisition for ravening wolves,
prophesied of by Christ and his Apostles, Mat. 7. 15. compared with Acts 20.
29. that come to us in Sheeps clothing; that ye would not do as the late
Parliament did, stop the Wolf's mouth in one Town and let him go and devour, or
at least, deceive the Sheep in another; if he be adjudged unfit to bite or
devour in one place, let him be held as unfit in another, lest ye should do as
if (in effect) they did put out the fire in Can and send it to Marlborough,
or endeavor to stop the plague in Bristoll by sending the infected persons to
London.

The next thing that I would beg of you for this poor nation, is, That whereas
the last Power did promise much, and perform little; be ye more like God, I
(both humbly and earnestly) request you, by promising less then ye intend to
perform; that ye may appear to us in very deed to be like him: He promised the
Children of Israel only the Land of Canaan; but besides that, he gave them two
other Kingdoms which he never did promise to give them: And to Zacharias, Luke
1. 20. He promised to give him his Speech again at the Birth of the Child, but
beside that he gave him the gift of prophecy; so that, as Paul says, He can
give and do abundantly, above all that we are able to ask or think.

And yet that say ye abide in him, ought so to walk, as ye have him for an
example. See Ephesians. 3. 20. 1 John 2. 6.

The next thing I would beseech of you, most noble and honored Senators, is
this, That ye would endeavor to unite all the Saints sound in the Faith, to an
union in the spirit of Love. Though England be but as a garden to the whole
world, and all the people in it but a handful, and scarce one of twenty of
this handful godly men; yet were these few Saints united by the blessed
Spirit, so, as their hearts might agree together, as touching any thing they
ought to ask; and were so well affected to lift up one voice, and one heart
(according to the will of God) they would have the things they ask; so as
nothing should be too hard for them to do; all the world could not stand before
them, nor undermine them, for they would be wise in the Lords wisdom, and
strong in him, and in the power of his might: Shall Herod and Pilate agree?
Turks and Pagans agree? Bears and Lions agree? Tigers and Wolves agree? and
shall not Saints agree? If the Saints were but once united, Antichrist would
soon be destroyed.

Oh let not our Supreme Power, under God, be angry, and I will speak but this
once. Oh let me then say to you, as once Mordecai did to Hester, Hest. 4. 14.
If thou altogether hold thy peace at this time, then shall their enlargement
come, and deliverance arise from another place, or power, but thou and thy
Fathers house shall be destroyed; and who knows whether thou art come to the
Kingdom for such a time as this? And (under correction) let me tell you, the
work is the Lords, and if ye will not carry it on, he will lay you aside with
shame, and raise up those that he will own and bless.

And whereas most of the Godly people in England are crying mightily to God for
you, to purge out self-seeking, and to plant a spirit of Government in you, and
to furnish you with natural and spiritual abilities suitable to the work that
lies before you; but if ye begin to flag (as the former power did) and so let
the work stick in the Birth; and every one minding his own things, not the
things of Jesus Christ; then let me tell you, that all the Lords people in
England, and the other Nations, will be praying to him, and wrestling with him,
and give him no rest, night nor day, till the Lord turn you also out of
doors, and bring in those that he will own and bless.

FINIS.
A Table showing the principal things in this TREATISE.
OF the state of Nature. 1 Of the state of Grace. ibid. The several degrees in
each of these states. ibid. How a soul yet in the state of Nature, may be
brought to Christ. 2 Which is first in the soul, Faith or Repentance, fully
discovered. 12 A great question answered, why does the righteous God promise
life to him that does believe, and threaten eternal death to them that do not
believe, seeing that it is not in the power of the Creature to believe. And
there are five reasons for it. 17 Conviction goes always with Conversion 18
Repentance and Forgiveness of Sins go together. ibid. Many sweet promises made
to a soul convinced of sin. 19, 20 One and twenty stumbling blocks cast in a
Christians way to Heaven, by the World Flesh, and Devil. 21 What those blocks
are, and how to remove them. 22 The first stumbling block cast in the way, is
to cause a soul to, question whether the Scriptures be the Word of God. 23
Proved by five Arguments that they are the Word of God. 24 The second
stumbling block is, that the Scriptures are corrupted by a spirit of ignorance,
and self ends in the Translators. 25 Proved that the generality of Scriptures
are, truly, clearly, faithfully translated. ibid. The third stumbling block
cast in the way is, that the promises were made to the Jews and Gentiles
heretofore in being; What has any man to do to apply them now? 26 Proved by
several Testimonies in holy writ, that the people now in being, may, and ought
to apply the promises as well as they. 27 The fourth stumbling block cast in
the way is, that I know not what the Scriptures mean, they are to be understood
in a spiritual sense (the Book is sealed.) 28 Proved, that the same God that
has commanded us to read them, has promised to open our understanding that we
may be able to understand and apply them. ibid. Three questions answered
concerning the Promises, by whom and to whom they are made. 29 The fifth
stumbling block cast in the way is, that I know not how to apply the Promises,
says a mis-giving-heart. 32 Means to help a soul to apply the Promises
understandingly, orderly, particularly, and strongly. 32 Means to help us to
forgive all injuries done to us. 37 The sixth stumbling block cast in the way by
the World, Flesh, or Devil, is, to persuade the poor drooping soul that the Day
of Mercy is past, his Glass is run out, his Sun is set, the Door of Mercy is
shut, the Golden Scepter is taken in. 39 This stumbling block also is removed,
and the door of the Kingdom of Heaven opened. 40 The seventh stumbling block
cast in the way is, I fear I am not elected to Salvation. 44 This block is
removed, and the nature of Election and Reprobation discovered. 45 The eight
stumbling block cast in the way is, that I fear I am none of Gods Child,
because I have so many fearful thoughts cast into me one after another. 46
This block is also removed, and the way to Heaven cleared. 47 The ninth
stumbling block cast in the way is, that surely, says another, I am none of
the Lords beloved, because he follows me with affliction, w^ath, and misery.
49 Proved by many instances that a man may be dearly beloved although sorely
afflicted. And so this block is fully removed. 50 The tenth stumbling block
cast in the way of many a p^ecious Ch^istian, is, that I have been a Blasphemer
my self, and caused many others to blaspheme, therefore no hope for me. 52
This block also is removed, and Satan, concerning the same, foiled. 53 The
eleventh stumbling block cast in the way is, [Oh Sir!] I have fallen into one
and the same sin often. 54 This block is removed, and many scruples of
conscience answered. 55 The twelfth stumbling block cast in the way is, that I
have, according to the command of Christ, examined my self, whether I were in
the Faith, and find I am not. 56 This block removed, and assurance of
salvation discovered. 57 The thirteenth stumbling block cast in the way is,
that I have been enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and am
fallen away. 60 This block also removed, and falling away distinguished. 63 The
fourteenth stumbling block cast in the way is, Oh, says a poor misgiving
soul, I cannot believe. 65 This block removed, and ability to believe is
promised. 66 The fifteenth stumbling block cast in the way is, that I fear I
have sinned against the Holy Ghost. 70 The nature of this sin discovered, and
this fear removed. 71 The sixteenth stumbling block cast in the way is, all a
man's sins may be set in order before him, and the judgments of God due unto
him for them, and he despairing under them. 79 For the removing of this block,
consider, all thy sins put together are but finite, but the mercy of God is
infinite. 82 The seventeenth stumbling block cast in the way is, [oh Sir!]
there is no hope of me, for I am ignorant of the Trinity, I do not know God, he
will come in flaming fire against me. 88 This block is removed, and the Trinity
revealed, or the blessed mystery thereof, in some good measure unfolded. 89 The
eighteenth stumbling block cast in the way is, that I have no hope of being
saved, because many Heathens have out-stript me in the way of civil obedience.
106 This block also removed, and the complete righteousness and obedience for
Christians unfolded. 107 The nineteenth stumbling block cast in the way is, (O
Sir) I fear I have but only a form of godliness without power. 121 This block
removed by a clear distinction of a power, in, and with a form, and a form
without a power. 122 The twentieth stumbling block cast in the way is, (oh Sir)
I have no power to do any thing that you have laid before me. 136 This block
removed, and the power that the Creature received from the Creator declared.
137 The one and tw^ntieth stumbling block cast in the way is, that there are so
many Opinions and Societies, all pretending to b^ in the right way, that I know
not with whom to join. 147 This block also removed, and the true Church of
Christ from all false Churches discovered. 148 A word of friendly reproof to
the scattered and d^scontented Members of the late Parliament. 191 And a word
of advice to the present Supreme Authority of England, Scotland, and Ireland.
197

There are many other particulars held forth in this little Book, very
seasonable and useful, the heads whereof (for some reasons) I forbear to
mention in this Table.

FINIS.

