A POLITICAL CATECHISM, OR, Certain Questions concerning the Government of this
Land, Answered in his Majesty's own words, taken out of His Answer to the 19
Propositions, Page 17, 18, 19, 20. of the first Edition; with some brief
Observations thereupon.

Published for the more complete settling of Consciences; particularly of those
that have made the late Protestation, to maintain the Power and Privileges of
Parliament, when they shall herein see the Kings own Interpretation what that
Power and Privileges are.

We can do nothing against the Truth, but for the Truth. 2 Cor. 13. 8.

It is this twentieth day of May, An. Dom. 1643. Ordered by the Committee of
the House of Commons-in Parliament concerning Printing, that this Book
entitled, A Political Catechism, be printed.

JOHN WHITE.

LONDON Printed for SAMUEL GELLIBRAND, at the Brazen Serpent in Paul's
Churchyard, 1643.

A Political Catechism, Serving to instruct those that have made the
Protestation concerning the power and privileges of Parliament; taken out of
his Majesty's Answer to the 19 Propositions.
Question.
HOW many Simple kinds are there of Civil Government of States, and
Commonwealths?

Answer. There are three kinds of Government among men; Absolute Monarchy,
Aristocracy, and Democracy, page, 17.

Qu. 2. Are there any of these Simple Forms perfect?

Ans. All these have their particular Conveniences and Inconveniences, page 17.

Observe. 1 Experience has taught men everywhere to acknowledge this, and
accordingly there never was long (if at all) continued any of these Forms
exactly Simple; though some have more seemed such then others. Also in all
mixtures there is commonly some one of these Forms more conspicuous then the
rest, from whence such a particular Government has its denomination.

Q. 3. Is the State of England governed by any one of these kinds simply?

A. The Experience and Wisdom of your Ancestors has. molded this [Government]
out of a mixture of these. page 18,

Q. 4 What kind of government then is that of the state of England?

A. Regulated Monarchy. page 18.

Observe. 1. If this Government be a mixture of all these, and a Regulated
Monarchy; then it is a fond thing with us to talk of an Absolute Monarchy, and
what an Absolute Monarch is, or may do. And it is only the language of
Flattery that holds such Discourses.

2 It need not be counted a Solecisme (as some would persuade us) to speak of
Free Subjects in a Monarchy, such a Monarchy as ours is.

3 If this Government be a mixture of all three, then the House of Commons, the
Representative Body of the People, must needs be allowed a share in Government
(some at least) which yet is denied, page 19.

4 If this Government be a mixture, then is not the Government according to
these Laws, Solely Trusted to the King, as seems to be affirmed page 18.

5 If the Government be Regulated, why do men tell us that the King is above
all Law? for it is by Laws that he is Regulated.

6 If the King be Regulated by the Law, then is the King Accountable to the
Law, and not to God only, as men would make us believe.

7 If the Monarchy or Regal Authority it self be Regulated, then whatsoever
is done by the King, undeniably without and beyond the limits of that
Regulation, is not Regal Authority. And therefore.

8 To resist the Notorious Transgressions of that Regulation, is no Resisting
of Regal Authority. And

9 It is so far from being a Resisting of the Ordinance of God, that it is
not so much as Resisting the Ordinance of man.

Q 5. By whom was this government framed in this sort? or who is to be
accounted the Immediate Efficient of the Constitution thereof?

A. The Experience and Wisdom of your Ancestors has so molded this, page 18.

Observe. 1. If our Ancestors were the moulders of this Government, then the
King has not his power, Solely, or Immediately, by Divine Right.

2 Much less has he his Power or Authority by Right of Conquest.

3 But the Immediate Original of it was from the People. And if so, Then --

4 In questioned cases, the King is to Produce his Grant (for he has no more
then what was granted) and not the People to show a Reservation; For all is
presumed to be Reserved, which cannot be proved to be granted away.

Q. 6 Is this Regulated and mixed Monarchy, as good as an Absolute Monarchy, or
better, or worse?

A. This Excellent Constitution of this Kingdom, (the Ancient, Equal, Happy,
Well-poysed, and never enough Commended Constitution of the Government of this
Kingdom. page 17.) has made this Nation so many years both Famous and Happy,
and to a great Degree of Envy. page 20.

Q. 7 How comes it to pass that this Constitution is so Excellent.

A. The Experience and Wisdom of your Ancestors has so molded this, out of a
mixture of these, as to give to this Kingdom (as far as Humane Prudence can
provide) the Conveniences of all three, without the Inconvenience of any one p.
18

Observe. 1. Then those that would place in the King, an Absolute and Abitrary
Power to do what he List, are Destructive to the Nations Happiness, and
Enemies to the Kingdom.

2. If this Mixture cause this happiness, then it is not the Greatness of the
Kings Power over his People, but the Restraint of that Power that has made
this Kingdom famous and Happy; for other Kings have Power as large, but not so
much restrained; which Largeness of their Power has Raised those Kings
indeed, (but not their Kingdoms) to a great degree of Envy.

3. Hence we discern, that it is Possible for Kings to envy their Peoples
Happiness, because the largeness of the Peoples Happiness depends much upon
the Restraint of the Kings Exorbitant Power.

4. If this Mixture and well-Poised Constitution have raised this Kingdom to so
Great a Degree of Envy, no marvel if Jesuitical Counsels be Active to
overthrow this Happy Constitution.

Q. 8 What is the Convenience or Good of Monarchy?

A. The Uniting of a Nation under one Head, to Resist Invasion from abroad, and
Insurrection at home. page 18.

Obs. 1. What Pernicious Councillors are they then to a Monarch that advise
him to bring in from abroad German Horse, or an Irish Army, or a Fleet of Danes
to invade this Kingdom; or to employ Dunkeirk Ships to seize upon his
Merchants, which is so formally contrary to the proper Good or End of Monarchy
it self?

2. Or are they better or worse that Advise him to Authorize, or even permit
any in his Name to Plunder, Rob, Spoil* Imprison any of his Subjects, whom they
have found peaceably in their houses, or at work in the Fields, and have not
disobeyed any Legal Command of his?

Q. 9 What is the Ill of Absolute Monarchy? or the Inconvenience to which it is
Liable?

A. The Ill of Absolute Monarchy, is Tyranny. page 18.

Obs. 1. Therefore the more Absolute a Monarch is, the more prone to be a
Tyrant.

2. Therefore also it is safer to Restrain the King of some Power to do us good
then to grant him too much opportunity to do us hurt; and the Danger is greater
to the People in Englarging the Kings Power, then in restraining it somewhat.

Q. 10 What is the Good or Convenience of Aristocracy?

A. The good of Aristocracy is the Conjunction of Counsels in the Ablest
Persons of a State for public Benefit. page 18

Obs. ^. Then surely it is for the Public Benefit of the State, that this
Conjunction of Counsels in Parliament should be made use of more then once in
thirteen or fourteen years; and the Law for a Trienniall Parliament (if there
were not others before for the holding of a Parliament yearly) was a most
necessary Law, as also that it should not be dissolved for fifty days.

2. It was not then Intended in the Constitution of this Government, that the
King in the Greatest Matters of Importance for Public Benefit, should only
hear what they say, and then follow it or reject it Merely at his own
Pleasure; for this may be as well done in an Absolute Monarchy.

3. Neither is it agreeable to the Constitution of this Kingdom, to withdraw
the King from affording his Presence to his Great Council of State, that so
the private Counsels of Private men may be preferred before those whom the Law
and the Constitution of the Kingdom* counts the Ablest to Judge of Public
Benefit.

Q. 11 What is the Ill of Aristocracy, or the Inconvenience to which it is
Liable?

A. The Ill of Aristocracy is Faction and Division. page. 18.

Obs. What shall we say then to those Private Counselors that have abused the
King, by persuading him first to withdraw himself from his Parliament, and then
to call away the Members of both Houses, when yet without the Consent of both
Houses this Parliament cannot be Adjourned to another Place, much less
Dissolved? Yet if all would have come away at call, had it not been Dissolved
for want of Legal Numbers Remaining? And what Greater Faction or Division can
there be, then such as Divide between King and Parliament, and between the
House and their Members? Are not they most Pernicious Instruments, that make
Monarchy it self, (whose end is to unite as was said before) thus far guilty
of Faction and Division?

Q. 12 What is the Good, or Convenience of Democracy?

A. The good of Democracy is Liberty, and the courage and Industry which
Liberty begets page 18.

Obs. 1. Then the more Liberties are Encroached upon, the more the People will
be rendered Cowardly and Poor, as may be plain enough seen by comparing the
Valor and Riches of this Nation in Q. Elizabeth's days, with what has been of
Late Days.

2. The King himself, when once his Subjects by having lost their Liberties
shall lose withal their Courages, will prove the greatest Looser; for then his
Kingdom will be an easy Prey to any Foreign Invader, or even to a homebred
Usurper, that could gather any sudden Strength, and would Promise more Liberty.

Q. 13 What is the Ill of Democracy, or the Inoonvenience to which it is Liable?

A. The Ills of Democracy are Tumults, Violence, and Licentiousness. page 18.

Obs. If these be the Evils for which the Peoples Liberty ought to be
Restrained by the Mixture in this Government, then the Restraint of the Liberty
should be measured according to the Exigency of these Evils, and so much
Liberty need only be Restrained as is sufficient for the Prevention of these
Evils.

Q. 14 What is the mixture of this Kingdom, which gives it the Conveniences of
all the three forementioned kinds of Government, without the Inconveniences of
any one.

A. In this Kingdom the Laws are Jointly made by a King, by a house of Peers,
and by a house of Commons chosen by the people: All having free Votes, and
particular privileges. page 18.

Obs. 1. Whereas there has been great Question made by many what is meant by
the Power and Privileges of Parliament, mentioned in the Protestation, which
has been so generally made thorowout the Kingdom? There is no Reason to doubt
but those things which the King grants afterward, to be the particular
Privilege of each House, and of both, are their certain Privileges according
to Law, and the Constitution of the Kingdom; and to the maintaining of them
every one that has made the Protestation is most strictly bound, without
peradventure or shift.

2. That the Privileges which the King challenges to Himself, are to be
yielded to, only so far forth as they are consistent with the Acknowledged
Privileges of the two Houses; because the Monarchy being Acknowledged to be a
Regulated Monarchy, and the Government mixed of Aristocracy and Democracy, as
well a Monarchy; it is the Privileges of the two Houses of Parliament that
makes the mixture, and so they must Regulate and Interpret the Privileges of
the King, and not the Privileges of the King Regulate or Interpret theirs,
save only to the maintaining still the Regal Dignity, and the Succession
according to Laws.

Q. 15 What Privileges does the King challenge to himself?

A. The Government according to these Laws is trusted to the king: power of
treaties of war and peace, of making Peers, of choosing Officers, and
Counselors for State Judges for Law, Commanders for Forts and Castles; giving
Commissions for raising men to make War abroad, or to prevent or provide
against Invasions and Insurr^ctions at home* Benefit of Confiscations, power of
pardouing, and some other of like kind are placed in the King. page 18.

Obs. 1. That all these are ordinarily in the King, Experience and Custom
Teaches, even those that Know not the Law by reading; but by what has been
noted before, and follows after, it is to be understood only so, as not to
prejudice the Privileges of the Houses of Parliament, specially in cases of
Necessity, (of which hereafter.) Also --

2. It is acknowledged here, that the Government, Trusted, is to be according
to the Laws, and so all these Things are not Absolutely in the King; as for
instance, Pardons, the Law denies Power of Pardoning wilful Murder; And
Benefit of some Confiscations belongs to some Private Lords of Mannours.

3. If Government only according to Law be trusted to the King then to Resist
Notorious Illegal Violences is not to Resist the Kings Authority.

Q. 16 For what end is this Authority trusted to the King, and Placed in him?

A. For our Subjects sake these rights are vested in us p 17 The Prince may not
make use of this high and perpetual power to the hurt of those for whose good
he has it. page. 19.

Obs. 1. Then the Good of the Subjects is ever to be preferred before the
Monarchiall Greatness of the King (the End is ever more considerable then the
Means) Salus Populi is suprema Lex.

2. Whosoever counsels the King to any Thing against the good of his Subjects,
is the Kings Enemy as well as the Commonwealths, by Attempting to turn him from
that which is the end of his Authority.

Q. 17 To what purpose especially are the privileges of the house of Commons
and the house of Peers?

A. That the Prince may not make use of this High and perpetual power to the
hurt of those for whose good he has it: and make use of the name of public
Necessity for the gain of his private Favorites and Followers etc. page 19.

Obs. 1. The Law then supposes, that such Cases may fall out, though it then
Charge the Blame upon those Favorites and Followers, and not upon the King (as
we shall see by and by.)

2. We need not wonder then why Private Favorites and Followers are such
Enemies to Parliaments and their Privileges, which are on purpose to hinder
their gains: Of which also more anon.

3. The two Houses are by the Law it seems, to be Trusted, when they Declare,
that the Power is made use of for the Hurt of the People; and the Name of
Public Necessity made use of for the Gain of Private Favorites and Followers,
and the like.

Q 18 What are the special privileges of the House of Commons toward this?

A. The House of Comm^ns, an Excellent conseruer of Liberty -- is solely
Entrusted with the first propositions concerning the Leauies of Moneys which is
the Sinnews as well of peace as of war etc page 19

Obs. 1. It seems then the House of Commons is presumed to be more careful for
the Subjects Liberties, then either the King, or the House of Peers.

2. Then it must needs be strange for any to conceive (as the Kings
Declarations would Persuade) that the House of Commons would Fight against and
Subvert the Liberty and Propriety of the Subject, and the Kings Favorites and
Followers Fight for them, and Protect them.

3. Then no Moneys may be Levied, neither for Peace nor War, no not under
Pretense of Public Necessity, (as Shipmoney and Monopolies were) without the
House of Commons first propound and Grant it.

4. If the House of Commons be an Excellent Conserver of Liberty, it must
Needs have some Power in some Cases to Levy Money even without the Kings
consent; or else it will be utterly unpossible to conserve Liberty at all. Of
which likewise more anon.

Q. 19. But if the Kings Private Favorites and Followers have ^ctually
persuaded him to any Thing against the Laws and Liberties of the Subject with
what further Power and Privilege is the House of Commons Entrusted toward the
Conserving of Liberty?

A. With the Impeaching of those* who for their own Ends though countenanced by
any surreptitiously-gotten command of the King, have violated that Law, which
he is bound (when he knows it) to protect; and to the protection of which they
were bound to advise him, at least not to serve him in the contrary. page 19.

Obs. 1. Then it is no Excuse to any that Violate the Laws, that they serve the
King in it.

2. The Law counts all Commands from the King, which are any way contrary to
the Law, Surreptitiously-Gotten.

3. Then the Parliament speaks according to the Law, when they constantly lay
the Blame of all violations upon the Kings Favorites and Followers, and their
getting Surreptitiously Commands from him, and not upon the King himself.

4. No Command of the King is to hinder the Commons from Impreaching such as
have violated the Law.

5. The King is bound not to Protect any of his Followers and Favorites against
the Commons Impeachment of them; because he Knows and Affirms, that he is bound
to Protect the Laws, and that this is the Law, that the Commons are to Impeach
such.

Qu. 20. What is the special Privilege of the House of Peers in the former
Case of such Favorites and Followers of the Kings as are Impeached by the
Commons? and so to decide all Matters in Questions between the King and the
People.

A. The Lords being trusted with a Iudicatory power are an Excellent Screen and
Bank between the Prince and the people, to Ass^st^nch against any Encroachments
of the other, and by just Judgments to preserve that Law which ought to be the
Rule of every one of the three, page 19.

Qu. 21. But have the two Houses Power to put their judgments into Execution,
as well as to Impeach and Judge?

A. The power of punishment is already in your hands according to Law, page 20.

Obs. 1. Then again it is no wonder that the Kings Favorites and Followers hate
Parliaments, (who not only Hinder their Gain, but have Power to punish them)
when they have violated the Laws.

2. Then the Lords (and much more the two Houses together) are supreme Judges
of all matters in Difference between the King and the People, and have Power to
Prevent all the Kings Encroachments upon the People, as well as the Peoples
upon him.

3. Then the King is Bound not to Protect any whom the Lords upon the
Impeachment of the Commons, have Judged Delinquents; For he has granted that
he is bound to Protect the Law, and that according to Law the Power of
Punishing (even of his Favorites and Followers, before spoken of) is in their
hands, and they cannot punish them, so long as he Protects them.

4. Then the Law Allows them as the Supreme Judicatory (even that which must be
a Skreen between the King and the People, and Assist the People against the
Kings Encroachments, and punish the Kings Favorites and Followers, though
countenanced by Surreptitiously-Gotten Commands from the King) a Power to bring
such as they have Judged, (or are to Judge) to Condign Punishment, which is
granted to all Inferior Judges in their Circuits and Jurisdictions.

5. Then if those Delinquents get the King to Protect them, or surreptiously
get Commands of him, to Raise Arms to Shelter themselves against the Judgment
of the two Houses; the two Houses have Power by the Law to Raise not only the
Posse Comitatus of those Counties where such Delinquents are* to apprehend
them; but also the Posse Regni, the Power of the whole Kingdom if need be; or
else the Power of Punishment is not in their hands according to Law, and it
would be safer contemning and scorning and opposing the highest Iudicatory, the
Parliament, then any Inferior Court, a Judge of Assize, or the like: and they
that could get Commands to Violate the Law before, would easily get Protection
against the Parliament when they are Questioned, if the Parliament had no Power
to Raise Arms to suppress them.

Qu. 22. But if there be an Attempt or Danger, that the Kings Favorites and
Followers go about to change this Regulated Monarchy into an Arbitrary
Government, and so into a Tyranny, is there Authority in the Houses
sufficient according to what was sore mentioned to remedy this?

A. Power Legally Placed in Both Houses is more then sufficient to Prevent and
Restrain the power of Tyranny P. 20.

Obs. 1. Then at least what ever Power is Necessary to Prevent or Restrain the
Power of Tyranny is confessed to be Legally placed in both Houses; for else
there is not Power sufficient, much less, more then sufficient.

2. Then it is Lawful for the two Houses to Raise Arms to defend themselves in
case an Army be Raised against them, for else they have not Power sufficient to
restrain the Power of Tyranny: There is no Greater Attempt of Tyranny then to
Raise Arms against the Houses of Parliament, and there is no way to Restrain
this Tyranny, but by Raising Arms in their own Defense: Less then this cannot
be sufficient.

3. If a Legal Power be placed in them, not only to Restrain, but prevent the
power of tyranny, then they are the Legal Judges, when there is danger of
Tyranny; and they have Legal Power to Command their judgment to be obeyed,
for Preventions as well as Restraint of Tyranny.

4. Then it is Lawful for them to provide for their own and the Kingdoms
safety, and they have Legal Power to command the People to this purpose; not
only when Arms are Actually Raised against them, but when they Discern, and
accordingly Declare a Preparation made toward it: for if they let alone
altogether the Exercise of their Power, till Arms are Actually Raised against
them; they may in all likelihood find it too late, not only to Prevent, but
even to Restrain the Power of Tyranny.

5. Then they have Legal Power in such Times of Danger, to put into safe
hands, such Forts, Ports, Magazines, Ships, and Power of the Militia, as are
Intended, or likely to be Intended, to Introduce a Tyranny; for else they
cannot have Power sufficient to Prevent or Restrain the Power of Tyranny.

6. Then they have Legal Power to Levy Moneys, Arms, Horse, Ammunitions, upon
the Subjects, in such cases of Danger, even without or against the Kings
Consent; for it cannot be imagined that in such cases when the Kings Favorites
and Followers have gotten Commands from him, to Protect them in their
Delinquencies, and Attempts to Introduce Tyranny, that ever he will consent to
^evies of Moneys against those Favorites and Fol^owers of his, or to the
Raising Arms against them, specially he being still in their hands, and among
them, and not with his Parliament; and without such Levies of Moneys, etc. it
is not possible for the two Houses of Parliament to Prevent or Restrain
sufficiently the Power of Tyranny.

7 They that have made the Protestation, to maintain and defend the Power and
Privileges of Parliament, may see in all these Things (Acknowledged by the
King, and clearly Following from his Acknowledgements) what is that Power, and
what are Privileges of Parliament, which they have so solemnly in the Presence
of Almighty God Vowed, Promised and Protested to maintain, etc.

8. And finally, since the two Houses of Parliament have so often and fully
Declared their Intentions in settling the Militia, securing Hull and the
Magazine there, and the Navy at Sea, with the Ports and Forts, and afterward
in Raising Arms under the Command of the Earl of Essex, and last of all,
Levying Moneys by voluntary Contibutions and Assessements; they have only used
that Legal Power which is in them for the Punishment of Delinquents, and for
the Prevention and Restraint of the Power of Tyranny, of all which they are
the Legal Judges; and all the Subjects of this Kingdom are bound by the Laws
to obey them herein, and those doubly bound that have made the late
Protestation.

That the Reader may the better discern how the Answers here applied do agree
with the words of his Majesty's Answer to the 19 Propositions, I have here
transcribed so much of it as concerns this particular.
Page 17. We call God to witness, that as for our subjects sake these Rights
are vested in Us, so for their sakes as well as for our own) we are resolved
not to quit them nor to subvert (though in a parliamentary way) the ancient,
equal, happy well-poysed, and neuer-enough-commended Constitution of the
government of this kingdom.

There being three kinds of government amongst men Absolute Monarchy,
Aristocracy, and Democracy, and all these having their particular conveniences
and inconveniences.

page 18. The experience and wisdom of your Ancestors has so molded this out
of a mixture of these, as to give to this Kingdom (as far as humane prudence
can provide) the conveniences of all three, without the inconveniences of any
one, as long as the Balance hangs even between the three Estates* and they run
jointly on in their proper channel begetting Verdure and Fert^lity in the
meadows on both sides) and the ouer-flowing of either on either side, raise no
Deluge or Inundation. The Ill of Absolute Monarc^y is Tyranny, The Ill of
Aristocracy is Faction and Division, The Ills of Democracy are Tumults,
Violence, and Licent^ousnesse: The good of Monarchy is the Uniting a Nation
under one Head, to Resist Invasion from abroad, and Insurrection at home: The
good of Aristocracy is the conjunction of Council in the Ablest persons of a
State for the public benefit: The good of Democracy is Liberty, and the
courage and industry which Liberty begets.

In this kingdom the Laws are jointly made by a King, by a house of Peers, and
by a house of Commons chosen by the people, all having free Votes and
particular privileges. The government according to these Laws is trusted to
the King, power of Treaties of war and peace, of making Peers, of choosing
Officers and Counselors for State Judges for Law, Co^manders for Forts and
Castles giving Co^missions for raising men to make war abroad, or to prevent
and provide against Invasions or Insurrections at home, benefit of
Consiscations, power of pardoning* and some more of the like kind are placed
in the King. -- Again, Page 19. that the Prince may not make use of this high
and pertetuall power to the hurt of those for whose good he has it, and make
use of the name of public Necessity for the gain of his private Favorites and
Followers to the detriment of his people; the house of Commons an excellent
Conseruer of Liberty* but never intended for any share in Government, or the
choosing of them that should govern) is solely entrusted with the first
Propositions concerning the Leauies of moneys (which is the sinews as well of
peace as war, and the unpeaching of those who for their own ends, though
countenanced by any surreptitiously-gotten command of the King, have violated
that Law, which he is bound (when he knows it) to protect, and to the
protection of which they were bound to advise him, at least not to serve him to
the contrary: and the Lords being trusted with a Iudicatory power, are an
excellent screen and bank between the Prince and people, to assist each against
any Encroachments of the other, and by just judgments to preserve that Law
which ought to be the Rule of every one of the three. --

Page 20. Since therefore the Power Legally placed in both Houses is more then
sufficient to prevent and restrain the power of Tyranny: -- since this would
be a total Subversion of the Fundamental Laws, and that excellent
Constitution of this Kingdom, which has made this Nation so many years both
Famous and Hapy to a great degree of envy; since to the power of punishing
(which is already in your hands according to Law) if -- since the encroaching
of one of these Estates upon the power of the other is unhappy in the effects
both to them and all the rest -- Page 2^. Our answer is* Nolumus Leges Angliae
mutari. But this We promise, that We will be as careful of preserving the
Laws in what is supposed to concern wholly our Subjects, as in what most
concerns Our self: For indeed We profess to believe that the preservation of
every Law concerns Us, those of Obed^ence being not secure, when those of
protection are Violated.

FINIS.

