SEVERAL POISONOUS AND SEDICIOUS PAPERS OF Mr. DAVID JENKINS ANSVVERED.

By H. P. BARRESTER of Lincolnes Inn.

LONDON: Printed for Robert Bostock dwelling in Paul's Church yard, at the Sign
of the Kings Head. 1647.

THE VINDICATION OF JUDGE JENKINS Prisoner in the TOWER, the 29. of April, 1647.
I Was convened upon Saturday the 10. of this month of April before a
Committee of the House of Commons, wherein Mr Corbet had the Chair; and I was
there to be examined upon some Questions then to be propounded to me; to which
Questions I refused to give any other Answer then that which was set down in a
paper I then delivered to the said Mr. Corbet, which follows in these words.

Gentlemen, I stand committed by the House of Commons for high Treason, for not
acknowledgin^, nor obeyin^ the Power of the two Houses, by adhering to the king
in this War. I deny this to b^ Treason; For the supreme and only Power by the
Laws of the Land is in the king. If I should sub^it to any examin^tion derived
from your Power, which by the Ne^ative oath stands in opposition to the Kings
Power, I should contesse the Power to be in you, and so condemn my (...) for a
Traitor, which I neither ought no^ will do.

I am sworn to obey the King, and the Laws of this Land: you have not power to
examine m^ b^ th^^e Laws, but by the Kings Writ, Pattent, or Commission; if yo^
ca^ produce of her thereof, I will answer the que^^ions you shall p^^pound;
ot^e^wise I cannot answer thereto, without the breach of my Oath, and the
violation of the Laws, which I will not do to save my life.

You your selves, all of you this Parliamen^, have sworn that the King is our
only and supreme Governor: you^ Protestation, your Vow and Covenant, your
solemn League and Covenant, your Declarations, all of them publish to the
Kingdom, that your scope is the maintenance of the Laws; those Laws are and
must be derived to us, and enlivened by the only supreme Governor, the
Fountain of justice, and the life of the Law, the King. The Parliaments are
called by his Writs; the Judges sit by his Pattents, so of all other Officers;
the Cities and Towns corporate, govern by the Kings Charters; and therefore
since by the Law I cannot be examined by you, without a power derived by His
Majesty, I neither can, nor will, nor ought you to examine me upon any
questions. But if as private Gentlemen, you shall be pleased to ask me any
questions, I shall really and truly answer every such question, as you shall
demand.

April 10. 1647. David Jenkins.

This paper has been misrepresented to the good people of this City by a
printed one, styling it my Recantation, which I own not; and besides is in it
self repugnant (just like these times) the Body falls out with the Head. To
vindicate my self from that Recantation, and to publish to the world the
realitie of the paper then delivered to Mr. Corbet, and the matter therein
contained, I have published this ensuing Discourse.

No person who has committed Treason, Murder, or Felony, has any assurance
at all for so much as one hour of life, lands or goods, without the Kings
gracious pardon. 27 H. 8. ca. 24.

The King is not virtually in the two Houses at Westminster, whereby they may
give any assurance at all to any person, in any thing, for any such offense.

1. The House of Commons has declared to the Kingdom in their Declaration of
the 28. of November last to the Scots Papers, pa. 8. That the King at this time
is not in a condition to govern. No person or thing can derive a virtue to
other men, or things, which it self has not: and therefore it is impossible
that they should have a virtue from the King to govern, which they, declare he
has not himself to give.

2. The Law of the Land is, ^ Eliz. c. 1.
That no person in any Parliament has a voice in the H^use of Commons, but
that he stands a person to all intents and purp^ses as if he had never been
elected or returned, if before he sit in the House, he take not his Oath upon
the holy Evangelists, that the Kings Majesty is the only and supreme Governor
over all persons in all Causes. All the Members of the said House have taken
it, and at all times as they are returned do take it; otherwise they have no
color to intermeddle with the public* Affairs. How does this solemn and
legal Oath agree with their said Declaration, That the King is in no condition
to govern. By the one it is sworn, He is the only supreme Governor; by the
other that he is not in a condition to govern.

3. The Oath is not, that the King was, or ought to be, or had been, before he
was seduced by ill Counsel, our only and supreme Governor in all Causes,
over all persons; but in the present tense, that he is our only and supreme
Governor, at this present, in all causes, and over all persons. So they the
same persons swear one thing, and declare to the Kingdom the contrary of the
same thing, at the same time, in that which concerns the weal of all this
Nation.

4. The Ministers in the Pulpits do not say, what they swear in the House of
Commons. Who ever heard sithence this unnatural war, any of their Presbyters
attribute that to his Majesty which they swear? The reason is, their Oath is
taken at Westminster amongst themselves: that which their Ministers pray and
teach, goes amongst the people. To tell the people that the King is now their
only and supreme Governor in all causes, is conttrary to that the Houses do
now practice, and to all they act and maintain. They, the two Houses forsooth,
are the only and supreme Governors in default of the King, for that he has
left his great Counsel, and will not come to them, and yet the King desires to
come, but they will not suffer him, but keep him prisoner at Holdenby: so well
do their actions and O^ths agree.

5. They swear now King Charles is their only and supreme Governor; but with
a resolution at the time of the Oath taking, and before and after, that he
shall not be only or supreme Governor, or only and supreme, but not any
Governor at all: For there is no point of Government, but for some years past
they have taken to themselves, and used his name only, to abuse and deceive
the people.

6. That this vertuall power is a mere fiction, their Propositi^ns sent to
Oxford, to Newcastle, to be signed by the King, do prove it so. What needs this
ado, if they have the vertuall Power with them at Westminste^?

7. To affirm that the Kings Power (which is the virtue they talk of) is
separable from his person, is high Treason by the Law of the Land: which is so
declared by that learned man of the ^aw, Si^ Edward Cook; so much magnified by
this present Parliament, who (...) 7. part of his Reports in Calvin's case, fol.
11 says thus. In the Reign of Edw: 2. he Sponcers, the Father, and Son, (...)
hatch^d in their h^arts, invented this damnable and (...) ^pinion, that homage
a^ doath of ligeance was more by reas^^ (...) Kings Cr^wn, (that is, of his
polit^ck capacity) then by reason of ^h^ pers^n of (...) King; upon which
^pinion they inferred ^hree execrable and (...). 1. I^ the King do not demean
himself by reason in the right of his Cro^n, his (...) are bound by Oath to
remove the King. 2 Seeing that the King could not be r^formed (...) of (...)
that ought to be done per aspertee: that is, by f^rce. 3. That his lieges be
bound to govern in aid of him, and in (...): All which were condemned by two
Parliaments, one in the Reign of Ed^: 2. called ^xilium Hugonis le Spencer; and
the other in Anno 1 Edw: 3. cap 2.

And that the natural body and politic makes one indivisible body, and that
these two bodies incorporate in one person make one body, and not diverse, is
resolved as the Law of England, 4. E^iz: Plowdon Com: fol: 213. by Si^ R^bert
Ca^lin, Lord Chief Justice of England, (...), Lord Chief Jus^ice of the Common
P^ease; the Lord Sa^ders, Lord Chief baron of the Exchequer, and by the rest o^
the Ju^ges, viz. (...), Justice (...) Justice Corbet, Justice Weston baron
(...) and (...) Sergeants* (...) General^. (...) Atturey of the Turchy: (...)
the learned it man of that age, in the kn^w^^dg^ of the Law, and Cu^^omes of
the Re^lm.

8. The Law in all (...) without any (...) is and (...) been: 2 H. ^ Ma^na
Cha^ta.
That no Act of Parliament (...) the Subjects of the Lord without the assent of
the King, So in every age till this day, and in every Kings time, as appears by
the Acts in print 1 part of the Instit. Sect. 234. in fine. where many of the
Law Books are cited.
either for Person, Lands, goods, or fame. No man can show any fillable,
letter, or line to the contrary in the books of the Law, or printed Acts of
Parliament, in any age in this Land. If the vertuall Power be in the Houses,
there needs no assent of the Kings. The styles of the Acts printed from 9 H. 3.
to 1 H. 7. were either, The King ordains at this Parliament, etc. or the King
ordains by the advice of his Prelates and Barrons, and at the humble Petition
of the Commons, etc. In Hen. 7. his time the Style altered, and has sithence
continued thus, It is ordained by the Kings Majesty, and the Lords Spiritual
and Temporal, and Commons in this present Parliament assembled. So that
always the Assent of the King gives the life to all, 7 H. 7. 14. 12 of H. 7.
20
as the soul to the body; and therefore our Law Books call the King, the
Fountain of Justice, and the life of the Law.

9. Mercy as well as Justice belongs by the Law of the Land only to the King.
2 H. 4. ca. 22. 4 pars instit. 42.
This is confessed by Mr. Prin^, and it is so without any question: The King
can only pardon, and never more ^ause to have sufficient pardons then in such
troublesome times as these; Mr. Prinn in his Treatise of the great Seal, fol.
17. 27 H. 8. c. 24.
and God send us pardons and peace. None can give any pardon, but the King by
the Law of the Land: The whole and sole power of pardoning Treasons and
Felonies belongs to the King, are the words of the Law, and it is a delusion to
take it from any other, and utterly invalid. 27* H. 8. ca. 24.

10. Queen Elizabeth summoned her first Parliament, to be held the 23. of
Janna. in the first year of her Majesty's Reign. The Lords and Commons
assembled by force of the same Writ, the 23. day the Queen fell sick, and could
not appear in her person in Parliament that day, and therefore prorogued it
until the 25. of the same month of Januarie. 3 Eliz. Dier 203.
Resolved by all the Judges of England, that the Parliament began not the day
of the return of the Writ, viz: the 23. of January, when the Lords and Commons
appeared; but the 25. of the said month, when the King came in person: which
shows evidently that this vertuall presence is a mere deluding fiction that
has no ground in Law, reason, or sense. They have the King now a Prisoner at
Holdenby, with guards upon him, and yet they govern by the vertuall Power of
their Prisoner. These are some few of the causes and reasons which moved me to
deliver that paper to Mr. Corbet, which I am ready to ^^stifie with my life,
and should hold it a great honor to (...) the honorable an^ holy Laws of the
Land: That (...) save this Land from ^^^truction, is an Act of Oblivion, (...)
Majesty's gracious ^^^^all pardon, the Soul^iers their (...) and every man his
(...), and Truth and Peace established in (...) ^^nd, and a favorable regard
had to the satisfaction of (...) Consciences.

April 29. 1647. David Jenkins.

An ANSWER to the Poisonous Seditious Paper of Mr. David Jenkins.
MR. David Jenkins in his Paper of the 29. of April last, lay^^ most odious
charges upon the Parliament: and consequently upon all that have adhered to the
Parliament in this War; and les^ these his desperate infusions should not
work powerfully enough upon the vulgar; he being an ancient practiser in the
Law, and promoted to the title of a Judge: he cites Book cases against the two
Houses, and seems forward to lay down his life in the cause.

His 1. Argument runs thus. The Parliament not having the Kings Writ, Patent or
Commission, cannot do so much as examine any man: But the Parliament has not
the Kings Writ, etc. Ergo: his minor is confirmed thus. If the Kings power
remain solely in himself, and be not vertually present in the two Houses, then
they cannot pretend his Writ, Pattent or Commission. But the Kings power is in
himself, and not vertually in the two H^uses, ergo, that the Parliament has no
vertuall power, he proves thu^*

1. If the Parliament had in them the Kings vertuall Power, they needed not
desire the Kings ratification: they needed not send any Propositions to him;
but now they send Propositions, ergo this vertuall power is but a mere fiction.

^ To affi^m that the Kings power is separable from his person, is by the Law
adjudged high Treason: but in the Parliament (...) the Kings Power is vertually
in them, then they separate it (...) his person Ergo.

3. If none can pardon Felony or Treason except the King, ^one has the virtua^l
power of the King, but none can pardon except the King, Ergo,

4. If the King be in no condition to govern, then he is in no condition to
derive virtuall power, but, etc.

5. If none can sit in Parliament but he must first swear that the (...) the
only Supreme Governor over all Persons in all Causes, then, no Member of the
Parliament, nor the whole Parliament, can suppose him or themselves superior
to the King: but none can sit in Parliament, etc. Ergo,

^ I^ no Act of Parliament bind the Subject without the Kings (...), then
there is no virtuall power in the Parliament without the Kings assent; but no
Act binds, etc. Ergo,

Out of these premises which this grave Gentleman judges to be ^rrefragable, he
concludes that the Parliament denies the King to be Supreme Governor, nay to
be any Governor at all, in as (...) as there is no point of government, He
says but the Parliament for some years past have taken to themselves using the
Kings name, only to abuse and deceive the people. He says further, the
Parliament pretends against the King, because that he ha^ left the great
Counsel, and yet the King desires to come to his great Counsel, but cannot
because he is by them kept (...) at Holmby.

(...) he says the Houses are guilty of pe^jur^as well as of the (...) the
people, and rebelling against the King; in as much as at the same time they
swear him to be only (...) Governor, and declare him to be in no condition to
govern.

How easily these things may be answered, and refuted, let the world see.

(...) cannot be denied: but the Parliament sits by the Kings Writ, nay if
Statute Law be greater then th^^ Kings Writ, it cannot be denied but the
Parliament (...) or ough^ to (...) by something greater then then the Kings
(...), And, if it be confessed that the Parliament sits by the Kings Writ, but
does not Act by the Kings Writ, then it must follow that the Parliament is a
void vain Court, and sits to no purpose; nay it must also follow, that the
Parliament is of less Authority, and of less use then any other inferior
Court. Forasmuch as it is not in the Kings power to control other Courts, or
to prevent them from sitting or Acting.

2. This is a gross non sequitu^ the Kings power is in himself, Ergo it is not
derived to, nor does reside virtually in the Parliament. For the light of the
Sun remains imbodied, and unexhausted in the Globe of the Sun, at the same time
as it is diffused and displayed through all the body of the air; and who sees
not that the King without emptying himself, gives Commissions daily of Oier and
Terminer to others, which yet he himself can neither frustrate nor el^de? But
for my part I conceive it is a great error to infer that the Parliament has
only the Kings power, because it has the Kings power in it: for it seems to me
that the Parliament does (...) sit and act by concurrent power, devo^ved both
from the King and Kingdom; And this in some things is more obvious and apparent
then in others. For by what power does the Parliament grant Subsedies to the
King? if only by the power which the King gives, then the King may take
Subsedies without any grant from the Parliament: and if it be so by a power
which the people give to the Parliament, then it will follow, that the
Parliament has a power given both by King and Kingdom.

3. The sending Propositions to the King, and des^ring his concurrence, is
scarce worth an Answer; for Subjects may humbly petition for that which is
their strict right and property. Nay it may sometimes beseem a superior to
prefer a suit to an inferior for matters in themselves due. God himself has not
utterly disdained to beseech his own miserable, impious, unworthy creatures:
besides it is not our Tenet that the King has no power, because he has not all
power; nor that the King cannot at all promote our happiness, because he has
no just claim to procure our ruin.

4. We affirm not that the Kings power is separated from his person so as the
two Spensers affirmed; neither do we frame conclusions out of that separation
as the two Spensers did, either that the King may be removed or misdemenors, or
reformed per aspertee; or that the Subject is bound to govern in aid of him; we
only say, that his power is distinguishable from his person: and when he
himself makes a distinction betwixt them, commanding one thing by his Legal
Writes, Courts and Officers; and commanding another thing extra^udicially by
word of mouth, letters, or Ministers, we are to obey his Power rather then his
Person.

5. We take not from the King all power of pardoning Delinquents, we only say
it is not proper to him quarto modo. For if the King pardon him which has
murdered my son, his pardon shall not ^ut me off from my appeal: and it is more
unreasonable that the Kings pardon should make a whole State which has suffered
remediless, then any private man. So if the King should deny indemnity to
those which in the fury of war have done things unjustifiable by the Laws of
Peace, and thereby keep the wounds of the State from being bound up, it is
equiable that an Act of Indemnity should be made forcible another way. And if
this will not hold, yet this is no good consequence the King is absolute in
point of pardons, therefore he is absolute in all things else; and the
Parliament has no power to discharge Delinquenties, therefore it has no power
in other matters.

6 The Parliament has declared the King to be in no condition to govern: but
this must nor be interpreted rigidly, and without a distinction: for if the
King with his sword drawn in his hand, and pursuing the Parliament and their
adherents as Rebels, be not fit for all Acts of Government, (...) not hereby
insinuated that he is (...) o^ the habit or righ^ of governing. (...) be
unq^^^ified now, (...) is not (...) for the future. If he may not do things
destructive to the Parliament, he is not (...) from returning to the
Parliament, or doing (...) to the Parliament. This is a frivelous civil, and
sub^erfuge.

7 We swear that the King is our supreme Governor over all Persons, and in all
causes; but we do not swear that he is above all Law, nor above the (...) of
his people, which is the end of the Law, and indeed Paramou^t to the Law it
self. I^ he be above all Law, or liable to no rest^aint of ou^ Law, then we are
(...) the French, or the T^^ks; and if he be above the pri^e end of Law common
safety, then we are not so (...) the French, or the Turks. For if the total
subversion of the French or the Turk were attempted they might by Gods law
imprinted in the book of nature justify a self-defence; but we must
remedilesly perish when the King pleases to command our throats. Besides, how
acheived the King of England such a Supremacy above all Law, and the community
it self, for whose behoof Law was made? If Gods donation be pleaded, which is
not special to him, or different from what other Kings may pretend too, then
to what purpose serve our Laws, nay to what purpose serve the Laws of other
Countries? for by this general donation, all Nations are condemned to all
servitude as well as we. If the Law of this Land be appealed to, what Books has
Mr. Jenkins read, where has he found out that Lex Regia, whereby the people of
England have given away from themselves all right in themselves? Some of our
books tell us that we are more free then the French, that the King cannot
oppress us in our persons, or estates, by imprisonment, denying justice, or
laying taxes without our consents: other books tell us, that the safety of the
people is the supreme law, and that the King has both God and the Law for his
Superior. But all this is nothing to learned Mr. Jenkins.

8. We admit that no Acts of Parliament are complete, or formally binding
without the Kings assent: yet this is still to be denied, that therefore
without this assent particularly expressed, the two Houses can do nothing, nor
have any virtuall power at all, no not to examine Mr. Jenkins, nor to do any
other thing of like nature, though in order to public justice and safety. I
have done, and wish Mr. Jenkins would call in, and lick up again his black,
infamous, execrable reproaches, so filthily vomited out against the Parliament.

The Reply of Judge Jenkins to Mr. H. P.
AFter the said Mr. H. P. has made a recital of the Heads of my Vindication,
he deduceth his Answer unto eight Particulars.

To the first.
I Was examined by a Committee appointed by the House of Commons: I say and
said that the House of Commons have no power to examine me, for that it is no
Court, every Court has power to examine upon Oath, this power the House of
Commons never claimed; 5 H 4 c. 3.
The Court of Pie-Powders, Court Baron, Hundred Court, 3 H 6. 46.
County Court, and every other Court of Record, or not of Record, 19 H 6. 43.
has power to examine upon oath, and an examination without Oath, 35 H. 6. 5.
is a communication only, examination in Law is upon oath.

There is no Court without a power of trial, Sir Anthony Maynes case, Cook 5.
pars, Reports, Lit. 2. lib. Sect. 194. 6 H. 4. 1.
the House of Commons has no power to try any offense, nor ever practiced it
by Bill, Indictment, Information, Plaint or Original, to deduce it to trial,
nor to try it by Verdict, Demurrer or Examination of witnesses upon Oath,
without which there can be no condemnation or judgment; and that which can
attain to no reasonable end, the Law rejects as a thing inutile, and useless:
Sapiens incipit a fine.

The Writ whereby they are called gives them power Ad faciendum and
consentiendum, 4 pars, Instit. fol 4. and 9.
to what? to such things Quae ibidem de communi Consilio ordinari contigerint,
(viz.) in the Parliament: This makes nothing at all for a Court for the House
of Commons; that consilium which that Writ intends, is cleared partly by the
Writ for choosing Knights, etc. For the King by that Writ is said to resolve to
consult and treat with the Prelates and Peers of the Kingdom, for and touching
the great concernments of the Commonwealth (for the King never fits in the
House of Commons;) and this also is made evident by the Writs to the Prelates,
Peers, Judges, and to his Council at Law; the words in their Writs are, To
appear and attend the Parliament, Consilium impensure, the one does consulere,
the other facere and consentire.

The House of Lords, 7 H 6. 28.
where the King fits in person, assisted by his Lords, 1 H 7. 20.
Judges, Sergeants, Attorney, Solicitor, Masters of the Chancery, 14 E. 3. ca
5.
is a Court of Record to many purposes, set down in the books of the Law, 1
Pa^s, Instit. pa. 21.
and the Statutes of the Land; and that Courts is only in the House of Lords,
where the King sits.

A Court must either be by the Kings Patent, Statute Law, or by the Common Law,
Plowd Com. 319.
which is common and con^^ant usage; the House of Commons has no Patent to be
a Court, nor S^^tute Law to be a Court, nor common usage; they have no (...)
Book but since E. 6. time: was there ever Fine by the House of Commons
e^treated into the Excheque^? For murder o^ Felony they can imprison no man,
much ^esse for Treason; the House which cannot do the less cannot do the
greater.

I^ is ordained, 25 E 3 c 4.
that no man shall be imprisoned, or put out of his Franchise by the King or
his Council, 3* Car Petition of Right.
but upon Indictment or presentment of his good and lawful Neighbors, where
the deed is done, or by original Writ at the Common Law, and so is Lex terrae
the Law of the Land, mentioned is Magna Charta. cap. 29 expounded; and the said
Magna Charta and Charta (...), are declared by the Statute of 25 E 1. (...). to
be the Common Law of the Land. All Judges and Commissioners are to proceed,
Secundum legem and consuetudinem Regni Angliae, as appears by all proceedings
in all Courts, and by all Commissions: and therefore the House of Commons by
themselves proceeding not by Indictment, Presentment, (...) Original Writ,
have no power to imprison men, or to put them out of their Franchi^e.

This no way trenches upon the Parliament, 4 pars, Instit. page 1
for it is in Law no Parliament without King and both Houses; 3 Pars. Instit.
p. 3.
I have only in my Paper de^ivered to Mr. Corbet, applied my self to that
Committee, 12 H 7. 20. Prince case.
that they had no power to examine me; but I never thought, said, or wrote,
that the Parliament had no power to examine me: 8 Pars* Cook. 1 Pars, (...) p
^59.
the Law and custom of this Land is, that a Parliament has power over my
life, liberty, lands and goods, and over every other Subject; 1 H 8 3
but the House of Commons of it self has no such power. Dier* 38 H 8 60


For the Lord Cooks relation, that the House of Commons have imposed (...), 1
P^^s, Instit p 19 ^.
and imprisoned men in Queen E^^z^^ths time, and since; Few facts of late time
never (...) power nor Court, 4 (...) ^^stit ca. Parl.
a (...) is no good (...) for the words of the Statute of 6 H 8 c. 16 that a
^icence to dep^^t from the House or Commons for any Member thereof is to be
entered of Record in the Book or the Clark of the Parliament, appointed, or to
be appointed for that House, does not conclude that the House of Commons is a
Court of Record.

For first, that Law of 6. H. 8. c. 26. handles no such question, as that,
whether the House of Commons be a Court, it is a maxim in all Laws, Lex aliud
tractans nil probat, the word (Record) there mentioned, is only a memorial of
what was done and entered in a Book: A Plaint removed out of the County Court
to the Court of the Common Pleas, has these words in the Writ of remove, Fitzh
Not. Br 70
Recordari facias loquelam, etc. and yet the County Court is no Court of
Record, and so for ancient Demesne, Fi^^h. Not, Br 13.
in a Writ of false judgment, the words are Recordari facias loquelam, etc.
and yet the Court of ancient Demesne is no Court of Record; 12 H 4. 23.
and so of a Court Baron, the Law and custom of England must be preserved, 34
H. 6. 49.
or England will be destroyed, and have neither Law nor custom.

Let any man show me, that the Court of Lords, or the House of Commons in any
age has made any man a Delinquent (Rege dissentiente) the King contradicting
it under his Great Seal. Sir Gi^es Mompesson, Michel, and others of late were
condemned by the prosecution of the House of Commons in King James his time;
did King James ever contradict it? And so of ancient times, 4 Pars, Instit.
Tit. Parl. p. 23.
where the House of Peers condemned Latimer in 50. E. 3. the Kings pardon freed
him: which shows clearly, that the Kings express or employed assent must of
necessity be had to make a Delinquent.

The Gentleman says, That the Parliament fits, or ought to sit by something
greater then the Kings Writ, etc.

No Parliament did ever sit without the Kings Writ, nor could ever Parliament
begin without the Kings presence in person, 4 Pars, Instit. p. 4. and 6.
or by a Guardian of England by Patent under the Kings Great Seal, the King
being in remotis, or by Commission under the Great Seal to certain Lords
representing the Kings person, and has been thus in all Ages unto this Session
of Parliament, wherein his Majesty has been pressed, and has passed two Acts
of Parliament, one for a Trienniall Parliament, and another for a perpetual, 4
E 3. c. 14.
if the Houses please, to satisfy their desires; 36 E. 3. c. 10.
how these two Acts agree one with another, and with Statute in E. the thirds
time, 21 I^c. the Act of Limitation of Actions, cap. 26.
where Parliaments are ordained to be holden every year, and what mischiefs to
the people of this Land such length of Parliaments will produce by protections
and privileges, to free them and their meniall servants from all debts during
their lives, if they please to continue it so long; and how destructive to men's
actions against them, by reason of the Statute of Limitations, which confines
their actions to certain years, and many other inconveniences or greater
importance, is easy to understand?

How can any man affirm, that the two Houses do act now by the Kings Writ which
relates to counsel and Treaty with the King, 4 pars, Instit. pa. 14.
concerning the King, the defense of his Kingdom, and of the Church of England,
there are the three points which it tends to, as appears by the Writ. They keep
their King prisoner at Holdenby, and will not suffer him to consult and treat
with them. Vow and Covenant, p. 11.
They have made a Vow and Covenant to assist the Forces raised and continued by
both Houses against the Forces raised by the King without their consent; and to
the same effect have devised the Oath which they call the Negative Oath: Is
this to defend the Kings Kingdom, or their kingdom?

When by their solemn League and Covenant they extirpate Bishops, Deanes and
Chapters root and branch, is this to defend the Church of England? (that Church
must necessarily be meant, that was the Church of England when the said Writ
bore test) they were not summoned to defend a Church that was not in being; 3
Pars, Cook. De^n and Chapter of Norwich.
to destroy and defend the Church are very contrary things; the Church is not
defended, when they take away and sell the Lands of the Church.

The Gentleman says, The King cannot control other Courts of Justice, or
prevent them from sitting or acting, and therefore not the two Houses, etc. It
is true, the King cannot control or prevent his other Courts, for that they
are his ordinary Courts or common justice, to administer common (...) unto all
men, according to the fixed Laws. The Houses make no Court without the King,
they are no body Co^porate without the King, nor Parliament without the King,
they all make one corporate body, one Court called the Parliament, whereof the
King is the head, 4 Pars, Instit. p. 1.
and the Court is in the Lords house, where the King is present: and as a man
is no man without a head, so the Houses severed from the King, as now they are,
have no power at all, and they themselves by levying War against the King, and
imprisoning of him, have made the State for not dissolving, adjourning, or
proroging this Parliament of no effect, by the said Acts of their own; they
sit to no purpose without his assent to their Bills, they will not suffer him
to consult with them, and treat and reason with them, whereby we may discern
what Bills are fit to pass, and what not, which in all Ages the Kings of this
Land have enjoyed as their undoubted Rights, and therefore they sit to no
purpose by their own disobedience and fault.

For the ordinary Courts at Westminster, 27 H. 8. c. 24, 28. H. 8 11. Dier.
the Judges in all those Courts are Judges by the Kings Patent or Writ,
otherwise they are no Judges: the Houses can make no Judges, they are no Judges
at all who are made by them; the whole and sole power of making Judges, belongs
to the King: the King cannot control or prevent his own Judges from sitting or
acting, but the Houses he may for they are not the Kings Judges, but the Judges
of the two Houses. 2 R, 3. 11.
In his other Courts, the King commits his power to his Judges by his patent,
and they are sworn to do common right to all men, and the King is sworn not
to let them from so doing: the King cannot judge in those Courts, nor
control; but the King is both Judge and Controller in the Court of
Parliament: Quoad. Acts, for his assent or dissent does give life or death to
all Bills. Many Lawyers have much to answer to God, this Kingdom, and to
posterity, for puzling the people of this Land with such Fancies, as the Gentl*
who wrote the Answer to my Paper, and others have published in these Troubles,
which has bin none of the least causes of the raising and continuing of them:
And so I have done with the first part of his answer.

A. D. 2.
For the Non sequitur, in the second Section of the Gent* Answer, the
Antecedent and the Consequent are his own.

Quem recitas meus est (o Fidentine!) libellus:
Sed male dum recitas incipit esse tuus.
My words are, that the King is not vertually in the two houses at Westminster,
to enable them to grant pardons, for that whole and sole power by the Law
belongs to the King. My Paper has no such thing, as that the KINGS power
cannot be derived to others or the virtue of his power: 27 H. c. 24.
For His power, and the virtue of His power is in all Patents to his Judges, in
Charters to Corporations, in Commissions of all sorts, and in the Parliament
assembled by force of his Writ of Summons, so long as they obey him; but when
they renounce that power, and claim it not from the King, and declare to the
Kingdom that he is not in condition to govern, and imprison him, and usurp
to themselves all Royal Authority, as the two Houses now do, no reasonable
man can affirm that they act by the power of their Prisoner, who has no power
to give them, that by force of Arms take all the power to themselves.

The Gentl. says, the King grants Commissions daily of Oyer and Terminer, 4 E
4, 39.
which he cannot frustrate nor elude. 5 E. 44.
The King may revoke and discharge the Commission by his Writ, 1 E ^. Dy^r 165.
as he may remove all Judges, and place other men in their room; and many
Kings death determines all the Judges Parents of Westminster Hall, 1 Mar.
Bro^ks case 447.
Commissions of Oyer and Terminer, etc. and so he might dissolve both Houses
in all times, by his Writ under the Great Scale, until that by this
Parliament, by his own concession, the King of his goodness has secluded
himself; which goodness has bin full ill requi^ed.

The Gentl. affirms, That the power the Parliament has, is concurrent from
the King and Kingdom; which he conceives, is proved by the Grant of Subsidies
to the King by the Parliament. The mistaking of this word (Parliament) has
been mischievous in these times to this Land, 4 Pars, instit. p. 1.
and it is affectedly mistaken, which makes the sin the greater, for the two
Houses are not the Parliament as before is declared; and at this time so to
inculcate it, when all men know, that of the 120. Peers of the Kingdom, who
were temporal Peers before the troubles, there are not not above 30. in the
Lords house, and in the house of Commons about 200. of the prime Gent. of the
Kingdom left the House, and adhered to his Majesty, who is imprisoned by them,
shows no such candor as to be desired

It is true, 25 Eliz. 1. Confirmatio chartarum, cap. 6.
that no Tallage can be laid upon the People of this Land, but by their consent
in Parliament, as appears by the Laws mentioned in the margent, but you
shall find in Mr. Seldens learned Book, 24 Eli. 1. cap. 1. de Tallagio non
concedendo.
called Mare Clausum, a number of Presidents in Henry the thirds time for
Ship Money, justly condemned this Parliament, to which his Majesty assented;
and in truth, that Ship Money was condemned before, by the said two Statutes of
25. E. 1. and 34. E. 1. de Tallagio non concedendo. Dane-gelt, Englitery, and
many grievous burdens were laid upon the people, and born, until that
memorable Princes time. But I am of opinion, that the Common Law of the Land
did always restrain Kings from all Subsidies and Tallages, but by consent in
Parliament; which does appear by Magna Charta the last chap. where the
Prelates, Lords, and Comminalty gave the King the fifteenth part of their
movables. In truth it is no manner of consequence, because the King cannot
take what he pleases of the subjects goods, that therefore they have a
concurrent power in Parliament: there have bin many Parliaments, and no
Subsidies granted, Parliaments may be without Subsidies, but Subsidies cannot
be without Parliaments: of ancient time Parliaments rarely granted any unless
it were in the time of foreign Wars; and in my time, Q. E. refused a Subsidy
granted in Parliament, and in the Parliament of 1. Jac. none were granted. The
Gent. should make a conscience of blinding the people with such untrue colors,
to the ruin of King and people.

A. D. 3.
The Gent. affirms, That the sending Propositions to the King, and desiring his
concurrence, is scarce worth an answer, for Subjects may humbly petition for
that which is their strict right and property, etc. The Propositions sent to
Newcastle, are in print; wherein the two Houses are so far from humbly
petitioning, that they style not themselves his Majesty's Subjects, as appears
by the Propositions.

That they have a strict right or property to any on of these Propositions, is
a strange assertion, every one of them being against the Laws now in force:
Have the two Houses a strict right and property, to lay upon the people what
Taxes they shall judge meet? To pardon all treasons, etc. that is one of their
Propositions. Have they a strict right and property to pardon themselves? and
so for all the rest of their Propositions.

These Propositions have been Voted by both Houses, 12 H. 7. 20
the Kings assent (they being drawn into Bills) makes them Acts of Parliament:
1 Iac. c. 1.
Has the King no right to assent or dis-assent? 1 Car. c. 7.
Was the sending but a Complement? All our Law-bookes and Statutes speak
otherwise. This Gentl. and others, must give an account one time or other for
such delusions put upon the people.

A. D. 4.
The Gent. says, They affirm not, that the Kings power is separated from his
person, so as the two Spencers affirmed, etc. His Majesty's person is now at
Holnby under their Guards; have they not severed his power from him, when by no
power they have left him, he can have two of his Chaplains, who have not taken
their Covenant to attend him for the exercise of his Conscience?

For the three Conclusions of the Spencers, 15 Ed. 2. Exilium Hugonis
do not the two Houses act every of them? They say his Majesty has broken his
trust, touching the government of his people: They have raised Armies to take
him, 1 E 3. c. 2. Calv. case 7 Pars, Reports 11.
they have taken him, and imprisoned him; they govern themselves; they make
Laws, impose Taxes, make Judges, Sheriffs, and take upon them omnia insignia
summae potestatis: Is not this to remove the King for misdemeanors, to reform
per asperte, to govern in aid of him; the three conclusions of the Spencers?
Do they think the good people of England are become stupid, and will not at
length see these things?

The Gentl. says, Plowd. 4. E. 213. the Kings power and his person are
indivisible.
they do not separate his power from his Person, but distinguish it, etc. His
power is in his legal Writs, Courts, and Officicers: when they counterfeit the
Great Seal, and seal Writs with the same, make Judges themselves, Courts and
Officers, by their own Ordinances against his consent, declared under his true
Great Seal of England (not by word of mouth, letters, or ministers only)
their Seal is obeyed, their own Writs, their own Judges, their own Courts,
their own Officers, and not the Kings: The time will come when such strange
actions and discourses will be lamented.

A. D. 5.
The Gentl. goes on, Stanfor. Pleas. 99. 27. H. 8. c. 24. Dier. 163.
We take not from the King all power of pardoning Delinquents, we only say it
is not proper to him quarto modo, etc. What do you mean by quarto modo? I am
sure, Omnis Rex Angliae, solus Rex and semper Rex can do it, and none else:
read the books of the Law to this purpose collected by that Reverend and
learned Judge Stanford, from all antiquity to his time, who dyed in the last
year of King Philip and Queen Mary's Reign, you shall find this a truth
undeniable; and this power was never questioned in any age in any book by any
until this time, that every thing is put to the question: You Gentlemen who
profess the Law, and maintain the party against the King, return at length,
and bring not so much scandal upon the Law, (which preserves all) by
publishing such incredible things.

We hold only what the Law holds, 1 Pars. Instit. p. 44. Plowd. 3. Eliz. 236,
237.
the Kings Prerogative and the Subjects Liberty are determined, and bounded,
and measured by the written Law what they are; we do not hold the King to have
any more power, neither does His Majesty claim any other but what the Law
gives him; the two Houses by the Law of this Land have no color of power,
either to make Delinquents, or pardon Delinquents, the King contradicting: (and
the Army under Sir Thomas Fairfax (howbeit but Soldiers) do now understand
that to be Law, and do now evidently see and assuredly know, that it is not an
Ordinance of the two Houses, but an act of Parliament, made by the King, Lords
and Commons that will secure them, and let this Army remember their executed
fellow Soldiers) And the Law was always so taken by all men until these
troubles, that have begot Monsters of Opinions.

A. D. 6.
The Gentl. says, The Parliament has declared the King to be in no condition
to Govern, etc.

There is no end of your distinctions, I and you profess the Law, show me Law
for your distinctions, or letter, syllable, or line, in any age in the Books
of the Law, that the King may in one time be in no condition to govern, and yet
have the habit of governing, and another time he may (viz.) when the two Houses
will suffer him: the Law says thus, Vbi lex non distinguit, non est
distinguendum.

He says, The King is not barred from returning to His Parliament, (as he
calls the two Houses) he knows the contray, the whole City knows the
contrary, No^ juris consulti sumus sacerdotes, (as Justinian the Emperor has
it, in the first Book of his Institutions) and therefore knowledge and truth
should come from our lips: Worthy and ingenious men will remember, and reflect
upon that passage of that good and wise man Seneca, Non quaitur, sed qua
eundum; follow not the rays of the Lawyers of the House of Commons. God
forgive them, I am sure the King will if they be wise and seek it in time.

A D. 7.
The Gentl. says, We swear that the King is our supreme Governor over all
persons and in all causes, etc. Why has he left out the word (only?) for the
oath the Members now take, is, that KING Charles is now the only and supreme
Governor in all causes, 5 Eliz. c. 1. Cawdreys case 5 pars, fol. 1.
over all persons, and yet they keep their only Supreme Governor now in
prison, and act now in Parliament by virtue of their Prisoners Writ, and by a
concurrent power in this Parliament, and by their own strict right and
property, (as the Gentl. affirms in his answer) these things agree well with
their Oath, This Oath is allowed by the Common Law of the Land.
that the King is the only Supreme Governor in all causes, over all persons;
this Oath is taken now in the Parliament time, by all the Members of the House
of Commons, and is required by the Law to be taken in all Parliaments,
otherwise they have no power, nor color to meddle with the public affairs.

This Oath being taken in Parliament, that the King is the only and Supreme
Governor in all causes, then it follows in Parliament causes; ever all
persons, then over the two Houses; let them keep this Oath, and we shall be
sure of peace in the Land: and good Lawyers ought to desire peace, both for the
public good and their private, and not dishonor that Noble profession, as
many do in this miserable time.

The Gent. says, We do not swear that the King is above all Law, nor above
the safety of his people; neither do we so swear, but His Majesty and we will
swear the contrary, and have sworn, and have made good, and will by Gods
grace make good our Oath to the world, that the King is not above the Law, nor
above the safety of his people, the Law and the safety of his people are his
safety, his honor and his strength.

A D. 8.
The Gentl. concludes, That Acts of Parliament are not formally binding, nor
complete without the Kings assent, yet the Houses have a virtuall power without
the Kings particular assent, to do things in order to public Justice and
safety, (viz.) In setting up the Excise, in raising and maintaining of Armies,
in taxing the people at pleawith fifth and twentieth part, fifty Subsidies,
Sequestrations, Lo^nes, Compositions, imprisoning the King, abolishing the
Common Prayer Book, selling the Churches Lands, etc. all these are in order to
public Justice and safety.

Mr. H. P. you are of my profession, I beseech you, for the good of your
Country, for the Honor of our Science, persuade your self and others, as much
as in you lies, to believe and follow the monition and Council of that
memorable, reverend, and profoundly Learned in the Laws and Customs of the
Land, the Lord Coke, who writes as becomes a great and a learned Judge of the
Law (a person much magnified by the two Houses) in these words: Peruse over all
Books, 3 Pars, Inst p. 36.
Records and Histories, and you shall find a Principle in Law, a Rule in
Reason, and a trial in Experience, that Treason does ever perduce fatal and
final destruction to the offender, and never attaines to the desired end (two
incidents inseparable thereunto) and therefore let all men abandon it, as the
poisonous bait of the devil, and follow the Precept in holy Scripture, SERVE
GOD, HONOR THE KING, AND HAVE NO COMPANY WITH THE SEDITIOVS.

CONCLUSION.
I Say again, that without an Act of Oblivion, a Gracious general pardon from
his Majesty, the Arreares of the Soldiers paid, a favorable regard had to
tender Consciences, there will be neither Truth nor Peace in this Land, nor
any man secure of any thing he has.

The End.

