A VINDICATION OF THE Imprisoned and Secluded MEMBERS OF THE House of Commons,
From the ASPERSIONS cast upon them, and the MAIORITY of the House, in a paper
lately printed and published:

INTITVLED, An Humble Answer of the General Council of the Officers of the
Army under his Excellency THOMAS Lord FAIRFAX, TO THE Demands of the Honorable
Commons of ENGLAND in Parliament Assembled:

Concerning The late Securing or Secluding some MEMBERS thereof.

PSALM. 27. 5, 6. Commit thy way unto the Lord, trust also in him, and he shall
bring it to pass. And he shall bring forth thy righteousness as the light, and
thy judgment as the noonday.

LONDON, Printed for Michael Spark an the blue Bible in Green-Arbour. 1649.

A Vindication of the imprisoned and secluded Members of the House of Commons,
from the Aspersions cast upon them and the Majority of the House in a Paper
lately printed and published: Entitled, An humble Answer of the General
Council of the Officers of the Army, etc. to the Demands of the Honorable the
Commons of England, etc.
AFter our being secluded, and some of us imprisoned, and detained from our
Service in the House of Commons (of which we are Members) now for above six
weeks space; finding a paper published in print against us, wherein we are
reproached with the names of Traitors, Apostates, Self-servers, corrupt
Members, and diverse other aspersions of the like nature charged upon us; We are
enforced (for our Vindication, and which is dearer to us, the Vindication of
the Freedom and Honor of the Parliament, and for preventing the matters
suggested against us in that Paper from abusing those by whom we are entrusted,
who might judge us guilty, if should be silent) to make this ensuing Answer to
that paper.

In the Preamble of this Answer, by way of Account, concerning the securing
some Members, and secluding others; It appears by the Proposals of the sixth of
December, the late Declaration and Remonstrance therein cited, That this
design to break the House by force has been long since plotted and contrived,
though not executed until now. Which Action the General Council of the Army in
their Answer say, We acknowledge it to be a Course in it self irregular, and
not justifiable but both by honest intentions for public good, and an
extraordinary Necessity for the same end leading us thereunto.

These being the two pillars upon which is laid the whole weight of the
justification of the Army in this extraordinary and (we believe) unparalleled
course of proceedings; We shall apply our selves to discover the weakness and
unsoundness of them both. For our more clear proceedings herein, we shall first
state the Case which is endeavored by this paper to be justified.

They are an Army raised and formed by Ordinance of Parliament of the 15 of
February 1644, for the defense of the King and Parliament, and true Protestant
Religion, the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom; and to be from time to time
subject to such Orders and Directions as they shall receive from both Houses of
Parliament. And for that end they stand commissionated by them, and receive pay
from them at this day. And besides the Trust they hereby have assumed, they are
under the obligation of a solemn Covenant sworn to Almighty God, That they will
in their places and callings; with sincerity, reality and constancy, with their
estates and lives, preserve the Rights and Privileges of the Parliament, and
the Liberties of the Kingdom; and defend the Kings person and Authority in the
defense of the true Religion and Liberties of the Kingdom. They being under
these Trusts and? Obligations by and to the Houses, with their Arms, contrary
to their Orders, marched into Westminster, and without any order from them,
they placed some of their Regiments at and about the door of the House of
Commons upon the sixth and seventh of December last, and there (with a List of
the names of diverse Members of the House) their Officers and Soldiers
(appointed for that purpose) forcibly secluded some, seized upon, imprisoned,
and detained others from their attendance of the House, and occasioned many
others to absent themselves. The Question now is, Whether any thing in this
paper can justify this Action of theirs, either upon the good Intentions or
Necessity pretended therein. This being the point in Issue, which they affirm,
and we deny: We shall now proceed to consider their grounds.

For their good Intentions, which cannot be known to us but by their
expressions and actions, they refer us to their Proposals, Declarations and
Remonstrances: where we find their desires are to take away the Kings life,
to take away the lives of the Prince and the Duke of York; at least, to
dis-inherit both them and all the Kings children; to put a period to this
Parliament; to set up a new Representative, which takes away all Parliaments;
to have an elective King, if any. These are the intentions for public good,
which must come in to help their actions, that are confessed to be otherwise
irregular and unjustifiable. We think the very naming of them does manifest,
that they are apparently against the Laws of God, and the Laws of the Kingdom
under which they live, and have no justification for themselves, much less any
to spare for their actions; whereof we leave the whole Kingdom (for whose
good, as said, these Intentions are) to be judges. And we shall produce no
other witness to prove this, but themselves. On the 15 of November, 1647, the
paper called The Agreement of the people, which is somewhat lower then these
which they call Intentions for public good, was condemned by the Army; the
promoting of it judged capital, Colonel Rainshorough and Major Scot complained
of by them to the House for appearing in it, and the paper it self then
adjudged by the House destructive to Government, and the being of Parliament.
And upon this their evidence against themselves we leave this point.

And to proceed to the other ground of their justification, viz. Extraordinary
Necessity, which is laid down in their paper thus: After they have brought in
their good intentions for their justification, (and what those are, we have
cited out of their own papers, to which they refer us,) it is then added, And
an extraordinary Necessity for the same and leading us thereunto. It appears in
the first opening of this necessity, of what nature it is, that tends to such
ends as they refer it. But for the better disquisition thereof, before we
come to the particulars to set forth this necessity in this paper, we shall lay
down some general Observations and Conclusions concerning this their Plea.

1. The Army made the very same plea of extraordinary necessity in their
Remonstrance June 23. 1647, that now is made in this paper, upon quite contrary
grounds then what they express now; and both to justify the same
extraordinary violent proceedings against the Parliament: differing only in
degrees, this later worse then the former. Then when the King was seized upon
by a party of the Army, without Order from the House, and the Army advanced
against the Parliament, they say in their Letter to the House July the 8, 1647,
There have been several Officers of the Army, upon several occasions sent to
his Majesty: The first, to present to him a Copy of the Representations; and
after that, some others to tender him a Copy of the Remonstrance: upon b^th
which the Officers sent were appointed to ^leer the sense and intentions of any
thing in either paper whereupon his Majesty might make any question. There
they treated with the King; and now they offer violence to the Parliament for
treating with the King. Then in their Remonstrance Ju^. 23. 1647, it is said,
We ch^rly profess, we do not see how there can be any peace to this Kingdom
firms or lasting, without a due consideration of, and provision for the Rights,
quiet and Immunities of his Majesty's Royal Family, and his late partakers.
Now they judge the Majority of the House corrupt, and proceed violently against
them for moving one step toward a peace with the King, though he has granted
more then all their Proposals, and make this a necessity sharp enough to
justify the using of their swords contrary to their Commissions. This were
cause enough to make the unsoundnesse of this plea of necessity appear to all
the world, and even to be suspected by themselves, that serves to justify
contradictions which they are put to, by making themselve Judgess of those
things they have no calling to meddle with; and taking them out of those hands
to whom of right it belongs to judge them.

2. This plea of necessity which is made in this paper, is destructive to all
Government. For by the same reason that the General Officer urges necessity
for acting against the command and persons of his Superiors, and makes himself
Judge of that necessity; the inferior Officer may urge the same necessity in
his judgment to act against the commands of his General; and the Soldiers
may urge the like for acting against their Officers; and any other 20000 men in
the Kingdom to act against the Army; and this Army to act (as against this
Parliament, so) against any other Government of Representative that shall be
set up; and so in infinitum.

3. Did the Members of Parliament proceed in Parliament contrary to their trust
in the judgment of those that did elect them: yet it is manifest, that the
power of advising, voting and acting being placed in the Members of Parliament
by the Law of the Land, and ancient Rights of Parliament, they are not
accountable, much less censurable for the use of it according to their own
judgment and consciences, though contrary to theirs that chose them. They are
only in such cases accountable to, and censurable by the House; which they
could not reasonably be, if they were cens^rable by the people that sent them.
For then the Parliament might judge that good service, which the Electors judge
evil: and e convers^, the Electors may judge that evil which the House may
judge to be good; and so no man can be safe or free in the service of the
Parliament. But were power and trust placed in the Members of Parliament by
law, only to be used or not used, valid or null, at the Electors judgment; yet
in such case the Members of Parliament were only accountable to the Counties,
Cities or Boroughs for which they serve; and not to Strangers: and in no case
are they accountable to the Army; who are so far from being those from whom
they received their Trust, that they are only persons in a subordinate Trust
under them, for their defense from force. Which how well they have performed,
we leave to the judgment of all those who observe their present proceedings.

4. These actions, which they undertake to justify, are contrary not only to
their trust, but to the express letter of the Covenant and Protestation which
they have taken. And breach of Oath being a moral evil, it is not to be
justified by necessity and good intentions. Saul, though a King and thereby
qualified to do justice; 2 Samuel 21 2, 3.
yet for executing the Gibeonites against a Covenant made many hundred years
before, and gained subtly by the Gibeonites, who were not of the children of
Israel, but of the remnant of the Amorites (with whom he might presume to be
more bold;) and though he did this in his zeal to the children of Israel and
Judah; yet this necessity in his judgment, for public good, could not warrant
him; God brought a Famine upon the Land for this breach of Covenant, which
ceased not until it was expiated by the death of seven of his sons that did
commit it. See here by this instance what legacy they by their present actions
may leave to their posterity.

Having thus laid down these considerations of this plea of Necessity in
general, it thereby appears, should we say no more, though we should be guilty
of the ^ensuing particulars with which we are charged, yet they could not be
innocent, nor justified in what they have done against us.

But for (...) furth^^ clec^^^g, and their further conviction, we come now to
enquil^ in^^ those particulars in this Paper, in which they h^ld forth the
necessity that must bear them one; wherein the question betwixt us, admitting
necessity, would justify th^^^ proceedings is thus; Whether that which is
assigned in the particulars following in their Paper, be that necessity wherein
we shall join issue with them, and freely put it to trial upon the particulars
following, which are six in number. But before we enter upon them, we must take
notice of what is said from the end of the second page of their Paper, unto the
end of the fifth page, wherein are used many words to show how the Majority of
the House came to be formed to serve the Kings, and other corrupt Interests.
The sum of all which is, That by the endeavors of some whom they call old
Malignant Members, and by the practices used in the new Elections, there came
in a flood of new Burgesses, that either are Malignants or Ne^ters. To which we
answer, That what is done by the majority of the House, it is the act of the
whole House; so what is done against the majority of the House is done against
the whole House: And to the Charge against the new Burgesses, as it is clear,
the Ordinance for new Elections was not carried by those we call old
Malignants, (if there be any such in the House) except the major part of the
House was always Malignants, and before the new Election so, for the Members
which came in upon the new Election, which are called Neuters or Malignants in
general, without fixing upon any one particular Member, to which a (...) all
in general were sufficient: Yet we shall further add, that of all those
Members of the new Election, that are secluded or imprisoned, we know none but
whose Elections are allowed by the House, and who are proper Judges thereof;
and who either by their services as Soldiers for the Parliament, or in their
Committees, or otherwise by imminent services or sufferings in their Cause,
gave a testimony of their faithfulness to the Parliament before they were
elected, which may free them from the name of Neuters and Malignants.

And it were not hard to show that many Officers of the Army who came in upon
the last Elections, are chosen by those places where they were scarce known,
and wherein they have no interest of their own; and by what other influence
they obtained those Elections, we leave it to themselves to judge, (...) whom
it is best known; and so come to the first of those six particulars, wherein is
assigned the extraordinary necessity to justify their proceedings in their own
words.

First, The betraying of IRELAND into the enemies bands by recalling the Lord
Lisle from his command there, and putting the best part of that Kingdom, and
where the Parliament had the strongest footing, ( Munster) into the hands of
Inchequin a native Irish man, who has since revolted from the Parliament, has
lately united with the Irish Rebels, and with them and Ormond again, engaged
with the King. To which we answer;

That if Munster be that part of Ireland wherein the Parliament had the best
interest, the Lord Inchequin did come in himself, and bring that interest to
the Parliament, whom he served against the Irish Rebels, and preserved a
possession in Munster for the Parliament, during the heat of their Wars in
England, when they had little other interest in Ireland, and less means to
relieve them out of England. That the Lord Lisle was not recalled from his
command there, but his Commission for Lord Lieutenant of Ireland expiring about
the fifteenth of April 1647. his Lordship on the seventeenth of April took
shipping for England. After the Lord Lisles departure out of Munster, the Lord
Inchequin proceeded successively against the Rebels, and took from them many
considerable Forts and Castles; the Garrison of Oramanagh, Capp^quin, the Town
and Castle of Dungarvan, the Castle of Calur, and others* And upon the
fourteenth of November following, at the battle of Knocknowes he obtained one
of the greatest Victories that ever was gotten over the Rebels Army, under the
command of the Lord Taff, wherein were taken of the enemies Horse two hundred,
slain of the Foot four thousand* Officers taken prisoners sixty eight, Arms fix
thousand, the Lieutenant general slain: For all which, we refer the Reader to
the Letters and Papers concerning these several services presented to the
House, and by their Orders published in print.

These were such testimonies of his reality to the Parliament long after the
Lord Lisles coming out of Munster; that the House did not call it into
question, and nothing to the contrary appeared to the Houses until the third
of April 1648. The Army here having disputed the Parliaments Commands, the Lord
Inchequin began to enter into Remonstrances and engagements against the
Parliament, for which he made the Remonstrances, Engagements and Declarations
of the Army the Summer before, both the Cause and President; as by the Relation
made to the House, published in print, does appear. We mention not these things
in the least measure to justify the Lord Inchequins revolt from the
Parliament, but have only related the truth of the matter of fact, for our own
justification against the Charge in this Paper, of betraying Munster; and we
leave to the Reader to judge, whether the Army has cause to complain of us, or
reflect upon themselves for the loss of Munster: and proceed to the second
particular, viz.

Their endeavors to bring in the King upon his own Terms, without satisfaction
and security to the Kingdom, viz. upon his Message of the twelfth of May 1647.
and to this end, with so manifest injustice and indignity, to di^band the Army,
before any Peace made or assured.

For the engagement of the twelft of May, it is well known the House of Commons
upon the first knowledge of that engagement voted it to be treasonable, and
afterward both Houses by Ordinance of the seventeenth of December 1647. put
(...) inc^patity, upon all those in or about the City of London, that entered
into, or contrived, acted or ^^etted that engagement, of bearing any Office in
the City of London for that year; which we take to be a sufficient Evidence to
prove us herein a right majority, as in other parts of their Paper, they take
the Votes of the House to prove us a corrupt majority: The Charge here lying
only in general, and not fixed upon any particular. Yet for our further
clearing, besides the Testimony we have given against the bringing in the King
upon any such terms, by our continued insisting upon far higher terms, to
which the King has agreed in the late Treaty; we do every one of us for our
selves respectively, profess our utter dislike of that engagement, or any
endeavor to bring in the King upon any engagement made or contrived without
the House.

And for what is said concerning disbanding of the Army, we say, that the Votes
of the House, that eight Regiments of Foot, four of Horse, and one of Dragoons
should be sent out of the Army to Ireland, which was desired might be in one
entire Body, and their resolution to contain ten thousand Foot, and five
thousand four hundred Horse, under the command of the Lord Fairfax, for the
necessary defense of the Kingdom, (as the state of affairs then stood in
England and Ireland) as it was to no such end, as is alleged, but for the
relieving of poor distressed Protestants in I^eland, the easing of the heavy
pressures lying upon the poor people of this Kingdom, and an honorable and fit
employing the Forces of that Army to prevent the high Distempers that since
have ensued, so as it was no injustice nor indignity to the Army.

To the third Article, viz. That they endeavored to protect the eleven
impeached Members from justice, and endeavoring with them to raise a new War.

We say, that as we desire no other protection then our own innocence, and the
Laws under which we live, so we never gave any other protection to the eleven
Members, then what stood with Law and Justice.

And for the mislending of two hundred thousand pounds, or the greatest part
thereof, which w^^ designed chiefly for Ireland: We say, that about eighty
thousand pound of that money was paid to Mast^^ Nicholas Loftus and others for
the service of Ireland and above fifty thousand pound to the Treasurers at Wa^,
for the Army; which might with more reason be said to be misimployed, in regard
there is an establishment for their pay another way, unless part of the Army
had gone to do Ireland service for that money: then what the Reformado Officers
and Soldiers, who obeyed the Orders of the House for disbanding, who received,
pressed the more earnestly upon the House for part of their Arrears, after
their Declarations and Remonstrances by the Army, for satisfying the Arrears of
all the Soldiers in the Kingdom were published.

For the fourth Article, their countenancing, abetting, and partaking wish the
tumultuous violence of the Apprentices and others against both Houses of
Parliament. It seems strange to us, when they had this in their thoughts to
charge it as a Crime upon us, they did not think of what themselves are doing,
and much more that they should urge the force offered to the House then (which
they declared horrid and treasonable;) to justify the violence offered to the
House by them, of a far higher nature. If it were a crim in the Apprentices,
why do the Army the same thing? If it were no Crime, why do they complain of
Us for abetting and partaking with it? wherefore, We say, that there is not the
least color or shadow of truth; and do every one of Us for Our selves
respectively utterly deny it.

And for setting up a new Speaker, the House of Commons did no more then what
in all ages has been their undoubted right to do in the case of want of a
Speaker. And as to the Ordinances and Votes then passed, We should make a
particular Answer thereunto, but that by the Ordinance of the 20. of Aug.
following, they are made void and null in themselves, which silences Us for the
present.

For the fifth Article, The holding correspondency, engaging and assisting the
tumultuous Petitioners last Spring, the rebellious Ins^^rections in Kent, the
revolted Ships, and Prince of Wales, and with the Scots Army. We do every one
of Us for our selvel respectively deny the having any hand therein.

Having thus giveu Our Answers to those Five particulars wherein the necessity
is assigned, by which they endeavor to justify their proceedings against Us;
We leave it to the judgment of their own Consciences, whether they do not
bear witness within them, that in all these particulars they have groundlesly
accused Us of those things of which they for the most part are guilty, and know
Us to be innocent. In these we have used the more brevitie, that We might be
the more large upon the sixth Section of the Paper; wherein they say, That when
the Army was dispersed and engaged in several parts of the Kingdom in
opposing the Enemies, suppressing the troubles these men had raised; and when
many faithful Members of Parliament were employed abroad upon necessary
public services, and others, through malignant tumults about the City, could
not with safety attend ehe House, then the corrupt and apostatizing party
taking advantage of these distractions and diversions, which themselves had
caused; first recalled in those Members, etc. then they recalled those Votes
for non-addresses, and Voted a Personal Treaty with the King. To all which
scandalous aspersions We Answer:

That they are altogether groundless; if there were any reality in what they
would here infinuate, That the proceedings of this Treaty were not by the
Concurrrence of the House, but surrepticiously gained, by taking advantage of
the absence of many faithful Members; Why do they complain then in other
parts of their Paper, That the Majorit^e of the House is corrupt? and take
pains to show, how the Majoritie of the House came to be formed to serve the
King and other coreupt Interests, or what necessity was there for them to
force the absence of two hundred Members of the House at (...)? for what i^
done in this Treat^e, if the complaint here be just, that (...) proceedings
thereunto were through the absence of the Members that could not with safety
attend the House, and for the distractions in the Countries, which they speak
of. It is manifest to all men, that heard the cries of the Countries at that
time, who in part occasioned those distempers, even in the Countri^a nearest
and best affected to the Parliament, who never, during the War, expressed so
high contempt to the authority of Parliament, until the like had bin first
done by the Armies quartering upon and amongst them a little before. And
although the president was followed by Sea and Land, almost to the ruin of
Parliament and Kingdom, yet those Members (if they mean such as are
imprisoned and secluded) which they most uncivilly and nuchristianly) requite
with the reproach of Apostates, were many of them employed and did improve the
utmost of their interests in La^cashire, Yorkshire, Lincolneshire,
Heref^rdshire, Hampshire, Suffolk, Essex, London and Surrey) and many other
parts of the Kingdom, to quiet distractions and oppose Insurrections, which
the extremity of the Armies proceedings had i^ part occastioned. We never
judged Tumults, nor Insurrections the way to Peace and Settlement. And for the
Charge of some of the eleven Members, to have taken Commissious from the
Prince, W^lay, and every of them for themselves affirming the Charge of their
taking Commissions from the Prince, or any other whatsoever, by verieu of his
Authority, is a most malicious and scandalous asperstion; They abhorring to
deviate in the least from what their primitive engagements were; which they
have from first to last continued in, and shall do (by Gods assistance)
notwithstanding all Calamnies cast on them, or sufferings (though to the
utmost) for so doing.

Having thus cleared the entrance to the Treaty from th^se prejudices laid in
the way thereunto; We come to that Vote of the House December. 5. That the Answer
of the Ke^^ to the Propositions of both Houses are a ^ound for the House to
proceed upon for the settlement of the Peace of the Kingdom. Of which they
say, that though they advanced hither to attend Providence for the opening some
way to avoid the present evils designed, and introduce the desired good into
the Kingdom; ye they said nor acted nothing in relation to the Parliament nor
any Member thereof, until by that Vote passed December. 5. they found the
corrupt majority so resolvedly bent to complete their Design in bringing in the
King, etc. Do they call their threatening Remonstrance sent to the House, and
the Declaration then published to explain the meaning thereof diverse days
before this, a saying nothing in relation to the Parliament? and their Marching
up to the City of London and Westminster with so many Regiments of the Army,
contrary to the Order of the House, a doing nothing in relation to the
Parliament. By this it seems the passing of this Vote is the very point of
that necessity, which they take to justify all their present actings, in
relation to the Parliament. For before that passed, they say they acted
nothing; therefore We shall be more large upon this Subject.

We shall therefore first state the matter in difference betwixt the
Propositions of the Houses and the Kings Answers. As the Propositions to the
King in the Isle of Weight contained in them all that security which the Houses
have judged necessary to propose for themselves, those that have adhered to
them in the Wars, and for the peace of the whole Kingdom; so the King
grants all those Propositions in which the main security rests, viz.

His Majesty granted the first Proposition for taking off Declarations, etc.
as was desired.

His Majesty granted the third Proposition concerning the Militia, as was
desired.

His Majesty consented to the Proposition of Irela. limiting the time of the
Parliam. disposing Offices to 20. years.

His Majesty consented to such Acts for Public Debts and Public uses as
should be presented within two years, and incurred within the time.

His Majesty granted as it was desired to the Proposition ^ncerning Peers.

His Majesty granted the disposing of Offices in England to the Parliament, so
that the time limited exceed not twenty years.

His Majesty granted the taking away the Court of Wards, having 100000l. per
annum allowed in leiw thereof, to be raised as the Parliament shall think fit.

His Majesty granted to declare against the Earl of Ormonds power and
proceedings after an agreement with his Houses.

The only difference remains upon two Propositions: that concerning
Delinquents, and that concerning the Church.

For the first of these, we shall here set down that part of the Kings ^^all
answer, wherein the difference lies.

And his Majesty does consent, that the several persons comprised in the said
Propositions shall submit to moderate Compositions according to such r^tes and
proportions as they and the two Houses shall agree upon. The particulars
whereof, his Majesty leaves wholly to such agreement, desiring only that the
rates and value may be mittigated and reduced to a more moderate proportion;
and his Majesty will give way that the persons insisted upon by his two Houses,
shall be removed from his Council, and be restrained from coming within the
verge of the King, Queens, and Princes Court; and that they may not bear any
office or have any employment in the State or Commonwealth, without advice and
consent of both his Houses of Parliament. But his Majesty cannot agree that
those who do the contrary shall incur such severe penalties, as to be guilty
of high Treason and forfeit their lives and estates without any capacity of
pardon, as in the said Proposition is contained there being a penalty legally
implied upon the breach of any Act of Parliament, which his Majesty intends not
to disponce withal. As to the seven persons mentioned in the said Votes to be
excepted, his Majesty for the peace of the Kingdom will consent that they may
absent themselves out of the Kingdom for such time us the two Houses shall
think fit, desiring nevertheless that they may be admitted to Composition for
their Estates; and if any of them shall be proceeded against according to the
ancient and established Law of the Kingdom, his Majesty will not interpose to
hinder any legal proceedings thereupon; but that his Majesty should join in
any Act for the taking away of the life or estates of any that have adhered to
him, his Majesty cannot with Justice and Honor agree thereunto.

As to all other persons mentioned in the Propositions, his Majesty will
further consent, that they shall not sit or vote as Members or assistants in
either House of Parliament, nor continue nor be of his Majesty's privy
Council, Officers of State, or Judges, or in other Offices without consent of
both Houses.

As for all Clergy men against whom any scandalous life can be proved, or other
legal Charges, his Majesty wlll remit them to the Law. But for all others who
shall conform to what his Majesty and his two Houses shall agree upon, his
Majesty conceives fit where their livings are void they may be restored to
them, and where any other is incumbent in any of their preferments, that the
party now outed of his living may receive a third part of the profits, unless
he be otherwise provided, that thus the one may not want a livelihood, nor the
other be outed of any living, until some fitting preferment be found for
eithor.

In this answer, though the King does not fully grant what the Houses desire,
yet he consents to join with the Houses in making them incapable of bearing
any Office of public trust without the consent of the Houses.

And for these, whom the Houses propose to compound with the King leaves them
to such Compositions as they and the Houses shall agree on, which is the
conditioo they are now in; the Houses forceing composition upon none but by
sequestration of their estates, which continues until they compound. And for
these whom the Houses proposed to proceed against capitally, the King leaves
them to a legal trial, with a Declaration, that he will not interpose to
hinder it which satisfied, the maine grievance of the Parliament (as we
conceive) dedeclared in the beginning of their War concerning Delinquents,
which was not for that the King refused to join himself with the Houses
punishing of Delinquents, but for that the King by force of Arms protected
Delinquents from justice; and all that the House did desire in the Proposition
concerning Delinquents presented to the King at Oxford, February 1642. was that
your Majesty leave Delinquents to a legal trial and judgment of Parliament.
And we see not what evasion from Justice is left to such as have made War
against the Parliament and Law of the land, when the King first by a Law
declares the Parliaments war to be just, and afterward leaves these that had
fought against them to the judg^ment of the ^awes.

The second Proposition wherein the only material difference rests, is that
of the Church, which stands thus, viz. The Houses proposed that a Bill be
passed for the utter abolishing of Archbishops, Bishops, etc. and for sale of
Bishops Lands, That Reformation of Religion be settled by Act of Parliament in
such manner as both Houses have agreed or shall agree upon: To which the King
answers,

That it is his judgment and conscience, that he cannot (as he stands yet
informed) abolish Episcopacy out of the Church; yet because he apprehends how
fatal new distractions may be to this Kingdom, and that he believes his two
Houses will yield to truth if that shall be manifested to them, if convinced,
his Majesty does again desire that there be a Consultation of Divines as he
has formerly proposed, and his Majesty will suspend the Episcopal power as
well in point of Ordination of Ministers, as in that of Jurisdiction, until he
and his two Houses agree what Government shall be established in the future.

As for the Bishops Lands, though he cannot consent to the absolute alienation
of them from ^he Church, yet he will agree that the propriety and inheritance
shall by Act of Parliament be settled in the Crown to be declared in trust for
the use of the Churchmen, to be employed by his Majesty, his heirs and
successors with advice of his two Houses for the use aforesaid, and that
Leases shall be made for lives or years (not exceeding 99 years) for the
satisfaction of the Purchasors and Contractors according to his former answers,
or reserving the old rents or other moderate rents for the maintenance of them
to whom they did formerly belong, and for the future benefit of the Church: And
in all things else, his Majesty refers himself to his former answers. And in
his former answers dated October 21. 1648. He consents to the taking away all
Archbishops, Chancellours, Commissaries, Deans and Sub-deans, and Chapters,
Arch deacons, Cannons, and Prebendaries, and all Chanters, Chancellours,
Treasurers, Succentours, Sachrists, old Vicars, new Vicars of any Cathedral
Church, and all other their under officers, out of the Church of England,
Dominion of Wales, and Church of Ireland,

In these answers (as we conceive) the King takes away the government of the
Church by Archbishops, Bishops, etc. by his taking away their Courts; the
Bishops having no authority to convent any person, send for any witness, hear
any cause, pass any censure or judgment, or exercise any Acts of Church
Government, but by and in their Courts, which being by this answer abolisht,
the Government falls. And for their power of Ordination; though it be not
absolutely taken away, yet the exercise of it is susp^nded, so as it is
equivalent, for the Bishops can never exercise that power again in England,
until they be restored hereunto by Act of Parliament; And if that power had
been absolutely taken away, yet if the King and both Houses of Parliament
restore it, it is again established: So that the maine desect in this answer
is, in that the King agree^ to settle the Presbyteri^n Government only for
three years, and that at the end of that time there is no Government in the
Church* until it be settled by Act of Parliament. We profess herein that the
Kings Answer comes far short of what we desired, and of what we shall use our
best endeavors fully to effect according to former engagements; there being
nothing wherein we should more rejoice, then to see as the power and purity of
Doctrine, so the beauty of Order and golden Reins of Discipline strengthened
and establ^sht by a perpetual Law amongst us. Yet the King consents to the
s^^ling of this Government in this Answer for so long a time as the Hou^es
formerly in their Ordinances presented to him at Newc^stle, did themselves
think fit to settle it.

This b^ing the true st^te of the d^fference betwixt the Kings Answer and the
Proposi^ions of the Houses for a safe and well grounded Peace (which were the
subject of the Houses debate, December. the 5th.) We shall in the next place,
before We come to those Reasons, which induced Us thereupon to Vote that, etc.
We shall premise First, by this Vote the House did not determine (as We
conceive) the having no further Treaty with his Majesty before a concluding and
declaring of Peace, nor was the Houses so bound up hereby, that they could not
propose any thing further, wherein the Kings Answers are defective, or from
making any new Propositions for the better healing our b^e^ches, or more safe
binding up a just and righteous Peace, which as it does appear by the Words of
the Vote it self; so it is also manifest to be the full purpose and sense of
the House therein, by their laying aside the former Vote ( that the Kings
Answers are satisfactory) by a Question upon a long debate. And at the same
time framing and passing this Vote, whereby they only lay hold of these large
Concessions, and declare their judgments thereupon against a breach with the
King, and continuance of this unnatural War betwixt the King and his people,
upon the difference at last by the blessing of God brought into so narrow a
compass. And this being a true state of the matter then in debate, and Our
sense in the Vote that passed thereupon, We judged it most consistent with Our
duties as Christians, and our Trust as Members of Parliament, to make this step
(having so much ground given Us) toward the happy settlement of thi^ Kingdom
in Peace.

This being published in Print to be so high a crime in Us, as to justify
whatsoever the Army has done against Us, and God and Man being appealed unto
therein. We shall here lay down some of the Considerations both on the one hand
and on the other, which carried our Judgments to the passing this Vote.

1. The advantages by this proceeding toward a close with the King upon what
he has granted, are the saving of the Kingdom of Ireland out of the hands of
the bloody Popish Rebels, and preserving it to the Crown of England; the
regaining the revolted Navy, and freedom of the Seas; the support of the
Ancient and well constitu^ed Government of this Kingdom, the honor of
Parliament in making Peace after so troublesome a War; and in a word, the
stoping the most sad issue of English blood that ever was opened in this
Nation; and the putting of the people of this Kingdom into possession of
greater security of their Laws and Liberties against the over growing power of
the Kings Prorogative, then ever any of Our Ancestors in the greatest of their
successes could ever attain unto.

The consequences visible in our eyes, if we should upon the matter in
difference have made a breach with the King are:

1. The deposing, if not the taking away the life of the King; what miseries
upon either of these have formerly ensued to this Kingdom our own Histories
tell Us. Although for the latter (which We unwillingly mention) there was
never any president for it in this Kingdom, nor ever made by any Protestants
in the World; and We desire it may never be done by any in this Kingdom,
being that, which from our hearts We do detest and abhor. We cannot but
remember in the end of our War the day wherein God has given Us prosperity,
the Declarations which We made in the beginning of Our War, and the
obligations which We laid upon our selves and the Kingdom when we were low.

In the Petition of Lords and Commons presented to his Majesty by the Earl of
Stamford etc. April the 8th 1642. are these words, viz.

That you will please to reject all Councels and apprehensions which may any
way derogate from that faithfulness and Allegiance which in truth and
sincerity We have always born and professed to your Majesty, and shall ever
make good to the uttermost with our Lives and Fortunes.

In a Declaration and Protestation of the Lords and Commons assembled in
Parliament, Page 143.
setting forth the Cause and ends of their taking up Arms, to this Kingdom
and to the whole World; October. 22. 1642. are these words, viz.

We the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, Page 663. 664.
do in the presence of Almighty God for the satisfaction of our consciences
and the discharge of that great Trust which lies upon Us, make this
Protestation and Declaration to this Kingdom and Nation, and to the whole
World. That no private passion or respect, no evil intention to his Majesty's
Person, no design^ to the prejudice of his just honor and Authority, engaged
Us to raise Forces, and take up Arms against the Authors of this W^rre,
wherewith the Kingdom is now inflamed; and We have always desired from our
hearts and souls, manifested in our actions and proceedings, and several
humble Petitions and Remonstrances to his Majesty, professed our loyalty and
obedience to his Crown, readiness and resolution to defend his Person, and
support his Estate with our Lives and Fortunes to the uttermost of Our Power,
etc.

A Declaration of the Lords and Commons, in Answer, etc. Concerning the
Allegations that the Army raised by the Parliament is to murder and depose the
King, We hope the Contrivers of the Declaration or any that professes but the
name of a Christian could not have so little chari^y as to raise such a
scandal, especially when they must needs know the Protestation taken by every
Member of both Houses, whereby they promise in the presence of Almighty God to
defend his Majesty's Person, the Protestations made by the Members of both
Houses upon the nomination of the Earl of E^^ex to be General, and to live
and die with him, is expressed that this Army was raised for the defense of the
Kings Person.

In the Solemn League and Covenant, for Reformation and defense of Religion,
and honor and happiness of the King; Thus

Having before our eyes the honor aend happiness of the Kings Majesty's
Person and his Posterity, We shall sincerely, really and constantly, through
the grace of God, endeavor in our several places and callings, to preserve and
def^nd the Kings Majesty's Person and Authority, in the preservation and
defense of the true Religion and Liberties of the Kingdom, that the World may
bear Witness with our Consciences that We have no thoughts or intentions to
diminish his Majesty's just power and greatness, etc.

And it appeared not unto V^ to be consistent with the public Faith of the
Houses in those Decl^rations, nor with other obligations which We have laid
upon our selves by these Oa^hes, Covenants, and Prote^^ations; to hazard* ^he
deposig of the King from his Crown and dignity, much less the loss of his
Life upon the making of a breach upon the matter in difference.

2. We could not but foresee the apparent loss of the Kingdom of Ireland and
extirpation of English Protestants, and of the Protestant Religion out of that
Kingdom into the hands and power of Pa^ists in Arms there. We cannot but
believe our tenderness to make a breach of proceeding out of hearts desire to
relieve and preserve the remnant of those poor Protestants, which otherwise are
like to be a prey to the Popish Rebels* who are not satis^ied with the lives of
many thousands of Innocents; whom they have already murdered, will justify Us
before God and Men for what We have done in endeavoring to lay hold upon the
grounds given Us toward the settlement of Peace.

3. We could not but apprehend with fear, the great advantage to the Popish and
Foreign Interests, and the disadvantage to the Protestant Cause in this
Kingdom and throughout the World* by a breach. The Prince and Duke of York the
two next Heirs to the Crown and Government of three Kingdoms, both in For^aign
par^s and under the (...) direction. If the War be stilll continued by the
Parliam^n^ upon the matter in differenc^, it may be feared the Prince may marry
with the daughter of a Popish King ostrengthen himself both at Land and Sea by
Foreign alliance (to which the right of his Inheritance to three Kingdoms, is
a fair invitation) unto which the Popish Interest in Ireland prevailing,
giving such an advantage, together with the assistance of the Papists in this
Kingdom; what can be expected for Us but to be certainly the the Seat of War,
and in great danger to be brought under a Popish yoke? which We beseech
Almighty God to keep us from.

4: It is obvious that a breach made at this time upon the grounds
aforementioned, as it will divide Us amongst our selves, hazard the loss of
Ireland; so it is like to lay a foundation of a perpetual breach betwixt these
two Kingdoms of England and Scotland. If there should be any thought of change
of Government here, how contrary are their declared Principles both of their
State and Church thereunto? The King of England is King of Scotland, and they
are under Allegiance and Covenants for the preservation of the Kings Person and
his Posterity as well as We: What diff^rences are l^ke to ensue betwixt the
Kingdoms, by Government against Government, perhaps Title against Title, and
one Kingdom against the other? And this Kingdom being the more wealthy, most
probable to be the Seat wherein all the Tragic Sceans and contentions betwixt
both Kingdoms shall be acted; and what have We in reason or conscience before
God or Man to bear us out against these many and Eminent hazards?

We had consideration of the vast debts which the Kingdom lies under, and for
which the Public Faith stands engaged. Of which we see no hope of payment,
but by a settlement. What vast sums of money are owing to this Army, and to
all the Soldiers in the Kingdom? What multitude of extreme sufferers in this
City* and in every County of the Kingdom, by what they have lent to, and lost
for the Parliament? Who by the continuance of the War are only like to be
paid with more sufferings and exactions, upon what is yet left them: and every
years War is like to make new Malignants through discontenting pressures;
destroy more families; increase the Public debt to be paid; and withal
increase the Kingdoms wants, and make it the less able to pay, until at last
the Soldier seeing no hope of Pay, the People no hope of Peace, but general
and desperate tumultuousnesse, fall amongst both, by laying hold of what is now
agreed might be prevented, the King having agreed to what is satisfactory for
the payment of Public debts, and damages, which yet may in good measure be
performed to satisfy the Soldiers, Lenders, and Sufferers, and engage them to
the interest of our Peace.

Lastly, when we cast our Eyes upon all parts of the Kingdom, the present
scarcity in the Countries, the poverty and disorders in our Cities; or when
we look at Sea, and behold our Navy divided; our Merchants robbed; our Trade
decayed, confusion threatening us on every side, These made our bowels yerne
within us, and call aloud upon us to improve the season and advantage offered
by this Vote.

Before we conclude this point, we must give Answer to an objection which
they insinuate (to aggravate the passing this Vote, by us in these words, Viz.

Although the King had finally denied such things, from some of which by their
Covenant (whereto they had pretended so much zeal) and from others by their
Public Faith given, they were obliged nos to recede. By Which this Paper
seems to glance at the Proposition for abolishing of Arch Bishops, Bishops,
etc. For sail of their Lands, and for settling the Presbyterian Government. We
cannot but observe its said their Coven^^t (and not the Covenant) to which they
pretended so much zeal. Is it not their Covenant who have taken it as well as
ours? We say we took the Covenant without any equivocation, or mental
reservation; and by Gods assistance have endeavored and shall endeavor to
continue faithful therein, although they seem here to scorn both it and us. If
they make this Objection with any sincerity here, what is meant in the third
page of their Paper by these words viz. Div^ns of those whose Principles were
more complyant to a closure with the King upon satisfaction in the particular
matiers especially concerning the Form of Religion and Church Government which
they mainly aff^ct^d. There they suggest that we fall in with Malignants to
obtain the Church Government, which we affect, and here they insinuat: that we
break the Covenant in not insisting more for it.

But for the Covenant, we say the Kings Answer takes away Church Government by
Arch Bishops, Bishops, etc. by taking away their Courts, and so far takes
away their Power of Ordination that it can never be revived again, but by an
Act of Parliament: so that Episcopacy is divested of any actual being by the
Law of the Land, and instead thereof the Presbyterian Government is put into
possession by a Law for three years. And we say, that the King having granted
the rest of the Propositions and so much in this, the Covenant does not oblige
us to make War upon this point to gain what we desired after the three
years, and shall really and constantly endeavor to obtain in our places and
Callings. Nothing could have made the Kingdom more irreconsileable to the
Presbytery then to have made that the sole Obstruction of the Peace, and state
of Warre^ and it is evident (except we should put out the eye of our reason)
that besides the hope we might have of His Majesty's coming nearer to us in
this point, and in the Covenant it self, upon our coming nearer to Him in the
absolute concluding and declar^ng of Peace; the Parliament, by what is granted
already, is put into a better capacity for settling Presbytery by a perpetual
Law, then (as things now stand) they can reasonably presume of by the
continuance of War. The power of the sword apparently threatening not only the
destruction of this Government of the Church* but the being of the Church (if
Almighty God prevent not) by striking at the foundations of our Faith,
contemning conscientious Ministers and Ministry it self, taking away their
Maintenance; obstructing the Reformation of the Universities; slighting of
learning; and professedly promoting a most licentious Toleration for all manner
of Errors, Heresies, Schisms and profaneness in the Kingdom.

This being our present condition, we hope we shall be sufficiently cleared
from the least suspicion of declining in our zeal to the Covenant, which we
have taken, in what we have done. For the Public Faith passed upon the sale of
Bishops lands* We say, that though the Purchasers might have afforded to have
give^ the same rates for their purchases, if they might have had them assured
to them by Act of Parliament^ for 99 years, and such moderate ^ents reserved,
as the King ^^timated in His Answer: yet, according to His Answer, expressing
further a satisfaction to be given to them; we should not have consented to any
such Act of Parliament, for settling the remainder in Him, and ensuring the said
Rents, until the Purchasers (who were in possession, and still held by the same
Title, under which they bought them (should be satisfied. And in case they
should not be so satisfied, we were not by the said Vote concluded from
insisting further for a full Confirmation of their purchases, having never
actually agreed with the King upon any such Terms; but prest^ it is the last to
get a full confirmation thereof, and only Voted that this was a sufficient
ground to proceed further. And now we appeal to the Purchasers themselves,
whether we ought to have made an absolute breach upon this point, or thereby
should have performed our Public Faith to the whole Kingdom and themselves.

As to what is said, that the corrupt majority would not lend an Ear to admit
a thought toward the laying down their own power, or rendering it back to the
People from whom they received it. We answer, that this is an unreasonable
objection, by them who endeavors to perpetuate an Army upon the Kingdom: Nor
is the continuance of this Parliament objected at large: but that we are not
willing to render our Power back again to the People, by which means (as their
other Papers and actions tell us) a new Representative made by the Army; so
that the complaint in effect is, that we are not willing to render the power
put into us for the Government of the Kingdom, into the hands of the Army;
which, we con^esse, we think we ought not to do. But as there is little
doubt to be made that before an absolute conclusion of Peace with the King, an
Act might have been had for putting a Period in short time to this Parliament:
We for our parts, when the Kingdom should had been in quiet possession of
these Propositions by Acts of Parliament, upon the conclusion and settlement of
Peace; There are no persons living would be more desirous then our selves to
put a Period to our service in Parliament, and leave it to the care of
succeeding Parliaments to preserve what, this has gained to our Posterity.

We should have ended this point here, but for one objection more; which is
made by their other Papers against any Agreement with the King, viz.

That whatsoever the King grants in this Treaty he may plead force to break
it, and that for any thing can be discovered, he is like to use his
endeavors to spoil us, by policy of what we have gained by the expense of so
much blood. For answer hereunto: We say first, That this objection lies against
any agreement with the King, though he granted all the Houses desired or could
desire; and against any agreement betwixt King and people after a War made.
It can hardly be imagined, after such differences, but that for sometime
animosities will remain, and a disposition in those who think they have lost
any part of their power to regain it) It being natural to all men in power to
increase their power) That this objection lay as strong against all former
Treaties with His Majesty for Peace after the War began, and against the
declared end of the Parliaments War, (and of all just War) a good Peace
with His Majesty.

But more particularly we say, That the weight of this objection, depends only
upon an uncertain conjecture of what may or may not be hereafter, and the
former experience, which this Kingdom has had in keeping such Agreements,
made in the heat of former differences, strengthened us against the fear of
the danger of it. And though sometimes the Kings of this Realm, and
particularly this King, have adventured to weaken their own Grants for a time,
yet they have ever been regained with advantage, obtained and enjoyed in the
times of peace.

The usual means whereby any of the Kings of this Land have made encroachment
upon the good Laws granted to the people, and their own agreements, have been
either by placing corrupt Judges, or other Ministers in the Courts of Justice.
Who, though they could not abrogate the Law: yet they have made it speak
against it self, and their good for whom it was made, or else by the power of
preferring corrupt Courtiers to honor and profit, to stop the course of
Justice by the Councell-Table for a time. Both these means are taken away from
this King, by what is agreed on in this Treaty.

The first, in the Proposition placing the choice of Officers in the
Parliament; whereby as they have the Laws they desire, so they have the choice
of the Judges and Officers that must administer them.

And the second, in the Proposition barring the King from making any new Lords
for the future to Vote in the House of Peers, without the consent of the
Houses. Which are a strong security against a politic, as the M^litia in the
Houses is against a forceable breach of this Agreement.

Lastly, we say, That it cannot be expected of any Agreement should be made for
peace settled after such a Civil War, without some hazard of violation or
interruption. But whether the hazards and dangers be a breach upon such terms
as are now in difference betwixt the Houses Propositions and the Kings answer,
be not more and greater, and whether (in case endeavors should be used
hereafter to violate this agreement) the Parliament might not then with more
Justice, and greater advantage draw the Sword, then they can now keep it
unshathed upon the matter in difference: We leave it to all sober minded men
to judge. And to what is said, That they wanted not good intelligence, that had
they been suffered to meet all in the House but once more, it was designed to
have passed some higher resolutions to lay further foundations of such new
quarrel, so as to carry therein the name and countenance of Parliamentary
authority together with the Kings, and acceptable pretense of peace, to draw
men in, and then to have adjourned the Parliament for a long time, the
exclusion of all remedy in the case but by another War. We say the House at
the passing Vote upon the Kings Answers immediately appointed a Committee to
go to the General and confer with him and the Officers of the Army, to
keep a good understanding betwixt the House and the Army. Which showed the
full intent of the House to proceed by all amicable ways with them, not by
force, but by reason. Which they were so far from attending unto, (as in duty
and conscience they ought to have done, and to which the Lord General promised
his readiness, however it was hindered afterward.) That they seized upon one
of the Commissioners appointed to Treat with them; affronted another of them,
and left no way for any conference, that might have given them the the grounds
of the Houses proceedings; which gives grounds of suspi^ion, that they were
resolved to do what they had designed, whatsoever the Houses had endeavored to
the contrary.

Thus we have the more largely opened the thoughts of our hearts for their
satisfaction (if it be possible) and especially for the satisfaction of those
that entrusted us in what we have done upon the result of this Treaty, and in
passing that Vote D^^^mb. 5. That the Answers of the King to the Prepositions
of both Houses, are a ground for the House to proceed upon for the settlement
of the peace of the Kingdom; for which we are charged to betray our Trust; to
be selfe-servers to complect her in our wicked designs, and the like,

For betraying our Trust, as our faithfulness has appeared by our services
and sufferings; so we hope it will not be accounted belonging our Trust to
endeavor the obtaining of a just peace; and for serving our selves, our own
hearts bear us witness, that we had not respect in this Vote, or any private
byasse toward our selves: so all that know what threatenings were cast into the
House, in the Anmi^s Remonstrance and Declarations in the entrance upon this
debate, what power of the Army was then in this City, what Language was
commonly spoke amongst the Soldiers? what Guards we then had, will judge that
we had more cause to be biased by fear^ from doing our duties, then at that
time to think to serve our selves by such a vote as this, to which nothing but
the forceable impulse of our consciences for the discharge of our duties could
have led us. And we now appeal even to the Consciences of those, even the Army
themselves (although Soldiers) whose advantages arise by War, are not
altogether the most competent Judges of constitutions for peace.) Whether this
were to bring in the King upon his own Terms, or upon the Kingdoms Terms?
Whether the sixth and last particular of their account, be ground of necessity
to warrant their extraordinary course in secluding us from the House; carrying
us along the streets of this City by their Soldiers, as if we were their
Captive slaves; and to imprison our persons, and reproach our names.

And to what they say in the close, That these Members, who are yet detained in
custody, they are either such who have been formerly impeached, and (in part)
judged by the house for Treason, and other crimes, and never acquitted; and
against whom, they can, and very shortly shall produce new matter of no less
Crime, or else such who have appeared most active and united in Counsels with
them, against whom also they are preparing, and shall shortly give matter of
particular impeachment. We say, as we doubt not but by what we have said
already, we yet stand clear in the judgments of all men that are guided by
the Rules of Religion, Laws, or Reason; so when all, or any of us know what
are those new Crimes, they say they can charge some of us with; and what those
charges are, they say they are preparing for others; and when we know who those
some and others are, we doubt not but they will make their innocence and
integrity appear against those Crimes and Charges which they have either in
pretense, or in preparation against them.

Lastly, the Army who has done this against us, and have strengthened their
hands to pursue it; say, they appeal^ to God: And we also appeal unto God
(who is our strength, and besides him we have none other to clear our
innocence, and protect us from violence.

If in what we have endeavored, we may be isntrumental to the settling of
this Kingdom in a safe and well grounded peace (wherein truth and
righteousness may flourish) If we may contribute to the saving of Ireland; the
Union betwixt the kingdoms of England and Scotland; the peservation of the
Parliament; the Government, and Laws of the Land; the true Protestant
Religion, and the Liberties of the people: we have our hearts desire. But, if
instead of Union and Peace in the three Kingdoms, the seeds of a longer and
more wasting War is sown; if in stead of Reformation of Religion (...) and
(...) (...) and that Government by the Sword instead of Law slavery and (...)
instead of Liberty b^^ our portion at the end of six years war, (which we
tremble to think of) we shall humbly submit to the mighty hand of God, who in
Judgment for our sins, and the sins of the Nation, reaches out this cup
of his sore displeasure to us. And in the midst of the greatest troubles, have
this to comfort us, that we did our endeavors according to the best of our
judgment and consciences toward the prevention thereof* and for the settling
this Kingdom in a safe and well grounded (...).

A List of the Imprisoned and Secluded MEMBERS.
Imprisoned.
MAj. Genesis Rich. Brown, Col. John Birch, Thomas Boughton, Esquire John ^ulkley,
Esquire Francis Buller, Esquire Sir Henry Cholmeley, Sir John Clotworthy, Commissary
Lionel Copley, John Crew, Esquire Francis Drake, Esquire Sir Walter Earl, Knight.
Nathanul ^ines, Esquire Sir Gilbert Gerrard, Baronet. Francis Gerrard, Esquire Thomas
Gewen, Esquire Giles Green, Esquire Sir Harb^t. Grimstone, Baronet. Sir Rob. Harley,
Kn. of the Bath. Col. Edward H^rley, Sir Anthony I^by, Knight. Richard
Knightley, Esquire Sir Martin Lister, Knight. Major Robert Harley. Col. Edward
Leigh. Thomas Lane, Esquire William Jews, Baronet. Sir Samuel Luke, Knight. Major
Genesis Edward Massey. Sir John Merrick, Knight. Sir Richard Ane^^^e, Knight.
Henry Pelham, Esquire William Priestly, Esquire William Prynne, Esquire Sir Robert Pie,
Knight. Sir Benjamin Ruddyard Knight Sir Thomas Soam^, Knight. Edward Stephens,
Esquire Col. William Strode. John Swinfen Esquire Charles Vaughan, Esquire Edward Vaughan,
Esquire Sir William Waller, Knight. Clement Walker, Esquire Thomas Viscount W^nman*
William Wheeler Esquire
Secluded.
Mr. P^regryne Hobbye, Mr. John Holcroft, Mr. George Horner, Mr. Thomas Hodges,
Mr. William Jones, Col. William Jepson, Sir Norton Knathpole Mr. James Cambell,
Mr. Capell Luckinge, Sir Martin Lumley, Mr. Cha. Pym, Mr. Henry Peck, Sir John
Pagrove, Sir Philip Parker, Sir William Playters, Mr. John Pelham, S^r Thomas
Pelham, Sir N^vile P^^i, Mr. Edward Pool, Sr. Edward (...), Sir Thomas Parker,
Mr. Tho. Povy, Mr. Henry Oxenden, Mr. Arthur Anes^^o, Mr. Arthur Owen, Sir
Dudley North, Sir Robert Needham, Mr. John Nash, Sir Nicholas Martin, Sir Tho.
Middleton, Mr. Tho. Middleton, Sir Oliver Luke, Sir William L^tton, Mr. Henry
Lucas, Sir William Lister, Mr. John Ash, Mr. Robert Packer, Mr. John Harris,
Sir John Seimor, Mr. Samuel Vassal, Sir Robert Napper, Sir Roger North, Mr.
Tho. Grove, Mr. John Selman, Mr. Herbert Hay, Mr. Robert Genner, Sir John
Burgen, Col. John Barker, Mr. John Nelthorpe, Mr. William Outfield, Mr. William
Ellis, Mr. Edward Wingate, Mr. John Whadden, Mr. Thomas Wa^^r, Sir Richard Win,
Mr. Richard Winwood, Sir Edward Askew, Sir Ralph Ashton, Mr. Matthew Allen, Mr.
John Alford, Mr. Michael Bi^ulfe, Mr. Peter Brook, Col. ^^hn Booth, Mr. Mor.
Bartow, Mr. John Buller, Sir Ambrose Brown, Sir Thomas Trever, Mr. Sim.
Thelwell,
Secluded.
Mr. Thomas Thinn, Sir John Temple, Mr. Thomas Temple, Mr. John Thomas, Mr.
Samuel Terrick, Sir Humphry Tufton, Mr. Edward Thomas, Sir. John Corbet,
Edward Lo. Clinton, Sir John Curson, Sir Thomas Dacres, Col. William Davies,
Mr. John Dodrigde, Mr. Thomas Earl, Mr. William Edwards, Mr. Charles Rich, Sir
William Spring, Mr. Simon Snow, Mr. Thomas Sands, Mr. George Scut, William Lord
Fitz-William, Mr. William Hoxwist, Col. John Floid, Mr. Richard Gennings, Mr.
Thomus Gell, Mr. Francis Gawdey, Mr. Samuel Gardner, Mr. Henry Hungerford, Mr.
Denzill Ho^lis, Sir Francis Hollis.
With sundry others driven away.

Imprimatur,

Joh. Langley.
Jan. 20. 1648/9.
FINIS.

