THE VINDICATION OF WILLIAM PRYNNE Esquire, From some scandalous Papers and
Imputations, newly Printed and Published, to traduce and defame him in his
REPUTATION.
WHere as A scandalous Paper have been newly printed and published in my Name
by some of the imprisoned Stage Players, or Agents of the Army, entitled Mr.
William Prynne his Defense of Stage Plays, Or, A Restraction of a former Book
of his called HIS TRIOMASTIX, of purpose to traduce and defame me: I do hereby
publicly declare to all the world, the same to be a mere Forgery and
imposture, and that my judgment and opinion concerning Stage Plays and the
Common Actors of them, and their intollerble mischeivousness in any Christian
state, is still the same, as I have more amply manifested it to be in my
HISTRIOMASTIX. And whereas another Pamphlet has been printed and published,
with this title. The examination of Mr. Will. Prynne by order of the House of
Commons, with his Answer: wherein is related. That the two Members appointed to
know Mr. Prynnes Answer, whether the scandalous Pamphlet to which his Name was
set was his? and whether he would own it? repored this answer, That when a
sufficient authority sent to Him, he would return a speedy answer; Which
answer is to be considered of on Thursday-next: that there is a mistake in this
Report: which I conceive my self bound to rectify, by relating the whole
truth, which is as follows. That on Friday last about five of the clock at
night, Mr. Humphrey Edwards, and John Fry, came to my Chamber, to the Kings
head in the Strand, and without showing me any order, or commission; told me:
that they were sent to me by the house of Commons to ask me a question: which
was, Whether a Book they then produced, and held in their hands, were mine, or
not? not reading the Title, nor any part of it; but J conceived it was the
Memento, To whom J returned this answer. That I knew of no authority they had
to demand this question of me; that I neither knew nor took them to be Members,
their elections being both void and illegal, and so proved at the Committees
which examined them, who had voted them such, and therefore they ought not to
sit, being voted out of the House. And that this was all the answer J should
return them: Who should be always ready to give an answer to any question,
concerning any book I had written in a legal way, when it should be demanded
by a lawful authority. M. Fry answered, that though his Election was voted
void by the Committee, that it was not reported to, nor voted void by the
House, and therefore he might sit, TO which I replied, That no man after his
election was unanimously voted void by the whole Committee, being so foul as
his and Mr. Edmonds were, had the impudency to sit and vote in the house, til
they made the president. Whereupon they departed somewhat disconted. This is
the real truth of all that passed between me and them, Which I thought it my
duty to publish to the world to avoid mistakes: and so much the rather, because
the Gen* counsel of the Army in their Answer of Jan 3, touching the secured
and secluded Members: p, 4, 5, complain of many abuses in the New Elections;
and that the elections of many honest men have been long suspended under
examination, and kept off from trial by practice of the secluded Members, when
as in verity, the greatest abuses of this kind that ever were, have proceeded
from the Officers and their parties; most of the elections of their adherents
being very foul and void, and petitioned against, being kept off by their
parry, from examination, and report: by reason whereof, the two forementioned
Gentlemen, Mr. Blagrave, (whose Election is voted void long since) and diverse
others now sitting, have been kept in the house against al right and justice,
when as there is not one secluded Member for ought J can learn whose election
is not fair and legal. In witness whereof I have hereunto subscribed my Name;

WILLIAM PRYNNE.
From the Kings head in the Strand, Ian. 10 1648,
Esaias 57, 4 None calls for justice; nor any pleads for truth: they trust in
vanity and speak Eyes: they conceive mischief and bring forth iniquity their
works are works of iniquity, and the act of violence is in their hands. Titus
1. 12 the Cretians are always liars, evil beasts, slow bellies,
FINIS.

