THE LATE Assembly of Divines CONFESSION OF FAITH EXAMINED.

As it was presented by them unto THE PARLIAMENT.

WHEREIN Many of their excesses and defects, of their confusions and disorders,
of their errors and contradictions are presented, both to themselves and others.

Humanum est errare l abi decipi, etc.
Humanius nihil est quam errantem revocare:
2 Thessal. 3.2. For all men have not faith. LONDON, Printed in the year. 1651.

TO THE The Supreme Authority THE PARLIAMENT of ENGLAND.
Right Honorable,
I Am more then confident you will not be offended, that I presume (though
unworthy) to present this Examen of the late Synods Confession of faith to your
grave and discerning judgments.

The Auhors of the said confession did present the same to the Parliament so we
(that are not satisfied in it) do with all humility the like, ut vincat
veritas, which is, magis amica, quam amicus Plato, quam amicus Lutherus, quam
amicus Calvinus, therefore is to be sought out of all that love it, which
cannot be, but as Solomon says Eccl. 7. (In another case) by setting one
contrary to the other, to the end a man find nothing after him: it is an old
and true maxim, Opposita juxt^ se posita clarius Elucescunt, as white and
black illustrate one another; and I fail much in my intellectuals, if you
find not all the argumenta dissentanea here, as making a vast difference
betwixt their confession and this examen thereof: for you may observe in some
passage the dissentane a diversa betwixt them* by which, though there might
have been a consent in many things, yet aliqua logica ratione dissentiunt, as
by a (...), and (...).

Here you may find opposita disparata, quorum unum multis opponitur.

Here you may find opposita contraria, quorum unum uni tantum opponitur, as
contraria relata, that though we all confess the same Father, yet rara est
concordia fratrum in these two Treatises.

Here are opposita adversa, in such things, quae inter se velut e regione
perpetuo adversantur, like as virtus and vitium.

Here are contraria negantia, likewise to be found, as contradicentia, quorum
alterum aiit alterum negat ubique; they affirm (that which we deny) they say
sin will and must remain in the best regenerate men as long as they live here,
which we according to Scripture do confidently deny.

And finally here are betwixt them contraria privantia, as habitus and
privatio, which is the greatest opposition in Divinity, Truth and error, light
and darkness: each seeking the destroying the possibility of the other; yet in
all these that which Solomon faith, Prove. 18.17. is verified of us both
respectivly: He that is first in his own cause seems just, but his neighbor
comes and searches him: The late Synod have been first in there own cause (as
most desire to be) and seem just: now we (their well wishing neighbor to
truth) take the boldness to come and search them, presuming that you most
impartial and judicious Senators, will vouchsafe unto us the like (...) in
this our humble tender as you did to them.

Surely the Parliament would never (with such a public lifting up of hands to
the most high) have entered into a Covenant to reform (as the ultimate end of
it) the worship of God in Doctrine and discipline: Yea they would never have
commanded us inferiors upon pain of their displeasure (whereby they have been
looked on as irreligious that refused) to enter into the said Covenant for
reformation. Yea they would never (I believe) have convocated an Assembly of
English, and Scottish Divines, to search out the truth which is according to
godliness, but that it was there real intention, that such a worship of God
(which is made the chief motive to the Covenant) might be found out and
established in three Nations, whereby Gods people might become one, and the
name of God in truth one among them.

Right worthy Heroes, when I considered of these particulars, I resolved
(against all impediments) humbly to present this unto you, and to the public
view; because I am obliged unto it, by the said Covenant, to yield my
endeavors, in my place and calling, to the said reformation, which I cannot, I
suppose, perform in any way, like the publishing this examen, to undeceive
many, yea if it be the will of God, the deceived Authors of that Confession,
who have so failed in a Confession of Faith, set out to regulate the judgments
and practices of three Nations in a good life, (the sum of all) toward God and
man.

Give me leave therefore (I beseech you) to use in some measure of sincerity
the words of Job, cap. 36.2.3. Suffer me a little, and I will show you what I
have to say on Gods behalf, I will fetch my knowledge from afar, and will
ascribe righteousness to my Maker.

My prayer is likewise that the Authors of the second Directory may recollect
themselves to do the like; that their second thoughts may be better then their
first, and I wish they may be so far from envy and displeasure, at what is here
presented to public view, as they may say with David, Psalm. 141.15. It shall
be an excellent oil, like that which Christ counseled the Church of Laodicea,
Revela. 3.18. to buy, and anoint their eyes that they may see the truth, which
will appear to all that try all things by the touchstone of truth, the word of
God; which the Assembly themselves acknowledge, Chap. 1. Sect. 9. of their
confession, to be the only and infallible rule of inter pretation, to which
rule we all that have our head and heart, concurring to prepare this or the
like examination for the Press, referr our selves; who would have subscribed
our names, but that the fear of envy, and some other evil consequences, press a
concealment of some; but I have adveured to offer this (most honored Patriots)
to your serious consideration, and to subscribe my name, because I doubted that
a Smect^mnius covert would not satisfy the Parliaments order, the
transgression of which in another case, though I was not sponte nocens, I
suffered deeply for) which is, that some (as I am informed) must subscribe
their name to own (if they will avoid offense) what is printed; therefore I have
put my hopes in my hand, and adventured the subscribing my name, that this may
come forth according to order, and I fulfill the Proverb, The worst must hold
the candle, that by the light thereof all that do not out of prejudice shut
their eyes, may see truth from error, and mistakes in the foresaid confession;
the discovery of which I am induced to hold forth, because for many years I
have, to some detriment, bin under the censure of many supposed great errors
against many assertions laid down in the said Confession: therefore to
vindicate my self; I have great reason to promote what verily I am persuaded to
be truth, for as Job said, Chap. 27.5. God forbid that I should justify them,
I will not leave my innocence till I dye.

But I humbly offer this and my self in all just obedience, and subjection to
you the Supreme Authority of the Nation, and

Subscribe my name W. PARKER.

To the Assembly of Divines who were Convocated by Authority of Parliament at
Westminster.
Men, Brethren and Fathers,
LEast we should seem any way to detract from your worth; we freely confess
these things following both concerning you that are here the Confessors, and
your faith which you have confessed.

That though you are not all the most learned men in this Nation, yet many of
you are men of much Learning and abilities: we confess likewise, That for life
and conversation, many of you are grave, sober, Religious and devoute persons
in your way; having a zeal of God, though in many things not according to
knowledge, as will appear.

That this Treatise of yours may, in some tolerable sense, be called a
Confession of Faith, faith being sometimes used for our present persuasion, be
it right or wrong, as the Apostle intimates, Romans 14.23. And he that doubts
is damned if he eat, because he eats not of faith; for whatsoever is not of
faith is sin.

That the errors and mistakes, failings, and misperswasions found in this your
Confession of Faith, by you presented to the Parliament, are not originally
yours as if you first introduced them: but you learned them of your Teachers,
and usually of your Authors, whom you read without serious pensitation, or due
animadversion, and to whom ye give too light and sudden credulity.

That ye err not alone, but have many men of note, and some whole nominal
Churches who walk and wander with you in the same aberrations.

And finally that ye will not (as we trust) prove pertinatious in your errors:
but if the Lord shall vouchsafe to open your eyes, and discover your erring
paths unto you; ye will turn from them and readily embrace the truth.

We hope you will not take this Examen in evil part, when ye reflect upon these
very words of yours, Cha. 31. Sect. 4.

All Synods and Councels since the Apostles days, whether general or
particular may err, and many have erred. Therefore they are not to be made the
rule of faith or practice; but to be used as an help in both. To the end
therefore that ye and all men may the better perceive that there has been a
great Apostasy and departure from the faith, as the holy Apostles forewarned
us, 2 Thessalonians. 2.5. Except there come a falling away first, 1 Timothy 4.1. Now the
spirit speaks expressly, that in the latter days some shall depart from the
faith, giving heed to seducing spirits and doctrines of Devils.

That the Lord Christ in his late spiritual coming as himself foretold it
should come to pass, Luke 18.8. Did scarcely find the true faith in the earth.

That many times that which is highly esteemed with men, is an abomination in
the sight of God, Luke 16.15.

And finally, that it may be seen not only what erratick lights the common
people have followed: but also what weak, and unexpert Counselors the Princes
and States of the world have chosen to advise and assist them in their
reforming enterprises; yea how little truth or infallibility is found in your
Authors whom you so Idolize; and how great a part of the modern Christians (as
well as the present Church of Rome) is still captived with error and unbelief.
We will here modestly, out of zeal of truth (and we hope the truth of zeal)
reveal many sacred mysteries of Christ (which were long hidden from us, as well
as others, but are through his rich grace made known unto us, and many more
unworthy ones) and detect the contrary mistakes, that God may be glorified, and
the Nations healed with the leaves of the tree of life, Amen.

Courteous Friends,
I Was in Holland the last year, and I received from a worthy friend these
Latin verses, which because they are pertinent to many things in the said
Examen; I have caused them to be Printed with the Book, and they are translated
into English, for the capacity of them that understand not the Latin.

In Belgarum Synodum Dordrecti habitam funesto illo anno orbique tremendo 1618.
Paulo post subortum cometam insignem irae divinz mundique flagellandi nuntium
Pacifici cujusdam and neutiquam indocti viri carmen posthumam.
BElgarum Clerus, tristis comitesque cometae
Dordrecti coeunt, conciliumq vocant,
Turba gravis paci, sibi cum posuere tribunal
Arminio litem pars Gomarhaea movet
Dordrectum roctum didicisset ab Amstelodame
Prater ubi (sidei jus) toleramen habet.
At Synodo nodus restat solvendus utrisque
Arbiter ecquis iis Aeacus aequus erit?
Scripturam dicis? trahit hanc pars utraque secum.
Interpres loquitur, litera sacra silet;
Est aliudque canon, ubi stat sententia clara,
In dubiis aliud judicis officium.
Ominis incerti, varioque interpret nutans;
Ductilis huc illuc, nemo sequester erit.
Judicibus ratio, rationi competit auris;
Number men's scripturae quae capit? aure capit?
Atvobis aderit judex celesia? Quaenam?
Vin Lutheranam? nolumus, inquis eam.
Romanam malles? sed ferri malleus adstat
Gens Jesuitarum, gens inimica tibi.
Elige Dominicos, Dominos at in omnibus istos
Admittes? Nego nos discrepat, inter, ubi.
Visn' Anabaptistas, quorum tibi copia, Belga,
Non emergendi copia, forsan ais.
Arbiter ipsus eris Gomarhaec? Quid? Hostis in hostem?
Judice me, supero, tu cadis, Hostis ait.
Arminius tibi fit judex; sub judice lis sit,
Illius arbitrio stesve, cadasve, placet?
Convocet is Synodum jam jam Gomarhaee secundam,
Is litem moveat, te peragatque reum.
Siquis erit (dubito) Gomarhaeos Vorstius inter,
Interdictus eat, magna pericla creet;
Examen cruciet monstrum hoc, qui cunque remonstre:
Hunc Hispanorum carnificina probet.
Haereseos signs Gomarhaeam stigmate gentem
Schismatis insimules parcere parce viris.
Damnetur Gomarhaea cohors cum cive Gomorrhae,
Tollite Damnandi munus ab Artifice.
Quid verum falsumve siet, decernite tuti
Vos penes arbitrium est Arminiana domus:
In lucem tenebras fidei pro dogmate profer,
Sit mundo fidei regula vestra fides;
Civilemque acuas gladium cum spirituali,
Ad Christi causam militis adfer opem;
Nil horum fieri tibi vis, Gomarhaee, per hosts?
Talia cur hosti feceris ipse prior?
Lege peris propria (nec lex est justior ulla)
Art tua captus, fossus and ense tuo.
Cymmeriis tenebris Gomarhaei dogmata nigrent,
Navis (...) migrat ad Armeniam.
Quis litem dirimat nisi venerit alter Elias,
Qui numen prodat coelitus igne dato?
Defec^t dudum, Gomarhaee, prophetia, dicis?
Ergo prophetarum nullus es ipse choro.
^essabit tandem si, test, prophetia, Paulo;
Cessat cognitio, cessat and ipsa fides.
Vatis honor carent, propria^ tellure, prophetae;
Teuto vate cares? En tibi vaticinor.
Vatis opus, dudum per Amoris pneuma, retundit
Bella, dolos, caedes, pacis Evangelio.
Vatis opus nostro Thesauros cord latentes
Libris octo aperit; quaerite divitias.
Nuperus and Jonas vos, nos, rescipiscere cunctos
Ninivitarum more modoque jubet.
Adsit Schnauberus, Praetorius adsit Elias
Europae monitor, tertius adsit iis.
Nec nova Teutonicis hodiernis deficit Hulda,
Zionis threnos quae lachrymosa, canit.
Quid Feyrum memorem? quid (...) Trapinum?
Quid, quae Behmanni vaticinatur opus?
Arndum Aquilam vestrum mitto, vatesque minores;
Teuto, prophetarum messis opima tibi.
En tibi vaticinans fallace nec ore cometa
Schismata, bella, dolos, cum nece, peste, famem.
Arminius reperit; sed postquam scrips^t, Eliam
Magnum, descendit, cui sacer ignis, Amor.
Hostia peccati consumitur ignibus istis,
Felix, his notis ignibus, Arminius.
Alter Elizaeus si vixerit, ipsus abiret,
Veri^m, hen, praepropere sancta vehic' la levant!
Inveniat Synodus, precor, inventumque sequatur
Hunc vatem, verum discat ut igne Deum.
Articulos cudens morbo cubat articulari:
Arminius, medici jam revalescit open.
Qualis at ista fides inhonorans numen, and ore
Vix non blasphemo quae temerare solet?
Quid memoras Aquilam? decreta Laconica narras?
Quid mihi Saturnum nativorumque refers?
En facinus crudele magis Bonitatis in ipsum
Finxeris Oceanum, Numen amore scatens.
Hunc paucis vitam, multis decernere mortem
Fingis ab aeterno, nil meritosque mali:
Cujus jus summum vix non injuria summa est,
Quod Summo tribuit, jure sed absque, Deo.
Hos libitu servare Deum, damnare sed illos,
Cum meritis aequet perditus incolumen.
Qua patet infelix Epicuri janua porcis,
Dum temere tribuis Stoica fata Deo.
Fas quid habet, quid obestque nefas? si cuncta ferantur
Praecipitis Fati flumine; Teuto bibe.
Innocuos pue ros patrio quae crimine damnat,
Quod Deus abjurat lege, vetatque nefas.
Heus Gomarhaee parens infontes urepuellos,
Justitia magnum nomen ut inde feras.
Quaeque voluntates in simplice Numine binas,
Huic illam adversam non sine fraud locat;
Mente revelata cunctis optare salutem
Dicens, ad paucis mente latente Deum.
Heu simulatorem! (Satanae contraria si men's)
Pejorum Satana dat malesana Deum.
Electos quae class una complectitur omnes,
Quos Deus hinc olim, quos hodieque legit,
Quos furnace probat, postque elegit ipse probatos,
Et quos ad vitam condition legit.
Quae non ob generum vult Christum singula passum,
Visceribus nectens cingula, vinc'la Dei.
Number Deus hic finitus erit? Quid brachia longa,
Cor breve das? meritis amplus is? arctus open?
Quae facit exosum, cum nil patraverat Esau;
Vim faciens Paulo, jus adimensque Deo.
Si Deus odisset, cum nondum mundus adesset,
Cur sibi fecit opus, quod cruciaret, onus?
En de prole Deus dicit, fers ventre gemellos
Genti majori jura minorque dabit;
Indicio Malachi Domino persona perosa
Est Edomaea domus non domitanda, ferox.
Quaenos immundos in mundum mittere Numen
Asserit; Anquicquam turpe creare potest?
Quae convertendos adoriri numen and armis
Vique invincibili, (quisque resistat) ait.
Hinc resides animi expectant animaque peric'lo,
Cogat ut invitos, tempus inane, Deus.
Quae libitu truncat, libet ut, ratione potitos.
Truncum vult hominem, nec sinit esse traham.
Disputet hinc nemo, scribat vel consulat alt'r,
Predicit, hortetur, nil nisi stipes homo.
Premia quid narras? Quorsum minitabere poenas?
Huic meriti nihil est, cui nihil arbitrii.
Quae legem tollit, vel saltem fructibus orbat.
Ulla prestari dum negat intus open.
Heu! frustra data lex, homo factus, missus Jesus.
Si Christo duce, non fiat and intus opus.
Quae dat velle piis, nec plus quam velli quid ultra,
Cum det velle piis Numen and efficere.
Quae docet injustum meritis non intus habendis,
Dum manet injustus, justificare Deum.
Absit at ut justos habeat discrimine nullo,
Qui nec sunt justi cord, nec esse volunt.
Quae medicum, tegat ut, non sanet vulnera, praebet;
Hoc sanasse modo corpora credis eum?
Quae rapit e manibus Satanae, rapit ignibus orci
Quemvis credentem somnia morte Dei;
Sed vis peccati, Satanaeque Orcique manebit,
Si nova crux Christi non domet intus eos.
Lutron grande, Dei sanguis cruce fusus; at unos
Sanguine purgatos pneumatis ille lavat.
Omne bonum Quae tollit opus credentis; ut audit,
Sufficit una fides, credere creed, valet.
Quaeque viatores a lapsu liberat omni,
Ne cautam reddat sollicitudo fidem.
Quae Satanae regnum dat, inexpugnabile Christo,
Indomitis vitiis mortis adusque diem.
Morti quam vitae plus roboris addit iniqua,
Nec morti Christum vi sinit esse parem.
Perge tuo Christo, peccantis and erige cristas:
Heu! Christus scelus est bajulus omne ferens.
Quid peccare nocet? Christus luit omnia, dicis;
Obsequio quid opus? Christus ademplet opus.
Quot dedit hac portenta fides sata Gente comata,
Stella comata novis concomitata malis?
Articulos numera numerosa prole beatos;
Quinque per incipiunt. quinque ter inde fluunt.
Suspensi reges Amorhaei quinque resurgunt,
Quid sibi vult Amori? pugna per ora, dicax.
En Midian redeunt basilisci quinque; Quid illi?
Omne caput litis: quid Midian nisi lis?
Quinque Palestinae satrapae rediere per urbes
Gath, Gazas veteres, Ashkelon, Ashdod, Ekron.
En Gath Prelum irae, vastamenut Ashdod, and Ecron
Extirpans (Quoties tuque Acheronta moves?)
Judicium appendit vix lancibus Ashkelon aequis;
Gaza quid? Humanae cognitionis opes.
Quidque Palestinus? Cinere ecce vir ipse volutus,
Quique cadit potu; Teuto quis iste tibi.
Gittaeo red^it proles prognata parente,
Scilicet errorum sexcubitalis homo.
Albentes Horim, peccataque splendida desunt?
Deficiunt Emim vi, nece terribiles?
Pravaque Zanzummim meditantes cord gigantes,
Nulli? Nulli Anakim nobile torque genus?
Doctus Episcop us scopis purgare nequivit,
Dum capita abscindit, pullulat Hydra novis.
Structores redeunt Babylonis; and extruit urbem
Tecum Lutherus, Papa manuque juvat.
Sanguine, lite, dolis, sua maenia tollit in altum,
Alterius vastans altera secta domos.
Quid Babylon? quae se pro Christi conjuge jactat
Moecha manens Satanae: (Dat tria scorta Babel)
Lite perit propria Midian, caeduntque vicissim
Se Moab, Ammon, Edom. Se Babel ipsa triplex.
Rana triplex cogit triplices ad praelia sectas,
Hasque omnes temerat caede, livore, dolis.
Effugient pauci, Lotus ut, de triplice secta,
Uvas qui Sodomae non comedere suae.
E Babylone fugam propera, properante ruina,
Ne te corripiant dira flagella Dei.
Mitte fidem citus hanc nobis tot monstra creantem,
Quot nescit monstri Nilus and ipse ferax.
Ad pulsus cytharae vestrae saltabimus omnes?
An fidibus vestris admodulanda fides?
Sis Gomarhaee puer, pueris coeleste paratur
Regnum, stultescas, si sapuisse velis.
Cum Christo moriare prius, vivatur ut illi,
Quam nos de Christo tale quid edoceas.
Scire tuum nihil est, vetitae nocet arboris esus;
Obsequium ad vitam jam patefecit iter.
Vera fides coelis ignem deducit Amoris;
Igneus hic currus tollit ad astra virum.
Quicquid lex mandat, quicquid sacra foedera spondent,
Et Legem and Vates unus adimplet Amor.
Arbor quid vitalis? Amor. Paradisus? Amores.
Fons Edenis? Amor. Vita perennis? Amor.
Quid Deus ipsus? Amor fine Mart, cupidinis expers;
Cui Veneres virtus; fas pietasque faces.
THE Lamentation over the Synod of DORT, OR, The verses of an outlandish, but
a learned and peaceable man since deceased, unto and upon that Synod sitting in
the fatal year, presently after the great blazing Star, that messenger of Gods
wrath, and the foreteller of the worlds ensuing calamities appeared, Anno Dom.
1618. now turned into English.
WHen in the Netherlands the learned crew
Of James Arminius first 'gan to brew
Or broach their sober Tenets to the Dutch
Prejudice-drunk, incapable of such,
The Gomarist the fatal Comets brother
A Synod called at Dort (which was no mother)
And being set upon the judgment throne,
Convents the Arminians yet leave out one.
But Dordrect might have learnt of Amsterdame,
No man that lives well, for his faith to blame.
Yet in that Synod rests a knot untide,
Who shall Umpire be 'twixt side and side.
Say thou the Scripture? That each side does wrest,
They make their own sense, not the Text the Test.
A rule is one thing in a lightful place,
A Judge another in a doubtful case.
Shall then the Church be judge? which of the twain
The Roman Synagogue or Lutheran?
Neither say you, the former are my foes,
The later with Arminius does close.
Will ye the Dominick shall moderate?
No, they in some thing suit the knaves I hate.
Then choose the Anabaptists at a pinch;
No, I fear drowning, if they me should drench.
Will thou be judge thy self? That likes me well,
What foe judge foe? So heaven may yield to hell.
Then let Arminius have leave to cite,
The Gomarists, and boldly them indite;
If Gomarists, shall any Vorsty yield,
Let that learned combatant be barred the field.
And let new Spanish inquisitions,
With interrogatories vex those sons:
Be sure with heresy, thy charge be strong,
With schism them burden, be it right or wrong.
Damn them to hell as reprobates alive,
The Authors of their damning Art deprive.
What shall for truth, for falsehood pass decree,
The Law is in thine hand, be bold and free.
Thine Articles of faith bring into light,
Though they be errors darker then the night.
Awake the civil sword, the soldier call,
To help the cause of Christ material.
Now, Gomarist does all this seem accursed?
Why did thou then this way pursue at first?
Cymerian darkness droppeth from thy quil;
The ship of truth does touch the Armenian hill,
Who to these haltings twain shall be umpire
Unless some new Elias bring down fire?
Do thou reply that prophets now are gone?
Then in the list of prophets thou art none.
Prophecy, faith and knowledge cease; But when?
When peece-works have an end with perfect men.
A prophet wants not honor save at home;
I Will prophecy of some, but be no Mome.
One by Loves spiri't does evangelize,
Of love and peace against wickedness and vice.
Another in his eight books does impart,
The Heavenly treasures hidden in man's heart,
A third to Ninivitish penitence,
Like a new Jonas does us all incense.
A Belgic prophetess, I here could spring,
Sions laments who dolefully does sing.
Pretor's Elias and Schnaubar Divine,
Europes post writer make? up a new trine.
What need I pantel Trapim, Fair recite?
Or Behman who did like a prophet write?
Arnd and thy lesser prophets I forget,
Oh what a harvest here of prophets met!
Was not the Comet late a prophet true
Of errors, schisms, and wars which all must rue?
Armin's when he had write, Elias found,
With him the fire of love, which to the ground
Consumes the altar with the sacrifice:
Oh that thou Gomarist mighst find the prize!
Who had he lived, would an Elisha prove,
But death untimely did the man remove.
When he that did these Articles discry,
Of the disease articular does ly.
What faith is this which soyles the Deity,
With little-less then tacit blasphemy.
Decrees Laconick which were writ in blood,
Saturn his sons devouring, far from good?
Yet far more cruel things to God the Fount,
And Ocean of goodness thou do count.
Who make him damn from all eternity
Most men then guiltless with unmoved decree;
Which Sovereign justice to him such ascribes,
As him from favor frees not, though from bribes.
Whilst men of equal merits it will have
Some to destroy at pleasure, some to save.
Which to the herds of Epicure sets open a gate,
By Stoical necessity and fate.
If all things hurryed be by fatal stream;
Drink Dutch man, cover, of no virtue dream:
Which for the fathers fault condemn's the seed;
This God abjures, and this his laws forbid,
Go burn thy guiltless infants, Gomarist,
That thou with the name of justice may be blessed.
Which the most simple Deity does fill
Here with a double but contrary will.
Who by his secret will would few men save,
By his revealed none would damned have.
Does not this faith make him an hypocrite;
And worse then Satan (see the foul despite)
For by the Laws of contraries the Devil
Has a will secret good, but the open evil.
Which of Divine Elections makes no choice,
Though one a calling is from sin and vice.
Another crowns after trial late,
A third from ages all conditionate.
Which says, that Esau yet unborn was hated,
Ere he or good or ill had perpetrated.
But why should God himself, so often perplex;
Creating things so hated, self to vex?
God of two seeds did to Rebecca say,
The younger people shall the elder sway.
It is the house of Edom desperate,
Whom Malachy does show this God to hate.
Which general for sorts Christ's ransom makes,
But individuals must claim no stakes.
Is not Christ's Godhead then a boundless spirit,
Infinite in mercy as well as merit.
Which makes God now create all men impure,
(Can he produce uncleanness) most past cure.
Which makes God use force and violence
When his converting work he does commence.
Hence slothful souls, till they drop into hell,
Expect a time, when God should them compel.
Which men at will in sacred things deprives
Of will, as that which no man draws but drives.
Hence threats and promises: man has no merit,
Nor preach, nor teach: He is a block, no spirit.
Which takes away the Law, or its best fruits
As not performable by best recruits.
In vain 'twas writ, man made, and grace distilld,
If by Christ's help it cannot be fulfilled.
Which says, the Saints may will, not further go:
Does not God grant to will, and then to do?
Which will have God to justify the lewd,
While they with sanctity are not endu'd.
Nor are nor will be justified within;
As men devoted to inherent sin.
Which freeth all men both from sin and hell
By Christ his outward cross, and passing bell:
Not urging once the needful death of sin;
Nor the inward cross, which victory must win,
Most precious we hold his blood and merit,
But first we should be purged by his spirit.
Such a physician which makes Christ,
As does not heal the Lepry with the priest.
But hides the sore from the eye with cloth or plaster,
Were men of old so healed by this master?
Which in believers all good works destroys,
Whilst it their phansy fills with these toys.
Faith alone saves; do but this believe,
Do not thy self with further trouble grieve.
Which calls the called to security;
Saying none such (though they may step awry)
Can finally or totally relapse.
With such soft pillowes some men get long naps.
Which says, what hurt does sin, Christ for it was killed:
What need obedience: he has all fulfilled.
Which Satan's kingdom stronger makes then Christ,
For not till death his kingdom is dismissed.
Thus death a passive, stronger is then life;
Then Christ himself to end this ghostly strife.
Go on with this thy Christ, drink, rant and whore,
He is the purse bearer and pays the score.
He is thy porter, all thy burdens bears,
But all without thee, naught within repaires.
How wide the way? how broad make thou the gate
Which leads to life? But Christ has made it strait.
What prodigies does this new blazing Star?
This faith of thine bring forth, O Synod rare?
Recount thine articles; see how they thrive;
With five begun they end with three times five.
Five Amoritish Kings were hanged, but now do rise,
These Amorites, vain talkings, signifies.
O Midian now do thy five Kings return,
Midian is strife, her raised heads we mourn.
See Philistines, your cities raised from death;
Ashkelon, Ashdod, Ekron, Gaza, Gath.
Goth is wraths winepress, Ashdod wasting sore,
Ekron a rooter out of rich and poor.
Ashkelon false weights in judgment uses;
Gaza the knowing wealth, which most ammuseth:
Philistines are men involved in ashes,
Or such as fall down drunken with their glasses.
The five sons of the Giants now revive,
Errors of many cubits high do strive.
The Horim clothed in white specious sins,
The Emims terrible with force and grins.
Zanzummim with their perverse thoughts we find,
The chained Anakims stay not behind.
Builders of Babel, of a triple sect;
Gomarist, Papist, Lutheran erect.
With strife, war, and bloodshed, a Babel new,
Which counts her self the spouse of Christ most true.
Yet from his life does lewdly go astray,
With world, sin. Satan, does the Harlot play.
Three unclean frogs their own respective catt'l,
Of God Almighty's wrath prepare the batt'l.
As Midianites fell by intestine strife,
And Edom, Moab, Ammon lost their life;
So this divided Babel now shall fall;
And blood shall drink, who unto Christ gave gall.
A remnant of each Sect with Lot escape
Which eat not of the Sodomitish grape,
Then fly from Babel, and her sins forsake,
Least thee her judgments chance to overtake.
Dismiss this Faith with her more monstrous brood,
Then Nilus bears (that Monster bearing flood)
Your faith a fidle, ill tuned instrument,
Shall we dance to it, and sing in one consent?
Become a child again, and go to School,
Who will be wise must first become a fool.
Forbidden fruit of knowledge thou must hate,
Obedience to life sets open the gate.
Learn first with Christ to dye, with him to live;
Ere thou of Christ true testimony give.
True faith brings down from heaven the fire of love,
This fiery Chariots mounts men up above.
What Cov'nants promise, what the law does will,
Both law and prophets, Love does all fulfill.
What Is tree of life? what is Paradise above?
What Is Edens stream? what is bliss eternal? love.
What Is God but love? No Mars, no Cupid blind,
This darling virtue does inflame his mind.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 10. line 4. for relations, read revelations. p: 19. l: 4. before
essential, put in, attribute so, p: 20. l: 32. for inward and, r: inward or. p:
24. l: 10. of the chapter, for work, r: rocks and l: 15. for knowledge, r:
foreknowledg. p: 30. l: 5. for that not, r: not that. p: 31. l: 21. for would,
r: could. p: 32. l: 21. after Angels, put in, And men. p: 43. l: 8. for no, r:
out p. 98. l. 19. for intentive r. incitative p. 99. l. 20. for spirit r.
spiritual p. 110. l. 36. after when r. as p. 125. l. 10. for view r. review,
and l. 23 for all r fall. p. 126. l. 1. for but r. one. And l. 18. for Remalia
r. Remaliahs son p. 127. l. 30. for unregerate r. unregenerate. p. ^^, l. 1.
for retain r. return. p. 140. l. 15. for the r. your p. 144. l. 36. for
interminate r. indeterminate p. 155. l. 15. for that r. the. And l. ^^ for
makers r. workers p. 156. l. 15. for person r. personal p. 158. l. ^ for
repeated r. revealed. p: 174. l. 32. for justified r. sanctified p: 201. l. 12.
after against his, put in will p: 208. l. 20. for hopes r. hopers p. 221. l.
1^. for whom r. when p: 22^. l. 32. for fourthly r. fifthly p: 24^. l. 12. of
the chapter for would r. could p: 250. l. 28. for being by 1. Beingly p. 270.
l. 9. for possibility r. visibility p: 273. l. 13. for of r. i^ l. 23. put out
odd p. 274. l. 8. for be not r. not be p: 276. l. 9. put opt delusion, and l.
23. after passes put in with p: 280. l. 10. of the ch^^ for tumble r. jumble
p: 285. l. 5. for certify r. rectify p: 297. l. 28. for of his r. of this p:
298. before l. 2. add And p: 310. l. 24. for verticum r. viaticum.

The late SYNODS Confession of Faith. EXAMINED.
CHAP. I. Of the Holy Scripture.
ALthough the light of nature and the works of Creation and providence do so
far manifest the goodness, wisdom, and power of God, as to leav men
unexcusable Romans 2.14.15. To. 1.19.20. Psalm. 19.1.2.3. Ro^. 1.32. with Chap.
2.1.
; yet are they not sufficient to give that knowledge of God, and of his will
which is necessary unto salvation 1 Cor. 1.21. 1. Cor. 2.13.14.
. Therefore it pleased the Lord at sundry times, and in diverse manners to
reveal himself, and to declare that his will unto his Church Heb. 1.1.
; and afterward for the better preserving and propagating of the Truth, and
for the more sure establishment and comfort of the Church against the
corruption of the flesh, and malice of Satan, and of the world; to commit the
same wholly unto Writing Prove. 22.19, 20, 21. Luke 1.3, 4. Romans 15.4 Mat. 4.4,
7, 10. Isa. 8.19, 20.
: which makes the holy Scripture to be most necessary 2 Timothy 3.15. 2 Pet. 1.19
; those former ways of Gods revealing his will unto his people being now
ceased Heb. 1.1, 2.
.

II. Under the name of holy Scripture, or the word of God written, are now
contained all the Books of the Old and New Testament: which are these.

Of the Old Testament.

Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomy, Joshuah, Judges, Ruth, 1
Samuel, 2 Samuel, 1 Kings, 2 Kings, 1 Chronicles, 2 Chronicles, Ezra, Nehemiah,
Esther, Job, Psalms, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, The Song of Songs, Isaiah,
Jeremiah, Lamentations, Ezekiel, Daniel, Hosea, Joel, Amos, Obadiah, Jonah,
Micah, Nahum, Habakkuk, Zephaniah, Haggai, Zechariah, Malachi.

Of the New Testament.

The Gospels according to Matthew, Mark, Luke, John, the Acts of the Apostles,
Paul's Epistles to the Romans, Corinthians 1. Corinthians 2. Galatians,
Ephesians, Philippians, Colossians, Thessalonians 1. Thessalonians 2. to
Timothy 1. to Timothy 2. to Titus, to Philemon, the Epistle to the Hebrews,
the Epistle of James, the first and second Epistles of Peter, the first,
second, and third Epistles of John, the Epistle of Jude, the Revelation of John.

All which are given by inspiration of God, to be the rule of Faith and Life
Luke 16.29, 31. Ephesians. 2.20. Rev. 22.18, 19. 2 Timothy 3.16
.

III. The Books commonly called Apocrypha, not being of Divine inspiration, are
no part of the Canon of the Scripture: and therefore are of no authority in the
Church of God, nor to be any otherwise approved or made use of, than other
humane writings. Luke 24.27, 44. Romans 3.2. 2 Pet. 1.21.
.

IV. The Authority of the Holy Scripture, for which it ought to be believed,
and obeyed, depends not upon the Testimony of any man or Church, but wholly
upon God (who is truth it self) the Author thereof: and therefore it is to be
received, because it is the word of God. 2 Pet. 1.19, 21. 2 Timothy 3.16 1 John
5.9 1 Thessalonians. 2.13.
.

V. We may be moved and induced by the Testimony of the Church, to an high
and reverend esteem of the Holy Scripture 1 Timothy 3.15.
, and the Heavenliness of the matter, the efficacy of the Doctrine, the majesty
of the style, the consent of all the parts, the scope of the whole (which is to
give all glory to God) the full discovery it makes of the only way of man's
salvation, the many other incomparable excellencies, and the entire perfection
thereof; are arguments whereby it does abundantly evidence it self to be the
word of God: yet notwithstanding our full persuasion, and assurance of the
infallible truth and divine authority thereof is from the inward work of the
holy Spirit bearing witness by and with the Word in our hearts 1 John 2.20.27.
John 16.13, 14. 1 Cor. 2.10, 11, 12. Isai. 59.21.
.

VI. The whole Counsel of God concerning all things necessary for his own
glory, man's salvation, faith and life, is either expressly set down in
Scripture, or by good and necessary consequenet may be deduced from Scripture,
unto which nothing at any time is to be added, whether by new revelations of
the spirit or traditions of men 2 Timothy 3.15.16, 17. Gal. 1.8, 9. 2 These. 2.2.
; nevertheless we acknowledge the inward illumination of the spirit of God to
be necessary for the saving understanding of such things as are revealed in the
Word John 6.45. 1 Cor. 2.9, 10.12.
; and that there are some circumstances concerning the worship of God, and
Government of the Church, common to humane actions, and societies which are to
be ordered by the light of Nature, and Christian prudence, according to the
general rules of the Word, which are always to be observed 1 Cor. 11.13, 14. 1
Cor. 14.26.40.
.

VII. All things in Scripture are not alike plain in themselves, nor alike
clear unto all 1 Pet. 3.16.
, yet those things which are necessary to be known, believed, and observed for
salvation, are so clearly propounded and opened in some place of Scripture or
other, that not only the learned, but the unlearned, in a due use of the
ordinary means may attain unto a sufficient understanding of them Psalm.
119.105, 130.
.

VIII. The Old Testament in Hebrew (which was the native language of the people
of God of Old) and the New Testament in Greek (which at the time of the writing
of it, was most generally known to the Nations) being immediately inspired by
God, and by his singular care and providence, kept pure in all ages, are
therefore authentical Mat. 5.18.
; so as in all controversies of Religion, the Church is finally to appeal unto
them Isa: 8.20 Acts 15.15 John 5.39, 46.
: but because these original tongues are not known to all the people of God,
who have right unto and interest in the Scriptures, and are commanded, in the
fear of God, to read and search them Joh. 5.39
, therefore they are to be translated into the vulgar language of every Nation
into which they come 1 Cor. 14.6.9, 11, 12, 24, 27, 28.
, that the Word of God dwelling plentifully in all, they may worship him in an
acceptable manner Col. 3.16.
, and through patience and comfort of the Scriptures may have hope Romans 15.4.
.

IX. The infallible rule of interpretation of Scripture, is the Scripture it
self; and therefore when there is a question about the true and full sense of
any Scripture (which is not manifold, but one) it must be searched and known by
other places that speak more clearly 2 Pet. 1.20, 21. Act. 15.15, 16.
.

X. The supreme Judge by which all controversies of Religion are to be
determined, and all Decrees of Counsels, opinions of ancient Writers, Dostrins
of men, and private Spirits, are to be examined; and in whose sentence we are
to rest; can be no other but the holy Spirit speaking in the Scripture Mat. 22
29, 31. Ephesians. 2, 20. with Acts 28.25.
.

The late ASSEMBLIES Confession of FAITH Examined.
CHAP. I. Of the holy Scriptures.
IN This Chapter you give an honorable testimony in many thiings to the
testimony of truth; that is the holy Scriptures, yet some things very
unwarrantable, and no less prejudicial to truth, have here, as elsewhere
slipped from you.

For first, you say, Section 1. That those former ways of Gods revealing his
will unto his people are now ceased; where, if you by those former ways,
understand such ways and means whereby God either ordinarily instructed the
people, as he taught the Families of the Patriarchs, by the Patriarchs
themselves, Genesis 18.19. and the people of the old world by the preaching of
Noah; 2 Pet. 2.5. or extraordinarily, by Angels, Dreams, Visions, Inspirations,
and the like, revealed his will to the Prophets and Apostles of old, you are
very much mistaken.

For as Gods arm is not now shortened, so neither is his care, good will, and
love toward the sons of men changed. He has of late, as elsewhere, so in
Wirtembergh spoken to a servant of his by an Angel, and forewarned them of the
return, and reinvasion of the Turks, to chastise all those parts of Europe for
their wickedness.

And for raising up of Prophets upon special occasion, consider these ensuing
Scriptures, among many others; Numb. 12.6. If there be a Prophet among you, I
the Lord will make my self known unto him in a vision, and will speak unto him
in a dream: Where the Lord speaks of that which is his usual course and
practice, and that which he will continue to do.

Isai. 59.21. As for me, this is my Covenant with them says the Lord; my
spirit which is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall
not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the
mouth of thy seeds seed, says the Lord, from henceforth and for ever.

Amos 3.7. Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he first reveals his
secrets to his servants the Prophets.

Joel 2.28, 29. And it shall come to pass afterward, that I will pour out of
my spirit upon all flesh, and your sons and your Daughters shall Prophefie, and
your old men shall dream dreams, and your young men shall see visions, etc.

Matthew. 28.34. Wherefore behold I send unto you Prophets and wise men, and
Scribes, and some of them ye shall kill, etc.

Rev. 6 9, 10, 11. Among other things to come, John saw (when Christ had opened
the fifth seal) under the Altar the souls of them lying which were slain for
the word of God, and for the Testimony which they held, etc. and heard that
more of them should be slain. Now this their Testimony, is not only called the
Testimony of Jesus Christ: Rev. 12.17. but also the Spirit of prophecy it
self. Rev. 9 10.

Even when Babylon is not only come to her height, but her downfall also, there
are Apostles and Prophets found in the Church, who are called to rejoice at her
overthrow. Rev. 18.20. Rejoice over her thou Heaven and ye holy Apostles and
Prophets, for God has avenged you on her: see also verse 24. For in her was
found the blood of holy Prophets, and of Saints, and of all that are slain upon
the Earth.

To all which add that of Wisdom 7.27. For she, that is, Wisdom, being but
one, can do all things; and remaining in her self, she makes all things new;
and in all ages entering into holy souls, she makes them friends of God and
Prophets.

Out of all which, and many Scriptures more, it is evident that the Lord will
have Prophets in all ages, and especially when he is about to bring
extraordinary Judgments upon the World in general, and the Churches in
special; and that the last times shall abound most of all with the prophetical
Spirit; so that these extraordinary ways of Gods revealing himself, neither are
ceased, nor shall determine in the Militant Church.

Secondly, in the third Section you Words are these; The Books commonly called
Apocrypha, not being of Divine inspiration; are no part of the Canon of the
Scriptures; and therefore are of no authority in the Church of God, nor to be
any otherwise approved or made use of then other humane Writings.

Where we cannot but wonder at three things: First, that you should equal those
Books to other humane Writings, without any discrimination; for you know that
some humane Writings are profane, some merely fabulous, some obscene, some
impious, some blasphemous, and some Atheistical.

Secondly, that you should give the Books (in the general commonly called
Apocryphal) no pre-eminence above other humane Writings, since you know that
they cannot only plead their Antiquity, but Gods special preservation; that the
Church and Saints have bin their Treasurers and Library keepers, that they have
been bound up and translated in various Languages with the other Oracles of
God, which by all are acknowledged Canonical, that they have been allowed and
appointed to be read not only in private but publicly: Nor are you ignorant
what an high esteem both Saint Augustine and other Fathers had of them above
all humane Writings, though they did not hold them coequal every way with those
commonly called Canonical.

And lastly, we marvail that you should use no distinction at all concerning
these Books, but pass the same censure upon them all alike: Since that the Book
of Tobit, or Tobias is extant in the Hebrew, as well as Greek and Latin; the
Book of Ecclesiasticus was translated out of the Hebrew text, by Jesus the son
of Sirach, as himself confesses. This Book, with the Book of Wisdom breaths
forth such a spirit of Wisdom and Holiness, that it may be said, Non vox
hominem sonat, that it transcends all humane capacity. To say nothing that the
words which the Apostle has, Hebrews chap. 1. verse 3. Who being the brightness
of his glory, and the express Image of his person, etc. seem to be taken out of
the 7 chap. of Wisdom, verse 26. these words, Hebr. 11.5. That he had pleased
God, are taken out of Wisd. 4.10. compare 1 Cor. 6.2 with Wisd. 3.8. More
especially, the fourth Book of Esdras is acknowledged by Clemens Alexandrinus,
Faber, and many more learned men to be written by inspirement of the Holy
Ghost. It is owned as Canonical by diverse holy Prophets of later times. Our
Savior cites these words, which are written, Mat. 23.37, 38 How often would I
have gathered thy children together, even as a hen gathers her chickens under
her wings, and ye would not. Behold your house is left unto you desolate; out
of the second Book of Esdras, chap. 1. verse 30. Many things showed to St John
in the Revelation, are found in that Book. It is doubtless a most lively
prediction of these last times; and the great famine, and general desolation
spoken of in the last Chapter, which is now in his accomplishment, will ere
long convince all the world that this Book is, or should be Canonical.

When you shall shortly see three Emperors at once in Europe, one set up by the
Pope, another by the Princes and People, and then the great Turk usurping that
place and dignity, think upon Esdras his vision of the Eagle with three heads,
Chap. 11.12.

Thirdly, Whereas you say in the sixth Section, That nothing at any time is to
be added to the holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, whether by new
relations of the Spirit, or Traditions of men.

We desire to know what warrant you have thus to determine. If you say that
Rev. 22 18. it is written, that if any man shall add unto these things, God
shall add unto him the plagues that are written in this Book.

We answer, that so much in effect was forbidden long before, as Prove. 30.6.
Add thou not unto his words, least be reprove thee, and thou be found a lier:
Yet many Books of the Holy Prophets and Apostles have been added since the
written word of those times, yea the same inhibition was given by Moses: Deuteronomy.
4.2. and 12, 32. Ye shall not add to the word which I command you, neither
shall you diminish ought from it. Therefore this addition thus prohibited must
necessarily be understood of any new Doctrine, in substance differing from the
Old, even that of Moses.

But that there should be a vindication of the same when misunderstood, or a
more full and free publication of the same, by the Prophets of the
Old Testament, or inspired men of the New, is not interdicted, but rather
promised.

It is true, the whole Counsel of God, concerning the glorifying of God and
man's salvation, is revealed in the New Testament, and so it was even in the
Pentateuch of Moses; Deuteronomy. 29.29. The secret things belong to the Lord our God;
but those things which are revealed belong to us and to our Children for ever,
that we may do the words of the Law.

Now look what reasons can be rendered why new books of Holy Scripture should
be written after Moses, by the Prophets of the Old Testament, and after both by
the Prophets and Apostles of the New Testament, and the self same will plead
for other Scriptures to be yet written after both.

If it be said that the Devil in time brought in a false understanding of
Moses, and so corrupted both the Civil and Ecclesiastical Estate, and therefore
it was necessary that Prophets should be raised up to clear the Doctrine of
Moses; to reprove Princes, Priests, and Prophets; to restore the Truth and
worship of God; and to foretell things to come, whether good or evil, etc. And
that in process of time, when Satan had corrupted Moses, and the Prophets with
false glosses, perverted the civil Government, defiled (...) Ministers, and
worship of God: That for the Reformation of these and all other abuses, as also
to record what was fulfilled in their days, and to prophecy of future things;
the Apostles and inspired men of the New Testament were appointed to write the
respective Books thereof: we shall crave leave to demand these things of you
again.

First, Whether Satan that old and malicious perverter of all truths and
goodness be not alive, and as vigilant and active, as heretofore.

Secondly, Whether it was not foretold even in the New Testament, that there
should be a departure from the Faith as before, 2 These. 2.3. 1 Timothy 4.1. Luke
18 8. That there should be false Teachers in the last days, who privily shall
bring in damnable heresies even denying the Lord that bought them: 2 Pet. 2.1,
2. etc. which Jude in his Epistle testifies also: That the whole Book of God
should become a sealed Book, Rev. 5.1. etc. That a smoke ascending out of the
bottomless pit, should darken the Sun and the Air, Rev. 9.2. That the two
witnesses which prophecy in sackcloath a thousand two hundred and threescore
days or years (which can be no other then the two Testaments, as most
spiritual men conclude) were to be slain and deprived of light and life for a
time: Rev. 11 8, to 12. That iniquity should so abound, that all love and true
goodness should decay: Matthew 24.12. 2 Timothy 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. etc. That
there should be false Christ's and false Prophets, which should preach those
Christ's, Matthew. 24.24. That Antichrist the son of perdition should fit in the
Temple of God, as if he were God, or Christ, 2 Thessalonians. 2.3, 4, 5, 6, 7. etc. And
finally, that for the most part the visible Church, with her several Sects,
should become a great Harlot, calling her self the Spouse of Christ, and
committing Whoredoms daily against Him, his holy example, and righteous Life
and Kingdom (which should be orabide in us) being full of names of Blasphemy,
the most wicked of every Sect or Profession calling themselves, ^^e Temple and
Tabernacle of God, and the Saints of Christ, Rev. 17.1, 2.

Thirdly, whether Christ himself shall not come again in the Spirit to reveal
Antichrist, to consume him with the Spirit of his mouth, and to destroy him
with the brightness of his coming, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. Luke 18.8. To bind Satan, and
seal him up in the bottomless pit, that he deceive not the Nations, as before,
Revel. 20.1, 2. and to shorten the days of seducement, contention, and mutual
destruction in the Churches, for the Elect sake, lest no flesh should be
saved, Mat. 24.22, 23.

Fourthly, whether the Gospel is not to be preached anew to the whole world
after all this ignorance, error, and corruption brought in, Mat. 24.12, 13, 14.
And because iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall grow cold; but he
that endures unto the end, the same shall be saved. And this Gospel of the
Kingdom shall be preached in all the World, for a witness to all Nations; and
then shall the end come, to wit, the end of Babylon, or of the false and wicked
Jerusalem of the Gentiles, spoken of in that Chapter under the type of the
former proud, factious, contentious, bloody, Christ-murthering City, of which
Christ took occasion to speak, Verse 1, 2. Nor was this universal publication
of the Gospel fulfilled in the Apostles days, but was foreshewed to St John as
a thing yet to com, Re. 14, 6, 7. And I saw another Angel flying in the midst
of heaven having the everlasting Gospel to preach to them that dwell on the
earth, and to every Nation, and kindred, and tongue and people; saying with a
loud voice: Fear God, and give glory to him, for the hour of his judgment is
come. That is, upon the last wicked Jerusalem before mentioned: Whereupon the
fall of Babylon follows, verse. 8. And the curse of him that worshipeth the
Beast or his image, verse. 9. both which, Babylon and the Beast become clearly
laid open by the said preaching of the Gospel.

Fifthly, Whether there shall not another Elias arise after John Baptist, to
prepare the way for Christ's spiritual coming, to purge and renew the earth, and
to judge and govern the world in righteousness, according to manifold promises
and prophesies, Isai. 2.1, 2, 3, 4. Micah 4.1, 2, 3. Jsa. 11.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and
chap. 54.5. Dan. 7.14, 27. Zach. 14.9. Psalm. 96.9, 10, 11, 12, 13. and Psalm.
98.1, 9. The reason of this Querie, is taken from the express words of our
Savior, Matthew. 17.11. Jesus answered and said unto them, Elias truly shall
first come and restore all things; where he grants that there is another
Elias yet to come besides John Baptist already come, spoken of in the verse
following.

Sixthly, Whether there shall not in time be a cleerer and more free
dispensation of all truths after the Apostles days, then in those or any
former times. Luk 12.3. Therefore whatsoever ye have spoken in darkness, shall
be heard in the light; and that which ye have spoken in the ear and closets,
shall be proclaimed upon the house topps.

Seventhly, Whether the Apostle reciteing the parts and holy vessels of the
Tabernacle in order, Hebr. 9.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. and telling us ver. 5. of which
things we cannot now speak particularly, (to wit by way of exposition) do not
imply that a time should come, wherein all those things, and likewise all other
mistical things of the Old and New Testament should be opened and declared: The
Holy Scriptures being written for our instruction here upon earth, and not in
heaven, or after this life.

8. Whether this Gospel, which is to be published to all Nations, shall not be
written, as well as the former was, that it may be so published, especially
since it is called an Everlasting Gospel, Rev. 14.6. shall it not be written
for the ages to come, as the Old and New Testament were before.

9. Yea, may not those Waters which issued out of the Temple, Ezekiel. 47.1. etc.
and Joel 3.18. Zach. 14.8. Rev. 22.1. be understood, as of all the gifts of the
Spirit, so of Gods most pure and holy doctrine, which shall then proceed from
the mouth and pen of the Holy Ghost? as is promised, Isa. 2.2, 3, 4, etc.
especially since the Word of God is expressly compared to Water, Jo. 15.3. Now
are ye clean through the Word which I have spoken unto you. Ephesians. 5.26. That he
might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of Water by the Word.

10. Shall that Spirit of God which is to be powered out in the last days upon
all flesh, lose his writing faculty which he formerly had and used in precedent
ages?

11. Shall not the Art of Printing, or gift of God bestowed upon the last age,
be made the instrument of Gods Holy Spirit to publish his sacred and infallible
Truth, as well as it has been made Satan's way of disspreading his falsehoods?

But to conclude this point, let us entreat you of the Synod, if you have any
Germans sitting among you, to enquire of them, or others, what inspired men,
or professing to be such, even of their Nation, have written any Gospel to the
whole world within six score years last past? and whether some one of them
has not written more then all the Books of the New Testament amount to? If so,
it may concern them, you, and us to find them out, to read them with
diligence, and earnest prayer to God for true enlightening judgment and
guidance, to compare and examine them not with the Writings of men be they who
they will; but with and by the Holy Scriptures themselves: for the Holy Ghost
cannot contradict it self.

If we find upon due search any such grace and mercy vouchsafed to this last
age, it may show the true cause why Germany (before and above all other
Countries) according to that Acts 3.22, 23. has bin plagued; and also afford
us a present mean and expedient whereby all controversies in Religion may be
decided from Gods own mouth, and hold forth a true Model to reform all
Churches and Commonwealths by. Sed verbum sat Sapientibus.

Fourthly, and lastly, in the tenth Section of this Chapter, you say; The
supreme Judge by which all controversies of Religion are to be determined, and
all Decrees of Councels, opinions of Ancient Writers, Doctrines of men and
private Spirits are to be examined, and in whose sentence we are to rest; can
be no other but the holy Spirit speaking in the Scriptures.

If you had added these words to private Spirits, even public Spirits also,
or pretending to be such, we would have closed with you in that enumeration,
and have acknowledged that the Holy Ghost, (yet left at large) must be the only
supreme Judge, to wit, either speaking in the holy Scripture, or without it,
although in all his determinations of Doctrine he does speak according to
former Scriptures; And hence it is, that for the trial of Spirits in his
days, Isaiah sends men to the Law and the Testimony, Isa. 8.20. And Saint Paul
in his time transmits men to the former Prophets, 1 Cor. 14.32. And the Spirit
of the Prophets is subject to the Prophets. And accordingly for the trial of
new or late professing Prophets, we are to examine their Doctrine by the former
Writings of the Old and New Testament; but not by our own, or our private
Authors corrupt and darkened Judgments. For the true Prophets were sent to judge
and reprove our Errors, and not to be judged or condemned by us. 1 Cor. 2.15.

The only exception that we take against your tenth and last section, is this,
That you limit the holy Ghost, as if he was inherent in the Scriptures, or
could not determinate without the same, when he pleases, saying "It is the
holy Ghost speaking in the Scripture, Howbeit, if you meant no more by that
expression, then this; That the Holy Ghost which first dictated the Scripture,
or still speaks in them being taken in his own sense; We admit it to be true,
but your exposition there is both obscure and ambiguous.

CHAP. II. Of God and of the Holy Trinity.
THere is but one only Deu. 6.4. 1 Cor. 8.4.6.
, living and true God 1 Thessalonians. ^9. Jer. 10.10.
: Who is infinite in Being and Perfection Job. 11.7.8.9. Job. 26.14.
; a most pure Spirit Joh. 4.21.
, invisible 1 Timothy 1.17.
, without body, parts, Deuteronomy. 4.15, 16. John 4.24. with Luke 24.39.
or passions Acts 14.11, 15.
, immutable Jam. 1.17. Mal. 3.6.
, immense 1 Ki. 8.27. Jer. 23.23, 24.
, eternal Psa. 90.2. 1 Timothy 1.17.
, incomprehensible Psalm: 135.3.
, almighty Gen: 17.1. Revel: 4.8.
, most wise Rom: 16.27.
, most holy Isa: 6.3. Revel: 4.8.
, most free Psalm: 115.3.
, most absolute Exodus: 3.14.
, working all things according to the counsel of his own immutable and most
righteous will Ephesians: 1.11.
, for his own glory Prove: 16.14. Rom: 11.36.
; most loving 1 John 4.8, 16.
, gracious, merciful, long suffering, abundant in goodness and truth, forgiving
iniquity, transgression and sin Exodus: 34 6, 7.
; the rewarder of them that diligently seek him Hebr: 11.6.
, and withal most just, and terible in his judgments Nehem: 9.32.33.
, hating all sin Psalm: 5.5, 6.
, and will by no means clear the guilty. Nahum 1.2, 3. Exodus: 34.7.
.

II. God has all life Joh: 5.26.
, glory Acts 7.2.
, goodness Psalm: 119.68.
, blessedness 1 Timothy: 6.15. Rom: 9.5.
, in and of himself; and is alone in, and unto himself all-sufficient, not
standing in need of any creature which he has made Acts 17.4, 25.
, nor deriving any glory from them Job: 22.2, 3.
, but only manifesting his own glory in, by, unto, and upon them: He is the
alone fountain of all Being, of whom, through whom, and to whom are all things
Romans 11.36.
, and has most Sveraign Dominion over them, to do by them; for them, and upon
them whatsoever himself pleases Re: 4.11. 1 Timothy: 6.15. Dan: 4.25, 35.
; In his sight all things are open and manifest Heb: 4.13.
; his knowledge is infinite, infallible, and independent upon the creature Rom:
11.33, 34. Psa: 147.5.
, so as nothing to him is contingent or uncertain Act: 15.18 Ezekiel: 11.5.
; He is most holy in all his counsels, in all his works, and in all his
commands Psa: 145.17. Rom: 7.12.
; to him is due from Angels and men and every other creature, whatsoever
worship, service, or obedience, he is pleased to require of them. Revel: 5.12,
13, 14.
.

III. In the unity of the Godhead there be three Persons, of one substance,
power, and eternity: God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost. 1 John: 5.7. Mat: 3.16.17. Mat: 28.19. 2 Cor: 13.14.
The Father is of none, neither begotten, nor proceeding: The Son is eternally
begotten of the Father: Joh: 1.14.18.
The Holy Ghost eternally proceeding from the Father and the Son. Joh: 1.15.26.
Gal: 4.6.
.

CHAP. II. Of God, and of the Holy Trinity, Examined.
IN This Chapter yon present us in the first Section, with a large description
of Gods Essence, where we cannot but wonder that you should omit an essential
to him, and an essence so bright and glorious in the Godhead, as the Divine
light of God is, whereby he manifests himself unto Angels and Men, opposes
himself to the Prince of darkness: And of which glorious Attribute or Nature of
his, the word of God makes so frequent mention.

There are found in the holy Scripture, some short, but excellent descriptions
of him; first Hebr 11.6. That God is, (that is) he only is of, from, by, and
in himself, and all other things are by, in, and for him. Secondly, God is
light, 1 John 1.5. that is, a lightful, bright and glorious being. Thirdly, God
is a Spirit, John 4.24. that is a most spiritual being, yea that Spirit (...).
2 Cor. 3 17. Lastly, God is love, 1 John 4.16. that is, a most holy, good,
gracious, kind, patient, virtuous, and perfect Being; for love is the bond of
perfection, Col. 3.14. see 1 Cor. 13.1, 2, to the 13.

Now it seems strange unto us, that you which are, and who would be accounted
Seers, should not observe the second of these.

Is not light Gods glorious Robe and Vestment? Psalm. 104.2. Who coverest thy
self wi^h light, as with a garment.

Is not light Gods habitation? Who dwells in the light whereunto no man can
approach 1 Timothy 6.16.

Does not God distinguish himself, and his work, from Satan's, and his Kingdom,
by this very thing? 1 John 1.5, 6, 7. This then is the message which we have
received of him, and declare unto you, that God is light, and in him dwells
no darkness at all, etc.

Is not God the Father called the light of Israel? Isa. 10.17. And the light of
Israel shall be for a fire, and his holy one for a flame.

Is it not said of the Son of God. John 1.9. That was the true light which
lights every man which comes into the world?

Is not the Holy Ghost the everlasting light of Gods spiritual Jerusalem? Isa.
60.20. Thy Sun shall no more go down, neither shall thy Moon withdraw it self:
for the Lord shall be thine everlasting light, and the days of thy mourning
shall be ended.

Is not Gods work in the regenerate light of this light? Ephesians. 5.8. For ye
were once darkness, but now ye are light in the Lord.

Yea, Is not our everlasting inheritance a participating of his living and
glorious light? Psalm. 36.9. For with thee is the Fountain of life, and in thy
light we shall set light; Col. 1.12. Giving thanks unto God the Father, who
has made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light.

Brethren what would you think of him who should undertake to give you a
description of the Sun, and should leave out his glorious splendour and light?
would you not conclude he had suffered some Eclipse of his inward and outward
senses? But we desire to spare you, and hope the best of many of you.

But here we must not omit to show our great detestation of a late Diabolical
Doctrine, which turns God into a Devil, making him the Author of the evils of
sin, as well as the evils of punishment; and affirming that he is the worker in
deeds of darkness as well as in the works of light; yea, maintaining that he is
as well pleased with the one, as the other; See 1 John 1.5. This then is the
Message which we have heard of him, and declare unto you, that God is light,
and in him is no darkness at all. If we say that we have fellowship with him,
and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not the truth. So also Jam. 3.11.

CHAP. III. Of God's Eternal Decree.
GOd from all Eternity did by the most wise and holy Council of his own will,
freely and unchangable ordain whatsoever comes to pass Ephesians: 1.11. To: 11.33.
Heb: 6.17. Rom: 9.15, 18.
: yet so as that neither is God the Author of sin Jam. 1.13, 17. 1 John 1.5.
, nor is violence offered to the will of the creatures, nor is the liberty or
contingency of second causes taken away, but rather established Act: 2.23. Mat:
17.12. Acts 4.27, 28. Job: 19.11. Pro: 16.33.
.

II. Although God knows whatsoever may, or can come to pass upon all supposed
conditions Act: 15.18 1 Samuel: 23, 12. Mat: 11.21, 23.
; yet has he not decreed any thing because he foresaw it as future, or as
that which would come to pass upon such conditions Rom: 9.11, 13, 16, 18.
.

III. By the decree of God, for the manifestation of his glory; some men and
Angels 1 Timothy: 5.21. Mat: 25.41
are predestined unto everlasting life, and others foreordained to
everlasting death. Rom: 9.22, 23. Ephesians: 1.5, 6. Pro: 16.4.


IV. These men and Angels thus predestined, and foreordained, are
particularly and unchangable designed, and their number is so certain and
definite that it cannot be either increased or diminished 2 Timothy: 2.9. Joh:
13.18.
.

V. Those of mankind that are predestined unto life, God before the
foundation of the world was laid, according to his eternal and immutable
purpose, and the secret counsel and good pleasure of his will, has chosen in
Christ, unto everlasting glory Ephesians: 1.4, 9, 12. Rom: 8.30. 2 Timothy: 1.9. 1 These:
5.9.
, out of his mere free grace and love, without any foresight of faith, or good
works, or preseverance in either of them, or any other thing in the creature,
as conditions, or causes moving him thereunto; and all to the praise of his
glorious grace Ephesians: 1.6, 12.
.

VI. As God has appointed the Elect unto glory; so has he by the eternal and
most free purpose of his will, foreordained all the means thereunto. 1 Pe: 1.2.
Ephesians: 1.4, 5. Ephesians: 2.10. 2 These: 2.13.
Wherefore they who are elected, being fallen in Adam, are redeemed by Christ,
1 These: 5.9, 10. Tit: 2.14.
are effectually called unto Faith in Christ, by his Spirit working in due
season, are justified, adopted, sanctified Ro^. 8.30. Ephesians. 1.5. 2 These. 2.13.
, and kept by his power through Faith unto salvation 1 Pet 1.5.
; Neither are any other redeemed by Christ, effectually called, justified,
adopted, sanctified, and saved, but the Elect only Joh. 17.9. Ro^: 8.28. to
the end. Joh: 6.64, 65. Joh: 10.26. Joh: 8.46. 1 John: 2.19.
.

VII. The rest of mankind God was pleased, according to the unsearchable
council of his own will, whereby he extends or withholdeth mercy; as he
pleases, for the glory of his Sovereign Power over his creatures, to pass by;
and to ordain them to dishonor and wrath for their sin, to the praise of his
glorious justice Mat: 11.25, 26. Rom: 9.17, 18, 21, 21. 2 Timothy: 2.19, 20. Judge:
5.4. 1 Pet: 4.8.
.

VIII. The Doctrine of this high Mystery of Predestination is to be handled
with special prudence and care Rom: 9.20. Ro^: 11.32. D^u. 29.29.
; that men attending the will of God revealed in his word, and yielding
obedience thereunto, may, from the certainly of their effectual vocation, be
assured of their eternal Election 2 Pet: 1.19.
.

Rom: 9.11, 13, 16. Ephesians: 1.4, 9.
So that this Doctrine affords matter of praise, reverence, and admiration of
God Ephesians: 1.6. To: 11.33.
: and of humility, diligence, and abundant consolation to all that sincerely
obey the Gospel Rom: 1^.5.6.20. 2 Pet: 1.^0. Rom: 8.33. Luk: 10.10.
.

CHAP. III. Of God's Eternal Decree examined.
IN this Chapter you begin well in the first Section, and end not much worse in
the last, if you had added a word or two more, and had observed the advice
therein given; but in the rest you fail much. Here then we must crave your
patience, (as elsewhere) that you will suffer your failings to be represented,
your errors detected, and those objections which have been so many stumbling
blocks to you, and many others, and may prove works of offense hereafter also,
if not timely removed, to be answered and cleared.

Your failings are here specially two; First, you forget your selves, and
contradict what you have spoken before in your describing of Gods holy nature;
and Secondly, you distinguish not things, but differ very much, as,

First, Betwixt Gods general knowledge, whereby he sees and knows all persons
and things beforehand: Acts 15.18. known unto God are all his works; and his
special foreknowledge of some men's ways and courses; and these either evil and
disapproved in themselves, as was the obstinacy and envy of the Jews, into
whose hands Christ was delivered by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge
of God, Act. 2.23. and Acts 4.28. or else foreseen and allowed, as the faith,
obedience and perseverance of the Saints, Romans 8.29. For whom he did foreknow,
those he did predestinate to be made conformable to the Image of his Son.

Secondly, Betwixt Gods predestination from everlasting, and his destination in
time.

Thirdly, Betwixt a predestination of things, and those either good, such as
are good works, which God has ordained that we should walk in them, Ephesians.
2.10. or evil, to wit, the evil of punishment; as, Tophet was ordained of old,
Jsai. 30.33. and betwixt the predestination of persons; and those either to
some office, estate or condition here, as Jeremiah was ordained of God to be a
Prophet, Jer. 1.4. Paul an Apostle, 1 Timothy 2.7. or to an eternal estate
hereafter of life or death.

Fourthly, Betwixt an absolute predestination, either unto life, and so only
is Christ ordained; or unto death, and so is the spiritual Antichrist, and that
great son of perdition appointed to death: and betwixt a conditional
predestination, either to life or death, under which, not only Angels fall but
men also; as, Romans 8.13. For if we live after the flesh we shall die; but if
through the Spirit ye shall mortify the deeds of the flesh, ye shall live.

Fifthly, Betwixt a general Election unto life, which is always conditional;
as first, of the Angels in case they should persevere in obedience, and so
retain their first estate. And then secondly, of men, and that in a twofold
estate: For in the state of Innocence they were ordained to life in case of
perseverance in obedience, and the retention of God's Image in which they were
created. And secondly, after their fall, in case they embrace the grace that
shall be offered, and fulfill the conditions or requiring of the same. And
betwixt God's special Election of some persons, both Angels and men out of
foreseen perseverance, etc.

Sixthly, Betwixt the special Election of God, which is from eternity, out of
foreseen Faith, Love, Obedience, Perseverance, etc. or that which is made in
time actually; and that is either conditional, as of those which (by
regeneration) are called out of the sinful estate, wherein other men are yet
captived; and so all called ones are said to be chosen: John 15.16, 19. and
Election in this notion is all one with calling: 2 Pet. 1.10. Wherefore the
rather Brethren, give all diligence to make your calling and election sure.
Which persons are chosen or called to life, conditionally, that they persevere
in Faith and Obedience, etc. Romans 11.22. Behold therefore the goodness and
severity of God; toward them that fell severity; but toward thee goodness, if
thou continue in his goodness: therwise thou also shall be cut off. Or else the
Election of God in time is absolute, such was the Election and choice of the
blessed Angels, after their perseverance in the fear and love of God, when
others had fallen therefrom.

And such is the Election of men spoken of by the Lord, Isai. 48.10. Behold I
have chosen thee in the furnace of affliction. These have fulfilled the
conditions aforesaid of peseverance in Faith, Obedience, and Mortification. And
therefore were absolutely and finally chosen to eternal life. These are the
Elect that cannot be deceived, Matthew. 24. and who shall never fall.

Seventhly, Betwixt some that were only typically Elected, or passed by in
God's providence, as figures and representatives of those which should be saved
or perish; as Isaac and Ishmael, the two sons of Abrab^^ were, Genesis 17.16. and
Romans 9.6, 7. without any prejudice to the salvation of either. And those which
are really elected or rejected; For as Moses, and Aaron were debarred entrance
into the land of promise, for their doubting or unbelief, for a warning to all
unbeleevers, Heb 4.1.11. Revel. 21.8. yet without any peril of their own
exclusion from eternal life (none (that we know of) making the least doubt of
their salvation) so it was not prejudicial to the salvation of Ishmael (his
father Abraham having obtained life for him by his prayer to God, Genesis 17 20,
21.) that he carried the type of those who should not be heirs of life; Gal.
4.22. etc. and peradventure the like may be said of the person of Esau, who at
the meeting of his brother Jacob was turned into another man, Genesis 23.4. and
did ever after sweetly accord with him, although Hebr. 12.16. he carries the
type of a spiritual fornicator and profane person that sels his eternal
birthright for a morsel of meat here in this world: and of him that losing his
first grace or blessing, obtaines not a second. But here we would not be
misunderstood; for though we brought Isaac as an instance of a typical or
representative seed, which he was in opposition to Ishmael, Romans 9.6, 7. yet we
do not deny, but that he was one really elected out of Gods special
foreknowledge; nor do we doubt but Ishmael might be so likewise: howsoever he
was generally and conditionally elected, as was also Cain, Genesis 4.6, 7. where
the Lord says unto him, Why art thou wroth? And why is thy countenance fallen?
If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? etc.

Eighthly, Betwixt these that are unchangeably designed to life or death out of
foreseen faith or unbelief, perseverance or Apostasy; and those that are
absolutely and peremptorily without any condition or respect to standing or
falling, rising again through grace or lieing still, retaining or losing grace
received: For after this last manner none are irrevocably designed either to
life or death from all eternity, among Angels or men.

Ninthly, Betwixt a sovereign power invested in a most wise, just, gracious,
loving, and merciful Prince, which may be used to his greater glory; and the
same placed in a rigourous and cruel Tyrant: which last to affix upon God is no
small degree of blasphemy.

Tenthly, Betwixt an absolute preterition of some from eternity, before they
have done, or thought good or evil, yea had any being, (which is not found in
God toward any of his future rational creatures) and a passing over of some in
time for their personal ingratitude and contumacy against him, as the fallen
Angels are declined after their fall, and some men after grace often refused,
and others after grace abused are lest to walk in their own ways.

Eleventhly, Betwixt the not extending of grace at all after a needless and
wilful Apostasy, (as the Lord dealt with the proud and presumptuous Angels
which fell) and the withholding of mercy from some persons which were not so
strongly and well situated in grace, and which fell through the temptation of
others; and thus God withholds not his first grace, which i^ also a sufficient
grace, from any of the sons of men, though they are fallen in Adam.

Twelfthly, Betwixt the withholding the first, or converting grace from fallen
men, which is not kept back for any till they resist it; and the withdrawing of
his second or subsequent grace from such as have wilfully cast off the first,
in the just requiring of it, and so do despite of the Spirit of Grace.

These few necessary distinctions being first premised we proceed. Now for your
errors and mistakes in your several Sections; First, we say that your assertion
in the second Section is very false and erroneous, where you say; That,
Although God knows whatsoever may or can come to pass upon all supposed
conditions, yet has he not decreed any thing, because he foresaw it as future,
or as that which should come to pass upon such conditions: For did not the Lord
foresee that if he created the Angels free Agents, some would fall, and others
stand still in their integrity? That if he created our first parents with
liberty of will, that they would fall; That if he offered fallen men his grace
to help them up again, some would embrace it, and some refuse it. That his
offered grace being conditional, some which received it would persevere, and
fulfill those conditions, and some would fail in the performance after they had
begun well. That Judas being returned to his former covetousness would betray
his Master for gain. That the Jews out of obstinacy and envy would condemn, and
deliver Christ to the Gentiles. That Pilate out of favor to men would yield
him up to be scourged and crucified: All which, and a thousand things more, the
Lord foresaw would conditionally or supposedly come to pass, and did thereupon
decree or determine that they should so do; because he could turn them to his
glory; yet do we not say, that the Lord was necessitated so to do always; but
when he foresaw that the effects and productions arising out of such supposed
conditions, were not conducible to his wise and holy ends; he both could, and
in time did put a stop thereunto, at his pleasure. Thus he foresaw that the men
of Keilah out of their wicked and ungrateful disposition (being left to
themselves) would deliver and betray David into the hands of Saul; and
therefore he did both decree not to permit it, and did actually hinder it, by
advertifing David of it that he might timely escape.

In your third Section there is truth and error to be found, accordingly as
your words are taken; for you speak generally and ambiguously saying, By God's
Decree for the manifestation of his glory, some men and Angels are
predestined unto eternal life, and others foreordained to everlasting death.

To which we answer thus; First, That men and Angels are not in all things, and
every way disposed of alike in God's eternal Decree. For though no fallen
Angels are ordained to life, yet by your own confession many fallen men are
appointed to salvation in Jesus Christ.

Secondly, We say that all both men and Angels are first predestined to
eternal life, in case they should continue in their first created estate by
answerable obedience. The truth whereof appears sufficiently in the
confirmation, and blessing of those holy Angels which persisted in their
allegiance, who are therefore called the Elect Angels.

Thirdly, We affirm, that all men, though fallen, are appointed to restoration
and life by grace conditionally that they believe on that grace, and obey its
requiring. Ezekiel. 18.23. have I any pleasure at all that the wicked should die
says the Lord; and that not he should return and live? Ezekiel. 33.11. Say unto
them, as I live says the Lord, I desire not the death of the wicked. 1 Timothy
2.3, 4. For this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior, who
would have all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the truth.
Whereunto add that of Tit. 2.11, 12. which holds forth both the universality of
grace it self, and its condition, For the grace of God that brings salvation,
has appeared to all men, Teaching us, that denying ungodliness and worldly
lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world.
But lastly, we grant notwithstanding that some both Angels and men were
appointed for destruction, yet conditionally through their own default and
disobedience, as the Apostles show both of the one and of the other; and first
of the Angels; 2 Pet. 2.4. God spared not the Angels that sinned, but cast them
down into Hell. Jude 6. And the Angels which kept not their first estate, but
left their own habitation, he has reserved in everlasting chains under
darkness to the judgment of the great day. And secondly concerning men, 2
These. 2.12. That all might be damned who believe not the truth, but had
pleasure in unrighteousness; Now these and some other Scriptures by us
alleged, do not speak immediately of Gods eternal Decree; yet we know, that
God works all things in time, according to the counsel of his own will from
eternity, Ephesians. 1.11.

In your fourth Section you declare your selves more fully in this point of
Predestination, saying, These Angels and men thus Predestined and fore
ordained, are particularly and unchangeably designed, and their number is so
certain and definite, that it cannot be either increased or diminished. Which
words of yours we will grant to be true: First of the Angels after some had
stood fast in obedience, and others had fallen; but this was a destination in
time, not a predestination from eternity. Secondly, Of Angels and men out of
the special foreknowledge of God, whereby he certainly foresaw the
perseverance of the good Angels in obedience, when the wicked spirits fell: as
also the persistance of the Saints in faith and obedience toward grace which
should be exhibited, on the one hand, with the Apostasy of the lapsed Angels,
and the obstinacy of the impenitent men, and backsliding temporaries on the
other hand, and so accordingly determined that the one part should be saved,
and the other perish. But that Gods decree in the general, toward Angels and
men was only conditional, and did no ways necessitate either to sin and
damnation, or to obedience and salvation; it is evident out of these ensuing
texts, and many more: As for the Apostate Angels the fault of their Apastacy is
wholly and clearly ascribed to themselves, 2 Pet. 2.4. Jude 6. as before: And
as for men, it is said Luke 7.30. the Pharisees and Lawyers did frustrate the
counsel of God against themselves, (...), which things would not possibly be
done unless God's counsel was conditional; add 2 Pet. 3.9. But God is
long-suffering to us ward, not willing that any should perish, but that all
should come to repentance: which is spoken as well of singula generum, as of
genera singulorum, and you had before God's oath, Ezekiel. 33.11. As I live says
the Lord, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked. To confirm his
affirmation; Ezekiel 18.23. Have I any pleasure at all that the wicked should die?
And as there is no enforcing necessity from Gods decree to dispose Angels and
men to obedience or disobedience, life or death: so neither was there any
necessity of nature, that is want, of liberty in their wills, or inability to
obey before their fall, whatsoever there is left afterward in mankind.

But if you mean by this particular and unchangeable designing men and Angels,
an absolute, irrespective, and peremtorie or inevitable dispose of some Angels
and men to life, and of others to destruction, and that from eternity; you do
not only make God a respecter of persons in those that are appointed to life,
from which the Scripture vindicates the Lord frequently, Acts 10.34. Rom 2.11.
Deuteronomy. 10.17. 1 Pet. 1.17. But this contradicts what you speak concerning God,
Chapter the second, where you describe him to be most wise, most holy, most
loving most gracious, most merciful, and most righteous, etc. When you ascribe
to him such a peremtory and irrevocable Decree of condemning thousands of
Angels and men everlastingly, and that before they had done, or purposed any
evil against him, or yet had any being. Consider this we pray you, could any of
you which is a father (and scarce has one drop of love, mercy and goodness,
compared with God's ocean) appoint one or more of your little babes (which yet
never offended you) to be burned to death? How far then must it be from the
gracious disposition of him that is love it self, and whose bowels of
Compassion are infinite, inevitably to design so many millions of Angels (his
children by creation) to endless and insufferable flames of fire, before they
had any existence in nature, or capacity of offending?

In your Fifth Section, you say, that those of mankind that are predestined
unto life, are chosen by God before the foundation of the world was laid,
according to his eternal and immutable purpose, and the secret counsel and good
pleasure of his will in Christ unto everlasting glory, out of his mere free
grace and love. All which is true both of Gods general and special election.
But whereas you add these words in conclusion without any foresight of Faith,
or good works or perseverance in either of them, as conditions or causes moving
him thereunto: It is a most dangerous error and falsehood. For was not that
counsel of God which Paul declared to the Churches, Acts 20.27. briefly
comprehended in that Doctrine, whereby (as he himself says) he testified b^th
to the Jews, and also to the Gentiles repentance toward God, and faith
toward our Lord Jesus Christ, Act. 20.20.21. Does not the same Apostle tell
us, Romans 8.29. That those whom God foreknew he did predestinate to be made
conformable to the Image of his Son? Does not Saint Peter tell the believing
Jews that they were elect according to the foreknowledge of God through
sanctification of the Spirit to obedience, and the sprinkling of the blood of
Jesus Christ? 1 Pe^. 1.2. Does not Saint Paul declare the counsel or will of
God to be conditional, when he says, 1 Timothy 2.3, 4. For this is good and
acceptable before God who will have all men to be saved, and to that end to
come to the knowledge of the truth? Are not the words of Saint Peter clear also
to that effect, 2. Pet. 3.9. Who wills not that any man should perish, but
that all men should come to repentance? Is not the saving grace of God, which
has appeared to all men conditional by the Apostles own testimony? Tit. 2.11,
12. For the Grace of God which brings salvation to all men bath appeared,
teaching us that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly,
righteously, and godly in this present world.

Is not the Gospel it self, which is a declaration of the whole counsel of God,
to be published conditionally? Mat. 18.19, 20. Mark. 16.15.16. Go ye into all
the world and preach the Gospel to every creature, he that believes and is
baptized shall be saved; but he that believes not shall be damned.

Does not God best know what his own will and counsel is, and was from
eternity, when he tells us Ez^k. 18. and 33 and almost every where else in the
old Testament, that the obstinate sinner shall die; but such as convert to him
shall live? Yea the final and last Election has foregoing works for his
motive, Revel. 3.4. Thou have a few names even in Sardis, which have not
defiled their garments, and they shall walk with me in white, for they are
worthy, and Rev. 7.14, 15. These are they which came out of great tribulation,
and have washed their robes, and have made them white in the blood of the
Lamb. Therefore they are before the throne of God, and serve him day and night
in his Temple, etc.

In your Sixth Sextion you affirm, That as God has appointed the elect unto
glory, so he has by the eternal and most free purpose of his will
foreordained the means thereunto. Which is true of all those that in mankind
are elected in general, as well as of the special elected or chosen ones. But
whereas you add these words: Wherefore they who are elected being fallen in
Adam, are redeemed by Christ, are effectually called unto faith in Christ, by
his spirit working in good season, are justified, adopted, sanctified, and kept
by his power through faith unto salvation. This part of the Section taken
conjunctively, cannot be verified of any elected ones, but those which are the
final and special chosen aforesaid. Thus far the words of this Section wisely
and warily understood may pass for truth; but the last words of all contain
manifold falsehoods: which words are these, Neither are any others redeemed by
Christ, effectually called, justified, adopted, sanctified, and saved. For
though it be true that none are saved but only the Elect: yet all the ^est of
that complexed speech being resolved into several propositions, will prove so
many false positions.

For first, Many others are redeemed by Christ besides the Elect, which shall
be saved, 2 Pet. 2.1. But there were false prophets amongst the people, even as
there shall be false teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable
heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and shall bring upon
themselves swift destruction. Yea, all mankind is redeemed by Christ, 1 John
2.1, 2. And if any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ
the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only,
but for the sins of the whole world. Yea, he came to redeem Singula generum
every man in particular. Hebr. 2.9 That by the grace of God he should taste
death for every man.

Secondly, Many others besides those special elected ones are called, Mat.
20.16. and Mat. 22.14. For many are called, but few are chosen.

Thirdly, some are justified for a time, that is, have their sins purged away
and forgiven, and yet by new rebellions and Apostasy perish afterward. Mat.
18.32.33.34 Then his Lord after he had called him, said unto him; O thou wiked
servant, I forgave thee all that debt because thou desiredst me; should thou
not have had compassion on thy fellow servant, even as I had pity on thee? And
his Lord was worth, and delivered him to the tormentors till he should pay all
that was due unto him. 2 Pet. 1.9. But he that lacks these things, is blind,
and cannot see afar of, and has forgotten that he was purged from his old fins.

Lasty, Some are sanctified in some measure, yet afte^wards fall away, and so
come short of salvation. 2 Pet. 2.20, 21, 22. For if after they have escaped
the pollutions of the World, through the knowledge of the Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, they are again entangled therein, and overcome, the latter end is
worse with them then the beginning: For it had been better for them not to have
known the way of righteousness, then when they have known it to turn from the
holy commandments delivered unto them. But it is happened unto them according
to the true proverb, The dog is turned to his own vomit again, and the sow
that was washed to her wallowing in the mi^e.

In your seventh Section you come to Gods preterition, saying, The rest of
mankind God has pleased according to the unserchable council of his own will,
whereby he extends or withholdeth mercy, as he pleases, for the glory of his
sovereign power over his creatures, to pass by and to ordain them to dishonor
and wrath for there sin, to the praise of his glorious justice.

Here We pray you give us leave to propound these Queries to you. First, who
are the rest of mankind of whom you speak? Are they all those who are not
elected? But we have showed before that all are elected in general upon
condition. Did not God make his Covenant of Grace with all mankind in Adam
after his fall, and afterward for them with Noah? Genesis 9.8, 9. Yea, he
covenanted with Abraham for all generations, and Nations, and People, Genesis
12.3. and 18 18. and that with an oath. Genesis 22: 16, 17, 18. Acts 3.24. Gal.
3.8. Whereupon all Nations, yea, all people are called upon to praise the Lord
for this his great merciful kindness, and for the truth of his promise which
endures for ever, Psalm. 117.1, 2. which being undoubtedly true, there can be
none of mankind passed over from eternity.

But if you mean that All, but those final and special chosen ones before
mentioned, are passed over from eternity, without any purpose of grace or mercy
to be extended toward them in Jesus Christ: your assertion is not only false,
but most dangerous. For, God is the Savior of all men, but especially of those
that believe, 1 Timothy 4.11.

Secondly, If Gods counsel herein be unsearchable, how came you to know it?

Thirdly, Since it is clear that Gods merciful kindness is toward all men as
before, and that he has concluded all in unbelief, that he might have mercy
upon all, Romans 11.32. who are they from whom he withholdeth, or to whom he
extends not mercy? Surely they can be no other, but such as thrust it away
from them, first or last, at least wise in its conditions and requiring, Acts
13.46. Then Paul and Barnabas waxed bold, and said, It was necessary that the
word of God should first have been spoken to you, but seeing you put it from
you, and judge your selves unworthy of everlasting life, we turn to the
Gentiles, Prove. 1.24, 5, 26. Because I have called and ye refused, I have
stretched out my hand and no man regarded: but ye have set at naught all my
counsel, and would none of my reproof: I will also laugh at your calamity, I
will mock when your fear comes, etc. See Psalm. 8^.8, 9, 16. Isa. 48.17, 18,
19. Hos 7.1. and 11.1, 2, 3, 4. Mat. 23.37, 38 Heb. 4.1, 2. Heb. 6.4, 5, 6. and
10.26, 27, 28. 2 Cor. 6.1, 2, 3.

Fourthly, Is not God's Sovereign power placed in one that is both most
righteous, and also most merciful, and not in tyrannical hands?

Fifthly, Is not that sovereign power most glorified in punishing offenders
after mercy has been offered; and contemned or rejected?

Sixthly, If these be passed over for their sins, as you affirm; How could this
preterition be from eternity? For men sinned not till they were.

Seventhly, If it were for sins, what sins did better deserve such a
preterition then men's own personal and actual sins; yea, then their contempt
and contumacy against grace offered?

Eighthly. If this preterition was for the praise of God's glorious justice,
must not his justice first be apparent and conspicuous in this his passing by
them? But he accounts it neither honorable for him that the Son should die for
the sin of the Father; Ezekiel. 10.1, 2, 3, 20. nor yet just, for he has
forbidden the self same thing in the Law, Deuteronomy. 24.16.

Lastly, Is there no difference betwixt a vessel of dishonor, and a vessel of
wrath? Many vessels are made by the Potter for dishonorable uses; yet none of
set purpose for destruction.

Finally, Your Caution in the last Section is very good, where you say, that,
The Doctrine of the high mystery of Predestination is to be handled with
special prudence and care, that men attending the will of God revealed in his
word, and yielding obedience thereunto, may from the certainty of their
effectual vocation, be assured of their eternal election: Where you should have
added, and from their perseverance in that obedience till the death of sin, be
assured of their spiritual, final, and everlasting election: there being a
twofold election from eternity as has been said.

But this caution of yours, you your selves have not very well observed and
kept. And whereas you add in conclusion, So shall this Doctrine afford matter
of praise, reverence and admiration of God; and of humility, diligence, and
abundant consolation to all that sincerely obey the Gospel. We report our
selves to your own consciences, and to all men, whether your Doctrine, or ours
here set forth, is likely to produce the good effects here by you remembered.

But now we come in the third and last place, to answer such objections as seem
to lie as so many rocks of offense, in your and other men's ways.

Object It is written of Hophni and Phineas the sons of Eli, 1 Samuel 2.25. That
they hearkened not unto their father, because God would destroy them.

Answ. It is true, God now had a purpose so to do for their abominable
wickedness which they had committed: but it does not follow that the Lord had
so decreed from eternity, unless it was out of prevision of their lewdness and
in order thereunto.

Object, 2. It is written, Prove. 16.4. That the Lord made all things for
himself, even the wicked for the day of ^^il.

Answ. The first part of the text speaks of God's ends, the latter part of the
event, as it is now fallen out through their own default, as Hosea speaks in a
like expression, Chap 9.13. Ephraim, as I saw Tyrus, is plante^ in a pleasant
place: But Ephraim shall bring forth his children to the murderer: that is,
eventually, not industriously; and so are the wicked created for the day of
evil.

Object. 3. It is said of Rehoboam, 2 Chronicles. 10.15. So the King hearkened not
unto the people; for the cause was of God, that the Lord might perform his word
which h^ spoke by the hand of Ahijah the Shilonite to Jeroboam the son of Nebat.

Answ. This Text speaks not of Gods eternal Decree, but of his wise and just
providence, leaving a man (sufficiently wicked before) to follow his own
counsels, for a temporal punishment of his own and his Fathers sins.

Object. 4. Jeremiah says Chap 52.3. For through the anger of the Lord it came
to pass in Jerusalem, till he had cast them out from his presence, that
Zedekiah rebelled against the King of Babylon.

Answ. This Scripture imports no more, but that wicked Zedekiah for a just
punishment of his own, and Judah's rebellion against the Lord, wat left at
length in the hand of his own Counsels, to rebel against his Lord and King upon
Earth, who was able to punish him, and did it accordingly.

Object. 5. Mat. 11.25. At that time Jesus answered and said, I thank thee O
Father Lord of Heaven and Earth, because thou have hid these things from the
wise and prudent, and have revealed them to babes.

Answ. This is to be understood of the second grace, withholden from those who
refused the former, and did shut their eyes against the first light; and so is
that place also Deuteronomy. 29.4. Yet the Lord has not given you an heart to
perceive, and cies to see, and ears to hear unto this day. For God reveals
his secrets (to wit, his further counsels) to them that fear him, Psalm. 25.14.
see Matthew. 13.12, 13, 14, 15, etc. For whosoever has, to him shall be given,
and he shall have abundance; but whosoever has not, from him shall be taken
away even that which he has, but uses not (as we see in him that hid) his
talent, Mat. 25.^^, 19.

Object. 6. Acts 13.48. It is said, that when the Gentiles heard that, they
were glad and glorified the word of the Lord, and as many as were ordained to
eternal life believed. Whence it seems to be clear that some persons are not so
ordained.

Answ. The original Text (...) is wrested and forced in the translation: For it
signifies not ordained, but prepared or disposed, and such only are they who
are good, willing to leave their sins, and to follow after righteousness,
according to the requiring of the Gospel. Titus 2.11, 12. for to such the
Angels wish peace and happiness, as knowing them only capable of it, Luke
2.14. (...), Glory be to God on high, and in the earth peace, to men, or in men
of good will: For so did St. Jerome, St. Augustine, and many of the Ancients
read that Text in their days, and so it is yet found in the best Greek copies:
Yet we could give another answer, if the Text before alleged were (...) or
(...), that is, foreordained; to wit, that so many as then and there, were
(out of Gods special foreknowledge) predestined to life, did at that time
believe: which notwithstanding hinders not but that many more; yea all there
present were appointed to life conditionally, as is there partly testified of
the unbeleeving Jews by the Apostle, verse 46.

Object. 7. Romans 9.6. It is said, That they are not all Israel, which are of
Israel. It seems then that all are not elected.

Answ. The Apostle intimates that the carnal Israel, or all that are come of
Jacob surnamed Israel, are not the Israel to whom the promises of salvation are
absolutely and finally made: Though in the general the conditional promises
belong to all Israel, as the Apostle shows, verse. 4. and to the Gentiles also,
verse. 24, 25. That we may not be misunderstood, know that there are among
others, seven promises made to the overcomers, Revel. 2 and 3. Chap. and such
as persevere in the Christian race unto the end of it, or to the death and
burial of sin. Now these and the like promises belong unto the Elect that are
chosen out of the furnace of affliction, Isa. 48.10. which with Paul have
fought their good fight, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. and so may fully expect their reward,
because God is faithful who has promised, see Hebr. 6 12, and 10 36. For ye
have need of patience, that when ye have done the will of God, ye might receive
the promise, Jam. 1.12. Blessed is the man that endures temptation, for when
he is tried, he shall receive the crown of life which the Lord has promised to
them that love him. But these and the like promises are made but conditionally
unto others.

Object. 8. Romans 9.7. Neither because they are the seed of Abraham, are they
all children: but in Isaac shall thy seed be called. Where the Apostle alludeth
to Genesis 17.18, 19, 20, 21. It may seem then that only Isaac, and not Ishmael
was chosen.

Answ. Isaac alone was chosen to be the representative seed of God, he being a
type, first of Christ, in whom God has made his Covenant: and secondly, he
being a seed born by Sarah, who represents faith, out of the promises, rather
then by the strength of nature; and so is a figure of the Spiritual seed of
Abraham, which are begotten or born by virtue of the promises: For so the
Apostle explaines himself, verse. 8. That is, they which are the children of the
flesh, (of whom Ishmael carried the type) these are not the children of God;
but the children of the promise are counted for the seed. As for Ishmael, who
was begotten by the strength of nature, and according to the flesh of Hagar,
which represents the Law, Gal. 4.21, 31. he figured forth those which would be
saved not by the grace of the promises but by the works of the Law; a people
with whom God has not erected his Covenant, that they should be saved in that
way. But though Ishmael carried the figure of such, it was without any
prejudice to his eternal election or salvation. For Abraham praying thus for
him, Genesis 17.18. Oh that Ishmael might live before thee or in thy presence: The
Lord answered verse. 20. As for Ishmael I have heard thee, etc. His being such a
type was no more prejudicial to him, then that Moses and Aaron were debarred
entrance into Canaan, (they therein being a figure of those that should be shut
out of Gods kingdom for unbelief) without any hazard to their own salvation, as
has been said before.

Object. 9. Romans 9.10, 11. It is said, That there is a purpose of God according
to election, not of works, but of him that calls.

Answ. Though Election there seems to import nothing but Gods grace, as the
explanation following (not of works but of him that calls) will in some sort
evict; yet we grant that there is a purpose of God both according to Election
of persons and things, and that either general or special, as has been by us
already often acknowledged. And the eternal election of persons, in mankind
now fallen, whether general or particular, is out of grace, and not by their
own works wrought by the strength of nature. Howbeit in that special or
particular election arising out of the special foreknowledge of God, works of
grace and perseverance therein are looked upon as a means and way to life: yea,
as a condition fulfilled, and a motive both in that, and the final election of
the Saints; which we called the election out of the furnace, Rev. 3.4. Thou
have a few names in Sardis which have not defiled their garments. and they
shall walk with me in white, for they are worthy, Rev. 3.8 Behold I have set
before thee an open door, and no man can shu it. For thou have a little
strength, and have kept my word, and not denied my name. Read more at large
Rev. 7.13, 14, 15, 16, 17.

Object. 10. Romans 9.10, 11, 12. For the children not being yet born, it was
said that the elder should serve the younger. Where Jacob and Esau are disposed
of before they were born.

Answ. First it is granted that all men may be so, yea are so, both for their
temporal estates here, and eternal condition hereafter, but in a most wise and
just way.

Secondly, We have showed before, that the Apostle relating to Genesis 25.23. does
not speak of the persons of Esau and Jacob, but of their two seeds the Nations
of the Edomites, and the people of Israel.

Thirdly, It is not their eternal estate that is there spoken of, but their
rank and place in this world. Now as it is lawful for the Lord to make some
Governors and superiors, and others inferior or subjects, so it was not any
injustice in him to make the seed of Jacob the greater and superior kingdom.
For even the Edomites were appointed to a good and comfortable condition.

Fourthly, The Apostles mentions this disposal of them beforehand, to prove
that Jacob's or Israel's preferment was of mere grace, and so the Argument was
apt for his discourse in that book, where he asserts God's grace against our
own natural works and merits.

Lastly, there is in this subordination of Esau to Jacob, a spiritual document,
showing that no natural or earthly man must be subject to the spiritual or
heavenly man, for Edom signifies earthly.

Object. 11. Romans 9.13. As it is written, Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I
hated. It should seem then that the person of Esau was hated before hand, and
Jacob als^ loved before they were born.

Answ. Some indeed have so understood the Apostle, and have run themselves and
others thereby upon dangerous rocks, not considering those things.

First, Where those words are written, to wit, not Genesis 25.23. as the other is,
but Mala. 1.1, 2, 3, 4.

Secondly, That the Prophet spoke not of the person of Jacob, where he says to
Israel verse. 1, 2, 3. I have loved you; and again, yet I loved Jacob: but of
the seed and posterity of Jacob.

Thirdly, That in the third verse the Lord speaks of the posterity of Esan in
that very age, and not of the person of Esau: Where he says, And I hated Esau,
and laid his mountains and his heritage waste for the dragons of the wilderness.

Fourthly, That the Lord shows the cause in the 4. ver. why he has hated Edom
at this time; It was for their incorrigible wickedness, saying, Whereas Edom
says we are impoverished, but we will return and build the desolate places:
They shall build, but I will through down; and they shall call them the border
of wickedness, and the people against whom the Lord has indignation for-ever.

Lastly, That the Apostle alleges this place, to show that what God had
spoken concerning Israel's pre-eminence above Edoms, Genesis 25.23. was now
fulfilled, they continuing to be his people, when the other were cast off for
their obstinacy.

Object. 12. Romans 9.14, 15. What shall we say then? Is there unrighteousness
with God? God forbid. For he says to Moses. I will have mercy, on whom I will
have mercy, and I will have compassion, on whom I will have compassion. It
seems then that there are some upon whom the Lord will not have compassion.

Answ. It is true, there are some such persons; and such were the incorrigible
Edomites, before spoken off: yet note three things.

First, That the Apostle preoccupates an Objection, which some might make, out
of Gods mercy continued still to Israel, but withdrawn from Edom, as before,
What shall we say then? Is there unrighteousness with God?

Secondly, That the Apostle answers it, not only with a detestation, saying
God forbid, but also with a Scripture taken out of Exodus 33.9. And I will be
gracious, to whom I will be gracious, and I will show mercy, to whom I will
show mercy.

Thirdly, That the Lord speaks there of continuing and enlarging his after
mercies and favors to those that walk humbly, faithfully, and answerably to
his first mercy or grace, as Moses had done then, when he begged of the Lord
that he would show him his glory: And not of his first grace, withholden from
none. Whereby the contrary it may be gathered, that God will withhold his
second mercies from some, who refused his first grace, as the Edomites had
done, or should abuse the same afterward by turning his grace into wantonness,
Jude 4.

Object, 13, Romans 9.16. So then it is not of him that wills, nor of him that
runs, but of God that shows mercy. Our salvation then is of mere mercy.

Answ. It is granted so to be, yet by the way note, that man can both will, and
run in some sort as this Scripture imports.

Object. 14. Romans 9.17, 18. For the Scripture says unto Pharaoh, even for this
same purpose have I raised thee up, that I might show my power in thee, and
that my name might be declared throughout all the earth. Therefore has he
mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he hardens.

Answ. First, note that here the Lord does not say, for this same purpose have
I created thee, but raised thee up, or brought thee upon the stage.

Secondly, That Pharaoh was known to the Lord to be a proud and obstinate
Rebel, before he thus called him out, Exodus 5.2. And Pharaoh said, who is the
Lord that I should obey his voice to let Israel go? I know not the Lord,
neither will I let Israel go.

Thirdly, That yet the Lord gives him to know his will, and graciously shows
him the danger of his disobedience, before he sends his plagues upon him.

Fourthly, That he leaves him not, till he made him, of unwilling, willing to
let his people go.

Fifthly, That God did not harden Pharaohs heart by infusing any hardness into
it, but rather used means to soften and bend his heart to obedience.

Lastly, That the Lord destroyed him not, till his heart byased, and wilfully
revolted from that inclination of letting Israel go, to which the Lord had
brought and wrought him. So that the Lords pleasure in hardening whom he will;
must out of this example be understood of such as are first or last refractory
against his grace, and gracious requirings, monitions. etc.

Object. 15. Rom, 9.19. Thou will say, why does he yet find fault? Who has
resisted his will? It seems then his will in condemning the wicked is
irresistible.

Answ. The will of God is manifold, First, voluntas signi, that which he would
have done by men, and that may be resisted or disobeyed.

Secondly, voluntas beneplaciti, that which he is pleased to effect, and that
either absolutely to be done by himself alone, or with others, which cannot be
withstood: or conditionally, in case the creature will act his part. This
conditional will may also be repugned, so that wicked men cannot excuse
themselves by the irresistibility of the first or last mentioned will. There is
also the unchangeable will of God's irrevocable decree, at length passed upon
the obstinate and incorrigible sinner, which like his powerful or efficacious
will is inexpugnable. But it is the obdurate man's refractory and inflexible
will that has now made this will or decree of God so peremptory against him.
So that God has just cause to fault and blame the man that perishes, but not
e contra.

Object. 16. Romans 9.20. Shall the thing formed say to him that formed it, why
have thou made me thus? Whence it may seem to follow, that God makes the lost
ones such as they are.

Answ. Paul intends nothing less then to lay any such aspersion upon God, who
is only the Author of their deserved punishment; but not of their sins, unless
of such as are just and severe compensations of their former contumacies.
Indeed the Apostle here first takes up these murmurers for their audacious and
presumptuous obloquies against their Maker, in this verse: Nay but O man who
art thou that replyest against God? Shall the thing formed say to him that
formed it, Why have thou made me thus? And then in the three next verses for
the total silencing of their obmurmuration, he asserts first Gods sovereign
power verse. 21. and then his justice verse. 22. with his mercy also verse. 23. If
the wicked then finding themselves lost, at length should cavil against God,
and say why did he create me with liberty of will and so with a power of
falling? It is answered, that this faculty might be improved to the salvation
of the creature, as well as to the glory of Gods grace, verse. 23. Or why did
God give us any being, since we must be wretched and unhappy for ever? It is
answered. verse. 22. that it coming to pass merely through their own default and
wilfulness, it was free for our Sovereign Lord thus to glorify his power and
justice against such rebels, yea, and his incurable enemies also.

Object. 17. Has not the Potter power over the clay, of the same lump to make
one vessel unto honor, and another unto dishonor? It seems then that God
makes some vessels of purpose unto dishonor.

Answ. I. It is certain that God is a wise Potter, and not a workman that never
had wisdom, or has lost his wits. Now such a Potter though he (as the event
falls out afterward) makes many vessels to be broken, yet forms none of set
purpose for destruction, as we said before: Some vessels indeed are made by him
for more honorable uses, as Salt-sellers, drinking-cups, etc. and some for
more dishonorable uses, for Chamberpots and the like, but none to be destroyed;
for that were to lose his labor. And so has the Lord appointed both in Church
and Commonwealth, some to be superiors and some inferiors as has been
showed, but none of the sons of men has he made of purpose to perdition.

II. It is evident enough that the Apostle alludeth to Jeremie 18. verse 3.4,
5, 6. Where observe these things.

First, That the Prophet being sent to the Potters house, he found that the
vessel in the Potters hand first miscarried, and was marred, representing man
not in the pure but corrupt mass.

Secondly, That the Potter took pains to make it up a new, or other vessel.

Thirdly, That the Lord expostulates with Israel for not suffering him to mould
them a new, as that Potter had done.

Fourthly, That the Lord forms not men anew by force or violence, as the Potter
did the senseless clay, but works upon them as rational creatures, and free
Agents, by persuading them and drawing them, as is evident from the 7. verse to
the 12. At what instant I shall speak concerning a Nation and concerning a
Kingdom, etc.

Lastly, That the better a vessel is that is so made out of a depraved lump,
the more honor it is for the work man, etc.

Object. 18. Romans 9, 22. What if God willing to show his wrath, and to make his
power known, endured with much long-suffering the vessels of wrath fitted to
destruction? Whence some collect that it is God that has so fitted them.

Answ. First, It is not said that they were created, but fitted for destruction
(...).

Secondly, It is not so much as employed, much less affirmed that they were so
fitted by the Lord.

Thirdly, The clear contrary is imported, where it is said, that he has with
much or great long sufferance endured these vessels of wrath. For if God
created or designed them purposely for destruction, things had succeeded
according to his own hearts desire when they went on in fin and rebellion: but
in as much as he heartily desired their repentance and return in order to their
salvation: hence it was that he bear their multiplied provocations, and their
contumacies against his grace with much irksomness and long sufferance, the end
whereof was salvation, as the Apostles teach, 2 Pet. 3.15. Romans 2.4.

Object. 19. Romans 9.23. And that he might make known the riches of his glory on
the vessels of mercy, which he had before prepared unto glory. Whence it may
seem that God has prepared these vessels from eternity for this their glory.

Answ. Note first, That no such vessels since the fall; can be vessels of
glory, till they be prepared thereunto, that is, purged from corruption, and
renewed, 2 Timothy 2.21.

Secondly, That the preparing and fitting of these vesfor the main part and
power of the work, is attributed to God in express terms, and so was not the
fitting of the vessels of wrath aforesaid.

Thirdly, That this preparing of the vessels of glory is said to precede glory;
but it is not here attributed to Gods eternal decree.

Lastly, That both the glory, and the preparation of the vessels thereunto, is
of grace, and so ordained, to Gods glory.

Object. 20. St. Peter says, Epist. 1. Chap. 2. ver. 7.8. Unto you therefore
which believe he is precious; but unto them which be disobedient, the stone
which the builders disallowed, the the same is made the head of the corner, and
a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offense, even to them which stumble at the
word, being disobedient, whereunto they were also appointed. It seems then that
some were fore-appointed to take offense at Christ, and to stumble at that rock.

Answ. It is granted that some were fore ordained thereunto, (and that it was
foretold also that they should do so, Isai. 8.14.) yet neither simply, nor yet
absolutely or irrespectively; but as their punishment for their former pride
upon their own self conceited wisdom, holiness, and righteousness; and for
their obstinacy also. And so much seems to be intimated in the word (...),
being dosobedient, namely before. For it is usual that former sins, especially
a refractary disposition, should be plagued with after and succeeding
perverseness, Psalm. 81 11.12. But my people would not bearken to my voice, and
Israel would none of me: So I gave them up unto their own hearts lust, and they
walked in their own councels. Read, Romans 1.25.32. And the like answer we give
to that place of St Jude, verse 4. For there are certain men crept in among
you, who were before of old ordained to this condemnation, ungodly men, turning
the grace of our God into laciviousness, and denying the only Lord God, and
our Lord Jesus Christ.

For first, The words (...), this condemnation, shows it to be a punishment.

And secondly, The cause of this condemnation is showed in the words following,
ungodly men they were, etc.

These are all the principal Objections which we could now call to mind and we
hope (though briefly and plainly) yet they are sufficiently answered, to the
satiffaction of all understanding and impartial men.

True it is, that this Argument rather required a Treatise, then so short a
Discourse: but as you are succinct, so we must not too far enlarge.

CHAP. IV. Of the Creation.
IT pleased God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost Heb: 1.2. Jo: 1.2, 3. Gen: 1.2.
Job: 26.13. Job: 33.4.
, for the manifestation of the glory of his eternal power, wisdom, and
goodness Ro^: 1.20. Jer: 10.12. Ps: 104.24. Ps: 13.5, 6.
, in the beginning to create, or make of nothing, the world, and all things
therein, whether visible, or invisible, in the space of six days; and all very
good Gen: 1. c. Heb: 11.3. Col: 1.16. Act: 17.24.
.

II. After God had made all other creatures, he created man, male and female
Gen: 1.27.
, with reasonable and immortal souls Gen: 27. with Eccl. 12.7. and Luk: 23.43.
and Mat. 10.28.
, endued with knowledge, righteousness, and true holiness, after his own Image
Genesis 1.26 Col: 3.10. Ephesians. 4.24.
, having the Law of God written in their hearts Rom: 2.14, 15.
, and power to fulfill it Eccles. 7.29.
, and yet under a possibility of transgressing, being left to the liberty of
their own will, which was subject unto change Genesis 3.6. Eccl. 7.29.
. Beside this law written in their hearts, they received a command, not to eat
of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil which while they kept, they were
happy in their communion with God Genesis 2.27. Gen: 3.8, 9, 10, 11, 23.
, and had dominion over the creatures Gen: 1.26, 28.
.

CHAP. IV. Of the Creation examined.
IN the last Chapter you bewrayed a world of defects; but here a defect of
worlds, you making mention but of one (and that of the least importance and
concernment to mankind) whereas the Holy Ghost in the Scripture, points out a
plurality of worlds, and some of them no less glorious to the Creator, nor
beneficial to men, then this present outward world of which you speak. For is
it not expressly written Heh. 1.1, 2. That God has in these last days spoken
unto us by his Son, whom be has appointed heir of all things, by whom also be
made the world. Yea, was it not an Article of faith in the Apostles days, that
God had so done? For the Author of that Epistle after a description and
encomion of faith, Heb. 11.1, 2. speaks thus ver. 3. through says we
understand that the worlds were framed by the word of God, so that things which
are seen, were not made of things which do appear.

If you answer (...) in the former place, Heb. 1.2. fignifies ages or
generations (as sometime that word is found to do) this last place which
clearly speaks of the work of creation (having the same word again) will
evict, that the former place speaks of worlds truly so called, as it is well
and truly rendered in our translation.

If you reply again that perhaps the Apostle uses the word (...), as the
Rabbis sometimes take the word gnolam, gnolam caton for the Microcosme, and
gnolam gadol for the Macrocosme; gnolam hazzeh for this world, and gnolam habha
for the world to come, and the same word again for the lower world, that is the
earth; sometimes for the middle world, which is all these visible heavens; and
lastly for the Angels world, or the invisible heavens.

Answer. It may be so, yet are these neither one entire world, nor were all
these things created in the space of six days, as you untruly affirm.

First, That the Angels world called by our Savior and the Apostle Paul,
Paradise, Luke 23.43. 2 Cor. 12 4. and this present world, are not one entire,
but two remote and distinct worlds, it is evident out of the words of our
blessed Savior, Mat. 12.32. But whosoever speaks against the Holy Ghost, it
shall not be forgiven him, neither in this world, nor in the world to come.
Luke 20.34, 5.36. And Jesus answering said unto them, the children of this
world marry, and are given in marriage: but they that shall be accounted worthy
to obtain that world, and the resurrection from the dead, neither marry nor are
given in marriage, neither can they die any more, for they are equal to the
Angels, etc.

Secondly, Nor were the Angels and their heavens created within the space of
those six days, wherein all things of this world were made, Genesis 1.1 -- but
long before. For,

1. It is certain that Moses makes no mention of them in the narration, and
history of those six days works.

2. Esdras in his second Book (of which we spoke before) says expressly Chap.
3.6. That Gods right hand planted Paradise before ever the earth came forward,
and that he having created man in time did lead him into it. Nor does he alone
speak this, that the Angels were existent before the creation of this world;
but the Lord himself also, Job 38.4. Where wast thyou when I laid the
soundations of the earth? and then follows, When the morning Stars sang
together, and the sons of God shouted for joy. So that those sons of God (who
are at all hands confessed to be the Holy Angels) were present and glorified
God when he laid the first foundation of this world. Nor is it improbable
(which some late prophetical men affirm) that man was created in the room of
the fallen Angels, which so much the more stirred up the envy of the Devil
against him. Certain it is that the wicked Angels were not only pre-existent,
but had fallen also from their first estate, before man was created.

3. As the Scriptures make frequent mention of the Heavens of Heavens, which
can be no other then Paradise, or the Angels, which also are Gods heaven in
whom he dwells: So the Psalmist shows that they were of old, Psalm. 68.33. To
him which rides upon the Heavens of Heavens which were of old. Nor can we or
you justly reject their opinion who say, that as the Angels are in nature
nearer to God then the creatures of this gross visible world, so he first laid
forth himself in them; and that many ages before he proceeded to the creation
of those things which were remoter, and further distant from him. But whether
the Lord used the ministry of these Spirits in the creation of this world, as
he does in the government of the same, we will not dispute. Howsoever it was
the unanimous consent of most of the Greek fathers (if not of them all) and the
assertion of divine Nazianzen in special, and of Jerome among the Latins, that
the creation of Angels did precede the making of this world, and that upon
these grounds before alleged, among many other.

After you have spoken of this world in general, you come to the composure of
the creature for whose sake this world was especially made, even mankind;
where according to holy Scriptures we find another world, not only because man
is styled a Microcosme, by ^o contemptible Authors: but by reason of an inte^^^
and spiritual world (and that far greater, and more excellent then this outward
Fabric) placed (...), of which Solomon not a stranger to any of these worlds)
speaks Eccles, 3.11. He has made every thing beautiful in his season; he has
also set the world in their beart; so that no man can find out the work of
God from the beginning to the end. Which world was Gods Kingdom in the man, or
the beautiful Image of God upon the inward and outward man, as may appear by
the promises of God which he has graciously given us in Christ, for the
repairing and re-edifying the same, when it was decayed and defaced, Esaias
51.16. And I have put my words in thy mouth, and have covered thee in the
shadow of my hands, that I may plant the Heavens, and lay the foundation of the
earth, and say unto Zion, Thou art my people, Esai. 65.17, 18. For behold I
create new Heavens, and a new earth; and the former shall not be remembered, nor
come into mind: But be ye glad and rejoice for ever in that which I create;
for behold I create Jerusalem a rejoicing, and her people a joy. 2. Pet. 3.13.
Nevertheless, we according to his promises look for a new heaven and a new
earth, wherein dwells righteousness. But the outward heaven and earth (of
which many understand this place) never was nor ever shall be the subject of
righteousness: for they are irrational yea liveless creatures. Nor is this
spiritual and glorious workmanship of God (though to the world and her wise
ones invisible) called a world in the Old Testament alone, but in the New also,
Romans 4.13. For the promise that he should be heir of the world, was not to
Abraham and his seed through the Law, but through the righteousness of faith.

Now if any hearing of more worlds, be sorry with Alexander, that he has taken
so much travail for one, growing ambitious to have the other also, let him
first by faith, obedience, prayer, and all other good means seek to get the
inward and spiritual world planted, and created in him, and upon him, by the
grace and power of Christ; and he may be in the better possibility of the third
and highest world, and prove an heir of Paradise with the blessed Angels. For
as the Lord himself proceeded gradually, first to that creation which was
spiritual and invisible; and then to that which was visible and corporeal: so
let the sons of men (now fallen and corrupted) turn from the outward creature,
get the inward world of righteousness and holiness, and so gradually tend
toward the world Angelical, that they may proceed from glory to glory.

CHAP. V. Of Providence.
GOd the great Creator of all things does uphold Heb: 1.3.
, direct, dispose, and govern all creatures, actions, and things Dan: 4.34, 35.
Psalm: 135.6 Act: 17.25, 26, 28. Job 38.39, 40, 41. Chapters.
, from the greatest even to the least Mat: 10.29, 30, 31.
, by his most wise and holy providence Pro: 15.3. Psalm: 104.24. Psalm: 145.17.
, according to his infallible foreknowledge Acts 15:18. Psalm: 94.8, 9, 10, 11.
, and the free and immutable counsel of his own will Ephesians: 1.11. Psalm: 33.10.11.
to the praise of the glory of his wisdom, power, justice, goodness, and mercy
Isa: 63.14 Ephesians: 3.10. Romans 9.17. Genesis 45.7. Psa: 145.7.
.

II. Although, in relation to the foreknowledge and decree of God the first
cause, all things come to pass immutably and infallibly Act: 2.13.
; yet by the same providence he orders them to fall out according to the
nature of second causes, either necessarily freely, or contingently Gen: 18.22.
Jer: 31.35. Exodus: 21.13, with Deuteronomy: 9, 5. 1 King: 22.28, 34. Esa: 10.6, 7.
.

III. God in his ordinary Providence makes use of means Act: 27.31, 44. Isa.
55.10, 11. Hos: 2.21, 22.
; yet is free to work without Hos: 1.7. Mat. 4.4. Job 34.10.
, above Romans 4.19, 20, 21.
, and against them at his pleasure 2 Kin: 6.6. Dan: 3.27.
.

IV. The Almighty power, unsearchable wisdom, and infinite goodness of God so
far manifest themselves in his providence that it extends even to the first
fall, and all other sins of Angels and men Rom: 11.32, 33, 34. 2 Samuel: 24.1,
with 1 Chr: 21.1. 1 King: 22.22, 23. 1 Chr: 10.4, 13, 14. 1 Samuel: 16.10. Acts
2.23. Act. 4.27, 28.
; and that not by a bare permission Act: 13.16.
, but such as has joined with it a most wise and powerful bounding Psalm:
76.10. 2 King: 19.28.
, and otherwise ordering and governing of them in a manifold dispensation to
his own holy end Gen: 50.20. Esa: 10.6, 7, 12.
; yet so as the sinfulness thereof proceeds only from the creature, and not
from God, who being most holy and righteous, neither is, nor can be the Author
or approver of sin Jam: 1.11, 14, 17. 1 John: 2.16. Psalm: 50.21
.

V. The most wise, righteous and gracious God does oftentimes leave for a
season his own children to manifold temptations and the corruption of their own
hearts, to chastize them for their former sins, or to discover unto them the
hidden strength of corruption and deceitfulness of their hearts that they may
be humbled 2 Chr: 32.25, 26, 31. 2 Samuel: 14.1
; and to raise them to a more close and constant dependence for their support
upon himself, and to make them more watchful against all future occasions of
sin, and for sundry other just and holy ends 2 Cor. 12.7, 8, 9. Psalm: 73.
thoughout Psalm: 77.1, to 12. Mar. 14.66, to the end with John 21, 15, 16, 17.
.

VI. As for those wicked and ungodly men, whom God as a righteous Judge, for
former sins does blind and harden Rom: 1.24, 26, 28. To: 11.7, 8.
, from them he not only withholdeth his grace, whereby they might have been
enlightened in their understandings, and wrought upon in their hearts Deu: 29.4
, but sometimes also withdraws the gists which they had Mat. 3.12. Mat: 25.29
, and exposes them to such objects as their corruption makes occasions of sin
Deu: 2.30. 2 King: 8.12, 13.
; and withal gives them over to their own lusts, the temptations of the world
and the power of Satan Psa: 81.11, 11. 2 These. 2.10, 11, 12.
: whereby it comes to pass that they harden themselves, even under those means
which God uses for the softning of others Exodus: 7.3, with Ex: 8.15, 32. 2 Cor:
2.15, 16. Esa: 8.14. 1 Pet: 2.7, 8 Esa: 6.9, 10 with Act: 28.26, 27.
.

VII. As the providence of God does in general reach to call creatures; so
after a most special manner it takes care of his Church, and disposes all
things to the good there of 1 Timothy: 4.10. Amos 9.8, 9. Romans 8.28. Esai. 43.3, 4,
5, 14.
.

CHAP. V. Of Gods providence examined.
IN this Chapter not without a specimen or document of Gods divine providence,
you have testified many things as rightly and truly, so with reverence and
honor to that wise and holy administration of his; yet in two things we crave
leave briefly to show you your defects; yet not so great or blameable as some
of your former failings. First then, in your second Section, you affirm, That
although in relation to the foreknowledge and decree of God (the first cause)
all things come to pass immutably and infallibly; yet by the same providence he
orders them to fall out according to the nature of the second causes either
necessarily, freely, or contingently. Where first you seem to us to make Gods
providence not only to jar with his decree, but even to thwart the same; For
this last orders many things to come to pass contingently and freely, as you
say, whereas the former appoints all things to come to pass immutably. It is
granted that all things come to pass infallibly in regard of the foreknowledge
of God: but we cannot see how all things should come to pass immutably, since
many things are decreed but conditionally, as we have showed Chap. 3. and here
you confess that all things do not come to pass necessarily, which they must
necessarily do, if all things be immutably decreed; but it is evident that God
decrees both good and evil toward men Hypothetically, Jer. 18.7, 8, 9, 10. At
what instant I shall speak concerning a Nation and concerning a Kingdom to
pluck up, to pull down and to destroy; If that Nation against whom I have
pronounced, turn from their evil, I will repent of the evil that I thought to
do unto them;. And at what instant I shall speak concerning a Nation and
concerning a Kingdom to build and to plant: If it do evil in my sight, that it
obey not my voice, then I will repent of the good wherewith I said, I would
benefit them. So verse. 11.12. Romans 8.13. and 11.22, 23. How could Gods counsel
be made void by men (as was said before out of Luke 7.30.) if it were
immutable in it self, as you affirm?

Secondly, In your sixth Section you say, As for those wicked and ungodly, whom
God as a righteous Judge, for former sins, does blind and harden; from them he
not only withdraws his grace, whereby they might have been enlightened in
their understandings, and wrought upon in their hearts, but also sometimes
withdraws the gifts which they had, etc, Wherein, besides that you mention
not the maine (if not only) sin, for which God leaves men to themselves, to
wit, men's shutting their eyes against his monitions, commandments and
requirings: you seem to lay some default upon God himself, saying, That he
withholdeth that grace from them, whereby their hearts, that is, their wills and
affections might have been wrought upon, which both derogates from Gods mercy
and is inconsistent which innumerable Scriptures testifying the contrary, as
Esai. 5.4. What could I have done more for my vineyard, that I have not done?
Mat. 23.37. How often would I have gathered thy children as a ben gathers her
chickens under her wings? but see would not, Acts 7.51. Ye stifnecked and
uncircumcised in heart and ears, ye do always resist the holy Ghost; as did
your Fathers, so do ye.

CHAP. VI. Of the fall of man, of Sin, and of the punishment thereof.
OUR First Parents being seduced by the subtilty and temptation of Satan,
sinned in eating the forbidden fruit Gen: 3.13 2 Cor: 11.3
; this their sin God was pleased according to his wise and holy counsel to
permit, having purposed to order it to his own glory To: 11.32
.

II. By this sin they fell from their original righteousness and communion
with God Gen: 3.6, 7, 8. Eccl: 7.29. To: 3.23.
, and so became dead in sin Gen: 2.17. Ephesians: 2.1.
, and wholly defiled in all the faculties and parts of soul and body Tit: 1.15.
Gen: 6.5. Jer: 17.9. To: 3.10. to 19.
.

III. They being the root of all mankind, the guilt of sin was imputed Ge:
1.27, 28. and Genesis 2.16, 17. and Act: 17.13. with To: 5.12, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19.
and 1 Cor: 15.21, 22, 25.
, and the same death in sin and corrupted nature, conveyed to all their
posterity descending from them by ordinary generation Psa: 51.5. Gen: 5.3. Job.
14.4. Job: 15.14.
.

IV. From this original corruption, whereby we are utterly indisposed,
disabled, and made opposite to all good To: 5.6. Rom: 8.7. Rom: 7.18. Col: 1.21.
, and wholly inclined to all evil Gen: 6.5. Gen: 8.21. Rom: 3.10, 11, 12
, do proceed all actual transgressions Jam: 1.12, 15. Ephesians: 2.2, 3. Mat: 15.19.
.

V. This corruption of nature, during this life, does remain in those that are
regenerated 1 John: 1.8. to Rom: v. 14.17, 18, 23. Jam: 3.2. Pro: 20.9. Eccl:
7.20.
; and althoug it be, through Christ, pardoned and mortified, yet both it self
and all the motions thereof are truly and properly sin To: 7.5, 7, 8, 25. Gal:
5.17.
.

VI. Every sin both original and actual, being a transgression of the righteous
Law of God, and contrary thereunto Joh: 3.4.
, does in its own nature, bring guilt upon the sinner Rom: 3.9, 19.
, whereby he is bound over to the wrath of God Ephesians: 2.3.
, and curse of the Law Gal. 3.10
, and so made subject to death To. 6.23.
, with all miseries spiritual Ephesians. 4.18
, temporal Romans 8.20. Jam. 3 39.
, and eternal Matthew. 25.41. 2 Thessalonians. 1.9.
.

CHAP. VI. Of the fall of man, of Sin, and of the Punishment thereof, examined.
IN this Chapter of man's fall, you have given sufficient evidence of it; for,
except the first and last Sections, all parts of it are a resemblance of the
depraved man (you spoke of) sufficiently corrupted: In the second Section these
are your words, By this sin they (that is our first parents) fell from their
original righteousness, and communion with God, and so became dead in sin, and
wholly defiled in all the faculties of soul and body. In which words we find
the fruits of the forbidden tree, evil as well as good, error as well as truth.
That they fell from their former communion with God, from some degree of
original righteousness, and that they became dead, that is liable to eternal
death, we grant you: but that they fell wholly from original righteousness, at
the first Act of their Apostasy, or that they presently became so wholly
defiled as you speak, are great mistakes. As to the first of these, did not the
Image of God in which they were created consist in holiness and righteousness?
Now you know habits are not lost by one act or two. Again, the thing that God
threatened, was a gradual punishment as well as a certain; In dying, ye shall
die. Furthermore, those that fall away from inchoated grace, and that renewed
Image of God (which is not at first so strong and vigorous as Gods similitude
was in the first man) though they die, and being in a great decree of
languishing are said to be dead; yet they die but gradually and after great
debilities, and decay, may be kept alive and recovered, Rev. 3.1, 2. I know thy
works, that thou have a name that thou live, and art dead. Be watchful, and
strengthen the things which remain, that are ready to die: for I have not found
thy works perfect before me.

Now as for the second, that they became wholly defiled in all parts and
faculties, no Scripture speaks it, nor could it be till the whole Image of God
was extinguished by contrary corruptions. True it is, that if the Lord had
wholly left them to themselves (as he did the rebellious and backsliding
Angels) it would have fared no better with them in the end, then you speak of:
but the father of mercies was pleased to appear unto them in the cool and
declination of the day, before it was dark night with them, and by his covenant
of grace to help them up again.

In the third Section you say, They being the root of all mankind, the guilt
of the sin was imputed, and the same death in sin and corrupted nature corveyed
to all posterity, descending from them by ordinary generation; where that they
were the root of all mankind is undoubtedly true: but all the rest of that
Section may be justly questioned. And first, that passage where you tacitly
exempt Christ from the imputation of this sin made unto him; for doubtless
that, with all other sins of ours, were laid upon him. But secondly, it may be
upon good ground hoped, that it, neither was, nor shall be imputed to any of
their posterity, who are not the imitators of the same in actual rebellion; for
that just Lord does not only forbid the punishing of the children for the
iniquity of their parents, even with temporal death, Deuteronomy, 24.18. but he swears
also by his own life, that he will not do that thing. Ezekiel 18.1 -- 20. Then
what you there affirm in the second place is more improbable then the other; to
wit; That the same death in sin and corrupt nature is conveyed to all their
posterity descending from them by ordinary generation, is yet more improbable.
For first, that some men are sanctified from the womb, as Jeremiah and John the
Baptist were, and the Virgin Mary might possibly be, none will deny. And
secondly, that all others are still created innocent, in some measure of Gods
image, there are not a few Scriptures which seem to testify it; of which
Genesis the 9.6. is one, where the killing of men by a p^ivate hand is
forbidden, because in the image of God created he man; which reason will not
hold unless man be still so created: For if it were derived or drawn from the
first created Adam, who by rebellion against God lost that image, and corrupted
himself with all his posterity, it would rather lay a ground that man might now
lawfully, or without any great scruple be killed (as a defaced, corrupt,
depraved creature) then that he should be so tenderly spared and preserved. For
so Cain apprehended after he had sinned, Genesis 4.14. saying, And it shall come
to pass, that every one who finds me, shall slay me. But to clear the place
unto all that seek the truth out of love unto it; we affirm that this place
must needs be meant of all mankind, where he says, for In the image of God
made be man, because the prepositive article and particle Ha, is prefixed
before the noune, Adam, the name of him who is here said to be killed,
declaring it to be an appellative name of the whole species, and not the proper
name of our first parent, yea, and he that is here said to kill, has here the
same name of Haadam, as well as the person killed, given unto him: where it is
said, At the hands of man and at the hands of every man's brother will I require
the life of men. It is therefore evident out of the context that the holy ghost
meant it of mankind in general, and not of the first created Adam, when he
says in the next verse, for In the Image of God created he man; which thing
may be yet farther evidenced from the co^nextion, which all true Logicians
observe betwixt the Antecedent and the Consequent, which is this; Quia
Antecedens, sic habet sei deo Consequens est, etc; For they depend as cause and
effect, the Antecedent here being the cause, and the Consequent instead of the
effect. The contextion is here confessed by all rational men in that act, ex vi
causae existere. Now to apply this to our purpose; if a man must not be killed,
because in the image of God he created man, then this reason which is the
Antecedent must be understood of man in general, or mankind universally, and
of every individuum of that species, or else this Consequent, that he shall
have his blood shed, who sheddeth man's blood verse 6. can have no force of
Argument from the said Antecedent, viz, That in the image of God created be man.

The second Scripture that is to be considered is that place Deuteronomy. 32.4, 5.
where we have two Arguments more to prove Israel, and consequently all men, to
be still created innocent. The first is from the perfection of all Gods works,
verse 4. He is the Rock, his work is perfect, for all his ways are judgment: A
God of truth; and without iniquity, just and right is he: How then can he which
is holy, righteous, and pure, create any thing that is unrighteous, unclean, or
unpure? The second is taken from Gods complaint there against men's personal
fall and corrupting themselves, whom God had not brought forth with any such
spots, verse 5. They have corrupted themselves, their spot is not the spot of
his children, they are a perverse and crooked generation. A third Text
asserting man's innocence, is the 8 Psalm, where verse 4, 5, 6. etc. the
Psalmist speaks thus of all mankind, What is man, that thou art mindful of him,
and the son of man, that thou visitest him? For thou bast made him a little
lower then the Angels; and have crowned him with glory and honor: which glory
lies in the Image of God, 1 Cor. 11.7. For a man indeed ought not to cover his
head, forasmuch as he is the image and glory of God: Thus the Psalmist shows
that the man is still set in honor, to wit, by his first state of production,
though he does not long retain the same, but falls therefrom, Psalm. 49. verse
12. Nevertheless, man being in honor, abides not: be is like the beasts that
perish. So again verse 20. Man that is in honor and understands not, is like
the beast that perish: But if man had been created so corrupt, as you speak he
had not only been lower then the Angels, but below all creatures here. A
fourth place evicting man's upright creation is, Eccles. 7.29. where the
Preacher publishes this truth to all the world, to vindicate Gods honor in
man's creation, and to shame the sons of men for their vile Apostasy and
degeneration; for This only have I found, that God has made man upright: but
he has sought out many inventions, Where it is evident, first out of the
context, and then out of the text, that Solomon speaks of all mankind in their
succeeding generations. For first he says verse 28. after his search into
mankind. For such as continued in innocence: One man (to wit Christ) among a
thousand have I found, but a women among all those have I not found. Secondly,
in the text it self, first, the word translated man, is in the origional
Haadam, the common name of mankind. And secondly, when the wise man comes
there to speak of the fall, he ascribes it not to our first fore-father alone
but to the individuals of their posterity, likewise saying, But they have
sought out many inventions, to which we might add this, that Solomon needed not
to have usherd in this fall and depravement of mankind with a Lo! or note of
wonderment in the beginning of this verse, if all men (as you both hold and
teach) came so corrupted into the world with the poison of propagated
uncleanness. A fifth place that here stands up for the defense of this
innocence, is that of Isa. 1. verse 21, 22. which may be understood as well of a
personal Jerusalem (each one of us being created for an holy City and
habitation of God) as of the inhabitants of Jerusalem and Judah, which were the
present auditors and object of Isaiahs ministry: How is the faithful City
become an harlot? It was full of judgment, righteousness lodged therein, but
now murderers. Thy silver is become dross, thy wine is mixed with water. Unto
such a personal Jerusalem as we described, speaks the Prophet Jer. c. 4. v. 14.
O Jerusalem, wash thine heart from wickedness, that thou may be saved: how
long shall thy vain thoughts lodge within thee? A fifth place which like an
undanted Advocate pleads for God still creating men in uprightness, is that of
Isaiah 5.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, etc. My beloved has a vineyard in a very fruitful
Hill. And he fenced it, and gathered out the stones thereof, and planted it
with the choicest vine, and built a Tower in the midst of it, and also made a
wine press therein: and he looked that it should bring forth grapes, and it
brought forth wild grapes. And now, O inhabitants of Jerusalem, and men of
Judah, judge I pray you betwixt me and my vineyard. What could have been done
more to my vineyard, that I have not done in it? Wherefore, when I looked that
it should have brought forth grapes, brought it forth wild grapes? Unto which
interrogatories the church, if they had believed your doctri^ might have
answered thus: Thou might have done much more for thy vineyard then thou
have done, if thou had created us all in Gods Image, as thou did our first
parents, a thing very easy unto thee: And how would thou, O wise and
righteous Lord, expect that we should bring forth any other fruit but wild
grapes, since by our depravation derived from our first parents we are a mere
wild vine. But as the choicest vine with which God planteth his vineyard, is
Christ from our creation planted in us, being called Ja. 1.21. The ingrafted
word which is able to save our souls; so this vineyard is our heart or inward
man, into which al are hired, or sent by the Lord to work therein, and to keep
and dress the same from the 3. unto the 11 hour, yet some at one hour and some
at another are more excited to labor therein Matthew. 20.1, 2, 3, -- 16. And the
wickedness which by our fall from God, we have brought in and planted, is the
vine of Sodom (that is of their secret or foundation) of which the Lord
complains, Deuteronomy. 32.32. For their vine is of the vine of Sodom, and the fields
of Gomorrah, their grapes are grapes of gall, their clusters are bitter. A
seventh place which lets his voice be heard without fear, is that of Jeremiah
2.21. where the Lord justifies himself, but justly blames Israel. Yet I had
planted thee a noble vine, wholly of a right seed: How then are thou turned
into the degenerate plant of a wild vine unto me? Now the whole nation of
Israel was yet never thus planted any other way, but by an upright creation:
for they were not all made such by way of regeneration in any age or generation
which was heretofore. Eighthly, when God by the same Prophet expostulates with
them about their falling from him and not rising again and returning, chapt. 8.
verse 4, 5. does not the Lord implie that they once stood before they fell:
yea, and that they had not yet lost all ability of returning, when by
precedent grace they where excited thereunto. Moreover, thou shall say unto
them, Thus says the Lord, shall they fall and not arise? Shall he turn away,
and not return? Wherefore is this people of Jerusalem slidden back, by a
perpetual back sliding? They bold fast deceit, they refuse to return. Ninthly,
the Lord in Hosea chapter 3. verse 9. lays Isreal's destruction upon her self,
and not upon her first parents. O Israel thou have destroyed thy self, but in
me is thy help: and so he does their fall likewise, chapter 14. verse 1. O
Israel return unto the Lord thy God, for thou have fallen by thine iniquity.

Tenthly, does not our Savior declare the state of children both to be
innocent and blessed, when first he makes it terminus, ad quem, unto which in
our conversion and regeneration we must return, and then tells us that the
kingdom of Heaven belongs unto such, and is replenished with such, saying,
Matthew. 18.3. Verily I say unto you, except ye be converted, and become as
little children, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. And again
Matthew. 19.1^. he says, Suffer little children to come unto me, and forbid them
not, for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven.

Eleventhly, does not the Apostle Paul remove not only from children malice,
but all evil of iniquity, when he would have the Corinthians in that behalf
conformed unto them, 1 Cor. 14.20. saying, Brethren be not children in
understanding: Howbeit, (...), in malice or iniquity be children, but in
understanding be perfect, or of a ripe age.

Lastly, to omit many other Scriptures which might be produced upon this
account, the Apostle James affirms that men are still created after Gods Image,
chap. 39. saying, Therewith (to wit, with the tongue) bless we God, even the
Father, and therewith curse we men, which are made after the similitude of God.
If it be here objected, that the Apostle here meant only such as were
regenerate; we reply these three things. First, that the verb here used
signifies to create or make, but to create or make, but not to regenerate
without some other exprssion in the text so to limit it. Secondly that the
Saints to whom St. James did now write, do not use to curse each other.
Thirdly, without doubt the holy Apostle and Disciple of Christ here restraining
and reproving the cursing of men, would make his restraint as large as his
master did, who would have us to love all mankind, even our enemies, and not
curse, any of them, but to bless and benefit them all herein following the
example of our Hevenly Father, Mat. 5.44.45. But I say unto you, love your
enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for
them that dispitefully use you, and persecute you, that ye may be the children
of your Father which is in Heaven: For he makes his Son to rise on the evil,
and the good, and sends rain on the just and on the unjust.

It is all mankind therefore that James would exempt from being cursed, and
consequently no less number that are made after Gods Image.

Thus we have proved, that neither the guilt of our first parents sin was
imputed, nor their spiritual death in sin and corrupted nature was conveyed to
all their posterity, or to any one of them by ordinary generation, contrary to
your assertions in your third Section.

And though this your doctrine has gone from hand to hand, a long time by
tradition, yet neither did the Scribes and Pharisees, nor yet the Disciples of
Christ, and much less Christ himself hold forth any such doctrine, nor were any
of them leavened with this opinion of yours, and your long mistasten
predecessors; for the Pharisees with the Jews, being highly displeased with
him who was born blind, and whose eyes Christ had opened for defending his
Savior and blessed Occulist, said thus unto him, John 9.34. Thou wast
altogether born in sin, and do thou teach us? Whence it is evident that they
did neither conceive all men in general, nor yet themselves to be by
propagation conceived and born in sin. And when Christ's Disciples asked him
saying, John 9.23. Master who did sin, this man or his parents, that he was
born blind? Jesus answered, neither has this man sinned nor his parents: but
that the works of God should be made manifest in him. Where according to your
doctrine our Savior should have answered positively; that both he and his
parents with all his progenitors, even as far as Adam, had sinned, and were
all, as many descended from Adam by ordinary generation from one generation to
another, conceived in sin, and brought forth in iniquity. But our Savior
taught no such doctrine, nor did his Apostles (when rightly understood) hold
forth any thing that tends this way more then the Prophets their Predecessors,
or the Prince of the Prophets, their Master did; in which point all are silent,
if not clearly opposite unto you: The Lord commanded by Moses, that Cities of
fefuge should be set apart in all the coasts and habitations of Israel for such
persons to flee to, as had slain any man at unawares, that the avenger of blood
should not slay the innocent with a temporal death, Deu. 19. etc. And will the
Lord pursue the innocent seed of Adam; and hold them guilty for their Fathers
sin perpetrated ere they were born? yea, will he himself be the avenger of the
blood against these innocents; Amaziah is commended for his justice (and his
obedience in that behalf, to the Law of the Lord) in not slaying the sons of
those that murderd his father Joash, but only the fathers that did the Villainy,
2 Ki. 14.5, 6. And will ye Brethren father upon God the fountain of all justice,
and the Father of mercies, a cruelty forbiden in his own Law, Deuteronomy
24.16. who was so far from destroying the infants of Nineveh (though but an
handful compared to the vast harvest of Adams posterity) that he spared the
whole Cities, mainly, upon that account, next after the peoples repentance, as
he declares unto Jonas who was not a little displeased to see; by this means
his prediction contradicted or come to nothing, Jonah 4.10, 11.

But having here vindicated the justice and mercy of the Lord from this your
putative most putid imputation of the first Adams sin to all his succeeding
offspring, as also derived innocence and righteousness in some measure from
God, the true Author of it, instead of propagated corruption to the ensuing
generations: let us now come to answer such objections as seem to stand in our
way or the passage of others, who are willing to be brought to the knowledge,
and imbracement of the truth.

First here it is objected, that the Lord says, Gen 8, 21. The imaginations of
man's heart, are evil from his youth. Answer, Even as Esau or Edom though he had
a birth right yet sold it in his youth to satisfy some strong desires kindled
in him: So men though created innocent, do in the time of temptation and trial,
too often and too soon yield unto the temptation, and sell or forfeit, that
their innocence and birth right, and so their imaginations become evil from
their youth, but are not so from their birth unless you here understand a
spiritual, conception and birth in sin, by our personal fall.

Object. 2. Job says chap. 11.4. Who can bring a clean thing out of an
unclean? not one. Answer, Job here confesses that himself was unclean, and
that ever since his personal fall: and therefore he of himself could not bring
forth an obedience or righteousness that was clean and pure: no nor the
adaequate fruits of righteousness, which might pass for such before the Lords
judgment of a long time, though he was helped by grace, for grace is not had
all at once.

Object. 3. Job 15.14, 15, 16. Eliphaz speaks thus, What is man that he should
be clean? and be that is born of a woman, that he should he righteous? Behold
he puteth no trust in his Saints, yea the heavens are not clean in his sight,
How much more abominable, and filthy is man which drinks iniquity like water?
Answer, this is an hy perbolical speech of his tending to the further
accusation of Job, whom he had more then sufficiently; yea, very unjustly
charged before. For first, God does put trust and confidence in his Saints and
Angels, whom he daily employeth. Secondly, The heavens and all other creatures,
as they come out of the Creators hands, are pure and good in his sight. And
thirdly, though some men are so accustomed to sin, that they have contracted an
hypodropical chirst thereunto, yet neither Job of whom he means all this in
hypothesie, nor any other of the Saints upon earth do drink iniquity like
water: But suppose all men did so, yet it does not from hence follow that we
are all so deeply tainted, and corrupted by sin drawn from Adam our first
parent: For as he corrupted himself by his personal Lapse and disobedience, so
may any other man, and so doubtless do all lapsed men do likewise. See Psalm.
14.2, 3. The Lord looked down from heaven upon the children of men, to see if
there were any that did understand, and seek after God. They are all gone aside,
they are all together become filthy: there is none that does good, no not one.
Of this fall and corruption Pilagius unmindfull in pleading man's ability, in
and of himself still, to keep and fulfill the law which Saint Austin grants
ought to be done by grace, not by corrupt nature. The like answer we give to
those words of Bildad, Job. 25.4, 5, 6. How then can man be justified? or how
can he be clean that is born of a woman? behold even to the M^on and it shines
not, and the Stars are not pure in his fight? How much less, man that is a
worm, and the son of man who is a worm; for as it must be granted that man
since his fall cannot by himself be either made just or clean; so it is false
that the Moon and Stars are not pure in Gods sight. Thus Jobs friend would make
good their unjust charge against him, with false principles, and glarifie God
with lies, for which he is afterward justly displeased with them, as he is
with all other that plead for him in a wicked way.

Job 42.7. The Lord said to Eliphaz the Temanite, My wrath is kindled against
thee, and against thy two friends: for ye have not spoken of me the things that
as right, my servant Job has.

Object. 4. David says, Psalm. 51.5. Behold I was shapen in iniquity, and in
sin did my mother conceive me, which words seem expressly to speak of his
conception and birth in the corruption by you set forth. Answer, we would first
gladly know of you, whether it be not David's scope in this confession, to
aggravate his sin; But if he here pleads the inevitable corruption of nature,
which you hold forth his words, will be found a mere extinuation of his
offenses, if not a throwing of all or most of the blame upon God, who had
brought him forth so corrupt, and so averse to all good, and so propense to all
evil, and that without hope of an absolute cure, while he was in this world.
Secondly for the clearing of the truth, let us first consider, whether David
had no other parents but Jesse and his wife, and then if he had which is the
mother that he here speak of. As to the first, besides our natural parents we
have spiritual Fathers and mothers, whether for our begetting in the evil and
iniquity, or for our regeneration in grace and goodness. Concerning our
procreation in sin, our Savior speaks thus unto the Jews, John 8.44. Ye are
of your father the devil, and his lusts will ye do. Now this father makes use
of a twofold mother to beget men in wickedness, besides their own lust, which
when it is intised and drawn away by temptation, conceives and brings forth
sin, Jam. 1, 14, 15. The first is the lying word, and promises with which he
deceives men as he did Eve, saying, Genesis 3.4, 5. Ye shall not dye, for God
does know that in the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes shall be open^d, and
ye shall be as Go^s knowing good and evil. The second is the false Synagogue
which through Satan's help begets men in a false faith, religion and worship.
Thus the Lord speaks to Ammi or his own people which were in the false
Synagogue of Israel, or the 10. tribes, Ho. 2.1, 2. Say unto your brethren
Ammi, and to your sister Ruhama, plead with you mother, plead, for she is not
my wise, neither am I her husband, let her therefore put away her whoredoms out
of her fight, and her adulteries from between her breasts, etc.

On the other hand in the work of the new birth, as God is our father, so the
word of truth is our inward mother, and Jerusalem or the Church which is
begotten from above, is our outward spiritual mother, Ja. 1.18. Of his own will
begat, he us with the word of truth that we should be a kind of first fruits
of his creaturs, Gal. 4.26. But Jerusalem which is above is free, which is the
mother of us all: Come we now to enquire which of these mothers, David here
speaks of: Not of his natural mother doubtless, for as his father Isai (which
signifies a gift) was a pious man in Israel; so no doubt is to be made, but his
mother was a godly matron: and being both of them well grown in grace ere they
begot this their youngest son, they were more likely to convey grace and
holiness, if that be communicable then sin unto him, since at this age they
must needs be well grown in goodness and very mortified persons: But that it
was the lie or lying promises of Satan with the folly therein contained, by
which he was shapen in iniquity, and conceived in sin (as our first parents
were, and all their fallen posterity have been since procreated) no man of wisdom
will doubt: And this is here the more evident to be David's meaning, because in
the next verse following, he by way of opposition (having now hope after his
late fall to be helped up again) speaks of a new Spiritual Father and Mother,
saying, verse 6. Behold thou desire truth in the inward parts, and in the
hidden part thou shall make me know wisdom. which wisdom is a mother, and has
her children, Mat. 11.19. But wisdom is justified of her children: as the lie
and folly, or Belial, has her brood likewise, unto whom the Lord speaks thus,
Isai 57.3. But draw near hither ye sons of the Sorceress, the seed of the
Adulterer and of the whore,

So we read often of lying children, or the sons of the lie, and of the sons of
Belial; yea, David himself attributes his sins to his folly, 2 Samuel 24.10.
saying, I have done very foolishly. Of these two Solomon speaks thus, Prove.
14.8. The wisdom of the prudent is to understand his way, but the folly of
fools is deceit, and Prove. 15.21. Folly is joy unto him that is destitute of
wisdom, and the Apostle says the like, Gal. 3.1.

5. Objection: It is said Psalm. 58.3. That the wicked are estranged from the
womb; they go astray as soon as they be born, speaking lies.

Answer, First we may here take notice that the Prophet speaks not this of all
men, but of the wicked only. Secondly, it must needs be the womb and birth of
iniquity, and not the natural birth of which he here speaks: For otherwise how
can men go astray, or speak lies so soon at they are born.

The 6. Objection, Ezekiel. 16.3. The Lord speaks thus unto Jerusalem, Thy birth
and thy nativity is of the land of Canaan; thy Father was an Amorite, and thy
Mother an Hittite.

Answer, The Lord does not here upbraid the Jews with the corruption derived
from our first parents, but with wicked poslutions learned from the Canaanites:
although the name Amorite serves fitly to represent the Devil, with his lying
promises; for it signifies a vain-talker, or man of words, as the name Hittite
sets forth the soul that is prostrate to him.

The 7. Objection. Paul confesses thus much concerning himself, and the Jews,
Ephesians. 2.3. Among whom we all likewise had our conversation in times past, in
the lusts of the flesh, serving the desires of the flesh, and of the mind, and
were by nature the children of wrath as well as others.

Answer, it is one thing to be sinners from our first Nativitie, and another in
time to become the children of wrath by our personal fall, and actual
disobedience, which also coming to pass in our natural man, and by his desault,
we may truly be said by nature to be the children of wrath; especially when sin
by custom becomes a second nature unto us. Yet does the word (...), here
translated by nature, import no more but (...) or (...), that is really and
truly such by disobedience, as the same word signifies Galat. 4.8. Howbeit when
ye knew not God, ye did sert vice unto them which by nature are no Gods.

The 8. Objection. But the grand objection which our opposites bring, is that
of Romans 5.12. etc. where it is said, That by one man sin entered into the world,
and death by sin, and so death passed over all men, for that all have sinned.

Unto which we first answer in the general. That this Chapter seems to be one
of those places unto which Saint Peter aludes. 2 Epist. 3. Chap. verse. 16.
saying, In which to wit the Epistles of Saint Paul) are some things hard to be
understood, which they that are unlearned and unstable, wrest as they do the
other Scriptures to their own destruction. For here are seven things rightly
understood by few, but perveretd by many.

First the Justification of faith, whereby we have peace with God, verse 1.

Secondly, the time of our small strength in the natural man when we first fell
through the power of temptation, and Christ dyed in us, and for us, v. 6.

Thirdly, the love of God then in letting his Son die for us, and not
destroying us, v. 7, 8.

Fourthly, the blood of Christ through which we are justify by faith, v. 9.

Fifthly the death of Christ, or rather his like death through which we are
reconciled to God, v. 10. Of all which we shall speak in their due places.

Sixthly, that one man Adam, in us, through whose disobedience all are made
sinners.

And lastly, That one man, Christ in us, through whose obedience many shall be
made righteous; which two Adams are not only paralleled and opposed here with
their fruits and effects, but in many other Scriptures likewise, whereof take
these few.

John. 1.13. Which were born not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of
the will of man, but of God. John 3.6. That which is born of the flesh, is
flesh: and that which is born of the spirit, is spirit. 1 Cor. 2.14, 15. For
the natural men perceives not the things of the spirit of God, for they are
foolishness unto him. Neither can he know them, for they are spiritually
discerned. But the spiritual man discerns all things, but is discerned of
none. 1 Cor. 15.22. For as in Adam all die, so in Christ shall all be made
alive, and verse 45, 46, 47, 48, 49. As it is written, the first man was made a
living soul, but the second Adam was made a quickening spirit; Hewbeit that was
not first, which is spiritual, but that which is natural, and then that which
i^ spiritual. The first man is of the ^^rth earthy, the second m^n is the Lord
from heaven: as is the earthy, such are they that are earthy, and as is the
heavenly, such are they that are heavenly: and as we have born the image of the
earthly, so must we bear the image of the heavenly, etc.

More particularly we answer, That this one by whom sin entered into the world,
is not meant our first parent Adam, but our own earthy or natural man, which is
called Adam, and Edom from the earth of his foundation. For the apostle shows
that Adam our progenitor, was not the original or first sinner. 1 Timothy 2.14.
For Adam was not deceived, but the woman being deceived was in the
transgression: according then to your Doctrine the apostle should have said, By
one Woman sin entered into the world. But you hear before how Solomon Eccles.
7.29. and the Lord himself, Hos. 14 1. scribe our fall to our selves. This is
yet clearer out of the 14. verse, here where the apostle speaks of some who
sinned after the similitude of Adams transgression, but makes mention of none
that sinned in him; where he had fair occasion to speak of it; yea, if he had
been of your belief, he had committed a grievous neglect, totally to omit it in
silence.

Secondly, here by the world, into which sin entered, we must understand the
world of fallen and corrupt men, as our Savior does, Jo^n 3.16, 17. and John
15.17, 18. and not all mankind as you do, etc.

Thirdly, by death is not meant the bodily death, which does not presently
ensue upon our fall, no more then it did upon our first parents; but a death
unto righteousness, or the life of innocence, with the contrary body of sin;
and so obnoxiousness to eternal death is hear meant.

Fourthly these words, and death passed upon all men (...) are thus to be
rendered, in as much, or so far forth as all have sinned: and as Moses in the
14. verse is not he that was the Lawgiver, but the work of the Law drawing us
to God, so neither is this man the litterall Adam: For Paul here says, That
death reigned from Adam to Moses, which must be understood necessarily thus;
from the fall of our natural Adam, till the work of the Law came: For otherwise
the extent of the reign of sin should reach from the first man to the last, and
not to Moses only. Which thing the 13. ver. holds out more plainly, that he
meant by Mose: the Law. For it is there said, That until the Law, sin was in
the world, which must be conceived that until the work of the law, sin is in
the world, that is likewise in the fallen and corrupted men undiscovered, which
is plain from the latter part of the 13 verse, where it is said, sin is not
reputed nor regarded, as the word (...) signifies, and so Coverdel translates
it, (and not imputed) when there is no Law; for that is false that sin was not
imputed when there was no Law extant; for it was imputed to Cain, Genesis 4. and
he was punished. So to the old world, and they punished, Genesis 6, so to Babels
builders, and they punished, Genesis 11.7.8. so it was imputed to Sodom and
Gomorrab, and they punished, Genesis 19. when there was none of Moses law extant;
but it is a very truth, that sin is not reputed not regarded, when there is no
work of the Law discovering sin unto the man; so St. Paul says of himself,
Romans 7.9. that he was alive without the Law; and verse v. he says, he had not
known lust, but by the Law, and Romans 3.20. it is said, that by the Law comes
the knowledge of sin. Thus you see how death reigned from Adam to Moses, yet
not from the first individual Adam to Moses, the Lawgiver; but in the 2. part
of the 14 ver. it is not affirmed that any sinned in the first individual Adam;
for he says, Some finned not after the similitude of Adams transgression over
whom (notwithstanding) death reigned. Now that expression hinteth these two
things.

First, Some sinned like Adam, not in Adam; others sinned, not after the
similitude of his transgression, but some other way, as after Esau's
transgression, Hebr. 18.16, 17. or the like, according to that, Eccles. 7.29.
Surely if the Apostle had believed any such thing, as the reigning of death
over all men by the first man's sin, he would not have omitted that, and only
mentioned from Adam to Moses; for all may perceive his main design is from
verse 12. to the 15. to set forth the inlet and extent of deaths reigning over
sinners therefore he would have used the fullest and plainest expression
serving to that purpose: but the 19. verse is more plain against universal
corruption by the first man's disobedience; for there the Apostle uses the word
many, and says, by one man's disobediene many (not all) were made sinners.
Therefore all fell not in the first individual Adam.

If any yet reply, That (many) in that place is tant' amount and equivalent to
the word (all)

We Answer, That then by the same reason, the word (many) in the latter part of
the verse must have the same latitude allowed, for the Apostle sets down a
full comparison of equals in that verse: here the verse must be thus
interpreted, That as by one man's disobedience, all were made sinners: so by one
man's obedience, all are made righteous.

If any yet reply, and say, By one man's obedience all that repent and believe
are made righteous: then by the same inter retation, By ones man's disobedience
all are made sinners; that imitate him, and sin like him, after the similitude
of Adam 's transgressions.

Thus all men may see, there is nothing gained by interpreting the word (many)
(by a Synecdoche) for (all) are made sinners by one man's disobedience; for the
latter part of the verse must have the word (many) so explained: which to
affirm, namely, that (all) are righteous by Christ, by an absolute and
uniuersal Justification, is accounted as detestable an Heresy, as it has been
hitherto, to deny that all and every one to be sinners by the first individual
man's disobedience: but grant that the word (many) in both parts of this 19.
verse must be explained by the word (all) how clear then without any darkness
is the meaning, when it is said, by one man's disobedience, namely, the natural
Adam 's disobedience all are made sinners, because all that ever sin, sin in
that natural Adam; for John 3.9. he that is born of God s^^neth not, neither
can he sin, because he is born of God: Hence by the obedience of one, that is,
the heavenly Adam, (many) that is (all) are made righteous according to that,
Cor. 15.48. As is the earthy, so are they that are earthy: and as is the
heavenly, so are they that are heavenly; and therefore as we have borne the
Image of the earthy, by our disobedience, so let us seek to bear the Image of
the heavenly; That (as Romans 5 19.) by one man's disobedience we all may be made
righteous.

Thus we hope it plainly appears that no place in the fifth of the Romans
asserteth the imputation of the first man's sin to all posterity, though it do
affirm that by one man sin entered into the world: which must be understood of
the one natural man, or common Adam, in, and upon us all according to that, 1
Cor. 15.22. For, as in Adam all die, so in Christ shall all be made alive. That
is, as all die in the earthy Adam (that do die) so all that live, are made
alive in Christ the Heavenly Adam.

We come now to answer the arguments brought a simili, whereby you deceive your
selves and others.

As first, It is usually said, That Traitors are not only punished themselves
for their Treason, but their posterity also have their blood tainted, and
deprived of their inheritance. But we demand by what Law? Is this by Gods Law
and Command, that the posterity of a Traitor should be so tainted and deprived,
or by man's law, without warrant from Gods Law? If so, That does not argue God
will deal with Adams posterity to taint them for his sin, and deprive them of
an inheritance immortal (which the Lord gives, and not man) for the first man's
sin.

But to apply our selves to your simile: We answer, That none but the fathers
are punished with death for that sin; their children are only disinherited of
the lands and honors which are hereditary, but are not made incapable of new:
and though all this be done In terrorem, yet it leaves Traitors life and being
with manyfold capacities of well being; but you leave a great part of Adams
posterity (for his sin by you imputed to them) no hope of salvation; yea, you
expose them to eternal destruction for that same they never consented unto, nor
could avoid.

Another Objection a simili, is this: That as the so^^ of Achan (Josua 7.24.)
perished with him for his sin, so may we justly perish with the first Adam for
his sin.

We answer, First, Achan's sons being acquainted with the hidden Treasure, and
approving the thest (as it is probable they might) were involved in the fin,
and worthy to be partaker of the punishment.

Secondly, It was but a temporal death which his sons suffered, and not an
eternal destruction.

Lastly, It is objected, That as young Vipers or Serpents are killed with the
old ones: (because we know they have the poisonous nature in them) So may Adams
posterity ^e destroyed with him.

We answer, That the similitude cannot hold; for (as we have proved already)
Adam's posterity are created innocent, yea, righteous still even in the nautral
man, besides a spiritual Adam that lies hidden in all men.

True it is, That by a voluntary fall, and the addition of manifold rebellions,
many men (as John calls them Matthew. 3.7.) make themselves a generation of
vipers: but they are not so born, by their descent from the first finful Adam.

Thus we need not throw dirt in the face of our first parents, nor transfer the
guilt of our fall to those which lived almost six thousand years before us, if
we rightly understood what we our selves have done; yea, if we understand that
one man (before spoken of, Romans 5.12. to the end of the chapter) to be opposed
unto, or paralleled with Christ in a contrary way or course: then we may
conceive, that one man as properly, if not more truly, to be meant of one
personal, yet common Adam, as of our first progenitors, to defame him: which
will be more fully declared when we speak of Christ the other member of the
collation or parallel in the 5. chapter, that is concerning Christ the Mediator.

We beseech you to pardon this our long abode upon your third Section, because
we know by experience our opposing the tradition of original sin in children,
will be most stumbled at and wondered at by them that never surveyed the
Scriptures about it.

In your fourth Section you proceed and say, From this original corruption
whereby we are utterly indisposed, disabled and made opposite to all good, and
wholly inclined to all evil, do proceed all actual transgressions. Where to
your former error of deriving both the guilt of Adams fall, and the corruption
of nature to his posterity, you add three more according to the multiplying
nature of error.

But first you will not deny that Adam was in the estate of regeneration before
he begat any of his children; and what true reason can there be given why grace
and the renewed Image of God being inherent and connatural, should not be
derived to his seed, as well as his corruptions which were not either
universal, or perfect in degree, even before he by grace was renewed again, as
we have already proved; but of that enough before.

II. How do you prove that the first fall which we call original sin, whether
happening in Adam or our selves, does presently render us both unable, yea, and
altogether indisposed and opposite to any good? For the whole Image of God is
not blotted out at once: Does not the Lord testify of Jeroboams son-who was
sick, That there was some good thing left in him toward the Lord; and
therefore he is taken away before that those last sparks be extinguished, 1
Kings 14.13.

III. As the Image of God is defaced gradually, so corruption is contracted by
degrees, so that all men are not corrupted in every part, nor alike deeply
corrupted: so Judah by continuance in sin, in process of time, had more
polluted her self then Samaria her elder sister, or Sodom her pounger, Ezekiel.
16, 45, 46, 47. etc.

The last age of the old world upon which the deluge was sent, was more corrupt
then any that went before it, and thereupon it was destroyed. Therefore that
which the Lord speaks, in complaint of that age is not equally applicable to
all ages, and muchless to all persons; Although that is true of all grown men
which the Lord speaks, Genesis 8.21. That the imaginations of man's hears are evil
from his youth, that is, from the first times of his fall, for so they then
begin to be.

True it is that the great wickedness, which the Psalmist complains of in his
enemies, and the persecutors of Gods people, Psalm. 14 1, 2. and Psalm. 36.1, 2,
etc. as also that which Isaiah confesses to God, Chap. 59.2, 3, 4, etc. is to
be sound in too many, and that not alone in those that are mere strangers unto
God, but in many members of the visible Church, and therefore the Apostle
applies those sayings to the Jews, to prove them guilty of sin and death, as
well as the Gentiles Romans 3.9, 10 -- But though it must of necessity be granted
(which the Apostle affirms there afterward, Romans 3.23) That all both Jews and
Gentiles since the fall have sinned and come short of the glory of God: Yet it
will not follow from hence that all are alike deeply corrupted as they imply;
And this is your second mistake in this Section.

Lastly, Whereas you say in the close of this Section, That all actual
transgressions do proceed from this original corruption, of which you here
speak; It is false undoubtedly. For Satan tempts men to many sins whereunto
they have no previous inclination, and suggests unto some of Gods servants such
blasphemies as they abhor: so far are they from being natural or familiar to
them: cannot that subtle powerful adversaries now tempt men as well without
corrupt inclinations, as he did our first parents in their innocence?

Lastly, to take a view of your fif^h Section: you do not only affirm gross
untruths there, but seem to contradict your selves also.

As first, That this corruption of nature does remain in the regenerate during
this life; of which afterward. And then you add, Though it be in Christ both
pardoned and mortified -- What do you say brethren? Is it mortified by Christ,
and yet does it remain?

Secondly, Is it pardoned and yet does it abide still in us? For the first of
these, must it remain in us all our life time? when then must it be quite
purged out? Must it be done in Purgatory hereafter? or must men carry the
remainders of sin with them into Gods Kingdom, whereinto no unclean thing can
enter? Rev. 21.27. Surely you did not foresee what a world of absurdities would
follow hereupon. Must we not be implanted into the similitude of Christ's death
(his total death) that we may be implanted into the likeness of his
resurrection? Romans 6.5. Certainly as the pattern was not a bare wounding or an
half death in Christ, so must our mortification be no less then a full death
likewise. Can Christ also be frustrate of the end of his coming? who gave
himself for his Church that he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing
of water by the word, That he might present it to himself a glorious Church,
not having spot or wrinckle, or any such thing, but that it should be holy and
without blemish, Ephesians. 5.25, 26, 27. Since this washing (as the Apostle
speaks) must be by the water of the word, surely it must be effected in this
life.

Thirdly, Is corruption a thing so well pleasing to God and his Chirst that he
will not depart with it or wholly lose the presence and society of it? See 2
Cor. 6.14, 15, 16. For what fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness,
and what communion has light with darkness, and what concord has Christ with
Belial? and what agreement has the temple of God with Idols?

Is not sin and corruption an enemy to Christ as well as death? Now the Apostle
faith, That the last enemy which shall be destroyed is death. If death then be
the last enemy, then of necessity sin must be destroyed before. But since you
are wont to object many things against this: Let us take a view of your
objections.

First you say, That as the Canaanites were left to prove the faith and
obedience of the Israelites, Judge. 3.1. so the Lord in the beginning of our
regeneration, leaves many corruptions to exercise our faith, love, and
obedience likewise.

Answer, It is true, that they are left at the first for that end: But would
the Lord have them always to continue in us? On no: For as the Lord was
displeased with his people Israel for permitting those Nations still to dwell
among them when they should have subdued them or cast them out, Judge. 2.1, 2.
so will the Lord be highly offended with us if we root not out these wicked
Nations through the help of his Christ, 1 Cor. 15.25. It is certain that David
a man after Gods own heart, subdued all the Canaanites; so that when Solomon
succeeded him, there was neither enemy left, nor evil occurrent, 1 King. 5.4.
And so has Christ the promise that all his enemies shall be his foolstoole,
Psalm. 110.1. Acts 2: 34. Yea he is given to us for our final deliverance from
them and conquest over them, Luke 1.71. John 3.8.

Secondly, You say, "That corruption is lest to keep us humble least we grow
proud.

Answer, If all corruption were purged out, what should become of pride? Are
not the Angels and Saints in Heaven most humble?

Thirdly, you alledg that which Solomon speaks, 1 King, 1.48. 's For there is
no man that sins not.

Answer, peradventure it may be granted that there is no man that ordinarily
lived to man's estate who has not often sinned (Christ excepted) Howbeit it
does not follow from hence that the regenerate shall always do so; for St. John
1 Epist. cap. 2. ver. 1. writes to the Saints not to sin; see also cap. 4.
verse. 17.

Fourthly, You are wont to urge that place, Prove. 20.9. who can say, I have
made my heart clean? I am pure from my sin?

Answer, First, that kind of interrogation does not always imply a nullity, but
sometimes a paucity only, as Isa. 53.1. who has believed our report?

Secondly, No man can say, that he has done this by his own strength.

Fifthly, Some also object that place, Prove. 24.16. the righteous falls seven
times, and rises again.

Answer, The words following show that this is to be understood of affliction,
not of sin, which words are these; But the wicked fall into mischief.

Sixthly, That place, Eccles. 7.20. is much insisted upon, For there is not a
just man in the earth which does good, and sins not; which place may be
three ways answered, and yet the saying hold true.

First, That though there were no such man in Solomon's time, being the infancy
of the Church, yet aftertimes might bring forth many such, when a fuller
dispensation of grace should come, James 4.6. and Hebr. 11.40. God having
provided some better things for us, that they without us should not be made
perfect.

Secondly, It is not improbable that there has been no man in any age (Christ
excepted) who has not sinned, or done that which is good continually, as we
said before.

Thirdly, There is an Earth of sin and corruption, in which there is no man but
sins often, Colos. 3.5. Martifie therefore your members which are upon
earth, Fornication, Uncleanness, In^rdinate affection, evil concupiscence and
covetousness, etc. This is that Earth which is opposed to be the Heaven of Gods
holiness, Eccles. 5.2. For God is in Heaven, and thou upon the Earth; For the
Lord is present in this outward Earth, as well as we; in this Earth all men sin;
but there are some places in the new Testament, also which you oppose us with;
as first that Luke 17.10. So likewise you when ye have done all these things,
say ye are ^^p ofitable servents. But this place if well considered, makes more
against you, then for you; for our Savior there implies that we may do all
things which are commanded, to wit, through his grace; yet having so done, we
are unprofitable servants to God; for, we have done but our duties, and that
through grace also, and so have added nothing to the Lord.

But a second, and a grand objection is made out of Romans 7.14, 15, 16, 17, 18,
19. etc. For the Law (says the Apostle) is spiritual, But I am carnal, sold
under sin.

Answer, Although this place is commonly taken, as if the Apostle spoke here of
his own personal and present estate, yet it is certain he did not; first,
because elsewhere (speaking of that estate) he contradicts what is here spoken
by him, as 1 Cor. 4.4. For I know nothing by my self, but here the person
spoken of knows much evil by himself; and Phil. 4.13. I can do all things
through Christ which strengthens me; but he that is here intended, though to
will is present with him, yet finds no means or power to do any good: yea,
that which the Apostle speaks of his present estate, chap. 8. of this Epistle
to the Romans, verse 2. is directly opposite to what is complained of verse 23,
of this 7 chapter; for in that 23. verse the complaint speaks thus; But I see
another law in my members warring against the law of my mind, and bringing me
into coptivity to the law of sin which is in my members; Oh wretched man that I
am, who shall deliver me from this body of death! But Romans 8.2. Paul says, For
the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, has made me free from the law
of sin and death: what can be more contradictory then this last place is to the
former? So that of necessity the fist place must be understood of babes in
Christ, whom Paul here personates, instructs, and comforts; and the latter of
his own present condition, and victory, as Occumenius and others well observe:
and what was more usual with the Apostle, then to speak of that which concerns
others in his own person, 1 Cor. 4.6. And these things brethren I have in a
figure transferred to my self, and Apollos for your sake, 1 Cor. 13.11, etc.
When I was a child, I spoke as a child, etc.

Thirdly, You allege against us and this truth, the words which the Apostle
speaks to the Galatians, chap. 5. verse 17. For the flesh lusts against the
spirit, and the spirit against the flesh; and these are contrae^y the one to
the other; so that ye cannot do the things that ye would: Here say you, the
Apostle describes that combat betwixt the flesh and the spirit, which must
continue while we endure in the body.

Answer, But where do you read that this conflict must last so long? The
Apostle says a good space before his death, 2 Timothy 47. I have fought a good
fight; I have finished my course; I have kept the faith. Were not the Galatians
Babes in Christ, so young and weak, that the Apostle had no sooner left them,
then they were ready to be drawn away from Christ by the false Apostles? See
Gal. 1.6. with 3.1, 2. Now to make their estate the highest pitch and growth of
a Christian in this life is, as if we should take the scantling of a child, and
conclude that it is the full stature of mankind, and that no man is or can be
of a taller groth.

Fourthly, You object what St. James writes, chap. 3.2. For in many things we
offend all, where you imvolue him and his fellow Apostles in that plural number.

To which we answer, That the Apostle can no more be there employed, then in the
9 verse, where he says again, and that plurally, With the same tongue we bless
God, even the Father; and, with the same tongue we curse men, which are made
after the similitude of God: Was James, or the Apostles now of the number of
those that still cursed men? But it is frequent for lenity sake, and in a
winning way, for the Prophets and Apostles of Christ to speak in the plural,
and sometimes in the singular number those things which concern not themselves,
but their hearers only, Nebem. 5.10. I pray you let us leave of this usury,
says the man of God, who was no ways guilty of that sin; Isa 59.10. the
Prophet speaks this, We groap for the wall like the blind, and we groap as if
we had no eyes.

Lastly, It is objected out of 1 John 1.8. That the Apostle says directly, If
we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and there is no truth in us.

Answer, The same Apostle implies chapter 4 17. that he and his fellow Apostles
were now without sin; Herein is our love made perfect, that we might have
boldness in the day of Judgment; because as he is, so are we in this present
world: There is no fear in love, but persect love casts out fear. The Apostle
therefore speaks the former words to those that were young in Christ, and yet
imperfect, as is evident, chap. 2. verse 1. My little children, these things
write I unto you that ye sin not, etc. Yea, he explains himself so, Chap. 1.
verse 10. that he may be safely taken into the number; If we that say we have
not finned, we make him a liar, and his word is not in us.

And thus much of your first erroneous proposition in your 5th and last
Section: Your other Thesis (wherein you affirm, That though this corruption
remains in the regenerate during life, yet it is actually pardoned) is false
also, and contradictory to these ensuing and many other Scriptures; Prove. 28
13. Luke 24.47. Acts 8.20. Acts 26.18. or, as we shall shall show at large
chap. 11. by Gods assistance.

Now for a conclusion of this last Section, give us leave to propound these
Queries unto you; First, whether those ten unbeleeving spies, did not highly
displease God, and much hinder, injure and prejudice the people which hearkened
unto them, who cried, that there were such Anaki^ in the way, that they could
not be subdued by them; and Cities so high that they were walled up to Heaven;
and therefore not (...) be scaled, Numb. 14. Did not the people (too slothful
and averse before to fight the Lords battle against the Canaanites) become
therethrough wholly unbeleeving, even despairing of victory, and altogether
indisposed to the fight enjoined by the Lord? Were not both they and those
their leaders, the unbeleeving guids shut out of Canaan? And are not these
things written for our instuction? See Heb. 4.12. Let us therefore fear least a
promise being left us of entering into his rest, any of you should seem to come
short of it, for, to us was the Gospel preached as well as unto them, but the
word preached profited them not, being not mixed with faith in them that heard
it.

CHAP. VII. Of God's Covenant with Man.
THE Distance between God and the Creature is so great, that although
reasonable Creatures do owe obedience unto him as their Creator, yet they could
never have any fruition of him as their blessedness and reward, but by some
voluntary condescension on Gods part, which he has been pleased to express by
way of Govenant Isa. 40.13, 14, 15, 16, 17. Job 9.32, 33. 1 Samuel 2.13 Psalm.
113.5, 6. Psalm. 100.2, 3. Job 22.2, 3. Job 35.7, 8. Luke 17.10. Act. 17.24, 25.
.

II. The first Covenant made with man, was a Covenant of works Gal. 3.12.
, wherein life was promised to Adam; and in him to his posterity To. 10.5. Romans
5.1^ to 20.
, upon condition of perfect and personal obedience Genesis 2.17. Gal. 3.10.
.

III. Man by his fall having made himself incapable of life by that Cov^^ant,
the Lord was pleased to make a second Gal. 3.21. To, 3.20, 21. Genesis 3.15. Isa.
42.6.
, commonly called the Covenant of Grace: Wherein he freely offers unto
sinners Life and Salvation by Jesus Christ, requiring of them faith in him,
that they may be saved Mark 16.15, 16. John 3.16. To. 10.6, 9 Gal. 3.11.
, and promising to give unto all those that are ordained unto life, his holy
Spirit to make them willing and able to believe Ezekiel. 3.6, 26.27. John 6.44, 45.
.

IV. This Covenant of Grace is frequently set forth in Scripture, by the name
of a testament, in reference to the death of Jesus Christ the Testator, and to
the everlasting inheritance, with all things be longing to it, therein
bequeathed Heb. 9.25, 16, 17. Heb. 7.22. Luke 22.20 1 Cor. 11.15. 2 Cor. 3.6,
7, 8, 9.
.

V. This Covenant was differently administered in the time of the Law, and in
the time of the Gospeli, Under the Law it was administered by promises,
prophesies, sacrifices, circumcision, the Paschal Lamb, and other types and
ordinances delivered to the people of the Jews, all fore-signifying Christ to
come Heb: 8.9, 10. Chapters. Rom: 4.11 Col: 2.11, 12. 1 Cor: 5.7.
, which were for that time sufficient and efficacious through the operation of
the Spirit, to instruct and build up the Elect in Faith, in the promised
Messiah 1 Cor: 10.1, 2, 3, 4. Heb. 11.13 John 8.16.
, by whom they had full remission of sins, and eternal salvation, called The
Old Testament Gal: 3.7, 8, 9, 14.
.

VI. Under the Gospel when Christ the substance Col. 2.17.
was exhibited, the ordinances in which this Covenant is dispensed, are the
preaching of the Word, and the administration of the Sacraments, of Baptism,
and the Lords supper Ma: 28.19, 20. 1 Cor: 14.23, 24, 15.
. Which, though fewer in number, and administered with more simplicity and less
outward glory, yet in them it is held forth in more fullness, evidence, and
spiritual efficacy Heb: 12.22, to 28. Jer: 31.33, 34.
, to all nations, both Jews and Gentels Mat: 28.19. Ephesians: 2.15, 16, etc.
: and is called the new Testament Luke 22 20.
. There are not therefore Two Covenants of grace, differing in substance, but
one and the same under various dispensations Gal: 3.16, 17. Rom: 1.21, 22, 23,
^0, Psalm: 3^.1 with Romans 4.3, 6, 16, 17, 23, 24, Beb: 13 8. Acts 15.21.
.

CHAP. VII. Of Gods Covenant with man examined.
WE will not say that you have made a Covenant with death, or an agreement with
hell; but in this tract of the Covenant you do not always keep league with
truth; for though you beging plausibly in the first Section, yet both there and
elsewhere you affirm many things untruly.

As first when you say, That the distance between God and the creature is so
great, that though all reasonable creatures do owe obedience unto him as their
Creator, yet they never could have any fruition of him as their blessedness and
reward but by some voluntary condescension on Gods part which he has been
pleased to express by way of Covenant. For do not the elect Angels from their
first creation by their first constitution, see God in his own light, and
participate of his blessedness in wisdom, holiness, power, life, peace, and
glory? And if the Lord did not create our first parents in so full a fruition of
blessedness; yet he could have so beatified them if he had pleased without a
precedent covenant: And was not the humanity of Christ in his inward man,
placed in that communion and fruition of God, from the beginning of his
incarnation, though his outward man was subject to mortality and misery?

Yet you make us some piece of amends in your second section, saying, That the
Lord made a Covenant of works with mankind at the first, wherein li^e was
promised to Adam, and in him to his posterity upon condition of personal and
perfect obedience, Where by the way you tacitly grant two truths by your selves
denied, and by us asserted Chapter the third; so powerful is truth in it self,
that often times it breaks forth from men de improviso though they have gain said
it before, the which two truths are these.

First that all men in Adam were appointed or ordained to life if the Covenant
of life was made to him and all his posterity. For God works all things in time
according to the eternal counsel of his will, as we said before out of Ephesians.
1.11.

And secondly, That this decree was conditional also; for so you confess the
first Covenant to have been, and so are all subsequent Covenants likewise or
the far greatest part of them, which are given by God himself to mankind.

In your third Section you are more defective and erroneous; for though you say
truly in the beginning of it, That man by his fall having made himself
incapable of life by the Covenant of works, the Lord was pleased to make a
second Covenant commonly called the Covenant of grace wherein be freely
offers unto sinners life and salvation by Jesus Christ: Yet herein you fail
in that you do not set forth that this Covenant was universal for all sinners
as indeed it was. For it was made with all mankind in our first parents, and
as all that fell had need of the same, and were by creation alike related to
God; so he had compassion upon all impartially, being no accepter of persons,
and appointed one mediator, alike near to all men, betwixt him and us, even the
man Christ as we showed before out of Romans 3.22, 23, 24, etc. Rom 10.11, 12,
Romans 11.32. Gal. 3.22.^8. 1 Timo. 2.3, 4, 5, 6. 2 Pet. 3.9.

Secondly, you are here deficient in setting forth Gods stipulation in this
Covenant: for you say, That God requires faith in Christ that men may be saved:
but the Lord insists not only upon faith, but upon obedience also to all his
commands, yea obedience unto the death, to wit the death of sin, Mark. 16.16.
Act. 2.38, 39. Act. 3.19. Heb. 5.9. Romans 6.8. 2 Timothy 2.11, 12. Rom 2.7. and
8.13. Matthew. 24.13. Revel. 27.11, 17, 26. Revel. 12.5. Thus of your defects
here; but whereas you say in the close of that Section, That God promises to
give unto all those that are ordained unto life his holy Spirit to make them
willing and able to believe, it is not true; we would gladly have you produce
anyone such promise; yet dowe grant that the Lord is pleased to enlighten and
teach all sinners that are out of the way, and capable of instruction, in the
way to life again; so that they may believe, repent and turn if they will,
Psalm. 25.8. Good and upright is the Lord, therefore will he teach sinners in
the way. The text to which you refer us, Ezekiel. 36.25, 26. is a promise made to
the house of Jacob in the latter days, and that of such a clensing from sin,
as you will not believe or admit, but not of faith: though the work of
regeneration there promised, implies a precedent faith, and therein both
illumination on Gods part and assent, or credence to the truth revealed on ours.

In the fourth Section you say: That this Covenant of grace is frequently set
forth in Scripture by the name of a Testament; and so is the Covenant upon
Mount Sinai likewise, Gal. 4.24. for those says the Apostle, are the two
Testaments.

But secondly whereas you add, That this name is given to that Covenant only
in reference to the death of Christ the Testator, and to the everlasting
inheritance with all things belonging unto it therein bequeathed;

You herein fall short again; for the believer, who is the other party to the
Covenant, must in following of Christ dye with him; and there must follow the
death of this Testator likewise. Romans 6.8. For if we be dead with him, we
believe that we shall live with him, Romans 8.13. For if we live after the flesh,
we shall dye; but if we mortify the deeds of the body by the spirit, we shall
live, So 2 Timothy 2.11, 12.

In your fifth Section you are defective likewise in two things and mistaken in
a third.

For first whereas you say, That this Covenant was differently administered in
the time of the Law and of the Gospel, your saying is true, but much too short
to express the various administrations of the Covenant, for it was administered
after one manner before the Law, after another under the Law, after a third
under the prophets: and all this before the time of the Gospel, before the Law
as it was at the first made with Adam, and renewed with Noah, but more solemnly
reinstituted with Abraham for the blessing of all Nations and generations of
mankind: so all this time it was administered without outward ceremonies and
services, more then commemorative sacrifices of Christ's inward sufferings, That
Lamb slain from the beginning of the world, Rev. 13.8. which yet were
intentive likewise to a dying with Christ unto all sin and wickedness: but
under the Law, as you truly speak, it was administered by promises, prophecies,
the Paschal Lamb, and other types and ordinances delivered to the people of
Israel in general, and not to the Jews alone, as you set forth: And it was
partly set forth as a Covenant of works, if not to mind us of original
innocence, yet to be our Schoolmaster to Christ, showing us our inability in
our selves to keep the law with our sins and miseries, and what manifold need
we had of Christ, Gal. 3.24. and partly as a Covenant of grace also; finally
under the prophets it was dispensed principally by promises and predictions,
Isa. 9.6. Isa. 11.1, 2. Jerem. 31.34, 35, 36. Jerem. 32.38.39. Ezekiel. 11.18, 19,
and 36 25, 26, etc. But as you were defective in saying, That those types,
sacrifices and services under the Law did only figure out Christ to come;
whereas they did teach the Israelites, the whole way to life also in following
of Christ: so you are in saying, that the Covenant of grace in regard of the
former dispensations, is called the old Testament, as you do also in saying,
That in the Gospel, it being under other dispensations is called the new
Testament in the sixth Section.

For according to the Scripture, and the mind of God the Old and New Testament
are thus to be distinguished? The whole word of grace, whether administered by
Prophets or Apostles, is the Old Testament, that is a foregoing Testament
administered by true Elders; but the work of grace in purging out sin, renewing
us in righteousness, writing the Law of God in our hearts, and sealing the
everlasting forgiveness of sins unto us, is the new Testament. So that the Old
Testament is the Covenant which we should observe and keep, or endeavor so to
do: but the new Testament is the work of grace which God has promised in and
through Christ; Thus Christ is called the mediator of the new Testament, Heb.
9.15. and his spirit blood, the blood of the new Testament, Mat. 26.28. Yet we
do not deny but that both the Prophets and Apostles were able Ministers of the
new Testament, as true publishers of this promised grace, and not of the letter
only as were the Scribes and Pharisees, 2 Corin. 3.6. Not that the writings of
Moses and the Prophets comparatively to the writings of the Apostles are or
should be called the old Testament, as they seem to be termed 2 Cor: 3.12. for
this we say, that the writings of the Apostles may be so called likewise, and
are no other in relation to the promised work of cleansing and renewing grace,
which God alone both can and must effect: Howbeit we do not condemn the common
distinction and distribution of the books written before and since Christ's
incarnation by the penmen of the Holy Ghost, into those of the old Testament or
instrument, and the other of the new, because they set forth the new Testament
more plainly.

In you sixth and last Section, besides the mistake before touched, we crave
leave to rectify you in these ensuing things.

First, whereas you say, That now in the new Testament Christ the substance is
exhibited; If you conceive that the incarnation of Christ is the substance of
all that was foreshewed, required or promised in the times of the Law and the
Prophets, it is a great mistake; for not only his sufferings and resurrection,
but our conformity in following him, with the whole process and work of
salvation was thereby set out manifoldly and clearly under the Administrations
of those times.

Secondly whereas you say, That now under the Gospel the ordinances (under
which the Covenant of Grace is or ought to be dispensed) are the preaching of
the word, and the administration of baptism, and the Lords Supper; we grant it
to be true, if those be administered by such persons to whom Christ is truly
come in his light, spirit, and power. Otherwise for men to preach a
self-conceived Christ, whom they have learned by reading or tradition from
their blind guides, or to administer the Sacraments without any due
understanding of the Baptism, flesh and blood of Christ's; these are not Gods
ordinances, but men's usurpations.

Thirdly we grant you, that where the Covenant of grace is set forth by men, so
taught and acted by the Spirit of Christ, as we have described, there it is
held forth in more evidence, spiritual efficacy and fullness, then it was in
Moses his literal services But this will not be equally verified of those that
preach a misconceived Christ, without true light or life.

Lastly whereas you conclude, That there are not then two Covenants of grace,
one under the old Testament, and another under the new; we will from this your
confession infer, that the first Covenant of grace made was unto, and for all
mankind because the Gospel by Christ's express command is to be preached to
every humane creature, and has universal, but conditional salvation annexed
unto it, Mat. 28.19 Mark. 16.15, 16. What then will become of your doctrine of
Gods preterition, of particular redemption of some men only, of the effectual
calling of this and that elected one only and many other points wherein with
Herod you imprison John, that is, you confine the grace and mercy of God.

CHAP. VIII. Of Christ the Mediator.
IT pleased God in his eternal purpose to choose and ordain the Lord Jesus, his
only begotten Son, to be the Mediator between God and man Isa: 42.1. 1 Pe:
1.19, 20. Joh: 3.16. 1 Timothy: 2 5.
, the Prophet Act: 3.22.
, Priest Heb: 5.5, 6
, and King Psalm: 2.6. Luk: 1.33.
, the head and Savior of his Church Ephesians: 5.23.
, the heir of all things Heb: 1.2.
, and judge of the world Act: 17.31.
, unto whom he did from all eternity give a people to be his seed Joh: 17.6.
Psa: 22.30. Isa: 53 10.
, and to be by him in time redeemed, called, justified, sanctified, and
glorified 1 Timothy 2.6. Isa: 55.4, 5. 1 Cor. 1.30.
.

II. The Son of God the second person in the Trinity being very and eternal
God, of the substance and equal with the Father, did when the fullness of time
was come, take upon him man's nature 1 John: 1.14. 1 John: 5.20. Phil: 2.6. Gal.
4.4.
, with all the essential properties, and common infirmities thereof, yet
without sin Heb. 2.14. 16, 17. Heb: 4.15.
, being conceived by the power of the Holy Ghost in the womb of the Virgin Mary
of her substance Luk: 1.27, 31, 35. ^al: 4.4.
, so that two whole perfect and distinct natures, the Godhead, and the Manhood,
were inseparably joined together in one person without conversion, composition,
or confusion Luke 1.35. Col: 2.9 Rom: 9.5. 1 Pet: 3.18. 1 Timothy 3.16.
, which person is very God and very man, yet one Christ, the only Mediator
between God and man Ro^: 1.3, 4. 1 Timothy: 2.5.
.

III. The Lord Jesus in his humane nature, thus united to the Divine, was
sanctified and anointed with the Holy Spirit above measure Psalm: 45.7. Joh:
3.34
, having in him all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge Col: 2.3.
, in whom it pleased the Father that all fullness should dwell Col. 1.19.
, to the end that being holy, harmless, undefiled, and full of grace, and truth
Heb: 7.16. Joh: 1.14.
, he might be thoroughly furnished to execute the office of a Mediator and
surety Act: 10.18. Heb. 22.24. Heb: 7.22.
, which office he took not to himself, Heb: 5.4, 5.
but was thereunto called by his Father, who put all power and judgment into
his hand, and gave him commandment to execute the same Joh: 5.22, 27. Mat 28
18. Act: 2.36.
.

IV. This office the Lord Jesus did most willingly undertake Psalm: 40.7, 8,
with Heb: 10.5, 10, 11. Joh: 10.18. Phil: 2.8.
, which that he might discharge, he was made under the Law Gal. 4.4.
, and did perfectly fulfill it Mat: 3.17. Mat: 5.15.
, endured most grievous torments immediately in his soul Mat: 25.37, 38. Luk:
22.24. Mat: 27.46
, and most painful sufferings in his body Mat: 26.27. chap.
, was cruc^fied and dyed Phil: 2.8.
, was buried and remained under the power of death, yet saw no corruption Act:
2.3, 21, 27. Act: 13.37. Rom: 6.9.
. On the third day he arose from the dead 1 Cor. 15.23, 4.
, with the same body in which he suffered Joh: 20.25, 27.
, with which also he ascended into heaven, and there sits at the right hand
of his Father Mark. 16.19.
, making intercession Romans 8.34. Heb: 9.24. Heb. 7.25.
, and shall return to judge men and Angels at the end of the world Rom: 1^.9,
10. Heb. 7.25. Romans 1^.9, 10. Act: 1.11. Act. 10.42. Mat. 13.40, 41, 42. Jud.
6. 2 Pet. 2.4.
.

V. The Lord Jesus by his perfect obedience, and sacrifice of himself, which he
through the eternal Spirit once offered up unto God, has fully satisfied the
justice of his Father To. 5.19. Heb: 9.14, 16. Heb. 10.14. Ephesians. 5.2. Romans
3.25, 26.
, and purchased not only reconcilation, but an everlasting inheritance in the
Kingdom of Heaven for all those whom the Father has given unto him Dan: 9.24,
26. Col: 1.19, 20. Ephesians: 1.11, 14. Joh: 17.2. Heb: 9.12, 15.
.

VI. Although the work of redemption was not actually wrought by Christ, till
after his Incarnation; yet the virtue, efficacy, and benefits thereof were
communicated unto the elect in all ages successively from the beginning of the
world, in and by those promises, types and sacrifices wherein he was revealed
and signified to be the seed of the woman which should bruise the serpents
head, and the Lamb slain from the beginning of the world, being yesterday and
to day the same for ever Gal. 4.4.5. Genesis 3.15. Rev. 13.8. Heb. 13.8.
.

VII. Christ in the work of mediation acts according to two natures, by each
nature doing that which is proper to it self; yet by reason of the unity of the
person, that which is proper to one nature, is sometimes in Scripture
attributed to the person denominated by the other nature Acts 20.28 Joh. 3.13 1 John 3.16.
.

VIII. To all those for whom Christ has purchased Redemption, he does
certainly, and effectually apply, and communicate the same Joh. 6.37.39. Joh.
10.15, 16.
, making intercession for them 1 John 2.1. Romans 8.34
, and revealing unto them in and by the word the mysteries of salvation Joh.
15.^3, 15. Ephesians. 1.7, 8, 9. Joh. 17.6.
, effectually persuading them by his Spirit to believe and obey, and governing
their hearts by his word and spirit John 14.16. Heb. 12.2. 2 Cor. 4.13. Romans
8.9, 14. Romans 15.18, 19. Joh. 17.17.
, overcoming all their enemies by his mighty power and wisdom, in such manner
and ways as are most consonant to his wonderful and unsearchable dispensation.

Psalm. 1^.1. 1 Cor. 15.25, 26. Mal. 4.2, 3 Col. ^.15.
CHAP. VIII. Of Christ the Mediator Examined.
WHen the foundation of the second Temple was laid, as the younger sort shouted
for joy, so those that had seen the former house wept. And though some
younglings in the faith may rejoice at this groundwork which you have laid, yet
were there any such here, who had seen the house of God built in the Apostles
days, they could not refrain from tears, beholding your ungrounded
groundwork.

True it is which the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 3.10, 11, 13, etc. That other
foundation can no man lay then that which is already laid by them, even Jesus
Christ; But as all materials are not apt for building: so both matter and
workmanship bewray the workmans skill, or unskilfulness. And truly, you brethren
discover sufficiently what manner of builders you are, who upon the foundation
Jesus Christ have built so much wood, hay and stuble, but so little of gold,
silver, or precious stones. But since the word of God is compared to a fire,
Jerem. 23.23. Let us try what stuff of yours will abide the fire, that you may
receive a reward, and what must of necessity burn, that though you suffer loss
therein, your souls may be saved.

In your first Section then besides many omissions concerning Christ, as that
he is the wisdom and power of God, 1 Cor. 1.24. The brightness of his glory,
and the express image of his person, the creator, and upholder of all things,
who purges our sins by himself. Heb. 1.2. You speak somethings of the Father,
and him ignorantly, preposterously and untruly also.

For first you say. That the father has given him a people from all eternity;
which being understood of an actual gift is false, for then there was no people
to be bestowed upon him.

If you here meant that this was done by design and decree only, why did you
not so express your selves? True it is by the confession of Christ himself,
that there are some which are given unto him by the father, which also come
unto him, at least wise for a time Joh. 6.39. But these are they who are taught
by the Father first, and actually brought to know Christ and believe on him,
Joh. 6.39.40, 44, 45, etc. Joh. 17.11, 12. Thus was Judas also given unto him
Joh. 17.12.

Secondly you say, That these are given to him, first to be redeemed, then
called, thirdly justified, fourthly sanctified, and lastly glorified by him.

Where first you may take notice of your preposterous disorder, for all that
are given or brought to Christ, are a people first called by God the Father,
Joh. 6.44. And though Christ invites them to come unto him for release from
their spiritual burdens, Mat. 7.28, 29. Yet until the father has called them
they cannot be sensible of such burdens.

Thirdly, whereas you say that he should first redeem against the Apostles
order, 1 Cor. 1.30. then justify, after sanctify, and lastly glorify them,
you may please to take notice in the sequel of this book, that inward or
spiritual redemption in the Apostles sense is al one with justification, and
that justification and sanctification differ not. And as for outward
redemption, the benefit of it accrues to no man, till he be first ^anctified,
and has put away his sins, that they may be pardoned.

Lastly, you here name but one sort of people who are to be saved by Christ; to
wit, those which are fallen in A^am, but Christ saves Infants also, as we have
showed, He being the only tree of life in the whole paradise of God, Rev. 2.7.

In your second Section, you make so clear a confession of Christ's two natures
united into one person, of his conception by the Holy Ghost, of his birth of
the Virgin Mary in the fullness of time, etc. as will vindicate you from the
errors of many heretics which heretofore troubled the Church. But is it
sufficient to salvation think you to be no Arrian, Nestorian, Eutychian or the
like heterodoxe? or is there no other union betwixt Christ and our humanity,
but that hypostatical union (at which you point here) to be thought upon by us:
or finally, is there not a spiritual conception and birth of Christ within us,
necessary for all fallen men who would be saved? If there be such an union and
conception, why have you made no mention of the one, nor of the other. As for
the former of these, we have showed already in part that Christ is in every man
by creation, which may be further cleared by these Scriptures, John 1.20, 26,
27, 28. John answered them, saying, I baptize with water, (...); But there
stands one in the midst of you, whom ye know not, he it is who coming after
me is preferred before me, whose shoes latchet I am not worthy to unloose,
These things were done in Bethabara beyond Jordan, where John was baptizing.
Here observe, that if Christ had been present, John would have pointed unto
him, as he did the next day, verse. 29. which declares, thus The next day John
sees Jesus coming unto him, and says, Behold the Lamb of God which takes
away the sin of the world. Wherefore this place must be understood of Christ's
inward presence. To like effect the Apostle speaks, Acts 17.26, 27, 28. That
Christ the Creator of the world has made of one blood all nations of men for
to dwell on all the face of the earth, and has determined the times before
appointed, and the bounds of their limitation, that they should seek the Lord
if happily they might feel after him, and find him, though he be not far from
every one of us, for in him we live and move and have our being. This is that
word which St. James calls (...) the implanted ^^ ingrafted word which is able
to save our souls, chapter 1.21. But that place Joh. 1.9. is like the argument that
it speaks of full of light and clearness to this our purpose, This is that
light which lights every man that comes into the world. For the 2. omission,
viz. Of the necessity of Christ's new conception and birth in us, you may take
notice of these places, that he is called Immanuel, especially for his
spiritual incarnation in us. And in the same regard his true disciples are
called his mothers, Mat. 12.50. Rev. 12.1, 5. John beheld the Church bringing
forth a man-child which should rule all nations, Gal. 4.19. the Apostle cries
out, ^ my little children of whom I travel in birth again, until Christ be
formed in you. Yea, so necessary is this spiritual conception of Christ for us
men now fallen and corrupted, that without it we could not have been saved, or
brought to communion with God again by that his other conceptio^ alone in the
womb of the Virgin Mary; as neither could infants be saved without his other
presence spoken of before: Thus is Christ both the resurrection and the life,
Joh. 11.25. viz. a life and preservation to the innocent, and a resurrection to
the dead who beleev on him, and obey him.

In your 3 Section you are first much mistaken, and afterward no less
defective. Mistaken in these things. 1. That you say, That the Lord Jesus in
his human nature was sanctified above measure. For though it is said of him,
Joh. 3.34. that he receives not the spirit by measure; yet that is spoken of
the Godhead, which alone is infinite. As for his humanity, it being a
creature, must needs be finite, though spiritually enriched above any other
creature. 2. Whereas you say, or imply, That in his humanity likewise all
treasures of wisdom are hidden, it is a mistake likewise. "For that place, Col.
2.3. to which you refer us speaks of the Diety likewise. The same we say
concerning, Colos. 1.19. where it is written, that it pleased the Father, that
in him should all fullness dwell, by you appropriated, but amiss, to his human
nature. 2. Though it must be granted also to be true, which the Aposte speaks
Heb. 7 26. that he is holy, hormless, undefiled, and separate from sinners, and
made higher then the Heavens; yet the last words transfer this honor to the
Deity especially, and not to the humanity alone, as you would restrain them.
And thus he is thoroughly furnished to do the great office of a Mediator; which
Office, as you truly say, Christ did not take upon himself, of his own head,
but was there unto called of his Father, who has put all power and judgment
into his hand. Thus of your mistakes; deficient you are in setting forth what
and wherein the Mediatorship of Christ does mainly consist, especially in his
works of spiritual Mediation, Intercession, and Redemption.

In your 4. Section you have in part set forth Christ's twofold state in the
humanity, the one of humiliation, and the other of exaltation; but if you will
confider what you have here omitted, you will have more cause to be humbled
then exalted. For 1. You make no mention at all, of that great work of his,
wherein Gods justice and severity against sin is so conspicuous, and the love
of Christ toward mankind is so illustrious, to wit, Christ's descending into
Hell, and his suffering there for us the torments due to the sins of the whole
world. Which grand article of the Faith, though retained in the most ancient
Creeds and confessed in the most Orthodox Councels, is by you suppressed to the
eternal blemish of this your confession. But Consider we pray you, was not
Jonah three days afflicted or tormented by the sense of Gods wrath upon him in
the belly of Leviathan, as a type of our Saviors future sufferings? See Jonah
2.2. Out of the belly of Hell have I cried unto thee, compared with Mat. 12.40.
For as Jonah was 3 days and 3 nights in the Whales belly; so shall the Son of
man be 3 days and 3 nights in the heart of the earth. Does not the Apostle
also expressly say, Ephesians. 4 9. Now that be ascended, what is it but that he
also descended first into the lower parts of the earth? Where take notice of
two things.

First, Of the comparative, (...) the lower, which is according to an usual
Hellenism in the New Testament, put for the superlative, the lowest, as utter
darkness is put for the utmost darkness.

And Secondly, That the heart of the earth aforementioned Matthew. 12. and the lower
parts of the earth, here mentioned, cannot possibly be understood of Christ's
Sepulther, which was upon the superficies of the earth.

Thirdly, Does not Christ comfort himself with this, that though he knew he
should go into hell, yet he foresaw that God would not leave his soul there
always. Psalm. 16.10. for thou wit not leave my soul in hell, neither will thou
suffe^ thine holy one to see corruption. Does not St. Peter, seconded with the
other Apostles, and all filled with the holy Ghost in the day of Pentecost,
expressly affirm, Acts 2.24. the God raised up Christ from the dead, loosing the
pains of death, etc? Now Christ's body while it remained in the grave, was not
in any pain, therefore it was his soul that at the hour of his resurrection was
loosed from those pains and torments. But here two things seem to puzle you.

First, That saying of Christ's upon the Cross not long before his expirement,
John 19.30. crying, it is finished.

Secondly, That he says to the penitent thief, this day thou shall be with me
in Paradise, Luke 23.43. To which we answer severally as follows.

To the first, We object a like place, John 17.4. where our Savior says unto
his Father, some space before his death -- I have finished the work which thou
gave me to do; that is, I have almost finished it: And how much more then
might Christ so say when he had suffered so much more in the garden, before his
Judges, and upon the cross.

If you reply, That in the former place he speaks of his ministry, we will
rejoyn that he speaks here of the sacrifice and offering up of his corporal
life, both to fulfill the types of the Old Testament, and to set us an example
of dying with him.

To the second we answer with Gillebert in Bernard, That as man consists of
three distinct parts, body, soul, and spirit. 1 These. 5.23. seconded with Hebr.
4.12. So did Christ's humanity also consist of the same parts. Psalm. 16, 9, 10.
-- Therefore my heart is glad and my glory rejoices; my flesh also shall rest
in hope, for thou will not leave my soul in Hell, nor suffer thine holy one to
see corruption. Where the heart is the soul, and the flesh the body; so the
glory was his spirit, which Jacob also calls his honor: Gen 49.6. O my soul
come not thou into their secret, unto their assembly mine honor be not thou
united. Which two are dissevered again by a gradation. Isa. 26.9. With my soul
have I desired thee in the night, yea with my spirit within me will I seek thee
early. The which distinction of parts being most clear, we say then, that the
spirit of Christ at his death immediately ascended to God, according to those
words, Luke 23.43. aforesaid, This day shall thou be with me in Paradise, his
body also was laid in the grave, yet saw no corruption, but his soul went to
hell there to suffer for us the condign punishment of our sins, in the proper
place of punishment: Oh justice upon the surety to be trembled at for ever! O
love in Christ never to be forgotten!

Secondly. You are deficient in setting forth the inward and spiritual
crucifying, death and burial of Christ within us, ever since our fall: Of which
as you here make no mention at all, so we justly fear you have no fight nor
feeling. Yet do these ensuing Scriptures with many others give a luculent
testimony of the same, Rev. 13.8. -- He is the Lamb slain from the beginning
of the world. If you here answer, That he was so in Gods decree, we reply that
Gods decree is said to be before the world, and before all ages.

The Prophet Isaiah Chap. 53. speaks throughout of the sufferings of Christ as
a thing past, and done both in himself and others, where the ninth verse cannot
be verified of Christ's sufferings in the flesh; And he made his grave with the
wicked, and with the rich in his death. For, though Christ was crucified with
two thieves, yet he was buried alone in a tomb which Joseph a righteous man
had prepared for himself. In which place the Holy Ghost holds forth two things;
the place of Christ's inward burial, and the cause of his death.

For Christ is slain and buried in two sorts of men, first in the openly
wicked, and secondly in those that are rich in the wisdom and holiness of the
flesh, sudh as were the Scribes and Pharisees: The cause why we let him dye, or
slay him, is, for that he will not consent to do any violence, nor is deceit
found in his mouth. See also Gal. 3.1. For the further proof of what we have in
hand, where the Apostle cries out, O foolish Galatians, who has bewitched
you, before whom Christ has been evidently set forth crucified in you and
among you? Now we all know that Christ in his humanity suffered at Jerusalem, (
Revel. 11.8.) and not in Galatia: So Heb. 6.6. The Apostle tells them who fall
away from Christ, That they crucify afresh the Son of God; which he could not
truly charge upon them, if they had not crucified him once before.

Finally, St. James says, chap. 5.6. you have condemne^ and killed (...),
which words must needs be understod of Christ within us, as the following words
evict, and he resists you not; for Christ for a time suffers patiently in us,
and that as a lamb led to the slaughter; but if men repent not, he will rise up
like a Lion to devour them. We here say nothing that the Farmers of the
Vineyard (which is our heart) do not only evilly entreat the other motions and
messengers of God, but kill the heir also, Matthew. 21.38, 39. Nor that John has
foretold us, that all Nations shall look upon him whom they have pierced, and
bewail the same in a time of grace, to which he says Amen, Revelations 1.7.

In your fifth Section you comfort your selves and followers with vain words,
the dreams and devices of men; for though it is true which you spoke in your
last Section, that Christ was made under the law, and did perfectly fulfill it;
yet has he not by his perfect obedience and sacrifice of himself, which he
through the eternal spirit once offered up to God, fully satisfied the justice
of God for us in any regard, but to take away the curse of the Law which was
due unto us, Gal. 3.13. Nor is it true that he has purchased a full
reconciliation for men with God, by that his outward obedience, nor finally
does it appear out of the Scripture^ that by the same means he has purchased
an inheritance in the Kingdom of Heaven for all or any of those whom the Father
has given unto him. And though the proof of what you have affirmed on the
contrary lies on your part, yet we will briefly show you our remonstrative
reasons.

First, It is certain that as Christ was a man, and so a creature, he did owe
unto his Father a personal and perfect obedience in fulfilling the Law; how
then could he perform the same for us also?

Secondly, All men in Adam were created to perform perfect obedience to Gods
Law and Will in their own persons; neither does it appear, that God has since
released them of that obligation; nor did David think that he was or could be
discharged there from, when he thus confessed and prayed, Psalm. 119.73. Thy
hands have made me, and fashioned me, O give me understanding that I may learn
thy Commandments.

Thirdly, The Moral Law requires of us a perfect observation of it, not by a
deputy, or surety, but in our own persons. In which regard the renewing and
assisting grace of Christ is most requisite for us, Romans 8.4. That the
righteousness of the Law might be sulfilled in us, who walk not after the
flesh, but after the spirit: But his outward active obedience therein helps us
no further, but as an example to be followed.

Fourthly, There is yet no other way unto life left for the sons of men, but by
the fulfilling of Gods commandments; witness our Savior's own words, Mat.
7.21. Not every one that says unto me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom
of Heaven, but he that does the will of my Father which is in Heaven; and Rev.
22.14. Blessed are they that keep the Commandments, that they may have right
unto the tree of Life, and may enter through the gates into the City.

Fifthly, Our Savior says thus unto us by way of anticipation, Mat. 5.17, 18,
19. Think not that I am come to destroy the Law and the Prophets, I am not come
to destroy, but to fulfill; for verily I say unto you, till Heaven and Earth
pass, one jot or one title shall in no wise pass from the Law till all be
fulfilled. And least we should dream that he by fulfilling the Law for us has
exempted us from it, or any way abated its requiring, he says at the next
verse, Whosoever threfore shall break one of these least Commandments, and
teach men so, he shall be called the least in the Kingdom of Heaven: But whosoever
shall do and teach them, the same shall be called great in the Kingdom of
Heaven; how then can Christ by his outward obedience satisfy Gods Justice for
us, or in our behalf? nor is there any one Scripture which so much as
colourably speaks for you, but that Romans 5.19. which yet will bear a better
sense, For as by one man's disobedience, many were made sinners, so by the
obedience of one man, shall many be made righteous; for we have proved before,
and shall now again evidence it further out of the 14 verse, that there are
more Adams besides our first progenitor, and namely one within us, by whose
disobedience, especially if not soly we are made sinners. And it it is more
clear that there is a Christ within the believers as well as without them, by
whose grace and spiritual obedience many are made holy and righteous.

For the first of these, namely the 14, verse you may observe that there is an
Adam from whom death raigns, the which say we is our Adam, our earthly or
natural man.

Secondly, That there is a spiritual Moses or time in us, till which death
raigns, namely, the time of Gods drawing grace, as is hinted in the name of
Moses, which also is the time of Gods delivering his Israel from under the
spiritual Pharaoh.

Thirdly, That men are not said here to sin in Adam, to wit, our first fathers
transgression, but after the similitude of it.

Fourthly, There are some which sin not after that pattern, but another way, as
we have showed before concerning Edom the same name with Adam in the Hebrew
consonants, and consequently in signification also.

Fifthly, That there is an Adam which is, or was the figure of Christ, and that
is our personal Adam also of whom the Apostle speaks thus, 1 Cor. 15.49. And
as we have born the Image of the earthy, so we also shall bear the Image of the
heavenly.

Lastly, That though Christ be already come in the flesh, yet here in this 14.
verse, he is spoken of as one yet to come, which doubtless is Christ's coming in
the spirit, John 14.21.

Now for our second task, You may please advisedly to consider these two things.

First, That the Apostle at the 17. verse speaks thus, How much more shall
they that receive abundance of grace and of the gift of righteousness, reign in
life by one Jesus Christ? Now since we cannot enter into life but by a personal
obedience, as we showed before; for what other intent should the abundance of
grace in Christ be more needful for us, then for the performing of that
obedience, through which we attain unto the Kingdom and righteousness of God?
And so by one man's obedience, even that of Christ within us, are many made, not
putatively, but really righteous, according to verse 19.

Secondly, That the Prophets and Apostles speak frequently of Christ's obedience
in us, but nowhere of his obedience for us more then of his suffering in our
stead, or his setting of us a pattern to be followed. Isa. 26.12. Thou Lord wilt
ordain peace for us, for thou have wrought all our works in us. Jer. 31.33. I
will put my law in their inward parts, I will write it in their hearts. Heb.
13.20, 21. Now the God of peace that brought again from the dead our, Lord
Jesus Christ, that great Shepherd of the sheep through the blood of the
everlasting Covenant, make you perfect in every good work, to do his will,
working in you that which is wellpleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ. 1
Cor. 15.10. But I labored more abundantly then they all, yet not I, but the
grace of God that was with me, Phil. 1.10. Being filled with the fruits of
righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ unto the glory and praise of God.
Phil. 4.13. I can do all things through Christ, who strengthens me. Romans 8.4.
That the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, etc. Now if the
righteousness of the Law may be fulfilled in us through the grace and help of
Christ, as the Apostle expressly affirms it there, what great need was there
that it should be fulfilled for us? Frustra fit per plura, etc. Furthermore, as
our disobedience was both begun and perfected, with our own consent and
endeavors, though not without the leading instigation and power of Satan; is
it not meet that our obedience likewise should be both enterprized and
accomplished with our wills and best concurrences, though guided and carried
on, yea accomplished also by the grace of God, and the power of his Christ? Is
not that which is done in us, or by u^, though in the strength of Christ, in
obedience to Gods Law and requiring, much more acceptable unto him, then that
which is done without us, without our knowledge, endeavor, or consent? We in
the mean time remaining enemies and rebels, or but lazy and loytering servants.
Indeed the outward and personal obedience of Christ as it was active, was
necessary in him as a Mediator, not only as our (...) or foregoer, but in
order also to his suffering for us; for had he failed in his obedience to the
Law, he might have suffered afterward for his own sins; but could not have
satisfied for ours. And as Christ could not by his outward and personal
obedience satisfy the Fathers justice for that personal obedience which we out
selves ought, and which by his grace and help we may perform, so he did not by
the same obedience purchase a reconcilement between us and God, as you here
affirm. Amos says, chap. 3.3. Can two walk together except they be agreed?
Although God affects us as a work of his hands, yet so long as the body of sin,
which is enmity against God, remains in us, we can neither be reconciled unto
him, nor he to us: For what fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness?
and what communion has light with darkness? 2 Cor. 6.14. Therefore it is said
in the foregoing Chapter, 2 Cor. 5.19, 20. That God was in Christ reconciling
the world unto himself, not imputing their prespasses unto them, and bath
committed unto us the word of reconciliation. Now then we are Ambassadors for
Christ, as though God did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead be
ye reconciled to God. Where we pray you to observe two things.

First, That Christ is not said to have done the work, to wit, by his obedience
or sufferings, as you conceive, but to be doing of it still; viz. by his grace
and spirit slaying the enmity aforesaid, in, and for those who believe aright
on him, and follow him in his like obedience and sufferings.

Secondly, That the ground of the emnity between us and God, lies on our part,
who hate him, his ways and righteousness, through the sin that dwells in us.
And therefore the Apostle prays us, yea in a beseeching manner, to be
reconciled unto God. And though two places, at the first view, upon which you
mainly ground, may seem to favor your assertion, yet being rightly understood,
they do not patrocinate the same at all: the first is Ephesians. 2.16. And that he
might reconcile both unto God in one body by the Cross, having slain the emnity
thereby: But here you may take notice, that the body spoken of is his mystical
body, and the cross whereby the emnity is slain, is his spiritual cross, like
patience, or sufferance: for by that we overcome every temptation of sin,
according to that of the Apostle, James 1.4. But let patience have her perfect
work, that ye may be perfect and entire wanting nothing: This is that cross
(and not afflictions themselves, as the world conceives) which Christ
commands those that will follow him into life to take upon them, for the
denying of themselves, or the putting off the old man, Matthew. 16.24. Hebr.
12.1. Wherefore seeing we also are compassed about with so great a cloud of
witnesses, let us lay aside every weight, and the sin which does so easily
beset us, and let us run with patience the race that is set before us.

Your other place upon which you rely, is that of Col. 1.20, 21, 22. And having
made peace through the blood of his cross, by him to reconcile all things unto
himself, by him I say, whether they be things in Earth, or things in Heaven;
And you that were sometimes alienated and enemies in your mind by wicked works,
yet now has he reconciled in the body of his flesh to present you holy and
unblameable, and unreprovable in his fight. Where you may take these things
into consideration.

First, Whom he reconcileth; All the members of the Church who are regenerate.

Secondly, From what; from the enmity in their minds, whereby they are set upon
wicked works.

Thirdly, Where; through the spiritual blood of the Covenant, or the spirit of
grace, which is called the blood of his cross, because it is then sent unto us,
and poured down upon us, when we are upon the cross with him, and suffer with
him, not yielding unto temptations.

Fourthly, That Christ is said to be still doing of that work, (...).

Lastly, In what way as a precedent for us he has done it, to wit, in the body
of his flesh, through death, as these ensuing Scriptures show, 2 Timothy 2.11, 12.
It Is a faithful saying, for if we be dead with him, we shall also live with
him; if we suffer wi^h him, we shall also reign with him; see Romans 6.8. But
that it is unpossible to have reconcilement and communion with God, unless it
be in such a way, the Apostle witnesses likewise, 1 John 1.5, 6, 7. This then
is the message we have heard of him, and declare unto you, that God is light,
and in him is no darkness at all; If we say that we have fellowship with him,
and walk in darknes^ we lie, and have not the truth; But if we walk in the
light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship one with another, and the
blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all Sin.

Thus far of Christ's spiritual and true reconciling us unto God, which is then
perfected and consummate, when besides the slaying of the enmity aforesaid, he
has made us in all things of one spirit with the Father. For which unity and
reconcilement he prays, John 17.21. That they all may be one, as thou Father
art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us.

Now for the purchasing of an everlasting inheritance for us, eternal life is
the free gift of God through Jesus Christ our Lord, Romans 8.23. And as the
Father has it in his hand to bestow, so it is in the Sons gift likewise; and
consequently as it seems to us, he needs not to purchase it. But if you will
call the fulfilling of that way and process, whereby the fallen man must attain
it, the way and race of obedience aforesaid, a purchasing of it, it is by the
inward and spiritual obedience of Christ, especially that we attain; Heb.
10.36. For ye have need of patience, that after ye have done the will of God,
ye may receive the promise. Howbeit his outward passive obedience was requisite
thereunto, without which as we could not be delivered from the curse, so
neither could we come to inherit life. By this you see we stand in need of an
inward and spiritual mediation from Christ, as well as that outward, of which
alone you here speak. Nor can we partake of the benefit of the outward, till
qualified, and prepared first thereunto by the work of the inward.

In your Sixth Section, you proclaim your great ignorance, or small regard of
our great and most necessary redemption from the power of sin and Satan,
saying. "That the work of redemption was not actually wrought till after
Christ's incarnation: For were not the fathers before and after the flood, with
the Prophets, and other holy Saints in the Old Testament, in their respective
times spiritually saved and redeemed by Christ? And much more does that great
secret of the Father's sparing and forbearing us along time for his Sons sake,
who in patience and meekness has been led as a lamb to the slaughter, and the
end of whose long sufferance in us is salvation, as St. Peter speaks, Epist. 2,
3. Chap. 15. seem to be hidden from you: Yet here you grant some truths at
unawares; as that Christ is the promised enmity against sin, who must break the
Serpents head, and consequenly that his power and Kingdom must be within us,
where Satan is to be trodden down, Romans 16.20. You grant also that he is the
Lamb slain from the beginning of the world: But whereas you add for a proof
thereof out of Hebr. 13.9. That Christ is the same yesterday, and to day, and
for ever: That speaks of his immutable Deity, and not of his humanity, though
now made unchangeable. Yet this we say brethren, ere we leave this Section,
that you hold forth a very lame and imperfect redeemer, which which has indeed
redeemed us by his death from the curse of the Law, when our iniquities are put
away from us: but who must redeem us from all our corruptions^ who must save
and deliver us out of the hand of all our enemies? who must enable us to keep
and fulfill the Law of God? who must renew the Image of God in us? Is not the
true Christ made of God unto us wisdom, righteousness, and sanctification, as
well as redemption? 1 Cor 1.30.

In your Seventh Section, As we grant it to be true, that Christ in the entire
office of a Mediator, acts according to both natures jointly, or severally,
as occasion requires, doing by each that which is proper to its self; so
perhaps it may be granted, that sometimes in the Scriptures, by reason of the
unity of the person, that which is proper to one nature, is attributed to the
person denominated by the other. Howbeit, the places to which you refer us, do
not prove so much; for that of Acts the 20.28.

Its true, First of Christ in the Godhead, that he has purchased his Church
with his own blood, having redeemed it from the power of Satan by his Spirit.

Secondly, To that of John 3.13. it may be said, that as Christ is spiritually
born in us, he is the Son of man which comes from Heaven, and is, or dwells in
the heavenly being.

Finally, To 1 John 3.16, It may be truly answered, that Christ the Son of God
has laid down his life for us, while he died in us, to keep off the deserved
wrath of God from us, and to preserve us from the death threatened in the Law;
as also to set us an example, how we may in following him overcome sin, and
recover life again, we seeking his grace and help thereunto.

In your eighth, and last Section, being like checquerwork you have black as
well as white, error as well as truth: where your first affirmation That
Christ does certainly and effectually apply and communicate his redemption to
all those for whom he has purchased it, will prove false in what sense soever
it be taken.

For first, If we here understand Christ's outward redemption as you
undoubtedly do, that being made for all sinners, as we have proved by manifold
Scriptures, it is not by him applied unto all men, as your selves will confess:
but if we here take up the inward and spiritual redemption of Christ; that is
not purchased for us, but we are rather purchased by it; and in the very
working of it, it being an inward work of Christ's, it must needs be effectually
applied also.

Secondly, Whereas you say, That Christ makes intercession for all such as he
bath redeemed; it is false also; for some deny even him that bought them, and
that in an Apostatical way, and by bringing in damnable heresies, whereby they
bring upon themselves swift destruction, 2 Pet 2.1. But we justly doubt you
whether you understand aright what the intercession of Christ does mean. For
his intercession at large, comprehends his whole office of mediation. Isa.
53.12. and Heb. 7.25. but to take his intercession for his supplicative office,
as you here intend it consists principally, if not alone in the spiritual
intercessions which he makes unto God for and in his Saints by his holy spirit.
To. 8.26, 27. As for his intercession at large, of which we conceive the
Apostle speaks Romans 8.34. Christ uses or imployeth that for none other, but
those whom the Father has called and given unto him, and for them also so long
as they continue with him. For the Lord is with us while we are with him. 2 Chronicles. 15.2. 1 Chronicles. 28 9. The like we say of his revealing his Mysteries unto
them, whether by the word or without it, and of his effectual persuading of
them by his Spirit to believe.

Where again you are mistaken; for God only illuminates, and makes known his
truth unto us, but it is our part to set to our seal thereunto. and in our
power to withhold the same. What you speak also of Christ's governing the hearts
of all those whom he has redeemeed, by his word and spirit, and of the
overcoming of all their enemies by his almighty power and wisdom in such manner
and ways as he sees good; all these may be true or false according to the
limitations aforesaid.

Yet here you tacitly grant or imply Christ's inward or spiritual mediation,
though you own it not for such a work. Yea, which is more to be wondered at,
you here import that Christ by his almighty power does overcome and subdue in
and unto his redeemed people all their enemies; to wit, Satan and their
corruptions, which elsewhere you hold to be unconquerable here, or not wholly
to be subdued in this life. But truth is so evident and forcible, that where it
is not narrowly watched and suppressed, it will break forth at unawares.

By all this which in this Chapter we have set forth, if the Lord open your
eyes rightly to read it, we hope you will be brought to acknowledge that the
predictions of Christ and his Apostles, concerning the departure from the
faith, are already come to pass, and that forewarning of his, that there should
arise false Christ's, and false Prophets, is fulfilled, and consequently that
there should be great need and cause for the Gospel to be preached anew to all
the world, as Christ himself foretold, Matthew. 24.14. and that mercy or blessing
was foreshewed to John, Revel. 14.6.7. For even those Authors whom ye counted
the greatest lights of this last age, have very little sight or knowledge of
that great Mystery Christ Jesus in you, the hope of glory, Colos. 1.27. Yea,
they have been all the publishers of a false conceived Mediator, or Christ.

CHAP. IX. Of Free Will.
GOD has endued the will of man with that natural liberty, that it is neither
forced, nor by any absolute necessity of nature determined to good or evil Mat:
17.12. Jam: 1.14. Deuteronomy: 30.19.
.

II. Man in his state of innocence, had freedom and power to will, and to do
that which was good and wel-pleasing to God Eccl. 7.29 Gen: 1.26.
, but yet mutably, so that he might fall from it Gen: 2.16, 17. Gen: 3.6.
.

III. Man by his fall into a state of sin, has wholly lost all ability of will
to any spiritual good accompanying salvation To: 8.7. John 15.5.
: so as a natural man being altogether averse from that good Rom: 3.10.12.
, and dead in sin Ep: 2.1, 5. Col: 2.13.
, he is not able by hi^ own strength to convert himself, or prepare himself
thereunto John 6.44, 65. Ephesians: 2.2, 3.4, 5. 1 Cor: 2.14 Titus 3.3, 4, 5.
.

IV. When God converts a sinner, and translates him into the state of grace, he
freeth him from his natural bondage under sin Ga: 1.13. John 8.34, 36.
: and by his grace alone, inables him freely to will, and to do that which is
spiritually good Phil: 2.12.13. To: 6.18, 21.
: yet so as that by reason of his remaining corruption, he does not perfectly
nor only will that which is good, but does also will that which is evil Gal:
5.17. Rom: 7.15 18, 19, 21, 22
.

V. The will of man is made perfectly and immutably free to good alone, in the
state of glory only Ephesians: 4.13 Heb: 12.23 John 3.2. Jude v. 24.
.

CHAP. IX. Of Free Will Examined.
ALthough man be always a free Agent in some measure, yet is he not at all
times such a patient, nor can we expect you here to be voluntary sufferers. But
if you will give us leave to be free with you, we must acquaint you, that even
in this short Chapter there are many things though freely spoken by you, yet
but gratis dicta. And especially in the three last Sections; but we fear that
you have granted more truth in the first Section, then upon the view you will
own again.

For you say, That God has endued the will of man with such natural liberty,
that it is neither forced, nor by any absolute necessity of nature determined
to good or evil; for you seem in the first Section of the next Chapter directly
to contradict yourselves, saying, That in our effectual calling God does not
only renew our wills, but determines them to that which is good by his Almighty
power.

And that which you speak in the second Section, That man in his state of
innocence had freedom and power to will and do that which was good and
well-pleasing to God, but yet mutably, so that he might all from it, seems to
us in some sort to hold true still of all men as they are now born till they
have personally and actually sinned. And that Scripture to which you reser us,
Eccles. 7.29. it speaking of mankind in general, and not of our first parents
only, evicts so much in the very words, saying, Lo this only have I found,
that God has made man upright, but they have found out many inventions. To
which others may be added, as Jer. 2.21. For I had planted thee a noble vine,
wholly a right seed; how then art thou turned into the degenerate plant of a
wild vine unto me? But that place in which the Lord speaks of a child shortly
to be born unto the Prophet, and to be called Immanuel, as some most learned
expositors affirm, Isa. 7.14, 15, 16. Therefore the Lord himself shall give you
a sign, Behold a Virgin (or a young woman, for the word signifies both) shall
conceive, and bear a son, and shall call his name Immanuel. Butter and honey
shall he eat, that he may know to refuse the evil, and choose the good, for
before the child shall know to refuse the evil, and choose the good, the land
that thou abhorrest shall be forsaken of both her Kings.

Here you may please to observe these things with us.

First, That though this place be commonly understood of our Savior, yet it is
a great mistake; for his proper name was Jesus and not Immanuel.

Secondly, This child was to be born shortly after this prophecy, and is given
to the Jews as a sign and token of a sudden deliverance from Rezin and
Remaliah before the child should be of age, and knowledge to refuse the evil
and choose the good.

And thirdly, The prophet in the next Chap. triumphing against the enemies of
the Church alludes to this very name, as if the child were then in being, Isa.
8.10. saying, Take counsel together, and it shall come to nough, speak the word
and it shall not stand, for God is with us; Where it is in the original
Immanuel.

The second thing to be observed, is, that this child even from i^s insancy
according to the common state of mankind should have the knowledge and ability
to refuse the evil, and choose the good, a faculty spoken of in two verses
together as before.

But to come to your third Section, where our main contest begins. Besides a
mistake in the very first entrance, Man that is fallen into sin, being by you
taken for all mankind, no small mistake, as we have proved before;

You are first defective in that you distinguish not of the different states of
sin.

And secondly, to maintain that which is true in it self, viz. that the fallen
man cannot without preventing grace by his own strength convert himself, or
happily prepare himself thereunto: you lay such grounds as are either false or at
leastwise improper, of which anon.

But first you speak of a state of sin into which man is fallen, as though there
were but one such, whereas there is a manifold state in sin, one against God
the Father, another against the Son, and a third against the holy Ghost, Mat.
12.32. There is a state of sin before regeneration, and another under grace,
Romans 7.9, 14. there is a state of sin before man's first conversion, and another
after their final falling away, 2 Pet. 2.21, 22. as there is a threefold degree
of righteousness, and grace, wherein some are Babes, some youngmen, and some
old men; so there is a threefold state, or age in sin. So the Lord says to
Abraham, Genesis 15.16. That the iniquity of the Amorites is not yet full; and
complains, Jer. 9.3. That the sinners proceeded from evil to worse; finally
there is a sin unto death, and a sin which is not unto death, 1 John 5.16.

Now the false grounds aforesaid, which you lay for the establishing of a
truth, are these, That the fallen man has lost all ability of will to any
spiritual good accompanying salvation. That a natural man is altogether averse
from from any such good: The ground that you here improperly apply is, "That
the man is dead in sin.

For the first of these, it is a rash, and ungrounded asseveration; for you will
not deny, That to become a Christian, to have our wicked thoughts forgiven us,
to hear the word preached, to eat, and drink at Christ's table, to keep the
commandments of the second Table, as they are commonly called, and finally to
dye the death of the righteous, are all of them spiritual good things, and such
as accompany salvation; But we find all these things wished for, and desired
by those which you count unregerate; for King Agrippa hearing Saint Paul's
defense, had more then a velleity, some good measure of inclination to become a
Christian, Act. 26.28. Simon Me^us entreated the Apostles to pray for him, that
his wicked thoughts might be pardoned, and that none of the evils they had
spoken of might happen unto him, to hinder his salvation, Act. 8.24.

Our Savior tells us, Luke 13.26. That many will plead before him at the latter
day, that they had heard him teaching in, their streets, and had eaten, and
drunk at his table. The young man who enquired of our Savior what good thing
he should do to inherit eternal life, had from his youth kept the precepts of
the second table aforesaid, Mat. 19.20. Yea our Savior looked upon him and
loved him on that behalf, Mar. 10.21.

Finaily, Balaam desired to dye the death of the righteous, and that his latter
end might be like his, Number. 23.10.

For the second ground that the natural man is altogether averse from any thing
that is good: it is alike erroneous with the former, whether we take a natural
man for the earthly man, as he is still created of God in innocence, or for the
fallen man in his unregenerate estate as you mean.

For in the first notion the natural man can both will and act according to his
first integrity, till he disables, and corrupts himself by falling, as Esau or
Edom a type of this man did seek to please and observe his father. And you may
remember that the Apostle would have us in malice and naughtiness to be like
children, 1 Cor. 14.20. But many natural men taken in your own sense, are not
utterly averse from all good things: even Herod himself heard John the Baptist
gladly, and not only willed, but did many things according to his Doctrine and
precepts, Mark 6.20. And Moses having set before all Israel, life and blessing,
with death and cursing, Deuteronomy 30.19. he there expressly commands them to choose
life, That both they and their seed might li^^, and Isa. chap. 1.19, 20
elicites and excites this freewilling faculty, saying, If ye be willing and
obedient, ye shall eat the good of the land; but if ye refuse and rebel, ye
shall be devonred by the sword; for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it: Yea
the very name of freewill offerings, so often mentioned in the Scriptures, argues
some competent remainder of that faculty, unless ye would subjectum tollere;
but consider we pray you these two things which we have partly touched before.

First, That all fallen men are not alike extensively corrupted, that is, they
are not all alike inclined to all fins, but some to voluptuousness, and
prodigality, more then to covetousness or the like. And though David a King
prays thus against covetousness, Incline my heart to thy Testimo. nies, and
not to covetousness, Psalm. 119.36. Yet Luther says, "That he was never tempted
to that sin. Whence it will necessarily follow that such a man is not equally
averse to all good, but to some virtues more then to others. The Pharisees
though inclined to pride and covetousness were not so propense to sensuality
and uncleaness, as some of the Publicans were, Luke 18.11, 12. and consequently
they did not so much abhor sobriety, temperance, and chastity as the others
did, nor did the other so much aversate sincerity, liberality, and humility as
the Pharisees did.

Secondly, You may take notice that all fallen men are not alike intensively
depraved; sinners do gradually sinks into sin by custom and continuance
therein; so the Lord says, Ezekiel. 16.46, 47. That Jerusalem had more deeply
corrupted her self, then her elder sister Samaria, or her younger sister Sodom,
and by consequence she was more averse to good then either of them both.

And our Savior affirms, that Corazin and Bethsadia were more averse from
repentance and amendment then Tire, and Sidon, Luke 10.13. And though it fares
thus with the devil and his Angels, yea and with all those men who through
pride, malice, and desperation are incorporated into him, yet we hope that the
case or state for the present is not so evil or desperate with any other, as
you here would make it with lapsed men. For to be utterly averse from all good,
is a most forlorn and deplorable condition, and their very incorrigible state
of whom the Lord complains, Jer. 13.23. Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or
the Leopa^d his spots? then may ye also do good who are accustomed to do evil.

Now for your ground improperly and impertinently applied, That because man
since his fall is dead in trespass, and sins, Ephesians. 2.2, 5. he cannot, therefore
by his own strength convert himself, or at all prepare himself thereunto.

To this we say, It is neither a lively nor a forcible kind of arguing; for it
must be considered to what kind of life men by their fall become dead, not to
their natural life surely; for the Apostle speaking of her that lives in
pleasures, says, that she is dead whilst she lives, 1 Timothy 5.6. Here then as
he charge her with a spiritual death, so he grants her a natural life still
remaining.

It is then to the former light of Christ, or life of righteousness, that we
are dead by our fall, as it is written Act. 8.33. That the life of Christ is
taken from the earth, and Isa. 58.8. That he was cut off from the land of the
living. Agreeably hereunto the Apostle tells the Ephesians that in their
unbelief, they were at thee time without Christ, Ephesians 2.12. and consequently
without power to do good, till we receive that again by grace.

But what is that to the willing, and nilling faculty which is a natural and
essential property to the soul? Must that be dead in the man also, and he
become a mere passive block or a dead trunk, as you would have him? we have
proved before that even the fallen man can both will and act some kinds of
righteousness, at leastwise toward man; witness that young man in the Gospel
before spoken of: But here to disintangle you and others we will first briefly
^istinguish concerning the use and exercise of that faculty; and then secondly,
show some causes why men do not ordinarily choose the good and nil the evil,
even then when it is in their power so to do.

For the first of these, we must distinguish, between freedom of will and
coaction, the latter of which may befall man, but not the will of man.

Secondly, betwixt a will that wills or nilleth with full consent, and a mixed
will, wherein the one party is predominant, Phil. 1.23. For I am in a strait
between two, desiring to depart, and to be with Christ, which is best of all.

Thirdly, Betwixt an indifferency of will or aequilibriu^ to good or bad, and a
will inclined more to that which is good, then to the evil. This we take to
have been the state of will in or first parents, if not of all men yet before
they fall.

Fourthly, Betwixt a will more inclined to the evil, then to the good, and a
will inflexible.

The former of these may be found after our fall gradually in men, according to
their inchoated, or more perfect habits in evil.

The latter of these is found in no man till he be wholly incorporated in the
pride, and malice or desperation of the devil. That the will of man after the
fall is not wholly inflexible, till such a diabolical incorporation, we prove
by these few instances instead of many.

First, Pharaoh that proud and obstinate Tyrant, although at the first he was
most averse to obey Gods voice, and let Israel go; yet he was brought to it by
degrees, until he fully consented, by Gods Judgments upon him and his people,
together with their persuasions.

Secondly, Those six hundred thousand Israelites brought out of Egypt, who
harkening to their unbelieving spies or searchers of the good land, refused to
go up and fight against their enemies, afterward being made sensible of Gods
displeasure against them, did of their own accord go up and fight against the
Amalekites in the mountain, even then when Moses forbad them, and threatened
them with capital danger, Numb. 14.

A most evident example of the vertibility of man's will, Judas himself, though
he would not be warned by our Saviors discovery of his treason aforehand, nor
by his threatening of the ensuing danger, Mar. 14.18, 19, 20, 21. Yet afterward
his will turned, and he brought the money again which had corrupted him, truly
confessing his great wickedness Wisdom it self, or Christ's declares, Prove.
1.20. -- 30. though many will not turn to him at his calling or reproof, yet
when it is too late, the door of mercy being shut against them in the time of
their great calamity, this will turn to him and seek him early, that is,
diligently. So that man's will is never finally obstinate till it be wholly
indevilled.

But from these last instances we should be warned to seek the Lord while he
will be found, Isa. 55.6. Where the Psalmist concluds thus, Psalm. 32.6. For
this shall every one that is godly pray unto thee in the time when thou may
be found. Surely in the great waterfloods (of Gods destroying calamities) they
(that is the wicked) shall not come nigh him: But to go on in our distinctions,
we must in the fifth place distinguish betwixt freewill, and power, voluntatem
and arbitrium; for the one may be had, where the other is wanting, Romans 7.18.

Lastly, Between a free will, or agency and some strong inclination of nature,
to this or that object, both which may stand together.

As first in God, who is strongly inclined to the good, and Satan who propends
wholly to the evil, yet does act freely without compulsion, though not without
some necessity, or strong influence of nature.

Now in the second place, the causes why the fallen man does not will the good
which he might, are these among others.

The first is the ignorance of that good -- ignoti nulla cupido. Thus the
ignorance of things promised, hinders the seeking of them, Romans 10.14, 15, etc.

A second let is a depraved judgment, Act. 26.9. for I verily thought with my
self, that I ought to do many things against the name of Jesus.

A third impediment is the want of due remembrance, and serious consideration
of what we know in general, Lam. 1.9. He filthiness is in her skirts, she
remembered not her latter end.

A fourth bar is the power of Temptation, of which the Apostle complains, 2
Cor. 12.7.8.

A filth and a powerful obstacle is habit and custom in sin, of which that is
verified. -- Qui non est ho^ie, eras minus aptus erat.

Lastly, Gods final desertion, one of the heavyest of Judgments, is an
unremovable obstacle to the willing of good, because seconded with Satan's power.

Hence we may take a view, how far the fallen man can will good, convert himself
or prepare himself thereunto, namely so far forth as men have some light of
nature left or new illumination, and convincing grace, the which of all other
is most necessary for the work of a true conversion. Jer. 23.24. O Lord, I know
that the way of man is not in himself, it is not in man that walks to direct
his steps.

Secondly, This may be done with the more facility, so far as they are chastned
by the hand of the Lord, and make a good use of it, which made the Prophet
Jeremy to pray as he does, Jer. 10.24. Correct me O Lord, yet in judgment; and
not in thine angor, lest thou bring me to nothing. Howbeit in all this the Lord
seems to lay no violent hand upon the will, but works upon it by understanding,
judgment, and reason, with the use of sense; and because he is the Author of
the new understanding and judgment, which leads and draws the will, he is
said to work the will also, Phil. 2.13. for, Causae causae est etiam causa
causaei. But the main way whereby the man after illuminating or preventing
grace can prepare himself to turn his heart or will, is by frequent meditation,
and deep consideration of what he knows by grace or nature.

In your two last Sections, First according to an ordinary distribution, you
distinguish the condition of converted sinners into a State of Grace and a
State of glory; but albeit there be different degrees in their new
Metamorphosis, or change, yet their least estate in regeneration is a State of
Glory, as on the contrary the highest degree of that change, and exaltation is
a state of Grace.

For the proof of the first of these consider what the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor.
3.18. But we all with open face, beholding as in a glass the Glory of the Lord,
are transformed into the same Image, from Glory to Glory, as by the spirit of
the Lord. 2 Pet. 1.3. -- Through the knowledge of him who has called us unto
Glory and Virtue.

And for the evidencing of the latter, weigh well what Saint Peter writes, 1
Pet. 1.14. wherefore gird up the loins of your mind, be sober and hope to the
end, for the Grace that is to be brought unto you at the Revelation of Jesus
Christ. See also 1 Pet. 3.7. as heirs together of the Grace of life.

But more particulary for your fourth Section, As in the beginning of it you
attribute too much to the first work or degree of our regeneration: so you
detract too much, from the last, and highest period of the same in the end of
that Section.

For first you say, but not truly, That when God converts a sinner, and
translates him into the State of Grace, he presently freeth him from his
natural bondage under sin, and by his grace alone enables him to will and to do
that which is spiritually good.

Here brethren, you go too far; for the Apostle in the behalf of the young
Babes or converts, complains thus, Romans 7.8, 9. For to will is present with me,
but how to perform that which is good L^nde not; for the good that I would, I
do not, and the evil that I would not, that do I. How then are they freed, when
the Apostle says, ver. 23, He finds another Law in his members not only
warring against the Law of his mind, but bringing him captive to the Law of
sin in his members, whereupon he cries out, verse 24. O wretched man that I am
who shall deliver me from this body of death?

Is a bondage then against your wills, no captivity? yea it is the most grievous
bondage of all others in our sense and feeling, though not so perilous to the
soul, as a willing subjection unto sin. Indeed it is true of the young in
Christ, which the Apostle writs to them of that age, 1 John 2.14. I have
written unto you young men, because ye are strong, and the word of God abides
in you, and you have overcome the wicked one; But the Babe in Christ cannot
attain thereunto while he is a chide.

Now in the close of that Section, you flag and fall as much too short, saying,
That this convert at his highest pitch (for so you mean) by reason of his
remaining corruption does not perfectly, nor only will that which is good, but
wills that which is evil also.

The which though it be true of the Infants aforesaid, and perhaps may
sometimes be verified of the middle ort, yet it is not true of the old or aged
men in Christ, such as the Apostles themselves were; as we have proved before.

In your last Section, you do as you are wont, wholly transferring the state of
Glory in which the will of man is made immutably good, out of this world, but
herein you are some what mistaken, if we may give credit to these Scriptures,
Rev. 3.12, and 21. C. 1.2.3, 4, 5, 6.

CHAP. X. Of effectual calling.
ALL those whom God has predestined unto life, and those only he is pleased
in his appointed, and accepted time, effectually to call Rom: 8.30. Rom: 11.7.
Ephesians: 1.10, 11.
by his Word and Spirit 2 These: 2.13, 14. 2 Cor: 3.6.
, out of that state of sin and death in which they are by nature, to grace and
salvation by Jesus Christ Romans 8.2. Ephesians: 2.1, 2, 3, 4. 2 Timothy 1.9, 10.
, inlightning their minds spiritually, and savingly to understand the things of
God Act: 16.18. 1 Cor: 2.10, 12. Ephesians: 1.17, 18.
, taking away their heart of stone, and giving unto them an heart of flesh
Ezekiel: 36.26 Eze: 11.19. Phil: 2.13. Deuteronomy. 36.6. Ezekiel: 36.27.
, renewing their wills and by his Almighty power determing them to that which is
good f, and effectually drawing them to Jesus Christ Ephesians: 1.19 John 6.44, 45.
, yet so as that they come most freely being made willing by his grace Cant.
1.4. Psalm. 110.3. John 6.37. Romans ^.16, 17, 18.
.

II. This effectual call is of Gods free, and special grace alone, not from any
thing at all foreseen in man 1 Timothy: 1.9. Tit. 3.4, 5. Ephesians: 2.4, 5, 8, 9. Rom: ^
11.
, who is altogether passive therein, until quickened and renewed by the Holy
Spirit Cor: 2.14. Rom: 8.7. Ephesians: 2.5.
, he is thereby enabled to answer this holy call, and to embrace the Grace of
God offered and convyed in it Joh: 5.25.
.

Elect Infants, dying in Infancy, are regenerated, and saved by Christ, through
the Spirit Luke 18.15, 16, and Act: 2.38, 39, and Joh: 3.35. John 5.11, and
Rom: 8.9. compared.
, who works when, and where, and how he pleases Joh: 3.8:
: So also are all other Elect persons, who are incapable of being outwardly
called by the Ministry of the Word 1 John: 5.12. Act: 4.12.
.

III. Others not elected, although they may be talled by the Ministry of the
Word Mat: 22.14.
, and may have some common operations of the Spirit Mat: 17.22. Mat. 13.20, 21.
heb: 6.4, 5.
, yet they never truly come unto Christ, and therefore cannot be saved Joh:
6.64, 65, 66. Joh. 8.24.
; much less can men not professing the Christian Religion be saved in another
way whatsoever, be theynever so diligent to frame their lives according to the
light of nature and the Law of that Religion they do profess Act: 4.12. Joh:
14.6. Ephesians: 2.18. Joh. 4.22. John 17.13.
; and to assert and maintain that they may, is very pernicious, and to be
detested 2 John 9.10, 11. 1 Cor: 16.22, Gal: 1.6, 7, 8.
.

CHAP. X. Of effectull calling examined.
AS you had no calling to deliver many things here uttered by you, so they are
not very effectual or true; In which kind the first Section is not the least
culpable; for therein you deliver these paradoxes among others.

First, That God is pleased in his appointed and accepted time to call all
those effectually whom he hith predestined unto life; the which is not true:
For as thousands dying in their Infancy never fell (which thing we have before
sufficiently proved) so such neither need, nor have any such calling as you
here describe. For though our Savior speak thus of all fallen men, Mat. 18.3.
Verily I say unto you, Except ye be converted, and become as little children,
ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of heaven, yet children have no need to be
conformed to such converts; for of them, and with such as they are is the
Kingdom of heaven replenished, Mark. 10.14.

Secondly, You say with no less untruth, That God calls only those
effectually whom he has predestined unto life, which in your sense are the
smaller part of men: But as you make the universal father, and common Savior
of all mankind, a partial God in his decree of election, or predestination, so
you make him an accepter of persons in his calling of sinners to repentance,
both contrary to manifold and clear Scriptures.

Here then we must assert those two things against you for the vindicating of
Gods honor, and the stopping of all mouths.

First, That the Lord calls unto him all the sons of men, who are fallen from him,
and that with sufficient though not always with a successful calling.

Secondly, That he calls some of these which retain not, with more industry and
earnestness, then many that come unto him, continue with him, and are saved in
the end; for the first of those we will here say nothing of that which our
Savior speaks, Matthew. 22.14. That many be called, but few are chosen: which
though it overthrow the last Section, yet it comes not up to a full proof of
what we are now to maintain, an universal and particular call of all men that
are fallen from God, and who are capable of instruction. But these following
texts will carry it before them, 1 Timothy 2.3, 4. where the Apostle would have
all men in general and in particular, who have not sinned that sin unto death,
prayed for upon this ground; For this is good, and acceptable before God, who
would have all men saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth. If he would
have it so, what hinders, but that he both may and does bring all men to the
knowlekge of so much truth as whereby they may be saved.

To this agree the words of the same Apostle, Romans 2.8. where he shows the true
and only cause why all that are lost do perish, But to those that are
contentious, and disobey the truth, and obey unrighteousness, shall be
indignation and wrath, which is the same in effect with what he had before
delivered, Chap 1 18. For the wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against all
ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, who withhold, or suppress the truth in
unrighteousness.

If you reply that the Apostle in the former place of 1 Timothy 2.4. speaks, de
generibus singulorum, That God would have some of all kinds and sorts of men
saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth.

We must here again urge the place of St. Peter, Epist. 2 Chap. 3.9. which
undoubtedly speaks universally in the negative, and the affirmative, and so de
singulis generum. Not willing that any should perish, but that all should come
to repentance. Does not Elibu speak thus of Gods gracious dealing with all
mankind that are gone astray? Job 33.14, 15, 16, 17, 18. For God speaks
once, yea, twice, yet man perceives, or regards it not. In a dream, in the
visions of the night, when deep sleep falls upon men, in slumbring upon the
bed: Then he opens the ears of men, and seals their instruction. That he
may withdraw man from his purpose, and hide pride from man. He keeps back his
soul from the pit, and his life from perishing by the sword.

And having named many other means which God uses for the self-same end, ver.
29.30. thus he sums up all and concludes the point. Lo all these things God
oftentimes works with man, to bring back his soul from the pit, to be
enlightened with the light of the living: And Job 34.23. For he will not lay
upon man more then is right, that he should enter into judgment with God;
which thing according to the doctrine, all the sons of Adam might do; for
having his sin imputed to them, before, they were actual sinners, and in him
being deprived not only of all wisdom, holiness, and power, but every way
blinded and depraved, and that without a sufficient help of grace to ridd, and
deliver them, as to the greatest part of them: And verse 26, 27. he shows the
cause why he strikes wicked men, even for this refractory opposition apainst
his teachings and calls; He strikes them as wicked men in the open sight of
others, because they turned back from him, and would not consider any of his
ways: whereas it was our duty to say to the Lord, as often as he teaches and
chastises, as it there follows, verse 31.32. It is meet to be said unto God,
I have born Chastisement, I will not offend any more. That which I know not,
teach thou me: if I have done iniquity, I will do no more. And chap. 35.10, 11.
complaining of man's perverseness, he says, But none (that is very few of the
stubborn ones) says, where is God my maker, who gives songs in the night?
Who teaches us (all mankind) more then the beasts of the earth, and makes us
Wiser then the foul of Heaven. How can the wicked say to the almighty. Job
21.11.22, 17. depart frou us, we desire not the knowledge of thy ways, if he
were not present with them at times teaching rebuking, drawing, and calling
them, that he might turn them to him; yea, with their wills from their wiked
and destructive ways? does not wisdom utter her voice to all the fallen race
of mankind? Prove, 8.4, 5. Unto you O men I call, and my voice is to the sons
of men. O ye simple understand wisdom, and ye fools be ye of an understanding
heart: yea, is not her invitation as universal, and particular also, Prove. 9.4,
11. as the call and seductive allurements of folly is, verse 16. for each of
them uses the self-same words. Whosoever is simple, let him turn in hither, etc.
yea, what is the true cause that wisdom says, Prove. 1.28, 29. Then shall they
call upon me, but I will not answer, they shall seek me early, but they shall
not find me: But this which follows there verse 29, 30, 31. For that they
bated knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the Lord; They would none of my
counsel, they despised all my repreof.

Thus of our first assertion; come we now to the second, That some of those
which stand out, are more earnestly and industriously called by the Lord, then
many true converts, which continue steadfast with the Lord: for which purpose
take these places.

First, Gods gracious and effectual dealing with Cain when his wrath and envy
was kindled against his brother: What could the Lord without offering violence
to his will, do more to him then he did, saying, Genesis 4.6.7. Why art thou
wrath? And why is thy countenance fallen? If thou do well, shall thou not be
accepted? and if thou do not well, sin lies at the door: And then it
follows, as one both judicious and skilful in the original has it. Idque a te
pendebit, tuque ei imperabis. And in thee shall be the will or desire of it,
and thou shall have dominion over it, viz. if thou will seek that grace Did not
the Lord also complain, that he had striven with the men of the old world, till
he was weary again? Genesis 6.3. And the Lord said, my spirit shall not always
strive with man, for that be also is flesh; yea, were not their spirits or
human souls cast into the prison of Hell for their disobedience, and
refractoriness? 1 Pet. 3.19, 20 does not the Lord say also, Isa. 5.4. What
could have been done more to my vineyard, which I have not done unto it?
Wherefore when I looked that it should bring forth grapes, brought it forth
wild grapes? you will say, Is not God almighty? Could he not have compelled
them?

Answer, Yes; but he will not violate the order, which he has set in our
creation, he will not force the will, but deals with man as a free agent, by
commands, promises, threatenings, rebukes, chastisements, allurements, and
rewards: So true is that of the Father, Nemo invitus fit bonus.

To conclude this point, what can be more express, then those three ensuing
texts, among many others, Ezekiel. 3.6, 7. Thou are not sent to many people of a
strange speech, and of an hard language, whose words thou can not understand;
Surely, had I sent thee to them, they would have hearkened unto thee: but the
house of Israel will not hearken unto thee, etc. Matthew. 11.21. Woe unto thee
Chorazin, woe unto thee Bethsaida; for if the mighty works which were done in
thee, had been done in Tire and Sidon, they would have repented long ago in
sackcloth, and ashes; Of which text we spoke before upon the last occasion.

Finally, That of Matthew. 12.21. brings full conviction with it, The men of
Niuive shall rise in judgment with this generation, and condemn it, because
they repented at the preaching of Jonah, and behold a greater then Jonah is
here.

If you demand here, what is the cause that these obstinate men do not answer
Gods call and return?

We answer, It is not want of illumination, and instruction; as we have showed,
nor want of reproof, as we have proved, but this let lies in men's abuse of
their free will, as we heard before, Prove. ^, 29, 30. Not that men's wills are
inflexible, when God first calls them, as we have evicted at large in the
foregoing chapter, but some men are self wise, and self-righteous already
through the illusion of Satan, and think that they need no repentance, or
conversion to any better thing, a^ the Scribes and Pharisees were in the days
of our Savior, who taught them with power and authority, Matthew 7.29. and whose
doctrine was confirmed sufficiently by miracles also. And others which know,
and acknowledge that they are evil doers, yet do defer their return till it be
too late, as Prove. 1.28, 29. Psalm. 32.6. aforesaid: Hence it is that they shall
be filled with weeping and mourning for the opportunity which they have lost,
as the other shall be with envy and gnashing of teeth, the concomitant of
pride, and selfwisdom, Matthew. 8.12. Luke 13.25, 26, 27, 28. And these are
Satan's two ways of destroying men; he either casts them into the sin of
contention, wrath, and envy through the riches of their self knowledge,
self-holiness, and self zeal, or into the stolen and pleasant waters of
voluptuousness, or worldly cares, therein detaining them till they be drowned
in sensuality; see Mark 9.22. But now to return to our first task back again.

The third falsehood which you affirm in you first Section, is, That God calls
all his predestinate only by his Word and Spirit: where we must grant you, that
his Spirit is always the chief actor, and that often times God is pleased to use
his word, whether written or spoken, as an instrument in that work, but not
always as yourselves after confess Section the third. Besides the Lord has
many other instruments and means to call, and convert men, besides his word, as
Elihu shows at large, Joh. 33.14 -- 29. of which also we speak before: Yet are
none more general, or more effectual then Gods chastisments both inward and
outward, Psalm. 94.10. He that chashseth the Heathen, shall not he correct?
Psalm. 119 67. Before I was afflicted I went astray, but now have I kept thy
word. For whomsoever God loves (as he loves all mankind) he chasteneth, and
scourges every son whom be receives, Heb. 12.6, 7, 8, 9, 10. see Job 5.17.
Behold happy is the man whom God corrects; therefore despise not thou the
chasining of the Almighty, Pro. 3.11.12. Psalm. 94.12, 13. Isa. 27.7, 8, 9. Isa.
9.13. Isa. 28.23, 24, 25, etc. 38.16. By this was Pharaoh wrought to obey the
will of God for the present, though he afterward rebelled, and perished. If
this will not bow us, we are incorrigible, and deplorate, Isa. 1.5, 6. Isa.
9.13. yea and are sure to perish in the end, Prove. 29.1. He that being often
reproved hardneth hss neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without
remedy. Other means are named and commended unto us in the word, which shall
work upon some when the word will not, As the good conversation of the wife
toward an unbelieving husband, or disobedient to the word, 1 Pet. 3.1, 2. But
Gods most usual, and powerful way of converting sinners, is by his spirit and
severe chastisements, those especially upon men's consciences, which we
elsewhere call the work of the Law, though ofttimes wrought without the written
Law or Word, of which the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 94 13.

A fourth mistake of yours there, is, That you say all men are by nature in the
state of sin and death; For we have already proved that to be false. And does
not the Apostle say, Romans 2.27. That if the uncircumcision, which is by nature
fulfill the Law (taking it for granted, that some may do so) he shall judge
thee, who by the letter, and circumcision do transgress the Law. True it is,
that the word nature is not always taken in one notion by the Apostle himself;
but as by nature here he understands a state of men without the written word,
so by nature Ephesians. 2.3. (where he says, that we were by nature the children
of wrath as well as others) he intends either corrupt nature, or a reality of
the thing, as Gal. 4.8. you did service to them which by nature are no Gods,
that is, not really such, (...) for (...).

A fifth error of yours in that Section, is, that you say, God in this his
effectual calling of men, determines the will to that which is good, wherein,
as we said before, he should overthrow that course and order which himself has
set up, making us free Agents, and leaving our wills free, and interminate. Yet
we grant that the Lord bows and inclines the wills of men, from evil to good,
by illumination in the understanding and working upon the judgment as we said
before, but he lays no violent hands upon the will immediately.

Finally, you have other mistakes in the first Section also, as when you say
that God in his effectual calling of men takes away the stony heart, and gives
them an heart of flesh: for that is not wholly done in our first conversion,
but in process of time, by our cleansing from sin, and renewing in Jesus
Christ, according to the Covenant, Ezekiel 36.25, 26, 27. Nor are all converts
brought to Jesus Christ at the first, as you here dream; for the father has
his work of regeneration upon us, ere we are brought to know or believe, on the
Son for his work of spiritual redemption, which is the second step or degree
of our regeneration, as we show in the sequel of this tractate, Yea, whosoever
resists the father in his work, or does not continue in it, he is not brought
by the father to the son to be saved by him from sin and Satan, John 6.44.

Nor is your second Section so sound, or Orthodox in all points as we could
wish it. For you say there, but not truly, That he who is called of God is
altogether passive, until quickened and renewed by the holy Ghost. For though in
the works of illumination, correction, and reproof, he is passive, yet
afterward in the turning of his will and desires to God, and goodness he is
active, as the Apostle speaks, 1 These. 2.19. For they themselves show of us,
what manor of entrance we bad unto you, and how ye turned to God from Idols,
to serve the living and true God. So Acts 11.21. And the hand of the Lord was
with them, and a great many believed, and turned to the Lord. Wherefore does
the Lord require this motion at our hands so often, if we cannot turn after
inlightning and convincing grace? Ezekiel. 18 30. Wherefore repent ye and turn ye
from all your transgressions; and verse 32. Wherefore turn ye, and live. see
Eze. 33.11. Joe. 2.12, 13, 14, etc.

In your third Section you abate something of your wonted rigor, in saying,
That all other elected persons (besides infants) who are incapable of being
outwardly called by the ministry of the word, are regenerated, and saved by
Christ, through the Spirit who works when, and where, and how he pleases.

If you grant then that there is an elect people among all nations, as John saw
an infinite or innumerable company of such standing before the throne of God,
and before the Lamb, clothed with white rober and palms in their hands, Re.
7.9. you have here yielded that they may be called without the ordinary means
of the word; and this is no other thing in effect, then what ye have here
maintained. For if the Lord could do this in Elihu, Job, Rahab, the widow of
Zarephta, and Paul, (all which were converted without the word) what hinders
but that he can do the like all over the world, in all ages and generations of
mankind, if they obstruct not his working. In this Section we pass over that
which you spoke in the beginning of it concerning elect infants, because we
know no other sort of infants. And that such need no regeneration, we have
showed before.

In your fourth and last Section you have heaped up together many untruths, as
these by name.

First, "That there are some persons that are not elected; which being
understood of a special, and final election is true, but being taken of Gods
general and conditional election, is false, as before.

Secondly, You say, That such as are not elected, and so not saved, though they
may be called by the ministry of the word, yet they receive only the common
operations of the spirit: It is most certain that many who are not finally
elected and saved, besider a true and effectual calling vouchsafed from the
father, have in some measure received a true faith, bringing forth repentance
for a time, a true love turning them to God, and bringing forth a temporary
obedience, a true hope, which brought forth patience, yea, and some proportion
of purifying and sanctfying grace, as is evident out of these Scriptures and
others, 1 Timothy 1.19. and chapt. 5.12. and chapt. 6.10. Heb. 6.4, 5, 6. and
chapt. 10.28, 29. 2 Pet. 2.20, 21, 22.

Thirdly, You say, "That such never came truly unto Christ, and therefore
cannot be saved: where it is true, that such can never be saved from the power
of their spiritual enemies, who never came to Christ, nor Christ to them; yet
many of them which were never chosen out of the furnace, nor in the end partake
of eternal life, yet were brought for a time both to believe in Christ, and in
some measure to obey him, who yet afterward fell from him, and lost all that
which they had wrought with their future hopes; of which number were those
apostate Disciples of Christ mentioned John 6.66. with Judas, Demas, and many
others: Hence John warnes us in his second Epistile verse 8. thus, Look to
your selves, that we loose not those things which we have wrought. And Christ
speaks to the like effect, Revelations 3.11.

Fourthly, and lastly, You exclude from salvation all men not openly professing
the Christian Religion.

Where first, We pray you to consider, whether such persons, as the Apostle
seems to describe, Romans 2 26, 27. may not be saved by Christ naturally planted
in them.

Secondly, May not many of the Jews as well under the Old Testament, as the
New, though they know not, or believe not the mystery of Christ's incarnation,
be saved by that faith which the Apostle describes, Hebrews 11.6, thus; For he
that comes is God must believe that God is, and that be is a rewarder of them
that seek him, especially if they expect, and seek the inward Kingdom of a
spiritual Messiah, with victory over their Ghostly enemies through him.

Thirdly, Whether some that are not in all things of the same faith with the
modern Christians, whether Calvinists, Lutherans, or Papists, may not possibly
obtain salvation by such a faith as we have here confessed?

Lastly, Whether such as Nicodemus and Joseph of Arimathea who are Christ's
sincere Disciples, but dwelling in the midst of persecutors, dare make no open
profession of their faith and hope, may not be saved in the end, and that by
Christ in whom they have believed.

CHAP. XI. Of Justification.
THOSE whom God effectually calls, he also justifies Ro^: 8.30. Ro^: 3.24,
, not by infusing righteousness into them, but by pardoning their sins, and by
accounting, and accepting their persons as righteous, not for any thing wrought
in them, or done by them; but for Christ's sake alone, not by imputing faith it
self the act of believing, or any other Evangelical obedience to them as their
righteousness, but by imputing the obedience and satisfaction of Christ unto
them Rom: 4.5, 6, 7, 8. 2 Cor: 5.19 20, 21. Ro^: 3.22, 24, 25, 27, 28. Tit:
3.5, 7. Ephesians: 2.7. Jer: 23.6. 1 Cor: 1.30, 31. Rom: 5.17 18, 19.
, they receiving and resting on him, and his righteousness by faith, which
faith they have not of themselves, it is the gift of God Acts 10.41. Gal: 2.16.
.

II. Faith thus receiving and resting on Christ and his righteousness, is the
only instrument of justification Joh: 1.12. Rom: 3.28 Rom: 5.1.
; yet is it not alone in the justified, but is ever accompanied with all other
saving graces, and is no dead faith, but works by love Jam: 2.17 22, 26. Gal.
5.6.
.

III. Christ by his obedience and death, did fully discharge the debt of all
those that are justified, and did make a proper real and full satisfaction to
his Fathers justice in their behalf Rom: 5.8, 9.10, 19. 1 Timothy: 2.5, 6. Heb:
10.10 14. Dan: 9.24, 26. Isa. 53.4, 5, 6, 10, 11, 12.
, yet inasmuch as he was given by the Father for them Ro^: 8.32.
, and his obedience and satisfaction accepted in their stead 2 Cor: 5.20. Mat:
3.17. Ephesians: 5.2.
, and both freely, not for any thing in them, their justification only is of
free grace Ro^: 3.24. Ephesians: 2.7.
; that both the exact justice and rich grace of God might be glorified in the
justification of sinners To: 3.26 Ephesians: 1.7.
.

IV. God did from all eternity decree to justify all the elect Gal: 3.8. 1
Pet: 1.19 20. Rom: 8.30
, and Christ did in the fullness of time die for their sins, and rise again for
their justification Gal: 4.4. 1 Timothy: 2.6. Rom: 4.25
; nevertheless they are not justified, until the holy spirit does in due time
actually apply Christ unto them Col: 1.21 22. Gal: 2.16. Tit: 3.4, 5, 6, 7.
.

V. God does continue to forgive the sins of those that are justified Mat.
6.10. 1 John: 1.7, 8 1. Joh: 2.2.
, and though they can never fall from the state of justification, yet they may
by their sins fall under Gods fatherly displeasure Luk: 22.32. Joh: 10.28. Heb.
10.14.
, and not have the light of his countenance restored to them until they humble
themselves, confess their sins, beg pardon, and renew their faith, and
repentance Psa: 89.31, 32.33. Psa: 51.7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Psa: 32.5. Mat:
26.75. 1 Cor: 11.30, 32. Luke 1.20.
.

VI. The justification of believers under the Old Testament, was in all these
respects one and the same with the justification of believers under the New
Testament Gal: 3.9, 13, 14. Rom: 4.12, 23, 24. Heb: 13.8.
.

CHAP. XI. Of Justification examined.
YOur doctrine is nowhere less justifiable then in this great business of
justification; for you neither understand the right notion of the word, nor the
secret of the work.

Hence it is that as in your other Sections you have much of error: so in your
first you have little of truth, where laying down the doctrine both positively
and negatively, you have been so unhappy for the most part; as to reject the
truth, and fix upon the error.

More particularly, first you say, That all those whom God effectually calls,
he also freely justifies, which is not true of such, as either resist his
calling, or of them who being brought to believe in Christ do by and by fall
away again.

For the first of these, see Gods complaint, Psalm. 91.13, 14, 15. O that my
people had harkened unto me, and Israel bad walked in my ways; I should soon
have subdued their enemies, and turned my hand against their adversaries; the
haters of the Lord should have submitted themselves unto him, but their time
should have endured for ever.

For the other of these, see Mat. 12.45. That sometimes the unclean spirit
which was cast out, returns again through men's unwatchfulness. Then goes he,
and takes with him seven other spirits more wicked then himself, and they
enter in, and they dwell there, and the last state of that man is worse then
the first, Romans 11.22. But toward thee goodness if thou continue in his
goodness; otherwise thou shall be c^t off, 2 Pet. 1.9. But he that lacks
these things is blind, and cannot see afar off, and has forgotten that he was
purged from his old sins. All which places, though they may at the first view
seem strange to you as proofs of what we have asserted, yet when you shall
understand what justification means in its true and proper notion, they will
justify what we have said.

Secondly, You say that God justifies men not by infusing righteousness into
them, whom he has called contrary to the express tenure of the Scriptures. See
1 Cor. 6.9, 10, 11. Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the
kingdom of God? be not deceived, neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor
adulterers, nor effeminate persons, nor abusers of themselves with mankind,
nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners shall
inherit the Kingdom of God. And such were some of you; but ye are washed, but
ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by
the Spirit of our God. Was not new righteousness put into these men? And were
they not thereby washed, sanctified, and justified, these three words
expressing one and the same thing? see also Tit. 3.4, 5, 6. But after the
kindness and love of God our Savior unto man appeared, not by works of
righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy he saved us, by
the washing of regeneration, and the renewing of the Holy Ghost, which he shed
on us abundantly through Jesus Christ our Savior, that so being justified by
his Grace, we should be made heirs according to the hope of eternal life. Where
you see again that the Apostle makes regeneration in Christ, and justification
to be the self same thing, as we intimated in the foregoing Chapter: Yea in the
whole dispute about justification by Christ, the Apostle Paul uses the word
(...) to justify, either for that part of justification, which we commonly
call mortification, or that other part which we usually term vivification, or
for both as Romans 6.7. (...). For he that is dead (to wit with Christ) is
justified, freed, or purged from sin* In this notion does the Apostle use the
word, Act. 13.39. And by him all that believe are justified (or cleansed) from
all things from which they could not be justified by the Law of Moses. Rev.
22.11. (...); that is, He that is unjust (will be so) let him be unjust still,
and be which is filthy, let him be filthy still; and he that is (or will be)
righteous let him be justified (or righteous) still; and that is holy, let him
be sanctified still. Where justification and sanctification are the same thing;
so Isa. 45.24, 25. Surely shall one say, In the Lord have I righteousness, and
strength; even to him shall men come, and all that are incensed against him,
shall be ashamed: In the Lord shall all the seed of Israel be justified, and
shall glory. Where righteousness, and strength being joined together the words
must be understood of an internal righteousness, through which our sins and
corruptions are purged out. And therein lies our justification, as the next
verse imports. Yea if mortification be not comprehended under the word
justification, it is wholly left out in that golden chain so much spoken of,
and so little understood, Romans 8.30. Moreover whom be did predestinate, them he
also called, and whom he called, them he also justified; and whom he justified,
them he also glorified: In this sense Cyprian uses the word frequently, and
among profane authors Catullus thus. Justificam nobis mentem avertere deorum,
And so must the word of necessity be meant by the Apostle, Romans 5.8. as
appears there by the opposition of our state as sinners to our justified
estate. But God commends his love toward us that while we were yet sinners
Christ dyed for us, much more being now justified by his blood we shall be
saved from wrath thruogh him: And so must the same word be taken, Romans 3.24,
25. Gal 2.17. We grant indeed that the word is a (...), and variously used, as
for defending our selves or others as just, Luke 16.15. Ye are they which
justify your selves before men, etc. for absolving or declaring one just, Romans
8 33, 34. It is God that justifies, who is he that condemns? for predicating
or magnifying some person or thing, Mat. 11.19. But wisdom is justified of her
children: But all these are founded upon that moral sense of being just, or
made just, or of being free from unrighteousness, which is the Apostles sense
in all his discourse of justification by Christ.

Thirdly you say positively, That God justifies by pardoning of sins; but
though (...) is used sometimes for the putting away of sins, and that by
regeneration, Luke 1.77. Ephesians. 1.7. and elsewhere, as well as for the pardon of
sins: Yet justification in Saint Paul's sense lies not in remission of sins.

Fourthly, you say positively also, That God justifies men by accounting and
accepting their persons as righteous, and you mean he does so while they are
otherwise both in heart and life. But God accounts of every man as he is; and
though he is so gracious as to pardon, the guilt of sins forsaken, and repented
of, and ready also in Christ both to cleanse us and renew us, because he would
not have us dye in our iniquities; yet, as he speaks to Moses, he will by no
means clear the guilty, or such as continue in evil. Exodus 34.7. He is a God of
purer eyes then to behold iniquity, Hab. 1.13. Does not he search the heart and
try the reins, that he may give to every man according to his ways, and
according to the fruit of his doings, Jer. 17.20. See what he says, Micah
6.10, 11. Are there yet the treasures of wickedness in the house of the wicked,
and the scant measure that is abominable? shall I count them pure with the
wicked balances, and the bag of deceitful weights? God indeed is said to
justify the ungodly, Romans 4.5. Yet not by accounting him righteous when he is
wicked, but by cleansing and renewing him, and so making him of ungodly a godly
and righteous person.

Fifthly you say, God justifies them not for any thing that is wrought in them;
which is false; for it is by something wrought in us, that we are justified,
and sanctified, and by something wrought in us also that we are justified, that
is declared just before God and men in Jesus Christ.

Sixthly you say, "That such are justified for Christ's sake alone, which is
true of Christ and his work within us, but not of Christ and his obedience
without us, as you mean it. But why do you in these two last passages oppose
that which is wrought in us to Christ, as if the father, and his Christ, with
the Holy Ghost, were not the makers of every good work in the unregenerated?

Seventhly you say, That God in this work imputes not faith, or the act of
believing unto us for righteousness, contrary to express Scriptures. Is it not
written, Genesis 15.6. Romans 4.3. Gal 3.6. that Abraham believed God, and it was
imputed unto him for righteousness? that is, the Lord accepted his believing
(whereby he gave him that honor of his truth, omnipotency and faithfulness) as
an acceptable duty at his hand, and rewarded it with the promised righteousness
as St. James speaks chap. 2.23. Yea does not the Apostle speak thus expressly,
Romans 4.23, 24. Now it was not written for his sake alone, that it was imputed
to him; but to us also, to whom it shall be imputed if we believe in him who
raised up our Lord Jesus from the dead.

Eighthly you say, That God does not impute any other Evangelical obedience to
men for their righteousness; wherein you run full butt against the whole stream
of the Scriptures, of the Old and New Testament, Deuteronomy. 6.25, And it shall be
our righteousness, if we observe to do, viz. through the help of Christ, all
these commandments before the Lord our God, as he has commanded us, Ezekiel.
18.22. All his transgressions that he has committed, shall not be mentioned
unto him: in his righteousness that he has done he shall live, Romans 8.4. That
the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the
flesh, but after the spirit, Romans 10.4. For Christ is the end of the Law for
righteousness to every one that believes, 2 Cor. 9.10. As it is written, he
has dispersed abroad, he has given to the poor, his righteousness remains
for ever. Now he that ministers seed to the sower, both minister bread for
your food, and multiply your seed sown, and increase the fruits of your
righteousness. See Heb. 10.36. James 1.22.23, 24. Rom, 2.13. For not the
hearers of the Law are just before God, but the doers of the same (and they
only) shall be justified, And Augustine himself does acknowledge, That
forasmuch as this obedience is performed with our consents and endeavors,
though principally begun and ended through the grace and power of God, yet it
is through the mercy and goodness of God imputed unto us, as if it were
entirely ours.

Ninthly you say, That men are justified by having Christ's obedience and
satisfaction imputed unto them, but we have showed before that the outward
person and active obedience of Christ stands upon his own score; he as a
creature being a debtor to keep the Law, and is not imputed unto us, as his
passive obedience is through which we are discharged of those sins which we
have repented of and left.

Tenthly you say, That persons to be justified rest upon Christ, and his
righteousness by faith; which is true of his internal righteousness, as we have
showed, but not in your sense: for so Saint Paul having spoken of the
righteousness of faith. Phil. 3.8, 9. does explain himself at the 10. verse.
saying, That I may know him and the power of his resurrection, etc. So the same
Apostle, Romans 4.11. says, That Abraham received circumcision (which in it self
signifies and sets forth sanctification) as a seal of the righteousness of
faith.

Lastly whereas you say, That they have not this faith of themselves, it is the
gift of God, we grant it to be true of Gods illumination, revealing unto us the
things which we knew not; but not of our credence which we yield unto the same,
as we said before.

In your second Section besides one of your former errors resumed of faiths
resting upon an imagined righteousness, his outward obedience aforesaid, you
affi^m two untruths more.

The first is, "That faith is the alone instrument of Justification, whereas
the Publican, who went away justified, rather then the self justifying
Pharisee, obtained that mercy partly by his penitence, and partly by prayer,
saying, Lord be merciful unto me a sinner, Luke 18.14. Furthermore the word of
God is a blessed instrument of our cleansing and justification from sin, Joh.
15.3. Now are ye clean through the word that I have spoken unto you, Joh 17.17.
Sanctify them through thy truth, thy word is truth; see Ephesians. 5.25, 26.

Finally, we have showed before that our obedience, both active and passive, is
a way wherein, and so a mean and instrument whereby we attain justifying and
sanctifying grace from Christ.

Secondly you say, but untruely, That faith is accompained with all other
graces. For though it is the high way to obtain whatsoever grace we want, yet
at the first it is seconded but with two other ordinarily, to wit, hope and
love. Hence the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 13.13. Now abides these three, Faith,
Hope, and Love, but the greatest of these is Love. And if it were attended at
the first with all other graces, why does the Apostle thus charge us? 2 Pet.
1.5, 6, 7. And besides this, giving all diligence, add to your faith virtue,
and to virtue knowledge, and to knowledge temperance, and to temperance
patience, and to patience godliness, and to godliness brotherly kindness, and
to brotherly kindness, love.

Lastly though you say truly, That the faith which justifies is no dead faith,
we may justly fear that such a faith as seeks no living justification is scarce
a lively faith.

In your third Section, first you harp upon that old string, That Christ has
discharged our debt, and satisfied Gods justice by his death; which how far it
is true or false, we have already declared: yet is our justification of
freegrace, and so contrived, that both Gods exact justice (which can have no
fellowship with iniquity) and his rich grace also might be glorified in the
justification (that is the renewing and reparation) of sinners.

In your fourth Section we acknowledge Gods decree to justify all sinners if
they oppose him not in the work, but not to justify all the elect. For such
chosen ones as die in innocence need it not.

We assent also unto it, that Christ did in the fullness of time in his assumed
humanity, die for the sins of all offenders, as in his God^ead he dies in them
from the time of their fall, but neither way does he suffer death for all the
Elect.

It Is granted likewise, that he is risen again both inwardly and outwardly, for
the justification of sinners, but not in your sense.

But that which you add in the close of the same Section, That they are not
justified until the Holy Spirit does in due time actually apply Christ unto
them, is false. Not that we dream as some do, that men are justified either
from eternity or from the time of Christ's resurrection, but that Christ in the
work of our justification applies the spirit unto us, and not the Spirit him,
as you here dream.

In your fifth Section, by not distinguishing of justification in sieri and in
facto, you bring forth both confusion and error.

For first you say, That God does continue to forgive the sins of those that
are justified, which is true of them that are now under the work, so far as
they continue in faith and obedience, or after falls renew their repentance; but
as for those who are fully justified, they have a general acquitance and
discharge of all their sins sealed up unto them in and through the death of
Christ, Heb. 10.14, 15, 16. For by one offering he has perfected for ever them
that a^e sanctified, whereof the Holy Ghost also is a witness to us: For after
that he had said before, this is the Covenant that I will make with them after
those days says the Lord, I will put my Laws into their hearts, and in their
minds will I write them, and their sins and iniquities will I remember no more.
Now where remission of these is, there is no more offering for sin.

Secondly whereas you say, That the justified persons can never fall away from
the state of justification, it is false of persons that are there in fieri, and
true of them only that are justified in facto vel potius perfecto.

Thirdly whereas you grant, That persons justified may by their sins, fall
under Gods fatherly displeasure, and not have the light of his countenance
restored unto them until they humble themselves, confess their sins; beg
pardon, and renew their faith and repentance.

This is true, yet not of those perfect or consummate ones, who fall not so
either into sin, or Gods displeasure: but of the younger sort only in the time
of their progress and growing up, who may not only so fail, and suffer as you
have affirmed, but possibly may through a wilful revolt, both fall away totally
and remain under indignation finally.

As to your sixth and last Section, because we have described the way and means
of justification more groundedly then ye have done, we can truly speak it in
your words, but not in your sense, That the justification of believers in the
Old Testament was in all these respects one and the same, with the
justification of believers under the New Testament.

But before we leave this subject, give us leave to inform you of two things.

The first is, That the means of our justification or spiritual redemption in
Christ Jesus, is principally his blood, the blood of the everlasting Covenant,
his promised spirit, Romans 3.24, 25. Ephesians 1.7. Colossians 1.14. Hebrews
9.14, 15. -- 22. compared with Jeremy 31.32, 33, Ezekiel 36.25, 26, etc.
Hebrews 10.29. chap. 13.20.21. Rev. 7.14, 1 John 1.7, 9.

The second is that remission of sins wherein you place justification for the
main, is to be had after sin is put away by sanctification and amendment, and
not before, as you fondly dream both here and elsewhere.

For which purpose take these ensuing Scriptures. Proverbs 28.13. He that
covers his sin shall not prosper, but but whosoever confesses and forsakes them
shall have mercy. Jeremy 33.8. And I will cleanse them from all their
iniquities, whereby they have sinned against me, and I will pardon all their
iniquities whereby they have sinned against me. Mark 1.4. John preached the
baptism of repentance for the remission of sins. Luke 24.47. And that
repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name among all
Nations. Acts 5.32. Him has God exalted with his right hand to be a Prince,
and a Savior for to give repentance unto Israel and remission of sins. Acts
26.17, 18. Unto whom I now send thee to open their eyes, and to turn them from
darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that they may receive
remission of sins, and an inheritance among them that are sanctified by faith
that is in me. 1 Cor. 1.30. Of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made
unto us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption. Hebrews 10.14.
For by one offering has he perfected for ever those which are sanctified.

To all which we could add that the blessedness which David speaks of Psalm.
32.2. lies first in the putting away of sins by sanctification, as the last
words there import, and the rest will bear it, and then in having them or the
guilt of them pardoned in Jesus Christ, which words may be thus rendered, O the
blessedness of the man whose transgression is taken away, and whose sins are
covered (or buried with the like death of Christ) O the blessedness of the man
to whom the Lord imputes not iniquity (by letting him dye in his sins as one
filthy and unpurged) and in whose spirit there is no guile.

CHAP. XII. Of Adoption.
ALL those that are Justified, God vouchsafes, in and for his only Son Jesus
Christ, to make partakers of the grace of Adoption Ephesians. 1.5. Gal: 4.4, 5 To:
8.17.
: by which they are taken into the number, and enjoy the liberties and
privileges of the children of God Joh: 1.12.
, have his name put upon them Jer. 14.9. 2 Cor: 6.18 Rev. 3 12.
, receive the spirit of Adoption To. 8.15.
, have access to the Throne of Grace with boldness Ephesians. 3.12. Romans 5.2.
, are enabled to cry Abba Father Gal. 4.6.
, are pitied Psalm: 103.13.
, protected Prove. 14.16.
, provided for Mat: 6.30.32. 1 Pet. 5.7.
, and chastened by him as a Father Heb: 12.6.
, yet never cast off Lam: 3.31.
, but sealed to the day of redemption Ephesians: 4 20.
, and inherit the promises Heb: 6.12.
, as heirs of everlasting salvation 1 Pet: 1.3, 4. Heb: 1, 14.
.

CHAP. XII. Of Adoption. examined.
ERROR, and misconceptions in you here as elsewhere, Hydra like, multiplies
heads needlessly; for this argument of Adoption is the same with effectual
calling in some measure; and the self-same with that election of God which is
in time, of which we spoke before; And as that is twofold, the first
conditional, the second final and absolute, so is this; and though all the
children of God are capable of these your privileges, or most of them in time,
if they continue in their filial faith, and obedience, yet are not they so at
the first; yea, some have by their faithful walking proceeded so far by Gods
grace, that they have left some of the lesser, and foregoing prerogatives
behind them.

Therefore you have first committed great disorder and confusion in attributing
all these alike unto all, not showing which privileges belong to all Saints,
and which but to some who may absolutely expect all or most of them, and who
may expect the same conditionally only.

Secondly, You take the high way here, as you have done elsewhere, to fill many
who are not yet past danger, with security and presumption.

For the first of these, There are three degrees of Gods name, Image, or like
being.

The first, Which is the fathers name, is written upon those that believe on
him, love, and obey him.

The second, Which is Christ's powerful and saving name, becomes written upon
such as are brought to know him, to trust in his saving office, and to seek his
help against their enemies, and who persist so seeking.

The third, Which is the name of the holy Ghost, and the new Jerusalem, with
the new name of Christ is engraven only upon those that have overcome all
their enemies through the power of Christ, Revel. 3.12.

These last are they that are never cast off, and who inherit the promises as
heirs of salvation.

But the other two, If they abide not in the Father, and in Christ after they
know him, may fall short of the promises, and be rejected.

Those of the third form are past Gods fatherly chastisements, because they now
sin not, 1 John 3. but the other two are not so.

As for the other, You tell us that all which are adopted to be the children of
God, are sealed to the day of redemption; but none are so sealed finally, and
absolutely, save the third sort, of whom we spoke before; the rest are but
sealed conditionally, yet left in good hope. Yea, all those privileges which
you further recite in this Chapter, must be necessarily thus understood; to
wit, conditionally, of those that are but inchoatively adopted; and absolutely
of such only as have accomplished the conditions of the premises.

And therefore you have here adopted many errors for truth though you have
spoken some truth also at unawares; as That all those that are justified God
vouchsafes in, and for his only Son Jesus Christ, to make partakers of the
grace of Adoption.

This is most true of those whom God has justified in our sense, that is,
purged from all corruption by the blood and spirit of Jesus Christ; for such,
and such only are absolutely and finally adopted, and enjoy all the liberties
and prerogatives here by you set forth.

But if you here understand initiated adoption, it precedes justification,
taken both in your sense and ours, and so your affirmation is erroneous.

It is true also that all they who are adopted in any measure, are taken into
the number of Gods Children for the present; but the younger and weaker sort
may by their unthankfulness for so great a grace, by their future rebellions
and Apostasy be abdicated and cast off for ever, 1 Chronicles 28.9. Romans
11.22. Behold therefore the goodness and severity of God: on them that fell,
severity; but toward thee, goodness, if thou continue in his goodness;
otherwise thou shall be cut off. Deuteronomy 32.19. When the Lord saw it, he
abhorred them, because of the provoking of his sons and daughters.

Thus the Lord makes all the regenerate partakers of the grace of conditional
adoption, but only the third sort of final adoption; yet all these are
protected by the Father, and provided for as children, while they continue
children; but not otherwise; all likewise have access to the throne of grace
(which is Christ Jesus) who are brought to know him, and believe in his name,
and who persist in that their faith and in good will; but none other, neither
they which yet know him not, nor such as by apostasy crucify him afresh, Acts
6.6. Hebrews 10.27, 28, 29.

Wherefore, Let all those who are incoatively adopted, bless God for that
estate, and rejoice in it. Galatians 4.6, And because ye are sons, God has
sent forth the spirit of his Son, whereby ye cry Abba, Father. 1 John 3.1.
Behold what manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be
called the sons of God. Yet let us remember it is but a conditional estate at
the first, and a long time after. Romans 8.15, 16.17. For ye have not received
the spirit of bondage to fear again, but the spirit of adoption whereby ye cry
Abba, Father; The spirit it self bears witness with our spirits, that we are
the the children of God; and if children, then heirs, heirs of God, and joint
heirs with Christ; if so be that we suffer with him, that we may also be
glorified with him. And to the end that we may obtain a final and absolute
adoption. ^et us fulfill the condition thereunto required. 2 Corinthians 6.17,
1^. Wherefore come ye out from among them, and be ye separate says the L^^d,
and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you, and I will be a father
unto you, and (...) shall be my sons and daughters says the Lord Almighty.

See also what the Apostle infers thereupon, 2 Corinthians 7.1, 2, Having
therefore these promises my beloved, let us cleanse our selves from all
filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting our holiness in the fear of God.

CHAP. XIII. Of sanctification.
THEY that are effectually called and regenerated, having a new heart and a new
spirit created in them, are further sanctified really and personally, through
the virtue of Christ's death and resurrection 1 Cor: 6.11. Acts 20.32 Phil:
3.10. To: 6.5, 6.
, by his Word and Spirit dwelling in them Joh: 17.17. Ephesians: 5.26. 2 These: 2.13
; the dominion of the whole body of sin is destroyed Rom: 6.6.13.
, and the several lusts thereof are more and more weakened and mortified Gal:
5.24 Rom: 8.13.
; and they more and more quickened and strengthened in all saving graces Col:
1.11 Ephesians: 3.16, 17, 18.
, to the practice of true holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord 2
Cor: 7.1 Heb: 12.13
.

II. This sanctification is throughout, in the whole man 1 These: 5.23.
; yet imperfect in this life: there abides still some remnants of corruption
in every part 1 John: 1.10. Rom: 7.18, 23. Phil: 3.12.
: whence arises a continual and irreconcilable War; the flesh lusting against
the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh Gal: 5.17. 1 Pet: 2.11
.

III. In which war, although the remaining corruption, for a time, may much
prevail Rom: 7.23.
; yet through the continual supply of strength from the sanctifying Spirit of
Christ, the regenerate part does overcome To: 6.14. 1 John: 5.4. Ephesians: 5.4, 16.
: and so, the Saints grow in grace 2 Pet: 3.18.
, perfecting holiness in the fear of God 2 Cor: 7.1.
.

CHAP. XIII. Of Sanctification examined.
HAving already spoken of Justification, this whole Chapter of sanctification
(which is but the Christening of the same thing with a new name, as we have
showed before) might have been superseded; and as the whole discourse is
superfluous, so many of your erroneous and unsanctified assertions, such as
those which follow, might profitably have been omitted.

As first, where you say in the first Section, That all they who are
effectually called, and regenerated, have a new heart and a new spirit created
in them; whereas many are called and that earnestly and effectually on the
Lords part, as we have showed ^lready, who admit of no change of will, and
affections through their own obstinacy: and though all that are truly changed,
receive at the first a new frame of heart, will, and disposition, yet they do
not by and by receive a new heart and a new Spirit in the sense of the holy
Prophets: for Ezekiel shows, That not only clean water must be poured down
upon us, but that we must be cleansed from all our filthiness, and abomination,
before we can have a new heart and a new spirit created in us, nor is the stony
heart wholly taken from us, and an heart of flesh wholly given unto us till
then; But this is the peculiar estate of such Saints or sanctified ones as have
attained the third and last degree of regeneration, when Christ according to
the spirit is risen up in them, as we showed before. See Ezekiel. 36.25, 26. Of
these the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 5.17. Old things are passed away, behold all
things are become new. See Revel. 21.3, 4, 5, of those to whom the new
Jerusalem is come.

Secondly, whereas you say, That such persons are sanctified through the virtue
of Christ's death; it is another great mistake; for though the virtue of his
death is great, and of inestimable value to take away the guilt of sin, and
remove the curse from us, as we have said before, yet we read nowhere of any
power proceeding from thence, in the mortifying of sin, though that his
suffering should be both a pattern, and a motive to follow him in his like
death, as has been said. Yea, the Apostle ascribes weakness, and not power to
Christ in his death, as that whereby he could properly suffer, 2 Cor. 13 4. For
though he was crucified through weakness, yet he lives by the power of God. It
was power indeed whereby he was raised up. Romans 1.4. And it is through the same
power, that those who are dead with him, must be raised up again. Phil. 3.10.
That I may know him, and the power of his resurrection, etc.

So then there is express mention in the word, of the virtue or power of his
resurrection to be employed in this work of our regeneration, but none of the
power or efficacy of his death; yea, that benefit which we have by the death of
Christ follows the work of sanctification in order of nature, and does not go
before it, as has been proved sufficiently before.

Thirdly, Whereas you say, or imply, That the whole dominion of sin, is
destroyed in those that are in any measure called and sanctified, it is a thing
rather to be wished, if it were the will of God, then to be granted for truth;
for we find the contrary in our own experience while we are babes in Christ;
yea, the Apostle describing the estate of such in his own person, (because he
had been formerly in that ^state) complains grievously of the remaining and
dominion of corruption, Romans 7.23, 24. But I see another law in my members
rebeiling against the Law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity to the
Law of sin. Oh wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of
death! indeed if you had said that the former love which the least of Saints
had to the body of sin, and their willing subjection thereunto is in some
measure destroyed, you had spoken truly; but is not a dominion against their
wills, a dominion still? Yea, it is the most grievious tyranny of all other, and
the hardest to be born. So then there is left in all the regenerate a dominion
and tyranny of sin, till by grace they obtain power, and victory against it,
though this dominion is now invitum imperium, and not so dangerous as it was in
the time of their voluntary subjection thereunto.

Fourthly, That which you speak in the close of that Section, is true, or
false, as men bestir themselves in resisting sin, and seeking Gods grace there
against, or otherwise neglect those duties; to wit, That the several lusts of
this body of sin are more and more weakened, and mortified, and they more and
more quickened and strengthened in all saving graces to the practice of true
holiness without which no man shall see the Lord.

Your second Section presents but one error upon the matter; but it is a
material one; to wit, That our sanctification in this life is always imperfect,
and that there abide some remnants of corruption in every part; that hence
arises a continual and irreconcilable war, the flesh lusting against the
Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh, Gal. 5.17. But brethren if our
sanctification must not be perfected here; when or where must it be made up? Is
not this life the time of our regeneration? Tit. 2.11, 12, 13. For the grace of
God which brings salvation, has appeared to all men, teaching us, that
denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and
godly in this present world, looking for that blessed hope, and that glorious
appearing of the great God and our Savior Jesus Christ. Must some corruption
still remain in every part? Why so, has God such pleasure in it? Shall Christ
lose the end of his coming, of which the Apostle speaks in the next verse,
Tit. 2.24. Who gave himself for us that he might redeem from all iniquity, and
purify unto himself a peculiar people zealous of good works. See Ephesians. 5.25,
27. of which we spoke before.

And though while the flesh, and the spirit continue, there remains an
irreconcilable ^ar betwixt them, must that war last always? had not Saint
Paul sought a good fight, and finished his course? 2 Timothy 4.7. Had he not
subued his body and brought it into subjection? 1 Cor. 9.27. shall we never
attain to be of a taller Stature and growth then those new born babes in the
Galatians, That you apply their conflicts, and weak estate spoken of Gal. 5.17.
to all? But we must pardon you, for in your third Section you seem to
contradict all this again, saying, In which war although the remaining
corruption for a time may much prevail, yet through the continual supply of
strength from the sanctifying Spirit of Christ, the regenerate part does
overcome; and so the Saints grow in grace, perfecting holiness in the fear of
God; but concerning this we must refer you to what we spoke before upon Chap.
6. Sect. 6. Surely as God caused his word to be written that we might there
through become absolute, 2 Timothy 3.14, 16, 17. And has given gifts from heaven
unto his Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, and Teachers to bring us unto such a
stature of perfection in Christ, Ephesians 4 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. So he praying for
the perfecting of the Saints, Heb. 13.20, 21. 2 Cor. 13.9. 1 Pet. 5.10. did
pray for things feasible; and attainable, nor can the prayer of Christ for the
same thing be irritous, Joh. 17.23. I in them, and they in me, that they may be
made perfect in one.

CHAP. XIV. Of saving Faith.
THE Grace of Faith whereby the Elect are enabled to believe to the saving of
their souls Heb: 10.30.
, is the work of the Spirit of Christ in their hearts 2 Cor: 4.13. Ephesians:
17.18, 19. Ephesians: 2.8.
; and is ordinarily wrought by the Ministry of the word Rom: 10.14.17.
, by which also, and the administration of the Sacraments and prayer it is
increased, and strengthened 1 Pet: 2.2. Act: 20.32. Rom: 4.11. Luke 17.5. To:
1.16, 17.
.

II. By this Faith a Christian believes to be true whatsoever is revealed in
the word for the authority of God himself speaking therein Joh. 4.42 1 These:
2.13. 1 John: 5.20. Act. 24.14.
, and acts differently upon that which each particular passage thereof
contains, yiedling obedience to the commands Rom: 16.26.
, trembling at the threatenings Isa: 66.2.
, and embracing the promises of God, for this life and that which is to come
Heb. 11.13. 1 Timothy: 4.8.
; but the principal acts of saving Faith are accepting, receiving, and resting
upon Christ alone for justification, sanctification, and eternal life, by
virtue of the Covenant of grace Joh: 1.12. Act: 16.33. Gal: 2.29. Act: 15.11.
.

III. This faith is different in degrees, weak or strong Heb: 5, 13.14. Rom:
4.15, 20. Matthew: 6.30. Matthew: 8.10.
; may be often and many ways assailed and weakened, but gets the victory Luk:
22.33. Ephesians: 6.16. 1 John 5.4, 5.
; growing up in many to the attainment of a full assurance, through Christ Heb:
6.11, 12. Heb: 10.12. Col: 2 ^.
, who is both the Author and Finisher of our Faith Heb. 12.2.
.

CHAP. XIV. Of Saving Faith Examined.
AS Your selves elsewhere condemn an implicit faith, (of which notwithstanding
you are not altogether guiltless, in letting your authors so often impose upon
you as they do) so we hope you will leave our faith free to dissent from you,
where truth is not on your side in this, and other chapters.

Here some men perhaps would quarrel with you for not setting forth the kinds
of faith; but since it was your scope and purpose to speak here of saving faith
only, which is a living faith, or hope, 1 Pet. 1.3. We will not much blame you
for making no mention of that dead faith spoken of by St. James chapter 2.20.
The like we say of omitting the mention of a false and feigned faith, seeing
that whereby me must be saved is called faith unfeigned, 1 Timothy 1 5.

The ordinary distribution of faith into those of historical, temporary,
miraculous, and saving, might here by you with the less detriment be passed
over in silence; because as historical faith is an ingredient into true faith;
so the temporary differs nothing or very little from it, but in point of
perseverance; and though outward miracles with the primitive power of
godliness for the greatest part seem long fince to have grown rare, yet the
true saving faith in Jesus Christ has always according to its strength and
growth been a worker of inward and spiritual miracles, and that upon sure
grounded promises, John 14.12. Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that
believes in me, the works that I do, shall he do also, and greater works then
these shall he do, because I go unto the Father.

And those words of our Savior, Mark 16.17, 18. being spiritually understood,
do set forth the signs of a true faith to the end of the world. And these
signs shall follow them that believe; In my name shall they cast out Devils,
they shall speak with new tongues, they shall take up Serpents, and if they
drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them; they shall lay their hands upon
the sick and they shall recover.

But the things we most wonder at are these; First, That you should now come to
speak of faith, not only after effectual calling, which in your sense implies
faith, but after justification, which you confess to be attained by faith; yea,
and after sanctification also, (which though you take it to be a distinct thing
from justification) must for the greatest part follow faith also as an effect
of it, Acts 26.18. Among them that are justified by faith that is in me.

And Secondly, That you should make no distinction betwixt the three degrees,
if not kinds of saving faith; to wit, Faith in God the father, Belief in God
the Son, and Confidence in the Holy Ghost.

The which as they are in part descriminated from each other, at least wise by
their distinct objects in the Apostles Creed, so are they clearly dissevered
from each other in the holy Scripture; It is in a general comprehension, that
the Apostle takes the faith of the elect, when he describes it to be an
acknowledgment of the truth that is according to godliness, in hope of eternal
life, which God that cannot lie promised before the world began; 1 Tit. 1.2.
But it is faith in God the Father, or faith in confuso, as we said before, that
is set forth, Heb. 11.6. For he that comes to God, must believe that God is,
and that he is a rewarder of them that seek him; as it is faith in God the Son,
which St. Paul points at Gal. 2.15, 16. saying, We who are Jews by nature, and
not finners of the Gentiles, knowing that a man is not justified by the works
of the Law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ, even we have believed in Jesus
Christ, that we might be justified by the faith of Jesus. It is also that faith
in the holy Ghost of which the Apostle speaks thus. Gal. 5.3. For we through
the spirit wait for the hope of righteousness by faith; that is the Lord our
righteousness, or the beavenly Jerusalem, Jer. 33.16. These three are distinct
from each other, and men may have the first without the second, and the first
and second without the third.

For first we find, that Cornelius believed in God, prayed unto him, gave
alms, and did many things with acceptance before God, ere ever he was commanded
to send for Peter, that he might by him hear of the faith in Jesus Christ, Acts
10. chapter.

Thus our Savior speaks to his Disciples and Apostles, John 14.1. Let not your
hearts be troubled; ye believe in God, believe also in me; intimating that
though they had a clear and strong faith in God the Father, yet their knowledge
of him in his right saving office, and their respective faith was but dark and
weak as yet; for they neither distinctly understood, that he must dye for them,
and that they must dye with him, if they should be saved, nor expected
salvation from sins and Satan by his blood and spirit; and much less had they
any hope or due knowledge of the promised Spirit, the everlasting comforter,
who should abide with them for ever, till Christ there, and especially after
his resurrection revealed the same unto them, and brought them to a true belief
and steadfast hope of the same; yea, where are they now to be found, who thus
believe in the holy Ghost, or in Jesus Christ himself, for a right
justification, and spiritual salvation, from the hands of all their enemies by
his alone power and grace?

Thus is that fulfilled, Luke 18.7, 8. And shall not God avenge his own Elect,
which cry day and night; to wit, for help against their spiritual enemies; I
tell you that he will avenge them speedily; nevertheless when the Son of man
comes, shall he find faith upon the earth? This faith was a rare bird, like a
black Swan at Christ's last coming in the Spirit. That there may be some pious
souls which not only want the third degree or kind of faith, but have not so
much as heard that there is an holy Ghost, the Scriptures witness clearly. Acts
19.2. The like may be said concerning the Lord Jesus and faith in him, among
the Heathen to whom the Father has not revealed him as yet.

But now to come to your particular Sections; In the first of them you say,
That faith whereby the Elect believe, to the saving of their souls, is the work
of the spirit of Christ: which thing in a proper and accurate kinke of
speaking, is not true; for it is the work of the Father to reveal and manifest
the Son unto us, as it is the work of the Father and Son to beget faith in the
holy Ghost; Thus speaks our Savior to Peter, when he had through faith
confessed him to be the Son of God. Matthew. 16.19. Blessed art thou Bar-Jonah,
for flesh and blood has not revealed this unto thee, but my Father which is in
Heaven; It is the Father that must draw us unto the Son, to seek and expect
redemption internal and external from him, John 6.44, 45, 46. Christ indeed is
called (...), Heb. 12.1, 2.

That is, He is the first Captain and Ringleader of ou^ faith, for he is gone
before us in the same way of trust and confidence, to be helped by the Father
in all his distresses, and raised up again after he had been obedient to the
death.

And secondly, He is the fulfiller of our faith, or of that which we by our
like faith, while we follow him in the same race, expect from him according to
the promises; But whether the first word (...) be well translated, Author; That
be is the Author of our Faith, except it be understood of his joint working
with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, we will leave the learned to judge, for
our selves dissent.

That also which follows in the same Section must be understood of such a
ministry as is called and enabled by the Lord for that work, and of prayer made
with understanding and affection, for the increase of that grace; where you
say, That Faith is ordinarily wrought by the ministry of the word, by which
also, and by the administration of the Sacraments, and prayer, it is increased
and strengthened; for such Ministers as teach vain Doctrine, and administer the
Sacraments with ignorance, and error, beget an answerable faith, and
persuasion in their hearers, who give ear and credit unto them; as your Authors
and Teachers have done in some of you; but this must here also be remembered,
that the Lord can, and often does when and where he pleases beget faith, even
faith in Jesus Christ by the sole illumination, and teaching of the holy Ghost,
as he did in Job among the Heathen, Job 19.25, 26. and in Paul among the Jews,
Gal. 1.15, 16. For to one is given by the Spirit the word of wisdom, and to
another the word of knowledge, by the same Spirit, to another faith by the same
Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.8, 9. And for this work sake he is called the Spirit of
faith, 2 Cor. 4.13.

In your 2. Section you confirm, what we said before of historical faith, that
it is an ingredient into true saving faith, where you say, 'By this a Christian
believes to be true, whatsoever is revealed in the word, you mean so far as
men are enlightened to the understanding of it, otherwise there is more repeated
in the word then most men do, or can understand while they are in the state of
Faith; but here you should have added this also to your former words; that the
servant^ of God believe also whatsoever God is pleased to reveal unto them,
besides the word; which yet is not contrary to the word.

Thus Paul believed that which God had showed unto him, concerning the
preservation of himself, and those that were with him in the ship, Acts 27.25.
And St. John gave respect and credit unto all that was showed unto him in the
Revelation, where by the way you may observe how God is the Author of Faith; to
wit, by revealing his saving counsel, and will unto us, which by nature, and
much more in our corrupt estate we are in a great measure ignorant of; And how
far faith lies in our own hand, and power, viz. only to assent unto that which
is so revealed, and made known out of grace.

Thus there is an assenting, or dissenting faculty in all men. See Acts 9.29.
Psalm 106 12. Then believed they his word and sang his praise, with verse 24.
Yea, They despised the pleasant Land, they believed not his Word, Acts 17.4.
And some of them believed, and consorted with Paul and Silas. verse 5. But the
Jews which believed not were moved mith envy, etc. John 3.32, 33. And what be
has seen, and heard, that he testifies, and no man receives his testimony,
be that receives his testimony has set to his seal that God is true; And
accordingly as men stand affected to the person reporting, or the thing
revealed, so are they apt to credit or discredit the same, Facile e^im credimus
quae volumus, etc. e contra. Hence it was, that some persons who were well
inclined to the leaving of sin, and the seeking of righteousness, and
consequently in a good order, and posture toward eternal life, did easily and
joyfully receive the word preached by Paul and Barnabas, when others who were
more engaged to their sins, self-wisdom, and false righteousness, believed not,
but contradicted, and blasphemed, Acts 13.44, 45, ^6. etc. Hence it is also
that after Gods grace was made known unto men, they were commanded to repent,
and believe the Gospel, Mar. 1.15. And that others are complained of for their
unbelief, Hebrews 4.2. For unto us was the Gospel preached, as well as unto
them, but the word preached did not profit them, being not mixed with faith in
them that heard it. For the Lord never requires more then either by his
preventing, or assisting grace men can perform, nor yet complains of them, but
where they are some ways deficient in acting their part.

Secondly, What you there speak of faith's different actings in relation to the
commands, promises, and threatenings, recorded in the word, is true also as to
the inhibitions and narrations found there; but herein you are defective.

First, in not declaring by what form, or vital principle faith becomes so
active; to wit, by love Gallatians 5.6. Without which, faith is dead, James
2.14, 15, 16, 17.

And secondly, In passing over the acts and offices of faith in God the Father,
and of faith in the Holy Ghost, both which have an eye to sanctification, and
eternal life as well as faith in Christ, though this last named seeks that
which we called justification more especially from Christ. But if Gods eternal
decree be so absolute as you speak of before; what need is there that says
should be moved with threatenings, or promises?

For your third, and last Section; It may be wholly admitted with this caution:
That faith at length gets the victory, and grows up to a full assurance, if
men persevere in love, and obedience to God, and fervently seek that victory,
and the assurance also from the Lord, and his power. But both time, and the use
of all good means are required thereunto; and as faith is weak in its first
beginning, so when it has gotten some strength, yet by neglect of the means
aforesaid, and by wilful disobedience, it may not only be much weakened, but
wholly lost, as we see in the parable of the Sower, Matthew. 13. Yea, the Aposte
tells not only of women that had forsaken their first faith, 1 Timothy 5.12. But
of men also who by putting away a good conscience, have made shipwreck of their
faith, as we said before, 1 Timothy 1.18, 19. How Christ may be said to be the
Author and Finisher of our faith, we showed before.

CHAP. XV. Of Repentance unto Life.
REPENTANCE unto life is an Evangelical grace Ezekiel: 12.10. Acts 11.18
; the doctrine whereof is to be preached by every minister of the Gospel, as
well as that of Faith in Christ Luke 24.47. Mar: 1.15. Acts 20.21
.

II. By it a sinner out of the sight and sense, not only of the danger, but
also of the filthyness and odiousness of his sins, as contrary to the holy
nature, and righteous law of God; and upon the apprehension of his mercy in
Christ to such as are penitent, so grieves for, and hates his sins as to turn
from them all unto God Ezekiel: 18.30.31. Eze: 36.31. Isa: 30.22. Psalm: 51.4. Jer:
31.18, 19. Joel 2.12, 13. Amos 5.15 Psalm: 119.118. 2 Cor: 7 11
, purposing and endeavoring to walk with him in all the ways of his
commandments Psalm: 119.6, 50, 106. Luke 1.6. 2 King: 23.25.
.

III. Although Repentance be not to be rested in, as any satisfaction for sin,
or any cause of the pardon thereof Ezekiel: 36.31, 32, Ezekiel: 16.61 62.63.
, which is the act of Gods free grace in Christ Hos: 11.24. Rom: 3.21 Ephesians: 1.7.
, yet it is of such necessity to all sinners, that none may expect pardon
without it Luk: 13 5. Acts 17.30, 31.
.

IV. As there is no sin so small, but it deserves damnation To: 6.23. Rom: 5.12
Mat: 12.36
, so there is no sin so great, that it can bring damnation upon those who
truly repent Isa: 55, 7. Rom: 8.1. I^: 1.16, 18.
.

V. Men ought not to content themselves with a general repentance, but it is
every man's duty to repent of his particular sins particularly ^sal: 19.13. Luke
19 8. 1 Timothy: 1.13 15.
.

VI. As every man is bound to make private confession of his sins to God,
praying for the pardon thereof Psalm: 51.4, 5, 7.9, 14 Psa: 32.5, 6
; upon which, and the forsaking of them, he shall find mercy Pro: 28.13. 1
John 1.9
; So he that scandalizeth his Brother, or the Church of Christ, ought to be
willing by a private or a public confession, and sorrow for his sin, to
declare his repentance to those that are offended Ja^: 5.16 Luk: 17.3.4 Josh:
7.19
, who are thereupon to be reconciled unto him, and in love to receive him 2
Cor: 2.8
. ^ Psalm: 51, throughout.


CHAP. XV. Of repentance unto life, examined.
IN this Chapter, though you deliver many things, not to be repented of, yet
you first strangely, and needlessly multiply ^eads and common places: For
wherein does your repentance differ from your conversion or effectual calling,
Chap. 10. and from sanctification joined with it, Chap. 13. or from adopting
grace as it is conditional, or from effectual calling jointly with
justification in Saint Paul's sense? In effect all this is one entire work of
grace, though calling, and sanctification, or justication are the parts of it;
But as you are herein redundant, so you are many ways deficient:

For first you do not distinguish repentance; there being a repentance wrought
by the Law, and accompanied with the spirit of bondage, or fear of wrath, Romans
8.15. and another wrought by the Gospel which again is twofold The one a
temporary humiliation and reformation, the concomitant, and effect of a
temporary faith; and the other a persevering, and through repentance never to
be repented of.

Secondly, you set not forth the degrees of repentance in the least measure, or
degree: whereas first there is repentance or conversion wrought by God the
Father, which follows upon our respective faith in him, of which these, and
many other Scriptures speak, Mar. 11.5. Repent ye and believe the Gospel. Act.
20 21. Testifying both to Jews, and also to the Gentiles, repentance toward
God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ, Heb. 6 1. Therefore leaving the
principles of the doctrine of Christ, let us go on unto perfection, not laying
again the foundation of Repentance, from dead works, and of faith toward our
Lord Jesus Christ: which work is all one with our conversion, and lies mainly
in our turning to God, Ezekiel. 14.6. Thus says the Lord, repent, and turn you
from your Idols, Ezekiel. 18.30. Repent and turn you selves, Joel. 2.14. Who
knows if be will return and repent, Acts 3.19. Repent you there, ore, and be
converted, that your sins may be blotted out, etc.

This first degree of repentance is that sanctification which we obtain and
receive from God the Father, in the change of our mind, will, and affections.
Jude, To them that are sanctified by God the Father. Besides which there is a
further progress in repentance of inward and outward reformation wrought by
Jesus Christ, when after the conversion aforesaid we are brought to believe on
him, for the purging away of their sins, and corruptions by his blood, and
spirit, which in its latitude contains the total, and final work of
mortification, of which those texts speak expressly, Luke 24.4^, 47. He said
unto them, thus it is written, and thus it behoove^ Christ to suffer, and to
rise from the dead the third day, and that repentance, and remission of sins
should be preached in his name, among all Nations, beginning at Jerusalem, Mat.
9.13. I am not come to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance, Acts
5.31. Him has God exalted with his right hand to be a Prince, and a Savior,
for to give repentance unto Israel, and forgiveness of sins; This is that work
of Christ, of which the Apostles, and Saints speak, Act 11.18. Then has God
also to the Gentiles granted repentance unto life. Thus of your defects in
general.

In your first Section you call this repentance unto life, whereof you speak,
an Evangelical grace, as if you thought it to be a single virtue, as hope,
patience, meekness or the like: But repentance in the latitude is an universal
change of the inward man, as the word (...) implies, to the putting away of all
iniquity in heart, and life, toward which, there are necessarily so many
virtues required as there are vices to be put away, for each sin is removed
by his contrary.

Secondly, Though in your second Section you concur with us in making
repentance, such an universal change of the whole man, as that he not only
grieves for, hates, and turns from all his sins unto God, but also both
purposes, and endeavors to walk with him in all the ways of his
commandments; yet here, you fail, or mistake in three things.

First, In describing such a repentance only as the least Saint attaines by the
work of the Father, and leaving out that repentance unto life, which lies in
mortification, See Romans 8.13. where it is said, If ye live after the flesh ye
shall dye, but if through the Spirit ye mortify the deeds of the flesh, then
ye shall live, and to that effect. Ezekiel. 18.31. Cast away from you all your
transgressions whereby ye have transgressed, and make you a now heart, and and
a new Spirit, for why will you dye O house of Israel.

Secondly, In saying here that it is upon the apprehension of Gods mercy in
Christ, to such as are penitent, that men so grieve for sin, hate and turn from
it; and so purpose, and ind avor to keep all Gods commandments: whereas the
apprehension of Gods mercy and grace in the general, and that for salvation,
may produce all this, and has done it in thousands of Jews and Gentiles in the
times of the Old Testament, and since also, who for the present had no
knowledge of Jesus Christ, and the further grace to be attained in him; yet do
we not deny but the knowledge, and belief of that grace which is held forth in
Christ, may increase that godly sorrow, and much strengthen that purpose, and
endevor of obedience, yea and make the believer to seek the second part of
repentance, even the work of mortification from the grace of Christ.

Lastly, you are short in this that you make this saving repentance to extend
no further, then to bare purpose, and endeavor of walking with God in the ways
aforesaid; For if this endeavor acts but according to the strength of nature,
or the first grace received, it must needs fall short both in the subduing of
sin, and the accomplishment of Gods will; and therefore true repentance unto
life, seeks grace, and power from Christ for both, out of faith in the
promises, and rests not till it has attained it according to the promises,
Ezekiel. 36.25, 26, 27, etc. Jerem. 31.33, 34. Ephesians. 5.25, 26, 27. 2 Pet. 1.4, 5.
Luke 1.74, 75.

In your third Section you strangely contradict your selves in saying, first,
That repentance is no cause of the pardon of sin, and yet afterward making it
a thing so necessary for sinners, that none may expect pardon without; Is causa
sine qua non, no cause with you? or is the fulfilling of such a condition as
without which remission of sins, shall not be granted, a thing of no
satisfaction at all to him that requires it absolutely though he help us in
it? Or is it in no wise to be rested in, as any satisfation to God who requires
it? We grant it is not the first inducing cause, nor yet the meritorious cause,
but is first, or last some antecedent cause, before the thing shall be estated,
and sealed upon him that is to enjoy it, especially since it is Gods absolute
will and pleasure to grant pardon no other way.

That also which you affirm in your fourth Section, is by some questioned, and
that not without cause. Whether there be not some sin so great, that it does,
and shall bring damnation with it though it be repented of: For there is a time
of patience and mercy, in which God has purposed to receive the sinner, if he
repents, and returns, Rev. 2.21. And I gave her space to repent of her
fornications, but she repented not. If in this term or space they repent not,
they may, yea shall be excluded from pardon, though they repent afterward,
Luke 13.25, 26. When once the Master of the house is risen up and has shut to
the door, and you begin to stand without, and to knock at the door, saying,
Lord, Lord open unto us, he shall answer, and shall say unto you, I know you
not whence you are; what say you to Judas who repented all too late, as many
thousands more do, Prove. 1.28.29.

Your fifth Section we grant, as also the necessity of confessing of sins unto
God, and in case of scandal given to the respective parties scandalized also,
Section sixth. But here again you are defective in two things.

First, in that you set not forth the expedience, yea necessity, that there may
be for such as are troubled in mind, either for some great sin committed, or
with terrible temptations, to confess, and open their estate to some wise, and
godly counselor, whether Minister, or private Saint, and to crave the help of
their advise, and prayers.

And secondly, you make no mention of restitution, which is requisite also in
many cases, if the party be able to recompense the damage, which he has done,
Exodus 22.1, etc. Luke 19.8.

CHAP. XVI. Of Good works.
GOOD works are only such as God has commanded in his holy word Mich: 6.8.
Rom: 12.2, Heb: 13.21.
, and not such as without the warrant thereof are devised by men, out of blind
zeal, or any pretense of good intention Mat: 15.19. Isa: 29.13. 1 Pet: 1.18.
To: 10.2. Jo: 16.2: ^ Sam: 15.21, 22, 23.
.

II. Those good works done in obedience to Gods commandments are the fruits,
and evidences of a true and lively faith Jam: 1.18, 22.
, and by them believers manifest their thank-fulness Psalm: 116.12, 13.
, strengthen their assurance 1 John: 2.3. 2 Pet: 1.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
, edify their brethren 2 Cor: 9.2. Mat: 5.16,
, adorn the profession of the Gospel Tit: 2.5, 9, 10, 11, 12. ^ Tim: 6.1.
, stop the mouths of the adversaries 1 Pet: 2: 15
, and glorify God 1 Pet: 2: 12 Phil: 1.11. Joh: 15.8 1.
, whose workmanship they are, created in Christ Jesus thereunto Ephesians: 2.10.
, that having their fruit unto holiness, they may have the end eternal life To:
6.22.
.

III. Their ability to do good works, is not at all of themselves, but wholly
from the Spirit of Christ Joh: 1^.4, 5. Ezekiel: 36.26, 27.
, and that they may be enabled thereunto, there is required an actual influence
of the same holy spirit to work in them, to will and to do of his good pleasure
Phil: 2.13. Phil: 4.13. 2 Cor: 3.5.
, yet are they not thereupon to grow negligent, as if they were not bound to
perform any duty unless upon a special motion of the Spirit, but they ought to
be diligent in stirring up the grace of God, that is in them Phil: 2.12. Heb:
6.11, 12. 2 Pet: 1.3, 5, 10, 11, Isa: 64.7. ^2 Timothy: 1.6. Acts 26.6, 7. Jud:
verse 20, 2^.
.

IV. They who in their obedience attain to the greatest height which is
possible in this life, are so far from being able to superogate, and to do more
then God requires, as that they fall short of much which in duty they are bound
to do Luke 17. Nehem: 13.22. Job 9.1, 2. Gal; 5.7.
.

V. We cannot by our best works merit pardon of sin, or eternal life at the
hand of God, by reason of the great disproportion that is between them, and the
glory to come; and the infinite distance that is between us and God, whom by
them we can neither profit nor satisfy for the debt of our former sins Rom:
3.20. Rom: 4.2, 4, 6. Ephesians: 2.8, 9. Titus 3.5, 6, 7. Romans 8.18. Psalm: 16.2. Job
22.2, 3, 4. Job 35 7, 8.
, but when we have done all we can we have done but our duty, and are
unprofitable servants Luke 17.10.
, and because as they are good they proceed from his Spirit Gal; 5.22, 23.
, and as they are wrought by us they are defiled, and mixed with so much
weakness, and imperfection, that they cannot endure the severity of Gods
judgment Isa; 64.6. Gal; 5.17. Rom; v. 15, 18. Psalm; 143.2. Psai 130.3.
.

VI. Yet notwithstanding the persons of believers being accepted through
Christ, their good works are also accepted in him Ephesians; 1.6: 1 Pet; 2.5. Exodus;
28.38. Gen; 44. with Heb; 11; 4^
, not as though they were in this life wholly unblameable, and unreproveable in
Gods sight Job 9.20 Psalm; 143.2^
, but that he looking upon them in his Son, is pleased to accept, and reward
that which is sincere, although accompanied with many weaknesses, and
imperfections Heb; 13.20, 21. ^ Cor: 9.12. Heb: 6.10. Mat: 25.21, 23.
.

VII. Works done by unregenerate men although for the matter of them, they may
be things which God commands, and of good use both to themselves and others a
Kin: 10.30, 31. 1 King: 21.27, 28. Phil: 1.15, 16, 18.
, yet because they proceed not from an heart purified by faith Gen: 4.5. with
Heb; 11.4. Heb; 11.6:
, nor are done in right manner according to the word 1 Cor; 13.^. Isa: 1.12.
, nor to a right end, the glory of God Mat; 6.2, 5, 16.
, they are therefore sinful, and cannot please God, or make a man meet to
receive Grace from God Hag; 2.14. Tit; 1.15. Amos 5.21, 22. Hosea 1.4. Rom;
9.16. Tit; 9.5.
; and yet their neglect of them is more sinful and displeasing to God Psalm
14.4. Psalm 36.3. Job 21.14, 15. Mat; 25.41, 42, 43, 44. Mat; 23.13.
.

CHAP. XVI. Of Good Works, examined
THis Chapter of good works is none of your worst labors in this tractate, yet
is your doctrine therein like the good works you describe, short and imperfect.

In your first Section you affirm that good works are only such as God has
commanded in his word, which is to be understood of such as are ordinarily to
be performed, or else your affirmation is not true, for many good works have
been done by instinct only of Gods Spirit, as the anointing of our Savior,
with that precious ointment before hand to his burial, Mat. 26.7; 8, 9, 10.
which yet are not contrary to what is commanded in the word: The obedience of
Moses, Gideon, and diverse other persons, who had immndiate, and extraordinary
callings, to do this or that service, was a good work also, and commanded by
God, but not in his written word before extant; yet every good work must have a
warrant from God for the doing of it, Nor can men have a better warrant for all
ordinary works then the written word, and therefore you justly there reject all
works devised by men out of blind zeal upon what pretense soever of good
intention, but we fear it will find your selves faulty: how much more then are
those works to be here excluded, which men work through the instigation and
illusions of Satan?

In your second Section, besides that you leave out our love to God and men,
whereof good works are evidences as well as of a true, and lively faith, 1 John
2.5. 1 John 5.2, 3.

You affirm that all believers are the workmanship of God, created in Christ
Jesus unto good works, which is true of all men in general according to our
first creation, but of none in the way of regeneration; but of such Saints
only as both actually believe in Christ, and are in some measure renewed in
him, for the Saints in God the Father are not yet come so far.

In your third Section, You affirm three things which are yet more strange, not
only to us, but to truth it self.

The first is, That the ability of the Saints to do good works; is not at all
of or from themselves? how then are they workers together with God, and with
his grace, 2 Cor. 6.1. For though the power whereby they work is principally
the Lords, yet our joint endeavors, and power are not excluded, 1 Corinthans
15.10. But I labored more then they all, yet not I but the grace of God which
was with me.

Secondly, That you seem to bereave men of the use of their wills, not only
before, but after their conversion.

And lastly, in that you make the grace which the Saints have received already,
to be vain, impotent, and useless: where you say, And that they may be enabled
thereunto, viz. to do good works, besides the graces they have already
received, there is required an actual influence of the same holy Spirit to work
in them, to will, and to do of his good pleasure.

We grant that in those works wherein the temptation of the enemy opposes it
self in power, such an influence is needful but not usually elsewhere; yea
those that are filled with the holy Ghost from heaven, and to whom the promised
kingdom is come in power, seem to need no other influence at all, for that
spirit leads them into all truth, and acts them continually.

In your fourth Section you do not only derogate from the chief Saints, but
from the grace and power of God working in them, in two false affirmations.

First, In saying, That they who in their obedience attain unto the greatest
height which is possible in this life, cannot supererrogate, or do more then
God requires: For did not St. Paul preach the Gospel of grace, which was no
where commanded? 1 Corinthians 9.1 -- 15.

Secondly, In maintaining that they fell much short of what in duty they are
bound to do; the which being understood of the Saints in their minority, and
growing up, is true, but not of the Elect Saints, or such as are perfected in
Christ Jesus; does not the Apostle say, That he was able to do all things
through Christ who strengthened him. Phil. 4.13. Why does holy Epaphras by the
testimony of the Apostle pray for the Collossians; That they might stand
perfect and complete in all the will of God, Col. 4.^2. if any such thing be
attainable? Yea, Christ himself shows that we may do all that which is
commanded us, though we are to God unprofitable servants when we have so done,
not adding any thing to him, Luke 17.10. It was one main end of Christ's coming
as we showed before; That the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in
us, which walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit, Romans 8.3, 4. then the
thing must needs be attainable.

In your Fifth Section, as you truly affirm, That we cannot by our best works
merit pardon of sin, or eternal life, at the hand of God, for many reasons
which you there allege, so in the close of that Section you utter some
untruths; As that all the works even of the best Saints, as they proceed from
themselves, are defiled, and mixed with much weakness, and imperfection, and
that they cannot endure the severity of Gods judgments; for does the Lord any
where require more of his Saints then to love him, with all their heart, and
with all their souls; and so much we find promised to all that truly return
unto God, if they have faith and will to seek it. Deuteronomy. 30.6. And the Lord thy
God will circumcise thine heart, and the heart of thy seed, to love the Lord
thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul that thou may live. Yea,
does not the Apostle expressly tell us, 1 John 4.17. That herein is our love
made perfect, that we may have boldness in the day of Judgment, because as he
is, so are we in this world: Defend the honor of God then according to the
truth, and take not from the glorious works of Christ, whereby the Father is
glorified, upon pretense of giving glory to the Father. Remember what Job
says, Chapter 13.7. Will ye speak wickedly for God? Will ye talk deceitfully
for him?

In your sixth Sextion, as you speak comfortably to the young believers in
Christ, who are constant in their good willing endeavors, that their good
works are acceptable to God in Christ, though for the present they are not
wholly unblamable; and do truly affirm, That the Lord is pleased to reward also
that which is sincere in them, though accompanied with many weaknesses and
imperfections; yet your sayings in that Section are so accompanied also.

First, In that you speak that the works of believers are accepted for their
persons, the contrary whereof may be truly asserted, that the persons are
accepted for their works wrought in them by Christ. Revelations 3.8. I know thy
works; behold I have set before thee an open door, and no man shall shut it;
for thou have a little strength, and have kept my word, and have not denied my
name. And verse 10. Because thou have kept my word, I will also keep thee from
the hour of temptation, which shall come upon all the world, to try then that
dwell upon Earth.

Secondly, In that you say, That the works of the best grown Saints in this
life, are not wholly unblameable, and unreproveable in the sight of God.

Thirdly, In your affirmation, That the unperfect works of the Saints are
accepted in Christ, though they remain such all our life long; which is not
true, of those who have both time and means to aim at perfection it self,
Hebrews 5.12, 13, 14. with Hebrews 6.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, etc. 2 Peter 1.8 9.

Lastly, Whereas you imply, That bare sincerity will carry out the Saints,
though they remain imperfect in their obedience all their life long; it is a
great mistake, for the Lord requires growth answerable unto the grace, means,
and space offered unto men, even of them who are sincere already. 1 Peter 1.22.
Seeing you have purified your souls in obeying the truth, ( under the
obedience of Love, says the old Latin Translation) to the unfeined love of
the Brethren; see that ye love one another, with a pure heart fervently.

But as you have here, and elsewhere weakened the hands of the regenerate, in
the work of perfecting their obedience and good works; so you have animated
the unregenerate in their way of working that which is good in your seventh and
last Section; where you say, and that truly. That the neglect of what they can
do in this kind, is more sinful, and displeasing to God, then the doing of
such things which for matter are commanded in the word; where by the way you
hint what are the requisite things which should concur to the making up of a
good work, viz. That they have the word for their rule, faith for their
efficient, a purified heart for their fountain, the Glory of God for their end;
where only your main efficient is wanting, the spirit, and power of God.

Yet thus much we must advertise you of, that many of those whom you account to
be moral men, and Heathens, do act out of Conscience, enlightened, and the
grace of regeneration also, as Abimilech seems to have done, Genesis 20.1.6.
Job, Rabah, the widow of Sarepta, and others did.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Perseverance of the Saints.
THEY whom God has accepted in his beloved, effectually called, and sanctified
by his Spirit, neither totally, nor finally can fall away from the state of
Grace; but shall certainly persevere therein unto the end, and be eternally
saved Phil: 1: 6. 2 Pet: 1.10 John 10.28 29. 1 John: 3.9. 1 Pet: 1.5.
.

II. This perseverance of the Saints depends not upon their own free will, but
upon the immutability of the Decree of Election flowing from the free and
unchangeable love of God the Father 2 Timothy: 2.18, 19. Jer: 31.3.
; upon the efficacy of the merit, and intercession of Jesus Christ Heb: 10.10,
14. Heb: 13.20 21. Heb: 9.12, 13, 14, 15. Rom: 8.23 to the end John 17.11, 14.
Luke 22.32. Heb: 7.25.
; the abiding of the spirit, and of the seed of God within them John 14.16, 17.
John 2.27. 1 John 3.^.
; and the nature of the covenant of grace Jer: 32.40.
; from all which arises also the certainty and infallibility thereof John
10.28.
.

III. Nevertheless, they may through the temptations of Satan, and the World,
the prevalency of corruption remaining in them, and the neglect of the means of
their preservation, fall into grievous sins Mat: 26.70, 72, 74.
: and for a time continue therein Psalm 51 title, and verse 14.
; whereby they incur Gods displeasure Isa: 64.5, 7, 9. 2 Samuel: 11.27.
, and grieve his holy Spirit Ephesians: 4.30.
, come to be deprived of some measure of their graces and comforts Psalm: 51.8,
10, 12. Revel: 2.4. Cant: 5 2.3, 4, 5.
have their hearts hardened Isa: 63.17. Mark 6.52. Mark 16.14.
, and their consciences wounded Psalm 32.3, 4. Psalm 51.8.
, hurt and scandalize others 2 Samuel: 12.14.
, and bring temporal judgments upon themselves Psalm 89.31, 32. 1 Cor:
11.30.32.
.

CHAP. XVII. Of the perseverance of the Saints, examined
PErseverance follows good works here in due order; for it is in them that the
Saints must persevere: howbeit we find in you a constancy which we cannot
commend, for you persist in doctrine, tending to security.

In your third chapter of Gods eternal decree, you make some presume, and
others to despair, teaching that Gods decree of life, and death, is both
particular, and absolute.

In your ninth, and tenth chapters, you make men stupid by denying us al use of
our wills, and setting forth Gods work to be irresistible in our first
conversion; and here you sow pillows under men's arm-holes, in saying, That true
converts cannot possibly fall away from grace. We grant indeed that this
controversy about the perseverance of the Saints, without greater light then
for a long time appeared in the world, was not like to be decided in have: for
it was not only agitated betwixt Protestants and Papists, but with intestine
debate by the dessenting Doctors of each Church, and that with seeming evidence
of Scriptures on both sides; So that great need there was of a Moderator to be
sent from Heaven for the composing of this, and manifold other most intricate
controversies besides; by reason of the returning darkness which after the
Apostasy from the faith, had overspread the Churches, each side also haling the
Scriptures, velut obtorto collo, to plead their cause: Howbeit if our eyes had
not been holden, we might easily have observed that the Scriptures do
distinguish both the Saints, and their privileges; and that as some of those
prerogatives are common to all, and such is a possibility of not falling away
from God, totally, and finally, if they continue steadfast in their faith and
obedience, or after some slips rise up by repentance, Psalm. 15.5. 2 Pet. 1.10.
So some others are peculiar to the Saints of the third form, who have followed
Christ both unto his death, and resurrection, and such is the prerogative of
final perseverance, or of impossibility to be deceived, or seduced, Mot. 24.24.
And though God is constant in his love, and assistance of grace; yet even his
called ones may by their inconstancy, and wilful revolt from him, alienate his
heart from them irrecoverably, as David well knew, and warned his Solomon
accordingly, 1 Chro. 28.9. So true is that which the Prophet Azariah spoke to
Asa and his people, 2 Chro. 15 2. Hear ye me Asa, and all Judah and Benjamin,
the Lord is with you, while you be with him, if you seek him, he will be found
of you; but if you forsake him he will forsake you. There is indeed a Covenant
made with David and his seed of constant continual, and everlasting mercy, 2 Samuel 7.14, 15. Psa. 89.28, 37. Therefore is this called, The sure mercies of
David, Isa. 55.3. but who are these children of David? not his seed after the
flesh, who have been long forsaken, Psa. 89.35, 36, 37. but that spiritual seed
of Abraham and David also, who are constant in their good will toward God and
righteousness, as we said before, (...). Luke 2.14. And peace upon earth to
good willing men.

But now to take a survey of your particular Sections: In the very entrance of
the first, you show that blindness is broken in upon the Churches.

First, In that you set Gods accepting of us in his beloved, before effectual
calling, as precedent whether in time, or eternity; to which last you incline:
whereas we are made accepted in his beloved Son, after we are called, and
brought to obey him; yea in some manner sanctified by him, and not before.

And secondly, In that you affirm of all the called ones and Saints in general,
that they shall certainly persevere to the end, contrary to many express
Scriptures, some whereof were before produced.

First, that of the unclean spirit, which with set on worse then himself,
returned to his old house again, Mat. 12.43, 44, 45. And that Romans 11, 22.
Behold therefore the goodness and severity of God on them that fell severity,
but toward thee goodness, if thou continue in his goodness, otherwise thou
also shall be cut off. That 1 Timothy 1.19. Holding faith and a good conscience
which some having put away, concerning faith have made shipwreck. That of 1 Timothy 5.12. Having damnation because they have forsaken their first faith, and
verse 15. For some are already turned aside after Satan. See 2 Timothy 1.15. Heb
6.2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Nor can these places following be fully answered to the worlds
end, Ezekiel. 18.24. But when the righteous turns away from his righteousness,
and commits iniquity, and does according to all the abominations that the
wicked man does, shall he live? etc. Heb. 10.26, 27, 18. for if we sin
wilfully after we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remains no
more sacrifice for sin, but a certain fearful looking for of judgment, and
fiery indignation which shall devour the adversaries; He that despised Moses
Law, dyed without mercy under two or three witnesses. Of how much sorer
punishment shall he then be thought worthy that has trodden under foot the Son
of God, and counted the blood of the Covenant, wherewith he was sanctified an
unholy thing, and has done despite to the Spirit of Grace. See verse 39. 2
Pet. 2.20, 21, 22. Jude verse 12. Revel. 3.2, 3.

In your second Section, almost every assertion is erroneous, and false as
follows.

First you say, but most untruly, That the Saints perseverance depends not at
all upon their free will: For did not Christ himself after some of his former
Disciples were departed from him, ask the twelve Apostles, Will ye also go
away, Joh. 6.27. Intimating that he holds no man against his, but they by the
abuse of their free will might uncompelledly leave him, yet at their own peril,
as Judas, one of them afterward did; what was the true reason that Peter in
his fall was pittyed, and by our Savior not only prayed for, but helped up
again, but because he was constant in his good will, as our Savior testifies
of him, and some others with him, Mat. 26.45. The spirit indeed is willing, but
the flesh is weak.

Secondly, That the perseverance of the Saints depends upon the immutability of
the decree of Gods election, whereas we have proved before, that Gods general
election of man is conditional; and as for his special election, it depends
upon foreseen perseverance, and not perseverance upon it, and so does Gods
last, and final election, as we showed before also.

Thirdly, That this perseverance depends upon the unchangeable love of God;
which as we have showed, may by our unworthiness, unthankfulness, and Apostasy
be changed into wrath, yea hatred, Deuteronomy. 32.19. And when the Lord saw it, he
abhorred them, because of the provoking of his Sons, and of his daughters.

Fourthly, you say, It depends upon the efficacy of the merit, and intercession
of Christ; but he makes intercession for none to obtain the Grace of
perseverance, but such as continue steadfast in their good will which they had
to the Father, and him; as we see he prayed not for the Apostate Judas, Jo.
17.8, 9, 10. Although he with a general intercession prayed for the
unregenerate, even for his enemies, Luke 23.34. and taught us by his Apostles
to pray for all men, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2, 3, 4.

Fifthly you say truly, "It depends upon the abiding of the Spirit in us: But
does not that abode of the Spirit, depend upon our constancy in faith and good
will, and upon our giving ear to it, when after our falls, and slips, it
reproves, admonishes, and teaches us anew. Hence we are charged not to grieve
the Holy Spirit, Ephesians. 4.30. Least he should depart, Heb. 10.38. Now the Just
shall live by faith, but if any man draw back my soul shall have no pleasure in
him.

Sixthly you say, "It depends upon the seed of God remaining in us, but that
seed remains in none unremoveably, but those which are born again in Christ
after the Spirit, or the Saints of the third form and order, of whom it is said
peculiarly, 1 John 3.9. That they cannot sin. For all other Saints those of the
second form, Saints and believers in Christ, which are not yet dead, and made
alive again with him, may and do sin as well, though not so often, as the
Saints of the first form, or the fathers new begotten ones.

Lastly you say here, That this certainty of perseverance depends upon the
nature of the covenant of grace, of which there are two parts, the one
promises cleansing grace in and through the blood, and Spirit of Christ; the
other a steadfast, and immovable kingdom, to those that are so cleansed.

See for the first, Jerem. 31.32, 33, 34, etc. and for the others, Jere. 32.40.
but all this is promised conditionally to those that believe, Mat. 28.18, 19.
Mark. 16.15, 16. to such as persevere unto the end, Mat. 24.13. and to him that
overcomes, Revel. 3.12. So that the steadfast estate and kingdom which cannot
be shaken depends upon perseverances in mortification, and our immovable
estate upon the receiving of that Kingdom.

Yet do we not deny but that the perseverance of the Saints whereby, they
continue in the following of Christ unto their death, and their infallible
estate from which they cannot afterward possibly fall away, has very great
dependence upon all the things by you named, but in such manner as we have
spoken.

In your third and last Section, you err first on the one hand, and then on
the other.

For first, Whereas you ascribe unto all the Saints upon earth promiscuously a
possibility of falling into grievous sins by temptations from Satan, and the
world, the prevalency of remaining corruption, and neglect of the means of
their preservation, whereby they may incur Gods displeasure, grieve his Spirit,
suffer some deprivation of their graces, and comforts, harden their hearts,
wound their consciences, hurt and scandalize others, and bring temporal
judgments upon themselves.

We say, That the Saints in the Holy Ghost that are risen again with Christ,
are past all this, 2 Cor. 5.12. Old things are passed away, behold all things
are become new, 1 John 3.9. He that is born of God does not commit sin, but his
seed remains in him, and he cannot sin, because he is born of God. See Revel.
2.17, 26, 27. Revel. 3.9, 10, 11, 12. Revel. 7.14, 15, 16, 17. Revel. 21.3, 4,
5, 6. And I heard a great voice from heaven, saying, Behold the Tabernacle of
God is with men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and
God himself shall be with them, and be their God, and God shall wipe away all
tears from their eyes, and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow nor
crying, neither shall there be any pain (to wit spiritual pain) for the former
things are passed away.

But on the other hand any other Saint, those especially which are in their
minority may possibly by the means aforesaid not only fail, and suffer,
after the manner aforesaid, but by their wilful and wicked desertion of God,
fall finally from grace, into everlasting perdition, and yet no one of those
can be plucked out of the Fathers hand, by all the enemies of mankind, if he
will abide with God, and his Christ, John 10.28.29. But how much safer had it
been for you, and your hearers, if in stead of your thus securing the Saints,
you had with Saint Paul, charged them to work out their salvation with fear and
trembling, as we said before, and with holy David, had showed them, what they
should do that they might be kept from falling finally, Psalm 15.1, 2, 3, 4.
and to have set Saint Peter's scale before them for the same end likewise, 2
Pet. 1.5.10. The high way to that kingdom which cannot be shaken, is to get
grace into our hearts, whereby we may serve God with Reverence and godly fear,
Heb. 12.28.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the assurance of Grace and salvation.
ALthough hypocrites, and other unregenerate men, may vainly deceive themselves
with false hopes, and carnal presumptions of being in the favor of God, and
state of salvation Joh: 8.13, 14. Mich: 3.11. Deuteronomy: 29.19. Jo: 8.41.
, which hope of theirs shall perish Matt 7.22, 23.
, yet such as truly believe in the Lord Jesus, and love him in sincerity,
endeavoring to walk in all good conscience before him, may in this life be
certainly assured that they are in the state of grace Joh: 3.14, 18.19, 21, 24.
Jo: 5.13.
, and may rejoice in the hope of the glory of God, which hope shall never make
them ashamed To: 5.2, 5
.

II. This certainty is not a bare conjectural, and probable persuasion,
grounded upon a fallible hope Heb: 6, 1^, 19.
but an infallible assurance of faith founded upon the Divine truth of the
promises of salvation Heb: 6, 17, 18.
, the inward evidences of those graces unto which these promises are made 2
Pet: 1.4, 5, 10, 11, 1 John: 2.3. 1 John: 3.14. 2 Cor: 1.12.
, the testimony of the Spirit of Adoption, witnessing with our spirits that we
are the children of God To: 8.15.16.
, which spirit is the earnest of our inheritance, whereby we are sealed to the
day of Redemption Ephesians: 3.13.14. Ephesians: 4.30. 2 Cor: 1, 21, 22.
.

III. This infallible assurance does not so infallibly belong to the essence of
faith, but that a true believer may wait long, and conflict with many
difficulties before he be partaker of it 1 Jo. 5 13. Isa: 50.10. Mar: 9.14.
Psalm: 88. througho. Psalm: 77. to v. 12. 1 Cor: 2.14. 1 John: 4.13. Heb. 6.11,
12, Ephesians: 3.17, 18, 19.
, yet being enabled by the Spirit to know the things, which are freely given
him of God, he may without extraordinary revelation in the right use of
ordinary means, attain thereunto 1 Cor: 2.12 Jo: 4.13. Heb: 6.11, 12 Ephesians:
3.17, 18, 19.
; and therefore it is the duty of every one to give all diligence, to make his
calling, and Election sure 2 Pet. 1.10.
, that thereby his heart may be enlarged in peace and joy in the Holy Ghost, in
love, and thankfulness to God, and in strength, and cheerfulness in the duties
of obedience, the proper fruits of the assurance To: 5: 1, 2, 5. Rom: 14.17.
To: 15.3. Ephesians: 1.3, 4. Psa. 4.6, 7. Psa: 119 32.
, so far is it from inclining men to looseness 1 Jo: 2.12. To: 6.1, 2. Tit: 2:
11, 12, 14. 2 Cor: 7.1. Rom: 8.1, 12. 1 Jo: 3.1, 2. Ps: 130.4. 1 John 1.6, 7.
.

IV. True believers may have the assurance of their salvation diverse ways
shaken, diminished, and intermitted; as by negligence in preserving of it, by
falling into some special sin which wounds the conscience, and grieveth the
Spirit, by some sudden, and vehement Temptation, by Gods withdrawing the light
of his countenance, and suffering even such as fear him, to walk in darkness,
and have no light Cant: 5.2, 3, 6. Psalm: 51.8, 12, 14. Ephesians: 14.30, 31. Psa:
77.1. to the 10. Mat: 26 69, 70, 71, 72. Psalm. 31.22. Psalm. 88. throughout
Isaiah 50.10.
, yet are they never utterly destitute of that seed of God, and life of faith,
that love of Christ, and the brethren, that sincerity of heart, and conscience
of duty, out of which by the operation of the spirit, this assurance may in due
time, be revived 1 John 3.9. Luke 22.32. Job 13.15. Psalm 73.15. Psalm 51.12.
Isaiah 50.10.
; and by the which in the mean time, they are supported from utter despair
Micha 7.7, 8, 9. Jeremiah 32.40. Isaiah 54.7, 8, 9. Psalm 22.1. Psalm 88.
throughout.
,

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Assurance of grace and salvation, examined.
IN your title or inscription of this Chapter you have joined two things
together which are not always inseparable. For the assurance of Grace for the
present, may be without certainty of salvation, for the future, but the
infallibility of the last always presupposes the former.

Here we cannot but commend your method, for the assurance of Salvation has
such close and immediate dependence upon perseverance in obedience, and grace,
that that where the former is but conditional, and possible, this latter is so
likewise; but where the other is certain, this follows it in infallibility.

And hence it will necessarily follow, that wherein you were mistaken in the
former; you must unavoidably err in this latter: how be it many things which
you here set forth have good assurance of truth, as those things in your first
Section.

That hypocrites and other unregenerate men may vainly deceive themselves with
false hopes, and carnal presumptions of being in the favor of God, and estate
of salvation, and that the hope of such shall perish; But remember we pray you,
that as privy hypocrites can have no such hopes; so some which take themselves
to be no hypocrites (because they serve God in outward duty and forms, yet are
strangers to the ways of everlasting righteousness) will be found in this
number of vain hopes at the last, Matthew 7.21, 22, 23. Luke. 13.25, 26.27. 2 Timothy 3.5.

It is true also which you there say in the next place of assurance, That such
as truly believe in Christ (which are only they that seek sanctification from
him, to make them new creatures, as well as deliverance from hell, or an
outward happiness in heaven) and love him in sincerity, endeavoring to walk in
all good conscience before him, may in this life be certainly assured that they
are in the state of grace, yea that such also may rejoice in the hope of the
glory of God, but where you add in ^he close of the Section, That this their
hope shall never make them ashamed; we cannot close with you, unless you put in
this proviso which the Apostle speaks of, Romans 5.5. That the love of God be
and remain shed abroad in your hearts, which we understand of a constant, and
active love; Thus the Apostle promises salvation to the weaker sex also 1 Timothy
2.15. Notwithstanding she shall be saved in child bearing, if they continue in
faith, love, and holiness, with sobriety. It is to perseverance that the
promises are made of final salvation.

In your second Section you say, That the assurance of hope is founded.

First upon Gods promises; where you might have added his oath also, Heb, 6.12,
13, 14, 15.

Secondly upon the inward evidence of these graces (you should have said those
conditions) unto which the promises are made.

And thirdly upon the witnessing of the Spirit of Adoption with our spirits
that we are the children of God.

But mark here we pray you first, that while the conditions of the promises,
are but a fulfilling, and not fully performed, our hopes, and assurances are
but conditional.

And 2. that as the spirit of Adoption is given us, but conditionally at the
first, so it bears witness with our spirit accordingly, speaking peace while
we carry our selves as children, reproving us when we rebel, and departing from
us when we remain incorrigible, Isa. 63.8, 9, 10 For he said surely they are my
people, children that will not err, so he was their Savior, In all their
affliction he was afflicted, and the Angel of his presence saved them, in his
love, and in his pity he redeeemed them, he hare them and carried them all the
days of old. But they rebelled and vexed his holy Spirit, therefore he was
turned to be their enemy, and be fought against them.

Yea the Apostle in the same place where he speaks of our Adoption, and the
Spirit of Adoption bearing witness with our spirits, declares that at the first
it is but a conditional estate, Romans 8.15, 16; 17. as we showed before; Chap.
12. The same we likewise spoke concerning the earnest of the spirit, whereby we
are sealed unto the day of redemption; for as some Deeds are fealed only as
skrols, to confirm a bargain when conditions are performed, so it is with the
earnest, and first sealing of the spirit, but when the conditions are fulfilled
in our dying with Christ, then the spirit seals men finally and absolutely,
and becomes the promised comforter, which shall abide with the Saints for ever,
Romans 8.13. 2 Titus 2.11, 12. Jo. 7, 38, 39. Act. 2.38. Jo. 14.17.

In your third Section you say truly, That this infallible assurance does not
belong to the essence of faith; where we will be bold to add, that it
pertains not to faith, but is an estate, which comes after that says in
Christ has done its office in purifying our hearts from sin, and not before:
Yet may a conditional hope, yea assurance be attained bef^^e, by the means
which you there set forth, and that without extraordinary revelation, yea that
conditional assurance may be of excellent use for the ends, and intents here by
you remembered, and how much more that absolute assurance which is the
concomitant, and fruit of Gods inward kingdom when it comes unto us in power;
of which the Prophet speaks thus, Isa. 32.15, 16, 17. Until the spirit be
poured upon us from on high, and the wilderness be a fruitful field, and the
frui^^ul field, counted for a forest, Then judgment shall dwell in the
wilderness; and righteousness remain in the fruitful field, And the work of
righteousness shall he peace, and the effect of righteousness, quietness, and
assurance for ever: which assurance when it is absolute will not incline men
unto looseness, as you there speak, but a false persuasion that it is absolute
when it is not, may make men remiss, yea secure, and loose also.

And how much more will your former doctrine which in this behalf we blamed do
it, by natural consequences, if Gods grace interpose not to the contrary.

As to your last Section, we grant that the inchoated, and conditional
assurance of believers may be either shaken, and diminished, or afterward
being taken in due time, may be recovered, and revived by the respective means,
which you here set forth.

Yea whatsoever you here surmise to the contrary, as we have proved, it may be
finally, and irrecoverably lost, by security, presumptuous rebellions, final
and total Apostasy. See 2 John 8. Look to your selves that we lose not those
things which we have wrought, Rev. 3.11. Hold that fast which thou have, that
no man take thy crown.

But the absolute and final assurance of which we speak, is neither subject to
shaking, nor any diminution, and much less to a total and final amission; as
the place before cited proves.

For when a man attaines to that estate, his seed remains in him, and can
never be lost, as we said before, 1 John 3.9. See Revelations 3.12. Him that
overcomes will I make a pillar in the temple of my God, and he shall go no
more out, etc. And I will write upon him the name of my God, and the name of
the City of my God, which is new Jerusalem, that comes down out of heaven from
my God, and I will write upon him my new name, and verse 8.10. of that Chapter,
Jeremy 32.40. John 14.16, 23. Hebrews 17.28. Revelation 7.14, 15, 16, 17.
Revelation 21.3, 4, 5, 6. Wherefore we ought (as you say in your former
Section) to give all diligence to make our calling and Election sure, 2 Pet.
1.10. as neither of which is sure or absolute at the first.

And this we must do not by searching out certain marks, and tokens, which
proves us to be in some estate of grace, but by adding virtue to virtue, and a
spiritual progress even to the end, 2 Peter 15, 6, 7, 8, 9. Wherefore add unto
your faith, virtue, and to virtue, knowledge, and to knowledge temperance, and
to temperance, patience, and to patienece godliness, and to godliness brotherly
kindnesss, and to brotherly kindness, love, where the Apostle sets forth seven
steps of spiritual progress beyond says, which you take to be the highest
estate of grace in this life, and then adds this encouragement upon our
respective proceeding, verse 12. For so an entrance shall he abundantly
Ministered unto you, into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord, and Savior Jesus
Christ.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Law of God.
GOD gave to Adam a Law, as a covenant of works, by which he bound him, and all
his posterity to personal, entire, exact, and perpetual obedience, promised
life upon the fulfilling, and threatened death upon the breach of it Gen: 1.26,
27. with Gen: 2.17. To: 2.14, 15. Rom: 10.5. Gal: 3.10, 11. Eccl: 7.^9. Act:
2^.28.
.

II. This Law after his fall continued to be a perfect rule of righteousness,
and as such was delivered by God upon mount Sinai, in ten commandments, and
written in two Tables Jam: 1.25. Jam: 2.8, 10, 11, 12. To: 13.8, 9. Deuteronomy: 5.32.
Deuteronomy: 10.8. Exo: 34.1.
. The four first commandments containing our duty toward God, and the other six
our duly toward man Mat: 22.37, 38, 39, 40.
.

III. Besides this Law Commonly called moral, God was pleased to give to the
people of Israel, as a Church under age, ceremonial Laws, containing several
Typical ordinances, partly of worship, prefiguring Christ his graces, actions,
sufferings, and benefits Heb: 9. c. Heb: 10.1. Col: 2.17. Ga: 4.1, 2, 3.
, and partly, holding forth many instructions of moral duties 1 Cor: 5.7. 2
Cor: 6.17. Jud. v. 23.
, all which ceremonial Laws are now abrogated under the New Testament Col.
2.14, 15, 16. Dan: 9.27. Ephesians: 2.15: 16.
.

IV. To them also as a body Politic he gave sundry Judicial Laws, which
expired together with the state of that people, not obliging any other now
further, then the general equity thereof may require Exodus: 21. chapter Ex: 22.1, to
29. Gen: 9.10 with 1 Pet: 2: 13, 14. Mat: 5.17. with v. 38, 39 1 Cor: 9.8, 9,
10.
.

V. The moral Law does for ever bind all as well Justified persons as others
to the obedience thereof To: 13.8, 9, 10. Ep: 6.2. 1 John: 2.3, 4, 5, 6.
, and that not only in regard of the matter contained in it, but also in
respect of the authority of God the Creator, who gave it Jam: 2.10, 11.
; neither does Christ in the Gospel any way dissolve, but much strengthen this
obligation Mat: 517, 18.19. Jam: 2.8. Rom: 3.31.
.

VI. Although true believers be not under the Law, as a Covenant of works to be
thereby justified, or condemned To: 6.14. Gal: 2.16. Gal: 3.13. Gal: 4.4, 5.
Act: 13.39. Rom: 8.1.
, yet it is of great use to them, as well as to others in that as a rule of
life informing them of the will of God, and their duty, it directs and binds
them to walk accordingly To: 7.12, 22, 25. Psa: 119.4, 5, 6. 1 Cor: 7.19. Gal:
5 14, 16, 18, 19, 20, 21, 21.
, discovering also the sinful pollutions of their natures, hearts, and lives
To: 7.7. To: 3.20.
, so that examining themselves thereby, they may come to further conviction of
humiliation for, and hatred against sin Jam: 1.23, 24, 25. To: 7, 9, 14, 23.
, together with a clearer sight of the need they have of Christ, and the
perfection of his obedience Gal: 3 24. Rom: 7.24, 25. Rom: 1.3, 4.
. It is likewise of use to the regenerate to restrain their corruptions, Jam:
2.11. Psalm: 119.101, 104, 128
in that it forbids sin, and the threatening of it serve to show what even their
sins deserve, and what afflictions in this life they may expect for them,
although freed from the curse thereof, threatened in the Law Ezra: 9.13, 14.
Psa: 89.30, 31, 32, 33, 34.
. The promises of it in like manner, show them Gods approbation of obedience,
and what blessings they may expect upon the performance thereof Lev: 36.1. to
15, with 2 Chr: 6.16. Ephesians: 6 2, 3. Psa: 37.11:
. Although not as due to them by the Law, as a Covenant of works Gal: 2.16.
Luk: 17.19.
; So as a man doing good, and refraining from evil, because the Law encourages
to the one, and deterreth from the other, is no evidence of his being under the
Law, and not under grace Rom: 6.12, 14. 1 Pet: 3.8, 9, 10, 11, 12 with Psalm:
34, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. Heb: 12.28, 29. --
.

VII. Neither are the forementioned uses of the Law contrary to the Grace of
the Gospel, but do sweetly comply with it Gal. 3.21.
, the spirit of Christ, subduing, and inabling the will of man, to do that
freely, and cheerfully which the will of God, revealed in the Law requires to
be done Exek: 36.27. Heb: 8.10, with Jer: 31.33.
.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Law of God. examined.
TRuth it self has no such cause to wage Law with you here as elsewhere, most
of those things which you have here set forth, especially concerning the moral
law being legal, just, and true (though herein you contradict your selves in
other places) yet you have here and there your illegalities, and mistakes also
in this Chapter.

In your first Section you truly say, That God gave to Adam and all his
Posterity, such a Law, and covenant of works as you describe, with power and
ability to keep it: And is he not the same God still in wisdom, mercy and
justice; requiring nothing at any man's hand, but what he will enable him to do
by his preventing or assisting grace, if he seek it?

In your second Section you say, and that truly, That the Law given to Adam,
being the same in effect with the Moral! Law delivered upon mount Sinai,
continued to be a perfect rule of Righteousness: Nor must the Israel of God
think to obtrude upon the Lord any other acceptable righteousness for ever,
then is therein required and described, Deuteronomy. 6.24, 25. And the Lord commanded
us to do all these statutes, to fear the Lord our God for our good always,
that he might preserve us alive as it is this day. And it shall be our
righteousness if we observe to do all these Commandments before The Lord our
God, as he has commanded us: Psalm 119.144. the righteousness of his
testimonies is everlasting: For the performing of which righteousness, because
it was become impossible to the fallen Man, Christ is freely bestowed upon us,
Romans 8.3, 4. And so it is the end and drift of the law to send us unto Christ,
to seek our power, wisdom and righteousness from him; Romans 10.4. Gal. 3.22, 23,
24.

But whereas you say in the end of that Section, That the four first
Commandments contain our duty toward God; and the six last our duty to Man:
Perhaps it will prove a distribution more common then sound. For as the whole
Law is spiritual, Romans 7.14. so it seems first to require duty toward God in
all the ten Commandments, and then to call for Service toward men in the second
place.

For the first four Commandments (which St Augustine, and some of the Ancients
reduce to three only) your selves do not deny it; Let us then take a view of
the rest. Does not the fifth Commandment enjoin us first of all to honor our
heavenly Father; and the Wisdom, or Jerusalem from above, our spiritual
Mother; 1 Samuel 2.20. For them that honor me, I will honor; Mal. 1.6. If I
then be a Father, where is mine honor? Matthew. 11.19. But Wisdom is justified
of her children, so Luke 7.35. Gal. 4.26. But Jerusalem which is from above is
free, which is the Mother of us all, Prove. 7.4. Say unto Wisdom thou art my
Sister, and call understanding thy Kinswoman.

Does not the sixth Commandment forbid spiritual murder in the first place,
to wit the killing of Christ, the quenching of the Spirit, and the destroying
of the inward messengers, and motions? Jam. 5.6. Ye have condemned, and killed
the just one, and he resists you not, Ephesians. 4.30. And grieve not the holy
Spirit, 1 Thessalonians. 5.19. Quench not the Spirit, Thus the Apostles complains of
the Apostates that they crucify afresh the Son of God, and put him to an open
shame, Heb. 6.6.

Does not the seventh Commandment, first prohibit spiritual whoredom against
God? Hos. 4.15. Though thou Israel play the harlot, yet let not Judah offend,
Jam. 4.4. Ye adulterers, and adulteresses, etc.

Does not the eighth precept, first restrain us from theft and robbery against
God? Malac. 3.8. Will a man rob God? but ye have robbed me. Romans 2.22. Thou
that abhorrest Idols, do thou commit sacrilege? See Act. 12.22. in Herod's
example.

Does not the ninth also, first inhibit a false testimony against the Lord?
Jeremy 5.12. They have belyed the Lord, and said it is not he, 1 Cor. 15.15.
Yea, and we are found false witnesses of God, etc.

Yea though the tenth commandment may seem to lay restraint upon us only in
the behalf of our neighbor, yet who has so near vicinity to us as God in whom
we live, move, and have our being, so that not only an open these against him,
in taking that which belongs to him as Achon did, but even to assume, or once
desire that which belongs unto the Lord, is impious, as we see in Herod, who
took, and consequently affected the glory that was due to God, Acts 12.22, 23.
Nor does the Lord want a house, Isa. 56.7. Mat. 21.12, 13, 14. Nor is he
destitute of a wife, Ezekiel. 16.8. And I swear unto thee, and entered into a
Covenant with thee says the Lord, and thou becamest mine See Re. 2. or of men
servants and maid servants, Psa. 116.16. Truly, O Lord, I am thy servant and
the son of thine handmaid. Nor is he without his Oxen, and Asses, 2 Cor. 9.10.
Mat. 21.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. which if they be alienated from him in our desires, it
is a sin of concupiscence-against the last Commandment.

So that it is most true in this regard which Saint James speaks, chap. 2.10.
For whosoever shall keep the whole low, and yet offends in one point, is
guilty of all; for any one sin against God breaks all the Commandments: It is
Idolatry, witcheraft, murder, adultery, etc. 1 Samuel 5.15.23.

And as the six last. first oppose sin against God; so the four first in the
second place restrain sins against man.

Thus we may not impose a false God upon our neighbor, nor set up a false
worship before him, nor swear falsely to his hurt, nor by profaning the Lords
Sabbath, or everlasting rest, before our neighbor, ensnare his soul: And what
we speak of the negativepart, is true of the affirmative, or possitive,
throughout all the Commandments, so that the great duty of love to God, and
our neighbor, seems to run through the veins of every Commandment. And as
these two are inseparable in the new creature, so the whole Law by the Apostles
own Testimony, is fulfilled in this one Commandment, Thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self, Romans 13.8. Gal. 5.14. which cannot hold true, except the
Lord be our first neighbor, who is to be loved in the first place; and surely
if we should not offer that wrong to God, which we would not admit, were we in
his stead, we should not sin as we do.

In your third Section, you set not forth the whole extent of the Ceremonial
Law which was to represent Christ's inward death, and sufferings, as well as his
outward, He being the Lamb slain in us from the foundation of the world, Rev.
13.8. and to be a document unto us, showing how we must follow him unto eternal
life; Howbeit you seem to go too far in saying, "It is wholly abrogated, now
under the new Testament, for though the costly and burdensome yoke, thereof is
taken from the Gentiles, yet some part of it by the words of the Prophets may
remain in use among the Jews, after their calling, and restoration, Isa.
66.23. And it shall come to pass that from one new moon to another, and from
one Sabbath to another, shall all flesh come to worship before me says the
Lord, Zach. 14.16, etc. And it shall come to pass that every one that is left
of all the Nations that came against Jerusalem shall even go up from year to
year, to worship the King, the Lord of Hosts, etc.

In your fourth Section, you yet seem to digress further from the truth, in
saying, That the judicial law did expire with the state of the Jews; for
doubtless whenever their Commonwealth shall be restored, that Law shall be
revived, yea how far it may now oblige all Christian states to follow, it is
worth your inquiring.

You say, That the general equity of it may still continue; In which words you
recommend the whole upon the matter: for what is there to be found in it, but
equity it self, can ever the Christian Nations hope to find out better
political Laws, then those which first came from Heaven?

Yea what by the Testimony of almost all men were more to be wished for in a
Christian state, then that their Laws might be few in number, just in
themselves, and eafie to be known (as those would be, if they were gathered
into a body) and that such as have controversies might have a speedy dispatch
as in Moses his days?

In your fifth Section you do justly maintain the continued authority and
obligation of the moral Law, over all persons under the Gospel. Where you truly
affirm, That Christ does not any way dissolve but muchst engthen this
obligation, which thing he does by his Doctrine, Mat. 5.16, 17, 18, 19. by his
example, John 15.10. and especially by the end of his coming, which is to
fulfill it in us, Romans 8.3, 4. and not for us (otherwise then we have showed
before) as you in your next Section, partly imply.

In your sixth Section, though you do not show what it is to be under the Law,
yet there you truly set forth many most precious uses of that law, even for the
regenerate.

Nevertheless, you forget a singular piece of service it did them in their
first converson by God their fathers cooperation, when it first made known
their sin and misery unto them, and was their Schoolmaster unto Christ
Galatians 3.22, 23, 24.

At which time while we were under the work of the Law breeding fear of wrath
(for we always remain under the rule of it till it be dead) we were troubled
with the spirit of bondage, which made us justly fear the wrath, and vengeance
to come, Romans 8.15.

And this was the first great bower, and encliner of our wills, to leave our
wicked ways, and keep Gods Commandments, yet an impulsive, out of self love,
and self preservation for the present, till faith in Gods gracious promises did
kindly melt, and charge our hearts to bewail, and leave sin; as also to work
righteousness out of love, and good will to him, that was so gracious towa^ds
us.

And in this sense we may grant you that which you speak of in your seventh,
and last Section of the Spirits subduing our wills, for it is by the work of the
Law that our pride is first brought down, and our strong inclination to sin,
with ou^ utter aversness to righteousness becomes broken in us, but our wills
are sweetly attracted and framed to choose the good, and nil theevil, by the
apprehension of mercy and grace from God, whom in our own sense, and by the
sentence of our own consciences, we deserved nothing but pe^dition: Lo this is
that wise, powerful, and gracious work of God, in the conversion of a sinner,
which you call Gods irresistible working, and yet is nothing less then a
compulsion, though it wants not strong impulsions at the first to work upon our
stiff, yet not inflexible wills.

That these forementioned uses of the Law are not contrary to the grace of the
Gospel, but either make way for the same, or sweetly comply therewith as you
speak in this last Section is undoubtedly true. And therefore the believer
under the Covenant of grace, remains still in some sense under works. But yet
if the Spirit of Christ both can, and usually does subdue our wills, and enable
us freely, and cheerfully to do the will of God, revealed in the law as you
here speak, what lets but that our corruptions may be abolished, our
sanctification perfected, and our obedience to the law made complete,
especially if we seek that grace, contrary to your former doctrines? Yea if
Christ by his Spirit can, and will so fulfill the Law in us (which of the
Saints made perfect in the world to come, you will not deny) what great need
can there be at that time may some say of Christ's outward obedience, to be our
righteousness? But of that sufficiently before.

For a conclusion then of this Chapter, as you here tacitly oppose the
Antinomians, and other such adversaries to the law, so we pray you remember,
that it is upon your own grounds, here and elsewhere, that they desert the Law;
for they thus argue, If Christ has fulfilled the Law for us in his active and
personal obedience to make us completely righteous before God, what need is
there of our obedience to the same? Yea some of them are so bold as to say,
They see not how God in Justice can require obedience to his Law the second
time at our hands, which he has both exacted, and obtained already, from his
Son in our behalf, yea, why should any still perish for their disobedience
against the Law, who yet believed on Christ as some do? Mat. 7.21, 22, 23. Thus
they argue for themselves out of your own principles, so dangerous a thing it
is to lay a sandy foundation in the bottom of the structure. But is not the
keeping of Christ's words, and sayings, and therein the fulfilling of the
Commandments through his grace and help, that immovable rock which he has
commended to every wise builder, for a sure foundatition, Mat. 7.24, 25.

CHAP. XX. Of Christian liberty, and liberty of Conscience.
THE Liberty which Christ has purchased for believers under the Gospel,
consists in their freedom from the guilt of sin, the condemning wrath of God,
the curse of the moral Law Tit: 2.4. 1 Thessalonians: 1.10. Ga: 3.13.
, and in their being delivered from this present evil world, bondage to Satan,
and dominion of sin Gal: 1.4. Col: 1.19. Act: 26.18. To: 6.14.
, from the evil of afflictions, the sting of death, the victory of the grave,
and everlasting damnation To: 8.28. Psa: 119.71. 1 Cor. 15.54, 55, 56, 57. To:
8.1.
, as also in their access to God To: 5.1, 2.
, and their yiedling obedience unto him, not out of slavish fear, but a child
like love, and willing mind Rom: 8.14, 15. 1 John: 4.18.
, All which were common to all believer, under the Law Gal: 3.9, 14
, but under the new Testament, the liberty of Christians is further enlarged,
in their freedom from the yoke of the Ceremonial Law, to which the Jewish
Church was subjected Gal: 4.1, 2, 3, 6, 7: Gal: 5.1: Act: 15.10, 11.
, and in greater boldness of access to the Throne of Grace Heb: 4.14, 16. Heb:
10.19, 20, 21, 22.
, and in fuller communications of the Spirit of God, then believers under the
Law did ordinarily partake of Joh: 7.38, 39. 2 Cor: 3, 13, 17, 19,
.

II. God alone is Lord of the conscience Jam: 4.12. To: 14.4.
; and has left it free from the Doctrines, and commandments of men, which are
in any thing contrary to his word, or beside it in matters of faith, or of
worship Act: 4.19. Act: 5.29. 1 Cor: 7.23. Mat: 23.8, 9, 10. 2 Cor: 1.24. Mat:
15.9.
, so that to believe such doctrines, or to obey such commands out of
conscience, is to betray our liberty of conscience Col. 2.20, 22, 23, Gal:
1.10. Gal: 2.4, 5. Gal: 5.1.
, and the requiring of an implicit faith, and an absolute, and blind
obedience, is to destroy liberty of conscience, and reason also Rom: 10: 17.
To: 14.23. Isa: 8.20. Act: 17.11. Joh: 4.22. Hos: 5.11. Rev: 13.12, 16, 17,
Jer: 8.9.
.

III. They who upon pretense of Christian liberty do practice any sin, or
cherish any lust, do thereby destroy the end of Christian liberty, which is
that being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, we might serve the Lord
without fear, in holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our
life Gal: 5.11. 1 Pet: 2.16. 2 Pet: 2.19. Joh: 8.34. Luk: 1.74, 75.
.

IV. And because the powers which God has ordained, and the liberty which God
has purchased, are not intended by God to destroy, but mutually to uphold, and
preserve one another, they who upon pretense of Christian liberty shall oppose
any lawful power, or the lawful exercise of it, whether it be civil or
Ecclesiastical, resist the ordinance of God Mat: 11.25. 1 Pet. ^.13, 14, 16.
To: 13.1. to 8. Heb: 13.17.
, and for their publishing of such opinions, or maintaining of such practices,
as they contrary to the light of nature, or to the known principles of
Christianity, whither concerning faith, worship, or conversation, or to the
power of godliness, or such erroneous opinions, or practice, as either in their
own nature, or in the manner of publishing, or maintaining them, are
destructive to the external peace, and order which Christ has established in
his Church, they may lawfully be called to account, and proceeded against by
the censures of the Church Rom: (...) 32, with (...) Cor: 5.1, 5, 11, 13 2 Jo:
10.11. 2 These: 3.14 1 Timothy: 6.3, 4, 5. Tit: 1.10, 11, 13. Titus 3.10, with 18,
15, 16, 17. 1 Timothy: 19, 20. Revel: 2.2, 14, 15, 20. Revel: 3.9.
, and by the power of the civil Magistrate Deuteronomy: 13.6, to 12. Rom: 13.3, 4.
with 2 Jo: 10.11. Ezra: 7.23, 25, 26, 27, 28. Revel: 17.12, 16, 17. Nehem:
13.15, 17, 21, 22, 25, 30. 2 Kings 23.5, 6, 9, 20, 21. 2 Chronicles: 34.33. 2 Chronicles:
15.12, 13, 16. Dan: 3.29. 1 Timothy: 2.2. Isa. 49.23. Zach: 13.23.
.

CHAP. XX. Of Christian liberty, and liberty of Conscience examined
THis head of liberty is not now unseasonable when liberty has got such head,
that almost every one affects that freedom which Tully describes Potestas
vivendi ut velis, but if we may use that (...), which we would both give, and
take, you have too much restrained your Christian freedom in your first
Section, and liberty of consciences in your second, contradicted your selves in
your third, and perhaps set the Governors too far at liberty in you fourth, and
last.

In your first Section you fail in three things, first in that your
enumeration of Christian liberties, and freedoms, is to defective: secondly in
that you reckon them up preposterously, and thirdly in that you mistake some of
them you name.

For the first of those, you have first left out our freedom from the bondage,
and bewitchment of carnal wisdom and holiness, Gal. 3.1. Who has bewitched
you, that ye should not obey the truth, 1 Pet. 1 18, 19. Forasmuch as ye know
that ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold, from
your vain conversation received by tradition from your fathers, See Gal. 5.1.
Col. 2.20, 21.

Secondly, The exemption from the great bondage of fear, wherein some are held
all their life long, justly expecting wrath and vengeance, is by you omitted,
Heb. 2.15. And deliver them who through fear of death were all their life time
subject to bondage.

Thirdly, Freedom for Christian Subjects, from the judicial Law as well as from
the ceremonial, by your own confession in the last chapter, especially where
other Laws not contrary to the word of God are imposed upon them, 1 Pet. 2.12,
13, 14, 15, 16.

Fourthly, A liberty to observe and omit some ceremonial Laws, for the edifying
of others and our own peace and indemnity, of which liberty in Christ, the
Apostle speaks expressly; Gal. 2.3, 4. And as he used it himself at Cenchrea,
Acts 18.18. and in circumcising Timothy there, Acts 16.1, 2, 3. and that he did
the like also with the advice of all the Apostles, Acts 21.22, 23, 24. So he
charge that we should let no man condemn us for such things, but either do
them, or omit them as it is required, or expected at our hands, by the people
with whom we are to converse. Col. 2.16, 17. Let no man judge you in meat, or
in drink, or in respect of an holy day, or new moon, or the Sabbath, which are
the shadow of things to come, but the body is of Christ.

Fourthly, You leave out our freedom from sorrow, pain, etc. Revel. 21.4, 7, 17.

Lastly you have omitted the great freedom of the Spirit, when he in fullness is
poured upon the Saints, or when the Jerusalem which is from above descends upon
them, which yet is not a freedom to sin, but an immunity from fin, to walk
with freedom, yea with delight in all the ways of righteousness, Gal. 4 26.
But Jerusalem which is from above is free, which is the mother of us all. 2
Cor. 3.7. Now the Lord is that Spirit, and where the Spirit of the Lord is,
there is liberty.

To which liberties some add two more; one is a license to observe any outward
thing not forbidden in the word of God, which shall be enjoined by
Ecclesiastical, or civil powers, because the things that are without us defile
us not; Thus say they, Paul became all things to all men, that he might win the
more.

To the Jews, he became a Jew, to them that were under the Law, as if he were
still under it: to them that were without Law, as without Law also, being
always under a Law to Christ, 1 Cor. 9.19, 20 21.

And 2dly a liberty to eat of things that had bin offered to Idols, when it
offends not others, 1 Cor. 10.27, 28, 29. If any of them that believe not bid
you to a feast, and ye be disposed to go, whatsoever is set before you eat,
asking no question for conscience sake: But if any man say unto you, this is
offered in sacrifice to Idols, eat it not for his sake that showed it, and for
conscience sake; conscience I say, not thine own, but of others; for why is my
liberty judged of another man's conscience? Yea, some grow so far as to allow a
liberty upon occasion to be present, before an outward Idol without
superstition or adoration in the heart, because that the true believers well
informed, know that such an Idol is nothing in the world, 1 Cor. 8.4. That is
say they, neither such a God as some out of a superstitious devotion would make
it, nor such a Devil, or defiling thing as others out of their superstitious
conceits, and fears would have it to be; this practice they would justify from
Ezekiels presence before Idols, Ezekiel. 8. throughout; and Paul's present
beholding of Idols and Idolaters at Athens, Acts 17, 23. And from the answer
which Elisha gave to Naamaus quaere and scruple, 2 Kings 5.18, 19.

True it is indeed, That the great Idol is the God of this world, and next to
him our lusts and corrupt desires, Col. 3.4. covetousness; but any other thing
by too much esteem, love, or fear of it, or trust, and confidence in it, may be
made an Idol, even our Authors, ministers, and shepherds may be Idolized, Zac.
10.2. Zac. 13.2.

Your second fail in this first Section, as we said, is your preposterous
placing of the Christian liberties which you recite: for you set freedom from
the guilt of sin, the condemning wrath of God, and the curse of the moral Law,
before deliverance from bondage to sin, and Satan, which in order of nature
must go before as we have proved before.

Your third fail is in mistakes, for the sting of death is sin it self, 1 Cor.
15.5, 6. which if it cannot be subdued wholly in this life, as you affirm, then
the sting of death cannot be wholly taken away, or we freed from it here.

So likewise the victory which the Apostle there speaks of, is not that of the
Grave, but of Hell, which is the inward condemnation of conscience, against
both which the Apostle triumphs, With thanksgiving, to God for the victory that
is to be had in Christ Jesus for all true believers.

In your second Section you straighten liberty of Conscience, as much as you
did Christian freedom, in the first, for though the requiring of an implicit
faith, be destructive to Liberty of Conscience, and the imposing of the
doctrines, and precepts of men, upon us, as if they were the commandments of
God (from which your selves are not free, in the next chapter, and elsewhere,
is very injurious likewise; yet the Liberty of Conscience may be diverse other
ways invaded, and infringed.

As first, By violent means to seek to alter conscientious men's judgments, and
their present persuasions; for it is the office of him that is the Lord of
Conscience, To lighten, and change men's minds when, and how he pleases. Phil.
3.15. Let us therefore as many as be perfect be thus minded; and if in any
thing you be otherwise minded, God shall reveal this unto you.

Secondly, By like forcible means, to incite anothe to will, and act, against
his Conscience, and much more by imprisonment, mulcts, terrors, or threats
Romans 14.15, 20, 21. For this is to make him destroy his soul, verse 20, 23.

Thirdly, we may not disturb the peace of men's Consciences, or make their
hearts sad with our invectives, or menacing them causelessly, with terrors
from the Lord, Ezekiel 13.32. Because with lies ye have made the hearts of the
righteous sad, whom I have not made sad, etc.

In your third Section, you do deservedly oppose the practice of any sin, and
the cherishing of any the least sinful lust, upon pretense of Christian
Liberty; But whereas you add, 'That this is to destroy the end of Christian
Liberty; which you there place in two things, deliverance from the hands of our
enemies, and a freedom to serve the Lord without fear in holiness, and
righteousness before him all the days of our life, you in some sort contradict
your selves in calling these the end of our Christian Liberty, which you had in
the first Section made two main parts of our Christian Liberty, as indeed they
are.

In your fourth Section you have set good bounds betwixt the subjects or
subordinates, and the Governors, saying; That they who upon pretense of
Christian Liberty, shall oppose any lawful power or the lawful exercise of it,
whether it be Civil or Eclesiastical resist the Ordinances of God. Wherein your
Doctrine is sound and good, whatever your practice has been or may be to the
contrary: For God is the Author of order, and not of confusion, and he which
has armed superiors according to their state and degree with authority, has
imposed subjection in all lawful things, with many other respective duties upon
the inferiors and subordinates.

It is true likewise, That no such opinions should be published or practices
maintained as are contrary to the light of Nature to the known and received
Principles of Christianity in all Ages, especially those of the Primitive and
purest times, whether they concern Faith, Worship; or Conversation, or are
opposite to the power of Godliness.

But how far the different opinions and judgments of men, may by learned men,
who yet want spiritual eyes, be judged erroneous, prejudicial to the power of
Godliness, either in their own nature, or in the manner of publishing and
maintaining them, we know not.

We are as much for modesty, and sobriety in men, and as far from any thing
that is destructive to the external Peace and Order which Christ has
established in the Church or Common Wealth, as your selves or any other.

But we would not have you assume to your selves, or attribute unto others a
power to lord it over men's Faith and Consciences, especially when men walk
obediently toward those that are in places of Rule and Authority, and live a
Godly, honest, sober, peaceable, and unblamable life.

If Men will do wickedly, and pretend a liberty in Christ so to do, let them be
liable to the sword of Justice for so doing. But far be it from us so much as
by example to draw a weak brother, a Saint and fellow servant of the Lord, whom
no man can accuse, but for his different judgment, to do any thing against
Conscience, whereby he should condemn himself, as the Apostle speaks, Romans
14. How much more ought Governors to be tender, and abstemious in the use of
violent and coercive means, to precipitate men into such perilous and
destructive courses. All Authority is given of God for men's welfare, and much
more for the Preservation, and not the Destruction of the Soul.

But Brethren, you which are so punctual in teaching the Subject his duty to
free your selves from flattery, temporising, or partiallity, might have done
God and his people, yea, the Governors themselves no disservice in minding
them of their duties also, and so setting due limits, and boundaries to their
authority and the exercise of it over their Brethren.

CHAP. XXI. Of Religious Worship and the Sabbath Day.
THE light of Nature shows that there is a God, who has Lordship and
sovereignty over all, is good, and does good unto all, and is therefore to be
feared, loved, praised, called upon, trusted in, and served with all the heart,
with all the soul, and with all the might To: 1.20. Act: 17, 14 Psa: 119.68.
Jer: 7.10. Psalm. 31.23 Psalm: 18.3. To: 10.12. Psalm: 62.8. Josh: 24.14 Mar: 12.33
. But the acceptable way of worshipping the true God, is instituted by himself,
and so limited by his own revealed will, that he may not be Worshipped according
to the imaginations and devises of men, or the suggestions of Satan, under any
visible representation, or any other way not prescribed in holy Scripture Deu:
12.32. Mat: 15.9. Acts 17.25 Mat: 4.9.10 Deuteronomy: 4.15 to 20. Exodus: 20.4, 5, 6.
Col: 2.23.
.

II. Religious Worship is to be given to God, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
and to him alone Mat. 4.10 with John 5.23. and 2 Cor: 13.14
; not to Angels, Saints, or any other creature Col: 2.18 Rev: 19.10 Rom: 1.25.
: and since the fall, not without a Mediator; nor in the mediation of any
other, then of Christ alone Joh: 14.6 1 Timothy 2.5. Ephesians: 2.18. Col: 3.17.
.

III. Prayer, with thanksgiving, being one special part of Religious worship
Phil: 4.16
, it is, by God required of all men Psa: 85.2.
: and that it may be accepted, it is to be made in the name of the Son John
14.13, 14. 1 Pet: 2.5.
, by the help of his Spirit To: 8.26.
, according to his will 1 John: 5.4
, with understanding, reverence, humility, fervency, faith, love, and
perseverance Psa: 47.7. Eccl: 5.12 Heb: 12.28 Gen: 18.27 Jam: 5.16. Jam: 1.6,
7, Mar: 11.24. Mat: 6.12, 14, 15. Col: 4.2: Ephesians: 6.18.
: and if vocal, in a known tongue Cor: 14.14.
.

IV. Prayer is to be made for things lawful Joh: 5.14
, and for all sorts of men living, or that shall live hereafter 1 Timothy: 1.1, 2.
Joh: 17.20. 2 Samuel: 7.29 Rut: 4.12.
: but nor for the dead 2 Samuel: 12.21, 22, 23. with Luke 16.25.26. Rev: 14.13
, nor for those of whom it may be known, that they have sinned the sin unto
death 1 John: 5.5
.

V. The reading of the Scriptures with godly fear Act: 15.21 Rev: 1.3.
, the sound preaching 2 Timothy: 4.2
, and conscionable hearing of the Word, in obedience unto God, with
understanding, faith, and reverence Jam: 1.22 Acts 10.33 Mat: 13.10 Heb: 4.2.
Isa: 66.2.
; singing of Psalms with grace in the heart Col: 3.16 Ephesians: 5.19. Jam: 5.13.
: as also the due administration, and worthy receiving of the Sacraments
instituted by Christ: are all parts of the ordinary Riligious Worship of God
Mat: 28.19. 1 Cor. 11 23, to 29. Acts 2: 12.
: beside Religious Oaths Deuteronomy: 6.13, with Neh: 10.29.
, Vows Isa: 19.21, with Eccles. 5.4, 5.
, Solemn Fastings Joel 2.12. Esther 4.16. Matthew: 9.15. 1 Cor: 7.5.
, and Thanksgivings upon special occasions Psalm: 107. throughout. Esth: 9.12.
, which are in their several times and seasons to be used, in an holy and
religious manner Heb: 12.28.
.

VI. Neither prayer, nor any other part of Religious Worship, is now under the
Gospel, either tied unto, or made more acceptable by any place in which it is
performed, or toward which it is directed Joh: 4.21
; but God is to be Worshipped everywhere Mal: 1.11 1 Timothy: 2.8.
, in Spirit and in Truth Joh: 4, 23 24.
: as in private Families Jer: 10.25 Deu. 6.6.7 Job 1.5: 2 Samuel: 6.18, 20. 1 Pet:
3.7. Acts 10:2.
, daily Mat. 6.11
, and in secret, each one by himself Mat: 6.6. Ephesians: 6.18.
: so more solemnly in the public. Assemblies, which are not carelessly, or
wilfully to be neglected or forsaken, when God by his word or providence
calls thereunto Is: 56.6.7 Heb: 10.25 Pro. 1:20.21, 24. Acts 13.24 Luk: 4.16.
Acts 2.42.
.

VII. As it is the Law of Nature, that in general a due proportion of time be
set apart, for the Worshipping of God: so in his Word, by a positive, Moral, and
perpetual Commandment, binding all men, in all Ages, he has particularly
appointed one day in seven, for a sabbath to be kept holy unto him Exo:
20.8.10.11: Isa: 56.2, 4 5, 6, 7.
: which from the beginning of the World to the resurrection of Christ, was the
last Day of the week; and from the resurrection of Christ, was changed into the
first day of the week Gen: 2.2.3 1 Cor: 16.1, 2. Acts 20.7:
, which in Scripture is called the Lord's Day Rev: 1.10
, and it to be continued to the end of the World, as the Christian Sabbath
Exodus: 20.8, 10. with Mat: 5.17.18.
.

VIII. This Sabbath is then kept holy unto the Lord, when men after a due
preparing of their hearts, and ordering of their common affairs, before hand,
do not only observe an holy rest, all the Day, from their own works, words,
and thoughts about their worldly employment, and recreations Ex: 20.8. Exodus:
16.23, 25, 26, 29.30. Exodus: 31.15, 16, 17. Isa: 58.13. Neh: 13.15, 16, 17, 18,
19, 21, 22.
, but also are taken up the whole time, in the public and private exercises of
his Worship, and in the duties of necessity, and mercy Isa: 58.13 Mat: 12.1, to
13.
.

CHAP. XXI. Of Religious Worship and of the Sabbath Day. examined.
IN the foregoing Chapters you gave us a scantling of your faith, and here you
exhibit a view of your piety or Religion, but as your faith was many ways
unsound; so your Religion for the greatest part will prove a will worship, and
both it and the time you allot thereunto, are so ungrounded, that we can
neither Sabbatize in your worship, nor worship your sabbath with you.

You have here touched many things that concern that worship; as the object,
the rule, the part or subject with which, the supposed matter the Place, and
time of it after your manner, but we cannot but wonder at four things, first
your strange omissions, secondly some truths which break from you at unawares
contradicting what you said before, thirdly your gross mistakes, and lastly
your confident affirming of things most false, and destitute of foundation.

For the first it is no small matter of wonderment to us, that you neither show
us what the worship of God is, nor of what latitude in the general, nor how
many kinds there be of it, nor wherein Gods principal, eternal, and saving
worship lies, especially since the holy Scriptures are so clear in all the
four, which set forth unto us;

First that to worship God is all one as to fear him, serve him, and glorify
him, Mat. 4.10. It is written thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only
shalts thou serve, with Deuteronomy. 6.13, and 10.20. See Revelations 14.7.

Secondly that our obedience to God and his worship in general are of equal
latitude, John 9 13. Now we know that God hears not sinners, but if any man
be a worshiper of him, and do his will, him he hears.

Thirdly that there are many kinds and degrees of divine worship as the worship
of Angels which they owe to God, Psalm. 97.7. Worship him all ye gods, and the
worship due from men, Rev. 19.10. worship thou God. This humane worship is
manifold.

As first, either Typical or real, Romans 7.6. That we should now serve him in
the newness of the Spirit, and not in the oldness of the letter.

Secondly, A glorifying or worshipping him inwardly, and another which is done
only in an outward manner, Isa. 29.13, 14. For as much as this people draw near
unto me with their mouth and with their lips do honor me, but have removed
their heart far from me, and their fear toward me is taught by the precepts of
men, therefore behold I will proceed to do a marvelous work, etc. Matthew, 15.8.
and 7.6, etc.

Thirdly, that there is a primary and secondary Worship, the former instituted
for it self, and accepted in it self: the other, for and in the former only,
Hos. 6.6. For I desired mercy and not sacrifice, and the knowledge of God more
then burnt offerings.

Fourthly and lastly, the primary, immutable, and salutiferous worship of God
(of which you speak no one word either in this your Confession of Faith, or in
your directory for worship in the name of a divine worship) stands in the
following of God and walking with him in his loving and everlasting
righteousness, as these places fully evict, God created man in his own Image
and similitude, Genesis 1.27. to wit, that therein he should serve and worship his
God; and Christ is given for this end, Luke 1.74, 75. That we being delivered
out of the hands of our enemies might serve him without fear, in holiness and
righteousness before him all the days of our life, and not in one day in seven
as you imagine. Thus Enoch walked with God, Genesis 5.24. So did Noah, Genesis 6.9.
Thus God required of Abraham, that he should walk before him, or with him, and
be perfect in that way, Genesis 17.1. this was the Religion that Abraham taught
his family even by Gods own testimony, Genesis 18.19. For I know him that he will
command his children and household after him, and they shall keep the way of the
Lord to do justice and judgment, that the Lord may bring upon Abraham the
thing which he has spoken of him. Thus the Prophets Catechized: and instructed
the people, Micah. 6.6. Wherewithal shall I come before the Lord, and how my
self before the most hig^h God, that is the question to which he answers, ver.
8. He has showed thee O man, what is good, and what does the Lord thy God
require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to humble thy self to
walk with thy God^: Thus Phynehas, and the holy priests both walked, and
taught, Malachy 2 6. The Law of truth was in his mouth and iniquity was not
found in his lips, he walked with me in peace and equity, and did turn many
from iniquity.

This is that worship in the Spirit or work of the Spirit which is required by
the father, John 4.24. God is a Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship
him in Spirit and in truth; where the word Spirit is by a metony my put for the
work of the Spirit, for the whole fruit of the Spirit is in all goodness and
righteousness, and truth, Ephesians 5.9. and the word Truth there implies the whole
divine nature, or new creature in opposition to the typical services?

Thus the Apostle shows both wherein the Kingdom of God, and his acceptable
worship lies, To. 14.17, 18. For the Kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but
righteousand peace, and joy in the holy Ghost; And he that in these things
serves the Lord Christ is accepted of God, and approved of men.

Thus far concerning your omissions, whereof this last is a most gross, defect
in them that would teach a whole Kingdom the way of Religion rightly: For the
truths which you have here at unawares confessed they are principally three,
all which reflect upon your selves.

The first is that where in the first Section you affirm, That the very light
of nature shows that there is a God who has Lordship and Sovereignty over
all, who is good and does good unto all, and is therefore to be feared, loved,
praised, called upon, trusted in, and served with all the heart, and with all
the soul, and with all the might. If then the light of nature extend so far,
why may not all men be saved, if they walk according to that light in turning
to that God thus made known unto them, in following him and serving him in all
the ways of his righteousness and goodness, in calling upon him for the pardon
of their sins, the healing of their errors and corruptions, the leading of them
into all truth and righteousness, especially if illuminating grace be added
thereto, which truth you have denied before.

Secondly you say in the same Section, That Gods worship is so limited by
himself, and his revealed will, that he is not to be worshipped after the
imaginations and devices of men, which is most true, but it falls soul upon your
worship here described, which is for the most part a mere imagination, and
humane invention, or tradition as it is obtruded upon us, for a worship, which
we will show by and by.

Thirdly, in you fourth Section, you say, that prayer is to be made for things
lawful, and for all sorts of men living, or that shall live hereafter, who sin
not the sin unto death, but not for those that are dead. If prayer should and
must be made for all sorts of men, that do, or that shall live hereafter, then
either there is no absolute decree in God to debar men of salvation, or we must
pray expressly against Gods will, or in our prayers not seek men's salvation,
which how it contradicts your former doctrine, we shall report it to your
selves and others.

Thirdly, for the mistakes, they are neither small nor few in this place.

For first you take it for granted that there is an outward worship of God
instituted by Christ in the new Testament in lieu of that ceremonial worship of
the old Testament new accomplished and abrogated by Christ.

Secondly, That there has been an outward worship of God instituted from the
Creation, and a set time even the seventh day from the Creation appointed
thereunto all which are mere dreams. For though the Fathers before and after
the Flood, sometimes sacrificed voluntarily, or by instinct, it were as a
monument of Christ's inward sufferings with his future passion, and to represent
the way wherein we must follow him into life, but there was no prescript or set
form of outward worship enjoined to the sons of men, till the days of Moses;
nor then to any others but the Israelites, and that when they were mad upon
outward things, witness their making of the golden Calf.

True it is, That the holy Prophets, and Saints of the primitive Church,
shortly after the Apostles days, seeing that the people then were grown
outwardly minded also, did for unity and edification sake, bring in a form of
Divine Service, called the Liturgy, which was both pious, and very profitable,
and how far it may oblige us to observe it, we will not here dispute; But the
forms of worship that now are in the reformed Churches are but prudential, and
not Jure divino.

Secondly, whereas you make thanksgiving and prayer to be a part of Gods set
solemn, primary, and prescript worship.

We grant that thansgiving shall be a part of Gods everlasting worship in
Heaven, but prayer with the reading of the holy Scriptures, sound preaching,
and conscionable hearing of the word, the holy administration, and receiving of
the Sacraments, the singing of Psalms, extraordinary fasts, oaths, vows, etc.
all which you make parts of Divine worship, are only holy duties, and means
appointed by the Lord, for the begetting, and edifying of his Church, but no
parts of any set or prescript worship as you imagine, yet are they piously and
often to be used.

Thirdly, you are mistaken, not only in the matter, but in the time which is
by you set a part thereunto, that being left to the care, piety, prudence, and
convenience of the Churches, Heb. 10.25. Acts 20.7.8. 1 Cor. 5 4. 1 Cor. 11.18,
20.

Nor does the fourth Commandment as it is positive bind any but the Israelites,
nor was the seventh day or the last day of the week to be kept as a Sabbath
from the creation till the resurrection of Christ. For that which is spoken,
Genesis 2.3. That God blessed the seventh day, and hallowed it, may be two ways
understood.

First by way of Anticipation, a thing usual in the Scriptures, Exodus 18.33,
34, 35. Genesis 1.27. Or,

Secondly it may be spoken of Christ in whom the Father has rested from all
his works, and whom he has blessed and sanctified for ever.

Neither was that day from the resurrection of Christ changed into the first
day of the week by Christ, or his Apostles, as you affirm.

His arising upon that day, or his appearing to his Disciples, upon or shortly
after that day without a Commandment to observe it, do not any way enforce the
observation of it; The two places to which you refer us, carry also little
force with them; for that in the Acts, Chap. 20.7. We say that the occasion of
that meeting was extraordinary, to wit Paul being ready to depart the next day,
and not likely to see them any more, sent for them, and their meeting was not
till the first day of the week was ended, for it was in the night that they met.

And the other place 1 Cor. 16.1, 2. not speaking of a public contribution to
be made upon the first day of the week, but of a private laying a part of some
money for such public uses, rather proves that day to be a working day (when
the Saints were to begin their next weeks work) then an holy day.

Nor finally is it clear, that this day is called the Lords Day, and muchless
that it was instituted for a perpetual holy day, or Christian Sabbath, for that
place, Revel. 1.10. seems not to speak of any outward time; for when the
Prophets and Apostles purpose to intimate the time when they received the word
of the Lord, they never omit the year, or month; as John does, so that if he
here would hi^t the time, it may rather seem he speaks of the annual day of
Christ's resurrection, whose mouth was then well known, then of the weekly day.
But there is an inward and spiritual day of the Lord, and so a true and
spiritual Lords Day, which the Saints hoped for, and this as it seems was now
appeared unto John, Heb. 10.25. But exhorting one another, and so much the
rather as you see the day approaching, 1 Cor. 1.7, 8. So that you come behind
in no gift waiting for the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall confirm
you unto the end, that ye may be blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ,
2 Pet. 1.19. Until the day dawn, and the day Star arise in your hearts, of
which coming of his as Christ had given his promise to all his disciples, Joh.
14.18. I will not leave you Orphans, I will come again unto you; So he in
special intimates that John should live to see the same, and share therein,
John 21.22. Jesus speaking of John, says thus to Peur, If I will that he shall
tarry till I come, what is that to thee: which coming of Christ's can be no
other then that his spiritual coming promised, John 14.21, 25. And indeed those
latter words, Rev. 1.10. (...) in the Lords day seem to expound the former
words, I was in the spirit, and to declare what measure and degree of the
spirit, he had then attained when he received that revelation. Howsoever most
certain it is that the observation of our Lords Day was first taken up by the
voluntary, and prudential act of the Primitive Churches, and afterward that
day with Wednesday and Friday were commanded to be days of holy Assemblies by
Constantine the great, and other holy Emperors, as Ecclesiastical Hystories
testify with one consent, and the greatest part of modern writers confess.

So that your propositions in the seventh Section which we have denied, are
very rash and bold assertions, some whereof are also very injurious, for how
can those countries which have either a perpetual day, or a perpetual night for
many months together every year, punctually observe such an outward Sabbath,
as you impose.

We grant that the fourth Commandment is moral as well as the rest, but the
morality of it lies not in appointing one day in seven for a public outward
worship (nor was it appointed for that end by Moses; though after he returns
from Babylon in part so used, but rather for a figurative rest) but in resting
from our own finful thoughts, words, and works through the help of Christ in
keeping Gods Judgments, and Commandments through his assistance, and in
seeking our eternal sanctification, life and rest in him; as Clemens
Alexandrinus Hieronym. and almost all the ancients with the best of our modern
writers unanimously agree. Christ says, that he Gave the Sabbath to be a sign
that he is the Lord that Sanctifies us, Exodus 31.13. Ezekiel. 20.12. and Saint
Paul says, That not only the other holy days, but even the Sabbath were a
shadow in the old Testament, and the body of them is in Christ: Col. 2.16, yea
that the Sabbath which is spoken of, Esai. 58.13. is Christ, whom we must not
trample under foot, by speaking our own words, thinking our own thoughts, and
doing our own pleasure, as the said Fathers expound the place: In your last
Section, as your Sabbath it self, so your sanctification of it is an humane
devise, any day may be so sanctified.

But for a conclusion of this Chapter, we offer five things to your better
consideration.

First, whether Gods will is since changed, who at the first created man after
his own Image, and established him in all righteousness, that he might worship
him therein.

Secondly, whether he would be worshipped at our hands one day in seven, or all
the days of our lives? See Luke 1, 71, 75. before cited, Rev. 7.15. Therefore
are they before the throne of God, and serve him day and night in his Temple,
and he that sits upon the throne shall dwell among them.

Thirdly, whether the thoughts, words, and works, which are called our own, and
from which we are commanded to rest, that we may sanctify the Lords Sabbath,
be those which are necessarily employed about the honest duties of our lawful
callings, or our sinful, thoughts, words, and actions? See Isaiah 55.7: Let the
wicked man forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, Isaiah 58.6,
7, 8. Their works are works of Iniquity, and the act of violence is in their
hands, their feet run to evil, and they make have to shed innocent blood, their
thoughts are thoughts of iniquity, wasting and destruction are in their paths,
Jer. 3.5. Behold thou have spoken, and done evil things, as thou could.

Fourthly, whether the Lord would rather have an outward day or time which is
one of the most transient and fluxible things of this world, or his everlasting
light, life, and rest, Christ Jesus honored by us. See Psalm. 97.7. Worship him
all ye Gods, Mat. 17.5. And behold a voice out of the cloud, which said this
is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, hear ye him, Joh. 5.23. That all
men should honor the Son, as they honor the father, Isa, 58.13. And shall honor
him; where the Sabbath mentioned in the beginning of the verse is turned into a
person, the person of the Lord Jesus Christ, who by our sinning against him is
trodden, or trampled under foot, Heb. 10.29. and therefore it is not without
cause that we are here, Isa. 58. commanded to turn or keep our feet from the
Sabbath, that is from trampling upon Christ.

Fifthly, whether we shall attain those high things promised, Isa. 58.14. to
wit, to be fed with the heritage of Jacob our Father. etc. by forbearing the
works of our lawful callings one day in seven, or by abstaining and resting
through the help of Christ from our own wicked thoughts, words, and works, all
the days of our life, that so we may keep Gods judgments, and commandments
which are his lesser Sabboths, Isaiah 56.2. and find all righteousness, rest,
and life in Christ the great Sabbath and Lords Day, or Day of the Lord in his
spiritual coming.

Yea we would entreat you to examine your selves impartially in or about those
six things ensuing.

First, whether you do not worship God in vain here teaching for doctrines the
precepts of men, Matthew. 15.9. for the Lord has neither instituted these
duties for a set and solemn outward worship, which you make the several parts
of his outward worship, nor has he appointed any other worship, but the
serving him in spirit and in truth, John 4.23, 24. And although the duties you
insist upon, are appointed by him as helps and furtherances to the attaining of
that grace whereby we may so worship God, and may in that sense pass for a
secondary worship, yet are they not limited by him to any set time, but rather
are lest to the Churches convenience and care, to her piety and prudence.

Secondly, whether you do not with the prodigal feed your selves and others
upon husks, while you rely thus upon the outward Sabboths which are shells and
shadows, Galatians 4 9, 10, 11. But now after yea have known God, or rather are
known of God, how turn ye again to the weak and beggarly elements, whereunto ye
desire again to be in bondage? ye observe days and months, and years, I am
a^raid I have bestowed upon you labor in vain.

If ye fay that ye keep not the Jewish Sabbath, but have turned that into the
Lords Day to be Rept after the same manner.

Then in the third place may it not be said unto you by the Lord, as it is,
Isaiah 1.12. When ye come to appear before me, who has required these things
at your bands, etc.

Yea fourthly, is it not some kind of superstition and Idolatry against the,
second Commandment, when God has removed a ceremonial and figurative worship,
for you now of your own heads, and in his name to set up another solemn, and
prescript outward worship, as if God were a visible, and corporeal God, or one
that took more delight that men should speak and hear discourses concerning his
everlasting righteousness, then to be worshipped therein. See Isaiah 38.1, 2,
3, 4, etc. See Isaiah 28.1, 2, 3.

Yea fifthly, when God has abolished one shadow or Image, to wit his seventh
days Sabbath which as was said before, was not at the first instituted for a
day of worship, but a figurative day of rest; for you to make another like it,
and as from God to set it in its stead, to be honored without any warrant, or
command from him, what is this but to set up, (...) an image like the former,
and a very Idol of your own brain? or at the best with Jeroboam to offer unto
the Lord, on that day which ye have devised of your own heart? 1 Kings 10.33.
Not but that this day or any other may be lawfully and profitably spent in such
holy duties as you speak of being observed as an ordinance of the Church, or
the civil Magistrate, so it be not imposed upon men as a Commandment of the
Lords as you obtrude it. For therein you with the Judayzing zealots, Acts
15.10. would put a y^ke upon the neck of the Disciples, which neither we nor
our fathers were able to bear.

And there in so doing how far you tempt God your selves, may advisedly
confider.

Lastly, Wherein does your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the
Scribes, and Pharisees, Mat. 5.20. for they not only kept the outward Sabbath
of the fourth commandment most severely but made long prayers, fasted often,
preached diligently, administered the Sacraments, yea compassed Sea, and land to
make a Proselite, or convert to their Religion, Matthew 12.1, 2, 3. Luke 18.10,
11, 12. Mat. thew 23.1, 2, 3.

CHAP. XXII. Of Lawful Oaths and Vows.
ALawful oath is a part of Religious worship Deu: 10.20.
, where in upon just occasion, the person swearing solemnly calls God to
witness, what he asserteth, or promises and to judge him according to the
truth, or falsehood of what he swears Exodus: 20.7. Lev: 19.12. 1 Cor. 1 13. 2
Chr: 6.22, 23.
.

II. The name of God only is that by which men ought to swear, and therein it
is to be used with all holy fear and reverence Deu: 6.13
, therefore to swear vainly, or rashly by that glorious and dreadful name, or
to swear at all by any other thing, is sinful, and to be abhorred Exo: 20.7.
Jer: 5.7. Mat: 5 34, 37. Jam: 5.12.
: yet as in matters of weight and moment an oath is warranted, by the word of
God under the new Testament, as well as under the old Heb: 6.16 2 Cor: 1.23
Isa: 65.16.
, so a lawful oath being imposed by lawful authority in such matters, ought to
be taken 1 Kin: 8.31 Nehe: 13: 25, Ezr: 10.5.
.

III. Whosoever takes an eath ought duly to consider the weightiness of so
solemn an act, and therein to avouch nothing but what he is fully persuaded is
the truth Exo: 20.7, Jer: 4.2.
, neither may any man bind himself by oath to any thing but what is good and
just, and what he believes so to be, and what he is able and resolved to
perform Gen: 24.2, 3, 4.5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
, yet is it a sin to refuse an oath touching any thing that is good and just
being imposed by lawful Authority Numb: 5.19, 21: Neh: 5.12. Exo: 22.7, 8, 9,
10, 11.
.

IV. An oath is to be taken in the plain and common sense of the words, without
equivocation, or mental reservation Jer: 412. Psa: 24.4.
, it cannot oblige to sin, but in any thing not sinful being taken it binds to
performance, although to a man's one hurt 1 Samuel: 25.22, 32, 33, 34. Ps: 15.4
, nor is it to be violated though made to Heretics or Infidels Ezekiel: 17.16,
18, 19. Josh: 8.19. with 2 Samuel: 21.1.
.

V. A vow is of like nature with a promissory oath, and ought to be made with
the like Religious care, and to be performed with the like faithfulness Isa:
19.21. Eccl: 5.4, 5, 6, 7. Psa: 6.8. Psalm: 66.13, 14.
.

VI. It is not to be made to any creature but to God alone Psalm: 76.11. Jer:
44.25, 26.
, and that it may be accepted it is to be made voluntarily out of faith, and
conscience of duty, in way of thankfulness for mercy received, or for the
obtaining of what we want, whereby we more strictly bind our selves, to
necessary duties, or to other things so far, and so long as they may fitly
conduce thereunto Deuteronomy: 23.21, 22, 23. Ps: 50.44: Gen: 28.21, 22. 1 Samuel: 1.11.
Psalm: 66.13, 14. Psalm: 132.2, 3, 4, 5.
.

VII. No man may vow to do any thing forbidden in the word of God, or what
would hinder any duty thtrein commanded, or which is not in his own power, and
for the performance whereof he has no promise from God Acts 23.12, 14. Mar.
6.26. Number. 30.5, 8, 12.13.
, in which respect Popish Monastical vows of perpetual single life, professed
poverty, and regular obedience, are so far from being degrees of higher
perfection, that they are superstitious, and sinful snares in which no
Christian may entangle himself Mat. 19.11, 12. 1 Cor: 7.29: Ephesians: 4.28. 1 Pet:
4.2. 1 Cor. 7.23
.

CHAP. XXII. Of lawful Oaths and Vows examined.
ALthough you would not so easily transgress in this chapter, as in some of the
former, the matter being more particular and very obvious, yet have you here
your defects and mistakes also, so that we cannot swear to all that you have
written concerning oaths and vows.

And first we demand of you wherefore you have here in this tractate of
Religious oaths and vows, made no mention of covenants, and protestations,
things of late so frequently persued, and not without your contrivance,
furtherance, or consent.

More particularly in the first Section where you speak of oaths, as you do in
the three following.

You affirm two things which must be either warily understood, or else they are
false.

As first, That an oath is a part of Religious worship, which we grant to be
true, that worship being taken in an equal latitude, with the fear and service
of God as it is, Deuteronomy. 6.13. and 10.20. and Mat. 4.10. but you understanding
here an outward set, and solemn public worship, as in the foregoing chapter,
you seem to contradict your selves: For is the taking of an oath tied to the
Sabbath day, as your worship is? Or is any day of the week sanctified
therewith? Or can you well distinguish it into a public and private worship,
as you do other duties? Indeed, if religious worship consist herein, this is
one of the most religious ages that ever were, Oaths of all sorts being never
so common as now.

Secondly you say, but not truly, "That the person swearing always calls God
solemnly to witness what he asserteth, or promises, and to judge him according
to the truth or fallehood of what he swears, for although God is such a
witness and judge, and our public oaths in England, run most in such a form,
yet all oaths do not so, yea very few of those juraments mentioned in the
Scriptures, are explicitly so formed; we know not whether you can add another
to that which the Apostle uses, 2 Cor. 1.23. Moreover I call God for a record
upon my soul, that to spare you I came not yet to Corinth. This form is very
solemn, lawful, and commendable, but not expressly used in all oaths.

In your second Section you have first told us, that which is true in the
general, that it is Gods name only by which men ought to swear, but you have
not declared what that name is: For Gods name is either appellative, or else
essential, and real; his Being, by name fignifyed by Jehovah,

Is first his Divine nature in himself. Deuteronomie 28.58. That thou may
fear this glorious and searful name (or being) Jehovah.

Thus Proverbs 18.10. The name (or being) of the Lord is a strong Tower, the
righteous run unto it and are saved.

Secondly, His name is his Image, or like being in his Saints, Zac. 10.12. For
I will strengthen them, and they shall walk up and down in the name of the
Lord: This is that name of Christ, wherein If two or three be assembled, he is,
and will be in the midst of them, Mat. 18.20. This is that new name of his
which he has promised to write upon the overcomer, Revel. 3.12.

Now to swear by Gods name, is first to swear by that dreadful and glorious
being.

Secondly, To swear in his like being, that is, in all righteousness.

And thirdly, To swear that Jehovah or the Lord lives, is properly to swear
that he lives in us, in his like being. Jer. 4.2. And thou shall swear the
Lord lives in truth, in judgment, and in righteousness, and the nations shall
bless themselves in him, and in him shall they glory. 2 Cor. 11.10. As the
truth of Christ is in me, no man shall stop me of this boasting in Achaia. So
to say or swear that God lives in us when he does not, is to take his name in
vain, Hos. 4.15. Though thou Israel transgress, yet let not Judah offend, and
come ye not to Gilgal, nor go up to Beth aven, (or house of vanity) nor swear
the Lord lives. See Isa. 48.1. and Isa. 65.16. Jer. 2.16. What name is that
which the Lord swears should be no more named in the mouth of any of those
which had forsaken him, and whom he had now finally rejected; but his like
being which he withholdeth from his enemies and obstinate rebels against him?

Jeremiah 44.26. Therefore hear ye the word of the Lord all Judah, and you that
dwell in the land of Egypt, Behold I have sworn by my great name (or being)
says the Lord; that my name shall be no more named in the mouth of any man in
Judah, in all the land of Egypt, saying the Lord lives, to wit, in me.

Secondly, You say in the same Section, That to swear vainly or rashly by that
glorious and dreadful name is sinful, but why have you made no mention of
forswearing by that name, perjury being the greatest evil of all sinful kinds
of swearing.

Thirdly, you say, "That to swear by any other thing is sinful, whereas the
Apostle swears by the truth or work of Christ in him, 2 Cor. 11.15. And by the
rejoicing which he had in Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 16.31. unless we should take
this last for an asseveration only. But as the Lord sometimes swears by
himself, and his whole being, Genesis 22.16. and sometimes by some particular
attribute of his, as Isa. 62 8. The Lord has sworn by his right hand, and by
the arm of his strength. So it may seem that men may swear, either by his whole
being or by some part of it, and have the Lords practice for their warrant.

Fourthly, It is true, that you speak, That a lawful oath, is warranted under
the New Testament, as well as under the Old; yet is there a greater restraint
of swearing laid upon us now, then in the old Testament, Mat. 5.34. James 5.12.
which has made some to shun all oaths, though called to swear by the
Magistrate in matters lawful.

In the third Section you give good cautions to them that are to take an oath,
saying, He that takes an oath ought duly to consider the weightiness of such
an act: but none to those which impose the same, as if men might not sin in
imposing unnecessary, subtle, and insnaring oaths, Zach. 5.3.4. There is a
curse goet out against swearers, as well as against Thieves; because of needless
swearing as well as false swearing, A land is made to mourn, Jer. 23.10.

Again in the same Section you say, It is a sin to refuse an oath, touching any
thing that is good and just, being imposed by lawful authority: where you imply
that only such as be in authority may require an oath, but the master may
require it from his servant, as Abraham did, Genesis 24.23. and one equal of
another, as Laban did of Jacob, Genesis 31.44, 45, 46. etc. Yea, an inferior
sometimes of a superior, as the poor Amalekite servant did of David, 1 Samuel
30.15, 16, yet all this upon weighty occasions.

Lastly, All lawful oaths are to be so taken as you speak in that fourth
Section; but whether a tyrannical oath tending to the destruction of the
Saints, either the swearer himself, or his fellow Saints may not when it is
enforced, be taken with some lawful reservation, or equivocation, when the
words will bear it, is a querie among the Schoolmen.

Now concerning vows, of which you speak in your three last Sections.

We first grant that there is a great deal of affinity betwixt a vow, and a
promissary oath, and therefore as we are commanded to be wary, and well advised
in our vows, yea, to be sparing therein, Eccles. 5.5. Better it is that thou
should not vow, then that thou should vow and not pay, etc. So we cannot
easily be too abstemious in taking of oaths, unless it be upon great and just
occasions.

The true Saint, or servant of God is described by this adjunct of fearing an
oath, Eccles. 9.2. As is the good, so is the sinner, and he that swears, as
he that fears an oath.

Secondly, We concur with you concerning the person to whom the things about
which, and the manner how vows are to be made, as also concerning the faithful
keeping of them, and of all lawful oaths.

Finally we agree, That Popish vows of perpetual poverty, oftentimes of regular
obedience, and of a monastic life, are neither warantable, nor true degrees of
an higher perfection; but rather superstitious, and sinful snares, wherein
Christians should not entangle themselves, yet must it be granted that some may
resolve of fingle life, and in some sort through the assistance of God vow so
to continue, 1 Cor. 7.37. Nevertheless he that stands steadfast in his heart,
having no necessity, but has power over his own will, and has de^reed in his
beart that he will keep his virgin, (or virginity) does well, Matthew. 19.12. For
there are some Eunuchs which were so bor^ from their mothers womb, and there
are some Eunuchs; which were made Eunuchs of men, and there be Eunuchs which
have made themselves Eunuchs for the Kingdom of God; he that is able to
receive it, let him receive it. The like may be said of such Canons as are in
themselves peaceable, pious, or lawful, of which one may lawfully vow, that by
Gods assistance he will be regular in the same* But though the superstitious
snares must be confessed to be sinful, yet there may lie other kinds of snares
in oaths, vows, and covenants, made by self seeking men, under specious
pretenses, which may be no less perilous or wicked then the other: what say you
to a mutinous snare among the Soldiers, when some private Officer, or
Soldiers draw their fellows into a combination against their General, or the
body of the Army, by pressing a self made League, or Covenant? What think you
of a Schismatical or Heretical snare, when some of the Clergy, or Laity, to
spread their own opinions, or strengthen themselves against their adversaries,
or to make themselves great, draw others into an oath, and combination with
them? What opinion have you of a rebellious confederation, bound up with solemn
vows, and oaths, such as was that in the late Irish Rebels and Murderers? Are
not all these sinful snares and entanglements.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Civil Magistrate.
GOD the supreme Lord and King of all the World has ordained Civil
Magistrates, to be under him, over the people for his own glory, and the
public good: and to this end, has armed them with the power of the sword, for
the defense and encouragement of them that are good, and for the punishment of
evil doers Rom: 13: 1, 2, 3, 4: 1 Pet: 2: 13, 14:
.

II. It is lawful for Christians to accept and execute the office of a
Magistrate, when called thereunto Prove: 8: 15, 16: Rom: 13:1, 2, 3:
: in the managing whereof, as they ought especially to maintain Piety, Justice,
and Peace according to the wholesome Laws of each Commonwealth Psalm 2: 10,
11, 12. 1 Timothy: 2: 2 Psalm: 82, 3. 2 Sa: 23: 2^ 1 Pet: 2: 1^
: so for that end they may lawfully now under the New Testament, wage war, upon
just and necessary occasion Luke 3:14: Rom: 13: 4 Mat: 8: 9: 12: Acts 10.1, 2:
Rev: 17: 14, 16:
.

III. The Civil Magistrate may not assume to himself the administration of the
Word and Sacraments, or the power of the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven 2 Chronicles:
26.18, 19. Mat: 10.17 and Math: 16.19. 1 Cor: 12.28.29. Ephesians: 4.12. 1 Cor: 14.12
To: 10.15 Heb: 5.1.
: yet he has Authority, and it is his duty, to take order, that Unity and
Peace be preserved in the Church, that the truth of God be kept pure and
entire, that all Blasphemies and Heresies be suppressed, all corruptions and
abuses in Worship and discipline prevented, or reformed: and all the Ordinances
of God duly settled, administered, and observed Isa: 49.23 Psa: 122.9 Ezra 7.23,
25, 22, 27, 28. Lev: 24.16 Deuteronomy: 13.5 6, 12. 2 Kin: 18.4 1 Chro: 13 1. to 9. 2
Kin: 23.1 to 26. 2 Chronicles: 34.33. 2 Chro: 15.12.13.
. For the better effecting whereof, he has power to call Synods, to be present
at them, and to provide whatsoever is transacted in them, be according to the
mind of God 2 Chr. 19.8, 9, 10, 11. 2 Chr: 29. and 30, cha: Mat: 2.4.5
.

IV. It is the duty of people to pray for Magistrates 1 Timothy: 2 ^, 2.
, to honor their persons 1 Pet: 2: 17.
, to pay them tribute, and other dues Rom: 13.6.7.
, to obey their lawful Commands, and to be subject to their Authority, for
Conscience sake To: 13.5. Titus 3.1.
, Infidelity, or difference in Religion does not make void the Magistrates just
and legal Authority, nor free the people from their due obedience to him 1 Pet:
2.13, 14, 16.
: from which Ecclesiastical persons are not exempted To: 13.1 1 Kin: 2.35: Act:
25.9, 10, 11. 2 Pet: 2.1, 10, 11. Jud: 1.8, 9, 10:
, much less has the Pope any power or jurisdiction over them in their
Dominions, or over any of their people; and least of all, to deprive them of
their Dominions, or lives, if he shall judge them to be Heretics, or upon any
other pretense whatsoever 2 The. 2: 4^ Re: 13* 15: 16: 17:
.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Civil Magistrate, examined.
ANtiquum obtinetis fratres, for in handling an office of order your selves are
confused; in this Chapter of Magistracy, you not only fail as you do
elsewhere, in not distinguishing, but for want of the same you affirm some
things unadvisedly, especially in the two last Section, yet do we not blame you
for not giving us the common distribution of Magistracy into his three kinds or
forms; as Monarchy, Aristocracy, and Democracy; nor for omitting another
distribution of it into simple, or compound government, which last may consist
of some two, or all three, and this is conceived to be none of the worst forms
of Government, nor will we tax you for seeming to approve of Monarchy, in that
you speak of the Magistrate so aften in the third person singular, as if one
supreme; for Monarchs and Tyrants are not always termini convertibiles: but
the distinctions which we most require and want are three especially. The first
of alawful and usurped Magistracy. The second of a supreme, and a subordinate.
And the third of a mere civil, and a Christian or spiritual kind of
Governors; to which we might add that of absolute and conditional; another of
elective and hereditary, with many other which we omit likewise.

Your first Section holds true of lawful Magistrates, That they are ordained of
God for his glory and the public good, and that he, and he alone has armed
them with the sword; but not always of usurpers, that they should be Gods
appointed ministers, unless it be in wrath as his scourges.

Your second Section is true: First in this, That Christians may accept and
execute the Office of Magistracy.

And secondly, Of such Christian Magistrates it is, and must be understood,
that they ought to maintain Piety, as well as Justice and Peace, according to
the wholesome Laws of their respective Commonwealth, but especially according
to the Law and mind of God.

And finally, It is true of them, as well a^ of the mere Civil Magistrate, that
they may make war upon just, and great occasion, though Hierom and some of the
Fathers be of another opinion; yet is not this true of the inferior Magistrate
making an offensive war against the supreme, as most writers conclude.

In your third Section, you monopolize, and are very partial if not plainly
injurious to the Christian Magistrate, especially if he be a spiritual or
inspired person in denying him authority to administer the Word and Sacraments,
and the power of the Keys. What say you to Moses, to Joshua, to Melchezedech,
to Samuel and David? Is not Solomon called a Preacher? Are not the two
witnesses of the Magistracy and Ministry, both Prophets, Revel. 11.3, 4, 5.

Give us leave to ask you these questions. First, whether the Saints are not
now to be Kings and Priests? See Rev. 1.6. 1 Pet. 2.5. Secondly, whether the
Priests office is so limited, and restrained now to persons, as it was in the
time of Uzziah, 2 Chro: 26.18 and of Uzzah 1 Chronicles. 15.2. Thirdly, who brought
in this distinction of Laity and Clergy in the New Testament? Lastly, whence
have you your authority so to administer the Word and the Sacraments, and to
use the power of the Keys, as you do in peculiar? you may have jus Civil, or
Ecclesiasticum for it, but not jus Divinum, an humane, or Ecclesiastical title,
but not a Divine right, and may not he that derives it unto you, have a share
therein if he have gifts, and qualifications for it?

Now what you affirm incontinently in that Section, That it is his duty to take
order that peace and unity be preserved in the Church, That all blasphemies,
and heresies be suppressed, That all corruptions, and abuses in worship, and
discipline, be prevented, or reformed, That all the ordinances of God be duly
settled administered and observed; and that for this end he has power, to call
Synods, to be present at them, and to provide that whatsoever is transacted in
them be according to the mind of God.

All this say we is true of the Christian Magistrate only, and not of the only
Civil Governor, but we pray you to take notice of two things by the way which
have passed from you in that Section.

The first is this, you there say, That it is the Magistrates duty to see that
the truth of God be kept pure, which indeed can never be corrupted.

And secondly you say, It is his office, to see that all the ordinances of God
be duly settled, administered, and observed; which is true of his spiritual
ordinances epecially, and these are first the commandments of the moral Law,
and then his other precep^ subservient thereunto; as the Scripture every where
calls them Gods ordinances (...) Exodus 18.20. 2 Kings 11.37. but not of the
preaching of man's doctrine, the administering the Sacraments, not without
ignorance, perhaps some superstition, and confusion, as you often do, and which
you account to be the main if not the only ordinances of God. Thus we fear that
will find you guilty, of which the Prophet complains, Isa. 24.5. The earth is
defiled under the inhabitants thereof, because they have transgressed the Laws,
changed the or^i^anc^^, broken the everlasting Covenant, etc. For what
ordinances do you speak of to the people, but of your way of preaching, and
administering the Sacraments, etc.

In your Directory for worship you have omitted the ten Commandments, Gods
principal ordinances, but highly magnified your kind of preaching, which has
more of art, then of the spiritual gift of Prophecy in it, your keeping of an
outward day in every week holy, with your self chosen worship, and other mere
humane ^rdinances, Is not this to change the ordinances as Isaiah speaks?

In your fourth which is your last Section. You first set out the respective
duties of Subjects to Magistrates well and truly.

Secondly you rightly affirm, That neither difference in religion, no nor
Infidelity it self do make void the Magistrates just, and legal authority, nor
free the people from their due obedience to him.

If Infidelity it self cannot do this what other thing can? Yet it must be
granted, that when Magistrates are esective, and chosen conditionally, the
breaking of a fundamental condition may disanull his place and claim.

Thirdly you say here, That Ecclesiastical persons are not exempted from their
obedience, which is but true in part, in regard of civil honor, obedience, and
all needful assistance especially where the Magistrate is no more but civil:
But in matters of faith, salvation, and damnation, the consciences not only of
Ecclesiastical persons, as you call them; but of laics themselves are exempted
from his tyranny, and force; therein they are only the subjects of Christ: Yea
in these things some persons may have authority over the Magistrate himself in
the Lord, though that Magistrate be a Christian also, to wit, such persons as
are inspired and sent of God to be his mouth, as Na^han and G^d were to David,
and John Baptist was to Herod; and diverse other Prophets were to their
respective Princes, and Governors.

Lastly you justly shut out the Pope, and his jurisdiction from us, as those
which have taken the oath of supremacy, but here you are too general in your
affirmatives for want of due distinction, or limitation, for in some parts of
Italy which are the Popes inheritance, he has power and authority over his
subordinate officers, and the people as other Princes have, and may justly
deprive those that are under him, of dominions and lives, when they break such
capital Laws as deserve death, confiscation, and disinheriting, but he may not
do this to foreign Princes and States, nor to their people who are not under
his lawful jurisdiction; whether upon the pretense of heresy, or any other
like pretext: Yet some Papists are confident of this, that now you have
deprived the Pope of his deprivative authority over Princes, you will assume it
to your selves, or bestow it upon your friends, when and where you think good to
serve your own turns.

CHAP. XXIV. Of Marriage and Divorce.
MArriage is to be between one man and one woman, neither is it lawful for any
man to have more then one wife, nor for any woman to have more then one
husband, at the same time Gen: 2.24 Mat: 1.19, 56. Prove: 2.17.
.

II. Marriage was ordained for the mutual help of husband, and wife Gen: 2.18.
, for the increase of mankind with a legimiate issue, and of the Church with an
holy seed Mal: 2.15.
, and for preventing of uncleanness 1 Cor: 7.2, 9.
.

III. It is lawful for all sorts of people to marry who are able with judgment
to give their consent Heb. 13.4 1 Timothy: 4.3. 1 Cor: 7.36, 37. Ge: 24.57, 58.
, yet it is the duty of Christians to marry only in the Lord 1 Cor: 7.39
, and therefore such as profess the true reformed Religion, should not marry
with Infidels, Papists, or other Idolaters; neither should such as are godly be
unequally yoked by marrying with such as be notoriously wicked in their life,
or maintain damnable heresies Gen: 34: 14. Exodus* 34.16. Deu. 7.3, 14. 1 Kin:
11.4. Neh: 13.25, 26, 27. Mal: 2, 11, 12. 2 Cor: 6.14.
.

IV. Marriage ought not to be within the degrees of consanguinity or affinity
forbidden in the word Lev: 18, c. 1 Cor: 5.2. Am: 2.7.
, nor can such incestuous marriages ever he made lawful by any law of man or
consent of parties, so as those persons may live together as man and wife Mar:
6.28 Levit: 18.23, 25, 26, 27, 28.
. The man may not marry any of his wives kindred nearer in blood, then he may
of his own, nor the woman of her husbands kindred, ^eerer in blood then of her
own Lev: 20.19, 20, 21.
.

V. Adultery, or fornication committed after a contract being detected before
marriage, gives just occasion to the innocent party to dissolve that contract
Mat: ^.18, 19, 20.
, in the case of adultery after marriage, it is lawful for the innocent party
to sue out a divorce Mat: 5.31, 32:
, and after the divorce, to marry another as if the offending party was dead
Mat: 19.9. Rom: 7.2, 3:
.

VI. Although the corruption of man be such as is apt to study arguments
unduely to put asunder those whom God has joined together in marriage, yet
nothing but adultery or such wilful desertion as can no way be remedied, by the
Church or civil Magistrate, is cause sufficient of dissolving the bond of
marriage Mat: 19: 8, 9: 1 Cor: 7: 15: Mat: 19: 6:
, wherein a public, and orderly course of proceeding, is to be observed, and
the persons concerned in it not left to their own wills, and discretion in their
own tase Deu: 14: 1, 2, 3, 4:
.

CHAP. XXIV. Of Marriage and Divorce examined.
IN this tract of marriage, and divorce the path is so trite, that it is no
wonder if you deviate not as you have done hitherto, yet are you sufficiently
deficient in many things, and in some other mistaken here also: Your defects
are these among others.

First, since those that marry, shall have trouble in the flesh as Saint Paul
speaks, 1 Cor. 7.28. and marrying brings with it of necessity many
avocations, lets, and distractions from attending upon Gods service, and the
seeking of his kingdom, 1 Cor. 7.32, 33, 34. you might very seasonably in these
calamitous times (wherein the people like the generation before the flood, are
mad upon marrying) have showed that as omnia prius tentanda quam belle
expertendum; so all means should be used, first to get the gift of continency
before people incur the wants, cares, burdens, sorrows, and distractions of
the marriage yoke.

Secondly, since our first parents were not joined together, till both were
settled in the Image of God, that the Lord might have a godly seed upon earth,
Mal. 2.15. you might have declared that not only maturity of judgment, but
that grace and regeneration, especially in the Church of God is first to be
sought before an husband, or wife, that they may live in the fear of God
together, and bring up their seed in that fear.

Thirdly you speak nothing of the advice and consent which children should ask
of their wife, and godly parents and guarcians, before they dispose of
themselves in marriage.

Fourthly in setting forth the ends, why marriage was Instituted; you have
omitted the maine (which the old rejected Liturgy did not forge:) to wit, that
it was ordained for a figure and representation of the mistical union betwixt
Christ and his Church; and that therein it is (...), a great mystery, a kind
of Sacrament; of which hereafter.

Fifthly you are silent concerning the reciprocal duties of the married
persons, such as cohabitation, 1 Pet. 3.7. mutual benevolence, 1 Cor. 7.2, 3.
of abstinence sometimes either by consent, 1 Cor. 7.5, or by injunction from
the Lord Levit. 18.19. nor do you set forth either the duties of husbands to
their wives, or of wives toward their husbands, in their specials, or
particulars.

Lastly, you set not forth this, That persons may commit spiritual adultery
against God, even in marrying while their hearts are more set upon the
pleasures of carnal copulation, then upon spiritual communion with God.

The mistakes which we would represent unto you are these.

First you say, That those which profess the true reformed Religion should not
marry with Infidels; where we desire your advised resolution to these two
things; since there are several Religions, each by their own respective
professors accounted the true reformed Religion, which of these will you pitch
upon, Lutheran, Calvinistical, Socinian, Attainian, the English formerly
established by law, all which are different. To say nothing of the subordinate
Sects of Antinomians, Seperatists. Anchaptists, Independants, Levellers,
Illuminates, Ranters, or Gods of Godmanchester, with their adherents.

Secondly wherein does he that professes the reformed Religion; and yet is in
the state of unregeneracy, and unbelief, yea perhaps of a most profane heart,
and life, deserve so well that he may not marry with an Infidel; many of the
Heathen whom you account infidels, being men of better life and more truly
conscientious though they know not Christ in the flesh, then thousands that are
called Christians, and living in the Cities and Countries of the reformed as
you call them.

Secondly you say, That such professors of the true reformed Religion, may not
intermarry with Papists: Why we pray you? Because the Lord reproves Judah for
marrying the daughter of a strange god, Mal. 2.11. But do not the Papists
believe in the same God, with the Protestants, even in the Father, the Son, and
the holy Ghost, though they differ in some articles, or branches of articles of
their belief, and in their way of worship? Yea are not some of the Papists
regenerate, conscientious and virtuous persons: If then the Protestant and
Papists be both Saints or sanctified persons, then they have both one Father in
Heaven, If they be both unregenerate, the devil is yet father to them both: But
you will say, that difference in judgment must needs breed alienation in
affection, disturbance in the service of God, if not seducement.

We answer, that first it is the similitude of natures, and dispositions which
conciliates love.

Secondly, they may take one another upon those terms of not intermedling with
each others Religion.

Thirdly, why may there not be a toleration of different judgments in the
family, as well as in the Church, or Commonwealth.

Lastly you say, that those professors of the true reformed may not marry with
any other Idolaters.

Do you mean any other Idolaters then themselves, for all men till by
regeneration, they be brought to know God, and serve the living God, in his
living righteousness, are Idolaters, Is not Satan the God of this world, 2 Cor.
4.4. The Covetous man is an Idolater. Ephesians. 5.5. So are they that make their
belly their God, Phil. 3.19. as some of the Clergy themselves do, serving their
own bellies, and not the Lord Christ, and the Apostle says, That they which
cause divisious, and offenses are of that number, Romans 16.17, 18. All that
serve the pleasures and desires of the flesh more then God, are Idolaters, Ephesians
2.3. Tit. 3.3. may not the people make an Idol of Monarchy, or some other
Government of a King, a Parliament, of an Army, or any other civil thing? Yea,
may not a jealous people, and religious in their way make an Idol of a Shepherd
or teacher? See Zac. 11.17. may they not make an Idol of an outward day, as
outward worship or the like; but peradventure, you can epsy Idolatry no where
but in the Mass, or the worshipping of Saints, or of Images made of wood, stone,
gold, silver, etc. and if these Idolaters be so frequent, and ubiquitary, where
shall the professors of the reformed Religion marry and yet shun Idolatrous yoke
fellows; must they go out of the world as the Apostles speaks, 1 Cor. 5.10. For
those that worship the living God in spirit and truth are very rare persons,
though some such are to be found even among Jews, Turks, and Heathens.

CHAP. XXV. Of the Visible Church.
THE Catholic or Universal Church which is invisible, consists of the whole
number of the Elect, that have been, are, or shall be gathered into one, under
Christ the Head thereof, and is the Spouse, the Body, the fullness of him that
fills all in all Ephesians: 1.^, 10, 22, 23 Ephesians: 5.23, 27, 32. Col: 1.18.
.

II. The Visible Church, which is the Catholic or Universal, under the Gospel
(not confined to one Nation, as before under the Law) consists of all those
throughout the World, that profess the true Religion 1 Cor: 1.1 1 Cor: 12.12,
13. Psalm: 2.8. Rev: 7.4. To: 15.9, 10, 11, 12.
; and of their children 1 Cor: 7: 14. Acts 2.39. Ezekiel: 16.20, 21. Rom: 10.16.
Gen: 3.15. Gen: 17.7.
, and is the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus Christ Mat: 13: 47: Isaiah 9.7.
, the House and Family of God These: 2.19. These: 3: 15.
, out of which there is no ordinary possibility of Salvation Acts 2.47.
.

III. Unto this Catholic Visible Church, Christ has given the Ministry,
Oracles, and Ordinances of God, for the gathering and perfecting of the Saints
in this life, to the end of the World: and does by his own presence and spirit,
according to his promise make them effectual thereunto 1 Cor: 12.18. Ephesians:
4.11.12, 13. Matthew: 28.19, 20. Isa: 59.21.
.

IV. This Catholic Church has been sometimes more, sometimes less visible
Romans 3.4 Revel: 12, 6, 14.
. And particular Churches, which are members thereof, are more or less pure,
according as the Doctrine of the Gospel is taught and embraced, Ordinances
administered, and public Worship performed more or less purely in them Rev:
2.3. Chapters. 1 Cor: 5, 6, 7.
.

V. The purest Churches under Heaven are subject both to mixture, and error 1
Cor: 13.12. Rev: 2.3. Chapters. Matthew. 13.24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31.
, and some have so degenerated, as to become no Churches of Christ, but
Synagogues of Satan Rev: 18.2. Rom: 11.18, 19.20, 21, 22.
. Nevertheless, there shall be always a Church on earth, to worship God
according to his will Matthew: 16.18. Psa: 72.17. Psalm: 102.28.
.

VI. There is no other Head of the Church, but the Lord Jesus Christ Col: 1.18.
Ephesians. 1.22.
: nor can the Pope of Rome, in any sense be head thereof: but is that
Antichrist, the man of Sin and son of Perdition, that exalts himself against
Christ, and all that is called God Matthew 23.8, 9, 10. 2 These. 2, 3, 4, 8, 9.
Rev: 13 6.
.

CHAP. XXV. Of the Church examined.
YOur Doctrine of the Church here exceeds not the state of the Churches,
whereof you speak, Section the fifth, saying, That the purest of them under
heaven are subject to mixture, and error.

Yet in your first Section, you begin well with a tolerable description of the
universal Church in heaven and earth, where notwithstanding you are mistaken in
making this congregation wholly invisible which is but so in part, and to some
men.

And secondly, in making it to consist of the whole number of the elect,
whereas we have proved before that all men are ordained to life, though but
conditionally; But if you understand by elect those only who are called out of
the furnace, and chosen from thence, then is your congregation defective, for
infants who dyed in infancy, and are no small part of this blessed number, will
hereby be excluded; we say nothing to your calling of the Church the Spouse of
Christ, because she is one of his brides, yea, among all other people the
Spouse of Christ, yet there is another thing, which is his first, and principal
Spouse; to wit, the Jerusalem or Kingdom of God, which descends from heaven,
of which we spoke before. See Rev. 21.2. And I John saw the holy City, New
Jerusalem, coming do^^ from God out of Heaven, prepared as a Bride adorned for
her husband.

In your Second Section you fail much more: First in going about to speak of
the Catholic Church upon earth, and fastening upon her a falls name, and
property or adjunct in that you call her the visible Church, wherein besides
that you close with Papists in that appellation, you both show your gross
mistakes, for is the husband invisible, and the wife visible? Is the head
invisible, and the body visible? See John 15.21. Now all these things will they
do unto you for my names sake, because they have not known him that sent me;
where was that possibility of the Church even in the new Testament, for the
space of 1260. days, or years; all which time the woman that brought forth the
man child Christ (which parturient or the Church) did hide her self in the
wilderness, Rev. 12.5, 6, etc. if you say first, "That they are visible in the
body, we answer, what marks have they in the outward man to distinguish them
from others, especially from formalists and hypocrites.

If you reply again, That they are visible and discernable to those that have
spiritual eyes.

We answer, that even the invisible God is so in some measure to those men; but
this is to make them intelligible, and spiritually discernable but not visible;
The work that makes them a Church is invisible, 1 Cor. 2.15. But be that is
spiritual judges, or discerns all things; yet is he judged or discerned of
none.

Secondly, In this Section you describe a formal not a true Church, when you
make it to consist of men professing Religion, which thing formalists and
hypocrites may do.

Thirdly, whereas by way of limitation you add professing the true Religion,
you still leave us in suspense. For as the true Church fled into the
wilderness, Rev. 12. so you leave us in a wood to find her out; for do not
every kind and sort of Religious people account their Religion to be the true
Religion, not only the Papists, Lutherans, and Calvinists, do so in the West,
but the Greek Churches, the Jews; yea the Turks, hold their professed Religion
to be right.

We say nothing here of the manifold and different Sects among Christians, each
of which maintain their Religion, to be the only true Religion, where then
shall we pitch to find your true Church.

But the true Church, especially that of adult men as the very name (...)
imports is a Congregation or collection of those who are truly called, or in
some measure sanctified, 1 Cor. 1.2. To the Church which is at Corinth to them
that are sanctified in Jesus Christ called to be Saints, etc. from which we do
not exclude the Infants of them or others dying before they sin actually, since
our Savior says expressly, that, Of such is the Kingdom of God, Mat. 10.14.
out of which numbers and societies, there is ordinarily no possibility of
salvation.

In your third Section you build upon a false and rotten foundation which you
had laid in the former Section. For it is not to that visible, and formal
Church which you describe, but to the congregation of true Saints that God has
given the ministry and his ora^les, and ordinances in the right use of them.
And to those he has given those offices and gifts, which you will not now
admit, as, some to be Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, etc. Ephesians. 4.9,
10, 11. yea, and the spirit of Prophecy, as we have proved before, as the
place^ which you refer us unto of Esaias 59.21. with Matthe^ 28.19, 20. Ephesians
4.9, 10, 11, 12. do evict.

But it is true which you say in the beginning of your fourth Section, That the
Catholic Church has sometimes been more visible, and sometimes less, if you
understand it of discernableness, otherwise it has been always invifible to
carnal men. And particular Churches as you afterward there assert, are more or
less pure according as the doctrine of the Church is taught and embraced, and
Gods ordinances administered; but what you add in the close, concerning the pure
performing of public worship, is a dream, since Christ has appointed none in
the new Testament.

But herein we will join with you, if you will alter your words and say, So far
as the true worship of God consisting in holiness, and righteousness of truth
is observed, for that makes a true Church, or society of worshipers, Luke 1.74,
75. John 9.31. Act. 10.34, 35. Ephesians. 4.22, 23, 24.

In your fifth Section, the better to color over your own faults, as it may
seem you asperse the best Churches, saying, The purest Churches, under heaven
are subject to mixture and error, what say you then to the two Churches, the
one of Smyrna, Rev. 2.8, 9, 10, 11. the other of Philadelphia, Rev. 3.7, 8,
etc. with neither of which Christ finds the least fault, but highly commends
them both.

True it is if we look into the Churches, there is mixture of the inferior
members, and they are subject to such errors, but there are preadventure, some
such members to be found in some of those two Churches, if not elsewhere, as are
no more subject to error then the Prophets, and Apostles were; certain it is
there is such a doctrine, and discipline from the immediate mouth of God, to be
found in one of those Churches, that no reformers have need to seek any
further, where also the true Church is fully discovered, and all causes of
discord, and controversy are in that behalf taken away.

But whereas you add in the same Section, and that most truly, that some
Churches have so degenerated, as to become no Churches, but Synagogues of
Satan, you do here necessarily grant, what you elsewhere deny, that some of the
Saints, and called ones, may fall finally from grace, for none other are the
members of the true Church, general or particular among men grown, but such.

We will here charge you, with that which you at unawares, and unadvisedly
affirm in the close of that Section, That there shall be always a Church on
earth to worship God according to his will, for that implies that the earth and
the Church there inhabiting, shall continue for ever, which we conceive is no
article of your belief.

In your sixth and last Section, you truly affirm, "That there is no other head
of the Church, but the Lord Jesus Christ, but you in your next words have
rather deserved the Popes Bull then his Benediction, if he may be Judge.

For first, If a Church be that which ye describe it, A Congregation of those
which profess the true Religion,

Why might not the Bishop of Rome, a: least wise in the Primitive times, before
that Church fell away, be in some sense a subordinate head of that Church under
Christ, or an earthly or Ecclesiastical head, as Paul was over the Churches of
the Gentiles. That the Pope should be an Antichrist (which of many Popes, and
of the state of Papacy is and may be truly affirmed) among many other, we
grant; but that he, or the succession of Popes, or the whole Hierarchy, as they
are called, should be that man of sin, and son of perdition which sits in
the Temple of God, exalting himself, above and against all that is called God,
2 Thessalonians. 23.4, 8. is doubtless a great, though a common mistake: for as to the
successors of Popes, they are many, but the Antichrist is one individuum; if
they all should perish, which no charitable man will affirm, they should be
called not one son of perdition, but sons of destruction.

But to pitch upon the person of the Pope, as one individual, and single
Antichrist, out of such a numerous company of Popes, which will you single out,
one past, present, or to come.

Certain it is first, that the Antichrist of which Saint Paul speaks, is a man
of sin, composed altogether of iniquity, and not of flesh, and blood as each
Pope is.

Secondly, That he is a mystery of iniquity, into which none but very spiritual
men can see, of which none of you or any of your authors or their adherents
have yet a true sight.

Thirdly, that the Antichrist exalts himself above all that is called God, or
is worshipped, and so does not the Pope directly do, who acknowledges God,
Christ, the Holy Ghost, yea Angels, and Saints to be above him.

Fourthly, Antichrist sits in the middle of the Temple of God, so does not the
Pope in your sense of the Temple, for he pretends to be head of the Roman
Church especially.

Fifthly he does not say, that he is God; as Antichrist does.

Sixthly, All Popes came not with signs and lying wonders, nor with all the
deceiveableness of unrighteousness, as Antichrist comes.

Lastly Antichrists coming, is inward, and not outward, 2 Thessalonians. 2.9, 10. and
deceives all which receive not the love of truth, but the Pope could never
decive all such; But what may this Antichrist be then?

Answer first, the Temple of God is man's heart, or soul where he sits.

Secondly, As Christ is the true unction there, so Antichrist is a contrary
unction, of false, and erroneous wisdom, righteousness, and zeal, which sets it
self, as if it were the holy Ghost, and his works, opposes the truth, and
Kingdom of God, and not only allows, but hides, fosters, and cherishes
iniquity in men where he reigns.

In a word if the Lord give you spiritual eyes to read the two texts, 1. that
of 2 Thessalonians. 2.3, 4, 5, etc. and then that of Revel. 13.11, 12, etc. (to both
which you refer us) you may by Gods grace, make a discovery of Antichrist, as
one nearer you then the Pope of Rome, and one more endangering your souls, and
learn truly to know and hate him, which mercy the Lord grant unto us all.

Concerning the first text, you may observe these things.

First it is evident, that this Antichrist takes his beginning, and rise from
men's Apostasy, or departure from the true faith, love, and godliness (which was
fet up by Christ and his Apostles) and that in all that fell away, 2 Thessalonians.
2.3. So that he must needs be the succeeding falsehood, error, hypocrisy, and
ungodliness.

Secondly, that he is (...) a man composed of nothing but sin.

Thirdly, That he must therefore needs be a child, yea the son of perdition.

Fourthly, That he opposes himself to all that is called God, that is to God
and all goodness, verse 4.

Fifthly, That he exalts himself above all that is called God, or worshipped,
even the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, All which is true of the false wisdom and
holiness which Satan begets in men, to delude them there with; and to oppose
the truth, kingdom, and work of Christ thereby.

Sixthly, That he sits in the temple of God, which is our heart, or inward man.

Seventhly, That there he shows, or gives forth himself for a God, as this
deceitful work of error and delusion, says it is the presence and work of the
Holy Ghost.

Eighthly, That he cannot well be known, but by spiritual revelation, verse. 6.

Ninthly, That there is one tha (what he can) hides him, keeps him close,
maskes; covers him, and lets or hinders his revealing, or disclosure, and that
is Satan, verse 6.7.

Tenthly, That as he came in by men's departure from Christ, his spirit, and
kingdom; so by Christ's spiritual presence and coming again in his brightness,
power, and glory, he shall be both revealed, and destroyed by the spirit of his
mouth.

11. That he is called the mystery of iniquity, verse 7. that is, such a work
of iniquity, and error, as passes man for wisdom, truth and righteousness from
above, as many men's faith, religion, and z^al does this day, which yet is mere
delusion, and from the father of lies.

12. That he is called (...), the wicked one, (...), which can be no other,
then he that is quite opposite to the righteous one, even Christ; and as Chirst
is the first born of God, so is this the first born, and chief master piece of
the devil transforming himself into an Angel of light.

13. That his coming is not only with lying signs, and wonders, but with all
deceivableness of unrighteness, obtruding that for truth which is falsehood,
commending, that for virtue, or holiness, or righteousness, which is iniquity
and abomination before God, verse 3.10.

14. Out of the same verse it is clear, that this Antichrist is an inward
person, agent, or evil worker, because it is said that he comes with all
deceivableness, of unrighteousness in them that perish.

15. This Antichrist is fent by way of wrath, and vengeance upon those that
received not the love of the truth.

Lastly, he is called in the next verse, the strong delusions of Satan, in
making them to receive and believe lies.

For the other text, Rev. 13.11.12, 13, 14, etc. you may please to observe.

First, That this beast, the wisdom and holiness of the flesh arises out of
the earth or natural man.

Secondly, That he has some semblance of the Lamb, and two horns with him,
with which he will seem to push against some sins of both Tables.

Thirdly, That yet he speaks like the Dragon both against all that differ from
him in opinion, way, and worship, and especially against the true Saints of
Christ.

Fourthly, That he exercises all the power of the first beast, which is
voluptuousne ss, or sensuality, or the open iniquity, for a false holiness
retains, or entertaines a new, the former corruptions which were in men,
without mortifying or resisting them to purpose, and so the last beast, which
is the false wisdom and holiness aforesaid, makes men to serve and worship the
first beast, which was the open or manifest iniquity in covetousness, ambition,
sensuality, etc.

Fifthly, Though the former beast was wounded by repentance and reformation for
a time, and had one of his heads, which is covetousness broken, yet this makes
him to live again in men, and causes an Image, or the like resemblance to the
first beast, to be set up in man, yea he gives life, quickening, and power unto
it: Thus also that first wicked beast bein; in some measure wounded by Christ,
and his Apostles in the Primitive Church through the Apostasy of men, and the
errors, and false holiness which crept in, was healed and revived to the full,
yea his image has been more, and more worshipped to this day.

Sixthly, That this hypocritical beast brings fire from heaven, that is, he
kindles a fiery zeal in men, for the maintaining of their own tenets, and the
opposing of others, and their devotions, and sacrifices are often filled with
fervency as it were fire from Heaven.

Lastly, He causes all that hearken to him, both bond and free, rich and poor,
to receive a mark in their right hand, or forehead, which is unrighteousness it
self, or unfaithfulness in their dealings with God and men, this is the grand
mark of the old beast, though one peculiar mark, whereby this last beast is
known, is enviousness against others, James 3.14, 15.

Thus brethren we have given you some hints of the true Antichrist; it is for
certain none of Satan's least policy to divert our thoughts, and eyes from
beholding this Antichrist within us, and to incense us against our own flesh
and blood; the Pope or some other whom we are commanded to love as our selves.
Oh how invisible has Satan, and his first born within us passed while he has
directed, and pointed us to a false, and imagined Antichrist, yea so far has
he bewitched many, that they can find no Devil to declaim against, but the
Pope, nor any kingdom of hell, errors, or wicked things, to write, or preach
against, but the doctrine, ceremonies, and practices of the Church of Rome, be
they right or wrong, wherein notwithstanding many things are very faulty, but
not all that some men boggle at or ball against.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the Communion of Saints.
ALl Saints that are united to Jesus Christ their head, by his spirit and by
faith, have fellowship with him in his Graces, sufferings, death, refurrection
and glory 1 John: 1.2 Ephesians: 3.1, 16, 17, 18. Joh: 1.16. Ephesians: 2.5, 6. Phil. 3.10.
To: 6.5, 6. 2 Timothy: 2.12
, and being united to one another in love, they have communion in each others
gifts and graces Ephesians: 4.15, 16. 1 Cor. 12. y. 1 Cor: 3.21, 22, 23 Col: 2.19.
and are obliged to the per formance of such public, and private duties, as do
conduce to their mutual good both in the inward, and outward man These: 5.11,
14. To: 1.11, 1^, 14. 1 John: 3.16, 17, 18. Gal: 6.10.
.

II. Saints by profession are bound to maintain an holy fellowship, and
communion in the worship of God, and in performing such other spiritual
services, as tend to their mutual edification Heb: 10.24, 25. Act. 2.42, 46.
Isa: 2.3. 1 Cor: 11.20
; as also in relieving each other in outward things, according to their several
abilities, and necessities, which communion as God offers opportunity is to
be extended to all those who in every place call upon the name of the Lord
Jesus Act: 2.44. 45. 1 John: 3.17. 2 Cor: 8.9. c. Act: 11.29, 30.
,

III. This communion which the Saints have with Christ does not make them in
any wise partakers of the substance of his Godhead, or to be equal with-Christ
in any respect, either of which to affirm is impious and blasphemous Col: 1.18,
19. 1 Cor: 8.6. Isa: 42.8 1 Timothy: 6.15, 16. Psa: 45.7. with 8.9.
; nor does their communion one with another as Saints take away, or infringe
the title, or property which each man has in his goods and possessions Exo:
20.15. Ephesians: 4: 28. Act: 5.4.
.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the communion of Saints examined.
IN your two first Sections here you speak positively, and in your last
negatively of the communion of Saints, where we hold fair correspondence with
you in many things, but not communion with you in all.

For first you distinguish not of the several ages, forms, or degrees of the
Saints but joining them altogether you rather bring in a confusion, then a true
communion of Saints.

And secondly you tumble duties and privileges, possibilities, and possessions
together.

For first as we said before, there are 3 degrees of Saints.

First Saints in God the Father, such as are only called and sanctified by him,
which was the common state of the Saints in the old Testament, Deuteronomy. 33.3. 1 Samuel 2.9. See Psalm. 31.33, and Psalm. 34.9. O fear the Lord all ye his Saints,
for there is no want to them that fear him.

Secondly, there are Saints in God the Son, who are called to know him, and
believe on him for salvation from their spiritual enemies, and deliverance from
the curse, Jude 1. To them that are sanctified by God the Father, and preserved
in Jesus Christ and called; which is the common Classis of the Saints in the
new Testament, Romans 1.6, 7. 1 Cor. 1.2. And thirdly, there are Saints in the
holy Ghost, as the Apostles were made in the day of Pentecost, when they were
filled with the holy spirit of promise, Act. 2.1, 2, 3, etc.

Secondly, All those have neither the same degree of fellowship with God nor
with each other, but have their respective communion either with the father
alone as the first, or with the Father and the Son as the second, or with the
Holy Ghost, also, and so with the whole Trinity as the third.

John 14.25. Jesus answered and said unto him; If a man love me, he will keep
my words, and my Father will love, and we will come unto him and make our abode
with him, See 1 John 1.3, 4, 5. And as the Saints have different degrees of
communion with God according to their several ages, and growth, so they all
have not alike fellowship with each other, in communicating spiritual gifts;
for the Saints in Christ Jesus can condescend to those in God the Father, and
those in God the Holy Ghost can stoop to both the other, to do them service,
but the first cannot communicate much in spiritual things to the second, nor
either the first, or second to the third, though all may in outward things be
serviceable to each other upon earth. These things premised for order, and
distinction sake,

We find then in your first Section these three errors. First, That you make
none to be Saints, but those that are actually united unto Jesus Christ their
head, hereby excluding out of that number, and communion, all those who as yet
are only bgotten by God the Father as were Cornelius, Act. 10.1, 2, 3. and
many other.

Secondly, You untruly affirm, that all those which are united to Christ by his
spirit and says, have actual communion in his sufferings, death, resurrection,
and glory; for none of them have fellowship in his resurrection, and glory,
till they be dead with him, and that the holy Ghost be poured down from Heaven
upon them, as he was upon the Apostles, Act. 2. See To. 6, 5. For if we have
been planted in the likeness of his death, we shall be also in the likeness of
his resurrection, 2 Timothy 2.11.12. neither have all that believed in Christ for
the present, proceeded so far as to suffer with him, and much more to partake
with him in his death, he is a good proficient in Christianity, that knows
what Christ h^th suffered in him, and for him, and is come to suffer with him,
not only outward afflictions, but inward sorrows, in resisting temptations
without yielding to them in their solicitations, wherein lies the main part of
our fellowship of Christ's sufferings; And as for our becoming wholly dead with
Christ, you your selves hold it, a thing not fully attainable in this life,
wherein you greatly wrong the grace and power of Christ, in his saving work and
office, and are not only injurious to others who give ear unto you, but fall
short of that happy conquest, and salvation ensuing, which is held forth unto
you in the Gospel almost everywhere, as has been showed before, See Luke
1.74.75. Romans 6.5. and 14. Ephesians. 5.25, 26, etc. Titus 2.11, 12, 13. Rev. 16.7,
11, 17.26, and Revel 7.14.15, etc.

And thirdly, you here make no distinction betwixt interest, and actual
communion, where you say, That the Saints have communion in each others graces,
which is true of the first, not of the last, where the place which you cited
out of Epbes. 2.5.6. speaks of the Apostles high seize, rather then of
the present state of the Ephesians, and other common believers.

In your second Section you seem tacitly, first to imply that there are two
sorts of Saints, the one by profession only, such as the members of your
Church Catholic were in your former Chapter, and some that are really such,
but we are sure that the Lord admits of no Saints for his Church or people, but
such as are truly sanctified, and continuing such he rejects them not.

Secondly, You truly say that Saints are bound to maintain an holy communion in
the worship of God, but this must be understood with diverse limitations to
fence it from error.

For first it must not be Saints living remotely from each other.

Secondly, It holds not concerning an outward worship, unless the Church set up
one that is pious, and profitable or lawful, at the least, for Christ himself
has instituted no such worship, as we said before.

Thirdly, Yet must all the Saints wheresoever they live, join in one true
spiritual worship of the living God, in his living righteousness.

Lastly, We grant notwithstanding that such as conveniontly can come together,
ought as frequently as their occasions and safety will bear, to meet together,
for the edification, and comfort of each other, and especially if the Christian
Magistrates, and spiritual Governors, command such meetings: But the residue
of this Section about the relief, of the Saints is sound and good.

In your third and negative Section, you truly and upon good grounds disavow
two things.

First, That the Saints are coequal with Christ, for no creature in his highest
perfection can be equal to Christ, the one being finite, the other infinite in
his divine essence.

And Secondly that the Communion of Saints upon Earth does not abolish, no nor
infringe the title, or propriety which each man has in his goods and
possessions, which is clearly imported in those Scriptures of Exodus 20.15.
Ephesians. 4.28. and Acts 5.4. which you point us unto, as also in many other
places of the Old and New Testament: But whether that estate which the Saints
attain at length, when with the Apostle they are raised up together with
Christ, and made sit together with him in the Heavenly places, or things,
Ephesians. 2.5, 6. be a bare quality or accident, or whether it be a spiritual
life, power and substance, we will not dispute; sure we are the Apostle calls
it the divine nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. and our Savior, or Wisdom calls it substance
in one notion or other, Prove. 18.21. And I will cause them to inherit,
substance whatsoever that estate is, the Platonists called him that had
attained it, not only (...), but (...), a deified man, and not only some of
the modern, but even of the ancient writers of the Church use the word
codeifying in a good sense, of such as are made pertakers of the Divine nature,
according to the capacity of creatures.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the Sacraments.
SAcraments are holy Signs and Seals of the Covenant of grace To: 4.11. Ge:
17.7.10
, immediately instituted of God Mat: ^8.19. 1 Cor: 11.
; to represent Christ and his benefits, to confirm our interest in him 1 Cor:
10, 16. 1 Co: 11.23 25, 26. Gal: 3 17.
, as also to put a visible difference between those that belong unto the
Church, and the rest of the world To: 15.8. Exo: 12.48. Gen: 34: 14
, and solemnly to engage them to the service of God in Christ, according to his
word To: 6.3.4 1 Cor: 10.16.21.
.

II. There is in every Sacrament a spiritual relation, or sacramental union
between the sign, and the thing signified, whence it comes to pass that the
names and effects of the one are attributed to the other Gen: 27.10. Matthew.
26.27, 28. Titns 3.5.
.

III. The grace which is exhibited in or by Sacraments rightly used, is not
conferred by any power in them, neither does the efficacy of a Sacrament depend
upon the piety, or intention of him that does administer it Rom: 2.28, 29. 1
Pet. 3.21
, but upon the work of the Spirit Mat. 3.11. 1 Cor: 12.13
; and the word of institution which contains together with a precept an
authorizing the use thereof, a promise of benefit to worthy receives Mat:
26.27, 28. Mat: 28.19, 20.
.

IV. There be only two Sacraments ordained by Christ our Lord in the Gospel,
that is to say Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord, neither of which may be
dispensed of any, but by a minister of the word lawfully ordained Mat. 28.19. 1
Cor. 11.20, 23. 1 Cor: 4.1. Heb: 5.4.
.

V. The Sacraments of the Old Testament in regard of the Spiritual things
thereby signified and exhibited were for substance the same with those of the
new 1 Cor: 10.1, 2, 3, 4.
.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the Sacraments in General, examined.
IN this your general Doctrine of the Sacraments you have in a general manner
kept the road of truth, though here and there you deviate following your
misleading guides, but first we allow you the retention, and use of the word
Sacrament, though not found in the Scriptures, because the thing thereby
signified is frequent there, and the term has not only been long retained in
the Church, but was at the first borrowed from a military oath, obligeing the
Soldier to obedience and faithfulness toward their general, to express our
like oligations to God and his Christ.

Then as to your several Sections, we take no acceptions at all to your second,
but must crave leave to certify you somewhat in most of the other.

As first in the first Section, where you setting forth the ends of the
Sacraments, do put that in the last place which was the first and principal end
of their institution, that is solemnly to engage men to the service of God in
Christ, for it is evident that Circumcision was ordained for that end mainly,
Genesis 17.10. This is the Covenant which you shall keep between me and you, and
thy seed after thee, that every man child among you shall be circumcised, Deuteronomy.
10.16. Circumcise therefore the foreskin of your heart, and be no more
stiff-necked; Jer. 4.4. Circumcise your selves to the Lord and take away the
fore skin of your bearts, ye men of Judah and inhabitants of Jerusalem; the
like we find written concerning the Passover, Exodus 12.17. And ye shall
observe the feast of unleavened bread, for in this self-same day have I brought
your armies out of the land of Egypt; therefore shall ye observe this day in
your generatious for ever, 1 Cor. 5.8. Therefore let us keep the feast not with
the old leaven, neither with the leaven of malice and wickedness, but with the
unleavened bread of sincerity and truth. And as the Sacraments of the Old, so
those of the New Testament are instituted, to instruct us in duty also.

Hence Baptism is called the Baptism of Repentance, Mark 1.4. And Christ in the
institution of the Lords supper says, do ye this in remembrance of me, 1 Cor.
11.24. and verse 26. As often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, show ye
the Lords death till his coming. viz. That spiritual coming which he promised.
John 14.19.23. Howbeit we do not deny, but that spiritual benefits are to be
expected in the performance of these duties; so the repentance taught by
Baptism has remission of sins annexed to it, Mark 1.4. and the spiritual body
and blood of Christ, of which we shall have occasion to speak in the 29.
chapter, are in the Sacraments of the Lords Supper assured to those that are
mindful of his death, and suffer with him in resisting temptations, by which
they are enabled to hold out, and overcome when they are tempted: but these
benefits are signified, and sealed unto us but conditionally, and in the second
place only.

Your third use, of that distinction between the people of God and the world,
we also allow; but you have omitted one main end which the Lord had in
instituting the Sacraments, which was thus even by degrees to build up his
Tabernacles of righteousness that was fallen down; to wit, the first part of it
in Circumcision, the second in the Passover, as also in the Lords Supper, and
the third in his breathing upon his Disciples, and saying unto them; Receive ye
the Holy Ghost, John 20 22. For which last end, both the feast of weeks in the
Old Testament, and Baptism in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, were
instituted in the new, especially that third part of Baptism.

Secondly, Whereas you say in your third Section, "That the efficacy of a
Sacrament does not depend at all upon the piety and good intention of him that
does administer it, you therein speak very unadvisedly; For whereas the efficacy
of a Sacrament is either obligement unto duty, or the assurance of grace and
help, are not both obstructed by him that administers it, if he be ignorant and
not able to declare the Mystery of the Sacrament, or if he administers the same
in a profane and absurd manner, or to other ends then it is ordained for, or
being a wicked person has his prayers for efficacy rejected? And on the
contrary do not the spiritual abilities of the Minister, his piety and fervent
payers conduce much both to the edifying of the people in that service, and the
drawing down a blessing upon himself and them therein.

Thirdly, Though we must grant you in the fourth Section, that there are but
two proper and complete Sacraments in the New Testament, yet there are many as
it were, semi Sacraments, to be found there, which are holy signs instituted
by God in the time of the Gospel or before, of which some represent our duties,
some the grace of God, and some both; such is the washing and wiping of the
Disciples feet, John 13.4, 15.

Secondly, The anointing with oil, such as were sick, and to be healed by the
Disciples, and Elders of the Church.

Mark 6.13. And they cast out many Devils, and anointed with oil those that
were sick, and healed them, James 5.14. Is any man sick among you let him call
for the Elders of the Church, and let them pray over him, anointing him with
oil in the name of the Lord.

Thirdly, Imposing of hands in a threefold case; First, In the way of healing,
Mark 16.18. They shall lay their hands upon the sick, and they shall recover.

Secondly, In confirming new Disciples, and communicating the Holy Ghost, Acts
8.17. and 19.6.

And thirdly, In ordaining either Deacons, or Ministers for the Churches, Acts
6.6. Acts 13.1, 2, 3. or Bishops themselves, 1 Tymothy 4.14. 2 Tymothy 1.6.

Fourthly, The near union betwixt the Husband and the wife, with their
reciprocal duties, figuring forth Christ and his Church, Genesis 2.21 --
24.2.19, 20. Ephesians. 5.25 -- 32.

Finally, Some adhere the Ceremony of the Husbands praying, and prophesying
with his head uncovered; because a cover is a token of uncleanness, and he
represents Christ the Head of the Church, who is holy and pure; but of the
Wives praying, and sitting to hear Prophesyings with their head covered, both
in token of subjection, and to show that the man her Head, is through the fall
unclean; which things is now neither observed nor regarded in the reformed
Churches: See Corinthians 11.2 -- 16. Yet let us consider advisedly, whether
the Apostle would spend half a Chapter about a needless thing which might be
observed, or omitted at pleasure: To those perhaps some might be added.

But secondly, whereas you say here in this fourth Section, That the two
Sacraments of the Gospel were both instituted by Christ our Lord. You are much
mistaken; for though the Lords Supper was so, yet Baptism was ordained by God
the Father, who sent John the Baptist by his Doctrine and Baptism, to make way
for Christ his Doctrine and Office, John 1.33.

Lastly, You truly affirm in the close of the same Section, That neither of
these two Sacraments may be dispensed by any, but by a Minister of the Word
lawfully called: But here we pray you consider seriously of it, whether the
bare calling of man be he the Civil or Ecclesiastical Governor, or both, be a
sufficient commission to dispense the Word and Sacraments by? Perhaps in a
formal Church of Professors the whole Frabrick being humane it may suffice, but
to administer these among the Saints, and household of God, who only are the
true Church, as we said before; peradventure it requires an higher call, even
Gods own authority, or commission, as the places of Scripture to which you
point, or some of them plainly intimate, to wit, Matthew. 28.19, 20. 1 Cor.
11.20, 23. 1 Cor. 4.1. Heb 5.4.

Finally, Whereas you say in you fifth and last Section, That the Sacraments of
the Old Testament were in regard of the things signified, for substance the
same with these of the New, it is not every way true; for circumcision the
initiatory Sacrament in the Old Testament did set forth the first part of
regeneration especially, but Baptism in, or unto the name of the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, represents all the three parts of the new birth: and the
Passover, though it imported to eat Christ's flesh, yet it was ordinarily but a
communicating in one kind, whereas the Lords Supper communicates in both
kinds, and holds forth the Blood of Christ, as well as his flesh for the
strengthening of those that follow Christ into his death.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of Baptism.
BAPTIM is a Sacrament of the New Testament, Ordained by Jesus Christ Mat.
28.29.
, not only for the solemn admission of the party baptized, into the Visible
Church 1 Cor: 12.13.
: but also to be unto him a sign, and seal of the Covenant of Grace Rom: 4.11.
with Col: 2 11.12.
, of his grafting into Christ Gal. 3.27 Rom: 6.5.
, of regeneration Tit. 3.5.
, of remission of sins Mark 1.4.
, and of his giving up unto God through Jesus Christ, to walk in newness of
life To: 6.3, 4
, which Sacrament is, by Christ's own appointment, to be continued in his Church
until the end of the World Mat: 28.19, 20.
.

II. The outward Element to be used in this Sacrament is Water, wherewith the
Party is to be baptized, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost, by a Minister of the Gospel, lawfully called thereunto Mar: 3.11
John 1.33. Matthew: 28.19, 19.
.

III. Dipping of the person into the Water, is not necessary: but baptism is
rightly administered, by pouring or sprinkling Water upon the person Heb: 9.19,
20, 21, 22. Acts 2. Acts 16.33. Mar: 7.4.
.

IV. Not only those that do actually profess faith in, and obedience unto
Christ Mark 16.15.16. Acts 8.37.38.
, but also the infants of one, or both believing Parents are to be baptized
Gen: 17.7, 9. with 17, 12, Gal: 3.9.14 Gol: 2.2. Acts 2.38, 39. Rom: 4.11.12. 1
Cor: 7.14 Mark 10.13, 14, 15, 16. Luk: 18.15.
,

V. Although it be a great sin to contemn or neglect this Ordinance Luk: 7.30
with Exo: 4.25, 26, 27.
, yet Grace and Salvation are not so inseparably annexed unto it, as that no
person can be regenerated or saved without it To: 4.11 Acts 10.2, 4, ^2, 31, 45
49.
, or that all which are baptized, are undoubtedly regenerated Acts 8.13 23.
.

VI. The efficacy of baptism it not tied to that moment of time, wherein it is
administered John 3.8.
: yet, notwitstanding by the right use of this Ordinance, the grace promised is
not only offered, but really exhibited, and conferred by the Holy Ghost, to
such (whether of age, or infants) as that Grace belongs unto, according to
the counsel of Gods own will, in his appointed time Galat: 3.17. Titns 3 5.
Ephesians: 5.25. Ephesians: 25.26. Acts 2.38.
.

VII. The Sacrament of baptism is but once to be administered unto any person
Titus 3.5.
.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of Baptism, examined.
ALTHOUGH some passages here are foul enough, yet they have some of them been
washed before.

As first, That where in your first and last Section, you would have the first
and main thing signified by this Sacrament, to be the spiritual grace contained
in the Covenant, as regeneration and remission of sins. Whereas the first and
principle scope in this, and all other Sacraments is to inform us in, and
oblige us unto duty, as appears out of the words of Ananias unto Paul, Acts
22.16. And now why tarriest thou? Arise and be baptized, and wash away thy fins
by calling upon the name of the Lord. See also Romans 6.2, 3, 4, 5, 6. How shall
we that are dead to sin, live any longer therein? Know ye not, that so many of
us as were baptized into Jesus Christ, were baptized into his death? Therefore
we are buried with him by baptism into death, that like as Christ was raised up
from the dead, by the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in
newness of life, etc.

Secondly, You say This Sacrament was ordained by Christ, which was only
sanctified and continued by him, but instituted and ordained by the Father, as
we have showed before, See Mat. 21.25.

And thirdly, You urge that this Sacrament is to be administered by a Minister
lawfully called thereunto, as you have it in the end of your second Section,
and by no other which we admitted before; if that Minister be called of God
thereunto, to administer this Sacrament to his Disciples; otherwise we doubt
whether his commission be authentic in the true Church, and the congregations
of the Saints.

But what you write further in that second Section, "That the Element to be
used in this Sacrament, is water; is true, nor is there any other Element to be
used, nor is any other composition, or sophistication needful. Notwithstanding
you are here two ways defective.

First, In not showing what the Element signifies, nor secondly, how we are to
be baptized in relation to the Trinity, either inwardly or outwardly aright.

But to make a supply for your defects; The water of Baptism signifies the pure
Doctrine, or Word of God, as has been partly intimated before. John 15.3. Now
are ye clean through the word that I have spoken unto you John 17.17. Sanctify
them through thy truth, thy word is truth. Ephesians 5.25.26. Husbands love your
Wives, as Christ loved his Church, and gave himself for it, that he might
sanctify and cleanse it, with the washing of water by the word: Thus we must
be born again, not of the Spirit alone, but of Water and the Spirit, Joh. 3.5.

Secondly, Those that are duly baptized, must be baptized (...) not in the name
only, but to the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost,
Matthew 28.19, 20. That is, to carry the name, or the like being first of the
Father; then of the Son, and lastly of the Holy Ghost

The first, In a love to all good, and hatred to all evil.

The second, In carrying the saving power of Christ as a conquest over, and
preservative against the power of sin and Satan.

And the third, In fruition of all truth, light, life, gifts and comforts of
the Holy Ghost, wherein the Heavenly Jerusalem, descending from above consists.

Thus the Apostles were sent by Christ: First with their doctrine, and then
with water to baptize men, that they might be fitted to receive, and carry the
threefold name, which yet in the end is but one name, and like being of the
living God, according to the capacity of creatures.

In the third Section you have some pretty sprinkling of Truth, where you
maintain, and that truly That dipping, or ducking in the Water is not necessary
in this Sacrament, but that effusion, or sprinkling with water will suffice.

But in your fourth Section, where you say, That the infants of one, or both
believing parents are to be baptized, your assertion is too far dipped in
error; For Infants are no where commanded to be baptized in the new Testament,
though the children of Israel were commanded at the eighth day to be
circumcised, nor does Baptism succeed circumcision in that behalf, or almost in
any other respect, unless it be first as an initiatory Sacrament, for new
converts. And secondly, so far as it is a Baptism in the name of the Father, or
of the Father and the Son at the uttmost; for Baptism in the Holy Ghost points
at a far higher estate, then either Circumcision or the Passover, or yet the
supper of the Lord hold forth: yet we do not deny but Infants may lawfully be
baptized, even the Infants of unbeleeving parents, if some friends of theirs
desire it, and the superior powers so appoint, because the Baptism of Infants
is no where forbidden, and though in regard of innate uncleanness they have no
great need of outward, or inward washing from sin, as we have proved before;
yet this Sacrament being administered in infancy, and afterward known to the
party baptized, may be as useful to him in the way of instruction and comfort,
when after his fall he would return to the Lord, as circumcision was to the
Isralites, which was administered in their Infancy.

Your fifth Section presents the neglect, or contempt of this ordinance as a
great sin, which is true of new converts, who should not only admit of it
being offered, but even seek and desire it where it may be had, as the Eunuch
did, Acts 8.36.37. But this is not alike true of infants who cannot desire it,
nor have need of it for the present; nor yet of their parents in relation to
them, unless it be in these Countries, and places where the Governors appoint
all infants to be baptized; for here to neglect or contemn, it is a sin of
contumacy against these Governors: and though some scruple at it, because they
cannot find Poedobaptisme to be Gods Ordinance, yet they ought to submit to it
as an Humane, or Ecclesiastical Ordinance, especially since obedience to
Governors is expressly commanded, and the baptizing of Infants no where
prohibited.

The residue of that your fifth Section is very sound and good, for you truly
and rightly affirm, That grace and salvation are not so inseparably annexed
unto baptism, as that no person can be regenerated, or saved without it, or
that all that are baptized, are undoubtedly regenerated.

Your sixth Section concerning the efficacy of Baptism, not being tied to the
very moment of administration, is true often his and all other Sacraments,
whether we understand the grace held forth only as you seem to do, not without
a great mistake, or the duty we should learn from it, and them which is no
small part of the drift, and efficacy of the Sacraments, as has been declared.

Lastly; Whereas you say in your seventh and last Section, That Baptism is but
once to be administered unto any persons; it may be either true or false, as it
is understood; for these Disciples at Ephesus which had not so much as heard
that there was an holy Ghost, were baptized into Johus Baptism; Acts 19.3. when
they had heard Paul preach unto them, were baptized again, verse 4, 5. so
doubtless were many more of John's Disciples, for though John made mention of
one that should come after him, And baptize his Disciples with the holy Ghost,
and with fire, Mat. 3.11. Yet he baptized them in the name of the Father, or
but unto the name of Son at the furthest, and not unto the Holy Ghost, from
which estate, his office and baptism stood at too great a distance, in that
his fore-running office; yet it is true, that those who are completely baptized
in, or unto the name of the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost, need not to
be baptized again: Howbeit two things would further be enquired into.

First, Whether the Apostle did not make some pause in the baptizing, naming
each person distinctly in whose name they baptized, and so paused a while
betwixt the first and the second, and then betwixt the second and the third;
because the Apostle speaks of the Doctrine of Baptismes, Hebrews 6.2. as also
for that some were said to be Baptized for the dead, 1 Corinthians 15.29. the
former of which places implies, that the acts of Baptism might be a plurality,
though all at one time successively performed.

The other, That some were Baptized to become dead with Christ, (which we take
to be the genuine meaning of that Text) and that the Baptizer there paused, if
he went any further at that time.

The other is, Whether those that were ignorant of what was done to them in
their Infancy by death of Parents, or Sureties, may not lawfully be Baptized
again at the time of their Repentance and Conversion to God; and that for their
further edification, or comfort, though otherwise we neither see what necessity
there can be of Persons once Baptized, and knowing they were so, to be
rebaptized, or what warrant the Anabaptists have from God or men, to reiterate
this Sacrament, or administer it at all.

CHAP. XXIX. Of the Lords Supper.
OUR Lord Jesus in the night wherein he was betrayed, instituted the Sacrament
of his body and blood called the Lords Supper, to be observed in his Church
unto the end of the world, for the perpetual remembrance of the Sacrifice of
himself, in his death; the sealing all benefits thereof unto true Believer,
their spiritual nourishment and growth in him, their further engagement in, and
to all duties which they owe unto him; and to be a bond and pledge of their
communion with him, and with each others, as members of his mystical body 1
Cor: 11.23, 24, 25, 26. 1 Cor: 10.16, 17, 21. 1 Cor: 12.13.
.

II. In this Sacrament Christ is not offered up to his Father: nor any real
Sacrifice made at all, for remission of sins of the quick and dead Heb: 9.22,
25, 26.28.
, but only a commemoration of that once offering up himself, by himself upon
the Cross, once for all; and a spiritual oblation of all possible praise unto
God, for the same 1 Cor: 11.24, 2^, 26, Matthew: 26.26, 27.
: So that the Popish Sacrifice of the Mass (as they call it) is most abominably
injurious to Christ's one only Sacrifice, the alone Propitiation for the sins
of the Elect Heb: 7.23, 24, 27. Heb: 10.11 12, 14, 18.
.

III. The Lord Jesus has in this Ordinance appointed his Ministers to declare
his word of institution to the people, to pray and bless the Elements of bread
and wine, and thereby to set them apart from a common to an holy use: and to
take, and break the bread, to take the cup, and (they communicating also
themselves) to give both to the Communicants Mat: 26.26, 27, 28. Mark 14.22;
33.24. Luke 22.19, 20. with 1 Cor: 11.23, 24, 25, 26.
; but to none who are not present in the Congregation Act 20.27 1 Cor: 11.20
.

IV. Private Masses, or receiving this Sacrament by a Priest, or any other
alone 1 Cor: 10, 6.
, as likewise the denial of the Cup to the people Mark 14.23. 1 Cor: 11.25, 26,
27, 28, 29.
, worshipping the Elements, the lifting them up, or carrying them about for
adoration, and the reserving them for any pretended religious use, are all
contrary to the nature of this Sacrament: and to the institution of Christ Mat:
15.^.
.

V. The outward Elements in this Sacrament, duly set apart to the uses ordained
by Christ, have such relation to him crucified, as that truly, yet
Sacramentally only, they are sometimes called by the name of the things they
represent, to wit, the body and blood of Christ Mat: 26.26, 27, 28.
, albeit, in substance and nature, they still remain, truly, and only bread
and wine, as they were before 1 Cor: 11 2^, 27, 28. Mat: 26.29.
.

VI. That Doctrine which maintains a change of the substance of bread and wine,
into the substance of Christ's body and blood (commonly called
transubstantiation) by consecration of a Priest, or by any other way, is
repugnant not to the Scripture alone, but even to common sense and reason;
overthrows the nature of the Sacrament, and has been, and is the cause of
manifold superstitions, yea, of gross Idolatries Acts 3.21. with ^ Cor:
11.25.26. Luke 24.26, 39.
.

VII. Worthy receivers outwardly pertaking of the visible Elements in that
Sacrament 1 Cor: 11.28.
, do then also inwardly by faith, really, and indeed, yet not carnally and
corporally, but spiritually feed upon Christ crucified, and all the benefits of
his death; the body and blood of Christ being then not corporally, or carnally
in, with, or under the bread and wine; yet as really, but spiritually present
to the faith of believers, in that ordinance, as the Elements themselves are to
the outward senses 1 Cor: 10.16.
.

VIII. Although ignorant, and wicked men receive outward Elements in this
Sacrament, yet they receive not the thing signified thereby; but by their
unworthy coming thereunto are guilty of the body and blood of the Lord to their
own damnation; wherefore all ignorant and ungodly persons as they are unfit to
enjoy communion with him, so are they unworthy of the Lords table, and cannot
without great sin against Christ, while they remain such, partake of the holy
mysteries Cor: 11.27, 28, 29. 2 Cor: 6.14, 15, 16.
, or be admitted thereunto 1 Cor: 5.6, 7, 13. 2 These: 3.6 14, 15. Matthew: 7.6
.

CHAP. XXIX. Of the Lords Supper, examined.
BRETHREN to give you your due, you have here truly set forth the Author of
this Sacrament, the time of its institution, with some of the ends for which it
was ordained in the first Section; and some part of the Ministers duty in the
right administration of it in the third Section: you have learnedly detected,
and confuted many of the gross abuses of the Papists in, or about this
Sacrament, in your second, fourth fifth, and sixth Sections: endeavored to
comfort the receiver of it in the seventh, and set Railes about the Communion
Table in the eighth Section, to keep back ignorant, profane, and unworthy
Communicants; but if we here convince your selves with your Authors and guides
of gross ignorance and error in the main Mystery of this Sacrament, we hope you
will the sooner yield that it was possible for you to err in other things,
even in the most of these we have mainly challenged you for; yea, peradventure
you will be hereupon induced to believe these things?

That there is a departure from the faith come into the Church, 1 Timothy 4.1.2. 2
These. 2.24.

That the man of sin, error, and delusion is crept in, 2 These. 2.3, 4,

That much saving truth has been lost for many hundred years.

That your Authors were not sent of God to preach the true Gospel, which they
never understood rightly in its chief mysteries concerning Christ.

That it was needful that the Gospel should be preached a new to the whole
world, before the end of the wicked world, or the great destruction come in,
Matthew 24.12, 13, 14.

That it was necessary that some extraordinary Prophet or Apostle should be
raised up in mercy for that end, Revelations 14.6.7.

And finally, That other holy Scriptures, and writings as we said before, might
in time be profitably added to the books of the New Testament, to clear and
vindicate them from the errors and mistakes of men, brought in by Satan in
progress of time, as those books were written for the like vindication of
Moses, and the Prophets, among other ends.

To return then to the business in hand, besides many other great mistakes of
yours in this argument, you plainly and fully discover to the whole world, that
you understand not the mystery either of the Cup, or of the Bread and Wine,
which are the true body and blood of Christ in this Sacrament, nor yet the main
end of its institution, and so upon the matter you are not less, but more
grossly deceived then the Jews were, John 6.52, etc. For our Savior speaking
unto them there of his flesh, which he would give for the life of the world
verse 51. and of the necessity of eating his flesh, and drinking his blood, if
they would have life, verse 53. and of the excellency and usefulness of his
flesh and blood, verse 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58. The Jews understood the same
flesh and blood of Christ which you do here, even those of his humanity; but
herein they exceeded you, whereas corporal things can be no ways eaten but
corporally, they conceived and that rightly, that if it were his humane flesh
and blood that they must feed of, they must Canibal like eat and drink the
same; but you hold that the same must be eaten by Faith, that is, by conceit
and imagination, and no otherwise; for bodily things must be eaten, and drunk
in a bodily manner, and with bodily organs, but spiritual things may be taken
in spiritually by Faith.

We pray you therefore to read this chapter advisedly, and the Lord give you a
right understanding in all things. Where if the Lord remove the scales from
your eyes, you may observe these things with us.

That Christ perceiving this their literal, and gross understanding of his
doctrine concerning his flesh, to be eaten and blood to be drunk, does at the
63. verse explain himself, and that first negatively, and then positively,
telling them, That the flesh which they understood the flesh and blood of his
humanity, etc. profits nothing, in the way of feeding, and quickening the
soul dead in sin; It is the spi-that quickens, and it must be spiritual food
that must give life, strength, and nourishment to the soul, the words that I
speak unto you are spirit and life, which come from the spirit, and life, tend
thither, and speak of the same, yea they are the flesh that I meant ye should
eat; That is, I spoke not of a corporal flesh and blood. Here you see that it
is not his humane flesh and blood that he gives us to feed upon, and that by
his own testimony.

Secondly he says, that unless we eat of his flesh, and drink of his blood, we
neither have nor can have life in us, verse. 53. but Infants, and all those that
never heard of Christ in the flesh, cannot eat of it in your sense, that is, by
faith or imagination; whence it will follow according to your Doctrine and
conceiving; that they cannot possibly have life.

Thirdly, Our Savior says verse 56. He that cateth my flesh, and drinks my
blood dwells in me, and I in him; which you cannot verify of all those that
eat his flesh and drink his blood in your sense, and according to your
doctrine, and conceiving; for we find many rejected by our Savior and shut
out of his Kingdom, who had eaten and drunk in his presence, Luke 3 25, 26, 27.
but it is most true of the spiritual flesh and blood eaten and drunken rightly.

Fourthly, Our Savior says, That his flesh is a bread that came down from
Heaven, verse 58. But his humane flesh, and consequently his blood came not
from thence.

Fifthly, Our Savior implies that this food must be both inward and living, in
those words, verse 57. As the living Father has sent me, and I live by the
Father; so he that eats me shall live by me.

Lastly, To eat these, is to eat Christ: If you demand then, What is that flesh
of Christ that is broken for us, and which blood of Christ is it that is here
signified? We answer to each distinctly.

First, The flesh of Christ is his Word, whereby the invisible Word the Deity
is made in some sort visible and edible unto us; thus Christ the Eternal Word
was made flesh to his Disciples and dwelt among them, John 1.14. And they
afterward saw his glory, as of the only begotten Son of God, when he was
spiritually incarnate in and with them. Thus he told us before by way of
explanation of himself, John 6.63. what was the flesh that he would have the
Jews and us to feed upon, even his Words, which are spirit and life. Thus
Jeremiah speaks of the eating of this word or flesh, chap. 15. verse 16. Thy
words were found by me, and I did eat them, And they word was unto me the joy
and rejoicing of my heart: Thus Origin among the other Ancients says,
Christiani omni die carnis agni comedunt, etc. Christians eat of the flesh of
the Lamb every day, whilst they feed of the flesh of the Word of God; This is
that Manna from Heaven which is Angels food, Psalm. 103.20. Bless the Lord ye
his Angels that excel in strength, that do his Commandments, bearkening to the
voice of his word, of which the Manna in the wilderness was a type, Psalm.
78.24, 25. He reigned down Manna upon them, and gave them of the Corn of
Heaven; Thus man did eat Angels food, he sent them meat to the full. All which
is more truly to be understood of the word wherewith God fed both them, and the
Angels before them, then of the outward manna which was but a shadow of it, Nor
was it unusual in the old or new Testament, to express the word of God, the
food of our souls by bread. Deuteronomy. 8.3. And he humbled thee, and suffered thee
to hunger, and fed thee with Manna which thou know not, neither did thy
Fathers know: That he might make thee know, that man lives not by bread alone,
but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of the Lord, does man live;
where by the way the spiritual mystery both of Manna and of bread is opened,
Amos 8.11. Behold the days come that I will send a famine in the Land, not a
famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but of hearing the word of the Lord:
where observe this word is no other but that which comes out of the mouth of
the Lord, or is spoken by his spirit, for otherwise how would it be so scarce
and hard to be found, as follows in the next verse, And they shall wander from
Sea to Sea, and from the North even to the East, they shall run to and fro to
seek the word of the Lord, and shall not find it; In that day shall the young
men, and the fair Virgins faint for thirst, but the written word, with the
comments and expositions of men thereupon, never was any hard thing to come by;
it was then true in the former sense only which is written, 1 Samuel 3.1. And
the word of the Lord was precious, in those days there was no open vision: And
as the word of God thus spoken is compared to bread in the Old Testament, Jer.
3.15. so is it likewise in the New, Matthew. 4.4. But he answered; it is written
that man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that proceeds out
of the mouth of God: As man then has a twofold life, so he must live by a
twofold bread.

Thus for the mystical flesh of Christ, his Blood here is that which came from
Heaven, as well as his Flesh, John 6.58. and which is Spirit, and Life, for the
nourishing and quickening of our Souls; and this is no other but the life, and
power, and spirit of Christ, whereby our corruptions are put away and removed
signified by (...), and our spiritual enemies overcome, Rev. 12.11. of which
you heard before out of Heb. 9 14. How much more shall the blood of Christ, who
through the eternal spirit offered himself without spot to God; purge your
Conscience from dead works to serve the living God: out of Heb. 10.29. Of how
much sorer punishment shall he be thought worthy, who has trodden under foot
the Son of God, and has counted the blood of the Covenant, wherewith he was
sanctified, an unholy thing, and has done despite to the Spirit of Grace, out
of Heb. 13.20, 21. Now the very God of peace, that brought again from the dead
our Lord Jesus through the blood of the everlasting Covenant, make you perfect
in every good work to do his will: For what is it we pray you, but this life or
spirit of Christ, that purges our soul or conscience from dead works to serve
the living God, or that sanctifies us, or makes us perfect in every good work?
This is the first blood of the New Testament, as we have proved before, It was
by this blood that the believing Jews to whom St. Peter wrote, were redeemed or
delivered from their vain conversation, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. It was with this blood
that the Saints had washed their robes, and made them white, Rev. 7.14. to
which places we added 1 John 5.8. which makes the water, the blood, and the
spirit to agree in one: These are the flesh, and blood of Christ held forth in
this Sacrament, as things spoken of before, John 6. This flesh or word of
Christ had been often broken by him, and given to his Disciples to eat; this
blood of Christ had been given them to take in, and drink. John 14.17. Even the
Spirit of truth, whom the world cannot receive, because it sees him not,
neither knows him, but ye know him, for he dwells with you, and shall be in
you, 1 Cor: 12.13. And ye have been all made to drink into one Spirit, where
the Mystery of the wine administered, and blood spoken of in that Sacrament is
expounded, as it is also by our Savior at the time of institution in these
words of his, Matthew. 26.28, 29. But I say unto you I will not henceforth drink
of the fruit of the Vine, until that day that I drink it new with you in my
Fathers Kingdom.

Where for the better discovery of your own former mistakes, you may observe
two things in the foregoing words of the institution.

First, That Christ speaks not of a body in the future tense, that should be
broken for them, but one that was then broken for them.

Secondly, That in the present tense likewise, he speaks of a blood then poured
out, as his spirit had been in some measure upon them, and not of a blood to be
wholly shed, or poured out for the future only.

This flesh and blood of Christ, is a good Mediator betwixt us and God, to
pull down the partition wall of sin, and slay the enmity betwixt us and him,
and the special means of our conquest, as we shall show by and by.

Yet far be it from us as we said before, That we should deny the use and
benefit of Christ's Humane flesh, and blood, who was made of the seed of David
according to the promises, and suffered for us according to the Scriptures, and
therein did not only set us an example, and monument of what he had inwardly
suffered for us, and in us, but also chalked out the true way to eternal life,
yea, paid an invalluable price for our Redemption from the curse of the Law,
Gal. 3.13. Heb. 9.27, 28. Yea, we showed before, that if the fallen man were
made perfect again in the way of regeneration, yet without the sacrifice and
satisfaction of Christ, he could not be saved from the guilt, and punishment of
his sins: See Heb. 10.14. For by one offering has he perfected for ever them
that are sanctified. But this is the thing which we here assert, that the flesh
of Christ which he commands us to eat, and the blood which he enjoins us to
drink in this Sacrament, are not those of his humanity, as you, and your guides
have hitherto taught, but that very flesh and blood which came from Heaven by
our Saviors own doctrine, John 6. aforesaid confirmed with many other
Scriptures, nor is it the custom of the Lord to figure out corporal things,
but spiritual by outward, and corporal Elements and Types.

And as you, with your Teachers have not had any true fight of those blessed
Mysteries, so have you not understood the Mystery of the Cup or Chalice, out of
which the Spirit and life of Christ, or the blood of the new Testament is to be
received and drunk; which Cup is first the suffering or Passion of Christ, as
we see in that his prayer, Father if it be possible let this Cup pass from me;
and then our like suffering for him, and with him both in the outward man, and
in the inward man also; and that especially in the resistance of temptation,
and the enduring of the enemies assault, and vexation, Matthew 20.22, 23. Are
ye able to drink of the Cup that I shall drink of, and to be baptized with the
baptism, wherewith I shall be baptized.

Now to take a short survey of your several Sections.

In the first of them you mistake the ends for which the Sacrament was
instituted, which was not to nourish or strengthen our souls with his humane
flesh and blood, or to make the same the band or pledge of our communion with
him, and each other, nor to seal up the benefits of his Sacrifice upon the
Cross, but to hold out in a mystery, and exhibit unto us a spiritual verticum,
wereby we may be enabled to keep a spiritual Passover with him from death to
life, and become the more strengthened to follow him in his like sufferings,
and death, and so to be better armed and fortified against all encounters of
the enemy.

Thus was the sacrifices of the Old Testament accompanied with a meat offering,
and drink offering, to show that we must be furnished with the body and blood
of Christ, to help us in the sacrificing and offering up our spiritual
sacrifice of sin.

Thus Melchizedek met Abraham when he was weary and faint with his late fight,
and brought him bread and wine to revive and strengthen him.

Thus furnished, we ought to remember and show forth the Lords death till his
coming to us in the spirit, 1 Cor. 11.23, 26. and by eating of this one bread,
we also become one bread, or flesh or bread with Christ, and each other, as St.
Paul speaks, 1 Cor. 10.16. and so this Sacrament without all controversy was
ordained as you speak afterward, to oblige us unto duty, and to further our
communion with Christ and with each other, that we may be made one bread, and
one body with him, and in him; yet not in your sens or way, but as St Paul
speaks, 1 Cor 10.16, 17. by being all made pertakers of one bread, to wit, his
word, and 1 Co^ 12.13. by being all made to drink into one spirit, as before it
was showed at large.

In your second Section you truly say, That in this Sacrament, Christ is not
offered up to his Father as a sacrifice for the quick and the dead, but Christ
here offers himself in his Mystical flesh and blood, as a true meat offering,
and drink offering to his true believers, and followers; nor is it advisedly
said of you there, That at or in this Sacrament there is no real sacrifice at
all made, beside the commemoration of his own offering of himself, with all
possible praise to God for the same; for in the right celebration of this
Supper, we ought to offer up both the sacrifices of a broken, and contrite
heart, Psalm. 51.17. and to sacrifice the remainder of our sins as our daily
offering in the holy of Gods Tabernacle, in true conformity to Christ, and
through the help of his spiritual flesh, and blood, 1 Pet. 4.1, 2. yet it is
Christ himself; and not his sacrifice, that is the alone propitiation for all
men, John 12.1.2.

In your third Section you set forth some of the duties of the person who is to
administer this Sacrament truly, but you have omitted the many parts of his
office, which are to declare the time, and ends of its institution, with the
holy mysteries which it signifies, and to stir up the people to lay hold of
these benefits, and to follow Christ unto the death, with suitable prayers and
thanksgivings.

In your fourth Section you truly affirm, "That the Priest, or Minister should
not observe, or take this Sacrament alone, and that he should communicate in
both kinds to the true believers and followers of Christ, and you do not
without cause deny pompous elevations of, and processions with the host for
adoration sake, and other superstitious reservations and abuses of the bread or
host.

In your fifth you mistake much, saying, That the Elements in their
signification, have relation to Christ crucified, as we have showed before. Yet
it is true, that the names of the Elements, are attributed to the body and
blood of Christ, which they are designed to represent, but the predication is
Sacramental as you speak, and lies in the verb substantive (...) or (...)
which is as much as does signify est for significat, as Genesis 41.25, 26, 27.
and Genesis 50.12, 18.

It is likewise true which you there affirm, That the Elements even after
consecration remain for nature and substance, bread and wine still.

In your sixth Section you justly tax and refute the Doctrine of Popish
transubstantiation, and might have reproved the consubstantiation of the
Lutherans also upon good grounds; but if that those terms, or phrases were used
to teach us, that we must be spiritually consubstantiated with Christ's body and
blood aforesaid, or transubstantiated into the same, it might pass in a good
sense of spiritual conformity.

In your seventh Section you comfort your selves, and your worthy receivers
with vain words, and hopes concerning the presence, not real only, but
spiritual, also of that body and blood of Christ, which were never signified by
this Sacrament; so that herein the Papists, Lutherans, and Calvinists, do
litigate de lan^ Caprina, and do not once discern which are the spi^itual flesh
and blood of Christ there intended.

In your last Section you say, That in this Sacrament persons ignorant of the
mystery, though made pertakers of the outward Elements, yet they receive not
the things thereby signified, wherein you speak truly, though the speech lays
hold on your selves among others; but it is a question, whether all that come
ignorantly to this Sacrament, be guilty of the body and blood of Christ? we for
our parts hope many are not, neither does it seem consonant to reason, that all
wicked or unworthy receivers, that are pertakers of the Elements (though they
sin in coming uncalled or unprepared, to this ordinance) should at that time be
guilty of the true body and blood of Christ, which perhaps they never
understood; but all they that esteem not aright of the body and blood of
Christ, when truly offered unto them, and rightly understood, are guilty of the
profaining of the same, and much more if they by Apostasy turn therefrom, as we
heard before, Hebr. 10.29.

CHAP. XXX. Of Church censures.
THE Lord Jesus as King and Head of his Church has therein appointed a
Government, in the hand of Church Officers distinct from the Civil Magistrate
Isa. 9.6, 7. 1 Timothy: 5 17. acts 20 27, 28. Heb 13.7, 17, 24 1 cor: 12.18. Mat:
28 18, 19, 20.
.

II. To these Officers the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven are committed, by
virtue whereof they have power respectively to retain and remit sins, to shut
that Kingdom against the impenitent, both by the word and censures, and to open
it unto the penitent sinners by the mystery of the Gospel, and by absolution
from censures, as occasion shall require Mat. 16.19. Mat 18 17, 18. Ioh: 20,
20, 21, 22, 23. 2 cor: 1.6, 7, 8.
.

III. Church censures are necessary for the reclaiming and gaining of offending
brethren, for deterring of others from the like offenses, for purging out of
that leaven which might infect the whole lump, for vindicating the honor of
Christ, and the holy profession of the Gospel, and for preventing the wrath of
God, which might justly fall upon the Church, if they should suffer his
Covenant, and the seals thereof to be profaned, by notorious and obstinate
offenders 1 Cor: 5. chapter. 1 Timothy: 5.20. Mat: 7.6. 1 Timothy 1 20 1 Cor: 11.27.
to ^ the end. with Inde verse 23.
.

IV. For the better attaining of those ends the Officers of the Church are to
proceed by admonition, suspension from the Sacrament of the Lords supper for a
season, and by excommunication from the Church, according to the nature of the
crime, and demerit of the person 1 Thessalonians: 5.12. 2 Th: 3.6, 14, 15. 1 cor: 5.4,
5 23. Matthew. 18.17. Thus 3.10.
.

CHAP. XXX. Of Church Censures examined.
HERE Brethren if we first agree what the true Church is, that have power to
censure, and then who are those Governors or Superiors in whose hand
especially that power lies, we shall not we hope be thought over censorious in
other things.

It is true then which you speak in the first Section, "That the Lord Jesus is
King and head of his Church, and of no other, though the Lord of all creatures;
and such an head he is both of the universal Church, whether upon Earth alone,
or in Heaven also, and of each particular Church, yea, of every member of those
Churches, which are in Christ, or are brought to believe on him, obey and serve
him in holiness, and righteousness of truth; but those Saints or Churches which
are only begotten in God the Father, and not as yet taught, and led to the
Son, have the Father only for their Head, and king for the present.

It is true also, That Christ appointed a Government distinct from that of the
Civil Magistrate, in, and for his true Church, which consists not of
formalists, and outward professors for the greatest part, but of true Saints
which obey and follow Christ daily in his active and passive obedience; but he
has ordained no such thing in his Gospel for national and visible Churches,
whose religion stands in outward professions, and formalities; mainly, or only.

Therefore the outward Government of such Churches, whether Episcopal or
Presbyterian, or mixed of both, are but prudential and humane, although it is
evident out of both the Epistles to Timothy, that to Titus, and many other
Scriptures, that there ought to be not only a Presbytery, or joint society of
Elders in complete congregations of such Saints, but if they be great, a
superintendent Bishop over them, if we will follow the constitution, and pattern
of Christ, and his Apostles, in the pure Primitive Churches, so that both these
in their right State were Jure Divino.

Thirdly, It is not to be denied that this Government is left, or to be placed
in the hands of some special members, or society of the Churches, rightly
called and constituted; but we rather call those Governors, or Overseers with
the Apostles, then Officers as you do; for that word among Governors,
signifies Agents, Instruments, and Ministers under others, or inferiors rather
then Superiors. Howbeit, Christ has thousands of Saints in several nations,
which living dispersedly here and there, either conveniently cannot, or
actually do not reduce themselves into one or more Congregations, and so want
the benefit of that Government, and other means of comfort, and edification
likewise.

And this is the common state of the Saints in Europe, and elsewhere, who
nevertheless are members of the invisible and true Church of Christ; we know
notwithstanding that there are some Congregations that by consent meet
together, and erect a Government among themselves, the greatest part of which
are but formalists, and as their Doctrines and Administrations are none of the
purest, so their Government is but arbitrary, or prudentiall also.

But here Brethren you are very defective in three things among others.

First, In not showing what Officers, or Governors each true Congregation in
Christ should have.

Secondly, By whom they should be chosen.

And thirdly, By whom the respective censures of the Church should be
administered.

For the first, we find, That a compotent congregation in one City or place had
their Elders, as Teachers, Counselors, and Rulers appointed over them, Act
14.23. And when they had ordained them Elders in every Church, etc. we read
also Acts 6.16. That when the number of the Disciples was increased at
Jerusalem, and some of the widows had been neglected in the daily ministration
of alms, and distributions, there were Deacons men of honest report, and full
of the holy Ghost, and of wisdom, chosen to be both treasurers, and dispensers
of the alms, and so were assistants to the Apostles, and Elders of the Church
in providing for the poor especially; yet did they upon occasion declare the
true Faith and Doctrine of Christ also.

And afterward in the absence of the Apostles, there were superintendent
Bishops, set over the great Churches, as James at Jerusalem, Acts 21.18. And
the day following, Paul went in, or unto James, and all the Elders were
present; and Tymothy at Ephesus, as appears out of the tenor of both the
Epistles writ unto him by St. Paul, and the subscription to the second.

And finally, Titus over the Churches in Crete a very spacious Island, Titus 1.5.

As to the second thing, the Elders and Officers of the Church are not to be
chosen by the congregation, but by the Superiors both in growth and place, and
such as were first called and chosen by the Lord.

Thus Paul and Barnabas ordained Elders in all the Churches, which they had
converted as before, Acts 14.23. and the superintendent Bishops had the same
power, Titus 1.15. For this cause left I thee in Greet, that thou should set
in order the things that are wanting, and ordain Elders in every City. See 1
Timothy 3. throughout, 1 Timothy 5.22. And though the Apostles gave leave to
the congregation to choose out wise and faithful men, of which things they could
judge, to be trusted with the keeping and dispensing of the treasures of the
Church under themselves especially as almoners, yet they gave them that
authority by laying their hands upon them, Acts 6.2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Nor does it
follow from hence, that the Congregation of Saints, should choose their
Teachers and Elders, and much less that the Vulgar in every Parish should make
their Election of ministers, for then there would be many a weak, if not a wild
and mad choice in too many places or Parishes.

As to the third, the Elders are to be admonished, or rebuked by the Bishop, 1
Timothy 5.1, 19, 20. the Elders are to be suspended by those who ordained them;
to wit, the Bishop, and Presbytery, 1 Timothy 4.14. 2 Timothy 1.6. The common
people are to be admonished according to their several ages, and degrees,
either by the Bishop, 1 Timothy 5.1, 2, 3 or by the other rulers and Elders.

Or finally, By the Congregation, 1 Timothy 5.14, 15. but excommunication, or
delivering up to Satan, should be executed by the whole body though considered
and resolved upon by the Bishop and Elders first, 1 Cor. 5.3.4.5. and the like
we say of absolution, or receiving into the Church again, 2 Cor. 21.12.

These things premised, we may admit that which you speak of the committing of
the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven in your second Section; to wit, to Elders
and Governors called of God, but not of man alone; but that remitting, and
retaining of sins is both ministerial under the Lord Jesus, and principally
placed in the Church representative, or the Superiors and Elders acted by Gods
spirit, and both fitted and called to that high office, Matthew 16.19. Matthew
18.17, 18. John 20.20, 21.22.

In your third Section you lay down good grounds, why there should be
Eccles^astical or spiritual censures in use; and therein you seem to lay no
small or weak, foundation of reducing the true Saints now dispersed into
congregations under spiritual, able, and faithful Overseers, and those under
some superintendent chosen of God, of which some may be found, if well sought
out.

Your fourth and last Section, (by Officers, right Overseers and Governors,
such as we have described being understood) we willingly embrace with this
caution: That you will with St. Jude, verse 23. rather pull men out of the
fire, then persecute them with a faggot for difference of Judgment

CHAP. XXXI. Of Synods and Councels.
FOR the better Government and edification of the Church, there ought to be
such assemblies, as are commonly called Synods, or Councels Acts 15.2, 4, 6.
.

II. As Magistrates may lawfully call a Synod of Ministers and other fit
persons to consult and advise with about matters of Religion Isa: 49.23. 1 Timothy:
2.1, 1. 2 Cro: 19.8, 9, 10. 2 Chro: 29.30. chapt. Mat: 2.4.5 Pro: 11.14
; so if Magistrates be open enemies to the Church, the ministers of Christ of
themselves by virtue of their Office, or they with other fit persons, upon
delegation from their Churches may meet together in such assemblies Acts 15.2,
4, 22, 23, 25.
.

III. It belongs to Synods and Coun^els ministerially to determine
controversies of Faith, and cases of conscience, to set down rules and
directions for the better ordering of the public worship of God and government
of his Church, to receive complaints in cases of male administration, and
authoritativly to determine the same; which decrees and determinations if
consonant to the word of God, are to be received with reverence and submission,
not only for their agreement with the word, but also for the power whereby
they are made, as being an Ordinance of God appointed thereunto in his word
Acts 15.15, 19, 24, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31. Acts 6 4. Matthew: 18, 17, 18, 19, 20
.

IV. All Synods or Councels since the Apostles days whether general, or
particular may err, and many have erred; Therefore they are not to be made the
rule of Faith or practice, but to be used as an help in both Ep: 2.20. Acts
17.1. 1 Cor: 2.5. 2 Cor: 1.24.
.

V. Synods or Councels are to handle or conclude nothing but that which is
Ecclesiastical, and are not to intermedle with Civil affairs, which concern
the Commonwealth, unless by way of humble petition in cases extraordinary, or
by way of advise, for satisfaction of Conscience, if they be thereunto required
by the Civil Magistrate Luke 12.13, 14. Joh: 18.36.
.

CHAP. XXXI. Of Synods and Councels Examined.
IN compliance with your first Section we grant that there may be great cause
of spi^itual consultations, and that either about temporal things, as Moses
went twice to the Lord about the daughters of Zelophebad, Numbers 27.1, 2, 3,
etc. and Numbers 36.1, 2, 3, etc. or in things of Religion, as Moses required
what should be done first to him that blasphemed the name of the Lord,
Leviticus 24.12. and secondly to him that gathered sticks on the Sabbath day,
Numb. 15.32, 33, etc. But it is the Lord that is to be consulted with in those
great difficulties, and that either immediately as Moses did in the places
aforesaid, and Daniel with the other three Children, Dan. 2. or else by some
person who has the judgment of Vrim, and is acted by the spirit of God, Numb.
27.21. Ezra 2.63. 1 Maccab. 4.4. especially if any such person be to be found,
of which there have been some in all or most ages if the Author of the book of
wisdom speaks true, chap. 7.27. And in all ages wisdom entering into holy
souls, makes them friends of God and Prophets; which is consonant to what the
Father promises, Isa. 29.21. and to our Saviors engagement, Mat. 28.20 Behold
I am with you to the end of the world; but in case no such person may be found,
there may be Synods and Councels called for consultation sake, and if the
matter be still too difficult, it must be reserved for Gods future resolution.
Ezra 2.63.

As to your second Section we grant that Magistrates may call a Synod of
Ministers, or other fit persons, especially of those that are spiritual and
wise, and it were good that persons of all different minds in Religion might
be freely heard, and their arguments well weighed, and full answer given in
writing to all that are in the wrong, that our controversies might grow to an
end, and so truth with love and peace take place; but in this case if any
inspired Prophet may be had at home, or consulted abroad it is safer to receive
resolution from the mouth of the Lord by him (which we might easily do in this
age, either by word or writing) then to rely upon the judgment of an hundred
ordinary Divines, often producing the letter of the word, but wresting or
mistaking the sense.

We grant likewise that such ordinary ministers and persons may be sent from
their own to other Churches, yet can they act only within their own Sphere, as
rational, learned, or devout persons, not as inspired men: But that ordinary
ministers may by their office when the Magistrate is an enemy, call each other
or assemble into a public Synod, we doubt, yet doubtless they may meet
privately, and advise, yea, pray together.

To your third Section we grant that Synods may handle controversies of fact,
and cases of conscience, direction for an outward worship, and the better
governing of a visible Church, as also hear complaints in cases of male
administration, and determine them or some of them authoritate sibi commissa,
especially according to the measure of Faith and Regeneration whereunto they
have attained; which decrees and determinations if consonant to the word, are
to be received for the words sake, more then for their authority, they not
being a divine but an humane ordinance only: for the meeting of the Apostles
and Elders at Jerusalem, (to which the Churches at Antioch and thereabouts
appealed) was an assembly of men acted by the Holy Ghost, as themselves set
forth, Acts 13.28. and differs far, both in warrant and authority from our
Synods and Assemblies, neither does the first make the last to be Gods
ordinance.

And in your fourth Section you confess no less; where you acknowledge, that
all Synods and Councels since that might err, and that many have erred, and so
have you in many things; but as your Confession here is ingenious, so we hope
you will not take the representing of your errors, in worse part then it is
meant, your better information, and the saving of your souls and others.

Finally, Since you have set so good bounds between the Civil Magistrate and
your selves in your last Section, we will not remove the Landmark.

CHAP. XXXII. Of the state of men after death, and of the resurrection of the
dead.
THE bodies of men after death, return to dust and see corruption G^n: 3 19
Act: 13.36.
, but their soul (which neither die nor sleep) having an immortal subsistence,
immediately return to God who gave them Lu: 23.43 Eccl: 12.1.
: the souls of the righteous being then made perfect in holiness, are received
into the highest Heavens, where they behold the face of God in light and glory,
waiting for the full redemption of their bodies Heb: 12.13. 2 Cor: 5.16.8.
Phil. 1.23^ Acts 3.20. Ephesians: 4.10.
. And the souls of the wicked are cast into Hell, where they remain in torments
and utter darkness, reserved to the judgment of the great day Luke 16.23, 24.
Acts 1.25. Jude 1.6, 7 1 Pet: 3.19.
. Besides these two places for souls separated from their bodies, the
Scriptures acknowledge none.

II. At the last day such as are found alive shall not die, but be changed 1
These: 4.15. 1 Cor: 15.5, 2.
: and all the dead shall be raised up, with the self-same bodies, and none
other, although with different qualities, which shall be united again to their
souls for ever Job 19.26, 27. 1 Cor: 15.42, 43, 44.
.

III. The bodies of the unjust, shall by the power of Christ, be raised to
dishonor: the bodies of the just by his Spirit, unto honor; and be made
conformable to his own glorious body Acts 24.13. John 5.28.29. 1 Cor: 15.43.
Phil: 3.21.
.

CHAP. XXXII. Of the state of men after death, and of the resurrection of the
dead Examined.
HERE we could revive a manifold resurrection by you buried in silence; one of
internal, both righteousness and unrighteousness, discovered and raised up at
our first humiliation by the spirit of God and the work of his Law, Romans 7.7,
8, 9. Another of men raised up by a work of regeneration, some to honor, as
those that persevere, and others to dishonor, as those that fall away again,
Dan. 12.2.

Thirdly, A spiritual resurrection with Christ after we have been dead with him
to sin, Rev. 20 6.

And lastly the raising up the souls again at our dissolution, that it may go
to judgment which is called a resurrection Catechristically: but because you
are now drawing toward a conclusion we shall have the less cause to contest or
debate with you, These violent motions should grow more remiss and gentle
toward the latter end.

Your first Section comprehends many Propositions which we dare not deny, nor
shall we much alter them.

That the bodies of men after death return to dust.

That then they see corruption.

That the Soul whether a distinct part from the spirit or no has an immortal
subsistence,

That the soul sleeps not, though many of them be at rest.

That the spirit returns to God that gave it, Ecclesiastes 12, 7.

That the souls go to God immediately to receive their doom.

That the souls of the righteous after death are made perfect in happiness, not
without some access of holiness.

That those so made perfect are received into the Highest Heaven, or into
Paradise.

That those which are so received behold the face of God, in life and glory,
waiting for the full redemption of their bodies.

That the Souls of the wicked are cast into Hell, where they remain in torments
and utter darkness, reserved to the judgment of the great day, yet we could
tell you of some, no contemptible Authors, and those no Papists who maintain a
twofold delivery out of Hell, the one made by Christ of the men of the old
world at the time of his resurrection, for which they allege Zech. 9.11. and 1
Pet. 3.19, 20. and 1 Pet. 4.6. The other to be made at the end of the Chiliasts
term of their thousand years, Rev. 20.5. But the rest of the dead lived not
till the thousand years were ended.

That besides these two places of the souls separatd from the bodies, the
Scripture for ought we yet find makes no clear mention of any other; yet are
we not altogether ignorant of what some have written concerning Limbo, nor that
some which favor not the Church of Rome, as Jacob Behman for one, do assign a
third place, namely the Region of the Land of Canaan to be an Elysian field for
the souls of departed Saints, because the Lord swear to give the Land to
Abraham and his seed for ever.

But whether the souls of the just shall dye imperfect, and have their
perfection adjourned to another world, as you mean is a quere of some
importance, and to hold that it must be so positively, may prove a dangerous
error. For our parts we acknowledge that the Saints in Heaven do obtain no
small access and increase, as of light and wisdom, so of power, love, holiness,
peace, and joy also; for the Apostle says, Phil. 1.21. For me to live is
Christ, but to die is gain, To which that seems to agree which the Apostle
speaks, 2 Cor. 5.1, 2. For we know that if our earthly Tabernacle of this house
were dissolved, we have a building given us of God not made with hands, but
eternal in the Heavens. But that the body of sin may, and should be destroyed,
the workmanship of Satan abolished, the righteousness of the law fulfilled, and
the Jerusalem that comes down from Heaven, be fully sought and attained by us
through the grace of Christ even in this life, we have sufficiently proved
before. It remains then that we all take heed to the Apostles charge, 2 Cor. 7,
1.2. Having therefore these promises dearly beloved, let us cleanse our selves
from all filthiness of the flesh and the spirit, perfecting our holiness in the
fear of God; yea, let all those that would be counted faithful Ministers in
Christ Jesus labor with St. Paul Colos. 1.28. to present every man perfect in
Christ Jesus.

As to your 2d. Section although the Apostle in that great and larger chapter
of the resurrection, 1 Co. 15. seems to speak only of the resurrection of the
just, yet we must grant that all the dead shall be raised according to other
Scriptures and namely that of John 5.28, 29. Marvel not at this for the hour is
coming, in the which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice and shall
come forth, they that have done good unto the resurrection of life, and they
that have done evil unto the resurrection of condemnation.

But for a conclusion of this chapter may not some be mistaken in thinking the
first resurrection which comes not to any till they be first dead with Christ,
Romans 6 5. is past already, see 2 Timothy 2.18. yea, to make our future happiness
sure, what had been more needful here, then for you to have pressed the
necessity of the first resurrection for all fallen and corrupted men, Revel.
20.6. Blessed and holy is he that has his part in the first resurrection, on
such the second death has no power.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of the last Judgment.
GOD has appointed a day, wherein he will judge the world in righteousness, by
Jesus Christ Acts 17.30.
, to whom all power and judgment is given of the Father Joh: 5.22 27.
. In which day not only the Apostate Angels shall be judged 1 Cor: 6.3 Jude 6.
2 Pet: 1.4.
, but likewise all persons that have lived upon earth, shall appear before the
tribunal of Christ, to give an account of their thoughts, words, and deeds; and
to receive according to what they have done in the body, whether good or evil 2
Cor: 5.10. Ec: 12.14. Rom: 2.16. To: 14.10 12. Mat: 12.36 37.
.

II. The end of Gods appointing this day, is for the manifestation of the
glory, of his mercy, in the eternal salvation of the elect, and of his justice,
in the damnation of the Reprobate, who are wicked and disobedient: For then the
righteous go into everlasting life, and receive the fullness of joy and
refreshing, which shall come from the presence of the Lord; but the wicked that
know not God, and obey not the Gospel of Jesus Christ, shall be cast into
eternal torments, and be punished with everlasting destruction from the
presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power Mat. 25.31. to the end.
Rom: 2.5, 6. Rom: 9.22 23. Mat: 25: 2^ Acts 5.19. 2 These: 1.7, 8, 6, 10.
.

III. As Christ would have us to be certainly persuaded, That there shall be a
day of judgment, both to deter all from sin, and for the greater consolation
of the godly in their adversity 2 Pet: 3.11.14. 2 Cor: 5.10, 11. 2 These: 1.5,
6, 7. Luke 21.27 28. Rom: 8.23, 24, 25.
; so will he have that day unknown to men, that they may shake off all carnal
security, and be always watchful, because they know not at what hour the Lord
will come, and may be ever prepared to say, Come Lord Jesus come quickly Matthew:
24, 36, 42, 43, 44. Mark 13.35, 36, 37. Luke 1^.35, 36. Rev: 22, 20.
. Amen.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of the last Judgment Examined.
THis argument de rebus novissimis is a good subject for you and us to close
with, but as you want some light in the beginning, so we cannot commend your
discerning or Judgment in your end. You by your Scriptures to which you referr
us, confounding so many kinds and times of Judgment, very different in
themselves.

First, you might have observed that Christ's office of Judicature is twofold,
the one in the Saints, and the other outward over all persons of Angels and men.

The former of these, his inward and spiritual office Christ executes two ways
at two distant times, yea, in two several degrees.

The first is when he judges betwixt them and their spiritual enemies, and not
only delivers his servants from them, but guides and rules them according to
his Laws and Will.

Thus as types of Christ, Othnicl, Gedion, Jephtha, and the Judges of old were
said to judge Israel, and sutably hereunto David speaks thus of Christ, Psalm.
72.4. He shall judge the poor of his people, he shall save the children of the
needy, and break in pieces the oppressors, and Christ himself says, John
12.31. Now is the judgment of this world, now is the Prince of this world cast
out.

Christ's second way of judging in his Saints, is when he rises up in them in
fullness of light and power, after they are dead with him; in which day and
coming of his he manifests unto them truth and error, light and darkness, life
and death, yea, every Council of their own hearts, even as the light of the Sun
lays all open to the eye, 1 Cor. 4.5. Therefore judge nothing before the time
until the Lord come, who both will bring to light the hidden things of
darkness, and will make manifest the counsels of the heart, and then shall
every man have praise of God for this very cause; the Apostle would have all
men forbear judging till that time, but not until the general day of judgment;
now the outward judging of Christ is either in this life or the other; in this
life he judges and punishes persons, nations, yea, and sometimes the whole
earth, as he did in the days of Noah. After this life he first judges every
man at his death, Heb. 8.27. It is appointed unto all men once to die, and
after that comes the judgment, and then as you have here set it forth all men
and Angels at or in the last day.

Thus then is a manifold day or time of Christ's coming to judgment spoken of
Matthew. 24. and 25. Chapters, and elsewhere.

First, His particular coming to every man at his death, Matthew. 24.

Secondly, His coming to judge and punish the nation of the Jews, Matthew. 24.23.
which came to pass about 38 years after his death.

Thirdly, His coming to punish the false, proud and Apostate Jerusalem of the
Gentiles, a work now in hand, Matthew. 24.3, 20, 36, 37.

Fourthly, Christ's inward and spiritual coming promised to his Apostles and
Disciples, John 14.19, 20. and spoken of 1 Corinthians. 1.7. Heb. 10.36, 37. Jam.
5.7. which spiritual coming of his was after a time to cease in the Church, by
reason of men's Apostasy, and the departure away from the true faith, Luke
17.12. The days will come when ye shall desire to see one of the days of the
Son of man, and shall not see them.

Fifthly, There is Christ's second coming, and his spiritual entrance into his
Church in the same kind, called also the day of the Lord, of which 2 These.
2.2. in which the man of sin the son of perdition, that mystery of iniquity
should be revealed, yea, and destroyed by the brightness of his coming, which
coming of his brings the Gospel with it that was to be preached unto all
Nations, Matthew. 24.30. And then shall appear the sign of the Son of man in
Heaven, and then shall all the Tribes of the earth mourn, and they shall see
the Son of man coming in the Clouds of Heaven with power and great glory: and
he shall send his Angels with a great sound of a Trumpet (the Gospel aforesaid)
and they shall gather together his Elect from the four winds, which time is by
Zachariah described to be a gracious time, chap. 12.10, 11.12. and wished and
longed for by St John Revel. 1.7, 22. This seems to be that blessed time
wherein Christ shall come in the spirit, but not in the body, as many Chiliasts
dream to errect a Kingdom throughout the earth in the hand of his Saints, Dan.
7.13, 14, 27, 28. which kingdom shall continue a thousand years, Rev. 3.4, 5,
6. yea, some are so bold as to say, that this coming of Christ, is the great
day of judgment spoken of Acts 17.30. and elsewhere; wherein Christ comes
spiritually with all his Saints, to give a true and upright sentence concerning
all spiritual things, good and evil; for which purpose they allege that text,
1 These: 3.13. But St. John describes another judgment which shall follow after
the thousand years are ended Rev. 20.7, 8.15. which seem to be that very
judgment which you aim at in this chapter.

And so sixthly, and lastly, There is Christ's day, or time of his last coming
to keep a great and general Assizes.

Thus much in reference to your first Section especially.

In your second Section we admit your reasons produced to show why there should
be such a judgment, with the proceedings then, and the several events by you
set forth, and the rather because you there in the manifestation of the glory
of Gods justice against there probates seem to lay their own condemnation upon
their own disobedience and demerit, and no way ascribe it to Gods absolute
preterition or sovereignty to the want of means, or sufficient grace for their
effectual calling, as you have done heretofore.

Lastly, For a peaceable and friendly conclusion, we grant you that which you
assume in your third and last Section, namly, that Christ, would have us
certainly persuaded of a general judgment to deter all men from sin, and for
the greater consolation of the godly, yet would he have us as well assured of
our personal and particular going to judgment for the same ends; so, he would
not have us ignorant of his spiritual coming, but hope thereupon and prepare
our selves thereunto, 1 These. 5.23. and though to take away security and make us
watchful, he would have the day and hour both of our particular and his general
judgment unknown unto us, yet by such foregoing tokens and Characters as he
has set forth in his word, we should learn to know his approaching, judgments
and commings, and order our selves accordingly, Matthew. 24.32, 33. Now learn a
Parable of the Fig tree, when its branches are yet tender and pntteth forth
leaves, you know that summer is nigh; so likewise you when ye shall see all
these things, know that it is near even at the door.

Against your 15. Article by you revised, and here published: we have not much
to say, but what has been spoken upon those heads, and should have had the
less, if you had left them all standing in statu quo prius: And therefore we
will here exhibit no articles against them, as being more Orthodox then your
selves, though you hold them not for oracles.

We have here endeavored to follow the Council of St. Jude verse 3. Earnestly
to contend for the faith, which was once given to the Saints: If any will be
contentious against the truth, we have no such custom, nor the Church of God,
1 Cor: 11.16.

But beloved building up your selves in your most holy faith, praying in the
holy Ghost, keep your selves in the love of God, looking for the mercy of our
Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life. Now unto him that is able to keep you from
falling, and to present you faultless before the presence of his glory, with
exceeding joy: To the only Wise God our Savior, be Glory and Majesty,
Dominion and Power, Now and ever, Amen. Jude 20, 21, 24, 25.

FINIS.

